THIRTEEN BOOKS OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY: VIZ. I. Of the Principles, and common
Adjuncts of all Natural Bodies. II. Of the Heavens, the World, and Elements.
III. Of Action, Passion, Generation, and Corruption. IV. Of Meteors. V. Of
Minerals and Metals. VI. Of the Soul in general, and of things Vegetable. VII.
Of Animals or living Creatures. VIII. Of MAN.


Unto which is added Five Books more of Natural Philosophy in several
Discourses. IX. Discourse 1. (...) Principles of Natural ^^^ngs. X. Dis. 2.
Concerning the Occult and Hidden Qualities. XI. Dis. 3. Of Atoms and Mixture.
XII. Dis. 4. Of the Generation of Live Things. XIII. Dis. 5. Concerning the
Spontaneous Generation of Live Things.


Written in Latin and English.

By Daniel Sennert, Doctor of Physic. Nicholas Culpeper, Physician and
Astrologer. Abdiah Cole, Doctor of Physic, and the Liberal Arts.


LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the sign of the Printing press in Cornhill, near the Royal
Exchange. 1660.

TO The most High and Illustrious Prince and Lord, THE LORD AUGUSTUS JUNIOR,
Duke of Brunswick and Lunaeburg, etc.
My most Gracious Lord.
IF any where in the whole World the Wisdom and Almightiness of the most good
and great God does appear (most High and most Illustrious Prince, my most
gracious Lord) in the Contemplation of Natural Things, it does most clearly
shine forth. For who is it that contemplates this admirable Frame of the World,
and therein the Sun, Moon, and other Celestial Bodies, considering their most
bright Light, most powerful Faculties, sundry turnings and returnings, and yet
for so many Ages so certain and regular, but that he must needs acknowledge a
most wise and Almighty Creator? who that views this vast Region of the Air, and
the Clouds therein flying and hanging over our Heads, and the Rains, Snows,
Hails, Thunders, and other Meteors? who that weighs and ponders in his mind
this Globe of Earth whereon we tread, hanging by Geometry in the empty Air, and
therein the high Mountains, steep Hills, low Valleys, plain Fields, and these
beset with so many Trees, Shrubs, Herbs, Flowers, and Fruits, affording food to
so many sorts of living things which fly in the Air, creep and walk on the
surface of the Ground; so many Fountains, Brooks, Rivers, and the Seas
themselves, and in them a countless crowd of Fishes? and in the Bowels of the
Earth so many sorts of Minerals, Mines, and Metals, so many Fires burning for
so many Ages together, and the Waters with great violence rushing and rolling
through the Bowels of the Earth without destroying the same? Who I say that
sees and considers all this without admiring the wisdom and almighty power of
God the Maker? Of whom St. Paul himself in the first to the Romans, thus
writes; The invisible things of God are clearly seen by the Creation of the
World, being understood by the things created; namely his Eternal Power and
Godhead: and Hermes or Mercurius Trismegistus; Man is made to behold the Works
of God, and he has admired them, and known the Creator. But as the works of
God in Nature are most wise and wonderful; so to search into and know the same
is exceeding hard, insomuch that even the Prince of Philosophers Aristotle
himself did not blush to confess, that the eyes of our Understanding were to
the Light of Nature as the eyes of Owls to the Midday Sun; and the most acute
Julius Caesar Scaliger in Exercit 307. Sect. 27. complains of the scantiness of
our Understanding, and confesses that it is a part of Humane wisdom to be
contentedly ignorant of some things; and in Exercit. 297. he ingenuously writes
of himself (though otherwise a most acute man) I often give my self the charge
to look about, remember and consider how weak the eyes of our minds an^ to
search into the deep Mysteries of Nature. Yet since in great and hard matters
it is a thing deserving commendation, but to endeavor to do somewhat: Rare and
Heroical wits in all Ages have not suffered themselves by the difficulty of
Nature to be frighted from the contemplation thereof. With whom though I cannot
compare my self; yet I was unwilling to lag behind, but spent a good part of my
life in these Contemplations. And though I have found that common saying
(Flattery gains Friends, but True speaking breeds Foes) to be true, not only in
civil Conversation, but also in Philosophical Disputations; while I have
observed that those who merely recite and transcribe the Inventions of our
Ancestors, are not so apt to be slandered and back-bitten; but those who
according to the Counsel of Seneca, being persuaded that though our Ancestors
have done much, yet that they have not done all, and that there remains yet
much work undone, have endeavored to add any thing to their Inventions, have
made themselves liable to hatreds and reproaches: yet have I always more
valued the Truth than the Friendship or Hatred of any man whosoever. And
therefore I have boldly adventured these my Meditations upon certain Heads of
Natural Philosophy into the public, and having written them a year or two
since, now I communicate the same to others.

And I was desirous (most Illustrious Prince, and my gracious Lord) to dedicate
them to the most Honored Name of your most Illustrious Highness, not so much
because I would follow the fashion of this Age; but because I know, and am
certainly acquainted that your most illustrious Highness is so seasoned with
good Literature, that you are also able to judge of the Labors of those that
profess the same. And therefore I do most earnestly beseech your most
illustrious Highness, that you would vouchsafe to receive this Work of mine,
such as it is with a favorable Countenance, and by the Splendour of your
illustrious Name to dispel such Mists as Malevolent Persons may chance to throw
about it. The most good and great God long preserve your Highness in Health and
Happiness.

Your most illustrious Highness's most Devoted Subject, DANIEL SENNERTUS,
Doctor.

TO THE INGENUOUS and FRIENDLY READER, ALL HEALTH and HAPPINESS.
SOME will perhaps wonder (ingenuous and friendly Reader) that at this Age of
my Life, and exceedingly taken up with other Employments, I set my self again
to write Discourses of Natural Philosophy. But those only are the men will
wonder, who having in their first Studies of Philosophy disputed of some most
general Questions of Nature, think they have sufficiently studied Natural
Philosophy, and laying the same aside, persuade themselves that they may now
pass right on to higher Disciplines (as they call them) and to the Art of
Physic it self. But the most learned Philosophers and Physicians of al Ages,
have been of a far different Opinion, who acknowledge that there are infinite
Treasures of Divine Wisdom lying hid in the Nature of things; in the enquiring
after and bringing whereof to light, the longer and more diligently any man
has labored, the less proud he is of his knowledge, and the more free and
forward to confess his ignorance, and the more he has learned, the more he
observes there is still remaining for him to learn. And doubtless if that
speech of the Conick Poet be in any thing true, it is most true as touching the
Comtemplation of things Natural: No man was ever so resolved in mind,
But Age, and Use, and things themselves might teach
Him something better, and his Ignorance show.
And that Device which now seems excellent,
When thou shall come to put the same in ure
May seem stark naught.


And therefore Galen bids him that would find the Truth, to judge, try, and
examine what he knows, a long time together, and to consider what is agreeable
to manifest experience, and what is different therefrom, and to choose the one,
and refuse the other. And therefore, I my self though in my youth I bestowed no
small pains in the knowledge of Natural things: yet I observed that there were
many things remaining not sufficiently known, and Experience the Mistress of al
Knowledge, acquainted me with many things not before observed. But this is a
thing which may be yet more wondered at, that since by a certain envious and
malignant person I have been so abused and ill handled, because of certain
Tenets differing somewhat from the common Opinions, scattered up and down in my
Writings, what should move me to propound the self same things in a peculiar
Treatise, which will the more provoke and incite his fury. But in very deed,
although I foresee the Calumnies and Revilings whereunto I make my self liable
by so doing; yet the study of Truth, and of the knowledge of Natural things
has so far prevailed with me as to make me contemn them al, and care no more
for them than I do for the barking of a Dog; especially since I cannot see the
man to produce any thing which is solid, and able to move a mind studious of
truth. I hear him indeed pitifully complain; That certain cross grained Wits
are arrived to so great a degree of Wantonness, and vain glorious Boldness,
that they are not ashamed to overthrow and drive out of the Schools, the
Doctrine and Basis of most true Principles, celebrated and preserved by the
general Consent of sincere and learned Antiquity, and rightly used to this very
day, against which every sound witted and pious person makes conscience to open
his mouth; and to establish their own absurd, false, stinking, HERETICAL and
BLASPHEMOVS Paradexes in their room; and by so doing, to corrupt all good
Disciplines, destroy the studies of the Liberal Arts, reduce Barbarism, and in
this last dreggy Age of the declining World, to take away all true knowledge of
things, and the solid wisdom of the Ancients: and which vainly endeavor to deny
the received and eternally true Principles of venerable Antiquity, to weaken
and pluck them up by the Roots; and to establish for Principles in their room,
their own Tenants and Paradoxes, foolish, colder than January, impious, false
Heretical, long since condemned, or lately hatched in the Brainlets of
Sycophants, and full of contradictions. But if any man shall ask what principles
those are, and upon what foundations established, for the contempt and neglect
whereof he makes, he makes so grievous complaints; and sticks not to load good
men with such bitter revilings, and manifestlyes which that old Liar and
Slanderer the Devil has suggested to him, he shall find nothing but Ignorance,
both of the things themselves, and the manner of Teaching, and if he go to the
quick he shall find two things chiefly objected. The first is; That Forms are
drawn out of the power of the matter. The other is, That in every Mixture there
is a new form brought out, and the degrees of the former always remaining that
others do come, and that together with these new Qualities are emergent; and
that Nature does assume, first universal forms, and by their means particular
ones, til at last she come to the forms of Individuals; and that so she induces
forms, first into the Essence, and afterward into the existence, and the first
for the last's sake. Or that Nature first induces the forms of the Essence,
then of the Existence, or that the first educes the Universal forms, and by
their help the particulars, until she comes unto the Individual form and
existence. That those first forms are for the last, and that their Essences do
not perish, nor are abolished, but that there might be a more noble form for a
more noble subject, laying aside their rigor, and taking upon themselves the
office of matter as it were, they submit themselves to the power thereof; and
out of this mixture of qualities arising from diverse forms, and the mixture of
bodies the forms being preserved, and putting on the Nature of matter as it
were, and power, that there arises a certain unspeakable propriety of
temperament, which may rightly after a sort deserve the name of an occult
Quality. You shall find withal, that there are no reasons brought to prove these
things; but that this manner of the generation of Natural things which never
was in Nature, nor ever will be, is obtruded upon us like an Oracle, so that he
which does not admit and reverence the same, he must be said to overthrow the
Principles of Nature, to be an Inventer of new Paradoxes, absurd; and that
there may be no want of Calumnies and lies, he must be a Blasphemer and an
Heretic. If moreover you shall demand what is that same venerable Antiquity,
of the contempt whereof he so complains; the greatest Aristoteleans will
ingenuously confess, that they have never as yet been able to find those
Principles, and such an Eduction of forms out of the aptitude of the matter;
and therefore some will answer that they must be ascribed to Averroes, others
not to him neither, since places contrary thereto are sound in him, but to the
Schoolmen. These (forsooth) are the eternally true Principles of reverend
Antiquity; this the Consent of venerable Antiquity. But let us (truly) suppose
that Aristotle either invented or published them; yet is not Aristotle (let me
say with his good leave whom I admire and reverence as a great Philosopher) the
most ancient, but there was a time when he was but a new Writer; for which
nevertheless his Writings could not be blamed: nor was Aristotle all Antiquity,
but there were before Aristotle, Pythagoras, Anaxagoras, Democritus,
Empedocles, Leucippus, Melissus, Parmenides, Xenophanes, Socrates, Plato, all
most learned and renowned men. And though Aristotle were the most ancient of
all Philosophers; yet he cannot therefore be taken for the Rule of Truth. For
Truth is the squaring of the Notions which are in the Understanding, not with
the Notions of another man, but with the things themselves. All which things
when I had weighed I would not suffer my self to be frighted from the study of
searching out the truth. This also has moved me to publish such things as I
thought to have suppressed, because I observed that mine Enemies did wrest my
Opinions into a strange sense which nere came into my mind, and charge me with
Opinions that I never held. I thought it therefore more convenient (Friendly
Reader) that you should know my mind from this Writing of mine own, rather than
from those of other men. Out of which also thou shall understand, That I was
not the first that spread abroad these Opinions, which the envious and
malignant Adversary does so bitterly inveigh against, and load with all the
Calumnies he is able to invent: but that there have been great Philosophers,
and such as have been more versed in Aristotle than this Detractor, both in
former Ages, and at this day; and as in other places, so in the most renowned
Universities of Europe the chief Professors, who have nothing to do with
Paracelsus, who hold the same Opinions in these Points with me; and that I
alone am unjustly chastised by this Detractor, and undeservedly traduced as the
Setter up of a new Sect.

Accept therefore (Ingenuous Reader) with a friendly mind these second Thoughts
and Meditations of mine concerning certain wonderful Works of God, wherein my
only endeavor has been to present Nature unto thee, which is the ordinary
Power of God, such as the most Wise God has framed her. For I am not ignorant
that it is an ungodly thing stubbornly to think and hold concerning Natural
things, otherwise than God has created them. If I have attained the Truth, I
have reason to rejoice: but if in this darkness of Man's Understanding I have
sometimes erred; I hope mine honest and not unprofitable endeavor will merit
pardon; since according to Aristotle, those that are minded certainly to know,
must of necessity learn well to doubt. I freely offer my Opinion to be
considered of; and let every other man (as is in a free Commonwealth fitting)
freely offer his; he shall not offend me. I have never railed against any man
differing from me in Opinion, nor being provoked with railings will I return
railing for railing, and reproach for reproach. For we are not only
Philosophers, but also Christians, whose Duty it is not to return evil for
evil, but patiently and contentedly to bear injuries.

To profit all, hurt none, it is my Will,
To love good Men, and to endure the ill.

DANIEL SENNERTUS.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I. Of the Principles and common Adjuncts of all Natural Bodies.
CHAP. 1. Of Philosophy in General. 1 Chap. 2. Of the nature of Physica, or
Natural Philosophy. 6 Chap. 3. Of the Principles of Natural things. 11 Chap. 4.
Of Nature and the Causes. 20 Chap. 5. Of that which is continued, and of that
which is infinite 23 Chap. 6. Of the Qualities in general. 29 Chap. 7. Touching
Place. ibid. Chap. 8. Concerning Time. 37 Chap. 9. Concerning Motion 41
BOOK II. Of the Heavens, the World, and Elements.
Chap. 1. Of the World. 46 Chap. 2. Of the Heaven, and the Stars. 51 Chap. 3.
Touching the Elements inasmuch as being Simple Bodies, they with the Heavens do
make up the bulk of this World 67
BOOK III. Of Action, Passion, Generation, and Corruption.
Chap. 1. Of the Elements as they are the Principles of mixed bodies. 84 Chap.
2. Of the Action, Passion, and Mixture of Elements 89 Chap. 3. Of the
Generation and Corruption of Bodies Natural. 94 Chap. 4. Of Temperament and
Coction. 99
BOOK IV. Of Meteors.
Chap. 1. Of Meteors in General 104 Chap. 2. Of fiery Meteors. 105 Chap. 3. Of
the Winds 111 Chap. 4. Of the Earthquake 117 Chap. 5. Of the Clouds. 119 Chap.
6. Concerning Rain 120 Chap. 7. Of Snow and Hail. 121 Chap. 8. Of a Mist, Dew,
Hoar Frost, Honey and Manna. 122 Chap. 9. Of the Rainbow, False Suns and
Moons, strakes in the Sky, and Circles about the Moon. 124 Chap. 10. Of
Fountains. 127
BOOK V. Of Minerals and Metals.
Chap. 1. Of Earths. 131 Chap. 2. Of Salts. 134 Chap. 3. Of Bitumen and
Sulphur. 136 Chap. 4. Of Stones and Jewels. 142 Chap. 5. Of Metals 152
BOOK VI. Of the Soul in general, and of Things Vegetable.
Chap. 1. Of the Soul in general 341 Chap. 2. Of the Vegetative Soul. 346 Chap.
3. Of the parts of Plants. 348 Chap. 4. Of the differences of Plants. 350 Chap.
5. Concerning the History of Plants. 354 Tribe 1. Mushromps and Toadstools. 354
Tribe 2. Mosses and mossie Plants. 355 Tribe 3. Grasses. ibid. Tribe 4. Reedy
Plants. ibid. Tribe 5. Rush^s. 356 Tribe 6. Bulbous and Tuberous Plants. ibid.
Tribe 7. Corns and Pulses 357 Tribe 8. Trefoyls, Cinquesoyls, and Herhs of that
Family. 358 Tribe 9. Anemonies, Crowfoots, Cranesbills. ibid. Tribe 10.
Gilloflowers, Rose-Campians, Violets, and the kinds of Loosestrife, and certain
allied Plants. 359 Tribe 11. Other Plants remarkable for their Flowers. ibid.
Tribe 12. Poppy, Henbane, Nightshade, and Herbs of kin to them. 360 Tribe 13.
Endives, Cichories. Lettices, and plants of kin to them ibid. Tribe 14. Orach,
Beets, Colewort Docks, Rocket, Mallows, Cresses, and Herbs of kin to these. 361
Tribe 15. Mint, Sage, Horehound, Bawm, and Herbs of kin to them. ibid. Tribe
16. Scabious and plants of kin thereto. 363 Tribe 17. Woolly and downy plants.
ibid. Tribe 18. The Hous-leeks ibid. Tribe 19. Bindweeds, and of Twining
Plants. ibid. Tribe 20. The Cowcumber, Gourd, and Plants of kin to them. 364
Tribe 21. Thistles and Thistly Plants. ibid. Tribe 22. Tufted Plants that have
clusters of seeds on the top. ibid. Tribe 23. Berry-cluster hearing Plants. 365
Tribe 24. Ferns and ferny Plants. ibid. Tribe 25. Milkie Plants. ibid. Tribe
26. Nervous Plants. ibid. Tribe 27. The rest of the Plants. 366 Tribe 28. Of
Shrubs and Bushes. ibid. Tribe 29. Of Trees. 367

BOOK VII. Of Animals or living Creatures.
Chap. 1. Of the Sensitive Soul in General. 368 Chap. 2. Of the Sight. 372
Chap. 3. Of the Hearing. 374 Chap. 4. Of the Smelling. 375 Chap. 5. Of the
Tasting. 377 Chap. 6. Of the Touch. 379 Chap. 7. Of the Internal Senses 380
Chap. 8. Of the desiring and moving faculty. 382 Chap. 9. Of Sleep, Waking, and
Dreams. 384 Chap. 10. Of the differences of living Creatures. 387
BOOK VIII. Of MAN.
Chap. 1. Of the Rational Soul. 395 Chap. 2. Of the Body of Man, and its
functions. 401
Books printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller of LONDON, at the
Exchange.
Thirteen new Books of Nich. Culpeper Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 Of the Principles and common Adjuncts of al Natural Bodies. 2 Of the
Heavens, the World, and Elements. 3 Of Action, Passion, Generation, and
Corruption. 4 Of Meteors. 5 Of Minerals and Metals. 6 Of the Soul in general,
and of such Creatures as have a growing Soul. 7 Of Animals or living Creatures.
8 Of Mankind. 9 Of the Principles of Natural things 10 Of Occult Qualities. 11
Of Atoms and Mixture. 12 Of the Generation of living things 13 Of living
things that breed of themselves without Parents.
Dr. Johnston's Idea of Practical Physic. Englished by Nich. Culpeper
1 The Art to preserve Health. 2 The Preternatural Disorder of Man's Body, and
their Signs. 3 Of Medicaments. 4 Of the Art of Healing. 5 Of the general Cure
of Diseases. 6 Of External Diseases. 7 Of Feavors. 8 Of Head Diseases 9 Of
middle belly diseases. 10 Of Lower Belly Diseases. 11 Of Venomous Diseases. 12
Of Childrens Diseases,
Thirty four Books of Nich Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology,
formerly published.
The first twenty four Books are all called the Practice of Physic, Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and several sorts of Signs;
Together with the Cure of a Diseases in the Body of Man. Being a Translation of
the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius, now living;
Counselor and Physician to the present King of France Above fifteen thousand
of the said Books in Latin have been sold in a very few years, having been
eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the Nature,
Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the Medicines for
the cure of them: as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 25. A Sure Guide
to Physic and Chyrurgery: That is to say, The Arts of Healing by Medicine, and
Manual Operation. Being an Anatomical Description of the whole Body of Man, and
its parts, with their respective diseases, demonstrated from the Fabric and
use of the said parts. In Six Books of Riolanus, translated, and adorned with
an hundred eighty four Figures cut in Brass. 26 Veslangus Anatomy of the Body
of Man, Wh^^ in is exactly described, the several parts of the Body of Man.
Illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates man ever was in English before
27 A translation of the new Dispensatory made by the College of Physicians o^
London. Whereunto is added, the Key to Galens Method of Physic. 28 The English
Physician Enlarged, being an Astrologo^ Physical Discourse of the vulgar Herbs
of this Nation; wh^^^in is showed how to cure a man's self (...) most D^^^^s
incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in England, and for three pence
charge. Also in the some Book is showed, 1 The T^me of gathering al Herbs, both
V^lgatly, and Astrologically. 2 The W^^ of drying and keeping them and their
Juyces. 3 The Way of making and keeping a^ manner of useful Compounds, made of
those Herbs. The Way of mixing the Medicines according to the Cause, and
Mixture of the Disease, and the part of the body afflicted. 29 A Directory for
Midwives, or a Guide for women. Newly enlarged by the Author in every sheet,
and illustrated with diverse new Plates. 30 Galens Art of Physic, with a large
Comment. 31 New Method both of studying and practicing Physic. 32 A Treatise
of the Rickets, being a Disease common to Children. Wherein is showed, 1 The
Essence, 2 The Cause, 3 The Signs, 4 The Remedies of the Disease: Published in
Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Dr Regem^rter: Translated into English,
and corrected by Nith. culpeper. 33 Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for
the Common People 34 Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic.
The London Dispensatory in Folio, of a large Character in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in twelves, a small pocket Book in Latin.

Sixteen Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded
1. Christ's call to all those that are weary and heavy Laden, to come to him
for rest, on Matthew. 11.28. Wherein is showed, First, 1 The Burden of Sin. 2.
the Burden of the Law. 3. The Burden of Legal performances with the Misery of
those that are under them. 4. The Burden of Corruption. 5. The Burden of
Outward Affliction.
Secondly, Christ Graciously offers to them that come to him, REST from al
those Burdens. Wherein is showed, 1. What it is to come to Christ. 2. That
Christ requires nothing but to come to him. 3. Several rules to be observed in
right coming to Christ. 4. Meant to draw souls to Christ. 5. That in coming
to Christ God would have us have respect to our selves. 6 That there is No REST
for souls out of Christ; and the Reasons thereof, with some conclusions from it.
Thirdly, There is showed 1. The Rest Believers have from sin. 2. The
deliverance from the Law by Christ is, 1 Privatively, 2 Positively.
3. The Rest Believers have from the Burden of the Law by coming to Christ. 4.
How Christ gives Rest from the burden of Legal performances. 5 How Christ gives
Rest from the Burden of Corruption, wherein is showed how Sanctification and
Holiness comes from Christ only. And encouragments to come to Christ for
holiness. 6 How Christ gives Rest from outward affliction. 7 Some Directions
how to get Rest from Christ in spiritual desertions.
2. Christ the great Teacher of souls that come to him, on Matt. 11.29. Wherein
is showed, 1. What Christ's Yoke is. 2 That Believers must take Christ's Yoke on
them. 3 The more we are under the Yoke of Christ, the more REST we have. 4
Christ is the great Teacher of his Church and People. 5 In what manner Christ
Teaches, 1 He is a Meek Teacher. 2 An Humble Teacher.
6 The Learners of Christ must be MEEK. 7 The Learners of Christ must be
humble. 8 Christ Teaches by his EXAMPLE. 9 Wherein Christ's EXAMPLE is to be
followed. 10 What kind of Pattern Christ is. 11 We must not follow the Example
of the World.
We must imitate Christ in MEEKNESS. 1. What meekness is. 2. Learn of Christ to
be meek toward God; and the Reasons thereof. 3. the Dreadful Evil of Anger and
frowardness toward God. 4 Meekness toward God examplified from Scripture
examples 5 Meekness toward Men, which consists in ordering Anger. 1. To the
right Object. 2. To the right Time. 3. To the right measure. 4. To the right
end etc.
5. The sad effects of Anger 6. the Excellency of Meekness. 7. Promises made to
meekness. 8. Many vain Reasons and Pleas for Anger answered. 9. Exhortations to
Meekness. 10. Means to get and keep Meekness.
3. Christ the humble Teacher of those that come to him. on Matthew. 11.29.
Wherein is showed, 1. What Humility or Lowliness is Not. 2. What that Lowliness
of Heart is that Christ would have us to Learn of him. 3. Arguments from the
Lowliness of Christ to work Lowliness of spirit in Us. 4. The properties of an
humble heart toward God, 5. The Properties of an humble and Lowly heart in
respect of Our selves. 6. The Properties of humility in respect of others. 1.
It is fearful of giving or taking offense. 2 It gives due honor to al. 3. It is
tender to others. 4. It Is not needlessly singular from them.
7. The Excellencies of Humility. 8. Humility brings REST unto the soul, 9.
Means to get Humility.
4. The only Easy way to Heaven. on Matthew. 11.30. Wherein is, showed, 1. The
way to Heaven that Jesus Christ teaches, is an Easy way. Six Evidences
thereof. 2. The Difference between the EASE a carnal heart has, and the EASE a
gracious soul has in Religion 3. The Reason why some gracious souls complain
of difficulty in Gods ways. 4. What it is that makes the ways of God so
Easy. 5. Consequences from the easiness of Gods ways. 6. Directions how we
may make the ways of God Easy.
5. Gospel Reconciliation, Or Christ's Trumpet of Peace to the World. Wherein is
Opened, Gods exceeding willingness to be Reconciled to Man; And Gods sending
his Ambassadors to that End. From 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 21. 6. The Rare Jewel of
Christian Contentment, on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1 what Contentment is.
2 It is an Holy art and mystery. 3 The Excellencies of it. 4 The evil of the
contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 7. Gospel Worship, on
Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The Right Manner of the Worship of God in
General; And particularly, In hearing the Word, Receiving the Lords Supper, and
Prayer.
8. Gospel-Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is showed, 1 That the
Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by the Light of Nature.
2 Beyond those that lived under the Law. 3 And suitable to what Truths the
Gospel holds forth.
To which is added, The Misery of those Men that have their Portion in this
life only, on Psalm. 17.14 9. A Treatise of Earthly mindedness Wherein is
showed, 1 What Earthly-mindedness is. 2 The great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3.
part of the 19. verse.
Also to the same Book is joined, A Treatise of Heavenly-mindedness, and
walking with God, on Genesis 5.24, and on Phil. 3.20. 10 An Exposition on the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 11 An
Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and tenth ^hapters of Hosea. 12 An Exposition
on the elev^nth, twelfth, and ^hirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now complete.
13 The Evil of Evils, or the exceeding sinfulness of sin, on Job. 16.21. 14
Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 15 Of Hope, on 1 John, 3.3. 16 Of walking by
Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.

Four new Books of Mr. Sydrach Simpson. VIZ.
I. Of Unbelief, Or the Want of Readiness to lay hold on the Comfort given by
Christ. II. Not going to Christ for life and Salvation, is an exceeding great
Sin. III. Of Faith, Or, That belee^ing is receiving, and receiving Christ is
Believing. IV. Of Covetousness.
In the first Book is showed.
1 What Unbelief it is that is here spoken of. 2 The best way to deal with
Unbelief. 3 That Unbelief is a sin against all the Atributes of God. 4 That
Christ will not bear with this Sin of Unbelief. 5 That we should be quick and
ready to believe. 6 Motives to endeavor for readiness to believe. 7 Helps to
attain readiness in Believing.
In the second Book is showed,
1 That Unbelief is a great sin, and exceeding Provoking unto God, 2 Several
Arguments provoking us to Believe the greatness of the sin of Unbelief. 3 Many
Objections answered. 4 Several sorts of this sin of Unbelief. 5 Means to
convince us that Unbelief is so great a sin. 6 Though the sin of Unbelief be
very great, yet it is pardonable. 7 God has pardoned Unbelief, and will pardon
it.
In the third Book is showed, (besides many other things)
1 That Persons that are Believers are Receivers. 2 That to Receive is the
Principal use of Faith. 3 That nothing should hinder our Receiving. 1 Not our
sins. 2 Nor Gods delays. 3 Nor the smalness of our receipts. 4 Nor the
greatness of our wants 4 How Faith Receives. 5 That Faith Receives Christ. 1 In
the Understanding. 2 In the will. 6 The temper of a man that has faith. 7 The
necessity of Faith. 8 Though Faith be small, yet it makes us the Sons of God. 9
The Nature of true Faith. 10 There are but few that Receive Christ. 11 Three
sorts that come not to Christ. 1 Such as Receive him not as he is. 2 Such as
delay their coming to him. 3 Such as give not that place to Christ in their
hearts that is fitting for him.
In the Treatise of Covetousness is showed
1 It is the Duty of al as they would obtain Eternal Life to beware of
Covetousness. 2 The Reasons of the Doctrine. 1 It is a spiritual sin. 2 It
overspreads the whole man. 3 It Is opposite to the Nature of Godliness and
Religion. 4 It Is the womb and seed of al sin. 5 It Is a base sin. 3 The
dangerousness of Covetousness 1 It is hardly avoided. 2 It is difficultly
cured. 4 You shall have al things needful for this life if you will look after
Grace. 5 Your Life lies in Grace not in Riches. 6 There is more to be feared
than to be desired in Riches. 7 We should Mortify our desires after Riches.
Mr. Hookers New Books in three Volums: One in Octavo, and two in Quarto.
These Eleven New Books of Mr. Thomas Hooker, made in New England: Are attested
in an Epistle by Mr. Thomas Goodwin, and Mr. Philip Nigh, To be written with the
Authors Own hand: None being written by himself before. One Volum being a
Comment upon Christ's last Prayer in the seventeenth of John: wherein is
opened, The Union Believers have with God and Christ, and the glorious
Privileges thereof. Besides many other Gospel Truths, there you have showed, 1
That the end why the Saints receive al glorious Grace, is, That they may be
one, as the Father and Christ are one. 2 That God the Father loves the
Faithful, as he loves Jesus Christ. 3 That our Savior desires to have the
Faithful in Heaven with himself. 4 That the happiness of our being in Heaven,
is to see Christ's Glory. 5 That there is much wanting in the knowledge of Gods
Love, in the most able Saints. 6 That the Lord Christ lends daily direction,
according to the daily need of his Servants. 7 That it is the desire and
endeavor of our Savior, that the desrest of Gods Love, which was bestowed on
himself, should be given to his faithful servants. 8 That our Union and
Communion with God in Christ, is the top of our happiness in Heaven.


Mr. Hookers first eight Books, of the Application of Redemption, by the
effectual Work of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost
Sinners to Go^. In which (besides many other seasonable, and soul-searching
Truths) there is also largely showed, 1 Christ has purchased al spiritual good
for HIS. 2 Christ puts al HIS into possession of all that Good that He has
purchased. 3 The soul must be fitted for Christ before it can receive Him: and
a powerful Ministry is the ordinary means to prepare the ^ea^ for Christ. 4 The
work of God is free: And the day of Salvation, is while this Life lasts, and
the Gospel continues. 5 God calls His Elect at any Age, but the most before old
Age. 6 The soul is naturally settled in a sinful security. 7 The heart of a
Natural man is wholly unwilling to submit to the Word that would sever him from
his sins. 8 God the Father by a holy kind of violence, plucks His out of their
corruptions, and draws them to believe in Christ.


Mr. Hookers Ninth and Tenth Books of the Application of Redemption, by the
Effictual Work of the Word, and Spirit of Christ, for the bringing home of lost
sinners to God. Besides many other seasonable, and soul-searching Truths, there
is also largely showed, 1 The heart must be humble and contrite before the Lord
will dwell in it. 2 Stubborn and Bloody Sinners, may be made broken hearted. 3
There must be true sight of sin, before th^^ art can be broken for it. 4
Application of special sins by the Ministry, is a means to bring men to sight
of, and sorrow for them. 5 Meditation of sin, a special means to break the
heart. 6 The same Word is profitable to some, not to others. 7 The Lord
sometimes makes the Word prevail most, when it is most opposed. 8 Sins
unrepented of, makes way for piercing Terrors. 9 The Truth terrible to a guilty
conscience. 10 Gross and Scandalous Sinners, God usually exercises with heavy
breakings of heart, before they be brought to Christ. 11 Sorrow for sin rightly
set on, pierces the heart of the sinner thoroughly. 12 They whose hearts are
pierced by the Word, are carried with love and respect to the Ministers of it:
and are busy to enquire, and ready to submit to the mind of God. 13 Sinners in
distress of Conscience, are ignoarnt What they should do. 14 A contrite Sinner
sees a necessity of coming out of his sinful condition. 15 There is a secret
hope wherewith the Lord supports the hearts of contrite sinners. 16 They who
are truly pierced for their sins, do prize and covet deliverance from their
sins. 17 True contrition is accompanied with confession of sin, when God calls
thereunto. 18 The soul that is pierced for sin, is carried with a restless
dislike against it.


Six Books more of Mr. Hookers in two Volums in Quarto, are printing

Twenty one several Books of Mr. William Bridge, collected into two Volumns.
Viz.
1 Scripture Light the most sure Light: compared with, 1 Revelations and
Visions. 2 Natural and Supernatural Dreams. 3 Impressions with; and without the
Word. 4 Light and Law within. 5 Divine Providence 6 Christian Experience. 7
Humane Reason. 8 Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1.19.
2 Christ in Travel: Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2 The first and after
effects of his Death. 3 His Assurance of Issue. 4 And his satisfaction therein.
Are opened and cleared in Sermons, on Isa. 53.11, 3 A lifting up of the Cast
down, in case of, 1 Great sin. 2 Weakness of Grace. 3 Miscarriage of Duties. 4
Want of Assurance. 5 Affliction. 6 Temptation. 7 Desertion. 8
Unserviceableness. 9 Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in
thirteen Sermons, on Psalm, 42.11.
His Four Sermons concerning, 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of
Infirmity, 6 The false Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The Good and Means of
Establishment. 8 The great things Faith can do. 9 The Great things Faith can
luster. 10 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened
and applied from Christ ITEMriestly Office. 11 Satan's Power to Tempt, and
Christ Love to, and Care of his people under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness
required in every Condition. 13 Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of
Faith through Natural Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance. 16 The
Spiritual Life, etc. 17 The Woman of Canaan. 18 The Saints Hiding place, etc.
19 Christ's Coming, etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances. 21 Grace and
Love beyond Gifts.

Mr. Rogers on Naaman the Syrian, his Diseass, and Cure: Discovering the
Leprosy of Sin and Self-love; with the Cure, viz. Selfdenial and Faith. Mr.
Rogers his Treatise of Marriage. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the first
Epistle of Peter By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the word of God at Dedham in
Essex An Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward
The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswich. The Discipline of the
Church in New England: By the Churches and Synod there, The Wise Virgins Lamp
Burning; Or, Gods sweet incomes of love to a gracious soul waiting for him.
Published by Mr. Thomas Weld, late of New England. Marks of Salvation. Mr.
Brightman on the Revelation. Clows Chy^urgery. Mr. Loves Case containing his
Petitions, Narative, and Speech. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, By John
Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism
Six Sermons preached by Dr. Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation Budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods Eternal preparation for his Dying Saints.
A Commemoration of King Charles his Inauguration. In a Sermon, By William Laud,
then Bishop of Canterbury. A Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible
Church. By Samuel Stone in New England. A Treatise of politic Powers, wherein
seven Questions are answered, 1. Whereof power is made, and for what ordained.
2. Whether Kings and Governors have an Absolute Power over the People. 3
Whether Kings and Governors be subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their
Country. 4 How far the People are to obey their Governors
Dr. Sibbs on the Phylippians. Vox Pacifica, or a Persuasive to Peace. Dr.
Prestons Saints submission, and Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in
Parliament time, Barriffs Military Discipline. The Immortality of man's Soul.
The Anatomist Anatomized. The Bishop of Canterbury's Speech. Woodwards Sacred
Balance. Dr. Owen against Mr. Baxter. Abraham's Offer, Gods Offering: being a
Sermon by Mr. Herle. Before the Lord Major of London. Mr. Spurstows Sermon,
being a Pattern of Repentance. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism (...) Mr.
Love's Casel, containing his Petitions, Narrative, and Speech.
The CONTENTS of Natural-Philosophical DISCOURSES:
Discourse I. Of the Principles of Natural Things.
CHAP. 1. That it is necessary for a Natural Philosopher to know the Creation
of the World. 416 Chap. 2. Whether the Principles of Natural Things are
contrary 419 Chap. 3. Of the Form. 420 Chap. 4. Of Privation. 424 Chap. 5. Of
the Consent and Dissent of things Natural. 426 Chap. 6. Of the Matter of
Natural things. 428
Discourse II. Concerning the Occult and Hidden Qualities.
Chap. 1. What Hidden Qualities are. 430 Chap. 2. Whether there are Occult
Qualities, and things that act by their whole Substance. 432 Chap. 3. Of the
Original of Occult Qualities. 436 Chap. 4. Of the Difference of Occult
Qualities. 441
Discourse III. Of Atoms and Mixture.
Chap. 1. Of Atoms. 455 Chap. 2. Of Mixtures. 455
Discourse IV. Of the Generation of Live Things.
Chap. 1. Whether Souls are made? 464 Chap. 2. Whether Souls come from God, or
from Heaven? 465 Chap. 3. Some other Opinions of the Original of Souls reckoned
up, and a vulgar Error taxed. 468 Chap. 4. Whether Souls are drawn out of the
aptitude of the matter? ibid. Chap. 5. Of the Formative Principle, and the
separated Instrument 473 Chap. 6. That the Seed has the S^^^ in it, and that
the Soul in the Seed shapes the Living Body. 476 Chap. 7. Arguments to the
contrary answered. 490 Chap. 8. Of the Generation and Propagation of Plants.
496 Chap. 9. Of the Generation and Propagation of Animals in general, and of
bruits in special. 499 Chap. 10. Of the Propagation of the Humane Soul. 509
Chap. 11. Whether Like may be said to engender its like if the Soul be not
communicated with the Seed? 514 Chap. 12. Whether God, or some Formative
Faculty does shape the Body of Man? 516 Chap. 13. Whether there are more Souls
in a Man than one? 517 Chap. 14. The Contrary Objections answered. 523
Discourse V. Concerning the Spontaneous Generation of Live Things.
Chap. 1. False Opinions concerning the Spontaneous Original of Living things.
161 Chap. 2. The true Opinion concerning the Spontaneous Original and efficient
Cause of these living Things. 169 Chap. 3. Of the Matter of Spontaneous living
Things. 178 Chap. 4. Of the End of Spontaneous live things. 182 Chap. 5. The
Sum of what has been said concerning the Spontaneous Original of Living
things. 183 Chap. 6. Of the Spontaneous-Original of Plants, and first of the
Generation of Mushroms. 184 Chap. 7. Of Plants which grow up of themselves. 189
Chap. 8. Of the Spontaneous Original of Animals. 202
THE FIRST BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of Philosophy in General.
THe words Sophia and Philosophia, are of kin one to another; the former being
of more Ancient use then the latter. For those Men who were by the French
termed Druides; by the Egyptians, Priests; by the Persian, Magi, by the
Indians, Gymnosophists, Brachmans and Samanei; being persons wholly employed in
the Inquisition of Truth, and reputed to excel all others in the knowledge of
great and excellent things: they, by the Ancient Greeks were termed Sophoi and
Sophistai, that is to say Wisemen or Sages.

And, Because this Title, seemed in it self, too much savoring of Arrogance;
The term^ Philosophy whence derived.
and many men void of all true Wisdom, did for gain or honors sake, make
profession thereof, terming themselves Sophous and Sophistas, that is to say,
Wise Men or Sages: Pythagorar, both to avoid the Arrogance of that Title (for
God alone is truly wise) and to distinguish himself from such men as were wise
only in Name, also to declare that Wisdom is no common thing, nor within the
reach of every Man; was the first that changed this Name, refusing to be called
Sophos, that is to say a Wiseman or Sage, and choosing in stead thereof the
Title of Phylosophos, a Philosopher, or Lover of Wisdom; as we find it
recorded by Cicero in the first Book of his Tusculans Questions, and by
Plutarch in his Third Book of the Opinions of Philosophers, Chap. 3.

The Novelty of this modest Title was so pleasing to learned Men of all Sects,
that they chose all by common consent to be called Philosophers, Lovers of
Wisdom, rather then Sophoi or Sophistai, Wisemen or Sages. So that, if we
consider the Original of the word, Sapientia and Phylosophia, Wisdom and
Philosophy, are of one and the same import.

Howbeit, The Word Sapientia, is commonly taken in a more strickt sense, so as
to signify the Metaphysics, as being reputed the most sublime and excellent
of all Theoretick Sciences and consequently termed Prote Sophia, the principal
part of Wisdom, and Prote Phylosophia, the most excellent Philosophy. Whereas
on the contrary side, the same word Sapientia or Wisdom is used in a larger
sense by Aristotle in the sixth Book of his Ethics written to Nichomachus,
Chapter, 7. where it is attributed unto Artificer and Phydias a carver in stone
and Polycletus a maker of Statues, are termed Sapientes or wise Men.

But as the word Philosophy is sufficiently known to all men; Plato (...)
Definition of Philosophy.
so are there very few that understand the true definition of the thing it
self. For those main Definitions thereof, which go up and down among learned
Men, are rather deicriptions and Encomiums, then right Definitions. Plato
describing the same in his Dialogue termed Phaedo, calls it The contemplation
of Death. For, there being a twofold kind of Death, the one natural, which is a
Separation of the Soul and Body; and the other such a Death as whereby the Soul
continuing in the Body, is weaned from Earthly things, abandons vicious
desires, and gives it self wholly up to the Contemplation of the most Excellent
Objects: and seeing Philosophy reaches, this same Abstraction and Separation
of the Soul from the Body, which is as it were the Prison thereof, and the
Garment of Ignorance, whereby it is clouded; therefore Plato (though
Metaphorically and therefore not so fitly) defines it to be, The Meditation of
Death. In the same sense, it is said to be The Separation of the soul from the
Body, An Affectation of Death, and a Customary course of Dying daily. And the
same Plato in his Dialogue termed Theaetetus says that Philosophy, is to study
as much as may be to be like God. For the Operations of God being of two kinds,
Viz. The knowledge of all things, and that Action whereby he Rules and Disposes
all: Philosophy makes a man capable of both these, as far as human Nature is
capable. For she both reaches us to contemplate all things, and to guide our
Actions by the Rules of Honor and Honesty.

That also is a common Definition of Philosophy which was used by the Stoics
and by Tully in the Second Book of his offices, Cicero his Definition.
Viz. That Philosophy is the knowledge of all things divine and human. By human
things understanding all things corporeal and subject to our senses; and by
things divine, meaning all such things as being incorporeal are not subject to
our senses, but perceptible only by the understanding. Or by the term human,
such things may be understood, as tend to the Preservation and Progagation of
this mortal life and civil society of mankind; and by the term divine such
sublime matters as transcend vulgar Capacities.

There are also certain definitions of Philosophy extant in the writings of
Aristotle, Aristotle's Definition.
as where in the first Book of his Metaphysics, Chap. 1. he says, it is the
Science of Truth; and in another place (though this seems to be intended by
him, as a definition of Metaphysics only) he says that, Philosophy is the
knowledge of all things that are, not particularly, but generally considered.

Nevertheless, Philosophy cannot be exactly defined.
as we said before, these are not right definitions, but either Encomiums and
Laudatory Elogies, or Tolerable descriptions, not containing the true kind not
the difference of the thing defined. Yea and the very truth is Philosophy
cannot be exactly defined because it is not Genus Vnivocum, and has a nature
distinct from its parts. Neither is it Homonymal (for the parts thereof agree
more then barely in name) but such an one as they term Ab uno ad unum. For we
must not think that Philosophy is some one science conversant about some
peculiar sort of being: but that it is the total kind, comprehending all the
Sciences in the world. For all things cannot be known by one habit of the mind,
but by diverse: which when they are all conjoined, they make that perfection of
knowledge, which is called Philosophy. And therefore all the definitions of
Philosophy which are usually brought, do swerve from the perfect Law of a
Definition.

Howbeit from what has been already said, Its Definition.
we may collect this following description: Philosophy is an Habit of the
Understanding, consisting in Wisdom and Prudence, as that which contemplates
all things, and so guides the actions of a Man, as that be may attain the
Summum bonum, or chief Felicity of which he is in this Life capable. For seeing
a Man is perfected by Philosophy, and thereby qualified, it must needs be a
certain quality or accidental form, by which a man is made fit to perform all
the actions and Duties belonging to the human Nature. And it is such a kind of
quality as is not born with us (for no man is borne a Philosopher) but
attained, being no other then an habitual ability, not of the body (for it is
not the body of a man but his mind which wants perfection) but of the
understanding. And therefore Philosophy is defined to be a twofold Habit of the
understanding, viz. Wisdom and Prudence, under which terms Intellection and
science are comprehended.

We are now to consider how Philosophy ought to be divided into its parts; The
Division of Philosophy according to the Stoics.
which is a thing wherein Authors are not agreed. The Stoics have divided
Philosophy, into natural, moral and rational; under natural Philosophy, taking
the phrase in a large sense, they comprehend not only Physica or the Doctrine
of Nature, properly so called, but also Metaphysics and Mathematics: by moral
Philosophy they understand that Doctrine which regulates the manners and
actions of men; and by rational Philosophy or Logic that which teaches us how
to reason, argue, and find out the truth. And the truth of this division, they
thus endeavor to prove. Seeing the happiness of a man, which Philosophy aims
at, does consist partly in the actions of virtue, and partly in the
contemplation of truth, hence two parts of Philosophy arise; the one of which
instructs our Manners and actions according to the Rules of virtue, and is
termed Moral Philosophy; the other is busied in the inquisition of truth and
hunting our the secret mysteries of Nature, and is termed Physica, or natural
Philosophy. And because in the search of Truth, we are very apt to mistake, a
third part is necessary, to teach us the way and method of reasoning; which
from Logos, reason, is called L^gica, Logic, or the Art of Reasoning.

But this Division of Philosophy, The same refuted.
is by very many and those very learned interpreters of the peripatetick
Philosophy, rejected, both because the word Physica is therein improperly used,
and because it makes Logic a part of Philosophy. For the intent of
Philosophers was, to include in this division such disciplines, as treat about
some real kind of being, Whether L^gick is a part of Philosophy
the knowledge whereof denominates a man to be wise or a Philosopher, and Logic
is no such Discipline. For the Reasons of things are not the subject thereof,
because compared to that which truly is, they have some sort of being; for in
this respect they belong to Meraphysicks; nor because, or in as much as they
are framed by the mind of man, for so they belong to natural Philosophy; but
only as instruments, profitable to denote our first conceptions, and such
things as truly are. And therefore Logic is not a part of Philosophy, but the
instrument of a Philosopher, to guide his understanding, being invented not for
its own sake, but for the better understanding of all other sciences. Which
Aristotle confirms in the first Book of his Topics Chap. 9. Where he calls it
the Handmaid of Philosophy, yet my intent is not contentiously to wrangle with
any man that shall be of the opinion of Pererius in the second Book of his
Natural Philosophy, Chap. 18. viz. That when it is disputed whether Logic be a
Science or a part of Philosophy, the Controversy is rather touching words and
the manner of Expression, then the thing it self; some taking the words
Philosophy and Science, in a larger, others in a more press and proper
signification.

Toletus divided Philosophy into three parts. Speculative, Active and Factive:
The division of Tolet.
taking the ground of his division from that Ignorance which Philosophy cures
in us, which is threefold, either of the Truth, and that part which heales
this, teaching us to find out the truth, is called Speculative or contemplative
Philosophy; or it is Ignorance how to act and play our parts upon the stage of
this world, and that which cures this, teaching us to conform our Actions to
the Rule of right Reason, is called Active Philosophy; or finally it is the
Ignorance of things necessary to maintain and preserve our Lives, and that is
healed by the Factive part of Philosophy, under which is comprehended all
curious mechanical Artifices. But, The said division refuted.
though this division be true in respect of the principal disciplins: yet is it
no good division of Philosophy. For, the Factive Disciplines are not to be
reckoned as a part of Philosophy; For, they do neither contemplate things
divine; nor do they regulate these actions which are proper to a Man; not is
honesty the thing they aim at, but Profit, nor does the chief good and
Felicity of a man consist in them. And who is there that dares reckon Smiths,
Carpenters, Joyners, Weavers and such like Artificers, amongst Philosophers?
For they are only the Servants of civil Policy. And therefore Lucian justly
derides those, which reckon Arts mechanical as a part of Philosophy, when
speaking of one that was about to dig up a Field, he says, that with his Spade
he would play the Philosopher.

It is therefore to be observed, The name of discipline larger then of Philosophy
that the name of discipline is of larger Extent then that of Philosophy, and
that all Disciplines are not comprehended under the Notion of Philosophy. Yet
has Philosophy obtained this peculiar dignity, that all disciplines are either
a part thereof, or fruits growing and resulting there from; or an instrument
provided and fitted for its Service.

I, for my part, take that to be the truest division of Philosophy, Aristotle
his division.
which is delivered by Aristotle in the Second Book of his Metaphysics, Chap.
1. and retained by all sorts of interpreters, viz. into Speculative and
Practical. The Speculative part, is that which contemplates all beings or
things, with their Principles and Affections or Qualifications, only for
knowledge and truths sake: But the practical part of Philosophy is that whose
subject is the Actions of Men, which it regulates according to the Rule of
right reason and Honesty; and does therefore teach us not only to know but to
do also. The same confirmed first from the subject
For seeing the mind which Philosophy is to inform and frame, has two parts,
the Intellective or understanding part, and the Appetitive or desiring part,
they make a double end, and it makes two parts of Philosophy; the Speculative,
which perfects the knowing or Jntellective part of the Soul or mind, and the
practical, which moderates the Appetitive part of the mind, and regulates our
affections. So that the Duties of a wise man are two, to contemplate all things
that are, and to perform such actions as are best, and most suitable to the
Life of a man. Or more briefly, to contemplate things divine and regulate human
affairs. For, after that (to use the words of Marsilius Ficinus in the fourth
Book of his Epistles) the Mind of a Philosopher, has contemplated what is the
first good or goodness it self, judging in human affairs, what things are good
and what bad what filthy and unseemly, and what honest and comely; what
profitable, and what unprofitable: according to the pattern thereof he disposes
the affairs of men; draws them from that which is evil, and by this prudence of
governing, he rules his own private Family, and the commonwealth, and teaches
the laws and ways of the Administration thereof. Nor was this division
unknown to the Platonicks, For these are the two wings wherewith the mind of
man flies up to Heaven, from whence being weighed down with Earthly
Cogitations, it had before fallen: concerning which see Plato in his Dialogues
called Phaedo and Phaedrus, and Marsilius Ficinus in the first Book of his
Epistles Page, 612.

The Verity of the said division is further demonstrated, Secondly the from
Object.
from the end and Object. But most immediately from its end: howbeit distinct
Objects do produce distinct ends. For seeing every discipline is conversant
about some one thing or other: and there are two kinds of things, as is
apparent in Aristotle his sixth Book of Ethics to Nicomachus, Two kinds
Chap. 3. Some things being necessary, others contingent, and of those which
are necessary, some are simply eternal, ungenerated and uncorrupted; others
necessarily made, Of things.
which though they are not always but are made; yet are they not produced by
us; but by nature, working by certain causes: Now the contingent are such
things as may or may not be, and whose principle is in the doer and not in the
thing done, which depend upon our will, in the power whereof it is, to effect
them or not. Hence we gather, there are two parts of Philosophy, one which is
busied about the things necessary, and the other about things contingent. And
this distinction of things, Thirdly from the end.
does also produce diverse Ends. For either we handle a matter, only that we may
know it, or that besides the knowledge we may effect the same: a third cannot be
assigned. For the things which always are or which are made, but by Nature and
not by our selves, we therefore handle, that we may know their nature. For what
was ever so made, as to endeavor to effect such things as are only possible for
Nature, but impossible for all the Men in the world to effect? But those things
which are not always, and may be effected by us, we do not handle only to know
them, but that their Nature being discovered we may learn to effect them. And
therefore those former disciplines, which are conversant about things, not for
any operation, but for knowledge sake alone, are rightly termed speculative
sciences, or sciences absolutely and properly so called. But the other
disciplines, which are verst in contingent things, or such things as are
subject to our will, are called disciplines or sciences (the word science
improperly taken) practical and operative.



what Pracis is.
For every energy or Operation of a Man is not termed Praxis in this Case, but
such as is subject to the command of the will, and seeing many Errors may
happen there abouts, it needs a certain habit, which being inherent in the
practical understanding, should be its rule as it were in acting. Now those
Actions which are subject to the will are threefold. One proceeds from the will
it self, as Election or choice; Threesorts of actions subject to the will.
a second proceeds indeed from another power, yet is under the command of the
will as the Operations of the wrathful and lustful faculties of the Soul: and
and touching this we chiefly speak in this place. The third of it self, is not
subject to the will, but in some respect, as the operations of the speculative
understanding, are so far subject to the will, as they are performed at this
time, and so long or so long, or according to other Circumstances. These
therefore, as the former, seeing they are not simply subject to our will, do
also not pertain to this place. We may therefore well grant, that
contemplation is an action, that is an act according to the inward energy or
operation of the Mind: but no external act, such as that is, in respect
whereto, one part of Philosophy is said to speculate, another to act. For this
internal action is no way different from the knowledge of the truth, as in
practical Disciplines whose action differs from the knowledge of Truth, and
whose end does not rest in the truth known, but besides that, proceeds to work
somewhat.

And seeing as has been said before that Philosophy has more then one single
signification; it is to be marked, that this name is attributed principally and
primarily to the Speculative part, and consequently and in the second place to
the Practical. For they are commonly termed Philosophers, who apply themselves
to the Sciences; and who profess themselves skilful to govern the life of man.

And this is the general division of Philosophy: The subdivision of speculative
Philosophy
afterward each part is subdivided. Aristotle in the sixth Book of his
Metaphysics Chap. 1. Divides the speculative part of Philosophy into Physica,
Mathematica, and Metaphysica. Which division truly, was both received by the
Ancients, and is this day in use, and has its reasons to support it. The same
demonstrated.
For since the diversity of Objects breeds a Distinction of sciences, it is
manifest that there are no more nor fewer sciences, then the three aforesaid.
For a being is considered two ways, Universally and Particularly. That Science
which considers the whole and Universal state of Beings as beings, is
Metaphysica. The other Sciences consider a being in Particular, and some sort
of being. And these are two, as there is a twofold sort of beings. The one is
in matter and cannot be known without matter, and this Physica considers: The
other is indeed in matter, but it may be separated therefrom by our thought,
and may be known distinct from the matter, which is handled by Mathematica. And
therefore Metaphysica considers a being, only as it is a being: Physica,
considers it as it is moveable or natural: Mathematica as it is abstracted from
Matter. But, as Pererius in the first Book of his Physica, Chap. 7. Rightly
says it would not be absurd, if a Man should add a fourth Science, which
should treat of spirits and substances separated from matter, which some at
this day term Pneumatica. Yea it were no Absurdity to add a fifth, Pneumatica.
which should treat of such things as might be naturally known concerning God.

Again there are several sorts of Mathematical disciplines. Mathematical
disciplines divided into pure and mixed.
For their subject is Quantity; which being double continual and discrete,
there will also be two Sciences purely Mathematical, Arithmetic and Geometry.
Music is subordinate to Arithmetic, from whence it borrows its principles,
and considers Number as it is joined with sound. This according to Aristotle in
his first Posteriora is two fold, Mathematical and aconstick; but the former is
truly and properly a Science, the Latter is rather to be termed an Art.
Stereometria which considers the Doctrine of solid bodies is a part of
Geometry. Nor is it subordinat to Geometry, because it does not consider
Quantity with any Contraction, and addition of matter and sensible quality; nor
is it of a middle Nature between Physica and Geometria: but purely
Mathematical; seeing it quite separates its subject from sensible matter. To
Geometry, Perspective is subalternate or subordinate, which considers a line as
it is visible: Now Geometry and Stereometry do bring forth Sundry disciplines,
which are in some sort of a middle Nature betwixt Mathematical and Physical:
yet are they called Mathematical, because they use Mathematical principles, and
considers all their subjects in relation to quantity. Such are: The Doctrine of
the Raine-bowe, Astronomy, Cosmography, Geography, Chorography, Topography.
Thence also afterward sundry Mechanical Arts do arise.

The other part of Philosophy was the Practical. The subdivision of Practical
Philosophy
But Praxis taken in a large sense, comprehends under it Poiesis and Praxis,
properly so called. Now Praxis or Action differs from Poiesis or working,
according to Aristotle in the sixth of his Ethics to Nicomachus Chap. 4. and
the first Book of his Magna Moralia Chap. 35. In that Action does leave no Work
behind it: but Working or Poiesis is such an Operation as leaves a work behind
it. From this twofold signification of the word Practice, two kinds of
disciplines arise, Active disciplines, and Factive disciplines. The factive are
the Arts, as was said before, and do not belong to Philosophy. But the active
part of Philosophy is divided into Ethica, Politica and Oeconomica.

As to the Utility of Philosophy, The Utility and necessity of Philosophy.
though that be chiefly to be regarded in the Practical part: yet has the
speculative also its profit, of which we read much every where in Authors. Two
Testimonies shall suffice in this place. The first is that of Hermes
Trismegistus in his Book Entitled, Of Piety and Philosophy. He that is pious
and Godly is an exact Philosopher. For without Philosophy it is impossible to
be perfectly religious. But he which knows the things that are, and how they
are ordered, and by whom, and for whom: he will give thanks to the chief
workmaster, as to a good Father, a loving Nurse and a faithful Steward: And he
that gives thanks is Godly; and he that is Godly and Pious, shall know, both
where the truth is, and what it is, and the more he learnes, the more godly
will be grow. The Second is that of Scaliger, in his 307. Exercitation Sect. 3.
The Searching into these subtilties, although it be not profitable to make
Windmils or watermils to grind Corn; Yet it scoureth off the rust of Ignorance
from our Minds and whets and prepares it to the knowledge of other things; in a
word fills it with so much splendour, that it can light it self to gain the
similitude of the first workmaster: who as he is fully and perfectly all
things, and besides and above all things: so he will have those to be his, that
are studious of the Sciences; and has made their understanding, Lord of all
things.

Finally, The pleasure of Philosophy
How great the pleasure is which arises from the knowledge of Philosophy and
chiefly the Speculative part thereof, Aristotle teaches in his first Book de
Partib. Animal. Chap. 5. I shall here set down what Caebius Rhodiginus, in the
seventh Book and Chap. 30. of his Antiquae Lectiones, Cites out of Maximus
Tyrius. You know, says he, what it is that I think the Speculation of a
Philosopher doer most resemble? Viz. A manifest, clear and flying dream. For
his Body remaining safe and sound, his mind runs all the world over; it is
carried from Earth to Heaven; it passes over the whole Ocean Sea; it flies
through the whole Air; with the Sun it compasses the Earth, with the Moon it
walks the round; it joins it self to the dance of the other stars, and comes
little short of bearing a share with Jove himself, in the Mannagement of all
things: O Happy Pilgrimage! O Beautyful shows! O most true and real Dreams!

Chap. 2. Of the Nature of Physica, or Natural Philosophy.
Seeing we are to treat of Natural things, it is altogether requisite, that we
declare in the first place what Discipline that is which treates of Natural
things, which we cannot do more conveniently then by enquiring into the kind
and subject (from whence the difference in definition of Sciences is taken) of
Physica, or Natural Philosophy.

As to its kind, The Genus or kind of Natural Philosophy
though some do ill in confounding Art and Science; yet all true Philosophers
and Peripatericks are agreed, that Physica or Philosophy natural, is a Science:
since the definition of a science does properly agree thereto. For it
demonstrates in a necessary subject the proper affections by the proper Causes:
as very many demonstrations touching things natural, do witness. And so also it
is called by Aristotle, in the Third of his Physics, Chap. 4. Text, 24. and
the Second of his Metaphysics, Chap. 3. Text the Third, and the same is by him
plainly proved, in the Fourth of his Metaphysics, Chap. 5. Text the 23. And
although it be reported that of old, Whether it be the knowledge of Natural
things.
Heraditus; Cratilus, and Pythagoras, held there was no knowledge of natural
things, but only opinion; and Socrates being discouraged by the Mutability of
natural things, and because he thought he had no certain knowledge of them,
leaving the same, gave himself wholly to moral Philosophy; Also Democritus
complained of the deep pit of truth which had no bottom, and Empedocles of the
narrow passages of the senses: yet it seems most probable that these
Philosophers did not deny all knowledge, but rather modestly dissembled their
own knowledge, then confessed their Ignorance; seeing what we know in comparison
to what we know not, is little more then nothing; and taxed their Arrogance who
did vainly boast of their own Wisdom. And as for the new Sect of Academicks
who did not only deny that there was any knowledge of things natural, but that
there was any knowledge of any thing, they are else where refuted. Nor let that
trouble us, because in natural Philosophy many times probable Reasons are
invented. For these take not away from the necessity of the Sciences truth, but
do often prepare and fence the way to following demonstrations, or are used to
declare the principles.

We must therefore hold that Physica or Natural Philosophy is a science and
that properly so called, viz. A speculative science, as appears out of the
sixth of Aristotle's Metaphysics Chap. 4. And out of the first of Metaphysics
Chap. 6. Although it be in a manner superfluous to ad the term speculative,
seeing if we take the word Science properly, all Sciences are speculative: now
words are not to be improperly used in Definitions.

Now as concerning the necessary truth of Physica or Natural Philosophy,
Natural Philosophy has two sorts of propositions.
we must observe, that there are in this Science two sorts of Propositions;
some are always and simply necessary, as the fire burns: the knowledge whereof
is most properly called Science: others are necessary for the most part,
concerning such things, as are in their subject, only in a certain state, or
for the most part, and when all impediments are removed; as a Man is born in
the ninth Month, with two hands, two Eyes, two Kidneys. For these dispositions
are of a middle Nature betwixt contingent and necessary, and therefore some do
call them necessary, by a Physical or natural Necessity.

Now before we speak of the subject of Physic or Natural Philosophy, The
subject thereof.
some things are to be premised concerning the word subject. For this word has
sundry significations. 1. A subject is that wherein there are accidents. 2. The
term subject how many ways used?
A subject is that part of a proposition of which somewhat is affirmed. 3. The
matter is termed a subject in respect of its form. 4. A thing is said to be a
subject in respect of some Action and Operation; and it is that about which the
Artist or workman is employed and whereupon he exercises his Labor. 5. That is
termed a subject, which is handled in any Science. Now it is so called, because
it is subjected to such accidents and affections as are demonstrated therein,
as also because our knowledge is conversant thereabout. And in this last
acceptance, we do here take the word subject: How understood in the place?
in which sense nevertheless, it is taken diverse ways. For first in a more
large signification, all that is termed subject, whereof we treat in any
Science, whether it be a principle, an affection and accident, or any other
thing. But properly that thing or matter which is therein considered is called
the subject of a Science, The properties of the subject of a science
which subject has these Properties. First, That we know that it is in Nature
always and necessarily, and what the name thereof signifies. And therefore the
subject is never demonstrated in its proper Science. For seeing it is the Basis
and Foundation of all things delivered in the Science, if that shall be called
into Question, denied, and taken away, all things that are said thereof, are
denied and taken away. The Second condition is, that it have proper affections
or dispositions, and proper principles, of all which it is the Basis and
Foundation. And therefore a subject, in that Science wherein it is a subject,
is not considered as inherent in any other thing; and every thing that is
considered in any Science, as being inherent in some other thing, is not the
subject of that Science. The third is, that it be adaequate or commensurate to
the whole Science, and not wider or narrower then it, and that all things which
are delivered in the Science, do pertain to the Explication thereof. Two parts
thereof.
Of a subject thus considered there are two parts: one is as it were the
matter, and is termed the thing considered; the other is in stead of the form,
and is termed the manner of considering. The thing considered, may be common to
many disciplines: but the manner of considering, which contracts the thing to a
certain and peculiar way of consideration, is proper to every Science, and
thereupon properly depends the distinction of Sciences.

Touching this Adaequate subject of Natural Philosophy, The diverse opinions of
Philosophers about the subject of Natural Philosophy
there is some difference amongst authors, most of the Greek Interpreters of
Aristotle, do make the subject of this Science to be Corpus Natural, a Natural
Body; Thomas Aquinas says it is Ens Mobile, a Moveable being; Albertus and
Aegidius say it is Corpus Mobile, a moveable Body; Scotus will have it to be, a
Natural substance; Tolet makes it, a Natural Being; others say it is Nature, by
nature understanding God and Angels and al Bodies, others again will have it to
be nature, meaning thereby al things pertaining to natural Bodies such as are
not only the compound bodies themselves, but also their principles and
affections or dispositions: others say it is Ens Mobile, a moveable being, not
only, as Thomas Aquinas, understanding thereby, a moveable Body, but also the
matter and form: others will have it to be Corpus Natural Mistum, a mixed
natural Body: others, a Body subject to generation and corruption.

It is not worth the while to produce in this place, The true opinion.
all the Arguments that are brought to justify these several opinions. I
approve only of the first opinion, which says the subject of this Science, is
a natural Body. To this opinion (as shall be said hereafter) I conceive the
four following may be reduced; and most learned men conceive that the strife is
more about words then the thing it self, and that herein lies the controversy,
how the subject of this Science, the thing it self being agreed upon, should be
called: whether a Natural Body, a moveable being, a Natural substance, a
Natural being: and therefore these other opinions are to be reduced to the
first, or are simply to be rejected, as the latter five.

The adaequate subject therefore of Natural Philosophy is a natural Body, The
adaequate subject of Physic

Natural, how many ways understood?


in as much as it has in it Nature, that is to say a principle of motion and
rest. For Natural is taken three ways. First, For that which is essential to
any thing, and belongs to the very essence or being thereof: Secondly, For
every thing which concerns the knowledge of Nature; in which sense, both the
first matter and form and accidents of a Natural Body, are termed Natural:
Thirdly, And properly it is taken for that which has Nature in it, that is to
say, a certain internal principle of motion and rest; and so neither motion,
nor matter is termed Natural, but only Bodies compounded of matter and form.
And seeing the Adaequate subject of a Science, as was said before, consists in
the thing considered, and the manner of considering the same: the thing
considered in this Science, is a body, and the manner of considering is, in as
much as it has Nature in it, that is to say. A principle of motion and Rest.
For although every Body has in it a principle of motion, and that which has in
it a principle of motion is a body; yet in as much as a body may be considered,
not only as it has in it a principle of motion, but in diverse other respects:
by this consideration, Natural Philosophy is distinguished from other
disciplines, which do also treat of a Body.

And that what has been said touching the subject of this Science, Confirmation
of the Opinion propointded.
is true, may hence appear: in that all the porprieties of the subject of a
Science do agree hereunto. For it is fore known what it is, and what the name
thereof signifies, it has its proper principles matter and form; its proper
affections as motion, place, time etc. nor is it in this Science, inhaerent in
any other thing, and it is Adaequate or commensurate to the whole Science. For
all things delivered in Natural Philosophy, are either the principles of a
natural Body, or its affections, or its kinds and sorts. The same also is
apparent from Aristotle. For as to the thing considered in this Science, that
it is truly said to be a Body, appears from the Beginning of his Second Book of
Physics, and his 3. de Caelo Chap. 1. and his first de Caelo: Where he tells us
that the Science of Nature is conversant about Bodies, and that it considers
their principles and affections.

And that the manner of considering is, in as much as the same Body has nature
in it, is apparent from the beginning of his Second Book of Physics. For seeing
all things are distinguished from other, by their form; and things natural
differ from artificial and non-natural things, because they have the principle
of their motion in themselves, but the other only by accident: doubtless, to
have in it self a principle of motion, is in stead of the form, and the formal
reason of the subject, whereby a Body, the thing considered in Natural
Philosophy, is differenced from all other things. The same is confirmed by
Aristotle, in the Second Book of his Physics, Chap. 7. Text 70. or 71. Where
he says: What ever things move being themselves moved, do belong to the
consideration of Natural Philosophy etc. For he teaches, that those things only
are considered by a Natural Philosopher, as his subject, which have in
themselves a principle of motion. Howbeit, other things may also be considered
in natural Philosophy, which have not in them a principle of motion, but it is
as they are principles or Accidents to bodies Natural, but not as the proper
subject of the Science of Nature. Which is manifest from the 73. of the same
Book, where he says, that there are some principles Physically moving, but not
Physical; that is to say not considered as the subject of Physica or natural
Philosophy, because they have not in themseles a principle of motion, The
Differing opinions Recon^iled.
And this is the true Opinion concerning the subject of this Science, to which,
as was said, the following four Opinions must be reduced, or rejected. For
seeing these Opinions contain two manner of considering the subject, the one,
as it is moveable; the other, as it is Natural: both of them do signify,
indeed, nothing else, but Nature having in it a principle of motion. For since
moveable, may be taken two ways, Movable understood two ways.
as for that which has an aptitude to motion, which is a certain affection of
a natural thing; or for that which has Nature in it, that is matter and form,
or the Principle from whence such aptitude arises: moveable cannot be taken
here in the former sense, but only in the latter. Because the passion of a
subject cannot be its Ratio Formalis, or formal Constitutive consideration; and
with its subject it makes a thing which is accidentally one, and is later then
its subject, of which it may also be demonstrated. Hence therefore would follow
this Absurdity, that the subject, viz. A thing moveable, should in its proper
Science, be demonstrated by its proper Cause, viz. Nature. And therefore,
Moveable cannot be taken for a passion, but for the reason and essential degree
of a Body, from which of it self motion arises. In sense it denotes nothing
else, but natural, or that which has Nature in it. Howbeit, if we shall
accurately weigh the matter, the manner of considering is better and righter
described by the term Natural, or that which has Nature, then by the word
Moveable. For seeing Natural includes both motion and rest, and Moveable only
motion; the former is commensurate, the latter not. And therefore either we
must take Moveable for Natural, and that which has Nature, or we must reject
it as less Proper and not commensurate. Since from all which has been said it
appears, that Natural, or in as much as it has Nature in it, is the true
manner of considering the subject of this Science, therefore by all means we
must make the thing considered to be equal thereunto. But if we shall consider
all things which are placed in the Predicament of substance, we shall find
nothing but Body equal thereunto. For what ever has in it a principle of
motion is a Body, And therefore it must needs be, that both Ends or Being, and
substance, are taken for a Body, But a Body in as much as it has Nature in it,
is more properly said to be the subject of natural Philosophy, because to have
Nature is accidental to Substance, and to Being, unless they be taken in a
pricked sense for a Body. Nor is there such a proportion betwixt Substance,
Being, and Natural, as ought of necessity to be, betwixt the thing considered
and the manner of consideration. For A Being is not said to be Moveable, as it
is a Being; for so every Being should be Moveable.

And if there be any that will not allow their opinion to be thus corrected,
and will endeavor to obtrude upon us, somewhat more common, or more narrow, for
the subject of natural Philosophy, they are justly to be reproved. For those
that will have God himself, the Intelligences, and Angels, to be handled in
Natural Philosophy, as the subject thereof: truly they do absurdly and
unskilfully confound things abstract and simple with bodily things and such as
are overwhelmed in matter. For seeing these things are exceedingly different,
how can any man assign to them one manner of consideration, which is the thing
which makes a Science to be one?

Nor do those men think a right, who make Nature the subject of natural
Philosophy; understanding, thereby, both the principles, and affections, and
Compounds. For they do not rightly use, neither the word Subject nor the word
Nature. For a subject properly so called, whereof we discourse in this place,
is not taken fo every thing that is handled in a Science, but for that whose
conditions are such, as have been set down before, and which is distinguished
from the Principles and Affections. Again, they do ill in confounding Nature
and a thing Natural; which they might easily learn, out of, Aristotle's second
Book of Physics Chap. 1. where the Philosopher shows us, how Nature, Natural
and according to Nature, differ one from another.

Also we approve not their opinion, who conceive that Ens Mobile a Moveable
Being is to be counted the subject of this Science; and by Mobile they
understand also the matter and the form. For nothing is called moveable, but
that which is the subject of motion: and nothing has in it a principle of
motion but a Body. For matter is not moved of it self, but by accident, viz. In
as much as, it is a part of that Body which is moved. But if so be whatever
has any relation to motion, should be called movable al things explained in
this Science, will be several sorts of its subject, and therefore there will be
no Principles, no Affections or adjuncts, different therefrom.

And as we have rejected their opinion, who make somewhat more common then a
Natural Body, to be the subject of this Science; so can we not agree to them,
who will have the subject thereof, to be somewhat more narrow. For some make the
thing considered to be, a Natural Body transitory, or subject to mutation:
others, a Natural Body mixed. Yet they agree in the manner of consideration,
which both make to be in as much as it is Movable. But they both are in an
Error. As to the thing Considered; because the former reject the Heavens; the
latter both the Heaven and Elements, from being sorts of the subject, and will
allow them to be only Principles thereof. For things must be so handled and
considered, as they are constituted by Nature, Seeing therefore the Heaven and
Elements are so produced by Nature, as not only that they should be the
Principles of other things, but also, that as peculiar sorts of Bodies, they
might complete the Universe: they are to be known and handled both ways. As we
see Aristotle has also done; who explained them after the former manner in his
Book of Generation and corruption; after the latter in his Books touching the
Heavens: in which Books, whatever is said of the Heaven and Elements, is said
without any respect to mixed Bodies. As to the manner of considering, they are
both out, in that they make it more large then the thing considered. For not
only, things mixed and subject to mutation, but the Elements also are Movable,
or have in themselves a Principle of motion.

From all the Premises, The definition of Natural Philosophy.
let us at last infer; that, Physica or Natural Philosophy, is the Science of
Natural Bodies, or of such as have Nature in them. Whereof being now to treat,
I shall chiefly follow that same Eagle-Ey'd Philosopher Aristotle. For he did
so excel in this part of Philosophy, that though some do make him inferior to
Plato in matters divine, (which Scaliger nevertheless denies again and again in
the 365. of this Bxercitations, Sect. 3. Yet in this Science he will easily
bear away the Bell. I will say nothing of the Platonists, I shall only relate
what is reported of Plato. For he coming upon a time into his School, and
Aristotle being not there, he cried out, The Philosopher of Truth is absent.
And another time when he was absent, he said, The Mind is not come. And amongst
the Peripateticks innumerable company of most Famous Men and every way most
learned, Greeks, Arabians, and Latins have handed this Philosophy to
Posterity, and spent all their lives in explaining the same, and acknowledged
it alone for the true Philosophy, and have judged it worthy of so much honor,
as never any other Philosophers Physics were thought worthy of, In the mean
time, I would not detract from the diligence and Industry of others, nor would
I call any man from making a more diligent search into the secrets of Nature.
Those who have gone before us (says Seneca) have done much, but they have not
done all. There is much work yet remains, and much there will remain, and he
that shall be born a thousand Ages hence will not want occasion to add somewhat
or other. But that Man will do it more easily, who, has known these things
aforehand: and it is easy to add to things invented.

And that I may propound a Summarie of al Natural Philosophy, Natural
Philosophy divided into a common and proper part.
as in a table before your Eyes; you must know, that Aristotle's Interpreters
have fitly divided all this Science into two parts; the former they call
common, the latter Proper. In the first we are to treat of the kind it self,
viz. A Body Natural commonly taken. And of all things appertaining to a Natural
Body so generally considered; which Aristotle handles in his 8. Books of
Natural Philosophy called Peri Physices Acroasews. In the other, we are to treat
of all the sorts of Natural Bodies; which Aristotle does in all his other Books
of Natural Philosophy. A Natural body how many ways understood?
Nor is this division without Reason. For, A Natural Body is taken three manner
of ways. 1. Only for the common kind, in it self considered, without any
consideration of the sorts. 2. For a Collection only of the sorts. 3. For both
together. viz. Both for the common kind, and the Collection of all the species
or sorts Nor are Natural Bodies only to be considered, according to the Proper
affections, but also according to the common. Nor must the common affections,
of the kind be attributed to the sorts, nor must such things as are proper to
the sorts, be demonstrated of the kind. A Body Natural therefore taken in the
first sense, is the subject of the common part; taken in the second sense, of
the proper; and in the third, of the whole Science.

We must therefore in Natural Philosophy, treat in the first place of a Body
Natural in general, and consider its principles and common affections, which
agree to al Natural Bodies, considered as such. And seeing a Natural Body is
twofold, Simple and compound: we must first discourse of a simple natural Body,
and its sorts, the Heaven and Elements, or of the world as it is a mass of al
simples. After the explication of simple bodies, must follow the Doctrine of a
mixed body; and first in general, where its principles, viz. The four Elements
and its general affections or adjuncts are to be explained. Here therefore we
must treat of the Elements, and of their qualities, of Action, Mixture,
Generation and corruption. Mixed bodies, seeing they are twofold, perfectly and
imperfectly mixed: in the first place we consider things imperfectly mixed; and
then such as are perfectly mixed. And seeing things perfectly mixed are either
similar or dissimilar: first we must treat of a body Homogeneal, perfectly
mixed; which is handled by Aristotle in the fourth of his Mereors. Afterward
the several sorts hereof are to be explained, as things dug out of the Ground,
Metals, and all the similary parts which constitute Animals and plants. Here
therefore we must treat of things dug our of the Earth and of Metals. For
other similar mixed things, because they exist not by themselves in nature, but
are therefore only, that they may constitute Animals and Plants, we must not
treat of them in any other place, save where we discourse of Plants and Living
Creatures. And thus far may that part of Natural philosophy be extended, which
treats of those things which are common to things living, and things liveless.
And the last place we must treat of such things as concern only things living:
and so the whole doctrine of natural Philosophy, shall end in the Explication of
plants and Animals.

Chap. 3. Of the Principles of Natural things.
ALthough these two words Principle and Cause, are oftentimes confounded,
Whether a Principle and Cause do differ and how?
yet they are found somewhat to differ amongst Philosophers. For a principle is
commonly of a larger extent then a cause. For all that is termed a Principle out
of or from which at first any thing is, or is made or known; but that a thing
may be a cause it is necessary that it receive its Essence therefrom, and
depend thereupon. And thus every cause indeed, is a principle, but every
Principle is not a cause. For the term from whence any man sets upon the way,
and the point whence a line flows, are the Beginnings of a way and a Line, but
not the cause. But passing over the sundry significations of a principle, let
us now treat thereof, as it concurs to the constitution and generation of
things Natural. In which sense, Principles are by Aristotle thus defined:
Principles are such things, as are neither made of other things, nor one of
another, but all things are made of them. And so there are three conditions of
Physical Principles. First, that they be not made of other things. For if they
were made of others, they should receive their Essence, from the principles of
another Nature, and so themselves should not be principles. The Second, That
they be not one made of another. For if one of them did constitute another and
were a part of the same Essence, they should neither be First nor Simple. The
Third, that all Natural things be made of them and receive their Essence from
them.

Now as concerning the number of Principles there were sundry not only Opinions
but Dreams also of the Ancients, The number of principles is three.
which because they are largly confuted by Aristotle in the first of his
Physics, and the most of them are now vanished: Yea and some of them are not
sufficiently understood: I shall here pass over all those Opinions, and only
undertake to explain that of Aristotle, as most agreeable to truth, who
asserted only three principles of Natural things, viz. Matter, Form, and
Privation.

Yet this one thing I must premise, That while I establish these three
principles, I do not exclude that only first Principle of all things, God,
eternal, immortal, only one and indivisible, from whom and in whom are all
things, but my enquiry is only after the first Natural principles of all
things. For neither does Aristotle deny that all things have their dependence
upon the most good and great God; as appears in the first Book of his
Metaphysics, Chap. 2. Where thus he writes: For God seems to be the Cause and
principle as it were of all things. And in the fifth Problem of the thirtieth
Section. God has given us two Organs within us, wherewith we make use of the
Organs that are without: viz. To our Body the Hand, to our Soul, the Mind.

Now being to search out the number of Natural principles; we will take out
beginning from hence, that the principles of things are contrary one unto
another: which both all the ancients do seem to grant, and the thing it self
argues as much. For those are called principles, which are neither made one of
another, nor of any other thing, but all things are made of them. Now such
things are prime contraries. For seeing they are first, they are not made of
any other: and because they are contraries they are not made one of another,
for one contrary cannot change into the substance of another thing which is
contrary to it. Moreover experience it self does withess; that of all things
that are, every thing does not act upon every thing, nor suffer from every
thing, nor is every thing made of every thing, unless accidentally; but every
thing acts upon its contrary, and suffers from its contrary, is made of its
contrary, and dissolved into its contrary; or as Galen speaks in his first Book
of Temperaments, Chap. 2. Every mutation is made by a contrary, and of a
contrary, and into a contrary.

Seeing therefore the Principles of things are contrary, they must needs be
more than one: for contraries are not one, nor can one thing be contrary to it
self. 1 Phys. Chap. 6. Text, 50. Nor yet can they be infinite. For so should
there be no knowledge of Natural things, which depends upon the knowledge of them
Principles, and Nature it self abhors infinity. Moreover, since in every kind,
there is one first contrariety; and of one contrariety, two extremes:
consequently in a substance there are not infinite contrarieties, but those two
first and extreme are to be held for principles.

Wherefore two first contrary Principles are sufficient: one from which the
departure is made, and which is the term from which the other, to which the
Progress is made, or the term to which. Howbeit these contraries are not alone
sufficient for the constitution of a thing. For as a contrary does not make its
contrary; so they alone of themselves cannot constitute a substance. For that
contrary which is induced, cannot be received into that which is expelled;
seeing contraries do mutually resist one another; and at the end of the motion,
that contrary which is expelled, ceases to be. A third principle therefore of
things must be added, which is contrary to neither of the other two, and which
one while with one, may constitute one natural thing, another while with the
other may constitute another, and which may be the subject of those contraries,
by turns. For seeing in every mutation a subject is required (for an accident
cannot be without a subject) as Aristotle in the first of his Physics Chap. 7.
Proves by Induction; and which in the mutation of accidents, is most of all
apparent, wherein we see there is a common subject of the accidental form
abolished, and of that which is bred a new: and it is manifest that there is no
progress from contrary to contrary, without some subject matter: the same is to
be concluded touching that substantial mutation, which happens in a natural
body.

And these three principles do suffice. For both one subject is enough to
suffer: and two contraies to act. For one contrary can corrupt its contrary.
The principles therefore are Partly contrary, which are called Form and
Privation: and partly not contrary. For the subject which we call Matter, is
apt to receive al forms. And they are all three necessary to Generation, which
is nothing but a progress from the privation of one form in the matter, to the
acquisition of a new form: yet every one after a peculiar manner, viz. The form
as the terminus ad quem, the term to which the motion is made; Privation, as
the term from which: the Matter, as the subject of the Mutation. Howbeit to
the Constitution of a thing, two principles are only necessary viz. Matter and
Form. For privation, besides that it is no substance seeing it is contrary to
the form, it cannot consist therewith. Hence Simplicius upon the first of
Arisiotles Physics, says, To enquire after the Principles of natural things,
is one thing, to enquire into the principles of mutation, is another; for of
things natural Privation is an accidental Cause; but of Mutation it is a direct
cause, or a cause by it self.

These things being thus generally spoken touching the principles of natural
things, Whether there be a Materia prima, or first matter.
let us proceed to handle them in particular. And as to the first Matter,
although that there is such a thing in Nature, was before proved: yet let us
prove it again, after this manner. Whatsoever is made, is either made simply of
nothing, or of something. Not of nothing, for that is creation and not
Generation; and therefore of something, now that of which a thing is generated,
is either only form, or the whole compound, or somewhat besides these. Not the
two former. For in the Generation of a new thing the former form perishes.
There is therefore somewhat else remaining besides the form in that thing, out
of which a new substance is generated, viz the matter, which has a privation
of the thing to be generated, and which is apt to receive as well that form
which it now actually possesses, as that which, the former being abolished is
introduced into its place. Now that this is the first subject and depends upon
no other, is thus proved. Whatever things are changed, have a common subject.
Al these sublunary things are changed one into another; if not al immediately,
yet mediately. For things mutually sight one against another, with contrary
qualities, alter one another, and throw one another from their natural state
and condition. Therefore they have al a common subject. For if it were of some
other thing, it would not be subject to all mutations: and if it were not
common, al things could not be changed.

But what is the Essence of Matter is exceeding hard to find out, The Doctrine
of the first matter is obscure and exceeding hard to be known.
and can hardly be discerned by a direct knowledge. For as essential mutation,
by which it is demonstrated, that there is matter, was known by way of analogy
from accidental mutation; even so by analogy, and a certain bastard kind of
knowledge and inspection (as Plato says) we come to the knowledge of matter. For
from the knowledge of sensible matter, we are led to the knowledge of insensible:
and so is matter related to form Natural, as Brass or Wood to the Form or
Figure of Mercury. For even as Brass or wood, does in it self actually possess
no artificial form; yet is it furnished with a power to receive al forms: even
so the first matter, has in it self, no determinate specific natural form;
yet is it apt to receive all forms, howbeit herein they differ, in that the
artificial matter is a body of it self existing and perfect: but the Natural
matter does not exist by it self without the form.

Now matter is considered Two manner of ways, one absolutely, Matter is
considered two manner of ways.
as it is a being or a certain substance: the other, repectively, as it is a
principle of natural things. In the first manner of consideration, we say it is
void of all forms and Qualities, Dimensions and Quantities, and we allow it a
power of receiving indifferently all forms; in which respect Aristotle in the
sixth of his Metaphysics, Chap. 3. Text. 8. Describes it by the negation of
all things. In the second notion we attribute unto it a power of receiving
particular forms, and privation; in which signification Aristotle in the first
of his Physics Chap. 9. Text. 82. Defines it, The difinition of matter.
that it is The first subject of every thing, of which every thing is made,
being not accidently inherent, and into which it returns when it is corrupted.

And although in its first notion, it can very hardly be known, The first
matter is no notion of the brain.
because of its weak and obscure Entitie, by which it comes near to a
Non-beeing, and is the lowest of al beeings: yet must we not think that it is a
mere fiction of our Brains. For it is undoubtedly a real being, and indeed a
substance, as appears in the l. Of Aristotle's Physics Chap. 6. Text. 52. Chap.
9. Text, 79. In the Second de Anima. Chap. 1. Text. 7. In the Seventh of
Metaphysics, Chap. 2. Text 7. For of it, and form al natural substances are
compounded; and it is the subject of Generation, and receives the forms; and
it self is in no other thing or subject. Now by substance, we do not here
understand a compound substance, which is properly called substance, but a
being as it is distingusht from an accident, and opposed thereunto: which is
twosold: One in act, as the form: the Other in power, as is the matter. Nor is
it an incorporeal but a corporeal substance. For seeing of it and Form al
compound bodies do consist if both were incorporeal, there would then arise
from incorporeals a corporeal compound which is absurd. Moreover seeing a body
of the predicament of quantity does always presuppose a body of the
predicament of substance; nor can a body of the predicament of quantity exist
without a body of the predicament of substance, nor this without that: and that
a body of the Predicament of substance, as shall be said, does immediately
inhere in the first matter, and altogether depend thereupon: it must therefore
needs be a body pertaining to the predicament of substance. And the first
matter has this its essence of it self, and as Scaliger says in his 5.
Exercitation, the matter by that essence which is proper to it self, is that
which it is; and in his 17. Exercitation. The matter has its quiddity or
Somwhatness, whereby it is somewhat, and differs from other things. The first
matter has no existency of is it self.


And although the matter has an essence and entity proper to it self, whereby
it is somewhat different from the form: yet has it of and by it self no
existency, which is proper only to a compound, which has it from the form:
which seeing the matter has not (which its indetermination that I may so speak
witneses) it cannot be said of it self to have actual existence, which is an
effect of the form, but only by the form, which determines it, perfects it,
and makes ^t to be this or that. The matter therefore is altogether a mere
possibility, that is to say, a certain imperfect indeterminate substance, and a
rudiment of all sorts of natural things, and which receives al its perfection
and all its qualities from the form.

Yet this is thus to be understood, not that the matter is only a possibility
to its own being, which it has of it self by its own Essence; but to this or
that sort of Being, as Scaliger says in his 17. Exercitation. Nor is it said
to be Apoios because it has no quality, but because every form and quality
which is therein, is without and besides its Essence. For, as Scaliger says,
in his 61 Exercitation. The first matter, is one Individuum or particular
being, like a lump of wax, one part whereof bears the form of a Candle, another
the form of an Image; another of a Ball, another of a Die: and the said mass
may have as well this form as that and challenges none as properly belonging to
it self, yet must it of necessity have always some form or other. Nor was the
matter created by God as a certain distinct sort of a natural thing, but it is
rather concreate or created together with natural things, and as was said it is
as it were a rudiment, Beginning and part of al natural things, nor did it ever
exist without any form but only with and under the same.

Quantity does properly follow the Nature of Matter, The first matter is
unlimited.
and is as old as it, nor can be separated there from, in deed or in thought.
But it is only unterminated quantity I speak of, For terminated quantity does
neither follow the form alone nor the matter alone, but both of them. For
quantity of it self flows from Matter (for, by means thereof al things are
termed so great or so great; and it also is the subject of all mutations. Now
every thing which is changed, is divisible. Phys. 6. Chap. 3.36.) But not from
the form; for it of it self has no muchity, is not divisible, only it is
extended, and is said to be so great or so great according to the extension and
quantity of the Matter. But certain bounds both external as the Figure, and
internal as certain sorts of Quantity, do proceed from the Form. For as it
streightens the Nature of the matter, and limits it to some peculiar and
determinate sort of natural thing: so it limits the Quantity thereof, and
imprints thereon, this or that sort and Figure of Quantity. And when we say the
Matter, is unbounded, let not any one so understand us, as that the matter
either is or has ever been without certain limits. Nor is it said in respect
of the form to be introduced, in which respect the seed of an Ox, if you
regard the bounds it shall receive from the form of an Ox may be called a
certain unlimited thing; but in respect of all limits, which either it has or
may have from any form whatsoever. For as the matter considered in it self, is
altogether without form; yet receives all forms, nor is ever without form: even
so Quantity and Dimension of matter which follows the essence thereof, has of
and by it, self no certain and determinate bound and Figure; yet is it fit to
receive all, nor is it ever found without some Figure and determinate
dimension. And thus unbounded and potential dimensions, are in a substance
corporeal, unlimited and potential, such as is the Matter: but actual and
determined, in a determined and perfect Body.

Out of the same Nature of the Matter, Theere is a two sold potentiality of the
matter.
flows Possibility, or Potentiality, which is an apitude or fitness to receive
all Forms, and it is two fold, Vnivesal and Particular. Universal is the
Aptitude and propensity of the matter to receive all forms without distinction,
and equally respects the two opposite principles, form and Privation, that is
to say all forms a like. Universal
For matter, to speak properly, has no appetite to Privation, as Privation,
but as another form, and privation is not desired but another form annexed
thereto. And this is termed the first and indeterminate Petentiality, and the
Appetite of the matter, which is nothing else, but the inclination of the said
matter to receive any form. For it is not rightly said, that the matter while
it is furnished with this form, does covet another; nor do the changes which
happen, by reason of the matter, but by reason of contrary forms, nor is there
in the matter any appetite of change, but only of perfection. And every part is
perfected under every form, and all the matter by all the forms; As Scaliger
has it in his 61. Exercitation.

Now this universal Possibility, or Potentiality is not the very essence of the
first matter taken in the first sense; but only a certain accident and Natural
Propriety, following the Essence thereof. Now no accident is essential to a
substance. And though the matter be sometimes termed a Possibility: yet by this
word is not understood a Quality, but its substance, which is imperfect, and as
it were incomplete, having only a weak kind of Being: or it may be termed a
potentiality, meaning a substance in Posse, and after this manner of speaking,
Potentiality or Possibility is used in stead of a difference, to declare its
obscure Essence, and which cannot be easily understood. And although also the
matter in its first Notion is termed Apoios without Quality: yet may we allow
some quality therein; but it must be such as makes no Restriction or
Determination of the matter, and does not restrain it to a certain and
specific Nature, such as is an universal Potentiality. For seeing the matter
is therefore said to be free from all Qualities and Forms, that it may receive
all: and this universal Potentia or Aptitude, does not only not h^nder but
further the Reception of all Forms and Qualities; it is not to be taken from
the matter. And this aptitude is as old as the matter and inseparable
therefrom. For seeing the matter by reason of its universal potentiality, has
an aptitude to receive al forms; and every day by Reason of contrary Agents,
some forms do perish: therefore this Appetite thereof can never be satisfied,
and one form going away, it desires to be perfected by another. But this self
same universal power or potentiality, is as it were of the Essence of matter,
according to the second acceptance. For in as much as the matter is a passive
principle; this Potentiality, is as it were its form and constitutes the same.
For therefore matter is termed a material principle, because it has an
aptitude to suffer, Particular
But a Particular Potentiality, is that whereby the matter respects one
determinate form: and this does not follow the Essence of the Matter, but is
communicated thereto by the Agent, or the form and Qualities, which fit and
determine the same, to receive this or that form. So the first matter, being
furnished with the form of a Dog's Seed, has no other Particular Aptitude save
that of receiving the form of a Dog. This Aptitude is accidental to the matter,
whether taken in the first or second sense, and separable therefrom. For when
the Act comes, it perishes; and therefore neither does constitute its Essence,
nor yet follow the same as an essential Accident. For the Matter, both as it is
a being, and as it is a principle of things subsists without it. For before it
received, for examples sake, this Particular Form of a Lion, the Matter was
actually in being, and when it shall have laid it down, it will remain in
actual being. Seeing therefore this Determinate and Particular power or
Potentiality, is not one alone, but many according to the variety of Forms, and
the matter may exist without any one of them: none of them constitutes its
Essence, or properly follows the same: moreover nothing Definite or Determinate
does constitute its Essence; or can depend thereon. Possibility indeed or
potentiality as such does immediately depend upon the Essence of the Matter,
and is an essential accident or adjunct thereof: but in as much as it is
definite, and respects this peculiar Form, it is not from the Matter, but from
the the Agent and present Form, which is a privation of the Form to be
introduced. And therefore it is not as old as the matter, but is separate
therefrom (as has been said) when the Act comes, it is separated. This
Particular power or possibility, is only opposed to the Act, as Privation is to
the Habit: the universal is not opposed thereunto. For that does not respect
any peculiar Form: but an infinite multitude of them.

And this is the Doctrine of the Peripateticks concerning the first matter: yet
not different from the Tenets of the Platonists, as we may see in Alcinous in
his Book de Dectrina Platonis Chap. 8. in these words. He (viz. Plato) calls the
Matter, the Receptacle, Nurse, Mother, Place, and Subject of all things; and he
says that it is felt without sense, and comprehended by a bastard kind of
reasoning. He will have it to be the property of matter, to receive al
Generations, and like a Nurse to cherish them also to receive all forms,
seeing it self of its own nature is void of all Quality. Form and Figure. Also
he says that it is sprinkled and figured with shapes, like a Picture, having
of it self no Figure or Quality. Nor were it a subject fitly prepared for
sundry impressions of forms, unless it were quite void of all those Qualities,
which it is to receive. For we see those that would make sweet ointments of Oil
do seek for Oil infected with no smell at all: and those who would print forms
upon Wax, or Clay, de first work and smooth and polish the matter, til the old
figures are quite blotted out. For it is fit that the universal matter, if it
be to receive all forms, should not have in it self the nature of any of them,
but that without all Quality and Figure, it must be the subject of (...) sorts
of things. And being such as is said, it is neither a Body, nor yet
incorporeal, but potentially a Body, even as Brass is potentially a Statue,
because receiving the figure it may become a Statue.

The other Principle of Generation is Privation. Privation and Negation how
they differ.
That we may understand what that is, we must see how it differs from negation.
For Negation is of larger extent than Privation, and is attributed to matter
taken in the first sense, and denotes an universal Absence of all forms and
Qualities in the matter. But such is not privation: (for one Privation is not
opposed to all forms, but to every one a proper) but it agrees to matter taken
in the second sense, and always presupposes other Qualities, and is
necessarily conjoined with some form, which goes next before the Form to be
introduced. For the Privation of the form of Wheat, is not an universal
negation of all forms in the first Matter, nor yet every other absence
thereof, as for example sake, that which is in Iron: for Wheat is not generated
of Iron: but that which acompanies some definite and determinate form, viz.
that of the grain of Wheat. Hence Themistius upon Aristotle's Postertora, writes
thus; Privation is a Negation in a determined subject, and Alexander de Ales
upon the Metaphisicks; Privation essentially requires the Negation of a form
with an aptitude to receive the same. And the very same Scaliger affirms in his
18. Exercitation. Privation (says he) seems to have the Nature of a certain
Being. For it is the same after a sort with that Habit, which is contrary to
the Habit, whereof it is a privation. And therefore as Zabarella says;
Privation is in its own nature, the absence of a form, and it is nothing, and
is opposed to a form only Privatively, but inasmuch as another form always
accompanies the same, in which respect the privation of that thing is properly
said to be some positive thing having contrariety thereunto. What Privation is?
We gather therefore from the Premises; that Privation is the Absence of a form
in that Matter which is immediately disposed to receive the same. Now Prvation
is not of the Essence of Matter, but an accident thereof being taken in the
seond sense, It is not of the Essence of Matter.
being necessary, not simply, but in respect of Generation. For it concurs with
other Principles to the Generation of a thing; and it is in Generation as it
were the term from which the motion is made. For that which is generated, was
not before; yet it was possible, and in generation not being goes before Being:
and therefore it is called a third Principle essentially distinct from matter:
and matter concurs one way to Generation: Privation another.

The third Principle of natural things we make to be the Form, which because it
is the most excellent of all, The Form
it requires more diligent consideration. That there is somewhat in things
besides the Matter, called Form, all in a manner do grant: but what that is,
whether a Substance or an Accident, all are not agreed. For there were both
Philosophers of old, and some there are at this day, who conceive there is no
substantial form in the matter. Yet verily, that is the truer opinion which
says that there is in every natural thing, besides the matter, some
substantial form, which is naturally before all the accidents or adjuncts, both
common and proper. For the Parts of a Substance, are themselves also
substances. And if things did consist only of matter, the Essence and operation
of all things, would be one and the same, and there would be no true
distinction betwixt them. For from accidents a true diversity and distinction
of Essence and Operations cannot be drawn. For the Act and essential perfection
of a thing, whence its difference is taken, does belong to the same kind,
wherein the thing is placed: or as Toletus says, No imperfect thing in any
kind is pefected in that kind, save by somewhat of that kind. Since therefore
Matter is an imperfect Substance, and is perfected in the compound; it must be
perfected by another Substance, viz. The Form. Moreover, the diversity of
Accidents and Operations, whence proceeds it? Why is the fire not cold, but
hot? not by reason of the matter: for that operates nothing, makes no
distinction, but is void of al Quality. Therefore we must presuppose something
more noble than an accident. The form is of its self an incorporeal Substance
Finally, if the Form were an Accident, there would be no Generation of any
thing, but only an alteration.

The Form therefore is a Substance of it self; and indeed incorporeal; of it
self void of all Quantity, Demension and Division. But it participates of
Quantity by Accident, viz. inasmuch as it is inherent in the Matter, according
to the extension and division whereof, it is extended and becomes divisible.
For as the matter is not, so neither is the form perfect of it self, nor
constitutes any sort of natural things; but it concurs together with the
matter, to make up the compound. And therefore neither the matter nor the form,
has of it self all things requisite to make the compound; but each wants the
others help, and they mutually assist one another. The form wants the matter to
sustain it; and therefore some call the Matter Principuum Subjectivum formae,
the Principle of the form, or that Principle wherein the form resides; upon
which the form depend in its making and conservation. But the matter is
perfected by the form and from it receives its actual being and perfection, and
therefore some call the form, the formal Principle of the matter; not because
it gives it its Essence, but because it perfects the same. The whole nature
therefore of the Form consists herein, that by a real conjunction with the
matter, it may give it that perfection which is proper thereunto, and so with
it constitute the compound. And therefore it is by Aristotle in the second of
his Physics Chap. 3. Text 8. defined to be, That which makes a thing to be
what it is, and in his 6. Book of Metaphysics Chap. 8. I call the form that
which makes a thing to be what it is, and the first Essence of a thing; and in
the 6. of his Metaphy licks Chap. 11. For the form is the inward substance of a
thing, from which a so the whole matter is called a Substance. For the form is a
simple substantial Act, with the matter making one entire compound. For this is
the end of Generation; by it the matter is perfected; it is coveted by the
matter; herein the matter finds it self contented; from it al accidents and
actions flow.

But, Concerning the original of Forms, The Original of Forms.
there is a very great controversy amongst Philosophers, which has exercised
the Brains of the most able amongst them; ^or seems it as yet sufficiently
determined whence the forms have their Original. For though Aristotle and his
Expositors do say, That neither the matter is generated, nor the form, but the
compound yet their Intent is not, that both the matter and the form are
generated at one and the same time (for the matter is not generated, nor can
be) or that some third thing different from these is produced; but this they
would signify: that the form is not produced by it self apart from the matter
and without it, and afterward joined thereto; but that it is produced in the
matter and joined therewith. For the compound is nothing but the matter and
form joined. Therefore we must grant that in some sort the form is made,
inasmuch as it is the Burt and End of Generation.

This being granted we must see Whence the forms have their original. Whence
the forms proceed?
If you shall ask a Peripatetick or follower of Aristotle (setting aside at this
time the Opinions of Anaxagoras Plato, and Avicenna) He will tell you they are
drawn out of the Aptitude or Potentiallity of the matter. I hear indeed (to use
the words of Scaliger in his 61. exercitution) the found of words; but I desire
something to satisfy my mind: but I hear nothing. For though this expression be
worn thredbare by many yet few do sufficiently explain what we are to
understand thereby. But this seems to be the opinion of those who do think most
rightly: What it is for forms to be drawn out of the power of the matter.
for forms (excepting the humane Soul) to be drawn out of the power of the
matter, is nothing else, but for them to be so made in a subject having a
natural aptitude unto them, and existing before them both in time and nature,
as that both in respect of their conservation and operation, they do so depend
thereupon, that out of it they neither can be made, nor preserved, nor operate.
For the form which is educed, is not at first produced apart from the matter,
and out of it, and afterward externally adjoined to the matter, but it is
produced in the matter. And so two things are required to the eduction of
forms: First, That the Subject have a natural aptitude to the form: Secondly,
That the form which is drawn forth, depend upon the matter both in their making
and conservation; that is to say, that without the help of the subject, and out
of it, it can neither be produced, nor preserved, nor operate. And consequently
al natural forms, except the humane, do so depend upon the matter, that out of
it, and without the assistance thereof, they cannot be.

But if any man, not content with what has been said, shall further urge, and
say, Whether the Form be made of nothing in the matter.
that he acknowledges what has been said to be true, viz. that for a form to
be drawn out of the aptitude of the matter, is nothing else, but for a form to
be made in the matter, and not out of the same: but shall yet enquire; whether
in the matter, Form is made absolutely of nothing. Which Picolomineus seems to
conceive in his 1. Book of Creation Chap. 7. So that the Agent affords nothing
of its own Essence thereunto, but action only; or so as that the Agent does not
communicate the Form it self, but brings the Aptitude of the matter to such a
Form into Act, causing the Potentiality of the matter to break out into a
formal Act. But whether a new Form comes out of the Essence of the old Form, is
an hard question to answer.

For seeing naturally, The Original of the forms from whence it is?
nothing is made of nothing, and a Form is now in the matter which was not
there before, the Question will be, whence is its Original? How the Interpreters
of Aristotle do torment themselves, about this point is every where to be seen,
and among the rest out of Teletus in his Comments upon the 1. of Phisicks Chap.
9. quest. 19. and upon the first de Generat. and Corrup. Chap. 3. Quest. 2.
where he reckons sundry opinions of the Peripetaticks in this point. For in the
first place, some mentioned by Du-Rand in his 2. B. upon the Sentences D. 18.
did hold, that there did precede in the matter certain Entities, out of which
afterward the Forms were made, viz. several forms out of the several Entities,
and these Entities or Beings, they called Possibilities of Forms. Secondly,
Others think, that the parts of the forms precede in the matter, but very
remiss, and that afterward they are in Generation vigorated and that so every
form is precedent in the matter, in a weak manner of Being. Thirdly, Albertus
Magnus held, that al forms did essentially precede in the matter, so the that
Matter is a kind of habit prepossessing al forms essentially.

But Toletus acknowledges the Absurdity of these opinions, and therefore he
determines, that there was nothing of the form in the matter, which did precede
the introduction thereof; and this he proves by firm reasons which you may see
in the forecited place.

Others that they may avoid these absurdities, do attribute this power to the
Efficient, and some with Plato make the Ideas to be the efficient Causes of the
Forms: and others since have brought in the Soul of the world to that intent:
Avicenna has invented a tenth Intelligence, whom in his own language he cal's
Cholchodea, and gives him this office of making forms. Fernelius with some
others makes the Heaven to be the efficient cause of forms. But if that were
so, Generation would not be univocal, and the form not having been in the
matter, must be held to be created. Howbeit that does not please other
peripetaticks. Wherefore Piccolimineus in his 2. B. of the Principles of
Natural things, although he grant, that the form is in part made out of
nothing, because nothing of it was before in the matter; yet he denies that it
is created, because it presupposes a Subject, out of which it is educed. But
Tolet. in his 1. de Gener. and Cor. sees that this answer, which was also
Marsilius Ficinus his answer, will not hold, and therefore he writes: This
Doctrine does not please me. For verily if the production be of the form it
self, seeing no part thereof was precedent in the matter, it must be called a
Creation. And the truth is, whether the form be produced in the matter or out
of it, if there were nothing thereof precedent, it must be a Creation; which
himself acknowledges ought not to be attributed to natural agents.

He therefore, to free himself from this difficulty, determines: that what is
first generated and corrupted is the compound; and that the form is not
produced by it self, but comproduced and made together with the production of
the compound, and that the Action is first terminated upon the compound it self
and consequently and as it were by accident upon the form.

But in very deed, whether the Form be made in the first or second place, or
consequently, whether alone or with the compound, the Question remains just as
it was; viz. Whence the form, which now is in the matter and before was not
has its Essence; whether it did praeexist in the matter, or was made by
conversion of matter into form, or of nothing. For it does not follow that if
the singer be made with the hand it is therefore made of nothing. Yea the
compound should rather be said to be made consequently and in the second place,
than the form. For as whiles Wood, Bricks, Mortar and other things are made and
compounded, an House is consequenly made: even so a natural compound, which is
nothing else but matter and form, is made, when the Matter and Form is made.
And seeing the matter is not made, what else shall shall we say is made except
the Form. And therefore when he observed, that he neither satisfied himself nor
others; and saw that no part of the form did preexist in the matter, nor could
a power of creating be attributed to Natural Agents; at length in his 1. de
Gener. and Cor. Chap. 3. Quest. 2. He concludes: I confess this is an admirable
power and Virtue, which partakes somewhat of a creating power: but it is no such
creating power: seeing it has always subjects to work upon. Also the Virtue
of the matter is wonderful, out of the Aptitude whereof things are produced,
which actually are not there. But in very truth, that virtue is not wonderful,
because there is none such, but their wilfulness is wonderful, who will have
that to be drawn out of the matter, which is impossible, as not being in the
power either of the matter or of the Agent. For many men had rather rest upon
certain principles, which cannot satisfy minds covetous of the truth, then
make profession of that which is the manifest and solid truth. Which they
perhaps therefore do that they may be thought good Philosophers: whereas, doubt
less, Aristotle if he had known the first and true Original of Forms, and the
Creation of the world, as we do, he would have left us, a Natural Philosophy
better and more complext then he has done.

Let us therefore to whom these things are made known out of the holy
Scriptures, omitting those opinions, which endeavor to bring the Forms out of
the matter, or from Heaven, or from elsewhere, determine that the Forms
themselves, as also the matter, were at the beginning of the world created with
the things themselves, that of them all Natural things might consist: And that
the first matter cannot indeed be generated but that by means of the Forms, all
changes of generation do happen, and that the Forms are the second principle of
Natural things, by which they are that which they are, and do that which they
are commanded to do; that according to the Forms al Naturul thin^s do not only
act, according to their Nature, that is to say, as the creator has commanded
them to act but thereby they are governed, preserved and propagated. For God
commanded, that natural things should not only exist by their Forms, but
propagate themselves thereby, and as he commanded it, so he gave every of them
a power to do so as he commanded, and forthwith to increase and multiply which
command of God (that no man may bring the Forms out of Heaven) appears to have
been given out before the Heaven was created. Genesis, 1. verse, 11 and 12. And
God said let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb yiedling Seed and the Fruit
tree yiedling Fruit after his kind whose Seed is in it self upon the Earth: and
it was so. For the Earth brought forth Grass, and the Herb yiedling Seed after
his kind and the Tree yiedling Fruit, whose Seed was in it self, after his
kind: and God saw that it was good. All Natural things do therefore obey the
command of the Creator, and al Forms, as in the first creation by a power put
into them, do beget by promotion and propagation of themselves; they remaining
nevertheless in the mean while entire; which also we see in Plants and Animals,
which generate by Seed. For they when they afford Seed do afford somewhat of
their matter and somewhat of their form. For the Seed of a plant while it is in
the plant, is animated with the Soul of the plant. But when it is separated
therefrom, that portion of the Form, which is Inherent in the Seed, and
together with the matter, of the Seed Is separate from the Plant, grows into a
plant like to that from whence it came. And the same holds in Animals. And
therefore the Form is Potentially in the Seed; because as Scaligar says in his
6. Exercitation, Sect. 5. The Seed is able to give the Form: it is therefore
drawn out of a remote possibility, which is the first act, to a near
possibility, which is the Second Act. So that the Form is in the same matter,
after the same manner as, to need no helps, but to enjoy its End and to which
the whole compound is ordained: which is then brought to pass, when the Form
does constitute its own matter, and Alter, Labor and dispose it as if it were
its House. And therefore when a living Creature is made of the Seed, the Form
is not then first induced thereinto, but exists therein already being
communicated by the Ingenderer, and it does only by assistance of the wombs
Heat display it self; which is rather a certain arising or springing out, then
a drawing out. To be short: This is common to all Forms (though to some in a
more noble, others in a more inferior degree) that they can multiply
themselves, are incorporeal, have of themselves no dimension or Quantity, nor
do of their own Nature take up, but do fill. And if we suppose the Body of any
Animal or Plant to grow never so big, yet the same Form without any Addition
will fill it all: and though it be never so much lessened, the Form is no ways
lessened or impaired. But let us conclude this discourse with the words of
Scaliger in his 307 Exercitation, Sect. 29. The matter is a possibility, apt to
be perfected: the Form is an Act, fit to perfect. And thus we see the
shallowness of man's understanding, who is so bold as to say be knows the Forms
of substances. But this exquisite knowledge is hid from our Eyes: viz. How of
two things, one is made. How the Form is totally in the whole and in every part
of the compound. So divine a thing is the Form, that being a substance, it fills
another substance so full of it self, that of both one is made. Wherefore to
search further, is the part of an overcurious and busy mind. For it is a part
of Man's Wisdom, to be willingly ignorant of somethings. Yet we must not reject
as falf, such things as are hard to be known. For (as Plato says in his
Dialogue called Theaetetus) they are profane who think there is nothing, but
what they can feel and handle.

Chap. 4. Of Nature and the Causes.
THere are sundry Significations of the word Nature, Diverse significations of
the Term Nature.
which you may see in Aristotle, in the 5. of his Metaphysics, Chap. 4. And in
Pererius, in the 7. of his Physic, Chap. 1. In Piccolomineus, in the 2. of his
Physics, p. 249. In Fonseca, in the 5. of his Metaphysics, Chap. 4. I shall
cite only some which are most suitable to our present matter in hand. And in
the first place, some call God himself by the name of Nature. Again, others take
Nature for the second Causes; in which sense Scaliger, in his 188. Exercit. and
359. Sect. 11. seems to define it to be the ordinary power of God. Thirdly,
Nature signifies the whole Universe of things. Fourthly, Nature is taken for the
Essence of every thing; in which sense we say that things separate from matter,
as God and Angels have a Nature, that is to say an Essence. Fifthly, Natural is
opposed to voluntary, so that a thing which acts without deliberation is called
Natural; and that which acts with Deliberation, Voluntary. And yet more
strictly, Natural is opposed to Animate, and Nature is taken for a Faculty
opposite to the knowing Faculty. For seeing the knowing Faculty respects both
parts of the opposition, and is apt to do as well this as that contrary: Nature,
contrariwise, is said to be that which respects but one contrary and is only
determined thereunto. Finally, in a certain middle way, betwixt these last
significations, Nature is said to be the internal principle of motion; and
every thing is said to be Natural which is mutable and variable. And in this
place we treat of it, in this last signification: and that we may the better
find out what it is, let us see how Natural things differ from things
Artificial.

All things in the whole Universe are of two kinds: some are from Nature, as the
Elements, Things Natural and Artificial how they differ
Living-Creatures and their Parts, Plants, etc. And some again are from other
Causes, as Art, Counsel, Fortune, Chance. And although things Natural differ
from Artificial many ways, as may be seen in Pererius, Lib. 7. Phys. Chap. 2.
Yet this difference shall serve our tutn: that Natural things have an inward
Principle of their motion and rest: But Artificial things, as such, and of
themselves, have no such principle. For whereas a Statue or Image tends
downwards, it does it not as a Statue: But as consisting of Stone or Wood.
Since therefore Natural things are hereby differenced from Artificial, The
definition of Nature.
Nature is not unfitly defined to be the Principle of Motion and rest in that
thing wherein it is primarily, of it self, and not by accident.

But before we pass to other things, that this definition may be rightly
understood, some things are to be hinted. And in the first place you must
observe, how Nature is said to be the principle of Motion and Rest. For it is
not so to be understood, as if Nature did effect both these together: but one
after another. Nor as if there were the cause of both in every Natural thing.
For every nature is not the principle of Motion and Rest. But it is thus to be
understood, that all things which naturally move and rest, have this motion and
rest from nature. For there are some things that always rest; some which are
always moved; some which both rest and are moved, and yet nature is the Cause
of al these. Moreover, this is not to be forgot; that every nature is not the
principle of every motion, but this of that, and another of another; nor is
every natural body moved with all motions. And by Rest we do not understand
every Cessation from motion, and every privation thereof: but to rest, is to
remain in its Natural place. So Earth, when it comes to its place, it has a
Principle whereby it Naturally rests therein, and removes not therefrom unless
by violence forced. And whereas in the Definition it is said, that Nature is a
principle of motion and rest, in that wherein it is; thereby, Nature is
separated from Art and from an external Agent, which are the Causes of a
Transient operation only. Yet, I deny not but that Nature is the cause of a
Transient Action. For Fire heates also other things. Howbeit, Aristotle would
define Nature, only by an immanent Action, because thereby it is manifestly
distinguished from Art. And if the definition of Aristotle be so explained,
that Nature is the internal principle, from which every thing has a power of
acting and suffering, and ceasing from both; al seeming difficulties will be
cleared up.

And because the principle of Motion is twofold, one Active, A twosold
principal of motion active and passive. IThe passive what?
by which the motion is effected, another passive, Wherein? hereuupon arises a
double controversy amongst Authors. First what we are to understand by a
passive Principle: Secondly, whether Nature be both these Principles or only
one of them. As to the First, a passive Principle may be understood two manner
of ways, First for the passive Aptitude of things opposite which is free, and
not more apt to receive of it self, one motion more then another, but is
equally propense to both: Secondly, For a power already restrained, and
limited, to one only of the Opposites, and Determined to one Motion, which is
said to be the Natural motion of the thing. I am of the latter opinion: for
from the former, this absurdity seems to follow that all violent and Artificial
motions, may be called Natural; seeing the first matter is of it self a like
disposed to receive all Motions.

As to the other Controversy: Nature is a principle as well active as passive.
although some have said that Nature is only an active principle, others that
it is only a passive; Yet I conceive, both may well be affirmed of Nature. For
to things having Nature in them, it is no less Natural to move themselves, then
to be moved by themselves.

And from what has been said it is now apparent what is Nature in things, viz.
The principle of motion and rest, both active and passive. To what things the
term Nature may be applied.
It remains that we now declare, what that is, and to what things the name of
Nature is due. Aristotle gives the name of Nature both to the matter and the
Form: and that not amiss, provided he be rightly understood. For the Form alone
primarily and of it self deserves to be called Nature: and it is a Principle of
motion as well active as passive. The Form is chiefly Nature.
But because the matter is indifferent and doubtful, disposed to receive
contrary motions, respecting no determinate motion, but al indifferently: it
cannot primarily and properly be called nature. For so, as all natural things
have one matter, so should there be of all but one Nature: whereas nevertheless
every thing has its own peculiar Nature. Yea, if so be the matter as well as
the Form were Nature, every thing should have two Natures. Nor is it absurd to
call the Form a passive principle. For seeing, as has been said, a passive
principle, is not so called, in respect of every indeterminate motion; but only
of that determinat and certain motion, which is peculiar and natural to every
thing: by very good right, the Form also is called a passive principle; since
from it proceeds al determination and restraint of matter to the reception of
certain determinate Motions. Now the Form is termed a passive principle, in as
much as it is in the matter (for in respect of the matter every thing is said
to suffer) and determinates the Nature thereof: and in as much as it is the
Form, it is also termed an active principle. The matter, notwithstanding as
has been said is also called nature: not because it is nature of it self; but
only potentially: or because it has an aptitude to receive the Form, which of
it self is Nature. Actually therefore the Form is nature; potentially the
matter.

The whole Sum therefore of this discourse is this: One thing has one nature,
which properly and primarily is called the Form. For this of its self is the
active principle in things, and in as much as it is the Form: and also the
passive, in as much as it determines the doubtful nature of the matter. And
therefore to be a passive principle, is in diverse respects attributed both to
the matter and the Form. For the matter is the Passive principle, not as it is
barely the matter but in as much as it is furnished with some Form, whereby it
is determined to receive some particular motion. The Form is a passive
principle, not as it is the Form, but as it determines the doubtful nature of
the Matter. And thus neither of them without the others assistance, can be
called a passive principle.

From what has been said, Whether every Form informing be Nature
it may easily be collected, what may be determined in reference to that
controversy, Whether every form in forming, is to be counted Nature, or not.
The Definition, truly, of Nature does evince: that every form informing,
inasmuch as it is inherent in the matter, and informs the same, may rightly be
called Nature.

It is now manifest what and what kind of thing Nature is. Things natural and
according to nature, how they differ.
One thing must yet be added: What that thing is which has Nature, and what
that is which is according to Nature. Natural things are Substances which have
nature in them, viz. A principle of motion and of rest. Such are only natu al
Bodies. For that thing is not called natural, which produces any thing that is
natural; for so God himself should be reckoned amongst natural things. Nor is
that said to be natural, which is produced by naturral motion; for so the first
Man and this whole world should not be natural. But that thing is properly
natural, which has an implanted Principle of its motion and rest. And such a
definition of a natural Body, does comprehend all bodies both Celestial and
sublunary. But according to nature, is of larger extent, than having Nature, or
Natural; for according to nature, are not only the Substances, but also their
properties, and their affections or adjuncts which follow their Nature. And so
much of Nature may suffice to be said.

But inasmuch as nature is chiefly considered in this place, as it is referred
to motion, or, as they say, it has a peculiar Causality over the motion and
rest of that thing wherein it is: the Causes are now to be explained, viz.
inasmuch as they have respect to motion; and we are to consider what kinds of
Causes have place in things natural. What a Cause is, and how many causes there
are?
They define a Cause to be that by the virtue or efficacy whereof any thing is
made: or by which any thing is of it self produced. Now they are four: The
Matter, of which a thing is made and subsists: The Form, by which a thing is
that which it is, and nothing else: The Efficient, whence proceeds the
Beginning of Mutation or Rest: The End for the sake whereof a thing is. Nor is
there need to invent more Causes; seeing by these we can sufficiently Answer
any Question, why a thing is, The Manners of Causes.
and whereby the cause thereof is demanded. Yet there are more Modes or manners
of Causes. For a Cause is near or remote: of it self or by accident; in act or
in aptitude, simple or conjunct, of which see Aristotle in his 3. of Physics
Chap. 3.

To Causes by Accident, Fortune and Chance, how they differ?
Fortune and Chance are referred. For seeing some things are made always or
for the most part, others seldom; again some are made for some ends sake,
others for none: and those which are made for an end, are made either by
Election or without Election: Fortune and Chance are said to be the Causes of
such things as happen seldom and without an end propounded. And herein Fortune
and Chance agree, that they are both the Cause of such things, which are not
always or for the most part, but seldom effected, and which are undertaken for
some Ends sake. Yet herein they differ, that Fortune is of things done with
Election, and Chance of things done without Election.

Fortune therefore is the Cause by accident of these things, What Fortune is,
and what Chance?
which among things done by Election and for some end, do not always nor
frequently but seldom happen. And in such a sense we may grant, that there is
both Fortune and Chance in things. But in respect of the most great and good
God, nothing happens by chance or by fortune.

But it is the part of a natural Philosopher to consider all the four kinds of
Causes, Whether it belong to a natural Philosopher to consider the Causes?
and by all four answer may be made to that question why or how a thing comes
to be, and that physically. For it is the part of a Physician or natural
philosopher, to consider the Parts and Principles of a body natural. And to him
it belongs, to explain the mutation and generation of things and their causes;
and to see for what things sake, the Efficient acts, or to enquire into the
end: moreover to weigh and consider what is made, or what form is introduced
afterward, to know what that is which suffers and receives the form, viz. the
matter, finally to search out the efficient which introduces the form.

Howbeit we are to know, that the three Causes, Efficient, Form, and End, are
in natural things many times united together, and grow into one Cause: so that
the form and end, though they differ in definition, yet in number and subject
they are one Cause: but the formal and efficient cannot be one in number, yet
one in kind. For the same form of an animal, is at the same time both the form
and end: the form in respect of the thing Generated, inasmuch as it is an act
perfecting the matter, and therewith making up the compound: but an end in
respect of the Generation. For it is the Butt to which nature rends, and
wherein she rests contented after it is attained. Moreover the same form is
also the Efficient, inasmuch as the thing generated, is of the same species or
sort with the, Generator.

This thing also is to be noted, after what manner every cause, does concur to
the Production of the Effect. The End concurs to the production of the Effect
no otherwise than as it moves the Efficient to produce the same, and after the
thing is effected, all the causality thereof ceases. The Efficient concurs
sometimes only to the production of the Effect, and sometimes also to the
conservation or preservation thereof; which latter efficiency does chiefly
belong to the universal Causes, which Scaliger does excellently show, in his
28. Exercitation. It is not (says he) necessary, that the particular efficient
Causes should be perpetuated together with their Effects: but then only to
stick to them when they work. For it is enough that they give them their ^orm,
whereby not only they are, but are preserved: since out of their matter the
qualifies being driven by their contrary, the form also is forced away. Only
the first Efficitent, because he is Lord of Eternity and the world, accompanies
his effects: there is no necessity that other Efficients should do so: no not
the Heavens themselves, otherwise than by his favor and Indulgence. So far
Scaliger

But the Matter and Form are necessary both for the Production, Constitution
and Conservation of the thing.

And although there were anciently, some who thought all things were made at
random and by hap hazard: yet we avouch that God and Nature do nothing in Vain.
Yet we do not here introduce a simple Necessity, but only a conditional, and
therefore we do not deny all Contingency in natural things.

Many things might be added touching the Causes; but all that may be said of
them, belongs not to our present Purpose, also I endeavor to be as brief as may
be. Only one Question we shall here discuss, viz. Whether an accident can
produce a Substance?
Whether an accident can produce a Substance. There are about this Point Three
Opinions. The first is of some late Writers who aver, that an accident by its
own proper Virtue can produce a Substance? so that when Fire produces fire,
that whole production intrinsecally and effectively proceeds from Heat, nor does
the substantial form which is in the fire concur to the effect. The second, is
the Opinion of Scotus, Ocham, and Du-Rand, who teach, that Accidents can
neither by their own proper Virtue, nor the power of substantial forms, produce
a substance: but that a substance is immediately produced by a Substance. The
third is the opinion of Thomas Aquinas, who avers: That accidents do not
produce a substance by their own proper force, but by the power and virtue of
the substantial forms, whose virtues and Instruments they are. This last
opinion seems to me most probable. For that substances act mediately, any body
may hereby learn, inasmuch as the things between which there is action and
passion, are many times, we see, in several places: whereas, nevertheless a
mutual contract betwixt the Agent and Patient is necessary, and the Agent and
Patient ought to be together. And that Accidents cannot of themselves produce a
substance, does hence appear; in that whatsoever is in the effect, does
praeexist in the efficient cause. For nothing give; that which it self has
not, either formally or eminently, as they say.

Chap. 5. Of that which is continued, and of that which is infinite.
NOthing is more intimately inherent in a natural Body than Quantity; as being
of equal durance with the first Matter, and altogether inseparable therefrom,
and by help whereof, all the remaining Accidents do adhere to the Matter Yea
and by a Body in the predicament of Quantity, we come to the knowldg of a
substantial Body, which is nothing but a substance that has three dimensions
of Length, Breadth, and Thickness. For these differ one from another, like
Substance and Accident. In Subject they are one. For that Body which consists
of Quantity, is not without a substantial Body: but they differ essentially,
having different essences, when no man thinks of them.

Now continued Quantity is that whereof we chiefly treat in this place; What
continued Quantity is and how in a yield. A (...).
whose bounds are one; or whose parts are coupled with a common boundary. And
there are three sorts thereof; a Line, a Surface, and a Body, each of which
has its peculiar Office and Peculiar bounds. For a Line is a Longitude without
Latitude, the bounds of a Surface. The bounds of a Line is a point; whose
Nature is to continue touch, terminate. For it begins, continues and ends a
Line. The Nature also of a Line is to continue, Touch, Terminate, and also to
divide. For by a Line a Surface is continued, and Terminated, and by the same,
two Surfaces, do mutually touch one another: Finally by means of a Line, every
thing is divisible according to one dimension, A Surface.
viz. Longitude. A Surface is a Quantity long and broad; by means whereof
Bodies are continued, do mutually touch one another, and are divided. For by
means of the Surface, a thing may be divided according to a twofold dimension,
A Body.
viz. Longitude and Latitude. Finally, a Body is a Quantity, Long, broad and
deep. And its Office is not to continue terminate or touch; but to fill and
possess, and to be apt to be divided according to its threefold dimensions,
Length, Breadth and Depth.

Thus therefore, Things possess a place only in regard of their being bodily.
in respect of all dimensions things are said to have Quantity and to be
divisible: but in respect of a body only they possess and fill. For that two
bodies cannot be together in one place, is not because they are substances: For
diverse incorporeal substances, may be together in one and the same place: but
because they have matter furnished with a threefold dimension, the Penetration
whereof is impossible.

Here I must take leave to digress a little, To take up and fill do differ.
and propound some things not much from our purpose, To possess or Occupy, and
to fill, is for a body to be so in a place, as that another cannot be in the
same place with it: and it is proper to such things as have matter of a
threefold dimension. For such things do so take up the whole place, that another
Body at the same time cannot be therein. But those things are said to fill,
which may either many of them together, or with other bodies, be in a certain
place, so that the Presence of one shall not hinder the presence of another.
Why two bodies cannot be in one place?
And therefore two bodies can never be together, nor can two hold the same
place: and as the common experssion is, Penetration of Dimensions is
impossible. For Naturally it cannot be, that into that place which any of us
fills, another Man, or any other Body, should be admitted, til we leave the
same. But it is otherwise in things free from dimension and Matter, and in all
Forms, substantial and accidental, which is manifestly apparent in the light of
the Stars, for the lights of infin te Stars, are every where shed and spread
about under the Concave of the Moon, nor d^ the Elements at all hinder them, by
whom this space is before possessed, nor does the presence of the one hinder
the presence of the other, nor though they are all of them in all places, are
they confounded or jumbled together. The same we see in other things which give
light. For if you place Looking-Glasses upon the walls of a chamber round
about, and set candles in the midst of the said Chamber. They will all send
their image and light into all parts of the Chamber, already full of Air, nor
will the presence of one hinder the other, nor will they be mixed or jumbled
together: but they will all appear distinctly, in all the Glasses. So in Honey,
in all parts thereof there is yellowness, and sweetness, and smell and moisture.
And the same happens in substantial Forms. For both our Soul and the Soul of
all living Creatures, does fill all the Body, which it informs, nor though a
Body have before taken up the place, is it hindered from being in all parts of
the Body. It is therefore the Property of things which have dimensions and are
corporeal, to possess and take up: but of things free from dimensions and
matter, to fill: and by how much a thing is more free, from dimensions, Matter,
and bodily bulk, by so much the more it fills. Hence we see a sound fills a
greater space, then a smell, and colors greater then sound; and the light of
fire yet a greater, and the light of the Heavenly bodies, God is present
repletively
a greater then that. Finally the most good and great God being insinitly free
from all dimensions and from al matter, does infinitely fill all things, yea is
himself an infinite fullness, absent from nothing, included in nothing, nor mixed
with any thing; but is totally all the world over, and totally every where
without this world. For though he is present with all things, yet is not some
part of his plenitude present with one thing, another with another, but he is
wholly present with all things. Finally this world is made in the Atome,
indivisible point or Center of his fullness. And therefore, al things void of
matter, Forms of themselves are without Quantity and made visible
and all forms, of themselves, have neither Quantity, nor can be divided,
unless by accident, in as much as they are inherent in a body by whose
dimensions they are bounded, and may be many of them together. For dimensions
being taken away, the Form of any of us, may be with the Form of another, in
the same place, and fill the said place, nor should the presence of one hinder
the presence of another. And we see the same Form; which at first sits the Body
of an infant, fill the said body without increasing it self, when the infant is
grown to a tall Person.

But let us return to Quantity: Whether that which is continued be made of
indivisible or of divisible parts?
where we are fallen into that most noble question which has exercised the
wits of so many renowned Men: viz. Whether a continued Body is made up of
indivisible parts, or of parts divisible? And whether that which is continued
may be divided infinitely? There were anciently some that held, that a
continued Body was compounded of indivisible parts, as Pythagoras, Democritus,
Leucippus, and the greatest part of those who flourished in Aristotle's time,
and the Stoics themselves who in this point followed their Ringleader Zeno.
But Aristotle undertakes their refutation, in the Sixth Book of his Physics.
Also they are opposed in that which is called, Of Indivisible Lines, which goes
up and down under Aristotle's Name, which some deny to be Aristotle's Book,
though according to his judgment, and collected from his public discourses.
And in this point the most excellent Philosophers and Mathematicians do follow
Aristotle. And though weighty Reasons be alleged on both sides yet shall I side
with Aristotle, and that for these Reasons following.

In the first place, if that which is continued be compounded of indivisibles,
as for examples sake, a Line of Points, one indivisible with another, will
either make a thing continued, or a thing contiguous, or a thing whose parts
are ranked one after another. But none of these can be. And therefore that
which is continued is not compounded of indivisibles. Indivisibles are not
continued. For continued things are those whose outmost bounds are one and the
same. But the outmost bound of Indivibles is not: for every extreme is distinct
from that thing whose extreme it is. And therefore indivisibles are not
continued. And for the same reason likewise they cannot be contiguous. For
those things are contiguous whose extremes are together. The same is also thus
proved. What ever touches another thing, touches it either as an whole touches
an whole, so that all its parts are together with the parts of the other, or as
a part touches a whole, or as a part touches a part. After these latter manners,
things indivisible cannot touch one another: for that which is indivisible has
not parts, nor can it be parted. Nor yet after the former manner. For every
thing continued, has parts without parts, so that one part is, seated here,
another there. If therefore in the making of a Line, the points should totally
touch one another, and in making a surface, the Lines should totally touch one
another; Finally in making a Body, the surfaces should wholly touch one
another: from all the points would spring one point, and from all the lines one
line, and from all the surfaces one surface only. And so a thing indivisible,
added to what is indivisible, makes it no greater then it was; nor does it
constitute a thing continued, which consists of many parts, each of which is
without the rest. Nor do indivisible parts in a thing continued, follow one
another as in rank or row: for so there should come nothing of the same kind
between: but between any indivisibles, there comes somewhat else of the same
kind: for betwixt two points there is a line, in which there must needs be
points.

Secondly, If a Line were made of Points, or a Surface of Lines, or a Body of
Surfaces; a Line which did consist of ten points, would be longer then that
which consists only of nine; and a Surface compounded of ten Lines should be
broader then that which does consist of only nine; and a Body made up of ten
Surfaces should be deeper then that which is made only of nine. But these
should not so happen save for a point, a Line, a Surface. Therefore that point
must have Longitude, that line Latitude, that Surface Crassitude or Depth. For
in respect of that which is not long, another thing cannot be said to be
longer; nor in respect of that which neither is broad nor has breadth can
another thing be said to become broader; nor in respect of that which has
neither depth nor thickness, can a thing be said to be thicker then another
thing All which things notwithstanding are manifestly falf. Thirdly it would
follow, that there are very many magnitudes, which cannot be divided into two
equal portions; which is falf: seeing, it is by the Mathematicians demonstrated
that every continued thing, may be divided into two equal halves, to which it
has a double proportion. For things consisting of unequal indivisibles, cannot
be divided into equal parts.

Fourthly, It would then follow, that the Diameter of a Quadrate were equal to
its side, and a greater circle equal to a less, which has the same center:
which is absurd. For if you draw lines from every point of one side of the
Quadrate, as many as you can possibly, to the opposite side, they will all pass
through every point of the Diameter, nor will there be any point therein,
through which they will not pass. For those lines fill all the space of the
Quadrate. So it from the Center you draw lines to all the parts of the greater
Circle, they will all likewise pass through the lesser Circle, and therefore
the less will have as many points as the greater, and so they will be equal. And
from these instances it appears, that a continued thing does not consist of
indivisibles, and therefore that it may be divided into parts perpetually
divisible. For seeing it consists of such into such it must needs be resolved.

Yet we are here to observe, that a thing may be said to be indivisible two
manner of ways: for a thing is either simply such as having no parts: or
respectively, which cannot be actually divided into such parts, though it
contain them, such as are the smallest things Natural. And touching the former,
is our Question; viz. Whether a line, consist of points; a Surface, of Lines; a
Body, of Surfaces. Moreover we must know, that when it is said a continued
magnitude may be infinitely divided we are not to understand, that it has
infinite parts actually or potentially, so as by continual dividing they may at
length become infinite: but thus we must hold, that so many parts cannot be
taken from a continued magnitude but more will remain. For we must not here
admit of a real division. For since all Quantity adheres in some Natural Body,
and there are Natural Bodies of the smallest size imaginable, there will be
found a quantity actually the smallest possible. But we must thus understand
it; that there cannot so small a Quantity be assigned, but that our
understanding can conceive it divisible into two parts, and again each of these
into two, and so continually descending lower and lower. Again, this is to be
observed, that it is rightly said, that a continued Quantity may be infinitely
divided: but it cannot rightly be said that it may be divided into infinite
parts. For if we say into infinite parts, we say not true: for as the continued
Quantity is actually finite: so also its parts are actually finite: and are
terminated by the bounds of the whole. But this is true, that a continued
magnitude is apt to be divided infinitely, that is to say, in dividing you
cannot come to any thing but what may be divided again. And hence it does not
follow, that what is continued in magnitude has infinite parts. For every whole
is estimated by such parts, as have a certain magnitude: and such in every
continued thing are finite: but those parts in respect of which a continued
Quantity is said to be infinitely divisible are not actually of any determinate
magnitude.

Hitherto has been showed that a continued Quantity in a Body Natural, is not
compounded of indivisible parts, and therefore is infinitely divisible, although
it be never actually divided into infinite parts; seeing Natural things have
determinate bounds of their greatness or smalness. Touching which, seeing there
is some controversy amongst Authors, I shall ad somewhat to what has been said,
and make inquisition into the greatest and smallest Natural things. Wherein
that I may proceed the better, I must premise some things.

In the First place, Although the notions of Greatest and Smallest, are
transferred from Quantity to other things, as also Qualities and motions are;
yet that in this place we speak properly of Natural substances. For touching
them the Question is, whether they certain bounds and limits set to their
Quantity. Secondly, That this Question may have a manifold sense: as a man may
ask both whether there be in Nature a greatest and smallest substance, then
which now can be greater or smaller: and whether Nature have set bounds of
Quantity, so that she has not of her self power, to make things bigger or
lesser? Moreover, it may be further queston'd, First whether there be
absolutely the greatest and smallest thing possible, in the Universe? Secondly,
whether in every sort of Natural Bodies both simple and compound, and of
Homogeneal mixed Bodies as well as Heterogeneal, and of animate as well as
inanimate, there are certain and set bounds of Greatness and smalness? Thirdly
we are to observe that the terms or bounds of greatness and smalness are
twofold; some intrinsecal which things receive from their own Nature: others
extrinsecal, which are by others externally prescribed to things. Fourthly,
That the greatest and least are so termed Positively or Negatively. Positively
that is the greatest thing, which is greater then all others, and to which
nothing is equal: and the least contrarily Negatively, that is greatest, then
which nothing is greater, though there be somewhat equal. And that is Negatively
the least, than the which nothing is lesser, though there may be somewhat as
little.

These things being premised, thus we conclude. I. In the whole Universe, There
is Actually in the whole universe and in every sort of natural things, somewhat
greatest and somewhat least.
and in every sort of Natural things, there is actually something which is
greatest and something which is least. For unless there were somewhat greatest
and somewhat least, in the whole world, and in every sort of things, either
positively or Negatively: there might be a greater then any that is never so
great, and a less then any that is never so small, and so there should be
actually in Nature an infinite multitude of things. But that that cannot be,
shall be hereafter demonstrated. The same does also hereby appear; Seeing all
accidents do follow the substantial Form: and every Natural Body, has a Form
actually determined: therefore every Natural Body must also have accidents
determined and a limited Quantity. And, indeed, of all Bodies Heaven is the
greatest, because it contains all things: but what the smalest thing is, we
cannot peradventure determine. Howbeit Aristotle in his ^. Book of the History
of living Creatures Chap. 32. Writes that in old Wax, as in wood, a white
living Creature is bred, which of all Live-wights may be, counted the least,
the name whereof is Acari.

II. In every sort of Live-things, there are intrinsecal bounds of greatness
and smalness, without which Nature cannot produce nor conserve Living things:
so that no Individual or Particular Creature of that sort, may be produced and
conserved, which either exceeds that term of Magnitude, or falls short thereof.
For examples sake, in case the greatest Height of a Man be four Cubits, the
smallest one Cubit: there can no man be generated that shall prove higher then
four Cubits, or lower then one Cubit: but all shall be either of four, or of
three, or of two, or of one Cubit, or of some other measure betwixt four and
one. And thus does Aristotle determine in his 1. of Physics, Chap. 4. Text 36.
in the 2. de Anima, Chap. 4. Text 41. in the 4. de Gener. Animal, Chap. 4. in
the 7. of Politics, Chap 4. And Reason persuades the same. For since
augmentation or growth is determinate: and quantity is acquired by
augmentation, it self must therefore be determinate. And that Augmentation is
definite, does hereby appear, because it is an action of the Augmenting
faculty, which is determinate as all other faculties of the Form are: the
instruments also are definite or determined. For the very Natural Heat is
limited, and becomes every day more remiss. Yea, and is at last extinguished.
Yea, and all the other. Instruments are also limited. Nor is experience against
it. For we never heard of a Dog born as big as an Elephant, nor grown to that
greatness, nor of an Elephant born no greater then a Puppy-Dog. Howbeit, hard
it is to set down and observe the terms, in every species. For they have sundry
variations, and more in one sort, then in another. Amongst Men there is a great
diversity of Magnitude; a greater amongst Dogs; but not so great amongst Cats,
and Birds and other Animals.

III. But the Elements have no determinate magnitude of themselves and
intrinsecally, but from without. For the Elements of themselves, if they had
matter enough; and there were no outward obstacle might be augmented
indefinitely. For look how much greater Bulk the sire gains, by so much the
more efficacy it has, the more it resists contraries, and turns them into its
own Nature But their magnitude is limited by the things which contain them, and
in respect of the Materia Prima, or first matter. For seeing the bulk of the
first matter is finite, the Elements cannot be infinitely augmented.

IV. And Because the Elements do likewise change their Quantity, by Rarefaction
and condensation; touching that, we are likewise to know: that of their own
(...) unless upon a very weighty occasion: yet seeing the opinion of Aristotle
is laden with very great difficulties, in the mean while, til some body shall
answer what is brought against his opinion (for I believe no man has yet given
a solid answer thereto) I must take the adverse side: especially since it is
well known that the very Interpreters of Aristotle have confessed, that the
other opinion is not improbable, nor has been by any sufficiently confuted, and
that there is no demonstrative Argument to the contrary; and that the opinion
of Aristotle, is only probable: but not necessary: and it is very well known,
that most men have been moved by Authority rather than Reason to defend the
opinion of Aristotle: which one man viz. Didacus Masius does plainly confess,
when in his Commentaries upon the 5. Chap. of the 4. Book of Physics, he thus
writes: But I (says he) unless I were hindered by the Authority of Aristotle
and Thomas Aquinas, should most willing^y embrace that opinion concerning
Space, which we may easily perceive, if diligently we shall weigh the foregoing
Arguments and what has been said touching the Nature thereof, that it is both
mo^e easy to be understood, and has fewer objections against it. But because
we must submit our understandings to Aristotle and St. Thomas, we are forced to
confess, that Place is a Surface and not a Space, because these most grave
Philosophers, have so determined

But that I may not seem to have done any thing without reason, The Properties
of Place.
wherein I imitate Aristotle, I shall propound the chief proprieties of Place,
and examine which do truly and properly belong thereto; that from thence it may
appear, which of these opinions is most probable. Aristotle in the 4. Book of
his Physics Chap. 4. Text 30. tells us, That these are the properties of Place.
1. To contain the thing placed, or whose place it is. 2. To be no part of the
thing contained, which property some join with the foregoing, thus: a place
does so contain the thing placed, as to be no part thereof. 3. That the place
be neither greater nor lesser, than the thing placed. 4. That the place is
separable from the thing placed; or as some read it, that the place cannot be
without some body, but may be without this body or that. 5. That all place is
upwards or downwards. 6. That every body is naturally carried to its own place,
and is disposed to rest therein. Howbeit, some join this with the sift. From
other places, Authors gather more properties: for they ad, 7. That it is a
property of Place to draw to it self the thing placed: which they would draw
out of the 4. of his Physics, Chap. 1. Text 4. 8. That the place has a faculty
of generating, conserving, and perfecting the thing placed: which they draw
from the 4. of his Physics chapter 1. Text 4. Chap. 5. Text 48. 49. from the 4. de
Caelo Chap. 3. Text 23, 24. from his 8. de Historia Animalium Chap. 28, 29. 9.
That the place gives distinction and unity to local motion. 10. That Place is
immovable, 4. Phys. Chap. 4. Text 41. 11. Out of Psellus they draw this
property: that a Place is neither abolished, nor does perish, though the things
which are therein, may be abolished.

And these are the chief Properties of Place which we meet with in Authors:
betwixt which we must nevertheless distinguish. For, as to the first, second,
third, fourth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, they are simply necessary to a place,
nor is there much doubt concerning them. As for the rest, we must see in what
sense they may be admitted, and we must enquire, what agrees with a place in it
self and as it is a place, and what by accident: in which point there is no
small confusionin Authors. In the first place, How place and Situation disf^er?
that is to be noted, which Scaliger does hint, in his 3. Book de re Poetica
especially in the 120. Chap. nor has it been omitted by others; that we must
distinguish betwixt a place simply so called, and as it is an affection of a
Body natural in general; and between Vbi and Situs, which is not any place, but
one affected with certain conditions, which they are nevertheless frequently
accustomed to call Place. Hence it is a common saying, that the place of light
things is above, and of heavy things beneath: because in the middle of the
world there are qualities by which heavy things are amicably cherished; and
about Heaven there are qualities that cherish light things: which Qualities
nevertheless do not necessarily belong unto the essence of place. For even the
fire in the Bowels of the Earth is in a Place, though not favorable thereunto.
Hence also Aristotle in his 8. B. de Historia Animalium, Chap. 19.28, 29.
Problem 15. Section 14 and Pliny every where, says that the natures of platns
and Animals are diverse according to the variety of places wherein they are and
that some places are convenient and others inconvenient.

Since therefore these are reckoned amongst the proprieties of place: that
every thing is carried to its place; that the place does allure and draw to it
self the thing placed; that the place has a power to generate, conserve and
perfect the thing placed therein: we must know, that all these properties do
not agree to a place, as it is a place. For seeing a place as Toletus says, is
formally Quantity: it is not of the Essence thereof to be a Cause. For
Magnitude as they say, is not the efficient of an accident; which Scaliger also
intimates in his 5. Exercitation, It is not true (says he) that bodies are
preserved by their place, but by their form. And if a Place as a Place, and
therefore not a proper one, should conserve: the Elements would not seek to get
out of that place into their proper place. The Elements therefore are not
preserved by their place; but by their Vbi. Scaliger in the same Exercitation,
Section 5. But so far the Place is said to preserve the thing placed, inasmuch
as the body there placed, does conveniently receive the Qualities of the
Heavens and Elements which are most agreeable thereunto: and inasmuch as
Qualities friendly to the thing placed, are in the Subject which is about the
place.

And therefore, seeing in the searching out of the nature of things, that which
is by it self, must be carefully distinguished from that which is by accident:
we do here understand the term Place, not in the latter, but in the former
Sense: Nor do we allow of that saying, that only the Elements are in a Place.
For we do not here seek after the Adjunct of some sort of natural Bodies; but
our Enquiry is, what Place is in it self cousidered, and as it agrees to al
natural bodies in general, and to al their sorts as a proper adjunct.

We are now in the next place to consider, Whether the Properties of place do
best agree to a Surface or a space?
whether the genuine Properties of place do best agree to the Surface of a body
containing, or to the Space commensurate with the thing placed. And that we may
begin with immobility; that is a most true propriety of Place, and by Pererius
his confession, though it make against himself, it is an essential Propriety
thereof, even as risibility or a disposition to Laughter is an essential
propriety of Mankind; and as Aegidius Romanus says Lib. 4. Phys. 1.41. Sect.
7. the very formal being of a place. To the asserting whereof, though there
were no other Reason, this might suffice, that all Men whatsoever their opinion
is concerning Place, do herein agree, that a Place must be immediable, and
every one endeavors to accommodate this propriety to his Place. And verily he
that takes away the immobility of Place, he takes away local motion and the
distinction thereof. For that which is moved, of necessity leaves one place and
goes into another: which could not be, if the place were moved with the thing.

From this Propriety therefore we conclude: seeing place is necessarily
immovable, and the surface of a body containing is not immovable: that it is no
Place. For suppose a Tower or a Pillar erected, or a Tree growing up in the
Air, or suppose an Hill in a River, or in the Air, at every moment as the Wind
blows and the River runs, their place will be changed, which is against the
Nature of Place. Yea and this great Absurdity will hence follow: that one and
the same body, fixed in one and the same space, quiet and without motion, shall
have every moment a new place, and so be in an innumerabe company of places.

In this Argument the maintainers of a Surface to be Place, are variously
perplexed as we may see in Pererius Book 11. Phys. Chap. 2, 3. and Tolet. Book
4. Phys. Quest. 5. And Pererius himself demonstrates that the answers carefully
sought out by Scotus and Aquinas are not satisfactory. And it will be worth our
while to consider whether he brings any thing more to the purpose, seeing many
affirm that he has answered all Objections. Now this is the judgment of
Pererius: First, he says the word Place is used in common and vulgar
acceptance for situation and position; and it is commonly said a thing has
this or that place, meaning that it is so or so situated; and therefore a
thing may change its place two ways, either actively or passively: Actively,
when it passes out of one place into another, leaving the place wherein it was
before: Passively, when the thing remains immovable, but the place about it is
changed. He supposes therefore, that a Tower, a Pillar, or Mountain, about
which ever and anon the surface of the Air or Water is changed, are not
properly in the same place: yet they remain in the same place, by place
intending situation: or they remain in the same place actively; because these
bodies themselves do not pass from place to place: yet they remain not in the
same place passively; because the Surface of the Air and water compassing the
said bodies, does not remain the same in number, but is ever and anon changed.
This is Pererius his defense, which whether it be not contrary to al Reason and
sense, let himself judge. But I would first have Pererius reconcile this
proposition which is in his 11. B. chapter 3. p. 615. The Surface of the Body
containing, which is of the Essence of place, is not always the same in number
about the same thing placed but is ever and anon varied; with that, in his 1.
chapter p 607. immobility is essential to place, because it is an essential
property thereof, as risibility is of a Man, and because immobility is used in
the definition of Place, instead of an essential difference. Can Surface be of
the essence of place, and yet not be immovable which is an essential propriety
of place? Again I grant, that the term place is frequently used for the
Situation and Position of a Natural Body, and allow such a speech be proper
enough: Yea, and if so be a thing remains in the same Situation, I aver
against Pererius, that it remains in the same place; for Situation always
presupposes place, and it signifies the relation of the thing placed to the
place. And therefore Natural bodies when they change their place, do also
change their Situation. And it is, doubtless, a great Absurdity to say, that a
thing not moved with any local motion should change its place. For a new place
is gained only by local motion: and that which changes place, is locally moved,
and by local motion, we are bronght to the knowledge of place, as may be seen in
Aristotle 4. Physic. Chap. 4. Text 32. And therefore Tolet rightly says: If I
stir not, and the Surface about me be changed, it may not be granted that I am
not still in the same place. That is therefore a weak defense, which is made by
distinguishing betwixt active mutation of place and passive. For seeing to
change place actively, is for a body to be transferred out of one place into
another; to change place passively must be, for the Place to come unto and be
moved to the thing placed: then which, what is more absurd? Nor is Ant. Ruvius
more happy in his solution, Book, 4. Phys. Quest. 3. who confessing, that this
Argument is so difficult, that in regard of the difficulty thereof, Authors
have been divided, as to the manner of attributing Immobility to place; and
examining and rejecting the opinions of others, he is at last forced to confess
ingenuously; that it is impossible that the whole Nature of Place, should
consist in a Stirface, and that Place should be immovable; since it is evident,
that the ambient Surface is frequently varied, and that therefore place
requires somewhat, in respect of which it may be immovable. And at length he is
fain to fly to this, that Particular places, are therefore immovable, because
they are parts o^ ^otal place, or parts of that whole space, real or imaginary,
which is comprehended under the compass of the Skies. Whereby to say the truth,
he so leaves Aristotle, as to join with them that say place is that space,
which every Body fills.

Another propriety of place, is to be equal to the thing placed. But the
Surface is not equal the to thing placed; and therefore it is not the place.
For a Surface has only two dimensions, but a Body three. Nor does Pererius his
answer remove the difficulty: viz. That the place is equal to the thing placed,
because the unequal Surface of the thing placed, and the hollow Surface of the
thing containing are equal. For the Question is not about the Quality of the
Surfaces of a thing containing and a thing contained: but touching place and
the thing placed. Now Bodies are placed, and not Surfaces. And therefore it is
necessary, that a place, be not only equal to the Surface of the thing placed,
but to all the dimensions thereof: for otherwise the place should not be equal
to the thing placed. For a Line is not said to be equal to a Surface, nor a
surface to a Body; but a Line to a Line, a Surface to a Surface, and a Body to
a Body.

I shall not compare any more proprieties of a place with a Surface. For what
has been already said, A surface does not agree to al Bodies.
is more then those can answer, who will have place to be a Surface. Yet one
thing I will add. Place is a common Adjunct of al Natural Bodies, and ought to
agree to all. But the Surface of a Body containing, does not agree to all
Bodies. Therefore it is no place. For the Highest Heaven, has no Surface of
any Body to compass the same about: The highest Heaven is in a place.
whereas it is nevertheless a Body, and is locally moved; and therefore
requires a place. For whereas some think it is no absurdity to say, that the
highest Heaven is in no place, nor that every Natural Body has a place: this
seems unreasonable. For that every Body is in a place, and that a Body cannot
be without a place nor a place without a Body, is the Assertion of the gravest
Philosophers Avenroes, Johannes Grammaticus, Porphyrius, Marsilius Ficinus, and
very many more both ancient and late Authors. Nor does Aristotle seem to
dissent in this point, in the 4. Phys. C. 1 Text 6. and 1. de Caelo, Chapter 7. T.
69. And that assertion is not void of reason in the 4. Phys. C. 7. T. 1.
Everything that is, is somwhere, and that which is not, is no where, and that
which is no where, is not. Natural Bodies, are real beings, and therefore they
are somwhere. Now there are three manner of ways, whereby a thing may be
somwhere, Repletively, Definitively, Circumscriptively, or Locally. But Natural
Bodies cannot Naturally be said to be any where in the two first manners. God
is present repletively.
For it belongs only to God to be Repletively any where: who as Damascrin truly
writes in Book 1 Chapter 16. is totally every where, totally in all things, and
totally above all things. Or as Scaliger in his 1. de Plantis; who is by all
things, above all things, in all things, before all things, after all things,
High, Glorious, Immense, Incomparable, Incomprehensible. Angels definitively
Bodies Natural Circumscriptively or locally.
And to be any where definitively, is said of Angels. And therefore Naturally
bodies as such, where ever they are said to be, they are said to be there
Locally: and by Reason of their Circumscript and Determinate dimensions, they
are in a Circumscribed and Determinate space. Hence Du-Rand says well in 4
Sect. Distinct. 44. Quest. 6. In this respect only a place is possessed by the
thing placed; because the thing placed has within the place, the distention of
its parts. Since therefore this is essential to the thing placed, at it has
Quantity, it is impossible the thing placed should be in the place, and not
take the same up. And a little after: If a Body be locally in a place, it
cannot be, but it must take the place up: because to take a place up, is to
have in the place parts distant in position one from another and from all other
Quantity: and that is nothing else, but to have Quantity. Also there is a most
elegant place to be seen in Scaligers 56. Exercitation, Sect. 6. wherein he
shows, how the place is necessary to the thing placed. And in very deed, motion
does sufficiently teach, that the Heaven is in a place. For seeing every thing
that is moved, is moved in its place, by local motion: and the Heaven is moved
with local motion; we must by no means deny that it is in a place. Nor can
local motion be imagined without a place, Yea verily, though the Heaven were
without motion; yet the Heaven of its own Nature is in a place. For seeing
place belongs to bodies not only because of their motion, but that Natural
Bodies are in place when they stir not; what ever you will assign to be the
cause why Natural Bodies are in place, it will be found also in the Heaven:
seeing it is a Natural Body.

And whereas the Authority of Aristotle is objected, who in the 5. of his
Physics Chap. 5, Text 43. delivers this rule of knowing what Bodies are in a
place and what not; viz. That Body is in a place, without which there is
another Body that contains it: but that is not, without which there is none:
this Authority does not hinder us at al. For Aristotle did build this rule upon
his presupposed definition of place; which definition falling, this rule falls:
and withal the argument drawn therefrom. viz. That the Heaven is not in a
place; because place is the Surface of a Body containing: but without the
Heavens there is no Body. For here the question is begged: and it is more
doubted whether place be a Surface, then whether the Heaven be in a place.

Seeing therefore, for these and many other Reasons, Place is a space not a
surface.
that Opinion which makes place to be the Surface of a Body containing, cannot
possibly stand: and by confession of all Peripateticks, such a thing as place
there is, and it is distinct from the thing placed; I do aver, that a place is
all that place long, broad, and deep, which the Body placed does Occupy and
this space is a thing different from the Bodies themselves. For though you
should imagine all the Bodies in the universe to be removed, there would remain
a space, long, broad, and deep; which nevertheless, is not at any time actually
without Bodies: but the whole Universe fills this whole space, and every part of
the Universe challenges a part of the whole space, equal to it self.

Now that there is such a space is apparent out of the 4. of Physics, Whether
there is such a space.
Text 3. and the change of things out of one place into another shows as much.
For there where Water now is, viz. In the Vessel, when that is powered out there
will be Air, or some other Body of equal dimensions will possess the same place.
Nor does this happen only in respect of Surface. For unless a Vessel be emptied
according to al dimensions; another body cannot go into it; and the thing
placed fills its place according to the three dimensions. Let there be two
Vessels of equal Magnitude and Capacity, in respect of their concave surface;
and fill the one which shall have nothing in it but Air, which Water: and
afterward pour the same water into the other, in the midst whereof a stone
shall hang by a thread; the water will not all be contained, by a vessel of the
same capacity and surface. What is the cause hereof? If a surface be place,
what is the reason, that, seeing there are in these two Vessels equal surfaces,
and consequently equal places, they do not receive a Body placed of the same
size? Namely, because a place is to be defined and estimated not according to
the surface, but the whole space and profundity, according to which the thing is
placed. And that two bodies cannot be together, is not therefore, because of
the surface of the Body containing, but because each body requires a peculiar
space for it self to exist in.

And that this space is place, The proprieties of place agree with space
does hereby also appear, in that all the genuine proprieties of place do agree
thereunto; and by this opinion, those great difficulties are avoided, which vex
other opinions. For the space contains the thing placed therein, and is equal
thereunto: and is never without one body or other; but it may be without this
Body or that: it is immovable, nor when any Body is removed, does the space
wherein it was move with it: but the Body passes out of one part of this space
into another. Also by this opinion, that most difficult Question, in the
answering whereof, one side is much puzzled as may be seen in Pererius B. 11.
Chapter The Heaven is in its space.
8. Tolet B. 4. Phys. Quest. 7. Colleg. Conimbr. Book, 4. Phys. Chapter 5. Quest.
2. Art. 12. viz. How the uppermost Heaven is in place, may easily be answered.
For it is in its space which it occupies, as Scaliger rightly says in his 5.
Exercitation, Sect. 3.

Now what for a thing this space is, What this space is?
is not very easy to determine. Yet we must not therefore deny that there is
such a thing. For these are distinct Questions, whether a thing be and what it
is, And if we should deny there were any thing but that the Nature whereof is
perfectly known to us: we must deny against manifest reason the beings of many
things, because their Essence is hid from us. Howbeit, when they who deny the
uppermost Heaven to be in a place, shall explain what that same Vbi is, in which
the upmost Heaven exists and is moved: it will be easy to explain what this
space is. Or let them tell us, what is the Essence of the first matter; and we
shall with the same ease unfold the Nature of space. For if from a Natural Body
I remove in my thoughts all the form, and all the adjuncts proceeding
therefrom, as Aristotle himself in the 7. of his Metaphysics, Chapter 3. Text 7.
Describes it by the negation of all things: what I pray you will there remain?
And shall we therefore, because we cannot sufficiently understand the Essence
thereof, and can only comprehend it by a bastard kind of reasoning, call it only
an imaginary kind of thing? By no means. Even so, though our mind cannot
conceive space, save by the denial of al Bodies: it does not therefore follow
that it is nothing, or nothing different from the Body. For if this and this
and that and that Body, may be removed from this space; doubt less all these
Bodies, will be different from this space, and the Space from the Bodies.

Yet I shall produce what Authors think thereof. Proclus held this space to be a
body animate, indivisible, immovable, immaterial. Others will have this space to
be nothing real, but of it self an emptyness, or privation of a Body, which yet
it can receive. Others say, this space is an accident, viz. A Quantity, long
broad and deep: not as Epicurus, existing by it self without any Body, but
always conjoined with some Body. Jordanus Brunus Nolanus, takes it to be a
fifth kind of Cause. Which seems to have been an old opinion. For they relate
from Albertus Magnus, that the Peripateticks did reckon place amongst the
Principles of Nature: from whose opinion, Franciscus Patricius, seems not to
differ, in his Book de Spatio Physico.

Among these opinions, because the three last have renowned Men for their
Authors, I am minded to propound them according to their Authors intents. Not
but that I know the Objections which those opinions also are liable unto;
seeing it is much easier to overthrow Aristotle's opinion of place, then to tell
what space is: but to the intent that the diligent searchers of Nature, may
have hereby an occasion to think of the matter. For as Aristotle wisely writes
in the 2. of his Metaphysics Chapter 1. For we are not only bound to thank them
that have so writ as to satisfy us with their opinions, but them also who have
spoken but superficially, for even these men also advantage us by affording
matter to exercise our wits. And as Scaliger says well* in his first Book of
Plants, A studious Person should pass nothing over, which may offer it self as
an occasion of fuller contemplation.

Julius Caesar Scaliger therefore, in his 5. Exercitation. Sect. 9. says, that
this Space is a Vacuity s^^led with Bodies, or a Vacuum wherein is a Body,
whose Nature is such, that when one Body gives place to another, there is a
Vacuum or Empty space made, that the other Body may come in as Privation is a
Vacuity of the Form to be introduced: and nevertheless is by Aristotle placed
amongst the Principles of Nature. For as Epicurus, in his Epistle to Herodotus
in Diogenes Laertius, writer; If that were not, which we call emptyness or
space, Natural Bodies would no have where to be, nor would any thing be moved,
as now we see things are moved.

Now the last opinion save one Phyloponus did long ago stiffly maintain, and
some even in this Age do account it no absurdity. Nor do they conceive, that
which is objected against this opinion, much to hinder the same: viz. if space
it self be long, broad and deep, and another body should be placed therein,
there would be penetration of dimensions. For two Bodies are not hindered to be
in one place, in respect of Quantity alone; for so a Body of the Predicament of
substance could not be with a Body of the Predicament of Quantity; whereas
nevertheless these two are one and the same in number and subject; but because
of the corporeal matter. And we must difference a Body extended and measured
out, from the extension and measurement it self: whereof the former is a
corporeal substance, the latter an accident: both which are nevertheless termed
a body, by reason of that penury of words in this Case. Hence Johannes
Grammaticus himself says, What a Body is?
that a Body is not a threefold dimension, but that substance to which the said
dimension is inherent as in a subject. Nor does any remarkable absurdity follow
from this opinion, viz. that an accident should pass out of one subject into
another. For that passage only of a Form or adjunct out of one subject into
another is impossible, whereby an accident or Form being one in number, does
leave its whole subject, and pass into another: but if a substantial or
accidental Form, does not go out of its whole subject, but remain therein, it is
not absurd that it should go out of one part into another. Therefore every
dimension may receive any Body, as one part of the dimension of the whole
Universe, may contain also some part of the Universe in it.

Finally, Neither does that follow from this opinion, that there can be places
actually infinite, or that a place can have a place, or that a place, can
change its place, as it is in the 4. of Physics Chap. 4. Text 37. For the
parts of water are in water, as in their whole, and in space as in their place:
which if they are finite, they have finite Spaces answerable, if infinite, they
have infinite. Moreover since all the water changes place, the parts also of
the water change place: yet place does not change place, nor is there a place
of place. But as the whole and parts are transferred: so also the whole and parts
change place: but the space which is part of the Universal space, remains
immovable. For neither a River, or Heaven or a Vessel, or any such thing is a
place, but that space wherein a River, Heaven or a Vessel or any other thing is
contained.

Didacus Masius out of Philoponus and other Defenders of Space, does thus
describe the nature thereof. The nature thereof is a body: for it consists of
three dimensions, Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity: yet is it immaterial;
because it has no matter nor form. For it ought to penetrate the thing placed,
according to all its dimensions: but if it were material it could not
penetrate. And therefore it is also indivisible; because from it no parts can
be taken away. For division can only have place in such things as consist of
matter: and moreover it is separa^ed from the Bodies placed therein. For the
same space in number which contains t^^. Wine in the Flagon, the same receives
Air, and when that is gone Water or some other Liquor. And therefore it
receives not its individual nature from the Bodies, but of the bodies within
whose sides it is contained, as the space in the Flagon from the Flagon; that
in the Air from the Air. Moreover it is affected with no qualities; because it
is neither white, nor black, nor hot, nor cold. And therefore it seems rather a
Mathematical Body, separate from all sensible matter, then a Physical and
natural body. Also it penetrates al bodies which it embraces in its Lap, yet
without division, as sweetness penetrates through the whole Body of the Milk
without dividing the same. For so it penetrates all bodies which it contains,
as to fi^ them according to all their parts and dimensions, but not so as to
divide them. Finally, there is one space in the whole univers^ and world, equal
thereunto, which in diverse parts receives diverse Bodies. Nor when a Body is
moved from place to place, does it carry its Space with it, but it passes out
of one part of the Space into another, the space it self remaining wholly
immovable.

Now Franciscus Petricius does thus conceive of Place. First, He s^ies it is a
common Notion of all men; both that the^^ is space, and that it is somewhat,
seein they have coined these Terms, Dimension, Distance, Inter^al, Space: and
that this consent arose from their Senses. For all m^n do see that the Heaven is
distant from the Earth, the East from the West, the Head from the Feet: and
local motion and the migration of bodies out of one place into another, do
teach the same thing. For where there was Water before, the water being Po^^ed
forth, Air ^hters into its place, and water again fills the place of Air.

Now he says this Space was before all other things produced by God the great
Work-master, inasmuch as all other things stood in need thereof, and without it
they could not be. And whereas it is hard to know what Space is; he says it is
no wonder: for all the Qualities of Bodies whereby they incur into our senses,
are later than the Bodies themselves: but Space is different from Bodies, yea
and is before Bodies. For he makes Space the first of all worldly things, yea
before the world it self. For if the world (says he) should be destroyed, and
reduced to nothing that space in which the world is now, as in its place would
remain quite empty. But it (...) will again make new Heavens and a new Earth
there is space beforehand, which can contain new Heavens and a new Earth. For
its being now full does not belong to the Essence of Space (no more than the
form belongs to the Essence of materia p^ima, though it be never without some
form) but a plenitude accidental ther^unto. For it happens by reason of the
Bodies, which are al differrent therefrom. And he says that Space is no
otherwise a place, than as it affords a place for bodies to abide in, and of
its own nature, before it is a place, it is a part of the universal space. And
to that com^on objection, If Space be any thing, it is either a Substance or
Accident, he answers: Space of it self, since it goes before the world, and is
without the world, is no worldly thing, excepting that part thereof which
contains the world, or which the world possesses with its Body but goes before
al worldly things, whether bodily or not bodily, Substantial or not
Substantial, and as all things are accidents to it, so is it to all things: and
that this same space was unknown to the Authors of the Predicaments. And at
last he defines Space to be an hypostatical extension, subsisting of it self,
inherent in nothing, But if it must needs be of some predicament: if (says he)
that be a substance, which sustains other things, which subsists of it self,
which is not inherent in any other thing, then Space is perfectly a Substance.
For Space subsists of it self, it rests upon nothing, it needs nothing, to help
it to be, or to sustain it but it self sustains substances, and so enables them
to be, and it supports all other things in nature. Also that it is the Original
of Quantity, and that it has length, breadth, depth, and all dimensions: also
that it is never moved in whole or in part, but whatsoever things are moved, are
moved through this space, so that it self is wholly unmoved and unmovable, What
he surther writes at large see in his Book de spacto Physico. This one thing
only I ad. The Quantity of a Body, is moved with the body it self whose
Quantity it is: but as Aristotle himself says, a body translated into the
place of another, possesses the same place in number and nature, which that
body into whose place it comes did before possess. For example sake, Water
succeeds Air in the same numerical place; and so the Quantity of the Air and
Water, are numerically different from the Quantity of the Space; since each
remains in its own body, though it takes up and possesses another place. And
seeing the Place is no part of the thing placed, nor any part (as has been
showed) of the ambient body, what other thing I pray you can we immagine, when
both the Ambient Body, and the thing placed be removed but a Space having three
dimensions of Length, Breadth, Depth? And so much for this point. Let us
conclude this hard discourse with an excellent saying of Julius Caesar Scaliger
in the 297. Exercitation. It Is easier for any man to oppose the Sayings and
Opinions of ^ise men, then safely to com^i^ his own Opinion to the judgment of
others. Nor do I ever forget, but always put my self in mind, to see,
consider, remember, how weak the Eyes of our minds are to pry into he^ secret
C^osets of Nature.

Chap. 8. Concerning Time.
A Peculiar adjunct of Essence, is that which Philosophers call Duration; that
is, as they say, a continual tract of being, as Scaliger rightly has it, How
Duration differs from Essence and Existency?
in his 350. Exerci ation Sect. 7. For Duration is the measure of the being of
every thing; and in every thing, these three follow one another. Essence
Existence, and Duration: which hold this order, that Essence is first,
Existence next, and Duration last of al: Now Duration differs, as well from the
Essence as the Existence of a thing. And indeed from the Essence of a thing it
differs really. For there are diverse things which have the same Essence, and
yet have different durations. But from the existence of a thing, Duration
differs not really. For it is in a manner nothing else for a thing to dure,
than to exist; and it is al one for a thing to be of a short or long existency,
and for a thing to have a short or a long duration. And as the extension of
Quantity is to Quantity (which nevertheless do not r^ally differ) so is the
Duration of Existency to Existency it self, yet there is some difference
between them. For the Nature of existency, is only this, that a thing be out of
its Causes, and actually somewhat; But Duration signifies the extention of a
thing, in this its being, and the continuation or abidance of the existency.
Duration therefore properly belongs to existency, not to Quiddity, and it
always presupposes existency, without which it can neither be, nor be
understood. Duration defined.
Hence therefore Duration is not amiss defined, that it is the Extension of the
Existence of a thing: or the abidance of a thing in its Essence.

Now such as the Essence of things is, such is also its Measure: and as many
manners as there are of a things abiding in its Essence, so many durations it
has. A threefold Duration.
As things therefore are threefold, so is there a threefold duration, or as
some phrase it, a threefold measure of Duration; Time, Age, Eternity. For the
measure of the duration of things, which are no ways infinite, and which have
both a Beginning and End, is Time: The measure of the duration of things, which
are partly finite, viz. in respect of their beginning, and partly infinite
because they have no end, is called Aevum, Age or Aeveternity. But Eternity is
the measure of the duration, of that which is absolutely infinite, having
neither Beginning nor End. But we are now to treat of Time.

Al Men do frequently talk of Time, and are often mentioning To day, Yesterday
to Morrow, and tell of days, months and years; and in so doing they acknowledge
that time is really somewhat: but what that is, very few can tell: and there
have always been sundry opinions about the nature of time, as may be seen in
Francisc. Piccollimineus his Book de Not. com. Affect. chapter 13. Aristotle
reckons up three and refutes them in 4. Phys. chapter 10. For some would have time
to be the motion of the Heavens; others the greatest of the celestial Spheres,
others Motion simply considered. That we^ ay therefore find out what Time is,
we must know, that time may be two ways considered; First as the internal
duration of a thing which has had beginning, and shall have end, and is
successively continued, and to say all in a word, of a thing which is movable;
Secondly for the measure of the said duration by some mo^ion: and in this
latter sense time is commonly understood by natural Philosophers, who hold that
time is not without motion, nor can be understood without motion. For then we
understand Time, when we understand there has been motion, and when we perceive
no motion, we are ignorant that any time has passed: as appears in such as
sleep: For they when they are awaked, joining the moment wherein they fell
asleep with the moment of their waking, conceive no time to have passed
between; which that Tale shows cited by Aristotle in Lib. 4. Phys. chapter 11. t.
97. Alike Story to which others relate, of three men at Athens who being drunk
at a Festival, slept three days together. For when one of them did awake the
next night after that in which he first lay down, and saw the Stars still
shining, supposing that first night was not yet over, nor the Sun yet risen, he
composed himself again to sleep, til at last a waking with his companions on
the third day, he returned to the Feast, believing it was the next day
following that night wherein he went drunk to bed. And a Story or Fable not
unlike is related by Pliny in his 1 Book of his Natural History chapter Time is
somewhat of Motion
52. of Epimenides. And daily experience suggests the the like. Time therefore
is not without motion, yea and somewhat thereof is motion. For Time and Motion
are perceived together. For though we sit still in the dark, and perceive no
motion by any of our Senses: if we conceive any in our minds, presently time
presents it self therewith; and again, as often as we think of time, some
motion does also therewith offer it self to our minds. Time therefore is
something of Motion: which what it is, let us thus further search out.

Whatsoevever is moved, is moved from somewhat to somewhat, that is to say, from
the term from which, to the term to which; so that between those two terms
there lies a Magnitude. Now all Magnitude is continued. And therefore that
motion which is made continually, through a continued magnitude, must it self
be continued: and consequently Time also must be continued: for so great as is
the motion, so great is the Time: and a longer motion is performed in a longer
time, a shorter in a shorter. Moreover in magnitude, there is former and
latter. For every magnitude is divisible into parts, which are so disposed,
that some go before, others come after. For which cause, there is
proportionably somewhat which comes before, and somewhat which goes after in
motion: and those parts of a motion are first, by which the Movable is moved
over the first parts of magnitude, and those latter, by which it is moved over
the last. And for the same cause, also in time there must be a former and a
latter; and so motion inasmuch as it has former and latter, agrees with time,
so that by the distinction of former and latter in motion, we come to the
knowledge of time. For when we consider two Instances or two extremes, wherewith
motion is terminated, and understand that there is a middle space betwixt these
two extremes, presently we conceive time. Contrariwife, when we conceive any
thing under the notion of one Instant, and do not think of two Instances one
former, the other latter: we perceive no time at all.

From what has been said we therefore gather, The Definition of Time. A twofold
number.
that Time is the number of Motion in respect of former and latter. Which
Definition that it may be more rightly understood and explained, these things
are to be observed. In the first place, that Number is twofold, the one
Nmubring as two three etc. the other Numbered as two Stones, three Trees, four
Men. The former, which is also called formal number, and wherewith we reckon,
is one Ens or being of it self, viz. discreet Quantity, by cogitation
abstracted from all matter, and perceptible by the mind: and it is common to
all things, nor is multiplied according to the variety of things numbered. Or
the word Number is taken two ways; First for Quantity discreet, or a multitude
consisting of parts distinct one from another, or for any measure though
continued. Now time is not a number in the first, but in the last sense; nor is
time a number wherewith we count (seeing time is a continued Quantity, number a
Quantity discreet) but a number counted or reckoned, viz. the parts of motion
reckoned up, For we must not here pass over, that some distinguish betwixt a
number numerable and numbered, and say that a number numerable are things, which
have an aptitude to be numbered and distinguished by the understanding, although
actually they are not numbered: but a number numbered are things, which are
already actually numbered by somebody. And they say that time is a number
numerable, or a motion, which may be distinguished, so as to have some parts
going before, others coming after, although there were no man actually to
number the same. From whence it appears, that Time is a real thing. For the
aptitude to be numbered, or the numerability, does not depend upon the numberer,
but is in the time and motion it self. A number numerable is again twofold: the
one which Coheres to things which are really separate one from another: and
such a number time is not: the other, consists of parts distinguished one from
another, not really, but by our thoughts, as if a man should conceive some
continued magnitude divided into certain parts; and such a number is time. For
it is a flux and continual spinning out, of the parts of motion, which
perpetually follow one another.

Moreover this also is to be observed in this place; A Measure twofold.
that a Measure is twofold: one formal which is called mensurata measured, or
mensurabilis mensurable; the other Measuring which is called active: which
others express by saying that time is the number of motion actively or
passively. Formal Measure, is that which when it is in any subject, it makes it
formally measurable; and thus every quantity, inherent in any Subject, makes
the same to be formally measurable, and this measure is as it were an accident
in that thing whose measure it is. But Measure measuring, is that which as a
rule measures another thing. For this is always without the thing which it
numbers and measures.

Hence therefore a Question arises: Whether Time be a measure or number, Time is
a Measure Measured.
with which being it self out of motion, we number moiton: or whether time be
the measurable motion it self? And although Authors say in both senses that
time is a number or measure: yet primarily and principally, Time is a formal
measure, and a number which is numbered. Aristot. 1 Phys. c. 11. t. 102 and 12.
t. 110. For the nature of time does not depend thereupon in that therewith we
number other things; but herein it consists, in that it is a motion numbered
according to former and latter. Moreover to be a measure ( viz. measuring or
active) is a thing respective: but time is a thing absolute. It is not
therefore essential to time to be a measure measuring. For as the essence of an
Ell yard does not depend upon measuring, viz. that we should therewith measure
Cloth or any other thing: but herein in that it is a stick or other material of
so many or so many Foot long, to which it afterward happens that we measure
somewhat therewith: so the Essence of time consists herein, that it is a motion
numbered, and distinguished according to former and latter, which afterward is
followed by this adjunct, viz. to become the measure of other things. So by
time, which is described by the conversion of the Heavens, we measure the
motions of other things; and by the parts of time, hours, days, months, years,
we measure some whole motion or other.

Nor because time is a number; Time is not a thing made. In Time two things are
considerable. 1. Its Essence. 2. Affection.
and a number does not exist with ^ut the Action of our mind: does it therefore
follow, that time is only a feigned thing, and a notion of our Brains. For we
must know that here are two things to be considered in time: First its Essence,
which is a certain duration of the parts of motion; The other is its Affliction
or Adjunct, which is numerability and mensurability. The former, viz. the
absolute essence of time, does no ways depend upon our understanding, but it
would remain though our understanding were gone. But mensurability does in some
sort depend upon the operation of our mind. For seeing the parts of Time are
either actually measured; or have an aptitude to be numbered: according to the
Act and as they are actually numbered, they depend upon the operation of our
mind, which being taken away, yet the mensurability would remain nevertheless.
Nor when our Minds compares the parts of time past and future, joins them, and
reckons; does it fe^gn any thing which is not, but finds out the parts which
were before really in the motion. For as an Ell-yard, when we do not think
thereof, has the Quantity of so many or so many Foot: yet the distinction and
the marking them out, is the work of our mind and Art: so also Motion is of it
self in nature, according to succession, without the operation of our minds;
but the comparing of the parts going before and coming after, and the reckoning
up the said parts, is the Action of our Mind.

We must also in this place take notice: that although time be a real thing,
Time is no permanent thing
yet it is no permanent thing, which has its parts together actually present
and permanent: but it is a Successive thing, which has no part actually
existing, but all its parts in a continual flux and succession, so that when
one is past another presently follows.

And we must also here enquire for better understanding of the definition: What
that thing is whose motion is underll^nd, in the definition of Time?
what things motion it is which is meant in the said definition? And we are to
know, that chiefly and principally is understood the Motion of Heaven, which is
of all others most known, most regular, uniform, and perpetual: but especially
the motion of the first Movable or Primum mobile, of the Sun and the Moon, by
whose Motions Days, Nights, Months and Years are described. But the common
People attribute no time to the motion of the rest of the Stars; because their
motions are to the vulgar unknown. Howbeit Mathematicians, do not quite omit
the same. And as the motion of Heaven is universally common to al Nations: even
so al Nations use this Time. Howbeit, we must not say, that time is not at all
in other Motions; for seeing there is former and latter in every motion and it
may be accordingly numbered: in every motion, also there will be time.

Out of what has been said another Question arises; Whether there be one time
only or many?
Whether there be one time or many. To which that an answer may be given, we
must know. First That one may here be said to be one in Number or in Sort.
Secondly, That time as has been said is more or less principal, more principal
is of the heavens, less principal and secondary, of all other motions. Thirdly,
That there are two things in time, as the Schoolmen speak, the one Material
which is motion, the other Formal which is number. Hence we answer to the
Question, That the first and principal time, is but one in Number. For as there
is every where, and in all Nations but one motion of the Heaven: so is there
but one time, depending thereupon. But if time be taken absolutely, for the
number of every motion, it is not one in number: but formally indeed it is one
in Sort, but materially it is many being Multiplied, according to the
Multiplication of motion. For as seven trees and seven Horses, do not differ as
they are seven, but as they are Horses and Trees: even so, what ever motions
are together, do not differ as they are numbered according to former and latter,
but as they are peculiar motions. Time therefore is formally one with all, for
the Nature of present, past, and future is common to all, and those things
which are distinguished according to these differences of time, they are also
distinguished according to time: and they which agree in any of these
differences, they also agree in time although they differ otherways.

And now there comes another Question; Whether in the definition of time Rest
should be added?
Whether Rest should be added in the definition of time? Because not only the
motions of things, but also their rest, is numbered by time, and as well rest as
motion, is in time. But no evident reason persuades, that we should mention
Quiet in the definition of time. For time is of it self the measure of motion,
but of rest, by accident. For Rest because it has not former and latter,
cannot of it self be measured and numbered. For rest is measured by time, either
as it is a privation of motion, for the measure of privation and habit is one
and the same: and a thing is said to have rested so long a time, as it has not
been moved, or as it should have been moved, if it had been moved all that
while; or because the rest of one body is always joined with the motion of
another, by means whereof, the rest is measured.

And seeing time and motion do hang so one upon another, Whether time do really
differ from motion?
this Question must also be discussed: Whether time do really differ from
motion. Now the sense of this Question must be first observed. For the Question
is not concerning the time of the Primum Mobile or first moveable, compared
with the motions of other Bodies. For hereof there is no Question, and all do
grant, that the time of the motion of Heaven, differs really from the motion of
other Bodies; seeing they are in several subjects; but the Question is, Whether
any time compared with that motion whose number and measure it is, do really
differ therefrom. And although others do think otherwise: yet theirs seems to
be the truer opinion, who conceive that motion does not really differ from
time. For time is nothing but motion numbered, according to priority and
posteriority.

Finally, What we are to understand by priority.
This remains to be explained in our definition: what is to be understood by
fore and after or Priority and Posteriority. Touching which we are to take
notice, that fore and after are not taken here absolutely, for a bare respect
but as added to the subject, and concretly for the parts of motion, including
such a respect. For priority and posteriority do in this place signify nothing
else, then the parts of motion numbered, according as they last, and one follows
another.

The Parts of time are Past and Future: The parts of time. Now no part of time.
Whether time generate and corrupt.
which parts are both distinguished and coupled by the present moment. Yet is
the present moment no part of time: As a point is no part of a Line. For so is
now to time, as a point is to a Line: now that which is continued is not made
up of indivisible parts.

Lastly, Concerning time we must not omit to enquire whether it be in the power
of time to generate or corrupt things. And although it is commonly said that
time does produce and perfect some things, and corrupt other some, and the
Poets commonly say, Time consumes all things; Time is a devourer: Time is able
to change all things, and that nothing is stonger then time, as may chiefly be
seen in Ovid his 4. de Tristibus, Eleg. 6. Yet we briefly answer with Scaliger
in his 352. Exercitation: That Time as time has no Force to effect any thing.
For seeing that it is Quantity, it acts nothing. And all those effects are to
be ascribed to things, which are in or with Time. But Time it self is therefore
said to corrupt or generate things, because the Application of Natural Agents
for the corruption or Generation of any thing happens in time. And so much for
Time.

Whereunto for Affinities sake, though they do not properly belong to this
place, Aevum.
I think fit to ad a few things touching Aevum and Eternity. The term Aevum,
although in that signification as it is distinguished from Eternity, and comes
short thereof as having a beginning; it was not used by Aristotle nor the
ancient Peripa^eticks and Platonists: Yet is it at this day very much used by
School divines and other noble Philosophers, who distinguish it both from Time
and Eternity, taking it for such a duration as has had a beginning, but shall
have no end, which they attribute to Angels. Now touching this same Evum or
Aeveternity although there are sundry opinions of Authors: yet this shall
suffice us to say in this place; that all the Nature of Aevum or Aeveternity,
does consist herein, that it is the Measure of the duration of those things,
which have a beginning but no end: or as some will have it, It is the duration
of things which have no end but have had a beginning. Now the way to measure
this Aevum wherewith we are best acquainted, is by its coexistency, as they
speak, and its relation to Time. For we say the Angels have dured 5661. years,
which is the Time since the worlds Creation. Hence it is manifest, that Aevum
differs from time and Eternity: from time in respect of the end which Time
has, but Aevum or Aeveternity has not; from Eternity, in respect of its
beginning, which Evum has, but Eternity has not. Which Leo Hebraeus expressed
in his third Dialogue of Love: The Aeveternity of Angels (says he) is placed
in the consines of Time and Eternity.

But Eternity, although there are other significations thereof: Eternity what
it is
yet properly it signifies a Duration which has neither beginning nor Bnd, In
which sense, we frequently meet with this definition thereof in Boetins:
Eternity is a total and perfect possession of a boundless Life, all at once.
For all the Essence of eternity consists in immutability or unchangeableness.
For that which is Eternal neither begins, nor ends, nor is any way changed; but
is always the same, and has its whole Essence all at once. Whence there
results two proprieties of eternity, First, Proprieties of Eternity.
that it has no bound, in respect of beginning or end: Secondly, that it is
all at once. For though we attribute days and years to etermity, yet we do it
only for our better understandings sake. All which Plotinus considering, in his
3. Ennead. Book 9. Chapter 2. he says, Eternity is a life all together, always
wholly present, and not now one part and after another. But these things belong
not to this place. I conclude therefore with Augustine, in his 12. B. de
Civitate Dei, Chapter 12. Nothing lasts long which has once an end and all the
bounded spaces of all Ages, if compared to boundless eternity, are not to be
accounted small, but nothing at all. Six hundred Millions of years or that sum
multiplied by as many, so that there were no name for the product or total Sum,
yet all compared to Eternity is nothing; and if the said sum be subtracted
from Eternity, not once or twice, but as often as any accountants are able to
substract the same, yet should they never reach to the beginning of eternity,
which has no beginning.

Chap. 9. Concerning Motion.
WE come now to a remarkable Adjunct of Natural Bodies, viz. Motion, by the
knowledge of which we are brought acquainted with the greatest part of the most
abstruse things in Nature; and by the guidance whereof, in a manner all the
knowledge of Natural things has been found out. Now to Question whether there
is any Motion, is the part only of a contentious and froward person: since it
is discerned by all our senses. And therefore Diogenes did well, who having heard
the reasons of Zeno, whereby he endeavored to prove that there was no motion,
he judged them not worth the answering, but only Rose up and walked, intimating
that in things subject to sense, we should believe our senses. Which Aristotle
also approves in his S. Physic. Chap. 3. T. 32. to say that nothing moves, and
to go about to prove it, omitting our senses, is weakness of Understanding.

But as it is most known that there is motion: so what is the Nature thereof,
is sufficiently obscure. And therefore, that we may the better understand what
motion is, we will in the first place propound Aristotle's definition of
motion, and diligently consider the same: by which means we hope to attain to a
good degree of knowledge touching the Nature of motion. Thus therefore Aristotle
desines Motion in the 3. of his Physics, Aristotle his definition of motion.
Chapter 1. T. 16. Motion is the Act of that thing which is in a possibility, in as
much as it is in a possibility, or of that which is moveable, in as much as it
is Moveable.

In this definition first we must diligently consider the word Entelecheia
(translated Act) which as it is most usual in Aristotle, and every where to be
found in his works; so is the signification thereof not so well known, and many
have taken pains to find out the true meaning thereof: so that it is reported
of Hermolaus Barba^us a very learned Man, that having once attained to speak
with a spirit, he desired nothing else of him, but that he would expound what
the word Entelecheia in Aristotle, did signify.

In the first place, Endelecheia and Entelecheia differ
we are to note that the words Endelecheia and Entelecheia are different:
although some do confound them, wherein they are to blame. For as these words
do herein differ, that Endelecheia is more ancient, being used by Menander and
Plato in his Timaeus, Yea, and commonly by the people of Greece; but
Enteletheia is a new word, witness Tully in the 1. of his Tusculans Questions,
and by Aristotle either invented or frequently used; so they differ also in
Derivation and Signification. For Endelecheia does signify a continual and
perpetual motion or agitation, so called from en cai dein cai Helam to
echomenon, because it is in the subject and draws and moves the same, as
appears from that Greek proverb Ranis endelechousa coilainei petran, the still
falling drop hollows the stone. From Aristotle in his 2. de generat. and
corrupt. Chap. 10. and other Greek Authors.

But Entelecheia is derived from ^n and telos or form Enteles and Echein,
Entelecheia what it is?
to have its end, to have perfection; and Entelecheia if you would render it
word for word, is the having of perfection, or the possession of perfection:
and Entelecheia is always in Aristotle opposed to possibility or aptitude, as
may be seen in the 3. of his Physic Chapter 1. T. 2. in the 5. of his Metaphysics
Chapter 2. and in his 2. de Anima. Chapter 1. T. 2. Out of which may be collected, what
Entelecheia truly signifies. For seeing a thing is said to be in a possibility
to be somewhat, when as yet it is not that thing which possibly it may be:
Entelecheia must signify to be really and actually that which it is said to
be, and really to have attained to be such a thing, and no longer to be in a
potentiality thereunto: and Entelecheia must be that which perfects and fills up
the Possibility or Aptitude of a thing; and makes that the thing may now really
and perfectly be said to be that, which before it was said to be only in way of
possibility or Aptitude: And to speak all in short Entelecheia is the ^lling up
of the Potentiality or Aptitude of a thing.

This being the signification of this word (which though new to the dull
multitude, yet was known to wise men to whom Aristotle wrote and not to
pedants, as Scaliger in his 307. Exercit. Sect. 39. has it) it is chiefly
attributed to the substantial Form, For it is the substance and perfection of a
thing, and because of it a thing is really that which it is said to be. And
indeed, as Franc. Piccolhomineus says in his 4. Chapter de Motu, Entelecheia is
applied, as well to forms free from matter as to such as are joined thereto:
which opinion of his seems to be countenanced in the 3. B. of Physics Chapter 7.
Text 3. Howbeit Zabarella herein dissents from him in his Book de Mente hum.
Chapter 7. who denies substances severed from matter to be properly called
Entelecheias: and he says that only in one place in Aristotle, viz. 2.
Metaphys. 1.49. the supreme or first intelligence is termed Entelecheia, and
that not without Reason. The same word is also attributed to accidents or
accidental Forms; seeing also because of the things themselves they are so
called, and they sil that possibility and Aptitude which the things had to
receive accidents. Yea, And as it appears out of Aristotle in his 2 de Anima,
Chapter 1. T. 2. Entelecheia is not only attributed to forms, whether substantial
or accidental, whence the operations proceed; but also to the operations
proceeding from the forms. in a word Entelecheia, signifies all that, by means
of which every thing, is really that which it is said to be.

But for the word Entelecheia, Aristotle often uses the word Energeia, Energ^ia
what it sig^^fi^s and whether it disser from Entelecheia.
which signifies not only operation, as Zabarel conceives, who in his Book de
mente humana Chapter 7. teaches that Energeia signifies only operation, and forms
conjoined with the matter, whose essence differs from operation as an accident,
he denies to be called Energies; and he says, among substantial Forms, it is
only rightly attributed, to those that are free from matter. Howbeit this word
is attributed as well to Forms joined with matter, as to those without it. For
Aristotle in his 9. Metaph. Chapter 6. simply opposes to be in energy, unto being
in potentiality or Aptitude, and in the same place he calls the substantial Form
joined to the matter Energeia: and up and down in the same Book, he calls the
substantial Forms of things, Energeias, as may be seen, chiefly in the 8. Chap.
which he also does in 8. Metaph. c. 2. And in the 4. B. chapter 2 Energein
signifies not only to operate, but really to be. Also, that Energeia is used to
signify the accidental Form, appears from the 3. of his Physics, Chapter 2. T.
15, and Ch 3. T. 18. but more evidently from the 20. Metaph. Chapter 8. where he
thus writes: Seeing every thing is divided into Act and Aptitude, I call the
Act of that which was before only in power, Energeia, Motion.

To these Greek words, the Latin word Actus does answer, which does not, Actus
or Act what it means.
in this place, signify Action only; But that, from which every thing is said
to be what it is. For as Scaliger says in his 359. Exercitation Sect. 2. we
must borrow ordinary words to signisie abstruse matters: which seem harsh to
Novices, and ridiculous to curious Ciceronians. Now according to Scaliger in
the same place, An Act is that being, which wants nothing to make it be what it
is, but has all its causes.

Now here in the definition of Motion Enteleche^a is taken, What E^telecheia
signifies in the place. An act is twofold.
neither for the perfect form, nor for the operation alone; but for a certain
imperfect Act. For there is a twofold Act, one perfect, which when it comes, it
expel^ al Aptitude or potentiality, and leaves none of it behind: another
imperfect, with which there always remains somewhat of possibility; which when
it is taken away, the Act is also taken away; and such an Act is Motion. For
seeing that is called moveable, which may be moved: motion is the fulfiling and
perfecting of that possibility, in regard of which a thing is called moveable,
and makes that it has not only a possibility of being moved, but that it is
now really moved, indeed and in truth. Howbeit this Entelecheia does not take
away al possibility, but only so perfects the Body moveable, that it retains
yet the possibility of being more moved, until at length it come to the utmost
term of motion, to which while it is moved, it must needs have the power of
motion. For truly the thing moveable, while it is in the term from which, is
not yet moved; but while it is in the term to which, it is moved no longer, but
now it is moved, and ceases from motion. But then it is truly said to be moved,
when it is now in the Act, in which before, when it was in the term from which,
it was not, but only had a possibility of attaining the same; and when it yet
tends to that further act, which in respect of the term from which, it has
not, but may attain. For if it had already the last term, it would be no longer
moved thereunto. For which cause it is also said in the definition of Motion:
that Motion is the Act of that which is in possibility. For whatsoever is
moved, as may appear by the premises, is part in act and partly in possibility.
In act, in respect of the Form and of that term which by motion it has already
gained, and actually possesses: in possibility, in respect of that which it
has not yet obtained, and for the sake whereof it is still moved. For examples
sake: Water which is in heating, is said to be moved, that is to say altered.
For it has already some degrees of heat, and has the possibility of gaining
yet more, and does likewise gain them by growing warmer: and when it has
attained all the degrees, it is then termed hot water; but is not said any
longer to grow hot, or to be altered and moved.

Motion is there fore neither a pure act, nor a pure possibility, Motion is an
imperfect act.
But a certain middle and imperfect act. And in every motion are found these
three things: Some of the Form, which is by motion already attained; a power of
receiving that form more perfectly and in a greater measure; a Flux and
Progress or Tendenay to the said Form. Finally Aristotle adds in the
definition, in as much as it is in possibility, to signify that motion is not
made in respect of that Form and term, which the moveable thing has already
attained. For a thing is no longer moved for the sake of that, which it already
possesses; but for the sake of that term which it has not yet attained, and
which it has a power to obtain. From what has been said, it is easy to gather
wherein the Essence and formality of Motion does consist.

For seeing there are in every motion two things, Two things in Motion.
one the form it self flowing; the other, the flux of the form: Motion
formally, is neither simply a form, nor a form flowing, but a continual
acquisition of Form, and the flux thereof, partly already acquired and partly
to be acquired. For to be moved, is not to have the form; but, to be moved, is
to tend to the form.

Moreover, To natural motion are required. 1 A Mover.
to all Physical or Natural motion, these things are required.

I. A Mover: For every thing which is moved, is moved by some other thing. For
it is impossible that the same thing in respect of the same form, should be in
Act and in Possiblity: But that which moves, or introduces any form, does
actually possess the same; that which is moved has only a power to receive the
form. And therefore it is not the same thing which moves and is moved. Howbeit
touching this Axiom we must observe, that it is only to be understood of
material things and natural bodies complete, and of the motion of the who!
compound; and that the intent of Aristotle in the 7. Physic. cap. 1. when he
delivered this axiom was to deduce natural motion to one first Principle, and
thereby to prove that there was one first mover, by which as by a first
Principle, all bodies are moved: otherwise, unless this axio^e be warily
understood and explained, many difficulties arise, seeing not only Animals are
moved by an internal force, but also the Elements by an inward principle are
carried to their place, where not only the body of the Element is moved by its
form to its place, but also the form it self tends to its place. See also
beneath Book 2. chapter 3.

II. A Movable.
A movable or thing moved, and hence every thing that naturally moves it self
is divided into a part moving, and a part moved. Now that which moves must
needs be with that which is moved, or that which primarily does move any thing,
without the Intervention of any intermediate agent, ought to touch that thing
which it moves, and to be very near unto the same. For we cannot so much as
imagine, how any thing can suffer from that, by which it is not touched, or how
any thing can act upon that which it does not touch. For since operation
follows the Essence of a thing: where the thing is not, there it is operation
cannot be. For though the first mover be absent from the thing moved in respect
of its substance, yet is it joined therewith, by the Virtue which it sends
forth. And thus the next mover and the thing moved, are always together, and
every action is caused by touching. Now motion is in the thing moved. For the
Act is in that thing, whose act it is. Yet is not the action of the mover
different from the act of the thing moved, but there is one act of the Agent
and the Patient, For it is one and the same thing which the mover produces by
acting, The Action of the mover and the Passion of the moved are but one motion.
and which is produced in the Patient by suffering. And the Action of the mover
and the passion of the moved are one only motion, not really distinct one from
another; but only respectively, viz. in as much as the same Act, does proceed
from the mover as from its Principle, and is received by the Moved, as the
Patient: which is well expressed by Aristotle in the 3. Phys. chapter 3. t. 22. For to
be the Action of this in that, and of that from this, differs respectively. So
that the same motion as it proceeds from the Agent, is an action, as it is
received by the Patient, a Passion. And the heating of water by fire, is but
one action: which as it proceeds from the Agent, viz. the fire, is called an
Action, as it is received by the water, a Passion. And therefore Action and
Passion are in one Subject. For seeing passion is in the Patient, and action
really differs not from passion: the action must also needs be in the same
Patient. Yet this must be observed that we spoke here of a transient action:
but not of an immanent action, which abides in the Agent.

III. Terms of motion.
The Term from which. IV. The Term to which. For seeing every motion is a kind
of change; it must needs go from somewhat, which is called the term from which,
to somewhat, which is called the term to which. And there are neither more nor
less, than these two terms. For though one motion may have many terms to which:
yet they are not the last and total, or they are not primarily intended and for
themselves, or they are not intrinsecal. But in motion we are chiefly to regard
the term to which. For that is it for the sake whereof the movable is moved,
and from it the Unity, Distinction and Contrariety of Motion are chiefly taken.
For seeing motion is a kind of continual progress from the term from which, to
the term to which, and the term from which is rejected, and the term to which
acquired: justly therefore the motion receives its denomination and distinction
from the term to which.

V. Time: For no motion is performed in an Instant, but Successively and in
Time. Time.
For since motion is the Act of a Being in possibility, and has no abiding
Essence: of necessity the thing moved, must be partly in act, and partly in
possibility: and therefore motion must be successive. For if it were all
together, it were all in Act, and the thing could no longer be said to be in
motion, but already moved.

VI. Continuity, or Unity of Motion, in respect of time, and the term to which.
Continuity
For the Continuity and Succession of the Motion depends chiefly, upon the Term
to which the motion is made; and the motion is said to be performed
successively, because the Term to which the motion tends, is successively
gained. But that a motion may be one in number, three things are requisite: one
movable, one term to which; and one continued time. To which a fourth may be
added, the Term from which. For one motion cannot proceed from diverse Terms.

What is the Nature of Motion has been explained hitherto, Motion and Mutation
differ.
it remains that we now show you what are the Sorts of Motions. Where in the
first place you are to take notice, that there is a difference betwixt mutation
and motion. Metabole or Mutation is of larger extent, and signifies every
variation of a thing, whether the terms in respect of which the thing is
varied, be positive and contrary, or contradictary: but Kinesis or Motion
properly so called, is not of so large an extent, but is conversant betwixt
terms (upon which, especially the term from which its nature chiefly depends)
which are contrary, or if mediate, yet having the nature of contraries.

Motion therefore properly so called is conversant betwixt contraries. Motion
is made betwixt contraries.
Now we term such things in this place contraries, not only which do most of
all differ under the same kind: but whatsoever positive terms, by the coming of
one of which another is changed, whether it be in respect of contrary
qualities, or according to intention, or according to extension. Whatsoever
therefore ought to be reckoned for a term of motion, must have these two
conditions. First that it have a contrary in such a manner as has been said; so
that the motion must pass from one contrary as the Term a quo from which, unto
the other contrary as the term ad quem, to which. Moreover, that must of
necessity be attained, which terminates the motion of it self, and not without
the change of the Subject, which is performed by real action and passion.

From which may easily be gathered, Motions are only in Quantity, Quality and
Place.
that true motion is only in three Predicaments, viz. Quantity, Quality, and
Vbi or Place; or that in respect of that thing to which the motion tends, it
may be reduced to these three Predicaments. For both the forms of these
Predicaments have contrariety, and positive opposite terms; nor can their
change happen without the change of the Subject.

But Generation and Corruption which are changes in the substance of a thing,
Generation and Corruption are not properly Motion.
are not properly Motions. For that Contrariety necessary to motion, is not
found in substances. Moreover, since every thing which is moved is an actual
Being; but that which is generated is no actual Being (for if it were already,
there were no need that it should be generated) therefore Generation cannot be
a Motion. Lastly, Every motion is continued and performed in time: but
generation is not performed in time, but in a moment, and therefore also it
cannot be a Motion. For substantial forms being indivisible and not capable of
more or less, cannot be successively acquired and by piecemeal.

Howbeit we must here observe, A two fold Acception of Gineration and
Corruption.
that Generation and corruption are taken two ways, either only for the
acquisition or loss of a substantial form, without precedent alteration: or for
the introduction of a form, with alteration which went before the same.
Generation and Corruption taken in the former Sense, are no motions, but are
performed in an Instant: but in the latter sense they may be allowed for
Motions.

Moreover, this must not be omitted neither. That Suceession in motion is
considered two ways: Primarily and chiefly as was said before, in respect of
the form, which seeing it may be intended and remitted, and has certain
degrees, in respect of which it is capable of more and less, it therefore
successively acquires those degrees, viz. one before, another after. But since
the substantial form has no such degrees, it cannot be intended, nor remitted,
nor is it successively introduced, but in an instant and all at once. Afterward
there is said to be a succession in respect of the Subject, which is movable:
which succession others seem to call extension. For since a thing movable is
divisible, and has some parts formore others hinder: and the mover acts first
upon the formore parts and which are nearest it self, and afterward upon the
hinder and more remote: also in this manner we may grant that Generation is
made successivly. But does these successions are considered, in motion properly
so called: but the former holds more of the nature thereof: which being absent
from Generation it cannot be called motion.

Moreover, it is evident, that there is no motion in Relation, Action, Passion,
When, and Habit, the Predicaments so called. For those mutations which are made
in them, do either not happen with the change of the subject, or not of
themselves primarily, but consequently and by accident.

Motion therefore properly is only made out of one subject into another: The
sorts of Motion.
and there are three sorts thereof. In Quantity there is Augmentation and
Diminution. For these two mutations have no common name. In Quality, there is
Alteration. In Place, there is local motion from place to place.

To Motion Rest is opposed, Rest what it is.
which is the Privation of Motion in that thing, which is naturally apt to be
moved; and in as much as motion is made to attain rest, it may also be said to
be the end and perfection of motion. So a body, when it has attained its
natural magnitude, ceases growing.

Rest is either natural, Rest twofold.
whose principle is internal, and to which the movable is naturally inclined:
So the Earth is naturally moved to the Center, and rests there. Or Violent,
whose Principle is external, when a body is kept by force in a place not
natural thereunto; as when a stone or clod of Earth, is hung up in the Air.

THE SECOND BOOK
Chap. 1. Of the World.
HIther to we have treated of a natural Body, as it is a General term,
comprehending sundry sorts, and we have spoke of the common Principles and
common adjuncts of a natural Body in general, without any consideration of the
sorts: we are now to come to the several sorts of natural Bodies. And because
the whole mass and heap of all Bodies natural, does make one total sum, which is
called the World; before we treat of any sort of natural bodies, or of any part
of the world, we must first speak of the whole; and explain what the world is,
and what proprieties and adjuncts it has.

That which is by the Greeks termed Cosmos, because of its absolute and perfect
Elegancy and Ornament the Latins call Mundus for the same cause: The sundry
significations of the word Mundus
which word because it signifies a thing which is absolute, perfect and
comprehending in it many things orderly ranked, many things are so termed.
Marsilius Ficinus on the 3. Book of Plotin. Bnead 1. makes two worlds, one
intelligible, being the divine mind, the Pattern and Idea of this sensible
world: the other sensible, viz. this which we behold, being the Image of the
divine Pattern. Others do again divide these two worlds, and make more worlds.
The first is the Archetype of Intelligible world, which is the divine mind or
God himself, who contains in him the patterns and Ideas of all things: the
second is the angelical world, made up of the multitudes of Angels ranked in
their Hierarchies: the third is the Elementary, which is made up of Heaven and
the Elements: the fourth is the great world, which contains alcreated things,
both corporeal and incorporeal: the fifth, is the little world or Microcosme,
which is Man.

We are in this place chiefly to treat of that world which consists of Heaven
and Earth and the Bodies therein contained, and by another name is called to
pan, the Universe because it comprehends al natural bodies, and to which the
term Mundus or World does chiefly belong and which in regard of its order was
given it by Pythagoras as Plutarch says in the 2. of his de placit. Phylosop.
ch 7. though we may doubt hereof, because the word Cosmos is read up and down
in the writings of Hermes Trismegistus. For this universe is truly Cosmos or
Mundus, that is to say adorned, orderly marshalled, and beautiful. And
therefore Ocellus inscribed his Book of natural things per^^ou pantos, de
universo, of the Universe, and touching these names he thus writes. I call this
whole world by the name of universe: For because it is distinguished and adorned
with all things that are, therefore it has gained this name Cosmos and Pan, the
world and Universe.

And as there are sundry significations of the term world, so there are sundry
definitions or descriptions thereof, which Franc. Piccollo nineus has collected
in his Book de Mundo chapter 2. But those are of all other most pertinent and most
fit for this place, which the Author of the Book de Mundo has in his 2. Chap.
(for whether it be Aristotle's or Theophrastus's, or of some other Author is a
question, of which see Ludovicus Vives upon Austin de Civitate Dei Lib. 4.
Chap. 2. Collegium Conimbricense in the proaeme to Aristotle's Physics quest.
5. art. 4.) the first is this, The world is a Fabric framed of the Heaven and
Earth and the Natures in them contained. The second is this, The world is the
Order and Disposure of all things, which is preserved by and through God: which
may thus I conceive be fitly joined both in one. The world is that same orderly
Disposure of all natural Bodies, proceeding from God and by him preserved.

The Matter therefore of the world are all natural Bodies, The worlds matter.
not only simple but also mixed; not only liveless, but also living: yea and
universally, a natural and sensible Body, as Aristotle says in his 7. de Celo,
chapter 9. t. 98. And the world is compounded of the Heaven, the four Elements,
mixed bodies, inanimate and animate, metals, things dug out of the ground,
Plants, and Anima is or living Creatures.

But what is the Form of the world is not so evident, Touching the form of the
world sundry Opinions.
and there are sundry opinions thereabouts. For some say God is the Form of the
world; others a soul common to the whole Universe; others, the Heaven; others,
its Figure; others, Order. But among these opinions, two have at this time the
pre-eminence: the one is that which attributes a certain soul to the world for
its Form: the other is that which makes order to be the form of the world. That
the world has a soul is an old opinion, approved by many most renowned men. It
is countenanced by Hermes Trismegistus, Zoroaster, and Orpheus. So in his Book
called Nous pros Erme, All things (says he) are full of soul. And in his Book
de Intellectione and sensu, he attributes a proper Sense and Intelligence unto
the world. Pythagoras held the same, with Plato and his Followers, who often
times call the world a living Creature, and assign it a common soul, which every
where through Land and Water, contains in it self spiritual and quickening
seeds; and of it self ingenders, wherever corporeal seeds are wanting; and also
cherishes the seeds left by Animals, and of a putrified Grape-kernel engenders
a various, orderly and precious Vine; which wherever there wants a generator,
and accidental qualities seem only the Cause of Generation, supplies the place
of a generating Substance; as Marsilius Ficinus shows at large, in his 4. Book
of Platonic Theologue Chapter 7.

But the Peripetaticks like not of this Opinion. For seeing no evident reason
persuades the same, nor is there any necessity that it should be so; they
neither attribute to the world any informing Substantial form, nor one common
soul, nor do they think it sit to multiply things without great occasion. For
no Action does plainly appear in the whole world, as proceeding from any
peculiar soul common to the whole world: but all operations do proceed from
peculiar and distinct forms. And therefore since all parts of the world have
their peculiar forms, there needs no common form to knit them together; seeing
without it, the several forms can perform their own operations. Moreover, if
there were one form informing the world, the other forms, must either be parts
thereof, or be informed thereby, both which are absurd. They cannot be parts;
for all forms are not univocal, and differ more then in kind, nor can they
make up one whole: And one form in number, cannot constitute distinct things,
such as Natural things are. For since the form gives unity as well as being: all
Natural things should be termed one rather then many. And that the other forms
should be informed by this, is also many ways absurd. Nor is there any reason
to believe that this form of the world, comes upon the other forms, just as the
form of a living Creature comes upon the form of a mixed Body. For if this were
so, it should be more excellent and more perf^ct then the rest of the forms:
which the Platonists nevertheless, will not grant. For the Soul of the world
does not include more and more excellent faculties, then the forms and Souls of
all Natural Bodies.

And therefore the Peripateticks deny that the world is one, by the unity of a
Form informing; and they attribute thereunto only an unity of order of those
things, which proceeding from one principle, do tend unto the same as their
end, agreeing one with another and with it; because all things come from one
and tend to one, The Form of the world.
as J. C. Scaliger says in his 6. Exercitation, S. 2. The Form therefore of
the world is the order or orderly disposure of Natural Bodies Howbeit, we are
here to observe, as Number is twofold, the one numbering, or wherewith we
number, the other numbered, which is nothing but the things themselves which
reckoned: so there is a twofold order, an order ordering, which is an accident,
and the mutual respect of the parts one to another, or as Augustine defines it
in his de Civit. Dei B. 19. Chapter 13. a Disposure which among things like and
unlike gives every one its place: and an order ordered, The Efficient cause of
the world.
which is nothing but the things themselves aptly disposed, and such is the
world. For natural Bodies, as they are aptly disposed, and participate of the
condition of one first principle, and mutually accomplish and cherish one
another, do make one orderly System, which is called the world.

As to the efficient Cause of the world, though the Ep^cureans were so mad as
to think and say that this beautiful Theater of the world was made by a blind
and fortunate concourse of Atoms: yet all sound Philosophers agree in this,
that this world depends upon the most good and great God, as the only first
principle of all principles. For as Austin in his de Civit Dei B. 11. chapter 4.
says, The world it self, by its most orderly mutability and mobility, and the
most beautiful Feature of all visible things, does after a sort silently
proclaim both that it was made, and by none but God, nor could he made by any
but him, who is unutterably and invisibly great, and unspeakably and invisibly
fair. And Scaliger in his 3. Exercitation, shows that Simplicious, Philoponus,
Ammonius, Avonroes, and many other renowned Men, neither fewer in number nor of
less Authority, then those of the contrary foolish opinion, did hold that the
world depended upon God, as its Efficient Cause: and at last, thus concludes.
For if by his Providence all things are governed (which no man in his wits can
deny) it necessarily follows, that he was the maker of al. For if he made not
the world: then he received it made by another, either as borrowed, or by
force, or by sale, or as a pawn, or hired, or by lawful succession, or seazing
upon it when empty, or by command, as a Minister, Servant and Mercenary from
his Lord. All which are mere trifling and Impious Conceits.

As for what concerns the end of the World: The End of the world.
The End moves the Agent to act. But there was nothing before the world saving
God alone. Nothing therefore moved God to create the world, but he himself
moved himself. and therefore he created it, that he might communicate his
infinite goodness. Which Augustine has neatly expressed in these words, de
Civit. Dei Book 11. Chapter 21. Three things we ought chiefly to enquire concerning
the Creature, who made it, by what he made it, and wherefore he made it. God
said (quoth he) let there be light, and there won light, and God saw the Light
that it was good. If therefore we ask who made it? it was God. If wherefore be
made it? because it is good. There is no more excellent Author then God, no
more efficacious Art, then the word of God, no better Cause, then that what is
good might be made by the good God. Nor does Plato render any other cause, why
God made the world, but because he is good. For it is the property of goodness
to communicate it self. And this is the end of creating the world.

But what the End is of the world already constituted and existing, is
elegantly taught us by Hermes Trismegistus, in his Book de Pietate and
Phylosophia. First there was God, then the World, then Mankind; the world for
Mankind and Mankind for God. For since every end is good, and the perfection of
that thing whose end it is; and God is the ultimate and most perfect of all
things: God is the end of all things.
God must needs be the end of all things, and all things are for that one,
which is for none but himself: and al things stand in need of God, Both to be
and to be well: Man therefore was made for God, and the world for Man. But how
all sorts of things are made for Man, is not so plain. For Scaliger calls them
the Enemies of Truth, who will have all things to be made for the use of Man.
For what profit has Man from Fleas and Wiglice? It Is truly ridiculous to say,
that Fleas are made to suck out the unprofitable blood, and Wiglice to awake us
in the night, that we may fall to our prayers. Nor does Scaliger allow that some
sorts of things were made only for varieties sake, and to stir us up to
admiration: but he determines that God made all things for some certain end.
For variety and bare ornament, is not the end, nor the Perfection of the
Universe, but a way only to that perfection. For from fundry sorts of things
orderly disposed, the perfection of the Universe does arise. Scaliger therefore
himself thus resolves the matter: that Man is a little world, and as it were
the Rule and measure of other living Creatures; yea and the Prince of al. But
he could not be Prince unless he were such as he is, viz. In the middle: nor
could he be in the middle, unless betwixt extremes. Therefore the extremes were
made that he might be in the midst: and if any of the extremes, or those
things seated betwixt the middle and the extremes were wanting, there would be
a vacuity amongst the forms. Which is much more absurd, then that there should
be a Vacuum without a Body. For seeing the most good God is full of himself, and
the world as the Platonists say, is Gods Statue or Standing Image: it must also
beful, and have no defect either in sorts, or Quantity. And therefore if even
the smallest thing were wanting in the world, the Universe would be no longer
the Universe, and the world would cease to be the world, that is to say,
beautiful, orderly ranckt, and perfect.

And thus far we have known the world by its Causes; it remains that we take a
view of the chief adjuncts thereof, and discuss the controversies raised
touching them. Now in the first place comes Eternity; and the question is,
Whether the world be eternal.
Whether this world be Eeternal or not? This question is much canvased by the
disputes of many Men, and the opinions of Philosophers concerning the same have
been various; some affirming the world had a beginning and shall have an end;
others that it had a beginning but shall never have an end; and others again
that it never had beginning nor shall ever have end. That we may therefore
disintangle our selves from so great a variety of opinions, we must first
observe this: that the chief question in this place is not: whether God made
the world. For though the madness of some has been so great, that they durst
say that this world was made by Chance; The World was not made by chance.
yet al sound Philosophers, do agree that God is the author of the world: and
therefore the Author of the Book de Mundo, Chap. 6. says Elegantly and
Piously: It is an ancient saying spread amongst all Men from their Ancestors,
that all things were made both of God and by God; nor can any Natural thing be
sufficiently furnished to persist in safety, if it be left to its own
saveguard* without the tuition of God. And that Aristotle himself knew the most
good and great God to be the maker of the world, and that he expressed as much
in words, is the judgment of most worthy Philosophers. Verily if the world were
not made by God, it must be made by it self: which is absurd. For a finite
thing cannot be the first being; and every finite thing depends upon some
other: nor are there many prime, infinite, eternal beings.

Here therefore the question is; Whether the world be from eternal, or were
created in the beginning of Time? The most renowned Ancient Philosophers have
held, that the world had a beginning. But Aristotle held that this world has
been from all eternity, as himself witnesses, in his 1. de Caelo chapter 10. t.
102. But let not us care what thi^ or that Philosopher has thought, seeing our
Religion does teach us, The world is not eurnal.
that this world was made in the beginning by the most great and good God. For
whom may we better believe when the world was made, then God himself the Author
thereof.

But whether or no, setting aside divine revelation, it may be firmly proved by
natural Reasons, that the world is not eternal, many do doubt* Iul. Caes.
Scaliger in his 61. Exercitation S. 6. says that Religion only does persuade
him, that the world had a beginning and shall at last be consumed by fire. Yet
he concludes in his 77. Exercitation, S. 5. that because God is the efficient
cause of the world, it must needs have had a Beginning and not be eternal. For
whatsoever is made, is after its efficient cause, and nothing that is made is
of equal durance with its maker, for so it should not be made. This Argument
others also use, and say that for a thing to be made and to be eternal implies
a contradiction. For that which was made, sometimes was not. And they say that
Eternity is the duration of God alone, nor can any creature be Coeternal with
its Creator.

Nor are those Arguments which Aristotle and his followers bring to prove the
eternity of the world, such as man's wit cannot answer and refute. And I
conceive it is well said, that no reason brought against our Faith is true, or
can be: because truth is not contrary to truth. For though things of Faith are
above the order of Nature, yet they are not contrary thereunto. For even here,
these who contend for the eternity of the world, do chiefly build upon two fall
foundations: one, that Creation is impossible, and that even the first cause
cannot produre any thing out of nothing: the other, that God acts by the
necessity of his Nature.

Now that Creation is not impossible and that the first Cause can produce
somewhat out of nothing, Creation is possible according to Philosophy,
may be evinced even by the light of Nature. For such as is the being of a
thing, such is its operation: but the immortal God, since in respect of his
essence he depends upon none, and needs no outward thing, neither does he need
any external thing to be presupposed in his acting. Moreover God is the cause
of all things, and nothing except God has its being of it self, but all things
depend on God. And in very deed, they who deny creation, and say it is
impossble God should make any thing of nothing, and yet grant that God is the
Efficient cause of the world (for they must needs grant that) do contradict
themselves. For if God be the efficient cause of the world: doubtless, he made
it of nothing. For besides God and the world, there is nothing out of which he
should produce it. Others bring more reasons to prove the same. And in truth,
they who deny that God could produce something out of nothing. they deny God to
be God, that is to say, that his power and perfection is ins^^ite.

And that God acts freely and not compelled by his Nature, God made the world
freely.
and that he most freely produced this world, is not contrary to humane reason.
For since God is a most perfect being, depending upno none, standing in need of
none, self sufficient, Autexousios, Autagathos, and (which word was elegantly
invented by Scaliger Exercit. 365. S. 2. Autautos, self, of himself: the will of
God cannot necessarily desire any Creature, nor can he necessarily produce any,
nor can his power be compelled by any thing: but himself most freely wills, what
by his wisdom he knows to be best: and he could, if he pleased, have made this
world much sooner or later, or not at all. Yet he does always, that which is
best. Nor, because he made the world in the beginning, was his will therefore
changed. For from eternity, it was his pleasure to produce the world, then when
he produced the same. Nor must we think, as Austin speaks in his De Civitate
Dei B. 11. Chapter 5. That any thing happened accidentally to God, in that he made
the world rather then, then in former times; since the former times had passed
equally through infinite spaces, neither had there been any difference, why one
time should be chosen rather then another. And as he says, in the said 11.
Book, Chapter 12. where he handles this argument excellently; that which we now
enquire after five thousand and od years, posterity may ask with the same
Curiosity six hundred thousand years hence, if this mortal condition of men
born and dying shall continue so long, and they retain their childish infirmity.
Those who were before us in the infancy of the world might move the same
Question. Yea and the first man himself, the day after, or the same day he was
created, might enquire why he was made no sooner. For indeed, as he says in
the same place, all the bounded spaces of Ages, if compared to boundless
Eternity, are nothing.

As it appears from Scriptures, The world shall have an end.
that the world had a beginning: so they alone persuade us that this World shall
have an End; nor is any Phylosophical reason strong enough to prove the same.
For though it be true which Scaliger says in his 61. Exercitation, S. 5. and
Exercit. 307. S. 20. that all things because they have not the cause of their
being from themselves, but depend upon another, are of themselves mutable, and
corruptible; but are not corrupted, because God will not have it so: yet true it
is, that the world left to it self, with that common and ordinary concourse of
God which now it has, may for ever endure, nor does it of its own accord tend
to corruption: but it shall end by the free command of God, viz. when he shall
withdraw from it his ordinary assistance, and change it into a better
condition. And so much for that Question whether the world be eternal.

Nor is it much less controverted: Whether this world be one. Whether there is
but one World.
For here Philosophers are at great va^iance, as may be seen in Mirandula his
Exam. vanit. doct. gent. Lib. 7. Chapter 20. For some have held the world to be but
one, others that there are many worlds, and they either like or unlike one
another. For some were of the opinion, that there were other worlds besides
this, in some of which there is neither Sun nor Moon; in others, that there is
Sun and Moon greater then those in this world; and in some many Suns; also that
there are some Worlds void of al Plants, Animals, and Moisture: and Metrodorus
did say, that it is as absurd that there should be but one world, as that in a
vast field there should grow only one Ear of Corn.

In this variety of opinions, we believe there is but one world: but we hold
setting aside what may be urged from our religion, that there is no
Phylosophical reason strong enough to prove the same. For sure enough God can
and could have made more worlds: But whether or no he will make more: none can
tell but himself, seeing neither sense nor reason can inform us. For as for the
reasons every where alleged by Aristotle and others for the unity of the
world; they are not such as do certainly prove the same. Which Plutarch,
besides others, does show in his Book of the Ceasing of Oracles, and Mirandula
in Exam. Vanit. Doct. Gent. L. 6. Chapter 9. who at last thus concludes: truly, as
it seems to me, if those other worlds pleaded for, be of several sorts,
Aristotle's reasons will be invalid: because the sort of Earth and water and
other parts and their Nature would be different. For so the parts being of one
and the same Nature would hang together and would not go out of their world;
all heavy bodies would seek their own Center, and that lighter would sly
upwards, and the same may be judged of the rest, proportionably.

Howbeit this one world does sufficiently demonstrate the goodness of God,
because he made it of his own accord, not being obliged so to do; also it shows
his great power, because he could make it of nothing; and exceeding great it
shows his Wisdom, because he has made al things so admirably and with such
rare skill.

And although we believe this world to be one; The World is perfect.
yet we hold the same to be perfect, with such a kind of perfection as a
Creature is capable of. For it was made by a perfect Artist according to a
perfect Pattern: nor is there any thing wanting, in the absolute perfection of
the things whereof it is made up; nor in their Variety. For it contains all
degrees of beings. Nor in order: for in so great a diversity of things, there
appears a rare order, and all things are fitly disposed in their places: The
figure of the world is sphericals
all which are enclosed with the Heaven, which because it is round, the Figure
or accidental form of the world, therefrom resulting, is round also. And so
much of the world in General.

Chap. 2. Of the Heaven, and the Stars.
NOw the world is divided into two Regions, the Etherial and Sublumary: and
being to treat of the Ethereal or Celestial in the first place, those most
Famous Questions present themselves, agitated by the disputes of most Famous
Philosophers, now for many Ages: Whether there is matter in Heaven: and if
there be, Whether the Heaven have matter in it.
Whether it is of the same Nature with that which is here below. And although
as to the former question, there are scruples good store on al sides: yet that
opinion seems to me more probable which attributes matter to the Heaven and I
conceive it was well said of Scaliger in his 359. Exercitation, Sect. 11. to
make a Body without matter, is all one as to make a dream without sleep: or as
he has it in his 1 de plantis Bread without meal. For where ever there is
quantity, Figure and Local motion: there must needs be matter. For Quantity
immediately follows the Nature of matter, and cannot be in any thing without
it, and all forms and accidents have no quantity of themselves, but are said to
have quantity, because of the Quantity of the matter wherein they are.
Wherefore since we see, that the Heaven has quantity, is of a certain Figure,
and a determinate magnitude, and locally moved: we must needs confess that it
has matter in it.

But what kind of matter this is, Whether the matter of the Heavens be the same
with that of inferior Bodies.
whether such as this of ours, or some peculiar: is so obscure a Question, that
resolve which way you will, you may easily find arguments to maintain your
Assertion. We deny that the Heaven consists of one or more of these Elements of
ours, which was the opinion of very many an cient Philosophers: yet I conceive
we should not assign it any other matter, then this first matter of ours. For
there is no need to invent a new one, nor any necessity to inintroduce a new
being, into the Catalogue of Nature: since what ever is attributed to the
Heaven in respect of its matter, may rightly be attributed to this matter of
ours. Scaliger therefore in his Exercitation, 61. does well conclude this
Question: One matter differs not from another, save by the Form entering
thereinto, whereby it becomes this or that. For matter as matter, includes no
act in it self, and has nothing determinate, but receives all determination
from the Form. Whereunto this may be added, that in Heaven there is Quantity,
and some other Qualities, which are common to it and these inferior Bodies, and
proceed from the first matter. Which things being so the opinion of Avenroes
cannot be admitted who invented a new simple Body not compounded of Matter and
Form, and held that Heaven was a Body, that was neither pure matter, nor pure
Form, nor any thing of them compounded, but a certain middle thing betwixt
these, viz, A certain form consisting of it self, furnished with dimensions and
apt for Local motion. For these things seem to be invented without cause, yea
and hard to conceive, That there should be a thing (to use Scaligers words
Exerc. 61. S. 1.) in Nature subsisting of it self, which is neither God, nor an
Act, nor a power; neither informing nor informed; neither matter nor
immaterial; neither a Body nor incorporeal; without the Predicaments, and yet
having Predicamental Quantity and Qualities. Which what for a thing it can be,
let himself consider. And if it could be proved, that there is a simple Body
not compounded of matter and Form: verily a great foundation of peripatetical
Philosophy will fall to the ground. And if there were such simplicity in the
Heaven: there can be perhaps no cause assigned, why it might not also be
admitted in some sublunary Bodies.

Nor if we should attribute to Heaven this first matter of ours, need we to
fear that the Heaven should fall and at one time or another of its own Nature
come to destruction. For according to Zabarella himself Lib. de Ortu and
Interitu c. 11. who nevertheless in this point takes part with Averroes, the
first matter, seeing it is a being merely potential, and acts nothing, is no
adequate Cause of Generation and corruption of things: and every action is to
be ascribed to the Agent; and to matter, passion only belongs. Nor is matter
the subject of Corruption, save when it is with Natural Forms corruptible, from
which the accidents flow, which have contrarily, or contraries also under
contrary differences. Therefore we must not deny the Heavens to have matter,
though they be not generated nor corrupted. For there are two offices of
matter. Universally and primarily it is given ^o all things, to sustain
Quantity, and to receive motion, and the actions of Agents. For it is the first
subject of Quantity, and is merely passive, acts nothing, but only suffers: and
all things naturally suffer, because they have matter. Moreover Matter is given
to sublunary things, because of Generation, to which it concurs as a secondary
cause, viz. In as much as it is apt to receive the Action of the Generator. The
cause therefore why there is no Generation nor Corruption in the Heavens is,
because there is nothing contrary to Heaven, by which it may be corrupted, and
because it has no Particular aptitude to receive other forms, which is only
opposed to act, and is really the same thing with privation. For in Heaven
there is no Privation of corruptiple Forms; because the Heaven has no
immediate aptitude to receive sublunary Forms, But the Form of Heaven does so
dispose and bind its matter to i^self, that it has no Particular aptitude to
receive other Forms, but only that same universal one, which is an aptitude to
receive all Forms indifferently; in respect of which nevertheless unless a
Particular aptitude be added, and a contrary agent be at hand, no Generation is
made. Yea and (which I would have those to consider, who think the Heaven must
perish, if it have matter) the Earth which is in the Center of the world is
safe from all Corruption nor is corupted, because no contrary Agent pierces so
far, by which it might be corrupted. We conclude therefore; that The matter of
Heaven has no particular and immediate aptitude to receive coruptible forms;
and that it has only an appetite of perfection, but not of Mutation, as
Scaliger says. For the Matter because it cannot subsist of it self, desires to
be perfected by the form, whatever form it be, whether of a Man or of a Beetle,
nor of its own accord does it lay down one form and take up another; but the
whole vicissitude of Generation and Corruption, depends upon the Contrariety of
the forms and the qualities issuing out of them, as on its principal Cause:
which seeing the Heaven has not, we need not to fear, that it shall come to
decay, only because of its matter. Of which see more in Scaligers Exercit. 17.
and 61.

Moreover that is also no Inconvenience that there should be one matter of
Celestial and Sublunary things. For the difference and excellency of things
proceeds not from the matter, but from the form; and the same first matter
which bears the form of a Mushrome or Flea, is also the subject of ou^
understanding, which is verily a divine Substance, and more noble than Heaven
it self.

Nor is it a less Controversy, What that form of Heaven is. What is the Form
of Heaven
Averroes and they which follow him do not allow the Heaven an informing Form,
but say that it is a simple body, without composition of matter and form. But
this opinion has been already rejected. But we do more rightly to attribute
unto Heaven an informing Form also, since as we have showed it consists of
matter. For matter cannot subsist of it self, not perform those most noble
actions which proceed from Heaven, besides its motion; since it is purely
passive, and no action belongs thereunto. Yea and matter of it self, cannot be
moved: for every thing which is moved is an actual Being.

But whether it be formally a soul or not, needs inquisition. Whether the
Heaven has a Soul.
It is indeed an old opinion of the Pythagoricks and Platonicks, that the
Heaven has a soul: howbeit the contrary opinion is truer, which holds that the
Heaven has no soul. For there appears no actions of any kind of living Creature
therein, which can proceed from a soul; nor has it any of those Organs, which
are necessary to perform the actions of a living Creature. The Heaven is not
nourished: because in Heaven nothing is corrupted or dissolved, which needs to
be restored by nourishment: nor does it feel because it has no organs of
feeling, nor of other senses, nor is there any end for which the Heaven should
have senses: Much less can we allow an intelligent soul to the Heaven to inform
the same, lest we fall into that Error which many have condemned in Origin, who
taught the Stars had souls and were capable of Virtues and Vices. It is
sufficient therefore to attribute to the Heaven a form which is no soul; but
yet more noble than the forms of the Elements, by means of which, it is that
which it is, has a certain figure, and a certain power by means of its Light
and Influences of acting upon these lower bodies, and also motion. And this is
the matter and form of Heaven by means of which it is also rightly termed a
natural Body. For if it were destitute of these, a just cause could hardly be
found, why it should be called a natural Body. And this Body consisting of
matter and form is termed Aethe^eal.

Moreover the Parts of the Heaven are twofold, some quite perspicuous, Some
parts of the Heaven perspicuous, some not, Whether the Heaven is one continued
Body?
which are the Orbs, and are sometimes in a special manner called Heaven, others
are not to be penetrated by our fight, and shining, called Stars. Touching the
Orbs certain weighty questions are moved, and in the first place we are to
enquire: Whether the Heavens be one continued body, or distinguished into
diverse Orbs or contiguous Spheres. Now the ancients have endeavored to prove
that there are many Heavens, by reason of the diversity of motions, which
cannot be in a simple body: seeing every simple body, is moved with one simple
motion naturally, as Aristotle tells us 1. de Celo chapter 2. t. 7. For when the
ancient Astronomers and natural Philosophers, began to observe the motions of
the Sun and Moon and other Stars; they observed that all the Stars did not
observe the same swiftness and distance, in their motion, but that some were
moved more swiftly, others more slowly, some never joined but always keeping
the same distance one from another, and others again coming nearer one to
another, even to a conjunction; that the Sun went always in the middle of the
Heaven, and that the other Planets declined some whiles to the North other
whiles to the South. From which variety of motions they gathered; that the
Heaven is not one continued Body, but is compounded of diverse contiguous Orbs.

But most of the latter Writers deny, that the various motions of the Stars do
rightly prove a plurality of heavenly Orbs; and they aver that this variety of
motions does not proceed from the number of the Orbs, but that it belongs
primarily to the Stars themselves. And in very deed it is more likely, that the
Stars are moved of themselves with their own proper motions: and that the
Heaven is a body, not hard, nor distinguished into real Orbs, wherein they
stick fast and are mo^ed by their motion, but a body sluid like the Air, of a
substance most thin and delicate wherein the Starr perform their motions. For
not to speak now of refraction, of which if the Heaven were solid, there should
be two, one by reason of the vapors ascending from the Earth, another by reason
of the solid body of the Heaven: whereas nevertheless those skilled in Optics
and Astonomy, have observed one only refraction which is sensible and worthy of
note: the motions of the Comets, do evidently demonstrate that the Heaven is
not solid. For since it is now out of Controversy (unless any will call in
question the most certain demonstrations of Astronomers) that Comets or unusual
Stars (for we shall not now contend about the name) have been seen in the Region
of Heaven above the Moon, and have observed peculiar motions, not like the
motion of any other Star fixed or planetary; this could not be, without the
penetration of Bodies if the Heaven did consist of solid Orbs: For if the body
of the Comet were fixed in the orb of any sixed or planetary Star, it would
always keep the same distance from the said Star or Planet. Which since it
does not, a peculiar Orb should be attributed to every Comet, to carry the same
about: Which cannot be; since the whole Cystern of Heaven according to the
ancient Doctrine, is possessed by the Orbs of the six'd Stars and Planets. Also
the motion of of the Planets proves the same. For seeing they are sometimes
nearer the Earth, sometimes further off, which the Doctrine of Paralaxes
teaches, and the appearing Quantity shows; for Venus appears sometimes so great
that the unwary beholders take her for a new Star; and Mars is sometimes seen
equal to to Jupiter in bigness: which cannot any otherwise come to pass, save
because in the fluid and penetrable body of the Heaven, the said Stars come
sometimes nearer the Earth, and otherwhiles go farther from the same. And how
could Mars be sometimes higher, otherwhiles lower than the Sun, if both were
carried in a solid Orb?

The Premises therefore considered, The Stars are moved by a faculty planted in
them by God.
we must hold that in that same fluid, penetrable, most thin delicate, and
invisible body of Heaven, The Stars are moved by a power and faculty implanted
in them by God their Creator, without any violent and external impulse or
carriage. For that God who willed and commanded, that the Stars by their
Motion, should describe the Times, Days, and Years, gave them power likewise
to Effect the same. And if the Creator could put such Power into the Elements
Earth and Fire, that in a most straight Line, the one should move down to the
Center, the other upwards from the Center, why could he not give the Stars such
a power as to move circularly? And therefore Cicero vainly wonders in his 2. de
Natura Deorum, where this constancy comes in the Stars, this so great an
agreement from all Eternity in such several motions, how it can be without
Mind, Reason and Counsel. For this faculy of Motion is not quite void of reason
and Counsel, but by the most wise Creator, it is granted to these his Forms and
Instruments.

Mean while it hinders not, ^^y Astronomers retain the Orbs. Heaven is a most
simple Body.
though the Circles and Orbs be retained by Astronomers as hypotheses. For such
figures are not without cause used, to describe the motions of the Stars, as
are described in the said Orbs, and Circles.

Now this Heaven is a Body most simple and most pure, of a different nature
from the Elements and therefore a fifth Essence so called by Aristotle: which
also is true nevertheless of the Stars. It is void of all color clear and
transparent, and therefore cannot be seen. The Heaven (...) not colored.
For though as Scaliger faies in his 66. Exercit. Sect. 1. the Heaven seems to
be of a bluish or sapphire color: yet it rather seems so, than is so indeed.
For even the Air also, though near us it have no color, yet afar off it seems
to be color'd. The Reason is, because it is thickened, not by composition of
parts, but by disposition. For distance represents many parts to the sight,
disposed al along in a visual line.

The said Heaven is unchangeable and uncorruptible (as also the parts) For
there is not any body in the world, by which the Heaven or the Stars, It is
unchangeable. The Heaven also it self works upon (...) lower bodies.
can be affected or changed. Contrariwise, the Heaven has power to work upon
these lower bodies, and does diversely affect them. For though the chief action
upon these lower bodies, proceeds from above from the Stars: yet must not all
active power be denied the Heaven it self, wherein the Stars are and are moved;
seeing it also has its form, which can no ways be idle. Moreover the Heaven is
the greatest of all bodies, since it embraces all other bodies of the world in
its Compass: It is the greatest of bodies.
also it has a Spherical Figure, because it is of all others the most capacious.

As to the Nature of the Stars, it is indeed commonly held, The Original of the
Stars.
that they are the thicker parts of their Orbs; but the truer opinion is, that
the most good and great God, did on the fourth day distribute that same
primitive light, which he made the first day, into the Stars, and hence was the
original of all this number of Stars. For it is absurd to think that first
light returned to nothing, seeing it was good. Or if any man please to place
that primitive light in the upmost region of the world, above the starry
Heaven, and to make that upmost Region its mansion place; yet it must be
confessed, that God the Author of the world, created the Stars themselves full
of light upon the fourth day; whereas he created the Heaven before, upon the
second day. And this light is, doubtless, a most noble substance, most
excellent, most simple, than which among all bodies, nothing is more beautiful,
more sweet, nothing more admirable: by which all these sublunary things are
inclined and cherished: without which this world would have no beauty: this as
among bodies it is most beautiful, so it is the first and chiefest Image of the
wisdom, beauty, power and goodness of the most high.

Howbeit, the inmost nature and Essence of this Light, is unapproachable and
unsearchable by humane wit; and therefore we cannot in this darkness of humane
understanding perfectly understand the nature of the Stars. For seeing the
Essences even of those things which are about us in this lower world, are
unknown to us; it is easy to see how little we can promise our selves
concerning the knowledge of things so exceedingly remote.

Very like it is, That every Star has its proper substantial sorm, and as here
below, Plants and Animals do by their forms differ from the Air wherein they
live, and one from a another, so also that the Stars differ both from the Heaven
and one from another, by their specific forms, which appears even from their
essential proprieties and Effects. For the Stars have light, the Heaven has
not, and the Stars do thereby differ one from another; and Experience shows,
that these things below are differently affected by different parts.

Since therefore we cannot pierce into the knowledge of the inner form and
Essence of the Stars, let us weigh and consider these proprieties and effects
which flow from the form and Essence of the Stars. And there comes here chiefly
to be considered, Their Motion, Light and Shine, Heat and hidden Influences.

And in the first place the most wise and powerful Creator, The Motion of the
Stars.
has placed this power in the Stars, that every one is moved with a certain
motion; and he that commanded them to describe the times by their motion, gave
them a power to move and to perform what he had commanded.

Now these Stars have a double motion. Some stars are fixed others Planets.
For some are moved with an equal motion in such sort, as they retain always
the same distance one from another, and these are commonly called the fixed
Stars: others have diverse motions, nor are they always equally distant one
from another, but now are joined, and after a while separated, one while they
are nearer another while further one from another; and those Stars are called
Planets.

Which being so, they make two motions of the Stars, Whether there are two
motions of the Stars?
one whereby the fixed Stars are perpetually moved altogether, retaining the
same distance one from another: the other is both differment for the motion of
the fixed Stars, and thereby every Planet is moved after a peculiar manner.
These motions are vulgarly termed the first and second motion, and they teach
that the first motion, is that whereby the uppermost Sphere is carried about
once in twenty four hours, and carries all the other Spheres with it from East
to West; and the second they say is that which is proper to the rest of the
Spheres, whereby they move contrary to the Primum mobile or first Sphere from
West to East, some more swiftly, others more slowly: which distinction of
motion we willingly allow the Astonomers, if they will take it as an Hypothesis
or supposition. Howbeit we conceive this distinction needlessly introduced into
the Schools of Natural Philosophy, and peradventure against the the Consent of
Nature: and we think it no absurdity to say that all the Stars are moved from
East to West, the sixed ones most swiftly, in the space of twenty four hours
the rest by how much they are lower, so much the slower, and the Moon most
slowly, much about the space of twenty five hours, only some minutes less.

For that seems not a sufficient Cause which they assign for their second
motion, viz. Because we see the Moon or some other planet, which was joined to
some fixed Star, in the West or the South, after one or two days, one or more
degrees Eastward, that Star being left Westward, with which it was before
conjoined, it becomes nearer and therefore was moved from the West toward the
East. For if you shall suppose all the Stars to move from East to West, and
every upper Star to be swifter then the lower, there will be the same appearance
in the Heaven, and the lower which move more slowly will be left behind by the
upper which are moved swiftly: which is more likely to be true then that the
planets move toward the East. Let the Sun and Moon be joined in one point
Westward and let us suppose that the Sun once in twenty four hours and four
minutes, and the Moon in twenty four hours, are carried about the Heavens; when
the day following, the Sun shall be returned to the same point, the Moon will be
yet distant therefore almost twelve degrees, and will at last reach it after
fifty one minutes are past. And this opinion which we propose Plato seems to
have favored in his 7. de Legibus, where thus he writes concering the Sun,
Moon, and other Stars. Every one of them goes round the same way, not many
ways but one way: though they seem to be carried about by various and manifold
ways. And that amongst them which is most swift, is not rightly judged to be
most slow, and that which is most slow, most swift.

Howbeit as to the period of the Stars, and their return (as they call it) to
the same point of Heaven; it comes all to one pass, whether you hold the Stars
to be moved with one motion or with two. For the Moon being departed from one
point of Heaven, after twenty nine days or near upon, she is seen in the same
again, which space is called Mensis Lunaris, the Moons month. The Sun, Venus,
and Mercury, return to the same place in the space of about a year: Mars in two
years; Jupiter within twelve years; Saturn in the space of thirty years; the
fixed Stars in the space of 48000 years, which space of time they call Plato
his great year: and Plato is said to have believed that when so many years are
past, al things in the world shall return unto their old State.

In the next place we are to consider in the Stars their Lux and Lumen, Lux,
Lumen, and Radius, how they differ.
Light and Shine, then which the whole world has nothing more pleasant, and
which are rightly called by Franciscus Patricius in the fourth Book of his
Panaugia, the good and great God his greatest and best Instrument. And first
let us see what Lux, Lumen, and Radius are, and how they differ one from
another. Some there have been and still are in that opinion, that Light is a
substance and the Form of the Celestial Bodies; but their opinion swerves from
the truth; since no substantial Form can be discerned by the sight. We must
therefore hold, that Lux light is a quality and Essential propriety of a
lightful body, of it self perceptible by the sight. But what is the first
subject of light, or, whether all the Stars shine with their own light, The
Stars shine both with their own and borrwed light.
or borrow it from the Sun, herein the opinions of Philosophers do vary. For
some hold all the Stars shine with their own proper light, others hold they al
borrow their light from the Sun, and others again hold that only the Moon
borrows her light of him. This is our opinion: That all the Stars do indeed
receive some light from the Sun: yet that they have also some light of their
own. Both which we are taught by experience. For first we may chiefly observe,
it in the Moon, which in regard of her several posture to the Sunward, has
various Appearances, in regard of the Variety of light which she receives from
the Sun: the same is to be seen in the rest of the Planets, which are observed
to be brighter or darker in regard of their several postures to the Sun. And
therefore Orpheus calls the Sun the quickening Eye of Heaven: Heraclitus, the
Fountain of Heavenly light; the ancient Philosophers, the Heart of Heaven; and
the Platonists placed the Soul of the world in the Sun, as Marsilius Ficinus
tells us in his Book de Sole Chapter 6. The latter may be observed not only in the
Moon, but also in the other planets. For in the Eclipse of the Moon, we see
she has some light, and the same appears also after her conjunction, when we
may many times see that part of her which is from the Sun, by means of her
inbred light: which also any one may observe in the planets which are lower
then the Sun, as Franciscus Patritius teaches, in the 7. Book of his Panaugia

From the light proceed Lumen and Rady, shine and Beams, which Franc. Patritius
says are two diverse things in the 3. B. of his Panaugia. The truth is, where
there are Beams there is shine, but there may be shine where there are no beams
or rays. For in a Chamber which looks toward the North, and is not right
against the Sun, there is a shine at noon tide, but no beam or Rays. What
(...) Beam or Ray is.
And therefore a Ray or Beam as he there shows, is as it were a secondary
Light, or a brightness arising from the first light, and shooting to a right
and an acuate Angle. And Lumen or shine, is as it were a third light, flowing
from the first and second not diffused into Lines and Pyramids, but loosely
shed abroad. First therefore there is Lux light in the lucid Body; then there
is Radius a Beam which is an image of the light, diffused from the lucid body
in a right Line; thirdly Lumen or shine, which diffuses it self obliquely,
aside the falling of the rays into all parts of the Medium. And indeed there
seems to be some difference between a Ray and shine, or at least it is one
thing to represent the light as a visible object and to offer it to the sight,
and another thing to Illuminate the Air. For light seen from a dark place, does
not enlighten all the air, betwixt the eye and the lucid thing; and that light
which enlightens the Air hardly a furlong, is seen some miles of, in the night
time; yea and the Stars themselves, are seen by us at an huge distance in the
night; though they do not illuminate the whole Air. Which difference causes,
that there is a twofold definition of Lumen or shine. For absolutely
considered, shine is the image of light, or the quality of a Lucid Body,
whereby it communicates it self to other Natural things, affording it self to
their sight, and cherishing them. But as Shine is considered in respect of
other things which it inlightens, it is the act of Colors whereby they become
visible.

Now concerning Lumen or shine some Controversies are agitated. Whether light
is a Substance or Accident?
And first touching the Nature thereof there has always been great
dissensions amongst Philosophers, which are not yet composed, so that it is
dangerous to determine any thing in this point. Howbeit I shall breisly
deliver, what seems probable in so obscure a matter. Now the question is
whether it be a substance or an accident. For there are very many who hold that
it is a substance, some corporeal, others into poreal. And they that say the
Rays and shine are a substance, are chiefly moved thereunto, because the shine
and Beams are diffused through the Heaven and the Air, and that in a moment;
which seems improper for an accident, which passes not out of one subject into
another and because falling upon adark and solid body they are reflected and
leap back again. And those arguments could almost move me unless the same
arguments, did make as much against all visible, yea, and sensible species or
representations. For, neither are other visible species moved with the motion
of the Air, and they are in a moment diffused through their whole Sphere: Yea,
and some also, witness the Echo, is reflected And therefore as often as I think
of this matter, I thus complain of the obscurity of Nature with that most
learned Philosopher and Physician Hieronymus Fracastorius. What shall I say,
Poor wretch, that I do, what life that Ilead now? These are Hexameter Verses in
Imitation of the Latin.

Restless in my mind, and always busily searching
After Nature, who still flies, and leaves me behind Her.
And when a while sh'has showed herself, then straight in a moment
Proteus like to a thousand shapes, She turns Her Visage.
And so She leaves and vexes me, continually mourning,
For lost Labor, and old Age, so vainly bestowed.
For when of late I busily Sought, those thinly appearing
Images that flow from things and shed them all over,
And to the Wayles woods went alone to the Silent
Secret shades, there I found, how by these shows I deluded
Was, though they smite always our sense and still they assail us.
Passing and Repassing through the Doors of our senses,
Haunting our Soul all day, and in the night when She sleeps.


Yet if we may say what is probable, Lumen, light, or shine is an accident not
a substance either corporeal or incorporeal.
that opinion seems to be truest, which does affirm that light is neither a
Body nor a substance incorporeal, but an accident, and quality produced by a
lucid Body in a transparent Medium whose act it is. For if the light were a
body, since it is diffused through the whole Air, and is received by all the
parts of the Air, there would be a penetration of Bodies. Moreover, if it were
a Body, it should be moved successivly in time. For a Body cannot be moved in
an instant through a Medium filled with another Body: because the middle Body
through which it is moved would resist the same in its motion. But we see the
light spread far and near in a moment. And that it is no incorporeal and
spiritual substance is hereby apparent: in that spiritual substances fall not
under our senses, or have dimensions; both which are true of Rays and Light.

That light therefore is no substance but a Quality, Whether light be a real or
intentional accident.
has been made appear. But whether it be a real or Intentional accident as
they Phrase it, is a great question amongst the expositors of Aristotle. And in
the first place we must rightly understand the sense of this question. An
intention and an intentional being, though it is commonly taken only for that
which depends upon the operation of our mind, and without it, is nothing, viz.
For an intelligible species which represents somewhat without the Soul to our
understanding, either immediately, such as are the first notions, or mediately
by the mediation of the first, such as are the second notions: yet here in a
more general sense, the word Intention, signifies that which is the Image and
representation of another thing without the Mind, that is to say the
representation of a sensible subject in the Medium; and so an intentional being
is taken for every spiritual species representing a real object, whether it be
sensible of intellectual. So the Collor which is in our Clothes or on a tree,
is called real; that which is in a Looking-Glass, and is the Image of the color
in the Clothes, and that which from the tree is shed upon the Clothes of him
that lies under it, is said to be an intentional color. And in this sense we
hold, that the shine, is an intentional quality: yet that nevertheless, it is a
real being, as having its own Essence, without the operation of our mind, yea,
and that it has a more noble office then other intentional species so called,
and that it is ordained out only for representation, but also for other
effectual operations. Others do thus explain the matter. That light is a
spiritual quality, not principal or real, or rather material. Now there is a
great difference betwixt principal or material, and spiritual Qualities. For
the former are not the image of another thing; they are received in the subject
successively, and are moved in time according to the motion thereof; they are
not totally in any part of the subject; they are not many of the same sort in
the same subject, differing only in number, and kept unconfused and distinct.
Whereas the contrary holes in spiritual Qualities; as we may see in Lumen or
shine. For shine is the Image of Light; it is shed through the whole Air in a
moment; it is not moved according to the motion of the subject. For though the
Air is tossed with winds yet the shine of light is not moved thereby. Every
part of the shine represents the whole lucid Body from whence it comes, and in
the same part of the Air, many images of lucid Bodies or lights are kept
distinct and inconfused.

A Ray or beam is divided into a right, a reflex, a fract, and a refract: and
that is termed right or straight, The division of a Ray or Beam.
which passes from the lucid Body, without any hindrance of a dark Body. That
is reflex, which lighting upon a thick dark Body rebounds back. That is fract,
which passes out of a thin into a gross Medium, as that which comes out of the
Air into the Water. That is refract, which comes out of a thick Medium into a
thin. Howbeit Scaliger opposes the terms of a reflex and fract Radius in his
Exercit. 75. Sect. 10. and conceives, not without cause, that that which is
commonly called reflex, should rather be termed fract: for the reflex commonly
so called, is not one Beam but two; one falling on and another rebounding back:
and that the fract, ought rather to be termed shed, or powered abroad. For that
is one Ray, which is in the Water and in the Air; dissering only in the
variety, The Heaven and the Stars do not therefore heat, because they are fiery.
and density of parts, being thinner in the Water, thicker in the Air.

After Lux and Lumen, Light and Shine, the Heavenly heat comes to be
considered, and the canses thereof to be searched into. And although, not only
some of the ancients, but of the latter writers also, have been of opinion,
that the Heavens and Stars do therefore heat, because they are of a fiery
Nature, and have in them Heat formally, as a Natural accident, by means whereof
they again heat other things: yet that opinion is by most men rejected, and it
is resolved, that the Heaven though it is not of its own Nature hot, has yet a
power of heating these inferior Bodies; and as Scaliger conceives in his 23.
Exercitat. that the heat is indeed from the Stars, but not in them, but in
these bodies beneath; and in the 74 Exercit. Sect. 2. that calefaction or
heating does primarily and of it self belong to the Sun, without any Medium, as
to a first Body, the author of Heat, but not the first subject thereof. But if
any man shall hold, that the Stars are hot, not with a fiery heat, but with an
heat proper to themselves, I see not by what solid reason, he can be confuted.
For there is no cause why the Heaven should be void of all qualities. And Heat
seems to be an individual conpanion to light. Nor need any man fear, that the
Heaven should be corrupted by these inferior Bodies, if it be hot. For since
the Heaven does not participate with these inferior bodies, either in the
Nature of its Essence, or its Qualities: the inferior bodies no ways act upon
the Celestial. Nor was Carden the first that held heat to be in the Heaven, but
the Arabian Philosophers long before, and Mirandulanus and others who followed
them. For thus writes Job. Picus Mirandulanus in Astrolog. Lib. 3. Chapter 4. Heat
follows light as a propriety thereof, not fiery heat, nor Aereal but Celestial;
a proper quality of the Heaven, as light is. I say an heat most effectual and
saving, peircing althings, cherishing all things, moderating all things.

From the Premises some light arises to that Question, How Heaven heats these
lower Bodies.
how Heaven heats these lower Bodies? It Is commonly held that Heaven heats
them, by its motion and light. But touching motion, it is a doubtful case. It
cannot indeed be denied, that a swift motion of a solid Body, does heat the Air
next unto it: since experience shows that to be true. For motion does heat by
attenuating, it makes the parts of the Air thin, and so heats them; yea and if
it be more vehement, turns them into fire. For the fire being, as hotter, so
thinner, then the Air. If the Air be a little more attenuated, the Form of the
Air can no longer subsist in a thin matter, but the form of Fire is introduced.
But this is doubted, whether the Heavens motion, produce heat in these lower
Bodies? Whether the motion of Heaven be a cause of Heat?
some holds the motion of the Heaven pierces as far as the Earth, yea and into
the inmost bowels thereof, and produces heat by making the Air thin, and by
grating thereupon. But contrariwise, Scaliger in his 23. Exercit. says, that
he did not believe the Son of Roes, who said, that the Heavenly Bodies did not
warm by any heat in themselves, but that through the swiftness of motion, both
heat and light came from the Stars, by their motion grating upon the Air; and
held that the cause of the motion of Heaven was, that the Stars might
communicate their virtues to the parts here below, but not that they should
heat. And indeed great cause there is to doubt, whether the Heavens motion do
heat the inferior Bodies. For they who hold that the Heaven by its motion,
warms these inferior Bodies, do all presuppose, that the Heaven is a solid
Body, by the Circumvolution whereof, the neighboring Elements are wheeled
about. But that this is false, has been already declared. The fire has not its
essential heat from Heaven.
Nor can the bodies of the Stars perform that with their motion, nor does their
motion reach to these lower bodies, by reason of their so great distance. Nor
does that fire which is next the Moon, receive heat from their motion. For it
has the highest degree of heat before, by its own Form. For if it were not in
the highest degree hot, it were not sire. And therefore the fire has not its
essential heat from the Heavens, but an accidental heat, as the most subtle
Scaliger, in his 23. Exercitation, says subtly, Yea, and obscurely enough.
For what heat can be added to that which is hot in the highest degree? But
peradventure, that is thus to be understood. That the fire receives not
essential heat from the motion of the Heavens, but has it from its own form;
but it is nevertheless preserved by Heavens motion.

Now it is commonly held a clear case, that the shine is the Cause of heat: The
shine is not the Cause of heat, but the beams.
though that of Scaliger in his 75. Exercitation, may give occasion of
doubting. Heat (says he) is an accident bred by the Heavenly Bodies, and
through the Heaven, without any affection thereof, brought to the Air, and
that not by the shine, but both with and without the shine. And indeed the
Rays or Beams, rather then the shine, are the cause of Heat.

For there is not Heat, where ever there is shine, and in Winter, the Cause of
the cold is not want of light; seeing in the midst of Winter, there are many
times as clear and bright days as in Summer, but it is the obliques of the
Suns beams. And therefore when Lumen or shine, is said to be the cause of heat;
the Beams or rays are to be understood.

But how the Rays or Light does heat, How the Rays or Beams do heat?
Doctors are not yet agreed. Some are of the opinion that light therefore
heats, because it ^arifies and makes th^^ the Air, after the same manner as
motion does; and that the doubled Rays do it in a special manner. For though
the incident and single Rays, have also the power of heating and attenuating:
yet their force, they say, is weak; but the doubled Rays beating one against
another do more strongly grate upon he Air and rarisie the same. Howbeit many
do contrary wise hold with probability enough, that the light does of its own
Nature produce heat, and that a Ray compounded of (...) one and a reflex, does
heat more then a simple, not because two Rays Imiting one against another do
grate upon the Air (for how should that great upon the Air which is no Body?)
but because, that portion of light which was to go straight forward, being
hindered by an Opake Body is reflected and joined with the incident Ray, and so
virture conjoined becomes stronger then that which is dispersed. Hence some
Rays are stronger then other some to excite Heat. For those which fall
perpendicularly, and reflect upon themselves, are of al others most effectual:
Perpendiculer rays most effectual.
and those are next these most powerful who go least into oblick Augles; but
the more they go oblickly from the point of incidence, the least heat they
raise. For the nearer the Sun comes to our Zenith and the directer his beams
^al upon us; so much the greater heat is caused. And it goes contrariwise in
the Winter, when the Sun darts his Beams upon us oblickly.

Now it will be worth our while to enquire whether the Heavens do not also some
other ways work upon these inferior Bodies. The Stars are not placed in Heaven
only for ornament sake.
There are some Men found ^o filly as to dare to deny, not only other more
noble actions of the Heavens upon things below, but also their power of
heating; and to hold that the Stars were set set in the Heaven only for
ornaments sake like Golden Spangles; of which fect of men Nicho. Frischlinus
seems to have been. But away with such Barbarousness I Asclepius was long since
of a better understanding, when he thus wrote to King Anmon: the good
operations of the Sun, are not terminated in the Heaven and Air alone, but even
in the Earth, they pierce into the deep bowels thereof: from whose Judgment,
the learned Men of latter ages, have not receded, but all have taught, that
Heaven acts upon these lower Bodies, and is a cause of much good to mortal Men.
For nothing in the whole Universe is idle, nothing made in vain, but all things
as they have their Forms; so by them they operate and act. Experience not to be
contradicted does witness the same. For we see and feel, how that by the
Heavenly Bodies, through the various augmentation of heat, the changes of times
and seasons, and the vicissitude of generation and corruption are caused;
tempests are raised; the humors of Animals, especially shelsish do increase and
lessen according as the Moon Fills or Wains. Let them go therefore, who deny the
Heavens to have any virtue, Whether the Heaven works by influence upon the
inferior bodies.
and let us consider: whether besides their light the Heavenly Bodies do work
upon things below, also by another peculiar and bidden way, which they call
influence? Most indeed of those who write against Astrology, say that the light
only of the Heavenly Bodies, which is variously communicated to several places
according to the variety of the Heavenly motions, is of it self sufficient to
produce all the effects, which are produced by the said Bodies. Yet we must
hold the contrary, viz. That the Heaven, not only by its motion and light and
the heat thereon depending, but also by certain peculiar powers, which they
call influences, does act upon these lower-Bodies. For many effects proceed
from Heaven, which cannot be ascribed to light. For light may be kept out, by a
dark or dense Body; whereas many things are generated by the concurrency of
Heaven in the profoundest Cavities of the Earth, under the Waters, whether
neither the light of Heaven nor the heat produced thereby can pierce. The
Heaven works upon things material, but does not immediate'y affect the ^oul.
And verily since there are in the Lodestone and other vulgar things, rare
virtues to act upon distant things, without any light: we ought not to deny the
same to the Heaven, so Magnificent a Body.

Howbeit we must enquire how far this Influx of the Heavens extends it self,
and upon what things it works. It is not to be denied, that the Heaven acts
upon all material and merely Natural things: but it is a question, whether that
Celestial Influx, do work upon our Soul and will. All sound Philosophers do
answer that the Stars do not work directly and immediately upon our wills. For
since the Heaven is a corporeal and material Agent, it acts only upon corporeal
and material things, but our will is a power not allied to matter. Mediately
nevertheless and indirectly, viz. by Mediation of the Organs of our Body, which
being variously Qualified do move and provoke the Fancy and the sensible
appetite, and thereby the will; the stars may incline our will to this or that.
Upon which ground it is also commonly said, that Men's manners follow the
temperament of their Bodies. Howbeit, neither the temperament, nor the stars by
the temperament do compel but only incline. For though any one through
abundance of Choler in his Body, be inclined to anger, and through phlegm to
idleness: yet it remains in the liberty of his will, either to resrain or give
the reins to his anger; or to give himself to labor or to take his ease. Hence
we may easily know what to think of Astrology, What is to be thought of
Astrological Predictions?
which is said to foretell fu^ure events, by observation of the Heavenly Bodies.
It is not to be denied, that Astrologers may many times probably foretell
Tempests, Rains, Barrenness and fruitfulness of the Earth, Diseases, and other
such like Natural effects, which Naturally depend upon the disposition of the
sublunary matter in respect of heat cold, Moisture, Dryness, and other such
like qualities, and may betide sublunary Bodies. Yet Experience shows that they
cannot always certainly foretell such things as these.

For seeing there is requisite to these kind of effects, not only the influx of
the Heavenly Bodies, which is the universal Cause, but also a certain
disposition of the Earthly Globe, which affords matter to Rain and other
Meteors, and also of the Matter and sublunary qualities, which are all unstable
and subject to change, and cannot be sufficiently discerned by the wit of man:
the judgment and prognostication cannot always be firm and certain. Much less
can any thing be certainly foretold concerning human actions which depend upon
the wills of Men, and touching things contingent and fortuitous. For though
these things depend in some measure, as has been said, upon the temperament:
yet because our temperament does not compel our will, and the Heaven it self is
not the immediate and principal Cause of the temperament, it is also hard in
this Case to foretell any thing with certainty.

Nor dare the sounder Astrologers themselves attribute any greater efficacy to
the Stars, nor to themselves any greater ability of Prediction. Whence also
Ptolomy himself, de Pred. Astronom. Lib. 7. teaches that those things only can
be foretold, in the Calculation of Nativities, which depend upon the
temperature, viz. That the Body of such an one is so and so, and his manners so
and so, whence such and such events will follow, because the quality of the
Heaven suitable to the temperament, is fit to produce a good habit, or contrary
thereunto. And he himself says in terms express, that those who forerel other
things, which have not Natural Causes, are cousening fellows, that abuse the
people. Ptolomy therefore the Prince of Astrologinians has set them their true
bounds and limits: within which nevertheless, all the Predictions which he
delivers in the following Books, can hardly be contained. And the same Author
also teaches in Lib. 1. That many things besides the Heaven, do concur to the
Temperaments of Particular persons, and that the seed falling from the Bodies
of their parents, has the chiefest force, also that the Country makes a
difference, and that education and Custom have no small force to change the
temperament.

The Causes of many Sympathies and Antipathies doubtless, betwixt the Heavenly
Bodies and these things below, do proceed from these hidden influences, the
Inquisition whereof does belong unto another place. Mean while let us hold with
that opinion of the Chaldaeans and Assyrians, recorded by Psellus, viz. That
there is a Sympathy betwixt things above and things below.

As to the other adjuncts of the Stars, viz. Their Figure and quantity: The
Figure of the stars is Sphaerical.
that their Figure is Spherical is Demonstrated. First, By the Illuminations of
the Moon: Secondly, By the Ecclipses; the sight of all Men wherever inhabiting:
since plain Bodies do change their Figure as often as those who look upon them
from below, do change their place and Situation.

And whereas the Stars appear flat like dishes; that comes from their over
great distance, for all lines drawn from the Eye to the surface of a Sphaerical
Body far off, appear equal to the middle or perpendicular line, drawn from the
Center of the Eye, to the Center of the spherical body. Vitello B. 4. chapter 65.

The Stars are of two sorts, Two sorts of Stars fixed, and wandering or
Planetary.
the Planets and fixed Stars, as was said before. Those are called fixed Stars,
which are in the uppermost part of Heaven, and in their motions do always keep
an equal distance one from another. The Planets or wandering Stars, are not so
called, because they really wander, or are moved with an uncertain motion, but
because though they hold a certian rule in their motions, yet in respect of the
fixed stars, they have a more free kind of motion, and are sometimes in one,
another while in another part of the Heavens.

The Planets are commonly reckoned to be but seven. The number of the Planets.
For though Favorinus in in Gellius B. 14. chapter 1. did doubt whether there were
only seven Planets; and supposed there might be more, though not seen by us, in
regard of their exceeding either splendour or altitude: yet because neither
experience, nor reason can evince there are more, the vulgar number has been
retained hitherto.

Howbeit amongst the late Astronomers Galilaeus a Florentine, has found out
certain new Planets, formerly not known or seen by any man, by help of his
optical Tube or prospective Glass; which he observed to move about Jupiter, and
called them the medicean Stars (from Cosmos medices the Duke of Tuscany, so
called, to whom he dedicated his labors) also the Jovial Stars or Jupiter's
Stars: whose number and motion he described in a Book called Siderius Nuncius:
wherein he described other things by him observed in the face of the Moon, in
innumerable fixed Stars, the Galaxy or Milky way, and cloudy Stars, worthy of
consideration.

Astronomers at this day reckon the fixed Stars to be 1022. The number of the
fixed Stars
but there are more indeed and in truth. For even Pliny in his Natural History
B. 2. chapter 41. says that skilful men had reckoned 1600. remarkable for their
effects and use; and those that have in our times sailed into the South parts
of the world, relate that they have observed more. And therefore though we may
grant to the Astronomers, that there are so many fixed Stars which may
evidently be observed, and may conducce to a astronomical Calculations: yet if
any shall contend that there are indeed no more, we shall stop his mouthwith that
of Austin in his 16. B. de Civitate Dei chapter 23. Whosoever (says he) boast that
they have counted and set down the total number of the Stars, the Authority of
this Book (Genesis 15.) does condemn them: and that there are indeed more, the
observation of the foresaid Galiaeus, does evince.

Also there is some controversy touching the order of the Planets: The Order
of the Planets.
Metrodorus Chius, Anaximander and Crates, as Plutarch informs us in his 2. de
Placit. Phylos. chapter 15. held the Sun to be highest, next him the Moon, after
her the fixed Stars and Planets. Plato and all the Greek Philosophers in a
manner, did believe the Sun to be next the Moon. Ptolomy placed the Sun in the
midst of the Planets, and made such an order of the Planets, as that the Moon
should be lowest and next the Elements, Mercury next above her, Venus next
above him, in the fourth place the Sun, in the fifth Mars, in the fixed Jupiter,
in the seventh Saturn, in the eighth the fixed Stars, which opinion is by most
men followed. For both the observation of the Parallaxes, and other
Astronomical reasons do confirm the same.

For the greater Parallaxe a Planet has, the nearer it is to the Earth; and the
lesser parallaxe, the further from the Earth. But amongst all the Planets, the
Moon has the greatest Parallaxe; Mercury somewhat a lesser; Venus yet a lesser;
and the Sun the least. Whence we collect, that the Moon is nearest the Earth,
Mercury a little further off than she, Venus more remote than he, and the Sun
more remote than Venus. Moreover the Moon obscures and takes out of our sight
Mercury, Venus and the Sun; which could not be, if these Planets were lower.

Nevertheless, although this be certain, and the reasons aforesaid do
sufficiently demonstrate, that the Moon is below Mercury and Venus: yet it is
not thereby proved that Venus is higher than Mercury. For suppose the Moon
obscure Venus and Mercury: yet it does not hence appear, whether Mercury or
Venus be next the Moon, or whether Mercury be below or above Venus. Nor do the
Parallaxes demonstrate the same. For though they teach that the Moon is next
the Earth, because it has the greatest parallaxe: Yet that which is vulgarly
reported of the Parallaxe of the Sun, Venus and Mercury, is not so certain. For
latter Astronomers have observed, that Mercury has many times the same
Parallaxe of the Sun, Venus often times the same, and often times also a lesser.
Which cause moved Tycho Brahe that most noble Astronomer, to invent a new
disposition of the Planets; with which as more probable, most Astronomers at
this day content themselves, til some body shall teach them better. But whatever
Situation of the Planets we shall allow, yet this remains certain, that it
cannot be defended, unless we hold, as has been showed before, that the Heaven
is no solid body, and that there are indeed no Orbs therein of which it should
consist. Which if it be not allowed, but we shall include the Stars in their
Orbs; there must needs be penetration of bodies, if their motions be salved;
which the motions of the Sun, Venus, and Mercury do chiefly declare. And most
probable it is, which also I propounded before, that there is not a double
motion of the Planets, one from East to West, another from West to East, but
that all the Planets are moved from East to West; since Entities or Beings are
not rashly to be multiplied, and without necessity: and since it suffices that
the Stars have an internal principle of their motion; it is needless to ad an
external and violent one. Aristot^e says rightly in his 1. B de Celo chapter 2.
when he demonstrates, that a violent motion is contrary to a natural, and that
a sin plemotion suits with the celestial bodies being simple; and that as the
fire is moved upwards, the Earth downwards, so the heavenly bodies are
naturally moved with a circular or wheeling Motion.

Astronomers have reduced the most considerable and visible fixed Stars, The
distribution of the fixed Stars into Constellations.
for better knowledge and memories sake, into certain figures resembling living
Creatures and other things, which they call Constellations. Which distinction of
Figures and Constellations is of exceeding Antiquity and was known either
before, or soon after the flood; witness, not only the most ancient Poets
Hesiod and Homer, but also the holy Scriptures: For in Job 9.9. mention is made
of Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades.

Now credible it is that the Astronomers were Authors and Inventers of these
constellations who were studious of the Heavenly bodies, also Seafaring men,
as appears by the Southern Constellations, found out by the Navigators of the
former Age and by them named, of which Virgil was aware, when he wrote, Navita
dum stellis numeros and nomina fecit.
When the Seamen, numbered and named the Stars.


Also Husbandmen, who in days of old wanting the benefit of Calendars or
Almanacks, were fain to begin their Labors, according to the appearance of
certain Stars or Constellations. Whence also it happened, that some Stars have
diverse names, according as the Astronomers, Sailers, or Husbandmen called them.

Here also is to be observed, The Constellations differ from the twelve Houses.
that the signs of the Zodiac or Austerisms differ from the twelve houses,
each of which has thirty degrees, according to which the motions of the Sun,
Moon and other Planets are reckoned, being obvious to the mind, but not to the
Eyesight. But the signs of the Zodiac, are Stars visible to the Eye, reduced
into certain Images, which Images, are not equal, but some greater, others
lesser. For the Constellation of Virgo than Libra, and Libra than Gemini.

Now these Constellations are divided into those of the Zodiac, and those
without the Zodiac, which are Northern or Southern. For the Zodiac is the
pathway of the Planets, out of which though the Planets, excepting the Sun, do
decline some whiles to the South, otherwhiles to the North, from the eccliptick
which is the Sun's path: yet they never wander out of the latitude of the
Zodiac which consists of sixteen degrees. The signs of the Zodiac are Aries,
the Ram; Taurus the Bull; Gemini the Twins; Cancer, the Crab; Leo, the Lion;
Virgo, the Maiden; Libra, the Balance; Scorpio, the Scorpion; Sagitarius, the
Archer; Capricornus, the Goat Buck; Aquarius, the Water-man; Pisces, the Fishes.

The Northern Signs are twenty one. The Bear greater and lesser; the Dragon;
Boots; Ariadne her Crown; Hercules; Cepheus; the Harp; the Swan; Cassiopeia;
Perseus; Hemochus; the Serpent; Serpentarius; the Ar^ow; the Aeagle; the
Dolphin; the Pegasus, or Flying Horse; The little Horse; Andromeda; the
Triangle.

The Southern signs as yet discovered are fifteen: The Whale; Orion; Eridamus
River; the Hare; the Dog; The little Dog; the Ship Argo; the Hydra or
Watersha^e; the Cup; the Crow; the Centaure; the Woolf; the Altar; the southern
Crown; and the southern Fish.

But Americus Vespacius, and they who after him have sailed the sourthern parts
of the world, do aver that the southern part of the Heaven, which has been yet
unknown, is adorned with many very bright and remarkable Stars: which in
imitation of the Ancients they have reduced into certain Constellations, by
them thus named; the Triangle; the Peacocks Tail; the Camel; the Indian Be;
the Crane; Noabs Ark; the Hornet; the Cross; Touta; The Water-snake; the
Clouds; the Phaenix; the River Indus. All which Constellations, both old and
new, may at this day easily be known by the Globes artificially made for the
same intent.

The Stars are also divided according to their magnitude, into six Orders or
Magnitudes; The Stars divided into tribes.
and some are said to be, of the first; others of the second; others o^ the
third; others of the fourth; others of the fifth; and others of the sixth magn
tude: which are every where reckoned up by Astronomers. Yet this is to be
observed, that the Stars which are said to be of the same magnitude, are not
all really of the same Quantity or Splendour; for the Syrius or Dog star, does
far outstrip all other Stars of the first magnitude.

To these heavenly bodies belongs also questionless the Galaxia or milky way:
What the milky way is
now it is nothing but a Circle or Zone rather of a white color, to be seen a
nights in the Sky, reaching from North to South; and dividing the Heaven into
two Haemispheres or half circles: the progress and carriage whereof Pliny in
his 18. of Not. Hist. chapter 29. has briefly described, and Manilius, more
largely, in the first Book of his Astronomical Poem.

Touching the nature thereof, sundry men are of sundry minds. We, omitting the
Poets fables touching Juno's milk a part whereof fell upon this region of
Heaven, as Hercules was sucking, as Caelius Rhod ginus relates in his 6. Book
^nt. Lect. Chapter 7. or concerning the burning of the world by Pha^ton; the fight
of Apollo against the G^ants; of the way of souls; of the seat of the Heroes or
semy-gods; and the opinions of others reckoned up by Aristotle in the 1 Meteor.
Chap. 3. Plu^arch in his ^. de plac. Philos. chapter 1. Picus Mirandula in his
Exam. Van. Doct. Genesis l. 7. c. 12. we shall in this place only consider whether
the Vial^ctea, be somewhat that is Elementary and a true meteor, Whether the
Vi^lactes be a meteor?
or some heavenly thing. Aristotle in the place newly alleged, says the
vialactea is not in Heaven, but in the Air and consists of an hot and dry
exhalation, gathered into that place, where are the greatest number of largest
Stars, being drawn up by the said Stars; so that it is s^t were a great Comet,
and is perpetuated, by the continual and perpetual attraction of vapors, caused
by the great abundance of Stars, in that place.

Nevertheless diverse most noble Philosophers and Astronomers, have rejected
this opinion of Aristotle, for these reasons chiefly. First the perpetuity of
the Vialactea: for seeing all meteors are somewhat disorderly made, nor is there
always matter enough, of the same figure, or color for meteors, nor is it
always carried to the same part of Heaven: the Galaxie or milky way, if it
were a meteor would not be always, nor of the same magnitude, figure, color;
nor always in the same place. Again if the Vialactea were not in the Heaven
but in the Air, it would not be always seen in the same place of Heaven, and
about the same Stars, and would admit some parallaxe; after the same manner as
Comets, which are in the Air, in this Region appear under one Star, in another
Region under another. Howbeit, experience teaches the contrary, which
witnesses, that for so many ages of years the milky way has always been seen,
when the Sky is clear, in the same place, of the same greatness, shape and
color, and in all places, about the same Stars.

Nor has the opinion of Franciscus Picolhomineus any place, who that he might
some ways defend the vulgar opinion, says that there is a twofold Galaxie or
milky way; the one Celelestial, which is an ab^ndance of shining Stars, in the
eighth Sphere; the other the Effect of the former, which is an abundance of dry
exhalations, brought together into the shape of a Zone Girdle or Swath band, in
the upper Region of the Air, apt to be inflamed, placed under the Heavenly
Galaxie, and preserved thereby; which by reason of the Light it receives from
the Heavenly Vialactea, presents unto us the resemblance of a large white Way
or Road. For though it be true that a greater company of Stars, will more heat
and raise up more vapors: yet no sufficient cause, can hence be assigned, why
the Galaxie or Vialactea, should appear always of the same Greatness, and
Figure, and in the same place. For to the constitution of a meteor, there is
not only required, the force of one or more Stars, but also matter, and that
after a certain manner disposed: which because it is fluent and unstable, and
is wonderfully changed by reason of the Influx of so many Stars, no meteor can
be perpetual, constant, and always return in the same measure and manner: nor
does the Sun nor any other Star, yea though in the same position, or returning
to the same place, raise the same tempests, nor can they cause the breeding of
the same meteors, by reason of the plenty or penury, or the various disposition
of the exhalation.

That opinion therefore of others is more probable, that teach, the Vialactea
to be a collection of very many and very small Stars, which they call Sporadas,
in the eighth Sphere, which because of their smalness and abundance, cannot be
distinctly seen, so that their light being jumbled together, represents to our
sight a white, or milky color. To this opinion others do also add: that this
part of the Heaven is a little more compact than the rest, and by reason of its
compactness comes neet to the nature of Stars, and therefore both by its own
light, and by that which it receives from the other Stars, it appears more
bright than the other parts of Heaven which are more thin and transparent, and
is of a remarkable whiteness.

Next to the Stars we rank Comets; Diverse Opinions of the Nature of Comets.
and truly there is an extreme diversity of opinions touching their Nature.
Anaxagoras and Democritus held that a Comet was the gathering together of
diverse Planets, which because they were met in one place, by the mingling of
their lights they seemed to make one Star. The Pythagoreans taught that a Comet
was a Planet distinct from the seven vulgar Planets, which commonly lies hid
under the Sunbeams, and by reason of the splendour of the neighboring Sun
cannot be seen: howbeit sometimes, after long Intervals, it departs from the
Sun and comes into sight, which also commonly happens to Mercury. Hippocrates
Chius and his Disciple Aeschylus, did consent with the Pythagoreans, that a
Comet is a Star: yet herein they dissented, in that the former held the tail of
the Comet to be a part thereof; but these latter held the tail to be vapors
lifted up on high, and near the Comet, receiving the rays and light of the
Sun, and so representing a stream of Hair. Howbeit Aristotle reckons up and
refutes these opinions in his 1 Meteor. Cap. 6. Seneca in the 7. Quest. Not.
Cap. 11, 12. etc.

The Opinion of Epigenes, which Seneca relates and refutes in his 7 Book of
Not. Quest. chapter 4. etc. was, that Comets did arise, when moist and dry
exhalations being shut up in one Globe, by reason of the internal Spirit and
the discord of contrary bodies, were agitated and whirled about. For then that
same force of the Wind going round about, did by its motion inflame whatsoever
it caught, and lift it on high, and that the shining of the Fire and the Comet
did so long last til there was no more fuel to seed it, which fuel ceasing
the Comet ceases. The Opinion of Aristotle though it differ in part, does
mostly agree with this. For Aristotle teaches, that a Comet does not consist of
Celestial but of elementary matter, namely of pleaty of far and thick
exhalations raised into the upper Region of the Air and there set on fire.
Plutarch in his third de placit. Phylosoph. chapter 2. besides the opinions of the
Pythagoreans, Anaxagoras, Democritus, Aristotle, Epigenes, relates also the
opinion of Strato, conceiving that a Comet was the light of a Star,
comprehended in a thick Cloud, as it happens in Candles: and of Heraclides
Ponticus, who said that a Comet was a Cloud on high enlightened with light from
above. Seneca in Lib. 7. Not. Quest. Cap. 22. conceives that a Comet is no
sudden Fire, but reckons it among the eternal works of nature. viz. the Stars.
For he conceived there were more Planets than Fire, besides the Sun and Moon,
but that the beginnings and endings of their motions were not yet known; seeing
they finish their courses at vast distances of time.

Late Writers do also differ in this point. Scaliger herein consents with
Aristotle, in thinking that a Comet is made of Elementary matter: but he denies
that it is inflamed. For in his 79 Exercitation thus he writes: I conceive
therefore that a Comet is a Vapor drawn by the force of some Star into the
upper Region of the Air; the nature of which vapor is not burning, but of a
mixed matter, like a fume or steam, receiving the Sunbeams, and therefore
visible, and letting them through, and by that means railed. Cardan whom
Scaliger there refutes, had said, That a Comet is a Globe in the Heaven
enlightened by the Sun, through which the Beams being transmitted, do make as
it were a tail. Because the Heaven is full of Stars, which are not very compact,
but when the Air grows dry, or for some other causes, they receive and retain
light.

Bodinus in his Theater of Nature Lib. 7. P. 217. thinks it better ingeniously
to confess his ignorance, than rashly to affirm any thing in this Point, or to
assent to most light opinions. Yet he in P. 221. of the said Book, seems to be
almost of opinion, that Comets are the minds of illustrious men, which having
for innumerable Ages had a great stroke on Earth, at last being about to die
they perform their concluding triumphs, or are recalled into the starry Heaven,
there to be as it were bright Stars: and that therefore, famine, popular
diseases, and civil wars do follow, as if Cities and Peoples were forsaken by
those most excellent Captains and Governors, who did pacify the offended
Deity. Other late Writers, who teach that the Heaven is not solid, but a fluid
body like the Air, hold that ^omets are not generated below but above the Moon;
some say of exhalations carried thither, others of a part of the Heaven
condensed, and by that means shining.

And these are the chief opinions of Philosophers about the nature of Comets:
in so great a number whereof, it is doubtless hard to judge which is the truest;
nor will the nature of this work, nor my design of Brevity suffer me at large to
examine them all. Yet that it may appear, what we conceive to be most probable;
their opinion seems to us most agreeable to truth, who hold that all Comets
have been, and appeared in the Region of Heaven which is above the Moon: and if
any man will call them new Stars, we shall not oppose him. Now that their abode
has been in the Ethereal and not in the Elementary Region, may be gathered,
chiefly by the regularity of their motion, the paralaxe, which they have had
less than the Moon, as also by their equal duration. For since it has been
observed that Comets have often endured a long space, and for six months
together, in the same Quantity, and have always had a regular motion: this can
no way be attributed to a body composed of exhalations. For all such kind of
Meteors, are made after an irregular manner, as may among others be seen in the
Clouds, in which there is nothing perpetual, lasting, or regular. And the
reasons which are brought for the contrary opinion, are but weak; and later
Authors, do not without cause, call in question the observations of the
Ancients; seeing there is need of great diligence to observe the Parallaxes.
But whether they are bred anew by natural Causes, or are miraculosly produced
by God, or whether they were before out of sight, and now at last appear, it is
no easy matter by sufficient reasons to determine.

Yet this one thing, I think sit to acquaint you with in this place, that even
the Ancients also did take Comets to be Stars, which sometimes appear, and then
again become invisible, as may be manifestly seen out of Hermes Trismegistus in
his B. de providentia and fato, where he thus writes There is another kind
which they call Comets, which appear but for a time, and a while after become
invisible neither setting, nor being dissolved, and others become evident
Proclaimers of Universal Events. Now those have their place under the Circle of
the Sun. When therefore somewhat shall befall the world, then they appear. And
having appeared a few days returning again under the circle of the Sun they
become invisible, having showed themselves in the East.

They say that Comets signify wars; because hot and dry exhalations, do breed
yellow choler in the bodies of Men especially of Kings, which afterward make
men prone to more violent motions, wrath, brawlings and wars thereof
proceeding. Yet verily these are too remote causes of wars; the Politicians can
tell us of nearer causes than these. And if wars depend hereupon, there is no
need of many consultations, touching the composing of wars; we must fly to the
Physicians, who by giving choler-purging medicaments may take away al wars, and
pluck up by the roots all the Causes of Wars, out of the Bodies of Kings and
Princes. Moreover, experience shows, that Comets have appeared, which have not
been followed by any such events. This is for certain, since the Appearance or
the Generation of Comets in the Heaven, is very rare and unusual, that they do
undoubtedly portend somewhat, if not peradventure as Causes, yet as signs
appointed by God to denounce his wrath against sinful men: whose particular
signification, is nevertheless known only to God, and not reveal to any mortal
Man. This indeed has been found true by the Experience of all Ages. An
Hexameter verse
Nunquam Spectatum impune Cometam.
Never did a Blazing Star appear, but a sad story followed.


And that after Comets great changes have happend in Enpires, so that Lucan
rightly called Comets, Kingdom changing Comets, and Camerarius, thus turned the
old Lattin verse into Greek; Oudeis Cometes, Hostis ou cacon Pherei.

But to what regions and Provinces they portend their bad tidings, it is scarce
possible for a man to know, till the Event has taught him.

Chap. 3. Touching the Elements, in as much as being Simple Bodies, they with
the Heavens, do make up the Bulk of this World.
NOw the Bodies of the sublunary Region are two fold, simple and compound. The
simple, are those which are called Elements, because the rest are made up of
them. Now the term Element which the Greeks call Stoicheion, Element has a
twofold signification.
although it have sundry significations, yet it seems they may fitly be reduced
to two principal ones, the one General, the other special. For generally it is
taken for whatsoever is first in its kind and has nothing before it: in which
sense it is defined by Aristotle in the 4. Metaph. Chapter 3. That is called an
Element, out of which first inexisting in the individual species, a thing is
compounded into another species. Moreover in a more special signification,
Elements are the immediate principles of mixed Bodies, and thus are defined by
Aristotle in his 3. de Caelo. Chapter 3.1.31. The Element of Bodies is that into
which the other Bodies are divided, wherein it is potentially or actually: but
it self is not divisible into parts of sundry sorts. And in the signification
we are hereafter to treat of Elements.

And these Elements truly have a twofold office and a double consideration.
Element in that latter sense have a twofold Office.
For their first office is, with the Heaven to make up this whole bulk of the
world: and in this manner they are absolutely considered according to their
essence, without any relation to mixed bodies: The Second is, to be the matter
of mixed Bodies. And for the performance of both these Offices, peculiar
qualities are given them by Nature. For that they might perform the former,
they have heaviness and lightness: for the latter, heat and cold, moisture and
dryness; whereby they can mutually work one upon another and make up a
compound. Now the Elements are to be considered by us in this place, both ways.

Because the Elements do first perform that Office of theirs whereby they are
carried to certain places in the world, and do therein naturally rest; The
Elements are simple bodies and have a simple motion.
we must first speak of their motion, and thence draw their Nature and number.
The Elements are simple Bodies. For although, being considered as made up of
matter and form, they may be termed compounds, yet in respect of mixed Bodies,
they are called simple. For they are not made up of other Bodies which were
before them, but themselves are the first Bodies of themselves existing in the
world, of which all the other Bodies are compounded. Since therefore they are
simple bodies, a simple motion is due to them.

Now there are two simple motions: the Right or Straight, and the Circular.
There are two simple motions.
The Circular belongs to Heaven: and therefore the Straight motion we attribute
to the Elements, having therein experience to justify what we do. For we see
these Elements so called, and all things compounded of them, according to the
Nature of the prevailing Element, go in a direct line to their proper place.
Now direct motion is either to the Middle, or from the Middle; to the middle
place of the world which is also the lowest, heavy things are carried; from the
middle to the outmost part which is also the highest, Why heavy things move
downwards and light things upwards.
light things are carried. For light things are such as being un-hindred do
always move upwards, and which always swim at the top: and heavy things are
those, which not hindered, are always carried downward, and sink to the bottom
of every thing. But what the cause is why some Bodies move downwards, others
move upwards, we must now enquire, and see into the end and efficient cause of
this motion.

As to the End, The end of this motion.
since Nature does nothing in vain, and all Natural things act for the sake of
some good, we must not think the Elements are moved with certain motions to no
purpose; but we must hold that every Element is carried to its own place, as to
its perfection: whence Aristotle says well 4. de Caelo. c. 3. t. 22. For every
thing to be carried to its place, is nothing else but for every thing to be
carried to its own Form. For the Forms of the Elements being of al others the
lowest and most ignoble, and hardly able to defend themselves sufficiently from
external injuries, their proper place is added to their form as an assistant to
preserve the Body thereof, which as it were an external Form, supplies what is
wanting to the internal Form. To its proper place, therefore, as to its own
perfection, every Element is moved. And the perfection which they receive
therein, is the preservation of their, Heat, Cold, Lightness, Heaviness, and
consequently of their Form.

As to the Efficient Cause of the motion of the Elements Authors do many ways
vary. The Efficient Cause.
Yet verily, if we shall rightly weigh the matter, and not wilfully entangle a
a plain matter with difficulties, and rightly mind the sense of the question,
it seems not so hard to answer thereunto. For if a man should ask, what is the
efficient cause, that the Fire and Earth, actually existing by their forms, the
former mounts right upwards, the letter moves downwards, unless they be by some
other thing violently detained; we answer simply; that the Fire by its Form is
moved from the middle of the world upwards, and the Earth by its form is moved
to the Center of the world downwards, for this motion is to them Natural and
therefore it must also proceed from Nature, or an inward principle, which is
their Form, and not from an outward. For this is proper to Natural things, to
have in themselves the principle of their motion, as may be seen in the 2.
Physic. c. 9. t. 48. Also the form of an Element which informs it, and is its
Nature, is also the principle of its motion. Also to what has been said may be
added, that as Aristotle says in 2. Physic. c. 3. t. 37. an effect actually
existing, requires a cause actually existing; and that especially in effects,
whose whole essence is in the present performance, as motion is: for the cause
hereof being taken away, it is also taken away, nor can it ever be separated
from its efficient cause. But the motion of the Elements is an effect actually
existing. It requires therefore a cause actually existing; which can be no other
then the Form. For this only always actually exists with the motion: but those
other causes which some do bring, as the Generator, the Remover of impediments,
may be separated from motion, and while it is yet existing, they may either
perish, or if they perish not, yet may they not coexist with the motion. Nor
does what has been formerly said of motion, hinder this opinion: that the
Moveable is distinct from the mover; which seems not to agree to the motion of
the Elements, if we hold their form to be their mover. For the Earth, when it
is moved to the middle of the world, it is not moved, as having matter. For the
matter in it self, is no more inclined to move upwards then downwards, but is
indifferently capable of al motions; but as it has a form, which determies and
restraines the aptitude of the matter, to receive this form. And therefore
seeing the matter is here the passive principle of the motion, it cannot be the
active. And this doubt, truly, may be satisfied, if we distinguish betwixt an
Agent with the transmutation of another thing, which is properly called an
efficient, and requires always a Patient different from it self: and betwixt
an Agent only (as they say) by emanation of the effect, which does not by
acting change another thing, but after the Nature whereof, the effect follows
of its own accord, that as it were not acting; and such an agent is the Form in
respect of all the accidents which are Naturally in the compound. For all
accidents do of their own accord follow the form, without any motion or
transmutation of the subject. That therefore which has formerly been said
concerning the distinction betwixt the moveable and the mover, is true of an
Agent by transmutation. But an Agent by emanation is not necessarily
distinguished from the Patient. Howbeit, even in an immanent action, or which
is produced only by emanation, we may observe some distinction of Agent and
Patient. For the Form, as the form acts; and suffers as it is in the matter.
And therefore, in the motion of the Elements, the form as the form, is the
Efficient Cause of the motion; but as it is in the matter, it is moved with it.
For the compound is moveable, or is the subject of motion, which is
distinguished from the form, in respect of the matter. For the matter also, is
really distinguished from the form. And this is the true explication of this
Question, Dexterously propounded, which must be by no means confounded, with
other questions which border thereupon. For it is quite another question; Why
an Element actually existing by its form, not hindered by any thing, tends to
its own proper place, the cause whereof has been already expressed; from this,
why for examples sake, water which of it self moves downwards, Why water ever
the fire moves upwards?
fire being put under, begins to mount up in vapors; or, what is the Cause that
a Stone which hung in the Air fastened to a string, as soon as the string is
cut falls downward. For the cause of the former is the admixture of Fiery and
Aerie particles, which attenuate the water, and carry it with themselves aloft.
And the cause of the latter is clearly, that which removes the Impediment.

The Elements therefore not being hindered, are moved by their forms, as the
internal and immediate cause, as has been showed: which forms as all others,
cannot be perceived by sense, but are by us known and described by heaviness
and lightness as accidents. For it is an usual thing to describe the hidden
forms of things, which want peculiar names, by their proper adjuncts, which are
better known to us.

Moreover what may be the Cause, Why the Elements are moved leasurely and by
degrees.
why the Elements are moved successively and leisurely, whether only because of
the resistency of the Medium, or through some other cause, comes now to be
enquired. Some late writers are indeed of opinion, that there is a twofold
resistency, one external, which proceeds from a full Medium, which is the Cause
that motion is slower then it would be, if it were performed in an empty space,
if such there were: another internal, which proceeds from the Nature of the
moveable, resisting the mover. Howbeit the opinion of Aristotle and Averrhoes
is truer, who hold, that the Elements have only an external resistency in their
motion, proceeding from the Medium; (For it being full and corpulent, resists
the mover in its motion, according as it is more or less thick) but no
internal. For if there were any internal resistency, it should proceed either
from the Form or the Matter. Not from the Form: for, it being the mover, does
not resist its self in its own motion, but endeavors as speedily as may be, to
carry the moveable to its due place. Nor from the matter. For it being merely
passive, and indifferent to receive all motions, and having no power to act,
can also be no cause of resistency. All the swiftness therefore and slowness of
the motion of Elements, depends upon the proportion of the Virtue and power of
the mover, to the resistency of the Medium. For when the force of the mover is
much greater, then the power of the Medium to resist, the motion is swift: but
when the power of the mover does not much exceed the force of the Mediums
resistency, there the motion is slower: but where the mover does not at al
exceed the force which the Medium has to resist, there is no motion at al.
Howbeit what has been said must be understood only of the Elements which are
simple Bodies, and have an internal principle of their motion. For in things
moved by external force, the case is otherwise for they by their proper Nature
resist the mover, and according to the excess, whereby their power is overcome
by the power of the mover, they are swiftly or slowly moved.

From what has hitherto been said the Cause may easily be rendered; Why heavy
and light things are moved more slowly in the beginning, and more swiftly at
the end?
why heavy and light things do move more slowly at the beginning and swifter at
the end. For experience shows that an heavy thing falling from an high place,
smites more strongly where it lights, then it would have done falling from a
lower place. For though diverse men think differently in this point: yet must we
resolve, that the true cause hereof, is the abatement of the resistancy of the
Medium; and the abatement of the resistancy proceeds from the forgoing motion,
which augments the swiftness of the following motion. Now why the precedent
motion augments the swiftness of that which follows, and why it abates the
re^istency, the Cause is this. Every movable is swiftly and easily moved
through a Medium, which is moved the same way with it; and less swiftly through
a Medium that moves not; slowly through a Medium which resists the moveable,
and bears the contrary way: an Argument whereof we have in sailing with or
against tide. And therefore, when any heavy Body begins to tend downwards first
the quiet Air resists it, the resistency whereof is nevertheless overcome by
the heavy Body, and drives the next part of the Air downwards: this first part
of the Air being driven, drives the second part of the Air, next unto it. And
therefore when the heavy Body comes to this part, and finds it not resisting
but going the same way and furthering it in as motion, it begins to be moved
more swiftly: and the Body being thus more swiftly moved, will more vehemently
force and drive the third part of the Air: and it being before driven also by
the second part of the Air, will be more swiftly moved then the second, and will
more strongly bear down the fourth part. When therefore the heavy Body shall
reach the third part of the Air, finding it more vehemently moved downwards
then the second, it will also be therein more swiftly moved; and so it will yet
more forcibly bear down the fourth part, being before pressed down by the third,
and when it comes to it, it will be therein yet more swiftly moved, because of
the lesser resistency and the Mediums being moved the same way. And this
swiftness of the motion will be for the same Reason continually augmented even
to the End. Heaviness and lightness are understood two ways.
But that no obscurity may remain, we must know, that Heaviness and Lightness
are taken two manner of ways, Either for the first act or quality, by which a
thing has a propension to move upwards or downwards; or for the second act or
operation, and impulse, by which some bodies are moved upwards, others
downwards. Which two things the Schoolmen to distinguish, they called the
former Gravitatem, the latter Gravitationem: and hence it is said that Gravity
in the Elements cannot be augmented, but Gravitation may: also, that the
Elements in their own places are Gravia and Levia, heavy and light indeed, but
they do not Gravitate nor Levitate, that is they strive not to go upwards or
a^wnwards.

Now the next thing is, The number of the Elements.
that we search into the Number of the Elements, about which later writers do
wonderfully differ. I shall prove that there are four in Number. And to prove
the same I shall not bring many reasons; seeing our very senses will easily
show us how many Elements there be. For we perceive the Water, Earth and Air
which fills that vast space above the Globe of the Earth, nor in the force of
Fire unknown to us. It Is here my mind only to produce one reason which many
use. There are two direct motions, one from the middle, another to the middle.
Therefore, for these two simple motions there must be two subjects which are
simple Bodies, one which is absolutely heavy, which is called Earth; another,
which is absolutely light, called Fire. Now because it is the will of Nature that
the world should be one; and two contrary extremes cannot make up one compound;
she always couples the extremes by things of a middle nature, and knits the
last of the upper kind, with the first of the lower. And therefore in this
case, a Medium is requisite. But this cannot be one only. For if that were
allowed, it would possess the middle place betwixt the extremes, and so it
could not be capable of a direct motion. For neither should it be truly moved
from the middle, nor to the middle, but it should be Capable of both these
motions, and so could not be called heavy more then light. And therefore we
must hold that there are two Mediums, the one of which is light and moves from
the middle upwards, but is in some respect heavy; which is called Air; the
other must be absolutely heavy, and tend to the middle, yet in some respect
light; which is called Water. There are therefore four Elements: Fire, Air,
Water, Earth. There cannot be a sift, for the same cause why there cannot be
but one Medium. If any one will hold there are more then five, he will be
confuted by sense and experience.

A question there is, Whether the Elements are found in the world pure.
Whether these Elements are found pure in the World: To which question we thus
answer: If the Elements are considered absolutely in that simplicity, which is
due to their Nature, and whereby they are the Rule and standard of mixed Bodies,
they are surely to be found any where pure. But if they be compared with mixed
Bodies, and the question shall be; whether they exist also by themselves, out of
mixed Bodies, it may be said they are found sincere and pure, not indeed with
an absolute purity, of which we spoke just now, but with such an one, as they
are capable of, compared to mixed Bodies. Howbeit the extreme are purer then the
Middlemore. Nor do the Elements, though they are not found exactly pure, lose
their Name, so as to be called mixed Bodies. Which are mixed Bodies?
For those Bodies are only to be termed mixed, wherein there is so great a
departure from the Nature and purity of Elements, that the Name and Form being
cast away; they come to be now some different thing from the Elements, and
receive a new and peculiar Name of some sort of Natural Body. But wherever
there is so great an excess of one Element, that it transcends al comparison,
with the rest that are joined with it, in that the Name of Element is retained.

It now remains that we speak of the Elements in Particular, Whether there is
any Elementary Fire?
as much as the Nature of this work will bear. And to begin with Fire, though
many late writers endeavor to cast it from the number of Natural things, and
take special pains to prove that it does not exist under the concave of the
Moon: yet shall we subscribe to the remarkable consent of the chief
Philosophers, to reason strong enough, and experience it self especially seeing
the Arguments brought to the contrary do all in a manner tend to prove, that
this fire of ours, is no pure fire; whence notwithstanding it follows not, that
there is no pure sire, nor that it is any where to be found: nor though all the
properties of our fire do not agree to that under the Moon, does it therefore
follow, that it is no true fire; seeing most of those things which are vulgarly
attributed to our Fire, do agree to Fire not of it self, but accidentally.

For there is a great difference betwixt this Fire of ours which we daily make
use of, and pure Elementary fire. For our fire of the Kitchen is not pure, How
Elementary Fire and Kitchen fire differ.
but mixed with vapors and gross matter, and therefore it shines, it burns, it
wants fuel. But that there is pure Elementary fire under the Sphere of the
Moon, the great lightness thereof, and its prepetual endeavor to ascend, does
argue. Fire the lightest Element.
For it is of all Elements the most light and thin Body, As next in place to
Heaven, so in Nature most of kin thereto, unto which also, if forced therefrom,
or generated elsewhere, it tends as to its proper place, concerning which
matter Scaliger in his 9. Exercitation thus writes. The Smoke which ascends,
has very much fire in it. For it ascends not because of water: much lest
because of the Earth. Nor does that motion proceed from the Air; for it is
already in the Air. What place therefore does it seek? That place verily which
above the Air is due to the lightest of Bodies. And again, these are the
principles of that demonstration whereby it is proved, that the Element of Fire
is under the Sphere of the Moon, viz. Bodies Natural, Motion, Place. Of these
are propositions certain, True, Primitive, immediate, thus made, the Causes of
this Conclusion: that the place of Fire is in the upper space under the Moon,
above the Air. Every movable thing is a Body: all Fire is movable, Ergo. Other
two: Every body is in a place; all Fire is a Body, Ergo. Thirdly, as many more;
Every movable mover Naturally to its own space; Fire is a Body movable, Ergo.
And the two last, which knock the Nail to the Head. Every space to which a Body
Naturally moves, is the proper space of that Body; The Fire moves Naturally
upwards, Ergo the space above, is proper to the Fire.

The exceeding lightness of the Fire is attended by exceeding rarity, Why our
Kitchen fire Burns?
and it has least matter of all the Elements, and amongst natural things, it
comes nearest the Nature of Form; and therefore it has the greatest activity
of all the Elements. Yet, when it is pure, and of it self, it does not burn: but
that our Fire burns the Cause is; in that it is condensed, and sticks in gross
matter, whence its parts being condensed and brought into a narrow compass,
attain the greater force. Or as Scaliger says in his 2. Exercitation, S. 2. it
has the power of burning from the propinquity, Multitude, Cohesion,
Coagmentation and union of its parts. An argument whereof we have in a red hot
Iron, wherein the force of the Fire is greater, because of the condensation of
parts, then it is stubble which consists of more spungy matter. The same
appears if you set spirit of Wine on Fire, for you may draw your finger through
the same without hurt, as also through the upper part of the flame; which in a
red hot iron you cannot do. The said Elementary Fire is not of it self visible,
no more than the Air, nor does it shine, unless it be received in a thick
matter.

No sound Philosopher denies that the Fire does belong to the Elements, Fire is
on Element.
which make up this world and constitute mixed Bodies. For although Cardan has
endeavored to exclude the same from the number of Elements; yet is he well
confuted by Julius Caesar Scaliger in his 9. Exercitation. For seeing, as he
also teaches, in his 10. Exercitation, that heat which is a most manifest and
effectual Quality is accidentally in many things, there must of necessity be
some first subject, wherein it is primarily and essentially: For nothing is in
any thing accidentally, which is not essentially in some other thing, And the
first subject of heat.
primarily and of it self. And truly, the first subject of heat is Fire, at
first created by God with the other Elements, and furnished with its qualities.
And there was never any time when Fire had not those qualities flowing from the
Form thereof. But from the ignorance of the Creation of the world came, Not
only potentially hot as Aristotle would have it.
that Opinion of Aristotle, which he has in the 1. Meteorol. cap 3. where he
says: Seeing the first Element is moved Circularly, the Bodies which are
therein, always that which is nearest at hand, being severed by the motion of
the lower world and Body, is inflamed and causes heat. For thus we must
understand the matter from the beginning. That Body which is under the upper
Circumduction, being it is as it were a kind of matter, and potentially hot and
cold, and dry and moist, and whatever other adjuncts follow these; such it
becomes, and ariser from motion and Immobility. An absurd saying, truly, and
unbecoming so great a Philosopher! For what matter I pray you can we imagine
actually existing of it self, which is potentially Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, but
actually receives these qualities from Heaven? For although some that they
might stick by Aristotle, have fancied a twofold heat in Fire, one Natural,
which follows the proper form of Fire; the other adventitious, which the Fire
receives from the motion of Heaven; yet Zabarella in his 1. B. de qual. prim.
c. 8. writes well, that the words of Aristotle do not receive all this
Interpretation; for Aristotle says, that all this matter of the lower world is
potentially Hot, Cold, Moist, Dry, but is made actually so by motion and
immobility. Therefore he allows no heat to the Elements, besides what they
receive from the motion of Heaven. Yet he himself falls into a much more absurd
opinion when he writes in the fallowing Chapter: thus, If any Man shall ask
whether the first qualities are sooner or later then the Forms of the Elements,
we must say, they are fore more and later in several respects. For in Original
and according to the order of Generation, they are doubtless sooner, as the
previous dispositions are in generation before the substantial Form, to the
eduction whereof they are directed, but they are Naturally after the same, in
as much as they are accidents. For accidents are after their substances. And in
as much as they are Effects, but the Forms causes, I do not mean efficient
causes but final. For qualities are produced in the matter, for the sake of
substantial Forms, and are directed to them as to their End, as also they are
conserved in the Elements by Heaven, that the Elements themselves might be
conserved; so that the next final cause of these Qualities, is the Constitution
of the Elements; but the remote and ultimate, is the production of mixed Bodies.
For the Elements are made for the mixed Bodies, and to be their matter. Thus
therefore Qualities may be said to follow the Forms of the Elements, in as much
as the Forms are their final causes: but the qualities themselves, although
they are preparations for the Eduction of Forms, they may not therefore be
called the Causes of the Forms, but only the latter Effects; seeing accidents
are Naturally later then substances. And therefore while they are together in
the Elements, as Naturally conjoined and substantial Forms and proper
qualities; yet the Forms are in the first place, and the qualities afterward,
and so they are said to follow the Forms of the Elements; especially seeing, as
we said before, they are given to the Elements by Heaven, for the Eduction and
preservation of their Forms. For if heat be a dispolition previous to the
reception of the form of Fire, into what matter I pray you is that disposition
introduced, and in what matter is the Heat inherent, before the Form of Fire
comes. And will the Form of Fire be idle, will it shed forth no quality? Thus
one absurdity being gathered infinite do follow.

Now the Fire of it self, It is a substence.
is a substance most subtle, and thin, piercing through al things; which
neither shines, nor is seen whilst it is p^re and simple without any mixture.
But when it is mixed with and is inherent in other things, it makes our vulgar
Kitchen Fire, which differs not Essentially from the pure Element of Fire, but
herein only in that it is mixed with some Hererogeneal matter.

Thomas Fienus, Not an accident.
indeed, in his Apology against Sanctacruze, p. 50. holds that this Fire of
ours which we use, is only an accident. But the Reasons of that opinion are
refuted in my 3. Hypomne. Phys. Chapter 1.

And since this Kitchen Fire of ours, is useful to many intents and purposes,
The inventors of Kitchen Fire.
many authors write many things touching the Inventors thereof, as may be seen
in Plinies Natural History, B. 4. Chapter 12. and Book 6. Chapter 30. in Vitruvius Book
2. Chapter 1. But it is apparent by the sacrifices and by the story of Tubal-Cain,
that the use thereof was known to the first Fathers of the world. Though it is
not to be denied, but that the other uses thereof were later known to other
Nations; and new inventions are always added; as may be seen in Gunpowder,
and sundry sorts of Fireworks, made thereof.

Now what the difference is betwixt Fire as it is potentially in mixed Bodies,
It Is either Potential, or Actual.
and as it is actually hot, is not easy to explain, yet a thing necessary to
be known. For Sulphur to feel to is as cold as a cold stick that has no
Brimstone in it; and a piece of Willow Wood dried is not colder to feel to then
a piece of Pitch-Tree Wood. And spirit of Wine which contains much Fire in it,
in coldness to feel to, is not inferior to the Wine it self. Yea in a flame
which actually is hot, there is less quantity of Fire and of the small particles
thereof, then in Brimstone; since in Brimstone not set on Fire, that is united
in a small space, which is diffused in a great flame. In Gunpowder a mighty
Quantity of Fiery Atoms lie hid, which is nevertheless cold to feel to. But
the flame of the said Gun power, when it is set on Fire, burns exceedingly,
though the Atoms are severed. This therefore is to be explained, why in a mixed
body potentially hot, so many fiery Atoms contained and collected, do produce
no actual heat; or, what it is that causes the Fire to heat.

The Former happens, because the Fire is mixed with other things, What maks the
fire not to heat or to heat.
and is contained quiet under the dominion of a superior Form. But it heats
actually, when it is separated from the rest of the Bodies, wherewith it was
mixed, and being set at liberty, freely acts. Of which latter we shall now
speak.

But actual Fire is variously disposed. For if it be pure, Pure fire neither
shines nor, is seen.
it neither shines nor is seen. Of which Scaliger in his 9. Exercitation. Meat
roasted on Spits is not touched by the Fire we see, but it is touched by the
Fire we see not: and it is so touched, sometimes, as to be burnt to a Coal. In
like manner, if a man hold his Hand over the flame, so that the flame do not
touch it, yet his Haud will burn. Fire also is perceived in quick Lime, when
water is poured thereon, in dung when it rots, in Water, Oil, Stones, Metal,
which are heated.

Now Fire appears to the sight and not only to the touch, two manner of ways;
It becomes visible two ways.
two manner of ways; either in an hot Coal or Flame, as Theophrastus teaches
in his Book de Igne, Now by a Coal is understood any Body red hot, that affords
no flame.

But that we may rightly understand, what Flame and Inflammation is, Touching
flame and Inflammation.
we must of necessity presuppose some Principles.

The First is: That there is Fire in all Bodies, and that so as to retain its
perfect Form, as I have demonstrated in Hypomnem. Phys. 3. Axioms. 1.
Howbeit it is in a greater quantity in some Bodies in a lesser quantity in
others.

The Second is: That actual Fire is always Naturally moved.

The Third is: Fire is two manner of ways in compounds, the one as fixed,
Scaliger in his 9. Exercitation, speaks, Gives back ashes to the Earth moisture
to the water, and takes and keeps to it self, that which is invisible to vulgar
Eyes, but cannot conceal it self from the Minds of wise men.

The Fourth is: That there is a Consent of Natural things, and things like are
drawn to like. But contrary things Fly from one another Ex Hyponem. Phys. 1.
cap. 1.

The Fifth is: That Fire has a great similitude and likeness to things that are
apt to flame; because they consist of Fire for the most part, and Fire does
easily unite it self to them.

Hence we conclude, The actuation of fire what it is.
that the Actuation or actual breaking out of Fire, is the separation of that
Fire which is potentially in mixed Bodies, from other things mixed therewith. I
say potentially, not in respect of the First act, or the Form of Fire, which it
has really in the mixed Body, but in respect of the second act and operation
thereof.

Which separation is made diverse ways, The manners thereof
as was said before, with slame, and without flame. Without flame in
putrefaction, quick Lime, hot Coals; with flame, when Bodies are set on a
flaming Fire.

Of which to speak somewhat in particular, What in^amation. 5.
we say: that inflammation or setting on a flame, is, the breaking out of Fire
from a Body apt to flame, and containing a Sulphurous Exhalation, caused by
the touch of Fire near applied. For when Fire already actuated, does touch a
body inflamable, the Fire therein, is attracted by the external fire, and by
reason of similitude, moves of its own accord thereto, and unites it self
therewith.

Now flame is Fire breaking out of an inflamable Body, What flame is.
touched by actual fire, and sticking in the fume, as in a Sulphurous
Exhalation, and shining therein, and moved therewith. And therefore Aristotle
in 1 Meteor. Chapter 4. desines flame to be the Boiling out of dry Fire and in the
4. Meteoral Cap. 9. Bu^ning Smoke. For slame is Fire, but not pure, joined with
a Dry and inflamable exhalation. And when it is set on fire, the fire extends
much farther then the flame. And therefore, as has been said, meat roasted on
spits, is touched indeed by the sire, but not by the flame, and a man's hand
held above the flame, may be burned, and paper or a candle may be lighted also
above the flame. Howbeit sire is then only seen, where being in a great
quantity, has a certain Fuliginous matter ari^ing from the fuel, joined
therewith.

Now actual Fire (...) engendered, Actual fire is bred two ways
and at last breaks into flame, either by propagation, or by Coition, and
union. The first is caused, when actual fire manifest to the senses, does touch
another inflamable body, and sets it on fire, drawing out the fire which lay
hid therein. The second is, when fire which lies secretly hid in mixed Bodies,
is drawn out, without the contract of external fire, and being united does
actually and manifestly show it felf.

The first manner is most common, when actual fire does set on fire other
inflamable Bodies. For by reason of affinity, it is easily united to them, and
draws out and unites to it self the fire in them. Galen in his B de usu
respirat. calls that same inflamable Body the Root of Fire: and Theophrastus in
his B. de Igne terms it the Beginning of Fire.

And because all things, Things which have sincere sulphur in them, easily
inflamed.
are inflamed and kindled by means of Sulphur; those things that have sincere
unmixt Sulphur in them; or though they have little thereof in them; yet are so
disposed, that fire may easily insinuate it self into all their parts; such
things I say are easily set on fire. For in the first place, if the Sulphur by
much and pure, and not mixed in its small parts with other things, but is of it
self alone immediately obvious to the external fire, it is easily united
thereto, because of its similitude: Contrarily such Bodies as have their
Sulphur, though much in Quantity, mingled in its small parts with other things,
are not easily inflamed. Whence it happens that Pitch Wood is more easily
kindled then Oak wood, though it is a question whether there be more Fire in
Pitch wood then in Oak. For in the Former, the fiery Sulphurous parts are
unmixt and at hand; but in the latter the inflamable fiery parts lie deep, yet
are they discovered by their effects in warming of a Stove. By reason of plenty
of unmixt Sulphur, spirit of Wine does soon take flame, and the purer it is and
more separated from the Phlegm, the sooner it is set on fire. But this is seen
most of all in Bitumen, which is exceeding Sulphurous, and contains in it a
spirituous matter, of kin to fire, and therefore is soon lighted, and conceives
flame even far from the Fire, as Pliny in Lib. 2. C. 105. says, Fire leaps to
it wherever it sees it. And After this manner they say Medea set Jasons
Concubine on Fire, as Pliny writes in the same place. For when Medea had given
to Creusa a Crown or Garland smeared with Bitumen, and persuaded her to be
present at the sacrifices, the Garland smeard with Bitumen, took flame from the
Fire and lighted wood, and so burnt Creusa. And I remember, when I was making
Balsam of Sulphur, and had put into a Glass Receiver, flower of Brimstone,
spirit of Terpentine and spirit of Wine, that they might stand in digestion,
and left it to the care of a certain Student, to cover the mouth of the
Receiver with a Glass Cover and close it up with spanish wax; some of the
spanish wax being lighted and falling upon the lid, the Spirit in the Receiver
was set on flame, although it was hardly a sixth part full. Hereunto belong
common Brimstone, Gunpowder, Pitch, Asphaltum, Ambar: Hence Galen relates in
his 3. de Temperam Chap. 2. that a man in his days, made a great boast of
lighting a Candle after a wonderful manner, which he first put out and then
applied it to a wall to light it, which he made show to be done without Fire,
which though some thought it to be a magical operation; yet when it was known,
that the said wall was smeared with Brimstone and liquid bitumen, the wonder
ceased. Like hereunto, is that which Cardan relates in his tenth Book de
Varietate Rerum, of a certain man who would light Candles not perfectly
extinguished at the mouth of a certain Image, which was made on purpose and
daubed with Sulphur and Bitumen or Petroleum, that so the Image might seem to
vomit Fire.

Moreover, Bodies spungy and dry, though they have little sulphur in them, Why
dry bodies are easiest inslamed.
yet because they are dry, and the watery parts, which otherwise do most of all
hinder kindling into a Flame, are absent, the Fire easily unites it self to the
sulphur which is in them, whence they come to kindle. Such bodies are, dry
Wood, Torches, Straw, Stubble, dry Hay, Tow, Wool, Paper, Tutch-wood, Links.

But that some things, as Oil, Suet, Wax, which contain store of Sulphur in
them, Why viscous and watery bodies are hard to take fire.
are not easily set on fire, but need store of fire to light them, as when they
are boiling, or must have a wiek to cause them burn: the reason is, because
those bodies are viscous and clammy, and not spungy, and because they stick
together in their small parts. Also, because they have a watery Substance, mixed
with their smallest parts. And the mixture of watery parts, does most of all
hinder Inflammation. For Water as much as any thing hinders the breaking out of
flame.

For seeing Water mingled with Wood, only by the roots thereof, does render
them less subject to take sire, much more will that Water do it, which is most
intimately mixed with the sulpur. But if a dry wiek be added to Oil, Suet, or
Wax; the flame or actual fire in the wiek, draws to it self its cozen sire mixed
in the matter close by, but flowly, because it cannot do it plentifully. For
that same watriness hinders, which must first be removed, that the sulphurous
part may be lighted. Now this is slowly dispelled: which also while it is in
doing, the fire also flies away, and so it needs new to succeed it, which it
does because it is freed from the Water. And indeed in every body which feeds
fire slowly, there is somewhat which resists fire. For otherwise there were no
reason, why the fire should not be altogether suddenly inflamed, as it happens
in Tow or Straw. And Brimstone it self affords a manifest example hereof, which
does indeed soon take fire, and yet is long before it burn out, because it has
in it store of acid spirit, which hinders the Inflammation.

Now the flame which we see kindled in any matter, is not always the same;
seeing the fire is in continual motion and flies away, a new fire comes fresh
and fresh out of the thing burning. And therefore as Aristotle says, Meteor 2.
The flame never continues the same.

And whereas it is commonly said that sulphurous things, How the Fire is fed
and whatever will kindle, is the food of fire; that must be rightly understood.
For it is not simply true, because fire is a simple body, which properly is not
nourished. But in that the fire cleaves to the body inflamed, it is not because
it needs food, but because through similitude, it endeavors to draw out the
fire lying hid in the body inflamed, and to unite it to self, and so to
multiply it self. For every Nature desires to multiply it self, and there is in
every thing an appetite of Infinity and Eternity, as I. C. Scaliger says in
his 9. Exercit. which is chiefly effected by union with its like. And therefore
fire sticks so long at least to the body inflamed, as there is sulphur and fire
therein, which failing, it s^es away.

Also from the Premises the difference appears between a flame, The difference
betwixt burning things that flame and those that do not flame.
and burning coals or other things which yield no flame. Flame, as has been
said, is joined with fuliginous vapors, and there is more fuliginous matter in
a flame than in coals. For when the char-coals were made, the greatest part of
the fuliginous matter flew away. And because abundance of fuliginous matter
does choke the flame, yea and the fire it self, and hinders the sudden
propagation thereof, of necessity the fuliginous vapor must have egress, whence
it comes often to pass that fire lies hid in a close chamber, but flame arises
not therefrom. But as soon as the door or window is opened, and a passage is
given to the sooty vapors, it breaks forth into a flame. And because the coals
themselves have yet in them some fuliginous matter, the fire consumes the coals
no faster, than the fuliginous vapors can find egress. And therefore thongh the
whole furnaces of Chemists are at once filled full of coals, the fire consumes
no more of the coals, than is answerable to the egress of the fuliginous
vapors, and so by opening or shutting, more or fewer, greater or smaller
vent-holes, a man may moderate the fire as he pleases. For no more fire is
kindled than the Prohibiter will allow. Yea and coals may be so set on fire as
that they shall not consume after this manner. Take a strong pipkin or stone
pot, which will endure the fire, fill it with coals, and put on the cover and
lute it round about, and when the lute is dry, put the pot into the midst of a
fire, that the whole pot may be red hot; and then the coals will be all on fire
(and if any will not believe it, he may by breaking the pot be sure of it) which
being done, suffer the pot being taken out of the fire to grow cold of it self,
then open or break the pot, and you shall find all your coals whole. The cause
whereof is because as the fire entered in through the pot sides, so it goes out
the same way, but the substance of the coals cannot pass the pot sides.

Howbeit we must here observe that it is not common to all fire, What fire
needs a free Air, what not.
nor does it agree to fire as fire to be extinguished in a close place. For its
known by Histories, that there have been lights which have burnt long in a
close vessel: but this is the property of some sort of fire only, namely of
that which comes out of a mixed sulphurous body, as Wood or the like, with
fumes and exhalations. For the flame only which arises from such bodies, being
shut up is extinguished. For since in a continual flame there is a resolution
of mixed bodies, and the mixed body is resolved into other things whereof it was
compounded, and a body resolved requires a larger space, than that which is
close compacted, it happens, because there is no place for the fuliginous
vapors which steam out, part oppresses part; and because naturally there is no
penetration of dimensions, while the compound is hindered from being resolved or
loosened, the cause also of the dissolution is stopped, which is the actual
fire.

And all these things which we have said, appertain to the first manner of
generation of Fire, viz. when actual Fire is applied to a combustible Body, and
a combustible or inflamable body is kindled by Fire put to it.

By this manner of Fire many things are made and prepared for the use of man:
The sundry uses of this fire.
and hence come not only the melting and never breaking Fires of Chemists and
other Artists, and those which are used in Kitchins, Stoves and Chambers to
warm us; but also Candles, Torches, Links and Lamps. Candles, Links and Torches
are made of Tallow, Wax, Pitch, Rosin, with wicks of Cotton and Cordage. Lamps
are made of Oil with Cotton, in a Glass or other Vessel. They are made to give
light in dark places. Oil of Olives, Line-seed, Ra^e-seed, Hemp seed, are
vulgarly used; also Lamps may be maintained with spirit of Wine or other
spirits. Now that which primarily and principally burns, is the Oil or other
inflamable liquor, which the wiek draws, which is hereby apparent, in that
there are some snufts that will not consume with Fire, such as those made of the
Wood Asbestum, of which Pliny speaks in his B. 19. chapter 1. and 2. and Book 36.
chapter 19. and of the stone Amiantos, of which Dioscorides speaks in his 5. B. chapter
147. as also of alumen plumosum. But if the wiek be combustible, it is
secondarily both inflamed and burnt up.

And although Water do quench Fire, Lamps burning in water.
yet Lamps may be made, which burn in Water and are extinguished in Oil; if
namely the Wick be soaked in liquid Vernish, and put into Water and so lighted:
for then it will burn in the Water; but if Oil be powered to it instead of Water,
'twil go out.

And that the Oil may burn the longer, Durable Lamps.
certain metallic substances must be mixed therewith. So if you take one pound
of red Lead half a pound of Ceruss, four ounces of quick Sulphur, common Oil
two pound, and mix them all in a Mortar by the Fire side, leisurely stirring it
sometimes, and then digest them Eight days in a Glass retort, and at last
distill them, you will have an Oil which will last a long time in Lamps. Or thus:
Take Liturige one pound, live Brimstone four ounces, Loadstone one ounce. Let
al being poudred be incorporated with two pints of Oil Olive. Let this mixture
digest ten days together; and let it be stirred about once a day, afterward
distill it with a retort, and use the Oil for a Lamp. If you would use spirit of
Wine for a Lamp, to make it last long, pour it upon equal parts of unslak't
Lime, crude Tartar, and Brimstone, and distill it once through a retort. Or
pour spirit of Wine upon equal parts of unslak'd Lime, crude Tartar, and common
Salt, and so distill it. Concerning the Lamp of Ammon see Plutarch in his
Treatise De defectu oraculorum. Also Cardan describes perpetual Lamps in his
10. de Rerum Varietate and in his 1 de Subtle. de principiis rerum, Caput 10.

And so much touching the first manner of the Generation of Fire, Hitherto
belongs the propogation of fire by the Sunbeams.
to which if any man will refer that also, which is caused by the Sun's beams, I
shall not quarrel with him. For if the beams of the Sun be so collected in a
burning Glass artificially made to that end, that meeting in a point, they set
on fire a combustible body, they do the same thing that fire applied does.

Moreover, There are also other ways, On by Coition and Union.
by which the fire which is potentially in a mixed body (that is to say, which
actually and according to the form, is really in mixed bodies, but is not liable
to the senses, but lurks invisible) may be called out of the said mixed body, so
as to become manifest to the Senses. Seneca in his 2 B. of Not. Quest. number. 22.
writes, That Fire may be made two ways, Which is done many ways.
one way is if it be forced out, as from the striking of a Flint; another by
rubbing, as when two Sticks are rubbed together a long time. But indeed there
are more ways, and at least three. For Fire is made. 1. By pu^refaction. 2. By
the flight of the Contrary. 3. By motion: to which some ad a fourth mentioned
by us in the first, viz. the Sunbeams.

In the first place, By putrefaction.
Fire is sometimes kindled. And it is known to Countrymen, how hot an heap of
dung will grow, so that the straw therein will be quite burned. So they relate
out of Theophrastus, that a Ship laden with moist Clothes, conceived Fire and
was burnt up. Nor is it unknown that heaps and Stacks of moist Hay and Corn
have been burnt up. Howbeit in matter putrefying hardly can there be so great
an heat raised, that the matter should flame, unless it gather strength
elsewhere. An example whereof Galen has in his 3. de Temperam Cap. 2. where he
writes: that Pigeons dung was cast near the window of an house in Mysia, in the
middle of a most hot Summer. The dung therefore putrefying, and being heated by
the Sun, sent forth a fiery vapor, which set on Fire the boards of the Window
which were smeared with Rozin, and at last burnt the whole House.

Secondly, Fire is collected and kindled by flight of its contrary; By flight
of the Contrary

Why Lime grows hot when wais powered upon it.

Theophrastus.


that it has been seen set wood on Fire that has been by it: which comes to
pass, because the fiery atoms or small particles of Fire which lie hidden in
the Lime, whiles they fly from the Water contrary to their nature, come to be
united together, and so to operate. Howbeit there is a dissent amongst Authors
touching the Reason of this growing hot of Lime when Water is poured upon it.
Theophrastus in his Book de Igne, writes thus thereof: Seeing Heat is not
without moisture or exhalation, therefore Lime burnt when Water is put to it,
rather than alone. He seems to think, that Fire lies hid in the Lime, but that
it is not pierced without matter; but Water being poured upon it, it is brought
into act, and exhales with the vapor, Pet. Aponensis.
and so affects the touch. Petrus Aponensis conceivs the Cause to be, that the
Heat being kept in by Antiperistasis of the cold Water becomes more forcible.
J. C. Scaliger.
Jul. Caes. Scaliger in his 5. Exercitation Sect 9. thus writes: In the
passages of the Lime, the natural moisture being consumed, there lurks Fire:
which flying from the Ingress of the Water, and thrusting it self into the
solid parts, it collects it self, and becomes sharpened by condensation: for
the piece of Lime, whose half only is covered with Water, as far as it is out
of the Water grows hot, receiving into self that Heat which is banished out of
the other parts. The Comentator upon Theophrastus, de Igne blames Scaliger, The
Commentator upon Theophrastus.
because in the Lime it does not so fall out that one part receives the Water,
another part the Fire. For the Water soaks through, and every where fills all
the passages, nor can this Collection and densation of the Fire be made in the
inner part of the Lime as in a Tower of Refuge.

And in good deed, They are examined.
true it is, that some humor exhales cut of the Lime, with the Fire. But thus a
cause is not showed, why at last the fire begins to exhale with the Water, and
why in other hot Bodies, water poured on does not produce the same effect. Nor
has the Antiperistasis of Petrus Aponensis any place here, since experience
testifies that the heat is rather poured out, then that it gathers it self
inwards. So also there is no such Concentration of the Fire as Scaliger
imagines; for as soon as ever the Water is poured on, it pierces into all parts
of the Lime.

I conceive therefore that the opinion first propounded is the truest. The
Authors opinion.
Namely, In the Lime there are many atoms of Fire, not so much they, which the
violence of the fire could not draw out, as those which have insinuated
themselves during the long time of its burning in the Kill. For Chalk is of a
Spungy Body. Therefore water being poured on, it penetrates into all parts of
the Lime, which the fire avoiding, as contrary thereunto, it exhales, and so
becomes sensible. And because the Lime contains yet some moisture in it,
whereby it hangs together, that unites it self to the water poured on, and
leaves the Body, whereupon the Body of the chalk is dissolved and reduced to
powder.

Upon this Ground, Mixtures made to burn with water or spittle.
mixtures are made which are set on fire, being wet with water, Yea, or with
Spittle: viz. If a like Quantity of Ship-Pitch, Greek Pitch, Sulphur, Tartar,
Niter and Petroleum be mingled together, and double the weight of all in
unslak't Lime, be added, and all made up with the Yolks of Eggs, and some days
digested in Horse Dung or in Balneo. This mixture is set on fire by Rain or any
other moisture. The like mixture may be made of Unslak't Lime, Sulphur, a
little Gum Arabic, and Line-seed Oil: whereof bals being made, they will be set
on fire by Water thrown on them. So, if you sill an Egg-shell half full of
unslak't Lime, and put Gum-powder on the top and stop the hole with wax: Then
the said mass Thrown into cold Water, will be set on Fire.

Thirdly, By motion.
which have Fire in them. For by rubbing and motion, the Fire which did lie
still in mixed Bodies, kept in bondage by an higher form, and thoroughly mixed with
contrary things, is moved, and so gains motion and activity. And this betides
more easily, if on woods now a while rubbed one upon another, Gunpowder, or
Powder of Brim-stone or such like be strewed. So Pliny in his 16. B. Chapter 4.
writes that the Mulberry Tree, the Bay Tree, and the Ivy and all Trees out of
which Fire is gained, are hot Trees. Spies in Camps and Shep-herds have found
this Experiment, because they have not always a Flint at Hand to strik Fire.
They Rub therefore one piece of Wood against another, whence Fire arises, which
is received on tinder, a dry Mushrom or withered leaves of Trees. But nothing
excels Ivy which must be rubbed with Bay, or let the Bay Wood be rubbed with
the Ivy. Also the wild Vine is approved in this case, not that which is called
Labrusca, but another sort, which Climbes Trees like Ivy.

Fourthly, By the Sun beams.
of which we speak above, in the first manner of gaining Fire. Whereof we allow
every Man to Judge as he pleases. The thing is of it self manifest and well
known, that by burning Glasses and other Glasses, Wood, Paper and other dry
things are set on fire. With such kind of Glasses Archimedes set on Fire the
Enemies Galleys and burnt them up. Of which see what the Teachers of Optics
say, and Johannes Baptista Porta. Yea, and the Rays of the Sun may kindle fire
without any Glasses, and experience has showed, that woods and bituminous
Lands and Seas, have been accidentally set on Fire by the Sun's Beams.

J. C. Scaliger in the same Exercitation, Scaligar, refers to the Head the
manner by attenuation of the Air: but he is confuted.
Sect. 1. has yet another manner of the generation of Fire, and conceives it
may be made out of attenuated Air; where thus he writes: We must confess that
out of the Air moved, smitten and attenuated heat may be caused. Which if it
proceed it turns to the substance of Fire, and that by Reason of the
attenuation of parts. But that this is false, does thus appear, that Stones and
the hardest Bodies smitten together, do not cause any sparkles of Fire, unless
they have store of Sulphur in them. And the Sulphur which is forced out of
flints may be perceived by its smell. Moreover the Air cannot be inflamed,
either by rubbing or any other way, but this is the property only of mixed
Sulphurous Bodies. And if the Air it self could be set on Fire, this lower
Region of the Air had been long a go burnt up, at the burning of great woods
and Cities. Aristotle truly, in his 2 de Caelo, Ch 7. Text 42. and 1. Meteor,
Text 3. Writes that the Air being moved is set on fire, and that arrows by
motion grow so hot, that the Leaden points have melted. But I do not believe
the truth of such reports. Whether the points of darts do melt.
And if the Leaden points of darts could meit, much more should bullets grow
hot, that are shot out of Guns, which they do not. And Pareus, in his
Apologismus Primus says that bullets shot against an hard Stone have been
presently taken up without hurting a Man's Hand. And if Leaden points of darts
or Leaden bullets, did grow hot with motion, much more would wax grow hot; and
yet experience has taught us that a bullet made of wax shot out of a Gun has
not melted, but has gone through a board two fingers thick.

So much for the manners of the generation of Fire. Contraiwise Fire goes out,
Contrariwise, Fire goes out.
especially flame, when either the inflamable matter fails, or though it be
present, it is hindered from flaming, and the Fire not suffered to come out of
the mixed Body.

For in the first place, when the inflamable Body fails, the flame ceases,
Either through deffect of inflamable matter.
or Oil fail, the flame dies in the Wiek and Lamp; and when the wood is quite
burnt and reduced to ashes, the Fire goes out; because that which was there
before, flies away, and no more follows it. For Flame is always in generation
and being bred it perishes immediately, as Theophrastus speaks in his Book de
Igne. For while the fire is made by consuming the fuel, when the fuel is gone
the fire goes out. For the fire properly does not die or perish, but flies
away: yet because it sticks so long to the inflamable Body, as long as there is
any thing to be kindled and burn, when that fails, it is thought to die. This
first manner of extinction, which is caused by defect of suel, is by
Theophrastus in his Book de Igne called, A Corruption almost Natural, and most
properly so called.

Touching the kindling and going out of Fire, The double motion of a flame
according to Galen.
Galen has an excellent place in his Book de respirat. Cap. 3. Where he
writes: All flames are moved with a double motion, the one from the matter, out
of which they are kindled, by which they mount aloft and spread abroad every
way; the other contrary to this, is to their beginning and their Roots as it
were, by which they settle and are contracted. For if you light a brand on the
very top, the fire comes suddenly to the lower parts; and if after you have
blown out the flame of a candle, and you shall hold another candle over the
Smoke of the snuf, you shall see it presently lighted, which could not so fall
out, if the fire moved only upwards. The cause of this motion.
And he adds that this is the cause of the said double motion, seeing (says
he) every flame is most speedily corrupted: for it is always scattered by the
ambient Air, therefore it is necessary that its generation should also be very
quick; otherwise it would not last the least moment. Now the generation of all
flame comes out of the matter, therefore it has not without cause given it by
Nature, not only a motion outward from its proper principle, but one contrary
thereunto, turning toward its own proper principle. And all flame must needs
be corrupted, if it want either matter, or one of these motions. In which place
of Galen, those two motions of flame, are diligently to be considered. First,
The Fire is carried to the Body inflameable, and the matter, or Root, as Galen
calls it, by reason of affinity, and it goes on al sides: the other is whereby
the fire which is drawn out, is naturally carried upwards.

Now the ways whereby the inflameable matter being present, Or because of no
generation of new actuated fire.

Which comes to pass again.


that in the extinction, the actuated fire goes away, and no more actuated fire
does succeed it, from the mixed Body inflamed.

This proceeds first from suffocation; viz. when as the fire breaking out of
the inflamed Body with the Smoke, finds no place to receive it. For then the
fire ceases to be moved in the fume or Smoke. For seeing, as was said before,
two bodies cannot be in the same place, Either by suffocation.
many exhalations go away with the Fire which fire which raised them; if they
find no place to receive them, their evaporation together with the flame is
hindered, by the necessary working of universal Nature. After this manner, all
things that deny place to the Fire and the exhalation joined therewith, do
extinguish the fire, and stifle the same: which happens when the flame and fume
are so shut up, that they have no free egress, nor place to hold them.

Its also a kind of suffocation, Hereunto belongs also extinction by thick Air.
when the flame is extinguished by thick Air and exhalations; which comes to
pass in the quarries of metals, the pumpes of Ships, and when Beer and new Wine
works. For seeing the Air is then filled with thick vapors, it cannot contain
the flame with its exhalation, whence its motion must needs be stopped and
choked in its Root.

To suffocation also, Also the compressi on of the Wiek.
compression may be referred, when the wiek being compressed, the flame of
Candles is put out unless any one will refer this to the following manner,
whereby fire is violently separated from its Fuel and Root as it were.

Secondly, Or by discussion and dissipation
before new fire can follow, and when the fire is taken away, which drew out
the fire in the mixed body. After this manner Torches are blown out by Winds,
and we blow out Candles and Lamps with our Breath. Why flame is both raised and
extinguished, by blowing
And seeing by the blast of ones Mouth or by Bellows, flame is raised, and the
fire in Coals turns to a flame, we must enquire the cause of these different
effects. Where we are to know; if a little flame do only stick in the surface
of the Body, it is soon extinguished by blowing, whereby the incendiary, and
the fire into which the mixed Body is resolved, are soon taken away. But if the
fire, actuated by blowing, is driven into the inner parts of the Body
inflameable the fire is more and more increased. Thus, by blast of the Mou^h,
and of the Bellows, the fire is droven into the inner part of the Coals, and
flame is raised, which when it has taken deep root, it is not easily
separated, but the fire desirous to preserve it self, always goes more inward,
and by that motion, more of the hidden fire is actuated. Which is manifest in
Coals. Hence it appears, why as Theophrastus says and experience teaches,
Lamps do consume more Oil, if the Wind blow upon them, then they do when the
Air is still, and torches also are sooner burnt out, when the wind blows. For
seeing the flame is prepetually generated, and the Wind or other blast
discusses the flame gennerated, the fire sticking close to its principle or
Root, does more greedily and powerfully draw out what ever is therein
inflamable, and turns it into flame.

Hence also a cause may be rendered, When and why the flame in the wiek, is
extinguished and blown in again.
why the flame being extinguished, is again excited by blowing upon the snuf.
Where you must observe that this does not always happen, but sometimes only,
when the snuf is large and full of fire, like a coal. For then, as burning coals
by the blast of bellows, do send forth a flame which otherwise, of themselves
they would not do: so also the fire being in great quantity in the snuf, by
blowing conceives flame. But if the snuf after the flame is blown out, have not
much fire in it, and be not red hot, 'twil be in vain to endeavor to blow it
into a flame,

This also is to be observed by the Way: Why the fire of a flame, is more power
fulhen that of burning coals.
that the fire of a flame, is much more vehement then that of Coals, and that
not without Cause. For all the strength of Fire is in motion. And experience it
self witnesses the same. And therefore Goldsmiths do most readily melt their
Gold by a Lamp, the flame whereof they direct upon the Gold by blowing. And
others also that work in metal, and amongst them, belfounders do rather use the
fire of flame rising from wood, then Coals, and if in other melting fornaces
they use Coals, they use the continual blast of bellows to make them flame.

There is yet a third way, Or by bindring the afflux of new fire.
when the flame, though the matter of fire be present in an inflameable body,
is extinguished, because that which is first bred, flies away; seeing flame is
in perpetual motion, and new fire is hindered from coming out of the inflameable
body, or the actual fire is hindered from drawing more out of the inflameable
body, or as Theoprastus speaks somewhat shuts up and stops the beginning.
Whether sire be extinguished, by presence of its contrary.
Which how it comes to pass, we are now to enquire. which how it comes to pass,
must be enquired unto. Some men may refer this to the presence of that which is
contrary, which when the fire perceives, it flies from it, and ceases its
motion. But, Seeing not only water, but also Oil and spirit of wine, too
abundantly poured about the flame, yea, and Ashes, Sand, and what ever covers
the inflameable body, that the Flame which calls out the lurking fire, cannot
touch the same, puts out the flame; and it is not only contrarity that makes to
the extinction of the flame. For the fire in the flame flies away, when it can
no longer touch the Body inflamed. And though the Body, which interposes it
self, be it self also inflameable; Yet, If either by means of the great
Quantity thereof, or by reason of the admistion of another Body, it cannot set
that body on fire, nor change it into a flame to succed, the former flame flies
away, and so no other coming in its place, the fire is extinguished. Yet,
because of al things water does most easily extinguish fire; if any one will
have it, that it puts out fire, not only by interposition of its body, but also
by its contrariety which it has to Fire, I shall not contend with him
thereabout.

But how it comes to pass that some fire burns under water, Why some fire burns
under the Water.
is an obscure question, nor that I know of, sufficiently explained by any Man.
For all inflameable things will not burn under the Water. For Rozin, Bitumen,
Frankincense, Yea, and Brim-Stone it self, if being set on fire they be put
into water, they are easily extinguished: and other things even when they are
not on fire will not admit of water, as Oils, Tallows, Fats. And if these be
much heated, and then water poured upon them, there arises a great sight
betwixt them and the Water, and the fire flies violently away with a great
noise; so that experience has taught, that fires have been caused by pouring
Water on such fat things when they boil. If therefore mixtures be made of such
things so fatty, which exceedingly resist water, adding such things as do most
of all cherish fire, and keep it from flying away, then those mixtures will
burn even in the Water. For a part of such a mixture being inflamed, does
vehemently drive the Water from it self, and therefore such things burn with a
noise, and hinder the water from piercing into the burning body, and the other
things do continually supply matter to the flame.

A Torch that will not be extinguished by Rain or Wind, may thus be made. A
Torch that cannot be quenched.
Take Colophony and Wax of each six pound, Turpentine two pound, Tallow one
pound. Mix all over the fire. And in this mixture dip Wieks to make Candles, or
Cords to make links, let them boil a little and then take them out and cool,
and wreath four together for one link. Which must be covered with four pound of
Wax and one pound of Turpentine.

A Candle that will burn in water may thus be made. Take Wax half a pound, A
Candle that will burn in water.
Brim-stone, unslak't Lime, Turpentine, Salt Ammoniack, of each two ounces,
Petroleum one ounce, Camphire half an ounce. Mix them and make thereof Candles,
which if they be lighted and thrown into the water will burn nevertheless.

Besides the manners and ways already reckoned up, Flame is also extinguished
when a greater is applied to a lesser.
whereby fire may be extinguished, Theophrastus, in his B. de Igne, has yet
another, viz. When a greater fire is put to a lesser. So we see, a great Candle
lighted and put to a lesser, puts the lesser out. But then the lesser flame
indeed is extinguished, but the fire in the Snuf is not put out: and the sire
and flame do not go away, only the lesser flame goes to the greater, because of
affinity, and is thereto joined; or the lesser flame is drawn to it by the
greater.

And that we may say somewhat also of the effects and operations of fire; Of the
operations of fire.
Fire is indeed essentially one and the same, but according to the diversity of
the matter wherein it is, it works diversely. Fire is most hot in a solid and
Earthy Body, says Theophrastus: but in a thin and rare or spungy body, it is
less hot. And Scaliger in his 9. Exercitation: Fire in Iron is most vehement by
reason of its density, Why some fire is more vehement then other some?
in wood less vehement, weaker in Wool and such Paper as we use; in a flame it
is so dilute that we can draw our hand through it without hurt; in Aquae-vitae,
on fire the flame is so thin, that it will not burn a cloth dipped therein. Yea,
And the same Scaliger in the same place says, that the fire burns not of it
self, but by accident, viz. Because of condensation. Howbeit, It is a question
obscure enough, whether fire of it self burns, and whether some fire be hotter
then othersome. Cardan has invented some causes of this thing, which may be
seen in Scaliger. The opinion of Scaliger.
Now that this question may be more rightly explained, Scaliger gives us light,
in the same place, who says the common manner and cause why fire is more
vehement then fire, is the frequency of its parts, their Coherence,
Propinquity, Coagmentation, Cohesion and union; for in a more compacted matter
very many parts are contained in a small place.

Andreas Libavius indeed opposes this opinion of Scaliger in his Comm. Alchym.
Libavius opposes the opinion of Scaliger.
Part. 1. Lib. 2. Cap. 12. And feigns I know not what intension of substances
and qualities, and objects diverse things of little validity against him, scarce
rightly stating the Controversy. For first he says, when stubble is loose and
spread abroad, the fire Flams and wanders at large, and we must say its heat is
less because of the dispersion of parts. Take them therefore in your hand,
twist them and twind them together, yet the fire becomes no stronger: but the
answer is easy. The stubble it self, whether spread abroad, or in a bund^^,
does not change its Nature, but continues spungy. And therefore it stirs up the
same degree of fire, save that when it lies scattered it cannot afford so joint
a Flame, seeing much Air comes between, as when it is gathered together. Again,
he says, that fire burning freely in a spungy piece of Wood has more
furtherances to its action, then in an hard and solid, although you imagine
both of them to be totally inflamed. The fire of loose Coals is more
spirituous, and more blown through then that of hard Coals, although a greater
impression seems to be made by the latter, if you touch them: yet it has less
spirit, it receives less nutriment from the Air; and because it is more shut
in, it is more weak, though more lasting in regard of the strength of the
matter.

But Libavius seems, Libavius his objections answered.
not to have been well acquainted with the Nature of fire, and there are many
things in these objections not agreeing with truth, also several questions are
mingled together. For the question is not, what material does more easily take
fire, and in which fire is most easily brought into act, and which burns most
freely. For we grant that al these things are true of Spungy bodies. But the
question is, in which the fire burns most, in a rare or a dense body. And we
say, that fire does burn more vehemently in a compact and dense body, as
experience shows. For a man may without damage draw his finger through the
flame, but if he do but touch a red hot Iron, he is burnt in a moment. Which
Libavius himself confesses when he grants, that we perceive a greater heat in
hard Coals then in spungy, if we touch them. Now that is false, that the fire
receives nourishment from the Air, since whatsoever is lighted must be in the
inflamed body. But if fire be allaied with much Air, as happens in the burning
of stubble and such like things, the fire is not thereby made stronger but
weaker. And Libavius confounds the increase of the siery parts and the stronger
action of the fire depending thereupon, with the intension of the heat it self.
That one fire is greater then another is out of question; and manifest also it
is, that in a greater Quantity the power of acting is greater, in a less
quantity lesser. For that metal which is melted by a large flame of Wood or
Coals, will not be melted by the flame of a Candle. But here lies the Question,
whether the heat and fire which is in a great flame, be of it self more intense
then that in a small one. Which Scaliger denies, for the causes aforesaid, and
maintains, that those parts of fire, which they call degrees, are augmented by
conjunction of parts, and not by intension of Virtue. Which opinion of
Scaliger, though Libavius call's it a Nicety; Yet, He must needs allow of it,
when he writes that the heat of Fire is as great as may be, in the smallest
spark, and of it self suffers nothing to be taken from it, nor admits any part
of a cold body into its society. And though he adds that the receptive subject
of them both is altered; yet will not Scaliger deny this neither. For by how
much the more Fire there is in any body, so much the hotter is it; and by how
much the lesser, so much the less hot. Take for an example (which Libavius
himself uses) seething Water. There is in boiling hot Water much Fire,
whereupon if you pour cold water, it becomes lukewarm, because of the
admixture of cold water, which has no Fire in it. In a small piece of Iron
there may be more Fire, then in a great deal of stubble.

I retain therefore the opinion of Scaliger, The Authors opinion.
and hold, that one Fire is not hotter then another; but that Fire burns more
strongly then Fire, comes by reason of the union of many parts; and that fire
burns weakly, proceeds from the distance of the said parts. Which that we may
understand more clearly, we must know, that Fire is most of all allayed by Air,
which easily insinuates it self into the society thereof. Whence it follows,
that in rare and porous Bodies, which contain much Air in them, Fire is more
weak and dilute, and its parts are not too near. Contrariwise, In solid bodies,
into which Fire pierces where there is little Air, the parts of the Fire do
stick more one to another, and are compacted.

Howbeit from the premises it follows, Fire burns of it self and not by
accident, as Scaliger Imagines.
that fire burns of it self, not by accident as Scaliger would have it;
contrariwise that it does not burn by accident at al. For, seeing Fire of it
self is the hottest of all bodies (though we have no such Fire with us, that is
pure) and in pure Fire there is a great cleaving together of the parts thereof,
it must also of necessity burn: which also it does in Iron, and other red-hot
metals, because the Atoms or indivisible particles of the fire do Cohere
together, and are extremely near one another, and very many are contained in a
small place, and because of their conjunction they act more effectually.
Contrariwise in stubble, and other spungy Bodies, because Air is mixed with the
flame; and as Scaliger in his 9 Exercitation speaks, the fire is allayed by the
Air, the parts of the fire do not stick together, but are at distance, the Air
coming between, therefore they cannot act so strongly. For Fire truly is the
first subject of heat, and the hottest thing of all others: but that it does
not allwaies Act to extremity, comes by admixture of other Bodies not so hot,
especially of the Air.

The next Element to fire is the Air. For it, What place the Air holds.

Its three Regions.


as it declines from the carity and heat of the Fir; so it takes up a room a
little more remote from Heaven, and is heavy respectively. The Air is divided
into three Regions: the uppermost, the middlemost, and the lowermost. The
uppermost is above the Tops of the highest mountains. For imagine but a
surface upon the tops of the Highest mountains, that shall make the Earth
exactly round, the Air above the same, to the Sphere of fire is the uppermost
Region. The other are below this, which are not allwaies of a like bigness. For
in Summer the lowest is greatest, which reaches as far as the reflection of the
Sun beams goes; and in Winter the middle Region. For in summer time when the
Sun beams fall to righter Angles, they are reflected higher; but in Winter, the
Beams of the Sun being very oblique are reflected sidewaies; nor do they
rebound aloft. The middle Region, in respect of the two others is least hot,
and therefore it is said to be cold, because the Sun beams are not reflected so
far: the other two are hotter; the uppermost, because of the Vicinity of the
Heaven and the siery Element; the lowest be cause of the doubled Sun beams,
direct and reflex.

Howbeit the lowest Region is variously disposed, sometimes it is hot,
otherwhiles cold, sometimes moist, otherwhiles dry, sometimes clear, otherwhiles
cloudy; and the Air being in this Region variously disposed, does diversely
affect our Bodies. For while we breathe, we continually draw it in, and by it
the spirits in our Bodies are repaired and cherished, and our heat which in the
Body needs continual fanning, is thereby preserved.

After the Air comes the Water, an heavy Element, The Water.
yet somewhat lighter then the Earth. This Element is no where found pure, but
is every where mixed with the Earth and ambient Air; of which the taste is an
argument, seeing you can hardly sinde any Water void of taste.

The lowest place is taken up by the Earth, The Earth.
which is of all Elements the most heavy, and most unfit for motion. It has
much matter, and is therefore thick and dark. The Earth is not found pure on
the top thereof, but if it be any where pure, it is in the Center, whither no
contrary does pierce, that may corrupt it.

The Water and Earth do not make a peculiar Sphere as the rest of the Elements,
The Water and the Earth do not make a peculiar sphere.
nor does the water compass the Earth on all sides, but the Earth receives the
water within its Cavities; and in very many places, by a singular providence of
God, the Earth stands bare, for the more commodious generation and nutrition of
Animals and other mixed Bodies, and it lies open to receive the Rays of the
Stars. For Beautifulness and Commodity overcame the force of necessity, in
respect whereof, the water was to have covered the whole Earth. As Scaliger
says, in his 9. Exercitation.

Now, How great the Earth and Water is can hardly be determined. That the
compass of the whole Globe made up of Earth and water is 18000. furlongs, or
5400 German miles, and the Diameter thereof about 1718. German miles, is a
thing out of question: but it is hard to say whether there be more Earth or
Water: Yet most likely it is, that there is more Earth then Water. For neither
is the greater part of the surface of the Globe of the Earth covered with
Water, as appears by the true description of the said Globe: nor indeed is the
quantity of the Water greater then that of the Earth; seeing by the sounding
Plummet we discern that there is Earth under the Sea; and the depth of the Sea
compared with the diameter of the Earth, is a thing of small moment. Of which
see Alexander Piccolhomineus in his Treatise of the Largness of the Land and
Water.

And, The water with the Earth makes one Globe.
that the Sea is not flat and even, but that it makes one Globe with the Earth,
is proved, first by Eclipses of the Moon, in which the shadow of the Earth
appears circular; and therefore argues the Body of the Earth to be so likewise;
and in the next place by Navigations: For if a man sail out into the main Sea,
and take notice of some House or turret on the shore, at first he sees it all,
afterward, scarce half, til at last he quite lose the sight of it, because the
swelling roundness of the Water interposes it self between the shore and the
man's Eye; for sight goes always in a right Line. And although the Earth it
self be not an exact Globe, but a Globous Body, high in some places, low in
other some: yet this highness and flatness bears scarce any proportion to the
whole Body of the Earth; which appears by Eclipses of the Moon, wherein the
shadow of the Earth appears Circular, and makes a Circular Line.

THE THIRD BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of the Elements as they are the Principles of mixed Bodies.
SInce in the Sublunary part of the World there is a perpetual Interchange of
the generation and corruption of things, these must needs be some immediate
Principles, of which variously mixed and tempered together, all things are
generated. Then Principles are vulgarly called Elements, The definition of the
Elements.
and by Aristotle 3. de Caelo, C. 3. T. 30. thus defined. The Elements of
Bodies are those things into which the Bodies are resolved wherein they are
actually or potentially, but they themselves cannot b^ divided into other
distinct sorts of things. And by Avicen they are defined to the same intent and
purpose: That they are simple Bodies, and the first parts of the Body of (...)
and other things; which cannot be divided into Bodies of different forms, of
the mixture of which, the several sorts of things generated are made. Where you
are to observe, that the chief Character of an Element, as it is the principle
of a mixed Body, is indivisibility, in respect of any parts of several sorts,
into which it can be divided. And therefore Galon also; when in 1. de Elem.
Cap. 1. He had defined an Element to be the smallest part of that where of it
is an Element, himself adds; but that which appears smallest to the sense, is
not indeed always the smallest in reality. For many things by their smalness
cannot be discerned by the senses.

Seeing these Elements were to be the Principles of a tangible and generable
body, it was necessary that they should have also certain Qualities, by which
they might be known to us, might work one upon another, and might be fit to
effect all kind of mixture: which what and how many they are, let us consider
in the first place. For they being known, The first Qualities, why so called.
we shall easily afterward know, both how many Elements there are, and what
their Nature is. These qualities are commonly called the first Qualities, not
because they are absolutely first, or first in dignity, or because all other
Qualities arise from them, but because they are originally in the first
sublunary bodies.

Now these are their Conditions: Their Conditions.
that they constitute the first sensible, that is to say, tangible bodies, and
be their differences us they are such: that they effect the first sense, viz.
the touch: that they be in all bodies subject to Generation and Corruption:
that they be contrary, and apt to do and suffer; for they are to be the Authors
of Generation and Corruption: that they have none before them, whence they are
termed first: that they cannot be made one of another.

Moreover, that we may search out how many such Qualities there are, How many
first Qualities there are?
we must take a view of al tangible Qualities. Aristotle, in de 2. Generat. and
Corrupt. c. 2. ^. 8. reckons up these first tangible Contrarieties; Hot, Gold;
Dry, Moist; Heavy, Light; Hard, Soft; Clammy, Crisp; Rough, Smooth; Thick,
Thin. Howbeit, among these seven Oppositions of tangible Qualities; only the
two first deserve the name of first Qualities. For Heavy and light do not act
one upon another. And the same may be said of the other four part of
Oppositions. For neither do they act or suffer one upon and from another; nor
are they first Qualities, but arise from others, and belong rather to compound
than to simple Bodies. And therefore there are only four first Qualities: Hear,
Col^, Dryness, (...). For in them all the abovesaid marks of first Qualities are
to be ^^^^d.

These Qualities are defined by Aristole in the 2. de Genesis and Corrup chapter 2.
(...) 9. The definition of Heat.
thus: Heat is that which collects things homogoneal or of like nature. For in
that ^t separates things heterogeneal comes by accident. For to collect and
gather together things of like nature, is to separate things of unlike nature.
Now by things homageneal, or of like nature, we must understand, not only such
things as are of the same sort, but which have like temper, and may be changed
into one nature: by things heterogeneal or of unlike nature, not only such
things as are of a different species or four, but also such as are of a diverse
temperament, nor can be reduced into one nature. For Heat always endeavors to
reduce things different into one Nature: which (...) it cannot do, by reason of
the difference of temperaments, it only unites such things as it has made
alike, and rejects the rest as Excrements. These operations of Heat are every
where to he seen, and especially in the Concoctions made in anima^^. For the
soul makes greatest use of heat as its fittest instrument to perform its
actions by. For fundry meats being cast into the stomach, the Heat of the
stomach reduce such as are fitting into one nature, and turns them into one
mast of chyle; the other parts which are unfit, it separates as Dregs and
Excrements, to be cast our by the (...). The same does the Liver; the same do
all the members. Also by the help of Heat all chemical operations are
performed. For that Art by Heat separates ^^^^als; seve^^ the parts of Plants
and other things, and does other wonderful works. Heat therefore is of all
Qualities the most excellent; the first Instrument of Generation, and most
efficacious in its operations.

Cold i^ a Quality that gathers together, both things of (...), Cold defined.
and things of unlike Nature. For we see now in Ice, by force of cold, several
things, as Wood, Straw, Stones, Earth are congealed together; and the like cold
does in other things and places; and it combines things together with one any
separation of what i^ heterogeneal. Here we must reject the Opinion of Cardan,
who would have cold to be only a (...) and privation of Heat. For Cold i^
doubtless a positive Quality; seeing it is (...) by the Sense, and has certain
powers whereby it acts and opposes Heat; which cannot be in a bare privation.
Of which see Scaliger in his 2^. Exercitation.

That is moist, which it hardly (...) in its own limits or bounds, The
Definition of Moisture (...) and Dryness.
easily in th^se of another thing. That is dry, which is easily commined in its
own bounds, and over not easily (...) the bounds of another thing. For we find
by Experience, that the Air does of it self flow every where al about and
easily accommodate it self to the sides of the thing contained; and the like
(...) Water: but the Earth flows not about, but retains and keeps with in its
own bounder nor does it easily accommodate it self to all the parts of the body
which contains it. By Moisture therefore things are made to cleave one to
another; and there^^^^ we see things overdried do breale: and from dryness
things have stability and Consistency.

Now touching these definitions, this is to be observed: that Aristotle did not
define the first Qualities absolutely considered, as they are in the Elementy,
considered as simple bodies and not compounded into mixed things; but as they
appertain unto them, when they go into a mixed body. Aristotle was not indeed
ignorant, that the first Qualities had other effects preceding those by which
he defined them; and that an Hot thing Heats, a Cold, Cools; a Moist moistens,
and a Dry Dries; yet he thought not fit to constitute or make up the
definitions of the first Qualities by these effects; both because these
definitions would reveal nothing that was hidden, but the same thing would be
defined by the same; and also because the first qualities are given to the
Elements by Nature, for no other occasion but that by them as the immediate
instruments they might be the principles of mixed bodies. And the first
operations of the first qualities are originally more principal than the second
operations of the said Qualities: but in the intent of nature contriving the
generation of a mixed body, they are not the principal, but the second are more
principal than they. Wherefore, omitting those common operations known of
themselves, which they perform both in mixed and simple bodies, Aristotle would
define them by those alone which they exercise in mixed bodies.

These Qualities are divided into Active Heat and Cold; Whether the first
Qualities are rightly divided into active and passive
and Passive Moisture and Dryness, of which division, although the opinions of
Authors are various, as may be seen in Archangelus Mercenarius, p. 239.
Zabarella de Qual. Elem. c. 5. Franc. Piccol. de Qual. p. 1. cap 8. yet I
conceive, this ought to be our judgment. All these qualities, in respect of
that univocal action, whereby each one by its first operations begets its like,
and destoies its contrary, as well in simples as in mixed bodies, do both act and
suffer: yet in respect of their equivocal action, which they only exercise in
mixed bodies, and whereby they produce the second qualities, and the nature of
the mixed body it self, different from the nature of the Elements; two are
termed active, and two passive. And in this respect, Moisture and Dryness have
no active power, but are only as matter which the Work-masters Heat and Cold
exercise their craft upon.

Seeing these Qualities are in the Elements as in their first subjects, we may
rightly by them search out also the number of the Elements. And omitting that
reason which was produced in the second Book foregoing, we shall thus proceed.
If the Elements be alterable, they must needs be more than one: but they are
alterable, for they must be the principles of alterable bodies, and bodies that
are corruptible. Therefore there cannot be one Element but many, and they
endowed with contrary qualities, by which they act and suffer mutually. This
reason agrees with that of Hippocrates, Lib. 7. de Not. Hom. t. 5. where he
says: if a Man consisted only of one Element, he should never be pained: for
there would be nothing to pain him, because he should be one thing; and, as
Galen says in his Comment, there would be no second to act upon him. For the
self same body cannot suffer from it self.

Now how many Elements there are, The number of the Elements.
Aristotle demonstrates in his 2. de Gener. and Corrup. cap. 3. t. 16. and cap.
5. t. 34. after this manner. The Elements are therefore called the principles
of mixed bodies, because being altered and changed one by another, they
constitute the said bodies. Now all alteration and mutation depends upon the
action and passion of the first Qualities, which are four as was said before.
Those simple bodies therefore which are the subject of the first Qualities,
shall be the principles of mixed bodies. And that they may rightly cause mistion,
it is necessary, Whether the first Qualities be the forms of the Elements.
that each may suffer from each, and that therefore it have not only one, but
two first Qualities.

From the Premises therefore, thus we conclude. There are so many Elements, as
there are possible combinations of the first Qualities: but they are only four;
Heat and Dryness; Cold and Moisture; Heat and moisture, Cold and Dryness: for
the other two are altogether impossible, nor can extreme Heat combine with
extreme Cold, nor extreme Dryness with extreme Moisture: seeing contraries
cannot be in one and the same subject. So many Elements therefore there are;
The Fire hot and dry; the Air, hot and moist; The Water, cold and moist; and
the Earth, cold and dry.

Hereunto may also be added another reason, which Aristotle uses in his 2. de
Generat. and Corrupt. Cap. 8. T. 40. So many Elements there are, as there are
things of which perfectly mixed Bodies do consist. But they consist only of
four: and therefore there are four Elements. For we see all perfectly mixed
Bodies to have much Earth in them, and to be moved toward the Earth: but mixed
Bodies are moved according to the motion of the prevalent Element. And mixed
Bodies because they are knit together and Co-here, and receive terms, there is
also water in them, for it is the part of Water to unite and fasten: if Water
and Earth, then the contrary Elements Fire and Air, by which they are to be
allaied, and wherewith to be mingled. For mixture is not made without mutual
action and passion. Moreover all Generation is made by Heat. And therefore
besides water and Earth, heat also is required to mixture: but one hot Element
does not suffice: For it would be vanquished by two cold ones. And therefore,
besides Water and Earth, Fire also and Air do concur to constitute all mixed
Bodies.

The number of the Elements being found out, Whether the first qualities be the
forms of the Elements.
we must now enquire into their Essence and Nature. And since the first
qualities are very intimate to the Elements, the question is; Whether the first
Qualities are the substantial forms of the Elements? Or whether the Elements
have other forms besides the Qualities. Not to be prolix in a plain case,
briefly thus we hold; that the first qualities are not the substantial forms of
the Elements, but accidents. A token whereof is, that the first qualities are
perceived by the sense; whereas no substance can of it self be perceived by the
sense; again they are found in other things as mutable accidents; and therefore
in the Elements themselves they cannot any ways be substances. Howbeit the
hidden Forms of the Elements are by them Circumscribed by Authors. And
therefore Hippocrates himself, often calls the four Elements by the Names of Hot,
Cold, Moist and Dry, as Galen witnesses in his 1. De Temp. Chapter 8.

By the Qualities therefore the Elements are known to us. The qualities proceed
from the Forms.
For they are in the Elements as their Proper subjects, from whose forms also
they depend and have their being. For I hold not with those who deny, that the
first Qualities which are in the Elements do proceed from the forms of the said
Elements, by way of Emanation, but derive them all from the motion of Heaven,
or the Negation thereof. For it is an absurd thing, that a Natural Quality
should proceed from any thing but its own Form. Nor must we think that the
forms of the Elements are Lazy and Heartless, and produce no Qualities, nor
work no operations. For if the first proceed not from the forms, which are most
intimate with the Elements; I do not see what other Qualities can proceed from
them: moreover an absurd thing it is, to hold that cold comes only from the
Privation of the motion of Heaven: for since it is a positive Quality, it
requires also a positive Cause.

But in each Element there are two Qualities. For seeing it is necessary, Each
Element has two qualities.
That every Element, for the more commodious generation of things and their
mixtion, should be able to act upon every one, and suffer from every one:
therefore each have two qualities. Now the Question in this place is; whether
both Qualities do equally agree to each Element? Whether each Element has one
quality in the highest degree?
Or whether one Element have affinity to one Quality more then another, and
have one Quality primarily, the other secondarily: Moreover; Whether in each
Element both the Qualities are in the highest degree, Or one only in the
highest degree, and the other remiss: and it is disputed, how that place in
Aristotle 2. de Gener. and Corrup. Cap. 3. T. 23. is to be understood; where
Aristotle thus says: The Earth is dry more then cold, the Water cold more then
moist, the Air moist more then hot, the fire hot more then dry.

'Twere long to recount the different opinions of Authors touching this
Question, and to make any certain determination is hard: yet I shall briefly
propound what I conceive most probable. Now we hold, that that one quality is
most intimate to the Nature of each Element and more of alliance thereto then
the other: also that one is more excellent, the other less excellent, viz. That
the fire, as Aristotle has it in the place forealleadged, is most Hot and Dry;
the Air most moist and hot: the Water most cold and moist; the Earth most Dry
and Cold; which also sense does testify: and that these Qualities do after
this manner flow from the form of each Element. And they are in an Error, who
while they are sollicitous about attributing to each Element its own Qualities,
do not so much regard the forms of the Elements, as their greater or lesser
distance from Heaven, and think thence to fetch the qualities. Nor is that of
any great moment, which has moved many to think the contrary: viz. That the
abatement of the quality is caused by its contrary; whereas the Elements are
most simple, and have no contrariety in them. For this is true only of mixed
bodies, but not of simple Elements: and that constitution of Qualities does
proceed from the form of each one. For as this is the Nature of the Air, that
without the mixture of any heavy Body it is not so light as the fire; so it is
a property thereof, not to be so hot as fire.

And here is also another Question, Whether the Qualities wherein the Elements
partake, are of several sorts.
whether symbolical Qualities, for example sake the Heat in the Fire and the
Heat in the Air, are of the same sort. Now the Answer is, That these Qualities
are not of several sorts, and that we are not to acknowledge eight, but only
four first Qualities, which in the first place our Sense it self does witness,
which judges all heat to be of one sort: and again when the symbolical
Elements are changed, the Quality wherein they partake abides: and the watery
coldness it self is as contrary to the heat of the Air, as to the heat of the
Fire.

From what has been said may easily be collected, what is the nature of each
Element. For the Fire is an Element exceedingly and primarily hot, and Dry.
Both which experience does witness, whereby we are all daily instructed that
Fire is dry. For Fire can change both Air and Water. And therefore it must have
Qualities contrary to them. For transmutation happens betwixt contraries: and
whereas both the Air and Water are moist, the Fire contrariwise is dry.

We must therefore reject the Paradoxical opinion of Johannes Baptista
Montanus, who teaches that the Fire and all Elements have some moisture in
them, and that whatever is continued in Nature and united, whether it be simple
or compound, is continued only by humidity, and that not only in this sublunary
world, but in the Heaven also. For in mixture only it is, that diverse simple
bodies are coupled by moisture: not simple bodies, for so they should not be
simple. But the form of every simple body, as it gives the being and bounds, so
it couples and contains the parts.

The Fire therefore, seeing it is Primarily and principally hot, al hot
operations are therefore therein more conspicuous: The Fire compared to a King.
and therefore it is neatly by Scaliger compared to a just King, which renders
every one his due, dividing the Land amongst families: and to a prudent steward
of an house that reserves to himself as much as he needs. For out of Wood, it
gives ashes to the Earth, liquor to the water, vapor to the Air; and takes that
to it self which is concealed from the Eyes of the Vulgar, but not from the
mind of the Wise. And although very many in this age seek to banish Fire out of
the Universe: yet I conceive we ought not to reject the same, as has been said
before in B. 2. chapter 3.

The Air is an Element in the highest degree and primarily moist. Air is most
moist and hot. The Air is hot.
Now touching the heat thereof, there is great difference amongst Authors. For
the Stoics as Seneca, Not. Quest. Book 2. Chapter 10. Cardan Lib. 2. de Elem. and
others do hold against the Peripateticks that the Air is cold. But I must take
part with the Peripateticks for the heat of the Air; seeing there are strong
reasons to back that opinion For Air is produced and preserved by that which is
hot: but is condensed by cold, and turned into water. Moreover the lightness of
the Air is a token of its Heat, feeing Lightness follows after or accompanies
Heat. Moreover, if the Air were cold, there would be no simple body hot and
moist, and water should agree with Air, and therefore one of the two would be
superfluous. More reasons are to be found in Authors to this purpose. But all
which is said of Air in this case must be understood of it, as it is a pure
Element. For being mingled with vapors, and affected with a strange quality, it
has oft-times a faculty of cooling, and oft-times of drying, which
nevertheless agrees not thereto of it self, but by accident.

Water is an Element in the highest degree and primarily cold, Water is an
Element most cold, and moist. Earth an Element most dry and cold.
and moist: the Earth in the highest degree and primarily dry, also cold.
Concerning these two Elements few Controversies are started. For whereas some
dispute, whether the Earth or the water is primarily cold, the question may
easily be determined, from what has been said. For they which would have the
Earth colder than the Water build upon a bad foundation: viz. that all the
Elementary Qualities proceed from Heaven, which was before rejected. And so
much for the Elements.

Chap. 2. Of the Action, Passion and Mixture of the Elements.
AFter we have explained the Nature of Elements, the next thing is, that we
declare, how mixed bodies are of them compounded. Now forasmuch as the Elements,
unless they be altered, cannot constitute mixed bodies; nor can they be altered
unless they act and suffer one from another; nor can they act and suffer,
unless they touch one another, as Aristotle has it, de Generat. and Corrupt.
Lib. 1. cap. 6. t. 43. we must first speak a little concerning Contact or
mutual touching, Action, passion and Reaction.

Contact is chiefly twofold: one improperly so called, which they term virtual;
whereby things incorporeal do act upon other things, or a distant body, does by
its Virtue work upon another remote body. The other is a Contact of magnitudes;
of which there are again many fashions. For absolutely and generally al things
are said to touch, which having distinct magnitude and position have their
extreme parts close one to another. And then there is a Physical or Natural
Contact, of which we are now treating; and this belongs to bodies having diverse
magnitudes, whose extreme parts are together: and which act and suffer one upon
and from another. Or in a word: Those bodies touch with a Physical contact,
whose bounds are together, and which mutually act and suffer one upon and from
another. For besides these things which are common to all bodies that are said
to touch one another, viz. to have magnitudes distinct, a certain position of
parts their place and extreme parts together; this is peculiar to Physical
contact, that bodies which do thereby touch one another, do act upon and suffer
from one another. Thirdly, Those bodies do touch one another, whose extreme
parts are together, and one only acts upon another, but suffers nothing
therefrom.

Contact is therefore required as a necessary condition in sublunary things.
For it has been before proved in general, that every Agent must be together
with the Patient. For since by the Agents action upon the Patient, some
mutation ought to be made, of necessity that must be present which changes, or
at least its Virtue; and its Virtue cannot be present, unless that be present
which carries it. And therefore in every action the Patient is touched by the
Agent, or at least by that which carries its Virtue. For nothing acts upon the
extreme, but it acts first upon the medium.

Yet we must here diligently observe; that there is a double action, the one
primary, which immediately follows the nature of the thing; the other secondary
proceeding from the primary. The primary action of the Sun is Illumination: the
secondary Heating. The primary action of the Fire is to heat; the secondary to
melt, to harden. Now touching the primary it is only true, that the Agent acts
not upon the extreme, before it act upon the Intermedium. For the second
Action, besides that that it presupposes the first, also it requires an
aptitude of the subject to suffer; whence that vulgar assertion in the
Phylosophck Schools, The actions of Active things, are received in a Patient
and that which is disposed also, Whatever is received is received according to
the disposition of the Receiver. So by the Sun light is produced, both in the
Ethereal and Elementary world; but the Heat not in Heaven, but only in
sublunary things. So Fire heats both Wax and Clay; yet it melts the former and
hardens the latter: because the former is indisposed to be hard, and the latter
is indisposed to melt.

With the Mutual contact of the Elements is conjoined their Action and passion.
Now by action we do not here understand every action, but that only which is
betwixt the first qualities, Now among what things there might be Action, the
Ancients were not agreed, as may be seen in Aristotle, de Generat. and Corrupt.
Lib. 1. Cap. 7. T. 46, 47. For some held, that all action and passion was
betwixt things unlike; others, that a thing did not suffer from a thing unlike,
but only from its like. We with Aristotle, in the place aforesaid, Text 50. do
hold the middle opinion, and do say: that every agent endeavors to make the
patient like it self, and that therefore a thing like as it is like, and
according to the same quality whereby it is like, does not act upon its like:
for examples sake, that which is cold, as it is cold, does not act upon a cold
thing: nor does that which is diverse, act upon that which is altogether
diverse; for Heat does not act upon heat: but contrary acts upon its contrary.
And therefore those things which act one upon another, and suffer one from
another, are partly like and partly unlike; like in Kind, but unlike in sort;
for contraries are under the same kind, but differ in the sort.

Howbeit, What has been said, that like does not act upon its like, must be a
little more diligently weighed: because from the right understanding of this
Axiom, we come to the knowledge of many things in Natural Philosophy and
Physic. In the first place it must be observed, that in this place, we speak
of that similitude which is betwixt the first qualities; and in the next place
that this similitude is threefold. For some things are alike, only according
to the sort of quality; although in the degree, or the intention of the quality
and vehemence of the action, which they call activity, they are unlike. So every
hot thing is said to be like another hot thing, and fire is said to be like
lukewarm Water, and other things any ways hot. Other things are alike, both in
the sort and the degree of the quality, although they differ in the vehemence
of their action: thus the sire in a red hot Iron, is like that in burning wood.
Other things are a like, both according to the sort of the quality, and
according to the degree thereof, and according to the power of acting. So two
fires, which are in matters of the same bigness, and of the same rarity or
density are alike. For this must not be forgotten; that equal activity does not
always proceed from the same degree of quality; nor has every heat which is
alike in degree and intension, an equal faculty of heating, but oftentimes
where there is no excess of degree, there is yet an excess of operation, either
by reason of the plenty of matter, or the density thereof. For the fire which
is made of a great Faggot, is not hotter or more intense then that which is
made of a stick or two; but only has a greater activity; and a dram of Pepper
is not according to the degree of heat more intense, then one Pepper Corn: but
only has a greater power to act. For in a greater magnitude there is more
virtue: and in much matter, much form. So the fire in a red hot Iron, is not
hotter then that in stubble: but it has a greater strength to act. For force
united is more strong then that which is dispersed: and an agent the nearer it
is to the Patient, the more it acts thereupon. Now the parts of a compact body
are less distant from any particular point in the parient, then the parts of
the same Body rarefied, and extended to a greater bulk. Moreover, in a dense
Body, there is more matter, and therefore more form, and by compactness of
parts, there is more substance in a less space, and therefore greater force.
For parts condensed are like many individuals joined together, which act more
powerfully then one. And therefore wherever there are more degrees of the same
quality, whether they be collected by intension, or the magnitude of the
subject, or the condensation thereof, there is the greater Action.

These things thus premised, we shall deliver our opinion concerning the action
of things like, What kind of action there is betwixt like things.
in these propositions. 1. Things like may act one upon another after the first
manner, so that the more intense will intend the more remiss; and that which is
remiss will abate that which is intense. According to the common Axiom of
Physicians, which is a principle of the Art of compounding of Medicaments. For
seeing action is betwixt contraries, not only the extremes do mutually act one
upon another, but also the Mediums and the extremes. For even by the Medium, as
a contrary, mutation is made. For as Aristotle has it in his 5. Phys. Cap. 1.
T. 6. A Medium is in some sort an extreme. And that which is remiss, is in
place of the other contrary. And Aristotle himself explains what he understands
by contraries, in 1. de Gener. and Corrup. Chapter 7. T. 51. Now because the Agent
and the patient are the same and like in kind, but unlike in sort; and such
things are contraries: it is manifest, that actives and passives are one
contrary to another, and also Mediums. Also experience proves the same thing,
which teaches us, that a hotter thing added to a less hot, makes it more hot,
and contrariwise; and that lukewarm Water put into that which is boiling hot,
does allay the heat thereof; and continually from the mixture of that which is
intense with that which is remiss there results a compound, more intense then
the remiss parts and more remiss then the intense.

II. Among things like, according to the second way, there is no action. For
seeing according to the sort and degree, and the first act, wherein the Nature
of qualities consists, and to which mutation tends, these qualities are like,
and are not of different sorts; and therefore are not contraries: therefore
there can be no action betwixt them. For every action is betwixt contraries,
and every agent by acting endeavors to make the Patient like it self, and to
give it the same Nature and Act. Moreover, since action supposes essence, no
thing which is in aptitude to be this or that, can be made actually so, but by
that which is actually such. And therefore a thing hot to four degrees, though
it may be intended to more degrees; yet it cannot be by any thing intended,
save by that which has above four degrees of heat in it. Also experience
justifies our assertion. For suppose for examples sake, that there are two
Bodies in the highest degree hot, the one greater and more compact, the other
less and more spungy; the former indeed acts more vehemently, Yet can it not
work upon the latter, because it has already attained the highest degree of
heat.

III. Also between things alike after the third manner, there is no action. For
seeing it is rightly said by Aristotle, in is 1. de Gener. and Corrup. Cap. 7.
T. 31. That the Agent does make the Patient like it self: Betwixt things
perfectly like, there can be no action. And from the premises it appears,
betwixt what things there can be action and passion; which Aristotle has
briefly comprehended, in the foresaid place, where he says: It is manifect
both that contraries, and those things also which are Mediums, do mutually act
and suffer, one upon and from another.

But here arises another Controversy from that which has been said, viz.
Whether there be Reaction among the Elements.
That al things of the same kind, do mutually act and suffer one upon and from
another; for it is hereupon disputed; Whether amongst the Elements there be a
reciprocal Action and passion, Which they commonly term Reaction: or whether an
agent, working by the first sensible qualities of it self, being close to the
Patient and contrary thereunto, do suffer any thing likewise from the Patient.
Now action is here by way of eminency ascribed to the stronger, and passion to
the weaker; and that action by which the Patient acts back again upon the
stronger and more potent, is termed Reaction; and the passion whereby the agent
being stronger receives the action of the weaker, may be termed Re-passion.

And besides other things, which make a difficulty in this Case, which may be
read in Tolet, L. 1. de Genesis and Corrupt. Chapter 7. Q. 15. Zabarella de Reactione
C. 2. Franc. Piccolhomineus L. de Effect. and perpess. operant. per Not. C. 20.
Victor Trincavellus in Quest. de Reactione. That passage of Aristotle, in his
B. de Animal. Mot. C. 3. Whatever things are of equal strength, they do not
mutually act one upon another, but are overcome by exsuperancy, has brought
many into an Error: some so as quite to deny all Reaction; and others who saw
it demonstrated by reason and experience, that there was Reaction, so as to
make them feign false manners of Reaction. For some hold, that there is indeed
Reaction, but that either it is not according to the same part, or not
according to the same Contrariety. For if there be a certain hot thing, which
has not an equal degree of heat in all its parts, they say it may act
according to its strong parts, and resuffer according to its weak ones: but if
all parts have equal Heat, then it cannot suffer any thing from the cold
patient, according to the same contrariety, but according to some other: as if
the fire act upon Water, it suffers nothing therefrom as it is cold, yet it may
suffer therefrom as it is moist. Others do thus think: that Reaction is
primarily indeed, and of it self, according to a diverse contrariety, but
secondarily and by accident, according to the same Contrariety. Forasmuch as
one quality may be corrupted primiarily by its contrary quality, and
accidentally by the Corruption of that, wherewith it is Naturally in the
subject: as for examples sake, the Heat of Fire while it acts upon Water as
cold, of it self or primarily it resuffers not from the coldness of the Water;
yet because the conjoined dryness suffers from the moisture of the Water, it is
also therewith debilitated and remitted.

You may read more opinions in the Authors forementioned all which rejecting,
thus we determine: that there is a Reaction; and that it is according to the
same contrariety, and the same part, and of it self and primarily, And the
first is taught, in the first Place, by experience. For if a Man take a piece
of Ice in his Hand, both his Hand is cooled and the Ice is melted; and a red
hot Iron cast into cold Water, it heats the Water, and is cooled by the Water,
And Reason proves the same. For reaction being taken away, there will be no
Mixture: seeing mixture cannot be made, unless the qualities of the Elements
being by mutual action and passion broken and remitted and altered, be reduced
to a certain temper and Concord. Aristotle says the same, in 3. Phys. Cap. 2.
Text 8.16. 1 de Genesis and Corrup. Cap. 7. T. 53. C. 10. T. 87.89. Lib. 4. de
Generib. Animal. Chapter 3.

The same Experience teaches the other, which witnesses that boiling Water and
Cold, which are only opposite in heat and cold, if they be mixed together,
become tempered, and that the boiling heat allaies the coldness of the cold
Water, and the cold abateth the Heat of the boiling hot Water. For unless
Reaction were according to the same contrariety, there could no mixture be
made. For if the Fire as hot should only act, and should not suffer; the heat
and moisture of the Water would remain in the highest degree, and consequently
no mixture would be made. Moreover, every contrary, Naturally and of it self,
acts upon its contrary, as long as it is in presence. Hither tends that, Out of
the 3. de Gener. Anim. That which beats is cooled by that which is heated.

The same Experience makes for the Third, and Reason teaches, that if there
must be perfect mixture, all parts of the Elements must be altered, and reduced
to a Mediocrity.

Experience also confirms the fourth, whereby we are taught, that hot and cold
Water, which agree in moisture, and are opposite only in heat and cold, can
nevertheless mutually act and suffer. And truly, heat is not peculiarly joined
with moisture or dryness, but may consist with either: whence it is also that
the Elements which have affinity one to another in one of their qualities, do
mutually act and suffer.

And that we may free our selves from that difficulty which has seduced
others, we are to know: that there is a twofold action, one imperfect and
begun, which they call an action without the Agents Victory, whereby the Agent
does not change the whole Passive subject, but only weakens the same, and
impresses some degree of a quality there into: the other perfect and complete,
which they call an action with Victory of the Agent, whereby the Agent makes the
Patient perfectly like it self. Hence, we answer, it is one thing to act,
another thing to overcome; one thing to suffer, another thing to be overcome.
And therefore, if Action be taken in the first manner, for action begun, in
every Alteration, there is Reaction, and the contrary Patient reacts upon the
Agent; provided it be in fitting distance and quantity. For even that which
has less force, before it is quite overcome and abolished, makes impression of
some quality upon the stronger, and extinguishes some degrees of the contrary
quality. But if action be taken for a perfect abolition of the other quality,
there is no Reaction. For nothing can perfectly destroy a thing, and be
perfectly destoied thereby. Wherefore that saying of Aristotle, before
alleged in his B. de Motu Animal. c. 3. must be understood of this action,
and not of the former.

And so much shall suffice to have spoken of the mutual action and passion of
Elements: The definition of Mixture.
we now come to Mixture which results therefrom, which Aristotle in his 1 De
Genesis et corrup cap. 10. Thus defines: Mixture is the union of things apt to be
mingled, being first altered. Now things apt to be mingled, are such as can
subsist separate, by themselves, and they are only substances. Hence accidents
are neither said to be mingled one with another, nor with their substances; and
mistion is properly of bodies, not of qualities: again, such things as are
contrary, and can mutually act and suffer; finally such as can give a bulk to
the mixed Body.

But here arises no light Question, Whether or no and how the Elements remain
in a mixed body?
How Elements remain in mixed Bodies. For seeing the things mingled ought to be
altered, not corrupted; it seems the Elements remain in the mixed body, but
perish not. Contrarily, seeing mixture is not only an heaping or jumbling
together of the things mixed, but an Union, so that of many Natures one is
made; it should seem that the Elements do perish, and that of them a certain
new Nature is made: whereabouts, the opinions of Authors are various. We,
rejecting the rest, will follow Avicenna, whose opinion is approved of very
many most learned Physicians, and seems so evident and firm to Fernelius, that
in the Second Book of his Physiology, cha. 6. he calls the contrary opinion
vain and childish, Yea and monstrous, and such he accounts it, as that it
stains all the Glory of that Philosopher that holds it. Now the opinion of
Avicenna is, that the Elements do not only remain in the Mixed Bodies, but also
retain their forms perfect and entire. For in the first place, seeing Aristotle
himself, in the end of his Book de Ortu and Interitu, defines mixture to be,
The union of the things mingled, being Altered; The very Nature of mixture
declares as much; Seeing things which are not preserved cannot be mingled. Nor
does the word union oppose this opinion. For Union is the coupling of things
which truly are, but not of things which are perished. And though of many
things one is made; Yet neither is it necessary that those simples should
perish, nor is it a bare heaping together, but by a superior form the simples
are reduced into one Body. Moreover, since action supposes an act, and in mixed
Bodies the Actions of the Elements appear, it must needs be that they are
actually in them. Not to speak of others, Aristotle himself, in the beginning
of his 1. de Caelo, writes that a mixed Body is moved according to the motion of
the most prevalent Element. Finally, the resolution of mixed Bodies into the
Elements shows the same. For mixed bodies are resolved into the Elements, and
Aristotle himself holds in 1. de Genesis and Corrup. Text 84. That the things
mixed may be again separated from the mixed Body. Which if it may be, they must
of necessity actually exist in the mixed Bodies.

Now their opinion is altogether foolish who hold, that the Elements do not
return out of the mixed Body, the same in number, but the same in sort; nor is
it founded upon any reason, but is only invented to palliate an absurd opinion;
rather it is opposite both to reason and Experience. For whereas they hold,
that the Elements return out of the mixed Body, by reason of the action of a
like Element, whereby they recover that which they had lost in the Mixture; how
I pray you in distillations and burnings, can Water and Earth be drawn out of
the compound, seeing the fire by acting upon the mixed Body, introduces nothing
Watery, nor any thing Earthy: Yea the action of the Fire is contrary to the
Water and the Earth, but does not augment, nor perfect the same?

And that which Averroes and Zabarella do produce concerning the refraction of
forms, is a mere figment, and that opinion is sufficiently refuted by the
Latins, disputing against the opinion of Averroes, who hold the forms of the
Elements are capable of more and less; nor have they ever brought so much as a
probable reason for their opinion, but only simply affirm, that forms have
certain degrees, some of which being taken away, the rest may remain.

Howbeit, not only the Concourse and action of the Elements is requisite, to
produce a mixed body, but the direction of a superior form must of necessity by
joined. Which thing also Scaliger acknowledged, where in his Exercitation, 307.
Sect. 20. he thus writes, Unless the four Elements should have a Governor or
Pilot, they would vainly and to no purpose toss and be tossed. For what is it
that mingles so much Earth with the rest? But there must be in every thing, one
thing primarily moved. Now they cannot move themselves to any work, but in
Compounds, by a more excellent form, and in things imperfectly mixed, by an
external principle, they are moved to a mutual connection.

Thus therefore we briefly express the whole Nature of mixture. In mixture the
simples must first of all be divided into very small parts; therefore things
Liquid, brittle, fine, are easily mingled. The Elements being thus divided into
small portions according to the Nature of the mixed Body; they do by their
contrary qualities mutually act one upon another, and suffer one from another;
do hear, cool, moisten, dry one another mutually, and one acts upon another, as
on a separated contrary: for they are not as yet united. But because the force
of heat and cold is greatest, therefore these things do first temper
themselves, and the cold renders the heat temperate and moderate, as far as the
Nature of the mixed Body to be produced requires. This tempered heat does
afterward extenuate the moist and dry as the matter, that the parts of the
simples may be perfectly mixed, according as the Nature of the mixed Body
requires. For heat alone of it self is the Author of mixture; but cold
accidentally concurs to mixtion, inasmuch as it moderates the heat.

Chap. 3. Of the Generation and Corruption of Bodies Natural.
BUt, inasmuch as a mixed Body and the Generation of a mixed body are either one
and the same thing, or at least the one cannot be without the other; we must
now treat of the Generation of a mixed Body. But, forasmuch as there are sundry
sorts of generable and corruptible things, and some are simple, others mixed, we
shall first speak of generation in general, viz. As it concerns every substance
liable to generation and corruption; afterward, of the sorts of generation,
viz. The Transmutation of the Elements, the generation of mixed Bodies, and
their corruption, which is putrefaction.

Now Generation as it is taken in General, The Definition of Generation.
Aristotle defines in his 1. de Genesis and Cor. cap. 4. t. 23. thus: Generation
is the mutation of the whole, no sensible thing remaining, as the same subject.
The Sense of which definition is this; that Generation is a substantial
mutation, wherein the specifical form of a natural body being abolished, a new
one is produced, so that there remains not the same sensible subject of the
form acquired, which was the subject of the form lost, and the whole compound is
said to be corrupted, and a new one generated. For the whole, in the definition
of Generation, dothnot signify all the parts of a natural body; for the prima
materia, or first matter is not corrupted: but the Integrity, Absoluteness, and
perfection of a natural body, consisting in its specific form; which is
therefore by Aristotle sometimes called Totum, because it compleats and perfects
the whole Essence of a thing. For as the sort of a number is taken away, when
one unity is subtracted, and the number of seven ceases to be seven, when one
is taken from it, although the other six unities remain: so, by reason of the
ultimate and specific form of a natural body, the whole is said to be changed
and to perish; so we say, an Horse is perished, though the form only be
perished, the Body still remaining.

Herein therefore consists the whole Nature of Generation and Corruption,
Wherein the Nature of Generation and Corruption consists.
that the last and specific form be abolished, and another arise, or be
introduced, by which the compound generated may differ specifically or as
another sort, from the former which was said to perish, when the form
perishes. Hence also it appears how that common speech, That Generation and
Corruption is not of the form, but the matter, is to be understood. For the
meaning thereof is not, as if all the parts of a natural body were corrupted,
or bred a new; for the matter remains the same in all generation and
corruption: but that, by the mutation of the ultimate and specific form the
compound it self is changed, and receives a new denomination.

Now that this is the Sense of these words, and what is to be understood by the
mutation of the whole, these following words of the same definition declare: No
sensible thing remaining as the same subject. By which words Aristotle
intimates; that in no substantial Generation the same sensible subject can
remain for both forms, viz. that which is lost and that which is gained. For
though the materia prima be preserved: yet is it not sensible: which is true
not only in the generation of Elements, and of mixed bodies, but even of the
generation of Animals. For when a living Creature perishes, the form which is
lost, is the Soul: but that which is the form of a dead Carcass, is an
inanimate mixed body, or a congeries or heap of many forms, which constitute
many and diverse homogeneal mixed bodies; and so these two forms have not one
common sensible subject. For that which was instead of a subject to the Soul,
was the form of mixture: but the soul departing, those forms of many homogeneal
mixtures do no longer supply the place of a subject, but of specific forms,
whose subject is the first matter. And although in the generation of a Carcass
there comes no new form; yet it is all one, as if there came a new form. For
the form of mixture in the living Creature, in respect of the whole live
Creature, did hardly supply the place of a form, but rather of a Subject and
Matter; since in every mixed thing, the Essential parts have the same respect
one to another, that every precedent inferior, is to the following superior, as
Matter to Form, and aptitude to Act. But when the Soul is taken away, the form
of mixture supplies the place of the specific form, and really performs the
office of a form, and gives denomination and specific being to the mixed body;
which it did not do before, when the Soul was present.

Out of the Premises an Answer may easily be made to that Question: Whether in
Generation, there is a Resolution into the first matter.
whether besides the first matter, any form which was before in the thing
corrupted, do remain in the thing Generated; or whether in every Generation
there is a Resolution into the Materia prima or first matter? For seeing things
perfectly mixed, are either parts of living bodies, or other sorts of bodies
natural, as precious Stones and metals; and the generation of these things is
performed, not only by the Concourse, and action of the Elements, but by the
direction of the upper form: again, it does not always draw and mingle simple
Elements, for the formation of a body necessary to it self, but also the first
mixed bodies; therefore it is not necessary, that there should be always a
resolution into the first Matter.

Also from the Premises all the Causes of generation may be collected. The Form
of Generation. The Subject. The Efficient.
The form is expressed in the definition, by substantial Mutation. The common
subject of generation, is the first matter it self; and the immediate subject,
are the four Elements of sublunary things. The general and remote Efficient, is
the Virtue of the Heavens: the immediate and adequate, is the Generator or
Agent, viz. the forms of sublunary things. For they by the first qualities and
vital heat, as their immediate Instruments, do make mixed bodies for themselves,
necessary for their own preservation, and the performance of their actions.

But the first matter is not the adequate cause of generation: seeing it is a
being, merely potential, and can beget or effect nothing, but only suffer. And
therefore the matter is a cause that the Generation may be made; but the Agent
or Generator, is the cause that it is actually made. The End of Generation, The
End.
is the Conservation of the several sorts of Natural things. For since in the
sublunary part of the world there is no perpetuity and eternity of individuals
or particular things; Nature conserves the Eternity of every sort, by the
perpetuity of Generation.

The definition of generation, agrees also to coruption, as manifestly appears
out of the last words of Text 22. c. 4. Lib. 7. de Genesis et Cor. and appears
from the thing it self. For the generation of one thing, is the corruption of
another; as is well said by Aristotle 1. de Gener, and Cor. c. 3. T. 17. For,
since that which corrupted is not turned merely into nothing, but the matter
remains; and it cannot subsist of it self, without any form; it must be, that
one compound being abolished, and one form destroyed, another form should come,
to constitute a new compound. Moreover, since two specific forms cannot be in
the same subject (for nothing can be at the same time under several sorts) it
must needs be, that when one form comes, the other which was before in the
subject, must give way. Hence also came that saying; That Nature primarily
intends generation, Nature primarily intends generatoon, secondari-corruption.
secondarily corruption. For one thing cannot be generated, unless another be
corrupted. For since the intention of the Generator, is to make the Patient
like it self; and this it cannot do, unless it first destroy the form thereof:
secondarily therefore it desires the destruction of another. And this is the
Cause of the perpetuity of Generations and Corruptions; viz. Because the matter
when it is robbed of one form, receives another; and when it puts on one, it
puts off another. Yet it must be here observed, that the Generation of one, is
not the corruption of a body of the same sort, but of another of a different
sort.

Having thus explained the universal Nature of Generation, let us now speak of
the sorts of Generation. The Proportion of the Elements which act one upon
another is various: For sometimes one contrary only prevails in strength over
another, so as to be able quite to abolish the same, and to turn it into its
own Nature; and then there happens the generation of one simple Element.
Sometimes the Elements are after a sort equal, or at least their inequality is
not so great, that one of them can quite destroy the other, and turn it into
its own Nature; and then, by mutual action and passion they weaken one another,
and making friends as it were, they grow together, into the Nature of one mixed
Body. Now we shall speak in the first place, of the generation of Elements. And
although, not only Enpedocles, Whether the Elements can be changed one into
another.
and other Ancient Philosophers, but also some late writers, deny that the
Elements are turned one into another: yet we shall retain the common Doctrine,
which is proved by reason and experience. For we see daily, that by fire other
Elements are turned into Fire; and water, which of its own Nature is moved
downwards, when it is set over the fire, turns to Air and mounts of its own
accord upwards, which motion belongs properly to Fire and Air. Now the Reason
is this: those things are apt to be changed one into another, which are
contraries, and have one common subject. And such are the Elements: for they
have the first matter for their common subject, and contrary qualities. And
therefore they may be changed one into another. Howbeit, the Elements are
changed, not in whole, but in part.

And indeed all Elements are apt to be mutually changed, and there is none of
them, which may not be changed into another: for as Aristotle says in 2. de
Genesis et Cor. c. 4. T. 24. Generation in out of Contraries into Contraries, and
all the Elements have a Contrariety one to another, because the differences are
contrary. Howbeit, these Elements which agree in one quality, as fire and Air
in heart, water and Air in moisture, are more easily and speedily changed one
into another: but those Elements which are quite contrary and disagree in both
qualities, are more hardly changed one into another. For when two things joined
together are to be changed by their contraries, they resist more strongly, then
when one quality only is contrary, and the other like; because by reason of
that similitude, the approach of the contrary is more easy. And therefore of
two contrary Elements, a Medium is sooner generated, then one of another: and
we see that of Fire and Water, Air is bred. For the Medium agrees with both, in
qualities.

And so much of the Generation of Elements. Mixture and the generation of a
mixed body, differ not really, but only in respect.
Let us now come to the simple generation of mixed bodies. Now the Generation of
a mixed Body and Mixture, of which we spoke in the foregoing Chapter, are really
one and the same thing: although they differ in respect. For both mixture, and
the Generation of a mixed Body, does signify a certain progress to the form of
a mixed Body, which consists first in mutual alteration, caused by the action
and passion of the first qualities; also in the action of the two active
qualities upon the two passive, or in the mixture of moist with dry; Finally
and chiefly, in the production of the form it self: and therefore both the
generation of a mixed body consists in Mixture, and Mixture is contained in the
Generation of a mixed Body. For the term union, does not only signify a
collection of the Elements, and a placing them together; but a production of
one Nature, out of several things mingled.

Yet they different respect. For since both in mixture, and in the Generation
of a mixed Body, the Elements are as it were the term a Quo, and the mixed Body,
the term ad Quem; the term mixture, does chiefly respect the Elements, for the
mixture is of the Elements, and not of the mixed Body: but the term Generation
respects the mixed Body it self. For that is then said to be generated, and not
the Elements. Nor yet can the one be without the other; nor does mixture in
time or Nature precede Generation: both consist in the production of one Nature.

Now Aristotle defines the Generation of a mixed Body, The definition of the
generation of a mixed body.
in the 4. of his Meteors Chapter 7. after this manner: Generation is a simple
mutation, by the active faculties, when they have their respect, from the
matter subject to every nature. Now, this is the sense of this definition: the
Generation of a mixed Body, is a substantial mutation, made by the two active
qualities, acting upon the two passive, as their subject matter, and ruling
over them in such a proportion, as is necessary to draw forth the form proper
to every mixed Body. For the active qualities are not always in an equal
proportion to the passive, but variously proportioned, according to the diverse
Natures of mixed Bodies, which require sundry temperaments. Nor is the dominion
of the active qualities over the passive, so to be understood, as though in
every mixed Body, the active qualities did in some degrees exceed the passive;
since experience does testify the Contrary, which teaches, that some mixed
things, are to be termed not, some cold, some moist, some dry, according to the
Nature of the overruling quality: but this dominion is only to be understood
in respect of the form of the mixed Body, to be Generated. For then Namely, the
active Qualities are said to rule over the passive, when the proportion of the
former to the latter is such, that out of them they might produce some certain
form of a mixed Body. For even that which is hot to four degrees, acts upon that
which is moist to six, and there of makes a certain mixed Body.

That Question also must not be here omitted; Whether in this Case the power of
the two active Qualities be equal, and their office and Dominion equal.
Touching which we are to know, that both the Generation of the mixed body it
self, and the alteration previous to the form, do proceed of themselves and
primarily from hear, and that cold does no other wise concur, then as it
tempers and moderates the heat, and makes it fit to produce this or that mixed
Body. For the Generation of a mixed Body does chiefly consist in a perfect
mixture of moist and dry, suitable to the Nature of the mixed Body: but this
cannot be done, save by attenuation, which makes that all the particles of the
moist matter may be exactly united with the particles of the dry; now
extenuation of it self is caused by heat, sometimes greater and sometimes less.
But cold of it self is not an instrument of generation, but rather of
corruption. Howbeit, in a mixed body already generated, and constituted in its
essence, even cold also acts of it self, and confers thereon its perfection as
it were, and aptitude to its operations. For mixed bodies are congealed and
condensed by cold.

Lastly, after the Generation of a mixed Body, it remains that we now treat of
the Natural destruction thereof, which is Putrefaction: concerning which, so
great are the Controversies amongst learned Men, that some late Philosophers
and Physicians have filled whole Books with disputes about putrefaction. We,
though much might be said thereof, shall briefly discourse thereupon, so much
as the Nature of our work will bear. Putrefaction is opposed to the generation
of mixed bodies.
And seeing Putrefaction is opposed to the Generation of mixed bodies, we may
easily proceed from the knowledge of Generation to the knowledge of putrefaction.
It has been already said, that the whole Nature of mixture, or of the
Generation of a mixed Body, does consist in a due conjunction of moist parts
with dry, which is caused by heat, in a certain degree: and since the Cause of
the Generation and conservation of a mixed Body is the same; a mixed body shall
so long remain in its Natural State, as there is a due and just mixture of
moist and dry, under a fitting dominion of heat: and the Destruction of a mixed
Body must proceed from the separation of the moist and dry parts: which must
arise from the abolition or abatement of Natural Heat. For the Natural heat
diminished on abolished, can no longer retain the dry parts joined to the
moist. Now the Cause which weakens the Natural heat, is the heat of the Ambient
Body, which if it be stronger, calls forth the Natural. For the Natural heat
being increased by the ambient heat, loses the proportion it ought to hold to
the passive Qualities, and therefore vapors away, and leaves the mixed Body;
whereof the moist and dry parts being destitute and having lost their governor
as it were, they become separated, and the moist parts are carried with the
Heat as its conveiance, into the outside, and so vapors away; and so comes
putrefaction, which is only the destruction of a mixed Body, considered as such.
I say the Natural destruction, that is, which happens according to the Laws of
Nature Universal, which will have all mixed things subject to corruption, and to
be at last resolved into the Elements whereof they were made: as violent
destruction of a mixed Body is when the whole is changed into one Element, as by
burning, or also by overmuch cooling, as some will have it.

All this whole Nature of Putrefaction Aristotle in the 4. Meteorol. Cap. 1.
has comprehended in this definition: The definition of Putrefaction.
Putrefaction is the corruption of the proper and Natural heat, which is in
every moist Body, by the Heat which is without the same, Namely, in the ambient
Body. Which Definition contains all the Terms of a perfect Demonstration, and
Demonstrates a proper Affection of its proper subject, by its proper Cause. Its
subject
The proper subject is a moist body. For nothing can putrefie, unless it be
moist. And therefore all mixed Bodies putrefie, inasmuch as they are moist. The
next Cause.
The next positive cause is the Heat of the Ambient Body; which is not only Air
and Water, but every thing containing, which overmuch augments the internal
heat, and disturbs the proportion which it bears to the rest of the Qualities.
Its adjunct is the Corruption of the internal Heat, Its adjunct.
and of the substantial form it self.

From these things thus explained an answer may be made to many Questions. Why
all things that putrify become at last cold?
For hence that Question may easily be answered, Why all things which putrify
become at last cold? Although in the beginning they were hot. The cause of the
former is the corruption of the inbred heat; of the latter, both the external
heat also, which increases the internal, is the Cause; and because the internal
heat, the proportion being disturbed which it bore to the rest of the Qualities
of the mixed Body, going out, does more show it self to the sense. For in the
mixture it was so tempered, and joined in such a league of friendship as it
were with the rest of the Qualities of the mixed Body, that it could hardly be
perceived by the sense; which League being broken in the Putrefaction, it
becomes more sensible, and acts more freely.

And upon this foundation depends that same distinction of Physicians, Why
things putrefying, become at first moist and then dry?
whereby they say, that some things are actually Hot or Cold, others
potentially: and they say that Pepper, Ginger and Wine, are only potentially
Hot, because they are not hot to feel to, but only when they are within the
Body, and dissolved by the heat of the Stomach. For the Cause hereof is, that
Pepper, Ginger and Wine, although they contain much heat in them; yet the same
is so tempered with other Qualities, that is does not put forth its force,
while it sticks in the mixed Body abiding in its Natural condition. But when a
man has taken them into his Stomach, that same harmony of qualities is
dissolved and disturbed by the heat of the Stomach, and the Heat of these mixed
Bodies is called forth; which does work more freely and strongly, (the
friendship it had with the rest of the Qualities being now broke) no longer as
the heat of a mixed Body, but rather as heat now separated, and left to its own
Liberty.

And the Cause is the same, why things putrefying become at first more moist,
and at last are quite dried up. For the moisture together with the heat vapors
out, flows abroad, and goes to the outward parts; Which at last being quite
dissipated and evaporated, the mixed Body turns to Dust and Ashes. Also hence a
Reason may be given why mixed Bodies in hot Seasons and places do sooner
putrify then in cold; Why mixed bodies so^nest put ifie in hot seasons and
places.
and why things very hot or very cold do not easily putrify. The Cause of the
former is, that in cold times and places the heat of the Ambient (if any remain
therein.) is not so strong as to be able to call out the internal heat: but in
an hot time and place the Contrary happens. And the Reason of the latter is,
because both a strong internal cold resists the heat of the Ambient, Why things
very cold or hot do not so easily putrify.
so that it cannot corrupt and call out the inbred heat; and a strong internal
heat does not suffer it self to be overcome by the heat external. Nor can an
external weak heat so intend an internal strong one, that it can be no longer
fit to conserve the mixed Body. Hence also a great Quantity is less apt to
putrify then a small one; Why agreat Quantity is less apt to putrify then
asmal one, and that which is in motion then that which rests.
because in a great Body there is more heat or cold, which also does more
strongly resist the external heat. Also a thing moved does not so easily
putrify, as that which rests, because it is less subject to the action of the
ambient heat.

Now from what has been said the Nature of putrefaction is sufficiently
apparent: and yet many dispute at large, whether it be only one, or there be
diverse sorts thereof. We, omitting tedious disputes, do acknowledge only one
putrefaction, viz. That which is explained, in the foresaid definition of
Aristotle. Yet we grant there is some diversity in the putrefaction of things,
because of the Various Nature and constitution of the mixed Bodies which
putrefie. There is only one putris action.
For those things do perfectly and totally putrefie, which are perfectly
resolved into the Elements whereof they were made, so that all the other
Elements evaporating, there remains nothing at last but Earth: and thus all
those things putrefie which have much Earth in them.

But those things putrify imperfectly and in part, which contain more moisture
in them. For seeing the moisture which is more abundant in them cannot be with
the heat totally drawn out: only some parts thereof, especially the more thin
and subtle are drawn out, and the rest are preserved; and this is termed
putrefaction according to part; the Nature whereof is nevertheless the same
with that of the putrefaction before defined. For herein the internal heat is
corrupted by the external. After this manner Wine putrifies, and the Humor in
our Bodies; the three Elements, The Fire does not putrify.
Air, Water, Earth, inasmuch as they are not pure, but in some measure mixed
with other things. The Fire alone does not putrify, for this Cause especially,
because nothing is more hot then it, which may corrupt and call out its heat.
Whether the form he abolished in punifaction.
But whether or no in this imperfect putrefaction the form of the mixed Body do
quite perish, and a new mixed thing be produced, or whether only some alteration
be made, is a doubtful case. We answer briefly: in every true putrefaction
somewhat is corrupted: but of an imperfect putrefaction there are more degrees,
one greater another less. For sometimes the putrefaction is so light, that some
particles only being corrupted, the mixed Body does still retain its proper form:
but sometimes again it is so great, that though the whole mixed Body be not quite
resolved into its Elements, yet the whole form thereof is abolished, and the
said Body changed into another sort. And therefore al Putrefaction is
Corruption, and not Alteration only. For although the Blood which putrifies in
the Veins, is not wholly corrupted, but only altered in part: yet those parts
which are said to putrify, are really corrupted according to their substance,
and cannot return to their Natural state, but must be evacuated by Purgation:
but the others which are not corrupted in their substance, are not properly
said to putrify, but only to be heated by the putrified parts.

Chap. 4. Of Temperament and Coction.
HAving treated hitherto of the Elements, their mutual action and passion, and
the Generation and Corruption of mixed Bodies: before we come to the sorts
themselves of mixed Bodies, we must and some things concerning temperament and
Coction.

As for what concerns temperament, Whence temperament depends?
certain it is that it depends upon the mixture of the Elements, and arises
from the action and passion of the first qualities: yet what it is, is not so
manifest. We, omitting the opinions of Fuchsius who not rightly, asserts in the
1 of his Just. Med. S. 3. C. 2. That a Temperament is a substance, not an
accident, and of others who hold that a Temperament is a bare Relation and
Harmony of Qualities, as also of others, which are by other Authors reckoned
up; we hold, that a Temperament in one Quality, arising from the mutual action
and passion of the first Qualities in mixtion. For the fight of the first
Qualities, which is necessary to the Generation of a mixed Body proceeds so far,
till they be all refracted and abated, and having cast away certain degrees of
Contrarieties, by which they were at extreme variance, Friendship being made,
as it were, they join and grow together into one Quality. And so a temperament
is nothing else but one Quality of a simple Essence, which is made up of the
remiss degrees of the four Qualities. For as of the remiss degrees of the
Elementary forms one simple actual form does arise, which nevertheless contains
them all in its faculty: so out of the first Qualities there arises one
moderate and actually simple Quality which potentially contains them all. But
we must not say (which opinion as some learned men tell us, is ill fathered
upon Avicenna) that a Temperament is a certain fifth Quality, diverse from the
four first, and superadded to them; but only a middle one, arising from the
others abated and conjoined, and containing them in it.

But since the Elements are in sundry manners mixed, The differences of
temperaments.
and the first qualities are tempered together in sundry proportions; hence
there arise sundry differences of temperaments. For if the Elements and
Qualities concur to the mixture in strength and degrees perfectly equal, a
temperament is effected, which is called Equale ad pondus, Equal in weight;
Temperament ad pondu^, what it is?
as if in it the degrees of the Qualities were weighed and distributed in an
equal weight; also absolute equality, because comparison is not made to any
extrinsecal thing. Now this is to be understood of the equality of degrees. For
the Elements cannot be mixed in equal Quantity; since the efficacy of Fire is
much greater then that of Earth; and therefore if they should concur in equal
portions, the Fire would not generate a mixed Body, but only Fire: and
experience testifies, that all perfectly mixed Bodies do obtain very much
Earth, by Virtue whereof they become heavy. Whether there be an equal
temperament.
Though some deny that this temper is to be found in Nature; yet we see no
firm Reason to hinder us from holding, that the contrary qualities may meet in
the same degree, to the constitution of a mixed Body. Yea and Galen says that
this is the Rule of all the rest, and that the rest cannot be known without it,
in his B. de Temperam. C. 3.

There is moreover as yet another equal temperament, A temperament equal
according to justice, what it is?
which is called equal ad Justitiam, wherein the qualities concur, not in a
degree absolutely equal, but in such a manner as is most convenient to the form
of the mixed body and to the performance of its generations, and which holds a
medium amongst mixed bodies of the same sort. For one mixed body of its own
Nature is hotter, another colder; one moister another dryer. The temperament of
a Lion is more hot then the temperament of a Fish; flesh is hotter then a
never; a bone dryer then flesh. And although in this manner this tempertment
may be called equal, viz., because that equality is kept therein, which is
convenient to every mixed body, and according to Geometrical proportion every
one has his own: yet in respect of a temperament absolutely temperate and
equal, it is termed unequal; and that body furnished therewith may be termed
intemperate: although commonly that is called intemperate which is departed
from the temper which Naturaly it ought to have.

Now how many sorts there are of this temperament Authors agree not. Eight
sorts of temperaments equal in respect of justice.
We hold with Galen, 1 de temp. C. 8. For when only one quality superabounds,
and overcomes its contrary, the two rest keep equality; for examples sake, if
any mixed body should have five degrees of Heat, and three of cold, and four of
moisture, and as many of dry; it should be called a simple temperament. Of
which there are four sorts; hot, wherein heat exceeds cold, and moisture and
dryness are equal; cold, wherein cold exceeds heat, and moisture and dryness
are also equal; moist, wherein moisture exceeds dryness, and heat and cold are
equal; dry, wherein dryness exceeds moisture, and Heat and cold are also equal.
But when two Qualities exceed the other two, it is called a compound
Temperament; of which there are again four sorts, according to the four
possible combinations of the four first Qualities; viz. Hot and moist; hot and
dry; cold and moist; cold and dry. According to these differences a thing is
said to be temperate or intemperate: How many ways a thing is said to be
temperate, and not temperate
but after several manners. For a thing is said to be so and so, absolutely or
respectively. Absolutely only the Elements are hot, cold, moist, dry; seeing
in them only these qualities are sincere and pure. Now by comparison and
exsuperance a thing is said to be so, which though it have all the Qualities,
yet one excells the rest; so that is termed hot which has more heat; and that
cold, which has more coldness. Now this comparison is made to four things;
either to the universal Nature of all mixed bodies, wherein if you can conceive
any thing of an indifferent temper, such as is the skin of a man, especially
that on the palms of his hands and the tops of his fingers, (unto which
therefore they refer the judgment of all temperaments;) all other things in
respect thereunto will be called intemperate, and according to the Quality
exceeding this Mean, they shall be called hot, cold, moist, dry; Or the
comparison is made to the next kind; as if in the whole kind of Living
Creatures you shall conceive some one to be temperate, as perhaps Man is; all
other animals shall be called intemperate, the name being borrowed from the
exceeding Quality: or comparison is made to somewhat Indifferent, in the same
sort; so a young man is said to be hot, and an old man to be cold: or finally,
comparison is made betwixt diverse sorts, or any obvious individualls. So a dog,
in respect of a Lion is cold, in respect of a Fish hot. So Peter compared to
Paul is hot: but if you compare him to another more hot, he is cold.

And this may suffice to have said in this place concerning temperaments: let
us proceed now to concoction, The definition of concoction
which is a certain perfection and compleatment of the temperament. Now thus
Aristotle (in his 4 Meteor. Chapter 2.) Defines concoction. Concoction is a
perfection, by the Natural and proper Heat, made of opposite passives, which
are the proper matter to each one. This definition as every orderly definition
of adjuncts or accidents, has in stead of kind the form, in stead of
difference the subject, with the efficient cause: all which are to be
considered in this place, that we may attain the perfect knowledge of Digestion
or Concoction.

The Form of Concoction is nothing but the ultimate perfection of the proper
temperament of a thing. The form of concoction.
For then a thing is said to be concocted, when it has attained that
perfection and compleatness, in its qualities or temperament, which it ought to
have. And therefore that perfection is here to be understood which consists in
Qualities, and not that which is Essential, proceeding from the substantial
form. Which also Aristotle signifies in the 12. Sect. Prob. 7. Concoction is
the alteration of the thing concocted.

The matter or subject of concoction are the two passive Qualities, The Subject.
but especialy moisture. And hence it appears, that coction is an affection of
a mixed body, as it is moist, and that it does not belong only to the meat of
living Creatures, because other things also are said to be concocted, which can
never become nourishment for animals. Hence also it is manifest, that coction
belongs to a thing already engendered and constituted by its own Nature. For
nothing is said to be concocted, but that which is already engendered, only it
has imperfection in its temper, which must by further alteration be perfected;
which being done the thing is said to be concocted.

As to the Efficient Cause: The Efficient Cause.
The beginning of perfection (says Aristotle) comes from the proper heat of
the subject, although it be perfected by some outward help. The principal cause
is always the proper heat of the thing; although sometimes it be not
sufficient, and therefore stands in need as it were of another Assistant, that
the concoction may be thereby better and more rightly performed. So Bathes and
Plasters help the Concoction in the Stomach. So Medlars and other Fruits being
gathered before they are ripe and laid up, are ripened by their own Heat: yet
the Suns Heat contributes much toward their more happy ripening.

This therefore is the manner of the whole business of concoction. The Manner
of concoction.
When as in a mixed body, already constituted by its form, there is as yet some
imperfection in the temperament, and the moisture is not sufficiently mastered
and tempered, nor holds a just and exact proportion to the dryness and other
Qualities: the Natural Heat consumes and excels the superfluous moisture, and
that which remains and offends not in quantity, it restrains and limits, and
unites it with dryness, as much as the Nature of the mixed Body requires; which
action is termed coction, or concoction.

And that the Nature of concoction may be the better understood, The External
End.
Aristotle besides the internal End, which is the same with the form, adds also
an External one, in these words: The end of concoction in some things is their
Nature, which we call the sort as it were and Essence; in others it tends to
some subject form, when the Humidity is become such and so great. In which
Aristotle Teaches, that the External End is twofold; either the form simply and
absolutely, which End chiefly appears in the ripening of Fruits, which are then
said to be ripe, when the seed is now so perfect, as that it can breed its
like: or some form or disposition, to the affording some utility, which
consists either in the induction of a new form, or in preparation for the
convenient expulsion of things unprofitable. The former use appears in that
boiling of the meat, performed in the stomach. For that is therefore ordained,
that the meats taken in might by the faculty in the stomach be turned into
Chylus. For such also is the Natural Concoction of phlegm. The other appears in
the Concoction of putrified humors in ulcers, and elsewhere in the Body of an
Animal, which are then concocted and ripened, when they are so labored by the
Natural Heat, as to become apt for expulsion. For since by reason of their
great corruption they cannot arrive to any perfect form and profitable to
nourish the Body, they are by concoction brought to some form better at least
then putrefaction. And thus Concoction does repress Putrefaction, and puts an
End thereunto, and severs the corrupt humors from the profitable, and renders
them fit to be euacuated without hurt to the Body.

Things therefore are said to be concocted, when the matter of coction, which
is chiefly moisture, shall be overcome by heat and bounded thereby, and have
received it is fitting thickness. And therefore Urines, Dung, and all the
excrements of our Bodies in like manner, being rightly digested, are a sign of
Health. For they declare that the Heat has its full power in our Bodies: and
that it is so much as to be able to restrain and duly to tame and keep in
order all the humors. And for the same Cause, all things being digested become
thicker and hotter. For Heat which bears the Rule in concoction, does both Heat
and Resolve the thin Parts. Which is also confirmed by Experience. For Apples,
Pears, Grapes, and all other Fruits, before they grow Ripe are colder then they
are afterward: and Milk, Seed, Quittour in Ulcers, and Filth gathered in the
corners of the Eyes, are thicker when concocted then before. Howbeit, we must
here take notice, when it is said, that things Concocted are thicker and hotter
then Unconcocted, that one thing must not be compared with another of a
distinct sort, or with it self after it has changed its species; but the same
sort of thing being unconcocted, must be compared with it self concocted.

To Coction is opposed Crudity, The definition of Crudity.
or indigestion, which is by Aristotle in 4. Meteor. thus defined: Crudity is
an imperfection of the passive Qualities, through the defect of proper beat in
the subject. And the defect of heat is cold. From which definition it is
apparent, that in Crudity all things are quite contrary to what they are in
Coction, saving the subject, which is one and the same. For the Form was there
perfection, and here it is imperfection; there the efficient Cause was heat,
here want of heat, or Coldness. And therefore those things are generally to be
called Crude, which have not as yet obtained those degrees of perfection in the
Qualities or Temperament, which they ought to have; and in which moisture
abounds, and by reason of the weakness of Heat cannot be rightly mastered and
Limited.

Having explained the Nature of Coction and Crudity, Coction is not an univocal
kind.
let us now come to their Sorts. Where it is first to be observed; That Coction
is not an univocal kind, but of the number of those which are called Pros Hen,
to one, and that therefore its definition does chiefly agree to the principal
and primary sort (which is the manner in defining those things which are said
of some one) but a little change being made, they may also be accommodated to
the rest. Now the primary sort of Coction, and which can perhaps alone
perfectly bear the name of Coction, is ripening, which it self also
nevertheless is not equally applied to all the sorts contained there under.
Ripening what it is?
For properly Ripening is the Concoction of that Aliment which is in the Pulp
of an Apple, Pear, or any other fruit. But for more easy understanding sake,
Aristotle applies Maturity, or Ripeness, only to fruits; though it be common to
all Animals, Plants, and Seeds when referred to Generation. Now then Maturation
is said to be made, when the Seed which is contained in the Pulp of the fruit
is so Elaborated, that it is able to beget its like. For at first, when there
is as yet a superfluous moisture remaining, the Seed is not yet sit for
Generation: but when the humidity shall by the Natural Heat be partly consumed,
partly better terminated, the Seed becomes sit for Generation. Again,
Figuratively, Phlegm, quittor, and other Humors in our Bodies are said to be
Ripened, when they are by the Natural Heat so digested, as either to become sit
to nourish, or if they cannot nourish, that at least they may be disposed to
Evacuation. Now, by ripening, flatulent things become Watery, Watery things
become thin; thin things become thick. For at first the spirit, or flatulent
matter is digested by heat; afterward, the Watery Humor is further digested,
and its thinner parts are resolved.

To Maturity or Ripeness is opposed Immaturity or Unripeness, What immaturity
is?
what as Maturity is also twofold: one properly so called, another
siguratively. For immaturity properly so called is the rawness of the
nourishment which is in the Pulp of an Apple or other fruit, by Reason of the
Penury or ill proportion of the Natural heat. For when the Heat is so little,
or the Humor so plentiful, that the Heat cannot exactly master the moisture,
there arises immaturity, and then the Seed is not fit for Generation. And
therefore all unripe things are windy, waterish, and their Humors thin and
cold, unfit to nourish. And afterward Figuratively, Catarrhs, Spittle, Quittor
in Ulcers, and Urin are termed crude. Also Milk unboiled is termed crude or
raw; as also Tiles and all Earthen Ware, is termed raw, before it is baked.

Another sort of Coction is Boiling, which Aristotle in the fourth of his
Meteors Chapter 3. thus defines: Elixation or Boiling, Generally, is the Concoction
of somewhat Indeterminate in an Humor, caused by a moist heat. For boiling is
thus made. A fiery heat being received in a Watery moisture, does moisten the
thing to be boiled, opens its pores, and makes them Wider, and so draws the
moisture of the thing to be boiled from the Center to the Circumference; and
the rest of the Humor which remains, it digests, Tames, and Terminates; and
therefore boiled things have less Native moisture, and more of that which is
foreign. And for this cause, Cooks that would Roast Meats carefully, do first
perboyl them, viz. that some of that Humor and Excrements which are within, may
be first drawn out, so that the rest may be by roasting more easily consumed.

From the premises it appears, that those things only can be boiled which have
moisture, which by the fiery heat which is in a Watery moisture may be overcome.
And that those things cannot be boiled, which either are Earthy, and have in a
manner no moisture, as Stones, Bones, etc. Or which have indeed some moisture,
but which is so condensed and Joined with an Earthy dryness, that by a moist
heat it cannot be called out and Vanquished, as Woods, Metals, etc. And for
this very cause, the flesh of old Animals is hardly boiled tender, in
comparison of younger; and Beef is harder to boil then Hens-flesh: because the
former are more dry, Earthy, solid and compact, and have their moisture more
tenaciously fastened with their dryness, so that it cannot easily be called out
by a moist heat. Also Woods, Metals etc. though improperly, are said to be
boiled. For though they are not so softened as things really Boylable: yet some
of their moisture is drawn forth, and communicated to the Water; which, the
taste the Water receives by their boiling in it, does witness. Also boiling is
attributed to a moist Body that has little dryness in it, as to milk, new Wine
or Must, and other things, viz. When by boiling some parts of them do vapor
away, and the remaining parts do receive some change in their temperament and
taste.

To boiling is opposed imperfect boiling, Imperfect boiling, what?
which is called Inquinatio and Flacciditas, which is defined by Aristotle to
be, The Inconcoction of that which is undetermined in a Body, by Reason of want
of Heat in the moist thing which compasses the same about. For this
Inquination or Flaccidity, is properly nothing else but a boiling begun, viz.
when the Heat which is in the Watery moisture is indeed so great, that it can in
some measure act upon the thing to be boiled: but is not so strong, that it can
perfectly Boil the same, but either by cold or overmuch moisture in the thing
to be Boiled it is blunted and overcome, that it cannot perfect its work: which
kind of imperfect Concoction often happens in Aged and Sick People, whose Heat
does in some manner alter the meats, but cannot perfectly digest them.

The last sort of Concoction, is Optesis, roasting; Roasting what?
Which is a Concoction caused by a dry external Heat. For if in a mixed body the
abounding humor be consumed and tempered by a dry external Heat it is called a
Rousting. Now roast meats are without indeed dry, but within moist with a
moisture of their own, and more moist then boild meats themselves. For the dry
heat withers the external parts, and straitens the pores, that the internal
Humor can find no way out. Now roasting and boiling are chiefly caused by Art,
and these names do chiefly belong to them, as being because Artificial best
known to us. Yet the same things are also done by Nature. For the Concoction of
Aliments in the bodies of Living Creatures, and especially that in the Stomach,
is boiling: also the same may not unfitly, in Hot and Dry Bodies, be called
roasting.

To roasting also is opposed Seminstulation, Toasting, or raw-roasting.
Raw-Roasting.
Now had roasting is caused through want of heat, which either is little of it
self, or not so great that it can possibly overcome a great abundance of
Humor, and therefore it perfects not the begun roasting. And so much touching
Concoctions.

THE FOURTH BOOK.
Chap. 1. Of Meteors in General.
HAving spoken hitherto in General of the Elements the principles of Natural
Bodies, and their mixture; of the Generation of Natural Bodies and their
corruption: order therefore requires, that we should now treat of the several
sorts of Natural Bodies. Mixed Bodies twofold.
And seeing that mixed Bodies are twofold, perfectly and imperfectly mixed; and
the imperfectly mixed are the Meteors: we must now come to that part of Natural
Philosophy, which all the Ancients (as Aristotle in his 1. B. Meteor. C. 1.
tells us) called Meteorologia, the Doctrine of Meteors.

Later writers do here indeed raise a scruple, and some deny that a Body
imperfectly mixed and a Meteor are one and the same thing; and they say the
name of Meteor is of a larger extent, since there are many Meteors which are
not Bodies, such as those things which happen only as an apparition as Thunder,
Lightning, Earthquakes: others again conceive that the term Meteor is only to
be given to bodies imperfectly mixed, and therefore they exclude those things
as Thunder etc. which have no subsistency, out of the Number of Meteors; since
all things which make up the subject of Natural Philosophy, and are parts
thereof, must be in the number of Natural Bodies. But this Controversy may
easily be composed. A Body imperfectly mixed must be somewhere explained in
Natural Philosophy, and indeed most fitly next after the Elements: and
therefore it is said to be the subject of that part of Natural Philosophy. And
seeing the same affords matter for Meteors, that part of Natural Philosophy is
called Meteorologia, the Doctrine of Meteors. For though in it are also
explained those things which are not Natural Bodies, as has been said; yet
those very things are either the Adjuncts or Effects of Bodies imperfectly
mixed. Hence use has obtained, that under the term Meteor, both Bodies
imperfectly mixed and their Adjuncts and Effects should be comprehended. And so
the subject of this Doctrine is Meteoron a Meteor, A Meteor what it is?
that is, Somewhat raised out of the Earth and Water by force of the Stars and
the underground Fire, and bred for the most part a loft in the Air. For the
word Meteoron in general does signify a thing sublime, Elevated, and hanging
as it were up on high.

And by aloft or on high we understand, not the Heaven, but all that space
which reaches from Earth to Heaven, which place is called upwards, or above.
Yea and since Meteoron signifies somewhat Elevated and suspended on high, even
those thing also which are made in the Caverns of the Earth, of exhalations
there raised up, are comprehended under this Name. For all things contained
under this name are not of one kind, as has been said before. Hence some
divide them into Hypostatical and Emphatical. The Difference of Meteors.
They are most conveniently distinguished into three Ranks. For either the
Nature of a Meteor consists in the changing of an exhalation into some other
thing, which happens in fiery Meteors, Rain and such like; or in motion, as in
Winds, Earthquakes; or in the Reflection of Beams, as in the Rainbow.

Most do hold the efficient Cause to be Heaven, The Efficient cause of meteors.
and the Heaven and the Sun are the chief cause which raises exhalations: but
they are not the only cause, but hear also concurs and the subterranean fire;
and in the Generation of Metals and Minerals many exhalations are raised, as is
known to those that search after Metals; and Winds and other Meteors are bred
no less in the Winter, when the Sun beams are weak, then in the Summer.

The remote matter, are not only the four Elements, The matter
especially the Earth and Water, but also mixed Bodies, out of which opposite
exhalations are wont to be raised. The immediate matter is a twofold kind of
exhalation, raised out of them being heated. For the Heavenly Bodies,
especially the Sun, and the Subterranean heat do excite and raise up a twofold
kind of Exhalations: whereof the one which is termed Atmis, that is a vapor, is
hot and moist, raised out of the Water or moist ground, being of as it were a
middle Nature betwixt the water and Air, so that it may easily be changed into
either Element. For it is moist in the highest degree, but heat is therein
remiss, and some degrees of coldness, or portions of Water carried up
therewith, do remain in it; and as Aristotle says in the 1 Met. Chapter 3. A
Vapor is as it were potentially a Water. But the other Exhalation is called a
Fume, or a Smoaky Exhalation; and it is Hot and Dry, raised out of the Earth,
and especially the d^ier parts thereof, heated and attenuated by force of the
stars; of a middle Nature as it were betwixt Fire and Earth. For this
Exhalation is exceeding dry, and moderately hot; for it retains some degrees of
the Earths coldness, or rather some parts of the Earth it self Elevated with
it. And therefore Aristotle in the same place says, that this Fume is
potentially, as it were, Fire. Now there are chiefly two sorts of Fumes, the
one of which is termed Ecphlogosis a flaming Fume, which is raised out of a Fat
matter and is apt to take flame: another which is raised out of drier ground,
and does not so easily take Fire, but rather turns to Winds and Blasts. These
two kinds of Exhalations though they are of a distinct Nature, and both in
respect of their Heat, dryness, Levity and Original differ one from another;
(because a vapor is Cold, Heavy, Moist, raised out of the Water; but a Fume,
Hot, Light, Dry, raised out of the Earth:) yet for the most part they are bred
Jointly, and both together, Because in most places the Earth is mixed with
Water: whereupon that which of its own Nature is Heavy, by help of the other
lighter, is lifted up and raised on high; although when they come to the middle
Region of the Air they are separated, and the Fume is raised higher, but the
vapor settles beneath. And these two Exhalations as they are commonly called
are the matter of all Meteors; whence also it is that they are called Bodies
imperfectly mixed; either because they do not consist of all the Elements, or
because in them the forms of the Elements are kept perfect and entire, and do
not incorporate into the form of one mixed Body. For which Cause also such kind
of Bodies cannot long last. Yet it is wont many times to happen, that Atoms
also of bodies perfectly mixed are mixed with these Exhalations; yet so as that
these Exhalations are not informed by the forms of perfectly mixed Bodies, but
only touch the said mixed Bodies.

The place where Meteors are engendered is chiefly the Air. The Place.
For it according to the diverse Regions whereinto we have showed it is divided,
does afford place to diverse Meteors, as we shall afterward declare. For even
those also which are said to be engendered in the Earth, are properly engendered
in the Air contained in the caverns of the Earth. Howbeit in the Sphere of
Fire, and especially in the Lowest part thereof, it must not be denied, but
that Fiery Meteors are generated. Also upon these, viz. the place and matter,
depends the chief distinction of Meteors. For some consist of an Exhalation,
others of a vapor: some are produced in the upper, others in the lower Region
of the Air. We shall begin with those which arise from an Exhalation, and among
them with those which are commonly termed fiery and inflamed Meteors.

Chap. 2. Of Fiery Meteors.
THe greatest part of fiery Meteors are bred in the upmost Region of the Air.
For when Hot and Dry Exhalations do ascend thither and are there inflamed,
sundry fiery Meteors are engendered, which differ according to the various
disposition of the matter, the diversity of inflammation, their magnitude,
Figure, Motion and Duration: of which though peradventure more sorts might be
reckoned up, whose Names are borrowed from the shapes which they represent in
their burnings, yet I shall recount the chiefest of them. Now many reckon the
Via Lactea and Comets amongst fiery Meteors, but of them we have spoken before.

Also very many fiery Meteors do arise, differing only in the posture of the
matter, the multitude and shape they represent whiles they burn; which also are
to be explained. And that we may begin here: if an Hot and Dry Exhalation, not
very thick and Fat, but subtle, stretched out in length and breadth, do take
fire in the upper Region of the Air, A burning flame how engendered.
there appears a burning and shining Flame; sometimes with so much brightness,
that it does a little dispel the darkness of the night. Some call this Meteor,
Burning stubble, for it represents heaps of stubble suddenly set on Fire.

Skipping Goats so called, Skipping Goats.
do appear, when the Exhalation is drawn out in length rather then in breadth,
having parts not equally disposed, or distinct Masses, Joined together by thin
and rare Exhalations; or they have on the sid^s certain threads as it were and
bristles annexed. For when this is inflamed, the Fire suddenly leaps, either
out of the subtle and thin part of the Exhalation into another part thereof;
or it runs out into the sides and those Bristles or Appendixes aforesaid, and
by and by runs back again; and so it seems to dance, like Goats wantonly
Skipping.

Burning Brands are, Burning brands.
when the exhalation is drawn out in like manner, rather in length then
breadth, having its parts nevertheless equally disposed* For if this be set on
Fire, it represents a burning Firebrand or Beam. And these Beams do not move
to and fro as Links or Torches, but are quiet, and shine in one and the same
place. A burning Spear or Dart.
The burning Lance or Dart commonly so called, seems to be the same Meteor with
the former. For by these Names a Meteor is designed, which is bred of an
Exhalation or Fume, drawn out at length, and having parts of equal thickness,
which being set on Fire does burn all together, and shows the image of a Dart
or spear. The burning Pillar
Nor does the Perpendicular or Pyramidal Fire, so called, differ much from
this, being engendered of an Exhalation drawn out in Length, and Lighter in its
upper part, Heavier in its lower. For being set on Fire in its upper and
lighter part, it represents a Pillar set bolt upright; and its lower and
heavier part resembles the Basis thereof. The Candle or Torch.
Like unto this is the burning Candle or Torch, Which consists also of a dry
Exhalation, drawn out in length alone, and equally thick. For this being
inflamed at one end, and in some measure shining upon the other part not
inflamed, it represents a burning Candle or Torch.

Running Stars, Shooting Stars.
as Pliny in the 2. of his Natural History, Cap. 37. calls them: the Coursing
of Stars (as Seneca Phrazes it, in the 1. Book of his Not. Quest. Chapter 14.)
Flying Stars as some call them, and falling or shooting Stars, because they
appear in the shape of falling or flying Stars, do happen two manner of ways.
First of all hen an exhalation in the upmost Region of the Air, drawn out in
length, is torn, distinguished and spread abroad into many particles as it were.
For the first part being inflamed does speedily communicate the Fire to the
other, the Second to the Third, the Third to the Fourth, etc. After the same
manner as one Candle lighted does easily light again another newly blown out;
and so it makes show of a shooting Star. Again, when an Exhalation subsists in
the middle Region of the Air, and either by Antiperistasis of the cold Air is
inflamed, made lighter and so raised on high, and shows like a flying Star; or
being by the coldness of a cloud compressed and Squeezed, it conceives Fire,
and moves downwards, for the most part side long, and violently; and then a
Star seems to fall from Heaven. Also a third manner may be added, viz. When an
Exhalation drawn out in length, of equal thickness, and apt to burn, is set on
Fire. For this burning all on a sudden, and the flame speedily passing from one
part to another, it makes the appearance of a shooting or flying Star. For we
must not give credit to the dotage of the Epicureans, who taught, that Stars
did really fall from Heaven. For, to use the words of Seneca, in L. 1. Quest.
Not. Cap. 1. if this were true, there would have been ere now no Stars left in
the Heaven. For there is no Night wherein many shooting Stars appear not. And
yet the Stars of Heaven appear in the same place they were in before. They are
all as big as before. When many shooting Stars appear, they foretell Winds to
follow. For they argue store of dry Exhalations which are matter for Winds:
whereof Virgil in the 1. Book of his Georgicks or Husbandry: When Stars in
Heaven do seem to Fall, and make
Through Nights dark Air, a long and Fiery Tracke,
It Is Sign of Wind.


The Flying Dragon is engendered in the middle Region of the Air. The flying
Dragon.
Now this Meteor is made, when an Exhalation not too clammy and hot, meets with
a cold Cloud, and is thereby driven back, and so either by motion or by
Antiperistasis; in its upper part, where it is lighter, it is set on Fire, and
seems to vomit Flames and Sparkles; but in its middle part where it is Thicker,
and is bowed, it Represents a Belly: and in its lower part which is Narrower
and Straiter, it Resembles a Tail.

In the lowest region of the Air is engendered the Ignis fatuus, Willy with the
Wispe, or Peg with the Lantern.
or Willie with the Wispe, near fat and moist soiles, pooles, Churchyards,
places of Public Execution where Malefactors are buried, where are store of
clammy and fat Exhalations. For they being set on Fire, either by
antiperistasis of the cold Air of the night, or by motion, do appear like
burning candles, and are diversely moved according to the motion of the Air; and
therefore they are called walking lights, and sometimes they seem to go before
a Man, and then again to follow him. For when such as travel in the night would
come to these Fires, Why when a man follows them, they go from him, and whoft
he runs from them they follow him.

Why they lead Travelers commonly into waters.

Helena, Castor, and Pollux.


the Air before them being driven by their motion, these Fires being also moved
with the motion of the Air do go along before and fly from them: but when they
run from the said Fires; the Air behind their backs following them, the Fires
do also follow. These Fires do many times draw Travelers out of their way, and
make them fall into Ditches, Quag-mires, and Rivers: because way faring people,
supposing that these Fires are Candles shining in the next Villages, do make
toward them, and leaving the right way fall headlong into the next Rivers and
Pooles they come at; Or by these Fires being generated about Watery Places, and
there seeking their Nourishment, they are seduced into the said Waters. And it
is hardly to be denied, nevertheless, but that sometimes the fraudulent
Illusions of the Devil does concur in the Case, Who continualy studies the
Destruction of Man kind, and seeks al occasions to do harm.

Also of a light Exhalation in the same manner are Bred these Meteors called
Helena, Castor and Pollux, which are wont commonly to be seen of Marirers at
sea, in the time of a tempest: and if two appear, they are called Castor and
Pollux; if one alone, it is called Helena: and one is counted unlucky, but two a
sign of fair weather. For so Pliny Lib. 2. Not. Hist. C. 37. These Stars are
of grievous importance, if they come single, and drown the ships, and if they
fall into the Hole, they burn them up. But if they come two together they are
good Signs and tokens of a prosperous voyage, by whose coming they say the
direful and threatening Helena is chased away: and therefore they attribute
this Divinity to Gastor and Pollux, and set their Images on the Ship stern as
turelary Deities whom they invoke at Sea; as may be seen in the Acts of the
Apostles, Chapter 28. v. 11. But these things are taken rather from Heathenish
superstitions then physical Causes. That appears more true, that when these
Meteors are moved up and down with an unstable motion, they foreshew Winds and
Tempests; and when in the time of a Tempest they fall down into the Ships, or
stick to the Masts, they are a sign of fair wether and a Calm. For now they
signify that the blasts of the Winds and the Tempests do abate. Howbeit
concerning the Star Helena, thus Cardan writes in his 2 B. of Subtilties P. 69.
Of the same kind wellnear is the Star of Helen about the Mast of a Ship, which
when it falls melts even Brass-Kettles, and is a certain Sign of Shipwreck.
For it happens only in grievous Tempests, and it cannot but Breed in a most
gross Air, nor be gathered in the Ship sa^e by great force of Winds, so as to
be set on Fire, and therefore it portends immediate Destruction. The same
Author in the same piece, endeavors to show a Reason why these Stars appearing
double promise safety to the Saylors, howbeit it is scarce of any moment.

Hitherto also pertains the Fire which is sometimes seen on Men's hairs, Fire
Cleaving to the Hairs or Garments of men.
and Garments, and on the Hairs of other Creatures, and upon other Things. This
arises from a Subtle and Fat Exhalation; dispersed through the Air, and
sticking to the Hairs or Clothes of Men, or out of the sweats of Animals of an
hot Constitution, or heated with vehement Motion, set on Fire by
Antiperistasis, or by violent Motion. some such thing happened to Ascanius, of
which Virgil in the 2 of his Aeneids. Hexameter verses.
See o'th top of Julius Head a glistering Luster,
And all about his Locks a Flame, without any burning.


Livie Relates such a like thing of Servius Tullius, Lib. 1. Dec. 1. And
Valerius Maximus, Lib. 1. Cap. 6. Also Livie writes in his 3. Decad. Lib. 5.
That when Lucius Martius was making an Oration a Flame sprung out of his Head,
which he felt not, and begot him great Favor among the Soldiers standing
about. Most are of Opinion that these Fires do signify the breaking out of
some great Honor or Dishonor, and that they have been always taken as signs of
good or bad Luck, as the Histories and Examples aforesaid do testify. And
therefore some deny that they are always to be referred to Natural Causes.
That is a Remarkable Passage related by Cardan; that a Certain Man came home to
his House after one a Clock in the Night, and when he put off his Cloak, a
Sparkle flew from the Cape thereof; and when he took his Cloak again and
laid it off, it Sparkled again, so that he was double affrighted; and within
15 Days he was by his Enemies accused of Witchcraft, and sought for, to be
tormented and punished: but by the advice of his Friends He underwent a
voluntary banishment.

Also from the same dry Exhalation Thunder Lightning and Thunderbolts do
arise. How thunder Caused.
Touching Thunder there are sundry Opinons of the Ancients, as we may see in
Aristotle, L. 2. Meteor. C. 9. Plutarch de placit. Phylosoph. Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
Seneca in Quaest. not. Lib. 2. Cap. 17.18. etc. Lucretius. Lib. 6. Nor are late
writers of the same judgment concerning the same. For Bodinus conceives that
Thunder and most other Meteors, do not arise from Natural Causes, but rather
from the Power of God, or the Devil. Aristotle, whose Opinion is thought to be
more probable then the Rest, does conceive that Thunders are thus generated:
When a twofold Exhalation hot and dry, is raised together, and thickened into a
round Cloud in the middle Region of the Air: and the Cloud being thickened by
Reason of the coldness of the place, nespecially in the upper part thereof, and
the hot Exhalation being shut up therein, and besieged on all sides by the
cold, it sights with the cold, and seeking an egress, it runs this way and that
way, shaking the sides thereof; or also breaking through the same it makes that
noise which we call Thunder. An Example whereof is seen in Guns; when the fiery
spirit, proceeding from the Coale-Sulphury Nitre, (to use the words of Scaliger
in Exe. citat. 11. Sect. I.) cannot be contained in the Room it was in when it
was Gun powder, it violently seeks its passage, and suddenly breaks out, making
a noise like Thunder. Which happens also in Wood and Chest-Nuts, when they are
put into the Fire, containing in them a hot Expiration. For the said Exhalation
being rarefied, and not finding a place to contain it self, it breaks out of
the wood and Chestnuts with a Noise.

Howbeit Chemical Operations do afford light to this Doctrine, Chemical
operations declare the generation of thunder
which do not only declare the Cause of Thunder more particularly and clearly;
but also show that the aforesaid Noise is caused not only by the matter shut up
and seeking an Egress, but also by the sudden breaking of the Air, caused by
the Motion of Bodies, mutually abhorring and flying one from another. For by
the aforesaid Operations it is easy to see, that as often as a part of inflamed
Sulphur is added to Nitre, a mighty Noise is Caused. Which also is to be seen
in Gunpowder, and in that Preparation of Nitre, which they call Sal Pruneliae.
Nor does the common sulphur only work this Effect: but the Sulphur also of
Minerals and Metals, when Nitre is added thereto, as appears in the Calcination
of Antimony with Nitre: but especially in Aurum Fulminans, or Thundering Gold,
so called, which being set on Fire, strikes with greater force and Noise then
Gunpowder, only it moves downwards. Nor is it unknown, that of Nitre, Sulphur,
Quick Lime, and Bitumen mixtures are made, which being sprinkled with moisture,
or wet with spittle only, are set on fire. Now that force depends not on
Sulphur alone, or Nitre alone, but on both mixed together. Sulphur indeed
quickly takes flame, but burns slowly: but Nitre is not easily inflamed, but
being once set on Fire, it burns quickly away and in a moment as it were. And
therefore it is from Sulphur that Gunpowder so soon takes Fire; but that it
burns up so suddenly proceeds from Nitre, and all the force thereof proceeds
from the said Nitre. From whence it is not hard to judge of the Generation of
Thunder. For when in the Summer time Sulphutous and Nitrous Vapors are
invisibly raised up by the heat of the Sun, especially when the Southwinds
blow; and afterward either by the opposite Winds, or by the coldness of the
middle Region they are united and condensed, it comes to pass, that they are
there inflamed, and hence proceeds the Thunder and Lightning.

Whence it appears, Thunder may also be made without Clouds
that it is not altogether untrue that Thunder or somewhat like it may be also
made without clouds. For Histories witness that Thunders have been heard the
Sky being clear: and Pliny relates Lib. 2. Cap. 51. That there was a man
smitten with a Thunder Bolt, on a clear day; and other have observed the same.
Which Thunders may well be thought to have been bred of a spirit and a dry
Exhalation, contained in the Caverns of the Earth, and breaking out with great
violence. Which thing is made more credible by what Seneca relates, Quest. Not.
Lib. 2. C. 30. after this manner: Once upon a time Aetna was full of fire: it
poured forth an Ocean of burning Sand. All the daylight was darkend with dust,
and the People were frighted by the sudden approach of night. At the same time
it is reported there were very many Thundrings and lightnings: which were caused
by the concourse of dry bodies, and not of clouds; for it is not credible there
were any clouds, the Air being so burning hot.

Also concerning Lightning there is some diversity of opinions, Lightning what
it is?
as may be seen out of the places fore alleged. Most retain the Opinion of
Aristotle, who held that Lightning was an hot Exhalation driven out of a cloud,
and set on Fire chiefly by vehement motion, and casting forth a shining Light.

And although the Thunder be before or as soon as the Lightning, Why the
Lightning is seen before the thunder is heard?
yet the Lightning is seen before the Thunder is heard; viz. Because the sight
is quicker then the hearing, and visible representations of things are more
spiritual, and more fit for sudden propagation, then audible. An example
whereof we have likewise in such as cleave Trees in the Woods, where we see the
blow light, before we hear the sound. And in Guns, where we First see the Fire
before we hear the Report.

A Thunderbolt differs not much from Lightening; A thunder bolt.
for it is an Hot and Dry Exhalation, more compact then Lightning, suddenly
breaking out of the Clouds with great force and violence. And therefore it is
not always dispersed in the Air, as most other fiery Meteors are, but is
carried often to the Earth: both because it is darted out of the Cloud with
great force and violence, as also because it consists of a matter well compact
and cleaving together: yet Pliny tells us (in his Not. Hist. Book 2. Chapter 55.)
that it never sinks into the Earth above Five foot. Hence Seneca in Quest. Not.
Book 3. Chapter 57. Lightning which only shines, and the Thunderbolt which is
darted down, are made after the same manner. But the former is of less force,
and has less nutriment. And to say what I think in a word: a Thunderbolt is
Lightning compact and Vigorated.

That these things may be explained from nearer principles: The Nature of the
thunderbolt declared from Chemical Principles.
the Lightning and Thunderbolt differ only in the disposition and plenty of
the Sulphur and Nitre. For the more plentiful and subtle the Nitre is; so much
more vehement is the blow: and because of the abundance of Sulphur, there is
more appearance of fire. Hence a Cause may be rendered why it lightens sometimes
with Thunder and sometimes without. For the reason hereof is not, because the
Cloud is spungy or compact, sometimes stopping the passage of the Exhalation,
and other whiles giving the same a free Egress: (for the Clouds are not so
thick as to be able to stop in the Lightning:) but because there is sometimes
good store of Nitre, other whiles but little joined with the Sulphurous
Exhalation; therefore sometimes vehement Thunder, other whiles little or none is
heard.

The Thunderbolt therefore is a fiery and thin Nitro Sulphurous spirit, and
not a stone as the common people imagine. For the wonderful power and force of
the Thunderbolt, of which we shall speak anon, must not be ascribed to a
stone, but to a Body much more thin and subtle. And if any man will hold, that
a most solid Stone may sometimes be bred in the Clouds of Exhalations thickened
and coagulated, and be cast down with the Thunderbolt or Lightning as a bullet
shot out of a Gun, I shall not contend with him; yet I think such a thing
happens but seldom.

I conceive it comes more frequently to pass, that by reason of a Thunderbolt
falling upon the Earth, the same and what ever matter is apt thereto, is melted
as it were by Fire, and out of that fluid matter such a stone is formed; since
it is otherwise a well known thing, that Iron and other Metals may be suddenly
melted with a Thunderbolt.

The Effects of Thunderbolts are wonderful. The effects of thunder bolts.
For by it Silver has been melted in men's Purses, and the Purses no way hurt
or harmed: the sword has been melted, the Scabbard remaining entire; all the
Iron has melted and run down a Post, the Wood unhurt; the Bones in live
Creatures have been mashed to pieces and the flesh not touched; and Martia a
Roman Lady had the Child in her Womb killed with a Thunderbolt, her self unhurt,
as Pliny tells us in his Hist. Not. B. 2. Chapter 51. In a word the Thunderbolt
hurts all hard and solid things sooner then such as are light and Spungy. The
Cause whereof Aristotle says to be (3. Metor.) because it sooner goes through
light and Spungy Bodies, then to be able to hurt or burn them. But in such
things as are thicker, while it stays a little seeking a passage which it
cannot easily find, it does the more hurt. And why the Hogshead being broken by
a Thunderbolt the Wine stands congealed, the reason (...), because the heat of
the Thunderbolt condenses the external parts of the Wine, that the Wine stands
congealed and shut up in a Skin as it were. Yet Seneca tells us that this
stif-standing of the Wine does not last above three days, Quest. Not. L. 2.
Cap. 31. That also is to be noted concerning the wonderful power of a
Thunderbolt, which Meuererus relates in Com. Meteorol. p. 140. How that a
certain Minister in the way from Leipsich to Toga, was so suddenly taken out
of the sight of all men by a Thunderbolt, that he was never seen more.

Pliny tells us that the Bay Tree, Whether some things are safe from
thunderbolts?
the Sea-Calf, and an Eagle are Thunder-proofe and cannot be smit by a
Thunderbolt. B. 2. Chapter 55. Some add the Hyacinth Stone, and other coral. Yet
most men Count these things but Fabulous, and late authors observe that the
Laurel or Bay has been Thunder Smitten: and Scaliger in Exercit. 113. The
motion of a thunderbolts.
disputes against the assertion of Cardan touching the Hyacinth. The motion of
Thunderbolts is commonly aslope or slanting: because the Fire of its own
Nature tends upwards, and the force whereby it is cast out of the cloud drives
it downwards. And hence a cause may be rendered, why Thunderbolts do frequently
smite high Mountains, Towers, Temples, Tall-Trees: because seeing Thunderbolts
are commonly moved aslant, the highest things are most Obvious to them, and are
therefore more often hurt by them

In Winter and Summer Thunderbolts are rare; At what time of year thunder bolts
are most frequent?
in the Spring and Autumn more frequent, as Pl^ny tells us, Lib. 2. Not. Hist.
Cap. 50. Yet later writers say they are most frequent in Summer, and seldom in
the Spring and Autumn; and to their Opinion experience gives witness in our
parts; for the hotter the weather, the more Lightnings, Thunders and
Thunderbolts we have. For in great Heats very many not Exhalations are raised
a loft, fit to engender Thunderbolts, and through the cold of the middle
Region of the Air they are shut up in Clouds, and out of them violently driven
down.

As to the difference of Thunderbolts, The difference of thunderbolts.
Pliny divides them (in 2. Book Chapter 43.) into Predicting and Brute, persuaded
rather by Heathenish Superstition then any Natural Reason. That is a more
convenient division of Thunderbolts, which Seneca brings in his 2. B. of
Natural Questions, Chapter 40. The kinds of Thunderbolts (says he) are the Borer,
the dissipater, the Burner. That which bores is subtle and flamy, flies
through the strairest passages, by reason of the sincere thinness and pureness
of the flame. That which dissipates is conglobated, and has mixed with it the
force of a fiery and stormy spirit. And therefore that kind of Thunderbolt
returns and escapes through that hole where it entered in. The force of this
Thunderbolt being spread far abroad breaks what it smites, but does not pierce
through it. The third kind, which burns, has much Earthiness in it, and is
more fiery then flaming. And therefore it leaves great marks of burning which
abide in the things smitten. Indeed, No Thunderbolt comes without Fire, but we
call this properly fiery, which imprints manifest signs of burning. That which
burns and makes brown, does burn three manner of ways: for either it blasts
only and hurts slightly, or it burns, or it kindles.

To the Meteors whose Nature and Generation has been Hitherto explained,
Strange Colors in the Sky, and Gapings.
may not unconveniently be adjoined the Phasmata so called, such as are, wide
gapings in the Skies, Ditches, Bloody redness and other Colors in the Skies
appearing. For these appear various by reason of the light of Stars or Meteors
received in a thick Air, or Exhalations, differing in plenty, Density, and
Position. For as a flame appears in sundry Colors, by reason of the various
permistion of Fire and Smoke: even so the light of the Stars or Exhalations
enflamed, according to the diverse dispositions of the matter wherein it is
received, does present to our Eyes sundry Colors and Shapes. For when that
which receives the light is very compact and dark, there appears somewhat that
is obscure and darkish; if it be not so compact, there is an appearance of a
Sky Color; if yet less compact, it appears purple Color'd. A Gaping.
And therefore they say a Gaping in the Sky is caused two manner of wa^es.
First, When the light of the Moon, or another Star, or of some Exhalation
enflamed (which is I conceive the more frequent cause) falls into a Cloud
beneath it; which is compact in the middle, and spungy in the sides. For so the
thicker part in the middle, which the Light cannot pierce into, expresses a
certain deepness remote from us a great way: but in the outmost parts through
which the light passes, it seems nearer to us. For every thing that is black,
dark and obscure, although it be as near as that which is white, yet it seems
further off then it: for white things do more work upon the sight. And
therefore painters also being to express a thing depressed and remote, do use a
black Color or that which is near to black; but to express a thing raised and
eminent, they use white. Ditches and other figures and colors appearing.
After the same manner also Ditches are made. For in them there is only more
depth, then in the foresaid Gapings. Of other Colors and Figures appearing in
the Air, the Cause is the same. For according to the various disposition of
Clouds in their several parts, in respect of thickness and thinness, the shapes
of diverse Animals are represented, of Mountains, etc. They say that a Caping is
made after a second manner, when a thin exhalation burns above some Cloud, and
attenuates the said Cloud in the middle, more and more, so that it seems to be
divided into two parts. Which being done, the Exhalation it self appears all on
Fire, and the Heaven being as it were opened, seems to burn. Yet probable it is
that sometimes such Prodigious Apparitions are by almighty God placed in the
Sky, to Denounce some Impendent Calamity, and Experience teaches as much.

Chap. 3. Of the Winds.
AFter the Fiery Mercors, we are to treat of Winds and Earthquakes. Now
although of old sundry Men have had several opinions concerning the Nature of
the Winds; and that Opinion chiefly was most Famous and common, Wind is not the
Air agitated.
which holds that Wind is the Agitation of the Air, or as Seneca defines it,
Quest. Not. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. Flowing or agitated Air: yet that these and other
Opinions are of no validity, Aristotle shows in B. 2. Meteorol. Chapter 4. The
manner of the Generation of Wind according to Aristotle.
But Aristotle himself held thus concerning the Generation of the Winds; that
all the Water which falls down in showers is totally distributed into the
Earth, and the Earth has in it self much heat and Fire; and the Sun does not
only draw that moisture which lies in the upper parts of the Earth, but also by
its heating Faculty dries the Earth it self; which Humor being drawn a loft in
vapors, is driven back by the coldness of the middle Region of the Air, and
agitated and moved athwart.

For the Matter of Winds, according to the Aristoteleans, The Matter of Wind
is an Exhalation hot and dry: of which thing they produce these signs. For in
the first place Winds do very much dry. Again as Cardan says in his 16. de
Subtle. p. 792. (and experience confirms the same,) red Clouds scattered all
over the Sky, or a red Moon, or the Suns setting amongst red Clouds; signifies
Winds to follow; only because they argue that many Hot and Dry Exhalations are
Elevated into the Sky. Howbeit the matter of Winds is seldom a pure Exhalation;
and some winds are drier then other some, because two sorts of Exhalations, as
was said before, are commonly drawn jointly out of the Earth; and again,
because they are mixed with Exhalations and Vapors, through which they pass:
and therefore also the Qualities of several Winds are different, as shall
afterward appear, by reason of the vapors they bring with them out of the
places through which they blow.

Now what should be the Cause of the Motion and Agitation of Winds, The
Efficient cause.
authors differ, as may be seen in Francise. Piccolhomineus, Lib. de Meteor.
Chapter 22. Collegium Conimbric. de Meteoris, Tract. 6. C. 3. And verily here is no
small difficulty and obscurity. But most Men hold, that dry Exhalations being
carried up to the middle Region of the Air, or thereabouts, are by the coldness
thereof driven back; and because by their own Nature they are light and
endeavor to mount upwards (but by the violence of the cold Air they are driven
down again,) therefore they are forced to move Athwart or Cross the Air. For
just as Smoke ascending out of a Chimney, if it meet with Wind is beaten down,
and passes obliquely this way and that way al abroad: so they think it no
absurdity to say, that an hot Exhalation meeting with the coldness of the
middle Region of the Air, is driven back thereby.

Now as we do not wholly reject this opinion, Aristotle's opinion examined.
since experience it self does watness, that after Rains Winds are raised in
the neighboring places, vapors being raised out of the Earth moistened with
showers; yet some things are to be added and observed concerning the same. For
first, though that same violent motion of Winds be chiefly to be attributed to
Exhalations: yet the Air it self does increase that motion, which being moved
by the Exhalations is it self agitated, and forcibly carried this way and that
way. Even as when it is moved by ones Hand, by a Whip, or Fann, we perceive it
makes somewhat which resembles Wind.

Moreover, although Winds are hardly bred without an Hot and Dry Exhalation,
since rarely one kind of exhalation ascends without another: yet nothing
hinders but that Cold and moist Vapors may be the matter of Winds; and
experience teaches us that there are many cold Winds, and many Winds moist.

Thirdly, It Is indeed credible, that out of the Earth moistened with showers
many Exhalations do ascend; but Credible it is not, that all the matter of
Winds arises from the surface of the Earth, and that the Earth within the
compass of ten Foot deep, more or less, can send forth such store of Vapors as
will serve to make Winds, which oftentimes out of the same Quarters do most
vehemently blow, diverse days together; especially when the Earth continues
moist even when the Winds do blow: but without all question the greatest part
of Winds do break out of the hollow Caverns of the Earth. For in the Winter
Season, when all the Surface of the Earth is hardened with Frost and Cold, yet
nevertheless more and more vehement Winds are then raised, then in the Summer
time; and Winds arise out of Rivers and Lakes, yea and Storms arise out of the
Sea it self. And although some think it improbable, that Winds are raised out
of the bottom of the Water, by the working of the Fire which is in the Bowels
of the Earth, yet Mariners have oftentimes found it so to be, to their great
danger and damage. For this is that Aeolia (which Virgil describes in his 1.
Book of the Travels of Aeneas,) out of which, as he says, Huf-puf Winds make
all to an Head, and where the Gate's open,
Out they Rush, with a blustering blast, and Blow the Land over.


Fourthly, Although I will not now dispute this point, whether Vapors and
Exhalations raised aloft, are driven back by the coldness of the middle Region:
yet nevertheless certain it is, that they when they break out of the Caverns of
the Earth, they are not destitute of all force and motion; and that not only an
Air arises out of Pools, Floods and lakes, but even out of the Calm Sea
oftentimes storms of Wind do arise. Now the Winds in the mean while do receive
this force at that time, either from the multitude of Waters which break into
the bowels of the Earth, and thrust forth the Air and Vapors there shut up; or
from the Fire contained in the Caverns of the Earth, and resolving the Waters
and other subject matter into Vapors: to which may be added some Huge Fragment
of Earth falling down into some vast Cavern of the Earth, and thereout
violently expelling the Air. Howbeit, amongst these Causes, the chief seems to
be the underground heat; and many things argue that it is no less effectual to
raise Winds, then the Heat of the Sun. For, as has been lately said, they
break out of Rivers, Lakes, and the Sea also in the Winter time, when the
surface of the Earth is hard with Frost. And that same instrument which
Chemists use instead of bellows to blow their Fire, does not a little declare
this business. They have a round hollow Globe of Copper, which being filled
with Water and close stopped, there is a small hole on one side or a Pipe with a
small passage: and the said Globe being filled with Water is laid on a Chasing
Dish of Coals, and the foresaid Pipe is instead of bellows turned toward the
Fire which they would blow: when the Globe grows Hot and the Water begins to
rarisie, there is a perpetual Wind blowing forth, which blows the foresaid Fire
like a bellows, til all the Water in the Globe be consumed. To all which causes
nevertheless one seems fit to be added, viz. The contrariety of those small
particles, whereof the Exhalations which are the matte. of Winds do consist*
For these particles (as appears by many Chemical operations, wherein for the
same cause the Vessels are violently broken, while they abhor and fly one from
there) do raise such a violent motion.

Howbert, The motion and posture likewise of the Stars, and especially of the
Planets, does also contribute to the Generation of exhalations; which being in
this or that part of Heaven constituted, or in conjunction with others, or
having mutual aspects; they move sometimes this matter, sometimes that, sometimes
in one place, sometimes in another, and varioutly drive and force the same.

The number of the Winds is by various Authors variously reckoned, The number
of Winds vulgarly observed.
as may be seen in Aristotle, in his 2. of Meteors, Chapter 6. in the Author of the
Book de Mundo dedicated to Alexander Chapter 4. Seneca in his Quest. Not. L. 1. C.
16. Pliny in Hist. Not. Lib. 2. Cap 47. Gellius, Book 2. Chapter 22. Who also
differ somewhat in the Names and Situations of the Winds. Thus we shall Muster
them. All grant that those are the four Cardinal or Principal Winds, which blow
from the four Principal points of the Horizon, or the four corners of the
World. For from the Equinoctial Sunrise blows the East Wind; from the
Noone-sted blows the South Wind; From the Equinoctial Sunset, the West-Wind;
and from the Pole Arctick blows the North Wind. The Ancients contented
themselves with the notice of these four Winds: the Age following added four
more. For, because the Sun does not always rise and set in the same place, but
the Equinoctial Sunrise and Sunset from whence the East and West winds blow,
are different from the Solstitial Sunrise and Sunset; and the Winter Sunrise
and Sunset is also different from them: they therefore added yet four Winds
more, blowing from the four points of the Interfection of the Tropicks and
Horizon, or from the points of the Summer Sunrise and Sunset, and the Winter
Sunrise and Sunset. For that which blows from the Summer Sunrise, they
called Caecias; That from the Winter Sunrise Vulturnus; that which blows from
the Summer Sunset, Corus; that from the Winter Sunset, Africus. To these
Posterity added yet other four, which blow from the Poles of the Zodiac, and
their opposite points; or from the sides of the Poles and the Polar Circles, or
from the points marked by them in the Horizon; so that every Cardinal Wind came
to have two collateral or side winds. And they called that betwixt the North
and the Summer Sunrise Thrascias; and that betwixt the South and Winter Sun
Set, Libonotus; that betwixt the South and Winter Sunrise, Phaenicias. And
this is the most usual number of Winds among Authors. The number of the winds
increased by late Navigators.
Later Navigators have amplified the number of the Winds to thirty two. For
they divide the Horizon into eight parts, to which they attribute eight Winds;
which they call principal, viz those which blow from the four cardinal points
of the Horizon, or corners of the World, and such as blow from the points
exactly in the middle of those. To these they add eight others, holding the
middle places betwixt the principal, and call them the middle or half Winds: to
these they add sixteen more, which they insert in the middle space betwixt the
principal and the middle, and call them Intermediate or Quarter Winds.

I shall here recount the chief of them, which follow one another in this
order, from East to South; from South to West; from West to North, and so from
North to East again. From the Equinoctial Sunrise blows Subfolanus, the
East Wind; from the middle point betwixt the East and the South, blows
Euronotus, the South-East-Wind; from the South blows Auster, the South Wind;
(...) the midst betwixt the South and West is Notozephyrus, the South West
Wind. From the Equinoctial Sunset blows Zephyrus, Favonius, the West Wind:
betwixt the West and North blows Thrasciozephyrus, the North-West Wind; from
the North, the North Wind; and betwixt the North and East, the North East Wind.

To these if we shall add eight and insert them in the middle among the
principal, (which were also used by the Ancients, and blow from the Summer and
Winter Sunrise and Sunset, and which the sailers call middlewinds of half
Winds,) we shall then have sixteen Winds worthy of observation. For betwixt the
East and the South-East there is Vulturnus, or the East-South-East Wind;
betwixt the South-East and the South there is Phaemcias, or the
South-South-East Wind; betwixt the South and the South-West there is the
Libonotus, the South-South West wind; betwixt the South-West and the West there
is Africus, the West-South-West wind, betwixt the West and the North-West is
the Caurus, Corus, or West-North-West wind; betwixt the North-West and the
North blows the Circius or North-North West wind; betwixt the North and the
North-East blows Boreas, Aquilo, or the North-North-East wind; betwixt the
North East and the East blows the Caecias, or the East-North-East-wind.

The chief thing observeable in these Winds is the contruriety. Coatrary winds.
Now those Winds are most contrary one to another which are most distant one
from another in place. Now those are most distant in place which are
Diametrically opposite one to another, or by a Line drawn through the Center of
the Horizon. Hence the East is opposed to the West, the South to the North; the
Winter Sunrise to the Summer Sunset, the Winters Sunset to the Summers
Sunrise: and therefore the Winds also which blow from these parts are opposite
one to another. So the East-South-East wind is opposite to the West-North-West;
the South-East wind to the North-West; the South-South-East, to the
North-North-West; South-South-West to the North-North-East; the North-East to
the South-West; the East-North-East wind is opposite to the West-South West
wind.

And here it is to be observed, The winds blow in a certain Method.
that these winds observe a Rule in blowing. Those which are contrary, because
they are Diametrically opposite, cannot blow at one and the same time, but the
stronger of the two suppresses the force of its opposite: or if it happen that
they blow together, it is with mighty contention and causes an hideous storm.
Now, this order the winds do commonly observe, that when one falls that which is
next it does rise; or the contrary to that which ceases does begin to blow.
Moreover in contrary Lines contrary Winds do for the most part blow: concerning
which see Aristotle, Lib. Meteor. 2. C. 6. Pliny in his Natural History, Book
2. Chapter 47.

Again, The tem per and (...) of the winds.
Here is to be noted the Temperament and Quality of the Winds. For though they
al agree in matter, and consist of an hot and dry Exhalation: yet since that is
seldom raised up alone, (but that for the most part out of the Sea and the
Earth watered with Rains and Snows these two Exhalations are drawn together,
and afford matter to the Winds;) moreover that they pass through places Hot,
Cold, Dry; therefore there is also a great difference of Winds in respect of the
places from whence they arise and through which they blow. For the Winds have
not only the Qualities of those places from whence they arise, but their chief
qualities they have from the places through which they pass.

Hippocrates in his Book de Aere, Aqua, and Locis, divides all the Winds into
Hot and Cold, because the force of these qualities is greatest: whom Aristotle
following in his 2. Meteor. Cap. 6. divides all Winds into North and South
Winds, even in respect of Heat and Cold also. To the Northern he adds the
Western Winds, and to the Southern the Eastern. The North-Winds are the coldest
of all other and Dry, for they arise from Snowy cold places, and pass through
places out of the Sun^ way and far from the Heat thereof. With these agree the
West Winds. For these are cold Winds, because they pass through places not much
heated by the Sun. To the North Wind the South Wind is opposed, an hot wind,
which passes through the Suns road, and through places heated by the Sun: in
Libya indeed it is dry, because the moist vapors are there consumed by the Sun:
but to us it is moist, because it comes over the Mediterranean or Mid-land Sea.
The Eastern Winds are Hot and dry. For the Sun is carried long over those
places through which they come.

The East Wind is Hot, Dry, temperate, Sweet, Pure, Subtle, Healthy,
especially in the morning: and therefore it brings no Venemeus blasts. The
East-South-East because nearer the South is moist and cloudy, and therefore
when it blows all things do seem to be bigger then indeed they are, as
Aristotle has it in the 26. Section of his Problems, Problem 56. The
East-North-East, is inconstant and somewhat cool. It drives not the Clouds away,
but draws them to it self; whence the Proverb: he draws evils to himself as the
East Nor-East Wind draws the Clouds. The West wind melts the Winter Snow and
Frosts, being of an Hot and moist temper, making the Herbs and flowers to grow;
and therefore it is thought to have its Name in the Greek Zephuros, as if you
would say Zoen Pheron bringing Life.

The West-South-West, is Cold, Moist, Rainy tempestuous. Hence Virgil calls it
Creber Procellis, in the first of his Aeneids, full of Storms. The
West-Nor-West, is Stormy, Snowy, Hailing, Cold. Therefore it, and the
North Wind, are the coldest winds of all.

The South Wind is moist, Hot, Thundering, Pestilent, engendring Clouds and
Store of Rain, making the Air thick and Cloudy.

The South-South-West is a temperate wind, Hot, Rainy, and sometimes Thundering.

The South-South-East wind is Hot and Moist.

Wherefore the South Wind, the South-west wind, West-South-west winds are hot,
but of these the South Wind is Hottest, Hurrful and Pestilent.

The South-South west is more moist then Hot. Howbeit, consideration must be
had of the Climate and the place.

The North-Nor-East wind is Cold and Dry, the Author of Cold, cutting the
Clouds, straitning our Bodies and shutting their Pores: making the Humors more
pure, and Purging the pestilential Air.

The North-Nor-west is the Author of Snow and Hail.

The North Wind is Cold and dry, without Rain, hurting Flowers, Fruits and
budding Vines. And therefore the North-Nor-East, North and North-Nor-west winds
do Purge the Air; and if they be not vehement cold, they make it clear and fair
weather; but especially the North-Nor-East and the North winds; and the
North-Nor-East brings Hail, and the North Wind brings Snow. And Generally all
winds from the North and West are drier then from the South and East.

Hence some winds are healthy, others unhealthy. Of winds some are healthy,
others unhealthy.
But in general the Southern winds are of all other most unwholesome. For they
cause moisture and putrefaction: and therefore when it blows, neither Cellars,
nor Houses, nor Libraries, nor Granaries should be set open. The South Wind is
more violent in the Night, the North Wind in the Day: the South Wind on the
Sea, and the North Wind on the Land.

A short and moderate South Wind makes the Air clear; but a great and lasting
South Wind Clouds the Air, and is wont to be more furious at the End then at
the beginning: and therefore it brings more Rain at the Conclusion, then at
first: but the North-Nor-East wind does the contrary.

Those winds which come through Populous places, as Cities full of people, and
where a great Army has been long encamped, through Stinking and Venomous
places, are hurtful: but those which come through healthy places, as pleasant
Meddows, woods, and along running waters, are wholesome, for they are Seasoned
with the Steams of Flowers, Leaves and Herbs. More observations concerning the
force of winds are to be read every where in the writings of Physicians, and in
Pliny in the place fore alleged; also some things may be brought out of
Aristotle touching this subject, Probl. Sect. 26.

And these are the common winds which blow every where all the world over.
Provincial winds.
There are also other winds peculiat to some places. The former are termed
common to all places, not because so many blow in all places; for there are
some Regions where those common winds cannot come, by reason of High-Mounrains
and other Causes: but because, no where there are found any more. And the
latter are termed Provincial winds, because they go not beyond a certain (...)
of ground and abide in the place where they were engendered not being able to
blow further: because they are bred of a small Quantity of matter, which
falling, they also do fade away. And such are commonly those winds which are
called Subterrancan, which come out of Caverns of the Earth, and from
Exhalations bred in those Cavities which are nearest the Surface of the Earth.
Or because they are particles of the common winds, separated from them by the
height of Mountains, deepness of Valleys. or the Heat or Cold of the Place. Of
which see Seneca. Quest. Not. B. 5. Chapter 19. Pliny in his Natural History Lib.
2. Chapter 47. Gellins Book 2. Chapter 22.

There are also universary winds, Anniversary winds
which return every year at set times, and they are chiefly three: The Onithiai
or Bird-winds, the Prodromoi or forerunners, the Etesiai or Anniversary winds
Particularly so called. Bird wind.
The Bird-winds called also the Rose-winds, are a sort of Westerly winds, which
blow gently every year in the Spring Season, when the Swallows and other Birds
return to our Parts, and when Roses flourish. Fore runners.
The Prodromoi or Forerunners, are Northern winds which come eight days before
the rising of the Dog Star. so called because they proceed the Etesian winds.
Etesian winds.
The Etesian winds are so called from Eror Annus, as if you should say
Anniversary winds Particularly so called, because they keep their course most
certainly every year, two days after the Rise of the Dog star, and blow forty
da^es together; now they are Northern winds, pleasing and healthful to man and
beast. For by their blast they moderate the Heat, break the violence of the
Summer, and defend us from the violence of the hortest months. They lise at the
third hour of the day, and therefore they are called sleepy winds and Dainty
Nice winds by the Mariners, as Seneca tells us. Not. Quest. Lib. 5. Chapter 11. and
at night commonly they leave blowing. Authors conceive those wind; are bred by
great heat, melting the Snows yet remaining on the Northern Mountains. For it is
likely, that the Land; disburthened of the Snow and uncovered do breath ont
more freely. And therefore they do not last beyond the Dog-daies; because after
them all places are bared, or at least very few do continue covered with Snow.

The winds do sometimes raise great Tempests, Turbulent winds.
and are exceeding turbulent; the chief whereof are Ecnephias, Typbon, and
Prester. The generation of the wind Ecnephias is thus described by Seneca in
his Lib. Eenephias
5. Quest. Not. Cap. 12. when a great inequali^y and dissimilitude of Bodies,
sent out by the Earths vapor, does ascend aloft, and some of these Bodies are
dry, others moist, from so great a discord of Bodies fighting together, when
they are gathered into a Globous Body, it is like that some Clouds are made
hollow, and that Fislulous spaces are left in them in manner of hollow strait
Pipes. In these spaces a thin spirit is intercepted, which desires a greater
space, when being smitten and cust together in its narrow passage it grows hot,
and so becomes wider, and cuts asunder its enclosures, and breaks out into a
Wind, which is really stormy, coming down from aloft and falling vehen ently
and siercely upon us, and making it self way by force and sighting. This wind
is called by the Greeks Eenephias, because it comes rushing Ec toon Neph^n, out
of the Clouds.

But if the said Exhalation be divided into parts, The whidwind
and breaks either our of diverse Clouds, or out of diverse parts of the same
Cloud, it causes a Whirlwind. For, because the wind seeking Egress meets
another, and is forced as it were out of a wide into a narrow place, it is
always driven to one side where it may find a passage, and makes a wheeling
motion; by and by being conglobated and mixed with some part of the Cloud, it
is carried Headlong and being repulsed and beaten back by the Earth carries
what ever it meets with its whirling motion, aloft into the Ait; it is the
chief Plague of Mariners, as Pliny says in Lib. 2. Not. Hist Cap. 48. bowing
and breaking, not only their masts but the very Ships themselves.

But if the said Exhalation be of an hotter Nature, and by Antiperistasis or
Motion be set on Fire, Prester,
and carry the Flame along with it, it is called Prester from burning. Seneca
calls it the Fiery whirlwind, Quest. Not. Lib. 5. C. 13. This does not only
overthrow, but buru^al that does stand in its way: and herein only it differs
from a Thunderbolt, in that it has more Wind, and less Flame; but in a
Thunderbolt there is more Flame and less wind. And so much for Winds.

Chap. 4. Of the Earthquake.
ARistotle relates the differing opinion of Authors touching the Earthquake,
(which the Greeks term Seismos.) in his 1 B. of Meteors Cap. 7. Seneca Lib. ^.
Quest. Not. from Chap. 5. to 21. Plutarch in his 3. de Placit. Philosoph. c.
15. Pliny B. 2. Not. Hist. c. 79. Gellius B. 2. chapter 28. from whence we may see
how careful the Ancients were in searching out the Cause, why that which is the
only immovable and fixed thing in the world, which substains us and all things
on it self, upon which Cities are built, which some have called the foundation
of the World, does sometimes reel and stumble. We, desirous to observe Brevity,
omitting the examination of other Opinions, shall only lay open the Truth.

Seeing the Earth is of it self immovable, nor can be moved by any thing which
Externally goes about the same, as winds or waters, (against the Motions and
most Vehement Tempests whereof the Earth has formerly stood and does still
stand immovable:) it is to be thought, that it is moved in Earthquakes from
somewhat within it self. Now in the Caverns of the Earth are included Waters and
two kinds of Exhalations. Now although that Gellius tells us, Lib. 2. Cap. 8.
Waters are not the Cause of Earthquakes.
that the most Ancient Greeks were of Opinion, that the Earth was moved by the
Floods and Violent Motions of Waters abounding in the Caverns of the Earth;
(and therefore they call Neptune the Earth-shaker:) yet waters being not very
apt to move, nor disposed to most swift and violent Motions cannot be accounted
the Cause of Earthquakes. Which is also confirmed by what Scaliger relates in
his 38 Exercitation. There is says he in the Western part of the Island of
Hispaniola a Mountain of huge Height, which has many hollow Caves within it,
whereinto Rivers are tumbled down with so great a noise and roaring of the
waters that they are heard five Miles of, yet no Earthquake is caused thereby.
And the like Judgment we are to make of moist Vapors.

The Cause therefore of an Earthquake must needs be hot and dry Exhalations.
The true Cause.
For hot and dry Spirits are fitting to raise Motions most swift, Violent and
Vehement, which is also apparent from Thunder, Thunderbolts, Winds,
Whirle-winds, Storms, and Guns: and every hot thing does of its own Nature tend
upwards. Also there are other Tokens hereof. For Histories bear witness, that
for the most part, after an Earthquakes a great abundance of winds and spirits
have broken forth, and have cast Stones, Ashes, and other Obvious things out of
the Caverns of the Earth; yea and the most Earthquakes have not ceased till
those winds included have made an Eruption: which Aristotle tells us did happen
about Heraclea of Pontus, and the Island Hiera, in the 2 of his Meteors, Chap.
8. Moreover, most Earthquakes happen, when the Sea is Calm and the Air free
from winds; viz. When all the matter of Winds is contained in the Caverns of
the Earth. You may find more signs in Aristotle, in the Place forealledged.

Now some hold, that these Spirits are either bred in the Caverns of the Earth
by the Heat of the Sun and of the underground Fire; or that being bred without,
they enter in; or that they are driven thither by the Antiperistasis of the
cold Air; or that when two contrary Winds do blow at once, the one being
vanquished by the other does pass into the Caverns of the Earth which it meets
with; or to avoid Vacuity, when the waters go out, the Exhalations insinuate
themselves into the hollow parts of the Earth. But the first amongst these
Causes is either the chief or only Cause. Now the Spirits which shake the Earth
are contained in the profound Caverns thereof. For those which are in the
Cavities next the Surface of the Earth, seeing they can easily find an Egress,
do not move the Earth. Now these Blasts are moved, because they have no place
in the Caverns of the Earth fit and large enough, or because they are pressed
by the Waters which flow to and from the Sea; or because they are shut up by
the Antiperistasis of cold, and gathering force, and their heat being
Augmented, they are Attenuated and Rarefied; which also may be performed by the
Subterranean or Underground Fires.

From the Premises therefore it appears, that an Earthquake is caused, when
hot and dry spirits are Praeternaturally shut up in the Caverns of the Earth,
and seek their way out. For, not finding the same they move this way and that
way, and by their great force and violence they shake the Earth. Now the sundry
manners and various fathions of Earthquakes proceed from the greater or less
Quantity of Exhalations; from the diverse figures of the Caverns; from the
longness or shortness of their distance from the Earth; Two manners of motion
of the Earth.
from the sundry manners of the Exhalations breaking forth; which the Author of
the Book de Mundo Cap. 4. and others do reckon up. Yet all of them may be
referred to two, whereof one may be called Tremor a trembling; which is caused,
when much Spirit is spread out Long-waies and Broad-waies: the other Pulsus a
beating or thrusting, when the Exhalation is disposed rather long-waies. For it
seeking Egress lifts up the Earth much after the same manner as the Artery is
lift up in the Diastole or widening of the pulse.

From what has been hitherto said, it appears, that the whole Earth cannot be
shaken at once. For the Spirits shut up in the Caverns of the Earth have no
proportion (to speak of) to the whole Globe thereof, nor have so much strength
in them. And therefore, Universal Earthquakes are not natural.
if there be any universal motions of the Earth, they ought to be referred
rather to the insinite power of God, then to Natural Causes. With the
Earthquake is joined a noise, caused by the vehement Motion of the Spirits
running to and fro in the Caverns of the Earth, and smiting against the sides
of the Earth; which noise sometimes goes before the Earthquake, and is a sign
thereof suddenly to follow; sometimes it accompanies the same, and it is
various, according to the Quality of the matter receiving, and the form of the
Cavities, or passages through which it goes.

The duration of an Earthquake is not one and the same always, How long the
Earthquake lasts.
but diverse, according as the Earth does more or less resist, or gives an easy
or dissicult passage to the winds; or as the Spirits themselves are plentiful
or scanty. For sew Spirits are sooner discussed and sooner get away, but store
of Spirits abide longer; also when there is a wide passage for them to go out,
they go out apace; but when the passage is shut up or is very narrow, they get
out more slowly and continue their Bustling longer. So Seneca in Not. Quest.
Lib. 6. Cap. 30. Relates that Campania trembled continually for diverse days
together. And Livy in Decad. 4. Lib. 4. Writes thus: In the beginning of the
year, when L. Cornelius, and Q. Minutius were Consuls, there were so many
reports of Earthquakes, that Men were weary not only of the thing it self, but
of the many Solemn days appointed because of the said Earthquakes. And the
same Author in his 4 Decad. Lib. 5. tells us, there was an Earthquake for forty
days together; yea and Aristotle in Lib. 2. Meteor: Cap. 8. and Pliny in the
2. of Not. Hist. Chap. 8. tells us that Earthquakes have sometimes lasted a year
or two years together, and that they have returned at certain Times and Seasons.

The Effects truly of Earthquakes are wonderful and horrible. The wondersul
effects of Earthquakes.
For many times, (as Seneca in Lib. 6. Not. Quaest. Cap. 1. Speaks,) it does
not only swallow up single Houses, Families or Cities, but it overthrows whole
Nations and Regions, and sometimes overwhelms them with Ruins, other-whiles
covers them in a deep Gulf, not so much as leaving any appearance of them: so
that the Earth is spread over most Noble Cities, not leaving any mark of their
former Existence: which happens when by impulse of the Spirit the Caverns of
the Earth are shaken and fall in. And sometimes indeed, the Cities and Houses
are not swallowed up in the Cavities of the Earth, but the Earth raised up in a
tumor, they fall down flat. Histories are full of such calamitous accidents. In
the Reign of Tiberius Caesar 12. Cities of Asia were in one Night overthrown
with an Earthquake, as Pliny relates in the 2. B. of his Not. Hist. Cap. 84.
He also relates that in Crete a Mountain was broken by an Earthquake, Book.
7. Cap. 16. Theodoretus tells us in the 2. Book of his Eclesiast. Hist. chapter 25.
how the greatest part of Nicaea was overthrown. Of the overwhelming of Helice
and Buri Seneca writes in Hist. Not Book 6. Chapter 23.26.32. And Ovid in the 15.
B. of his Metamorphosis.

Many times also in the Sea a Gulf has been opened, and the waters swallowed
up, as Rivers on the Land, so that the Fishes and Ships have stood on dry
ground. Contrariwise, many times the Earth swelling on high has not settled
again, producing Mountains on the maine Land, and Islands in the Sea: whereupon
also sometimes the Sea has been raised aloft like a Mountain, and has
afterward fell in upon the Neighboring Lands. Such an Earthquake Socrates
speaks of in the 2. Book of his Ecclefiastical History, Chap. 3. For the same
Cause the Courses of Rivers have been sometimes changed by Earthquakes, viz. a
Tumor or swelling of ground being raised up in the midst of the former
Channel. Sometimes new Rivers have broken forth, the ways being opened through
which the underground Waters are carried. Sometimes Fire and Ashes are cast out
by an Earthquake: sometimes a Venomous Spirit is belched forth, which proves
baneful to Man and Beast. Seneca tells in B. 6. Not. Quest. chapter 27. of a Flock
containing Six hundred Sheep, all killed by an Earth quake. Many other mischiefs
also an Earthquake brings with it, all which were contained in that one
Earthquake which happened under Theedosius, which is described by Euagrius in
the 1 B. of his Ecclesiastic Hist. Chap. 17.

And we may well believe, that Earthquakes bring not only present mischiefs,
and that the danger is not always in the motion, but that there is as great or
greater foretold by Earthquakes; and Pliny says well, Lib. 2. Not. Hist. cap.
84. that Rome was never shaken with an Earthquake, but it was the sign of some
Event to follow. And very many Histories Testify, that the same has happened
in other places.

And therefore look what the Romans did of old, who when they felt an
Earthquake, or heard tidings thereof, they made Proclamation that the people
should keep Solemn days for that Cause, as Gellius tells us, B. 2. chap. 28.
much more should we, when such Calamities are present or impendent, call upon
God by Prayer. For that which the Romans feated, (as the same Gellius records,
in the same place,) viz. lest by naming of one god instead of another, they
should engage the People in a false Religion, and therefore they durst not in
their Edict, as was the usual manner, Name or appoint to what god the People
should sacrifice; that have we no need to fear, to whom that God is known, who
being angry, the Earth trembles and the Foundations of the Hills are shaken, 2
Kings, chapter 22. ver. 8.

Chap. 5. Of the Clouds.
WE have Hitherto explained those Meteors which are bred of an Hot and Dry
Exhalation; we come now to those which are bred of a vapor in the middlemost
and lowest Regions of the Air. In the middlemost Region are engendered Clouds,
Rain, Snow and Hail.

A Cloud is engendered when vapors being raised aloft, either by heat which they
have received from the Sun, or other heating causes, or by hot Exhalations mixed
with them, How a Cloud is engendered.
are assembled in the middle Region of the Air, so that they cannot be
penetrated by the sight. For a Cloud is nothing else but a vapor raised up in
the middle Region of the Air, What a Cloud is.
and there compacted; which appears hereby, in that in the lower Region of the
Air, when vapors and Exhalations are raised out of things which boil or burn,
they represent Clouds; and because they that walking beneath see Clouds upon
Mountains, when they ascend to the tops of the said Mountains, they walk
through the Clouds as through Mists; and because as soon as the said
Exhalations are condensed they remain no longer Clouds, but turn into Rain.

Touching the Height of Clouds, Authors are at variance. The height of the
Clouds.
Some conceive that the Clouds are not above three miles distant from us; yea
and that some of them are not above half a mile high. Others write that no
Cloud is above nine miles distant from the Earth. Vitellio is of opinion, that
the vapors ascend 52000, paces, or 13. German miles. Cardan in his book de
Subtle. Lib. 4. p. 205. reprehends Vitellio, and avers that the highest which
vapors mount is 772000 paces, or 193. German miles. Howbeit, it is like enough,
that the height of the Clouds is not always the same, but various, according
to the variety of the matter, places and times: Yea, and we often see with our
Eyes, that at the same time and in the same Region, one Cloud is higher then
another, and that one goes above another. I my self have seen two clouds
carried with contrary motions: and one moving above the other, toward the
East; the other moved under the other, toward the West. Also experience shows
that clouds are not so high, as some imagine. For the tops of some Mountains
reach above the clouds. For the Mountains Olympus and Athos are so high that
Ashes left upon their tops all the year long have neither been blown away by
Winds, nor washed away with Rain. And such as have stood on the top of Vesuvius
have observed that some clouds were just as high as the Mountain, and some
much lower. To which that agrees which Zabarella writes in his 8. Chap. de
Regianth. Aeris. I went says he, to the top of Venus Mount, which is the
highest in the Territory of Padua, and there I found the Air clear all day
long; but beneath, a bout the middle of the Mountain, I saw the Clouds, which
hindered me from seeing the Valleys: and in the Evening being come down from the
said Mountain, I found that there had been a great Rain that day, below,
whereas it Rained not at all on the Mountains top. Francisc. Piccolhomineus de
Meteor. C. 11. says the same, how that Men living upon high Mountains, or
Travailing thereupon, do see the Rains below them in the Valleys; whereas they
themselves are in clear weather; and he says the same happened to himself
traveling over the Alps and the Apennine Hills. And any man may observe the
same in Mountanous places.

The Colors of Clouds are various, The Colors of Clouds.
according to the various disposition of the matter receiving the Beams of the
Stars, and especially of the Sun, which Pontanus thus describes. Hexameter
verses.
The white Cloud's not very thick, and mixed with a thinspred Vapor,
Through which the Sun with his rays does break to the inside.
The black Cloud is full of a thick dark Smoke and a Vapor,
Not at all to be pierced through, by the Beans of the Sun shine.
In a Purple Cloud's much beat; and Good Store of Humor
In the blew colord Cloud is bid, which lustily Rameth.


Chap. 6. Concerning Rain.
SOme Clouds are termed barren, which are white and Transparent, and do rather
by agitation of the Winds turn into Air then showers: others fruitful, which
being moister then the former, What Rain is and how it is bred?
are fit to engender Rain. For Rain is nothing but a Cloud, Cooled, Condensed,
and turned to Water. And Rain is bred, when the va^ors which make a Cloud are
yet more condensed, and turned into Water; which being heavier then the Air
falls down of its own accord in drops. For Rain is made after the same manner as
hot vapors upon the walls of Baths, or in the Winter in hot stoves upon Globes
of Glass, Iron or Tin jugs that are cold, are turned as we see into Watery drops.

Now there is some diversity of Rains, Diversity of Rains.
proceeding from the variety of the Clouds, and of their place, which is
sometimes higher and sometimes lower. For when the Cloud is High, Unequal, Spungy
and Barren, and few small drops fall like Dew, they are called Psecades
heat-drops. Psecades. Imber.
But if the Cloud be more near and compact, and the drops fall down thicker,
it is called Imber a shower. Finally, if the Cloud be yet thicker and suddenly
condensed by a greater cold, and greater drops fall more thickly, Nimbus.
it is called Nimbus a strong shower. Yea and sometimes whole Clouds are so
condensed by a sudden cold, that the waters descend not drop by drop, but come
down in streams, The Lump of a Cloud.
and destroy Towns and Cities: and then they say a Lump of a Cloud is fallen
down.

Also there are Prodigious Showers so called, such as we read of every where in
Histories, Prodigious Rains.
Tit Livius relates in Decad. 3. B. 7. that it Rained Milk, as does Plmy also
in B. 2. Not Hist. C. 56. and Livy tells us that it Rained Blood, Decad. 3. B.
4. Decad. 4. B. 10. and Pliny in the place forecited. Also that it Rained Flesh
Livy tells us in Decad. 3. B. 3. and Pliny in the foresaid place. That it Rained
Stones in many places Livy relates, Dec. 1. B. 7. Dec. 3. B 1.234.6.9.10. Dec.
4. B. 5. 68. Dec. 5. B. 1, 2, 3. That it Rained Earth the same Livy informs us,
Dec. 4. B. 4.57. Dec 5. B. 5. Pliny, in the forecited place writes, that it
has sometimes Rained Iron, Wool, and Bricks. Authors telus that Fishes have
sometimes fallen down in Showers of Rain: and those Frogs and worms which are
seen after Rain are by Iome thought to have fallen down with the said Rain. Yea
and some relate out of Avicenna that once on a time a Calf fell out of the Sky.

Most of these Prodigious Rains are to be ascribed to Superior Causes, Their
Causes.
viz. To God warning Men of Evils to come; and to the Devil, indeavoring by
such Prodigies to draw men into Errors and Superstitions; yet some of them may
also be referred to Natural Causes. True Bood and Milk cannot Naturally descend
in showers; since they are bred only in living Creatures. Yet nothing hinders
but somewhat like them may fall down, viz. When by the Sunbeams a vapor is
drawn out of a red or white Earth, or is a loft so digested, that it may show
such a color, and being afterward resolved into Rain may resemble Milk or
Blood. And that small Stones may be made by a great heat of store of dry
Exhalations in the Air, is a matter sounding like Truth.

As for those kind of living Creatures which may otherwise be bred of
Putrefaction, such as Frogs, were must hold, that either they are engendered of
some matter in the Earth moistened with showers (which seems to many men most
probable) or that they lie hid in the chinks and Caverns of the Earth, and by
the falling of the Rain are called out as it were and so leap forth. But
incredible it is that more perfect Animals which are generated only of Seed,
and great Stones should be bred in the Air: but likely it is they have been
caught up by whirlwinds in one place, and thrown down in another. Now there are
certain signs of Rain as of other Tempests, which would be too long to reckon
up in this place, and long Catalogues of the same are set down by others. But
the principal may be seen in Plinies 8. Book Not. Hist. C. 35. And in Virgils
1. Book of Husbandry.

Chap. 7. Of Snow and Hail.
OF the same matter with Rain is Snow also made. How snow is bred?
For Snow is bred of a Vapor raised to the middle Region of the Air or somewhat
lower, or of a thin cloud before it is turned into Water and Rain, congealed by
vehement Cold, and torn into parts or flakes, which descend like soft Wool,
sometimes greater, other whiles lesser, according to the vehemence of the Cold.
Now Snow is bred in the Winter time chiefly, because the cold is then strong
and vehement, so that ^^^s able not only to condense vapors into clouds and
Rain, but also into Ice. For Snow as Seneca says, Quest. Not. Lib. 4. cap. 3.
is nothing but a kind of Ice bred in the Air.

Now Snow is white, because it is engendered of a Spungy transparent cloud. The
color of Snow why white.
And that which is transparent, after it is terminated, does next of all become
white, because that color is most of kin to transparency. This appears in
Crystal or Transparent Gl^ss, and clear Ice; whose surface if a man render
uneven, so that it is no longer transparent, or break and grind it into small
parts, in room of transparency whiteness is produced. It happens sometimes,
that, when the lower Region of the Air is a little h^tter then ordinary, the
Snow as it falls down does melt when it comes there; and so, that which is Snow
above, is Rain below. And therefore frequently when it Rains in Valleys, it
Snows upon the high Mountains. And for the same cause on the highest Mountains,
when there is no Snow to be seen on the Plain ground, there has been Snow
lying, even in the middle of the Summer. Touching the good which Snow does to
fruits and Trees, read Pliny his 2. chap. of the 17. Book of his Natural
History.

Besides Rain and Snow, of Clouds also there is bred Hail. Hail what it is, and
how and where Generated.
For Hail is nothing but congealed Rain; and it is bred, when a Cloud is
dissolved into Rain and descends, and in its coming down by extremity of cold
it is congealed into little round Balls. Now Hail is congealed, not only in the
middlemost, but also in the lowest Region of the Air. Which may hence be
gathered because sometimes Chaf is found congealed in Hail stones, which Chaf as
it was coming down the cold also intercepted, and shut up in the congealed
Water. If the cold be remiss a certain imperfect and soft kind of Hail is bred,
of a middle Nature betwixt true Hail and Snow, which they term Granula, and
resembles small Sugar-Plums, and this false chiefly about the End of Winter.
Before the falling of Hail, for the most part great and terrible sounds are
heard in the Air, which are caused by the great contrest of Heat and Cold in
the Clouds. Hairs, and Chaf, and other things which are sometimes enclosed in
Hailstones, have been carried a loft by the Winds, and congealed together by
the Cold. many times there are strange shapes in Hail.


And whereas sometimes strange Figures are said to be seen in Hail, it is partly
to be ascribed to the Fancies of Men, who looking intently upon the Snow, do
conceive therein Sundry Images, as they do in the Clouds; and partly to the
divine Power, which may imprint certain resemblances in the Snow, whereby men
may be admonished of some faults in their life and Conversation.

Chap. 8. Of a Mist, Dew, Hoare Frost, Honey and Manna.
ALso of a Vapor some Meteors are Generated, in the lower Region of the Air,
which must also be mustered. And to begin with a Mist, the Author of the Book
de Mundo, What a Mist is?
in his fourth Chapter thus describes ^t: A Mist is a certain dewy exspiration,
not apt to turn to Water, thicker then the Air, more spungy then a cloud. It Is
bred either of the beginnings of a cloud being rarefied, or of the Relics of
a cloud. In which words he determins that a mist is a certain vapor, thicker
then the Air, thinner then a cloud, hovering over the Earth, bred of an
Exhalation growing thin, which should otherwise have been the matter of a
cloud; or of the thinner parts of a cloud, unfit to engender Rain, and
remaining after it. And therefore a Mist is a token of Fair weather to follow.
There is also another Mist, which consists of thicker vapors, exhaling out of
the Earth, which also by Reason of their thickness, and the small heat in them,
cannot be carried a lost, but settles in the lowest part of the Air; and so
they cause a darkness; and if by the heat of the rising Sun they be discussed
and extenuated, they intimate fair weather; but if they be drawn up all
together into the Air, being there congealed by the coldness thereof they
become matter of Rain.

Now Dew is made of a small Quantity of a thin vapor, The Dew where and how
engendered.
which because of the weakness of the heat reaches no further then the lowest
Region of the Air, and indeed below the upper part thereof, and being by the
cold of a temperate night turned into small drops of Water, it sticks to Plants
and other things. For the dew is chiefly found on the Leaves and Flowers of
Plauts, especially where they are smooth and thick; and sometimes also in other
parts of them, as also upon Stones. For though it falls a like upon all places
below; yet either by reason of their frequent pores, and roughness, or by their
heat, it is drunk up and dissipated. On high Mountains there is no Dew bred;
and sometimes also it rises not above two cubits, and only the grass is moistened
thereby, but things a little higher remain dry. Dew therefore differs from
Rain, only in the paucity of the matter, the place where it is bred, and the
weaker heat whereby it is congealed. Now Dew is Generated chiefly in the Spring
and Fall: but in the Heat of Summer and Cold of Winter it is not bred. For the
Heat consumes the matter; and the cold suffers not the Vapors to be raised.
Also it is not Generated, but when the Sky is calm and clear; because when the
Sky is troubled and agitated with winds the vapor is dispelled, and cannot be
congealed into Dew. Likewise Dew never falls but in the morning and Evening. For
in the day time it is consumed by the Suns heat, and degenerates into a very
thin and light Spirit, so that if an Eg-shell be filled with Dew, and the hole
stopped with Wax, or other Glue, The Nature of dew explaind by the Chemists.
Hore-s^ost how engendered.
and it be then exposed to the Sun, the Eg-shell will mount aloft; the Dew
being changed into a most thin vapor and spirit, which ascends upwards, and
carries the Eg-shell with it. The Chemists teach, that Dew contains in it the
most subtle part of Nitre and Volatile Salt, which is contained in the surface
of the Earth, and therefore it is used to make Extracts.

Hoar Frost does not very much differ from Dew; for Hoar Frost is bred, when a
thin Vapor in a small Quantity is lift up from the Earth, and cannot rise high,
but by the vehement cold of the night it is congealed, before it turns to
water. Therefore, look what Snow is in the middle Region of the Air, that is
Hoar Frost in the lowest Region; and what is Rain above, is Dew below.

Also Honey is to reckoned as a kind of Dew, What honey is, and ^ow it is bred?
touching the generation whereof this is the common Opinion: that with the
Vapors which are drawn up in the day time out of Waters and Moist places, for
the most part, Hot, Fat, and subtle Exhalations are lifted up, not only out of
the Earth and Water, but also out of Plants and other things, which being
thoroughly mixed with Earthy Watery and aerie parts, and concocted by the heat of
the Sun in the day time, and then by the moderate cold of the Night condensed,
they stick upon Plants like Dew. And that Honey is nothing else but a juice,
consisting of Exhalations and vapors, mingled and digested in the Air, by the
Heat of the day, and congealed by the nights Cold, and so descending in the
manner of Dew.

Which opinion as it is not quite to be rejected: so it seems not satisfactory
of it self. For if the Dew be easily elsewhere dissipated and discussed by the
morning beams of the Sun: How comes it that Manna and Honey are not also
dislipated. Also manna and Honey differ not a little from Dew; nor has Dew of
it self any Fat or Clammy parts. And therefore this also seems sit to be added:
that out of Plants a certain juice and Native Vapor does distill or breath our,
which nevertheless is dissipated by the day-heat of the Sun: but it is at night
mingled with the falling Dew, which hinders it from being dissipated, and grows
with it into one Nature. From whence it is casie to show a Cause, why there is
more Honey gathered at this or that time of year, in this or that constitution
of the Air.

And therefore though all Honey is sweet of it self; yet sometimes both its Taste
and Smell is changed, according to the Nature of the Plant from which it is
gathered: and therefore it is sometimes Venomous, when it is gathered from
venomous Plants. Whereof see Pliny Lib. 21. Not. Hist. Cap. 13. Dioscorid. B.
2. Cap. 74. and Book 6. Cap. 8.

This same Honey is twofold, Manna called also Air-Honey, or Dew-Honey, Two
sorts of honey.
and which in a special manner is called Honey. For Manna is a Honey or Dewy
Humor, mixed of a vapor and the Subtle and Fat Exhalations of Plants. and by
the temperate coldness of a clear night congealed; sticking upon Plants, Stones
and other things near the Ground; which at first is more liquid, and after ward
the thinner parts resolved it becomes harder, and having attained its
consistency, it is coagulated into certain grains. For although some hold, and
among them Christophorus a Vega Lib. 2. de Art. Med. Sect. 3. cap. 11. That
Manna is the work of certain small bees resembling large Gnats, from which Bees
sitting in swarms upon the Trees the Manna drops down like sweat: yet most
likely it is, that these small Creatures are rather drawn thither by the
sweetness of the Manna, then that they make the same. There is much bred in the
East, because of the purity of the Air and a certain moderation of heat and
cold in those parts. It Is not bred in cold places: there is little bred in
Italy, save in Calabria, from whence it is carried as a commodity into other
parts.

Now whether that Manna wherewith the Israelites were fed forty years in the
Wilderness, was the same with this of ours, Authors vary. Vallesius in his B.
Whether our manna be the same which the Israelites had.
de Sacra Philosoph. chap. 57. and other later writers hold it was the same
kind of thing. Many things said of that Manna of the Hebrews, Exodus 16. Numb.
11. do also agree to this of ours: yet herein that disagrees from ours, because
thereof, (beaten or ground.) Cakes or Cracknels were made. For our Manna is not
of such an hardness. But however herein all agree, that many things which
happened touching the Hebrews Manna cannot be attributed to Natural Causes, but
only to the infinite power of the most good and great God.

But vulgar Honey differs little from Manna, Common honey what it is, how
differing from manna, and how generated.
and the matter of both is one and the same, save that the matter of Manna is
thicker, more compact and Earthy; but that of Honey more subtle and more
digested. For Honey is a certain Dew, gathered by Bees, and receiving
alteration from the little bladders they have within them, and afterward
stored up by them in little cells in manner of a pure Liquor, wherein
afterward it works like new Wine; and is by its Natural heat concocted, and
grows thick, as Aristotle relates in his 5. de Histor. Animal. Cap. 22. and
Pliny in Not. Hist. L. 1. Cap. 13.

Honey is chiefly gathered by Bees both wild and domestic: Yea and Drones also
and other insects, being much of the Nature of Bees, do gather Honey, out of
all Herbs which have hollow flowers like Cups, and out of others wherein there
is any sweetness: which is done without any detriment to the slowers. You have
more of the Nature of Bees and Honey in the same place of Aristotle, and in
Plinies B. 21. Not. Hist. from chap. 5. to the 16.

Chap. 9. Of the Rainbow, False Suns and Moons, strakes in the Sky, and
Circles about the Moon.
AFter Clouds and such things as are of them engendered, there remain to be
handled certain things appearing in them, called Phantasmata, apparitions; such
as are the Rainbow, the Halo or bright Circle, and other like Images. And to
begin with the Iris or Rainbow, which they say has its Name ab Eirein to tell,
because it foretells Rain or Fair weather, (and therefore it is by Poets termed
Junos Messenger, What the Rainbow is?
) It is a bow of three colors, in a Dewy cloud, caused by the beams of the Sun
or Moon opposite to the said Cloud, and therein refract and reflexed.

And that it may be better understood what the Nature of a Rainbow is, all the
members of the definition must be weighed. The subject of a Rainbow is a dewy
vapor, or a Dewy Cloud, which is beginning to be resolved into drops or Rain;
but it is not yet Rain, only it is condensed into little drops like dew or the
Water which a man blows abroad out of his mouth half shut. For a continued
Cloud is not the subject of a Rainbow; but those parts thereof which do no
longer hang together, but being by the cold straitened and condensed are every
where distant one from another, divided into very many small drops, which are
like little Looking-Glasses, and are of a middle Nature betwixt a perfect Rain
and a Cloud.

Now that the Rainbow cannot be made in any continued vapor, The subject of
the Rain how.
but that it may be generated in many little round Bodies, is demonstrated from
the rules of Optics concerning the Nature of reflection. We shall only here
produce what experience teaches. Let a man stand with the hind part of his Head
to the Sun, and with his mouth or other Instrument let him throw water into the
beams of the Sun, so that the Water may lose its continuity, and be resolved
into very many very small drops: which being performed, a Rainbow as it were
will appear in those little drops, which represent the rorid Vapor. The same
may be observed when the Water is scattered by Oars, or falling violently upon
a stone it is scattered into the Sunbeams. And though the rorid Cloud, which
is the subject of a Rainbow, is no longer continued; yet to us it appears
continued, by Reason of the Vicinity of the parts, and its overgreat distance
from us.

The efficient Cause of a Rainbow, The efficient cause of a Rain bow
are the beams of the Sun and Moon, broken and reflected in these drops. And
that reflection is altogether necessary to the making of a Rainbow, hence
appears; because both the incident Rays and the refract do go into the part
opposite to the lightsome Body, nor do they pass on to the part seen by the
lightsome Body; nor to the sight, which is averse from the lightsome Body
in-such as behold the Rainbow, can they come, unless they be reflected.
Therefore in the same manner, as we see in looking-Glasses the Images of things
behind us, even so the rays of the Sun or Moon are reflected in those little
looking-Glasses.

Howbeit, It Is necessary that there be also refraction. For when as a Ray of
the Sun or Moon comes to the first drop of the Vapor, it pierces the same being
through nearness of the Sun not yet much condensed, yet so as that it is
refracted. From thence going to another hindermore drop, which is thick enough,
it is presently reflected, if no other drop of a rorid vapor stand before the
same: but if any such drop stand in the way, the beam is first refracted, and
afterward so refracted it is reflected to our sight. Also many Rays are
refracted in many obvious drops; and whiles they fall in, and pierce through
diverse thinner drops to one thicker, in which they are reflected; then by such
a like drop they are again reflected. For every Ray, as well the incident as the
reflect, is twice refract in such a drop. First, Toward a perpendicular line,
when it enters the drop; because it falls out of the thinner Air into a thicker
Rorid Vapor: afterward, it is disjoined from the perpendicular, when it goes
again out of a thick drop into the thin Air.

The Rainbow therefore is bred, when some rorid Cloud is in making, and begins
to be resolved into very many small drops, and to be condensed into Water: Which
drops are yet nevertheless more thin, and not quite turned into Water, so as to
fall down. For if the Sun or Moon shine just opposite thereupon, the lucid
beams being variously refracted in these drops, and reflected to our fight in
form of a Pyramid, their light being confused and mixed with the Heat and shadow
of the drops, they present unto our sight a colored Bow.

Now most Rain-bows are caused by the Sun, few by the Moon. A Sun and a Moon
Rain bow.
And therefore Aristotle tells us, that in the space of fifty years there were
but two Moon Rainbows seen. For to the making of a Moon Rainbow, besides a
fitting vapor, it is requisite that the Moon be in the full; otherwise its
beams are too weak; also that it be near the Horizon: al which do seldom sall
out. In the Year 1599 foregoing, at Mid Summer, after great Thunder, Lightning,
Thunderbolts and Rain in the Night, betwixt the North and East we saw a
remarkable Rainbow, which might compate with some Sun-Rain-bows, in the
Brightness and Beauty of its Colors. Now why only the Sun and Moon make
Rain-Bows, the Reason is, Why the Rain bow is made only by the Sun and Moon.
because the beams of these Stars only can reach Cross the Horizon to the
Clouds, and be from thence reflected; those of the Sun because they are most
strong; those of the Moon because they are near at hand. But the Beams of the
other Stars are either too weak or too far off. Or if they be so strong as to
be able to reach cross the Diameter of the world to the Clouds: yet are they
not so strong as to be reflected to our sight. For reflect Lights are weaker
then those that shoot their Beams directly, according to the Rules of Optics.

Now why only the Colors and not the Image of the Sun or Moon appears in these
Looking-glasses, there is a Threefold Cause. First, Why only colors and not the
image it self of the Sun and Moon appear.
because the Cloud is not a continued Body, but resolved into very little drops
or Optic Glasses. For in so small Glasses the Images also are very small, which
being afterward reflected are so weak, as that they appear not distinct, but
confused. Again, the Rays are of themselves weakened before they come from the
Luminous Body to the sight. Finally add hereto the blackness of the Cloud. For
the rorid vapor, because it begins to be resolved into water, assumes a
certain blackness and Watery Color, which being mingled with the Light, makes
that the Image of the Sun or Moon cannot distinctly appear, but rather a Color.

Now the diversity of Colors in the Rainbow springs from hence, The Colors of
the Rain bow.
because some rays enter more deeply into the dewy Vapor, and are reflected
by the remoter droplets, others are reflected from meaner vapors and resting
in the surface of the Cloud, by which are made diverse reflexive pyramides,
having bases equally distant. Now the Colors are three, red which is the
upmost, or outmost, and is bred of the greater splendour, and the rays of that
reflexive pyramid, whose basis is of all others nearest our sight: and
therefore its Rays are also strongest. Now because the Light is bright
shining, and the Water blackish, the Color appears neither white nor black,
but a reddish Color betwixt both. The next Color is a Leekgreen; which is the
middlemost in the Rain bow, this is caused by the Rays reflected from a more
deep part of the vapor; and therefore it inclines more to blackness. For the
Rays also themselves are weaker, because reflected from a place more remote;
and that vapor because it is farther from the Sun, is more compact, and comes
nearer to the Nature of Water then the former. Hitherto also the shadows do
very much contribute, which are shed from the former droplets or small glasses
upon the hindermore, with which the rays reflected from the hindemore are
mingled. Of which we have an example in the colors that are in the necks of
Doves, arising from the Sunbeams. For these colors are bred from the shadows
that being sent from the Feathers are mingled with the Suns light. The third is
the Purple, which is the internal, and arises from the Rays reflected from a
place yet more remote; and for the same reasons why the Second is blacker then
the First, the Third is blacker then the Second.

And although there may be more then these three Colors in a Rainbow; yet
because for the said Reasons the Blackness is more and more increased, after
the third no Color can be perceived: and not only the reflected Rays are so
weak that they cannot reach to our sight; but the Light also is so darkened by
the Blackness of many shadows, that it is hardly discernable by the sight. Now
the fourth Color which they call yellow, and is seen betwixt the first and
second, is no new Color, but arises from the Neighborhood of those two. Now
the Lunary Rainbow is whiter then the Solar: The Moon Rain bow whiter then
that of the Sun.
because the Light it self of the Moon is paler then that of the Sun; again,
because the shadows which are by the foremore drops cast upon the hindermore
are not so obscure and dark, as those cast by the Light of the Sun. For the
shadow of a stronger Light is blacker, and contrariwise. Add also hereto the
darkness of the night. For that which is of its own Nature Blackish, if it be
set by a more black thing, it appears whiter.

But why the Circumference only of a Circle appears and not the whole and
entire Body thereof, the cause is: forasmuch as that part only of any
irradiated Body is seen, from which the Rays are reflected to the same center
of sight, according to equal Angles, and of a radiated cloud nothing is seen
but what is carried by Rays collected in the same point of the Axis wherein
the sight is. But these do only make a bow, as the Teachers of Optics do at
large demonstrate.

Now why the Rainbow never makes a perfect Circle, Why the Rain bow never
makes a perfect Circle.
but either a Semicircle, or an Arch less then a Semicircle; and that it is a
Semicircle when the Luminary is in the Horizon, but an Arch less then a
Semicircle, when the luminary is above the Horizon; and that the Arch is so
much the wider, by how much the Lummary is nearer the Horizon; and so much the
lesser by how much it is nearer the Meridian; the reason thereof is, because
the Center of the lucid Body, of the sight, and of the Rainbow, are always in
one and the same right line. And therefore the Center of the Luminous Body
being placed in the Horizon, in the opposite part of the Horizon will be the
Center of the Rainbow, and so there will be a Semicircle above the Horizon.
But when the Sun is elevated above the Horizon; the Center of the Rainbow is
on the other side depressed; and therefore that Segment of the Circle which is
beneath the Horizon is greater because it contains the Center, and that above
is less. For we see only those things which are above the Horizon And by how
much less of the Diameter of the Rainbow is above the Horizon, so much the
greater is the Circumference of the Circle; and a Semi circle is half of the
lesser Circle of any Arch whatever that is greater, which proceeds from the
Refraction of the beams: because about the Sunrise the Air and vapors are
thicker, which afterward by the directer beams of the Sun are attenuated. And
therefore the Rainbow which is seen through a thicker Medium, appears also
larger. But I pass over these and other things which might be said of
Rain-bows, seeing they cannot be rightly explained without optical
demonstrations and many Diagrams, which must be here for brevities sake
omitted. They may be seen in Aristotle's 3. de Meteor Chapter 4, 5. the writings of
optical Authors, and in the learned Treatise of Johannes Fleischerus, de
Iridibus, wherein he comprehends the Doctrine of Aristotle and Vitellio
concerning Rain-bows, and augments the same with necessary demonstrations.

Of kin to Rain-bows are the false Suns, Falls Suns.
or other Suns placed by the true Sun. Now the Parelios or false Sun, is the
Image of the Sun, received in a Cloud continued, compact, equal, ready to turn
to Water, in its forepart Transparent and Polished as it were; in its hinder
part dark and terminated, and placed obliquely by the Suns side, and reflected
thence to our sight. For look as if a man should set a Looking-Glass slanting
by the side of any thing, he will twice see the Image of the thing: so if a
Smooth cloud like a Looking-Glass be set assant beside the Sun, there will
appear diverse Suns. But Pliny writes that to his time there had never been seen
more then three at once, Hist. Not. B. 2. Chapter 31. Howbeit they report that six
were seen at Papia, before the War. Now these false Suns seldom appear, because
there is seldom found a cloud that has such a disposition and such a Posture
to the Sun.

After the same manner is caused the Paraselene or false Moon, The Paraeselene
or sats Moon.
which herein only differs from a Parelios, that the former is an Image of the
Sun, this latter of the Moon. Now the Images of these two Stars only are
reflected to us; because their Rays are the strongest. Yea and a false Moon
never appears but when the Moon is in the full, when her Light is most plentiful
and strong.

Hither also are to be referred the Virgae or Rods so called, Rods, and strakes
in the Sky.
which are as it were certain lines and long Pillars, which appear of diverse
colors, in an uneven cloud, placed on one side of the Sun, arising from the
beams thereof refracted. For such straks are engendered, when an uneven cloud,
which has some parts thicker and as it were of a waterish Nature, and others
thinner, is placed beside the Sun. For when the Sunbeams fall thereinto, they
cannot pierce equally because of the diversity of the parts; nor do they appear
contiguous, but rather disjoined, and in the hinder parts, through which they
penetrate, refracted; and so they represent diverse colors: after the same
manner as the Sunbeams coming through chinks into a close Chamber, they
represent lightsome Lines. Now the colors are not the same, but various
according to the diverse disposition of the parts wherein the Rays are
received, which in thinner parts appear more light and white, in thicker more
black and dark. Now these Rods or Strakes do appear for the most part, when the
Sun rises or when he sets, but never at Noon tide; for then his Beams are so
strong, that they easily attenuate and pierce into thickest Vapors.

Finally, There is seen in the Clouds the Halo, Hale the Circle about the Sun,
Moon etc.
which is by the Author of the Book de Mundo thus desined, Cap. 4. Halo is a
shining Circle, under the Sun, Moon, or other cl^ar Star, appearing just
betwixt us and the Star, made by the Beams thereof there refracted. For this
same Circle is made when the stronger beams of some Star fall into a cloud
equally spungy, which in regard of the Spunginess can indeed pass through, yet
are refracted therein because of the thickness of the Air, and being refracted
to even Angles they make a Crown. Now in the Center of the Crown the Star
appears which is the cause thereof; because the straight Rays are stronger,
and do more attenuate, Rarisie, and Illuminate the cloud. Now this kind of
Crown appears most commonly a nights. But the vehement heat of the Sun
dissipates the Vapor, and makes it more rare, so as it is unfit to refract the
Sunbeams, by which means such a colored circle might arise. Now the Sky must be
calm, that the Halo may be seen. For a cloud moved and variously agitated can
neither retain an equal disposition of parts, nor present a certain color by
the refracted Rays.

Chap. 10. Of Fountains.
BUt that we may at last finish our Doctrine of Meteors, let us speak somewhat
in the last place of Fountains and of the Sea. Aristotle his opinion of the
original of Fountains.
The opinion of Aristotle is commonly known touching the original of Fountains:
how that Air and Exhalations in the Caverns of the Earth do by the coldness of
the place lose their heat, grow thick, and are turned into water: after the
same manner as in the middle Region of the Air, of vapors condensed, Rain is
engendered; which afterward descending, and from many places gathered into one,
and there flowing out become a Fountain: whose continual running is maintained
by new Air daily succeeding in the Room of the former to avoid Vacuity, and
afterward changed into Water.

But in good deed if we understand this Opinion of his concerning all Rivers,
it is not true. For though we should grant that some Water may be made of
Vapors condensed in the Caverns of the Earth, and that this may happily give
beginning to some Fountains: yet we cannot be brought to think, that so much
Water is this way generated, as to supply all the Fountains and Rivers that run
upon the Earth. For since it is apparent, how great a Quantity of Air is
required to make a little Water, and how much space those vapors take up of
which a little Rain is bred; where will there be so many and so large Caverns,
wherein so many Vapors, and so much Air, can be collected for the production of
so many and so great Rivers? Also a reason of the perpetual Course of Rivers
can hardly be rendered according to this opinion; seeing there is not always
the same plenty of Vapors. Much less can a Reason be given why many Fountains
Issue from the tops of the highest Mountains.

Let us therefore rather embrace that opinion which is the most ancient of all,
The true opinion.
which the Preacher in Bccles. 1. v. 7. comprehends in these words: All Rivers
run into the Sea, and the Sea Flows not over; the Rivers return to the places
from whence they came, that they may flow again; And let us hold with very many
most learned men, that Fountains and Rivers as they run into the Sea, so have
they their Original from thence. For otherwise the continual running of Rivers
cannot be made forth, not a cause be given, why the Sea receiving perpetually
so many Rivers runs not over: or how Fountains come to arise from the tops of
highest Mountains. And unless the Rivers had their Original from the Sea, Why
the Sea flows not over.
it could not be but the Sea must run over. For the Rivers have some proportion
to the Bulk of the Sea, seeing some of them are poured with such violence and
in so great plenty into the Sea, that for the space of many miles together they
afford in the Continent sweet Waters to the Mariners, amidst the Sea Waters.
Nor can the Sun or Winds consume so much thereof as does flow in; but the Sea
repairs its detriment which it receives in common with the Rivers from the Sun
and Wind, out of the Air, in the Nights. Also many Fountains have many things
common with the Sea. Pliny writes in Not. Hist. Book 2. Oh. 103. of Jupiters
Fountain in Dodona, that it was always dry at Noon; and from thence the Water
increased, till at Midnight it overflowed, and after that it deceased by
little and little. And he relates in the same place, How that overagainst the
River Timavus there was a small Island in the Sea, with hot Fountains in it
which Ebd and flowed as the Sea. Nor does Plato seem to have been averse to
this Opinion, who in his Dialogue called Phaedo writes, that there is an hollow
place in the Earth, into which all Rivers run, and out of which they run back
again.

Hence also a cause may easily be rendered, Why Founains arise ^om the ^ps of
highest Hills?
why Fountains arife on the highest tops of Mountains. For since the Globe of
the Earth is round, and the store and weight of the Sea Water is great: it may
easily by its weight thrust the water which flows through the veins of the
Earth into the highest Mountains. And whereas the Fountain waters are not Salt,
though the Sea is Salt, and that they have great diversity in qualities,
springs from hence; because the Sea Water being strained through many turnings
and Veins in the Earth, loses its saltness, and receives other qualities out of
the Caverns of the Earth through which it runs and flows. Now the difference of
Fountains is great; for some are used instead of drink, and others for Physic.
The former are more simple, the latter more compound.

Metal line or Mineral Waters are those, Mineral waters what?
which have in them the spirits or smallest particles of Minerals, Metals, and
Subterranean Juyces, and differ from other ordinary potable Waters, in Smell,
Taste, Color, and therefore are not used for drink, They are twofold.
but only as Physic. Now these Waters are of two kinds; some have in them the
very Bodies of Minerals and Mineral Juyces, such as are Salt Waters,
vitriolated Waters, Alum Waters, out of which the water being boiled away,
Salt, Vitriol, and Alum are drawn; nor may they conveniently be used as baths.
But some contain in them the Spirits of Metals, and therefore in regard of the
very great active and penetrating Faculty which they have, they are Medicinally
used, both to drink and to Bathe in; such are the hot Baths, the acid and
brackish Waters.

Now whence these Waters have their faculties, Whence metalline waters have
their virtue.
Authors are not agreed. Some conceive they have their Virtue from the Minerals
and Metals through which they flow. But this is not likely to be true. For
since the Bodies of Metals are so compact, the Water which flows over them
cannot so easily draw in their Forces; and if Mineral and Metalline Waters did
thus gain their Virtues, we should have more of them. This indeed is true, that
Minerals, as Vitriol, Alum, and such like, are corporeally mixed with the
Water; and therefore they are separated from the Waters by boiling: Howbeit
those Waters wherewith the Minerals are mixed only Bodily, do not gain those
Virtues which the true Mineral Waters have, out of which the Metalline Bodies
cannot be separated. But Merals cannot communicate their Faculties to Waters,
only by the Waters running over them.

And Experience does witness that many springs breaking out of high Hills do
bring out with them Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, Lapis Lazuli, the
Armenian Stone; and yet they have no faculty of any of those Metals which they
carry and drive forth, but may be drunk as ordinary Waters.

Moreover if those Waters should gain their Virtues only by washing the Metals
in their Course; the Virtues of the next Veins through which they flow had been
long since exhausted: whereas nevertheless these Waters have had the same
Virtues for many Ages together, and do still retain the same. Moreover out of
those metalline Waters no Metals can be drawn forth, either by distillation,
boiling or any other way.

Most likely therefore it is, that those waters take their Virtues from the
first matter of the Metals, which is a subtle, Fluid, and spirituous
substance, not yet compacted nor coagulated into a solid Metalline Body. For
these spirits of the Metals are mixed with the waters, and communicate all
their Vartues to them. For as out of Vitriol, Sulphur, Yea and Metals
themselves, by force of Fire spirits are drawn, which being mingled with water
do communicate their Virtues thereunto: even so Nature also, in that great
Circulatory the Earth, in the generation of Metals produces spirits, which
being mixed with neighboring Waters and such as run by, do bestow their
Virtues upon them.

Nor does a less difficulty occur in searching the Cause of hot Baths. The
Cause of the heat of Baths.
Some attribute the Cause to the Suns heat, others to winds gathering hot
Exhalations into one place: but without any probability. Others think they have
their heat from the Lapis Calcarius or Chalk Stone so called. But neither is
this probable. For the Lapis Calcarius does not heat water unless it be first
reduced into Lime by Fire. And suppose that those Stones were Calcined by the
Fire under ground, yet could not that heat be perpetually continued. For after
that the Limestone is once soaked in Water, it will afterward no more become
hot.

Others therefore do more probably deduce the cause of the heat of Baths from
the Fire which is in the Bowels of the Earth, and that the Waters do either run
through those hot places underground, or that in the way they are joined to the
Fire and flame, or that they run so long near or over the Channels of Fire, as
to grow hot thereby; or whiles the Earth is made hot by subterranean Fires,
many Vapors are from thence lift up, which at last in some wide place turn to
water, and some where or other seek their way out. Which they declare by this
example. Let salt water be mixed with Potters Clay, and make a round Globe of
the said Clay, hollow within, whereinto put a Pipe, and stop the hole with Clay
whereinto the Pipe is put; then put the Globe upon the Fire, with the Pipe from
the Fire. When the Globe Waxes hot, hot Salt Water will flow out of the Globe
through the Pipe.

Howbeit, some there are, who though they allow this manner of generation in
many places; Yet seeing in all places where there are hot Baths there are not
signs of any Subterranean Fire; and moreover there are Baths found, whose heat
vanishes away, if you dig a little to find their original: wherefore they
conceive it probable, that some hot Baths are caused by two or more metalline
Waters, which are cold to the touch, of their own Nature, but upon their
meeting together they grow hot by the Repugnancy of Spirits. An example whereof
is seen in spirits of Vitriol and Oil or Salt of Tartar; also in Aquafortis and
Tartar. Butter of Autimony and Spirit of Nitre: which though to the touch they
are cold: yet if they are mixed they grow hot; and that in such a measure, as
if suddenly you pour Oil of Tartar upon Aqua fortis wherein Iron has been
dissolved, it will not only boil but take flame: which also will happen, if you
suddenly pour a quantity of spirit of Nitre upon Butter of Antimony so called.
And therefore they conceive it rational, that when two springs consisting of a
mixture of such Repugnant spirits do meet and mix together, that the water
should by that means wax hot.

Now concerning the Sea, Authors are wont in the Doctrine of Meteors to handle
two questions principally, one concerning the Saltness of the Sea. another
touching its Ebbing and flowing. The Cause of the Seas. Saltness.
Touching the Seas saltness the opinions of the Ancients were many, which
Aristotle refutes in his 2. Meteor. Cap. 3. We in this point follow Aristotle,
and hold that the Sea water is not Salt of its own Nature, but that it becomes
such by the admixture of some Salt thing; which also is seen in Ley. Which also
may be gathered from that which Aristotle in the forecited place, and Pliny in
Not. Hist. Lib. 31. Cap. 6. deliver, how that hollow balls of Wax let down by
Nets into the Sea, and empty vessels stopped, they gather into themselves fresh
Water. For many Earthy Salt Exhalations do both fall into the Sea in showers,
and flow thereinto with Rivers: also the Sun exhals out of the Sea the moister
and sweeter parts of the Water, leaving behind the more heavy and Earthy. And
therefore on the top the Sea is salter, then toward the bottom, because the
Sun does more exhale the sweet parts out of the Surface: also the Sea is salter
in the Summer then in the Winter, and more in the Eastern and Southern parts
then elsewhere; because in those places the Sun becams are stronger.

As to the Ebbing and flowing of the Sea, The Ebbing and flowing of the Sea how
caused?
there is very great difficulty, chiefly caused by the very great variety which
is in the said Motion. For in some places there is no such motion, or it is
scarce discernable: in other places it is so great, that vast shores lie bare,
and there are places to go over dry, which were before covered with Water: in
some places the motion is flow, in other places so quick, that in the space of
an hour or two many miles will be covered with the Flood, and as many bared by
the Ebb, so that men can hardly run fast enough to save themselves from the
fury of the Tide coming in. Nor does this motion keep the same time in all
places. For the most part, it flows six hours and Ebbs as many. Yet in some
places is flows seven hours and Ebbs five: in others, it flows four hours and
Ebbs eight. In which Variety nevertheless there is this regularity, that the
Ebbing and flowing together last but twelve hours. In very many places the
greatest floods are at full moon; yet in some places they happen at new Moon.
Touching which variety of this Motion, you may read in Cardan, Lib. 2. Subtle.
p. 168. Scaliger. in Exercit. 52. Caspar Contarenus in Lib. 2. de Elementis.
Collegium Conimbric. de Met. Tr. 8. Cap. 4.

Now touching the Cause of this motion there are so many several opinions, that
you can hardly tell which to assent unto. Wherefore not without Cause J. C.
Scaliger in his 52 Exercit. thus writes: My common saying which I use every
where, That we know nothing, is most seasonable in this disquisition
touching-the Motion of the Sea. And a little after. Who will not say that
Philosophy her self can but stutter in this point? When he shall see almost in
the same shoars, that it is high water at Calicut when the Moon is full, and at
the shoars of the River Indus, when the Moon is new. This is a point of
subtilty which thou ought to have searched into, O Cardan; which if thou
can unfold unto us, I will consent that thou be counted the god of
Philosophers. You will askme, what say you to the matter? I? I did nothing but
expect to hear from you. But seeing you appear not in this Point, I dare no. so
much as expect my self. And therefore if so great a Philosopher does here
confess his own Ignorance, what can we promise after him save to reckon up the
opinions of some Authors.

Julius Caesar Scaliger therefore attributes the force hereof to the Moon, and
divides half the Heaven which is turned about in twelve hours, into two
Quadrants, and that during the one the Waters do follow the Moon to the middle
of Heaven six hours, and as many more they fall back, being driven by the
repulse of the shoars. But whether the increase of the Sea be caused by
rarefaction, or by addirion of new substance, he dares not determine; only he
says, the Sea Waters do follow the Moon, and that they are suspended thereby
as the Iron by the Loadstone. And herein most Authors are agreed, that the
Motion of the Seas Ebb and flow depends upon the Moon, and that it is
terminated in twelve hours. And that because the Moon does not always rise in
the same place, nor is also always at the same time carried above the Horizon,
therefore the Ebbing and flowing does not observe the same time. Now that this
motion depends on the Moon, besides what has been said, this seems also to be
a sign, viz. That the Flood comes every day an hour later; because the Moon
returns to the same place in about the space of twenty five hours. Now Scaliger
in the same place endeavors to render a Reason of that variety, of swiftness,
and Cessation in some places, and of other things seen in this Motion; from the
various Situation of places, the highness and lowness of the shoars, the
greatness and narrowness of the Sea, the even Plainness of its Course, or the
many turnings, windings and straits, and the Nature and depth of the bottom.

Contarenus conceives, that when the Sea flows the waters are rarisied and
sowel and are on all sides poured out to the shores; and that in the Ebb the
Waters are condensed and contracted into themselves and so leave the shoars;
and that the rarefaction proceeds from Heat, the force of which heat depends
upon the Moon. And to explain the time of this motion, he divides the Heaven
into four equal parts, with the two greatest Circles, the Meridian and right
Horizon, upon which when the Moon ascends toward the Meridian, the water swells
and is poured abroad; for then the beams of the Moon have greatest force: but
when the Moon is moved from the Meridian to the occidental Horizon, the water
flows back again, and gathers it self into it self, because of the weakness of
the Rays of the Moon. But why, when the Moon is moved from the Occidental part
of the Horizon, unto that part of the Meridian which is beneath the Horizon,
the Water should swel again, and afterward decrease when the Moon goes from
the Subterranean Meridian to the oriental Horizon, he faies he can find no
probable cause himself, nor can see any made out by others. Also he professes
the Cause is to him unknown, why in some places there is no Ebbing or flowing
of the Sea.

Taurellus holds thus: The Sea disburthening it self into the inmost parts of
the Earth, is the cause that the Waters with great violence flow from all the
shoars round about to that Gulf or inlet. For there where the Sea empties its
Waters into the Cavities of the Earth, there also it is depressed and falls,
that the other Waters may from all parts creep thither, which (the Caverns of
the Earth being filled) being gathered from all sides into one place, according
to the Largness of the Sea and the force of the Waters it is raised alost, and
afterward settles by degrees, and returns to the shoars formerly forsaken, an
addition also of Waters being made from the Rivers. Thus the whole bosom of
the Sea is filled with Waters, til the upper Cavities of the Earth being
emptied they require more Water of the Sea, to swallow up after the foresaid
manner.

THE FIFTH BOOK. Of Minerals and Metalls.
Chap. 1. Of Earths:
AFter Meteors, we are next to discouse of Bodies perfectly mixed. Now Bodies
perfectly mixed are of two sorts: some lifeless, others living, The lifeless
are Metals. For by that word all things bred in and digd out of the Earth are
understood, as appears by the preface of Dioscorides to his Fifth Book. Late
Writers call them in general Minerals: because the Quarries and Pits whence
they are digd are termed Mines.

Now concerning the Nature of all these kind of things, Whence Minerals have
their forms?
this is first to be known; that many men conceive, that these Minerals and
Metals contain nothing in them besides Elements, and that they are only simply
mixed bodies: but herein they are mistaken. For their operations are of a far
other Nature, then that they can be deduced from the Elements alone. And
therefore Scaliger says rightly in his Exercitation 137. Sect. 20. That every
form of a perfectly mixed Body, although it is no Soul, (as for example that of
an Adamant) is a fifth Nature far different from the four Elements. And in his
Exercitat. 101. Sect. 14. he reprehends Cardan for believing, that only by the
mixture of the Elements it can come to pass that the Lodestone can draw Iron.
For even these things have also, that I may so speak, their Seminary forms and
Virtues, put into them by God at their first Creation; nor were they made after
the Creation of the world, by the various conflict of the Elements, but were
created by God; and by those forms they are perpetuated; and from those forms
proceeds not only the forming of their Bodies, (which is no less admirable then
in some plants,) and their wonderful Virtues, but also their Propagation and
Perpetuation. For the form of Minerals and Metals can multiply it self; and
those Bodies have in their Creation a power given them by God to multiply
themselves in a fitting matter and a convenient place. Which even Nitre does
teach us. For though out of Nitrous Earth the Salt be once extracted by
boiling: yet out of the Mother of Nitre, as they call it, new Nitre is
generated; and that not once only, but very often; which our Saltpeter men now
a days know very well. Nor was it unknown to the Ancients, as appears from
Pliny, B. 31. Cap. 10. where he writes, that the froth of Nitre was made, when
the Dew had fallen, the Nitre Mines being Pregnant, but having not as yet
brought forth. By reason of which form it comes also to pass, that though in
these Minerals there is a mutation in their external form, so that they are
reduced into Pouders, or Liquors, or Glasses: yet they nevertheless easily
return into a Metalline Body; because their internal form continues safe and
sound, as may be seen in Mercury, Antimony, Lead and other things. And
therefore when the Question is touching the Generation of Minerals and Metals;
it is not enough to have recourse to those Vapors mentioned in the Doctrine of
Meteors, but there is need of more determinate and Specific principles.

Now what these are, cannot in general be well explained. For there is great
variety of Minerals, which must first be propounded. Now they are by others
otherwise divided. I think fit in this place to retain the division of Albertus
Magnus, who makes three kinds of them, Stones, Metalls, and Middle Natured
Minerals; by which Name he comprehends all the rest, which have a certain
middle Nature betwixt Stones and Metals.

And that we may begin with the last kind, it contains many things under it;
Earths, Stones, Sulphurs, Bitumens, and some things mixed of these, coming
nearer the Nature of Metals. As for what concerns Earths, we do not thereby
understand the simple Element, nor yet that Earth which is every where plowed
up by Husbandmen, and which is fit to sow Corn and to set Herbs in: which
though it be not simple, yet it comes nearer to the Nature of the Element of
Earth, then the Metalline Earths do. Although here also is great variety, and
some ground partakes little or nothing, another partakes much of a Metalline
Nature. Now that many grounds partake much of Minerals does hereby appear, in
that when they are burnt they send forth a Sulphurous Vapor, as Metals and
Minerals are wont to do. But by earth in this place, we understand a Body digd
out of the ground, which partakes of a Mineral Nature, and which (water being
thrown on it) dissolves, and turns to Clay.

Among these kind of Earths the most vulgar is Argilla and Potters Clay;
Potters Clay and Argilla.
which is a Clammy Earth, and breaks not when it is molded, nor chops when it
is dried. There is also great variety hereof, according to which the Vessels
differ, which are made not only for Kitchen uses, but for other House
occasions, and for the use of Goldsmiths that melt Metals, and for Chemists.
For of every kind of Clay all Vessels cannot be made, and one sort will endure
the Fire better then another: also one sort will be molded more delicate, thin
and fine then another. Whence the excellency of Potters Clay is estimated.

After Argilla and the several sorts of Potters Claies comes Marga or Marle.
Marga, Marle.
Now this is a Fat Earth, being as it were the fatness of the ground, and the
name comes from the High Dutch, and it is called Steinmarck as if you would say
the Marrow of Stones; and it is found shut up amongst Stones. Now there are
sundry kinds thereof; Pliny reckons six, White, Red, Dove colored, Clayish,
Stoney, and Gravelly. And of each of these there are again many different
sorts. It Is found in many parts of Germany, and among them the Marle of
Rochlich is most famous; which they use in the stead of Bole-Armeniack.

To Earths also belongs Creta Chalk, by which name also Earths are understood,
which are used to Polish, Cleanse, Rub, Paint and Color. There are many kinds
thereof, yet because it is chiefly digd up in the Island of Creta, therefore
all sorts have borrowed their Name from it.

There are also many other kinds of Earth, which are used partly by Physicians,
partly by other Mechanical Artists, which differ in Rarity or Spunginess, in
Clamminess, in color, taste and use. And as to their Medicinal use; some bind
cool and dry, as the Eretrian, Samian, Lemnian, Armenian: some with their
astriction have a certain biting quality, either from Nitre, as the Chian,
Selinusian, Cimolian, and Pignitis, which are Abstersive or Scouring; or from
Alum, as the Melian Earths, and the Clay of many Baths, which are good for the
Gout and Malignant Ulcers: or they have in them some quantity of Bitumen and of
Sulphur. Also there are some Earths which give a black Tincture fit to make
Ink, as Calcitis, Mysi, Sori, and Copperas.

The most renowned among these Earths are Terra Lemnia and Bole-Armeniack.
Terra Lemnia Sigillate.
The former is so called from the Island wherein it is found. Also it is called
Terra Sigillata or sealed Earth, from the Seal imprinted thereupon. Galen avers
that he saw with his own Eyes a certain hill near the City Ephestiades, wherein
no plant grows, the soil being as it were burnt up, of a red color, out of
which the Earth is digd. Also that there were three differences thereof: that
one was of a red color, but not staining the hands, being the most excellent
of all, which the Priest might only touch, as a sacred thing; and he sealed it
with Diana her signet, which was the Picture of a Goat: the other was red Oker
which did color the hands of the touchers; the third was used to scour
Clothes, because of its clensing faculty. Those who at this day sail to the
Island of Lemnos, do say that it is gathered in the Dog-daies in a moorish
ground, that it is signed with a certain Seal and sent to the great Turk, and
that therefore it is hard to come by, and not publicly sold. But these sealed
Cakes have not all the marks of the old Terra Lemnia. Now the old Terra Lemnia
had an excellent Faculty to resist the Plague and Malignant Diseases.

Bole Armeniack or Earth of Armenia was brought out of that part of Armenia
which is next to Cappadocia. Bole-Armeniack.
It was of a pale color, would quickly be reduced to fine powder like as Chalk
will, being held in the Mouth it would melt like Butter: it was drying and
binding; and therefore it was used for the Dysentery, the looseness of the
Belly, and spitting of Blood; for Catarrhes, and Ulcers of the Lungs: also it
was good against the Plague.

Moreover there are many other Earths, Eretria, Samia, Selinusia, Chia,
Cimolia, Pignites, Melia, Rubrica, and Sinopica, Precious Earths so called most
of them from the places where they were dug. Of which see Pliny Book 35. Chapter
16. and 17.

And indeed the Ancients used such Earths as were then known to them, and were
^rought out of neighboring places; and seeing we have hardly now any certain
notice of many of them, and the Quarries of the Ancients by injuries of time
and the change of Empires are either unknown or exhausted, and every where in
other places and in our Countries the like Earths are found: it is better to
ascribe the Virtues of these Earths to the kind then the place, and to value
every one according to its own Nature, and to try the Virtues of Earths by
Experiments.

For there is in Hungaria Bolus Tockaviensis, Bolus Tockevienfis.
which Crato in his Epistles tells us that it will melt in the louth like
Butter, and has all the signs of true Bole-Armeniack, and is very good against
Catarrhs; and he prefers it far before the Bole-Armeniack which we have at this
day, yea before that which was brought the Emperor out of Turkey. He says he
found by experience that it holp many of the Plague at Vienna.

Moreover there is the Terra Sigillata of Silesia, Terra sigill at a of Silesia.
which is preferred before the Ferra Lemnia and the Turkish Earths which we
have at this day. For it is now proved by many experiments, that it has rare
Virtues against the Plague, Malignant Fevers, the bitings of Venomous Beasts,
the looseness, and the Bloody flux. The Chemists call it Axungia Solis. The
finder out thereof was Johannes Montanus a Silesian, who published a Writing or
Treatise concerning the same, how that Gold was changed by the ordination of
God and Provident Nature into a most excellent prepared Medicine, especially
good against Poisons, no less then those Medicaments which are made with great
Cost of Hungarian Gold. And if that be true, I wonder why it is dissoled rather
with Spirit of Vitriol then Spirit of Salt.

There is also found another about Lignitium and Gold-berg in Silefia, which
the Chemists term Axungia Lunae: and in many other places other such Earths are
found. And therefore, as I said before, these kind of Earths are not so much to
be esteemed according to the places, as their own peculiar Natures. And because
they have all their Virtues from Minerals and Metals, when we would judge of the
Virtues of any sort of Earth, we must consider with what Mineral or Metal it
has affinity. And now we proceed to other things of this kind.

Chap. 2. Of Salts.
AS concerning Salt, there are many kinds thereof. First, There is common Salt:
which again is threefold: digd Salt, Sea Salt, and that which is boiled out of
Salt Fountains. The Original of Salt
Now what the original of Salt is, is not so manifest. It Is commonly said to be
engendered of a warty and thick Earthy Juice mingled together. But this does not
sufficiently explain the matter, nor is the cause rendered why it is found only
in some certain places. The more probable opinion and most likely is, that Salt
as other minerals and Metals, was at the beginning of the World created in the
Earth, wherein it still Preserves and Multiplies it self, by a faculty placed
therein by the Creator. For if the simple Elements, in so many Mutations and
Vicissitudes of Sublunary things, do preserve and multiply themselves, and so
remain entire, from the beginning of the world to this very day: I see no
cause, why we should deny the same power to these Bodies. For that which was
before said of Nitre, is true of common Salt. And therefore it is not bred in
all places, but in those only where that spirit, (or Seminary principle, if I
may so call it,) is present; as Nitre is bred only in that Earth, in which there
is the Mother of Saltpeter. And from the principle of Salt, in the Caverns of
the Earth, where there is no great store of moisture, Sal Fossilis or digd Salt
is bred. And according as that matter which by the Principle and spirit of Salt
is coagulated into a Body, is purer or impurer: so this digd Salt is bred purer
or impurer, and some is blackish and dark colored, othersome is white and
transparent like Crystal, which is called Sal Gem.

But if the said principle of Salt be mixed with much humidity and Waters
sliding through the Caverns of the Earth; Salt Fountains, out of which Salt is
boiled do thence arise. Some indeed conceive that Salt Fountains arise from the
Sea. But the Sea Water does not contain so much Salt in it as many Salt
Fountains do; which experience does teach. Nor let any man say, that the Waters
while they flow through the Caverns of the Earth do exhale, and are consumed by
the underground Heat, and that so some Fountains come to be Salter then the
Sea. For if this were so, the Salt Fountains which are farther from the Sea
should contain more Salt in them then those that are nearer, which nevertheless
agrees not with Experience. Others conceive that Salt Fountains proceed from
waters which run through the Caverns of the Earth containing much digd-Salt in
them. But, though this cannot be absolutely denied; yet the question is whence
that ground Salt has its Original and Durability. For if Fountains were made
Salt only by their Waters flowing through ground-Salt, they would not last so
many Ages; but the ground Salt being melted into the Waters would be consumed,
but especially those Fountains would not always afford a like quantity of
Salt, seeing the Salt being melted by the running by of neighboring Waters
would be washed away. Therefore we must of necessity add the Spirit of Salt, the
primary principle of the Generation of Salt.

Sea Salt is made of the Sea water, the Hear of the Sun consuming the Watery
moisture. And if the Heat of the Sun be not sufficient, it is perfected by
Fire: and to make it whiter and purer, it is purged by Solution and
Coagulation. There are also certain Lakes, which by the Heat of the Summers
Sun, turn to Salt, whence we have the Tarentine and Phrygian Salt.

The chief use of Salt is to Season Meats, The use of Salt.
and all the Spice in the world will not make meat pleasant, without Salt. It
Hearts, Dries, Scours, and consumes supersluous moisture, and therefore
preserves from putrefaction. And although it desends from Putrefaction, yet is
it not good in putrid Fevers; not only because it is Hot, but because it dries
too much.

Beside Salt used in food, there is another ground-Salt, Ammonias Salt.
called Armeniacus or Ammoniacus, called so from Ammos the Sand, because it is
found under the Sand congealed into plates, in the Cyrenaick Country. It was
of a blackish color, and ill tasted. And therefore it is now adays out of use;
and Sal Gem is used in stead thereof. But that Sal Armeniack which is commonly
now so called, and which the Chemists use, is made by Art. It is made of five
parts of Man's Urine and one part of common-Salt, and half a part of the Soot of
Wood, boiled together til the moisture be consumed. That which remains is
sublimed, dissolved again and coagulated.

This Salt is extremely volatile, and renders all fixed things volatile, and
therefore Chemists use it in the Solution and Sublimation of Metals. And in
Plants and Animals, since there is found both a fixed and Volatile Salt, the
Volatile is frequently by the Chemists called Sal Armeniac. Concerning Salt see
Pliny Lib. 31. Not. Hist. Cap. 7. and 9. and Dioscorides, Lib. 5. Cap. 85.

Thirdly, Nitre also it self belongs to the family of Salts, Nitre or Salt
Petre.
and it is bred in a peculiar kind of the Earth, upon Walls and Rocks, where it
sprouts out like white down, and therefore it is called Sal-Petrae Saltpeter,
that is Salt of the Rock. Also they relate that it breeds of it self in Asia,
for it drops down in Caves and is gathered and dried afterward in the Sun. The
Lydian is the best, which is known to be true by its lightness and crumbling,
and color almost Purple. This sort is called Aphronitrum, as if you would say,
the froth of Nitre. Also it was bred of its own accord in Macedonia among the
Ancients, by the Coagulation of Water, and they called it Chalasticum, being
white and pure, and the likest to Salt. By Art and boiling it is extracted out
of the Nitrous Earths. Now this same Salt is of a wonderful Nature. For to
sight it appears white; to the touch cold: yet it contains in it a Spirit
exceeding Red, Hot, and extremely apt to take flame, and perfectly of a Fiery
Nature. All the strength of Gun-pouder proceeds from Nitre, only Brim-stone
makes it speedily take fire: yet because all the Sulphur is not inflamed as it
were in a moment, but successively and by parts; but Nitre after it has once
taken Fire suddenly and forcibly burns all away, (and because being set on Fire
it cannot be contained in the Room wherein it was before; and besides the Nitre
and Sulphur are as it were Enemies:) hence comes that same thundering force of
Gunpouder. The Chemists take Nitre well purified before and purify it yet
further, Sal Prunellae.
by casting into it when it is melted over the Fire diverse parcels of Sulphur;
and this they call Nitrum Praeparatum and Sal Prunellae, because it is of rare
use in burning Fevers, especially those wherein the Tongue and Throat is
inflamed, which inflammation is called Prunella. Concerning Nitre see Pliny, in
Hist. Not. Book 31. Chap. 10.

Fourthly, Of the Family of Salts is also Alum, called by the Greeks Stupteria,
Alum.
because of its vehement astringency. For all sorts of Alum do Heat, Bind,
purge putrid Ulcers, dry up moisture, quel proud flesh, and therefore it is
used in many Medicaments ordained for Ulcers. It is found in its mines, and is
extracted by boiling. And where Alum is bred, there commonly is found Vitriol
and Sulphur. And as it is boiled it contains much fattiness in it, which cannot
be separated but by man's Urin, which being poured thereon, it makes it fall to
the bottom. Dioscorides reckons three kinds thereof; Digd-Alum, Round Alum,
Liquid Alum. Kinds of Alum.
There are now more kinds known. The first is Alumen Rupeum or Rochae,
Rock-Alum or Roche-Alum; which Greek word Rocha serves the greatest part of
Europe to signify a Rock, as Scaliger says in Exercit. 104. Sect. 6. Also
they call it Ice-Alum because it is congealed in the form of Ice; and Roman
Alum. This is most used in stead of the Natural sorts, and is made in the Roman
Territory, of a certain Stone burnt. Scaliger, in the place forecited, shows
all the manner of the work. Then there is Alumen Saccbarinum, made up like a
Sugar Loaf, of Roche Alum, the whites of Eggs and Rose Water, for Women to
beautify their Skins. Alumen Squammosum or Alumen Scajolae (for Scaja and
Scalia signify a Crust or Scale, Scaliger Exercit. 104. Sect. 7.) it is made of
a Scaly Stone, transparent like Glass, which being burnt divides into plates,
and grows white like Plaster. Moreover there is a sort of Alum made of Lees of
Wine, burnt in the Fire. Also Alumen Catinum, made of the Ashes of the Plant
Kali or Soda. But these are rather Artificial and Compound Salts of Plants,
such as Chemists do at this day make, of all sorts of Plants. To the kinds of
Alum is referred also Lapis Amiantos, Alumen Plumosum, Fetherd-Alum; which
nevertheless is not properly Alum, nor has it the same faculties with other
sorts of Alums. It grows in Mineral Quarries, Interwoven as it were amongst the
stones; being so fixed that it will bear the Fire; whence some term it Linum
Vivum. Concerning Alum see Pliny in Not. Hist. Lib. 35. Chap 11.

Fifthly, Vitriol
Amongst the Salts there is Vitriol so called from its Glassie clearness, and
by the Greeks Chalcanthon, by the Latins Atramentarium Blacking, because Skins
and other things were therewith died black. This kind of Salt is of an
admirable, and perfectly fiery Nature, and contains in it a burning Sulphur;
and therefore it performs more then other Salts, in the dissolving, coloring
and generating of Metals; and the spirit thereof changes Iron into Copper. Now
it contains in it two spirits, the first white, of great and known use in
Physic; the other red; and in the Earth at last remains the fixed Salt. Now
Vitriol is either Natural, Congealed in the Caverns of the Earth, or dropping
therefrom; or else Artificial, which is boiled out of certain Vitrolous Stones,
or out of a rusty kind of Earth, or out of an Ashcolour'd Earth, speckled with
green and red Spots, which nevertheless makes no difference in the essence of
the thing: even as Salt digd out of the Earth, and that boiled out of Salt
Fountains differ not essentially. Other differences are rather to be observed,
whence also the difference of virtues depends. For although all Vitriol do
partake of the Nature of Brass, and therefore vitriolated Water changes Iron
into Copper, which is practiced in Hungaria and at Goslaria: yet some partakes
more of the Nature of Brass or Copper, and other of the Nature of Iron; and
therefore some is of a Blew, other of a Green Color, and that either a deep
Green or a light Green. The Blew partakes of the Nature of Copper; the Green,
of Iron. And that is best which is of a deep and pleasant color, and
transparent. The Cyprian, Roman and Hungarian are commended; nor is that a base
sort which is found in some parts of Silesia. The best now adays is made by
Chemists out of Copper, of a delicate Azure color: which they term Vitriolum
Veneris. There is also white Vitriol so called. Now Vitriol heats and is
astringent, consumes moisture, contracts the flesh, dries, and preserves moist
flesh from corruption. The Ancients also gave it inwardly, to kill Worms and to
resist the Poison of Toadstools. But now, as was said, a spirit is drawn out of
it, which is more safely given, and has a rare faculty to dry and resist
Putrefaction; and therefore it is profitably used in putrid Fevers and
Pestilences. See of Vitriol, Pliny Lib. 34. Not. Hist. Cap. 12.

Chap. 3. Of Bitumen and Sulphur.
THe Third kind of Subterraneal Bodies or Minerals we told you were Bitumen and
Sulphur in their several sorts; viz. All such things as are Oily and Fat, and
are therefore easily mingled with Oil; whether they be liquid or dry. And that
somewhat may be said in general touching the original of them all; The original
of Bitumen and sulphur.
it is commonly held, that these kind of bodies are bred in the bowels of the
Earth, of an Hot and Dry Exhalation. But what was said before of Earths and
Salts, the same must now be said of the sorts of Bitumen and Sulphur, and
afterward of Metals; that we deny not the mixture of the Elements in these
things; but seeing there is no specific Form of any Natural Body, which had
not God for its author in the first Creation of the World, we must needs hold,
that these things have not begun to be after the Creation of the world, by
Reason of the Various concourse, Fight, and mixture of the Elements, but that
they were made by almighty God at the beginning of the World, and that they
received from the same Author this mixture which they have, with their
Specific Form, and a power to multiply themselves, and to change fitting
matter into themselves. Where Bitumen and sulphur are generated.
Whence it is, that though there are no where wanting Elements that may be
mixed; yet cannot Bitumen and Sulphur be bred in all places, any more then
Salts and Metals; but there only where the Specific Form of Bitumen and
Sulphur is found; which when new Bitumen and Sulphur is engendered, is the
principal Cause and Directrix of the mixture of the Elements. And therefore
though we grant that such Bodies consist of Elements: yet we deny that they
have their Forms from the Elements, but here also make use of that passage of
Scaliger formerly cited, out of Exercitat. 137. Sect. 20. that every form of
every perfectly mixed Body, as of an Adamant, though it be no Soul, is a fifth
Nature, far differing from the Elements.

And although we grant that the Matter of Bitumen and Sulphur are Elements: The
matter of Sulphur and bitumen.
yet are they only the remote matter: but the immediate matter and whereof all
sorts of Bitumen and Sulphur do partake, is a simple similary Body apt to take
flame, and Fat, and which may in general be termed Bitumen and Sulphur, as you
please: where with afterward when the Salts concure, especially that of Nitre,
Waters and other things, either Spirituous or Fluid, or Dry and Earthy
Metallic Concretions, (the formative principle directing all to some certain
form) thence are made sundry sorts of Bitumen and Sulphur. Now Bitumen and
Sulphur are bred in the Earth, or in this Globe consisting of Earth and Water.
For although some such thing sometimes falls out of the Air: yet was it first
drawn up in form of an Exhalation out of the Mines into the Air, where being
coagulated it falls down again. Now when it is engendered in the Eartus Caverns
it is voided forth either into the Sea, and is there cast ashore; or it flows
out of the Earth, either alone or with Fountain Waters, or it is dug up. And
there is scarce any Region in the World, wherein some sort of Bitumen and
Sulphur is not found. Bitumen is apt to take flame.
Now aptitude to take flame is proper to al Bitumen, and after it has once
taken flame, to burn fiercely, and if Water be sparingly poured on, not to be
extinguished but to burn more furiously. The Reason whereof is, because such
Bituminous substances, after they conceive flame, do not only take flame on the
top, as Wood and other things, but they do totally take fire and break into
flame. Whence it comes to pass, that though the outer surface be wet with
Water; yet the inner part which also flames receives not the wet, but rather
gathering it self into it self it grows more strong, dissipates its Enemy
Water, and flames more lustily. And hence also it comes to pass, that some
mixtures of Bitumen do burn under the Water it self. The effects of Bitumen.
And the burnings of certa in Mountains, Territories and Waters, do proceed
from Bitumen and Sulphur. Now all Bituminous Bodies have the Faculty and
Heating and Discussing; and therefore Fountains and Baths that have Bitumen and
Sulphur in them are profitably used to dissipate cold Humors, in Palsies,
Epilepsies, and such like Diseases.

And there is a great variety of such Bituminous Bodies. The difference of
Bitumens.
Yet they are all reduced to two kinds, whereof one is liquid, which flows like
Oil, the other coagulated and condensated. And again there are many sorts of
both. The Liquid, which go all under the Name of Asphaltum, are Naphtha,
Petroleum, Liquid Bitumen peculiarly so called, or Native liquid Pitch.

And Naphtha in the first place is the liquid part of Babylonian Bitumen,
Naphtha.
being Hot, Dry, and of a Nature perfectly Spitituous and Fiery; which has so
much Affinity with Fire, that the flame will leap to it at a distance, and it
may easily be set on Fire by the heat of the Sun. And therefore Plutarch in his
Alexander, writes, that Naphtha was by some called Medeas Medicament with which
she smeared the Crown and Vail of the Daughter of Creon, and so burnt her. What
if Hercules coming to the Altar to sacrifice, with a Garment smeared with
Naptha, his Garment caught flame, and so he was burnt; and this was the Blood
of the Centaure Nessus, of whom the Poets Fable? Of whom Ovid, Metamorph. L. 9.
Fab. 3.

It is questioned amongst Authors, whether Naphtha should be called by the Name
of Bitumen, or Sulphur, or Oil. But seeing these Names are not always used in
the same manner, you shall not offend, whether you call it an Oil, viz a Native
Mineral Oil, or a most delicate Bitumen. Indeed, it is a bituminous Spirit; and
it seems to be to Bitumen as spirit of Wine is to Wine, and Spirit of
Turpentine to Turpentine. The most pure and excellent kind of Naphtha is white:
yet they report that there is also found a Yellowish, and also a black sort.

By Reason of its extreme aptness to take flame, it is hardly used about any
thing: The Virtues of Naphtha.
otherwise among all the sorts of Bitumens, it is most Hot, Dry, and piercing.
And therefore it may be used as an Ointment to discuss cold Humors, also for
Cholicks sleepy Diseases, Apoplexies and Palsies. Concerning Naphtha see
Dioscorides, Lib. 1. Cap. 85. and Matthiolus and others that have commented
upon Dioscorides.

Next to Naphtha is Petroleum, Petroleum.
as if you would say Petrae Oleum, Oil of the Rock, because it distills out of
Rocks, with a very strong smell. It is a Bituminous Oil not so subtle, nor so
spirituous as Naphtha; and therefore it neither takes flame at a distanc, nor
so suddenly. It Is of a various color; the best is white; Liquid Succinum and
Liquid Ambar.
the worse Yellow, Red, Black. Hitherto belongs liquid Succinum and
Liquid-Ambar, which are nothing but certain sorts of Petroleum. It is found in
many Regions. In Italy, in the Country of Mutinum, it drops out of the Rocks,
white and Red, of a very strong smell; in Sicily it swims upon their fountains,
and they call it Oleum Siculum, and use it for Lamps instead of the Oil, and
also Pliny commends it for Scabby Cattle. But it is found in very many places
besides; nor must we esteem it from the place, but according to its Nature. It
is al of an heating drying faculty; by reason of the thinness of its Essence it
penetrates, and discusses excrementitious Humors, and therefore it is good
against the Palsy, and Cold pains and Diseases of other parts, especially the
Nervous parts.

In the Third place is liquid Bitumen, Liquid Bisumen.
so called by translation of the general term to one special sort; it is
thicker then Petroleum, which they mingle with Tallow, to Smear the Axletrees
of Coaches and Carts. If black Pitch be mingled therewith, it serves also to
Pitch Ships and is called Pissasphaltus. Now these three, Naphtha, Petroleum,
and Bitumen Liquidum, seem to differ, not in original, seeing they agree for
the most part in one Root, but in the thinness of their parts; so that the
thinnest and most spirituous is termed Naphtha; the middle and Oily sort,
Petroleum; and the thicker and more dreggy is called Bitumen Liquidum in a
special manner. And the difference of these Bitumens may easily be observed in
the distillation of Ambar: wherein, that which is thickest and remains at the
bottom resembles the Pitchy Bitumen; the Oil resembles the Petroleum; and the
most subtle part resembles Naphtha, and like it does also snatch the flame to
it self.

Finally, Maltha.
Amongst the Bitumens is Maltha, although it seems not to be mere Bitumen, but
a Liquor thereof mixed with a Clayish slime; of which Pliny Lib. 2. Not. Hist.
Chapter 104 makes mention: in Commagenes, says he, a City of Samosate, there is a
Lake which sends forth burning slime or mud, which they call Maltha. If it touch
any solid thing, it sticks to it: Moreover, being touched, it follows them that
go from it, etc. To smear and daub Walls, it serves instead of Chalk or Lime.
Vitruvius tells us it was used to build the Walls of Babylon. Lib. 1. Cap. 5.

Also there are many kinds of Concrete and Coagulated Bitumen. H^los anthos
flows of Salt, or Sperma Ceti.
The first is Halos anthos the Cream of the Sea or of Salt, commonly called
Sperma Ceti; it being as it were the Froathy Fatness of the Sea. It is no part
of the substance of the Sea, but a certain matter that flows in from elsewhere,
which may nevertheless contract somewhat from the Sea, especially saltness.
Whether Halos anthos and Sperma Ceti be one and the same thing, is here no
place largly to dispute. See the Commentators upon Dioscorides Book the 5. Chapter
88. Only this I must advise you of, that this Name is given a Medicine, now
sufficiently known, from a false opinion, that it is the Sperme slipped out of
the Womb of the Shee-Whale: whereas indeed and in truth it is a fatness of the
Sea; and therefore some call it, not amiss, Ambra alba and Succinum Marinum,
white Ambar and Sea-Ambar. The rare efficacy of Sperma Ceti in dissolving
Clotted Blood is known to the common people: ^is use.
it is also profitably given to attenuate thick Humors in the breast, and it is
good for such as have the Tissick.

Moreover among these Bitumens is Ambra Odorata, Ambar Greece.
Ambra Grisea, Ambar Greece [that is Ambar gray, or gray Amber, for Greize and
Greizely signify gray, though now obsolete.] Now the Name of Ambar is vulgarly
used for all the kinds of Succinum. In a special manner the Arabians by this
Name understand a certain most Odoriferous Medicament, which the Latins call
Ambarum and Ambracane. Hermolans Barbarus first called it Succinum Orientale,
Eastern Succinum. And although the question about the Nature and Original of
Ambar greece is most intricate: yet their opinion is most probable and founded
upon the most Reasons, who will have it to be a kind of Bitumen. For it is a
certain fat substance, most Odoriferous, found i^ the Sea, especially in the
Indian and Ethiopian Seas, or on the Sea shores, which is the best of all
other, and most precious; sometimes harder, other whiles softer, for the most
part brittle, yet so that under the Teeth and Nails it may be wrought and
drawn out like Mastick. The color sometimes is uniforme, and has otherwhiles
yellowish or white specks interspersed. And although it be found in the Sea,
yet is it not bred in the Sea, but is a kind of Bitumen or Oil flowing out of
its fountains, and being on the top of the Sea exposed to the Air it is
Condensed and Coagulated like Succinum or white and yellow Amber. And the
Histories of the Indian Voyages do testify that in some places of India a most
noble Oil or Balsam flows out of certain Fountains. That same most grateful
and pleasing smell springs from a most noble kind of Sulphur. Yea, Crato writes
that it is Sulphur, or that there is Sulphur in Ambar Greece. The Victues of
Ambar Greece.
It has a rare faculty to Roborate the Animal and Vital faculties: and
therefore it is good for the Brain and Heart, and makes all the senses more
lively. It Is good for old Folks, and cold Natures; it is profitable against
swounding fits and Melancholy.

After Ambar Greece, follow Succinum, yellow Ambar, Succinum or yellow Ambar.
which the Greeks call Electron, the Arabians Carabe, also Ambra Citrina yellow
Ambar (in way of distinction from the foresaid Ambar which is called Grysea or
Chrysea) also Gagates and Vernix. That is now best known which is found on the
shore of Borussia by the Mediterranean Sea, in shape of a Mass or Clod without
any form or Figure, hard and solid like a Stone, sometimes pure and sincere,
sometimes mixed with Herbs, Woods, little insects, a certain black vitriol, and
other filth. Hence some Lumps are transparent and clear, some dark: the color
is also various; the smell pleasing in its kind. Being rubbed with a cloth it
draws to it dry Chat and Straws, by its spirit going forth. Being put to the
flame of a Candle it takes fire, flames and sends out much sooty Vapor.

Touching its Nature and Generation there are sundry opinions, whiles some hold
it to be a vegetable, others a Mineral, others partly vegetable and partly
Mineral; all which here to relate, (with the Reasons which are brought to
confirm each opinion.) and to examine the same, would be too tedious. We shall
propound therefore only that opinion which is most likely to be true: viz. That
Succinum or yellow Ambar is a kind of Bitumen. For it has all the proprieties
thereof, and it is got out of Mines in the Earth, in Germany, France, Italy,
and it has been found on the outside Coagulated and absolute Ambar; and within
pure Naphtha or Petroleum. Also that Melanteria, Chalcitis, and other Minerals
did grow to Ambar. Finally, By Chemical Art an Oil is drawn out of it, agreeing
with Petroleum. And this Bitumen, according as it is White, Yellow, or Red,
Black, Pure or Impure, so the like Succinum or Ambar is bred thereof. Now it
does nor consist only of Bitumen, but also an Aluminous, Nitrous and
Vitriolated spirit do concur; and therefore in many places where there is
Petroleum no Succinum is bred, because these spirits are wanting. Now, At first
Succinum or Ambar is liquid, but afterward when it is shed into the Waters,
without any Exhalation of parts and evaporation, it is Coagulated and grows
hard by means of a Nitrous, Aluminous, and Vitriolated spirit, the Saltness of
the Sea also, Peradventure, Concurring. And that these are the immediate
principles of Ambar or Succinum, Chemical resolution it self does show. For a
Vitriolated, Aluminous, Salt spirit comes out with the phlegm: and moreover good
store of Salt sticks to the Neck of the Retort. In its Rectification, if the
work be diligently plied, a white spirit ascends, like the Naphtha Babylonica,
which takes flame, so that it is not safe to hold lighted Candles near the
Vessels wherein Succinum or yellow Ambar is distilled. A twofold Oil may be
drawn forth. Yellow and Red answering to Petroleum. The black Feces or Dregs,
if it be suffered to still till it is dry, do grow together into a Bitumen very
like that of Judea.

It Dries and Warms; it helps the distillations of the Head, the
Falling Sickness, The Virtues of ^ilow ambar
Apoplexy, Palsy, Mother-fits; is good for spitting of Blood and the
Consumption, also for the Gonorrhaea, to Facilitate Childbirth, and to provoke
Urine: the Smoke thereof is an Enemy to Venomous Beasts, and Detects such as
have the Falling Sickness.

Of kin to Succinum is Gagates or Jet, so that some take it to be the same. Jet.
It is also a kind of Bitumen, or a Bituminous stone, for the most part black;
yet sometime of a pale or yellow color. It Is soon set on Fire, smells like
Bitumen. It detects such as have the Falling Sickness, by the Smoke thereof;
and has a softening and discussing faculty.

There is yet another kind of Bitumen, Asphaltus.
but more concrete, which is called by the general Name Asphaltus. It is an
hard kind of Asphaltus or Bitumen, and has no filth mixed with it. It is of a
solid substance, and shines like purple when it is broken. It is weighty and of
a strong smell. Of this kind, that of Sodom is the best. That which is more
impure does not shine so, nor has so strong a smell. It Dries and Heats,
Discusses, Mollisies, and sodders Ulcers: it takes away fits of the Mother in a
Suffumigation. See Dioscorides in his 1 Book, Chap. 83. etc. and the
Commentaries of Matthiolus and others.

Finally, To the Family of Bitumens are to be referred certain Bicuminous
Earths and Stones. For it matters not much whether you call them Earths or
stones. Their first and chief Original is from Bitumen, with which as there is
more or less of an Earthy and Stony matter conjoined, so it receives this or
that Name. And hence it is that in the Nature of Bitumens we meet with great
difficulty, whiles Writers regarding the places where they are bred, or the
outward Figure, but little considering the internal Nature, either they
separate things of the same kind, or confound and Join together things of
different kinds.

For this Bitumen of which such kinds of Earths and Stones do consist, is not
sincere and pure Bitumen, but mixed with Earthy Juyces, Mud, Potters Clay, Veins
of Metal and Stones. Terra Ampelitis.
Of this kind is Terra Ampelitis so called, which is black like Sea-Coals, and
resembling Bitumen; it dissolves in Oil, resists worms, and Dries and softens
as Asphaltus does. Some account this Ampelitis Earth and Pit-Coals to be all
one, but others make a difference. If they are not just one and the same, at
least they are much of kin; whence come the sundry Names of the Germans which
they give these kind of Bodies, as Schwartse, Kreide, Koblerde, Steinkehlen,
Bergkolen, Dorff, and Durpte. For these kinds whether of Stones or Earths, have
all one Root and Mother, viz. Black Bitumen: the Particular difference proceeds
from the Various manner of Concretion and Admixture of other things.

For that which the Germans call Dorff, and Durpte, Peat and Turfe, are
Bituminous Earths which they Cut and Dry for Fuel. It is dug in
West-Frise-Land, Gelderland, Flanders, Brabant, Zeland. It is also found in
Collao a Province of Peru, which Monardus describes in these words. In Collao a
Province of Peru there is a place quite bare, without Tree or Grass, because
the Earth is Bituminous, out of which the Indians draw a liquor, good to cure
very many Diseases. The manner of their drawing of the said liquor is thus.
They cut the Earth into Turss, which they lay in order upon poles or thick
Reeds in a Sunny place, having vessels under them to receive the Liquor. For by
the Heat of the Sun this Bitumen Melts, or the Juice included in the Earth
dissolves and sweats through. Afterward the Turfs remain Dry, and Robbed of their
Oily Liquor, and so become sit for Fuel. But the Fire made of them is hurtful,
by Reason of the thick blackness of the Smoke, and the stinking smell it makes.
Yet for want of other Fuel they use the foresaid turfs. The Liquor which falls
from them is good for many Diseases, especially such as proceed from cold. For
it Mitigates pains, and discusses cold swellings. Wounds are cured therewith,
and other Diseases for which Caranna and Tacamabaca are good. Its color is dark
Red inclining to black, and its smell is strong. In Saxony, Misnia, Low-Germany,
Scotland, and other places, Bituminous and Fat Turfs are found: the Germans call
them Motten.

Lithanthrax, Sea-cole or Pit-Cole.
Carbo Mineralis, or Fossilis, or Carbo Lapideus, Stone-Coal, Mineral-Coal.
Pit-Coal or Sea-Coal, is harder and of a stoney Nature, consisting of Bitumen
and a stone making Earthy Juice, Black, good to make Fires, especially for
Smiths Forges. It Is found in Germany, Bobemia, Scotland, in many places.

And some has in it more Bitumen, and some more of the Stone making Juice: and
therefore some of it will easily burn, but some will not burn, unless it be
mixed with other Coals and blown with bellows.

But he that would know more concerning Bitumens, let him read the Commentaries
upon Dioscorides, especially that rare third part of Andraeas Labavius, wherein
largely and learnedly he explains the History and Nature of all sorts of
Bitumen.

In the next Place comes Sulphur, or Brimstone, which the Greeks call Theion;
Brim-stone
it is a Mineral Juice, consisting of one part which is inflamable and sends
forth a grievous smell, and of another part which is Earthy, thick, and fixed,
having a vitriolated Juice mingled therewith. It is reputed the Agent and
Father in the Generation of Metals, and Coagulates the Mercury, if there be
conjoined a Metalline Spirit, and a Seminary Principle. Of which if it be
destitute it destroies Metals, and consumes such things as are volatile. Now it
is twofold, Native or Quick, Apuron, which has not felt the Fire. For it is
engendered pure solid and in clods, so that there needs no Fire to separate its
Impurities. The Ancients de^^ribe it to be transparent. And now adays there is
hardly any such found; but it is of an Ashy color, and when it is broken.
Yellowish within. Factitious or Artificial Brim-stone stone is boiled out of
the Sulphurous mine which is dug out of the Ground. Now there is some
difference in the Artificial, especially in regard of Purity and color
depending thereupon, and some is yellowish, other some paler, and some
enclining to an Ash-color.

Of Sulphur and Quicksilver is made Cinabrium Factitium, Artificial Sinoper.
Of the Smoke of inflamed Sulphur received in a Glass Bell is made a sharp
Liquor, like Spirit of Vitriol. And flower of Brim-stone is the purer part
thereof, being sublimated with Salt and Calcined Vitriol.

Now Brim-stone is of a digesting, discussing and drawing faculty, The Virtues
of Brim-stone
it is good for such as breath short and have an Empyema, taken in an Egg.
Externally applied with Butter and Hogs-Greece, it Cures the Itch; and with
Turpentine it heals the Tetter.

Neighbor to Brim-stone is Arsenick, Orpment, and Sandarach, Arsenick, Orpment
and Sandarach.
which seem to agree in Nature and Faculties, and only to differ, because the
one is more the other less digested in the Bowels of the Earth; or that one
has more or less Quicksilver and Salt mingled with the Sulphur. Some take
Arsenick for the kind, and call Orpment Saffron-colour'd Arsenick; Sandarach,
red Arsenick; Risagal, white Arsenick. But that which they call white Arsenick,
is now adays known by the Name of Arsenick absolutely: viz. Orpment so often
sublimed with Salt til it become white, and Transparent like Crystal: the
strongest of all Eating and Fretting Putrefying Poisons. Now Orpment is a
Sulphurous Mineral Juice, having joined therewith a little Quicksilver, and
the Spirit of Salt. All the kinds are caustic and corrosive, and Enemies of the
inward parts, which they fret, and consume the radical moisture. Yea, it is not
safe to apply Arsenick externally by Reason of its extreme Venomous and
Corrosive Nature. But if it be Calcined with Nitre, its volatile mercury and
inflamable Sulphur are taken away, and a certain buttery Fatness remains, which
is used externally for Fistula's and Ulcers hard to cure.

Hither also we must refer Antimony, Stimmi or Stibium, Antimony.
which although it seems to come nearer the Nature of Metals, yet is it a
Mineral Body, resembling Lead, but brittle, consisting of Sulphur, crude
Arsenick and much Quicksilver of an Earthy Nature, but all of them volatile.
And therefore it yields a stinking and hurtful Fume, which for the most part is
Mercurial, but in some part Sulphurous and Arsenecal. Being crude applied
externally it imitates the Virtues of Lead, and is binding, hinders the growing
of flesh, takes away the filth of the Eyes, and cures Ulcers. It makes great
work for the Chemists, who make thereof sundry purging and sweating
Medicaments; of which they have written whole Books, wherewith you may consult.

Finally, Betwixt Antimony and Lead is Bismuthum, Bismuthum.
which is therefore called Ash-colored Lead; being a Mineral Body whitish and
Livid, Hard, Brittle, consisting of Earthy and crude Mercury, Sulphur and
Arsenick, and all of them impure and Volatile.

And that we may conclude this subject, those various kinds of Earths and
Minerals, which we have mustered hitherto, (and if there be any other to be
reckoned,) they have their original from the Roots of Minerals. For in these
also there happen sundry corruptions. For although Gold and other Metals now
perfectly digested do not putrify, and seem incorruptible; yet in their first
Original they may be corrupted. So Terra Sigillata, of which we spoke before,
is thought to be nothing else but the first matter of Gold, Silver, or some
other Metal (for there are sundry kinds thereof) corrupted, viz. When the
principles of Metals do not remain united, but the Sulphur and Mercury are
Separated and Sublimated, and either transferred into some other place, or
dispersed into the Air. So Antimony seems to be nothing else but crude or raw
Gold, corrupted before it was ripe; and Bismuthum, immature Silver corrupted.

Chap. 4. Of Stones and Jewels.
THe hardest of Minerals are Stones. And since that under this kind are
comprehended both common Stones and Precious Stones or Jewels, we must first
speak something in General of the Generation of Stones. The Ge^^tion of
It is commonly held, that by the concourse and mixture of Elements, the first
and Second qualities Cooperating, Stones and precious Stones are produced. And
though it is not to be denied, but that the Elements do concur unto their
Constitution: yet the Elements alone do not suffice, and are only the remote
cause of Stones and Jewels. Be the Elements mixed how they can, yet the Primary
agent being absent, no precious Stone is made of them.

They who would produce a nearer Cause, have made exhalations the matter of
Stones: but that also is too remote, nor will it suffice alone, ^^less it be
more specially determined. Avicenna therefore and Albertus Magnus, that they
might come more near to the business, have held the matter of Stones to be Clay
and Juice, viz. A clammy roaping Clay, to the mixture whereof more Earth has
concurd then Water: and a juice that been has sucked in, and raked off from the
Earth, or that has a Tincture of some M^tal. This opinion others follow, and
hold that Stones are made of Clay of Earth glewed together with a clammy
moisture, such as are dark; and with a Transparent Liquor such as are clear and
Transparent.

Yet in truth, not only Water and Earth, but all the Elements are in Stones,
especially precious ones. Yea, and the Chemists think the Elements are not
sufficient, but that as Metals so Stones and Jewels they say are made of those
three principles, Mercury, Sulphur and Salt. Of which opinion I shall speak
elsewhere.

This only we shall hint in this place; that the matter of Metals, Stones and
Jewels, is very near of kin, which not only the place where they grow but many
other things do witness. For examples sake, let us take Pome Garnets, out of
which and Iron Tinctures are drawn so like, that it is not easy to discern
one of them from another; and a more base sort which are found in Silesta and
Misnia do resemble from also in color. Also many Stones, if they are burnt, do
send forth Sulphurous fumes, just as Minerals and Metals do; and of Metals
Glasses are made which do very much resemble some precious Stones. And
therefore Jewels and Metals seem not unsicly to be reduced to common
principles: and it seems possible to reduce Jewels to some certain Metals.

Authors do stick yet more in Explaining the Efficient Cause of Stones: The
efficient Cause.
and the most have recourse herein to Heat and Cold, and savor nothing beyond
the Elementary qualities. And among Stones, those which they count to be made
of Clay, they think are coagulated by being baked together by Heat and d^yeess:
and such as they conceive to consist of a watery matter, they hold to be
Coagulat^^d and hardened by vehement cold, as Crystal. But many such dark Stones
are generated (...) the midst of Waters and springs whose Coagulation cannot be
made by the baking of heat and dryness. And they are truly too simple, who
think that Crystals, Adamants and such like Stones, are frozen together by the
Cold; since they are generated in the hottest Countries on the Surface of the
Earth, both Adamants and other transparent Jewels; nor will they melt with Fire.

The Chemists hold Salt to be the Cause of Concretion and Coagulation: The true
Cause of Concretion and Coagulation. A double Concretion
against which opinion of theirs although some siercely dispute, yet is it not
absolutely to be rejected; seeing many evident Documents do prove the same; and
ce^ain it is, that many things are Coagulated and grow together in moist
subjects, where neither dryness, Heat, nor cold have place. Yet, seeing there
are two sorts of Concretion, which happen without adding or taking away any
part of the matter: they are in no wise to be confounded, and we must speak
distinctly of the distinct manners of Coagulation.

The former manner of Concretion is seen in Salts, as in common Salt, Vitriol,
Nitre, The Concretion of Salt:
Alum, Urin, and in the Salts made out of Plants and Animals may be seen; and
it is proper to Salts, which naturally tend to such a Coagulation, and indeed
under a certain Figure; as the said diversity is to be seen in Nitre, Vitriol,
Alum and other things.

But because Salts have not hardness of themselves, The cause of solidity and
hardness:
but are easily broken and dissolve in moisture, but Jewels and Stones do not
only grow together, but they are solid and hard, and do not melt in moisture:
this kind of Concretion or growing together is different from the former. The
cause of which concretion some do also refer to Salt, and the hardness to the
admixture of Earth therewith: But others again (and that probably enough) do
hold that this Stoney hard concretion or growing together of Bodies does
proceed from a Stone making spirit or Juice, which Stone making spirit and
Juice is every where found in the Earth and in the water, but not without Salt.

And thus the immediate cause of Stones and Jewels is agreed to be a Stone
making Juice, that is to say, The Immediate Cause of stones and precious Stones
a matter of its own Nature tending to such an hardness and solidity. Now that
several Stones and Jewels are generated, proceeds from the especial form of
each. For every precious Stone has its proper and specific form whereby it is
differenced from al other, which it obtains from, (as I may say) its Seminal
principle of Generation. Which does not proceed from the Mixture of the
Elements, but, as Scaliger rightly Names it, it is a sift essence, put into
this sort of Natural things by almighty God, at the first Creation of the
world. Which seminal principle and Architectonick Spirit, although it does not
appear in a Body peculiarly distinct, as in most plants, nor can its Essence be
sufficiently explained, yet must it not be therefore denied. For as the Willow,
though it produce no Seed as other Plants do, yet it has a Seminal principle
dispersed through the whole tree, and so is propagated by a bough cut off and
stuck in the ground: so the Seminal principle of Jewels and Stones lies
concealed in the Stone making matter; and in this darkness of our Minds its
essence is unknown to us, as al other forms are; and their difference is not
known save by the diversity of their faculties, operations and Qualities. For
upon this diversity of Forms, fit matter being Joined thereto, depends the
diversity of colors and external shapes.

Hence the Crystal and Adamant of Hungaria and Silesia have an Hexagonal or
Six-corner'd shape; the Occidental Smaragds are four Square; the Bohemian
Gnanate and the Stone Geodes have a Globous Figure; and other precious Stones
have other shapes.

Now I conceive the Colors of precious Stones may chiefly be drawn from the
Sulphur of Metals. For, Carbuncles, Rubies and Granats, Whence the Color of
precious stones is:
do participate in their Tincture with Gold and Iron: The Turkois has the
Tincture of Copper. And there may by Spirit of Salt, Urine, and other liquors,
Tinctures be drawn out of Metals, which do perfectly resemble the Colors of
certain precious Stones. And from the same causes, viz. The forms and Mineral
principles, other qualities also of Stones and Jewels, as hardness and weight.
etc. As also their Virtues and properties do flow.

As to their Native place, Stones are found every where; precious Stones, The
Natural place of precious Stones:
as in many other Countries, so in Misnia, Silesia, Bohemia, and other places
of Germany. But the more noble precious Stones are chiefly found in the Indies.
The cause whereof is diversely by diverse assigned; and the most refer the same
to the posture of the Sun and Stars over the Zenith. Yet since in Africa,
America, and other Regions which are under the same climate, there is no such
store nor such excellent precious Stones found: the cause is rather to be
attributed to the Nature and disposition of the Soil, and the Seminal principle
implanted therein at the Creation.

Now Stones are some vulgar, others precious, The difference of stones:
according to the Purity or Impurity of the matter whereof they consist, and
the nobility of the Form. For vulgar Stones consist of a gross and impure
matter, and have a more Ignoble Form: and therefore their effects are less
excellent. But precious Stones consist of a more pure and Subtle matter, and
have a more noble form. For the Chalk-stone, and other common Stones have also
their sulphur, which is sufficiently discovered when they are burnt; but much
thicker and impurer then the Granate or Amethyst.

Now Stones are some Spungy, Ground Unicorne
others Solid. Amongst those kinds of Stones that is justly in the first place
to be explained which is vulgarly taken for Unicorns Horn; and some call it
ground Ivory, others ground Horn. For in Thuringia, as also in Bohemia and
other places, such Horns are found; yea, and not only horns but other bones
also; which are said to be good to Sodder wounds and to heal Ulcers. Its Use
But especially, experience has taught that these Stones have no small use in
the Falling Sickness, Malignant Fevers, the Pestilence, gripings of the Belly
in Infants, and the Cure of other Diseases; and therefore they are commonly
given out for Unicorns Horns. How it may be known from true Unicorns Horn:
Howbeit they may easily be discerned from the true Unicorns Horn. For the true
Unicorns Horn is hard and solid, that it can hardly be rasped, much less can it
be beaten to powder: nor does it much cleave to the Tongue; But this Stone is
not hard, but as it were calcined, it is easily broken and rubbed to powder, and
being put to the Tongue it sticks fast, like Terra Sigillata or Bole-Armeniack.

Touching the Generation thereof, Men are of several opinions. Some conceive
they are the bones of an Unicorn overwhelmed in the Earth by a flood, or some
other occasion, which remain after the flesh and softer parts have been
consumed by Time. But this opinion is not agreeable to reason. For how should
there be so great a number of Unicorns, in Thuringia, the Hercinian Forest,
near Elbingroda, also about Heidelberge, Hildesheme, in Misnia, Silesia,
Moravia, and in many other places? And why are these horns found in those
places rather then elsewhere, where it is more likely that there are Unicorns?
Moreover stones are found, which represent the Bones not of this Creature only,
but of others also.

More probable therefore it is, Its immediate matter:
that these are Mineral Stones. But what is their immediate matter is not easy
to tell. Some hold that it is Bitumen or corrupted Ambar; others, as Anselmus
Boethius, Lib. 2. Cap. 242. that it is Marga, or a kind of Marle; others that it
is some putrified and rotten Stone. This is certain, that it is a mineral
matter, not unlike some Terra Sigillata, or a Mineral Juice mingled with some
such Earth, and shaped into the Form of an Horn, Tooth, or other bone.

Nor let that same external form stumble any man. For though no man can easily
tell the Cause of its Conformation, though many have labored to do it; yet
certain it is, that many wonderful things are shaped in the Earth. Not to speak
of other things at this time, it is sufficiently known, how many sundry shapes
are seen in Stones dug up at Islebia and elsewhere. For there are seen in
those Stones sundry shapes of Animals and Plants; of a Frog, as Salamander, a
Serpent, a Viper, an Eel, a Carp, a Gilthead, a Gudgeon; Yea, and the Pictures
of Princes and renowned Men. And what should be the cause of these Pictures
it is hard for any man to tell.

As to the Virtues of these Stones, it is certain they are very good against the
Falling Sickness, and Malignant Diseases, and therefore they are many times
used no less succesfully then the Horn which is counted to be the Unicorns.

Now vulgar Stones are either Porous or Solid. Spungy stones:
The Porous or Spungy Stones, are the Tophus or crumbling gritty Stone, the
Pumice, the Ossifragus, the Osteocolla, Stalactites, and most of those Stones
which are bred in living Creatures.

The solid Stones are many, Solid stones:
the Sand-stone, the Chalk-stone, the Flint, the Fire-stone, the Whet-stone,
the Touchstone, the Smiris wherewith they cut Glass. Sundry kinds of Marble,
Alabaster, Serpent-stone, Porphyry-Stone, Freestone, Ceraunias or
Thunder-stone, the Belemnites, so called; and very many more.

Also there are other Stones of a middle Nature betwixt those common gross
Stones and the Noble precious Stones: I shall only speak a little of one or two
of them.

The Lodestone in the first place, is a stone sufficiently known; The
Loadstone and its wonderful esfects.
and its effects are wholly wonderful, the cause whereof many learned men have
hitherto labored to render. Now the effects of the Lodestone are either of the
Stone alone, or of Iron touched with the Stone; or of both the Stone and Iron.
The simple effects of the Stone are, to draw Iron to it, and to turn toward
the Poles of the world. That it drew Iron was a thing not unknown to most of
the Ancients: but its faculty of turning to the Poles of the world, as it is at
this day very well known, so was it not known to the Ancients; nor has any man
been able as yet to make it appear, that it was known to Aristotle,
Dioscorides, Theophrastus, Lucretius, Pliny, or any of the Ancients: but this
Virtue was first discovered some few Ages since; although it is uncertain who
was the Author or Inventor.

But what is the Cause of this motion, and whether it should be sought in
Heaven or in Earth, is very obscure. But that we may search it out as much as
is possible, we must presuppose this in the first place, that the Lodestone in
many places does not turn exactly to the Poles of the world but toward them,
declining a little from them, in some places more, in others Iess. Which
declination from the Poles of the world is altogether of great use and moment.
For whereas the Ancients at Sea knew only in the day time by the Sun in what
Meridian of the world they sailed; and in the night they knew by the Stars the
Elevation of the Pole, and in what Latitude of the World they were: now by the
help of the Lodestone they can find in what Longitude they are: and seeing it
is confessed by all the Ancient Geographers, that nothing is more difficult in all Geography then to find out the Longitude of places, for which cause they do
so much vary in assigning the Longitude of the most Famous Cities: by help of
the Lodestone alone the Longitude of every place may most easily and exactly
be found out. The Ancients indeed reckoned their degrees of Longitude from the
fortunate Isles, and there they made the beginning and end of the Globe of the
Earth. But the late Cosmographers observing that the Pole of the Lodestone and
the Pole of the world did consist in one Meridian, in the tenth degree beyond
the fortunate Isles Westward, about the Azores or Flandrick Islands; they make
the beginning of Longitude there, not only to please themselves but moved
thereto by this Natural reason, Namely because in that Meridian the Poles of
the Lodestone and the Poles of the world do agree together. Now from that
Beginning and Meridian, toward the East, the Declination increases more and
more, and it is greater or lesser, according as the place is nearer to, or
further from this first Meridian. In Germany, especially about Norinberge, the
Declination is ten degrees; here at Wittenberge about nine. The Hollanders who
have sailed into Norwey and the neighboring places toward the East, have
found the declination of the Lodestone from the Meridian to be sixteen
degrees; and at Nova Zembla seventeen degrees in the more Easterly parts,
provided they made their observations with exact Instruments. And it is
probably asserted, that if the Hollanders should finish their Navigation
toward the East, the more Easterly they went and the nearer to China, they
should find the declination of the Loadstone from the Meridian so much the more
abated, and they should at last come to that place toward the East, in which
the Poles of the Lodestone and the world would be in one Meridian, and that
there would be no deflection of the Pole of the Lodestone in the hundred and
eighty degree of Longitude, opposite to the beginning of Longitude in the West.

Yet there is a certain learned Man who holds that the Hollanders are deceived
in this point. For when they looked upon their compasses they did not consider
that the Compasses were so made, that the Iron touched by the Lodestone was not
placed just under the Flower-de-luce painted upon the card, but was distant
therefrom certain degrees. And therefore whiles the Hollanders looked upon the
Flower-deluce, and saw that it pointed directly toward the North, they
conceited that there was no Magnetical declination in that place; whereas the
Iron touched with the Lodestone was some degrees distant from the Flower-de
luce or the true Northpoint. And therefore he placed the first Meridian, with
the Ancients, in the fortunate or Canary Islands, because in that place there
was no declination of the Lodestone at all. In which point experience must be
judge. Yet it seems to me improbable, that the Hollanders who knew very well how
to make their compasses, should be so heedless in such a Case.

But be it how it will be, this is certain and confirmed by manyfold experience,
that the Pole of the Lodestone is distant from the Poles of the world twenty
three degrees or thereabouts.

And hence some do probably collect, that the declination of the Poles of the
Lodestone from the Poles of the world, and the declination of the Poles of the
world from the Poles of the Zodiac, is one and the same; and since the utmost
declination of the Planets is twenty three degrees and some minutes, that
doubtless therefore the declination of the Poles of the Lodestone from the
Poles of the world is the same.

But doubtful it is whether the Cause of this motion of the Lodestone toward
the Pole is in the Heaven or in the Earth, The Cause of the Loadstoaes turning
to the Pole.
and where in the Heaven, or in the Earth. Some are indeed of opinion that
there are certain Mountains of Lodestone under the Pole, to which the
Lodestone moves by similitude of Nature. But they cannot well tell what or how
great those Mountains are; nor are mines of Lodestone wanting in other parts
of the world, but they are found in many Regions, especially in Egypt.

Others say the Lodestone turns to the Pole Star, others that it turns to
some Stars about the Pole Star. But the Lodestone does not look directly to
the Pole; save in such places where the Meridian goes through the Pole of the
World and the Pole of the Lodestone both at once: in all other places it
declines.

Moreover, that which is said of the conversion of the Lodestone to the North
pole, is now adays called in question by learned Men. And some do make two
opposite points in the Lodestone, whereof one turns to the North, the other
to the South, if the Stone hang moveable and free. Which though others do not
wholly deny; yet they say that point is stronger which turns to the South then
that which turns to the North, and so they hold that the Lodestone turns
rather to the South then to the North. And though there were nothing in the
Lodestone which did Naturally turn to the North; yet its turning to the South
is sufficient to show the North Pole. For since the South-Pole is just opposite
to the North, if one part of the Lodestone or of the card touched with the
Lodestone turn to the South, the other end must of necessity point to the
North. Of which this is a remarkable token, that those who make compasses and
Sun-Dials with magnetic Needles, do rub the Lodestone upon that end which
stands to the South, and not upon the Crossend which Looks to the North; and
therefore the Magnetic Needle turns primarily to the South, and the opposite
part points to and shows the North.

Hence therefore some have come to be of opinion, that the Lodestone is turned
toward the South; because all the Planets have their Efficacy and Operation in
the South. Since they move from the East, through the South, toward the West.
Yet in very deed, although it go so in our Regions: yet there are opposite
places, wherein the Ecliptic declines from the Equator toward the North, and
the Planers perform their courses, from the East, through the North, toward
the West. Moreover the Planets do not abide in the same place, but one in one
place, another in another; moreover they do not stick fast, but pass over the
whole Heaven every day. If therefore the Lodestone should look toward the
Planets, it could not look toward one place, since there are diverse Planets;
nor would it stand still, but should be always moved, following the motion of
the Planets.

The opinion of others is more probable who hold, that as other things tend to
their own proper place: so the Lodestone unless it be hindered does also defire
always the same Situation which it had in its Native place. Wherein
nevertheless we must consult with experience, and enquire how the Lodestone is
Situate in the Mines.

But that Opinion is most probable, that the Lodestone is moved toward its
own Pole in the Earth, which is distant about twenty three degrees from that
point which answers to the Pole of the World: and that either the South only,
or if the Lodestone have two Poles, and one part thereof turns to the North,
another to the South (concerning which we must again consult with experience)
yet that it chiefly tends to the South: and that it has some affinity with its
own place, or with the things that are there; and that doubtless the point to
which the Loadstone moves must be held to be rather in Earth then in Heaven.
For that same point is fixed; but the Pole of the Zodiac, or any other Star
thereabouts to which the Lodestone should be moved, does it self move and
finishes its round in the space of twenty four hours; whereas the Lodestone
does perpetually turn to one point. Nor can it be perceived that the
Lodestone, or the smallest Iron Wires touched with the Lodestone do ever move
upwards toward Heaven. Contrariwise, good Authors relate that the Lodestone
tends toward the Earth, which may be proved, they say, by these experiments.
If you place a Needle in Aequilibrio so so that both ends are equally distant
from the Earth, and then touch one end with a Lodestone; they say that end
will bow toward the Earth more then the other. Also if you weigh pieces of
Iron Wire, and after they are touched with a Lodestone put them in the Scales
again, you shall find that they weigh more then they did before they were
touched, because they incline toward the Earth. And therefore, since two Poles
of the Lodestone are to be constituted in the Earth, one distant about twenty
three degrees from the point just under the North Pole of the world, toward
the place now called the straits of Anian, the other in the South part
oppolite, Situate in the Meridian which passes through the Azores or Flandrick
Islands, Caput Viride and Caput Corvo, or (as others will have at) which passes
through the Canary Islands: in all places under this Meridian there is no
declination of the Lodestone, but the Needle touched by the Lodestone falls
exactly with the Meridian; in all other places of the whole Earth the said
Needle declines from the Meridian of the place, sometimes more, sometimes less,
sometimes toward the East, otherwhile toward the West; whereof see the
observations of the Hollanders, and the Mathematical Memorials of Simon
Stevinus, in the 5 Book of his Geography. But what that is to which the Load
stone is moved, is hard for any man to tell: let that suffice us, which Scaliger
writes in his 131. Exercitation, where there are also other things concerning
the Load stone, worthy to be read: Nature (says he) being linkt in a league of
Amity to it self, has allied all things as well those above as these here
below in a perpetual band of friendship, which makes all this world to be one
thing admirably disposed; so that there are not only certain degrees as it were
of approach and distance in things separated: but also the Commixtures of those
substances, which are quite parted one from another.

Now concerning the Virtue of drawing Iron (for I do not here dispute, Why the
Load stone draws Iron
as Scaliger has it in Exercit. 102. Sect. 6. whether the Lodestone draws
Iron, or Iron the Lodestone; for which so ever it is, the Cause is one and the
same) the Controversy is no less. Epicurus is said to have held, that from the
Iron and Lodestone Atoms do flow, which agreeing in Figure do embrace one
another, and strike against the Bodies of the Load stone and the Iron, from
whence being reflected they draw the Iron. Anaxagoras held that the Lodestone
had a Soul and therewith drew the Iron. From whom Cardan differs not much, who
also avers that the Magnet or Load stone does live; whom Scaliger opposes
Exercitat. 102. Sect. 5. Marsilius Ficinus in Lib. 3. de Vit. Coelit. Compar.
Cap. 15. fetches the Cause hereof from the Constellation of the Bear, to which
both the Lodestone and Iron are subject, and both do orderly follow the Bear;
but the Lodestone holds the upper degree in the propriety of the Bear, and
Iron the lower; and that so the Lodestone as being in the upper order draws
the Iron, which he reckons to be in the lower.

But in good earnest, if we shall diligently weigh the matter, we shall hardly
find any thing more probable then that same mutual consent of things Natural.
For therein well-near al learned men that have pondered the Nature of the
Lodestone do consent, that the Lodestone is a kind of Iron Mine, and that
Iron may be made thereof.

And here is to be observed, that the whole body of that which we call the
Lodestone, is not indeed the Loadstone, for the whole Stone does not draw
Iron; but that the substance of the Magnet is dispersed in its stone like
Veins; even as other Metals are seldom bred a lone and pure, but in their
Matrixes or Wombs, and therefore the Maghetick-stone draws the Iron only with
that part, where is the Vein of the Lodestone.

From whence this also follows, that the Cause of Attraction is rather in the
Lodestone then in the Iron. For the Iron is already a fixed metal: but the
Lodestone is not yet fixed, and therefore it can more freely send forth its
strength and spirit.

Andreas Libavius, Part. 3. Singul. Lib. 1. Chap. 12. where he treates of the
attractive Virtue of the Lodestone, endeavors to assign yet a more special
Cause, and writes that the Nature of this principle in the Lodestone is
Bituminous, which is reduced and directed to a singularity with the Iron, by
similitude of that conspiracy and mixture, whereby the same principles have
grown together in Iron: and that an Iron and Bituminous spirit is common to
them both, but that it does not flow so strongly nor so continually from the
Iron as from the Lodestone, because of the different Coagulation or
Consistency. Where we willingly grant that a certain Sulphur or Sulphurous
spirit is common to the Lodestone and the Iron: which if Libavius please to
call Bitumen (for he counts Bitumen to be a thing more general then Sulphur, and
that Sulphur has its original from Bitumen) I will not contend with him about
the Name; but that Bituminous or Sulphurous things only have a mutual Appetite
one to another, I see not how he can prove. Nor does hetel us, whether they
mutually desire one another, by Reason of their Sulphur, or of their whole
essence. But whatever is the Cause of the affinity betwixt the Lodestone and
the Iron, which cannot be denied; that general Rule there laid down by Libavius
holds true: one Nature covers another of the same sort, and like will to like,
as much as it can; especially there where the Virtue arises and sticks, and
apprehends another like it self.

We must not in this place pass over the armed Lodestone, The Loadstone armed.
whose force is much stronger then that of the unarmed. For a Lodestone
unarmed will draw only a Pack-needle or a bit of Iron hardly weighing a dram or
two: but if it be armed, it draws sixteen ounces or more. The Art of arming
them, is this. Seek out in a Lump of a Lodestone its Poles, which may be done
with the help of a Needle in a Sun-Diall; the Poles being found, let the
Lodestone be polished, and reduced into such a shape as it is capable of
(howbeit the long squar is the most convenient shape) yet so that the Axis
reaching from the one to the other Pole may lie in the midst betwixt two
parallel lines, equally distant from each of them. The sides being formed, let
also the upper and lower part be wrought and polished, as also the sides, to
the ends of the Axletree. Then let two plates be framed of the best Steel, of
which the one side which touches the Lodestone must be smooth and even, if the
sides where the Poles are be plain; or of what shape soever they be, they must
be so fitted to the sides of the Lodestone that no space may be left betwixt
the Steel and the Lodestone, but the other side must be a little round, and on
the lower side the plates must hang a little beneath the Lodestone; and the
parts that hang under must be somewhat thicker and squarer then the rest like
Pillars. The Plates being thus formed must be applied to the Poles on each
side, and to keep them fast they must be bound with two round hoops of Silver
or brass, which must go about the Lodestone above and beneath. Also let the
upper side thereof be covered with a Plate of Silver or Brass, with a Ring
whereby to hang up the Loadstone thus armed. When it is hung up apply unto the
little Pillars of Steel which come beneath the Stone, a Plate of Steel as big
as it can draw and there let it hang.

In the next place we must not forget Bezoar Stone, Bezoar Stone.
whereof Many things are extant in the writings of Physicians; seeing it is
both precious and rare, and especially commended against Poison. Some think
it is so called from a Persian word Pazar, or Pazan, which signifies a Goat.
Others think it is derived from the Hebrew word Bell which signifies a Lord, and
Zaar which is Poison. But an Antidote is by the Arabians called Bedsoar, and
therefore they call all Medicines good against Poison, by the general term of
Bezoartick Medicaments: whence Bezoar-stone seems to be so called because of
its rare virtue against Poison.

Now Bezoar stone is not dug out of the Earth, What Be^ear is.
but is bred in the belly of an Indian mountanous She-Goat, shaped somewhat like
a Buck or Heart, and is therefore by some termed the Hart-Goat. The Stones are
long and round, and sometimes like Ches-Nuts or Acorns. Their color is sometimes
blackish, sometimes yellowish, greenish, Ash colored, dark Red, or blackish
Green. On the outside it is smooth and slippery. It is not very hard but is
easily broken. It grows together by Scales, Scale over Scale, as an Onion is
made up, upon some small Foundation, which is commonly a little Straw or Stalk;
to which a certain humor cleaves. And therefore this Stone is made up of many
Plates as it were, being greater in an old, lesser in a young Goat; and all the
Plates both Internal and External are smooth and shining.

Now there are two kinds of Bezoar-stone, the one Oriental, Its kinds
which is brought out of Persia, Egypt, China, Cathai, and the bordering
countries, which ^^ore excellent then the other; the other is occidental, which
is brought out o^ America and Peru. This Stone is very much commended against
all Poisons; Its uss,
it is given in malignant fevers, to expel Worms in Children, and against
Melancholic Diseases.

Some take Lachryma Cervi, or the Hearts Tear, to be Bezoar-stone. But though,
Lachryma Cervi:
as I said before, the word Bezoar is used by the Arabian Physicians to
signify Antidotes in general; and the Lachryma Cervi has a rare Virtue
against the Plague and Poisons; Yet Bezoar Stone and it are diverse things. Now
concerning the Lachryma Cervi, which he says he keeps as a great ratity in his
study, Scaliger thus writes in his Exercitat. 112. It is not bred in the Heart,
before he be an hundred year old. After that age it grows at the Corner of his
Eye, to the bones themselves, and becomes i^ self a protuberant bone, of such
hardness as exceeds that of the Horn it self. That part which sticks bunching
out is round, of a rare brightness, of a yellow color, not without some show
of black Veins. It is so smooth that you can hardly feel it, and it slips from
between your Fingers, as if it could move it self. It is an excellent remedy
against Poison. Its given to such as are taken with the Plague, with a little
Wine. Whereby so great a sweat is caused, that you would think the Patients
whole Body were well nigh Melted. Touching Bezoar Stone see a peculiar Treatise
of Casparus Bauhinus.

Moreover, of this kind there is Coral, Lithodendron, or Stone tree, Corel:
being a Seashrub, which when it is taken out of the Water turns to Stone. The
reason whereof is, because there is much Salt and Stone making juice in the
Plant: which the Chemical resolution thereof shows, for all the coral well near
turns to Salt.

And this is the common opinion of all Authors well-near, touching the
Generation of Corals, who hold that Coral is soft under this Water, and
afterward grows hard in the Air. Yet Beguinus in Tyrocin. Lib. 2. Cap. 10.
questions the truth hereof and says it is a Fable, and relates from the report
of credible witnesses and certain experiments, that Coral is as hard in the Sea
and under the Waters, as after it is drawn out into the Air.

There are three sorts thereof: Red, Black, and White. The sorts thereof:
The best is the Red and that which has many clusters. It Binds, moderately
Cools; Cures the flux and vomiting of Blood, the Gonorrhaea, and Whites in
Women. Its Use:
It helps the Fallingsickness and is a strengthener.

To this family also belongs the Stone Aetites or Eagle-stone, Eaglestone
so called because it is believed that the Eagle carries it to her Nest to help
her bringing forth of her young ones. It contains another stone within it. It Is
found in many places: the Oriental ones are best. But they are found also in
Saxony, Misina and Silesia. It Is thought to further Childbirth and to prevent
abortion. To prevent abortion they tie it to the Woman's Arm: to further
Childbirth, to her thigh.

There are also other Stones found in Living Creatures, as the Cock-stone, the
Swallow-stone, the Toad-stone, Crab's-eyes so called, Carpe-stones, Perchstones.

Before, Lib. 5. Chap. 2. Ami^nthus.
among the sorts of Alum mention was made of the stone Amianthos, which is
commonly called Alumen Plumosum, Fetherd Alum, and sold under that Name; but it
belongs rather to this place. In days of old it was made into Thread and Woven
into Coverlids as if it had been Wool, and thereof they made Funeral Coats
for the Bodies of Kings, that the Ashes of their burnt Bodies might be thereby
separated from the other Ashes. But the manner of weaving the same it at this
day unknown.

Of this Family also is Haematites, the Boodstone, The blood stone.
especially good to stop bleeding.

Now come the Nobler Stones and Jewels. In the first place, the fragments of
five precious Stones are known and used in the Apothecaries shops: and those
Stones are the Sapphire, the Hyacinth, the Sardius, the Granate, and the
Smaragd.

The Sapphire, the Sapphire.
in the first place, is of a Sky-colour, like the Heavens on a clear day. The
whiter Sapphire is called the female. It resists Poison and strengthens. Being
worn it hinders Pestilential Carbuncles from breaking forth, and laid upon a
Carbuncle it extinguishes the (...), and hinders venomous exhalations from
passing thence to the Heart: being worn by a ^ascivious Person it loses its
brightness and beauty. It hinders fleshly desires, also it is commended against
Diseases of the Eyes, and is said to strengthen them.

The Hyacinth is of a yellowish redness, the Hyacinth.
and glisters as it were Gold, and imitates the flames of Fire. It is commended
to cure the Plague, being worn in a Ring or hung about the Neck.

The Sardius, the Sardi^^ or Carnealus.
so called because first found at Sardis; also Carneolus, Cornelian, because in
color it resembles bloody water wherein raw flesh has been washed. The Sardius
worn is said to recreate the Mind, to drive away Fearfulness and sad Dreams; to
which intent it goes into the Electuary de Gemmis. Being drunk with harsh red
Wine it stops the Courses, and Blood flowing from any part of the Body.

The Garnet is red, the Garnet
but with some yellowishness resembling Fire, and it has the color of
Vermilion. It Is said to strengthen the Heart, and resist Sadness and
Melancholy.

The Smaragd is a most neat Jewel, the Smaragd:
the most excellent of all green precious Stones, and by its pleasant Greeness
it refreshes and recreates the Eyes. It is given against Poison, and the
bitings of venomous Beasts, and pestilential Fevers. Being tied to a Woman's
Hip it is said to further Childbirth; and being laid on her Belly to prevent
Abortion. It is contrary to all Venereal matters, and if it touch the Skin of
the Man that is in his carnal Embracements, it is said to break asunder. Worn in
a Ring or hung about the Neck it preserves from the Falling Sickness.

There are also many other precious Stones and Jewels. the Adamant or Diamond:
The Adamant or (as we say) Diamond, is so called, because it is unconquerable
by Iron or by Fire. For it is the hardest of all Jewels, transparent like
Water. Rare virtues are by many attributed to the Diamond; and it is said to be
an Amulet against Poison and Wi^ch-crast, frightful Dreams, and the Nightmare;
and to resist pestilential Causes.

The Carbuncle has its name from a burning Coal: the Carhuncle:
It is commonly beleevd to give light in the dark, but there is no Eyewitness
thereof. And therefore learned Men conceive, that if there be any such Jewel as
a Carbuncle, it is a great and a noble one.

The Ruby, the Ruby
whose brightness and flaming redness shines above other stones. It resists
Poison and putrefaction, preserves from the Plague; it drives away sadness and
fearful Dreams, and exhilerates the mind.

Granates or Garnets are as it were imperfect and rude Rubies, the Granate.
of which we have spoken before.

The Amethyst is so called, the Amethyst.
because it is thought to prevent Drunkenness, it is of a violet color, mixed as
it were with Purple.

The Opal is an exceeding beautiful Stone, the Opal
which alone has in it all the colors of other precious Stones. For there is
in the Opal, as Pliny in his 37. B. chapter 6. writes, the thin fire of the
Carbuncle, the bright purple of the Amethyst, the Greenness of the Smaragd, all
shining together with an incredible luster. And therefore it cannot be
counterfeited, as other precious Stones may. And as it has the colors of all
other Stones, so it is thought to have all their Virtues. But it is most
commended for preserving the Eyesight, being worth.

The Topaz, the Topaz or Chrysolite.
which is now called the Chrysolite (though some difference them by the
brightness of the color) receives it name from its color: for it is a Jewel
transparent and of a Golden color. It is commended to strengthen the Heart and
to drive away Melancholy: but is especially used against the Falling Sickness,
and applied to Wounds to stop the Blood.

The Beryl in its color represents the Greenness of the Sea when it is clam,
the Beryl.
or the color of a watery Hyacinth. It is chiefly commended for Wounds in the
Eyes, being reduced to most fine Powder.

The Crystal indeed was named by the Ancients from Ice, the Crystal.
and therefore some have held that Crystal is made of Ice frozen together upon
exceeding cold Mountains. But this is salfe. For Crystal is generated also in
Cyprus, and other Mountains, where Heat is never wanting. Again it will not melt
with Fire, as those things use to do which are frozen: but the Fire reduces it
into Earth and Salt. And doubtless it is coagulated by a Salt spirit or
stone-making juice. Being made into fine Powder, and given with Honey in Wine
or Broth, it is said to increase Milk by a propriety which it has. Held under
the Tongue it quenches thirst. A dram taken with Oil of sweet Almonds is a
present help for such as have taken Mercury Sublimate. Also it cures the bloody
Flux, and the Whites in Women.

The Jasper is of many colors, and therefore they make diverse kinds thereof.
The Jasper
That which is reddish is much commended against a Flux of Blood from the ^^se,
Womb and Hemorrhoides; Yea, and it is also commended for Wounds: and credible
persons report, that a Flux of Blood and the Womb Flux, which could by no means
be stopped, has been staid by a Jasper Stone bound to the Woman's Thigh; as
also Nose-bleeding that no other Remedies would cure, has been stopped by
hanging the Jasper Stone about the patients Neck. Also it is commended to cure
the Falling sickness, if it be worn upon the Mouth of the Stomach.

Some few years since there has been brought out of new Spain a Stone called
Lapis Nephriticus, the Kidney-stone; which is justly counted as a kind of
Jasper. The Nephritick Stone.
Its Surface is always fat, and as it were smeared with Oil. There are sundry
kinds thereof in respect of color. For the most part it is of a whitish Green.
It is commended against pains in the Kidneys, from whence it had its Name; and
being tied to the Arm it has a wonderful Virtue, yet confirmed by experience,
to break the stone and drive it out by Urine: of which later Physicians that
have written of the stone, do every where speak.

The Turcoise is a Stone, not transparent, yet of a very pleasing color, The
turcoise.
being a mixture of green and blew. It is believed to strengthen the Heart and
Spirits. But especially they attribute thereunto admirable Virtues to preserve
a Man from falling. For if a Man be any ways in danger of a fall, and wear this
stone, it preserves him harmless; and they say the Stone it self will break or
lose its Color and grow Pale, when the party is in danger of a fall. The same
it will do, they say, when the wearer is not well.

Lapis Lazuli so called by the Arabian Physicians, Lapis Lazuli.
and by the Greeks Cuanos Lithos, is also a Stone that is not transparent, of a
deep blew color adorned with Golden specks. This Stone has a rare Virtue to
purge Melancholy Humors, and therefore it helps Diseases springing from that
Humor: of which see the writings of Physicians. Of Lapis Lazuli is made that
most excellent blew color, called Vltramarinus, which is dearer then Gold. Also
Gold is got out of the said Stone. And even this Stone alone does teach us,
Metals and Stones have the same common principles. Lapis Armenus.
that there is one common principle of Metals and Stones, as was said before;
and that the matter of Metals does suffer many mutations, and that thence
various Minerals may be generated, each of which has a peculiar affinity to
that Metal to the generation whereof the matter was disposed: which I leave to
the diligent consideration of others.

Lapis Armenus is in color and Virtues of kin to the former. But this is not
so hard as the Lapis Lazuli, nor is it adorned with specks of Gold, but with
many green, blew and blackish specks.

Finally, let us conclude this our Doctrine of precious Stones with Pearls;
Pearls.
which are not indeed generated in the Earth, as other Jewels are, yet are as
precious and Noble as they.

Now they are bred in certain Shel-fish, of that Humor whereof the Shel of the
said Fish is made. The most excellent are found in the Persian Sea, and in the
Regions of China and the East Indies: the occidental Pearls because they have
not the Silver glance of the other are of less value. Now Pearls have a rare
faculty to strengthen a Man, and to restore his Spirits; and therefore they
resist Poison, Putrefaction and Pestilential Fevers, they cheer the mind, they
are a Remedy for swooning, and Melancholic Diseases. They are good against a
flux of Blood and looseness of the Belly, they do strengthen the Brain and
Nerves. Mixed with Eye-salves they scour away the Clouds and Filth of the Eyes,
and consume the dropping moisture thereof.

But so much may suffice to have spoken in brief of Stones and Jewels. You may
see more in those Authors who have wrote peculiarly of this subject, as
Franciscus Rueus, Georgius Agricola, John Kentmannus, Andreas Baccius, and
especially Boethius, who has published an excellent History of Stones.

Chap. 5. Of Metals.
NOw concerning the generation of Metals the opinion of Authors is various. The
Aristoteleans opinion concerning the matter of Metals.
And as to the matter of Metals, the Aristoteleans do hold that as all other
things dug out of the Earth are made of a Smoaky exhalation, so all metals
do spring from a vaporous Exhalation, and that moisture is prevalent in them,
because they may be Melted and Hammered. And they teach that Metals are
generated, when a Subtertaneal Vapor included, especially in Stones, in regard
of a dry Exhalation which drew it upward, is gathered into one, and Coagulated
like Dew into very small drops, which cannot be done without cold: yet with this
difference; that in the Generation of Dew and Hoar-frost the foresaid dryness
which carried the Vapor upwards is separated: but in the generation of Metals
that same separation is not made, but the dry Exhalation is contained and
Coagulated with the Vapor.

Howbeit, this opinion is not to be received unless it be otherwise explained.
For it supposes a matter too remote, and speaks of the generation of Metals,
as if it spoke of Meteors. And those who hold thus concerning the Generation of
Metals, seem to be of his mind, who intending to speak of the Generation of
Animals, should make, not Blood and Seed, but an Exhalation Dry or Moist, the
principle of Living-Creatures.

The Chemists therefore do better, The opinion of the Chymises.
who having more diligently sought into the Generation and Resolution of
Merals, hold their principles to be Sulphur and Mercury; to which later writers
have, not without Cause, added Salt, or a Metalline, Copperasated, or
Vitriolated Earth: and that in all these a Formative and Seminal Faculty was at
the Creation implanted by God the Creator; which as Scaliger says Bxercit.
307. Sect. 20. is a certain fifth essence far different from the four Elements,
and which as the principal agent makes Metals of matter thereto disposed. And
therefore wherever this Sensinal Principle is wanting, no Metal can be made of
any Exhalation, Dry or Moist, by the power of any efficient whatsoever.

And that the Matter-thus stands, is apparent from the Metal mines, the
meltings, Probations, and resolutions of Metals, and the very Proprieties of
the Metals them-selves. For in all Mines these principles are found, and out of
all the Oate where-in all Metals are Generated, Sulphur is boiled. Also it is
very well known to Chemists, that Metals may be changed into running
Quicksilver, and that of Quicksilver Metals may be made. Yea any man may judge
by his Nose and Eyes, that there is Sulphur in metals; because in the
Calcinations and melting down of Copper and Iron, a greenish and reddish flame
is seen, and there is a smell of Brim-stone. And most Diseases wherewith diggers
and refiners of Metals are troubled, have their original from Sulphur and
Mercury. The Resolution or Dissolving of Metals shows the same, which is not
into Dry and moist Exhalations only, but into things of kin to Metals,
retaining their own Nature and properties, in sundry alterations and external
Mutations. For Lead being turned into Ceruss, although it seem to have quite
put off its Nature, yet may it be melted into Lead again. Yea and Stibium does
turn again to Antimony without much ado. The specifical proprieties of Metals
do argue the same, which witness; that they have not their original only from
the mixture of Elements. For that which is true of the Lodestone, as Scaliger
writes, that it cannot by any faculty of the Elements draw Iron: the same may
be said of many proprieties and operations of Metals.

And the Mercurial matter is the chiefest in the Constitution of Elements;
which being sundry ways mixed with fixed or volatile Sulphur, and a
copperasated Salt or Earth, makes sundry sorts of Metals. And the Chemists do
commonly call Mercury the Mother and Feminine Principle, and Sulphur the Father
and Masculine principle. Now wi^h Sulphur is mingled Vitriol or Metallic Salt;
and in Sulphur there is Vitriol, and in all Vitriol, Sulphur: whence it happens,
that out of both there is a Spirit drawn much a like.

But that others do think otherwise in this point, the chief cause is; inasmuch
as these principles are not always found in mines after the same likeness and
form as they imagined. Moreover, because metals are not found every where and
in all places in which Quicksilver and Sulphur are found. And Finally, became
they cannot sufficiently discern these principles in Metals. For they think it
necessary, that in every Mine of Metal these principles should be found with
the Metals, but especially that Metals ought always to be found in the Veins
of Mercury and Sulphur: and if Sulphur were in Metals they conceive it must
needs flame.

But unless they were blinded with the darkness of Chemical Ignorance they
might easily see those principles in Metallic Veins. For they do not always
appear under one and the same visible form and shape; though sometimes they are
found in the mines, in the very same shape: but sometimes they wander in the
shapes of Exhalations and Spirits, sometimes they are Coagulated into the form
of a Juice, an Earth, or some other form. Yea, and the Metals themselves are
found sometimes Fixed, other whiles Volatile. For Nature Generates Mercury after
a Spiritual manner; to which if a Copperasated Sulphur be added, and a
formative principle, it is Coagulated into a Metal. But if Sulphur and the
formative Principle be wanting, it grows together into a peculiar matter and is
found alone. For one of these does not suffice to make a Metal, but all of them
are requisite. And therefore in such Mines, in which one is present and the
rest are wanting, Metals are not generated. But there alone Metals are bred,
where a Sulphurous Vitriolated sixative Spirit is exactly mixed with
Quicksilver in a matter fit to become a Metal. Those Bodies do not make
Metals, but the Spirit must of necessity be mingled most intimately. But in
this formation, before they grow quire firm and Dry and come to Maturity, they
are often found in the likness of a Mineral juice, and unripe Metal: and at
last they are Coagulated and compacted into a perfect Metal.

And they that are stumbled at the inflameable Nature of Sulphur, must know,
that there is no necessity that Metals must take flame because they have
Sulphur in them. Simple Water Wets, but it does not so in compounds; Air
ascends upwards, but not in mixed Bodies. Again, they are ignorant that an
inflamable and Volatile thing may so be fixed, that it shall take flame no
more. For it is the property of all Sulphur to be inflamable, but not at all
times: and the more it is fixed the less it conceives flame; and the more it is
fixed, the less subject Metal is to burn. Hence it comes to pass, that Iron and
Copper are burned, and send forth a notable slame: but Gold by reason of the
sixedness of its Sulphur withstands the violence of Fire.

From hence also, The efficient cause of Metals.
it is easy to judge of the Efficient cause and active principle in the
Generation of Metals. For they who conceive that Metals are Coagulated only by
cold do discover their own simplicity of wit, or their unskilfulness in the
point of Metals: seeing Metals have already an internal Cause of their
Coagulation, and are dissolved by heat; cold only gives occasion of their
Coagulation. But if that internal Cause of Coagulation be wanting, no external
cold is sufficient to Coagulate the same. Which is to be seen in Quicksilver,
which no cold can congeal, and yet it is Coagulated with the Spirit of Lead.
Yea, in the very Fire it self, by Cementations and other Coctions, Coagulation
and sixation is made.

We ought therefore, touching the Nature and original of Metals, rather to
credit the Diggers, Refiners, and Triars of Metals, and the Chemist, then idle
disputers, Ignorant of the Nature of Metals, Who, out of an hatred to
Chemistry, do endeavor (by I know not what Reason) to persuade us otherwise.
And therefore the most learned also of the Peripateticks, who have fearcht more
deeply into the Nature of Metals, do in this point follow the opinion of the
Chemists.

Now the Common Affections of Metals are, to be melted with heat; The Adjuncts
of Metals.
to grow hard again by cold; to be hammered and beaten out, to drink in Quick
Silver; to be dissolved by Aquafortis.

They flow and melt by Reason of Quicksilver: and therefore those who have
most part Quicksilver are more easily Molten; but those more hardly, in which
Sulphurous dryness and Salt are most prevalent. And if there be good store of
Mercury in Metals they become so soft, as to be melted by the very least heat;
Contrariwise, such as are often burnt in the Fire, their Mercurial moisture
being taken away, they become at last hardly Meltable; as also if they be
steeped in Aluminous, Copperasated, and fixatory Waters.

Also malleableness depends upon the Mercurial Humidity. And those Metals may
be best hammered and spread abroad by beating which have a Mercurial moisture
most exactly mixed with a Sulphur proportionable. Contrariwise, those in which
there is most of a Vitriolated Sulphur, of Salt and Metalline Earth, they are
least Malleable.

Now Metals do drink in Quicksilver, because they have one Root, and their
substances are of kin; as we see Oils easily mixed with Oily things, and Water
with things Watery.

Metals are by others otherwise divided: Difference of Metals.
but they are by the Chemists usually divided into Perfect and Imperfect. And
they count that perfect which is complete both in Substance and Accidents, and
excellently fitted for use. Such an one (Namely) as has a subtle Mercurial
Substance, a most ponderous Nature; that endures the Fire and all the trials
thereof, without even the very least detriment; it is easily joined with
Mercury, and most easily and largly dilated. Al which marks, since they are
most to be found in Gold, it is by the consent of al Nations reputed the most
excellent and perfect Metal. Whereof nevertheless you may read what
Mirandulanus says, in his Book de Auro.

Now a Question is here raised, Whether Metals differ specifically or not.
whether Metals differ specifically, or not. Very many Chemists hold, that they
do not specifically differ, but only in degrees of perfection, and that they
consist all of the same matter; have the same efficient Cause; are generated in
the same place: that in Lead there is always some Gold found; in some Brass
there is Gold; and diverse of them are commonly bred together; they are mutually
changed one into another, as Iron into Copper; out of all Vitriol is made, and
all are resolved into Mercury. Hence doubtless were these sayings of the
Chemists: Lead is Leprous Gold: the Inner parts of Silver are Gold.

Yet, If I may speak mine own opinion, I c^nceive that Metals are specifically
different. For though it may rightly be said that al have one and the same
matter, not only generical and remote, but also immediate (in which respect
they differ from other Natural things, and for which cause it is that they are
turned one into another, and diverse generated at once in the same place) yet
have they not the same Ultimate matter; but therein they differ. Yet neither
are they differenced only by accidents, but by a substantial specific form,
and there is one form of Gold, another of Iron, and another of Lead, which
disposes and Labors that common matter according to its own Nature, which
appears by the effects and operations. Hence it is, that though all of them are
resolved into vitriol and Mercury; yet that Vitriol which is made out of Copper
differs not a little from that made out of Iron.

Nor is that of any moment which some Chemists say; that Nature always intends
that which is most perfect. For this is true in every kind. In the kind of Men,
Nature intends to make the perfectest man; in the kind of a Vine, the most
perfect Vine; in the kind of Gold, the most perfect Gold. Yet does it not
therefore follow that because Gold is the perfectest Metal therefore Nature
always intends to make Gold. For that is just as if a Man should say, that
Nature in the kind of Animals always intended a Man, who is the most perfect
of al Live-Creatures. And if Nature always intended Gold, why is there no more
to be found? Now they hold that there are two perfect Metals, Gold and Silver:
and four imperfect ones.

Gold is the most perfect of all Metals, Gold what it is?
consisting of the most pure Mercury, most perfectly digested and ripened, by
Virtue of a most excellent and fixed ruddy Sulphur, wherewith it is most
exactly mixed and united. Hence it comes to have a yellow color; it is most
weighty of al Metals, it indures the Fire, it may be beaten out exceedingly
thin, and it is most easily of all Metals united to Mercury. The Chemists do
call it Sol, the Sun.

Silver is a perfect Metal, Silver, What?
yet more inferior then Gold, consisting of a Mercury almost fixed, and of a
white Sulphur, almost sixed also. For it is neither so heavy nor so fixed as
Gold. And therefore although it endures the Fire after a sort, and abides in
the Ashy Cement, yet does it not endure in the Royal Cement, Antimony, Sulphur.
Next to Gold it is beaten to the greatest thinness of any Metal. The Chemists
call it Luna, the Moon.

Imperfect Metals are those which have principles not so mature and well
digested, nor so fixed and pure: whence it happens, they can neither endure the
thunder of Lead, nor the Cement, nor Sulphur, but fly away in smoke and
sparkles, or are changed into dross, Glass, Stones.

Now they are hard or soft. The hard are those which by Reason of their Earthy
Sulphur and hardened Mercury are first red hot before they melt; the soft are
those which by Reason of a moister Mercury and less digested are first melted
before they are Red Hot. The hard have more Sulphur then the soft; but it is
Earthy and contains more vitriolated Juice. And therefore they are easily
turned into Vitriol. Hence it comes to pass, that they suffer detriment by
Fire, and will not endure the trial of more perfect Metals, but Fly into the
Air.

Now the hard Metals are two, Brass or Copper, and Iron. Brass o^ Copper.
Brass is an imperfect Metal, Hard, consisting of a little Mercury and very
much impure Red Sulphur, nor perfectly ripened, for the most part but yet not
perfectly sixed; being of a reddish color. And hence, by reason of its
Sulphur, it is thought to have affinity with Gold, and to contain in it the
principles and Seeds of Gold; and it is believed that by digestion it may
attain to some maturity and perfection. Also it has affinity to Silver; seeing
in the Marchasite and the Lapis Fissilis they are oftentimes found both
together: and Silver and Copper being dissolved are both of a blew color. The
Chemists cal^t Venus.

Iron is an imperfect Metal, consisting of a little Mercury and much fixed
Sulphur, Iron.
being of a whitish black and Blew color. Hence it comes to pass, that it is
exceeding slow in melting and bears long the force of Fire; and is readily
calcined. Also it is hardly Joined with Mercury, because there is little
Mercury in it. Also it has little Vitriol, and therefore it is of a whitish
livid color. The Chemists call it Mar.

The soft Metals are, white Lead which is called Tinn; and Black-Lead which is
called simply Lead.

Tinn or white Lead, is an imperfect Metal, soft and white, Tinn.
consisting of much Mercury, less pure and fixed then in the persect Metals,
but purer and more fixed then in Black-Lead, and of a white impure and unripe
Sulphur. Being mixed with Gold and Lead it leaves them malleable; but being
mingled with the other Metals it makes them break under the Hammer. The
Chemists call it Jupiter.

Black-Lead is an imperfect Meral, Soft, of a livid color, Lead.
generated of much impure and undigested Mercury, and of a little Sulphur
impure likewise and stinking. Hence, being used in the trial of perfected
Metals it consumes the imperfect, and carries them away with it self in Smoke,
or turns them into dross. It is of all Metals the most easily melted. The
Chemists call it Saturn.

Finally, Of kin to Merals is Quicksilver, a Mineral Liquor, Quicksilver.
of a wonderful Nature, for it flows like Water, and yet it wets not. It is the
weightiest of all Minerals, and will suffer nothing to sink into it but Gold.
Now it consists of a clammy Metallic Water, and a Sulphurous Earth, exactly
mingled; and it mingles with Metals, first with Gold, then with Tinn, then with
Lead, then with Silver; hardly with Copper and Iron. The Chemists call it
Mercury; because as Mercury associates himself with all the Planets, so does
Quicksilver with all Metals; and because its Nature is moveable and shifting,
which has hitherto sufficiently exercised many Chemists, and is not yet
sufficiently understood. And therefore hardly can we say any thing thereof in
this brief discourse.

And here to conclude our Discourse of Metals, Whether the Transmutation of
Metals be possible.
we must not pass over that controversy concerning the transmutation of
Metals. Out of which briefly to unwind our selves, seeing, as Aristotle rightly
judges, it is a certain weakness of mind to seek for Reasons and let go Sense;
I conceive the shallow Reasons of some Persons unskilful in Chemistry are no
ways to be preferred before experience. Now it is a most known thing, that in
Hungaria, at a Town called Smoinits, in the Mountain Carpathus, there is a
Fountain, whereinto Iron being cast is turned into very good Copper. The like
is done at this day in Goslaria. Nor is this performed by Natural Waters only,
but the same may be done by Art also. For if Iron be cast into vitriolated
Water there sticks a red powder thereto, which being melted in the Fire becomes
Copper. So Quicksilver is turned into Lead, with no great pains. Also it has
been often found true by experience, in this Age of ours, that other Metals may
be turned into Gold: and it is Notoriously known, what that same Alexander
Sidon, a Scotchman performedat Colenius Basil, and others places. Concerning
which matter see the Historis of the Metallic Transmutation described by
Ewaldus de Hoghelande; and the writings published by Andreas Libavius, for
defense of Transmutatory Alchymy.

Since therefore by Experience it is sufficiently manifest; we need not dispute
long of this Matter. One thing we shall briefly hint. That the Transmutation of
Metals is not Simply and Barely Artificial, save as it applies things Natural
to perform some certain action. Nor does the Art proceed upon any but merely
Natural principles; and such things as Nature has generated she does only mix
after a certain Fashion.

THE SIXTH BOOK. Of the Soul in General, and of things Vegetable.
Chap. 1. Of the Soul in General.
SInce Method requires that we should now treat of Living and Animal Things; we
must first speak of the Soul. Whether there be a Soul or no?
That there is such a thing as a Soul, is manifest by the operations thereof.
For we see that Living things perform many operations which they cannot do when
they are dead. It follows therefore that the Body it self cannot be the cause
of those operations; but that there is somewhat in the Body which persorms the
same. Now since every operation is a kind of transient accident, never firmly
subsisting in it self; there must needs be in the Body some cause, which is the
stable and constant producer of actions; which being present, life and every
action is performed, and when it departs, the life cease: and this cause of
such like actions is termed Anima, the Soul.

As to what concerns the Essence of the Soul, I omit the sundry Opinions of the
Ancients, which are reckoned up, and largely refuted by Aristotle, Lib. 1. de
Anima. Marsilius Ficinus, Lib. 6.7.8. Theologiae Platonicae. And I shall retain
the Definition of Aristotle in 2. de Anima, c. 1. text. 6. which is this, The
Definition of the Soul. The Soul is neither an accident, nor a body.
A Soul is the first act and perfection of a Natural Body, which bath an
aptitude to Life; or briefly, of a Natural Body, whose parts are Organs. For
the Soul is neither an accident, (seeing an accident cannot be one part of a
compounded substance, such as a living Body is, nor the first principle of all
actions, or make a true difference betwixt two substances;) nor a Body, for two
Bodies cannot be in one place: But it is the act, or substantial form, by which
a living Body is a living Body indeed; that is to say, by which it has an
inbred power and faculty to perform all the actions of Life. More may be seen
touching the word Entelecheia used in this Definition, in Book 1. chapter 9.
concerning Motion, where I have at large explained the genuine signification of
this Word.

Now a Soul is not the perfection and form of any Body, not of an Artificial,
but a Natural Body; nor yet of every Natural Body: For every Natural Body is
not animated; but that Body only, which has an aptitude to exercise the
actions of Life, and is so disposed that the Soul may thereby, as by
Instruments, exercise its actions. For here we must hold out of Aristotle, in 2
Metaphys. com. 31. That the action of an Agent does not proceed from the
subject without a form, nor from the form without a subject: for otherwise the
subject and its form would be actually two things. Now if so be action cannot
be performed by a subject without a form, nor by a form without a subject, much
less can it be performed by Instruments without a Working cause. From whence it
follows, that Action is performed by a certain compound of Matter, Form, and
Instruments; so that the whole Compound may be called the Principle which acts;
but the Form, the Principle wherewith the act is performed, because the
Compound acts by virtue of the Form; Finally, the Instruments, whereby; seeing
the operation is performed through their subserviency.

Moreover, There is also another Definition of the Soul in Aristotle, in 2. de
Anima, Another definition of the Soul
cap. 2. text. 18. which is this: Our Soul is the Principle whereby we live,
move, use our Senses, and understand.

And seeing there are many kinds of Living Creatures; we shall best come to the
knowledge of their Differences, by observation of the effects and operations of
the Soul; since every cause discovers it self by its effects, and the form by
its operations. Now the proper Energy of the Soul is Life, which as the second
act, is evermore attended upon, and companion to the Soul as the first act. We
may therefore from the distinct manners of Life constitute the distinct sorts
of souls and animated things. Now a man lives, and so do other Creatures, and
so do Plants, but each of these after a peculiar fashion. The life of Plants
consists in Nutrition only, and the action proper to each one, but Plants have
no Senses: the life of Brutes, besides Nutrition and action, contains also
sense; and each sort of Bruits has its proper action: Finally, Man besides al
these, does also understand, and make use of Reason.

There are therefore three distinct sorts of Souls: Three distinct sorts of
Souls.
all which are in Matter, and do constitute a living Body: Yet one of them is
more loose from the matter, but another more plunged therein; and one can
receive the spiritual and immaterial species of things, wherein consists the
force of knowledge, but some cannot. Plants are nourished, and understand
nothing; Bruit Animals can understand some things; they receive immaterial
species, howbeit with some conditions of the matter: For what things they
perceive are here present, and at this time; seeing Sense is busied about
particulars. But the rational Soul receives immaterial species or
representations of things, even without all conditions of matter.

And seeing the soul is the cause of various actions, Whether the Faculties of
the Soul differ therefrom, and how?
and has the power to perform sundry operations in living Creatures, we must
consider how the powers or faculties of the Soul are related to the Soul it
self. And here some hold, that the faculties of the Soul are the very Essence
thereof, which according to the sundry actions whereof it is the cause, has
sundry names: others contrariwise do conceive that the faculties and powers of
the soul, as all others, are qualities of the second sort, and that they are
really and essentially different from the soul. And this latter Opinion is the
better of the two. For the Powers and Faculties of the Soul are indeed only
properties and inseparable accidents thereof, and essentially distinct
therefrom. For the Soul is a substance, but these are accidents or aptitudes
and propensions to operate; which flow from the essence of the Soul, as their
first cause, only by emanation, and so depend thereon, and are received without
any medium, in the same animated Body, wherein the Soul is. For every power is
ranked amongst the second sort of Qualities: and seeing the Powers of the Soul
themselves are distinct one from another, they must also differ essentially
from the Soul: For if they were the same with it, they would be the same one
with another. Howbeit, it is to be observed, that the faculties are not mediate
Agents, or middle causes betwixt the Soul and its operations, but only
conditions and aptitudes to operate: For operations proceed from the Act, and
not from the power; nor is it necessary that betwixt every agent and its
operation there should intercede some middle agent. For so, neither could that
middle agent be the cause of action, without another middle agent: and so there
should a progress ad infinitum, without end.

These diverse Souls are with their faculties so disposed, that the upper
faculty does always pre-suppose the lower: but the inferior may be without the
superior. The Vegetative is without the sensitive in Plants: the Vegetative and
Sensitive are without the Rational in Bruits: in Man all three concur. But how
the Faculties are disposed in reference to the Soul in diverse sorts of Living
Creatures, intricate and hard Questions are agitated amongst Philosophers.

For in the first place Enquiry is made, Whether in one living thing there is
more than one Soul.
Whether in every living thing there is only one Soul, or more. For some teach,
That in every living Creature there is only one Soul, and that it is furnished
with all the faculties of an inferior Soul; and that there are not in Man three
souls, an Intelligent, a Sensitive, and a Vegetative; but one that is endued
with the powers of all three, and takes its denomination from the nobler
faculty: and that so the faculties which are in living Creatures of the same
sort, do proceed from one sort of Soul; but those which are in living Creatures
of a several sort, do arise also from a several sort of Soul; although both
here and there they have the same names, and are attended by the same
operations. Others do hold contrarily, That there are distinct Souls, not only
in living things of several sorts; but that more also may be found in the same
living Creature; and that in Man there is not only a nutritive and sensitive
Faculty, but a nutritive and sensitive Soul, and also a rational; and that
wherever the Faculty is, there is also the Soul, to which it primarily
belongs.

And although both Opinions have learned and famous Defenders; yet the first
which is the commonest and most received, seems to me the more probable. For
since there is one specifick-Essence, and consequently one only Form of every
thing; therefore the Soul of every living thing, which is the Form, and
principally constitutes the Essence thereof, can be but one. Moreover, it is
not possible, that the principles of things, opposite one to another, and
several sorts of Souls can meet together, without uniting or confounding the
Effences of things; or yet be subordinate one to another; feeing they are such
opposites as Logicians call Disparata, and do exclude one another out of the
same subject. Moreover, it is a needless thing to multiply souls; since one
soul, furnished with diverse faculties may produce all the degrees of life; and
a soul of an higher degree, and more noble, does include the faculties of the
more ignoble and inferior; just as the number Four includes the number Three:
nor is it necessary, though there are in the understanding subordinate
conceptions, by reason of subordinate differences, that there should therefore
be subordinate Forms, without the Understanding. For the multiplicity of
universal subordinate conceptions does not multiply the Essence and Form of a
thing.

Now the Principal Cause that others have erred in this point, has been this;
That they thought the vegetative power alone to be a peculiar Soul, and to
constitute the sort of a Plant; and the sensitive Faculty also to be a peculiar
Soul which constituted the sort of Animal: Whereas nevertheless there are many
sorts both of Plants and Animals; and the Plants have different sorts amongst
them, as also the Animals, and there is one specifical form of a Rose, another
of a Violet, another of a Willow; though the vegetative Faculty be found in all
of them: one of a Lion, another of a Dog, another of a Wolf, although the
sensitive Faculty be common to all. All Plants have indeed a nutritive and
generative Faculty, but not that only, but withal somewhat proper, whereby a
Violet differs from a Rose and a Willow. So a Wolf is nourished, does generate,
and exercises its senses, but it does not these things alone, but it has also
somewhat proper to it self, whereby it differs from a Lion and a Dog; and from
the same soul in a Dog does flow the Faculty of nourishing, of sense, and of
doing that which is proper to a Dog, whereby it differs from other Animals. Nor
are there in a Dog many and diverse Essences, as the Patrons of the other
Opinion do erroneously suppose. For neither are the Vegetative and Sensitive,
or the Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational, certain peculiar general Forms, or
three Essences; but only general conceptions, arising, and constituted out of
the comparison and convenience of Living thing, which do no where exist
separately save in the mind; just as Being; Substance, Body: and therefore
they do not multiply the Essence of things.

After this Question follows another: Whether the Soul be totally in the whole
Body, Whether the soul be totally in the whole Body, and totally in every part.
and totally in every part? or whether it be all in the whole Body, and part of
it in one part, and part in another. But first that ambiguity which lutks in
this Question, must be distinguished: For the term Whole, may here be considered
in a threefold notion; in respect of a Substance, Quantity, and Quality. The
first is constituted of the parts of the Soul in the same living Creature; the
second of the Subject, according to the extension whereof the Soul is extended,
so as to have quantity; the third of the faculties, wherewith it is furnished.
The Schoolmen call the first, the Essential whole; the second, the Quantitative
whole; the third, the Potestative whole.

As to the first, Inasmuch as the soul of every thing is simple, and not
compounded of Essential parts, where ever it is, there it is totally, and so as
that it is totally in the whole Body. For we must not allow of their Opinion,
who hold, That the substance of the Soul is only in one part of the Body, which
is the principal part; and that the rest of the Body is governed by powers shed
out of the Soul: For thus the whole Body should not be animated, but only that
part wherein the substance of the Soul is: For those Faculties whereby
(according to their Opinion) the rest of the Members are governed, since they
are accidents, cannot supply the room of a substantial Form. Moreover, since
the Faculties are accidents, flowing from the Essence of the Soul, only by way
of emanation, they cannot have a subject different from their Form, not be
produced in any subject, save that wherein the Soul is; and therefore where
they are, there we may know the essence of the Soul to be. And therefore we
conclude that the Essence of the Soul is in all parts of the animated Body, and
that no part is destitute thereof.

Yet is not the Soul in its Body, in all animate things, after one and the same
manner. For in Plants and some Animals, there is no principal Member, but
instead of a principal Member, a certain humor is diffused through the whole
Body, by means of which, chiefly, the soul is joined to the Body: whence it is,
that also the parts being plucked from the Body do live for a season. But the
case is otherwise in perfect Animals, in which we must hold that there is some
principal Member, wherein the soul, as in a Root wherein it is naturally inbred
as it were, may reside, and pour it self out to the other Members. And
therefore that principal Member being hurt, the Animal soon dies; but not if
any other be hurt; and the Members plucked from the Body, do presently die.

Secondly, If we enquire how the Soul is in the Body, in respect of Extension
and Quantity, the Answer is briefly this: That every form which informs the
matter and is united thereto, and makes up one compound therewith, is extended
according to the extension of the Matter. Concerning which thing it is
nevertheless to be observed, that only Matter is of it self furnished with
Quantity, and divisible; but that the Soul of it self is neither subject to
Quantitity, nor to Division. In the mean while, because it informs the whole
Body, it is rightly said to be coextended therewith, and that where ever the
body is that lives, there also the Soul is. Hence the Body is properly said to
be divided, and to be made greater or lesser; and the Body of a Plant, from a
small Twig, grows to a tall Tree, a Calf to an Ox; and a Body in a Consumption
grows less, and so does a Tree whose boughs are cut off. But it is not so with
the Soul; nor is that Soul which is in a small branch, less in it self, than the
Soul which is in a tall Tree; nor is the Soul of a Calf less than the Soul of
an Ox, but remaining the same, it spreads it self abroad into the additional
nutriment; nor is a Plant or Animal the less by communicating it self in
generation; nor when the branches of a Tree are cut off, is the Soul of the
Tree the lesser; nor has an Animal that is consumed a lesser Soul than that
which is corpulent. For the Soul is joined to the dimensions, partly as colors,
partly after another manner. For it informs the measured quantitative Body, and
its plenitude and fillingness is as great as the Body it self and the dimension
thereof. And though we suppose the Body to increase never so much, the Soul
without any addition will fill it al; and if it be diminished never so much, it
will fill no more than that little Body. Of it self therefore the Soul has no
Quantity: but in respect of dimensions whereto it is joined, it has such a
property, that it fills no more than the Body, be it great or little. And though
notwithstanding by accident its plenitude is restrained and contained: yet is
it not cut in sunder or diminished. In which particular it affords a certain
resemblance of the most good and great God, who as J. Caesar Scaliger speaks,
Reigns every where without place, is all without all, and the whole without
parts.

Finally, Since diverse and sundry powers do flow from the Soul; the Question is
whether the Soul have all these powers together, in all the parts of the Body.
We answer: That in all the parts of the Body, there are all the faculties
according to their Original; and that the Soul brings al its faculties into al
parts of the Body: yet peculiar saculties are only received in peculiar parts
as in their subjects. For the Soul indeed is in all the parts, which is the
Original of all the faculties: yet such is the nature of proper accidents, that
it exists from a principle or certain cause; yet they insist only in a certain
Subject. Hence Scaliger Exercit. 103. s. 37. You shall see some doubt, whether
Memory be in all parts of the Body. Nay I tell thee, the Understanding is in the
Feet. For we have one Soul every where attended with its faculties, as being
essential thereunto. But where there are Insiruments, there the faculty
exercises its act. For if there were an Eye in the Finger, the Finger would see
by that Eye, without calling any power or faculty from the Brain. For the Soul
which is the same in all parts of the Body, is indeed every where furnished with
the same faculties; and has in all members the power to do whatsoever is proper
to it; yet it performs certain actions by certain instruments; it sees by the
Eye, hears by the Ears, smells by the Nostrils.

But because we are fallen upon mention of the principal part, Which is the
Principal part of the Body.
and the foregoing Question can scarce be rightly resolved, without explication
of the Controversy concerning the principal member in man and other sanguine
Creatures, we must not omit to handle the same. For it is one and the same
Question, which is the Seat of the Soul, and which is the principal member. For
the principality is to be assigned to that member wherein the soul does chiefly
reside. Now that there is one principal member Philosophers and Paysitians
agree, though they contend sharplyh which it is: and reason persuades the same.
For since the soul is not the form of an homogeneal body, but of a body
heterogeneal and organical, which has many and different parts: there must of
necessity be some order established amongst them, and we must believe that one
of them is more worthy than another: and since as has been said, the Hand,
Foot, and other members being cut off, die presently, the rest retaining life,
we must needs think that the Soul has more affinity to one than another. But
what that principal member is, the Platonists, to whom Galen and many
Physicians join, are at variance with the Aristotelians or Peripateticks.

Plato and Galen hold three chief Parts, the Liver, Heart and Brain, and they
assign the principality to the Brain, because therein is the principle of Sense
and motion, and the ratinal soul has there its residence. Contrariwise, the
Peripateticks hold the Heart to be the principal monber.

But several men seem to have several respects in their assigning the principal
part. Galen has respect to the nobility of the actions; but the Aristotelians
respect the Radication (that I may so speak) of the Soul it self. The
Physicians count the animal faculties, so called, most noble; the Peripateticks
make most account of the Action of the Heart, because thereby all the rest are
cherished and governed. And therefore though we may grant Physicians, that
there are three chief members of the Body: Yet if question be made touching the
principality, and the radication of the soul, since there is only one soul in
every Animal, not many, and one Animal has only one soul and specific form;
we must hold there is one principal member, wherein it resides, as in its
Castle: although it perform not all its actions therein, but act definitly and
distinctly in the organs proper and ordained to every distinct action.

Now if you shall ask me which is this member, The Heart is the Principal part.
I do with the Peripateticks aslign the principality to the Heart, and hold
that the soul does stick therein as in its root, from whence it is diffused
into all the rest of the members. Yea and the holy Scriptures ascribe not only
the radication of the Soul to the Heart, but certain other actions also which
most men attribute unto the Brain. And indeed this is a very ancient opinion;
Plato (says Scaliger in his 1. Book de Plantis) learned these things of the
wise men of Egypt, the Egyptians learned them of the Chaldaeans, out of whose
decrees all exact literature has flowed. For the Chaldaeans placed the
Principles of all our motions in the Heart, as in their principle.

Now that the Heart is the Part wherein the Soul adheres as in its root, and
therefore the principal part, is many ways apparent. For that is the principal
member, not wherein as in the immediate Instrument, the most noble action is
exercised; but that whereon the actions of al parts whether ignoble or noble,
do depend, and whereby they are governed. For the prime Agent is more noble
than the secondary and Instrumental Agent. Hence that Argument of Galen is
invalid, who thus concludes; that is the Principle, from whence the Nerves,
Veins, and Arteries arise. For that member seems to be the fountain and seat of
the faculty, from which the Instruments arise. But these three kind of Vessels
have their original from three members; the Veins from the Liver, the Arteries
from the Heart, the Nerves from the Brain. And therefore there are three chief
members, and the most excellent is the Brain. For we must distinguish betwixt
the prime and chief principle of any operation, and the instrumental or
secondary principle. For that which is the immediate Principle of an action, is
not always the first and most excellent. The immediate principle of sense and
motion is the Brain: but yet the soul is not rooted therein.

Nor is that Argument of greater moment, that when the Brain is hurt, the
operations of the sensitive Soul are hurt; to which therefore for the same
cause medicaments are applied. For the first Agent cannot act without
Instruments. And therefore when they are hurt, the action is taken away. And
therefore, though the Heart which is the immediate Agent be well, if the Brain
which is the immediate Agent be hurt, the action is abolished: after the same
manner, the Hand being hurt, although the Brain be well, a man cannot handle or
hold a thing; because the immediate Instrument of handling is hurt.

That therefore must be held to be the principal member, which governs all the
actions of the whole Body; which breeds the common and most familiar Instrument
of the whole Soul, viz. the spirits, but that is the Heart: which besides other
tokens, is manifest from swooning fits, in which sense and Motion, and all the
actions in the body are taken away, through want of spirits which should flow
from the heart.

Moreover, that is the principal Member, according to the unity or plurality
whereof there comes to be one or more Animals. For because an Animal by means
of one soul is one; by means of two, two; that member by the doubling whereof
the Animal becomes double, must needs be held the seat of the Soul. Now that
the Heart is such a member Aristotle tells us, Lib. 4. de Gener. Animal. cap. 4.
and that truly. For experience does teach us, that by multiplication not of the
Brain but Heart, an Animal has been made double. I will produce some Instances
collected by Schenkius, observat. Med. P. 1. Obs. 10. In a certain Town called
Emaus, in the reign of the Emperor Theodosius, a Boy was born, who to the Navel
was perfect, but above he was divided into two, had two breasts, two Heads with
their parts and Senses. For sometimes one part would eat, and the other would
abstain, one would sleep, the other wake, sometimes they would play together,
laugh and weep, and beat one another. Now they lived near upon two years.
Afterward it fell out that when one of them died, the other that remained alive
died by reason of the putrefaction communicated from the other. Again, in the
year 1531. there was one born, and grew to the stature of a perfect man, who
had only two Heads and two Shoulders, so that one Head stood behind the other,
and they were wonderfully like in favor, their Eyes and Beards were alike. They
had the same appetite to meat, were hungry at the same time, had the same
voice, and both Heads had the same desire to the Wife which he had, and to
evacuations. From which Stories it is apparent, that in the first who had a
double Heart, all the Animal actions were doubled, but in the other, though
there were two Heads, yet the actions were single, and that therefore the
Principality belongs to the Heart. For if Sense, Motion, and other animal
actions depend primarily on the Brain, and not on the Heart, why were those
actions double only in the former, in whom besides the Brain there were two
hearts; and not in the latter, in whom there were only two Heads?

Chap. 2. Of the vegetative Soul.
HAving spoken thus much of the Soul in general, it remains now that we treat
of the sorts of Souls. And because the vegetative Soul is common to all living
Creatures, we will begin with the consideration thereof. Now the vegetative Soul
is the act or persection of an organick body, The definition of the vegetative
soul

The three facultie^ thereof.

The nutritive faculty.


whereby it lives, is nourished, increases, and begets it like. There are
belonging to this Soul three faculties: the nourishing, growing, and ingendring
faculty. The nourishing faculty tends to preserve the Individual or particular
living thing; the growing faculty tends to increase the Quantity thereof; the
Generative preserves the kind or sort. For the nutritive or nourishing faculty
is that which turns the food into the substance of the living Body. For since
the parts of a living Body are consumed by the native heat, (lest if there
should be a continued resolution, the Creature should perish) the nourishing
faculty was bestowed thereupon, to repair that which is consumed. Now this
Interchange of resolution and nutrition, lasts as long as the life: for a
living Creature is nourished as long it lives. Aristor. 1. de Genesis et Corrup.
cap. 5. t. 41.

Now to Nutrition three things are necessary, as Aristotle teaches 2. de Anim.
cap. 4. t. 49. The thing nourished, that wherewith it is nourished, and that
which does nourish: now that which nourishes is primarily the Soul, that which
is nourished is the Body which contains it; that wherewith it is nourished, is
the food. Now Zabarella has thus expressed the whole nature of nutrition, in
Lib. de Accret and nutrit. cap. ult. Nutrition is the aggeneration of matter to
the parts in a living Body, caused by the vegetative soul through help of
natural heat, out of the food which is taken in; that the matter which is
steamed away may be restored, and that the living Creature may be preserved, to
the end of the term appointed by nature. Scaliger thus briefly defines it:
Nutrition is a natural union of the changed food.

The Principal faculties have other faculties subservient to them, Four
faculties subservient to the nutritive.
which yet do not arise from the Principal. For one faculty does not possess
another: but they al depend upon, and proceed immediately from the Soul. The
nutritive faculty has four faculties subservient thereunto; the Attractive,
Retentive, Concoctive, and Expulsive: others add the Separative, which severs
things hurtful. The Attractive, is that which draws the food; the Retentive is
that which retains it, til it be duly elaborated; the Concoctive, is that which
alters it and makes it fit for the living Body: the Expulsive, is that which
drives out superfluous matter, which is unfit for nourishment.

Now in the first age, The Augmentative faculty

The definition of augmentation.


not only nutrition is made, but also augmentation, and the parts which are
added to the living Creature are greater than those that are consumed by the
na^ural ^^at. Now Augmentatation or Growth, according to the definition of
Zabarella de accret. and nutrit. cap. 25. is the motion of a living Body,
whereby the whole Body and all the parts are at once extended according to al
dimensions, so as to gain a greater quantity; caused by the Vegetative Soul
through assistance of the natural heat from the food taken in, and converted
into parts of the substance of the Body, greater than what has been consumed;
that the living Creature may attain to that greatness which it ought to have,
that it may perform all the operations of Life. For Accretion or Growth differs
not from Nutrition in the subject thereof, matter out of which it is made, and
the Efficient Cause. For the some surject is the living Body; the Matter out of
which, the Food; the Efficient, the Soul* but they diff ^^ in their form and
End.

For Nutrition is ^he ^g generation of aliment, and belongs rather to
Generation than Motion: but the form of Growth is a motion of extension, to a
greater Quantity of the whole body and all its parts. The End also is different:
For in Nutrition there is only the restoration of what is consumed; in growth
there is an acquisition of more than is consumed. Hence Aristotle, 1. de
Generat. and cor. cap. 5. text. 14. Nutrition is the same thing with Accretion
or Growth; but they differ respectively: For inasmuch as that which is joined
to the Body, is potentially so much flesh, it is able to increase the body: but
inasmuch as it is potentially bare flesh, so far it is able to nourish.

Now because there are many Augmentations improperly so called, The Conditions
of Augmentation.
it is worth cur labor to observe out of Aristotle, Lib. 1. de Generat. and
corrupt. cap. 5. t. 33. three conditions of Accretion or Growth properly so
called, or three things necessary to Accretion. 1. Not only the whole Body must
become greater, but also every part thereof. 2. It ought to become greater, by
means of some matter coming from without. 3. That which is augmented must
continue the same thing in number which it was before. In the first condition
is explained the proper nature of Accretion. For though some doubt (since many
mutations concur in Accretion, and not only the addition of Aliment, but also
extension is necessary) in what mutation the nature thereof should consist: yet
their Opinion is the truer, which join both these mutations together, and hold
that Accretion or Growth consists both in the conversion of the matter of the
Aliment into the substance of the living Creature, and also in the extension of
the said Creature. For Growth is caused by somewhat coming to the body, and the
thing grown has changed its place, 1. de Gener. and Cor. cap. 5. text. 25.

Now, after what manner a greater quantity is acquired in a living Creature,
Authors are also at variance; Some conceive it is done by driving, and that one
part drives another, and another another, after the same manner as we see it is
in the Nails and Hairs: But this is not agreeable to truth. They think more
rightly, who believe that it is done by extension, viz. When the Aliment is
extended through all the parts of the body, and through all the different
postures of the said parts; which comes to pass when all the Pores are filled,
which being full, the parts are extended: and all the parts being extended and
augmented, the whole body is also increased; after the same manner as we see a
sponge grow great, after the water has insinuated it self into all the parts
thereof. Now according to the extension of the Body, the soul is also extended:
and if any man will call it being so extended, greater, let him remember, that
a Form of it self is neither great nor little. Hence Scaliger, Exercit. 101.
Sect. 15. The Form when it extends it self into the newly applied matter, it
advances it self, but is not increased: For it does not generate a new Form.
And verily he that shall call a Form greater or lesser, will abuse the patience
of wise men.

Now living Creatures are not always augmented, but only to a certain term of
their age; the cause whereof is not in the soul: For neither it, nor its
Faculties, which are proper to its Essence, are corrupted or weakened, but only
the body. Nor is the cause in the natural heat; for that is as strong in a young
man, as in a boy. But the impediment is in the body; viz. the bones, which are
the chief part that is augmented, and according to the increase whereof the
whole body is increased, are more moist and soft in youth, and more apt to be
extended; but in succeeding Ages they are so dried and hardened by the natural
hear, that they become unapt to be extended. Although in some elderly persons
the flesh and fat are many times augmented, yet that is no true growth, because
the whole body is not augmented, but only the softer parts.

Finally, The generative Faculty is that which by the prolifick seed begets its
like: The generative faculty.

The definition of generation.


And the Generation of a living Creature, as Aristotle defines it, de Vita et
Morte, cap. 10. Is the first participation of the Vegetative Soul with heat.
For living Creatures are said to beget their like, when they give out somewhat
of their own matter, and their own form; which is then done when they yield
their seed. For in the seed there is both the matter and form of a Dog forth
coming: Nor does the seed of a Dog differ from a Dog, otherwise than as
aptitude from Act; and there is nothing added to the seed, but an expression of
those Organs which were before confused, says Scaliger in Exercit. 268. and
Exercit. 6. Sect. 5. and 7. The form is in the Dogs seed, in the aptitude
whereof it is said to be; because the seed is able and apt to give that form
which it contains in it self; or because it wants the express Instruments,
which afterward the Soul frames to it self, both by altering the whole, and
disposing the parts, and is its self the builder of its own house. And in the
same Exercit. Sect. 10. Therefore a Tree generates when it produces its seed.
But a Tree is not then generated, when it sprouts up out of the seed; but then
the generated Tree, which was before imperfect, becomes perfect. So a Dog does
not engender when the whelp is brought forth, but when he ingenders seed:
Because in the very act of copulation many have died, before the seed received
any disposition or qualification in the Womb. Which we see more evidently in
Plants: For the Almond Tree being dead, a planted Almond taken therefrom grows
up to a Tree. Now the Soul engenders a Soul by promotion of it self; after the
same manner truly, as in growing it insinuates it self into the new matter of
the nourishment.

Now Living Creatures obtained this Faculty of propagating their kind, from
their first Creation by God, when he blessed all living Creatures, saying,
Increase and multiply; and again, Let the Earth bring forth Grass, the Herb
yielding seed, and the fruit Tree yielding fruit, whose seed is in it self,
upon the Earth: and again, Let the Waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that has life, and fowl that may fly above the Earth in the open
Firmament of Heaven: and again, Let the Earth bring forth the Living Creature
after his kind, Cattle, and creeping things, and the Beasts of the Earth after
their kind.

Howbeit the manner of the Propagation of living things is various. In Plants
indeed if a branch of Willow be plucked from the Tree, the Soul is divided by
division of the matter, and abides in the branch; and therefore from the said
branch stuck into the Earth, a Tree of the same sort will grow up. The same is
done in other Plants by their Roots, in others by their seeds, and in others
after other manners propagation is caused; as may be seen in the Writers of
Husbandry. In all which nevertheless it is necessary, that the matter taken
away may afford a fitting Mansion for the soul; which every part in all Plants
cannot afford. For examples sake, A Willow is propagated by a bough stuck in
the Earth; but a Pear Tree cannot be propagated after the same manner.

But in Animals or living creatures, although the manner of Propagation may
also seem to be various, whiles some produce Eggs, others living creatures: yet
herein they seem al to agree, in that Animals do not generate by any part of
their body plucked off as Plants, but by seed, or somewhat which answers to seed.

For the seed which Epicurus (as Plutarch relates, de placit. Philos. Lib. 5.
cap. 3.) called an Abstract of the Soul and Body, being cut off from the rest
of the body, according to the division of the subject, the Soul is also
divided, and some portion thereof is with the seed separated from the Animal;
which being of the same species with the Soul from whence it is taken, is now
become numerically different, in regard of the subject. Out of the seed, by
reason of this soul, a new Animal arises, while the soul lying hid in the seed,
rouses it self, and displaies its Faculties, and by operating manifests it
self; and making use of the innate heat and spirits, it begins to shape al
things necessary to the constitution of an Animal or livnig creature, and
distinguishes, disposes, orders forms, and fashions the subject matter; that so
it may have a perfect and fitting house, like to that from whence it came, and
that it may have Instruments in a readiness, whereby it may put forth al its
Faculties, and exercise al its natural Actions; which house it afterward
possesses, after the same manner as it insinuates it self into the new matter
of Aliment, when the Creature grows.

Howbeit, there is betwixt Plants and Animals, especially the more perfect
sort, this difference; That Plants which breed seed, breed it so qualified,
that it alone suffices to the production of a like Plant: but in the more
perfect Animals which have Sex, the seed of neither Parent is sufficient to
beget their like; but as Plato has it, Each Sex contributes its shot to the
matter of Generations; and the seed of neither Sex taken alone, but of both
joined together, and united in the Womb of the Female, is prolifick and
fruitful seed.

Chap. 3. Of the Parts of Plants.
SInce therefore there are three manners of Life, and Plants live, are
nourished, grow, and generate; Bruits have besides, the use of sense and local
motion; and a Man besides all these, has the use of Reason: having spoke of
the Vegetative Soul, before we shall speak of the Sensitive and Rational Soul,
The definition of a plant.
we must first treat of Plants. Now a Plant (which the Greeks call Phuton) is a
Body animated and vegetative, or endowed with a nutritive and generative
faculty. Where I must in the first place acquaint you with this, of which
mention was made before, viz. How that many are of opinion, that all sorts of
Plants have no other Faculty but the Vegetative, which is common to the whole
kind, but that only the same kind is restrained by certain bounds to the proper
faculty of its own sort. But this is a false Opinion: For if the case were so,
there should be indeed no specifical difference in Plants and Animals; nor
should a Rose differ from an Oak, nor a Mouse from a Lion, except in some
Accidents. But thus we are to hold; That the Vegetative Soul alone does not
constitute any sort of Plants; nor does the sensitive Soul constitute any sort
of bruits, but only an Animal or Living creature, which is the kind
comprehending Man and Beast: but the sorts of Plants and Animals do differ by
their specific forms; as namely a Rose from an Oak, a Fir Tree from a Violet,
a Dog from a Wolf, and a Wolf from a Lion and a Man. And from the difference of
forms proceeds this diversity of Actions, so that among Living Creatures some
are more ingenious than others. And in vain it is that some anxiously dispute,
Whether some Animals besides Man, are not Rational? whether some bruits are
rational?
For those actions we see in some Animals which are more ingenious than others,
do not proceed from a Rational Soul, which is proper only to Man; but from the
Soul that is proper to that sort of Animal. For as a Rose has one soul, a
Poplar another, and therefore the Rose and the Poplar have different
operations: even so, as there is one soul of a Sheep, another of a Sow, another
of a Dog, another of a Fox, another of a Lion, another of an Elephant; so also
all these sorts of Living Creatures do differ both in the structures of their
bodies, and in their specifical actions. And although in some sorts of Animals
actions appear sufficiently wonderful; yet the soul of Man has only gained a
proper name, and is termed Rational: the rest are for the most part destitute
of proper appellations. But that we may speak now of Plants; every Plant
consists of a proper soul, and of a body convenient to its sort.

We have already spoken of the Soul, it remains that we should speak of the
Body. Whether there are two Sexes in Plants?
But first there is a Question that presents it self: Whether the two Sexes are
in Plants? To it Scaliger answers, in 1. de Plantis: There are in Plants (quoth
he) the principles of Male and Female consounded, and that by an excellent
design of Nature. For since Generation is made by an agent in a Patient; Nature
has put into her work, to which she had denied Motion and granted Generation,
proportionable generative faculties joined together, which may be also hence
collected: Because in some Plants it is seen, that of one seed the male, of
another the Female does spring up. Which is apparent in Hemp; Out of the same
trunk proceeds seed, which partly grows to be Male, and partly Female.

Now some parts of Plants are necessary to the constitution of the whole Body;
The Excrements of Plants.
others are superfluous. There are some hard Excrements, as Mushroms, and
Puck-fists; some soft, as tears; and of these, some remain liquid; others grow
hard, as Gums.

Among the parts necessary to the constitution of the body, Their simple parts.
Fibers and Nerves.
besides that same juice diffused through the substance of the whole body,
wherewith Plants are nourished, and which answers to the blood in Animals, the
most simple are, Fibers, Nerves, and Flesh. Fibers, which the Greeks call Ines
(which Scaliger, de Plantis, would rather call threads or hairs; because the
lobes and little roots of the Liver are called Fibrae) are those long,
continued, stretched out parts, running through the whole Plant, answering to
Veins, Arteries, Nerves, and Fibers in Animals; the greater and more succulent
whereof are called Veins and Ribs, but the thinner and drier are called Nerves:
And they are made both for the nourishments distribution into all parts of the
Plant, and also for their firmness and consistency. The flesh is the remaining
substance of the Plant, answering to musculous flesh in Animals. Flesh.
Now the flesh is of three kinds; some is moist, such as is in Cherries,
Prunes, and such like fruit; some is a little more solid, such as is the pulp
of a Pear and an Apple; some is of a more compact and woody substance as it
were.

Of these are made others, which themselves also are numbered amongst the simple
and similar parts; viz. The Wood, the Marrow, and the Bark. Wood.
The Wood in Plants called Lignum, is a body hard, that will cleave, and
consists of thin sibres: the middle part in the Wood is called the Marrow,
Pith, or Heart: The Coat wove together of Fibers, Marrow.
going about the wood is termed Cortex, the bark; which when it is very thin,
Bark.
it is by a special name called Cutis, the Skin or Rind, especially in Fruits,
whose flesh is always covered with skin: that which is thicker is called by
the general term Bark. Howbeit the Bark it self is not simple; but in most
Plants there is an outer, and an in^er: The inner is called Liber.

As to the compound parts of Plants, some are constant, others mutable. the
Compound parts. Root.
The constant are, the Root, the Stock, the Bough, the Branch: The mutable are,
the Leaves in most, the Flowers, the Fruits. The Root is the lowest part of a
Plant, whose Office is, not only to fasten the Plant and support it in the
Earth, but also to draw its nourishment; and therefore it is compared to the
Mouth in living creatures; yea, and by some the concoction of the Aliment drawn
out of the Earth is ascribed to the Roots.

The Stock, the stock, stalk, trunk Branches, Boughs, twigs. Suckers.
Stalk, or Trunk of a Plant, is that part which rises immediately from the
Root. Which is indeed soft in Herbs, and is termed the stalk; but in Trees and
woody shrub^ it is hard, and termed Caudex the stock. The stalk and stock parts
into branches, and the part where the branch issues is properly called a knot;
the branches are divided into boughs and twigs; besides these there are
suckers, or small twigs that grow up out of the Root.

Our of the boughs and twigs spring the Leaves, Leaves, Flowers, Fruit.
Flowers, and Fruits; and in some Plants tendrels, fingers, or claspers, by
help whereof they rear and sustain themselves against some wall, pale, tree,
etc. Parts of the Leaves are the little stalks they grow by, yet some Plants
have them not, as the Indian Fig Tree.

The Flowers to Plants are as the child in the womb, Flowers.
which come to perfection in the seed and fruit, or they are rather the first
covering of the fruit. Now the Flowers consist of a most thin exhalation and a
subtle spirit, which breaks forth when any Plant does grow wanton and big with
desire of generation. For there is no emission of seed without such a spirit,
nor any propagation of the soul, in Plants nor in Animals. Now the Flower
includes within it self, and defends the fruit when it first breaks forth, till
it becomes more firm and able to bear the injuries of the Air. For then the
spirit ceasing and failing, which breaks out with the fruit, and in the act of
Generation, the flower falls off. Howbeit all Plants do not blossom, nor do all
that blossom bear fruit. Now the flowers are compounded of diverse parts: For
they consist of very thin Leaves, severally colored, shaped, and ranked in
several Plants. the Cup.
Then is the Cup wherein the little Leaves are planted as in their basis, and
wherein they are shut as in a case. There are also threads or hairs, such as the
yellow in Lillies and Roses; finally, there are the small stalks by which the
flowers hang.

Finally, Fruit.
there is the Fruit, by which word we sometimes understand the seed; sometimes
beside the seed, the flesh with the seed is after a special manner termed
Fruit. For the seed is either contained in Cods, as that of beans and pease; or
in Cases; or in the pulp of the fruit, as in prunes, pears, cherries. Now the
Greeks term that same flesh or substance which compasses the seed, Pericarpium.
And of these parts do Plants consist, and some have all these parts, others
not. And some have only one of them, others more. The whole substance of a
Pucksist is well near all Root. Contrariwise some have no Root, as Misselto
which is sustained and nourished by the Root of another Plant. Also Toad-stools
have commonly no Root. A Rush has no branches; Dodder no Leaves; the Fig Tree
no flower; the Orice flower no fruit; Maidenhair neither flower nor fruit.

Besides these parts, some Plants also have others, which grow out of an
excrementious humor. Such is the moss of old Trees, the little spunges on
Dogs-bryar, and other excrescences on other Trees.

Chap. 4. Of the Differences of Plants.
NOW Plants are divided into four kinds: the division of Plants.
Dendron, a Tree; Thamnos a Shrub; Phruganon a Bush, (which Gaza calls
Suffrutex, though Scaliges like not that word, Exercit. 139.) and Botane an
Herb. Now how these kinds differ, is not so manifest. They are commonly
distinguished by their Trunk, and their continuance: but Scaliger likes not
this kind of Division, Exercit. 389. For also Hart's-tongue lasts all the year
without any Trunk. And Lettice and Coleworts have a kind of trunk, which are
Herbs. He therefore both in the place alleged, and in his 1. de Plantis, thus
distinguishes them: An Herb sends from the Root Leaves, besides those two
common to all, which presently issue out of the pulp of the seed changed; and
in process of time a stalk, though some never have any. But in a Tree and bushy
shrub these Leaves do not first come forth, but in the first place a stalk, and
that one, or many; if one, either it is a great one, and that is a Tree; or a
little one, and that is a shrub; or if many, then it is a bush: and it is the
property of a Tree not to die and come up again; but shrubs and bushes do some
continue as trees, and others die and come up again, as Herbs. Thus then a tree
and a shrub agree, That each has a single trunk. But they differ in greatness,
and sometimes in yearly dying. A bush differs from a tree in smalness, and
therein it agrees with a shrub; but it differs from both in the multiplicity of
its stems or trunks. There is no need it should last all the year, no more than
that a shrub should. An Herb agrees with a shrub in the singleness of its stem,
as the Colewort; sometimes with a bush, in the multitude of its stems, as
Fennel; sometimes with neither, by having no stalk.

But Scaliger seems not to have perfectly explained the whole Business; and
especially there is a doubt concerning the Shrub, which he will have to be
single stemmed, because he held that the shrub had but a single stem: whereas
others attribute a manifold stem to the shrub, and they say that is a shrub
which amongst wooden Plants is of smallest height and thickness, such as Rue,
Sage, Hysop, Marshmallows.

In searching out the Universal Nature of Plants, we must diligently enquire
into their differences: which are indeed very many, so that it is hard to omit
nothing, and in the mean while, not to produce things unprofitable and
superfluous. Now these differences are taken from their Original, Native place,
internal form, external sigure and matter. Now since the internal forms lie
hid, nor are known to the sense, they must be known from the virtues and
qualities which proceed from them.

And first from the manner of propagation, which is manifold. For, first of
all, some Plants spring of their own accord, in such places as are far from the
resort of men, and are not capable of tillage. For the Earth has in it the
hidden seeds of Plants, from the beginning of the world, inserted thereinto by
the Divine Benediction, and she sends them forth out of her bosom; or she
receives seeds brought from elsewhere by Winds and Rains, and other means, and
cherishes them in her lap; which manner notwithstanding does appertain to that
which follows. For in the second place, some Plants spring from others. For
first some Plants are propagated by seed; some by roots, bul^s, boughs and
branches, and some are propagated by one of these, others by more: some spring
from seed alone, as Smallage, Marjoram, Henbane; others hardly or never of
seed, as the Fig Tree; others late, as the Peony; others of a Root alone, as
the Hop, and Acorus; others of seed and branches, as the Rosematy. And the way
of propagation by branches is again threefold; For either the branch or bough
plucked off, is simply stuck in the Earth; and so the Willow and Rosemary are
propagated; or the branch is inserted into another trunk, which is called
Grasting; or when the Suckers which arise from the Root are pulled away. Or
when a branch near the Root has its lower half covered with Earth, the upper
part remaining free. For then that branch sends out Roots into the Earth: which
being done, a year or two after that branch is cut off from the Tree, and
becomes a peculiar Plant: or of one Plant many are made. So the Dressers of
Vineyards are wont to wean their Vines.

Moreover, Some Plants grow in moist places, others in dry. Those which grow in
moist places, grow either in the water it self, or near the water, as on the
banks, or upon Walls and Rocks, and other places, which are moistened by the
appulse, or sprinkling, or vapor of the waters, as Liver-wort and Maidenhair.
Those which grow in the waters, grow either on the top, as Duck-weed, or from
Roots. Also some never mount above the water, as the kinds of Alga, Sea-weed,
or Ore-wood; others spring above the water, as Aquapium. Again, some grow in
Brooks, others in Fountains, others in Ponds, Pools, and Lakes; some grow in
the Sea, others in other places where water has been, but now is not, as
Xanthium, or Ditch-bur. Again, Land Plants do grow some on Mountains, Hills,
Rocks, Walls, House-sides, upon hedges, in fields, meadows, Vineyards, Woods:
others in plain places, earthy, gravelly, sandy, or clayish.

To the Native place also belongs this consideration, that some Plants are
instead of ground to others which grow upon them, as to Moss and Misselto which
grows upon the Oak, the Holm, the Pear Tree, the Hazel, the Linden, the Birch,
the Apple Tree, the Plum-tree, the Fir, the Pine, the Elder, and Chestnut-tree.

Most indeed of the Ancients were of Opinion, That the Thrush having eaten
Misseltoberties, the pulp being digested, the seed was cast out with the dung,
and falling upon such Trees as the Thrush used to sit upon, from that a new
Plant of Misselto sprung upon the said trees. But this conceit is not agreeable
to Reason: For it is not probable, that the seed can so cleave the barks and
pierce into the hard wood of a tree. And why should it not grow upon many more
trees on which those birds nestle, as well as on the foresaid? Nor has there
ever any seed been found in the maws of Thrushes that have fed upon
Misselto-berrirs. Most likely therefore it is, That Misselto is like the horns
which spring out of the bones of Animals, and that the principles of Misselto,
in a juice Natural thereunto, being cherished by the internal heat, and
assisted by the heat external, do grow together into this Plant.

Moreover, some Plants grow most speedily and attain their perfection, others
very slowly; so that this difference is manifest in the Alder, Willow, Peach,
Pitch-tree, and Oak.

Again, some last all the year, as Trees and Capillary Herbs; some continue
not. And of these some die and grow no more, as Wheat, Barley; others grow
again, as Gentian. And of these some last all the year, as Agrimony; and some
perish within the compass of a year in several manners. For some last one
month, others three months; some two years, others three, and others four.
Again, some are perpetually green, as the Fir, the Box; in others their Leaves
fall off, and grow again.

Moreover, some are fruitful, others barren; some bear flowers only, others
both flowers and fruit; and some only once in their life, others often; and
that either yearly, or every other year: and some flower in their first year;
others in the second, third, and some not till their fourth year.

Also in their figure and other qualities partly arising from their forms,
there is a great diversity. For some are straight, others crooked, round,
cornered, Turbant-fashioned, hollow, solid, prickly, without any knot. They
differ in substance, which is spungy, compact, soft, hard, thick, thin, fat,
clammy. Some are temperate, others hot, cold, moist, dry; some are smooth,
others rough, thorny, hairy, downy. The taste of some is sweet, of others
bitter, biting, salt, harsh, sour; others are void of taste. Also some Plants
have taste in all their parts, others in some only. Some have no smell, others
have a strong smell, others a sweet; some a vehement smell, others a weak; some
smell totally, others only in some part.

There is no less variety in their colors. For though al Plants are green; yet
some are more, others less green; some are of a light, others of a deep green;
in some there is a whitish greenness, in others a yellowish, in some a reddish;
some are spotted, and others have no spots.

Moreover, there is a great difference of Plants in respect of the parts
whereof they consist. For the juice wherewith they are nourished, and which
answers to the blood in Living creatures, represents water in some, milk in
others, as in Spurge; in some it has a Saffron dye, as in great Celandine; in
others it represents Oil: and therefore it differs much in color and taste. Also
some juice is wholesome, another purging, another venomous.

Again, The Fibers in some Plants are straight, in others oblique, small, thick,
soft, hard. The flesh is in some thick, compact; in others spungy, tastful,
tastless; also it is of different smell and color in different Plants. The Bark
is fleshy, nervous, clammy, in color, taste, smell, much different: And the same
differences we find in the Wood. The Matrix or Marrow, is in some solid, in
others spungy.

Also there is a great difference of the Roots of Plants. You have a Root
great, small, long, short, continued, cut off; round like a Globe; single and
manifold; fibrous; collected, spreading; deep, shallow; thick, thin; soft,
hard; stiff, limber; crisped, even; straight, bending; compact, spungy; fleshy,
barkish, woody; round, turbant fashioned; single, double; hairy, smooth; rough,
glib; mossie, juycie, dry; consisting of scales, uniform; crumbly, soluble,
boylable, esculent; heavy, light; white, yellowish, red, black; sweet smelling,
stinking; bitter, sweet. A great Root bears a great Plant; a little Root, a
little Plant; a great Root bears a small Plant, as in a Turnep; a little Root a
great Plant, as in a Pine Tree: as Jul. Caesar Scaliger has collected, and
digested these differences, in 1. de Plantis.

The stems do arise some before the Leaves, others with the Leaves, in some
they are perpetual, in others annual; in some straight, crooked, trailing on
the ground, growing upright, thick, thin, solid, hollow, knotty, without knots,
woody, herby, round, four square, three cornered, nervous, streaked, smooth,
rough.

The variety of Leaves is thus digested by Jul. Caes. Scaliger, in 1. de
Plantis. In respect of shape: there are round Leaves, as in Penny-wort, or
Two-penny grass; almost round, as in Bindweed, small Celandine, Asarabacca;
oblong in Hysop; plain in the greatest part of Plants; round and long in
Stone-crop; with a continued edg in the Birthworts; with a crested edg in the
Laurel; a Saw-fashioned edg in the Elm; blunt teeth in Scordium; large toothed
in the two Cichories; full of bendings in the third kind of Cichory, which they
call Monks-head; forked in the Caucalis or bastard Parsley; singered in
Ellebore and Woolfs-bane, lobed in Fern, hair-like in Fennel. In respect of
their Surface, they are rough, biting, sharp-pointed, in Borrage, Nettles,
Artichoaks; they are prickly either by reason of their kind, and that
continually, as the But-Thistle; or by age in a kind, as the Sow-Thistle. Some
have for Leaves real Thorns, as the Corruda or wild Asparagus; some as it were
Thorns or Prickles, as the Juniper. Many have thin leave, Purslane have thick.
The Leaves of most Plants hang on by a small stalk, which is straight or
crooked, long or short. Some have no stalks, as the Lilly. Also from the places
of the Plant; from the root, from the stem, from the branches; on the top; on
the bottom. The Flower-de luce has sharp-pointed Leaves, most Plants have them
blunt. In respect of Quantity: they are great, little, broad, narrow; single,
manifold, In point of relation and situation, some grow thick and close
together, some grow thin and far asunder. In respect of color; they are al in
a manner green, but with a vatious greenness; some few are pale-green, as a
sort of Orach; some red as another sort of Orach and Beets. Also some naturally
die by sickness in the Autumn, as the Bramble, the Vine, the Apple Tree. In
point of situation; some stand bolt upright, others hang down, some are
saddle-shap'd, crooked, crisped, rouled together, hollowed as the Lettuce;
streaked, nerved, veined, with bending Gutters. And what has been omitted in
the former differences; as the soft, hard, leatherish, limber, brittle,
shining, dull, woolly, hairy, smelling sweet, acid, bitter, salt, sweet, harsh,
tastless, continued, with holes bored through, or holes as it were, as in St.
John's Wort. Also the dispositions of trembling, of falling, of abiding, and
turning according to the Sun. Also of order; some are set in a confused manner,
others are orderly placed; some alternatively do cloth the branch at equal
distances, some are set just one against another, whether they be two, three,
or four, compassing the branch like a Crown. Some breed one Leaf upon another.

Flowers do some of them come out before the Leaves, as in the Peach; others
after the Leaves; some come out the first year with the Plants, others the
second or third year, and some later. Also in respect of the time of the year,
there is great variety. For some flower in the Winter, as black Hellebore; some
at the beginning, others at the end of the Spring, some in the Summer: and some
flower once a year, others twice, others thrice. Also the situation and place
from whence Flowers grow, is not the same: for the most part, they grow out of
the stock, the branch or twigs; yet sometimes from the Roots. And some flowers
stick on the small stalks, and those either long or short; Some come out of one
Cup, others out of diverse Cups; some come out like clusters of Grapes, others
like ears of Corn, others in a round tuft, on some there are more flowers, on
others fewer, and some of them have many, some few leaves. Some Flowers are
fertile, others barren, and these do some of them compass the fruit, others are
seated therein. Also there is a great difference in the falling off of the
Flowers, some fall off more slowly, others go away in Down, some are
contracted, others dried.

The same variety is in the colors, odors, taste, and shape, al which can scarce
be perfecty set down.

Finally, The same variety is to be seen in the Seeds, and Fruits. For some
Plants bear fruit, others not, as Hart's-tongue. Of those which bear fruit, some
bear much, others little; some once every year, some twice, others thrice;
again some beat fruit only once in three years. Some bear fruit early, others
late; the Mulberry Tree flowers late, its fruit comes suddenly to perfection;
contrariwise the Peach-Tree soon flowers, but is long ere it bear fruit. Again
some flower late, and bring forth late fruit. Some have fruit and no flower, as
the Fig Tree; some have flowers without fruit, as the Flower-de-luce; but for
the most part the fruits come out of the flowers. Some have fruit of only one
kind, others of diverse kinds, as the Oak. Some produce fruit from their root
and stem, some at their boughs, others on the boughs under the leaves, on the
leaves, above the leaves; and the fruit sticks upright, or dangles, or sticks
fast, or sits, or cleaves, with a stalk, without a stalk, single, double, one,
diverse, thick together, here and there, far asunder, rare.

The Seeds grow, some of them naked, others are shut up in some other
substance. And some are contained in some humor, others in a shel or bone,
others in an hollow bag, and sometimes in one fruit one seed, and sometimes many,
either ranked in order, or without order. There is no less diversity in their
figures; some are round, others oblong, some represent one thing, some another.
In the bags or cods wherein the seeds are contained there is the like Variety.
For some of the Cods may be eaten, but the grain not, as the Ceratia or Careb
fruit. Of some the pulp only is esculent, as the Cassia: some cods are not at
al esculent, as of Bean, Lupines, horned Poppy; some boiled are all eaten cod
and fruit, as french Beans: of some only the Surface is eaten, the skin being
left, as of Pease and the Pigeons-Vetch. Also from the figure there is much
difference: also from the substance of the Grains, their magnitude, figure,
number, marrow, bark, color, situation. Scaliger in 1. de Plantis. In fruits
also, the Rind wherewith they are covered, is thin or thick, hard, boney,
woody, smooth, rough; and al fruits are covered with flesh, skin, or shel. And
with it they are either totally covered, or half covered, and that not after
one manner. For an Acorn is covered in one manner, an Hazel Nut after another
manner. Also there is great diversity of taste in fruits; yea and in one part
there is one fruit, in another another. Also some fruits may be eaten, others
not; and in some that which is to be eaten is within, as in Almonds; in others
both the kernel may be eaten, and the pulp which does compass the same.

Now to illustrate these differences of Plants with examples would be too
redious. This as it has been done by others; so Andreas Matthiolus a most
learned Herbalist, in his Preface upon Dioscorides, has both collected all
this variety, and showed how Plants differ in their native place, their roots,
stalks, flowers, seeds, and fruits.

Chap. 5. Concerning the History of Plants.
FOrasmuch as that which Jul. Caes. Scaliger writes in his Exercit. 104. sect.
6. To collect out of Books such things as have been delivered by the ancients
is very dangerous: the true knowledge of things is learnt of the things
themselves; is both true in other things and most true in the Doctrine of
Plants: they that would gain the knowledge of Plants must of necessity know the
Plants themselves. And although in this Age of ours, he Art of Printing has
afforded great helps to this Intent; seeing not only the History of Plants has
been described and published by many, but also the Plants have been delineated,
and painted out with elegant pictures, by many learned men, especially Tragus,
Matthiolus, Fuchsius, Dalechampius, Pena, Lobelius, Dodonaeus, Clusius,
Taberno-montanus, Baubinus and others; by which it is much easier to know the
Plants than by their descriptions alone: nevertheless Plants are best of all
known by view of the Eyesight.

And seeing in this place it is impossible, by way of compendium to reckon up
al plants, much more impossible to describe the same; and that yet it is very
profitable to the knowledge of Plants, to have the knowledge of certain general
heads, to which al Plants may be reduced; I have thought good in this place to
propound certain Tribes, and a method as it were of Herbarisme, with the names
of the principal, and the virtues of such as are most in use. For though I know
some have been extremely sollicitous, laboring to reduce all to Dichotomies:
yet how unhappily they have acquit themselves therein, the success does show.
And therefore I have chose herein rather to imitate Lobel and others, who have
distributed some Plants at least into certain Tribes. It will be easy for any
man to fetch the perty divisions and enumerations from the foresaid Authors,
and there to see their Pictures and Descriptions. Only this I shall hint by the
way, that many are indeed superstitious in reckoning up abundance of names and
differences of Plants; but very short and bare in seeking out their virtues. It
is better in my opinion, to know fewer Plants, and to understand their virtues
withal, than to be able to reckon up the names of abundance, which many
illiterate Gardeners are able to do; and to be quite ignorant of their
faculties and Qualities.

Tribe I. Mushrumps and Toad-stoals.
Since Nature, yea rather God himself the Author of Nature, contrives and works
nothing without order; and that order is also most clearly to be seen in
Plants; therefore I think fit to begin with Mushrumps, and Puck-fists, which
are as it were the Rudiments of Plants. Puck-fists grow within the Earth,
without any stalk, leaf, sibre or thread. Moshrumps do some grow out of the
Earth, others upon the stocks of Trees. Those which grow out of the Earth, are
some of them soon ripe, in April: others come late, in Autumn; among which
there is great difference, from their shape, color, and other Qualities; and
some are fit to be eaten, others are venomous. The several kinds have in sundry
nations their peculiar names. Crepltus lupi, the round Puck-sist.
There is also a peculiar sort, round like a ball, sticking to the ground
without any stalk, whitish in color, which being dry becomes poudery: it dries
without any biting, and is therefore used to heal places where the Skin is
galled off, and by Surgeons to stop Blood.

Among Mushrumps that grow on Trees, Agarick.
the most noble is Agarick, which is white, spungy, sweetish in taste,
especially that which grows upon the Larch-Tree. It is very well known to
Physicians, for purging cold and phlegmatic humors. Touch-wood, Touch-wood.
well known for its use as tinder in striking fire, does also grow on Trees. St.
Mary's Bal so called, or Halcyonium, is a kind of Toad-stool, also the
Seaspunge.

Tribe II. Mosses and Mossie Plants.
Moreover amongst the Rudiments of Plants are also the Mosses and certain
mossie herbs: amongst the which notwithstanding some perfect Herbs are
reckoned. Now Moss is an hairy substance sticking to the stocks of old Trees,
upon the ground, and on stones, also swimming upon the water. And there is, I.
Earth-moss, which they call Lycopodium, Wolfs-claw, of three sorts, the
greatest, middlemost, and smallest. II. Hitherto appertain certain creeping
herbs, as hairy Moss, Golden Maidenhair, and Ros Solis. III. The common Moss
of Trees, and Broad-leav'd Moss or Lungwort, which heals the Ulcers of the
Lungs. IV. Lichen Liver-wort, which grows to Stones, in dark and moist places.
The Apothecaries call it Hepatica, others call it Hepatica Petraea, Stone
Liver-wort, because it is good against inflammations of the Liver and Fevers
proceeding from Choler. For it is cold and dry and a little astringent; whence
it stops bleeding, and resists inflammations of the mouth. V. Sea-Moss, of which
there are many sorts. VI. Corallina.
Corallina which is also a Sea-Moss, having a drying and astringent faculty,
and kills Worms and drives them out the same day, to admiration. VII. Fucus
Marinus, Seaweed: of which there are also some kinds; among which is the
Sea-Oak so called. VIII. Maidenhair.
Hither may be referred the common Maidenhair of the Shops, because of the
likness it has in its stalks to capillary Mosses: appropriated chiefly to the
Breast and Lungs, whose gross humors it extenuates: also it breaks the Stone.
IX. Wall-Rue, or white Maidenhair, growing in moist places, Wall-Rue. Duckweed
and on old Walls; like in faculty to the black and vulgar Maidenhair
aforesaid. X. In this Tribe may be reckoned Duck-weed, which is as it were a
Moss, swimming on the top of standing waters: it cools and represses
Inflammation.

Tribe III. Grasses.
In the third Tribe we rank Grasses, among which the first is the vulgar meadow
Grass, with long, white, knotted and sweet roots, the decoction whereof is good
for the Kidneys and Bladder, and opens their obstructions, and the obstructions
of the Liver: it kills Worms also.

There are sundry sorts of Grass; Wood-Grass, Cats-tail-Grass, Cypress-Grass,
Knot-Grass, Dog-Grass, Painted-Grass, Sorgh-Grass, Miler-Grass, Canary-Grass,
Stanch-blood-Grass, Manna-Grass, Esculent-Grass, shining-Grass, Oat-Grass,
Fox-Grass, Wild-Chamomel-Grass, Corn-Grass, Bulbous-Grass, Reed-Grass, Grass of
Parnassus, Water-Grass, River-Grass, Rush-Grass, Panick-Grass, Sea-Grass,
Flowty-Grass, Wooly-Grass, Hares-Grass, Broom-Grass, Grass-nobone, Clove-Grass,
or Gilloflower Grass, Mous-tail, Spider-Grass, Sword-Grass or Sedg.

Tribe IV. Reedy Plants.
The fourth Tribe contains Reeds and reedy Plants. Arundo, a Reed, which the
Greeks call Calamos, contains many sorts. For there is in the first place the
vulgar small reed, which is called Phragmites, good to tharch Houses and to fence
Gardens; after that is the solid or full Reed, which is not hollow, called
Nastos, of which Darts are made. There is also the pipe Reed, the Donax or
Cyprian Reed, the broad-leav'd Indian Reed or Cane. Also to the family of Reeds
belongs the Water Cats-tail.

Among Reeds the most excellent are the Calamus aromaticus or spicy Reed,
Calamus Aromaticus.
and the Sugar Cane. For though at this day Apothecaries use the root of the
Tree Acorus in stead of Calamus aromaticus: yet that is not the Calamus of the
Ancients, which was not a Root, but a reedy hollow Cane in Syria near Mount
Lebanon, and in Arabia and India; Which Reed though hitherto it has been
almost out of knowledge; yet it is now come to light again; and is every where
to be had at the Apothecaries. It heats and dries, is gently astringent, a
little biting, and by tenuity of its parts opens the passages of the Body,
moves the Courses, and refreshes the spirits.

Moreover, The Sugar Reed, or Sugar-Cane, is spungy and full of pith, The Sugar
Cane or Reed.
and within full of a most sweet juice, which either drops out of the Trunk
being cut, or it is drawn out of the pith by boiling, which boiling is
continued til the liquor congeal into Sugar, resembling Salt.

To this Tribe may be referred the several sorts of Flower de-luce, which
differ chiefly in the color of the flowers, and have their name from the
Rainbow which they represent in their partly-coloured flowers. There are two
sorts especially now in use; the one is the vulgar which has a blew flower,
whose Root, especially the juice pressed thereout, does powerfully purge the
water from such as have the Dropsy. To which belongs the small thinleav'd
Flower-de-luce, also the Chamaeiris or ground Flower-deluce. The other has a
white Flower and Root which smells like a Violet, and therefore the Germans call
it Viol-wortel or Violet Root: it has a spicy faculty, heats and extenuates,
and is good for the Heart and Brain, but especially for Chest. There are also
the Dalmatian, Chalcedonian, double flowred, and Portugal Flowers-de-luces etc.
To this family belongs also the Spatula faetida, Xiris or stinking Gladon,
having a stalk and leave^ like the Flower-de-luce, but blacker and stinking,
its flowers also are alike but lesser and of an obscure purple color. Also the
wild yellow Flower-de-luce. Nor is the Water-gladon with purple flowers to be
shut out of this Tribe, though by others referred to the following Tribe. Some
call it Juncus floridus, and Gramen arundinaceum; Dodoneus terms it Platanaria,
and Matthiolus Sparganium.

The Acorus also or Acorum belongs to this Tribe, The Acorus verus.
which the Shops very erroneously do call Calamus Aromaticus. And this is the
true Acorus, in stead whereof the Apothecaries do sometimes badly make use of
the bastard yellow Flower-de-luce, whereas their faculties are far different:
for the bastard Orice is void of smell, cools and binds: but the true Acorus is
of a spicy smell and taste, heats and dries, moves Urine, is good for Gripings in
the Guts, and for pains of the Sides, Chest, and Liver. Also the Cyperus, long
and round, and the bastard Cyperus. Cyperus.
Now the roots of Cyperus do heat and dry, and are a little astringent, and
therefore good to bring moist Ulcers to a Scar: Also they have a cutting
faculty, and therefore are good for such as have the Stone, cannot Piss freely,
and want their monthly Courses. Also Galangal the greater and lesser sort,
which heats, and helps al cold Diseases caused by phlegm, discusses Wind, and
helps the Cholick. But the smaller sort is more effectual than the other. Some
also refer to this Tribe Costus, Zedoary, and Ginger.

Tribe V. Rushes.
To the reedy Plants aforesaid, Rushes are nearest of kin, and therefore they
make up the fifth Tribe. Now they are all void of Leaves, and instead of Leaves
have long round stalks, void of knots, and ending with sharp points. There are
sundry even, short knotted Rushes which grow in the waters and watery places.
Schaenanthum is the flower of a certain odoriferous Rush. Spartum seems to
belong to this Tribe. Also some refer the sorts of Equisetum or Hors-tail to
this family: which have indeed thin rushy Leaves growing about the Joints, but
knots withal. To the sorts of Hors-tail also pertains the female Knot-Grass
which grows in moist places, Asparagus
and by Brooks and Rivers. Also Asparagus is reckoned amongst these; which word
in general signifies the tender stalk of any Plant when it first springs up:
but it signifies more peculiarly a Plant that sends forth such young stalks sit
to be eaten. It is Garden or Wild; and of the Wild there are certain sorts.

Tribe VI. Bulbous and Tuberous Plants.
Seeing among Bulbous Plants there are many which have affinity with certain
reedy and rushy ones of the two former Tribes; therefore we marshal the Bulbous
Plants in this sixth Tribe next to them; specially because there are some
Bulbous Plants, one sort where of is only bulbous; the rest agreeing with other
Rushes even in the Root. Now a Bulbous (whence this Tribe is termed) is a
certain kind of Root short and round, and consisting of many Skins or Scales
one within another, as you see in an Onion. The first of these is the
Asphodelus bulbosus Galeni, Galen his Daffodil with a bulbous root. And then
there are other Daffodils, whose roots are not really bulbous, but long-round,
somewhat like to Acorns, and of those also there are many sorts. I. There is one
with a white flower, and that is greater o^ lesser, which in stead of Roots
has many thick fibers. II. There is also a white-flowred bulbous Plant called
Ornithogalum Birds-milk, and Yellow Birds-milk, or Ornithogalum of Narbon. III.
There are three or more sorts of a Bulbous Flower-de-luce. IV. Single Gladen,
bearing flowers on both sides. V. Sisynrichium, the greater and lesser. VI.
Sundry sorts of Hyacinths or Crows-toes, for there is an oriental one greater
and lesser; there is the Botroides of two kinds; the hairy, the autumnal
greater and lesser. VII. Narcissus, the Water Daffodil, of which there are many
sorts; one purple in the middle; another yellow in the middle; and that is not
of one kind, there being one al white and double, another Rush-leav'd, greater
and less; a wild yellow one greater and lesser, and the Sea Narcissus. VIII.
The Bulbous Stock Gilloflower, that with three leaves, and that with four, that
with many leaves, and that of Autumn. IX. Sundry sorts of Tulips. X. the
Wool-bearing Bulbous, and the Flos Tigridis. XI. Sundry sorts of Lillies, the
White, the Purple, the Blood-red, of which there are some sorts. The
Hemorocallis or wild Lilly which lasts but a day; the Martagum, the Crown
Imperial. The white Lilly.
Now though there are sundry sorts of Lillies: yet the white Lilly is more used
than any of the rest, which has a rate virtue to soften hard swellings and
ripen them, and to take away obstructions; of the flowers of this Lilly a neat
Oil is made, which asswages pain. XII. Fritillaria. XIII. Colchicum, Meadow
Saffron, which most call Ephemeron; and which have wrongfully used in stead of
Hermodactilis. Now there are two sorts of this Colchicum, Ephemeron or
Meadow-Saffron; the first is of a strangling nature, and will choke a man to
death; the other strangles not and is properly called Meadow-Saffron: but the
true Hermodactil differs from them both. XIV. The Lilly which is not bulbous,
called the Lilly convally, or the One-leav'd Lilly. XV. The true Saffron,
Saffron.
whose flowers which are in use are hot and dry, does recreate the Spirits and
strengthen the Heart, breed cheerfulness, make all the Senses quick, cure the
obstruction of the Liver and the Jaundice, move the Courses, provoke Urine, and
incite to Generation; yet too much thereof is hurtful. There is a wild Saffron,
a Spring Saffron of several sorts, and an Autumn Saffron. XVI. The Squil
The Squil or Sea-Onion, which has a rare cutting faculty, and is therefore
commended against cold Diseases of the Brain and Nerves. XVII. Panoratium, a
Sea-Onion so called, has affinity with the Squil. XVIII. Moly, Ladies-Cushion,
or Sea-Grass, the Narrow-leav'd, Broad-leav'd, and the Indian. XIX. The several
sorts of Onions and Leeks, to which pertain the Rush-Leek, the Vineyard-Leek;
Garden Garlic, and sundry sorts of wild Garlic, as the narrow-leav'd,
broadleav'd or Bears-foot Garlic, and that of the Alps. XX. Many kinds of the
Orchis, Gander-Goose or Dog-stone, which have sundry names from their shapes.
XXI. Sundry forts of Palma Christi and Satyrium or Ladies-Traces, Ladies-Traces.
Stander-Grass. Of which one kind is now in use, whose Roots are kept in the
Shops, preserved in Sugar, and being of a temper hot and moist, are thought to
be very good for Persons in a Consumption, and strongly to provoke to
Generation. XXII. To this Tribe is referred and reckoned for an Orchis the
Bifolium or Tway-blade, which most do call Ophris; Tway-blade.
which is also of two kinds.

Tribe VII. Corns and Pulses.
To the seventh Tribe we may refer Corns and Pulses: amongst which Wheat is
Captain, after which comes Zea, Zeopyron, Secale, or Rogga Rye, Barley, Oats,
Turkish Wheat, viz. al such Grains of which Bread is made. But Legumina
Cerealea, Pulses, Galen tells us are such as of which bread is not made: as
Rice, Milet, Panick, Beech-Corn; though some count these Corns and reckon none
for Pulses but such as are pulled up by hand. Amongst which nevertheless
Authors reckon many things which are food only for Beasts, and not for men,
whose seed is in daily use; such as are Beans, French Beans, sundry sorts of
Pease and Hastisers, Vetches, and Tares; of which many sorts, Wild and Garden;
Lentiles, Erets, Lupines, Sesamus.

To which family may be reduced such Plants as have some affinity to these, or
which are bastard and corrupted Corns and Pulses, some of which notwithstanding
are used for Food; such as are the Fox-tail, Wild and Garden-Flax, Hemp, (which
others refer to the Trefoils or three-leav'd Plants) Garden and Wild;
Faenugreek Garden and wild; Hedysarum, Securidaca, and Hors-shoo; Galega,
Goats-Rue or Cocks-comb, Galega
which is of great efficacy against the Plague; Onobrychis, Earth-Acorns,
Astragolus, Anthyllis leguminosa, Stella leguminosa of Lobelius. Birds-foot,
Aphace, several sorts of Wild Vetches, Sea-Wheat, Bromos Wild Oats, Cow Wheat,
Smutted Corn, Orobanche and Anblatum of Cordus, Tribulus terrestris or Caltrop.
Some refer to this place Cassutha or Dodder, which removes obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, helps the Jaundice, moves Urine, and is good against Diseases
springing from Choler and Melancholy also the Leguminous Capar is referted to
this Tribe.

Tribe VIII. Trefoyls, Cinque-foyls, and Herbs of that Family.
In the first place, there are many kinds of Trefoyls, or three-leav'd Plants:
Meadow-Trefoyl or Clover, shrubby Trefoyl, codded Trefoyl, American Trefoyl,
Heart-fashioned, spoon-fashioned, horn-fashioned, odoriferous Trefoyl, or
Melilor. Also all the forts of Lotus and Melilotus, Cytisus and bastard
Cytisus, the Medica, the sorts of Zapogus, four Trefoyl or Wood Sorrel, which
Pliny calls Oxys, Golden Trefoyl, or Golden Liver-wort, Marsh Trefoyl.

Also there are sundry sorts of Cinquefoyls or Five-leaved Herbs: The great,
the less, the Ash-colored, the creeping, the marrish or berry-bearing
Cinquefoyl. Whereunto belongs Tormentil, Tormentil.
the Root whereof resists putrefaction, is good against the plague, and moves
sweat; it stops the bellies looseness, flux of blood, and the Courses. Also it is
good for such as are fallen from on high, and who are suspected to have
received some inward hurt. Moreover, there are other Plants also, which have
commonly two Leaves opposite one to another, not unlike the sorts last
reckoned, but at the end of the branches they resemble Trefoyls, Ononis.
and may be reckoned in this Family. Such are Anonis or Ononis, Restharrow, the
bark of whose Root moves urine, and breaks the stone: Strawberry Leaves, wild
and Garden Liquoris, Liquoris.
whose Root makes the windpipe smooth, is good for the Chest and Liver,
quenches thirst; cures the scabbiness of the bladder, and pain of the kidneys;
Broom, Broom,
perry Broom. Now the seeds of Broom have a faculty to loosen the belly,
provoke urine, and break the stone both in the Reins and bladder. Hence a
Conserve made of the flowers thereof is very good to remove obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen. Hypericum, St. John's Wort: St. John's Wort
of it an Oil is made, most effectual to heal wounds. Also this Herb has the
faculty to provoke Urine and the Courses.

Centory the Lesser, Centory.
which being beaten green, and laid on, cures wounds, and purges ulcers. It is
exceeding bitter, and therefore it is called the Gall of the Earth, and cures
Fevers, and has its name thence in the German Tongue; it kills worms. Flos
Solis, the flower of the Sun, like to Cistus and Ledus.

Sena, Sena.
which is now known sufficiently not only to al Physicians, but even to the
common people. For it has a rare faculty to open, digest, cleanse, gently
purge, and also wonderfully to comfort and strengthen all the members of the
whole body; so that it is a purge for all Sexes, and for all long and melancholic
Diseases most convenient.

Rue has no small affinity with some Herbs of this Tribe already mentioned, Rue
both the wild and garden Rue, which is hot and dry, of subtle parts,
discusses wind, cuts thick and clammy humors; and consequently cures shortness
of breath and a cough proceeding of a cold cause; it moves Urine and Courses,
and takes away the Appetite to Generation: among the wild sorts is reckoned
also Hermala.

Nor must we in this place omit Fumitory, Fumitory
which is hot, though accidentally by purging choler it cools, and therefore is
by some said to be cooling, though falsely; it opens, and frees the Liver and
Spleen from obstructions, purifies the blood, and provokes urine. And therefore
it cures Fevers, and all Diseases springing from adust humors; and is most
effectual and safe in curing the itch, and other diseases of the skin; since in
the mean while it strengthens the Liver, stomach, and other bowels. Hither also
must we refer Thalietrum or Thalictrum, Fluxwort, the greater and lesser.
Finally, hitherto belongs Madder, to which Clivers, Mollugo, Ladies Bedstraw,
sweet Wood-towel, and other sorts thereof do retain; Cruciata, Cross-wary,
Gentian.

Tribe IX. Anemonies, Crowfoots, Cranes-bills.
Next to the foregoing Tribe, we fitly rank Anemonies, Crowfoots, and
Cranes-bils. There are many sorts of Anemonies, differing in Leaves, Roots, and
Flowers. There is a tuberous sort; one whth many Flowers; one that has three
Leaves. Hither some refer the Flower of Adonis, as also Dentaria alabastrites,
or Viola dentaria and pulsatilla. To these also may be reckoned the greater and
lesser hollow Root, which some wrongfully use for Round Birthwort Root.

Moreover, There are also many Crows-foots; some sorts of Garden Crow-foots;
and diverse wild ones. There is the simple tuberous Crowfoot, and that with the
many flowers, the Grassie Crowfoot, the Illyrian, the Alpine, the greater and
lesser Spear-crowfoot. In this Family may be reckoned Wolf-bane the greater and
lesser yellow; also the little purple and blew one; also the Napellus and
Anthora.

Thirdly, There are many sorts of Cranes-bils; the tuberous, Herb Robert, the
musked or muscovy, the Cretick, Doves-foot, Cranes-bill, Geranium supinum,
Frog-like, Mountanous, etc.

Tribe X. Gilloflowers, Rose-Campians, Violets, and the kinds of Loose-strife,
and certain allied Plants.
Gilloflowers, which some call Betonica or Vetonica, and Flores tunicis,
Gilloflowers
are of sundry sorts, differing both in the color and figure of the Flowers,
and other ways. There is the great and the little, the single and double, the
white and purple; also the feathered, wild, and proud Gilloflower. Also many
sorts of Armenian flowers; among which the most remarkable is the Carthusians
Gilloflower, and the Viscaria or Catch-fly. But among all the Garden
Clove-Gilloflowers are most in use, Clove-gilloflowers.
which with the sweetness of their smell do wonderfully refresh the spirits, and
are exceeding friendly to the Brain, Liver, Stomach, and Heart. Hence their
Syrup is cordial, good against poisons, and the bitings of venomous Beasts, and
is commended by late Writers to increase blood, and strengthen the Liver.

Nor is there less variety of Lychnides or Rose Campians; for first there is
Lychnis Coronaria, to which belongs the Flower of Constantinople, and the
Lychnis of Chalcedon. Moreover there is a wild one with a single, and another
with a double flower; a sort whereof is Ocimastrum or bastard Basil, by some so
called. Hither also belongs the Herb commonly called Papaver spumeum. Nor is
bastard Nigella a stranger to this Tribe, not Soapwort, Gentian, and Cruciata,
or Dwarf-Gentian.

Thirdly, In this Tribe may be Ranked the purple Violets, with the sweet
flower, Violets
both simple and double. These Violets are cold and moist, and the flowers are
good for internal Inflammations of the Breast, and smooth the roughness of the
Throat and Windpipe; allay the heat of the Liver, Reins, and Bladder; mitigate
the acrimony of choler, and consequently take away the heat and thirst of
Fevers, and strengthen. Also there is a wild Violet without color; also three
color'd Violets, or Herb of the Trinity, which we call Hearca-ease and Pansies.

Then there is the Leucoion, or white Violet, with a single and a double
flower. Also the yellow Leucoium, which the Arabians call Reiri; whose flowers
and also the seed move the courses, bring forth the S^condine and child; the
Oil made of them is good to resolve cold humors, to assuage pains, and to
strengthen the Nerves.

Among these are reckoned the Viola matronalis, or Matrons Violet, or Lunaria
Graeca; to which the Viola Mariana is of kin, or the Viola Calathiana or
Pneumonanthe: as also Flos ambarvalis, commonly called Polyganon: to which
appertain Cervicaria major, media, minima.

Next come the sorts of Digitalis, especially differing in the color of the
flowers. Yea, among these may be numbered Aquilegia, chiefly distinguished by
the variety of flowers: Aquilegia
A dram whereof in powder is given to such as have the Jaundice, to make them
sweat. It Is commonly used to drive out the Meazles and small Pox.

To this Tribe may be reduced Lysimachium or Lysimachia, Loos-strife, whose
sorts are, the yellow, the purple; and there are many kinds thereof, some of
which have the flowers upon the top of the stalk like a fore-top, or as an ear
of Corn; others have them in Cods, which are therefore termed Codded
Loos-strifes. There is also a sort which may be called the Shrubby Loos-strife.
Among the bastard Lysimachia's there is reckoned a blue one. Moreover, because
of the affinity of the flowers, we add both some water and marish Herbs: as
Water-violets, Frogs-bit, white Water-Lilly, yellow Water-Lilly, Water
Crowfoot, Water Archer, the Marish Marigold.

Tribe XI. Other Plants remarkable for their Flowers.
To this Tribe many and sundry Plants may be referred, among which in respect
of the greatness of the Flower, Chrysanthemum Peruvianum, or the Flower of the
Sun of Peru, may justly be Captain. In the next place Elecampane, whose Root is
of great use, Elecampane
being good against poisons and biting of poisonous beasts, is helpful to such
as cannot fetch breath without sitting upright, cuts gross humors in the
breast, and cures the Cough, moves Urine and Courses, helps the stomach and
digestion.

Next come the other sorts of Chrysanthemum or Golden flower, which are
commonly called Oxen-eyes. To which the sorts of Chamomel are allied: also
Eranthemum, or flower of Adonis, which some reckon among the Anemonies, as we
said before.

Chamomel is frequently used in Physic: Chamomel
it heats, is loosning, discussive, mollifies internal and external pains. Of
kin to Chamomel, and as it were a wild Chamomel, is Cotula foetida. Also the
kinds of Matigolds are to be referred to this Tribe, as also the African
Flower: also sundry sorts of Blew-bottles: Tragopogon Goats-bead, and
Scorzonera.

To this Tribe also Nigella or Gith is a retainer, Nigella
whose seed heats, dries, cuts, and extenuates: being smelt to frequently it
dries up the distillations of the Head: taken inwardly, it discusseth winds,
cuts phlegm, moves the Courses, helps shortness of breath. Pellitory also.

Hither also are to be referred the Daisies both Garden and wild: and the After
a^ticus, or Star-wort. Nor are the sorts of Tansies unlike in flower, as the
common sweet Tansie, the crisped, the Tansie without smell, the little white
Tansie. Also Matricaria or Feaverfew belongs to this sort, which others reckon
among the Corymbiferous Plants, that bear clusters of Berries. Tansie Feverfew
Now Tansie is an hot and dry Herb, and bitter: it kills worms, moves Urine.
Feaverfew is hot in the third, dry in the second degree: it opens, clenses, is
good for the Womb, and brings away the dead child: it cures the Tissick,
Melancholy, and the stone. Peony brings up the Rear in this kind, having a
goodly Flower. The Root whereof is especially good against the
Falling Sickness, and strengthens the Brain and Nerves.

Tribe XII. Poppy, Henbane, Nightshade, and Herbs of kin to them.
First there is Garden Poppy of many sorts, Poppy Opium
differing chiefly in the flower and seed. All Poppies have a cooling sleepy
faculty; but the black is the strongest. Of Poppy Opium is made, which is the
juice which drops out of the Heads of black Poppy in hot Countries, the said
heads being cut; and it is afterward condensed. That of Thebes is most
commended. Now it is bitter, of a strong smell, causes sleep and stupifies.
Touching the Quality thereof Physicians are at variance: while some make it
cold in the fourth degree, because of its sleepy stupifying faculty; others say
it is hot, in regard of its bitterness and acrimony. But now adays not only
Chemists, but other learned Physicians hold, That sleep and stupefaction is
caused, not so much by its coldness, as by a stupefying Sulphur, which is
found also in hot things, as in Spirit of Wine: and from such a Narcotick
Sulphur Opium has al its force; but its bitterness it has from a bitter salt.
A token whereof is this, That being largely taken it causes a drouzy dullness,
with an itching all the Body over: and the Turks use their Maslach to make them
courageous in Battle, wherewith they become as it were drunk. After this comes
Red Poppy, or Corn-Rose; also horned Poppy, of which there are some kinds, and
Hypecoon.

Also Henbane is manifold, white, black, yellow; Henbane of Peru, which they
call Tobacco. It also, though hot and dry in the second Degree, has nevertheless
a Narcotick Faculty; the smoke taken in a pipe draws Rheum out of the Brain;
the juice given to strong persons, purges by stool, the operation being
followed by a deep sleep. Some give the water stilled out of the Leaves in
Agues before the fit, to drive the same away. An Oynt meant is made thereof good
for Wounds.

There is Garden Nightshade, Winter-Cherries
and Winter-cherry Nightshade, of which there is an outlandish sort. The Winter
Cherries have a notable faculty to provoke Urine, and to bring gravel from the
Kidneys and Bladder. There is also a deadly sleeping Nightshade. Hithes also
belongs the Mandrake. Also of this Family are the Apples of Love, Golden
Apples, or mad Apples of Aethiopia; also the Thorn-apple; and Strychnodendrum,
or Woody Nightshade.

Tribe XIII. Endives, Cichories, Lettices, and Plants of kin to them.
To this Tribe belongs Garden Endive, Endive, Cichry, Dandelion, Gum-Cichory
broad leaved and wild Cichory, Dandelyon, Gum Cichory; al which are cold and
dry, bitterish, whence they open and cleanse, and are a little astrictive;
whereby they strengthen the Bowels. Hence they are most profitably and most
frequently used in opening the obstructions of the Liver, and other Bowels, and
in clensing away cholarick humors. Sundry sorts of Hawkweed are of this Tribe;
also Groundsel, Ragwort, Sow-thistle, and sharp thistle; many sorts of Garden
and wild Lettice. Al Lettices moist and cool, help a choleric stomach, and
procure sleep.

Tribe XIV. Orach, Beets, Colewort, Docks, Rocket, Mallows, Cresses, and Herbs
of kin to these.
In the first place there are sundry sorts of Orach; The Garden, the Wild, the
Sea Orach; Bonus Henricus and tota bona, English Mercury; which some
nevertheless refer to the sorts of Docks: Pes anserinus, Goof-foot. Then there
are Blites, a greater, a lesser, a spotted; to which appertain the sorts of
Amaranthus Purpureus, or purple Flower-gentle.

Thirdly, there is Spinach and some kind of Beers; and among them the red Beer,
whose Root is eaten as a Sallet with Vinegar and Oil; also some kind of Garden
Colewort, also the wild, one sort whereof they call Perfoliata, Thorough-wax.

Fourthly, To this Tribe Borrage and Bugloss may be referred; Bugless, Borrage,
to which Anchusa or Alkanet, and Echium Vipers-borrage, are added. Now Borrage
and Bugloss (especially their flowers) have a very great faculty to strengthen
and cheer the heart, also they refresh and recreate the spirits; and therefore
Conserves and Syrups are made of them, which in Melancholic Diseases, and such
as proceed from adust humors, are very good.

Fifthly, Mercury, male and female, Cynocrambe, Dogs-Cabbage, Pellitory of the
wall.
and Herba impatiens the impatient Herb, or Touch me not; and Pellitory of the
wall, which is cold and moist, clenses, is good for imflammations and burnings.
The Leaves applied in manner of a Caplasm to the share, with Oil of sweet
Almonds, are an help to such as have the stone, and provoke the stopped Urine.

Sixthly, The kinds of Docks, as the wild Dock, the Garden Dock, Monks Rhubarb,
red Dock, Sorrel, tuberous Sorrel, smallest Sorrel. Now Sorrel cools and dries,
Sorrel
hinders putrefaction, provokes Appetite, and is therefore good for continual
Fevers and Pestilences.

Seventhly, Garden Mallows with the double Flower, which is called also the
Tree-Mallow, and over-sea Rose; also crisped Mallows, wild Mallows, Marsh
Mallows, Abutilon yellow Mallows; Vulgar Alcea, and Alcea Vesicaria; the
Cotton-plant.

Eighthly, We refer to this Tribe such Herbs as have a biting taste: Amongst
which the Captain is Watercresses, and a sort thereof called Cuckows Flower;
Brooklime; Scurvygrass; Garden Cresses; Winter Cresses; Indian Water-Cress;
Garden Mustard, and wild; Watercresses,
all the Nasturtia or biting Cresses are hot and dry, provoke Urine, expel the
Gravel and stone, and are therefore good for the Kidneys and Bladder.
scurvy grass.
But they are especially excellent against the Scurvy, and principally
Scurvy Grass.

Also Garden Rocket, and wild Rocket: to which may be added small Celandine;
herb Dragon, wild Dragon or Neesewort: several kinds of Thlaspi or wild
Mustard; among which is that of Candie; Erysimum, Bank-cresses; Lepidium,
Dittander or Pepperwort. The Turnep, the Navew, Rapistrum or Charlock; Garden
Rhadish, Lampsana or Dock-cresses, which others are wont to refer to the
Hawk-weeds.

Finally, we add to this Tribe the Nettle, which is burning and stinging, or
dead Nettle. the Nettle
The stinging Nettle has some sorts: they are al hot and dry, being boiled
they loosen the belly by abstersion, drive out the Urine and Stone; the seed
provokes to Generation; it digests crude humors in the Chest, and is therefore
good for them that cannot breath unless they fit or stand upright: it is a
present Remedy against the poison of Hemlock, and the malignity of Henbane and
Toadstools. There are also diverse sorts of dead Nettle and Archangel.

Tribe XV. Mint, Sage, Horebound, Bawm, and Herbs of kin to them.
In the first place, there are many kinds of Mint: and then there is bastard
Mint, Mint
Sisymbrium, Mountain and field Calamint, Cats-mint, Sarazens Mint. Mint is hot
and dry, has a rare faculty to strengthen the stomach, and help digestion,
stops vomiting, dispels wind, ceases gripings, stops flux of the belly, and the
whites; it hinders Milk from curdling in the stomach, hinders conception.
Calamint is also hot and dry, good for the Tissick, Calamint
stops gripings, heals the womb, kills worms, brings down the courses, and is
especially good for the womb, and furthers conception.

In the second place there is Sage the greater and lesser sort, which heats and
dries, opens, Sage
is especially good for the Head and nerves, and is good for the cough and
spitting of blood, and against the bitings of venomous Beasts. Wild Sage;
Sclarea and Horminum, Clary, of which also there are diverse sorts.

Thirdly there is Horehound white and black: Horehound
now this is hot and dry, opens obstructions of the Liver and Spleen; purges
the Chest, and is therefore good for Persons in Consumptions who have no
Fever, it brings away the Courses and the Afterbirth: it is good against
Venoms and bitings of venomous Creatures.

Fourthly Bawm, Bawm.
it is hot and dry in the second degree, a great and good friend to the Brain
and Heart, recreates the Spirits and comforts the Memory; it is good against
Poisons and helps the bitings of Dogs, Scorpions and Spiders, being outwardly
applied; it moves also the Courses.

There are also other Herbs, Basil.
like these in smell, which may be justly reckoned in this Tribe, as Basil,
which some think is called Ozimos because of its sweet and savory smell. Being
smel'd to its good for Head and Heart; the Seed helps the Diseases of the
Heart, Discusses sorrow and sadness proceeding from Melancholy, and begets
Mirth and Cheerfulness.

Pennyroyal is hot and dry with a certain bitterness and astriction; Pennyroyal
it has a rare faculty to open obstructions, and to cut thick humors, to move
Urine, and especially the Courses, also cures the Stone, Dropsy, Gout and
Palsy.

True Wild Origanum or wild Marjoram is hot and dry in the third degree,
Origanum.
has a very great faculty to cut, attenuate and scour, and is good against
Poison. Therefore its decoction is profitably given to such as have the Asthma,
Convulsion, Dropsy, and such as are bitten by a Serpent. To Origanum belongs
Trag-Origanum, or Goats Origanum.

Wild Time Serpillum, Wild Time
is an Herb very much of kin to Peny-royal, and sends forth amost swe^^ and
fragrant smell. It provokes the Courses, plentifully brings down the Urine,
asswages Headache coming from a cold Cause, allaies the Griping of the Guts, and
is good against the Lethargy.

Arabian Staechados, Staechados
most effectual against al Diseases of the Head from a cold Cause.

Also Polium and Hysop, Hysop.
which being hot and dry in the third degree, digests, opens and discusses.
Therefore boiled with Honey and drunk, it helps much to digest and bring out
phlegm in the Chest, and frees the Lungs stuffed with vicious humors; and helps
an old Cough.

Mother of Time, Mother of Time Time. Savory.
Time, Savory, are plants of affinity; have in a manner the same faculties,
being hot and dry; being mingled with out meats, they help the Concoction of
the Stomach, free the Womb distended with Wind; are thought to help the Palsy
and al sleepy Diseases.

To these may be added Lavender and Spike, Lavender and Spike.
being hot and dry Herbs, spiritful, oily and odoriferous, most effectual in
cold Diseases of the Head. Hence their water applied to the Forehead and the
Temples is good for the Palsy of one side of the Body, and for the
Falling Sickness; and a Conserve of the flowers is effectual against the
Apoplexy and cold Diseases of the Brain.

Next to these marches Herb Mastich or Clinopodium and Rosemary, Rosemary.
which is hot and dry, with some astriction, heals al cold Diseases of the Head
and Brain, dries the Brain, whets the Senses and Memory, is good for the Poze,
strengthens the nervous parts, comforts the Womb, and helps the old fluxes
thereof.

Marjoram, Marjoram
which also heats and dries in the second degree, also helps the cold Diseases
of the Brain; and snuffed up the Nose it causes sneezing and brings away phlegm,
provokes the Urine and Courses.

Betony is also hot and dry in the second degree, Betony.
and cutting; it is good for the Falling Sickness, and cold diseases of the
Head, purges the Breast and Lungs, opens the obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, cures the Jaundice, strengthens the Stomach, and helps Digestion; moves
Urine, breaks the Stone, is good for the pain of the Kidneys and Bladder, moves
the Courses, allaies Mother-fits, is good against the bitings of Serpents and
Venomous Beasts, is good for Worms and the Sciatica.

Dictamnum verum or Creticum, Dittamus.
Dittamus of Crete, being in faculty like Pennyroyal, moves the Courses,
expels the Afterbirth and dead Child, facilitates Childbirth, is good against
the stingings of venomous Beasts.

Scordium heats and dries, Scordium.
cleanses and purges the Bowels, moves Urine and the Courses, draws gross and
purulent humors our of the Breast, and is therefore good for an old Cough. It Is
useful mixed with Antidotes against Poison.

Tribe XVI. Scabious and Plants of kin thereto.
There are many kinds of Scabious, the greater, the lesser, the middlemost, the
greatest, Scabious.
the Spanish, and that of the Alps: It is hot and dry in the second degree,
attenuates and cuts thick and clammy humors; therefore it cleanses the Lungs,
helps the Cough and shortness of Breath, is good for the Scab, effectual
against the Plague, pestilent Fevers, and the bitings of venomous Beasts, and
is good to move sweat in such Diseases.

Hereto belongs Staebe, Devils-bit, Jacca^gra or black Ma^^ellon. Among these
some do reckon the Blew-bottles mentioned before in the eleventh Tribe; also
the Royal Comfreys, or Flower Royal, and the Serratula or Saw-wort, Centaury
the great, Sarasens Confound, Virga aurea, or Golden Rod, Plants good to heal
Wounds. Agrimony.
This Tribe admits also other Herbs, as Agrimony, which has an attenuatting,
opening faculty, and is especially good for the Liver; also the Herb of
Kunegund or Avicennas Eupatorium.

Also the kinds of Veronica or Fluellen, Veronica
which is good for obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, brings forth the Urine
and Stone, heals the Scab and all Diseases of the Skin, wounds, and especially
cancerous Ulcers. Also it helps those that have the Tissick, and who cough up
purulent matter.

Vervain, Ground-Oak, and Teucrium or Tree-Germander, with Ground Pine or
Chamaepitys and their sorts. Now Chamaedrys or Germander, and Chamaepitys
Ground Pine, Chamaedris
have virtues much alike. Chamaedrys opens obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen, helps the Dropsy, moves the Courses, and is good against the biting of
Serpents; Chamaepitys.
also Chamaepitys opens obstructions, clenses the Kidneys, moves Urine and the
Courses, strengthens the Nerves, helps the Sciarica and other diseases of the
Joints; wherefore it is commonly called Iva Arthretica, and Herba Apoplectica.

Finally Eyebright, which by a strong faculty comforts the Eyes, Eyebright
and helps dimness of sight.

Tribe XVII. Woolly and Downy Plants.
Among those Herbs whose Leaves are covered as it were with Down; the first is
Gnaphalium, Cud-weed or Cotton-weed: And then the sorts of Mou^-Ear,
Leontopodium Matthioli, yellow Staechados: the third Scorpion-Grass, the sorts
of Mullein, and Ethiopian Mullein: To which also other Herbs are referred,
though not downy, as Blattaria, Mothmullein, the Primerose, which is good for
diseases of the Joints and Nerves, The Primrose.
also for Ruptures and Dislocations of the Joints, and the Stone in the Kidneys
and Bladder; Bears-Ear. Also Hounds-tongue, and Anchusa or Alkanet, are by some
reckoned in this Tribe.

Tribe XVIII. The House-Leeks.
To this Tribe belong the kinds of Houseleek, as the great branching Houseleek,
the small Houseleek, that is called Illecebra; Telephium and Crassula.

Aloes, of which is made a thickened Juice well known in Physic, it purges
yellow choler, Aloes
helps the Stomach and Brain, resists putrefaction, opens the Hemorrhoids,
moves the Courses, clenses Wounds and brings them to a Scar.

Purslane, which is cold and moist and binding, helps the Teeth when they are
on edg, Purslane
kills the Worms in Children, especially if they have a Fever withal, is
effectual against spitting of Blood the Bloody Flux, and voiding of Blood.
Radix Rhodia.
Some also refer to this Tribe the Radix Rhodia or Rose-wort, especially good
for the pains of the Head.

Tribe XIX. Bindweeds, and of Twining Plants.
Of this Tribe are Briony, Wild Vine, white Vine, Dulcamara or Bitter-sweet,
black Bindweed, Indian Bindweed, Blewbel Bindweed.

Scammony, the Juice whereof, (called by the same name) is famosly known, being
an effectual purger of Choler and wheyish Humors; being prepared and boiled in
a Quince, it is called Diagridium.

The Smilax laevis greater and lesser, or the greater and lesser Bindweed; the
Smilax aspera, the Hop, the Jessemine, Periclymenon or Woodbind, Hedera
clematis, Creeping Ivy, Daphnoides or Vinca Pervinca; Flammula or Spearwort,
and creeping Chickweed; Ground Ivy, Twopenny-wort, wild Tansie or Silver-weed,
Soldanella; Mechoacan, which was unknown to the Ancients, and is now in great
use; it purger Phlegm and watery Humors, is good for the Falling Sickness, the
Gout, the Tissick, Colic, and Mother fits. Hithen also may be referred
Epithimum, Polygonum mas, male Knot-Grass, Anagallis or Pimpernel; Herniaris,
or Rupture wort.
Rupture-wort or Herniaria, most excellent for Ruptures, whence it has its
name; which they say does also move Urine and break the Stone. Some say it is
especially good to comfort the Sight.

Tribe XX. The Cowcumber, Gourd, and Plants of kin to them.
In regard of their long crawling stalks wherewith they creep on the ground, we
join to the former Tribe Cucumbers, Citruls, Muskmelons, Pompious, Gourds: of
All which there are many sorts. Balsamina
Hereto appertains Coloquintida or wild Gourd, Balm-Apple, Balsamina which is a
wound Herb: and the Oil wherein the fruit has been steeped after the seed is
taken out, is good for Burnings, Burstness, Pains and Ulcers of the Dugs.

Tribe XXI. Thistles and Thistly Plants.
In this Tribe is Garden Bears breech, Carduus Mariae.
breech, Carduus Mariae or Milky Thistle, which removes obstructions of the
Liver and Spleen, and purges the waters of such as have the Dropsy. The seed
is said to be good for Convulsion fits of Infants, and to help such as are
bitten by a Serpent; and it is now frequently used for the Pseurisie. The
Globe-headed Thistle or Roundheaded Thistle, the Downy headed Thistle, the
Goldenflowred Thistle, the Star Thistle, the Artichoak, the Chameleon, Spina
Solstitialis, Venus basin, Shepherds Rod: Carduus Benedictus, Carduus Benedictus
the blessed Thistle, commonly called Carduus, which is hot and dry, cleanses
and opens, resists Poison, opens obstructions of the Bowels, cures inveterate
Fevers, Frynge Roots.
kills Worms, moves Urine, is good against the Stone. Wild or Wood-Thistle;
Garden and Wild Carthamus: Eryngus and Chrythmus; Eryngus moves Urine, and the
Courses, stays Gripings, helps those that are Hepatick and Nephritick, incites
to Generation. Also Cirsium, or soft Thistle.

Tribe XXII. Tufted Plants, that have Clusters of seeds on the top.
In this Tribe Fenel is the Captain, Fennel
whose Roots open obstructions, provoke the Courses, move Urine. The seed
comforts the Stomach, dispels Wind, comforts the Sight, increases Milk, drives
out the Urine and Stones.

Anise is very much of kin to Fenel, Anis.
it also expels Wind, provokes to Generation, helps shortness of Breath.

Caraway, Carway.
Its seed is hot and dry in the third degree, discusses Wind, helps Digestion,
moves Urine.

Dil, Dill.
whose seed boiled increases Milk, allaies Gripings, helps the Hiccup though
but smelt unto.

Cumin, Cumin.
whose seed is also hot and dry in the third degree, it discusses Tumors and
Winds, allaies Gripings, outwardly applied; being drunk it is good for a cold
Breast, being beaten and mixed with Vinegar it stops bleeding of the Nose by
smelling thereto.

Coriander, Coriander.
whose seed prepared, (that is to say, steeped in Vinegar and dried) taken
after meat dries up the moisture of the Stomach, consumes the Spittle, expels
Worms, and moves Urine.

Ammi or Bishops-weed, Carrot, Libanotis Hogs-Fenel, Beats-breech, Hercules
Wound-heal, Asclepium.

Lovage, Lovage.
whose Roots drunk with Wine help the digestion of the Stomach, discuss Wind,
move sweat, provoke the Courses and Urine, bring away the Afterbirth, are good
for Mother-fits, heals the biting of Serpents.

Angelica, Angelica.
which is good against Poisons and the bitings of venomous Beasts, dissolves
clotted Blood, purges the Chest.

Mountain Siler, Pimpernel
Pimpinel, hot and dry in the third degree, whose Roots move Urine, break the
Stone, provoke the Courses, open the Liver, dispel Wind, ease the Colic pains,
is good against Poisons.

Imperatoria or Master-wort, Master-wort
whose Root is hot and dry in the third degree, of thin parts, digests cold
Humors, moves Sweat and Urine, dispels Wind, is good for Nephritick and
Hydropick Persons.

Herb Gerard, Fennel-Giant, Hogs-Fennel: Garden and Marsh Smallage, Mountain
Smallage, Persley, which moves Urine and the Courses, and drives out the Stone:
Hipposelinum, Chervil, Smyrnium, Caucalis, Sweet Cicely, Gingidium or
Tooth-pick, Hemlock, Cicutaria bastard Hemlock. Filipendula.


Filipendula, which is hot and dry, opens and cleanses with a certain
astriction; the Decoction of the Roots drives out the Urine and Stone: some
commend the powder thereof against the Falling Sickness. Meadow-sweet. Valerian.


Meadow-sweet, Thapsia, or stinking and deadly Carrots, Parsneps, Carrots,
Valerian, whose Roots are good against the stingings of venomous Beasts, and
the Plague; they take away the Strangury, Cough, Winds; help faults of the
Eyes, and comfort the Sight.

Tribe XXIII. Berry-cluster bearing Plants.
I think fit to place in this Tribe such Plants as bear Clusters of Berries or
seeds and are therefore called Plantae corymbiferae; for Corymbus being a round
bunch of Berries such as we see in Ivy, these kinds of Plants have thence their
name: Mug-wort
such an one is Mugwort which brings away the Courses and Afterbirth, also the
Child, and drives out Urine and Stones.

Yarrow, which cleanses with astriction, glews together wounds, Yarrow.
stops Blood flowing from any part, stays the Courses, and heals the Bloody
Flux.

The sorts of Tansies, whose flowers in Wine or mul'd Sack kills and drives out
Worms, Tansies
dissolves the Stone, and brings away Gravel.

Matricaria or Feverfew, as the name shows, Feverfew
is good for Women troubled with pains in their Wombs both inwardly and
outwardly applied, discusseth Wind and wonderfully strengthens the Womb.

Ambrosia, Botrys, Southern-wood.

Wormwood is a common Plant, but of manifold use, very bitter, Wormwood
very good for a Stomach troubled with Choler; for it scoures it away, by Stool
and Urine: It strengthens the Stomach, increases appetite, comforts the Liver,
and opens its obstructions, expels bad humors by Urine; and in this respect it
is with great profit used against long Agues, especially Tertian, which at
length bring the Patient to a Cachexy.

Chamomel, Cotula Faetida, stinking Chamomel, which have been reckoned up in
Tribe 11.

Tribe XXIV. Ferns and ferny Plants.
All Plants whose Leaves are placed along the stalks like wings, may be called
Ferns. Polypody
There is first male and female Fern; to which Polypody is of kin, which
cleanses away and digests thick and clammy humors: most say it purges, but
experience shows it purges little or not at all; yet it is good to mingle with
other Purgers, especially of Melancholy. Oak Fern.

Hart's-tongue, to which though others ascribe other virtues; Hart's-tongue.
yet experience tells that it is good for Diseases of the Spleen, whose
obstructions it opens, asswages its hardness and swelling, and is good also for
the like Diseases of the Liver. Hemionitis, or Miltwort.

Scolopendrium, Ceterach or Finger Fern, Ceterach
is of rate virtue to open and assuage the swelling of the Spleen, cure the
Jaundice, break and expel the Stone; Lonchitis, great Spleenwort. To these also
may be added Lunaria or Moon-wort, and Ophioglossum or Adders-Tongue.

Tribe XXV. Milkie Plants.
Besides the forementioned there are other Herbs that have a milky juice in
them; as all the kinds of Spurges, Characias, with its sorts: Cyparissias,
Myrtoidis, Paralius, Esula.
Helioscopius, the broad leaved, narrow leaved, Knobby, and the woody, all the
sorts of Esula, and Pytiusa, as Lathyris, Peplis, Peplion, Chamesyce or
Ground-Fig. The Esulae do purge vehemently Choler and Phlegm, move Vomit, burn
the Throat, and exulcerate.

Tribe XXVI. Nervous Plants.
In this Tribe we may place all the sorts of Plantane: Now Plantane cools and
dries, Plantane.
is astringent and abstersive, and has mixed faculties: it cures Tetters and
Inflammations, is good against all fluctions, yea of Blood; resists
Putrefaction and strengthens the parts, and is good against Poisons;
Swines-Cresses, All-bone, Fellon-wort.

Psyllium or Fleawort, Psyllium
whose seed is cold in the second degree, temperate as to moisture and dryness,
according to Galen. Its Mucilage mitigates burnings within and without the
Body, is good for exulcerated Guts: yet the frequent use thereof hurts the
stomach. Hitherto also some refer Hounds-tongue; Star-wort, or the Hartshorn
of Dodonaeus; Woad, Toadflax, and Linosyris or Golden Star-flowered Toadflax,
Shepherds pouch, Knot-grass, Vincetoxicum
Vincetoxicum or Indian Swallow-wort, which as the name shows, is good against
poison.

Tribe XXVII.
The remaining Plants which could not conveniently be reckoned in the foregoing
Tribes, we put al together into this last Tribe, and leave it to further
consideration, how they may be better digested and disposed. White Hellebore
And in the first place we rank white Hellebore; whose Root purges by Vomit,
but very violently, kills the child in the womb, kills Mice mixed with honey and
flour; also the powder drawn up into the Nose causes sneezing. Elleborina,
bastard Hellebore, our Ladies slipper.

After the white comes black Hellebore, black Hellebore
which purges melancholy, and therefore cures madness, Hypochondriacal
melancholy, those troubled with the spleen, Quartan Ague, Falling Sickness, and
al Diseases proceeding from Melancholy.

Ricinus, Ricinus
or Palma Christi; it heats and dries, its seeds purge choler and water by
stool. Ladies Mantle Sanicle Avens


Ladies-Mantle and Sanicle, which have the faculty to heal wounds.

Garyophyllata or Avens, whose Root smells like a Clove, whence it has its
name, it hears and dries, is good for the stomach and Liver, dissolves blood
clotted within the body, and helps such as are bit by venomous Beasts.

Asarum or Asarabacca, Asarabacca
whose Roots cause vomit, and purge out thick and phlegmatic humors: they move
Urine and the Courses, remove obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, and so are
good for the Dropsy and Jaundice.

Aristolocbia or Birthwort long and round, Birthwort long and round.
so called because it is good for women in child bed whose after-births it
brings away: also it moves the Courses, and is good for the Tissick and Spleen.
Cuckow-pintle
Arum or Cuckow-pintle, whose Root cuts thick humors in the chest and elsewhere.
Dragon, water Dragon.

Bistorta or Snakeweed, Bistorta
whose Root cools and binds, and therefore stops the looseness of belly and flux
of blood, is good for exulceration of the Guts, strengthens the inner parts,
resists putrefaction and poison, strengthens and fastens the Gums. Bindweed,
Herb Parts, water Pepper, Ars-smart.

Coltsfoot, Coltsfoot
whose green Leaves do somewhat cool, and therefore they are good to apply to
hot Ulcers. Being dried they are hot and dry, and moderately biting, and their
smoke taken in a Tobacco pipe helps shortness of breath; also the Root is used
to the same purpose, and against the cough, whence it is called Tuffilago.

Perfoliata or Through-wax, Thorow-wax
is bitter and affrigent. The Decoction or powder thereof is given to such as
are bursten and fall from on high; and represses the starting Navils of children.

Symphytum or Comfry, Great comfry
of which there are certain sorts: The great, which cools, contracts, and
binds, heals Ruptures and broken Bones, stops spitting of blood and other
Excretions thereof, and is good for the Bloody flux, and most effectual to
sodder wounds.

Hereto belongs spotted Comfrey or Lungwort, Lungwort: self-heal:
good for ulcers, and other diseases of the Lungs. Also Bugle and Rock-comfrey;
and finally, Prunella or Self-heal, which is commended against the blackness of
the Tongue in burning Fevers.

Tribe XXVIII. Of Shrubs and Bushes.
Shrubs are The Bramble, greater and lesser; the Cisius or Holly-Rose, the red
Corants, the Barbery Bush, Goats-thorn; Acacia, the Slo-bush, the Buck-thorn,
white thorn, Holm, Broom, Tamarisk, bastard Dittany, bastard Sena, Rocker,
Black-berry-bush, the Myrtl-bush, the Dwarf-Myrtil, Agnus Castus, Privet; the
Pipe-bush, Curriers Sumach, Box, Hounds-tree, black Aller or Butchers-prick
tree, Spindle-tree.

Tribe XXIX. Trees.
There are many sorts of Trees, but not so many as of Herbs. There are many
kinds of vulgar Apple Trees; also which more belong to this place, there is the
Citron tree, the Limon Tree, the Orange Tree, the Pomegranate Tree, the Quince
Tree, the Peach Tree, the Apticock Tree, the Almond tree, the Pear Tree, of
which again there are many kinds; the Prune and Plum tree, the Cherry tree, the
Mulberry tree, the Fig tree, the Medlar tree, the Cornel tree, the Service
tree, the Jujubee tree, the Chestnut tree, the Walnut tree, the Hazel tree, the
Pistachio Nut tree, the Bladder Nut tree, the Palm tree, the Olive tree, the
Bay tree, the Rose tree, the Juniper tree, the Oak, the Holm, the Cork tree,
the Beech tree, the Ash tree, the Alder tree, the Cedar tree, the wild Ash
tree, the Poplar, the Elm, the Linden, the Bitch, the Willow, the Elder, the
Lote, the Savine, the Cypress tree, the Tree of Life, the Eugh tree, the Pine
tree, the Pitch tree, the Fir tree, the Larch tree, the Turpentine tree, the
Lentisch tree.

And thus you have a Catalogue of the chief Plants, which I have therefore set
down, both that al men, but especially our idle Disputers (who always stick in
the same general matter, and yet think themselves rare Naturalists) may see by
the example of Plants how great the amplitude of Nature is, and how that which
we know is the least part of what we are ignorant of: also that such as are
studious of the knowledge of Plants might have occasion to consider how there
may be a Method in Herbarism, and how al Plants may be reduced to some certain
Tribes: Which though I have not here finished and brought to perfection, yet I
have laid the Foundation. And not to speak now of others; Andreas Caesalpinus
in his Sixteen Books of Plants, undertakes a laborious Method: For after in the
first place he has explained Trees and Shrubs; he propounds the variety of
Herbs according to the difference of their Seeds. And in the first place he
describes such as bear single seeds under every Flower, or have a single
receptacle of seeds: Secondly, such as contain two seeds or receptacles of
seeds, under the same flower: Thirdly, such as contain four, or more: And at
last such as have no seed.

But though this distinction of Plants seems to be laborious and curious
enough, and is therefore commended by some, yet I see not what Foundation it
has; seeing those Plants are joined in one and the same Tribe, by reason of
the agreement of their seeds, which neither agree in any signature, nor any
other ways. As for example sake, in the fourth Book, what agreement is there
betwixt Valerian and Spica celtica, Hemp, Hops, Beets, Wheat and other Corns?
In the Fifth Book, how do Cowcumbers and Gourds agree with Dwarf-Elder,
Nightshade, Indian Pepper, Lilly Convalley? In the Sixth Book, what argeement is
betwixt Rose Campion, wild Turnep, Twopenny grass, and Purslane? And the same
may be said of the rest.

But I leave it free for any Body to change and perfect this Method as he
pleases. For I am not ignorant that several men have several aims in their
Methods of Plants. Physicians rank them according to their faculties and use in
Physic. Natural Philosophers have others considerations; some this, and some
that.

THE SEVENTH BOOK. Of Animals, or Living Creatures.
Chap. 1. Of the Sensitive Soul in General.
AS the Vegetative Faculty is common to all Living things; so in all Living
Creatures there is Sense, which is common both to Man and Beast. By the faculty
of Sense Animals are distinguished from Non-animals, as Aristotle has it de
Juvent. and senect. cap. 1. and de sens. et sensil. cap. 1. Wherefore having
treated of Souls in general, and of the Vegetative or growing Soul, and of
Plants; we now come to the Sensitive Soul, and to treat of Living Creatures.

And here in the first place, The sensitive soul is not the specific form of
any beast:
as we did before concerning Plants, so we must signify, That the Sensitive
Soul is not the form of any Animal, though void of reason; nor is a Horse a
Horse by virtue of its principle of sense; for so a Pike-fish should be an
Horse, nor would a Lion differ from a Dog. Yet is it most manifest, that these
Animals differ in their forms, and in their specifical operations depending
thereupon. But what those specific forms are, is not easy to tell, but they
are known by their specifical actions. Bruits are not rational:
And though many bruit Beasts perform wonderful actions by their specific
forms; yet are they not such as that we should therefore hold them to be
Rational, and to partake of understanding. For as Scaliger, Exercitat. 317. s.
5. rightly proves, No living Creature (except Man) performs actions properly
Rational. And the holy Scripture attributes Reason to Man alone, as being
created after the Image of God, Ecclus 17. ver. 16, 17, 18. Psalm 32. ver. 9.

But that we may treat of the Sensitive Soul in general; The faculties of the
sensitive soul:
there are three faculties thereof; the knowing, desiring, and moving faculty.
The knowing comprehends the external and internal senses so called: Appetite
follows knowledge: finally to the thing known the living Creature moves. And
seeing the knowing faculty goes before the rest, in the first place we must
treat thereof, and for the same cause we must first speak of the external
Senses. And here you must observe, The word sense taken two ways
that the word Sense is taken two ways; sometimes for the Soul it self, or its
Faculty; sometimes for the operation which proceeds from the Sensitive Soul, and
is called Sensation.

Now to the performance of Sense these four things must necessarily concur.
First, The Sensitive Soul: Secondly, the Organ: Thirdly, the Object: And
Fourthly, the Medium, which comes between the Organ and the Object. For in the
first place. Although Sensation is attributed to the whole Animal, Soul and
Body; yet the sensitive Soul is the Primary Efficient thereof, and the body is
sensitive by means of the soul, which is the sensator or perceiver of things by
the senses. For it is the Entelecheia or act by which a sensible Animate Body
perceives things without it self. And therefore a dead body void of a sensitive
soul has no longer the use of sense. Now the secondary Efficient is the
Instruments of Sense, which are also necessarily required to sensation. For
although the soul be essentially present in the whole body; yet is it no where
the Author of any sense, where it has no Organ: and although the same Essence
of the Soul which is in the Eye, be also in the Foot; yet because in the Foot
there are no Instruments either of seeing or of hearing, in the Foot it neither
sees nor hears.

Now the Instruments of Sense (to use the words of Scaliger, Exercitat. 297.
Sect. 3.) The Organs of the senses:
are two: The Spirits which have most affinity to the Faculty; and the Members
which have most affinity to the sensible Object. For the Spirits are so
subtle, that they may be almost reputed immaterial. They receive the imprinted
species or representations of Objects. But the Instruments are the conveighers
of the Spirits. And although the Organs of the Senses consist of many parts;
yet one above the rest is the chief Instrument of Sensation: which Aristotle
also tells us in these words, 2 de part. animal. cap. 1. All sense is caused by
means of the similar parts, because every sense is of some one certain kind of
thing, and each sensitive part is accounted capable of some one sensitive kind
of things.

Now the Object is that which is perceived by the Sense, viz. The sensible
qualities. the Objects
For although the Objects of the Senses are said to be singular or several
things, and corporeal substances; yet substances are not perceived by the
sense, as they are substances, but as they are endued with sensible qualities,
and contain in them the formal Nature of a sensible Object. For Peter (for
examples sake) is seen as he is colored; is felt as he is hot, cold, etc.

Now a sensible Object is twofold; of it self, and by accident. That is
sensible of it self, Sensible object twofold;
which primarily affects the sense, without the intervention of any other
thing, as color is perceived by the sight primarily and of it self. But that is
accidentally sensible, which is not perceived of it self, but by help of some
other thing wherewith it is joined and coupled. For example sake, when we say,
I see a sweet thing, meaning Milk: the whiteness of the Milk is seen only of it
self, which is the proper object of the Eye; but the sweetness because joined
with that whiteness, is said to be seen.

A thing sensible of it self, is again twofold; Proper and Common. The Proper
is that which can be perceived by one sense, and no other; and concerning which
no Error can be committed, as color by the sight, sound by the hearing, etc.
But the Common is that which is not proper to one sense, but common to diverse.
And these are five: Magnitude, Figure, Number, Motion, Rest; as Aristotle
reckons them 2. de Animal. cap. 6. text. 64. And to these general Heads may al
those be referred, which others reckon up; as neerness and farness, which
Scaliger in Exercit. 66. makes a sixth common sensible thing; Situation,
Continuity, Separation, Roughness, and Smoothness, and others which are wont to
be reckoned.

Now which way the common sensibles do affect the senses, is controverted
amongst Authors, while some say that peculiar species are by them imprinted
upon the Senses, and others deny it. But their Opinion is nearer the truth, who
hold, That the common Sensibles do present no peculiar species or
representations to the senses; but only determine the species or
representations of the proper sensibles, and add to them a peculiar manner. For
because the Sensitive Qualities are not perceived separated from their
subjects, but together with them, the proper enters the sense with the common
by one simple species or representation, yet somewhat qualified: and color
appears after one fashion in a square Body, after another fashion in a round.
But if the common sensibles should send forth proper species, they should also
do it without the proper ones. But that they do not do, which appears in
transparent things, as the Air, whose figure we do not perceive by its color
which is none at al, but by the containing body, rather by imagination than by
sense.

Yet we do not say that the common sensible objects are perceived by accident,
but by themselves secondarily. For there are three things which belong to a
sensible by accident, which do not belong to a common sensible. First, a
sensible by accident acts nothing upon the outward sense, whereby it is said to
be accidentally discerned, but is only joined with that which of it self
affects the sense. Again, a sensible thing by accident may be perceived of it
self, by some peculiar faculty in the Perceiver, whether it be some external or
internal sense, or the understanding. Finally, it may easily be perceived by
its proper power.

Now seeing al action is performed by mutual touch, and the sensible object is
many times far distant from the Organ of sense; the Question is, how the object
affects the sense. Herein al sound Philosophers agree, That some quality is
sent out of the object unto the sense. Now qualities are twofold, some real or
material, others spiritual or intentional; as was said before in Book 2. chap.
2. and the spiritual are nothing but Pictures and Images of the sensible
objects, flowing from them, pure, thin, and free from the concretion of matter;
and that there are such spiritual qualities experience it self does teach us.
For in the Summer time, we see the clothes of such as lie under a Tree painted
green with the color of the Tree; and a cloth held beside a Glass full of
Claret, appears red; and other examples Scaliger brings, Exercit. 80. Sect. 8.
and Exercit. 298. Sect. 3. And in general the same thing is taught by
artificial Glasses, which receive the Images even of things remote. And the
same is apparent also as to other senses. And that the Nature of sensible
spiritual species or representations is quite different from that of material
representations, Leo Hebraeus shows in his Dialogue de Amore, Lib. 3. by many
reasons. The first is, because al other qualities diffuse themselves
successively and by degrees through their subject, but light penetrates
suddenly and in a moment through a transparent body. Secondly, a quality when
it comes changes the natural disposition of the subject; but Light makes no
alteration in the transparent body, save that it enlightens the same. Thirdly,
other qualites do not extend themselves through an infinite space, but light
does. Fourthly, that though the efficient cause of other qualities be removed,
yet there remains some impression upon the subject; but the Illuminator being
removed, there is no light remaining. Fifthly, other qualities are moved with
their subject; but Light is not moved when the Air or Water is moved. Sixthly,
many qualities of the same sort in one subject are joined and mixed together;
but many Lights are not jumbled nor confounded, but two Candles make two
shadows, three make three shadows, etc.

The first Question therefore in this place is, Whether all the senses do
receive only spiritual representations of things?
Whether all the Senses receive spiritual representations of things. Some
indeed have been of opinion, that spiritual representations are not necessary
in all the Senses, but only in the sight; and that all the other senses are
wrought upon by material qualities issuing from their objects. But this opinion
is false, and all the senses are wrought upon by their objects with spiritual
species or representations. And seeing of all the senses feeling is most
terrestrial and most drowned in matter, and its object seems to have most
assinity with material qualities, if we shall prove that this sense is not
wrought upon by real but spiritual qualities, the same will be proved of all the
rest. But heat according to their opinion, acts upon the touch materially; and
therefore produces another heat therein; which nevertheless is false. For all
the senses are said to perceive the same numerical object whereby they are
affected; which observation is true in spiritual qualities. For although an
accident or real object does also differ from a spiritual, numerically, if it
be considered in it self and according to its own Nature; yet as being the
image thereof it resembles and represents the same, it may be termed the same
numerically; and the sense perceiving the spiritual image of a thing, is said
to perceive the thing it self; but not so, if it perceive a like real quality
produced thereby. So he that has seen the image of Aeneas, is said to have
seen Aeneas: but he that has seen Ascanius his Son, is never said to have seen
Aeneas. The same appears from the difference betwixt a material and spiritual
quality. For since the action of the first qualities is true motion, and is
performed in time, and seldom produces in the Patient a quality answering in
degrees to its own virtue, by reason of the resistency of contrary qualities;
it would follow that sense should be performed in time and leisurely: also that
the sense should seldom perceive the true degree of its object, but commonly a
lesser. But seeing it is not thus in sense, we must hold that only spiritual
species or representations, which have no contrary, are perceived by sense:
which opinion also Aristotle professes to hold in 2. de Anima, chap. 12. text.
121. Which also is exceeding manifest in most of the tangible qualities, which
if they should act materially upon the touch, they should produce therein a
real quality like themselves, and the organ of feeling should become hard by
feeling an hard thing, soft by feeling a soft thing: whereas these qualities
have no such activity; and no such thing is found, either in the Feeling, or
any other sense.

Nevertheless you must here observe, that indeed al sensible species or
representations of objects are qualities not material but spiritual, and Images
or Pictures of the sensible objects flowing from them, as was said in the place
before alleged; and that nevertheless there are some differences of them, and
that some are drowned in the matter and cannot get out, others diffuse
themselves far from the Body from which they arise, being tied to no matter.
The lowest of the Senses is feeling, whose object does no where raise it self
out of the matter, but being hid in the matter offers it self to the sense. So
that nothing is perceived by the touch, but what immediately touches the
sensible body. And just so it is with tastes, which never affect the sense of
tasting at a distance; but whatever affects the taste must immediately touch and
affect the tongue. But the visible species or Images of things, imitating the
most noble Nature of Light, are free from matter, and at far distances are
carried to the sight and affect the same, no body coming between wherein they
adhere. After the same manner Sound is diffused to a long distance, and
penetrates not only the Air, but also Metals, especially those that are less
solid. Betwixt these species or images, viz. The tangible, tastes, and visible
representations, smells are as it were of a middle nature. For they for the most
part, though they are not brought to the organ of smelling without a subject,
as the visible species are brought to their organ; yet is there no necessity
that the thing smelt should be wholly applied to the nostrils, but smelling
things do send forth certain vapors, which are not themselves odors properly to
speak (though some Physicians do so think) but the odours are in them; nor can
the species or representations of smells be carried without them, into distant
Places.

Now as touching the original of the sensible representations, we need not vex
our selves, The original of sensible species.
nor introduce any agent sense, to form sensible species out of the objects.
Such is the nature of qualities properly sensible, and this power they have,
That they can multiply themselves by sending forth their Images; and al forms
can multiply themselves, some both really and spiritually, some spiritually
only. And if any shall ask, What way they do it? We can answer him no more than
if he should ask us how or why Fire heats. The Mediums of the senses.


Also a Medium is necessary to Sensation. For seeing the senses are only
virtually affected by the object, a Medium must needs come betwixt: which also
Aristotle affirms, 2 de Anima, cap. 11. text. 114. We perceive all sensible
objects through some Medium: And in 2. de Anim. cap. 9. t. 98. It is common to
all, that a thing laid upon the Organ of Sense cannot be discerned. And al
these things must concur, if Sensation be made, and that rightly disposed to;
whereof if one be absent, or be not rightly disposed, the Sensation either
ceases or is vitiated.

Now wherein the Nature of Sensation consists, Authors vary; nor is the
Controversy small, Whether Sensation be merely a Passion, and nothing but the
reception of the representation of sensible things? Or whether besides the
reception of the species there is any other action of the Soul concurring
thereto? I spare to relate all the Opinions of others, which are at large by
Authors related and confuted; only I shall set down that which seems to me most
true, and this it is: The sensible species, or the object which sends forth the
sensible species, is not the agent or active principle of Sensation: for
Sensation is the work of the Soul, and that an immanent work, not can be
attributed to any external thing, especially an accident; but it offers and
represents to the sense the thing sensible as the immediate object. Nor is
Sensation only Reception; which besides other things, is hereby apparent, in
that very often, when the sensible species is received in the organ, there is
nevertheless no sensation, because the soul intent upon other things does not
discern the sensible appearances: but Sensation is also a kind of Action. For
Action which is more noble and worthy than Passion is not to be denied to the
sensitive faculty, since it belongs to the vegetative faculty, and to Accidents.

Yet we are not to hold two Senses, one active, another passive, really
distinct: Whether there is an active and a passive sense?
but the same Soul is said to act and suffer in a different respect. For the
Soul inasmuch as it judges and takes cognizance, is so far said to act; but
inasmuch as the species is received in the organ, so far the Soul also it self,
which is in the organ and informs the same, is said to suffer. Wherefore to
receive the sensible species belongs to the Organ; to judge thereof when
received belongs to the Soul: yet because the Soul gives the Organ power to
receive the species, the manner of sensation:
and is it self the cause of Reception, Passion is also ascribed thereunto.
Sensation is therefore thus made: Spiritual Representations produced by a
material object, are received in an animated Organ: being so received the Soul
takes cognizance of them and judges of them, and so is said to be sensible:
finally, the Action is received in the Organ, and communicated to the whole.

One thing remains yet to be explained, what credit is to be given to the
senses, Whether the sensc^n or bo^^ (...) ^^ject?
and whether they may err about their proper objects. The Epicureans did
attribute so much to the Senses, that they thought we could never be deceived,
and held that al which we learn is to be measured by the Rules of the Senses,
as Austin says in his Book de Civitate Dei, B. 8. cap. 7. Whence Lucretius in
his Fifth Book, conceives that the Sun and Moon, are no bigger than they appear
to us. Contrariwise, the Academicks will give no credit at al to the Senses.
That we may know what to think in this point, we must observe these things
following: The sense may err three manner of ways: First about the kind or
common nature of its object, as taking color for sound, sound for smell.
Secondly, in the sort and particular nature of the object, as to take white for
black, bitter for sweet. Thirdly, in its application to the object; when it so
apprehends some sensible thing, as if it had in it some quality which it has
not indeed; as when the taste judges meat to be bitter, which is not so indeed,
but seems so, by reason of the bitterness of choler, wherewith the tongue is
infected.

Hence therefore thus we conclude the matter: The Sense cannot err about its
object, after the first manner: for the sight never mistakes Sound for Color,
nor the Ear Smell for Sound: but concerning the common sensibles it may be thus
deceived: for it often takes that which is moved to stand still; and that which
is divided into many parts it often judges to be one continued thing. But in
the second manner it is not impossible for the sense to be deceived; and that
which is blew seems many times far off to be black. Finally, in the Application
both of the common and proper Objects it is deceived: so a white thing sending
its appearance through a red Glass, is thought to be red also: for then the
sight errs not in the color, but in the application thereof to a wrong
subject; and so it is when the Sun is seen through a red Cloud; for it
attributes the redness which is in the Cloud unto the Sun. And therefore
concerning its proper object, the sense can be deceived only these two latter
ways; about the common object all three ways. Howbeit these errors may be
avoided, especially in the proper objects, if these conditions be observed.
First, That the Organ be rightly constituted, and there be no fault therein.
Secondly, That the medium be fitly disposed, and infected with no strange
quality. Finally, That that be a fit distance betwixt the Object and the Organ.

Chap. 2. Touching the Sight.
BUt that we may now come to the external Senses themselves, Five external
Senses.
which in the outer part of the Body do perceive outward things which are
present, we acknowledge them to be five in number. For experience shows, that
there are no more Organs of Sense, nor can we find more in Man who is the most
perfect of Living Creatures, nor in other Creatures any more: and so many do
both suffice the use of Living Creatures, and are able to bring the
Understanding to the knowledge of Substances. More may be seen touching the
sufficiency of the Senses, proved from their End, Sight the most excellent
Sense.
Efficient, Subject matter, and Object, in Scaligers Exercit. 297. Sect. 2.3.4.
Let us now begin with the Sight: For that is the most excellent and noble of
all the Senses; seeing it apprehends more things, more excellent and diverse,
quicker and at a greater distance than the other Senses; Scaliger Exercit. 298.
Sect. 6.

Now Sight is an external Sense, Its definition.
perceiving and discerning the representations of things visible. And Vision or
Seeing, is the apprehension of visible things by the Soul exercising its
sensitive faculty in the Eye. The Organ of sight
The Organ of seeing is the Eye, receiving the visible species or shows of
things like a Looking-Glass: Hence is that common saying that the Eye is the
Looking-Glass of nature, and that a Looking-Glass is the Eye of Art, as Coelius
Rhodiginus has it in Ant. Lect. Lib. 3. Cap. 28. But the chief part of the
Organ is the Chrystalline humor, for the sake whereof the other parts of the
Eye were by nature ordained.

The Object of Sight, Its Object.
is that which is visible. Now what that is, we are to consider. Now although
many things are said to be seen; yet as to the proper object of sight, the
controversy seems to be chiefly of Light and Color: For the best Philosophers
do sometimes say, that Light is the first thing visible and that which is
visible of it self: and sometimes again, they say the proper and adequate object
of the sight is Color, and that all visible things are colored. Howbeit these
two Opinions are not contrary, but if they be rightly explained they include
the true opinion concerning the Object of Sight: For indeed the adequate object
of sight is color, and whatsoever is seen under the notion of color; and
therefore light it self inasmuch as it is said to be seen, is comprehended
under color, and is as it were a whiteness. Howbeit, you must observe, it is
one thing to be visible, another to be actually seen. All color is of its own
nature actually visible, nor does it receive its visibility from any external
Cause; and though it should never be seen, yet were it visible of its own
nature, says Scaliger, Exercit. 325. Sect. 4. and that color which is in the
dark, and deep within a thing, is actually color, yet light is required that
it may be actually seen.

Now Aristotle defines color, What Color is.
in his B. De sens. and sensibl. cap. 3. The extremity of that which is
transparent in a terminated body, or the Extremity of a transparent thing
terminated: which definition that it may be rightly understood, it is to be
observed, that color belongs to al things by means of perspicuity, and that
transparency terminated is the Subject of colors. For transparency being
condensed, so that it can be no longer seen thorough, nor transmit the Images
of other things, becomes colored, and is said to be terminated: for it
prescribes bounds and limits to the Sight, and is an hinderance that other
things cannot be seen which lie betwixt it and the sight; for although that
same color also which is in the middle and depth of a thing, is also color:
yet he seems rather to have defined that which is actually seen, and is in the
Surface. For Color is not the Surface as some ill expound Aristotle, but in
the Surface: and the extremity of a body as a body is one thing, and the
extremity of a diaphanous or transparent body considered as such is another.
Now the term or bound of a Diaphanous or transparent body is where it becomes
dark.

Color therefore has its Original from the termination of that which is
transparent: And that is two ways; first only by condensation of the
transparent body, without the admixture of another body, after which manner the
Stars come to be seen. Again Color is made by the mixture of a dark body with
a transparent. So Fire which is of it self transparent, if it be mixed with
exhalations and fumes, appears of a red color; and the same comes to pass in
the Air and Water: for these three Elements are transparent, though in a
various degree; for Fire is most of al transparent; after that the Air; Water
seems to have some darkness in comparison; but the Earth is absolutely dark.
And therefore by the mixture of the earthy parts with the other Elements sundry
colors arise. But in the first place, that which is transparent becomes white;
and therefore that which is transparent, light, and whiteness, are almost of the
same nature: in like manner, Intransparency, Darkness, and Blackness are also
of kin. And these are the first, simple and extreme colors, which do also
proceed from the first simple Bodies, and all other colors consist of a
mixture of these; all the sorts whereof to reckon up in this place would be too
tedious; touching which Scaliger has many excellent things in his 325.
Exercitation.

Now apparent colors are made of the Species of real colors mingled with
others. Apparent Colors how made
And therefore when the Sun's light is mingled with the color of Clouds,
various colors do result therefrom. Therefore we conclude that color is
visible, but that illuminated or shining color is only actually seen.

Whence also a Cause may be rendered why some things are not only seen
themselves, but make others to be seen; and some things can be seen themselves,
but cannot make other things to be seen: and others again can neither be seen
themselves, nor make others to be seen. For some things have an inbred light
proper to themselves; some only an adventitious or borrowed light. Such as have
an inbred light can be seen without the help of other things. And such as have
it plentiful and potent, as the Sun and Fire, do also make other things
visible; but such as have little light in them, and so little as can only
render them visible, and that but in the Night, do not at al help other things
to be seen; such as are some rotten woods, Glowworms, and such like: but those
things that have no innate light, can neither make other things visible, nor
are they visible themselves, unless they be enlightened by some other thing.

Now because Light is necessary to Sight, it is worth our enquiry how it
concurs thereto. How light concurs to sight.
Some hold, that it is only required to illuminate the object and medium,
others that it is necessary also to inlighten the Organ. As to the object, it
is altogether necessary that it be illuminated, that it may be actually seen;
and that appears by experience. For although the whole Air which is about the
Party seeing be illuminated, yet if that which is about the color be not
illuminated, the color cannot be seen: for the colors of themselves if they
be not illustrated by light, do remain sluggish as it were, so that they cannot
produce an Image of themselves; and light is the act of color, not to make it
to be, but to make it visible, as Scaliger says, Exercit. 75. S. 7. Also for
the Medium light is requisite: yet is it not necessary that the whole be
illuminated, but only that part which is about the thing visible: and so light
seems not necessary to the medium as a medium; but only in respect of the
visible object therein residing. For even when we are in the dark we see those
things that are in an illuminated Medium; and in the deepest wels, where no
light reaches, we see the Stars even in the day time.

As to the Organ, we avouch with Aristotle, de sens. and sensibil. Cap. 3. that
as without, so within, there is no seeing without light: howbeit we hold that
it is rather an inward and inbred than an external light, which the Eyes of
many Creatures that shine in the night, do witness. But that an Eye which is in
the thickest darkness can be illuminated and illustrated by a light so weak, as
to be able to inlighten things close by it (as for example that which shines
from rotten wood) is improbable: As also it seems impossible that a light and
color small and weak, far distant from the Eye, can any ways inlighten the
whole Air as far as to the Eye.

And because that Light is altogether necessary to sight, it is enquired,
Whether Light it self be seen
whether it also be seen. We answer: That Light while it is in a transparent
medium is not seen, as that which, but as that wherewith; and that it is not
seen of it self, but by accident; because it makes colors to be actually seen:
and when we see color, we judge that the Air is illuminated.

But the Medium of Sight is that which is transparent; The Medium of sight.
and that which is seen is always more darksom than the Medium. Hence we see
water in the Air, and the same thing colored is seen in pure clear water, and
hid in that which is troubled. And therefore a thing colored may also be the
Medium of Sight, provided it be not quite dark, but more transparent than the
visible object. So we se^ small creatures enclosed in Amber.

The Manner of Sight remains yet to be explained, Whether sight be caused by
receiving in, or sending forth.
concerning which there are no small controversies amongst the Ancients. For
though herein al consent, That to cause sight the object must of necessity be
joined to the organ; yet how that is done they are not al agreed. The
Platonists (for as for Plato himself, some will have him to be of one Opinion,
and some of another; and Scaliger in Exercitat. 325. Sect. 5. cites places out
of his Timaeus and Meno, whereby he endeavors to prove, That Plato conceived
sight to be caused by species flowing from the Object to the Eye) very many
skilled in the Optics, and al ancient Philosophers in a manner until Aristotle,
held that the Optic spirits and rays went out of the Eye to the Object, and
laid hold of the same.

But this Opinion is false and corrected by Aristotle, so that those Ancients
are not so much to be blamed, as they are to be chastised who contrary to the
judgment of that wise Man, do still follow those toys. For Sight as al other
Senses, is an immanent action, and therefore it must be performed in the Eyes,
and not without. And seeing every agent which acts upon another thing without
it self does not receive in it self the end and fruit of its action (as the
operation of heating is not received in the agent but the Patient) the fruit
also of sight if it were caused by sending forth of rays, would be in the
thing seen, and not in the Seer; which is absurd. For the end of sight in a
Living Creature is the accommodation of its life: but in Man besides that, also
the knowledge of Nature, comprehension of God, and Happiness. Finally, What can
that be, which out of so small an Eye-bal can be sent so suddenly to so many
things as we behold, so distant? A corporeal substance, such as are the Optic
spirits, cannot be shed forth in so great plenty. For there is nothing that can
suffice to repair so many spirits; nor can it be moved in an instant from the
Eye so far as to the Heavens: Nor can any quality of it self perform the same;
but if it should do this, the soul must needs be in it. But the subject of the
soul is a substance, not an accident. Yea, in general, whatever you hold goes
forth and causes sight, it must do it by means of the soul. Whence it would
follow, that the Air has in it not only one soul, but the souls of many living
Creatures. And those very arguments and many more which are brought by
Zabarella Lib. 2. de Visu, cap. 4.5. do make against that Opinion of Galen and
others, who hold, That the sight goes out a certain distance, and is united
with the image of the visible object, and that so sight is caused.

Let us therefore hold with Aristotle, the true manner of sight.
That sight is caused by the reception of visible images into the Eyes; and
that as from every point of a lightsom body into every point of a transparent
Medium Light is propagated: so from every part of a colored body, an Image
thereof is sent into a transparent Medium, by a right line, and received into
the Eye, and discerned by the sight. For even the images received do appear
within the apple of the Eye; and an excellent visible object hurts the sight;
and the Eye is made of so many parts, for this Receptions sake.

Chap. 3. Of the Hearing.
AFter Sight we rank Hearing; the definition of hearing.

What sound is.


for it (after Sight) is the most excellent Sense, and seems to contend
therewith in point of nobility. Now the Hearing is an external sense, which by
help of the Ear perceives audible things, viz. Sounds: for the object of
Hearing is Sound. Now Sound is a quality arising from the Air or Water being
smitten and broken by the vehement and sudden concussion of solid bodies.

To the generation of Sound three Bodies are necessary: How sound is generated.
two of which mutually strike one another, or at least one performing the
office of two, in two parts. Now these bodies ought to be solid, that they may
gather and condense the Air, and not having many pores. Hence Spunges, and
locks or fardles of wool knocked together, do cause no sound; because being full
of many pores, the smitten Air is received by them, and so it is not broken.
Besides two solid bodies, a third thing is required, which may be intercepted
betwixt those two solid bodies and broken. And this is that which also Fishes
hear.

The Mediums which receive sound are the Air and the Water. the Medium of
hearing.
They commonly hold, that a certain inbred air of the Ear is the chief organ of
Hearing. Contrariwise other later Authors, since the Organ of a sense ought to
be a similar part animated, do reject this Air: and hold the principal
instrument of Hearing to be a certain Nerve spread out in the E^r. And truly the
former Opinion is not so allowable as this, unless it be explained as
Capivaccius explains it; who teaches, that as the innate heat of the Eye is
luminous or lightful; so the innate heat of the Ear is Aerial, so that it may
be affected by sound, and is commonly called, complanted Air, that is, Air bred
in the Ear from the first formation; but that it is not included in any
peculiar Cavity, but ingrafted and implanted in the expanded Nerve.

Here we must not pass over the Echo, How Echo is caused.
which is a reciprocal and reflected sound from a smooth and hollow place. For
as Light and visible Images lighting upon a smooth and polished body are
reflected: so sounds, if they light on a smooth, even, and hollow body, whereon
they are not broken, they are reflected. And as in general, that sound may be
heard, it is not necessary that all the air from the place where the sound is
first caused, should be continually broken, as far as to the Ears; but it is
enough if the image thereof be propagated so far; even so an Echo is not bred
by a new breaking of the Air, for so this reciprocal sound would not be
articulated: but only the image of the former sound rebounding back to us. Nor
may a word be only once reflected, but diverse times, viz. If the voice beaten
back do light upon other hollow places, one after another. So the seven
Cyzician Towers did multiply words received by them with a manifold Echo. And
Pliny relates, how in the Porch of Olympia, which they therefore termed
Heptaphonon, the same word was seven times repeated; Not. Hist. Lib. 36. cap.
15. And Lucretius in his Fourth Book, thus writes: I Have known some Echoes, if
you spoke a word,
Would six or seven times back the same afford.


Chap. 4. Of the Smelling.
THe Smelling follows after the Sight and Hearing in point of Excellency, the
Definition of Smelling. Its object.

the Nature of the smelling.


which is an external sense perceiving smells, by help of the Nose or mamillary
processes therein. For the object thereof is a scent or savor.

Now touching the Nature of the Smell, the vulgar Doctrine is, that it is a
quality arising in mixed bodies, from a dry savory thing by the Heat mingled
with moisture. For they say smell and taste are so of kin, that al things which
have taste have also smell, and every thing that has no taste, has no smell
neither. Hence mixed things only have smells, and not the Elements, which also
have no taste: for neither have al mixed things smells, but those only which have
tastes. For stones have no smell, which are also void of taste; but woods, and
other things which have tastes, have also smells. But herein nevertheless smells
and tastes differ, in that dryness prevails in smells, moisture in tastes. Hence
Nitre has a stronger smell than Salt, and Salt is moister than Nitre; because
in Nitre there is more dryness, in Salt more moisture; and things that smell, if
they are over moistened they loose their smell. For the same cause, if after a
drought the Rain falls, at first a certain smell is perceived; because the dry is
mingled with the moist: but the smell lasts only so long as until the dryness
overcomes the moisture; but if the rain continue so long, that the dryness is
vanquished by the Moisture, the smell also ceases.

They hold the efficient cause of smells as of al works in mixed bodies to be
heat, the Efficient cause of smell.
which in due measure and manner mixes the moist with the dry. And hence they
give the cause why most things that have smell, smell strongest when they are
hot; why some things smell not at al unless they be heated; and why most things
smell more in the day than in the night, in the Winter than in the Summer. For
when in the mixed body moisture does very much abound, or dryness is not rightly
mixed with the moisture; there arises either no smell, or one which is
imperfect. And that therefore there is need of heat, which may either consume
the overmuch moisture, or mingle the same with the dry parts after a due manner.

But seeing what Scaliger says of Tastes, Exercit. 279. Sect. 4. That Taste no
more arises from the first Qualities than Laughter, is most true of smell: they
labor in vain, who endeavor to draw smells from the first Qualities; since they
are not in the power of the first Qualities, and we must have recourse to
nearer principles. And the Chemists do far more probably deduce odors from
Sulphur, and hold that Sulphur is the prime subject of smells; of which we have
spoke elsewhere in our Treatise of the Consent and Dissent of the Chemists with
the Aristoteleans and the Galenists, chap. 11.

The differences of Smells are little known; Differences of Odors.
but because the Taste and Smell are of kin, and most smells have much affinity to
tastes, the names of tastes are also given to smells. Now the Tastes do follow the
Nourishment, which is examined thereby by Creatures that eat the same; and
therefore these savors of themselves bring no pleasure or displeasure, but only
by accident, as they are signs of good or bad nourishment. Hence the greasy
smell of roastmeat is delightful to the hungry. These odours are exquisitely
perceived by Bruits, and therein they excel Mankind.

Yet there is also another kind of smells which does not follow the Aliment, but
is of it self pleasant or unpleasant, as the smell of Spices and many other
things. And with these smells, as also the beauty of colors, Men are either only
or chiefly affected: and other Living Creatures how exquisitely soever they
smell other scents, yet herein they are far outgone by Mankind; so that either
they take no delight from sweet smells, or if they do, it is very imperfect and
maimed, and agrees but to a few of them. Of which see Scaliger in Exercit. 303.
S. 2.

From what has been said is not hard to judge what is the true object of
smelling, and after what manner smells are perceived by the sense of smelling.
That Odours are the object of smelling was said before, nor does any man deny
it: but how that is to be understood, is not so manifest. Heraclitus (as
Aristotle says) de sens. and sensibil. cap. 5. Many ancient Philosophers,
Galen and very many Physicians are of Opinion, That the sense of smelling is
not only affected by some spiritual image and representation, but that a
certain corporeal, aerial, thin exhalation does flow out of smelling things,
and is perceived by the sense. Contrariwise, the greatest part of Peripateticks
are of opinion, that a naked image of the smell does spiritually flow from the
odorous body, as an image from a thing visible, and is carried to the organ of
smell, and thereby perceived.

The latter Opinion seems truer to us, Odors are not substances.
provided it be rightly explained: yet that there is some truth in the former
cannot be denied, though in some part it swerve from truth. For in the first
place, this must of necessity be allowed, That odours are not substances, nor
any thing corporeal: For the senses do not perceive substances, but only their
accidents. Again, this also has been shown before; That no sense is affected
by a real or material quality, The smelling perceives only an image.
but only by its representation, or a spiritual and intentional quality as they
call it. And therefore we must also hold the same as to the sense of smelling,
that the said sense perceives nothing corporeal, nor yet any real quality, but
only the Image thereof.

Nor must we in the next place deny that somewhat does flow from and exhale out
of such things as smell, and is carried in the Air. For daily experience
teaches, That odoriferous exhalations do sundry ways affect the Brain, and
very often change the temper thereof, and sometimes qualify and rectify the
same, other whiles cause heaviness of head, as Hippocrates has it in his 5.
Sect. of Aphorisms, Aph. 28. Yea, and this comes not to pass in the Brain only,
but many times by odorous exhalations we perceive our Nostrils, Eyes, and Face
to be gnawn as it were, and pained. Moreover, we see that odoriferous things by
little and little do for the most part wast and consume away. And when an
odoriferous thing is taken away, the smell remains many times a long while after
in the Air, which cannot be done by the images alone, which do not remain when
the object is removed. Al which things teach, that oftentimes there flows from
odorous bodies a certain corporeal exhalation, which has a power of heating,
cooling, and doing other things, which cannot be effected by bare species and
images. This therefore we grant, That from many things a certain odoriferous
vapor exhales, and that corporeal savory vapors do flow from things that have
smell: but yet we avouch that a spiritual species is required and presupposed to
cause the sense of smelling. Whether the species of smell need always the
carriage of a vapor.
But whether or no both are always necessary, and whether the species of the
Odor, which is properly perceived by the sense of smelling, is always joined
with some corporeal subject or vapor, without which it cannot be carried to the
Organ of Smelling, is yet in doubt, and this is the main hinge of the
Controversy.

We have spoke before in cap. 1. of the difference of sensible species, and
have granted that odours for the most part are indeed carried to the smell with
a corporeal substance: but we deny that this is always necessary, and hold
that the exhalation which comes from the odorous body does not always reach so
far as to the Nostrils, yea, and that sometimes no such thing comes from the
odorous body, and that the smelling is caused by spiritual qualities and
images, of the savors proceeding from the odoriferous body to the organ of
smelling. For if that same vaporous exhalation should be always joined with
smells as their carrier, Fishes could perceive no smells in the water, nor could
be allured thereby to seek the Bait: For since the nature of odoriferous
exhalations does consist in a dry subject elaborated by heat, and the nature of
exhalations is such as to ascend upwards, how should those exhalations come to
the bottom of the water? or if they should come thither, how will they retain
their dryness and the integrity of their nature in the water, since odoriferous
things when wet are wont to lose their smell? Moreover, how can there be so
great and so long an efflux of vapors from odoriferous things, as may suffice
to fill most large spaces? The whole odoriferous things verily which are but small
many times, if they were al turned into vapors, could not fill such distances.
Yea, and we see many things do smell a very long time together, and yet are not
at al consumed or wasted.

From the Premises also that Question may be explained; Whether Odours nourish?
Whether Odors can nourish a man? For seeing the nourishment of a body ought to
be a body, and we are nourished with the same things whereof we consist; and
odors are qualities; we hold that they have no power to nourish. And whereas it
is said that sick persons are many times refreshed with smells, and that
Democritus for his sisters sake (whom he would not draw from the Feast of the
Thesmophorist) did prolong his life three days only by smelling to hot Bread;
that must not be attributed to smells, but to odoriferous vapors exhaling from
the Bread, and recreating the spirits. Nor is that true nutrition which is made
by apposition of a like substance, viz. Of Blood elaborated in the Liver; but
only a certain cheering of the Spirits.

As to the Organ of Smelling, though al agree herein, What is the Organ of the
smell?
that the Nostrils are the Instrument of smelling; yet it is controverted
betwixt the Physicians and Peripateticks, what is the chief Organ of smelling.
For the most Peripareticks do hold the proper Organ of Smelling to be the
Nerves dilated in the Nostrils. Galen holds smell to be produced in the foremost
Ventricles of the Brain, in 8. de usu partium, cap. 6. de olfactus
Instrumentis, cap. 4. Other Physicians say, That from the Brain near the Cavity
of the Eyes, two Channels are derived to the bored bones of the Nose, whose
ends seem like teats (whence they are called the mammillary or teat-like
productions) and that in them as the proper instrument odors are discerned.
Which Opinion is most agreeable to truth, and the greatest part of the best
Physicians do follow the same. For the Brain is not the proper Organ of any
external sense, but the common, as supplying spirits into the organs of the
external senses, As to the Nostrils, true indeed it is, That odors are
perceived by them alone, and that these are the only ways Nature has
appointed to carry smells to the Organ of Smelling: yet the perception and
judgment of Odors is not in them, but in those mammillary or Teat-like
productions, which are placed before the Ventricles of the Brain, as the
examiners of smells. For if we attribute the faculty of perceiving Odors to the
Nostrils alone, and the Nerves in them dilated, what should hinder us from
smelling, so long as we have our Nostrils? Yet Experience shows, That when
those processes are obstructed, as is wont to happen in the Coryza, the
Smelling is either abated or quite taken away, without any fault in the
Nostrils. Moreover, if Smelling were made in the Nostrils, we should perceive
smells without breathing; whereas nevertheless we find by daily experience, that
the most odoriterous things being put to our Nose, we smell nothing unless we
draw our breath; the reason whereof is, because those mammillary processes are
placed within the Skul, so that smells cannot come thereto save by attraction of
the Air.

The Medium through which Odors are discerned, is the Air and Water. The Medium
of smelling.
As to the Air there is no doubt. But that in the Waters also smells are
discerned by Fishes, this is an argument, that Fishes are allured by the smell
of Baits; which Aristotle proves by many examples, in his Book de Histor.
Animal. Lib 4. cap. 8. And so much may suffice to have said of the Sense of
Smelling.

Chap. 5. Of the Tasting
THe Taste is an external Sense, by help of the Tongue discerning savors. The
Definition of tasting: Whether taste differs from feeling:
Which sense though some consound with feeling, and make it only to be a sort
of Touch: yet they are questionless in an error, and we must acknowledge the
Taste to be a peculiar Sense. For although the touch is sometimes generally taken
for a sensitive power, which takes cognizance of an object, not removed but
applied to the Organ (and in this manner the Taste may be called a kind of
feeling, and so it is by Aristotle in that sense called.) for it does not
perceive things distant as the sight does colors, but only savors applied to
the Tongue; yet that signification is not so proper; and the Question is,
whether the Touch be the same Sense, with that power that perceives Tangible
Objects: which is denied. For they differ both in the Object and Organ: for the
Object of the touch is tangible Qualities, but of the Taste Savors: and the taste
may be lost in the Tongue, while the Sense of Touching remains entire. And
therefore their Organs are quite different; and though in the Tongue there be
Touch, yet where ever there is Touch there is not Taste; but only in the Tongue;
whose thin soft and spungy flesh, the like whereof is not in the whole Body, is
the propes Instrument of Tasting.

The Object of Tasting is Savor. Touching the nature whereof, we pass over the
Opinions of the Ancients, Empedocles, Democritus, Leucippus, and Anaxagoras.
The Peripateticks do thus teach concerning Savor. No simple Body has any savor
of taste, it being only an adjunct of mixed bodies, and thereto three things are
requisite: an earthy dryness, a watery moisture, and Heat which is the Author of
all operations in mixed bodies: Of which we have every where frequent signs and
tokens: For Water which of it self is tastless, if it be strained through some
earthy dry substance, it becomes savory, as appears in Fountains, which receive
diverse tastes from the parts of the Earth through which they flow: and the water
of Lie is bitter, because it is strained through Ashes. Howbeit the Nature of
taste consists more in moist parts than in dry: and it is a quality affecting
the taste, arising in mixed bodies from the permistion of a watery moisture with a
dry earthiness. And seeing the mixture of moisture with dryness is various; and
the watery moisturejoyned with earthy dryness which is the subject of Tastes is
various, sometimes thicker, sometimes thinner, and the Heat which is the Cause of
tastes is sometimes stronger, otherwhiles weaker, hence also sundry tastes do
arise which are severally reckoned up, Kinds of tastes.
by several Men. Most do acknowledge chiefly seven simple tastes or savors; and
from their commixture others may arise, or at least they may be referred to
them: Sweet, Sout, Harsh, Rough, Salt, Bitter, Biting. These tastes may be
considered two manner of ways, either in respect to the first Qualities Heat
and Cold, or to the sense of Tasting which they affect.

The former way they are chiefly considered by Physicians, and they serve them
to know the Qualities of medicaments by, and are divided into Hot and Cold.
Into three Cold, Sour, Harsh, Rough; three Hot in excess, the Biting, Salt, and
bitter, and one moderately hot, viz. Sweet. And thus with Physicians the Harsh
and Biting tastes are the extreme tastes, the former the Coldest, the latter the
Hottest of all others. The Philosopher considers them rather after the latter
manner, and takes not their difference from the tangible Qualities, but from
the Effect whereby they work upon the taste: and thus because that taste which is
most contrary to sweet is the bitter Taste, and the one is most pleasant, the
other most unpleasant: therefore these two are by Philosophers counted the
extreme tastes, the rest are intermediate.

The sweet Taste therefore is most pleasing to the Palate, Sweet taste
arising from the mixture of a watery moisture with an earthy dryness, made
commonly by a moderate heat. Such is in Bread, Milk, ripe Grapes, Figs,
Licoris, Sugar, Honey. Although in these also some degrees may be observed in
heat, for some are botter than other some; and those that come nearest a
mediocrity are most fit to nourish a man.

An acid sharptast consists in a matter thin and subtle, A tart taste
and arises from a weak heat, or because in the mixture there are many watery
parts which cannot be overcome by the Heat, or because out of the mixed body the
hottest parts, especially those that are most pure, namely the Aerie, An harsh
taste
are exhaled. Such a taste is in Vinegar, Sorrel, Juice of Lemons. An harsh taste
consists in a matter indifferently thick, and arises from a greater degree of
cold, and a weaker heat than the Sour. A rough taste
If the matter be yet thicker and the Heat weaker, and the Cold stronger, it
causes a rough taste, which is in some unripe Apples, in Acorns, and Galls.

A Salt Taste is in an earthy matter, Salt taste
not subtle, but rather thick and earthy: and it arises from an heat exceeding
mediocrity. And therefore the first subject of a Salt taste is an earthy
dryness, through which a watery moisture is strained, adust, so that little of
the watery humor remains therein: A bitter taste the biting taste
yet from a small portion thereof a great quantity of Water may be infected. In
a bitter taste Heat is commonly yet greater, and its matter drier and more
earthy. Finally from the greatest heat arises the biting Taste, and it consists
in a subtle matter: and therefore things so tasted havea faculty of burning,
penetrating, and drying; such is in Pepper, Ginger, Garlic, Onions.

Thus I say, the Peripateticks and the Galenists endeavor to deduce the kinds
of tastes from the first Qualities. But as was said before from the Exercit.
297. S. 4. of Scaliger, Tastes do no more arise from the first Qualities than
Laughter. And what lost labor it is to endeavor to give a reason of Tastes from
the first Qualities alone, is learnedly shown by L. Grillus in a peculiar Book
de Sapore amaro and dulci. The Chemists more probably draw tastes from Salts,
and teach that Salt is the first subject of Tastes, and that from the several
kinds of Salts proceed the sundry kinds of Tastes, of which elsewhere in my
Tract. de Consens. et dissens. Cbym. cum Aristotelicis and Galen Cap. 11.

There is no external Medium required to taste, The Medium of taste.
but if the taste of any thing is to be discerned, it must be applied to the
Tongue. Yet the Internal medium is a spungy or rather porous Skin drawn over
the Tongue, and the moisture of Spittle. For to this part the Taste is first
communicated, whose representation is afterward carried through the pores of
the Tongue into the flesh thereof, and is there perceived by the Soul
exercising the sense of Tasting. And so much for the Taste.

Chap. 6. Of the Touch.
THe last external Sense and the most common of all the rest, is the Touch, The
touch.
which perceives tangible Qualities. Touching this sense, Whether there be but
one Sense of Touching.
no small Questions are wont to be agitated. And in the first place they are
wont to enquire; whether the Touch be only one Sense in number,; or whether
there be one power of Feeling, as there is one of Seeing, one of Hearing, one
of Smelling, one of Tasting, or more. Aristotle moves this Question in 2 de
Anima Cap 11. and brings this reason of doubting. There is one Sense of one
first Contrariety: and one Sense has one proper Object, to which all that it
perceives may be referred: But the Touch seems not to have one common Object,
but many: for it perceives Hot, Cold, Dry, Moist, Heavy, Light; Hard, Soft;
Clammy, Brittle; Rough, Smooth, Thick, Thin; which cannot be reduced to one
common kind, or one common notion, according to which they are perceived by the
Touch. Many being persuaded by this reason, have held diverse Tastes; some two,
one to perceive Hot and Cold; another to perceive Moist and Dry; others three;
the two aforesaid, to which they attribute also Hard and Soft, Rough and
Smooth; and a third to perceive Lightness and Heaviness: others hold that there
are so many senses of Feeling, as there are differences and contratieties of
tangible Qualities. Others have yet added more senses of touching, to perceive
Pain, Pleasure, Venery, Hunger, Thirst. Others contrariwise do hold that there
is one only Touch or Sense of Feeling, which though it has diverse Objects, yet
it perceives them all under some common notion; just as the Sight perceives
White, Black, Red, Yellow, Green, under the common notion of Color.

Now although it be hard to compose this Controversy, and most learned men
have held, that no certainty can be determined in this Point: yet very many
have thought it most probable that there is only one faculty of touching. And
several men have severally endeavored to reduce the sundry differences of
tangible Objects to some one common Nature. For some say, though the Object of
Feeling be manifold: yet is it contained under one common kind, though it want
a name. And that it is a Quality that primarily follows a body as a body, or
which immediately depends upon sublunary Bodies, and necessarily accompanies
the forms of the Elements, and of the bodies of them compounded. Others also
attribute to tangible Qualities one manner of affecting the touch, and that
they say to be a changing of the complexion of the first Qualities, and hence
the sense of feeling is said to be a sense of the temperament: and that
therefore the first Qualities are the chief object of feeling, and the rest
pertain thereto after a secondary manner; and such things as cannot be reduced
to these, are common sensible objects, which constitute no peculiar sense.
Finally, others distinguish betwixt the external sensibles, such as are Hot,
Cold, Moist, Dry, Hard, Soft, etc. and betwixt the internal, which are
perceived in the Feeler, as Pain, Pleasure, Hunger, Thirst. They conceive the
external are perceived by one only sense. For although they are many, yet they
may be reduced to one common notion: and indeed we find by experience, that he
who can by touch perceive one of those contrarieties, he can also feel the
other by the same part: contrariwise he that cannot feel one of them, cannot
feel the other. But they hold that Hunger, Thirst, Pleasure, Pain Corporeal,
are discerned by another powet; seeing these powers and acts are so separated,
that in the part wherein the external are perceived, Hunger, Thirst, and such
like are not perceived.

As to the Organ, the Organ of feeling:
it is not so easy to find it in this Sense as in the rest, and there are very
great Controversies hereabouts, not only among the ancient Writers, but the
later also: for some hold the Flesh, others the Skin, others some other thing
to be the said Organ: but we conceive the true Organ of Feeling is a Membrane.
For wherever there is a Membrane, there is also Feeling; and where there is
no Membrane, there is no Feeling. Hence the Brain feels not save by means of
the Membranes; and the Membrane which compasses the bones being removed, the
bones themselves have no more feeling. Moreover, because the Touch is a Sense
most common, and is given to Living Creatures in their whole Bodies, to avoid
the external injuries, therefore its Organ was to be spread all the body over,
and that such an one as should have no other office in the Body: for every
Sense has its proper Organ. But if we consider al things in the whole Body, al
have peculiar offices save a Membrane: the Nerves carry animal Spirit, the
Veins Blood, and other parts (as is known) have other uses. And therefore this
office cannot be assigned to them; and there remains only the Membranes which
are both similar parts, and have no other use, but are given to Living
Creatures only, that they might be the immediate Instrument of Feeling.

Chap. 7 Of the Internal Senses.
HAving explained the External Senses, we come now to the Internal, which are
busied about matters sensible presented by the external Senses. For this is the
chief difference betwixt the internal and external Senses, That the external
are immediately affected by an external object, whence also they are called
External: But the internal are not moved by the external sensible object
immediately, but they are moved by the external Senses; and therefore they are
called Internal. But as touching the Number of the internal Senses the
Controversy is so great (as may be seen in Francisc. Piccolhomineus, de sens.
intern. cap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Francisc. Toletus in Lib. 3. de Anima, cap. 3. Qu.
6. Collegium Conimbricense in Lib. 3. de Anima, cap. 3. quest. 1. Artic. 1, 2,
3.) that it is a hard matter for a man to disintangle himself, the internal
senses are three:
being herein engaged. We retain the common Opinion, which is the most
probable, and acknowledge three internal Senses, from the diversity of Offices
and Works by them performed, viz. Common Sense, Fantasy or Imagination, and
Memory.

We must by all means hold a common Sense: Common sense
For since Animals do know the differences betwixt the proper objects of sundry
Senses; and the external Senses cannot perform this Office; since each of them
knows only its own peculiar object: of necessity we must hold there is some
internal Sense, which apprehends the objects of all the external senses (whence
also it is called the common Sense) and discerns one from another, and does know
that color differs from sound, sound from smell, smell from taste, taste from what
is hot, that which is hot from that which is black, etc. For the chief Offices
of the common Sense are, to perceive the objects of all the external Senses by
help of the said Senses; to know and perceive that we are sensible of this or
that; to know the difference betwixt the diverse objects of the Senses; to judge
the privation and absence of the objects, as of darkness, silence, etc. to move
the Fantasy and to offer Images and representations of things thereunto. This
Sense therefore is as it were the middle stickler betwixt the Senses internal
and external, and receives images from the external, and communicates them to
the rest of the internal. Whence it is not unfitly compared to the Center of
the Circle, wherein five Lines concur and meet together.

Besides the common Sense the Fancy must also be added. Fantasy:
For since in perfect living Creatures it is not only necessary to apprehend
things present, but also diligently to consider that which is no longer
present, that they may be incited either to seek or shun the same; among the
internal Senses we must also reckon Fancy, which may retain the sensible
representations perceived by the common Sense, or framed by it self, and
diligently examine the same. And although it be altogether necessary, that the
Fancy be first moved by the external Sense; yet after it has once perceived
the object, and has committed the image thereof to the memory, afterward even
in the absence of the external object, it can as often as it list review and
imagine over again the same image. But of necessity the Fancy must first be
moved by the external Sense, and we can imagine nothing which we had not before
perceived by the external Senses. And though we may imagine a Mountain of Gold
and the Monster called a Chimaera, which we have never totally seen; yet we
have seen them by piecemeal; and except we had seen Gold and a Mountain we
could not imagine a Golden Mountain: so unless we had seen a Lion, a Goat, and
a Dragon, we could not imagine the Chimaera or Monster compounded of al those
Beasts.

Finally, among the internal Senses the Memory is to be reckoned: the Memory:
For because the Fancy without knowledge cannot receive the species or
representations of things; and it cannot take cognizance of many things at
once: therefore there is need of a faculty, which it self does not take
cognizance, yet is subservient to cognition, that is to say, which may receive
diverse sensible representations known by the Fancy, and reserve the same, and
suggest and present the same thereto again when need is. Also Experience it
self does witness, that indiseases of the inner Senses, one of them may be lost
and destroyed or depraved, the other remaining safe and sound: and in Fevers
it often happens, that the Patients their Memory being sound, do imagine that
there are Fiddlers and other things in their Chambers, and seek to pick flocks
and seathers or straws where there are none: and such like examples are
frequent in the Writings of Physicians: which is an argument that the Fancy is
a faculty distinct from the Memory.

Now some do make a twofold Memory, Sensitive and Intellective: A twofold
Memory.
but it is enough to say that the Memory is a Faculty common to Man and Beast.
But after what manner the act of remembering is performed, is a very obscute
point. They commonly hold that sensible objects do imprint certain images on
the Brain or Organ of Sense, even as in Wax the Picture of the Seal is
imprinted, which remains after the Seal is taken away. Whence they say, such as
have an hard and dry brain have an hard apprehension of things, but retain them
longer; but they that have it moist and soft, do easily receive, but cannot so
long and faithfully retain.

But it is (peradventure) more advised to confess that in this point we are in
the dark, than to hold such things; especially if you weigh that which Scaliger
has, in his 397. Exercit. Sect. 28. against this Opinion. For if Memory be
made after this manner, since it is in a manner Infinite; in what spaces can so
many Images be retained? in what seats can they be so disposed and ordered,
that we may draw out, rank, direct, every one apart, and al together. Now why a
dry Brain is more apt for Memory, Scaliger brings a new cause in the place
forecited, which may there be seen.

Now there are two acts of Memory, or of the remembering Faculty: Two acts of
Memory
the one of which is called by the name of the Faculty, Memory; the other
Remembrance. Memory.
Memory is desined to be the iterated apprehension of a thing formerly known;
or a repetition of what has been formerly perceived by the Senses, just as it
was perceived: For examples sake, if I am asked what is the name of the King of
France, I can suddenly recite the same, Remembrance.
as I have sometimes heard it named. But Remembrance is to go back from one or
two things retained in the Memory, til we call to mind somewhat which we had as
it were forgotten: as if a man having forgotten a name, should go over all the
Letters of the Alphabet, and join every Consonant to each Vowel once, and so
make single syllables, til meeting with the first syllable thereof, he come
thereby to call to mind the whole name which he had forgotten. And therefore more
things are required to Remembrance than to Memory; and Memory is common to the
Bruits, but not Remembrance: For to Memory it is enough that we apprehend a
thing again, after the same manner as we received it: but to Remembrance it is
requisite, that the thing be first forgotten, and then that we hold another
thing fast in Memory, whereby we are brought again to the knowledge of what we
had forgotten.

Nor does it seem necessary to hold any more internal Senses. Some indeed do
add the Aestimative, to discourse from that which is known to that which is
unknown in particulars, or to perceive those things which the Senses could not
perceive: for examples sake, when the Sheep sees only the color, bigness, and
shape of the Wolf with its eyes, and yet does not for these things fly the
Wolf, they conceive it necessary to add an Aestimative Faculty, whereby the
Sheep discerns the enmity of the Wolf against it self, which falls not under
cognizance of the external Senses.

But this Opinion seems not agreeable to truth: For the Faculty of Reasoning
and Discoursing is only in Man alone; and for the apprehension of al sensible
things, the Fancy alone is sufficient: nor must we hold a peculiar faculty
which they call Aestimativa, because of the enmity, pleasure, hate, or pain
which Animals perceive from somethings. For these are nothing in the sensible
object it self, but passions and affections following upon the perception of a
thing, and proceeding from a certain proper natural Instinct which is granted
to living Creatures to stir up the appetite, either to seek or ^^un the object.
For in the perception of al sensible things, these three things do follow one
another in order: First the perception of a sensible object under the proper
notion of an object: Secondly, pain or pleasure arising from the said
perception: Thirdly, a stirring up of the Appetite, which either seeks the
object as pleasing, or shuns the same as displeasing. The two former do pertain
to the same faculty, viz. The sense or Fantasy, yet with some diversity. For
the Apprehension of the object under its proper notion; is the work of the
Sense as Sense, and the Fancy as Fancy; and al Living Creatures do perceive the
object under the notion of an object after the same manner, both with the
external Senses and the Fantasy: as al Creatures discern a white color as
white, none as black. But the Apprehension of the object as pleasing or
displeasing, is not of the Sense as Sense, nor of the Fancy, nor do the same
things seem pleasing or displeasing to al Living Creatures: but this belongs to
the Senses as they are limited and determined by the proper form of every
Creature; which because it is for the most part unknown to us, is by some
called natural lustinct. Hence the sight of a Wolf is painful to the Sheep,
which yet it is not to the Lion, but rather a delight if the Lion be hungry.

This Question is by Zabarella thus explained. But it may to the same purpose,
yet peradventure more clearly, be thus briefly resolved. In all living Creatures
there is not only the Vegerative and sensitive Soul; but also as was said
before a certain peculiar specific form, whereby every Living Creature differs
from others of another kind, as for Instance whereby a Lion differs from a Man,
an Horse, an Ox, etc. This in Man kind is the Rational Soul; and in Bruits
also, it is a peculiar soul, which though it be not a rational soul, yet it
answers to the Rational Soul in Men, and is in some more noble, in others less
noble; and to this al those more noble operations, which cannot be referred to
the Senses, and are different in several Creatures, are to be ascribed.

And therefore their Doctrine is not true (among whom is Piccolhomineus, de
sensibus internis, chapter 11.) who hold that it is one of the Offices of the
Fancy, to ad subnotions, and to judge the objects to be agreeable or
disagreeable to the Creature; also that it is the principle of sundry admirable
works, which irrational Creatures perform, as the Swallows making her nest, the
Spiders weaving her web, the Bees making her Honeycomb, etc. For as in Man, to
reason is not a work of the Fancy; so in Bruits it is not the work of Fancy to
act such things as are proper to their kind, but of a superior faculty, whereby
every Bruit is distinguished from other Bruits.

Hence that Question of some may easily be decided, whether bruit beasts are
rational?
Whether Bruits are Rational or no? That they are not Rational is certain,
because they are not Men. Mean while as a man not by his Fantasy, but by
Reason is differenced from other Living Creatures: so the soul and specisick
form of every Bruit has a proper faculty above the Fancy, whereby it differs
from other Bruits. And hence there is so much variety in the actions and works
of Bruits, and some are more ingenious and crafty than other some; the Fox than
the Hag, Ox, or Ass; the Be than the Fly: Of which matter he that would
rightly judge, let him consider what is written of the Works of Elephants, Dogs,
Silkworms, Bees, etc. and what daily accurs in Nature.

Chap. 8. Of the Desiring and Moving Faculty.
HAving treated of the knowing Faculty of the Sensible Soul: we are now to
speak of the Apperite. And although there are sundry Apperites, and as Scaliger
in Lib. 1. de Plantis, writes, the Fare is said to have an Appetite to mount
alost, the Iron to join it self to the Lodestone, a Plant to augment its
moisture, an Horse to Ven^ry, a Man to blessedness; yet here we treat only of
that kind of Appertire which they commonly call Sensitive; What the Appetite is
which is a power of the Soul, whereby a Living Creature has an inclination
toward something perceived by the sense. Its object is some good thing
apprehended by Sense, whether it be really good, or only appear so. For the
Appetite rends to an end; and every end has in it the notion of goodness. But
although the Appetite is said to seek good, and fly from evil: yet evil also
belongs to the Appetite under the notion of good; for to fly evil seems to the
Appetite a good thing. From the Appetite as its acts proceed the Passions and
Affections so called.

The Appetite of Living Creatures is followed by their voluntary motion; The
Motion of living Creatures.
for unless the Creature had a power to attai^ that the Appetite desires, it
were a vain thing for it to have an Appetite; but Nature does nothing in vain,
but has granted a saculty to Animals spri^ging from the Sensitive Soul,
whereby they can transfer either their whole Body, or some part thereof, from
place to place.

Now to cause this Motion, five things are necessary. Motion how cansed.


I. An Object, which may excite the Creature to move, and for the sake whereof
it is moved. For a Living Creature is not moved in vain: but the Appetite is
stirred up by the Object as its end and good thing desired.

II. There must needs be a directing Principle by which (being in the living
Creature) the first motion is made. For voluntary motion is given to living
Creatures, to seek out things profitable, and to sly things hurtful; which
cannot be done, unless there be some power which may know the Object, and offer
the same to the Appetite, and incite the same either to seek or to shun the
same. And therefore this principle ought to partake of knowledge. Moreover,
because a living Creature is moved not only to things present, but absent also;
it ought to perceive not only things present, but such also as are absent. But
these conditions do neither suit with the nutritive Soul, nor the external
Senses, nor the common Sense: but only with the Fancy. For although the mind
also may direct to Motion: yet it is a more remote principle of motion, nor
does it move without the Fancy; whereas nevertheless the Fancy may move without
the Mind; as we see in Bruits, which though destitute of Reason, yet are they
incited to motion by their Fancies.

III. To come a little nearer, the Principle of Motion and that which commands
the Motion is the Appetite. For because the motion of Animals is made to follow
after some things profitable and convenient, and to sly some things adverse and
noxious; and that to the Appetite belong the affections of Love and Hatred: of
necessity in the next place the Locomotive or stirring Faculty is moved by the
Appetite, so that the Appetite commands Motion.

IV. Besides the Appetite, there is need of an executive power, which may
produce into act that motion which is commanded by the Appetite, and perform
the same. For since Local motion is a different operation from the operation of
the Appetite, and the operations of the Appetite are immanent, but motion a
transient action: another power must be granted, which is the immediate cause
of Local voluntary motion in Animals.

V. Finally, An Instrument is requisite by which the motion may be performed.
For Experience shows, that those who have some Member maimed, although the
object be at hand, and the Fancy do move the Appetite, and the Appetite command
motion, yet they cannot stir, because of the unfitness of the Instrument. Now
though there is some Controversy among Authors, what is the Instrument of
Motion; yet we hold that it is a Muscle. And whereas some make anxious
Inquisition, which part in a Muscle is the chief Instrument of motion, whether
a Nerve or a Tendon; they seem herein to busy themselves more than they need.
For, as Aristotle has it, 2 de Part. Animal. cap. 1. The power of sense is in
the similar parts, but the Actions are performed by parts dissimilar.

The voluntary motion therefore of a Living Creature is made after this manner
and order. The monner and order of the motion of a living Creature.
In the first place an external object is offered, which as an immovable mover,
being received by the external Senses and the common sense, is communicated to
the Fantasy, and is thereby known what it is. Afterward more attently and
punctually it is known whether it be convenient and acceptable, or hurtful and
unpleasing. This knowledge is followed by Love or Hate, or an Appetite to lay
hold on a thing grateful and delectable, and to avoid a thing hurtful. This
Appetite in Bruits is presently followed by motion.

But in Man, before motion be made, some things do yet intervene, For the
Appetite and these motions of the internal Senses are offered to the Mind, that
they may be thereby approved or disapproved. If they be approved, and the mind
understands that the Appetite of the Senses is right, presently motion follows:
but if it be rejected as false, a contention and fight arises betwixt the
sensitive appetite and the rational, til the one vanquishes the other; and that
which overcomes is the principle of the motion, and commands the motive faculty
to move. The motive faculty being implanted in all the Muscles of the whole Body,
does contract such Muscles as are needful: the Muscles being contracted draw
the Tendons to them, the Tendons being drawn draw the Bones: finally, the Bones
being moved, the Member or whole Body is transferred from place to place.

Chap. 9. Of Sleep, Waking, and Dreams.
SLeep and Waking are Affections of the Senses hither to explained. For we
perceive a Man is awake, by the exercise of his external senses; and that he is
asleep by their cessation from operation. And therefore sleep seems to be a
privation of waking: and sleep and waking belong to the same faculty, viz. the
sensitive: and sleep and waking are affections of the sense, agreeing to all
Animals and to them alone. And therefore things destitute of a sensitive Soul
neither sleep nor wake, as Plants. Again no Living Creature does always sleep,
nor always wake. For because al things must necessarily be weakened in their
Operations, and the Spirits are consumed by the operations of the Senses; Sleep
is also necessary to repair the strength and restore the Spirits. And though
this be not so manifest in the more imperfect Animals, which are not furnished
with all their Senses; yet manifest experience convinces that the more perfect
Animals do sleep. Of which see Aristotle in his 4. de Hist. Animal, cap. 10.
Pliny in Lib. 10. Not. Hist. cap. 75.

Now Sleep is not every cessation of the Senses, the Cause of Sleep.
or impotency in the exercise of the Senses: for even in swouning fits also,
and other Diseases, the operations of the Senses cease: but when there is an
inability to operate in the first Organ of Sense. Sleep therefore is a natural
cessation of the common sense and the other senses, caused for the good of
living Creatures, or as Aristotle says in his B. De Somn. and Vigil. cap. 3.
It is the Cessation of the first original of sense, as being unable. to act, of
which definition see Scaliger in Exercit. 289. Now the common sense is chiefly
affected in sleep; and it resting the other external senses rest also. But the
other internal senses do not always necessarily rest in sleep: but if they do,
it is because the external rest. For if the Fancy does sometimes not operate in
sleep, that does not therefore happen because sleep is an affection or adjunct
thereof, but because there is nothing brought unto it from the external senses
to busy the same.

Now what the Cause is which thus binds as it were the external senses, is
worth our Enquiry. The cause whereof is nothing, but that the animal spirits do
not flow from the Brain into the Organs of the Senses. But what should hinder
the Influx of the spirits is somewhat obscure. Aristotle de Somno and Vigil.
cap. 3. held that this was caused by obstruction of the passage of the common
sense, through which the animal spirits as a common Instrument of the Soul are
sent into the Organs of all the senses. Now the obstruction he says is caused
by vapors, chiefly such as are carried out of the Stomach into the Brain. For
they when the living Creature rests, whereby the Brain becomes somewhat colder,
are condensed, and become more thick and heavy, and so begin to descend again,
and stop the passages of the Nerves, so that the animal spirit cannot be
carried into the Organs of the Senses, of which thing there are many tokens:
for after meat, especially if we have eaten liberally, we become sleepy, and
Persons that are drunk sleep exceedingly: contrariwise, such as have fasted
long cannot sleep a nights, and most sleepy medicaments do send many vapors
into the Head; or cool the Brain, that the vapors may be therein somewhat
thickened, and so may stop the passages. Others contrariwise, conceive the sleep
is not caused by vapors, nor by such things as stop the passages of the Nerves,
but because the soul draws back the spirits to it self, lest by continual
operation the animal faculties should be destroyed. Hence not only after Meat
sleep comes; but Music, Weariness, Darkness, and Quiet cause fleep.

But both these Opinions ought (I conceive) to be joined together, and thus
Sleep is bred. The living Creature being composed to rest, the Soul finding a
kind of languishing feebleness, by reason of the operations of the senses all
day long, dissipation of the spirits, and absence of the quickening heat of the
Sun, endeavors a restoration and recreation of the strength and spirits to the
preservation of the living Creature in Health. And because the animal spirits
have their original from the Vital, that the Vital may first be restored and
repaited, the Heart draws to it self some Heat, which is scattered into the
other parts. Hence the remote members, and especially the Brain, becomes a
little colder, to which the coldness of the nights Air, and the Ceasing of the
bodies motion, which causes heat, do lend an helping hand: but the Heat about
the Heart and parts thereabouts is increased. The Heat there increased raises
out of the Aliment certain sweet vapors, which being carried to the Brain, by
the coldness thereof are a little thickened, and begin again to descend; and
slipping into the roots of the Nerves they fill and stop their passages, and are
the cause, both that the vital spirits and Heat cannot ascend out of the lower
parts into the Brain, and that the animal spirits cannot be distributed into
the Organs of the Senses: for want of spirits all the members do hang loos, and
all the operations of the external Senses do cease.

The End therefore of Sleep is to restore the strength of living Creatures. the
End of Sleep.
For because much spirit is consumed by motion, and the operation of the
external senses, that the Creature may not be endamaged in point of health,
they must of necessity be restored. Scaliger in Exercitat. 289. adds another
End, in these words: Sleep was made by God, not only (as is well said) to
refresh and repair the Body, but for the Liberty of the Mind. For because if
you regard the offices of life, when we sleep we live but the life of Plants;
it was his pleasure that then we should truly live: For the Servant at that
time is free, yea and becomes a Master sometimes in his Dreams. The Minds of
evil men are punished in Dreams, those of good and wise men become divine, by
the searching out of truth and performance of laudible offices. For being freed
not from the Body, but from its service, they do their own work: for they move
themselves, and also advance themselves to the Pattern of their End which they
shall in time see face to face.

To Sleep, Watching is opposed, Watching.
which is nothing but the Activity or Freedom of the Senses. Now a living
Creature is wakened from sleep two manner of ways, either of its own accord,
or being disturbed and troubled by some external Cause. The first manner is
most natural, and comes to pass when the Heat which had hid it self within, for
the digestion of the aliments, and reparation of the spirits (concoction being
finished, and the spirits repaired) does again break forth into the outward
parts, and discusses those vapors which were an obstacle to the Spirits, that
the Spirits may freely pass into the Organs of the senses. Now although
sometimes the living Creature is awaked of it self, before concoction be
finished (if sharp vapors arising from bad humors be carried into the Brain; or
through some other Causes) yet this manner aforesaid is most common and natural.

Now the wakening of a man out of sleep by external things, (as if a man be
rouzed by crying aloud and pulling) is caused by perception of external
sensible objects. For although in sleep there is a defect of spirits in the
Instruments of the senses: yet the Organs are not quite void of animal spirits,
but there are some yet remaining in them, which are sufficient to perceive
vehement sensible objects. Therefore the sensititive soul in sleep being
stirred up and provoked by a vehement external object does begin to exercise
its senses, and at first it obscurely perceives the object, but afterward that
it may more clearly discern the same, it gives out a greater quantity of
spirits; which seeking way to the Organ of that sense which is affected, they
break through the passage of the common sense; and so way is opened to the
Organs of all the Senses, and consequently the sleep ceases. Hence they who in
sleep have the passages of their senses obstructed by many thick vapors, which
is usual in such as are drunk; they are hardly awakened, nor can their spirits
easily find their passage: but those who abound not with thick vapors are
easily awakened. For the same cause the first sleep is more sound and deep;
because the vapors in the first concoction are more plentiful and thick, which
afterward are by little and little consumed and attenuated.

In sleepy Dreams do happen, which are no passion of the external senses. What
a Dream it.
For in such as sleep (who only Dream) all the external senses are bound and
tied up. Nor is a Dream a passion of the rational Soul: for Dogs and other
Creatures Dream as well as Mankind. But a Dream is an adjunct of the internal
senses, and especially of the Fancy: and it is defined to be a Phantasm or
Apparition happening to such as sleep.

And because in such as Dream the Fancy is busied, and some apparition appears
thereto; and we Dream not only of things which we have done in the day time,
but also of things a great way off, and which we have neither seen nor heard,
nor perceived by any of our senses, yea and of things never yet done, but which
are hereafter to come to pass: The Question is how the Images of things absent,
never perceived by our senses, and which are not yet come to pass, can be
offered to our Fancy. The Epicureans held (as appears out of Lucretius, Lib.
4.) That certain thin Images do come from the outsides of visible objects,
which are as it were their Skins and Barks, having the representation of the
things from whence they came. And these they thought did insinuate themselves
into Persons asleep, and foreshew things to come. But this Opinion has been
long ago rejected.

The conceit of Coelius Rhodiginus is not much better, who in the 27. Book of
his ancient readings, Chap. 11. denies that there are any such Images flying up
and down in the Air, as the Epicureans imagined: yet grants that there are
certain motions which exercise and work upon us in stead of Images, and that
they do proceed from the Beginnings of certain things afterward to be said or
done, the Air being first changed, which being afterward through the Nostrils
and Ears transmitted to the Heart, they cause us in Dreams to foresee the
events of future things. And that these motions cannot at any other time make
themselves sensible save in the night. But what motions can there be of things
which are not? or how can things absent fifty or a hundred miles al along
affect the Air? or why should not these motions affect any persons that sleep,
but only such as are concerned to know the thing revealed?

We refer all such Dreams which are of things which we never before perceived
with our Sense, or arise from causes which are not in our bodies, unto a more
Divine power. Thus therefore we conceive Dreams are to be divided.

Dreams are some Natural, The Differences of Dreams. Animal Dreams.
others Supernatural or Divine. The Natural are such as proceed from Natural
causes. And these again are by some divided into Ammal and Natural peculiarly
so called. Those are called Animal which are conversant about such things as
have been presented to us while we were awake. For certain species or Images of
sensible things are imprinted upon the internal Senses, which remain even then
when the Senses work not, and when sensible objects are absent, and raise
dreams. These though they do not always appear to persons awake, being busied
about other objects: yet in persons asleep, the Senses ceasing to operate, they
again arise, and present themselves to the Fancy. These Dreams do not always
present things to us just as they were acted: for nothing can be imagined so
foolish, absurd, and monstrous, which is not presented unto us sometimes in
Dreams. For the Soul being not wrought upon by external Objects, revolves the
Images of things formerly presented, and joins this with that as each offers it
self, and of many and diverse things compounds one; also it wonderfully
confounds the order and circumstances of things. And to this the plenty of bad
vapors is a furtherance. For as bad vapors and humors in persons awake, as in
such as are melancholy and mad, by disturbing the Brain are a cause of absurd
cogitations; so they do the same in persons asleep; so that it is rightly said,
Dreams are the Ravings of persons asleep, and Ravings are the Dreams of such as
are awake. Hence melancholic persons, and such as have over eaten, have absurd
and terrible Dreams. And for the same cause, such as are drunk, and those that
first compose themselves to sleep, have for the most part no Dreams; because
there is in them so great store of vapors that their Brain is filled, and all the images overwhelmed: But toward day, and after the Meat is digested, the
Dreams are more clear, because the vapors arising from the Meat are attenuated
and for the most part discussed.

But Natural Dreams are such as arise from some hidden cause in the Body,
Natural Dreams.
as the humors, temperaments, etc. For if such a cause be vehement, it may even
in sleep also affect some external sense, and present an image of it self to
the Fancy; yet it seldom does it distinctly, but by the appearance of some
other thing like to it, or joined with the appearance of a like thing. So as
Galen relates de Praesag. ex Insomniis, when a certain man dreamed that one of
his Thighs was turned into a stone, a while after unexpectedly he was taken
with a palsy in the same Thigh.

But to Supernatural Dreams we refer al those which are sent into us by higher
and supernatural causes; Supernatural Dreams. Divine Dreams.
whether it be by God, good Angels, or Devils. Such as are infused by God and
good Angels, are termed Divine, of which some examples are extant in the holy
Scriptures. For the most good and great God is wont to present to men in
Dreams, either new Images of things, or so to order and join such as were in
them before, that they may become warnings of things to come. Also the Angels
are wont to excite and aptly to dispose such Images, Spirits, or Humors as are
in the Body, as that they may admonish a man of some necessary and profitable
thing. Diabolical Dreams.
But Diabolical Dreams are caused after the same manner as the Angelical, but
to a different end: For the Devil studies to do men mischief, and endeavors
even by Dreams to possess them with vain Superstitions; which the Oracles
suggested in Dreams do witness; some examples whereof are related by Tertullian
in his Book de Anima. Coelius Rhodigin. antiq. Lect. lib. 27. cap. 14. or by
ungodly and lascivious Dreams he endeavors to allure men to lusts and unlawful
pleasures.

From the Premises it is apparent how even absent and future things may be
presented to us in a Dream. The Platonists conceive many Dreams may be caused
by the Geniuses and Spirits which they conceived did attend upon every man, and
admonish them of many things; and the Divines refer them more rightly to
Angels, which many think every man has to attend him. But this seems fit to be
added to what has been said out of Tertullian, who in his Book de Anima thus
writes; the liberality of Divine Dreams is also wont to drop down upon profane
persons, God making the Sun to shine upon the just and unjust. For even
Nebuchadnezzar had a Divine Dream. And as Gods goodness vouchsafes it self to
Heathens, so also the tentations of the Devil do follow even holy men, whom he
abstains not to tempt by day, or to molest when they are asleep, if he cannot
do it when they are waking.

From what has been said it is easy to collect what we are to think of
Divination by Dreams. For Dreams are either Significative, which foretell
somewhat; or Nonsignificative, Touching Divination by Dreams.
which foreshew nothing. Again, significative Dreams are either Theorematical,
which clearly express the Nature of the Event; or Allegorical, which express
the thing foreshewed wrapped up in figures and Allegories. To explain these
latter is not in the reach of every one; but they are the best expounders of
Dreams, who can best discern the similitudes and resemblances of things:
whereof the Books of Interpretations of Dreams do treat.

The Dreams infused by God and good Angels do questionless foreshew somewhat to
come: but al cannot expound them, only they that have it granted them by God.
Most Diabolical Dreams are vain, and sent to allure men to sin; and if any of
them be true (for the Devil also can sometimes conjecture things to come,
knowing them by their superior Causes or Signs) he does also by them endeavor
to draw men to some false Religion. But Natural Dreams, which arise from the
Constitution of our Bodies, do also afford figns thereof; and Physicians are
wont to observe them; and what Dreams do argue such and such Constitutions of
Body, is taught at large by Hippocrates, de Insomniis, and by Galen in his
Treatise de praesagiis ex Insomniis: and seeing these are most frequent, it is
well said by the Preacher, Ecclesiastes 5. In the multitude of Dreams and many
words there is much vanity: but fear thou God.

Chap. 10. Of the Differences of Living Creatures.
HAving spoken of the Form of Bruit Beasts, we should now speak of their
Bodies. But forasmuch as Man of al Animals or living things (for we trouble not
our selves whether these terms do differ, of which see Scaliger, Exercit. 216.)
is the most perfect; and in every kind the more imperfect are to be judged by
the most perfect: Moreover, the parts of al Animals or Living Creatures are not
yet known and described; but in the description of the parts of Man's Body
Anatomists have been as diligent as can be imagined: Such things as should have
been said of the pirts of Living Creatures in general, must he setcht from the
History of the p^^^s of Man; and such things wherein the parts of other
Creatures differ from those of Man, must be taken into consideration. We shall
here therefore treat rather of the differences of Ammals; where also some
things will fall in our way as touching their parts. And seeing every living
Creature consists of a Soul and a Body, we will weigh and consider the chief
differences which slow both from the Soul, and from the Body, and from the whole
Creature, consisting and made up of both.

And first as to the Vegetative Faculty, three things are therein considerable:
Nutrition, The differences of Living Creatures in respect of the Vegetative
faculty.
Augmentation, and Generation. And as for Nutrition, there is no Bruit Beast
which does no^ eat some kind of food or other: for some eat flesh, as the Wolf,
Tigre, etc. some eat diverse kind of things promiscuously, as Dogs; some Herbs
and Corn, as Horses, Hearts, etc. some feed on Worms, as very many Birds; and
some on Fishes. And of these again, some hunt for their living, and prey upon
other Creatures, as the Crocodile, the Lion, the Wolf, etc. some lay up their
Meat in Summer, as the Pismires; some seek their Prey night and day.

As to Generation, Bruit Beasts have doubtless a Faculty (which they received
from the blessing of God at the Creation) of multiplying themselves by
mediation of a certain Seed, whether it be properly so called, or analogically,
in such things as are commonly said to be produced by equivocal Generation. For
we find by experience that Insects and such like things, which are said to be
produced by equivocal generation, are not generated in any, but only in some
peculiar sort of matter. For a Beetle is not bred of any, but only of some
determinate sort of Matter. Hence also it comes to pass that Beasts generated
of a putrid substance, containing therein a sitting Seed, are not found to
differ from other Creatures of the same name. For besides that they agree
altogether in form and figure, they do moreover possess the same proprieties,
and perform the same operations, and can beget their like.

For living Creatures are produced three manner of ways: A threefold
Generation of Living Creatures^
Some by a mutual Conjunction of male and female; some out of the putrid matter
of a corrupted body, but containing in it a sead fit to propagate such a
Creature: and some are produced both ways, viz. both by Copulation and by
putrefaction, as Mice, Locusts, Beetles, Flies, etc.

Moreover, Bruit Creatures engender after sundry manners; some produce live
Creatures, and are therefore called Vivipara, as Does, Bitches, Dolphins,
Vipers; some bring forth Eggs, out of which cherished with a bening gentle
Heat, are hatched Chicken, Birds, Fishes: Finally, some bring forth a Worm.

Aristotle defines an Egg, What an Egg is.
that thereout an Animal does exist, not from the whole, but from one part
thereof only, the reft being turned into nourishment: and a Worm he defines by
saying, that the whole grows up into an Animal. And so Aristotle divides an Egg
into two parts; which in perfecter Creatures are manifestly different and
distinct in color; but in the imperfecter sort of Creatures they are not seen
distinct, but both are confounded and jumbled together into one substance. Of
which part of the Egg the Creature is made.


But of what part of the Egg the Creature is made, is a controverted point.
Hippocrates, or the Author of the Book de Natura pueri, says, That it is made
of the Yolk; Aristotle says of the White. If we consult with experience we
shall find it as Aristotle saics; and thus we shall find it to be: If you shall
open an Egg the second, third, or fourth day after the Hen has sat upon it,
and diligently view the same; you may easily observe that the Heart is the
principal Member: For it is easy to see that the rude Chick is first formed,
and in it, first the Heart, which sends forth two veins; and after the
generation of the young Chick, the Membranes which are thereto subservient are
evidently seen to grow together. And indeed on the eighth day, the heart is not
only apparent, but together with the Veins, being of the same red color, it is
manifestly seen to move and beat. On the fourth day the bodies of the Membranes
being now confirmed and grown thicker, begin to be less transparent: on the
seventh day by reason of their compactness, they obscure the whole Chick in a
manner, or cover the same; yet the Heart is seen by its conspicuous red color,
as also the Veins, and by its motion. Mean while, the Liver does not yet
appear, but on the seventh day there is first seen a liquor or yellowish slimy
Matter underneath the Heart, which is the beginning of the Liver growing
together, and in the following days it makes up this Body of the Liver; till
which time there remains much of the Yolk, yea, when the Chickens are hatched.
And in this place of the Liver for nine whole days together, after the first
formation, no blood in seen; the heart notwithstanding in the mean while being
full of blood, as also a most large Vein, drawn under the heart, the whole Bodies
length. By all which it appears manifest, that the Soul sticks in the Heart as
in its Root, and that the Heart is the first thing which lives, and is the
Creature as it were.

But of which part of the Egg the Chick is framed, and with which part it is
nourished, is not so plain: yet thus the matter seems to go. Much about the
middle of the Egg longwaies, where the Yolk is joined to the White above, the
second day after the Hens sitting, there is a certain whitish beginning, more
compact than the rest of the White, and as it were through a glass there is the
appearance of a Chicken, the head being most conspicuous, and near the Head a
red point dilating and contracting it self: The days following, from that red
point a very red Vein is drawn al along the Chickens back, every day further
and further; from which afterward Veins proceed to the skins drawn about the
yolk. By which it may be conjectured, that the Chick is first made of the
White; and that the aliment to be turned into blood is made of the Yolk, and
carried through the Veins to the little skins stretched about the Yolk, and
perfected in the Liver, which Liver has also a similitude with the Yolk. Yet
if any man shall hold, that the Yolk gives nourishment to the blood and parts
nourished with blood; and the White to white parts bred of it self, and like to
it self, til the Liver grow so strong as to be able to afford nourishment to all the parts, and that therefore the place of shaping is in the confines of the
White and the Yolk, I shall not contend with him thereabouts.

Howbeit some Creatures there are, which engender not only often, but bring
forth many young ones at a time, as Swine, Hares, Pigeons, etc but some bring
forth few young at a time, and seldom also. And al for the most part by
mediation of the two Sexes; nor are the Sexes confounded in any kind of
Creatures, so that the male should be female, or the female male; which some
confidently affirm of Hares. Although it may be perhaps granted, That
Hermaphrodites are more frequent in this kind of Creatures than in any others.
The difference of Creatures according to the sensitive faculty. Moles.


Secondly, There is also some difference in Creatures with reference to the
Sensitive Faculty: For every sense is not allowed to every Animal; howbeit the
Feeling, as the first sense, is granted to al Creatures. And those that have
only this sense and want all the rest, are called Zoophita, Plant-animals. All
other Creatures have more Senses. Nor do we think fit to deny Sight to the
Moles; for to what end have they Eyes if they cannot see? For although they
have no need of sight, to see under the ground, yet they have it given them to
avoid the light and the bright air; of which see Scaliger in Exercit. 244.

Howbeit, some Creatures excel in one sense, some in another; some in seeing,
others in smelling; some in one are more excellent, some in another, both
external and internal Senses.

Finally, there is great difference in living Creatures, The difference of
Animals in respect of the Locomotive faculty.
with reference to their faculty Locomotive, whereby they remove from place to
place: For every Creature does shift place, but some after one manner, and some
after another. Some only in part, as was said of the Plant-animals, which
though they are always fixed in the same place, yet they contract and dilate
themselves. But others move their whole bodies, some after one manner, others
after another: For some Beasts go, and that either on two seet, on four, six,
or more, as Spiders; some move themselves by swimming, as Fishes, and some that
live both on Land and Water; others by flying, as Birds; some by leaping, as
Grasshoppers; finally, some by creeping and crawling, as Worms and Serpents, who
by contraction and dilatation of their bodies do move themselves from place to
place.

Moreover, in respect of their parts, there is a great variety in Animals: the
difference of Creatures in respect of their parts.
For as Aristotle has it in 1. de Hist. Animal. cap. 2. Parts of Animals are
the same and diverse, either in form, or sort, or exuperance, or analogy, or
situation. And in the first place the parts by which they take their
nourishment, and whereinto they bestow the same, are common to al Creatures.
For the necessity of food is common to them with Plants: which Plants indeed
have from the Earth, and therefore sticking in the Earth they have nourishment
enough. But Animals (seeing they are more perfect than Plants) they were to
have more exquisite diet than such as the Earth affords. And therefore they had
not only taste given them to try their meats, but also members wherewith to
receive the same, and turn it into juice fit to nourish the body, viz. The
Mouth and Stomach.

Now this Aliment received is in several Animals severally changed into
Nutriment properly so called, or an humor which is the immediate aliment of the
body, which when either by Nature it self (the heat in process of time
devouring the same) or by violence (as in sickness and other cases) it comes to
be consumed, the life is extinguished. Now this Humor, the next aliment of the
body, is in some blood, in others a fatty and bloody moisture, like Sames or
Blood-water running from hurts of the body; as also the part wherein this
aliment is contained is in some a Vein, in others a Fiber. Hence Animals are
divided into such as have blood, and such as are bloodless. In the more perfect
sort of animals, intended for nobler actions, and therefore needing more heat,
this Humor is red and is called Blood. Yet there is in some bloodless Animals a
certain red humor which is not blood, but an excrement, as in the Purpura. But
other Animals whose bodies are more imperfect, do also need a less perfect
nourishment; if moist, an white; if dry, a more obscure humor: which humors
having no proper names, they are termed Ichores, and are blood as it were newly
begun to be made and imperfect. As also in Creatures that have blood, when the
blood is not well elaborated, it puts on the nature of an Ichor as it were, as
we see in Cachectical persons.

Also al Living Creatures have an Head, except the Polypus, the Polypus. the
Elephant.
who instead of an Head carries as it were a Hive. Limbs are wanting in some
Infects; in others the fore feet are instead of fingers. The Elephant instead
of hands has his Trunk let down from his Mouth. Fishes have no necks. Most
Creatures have Tails, and they are of several fashions, which Man has not.
Instead of Teeth Birds have Bills of a boney nature, wherewith they do break
their meat; instead of Nostrils they have only two holes; as also two passages
instead of Ears. Moles have their Eyes obscurely buried, yet are they not
without Eyes. Instead of a Tongue many Creatures have a fleshy substance in
their Mouths; and many with an external sharp tool spungy and hollow do both
taste and draw their meat to them. All Creatures that have Blood have Skin.
There is in all Creatures having blood and heads properly so called a Brain,
which on the fore side is divided into two parts. The Seeing, Hearing, and
Tasting Nerves, with the other parts which make up the whole Organ of Sense, are
found in all perfect Animals. And the Heart, or at least somewhat answering
thereto, is in all living Creatures. There is no Lungs in Fishes; instead of
members of generation, Fishes and Serpents have certain holes ordained for
their seed. Most of the Guts and Bowels are to be seen in perfect living
Creatures; but in the imperfect they do not exactly agree with those of a Man's
body, and for the most part they differ in Fishes and Serpents. Fishes instead
of bones have a spine. Insects have a condition proper to themselves; for they
have a cloven flesh obliquely directed, and something of a middle nature betwixt
nerves and flesh, which is to them instead of Bones and Spines. Proper Spirits
are given to every living Creature, which the Soul does unmediately use to
exercise sensitive actions.

Moreover there are other Differences of Animals from the places wherein they
live, Difference of Living Creatures from the place where they live. Whether
any Creatures live in the Fire
and their Actions. For first, some inhabit only one Element and live thereof;
in the Air the Manuco^ ^a; in the Water the Apua; in the Earth the Toad. But
whether there are any Creatures that live in the Fire, Authors are at variance.
Some hold that the Salamanders and Pyraustae live in the Fire, as Aristotle,
Pliny, Aelian, Austin. As to Salamaders they are so far from delighting in
Fire, that they are found no where but in places both cold and moist, and they
put out most hot burning coals, either by their coldness or clamminess of
substance, before they can be burnt. That the Pyraustae live in the Fire
Scaliger eagerly defends, Exercit. 9.23. and 194. sect. 4. But others hold
there is no Animal which is not burnt and killed in the Fire; and that the
Pyraustae indeed are bred and fostered in little holes about Furnaces, but
never bide in the Fire, whereinto being cast they are burnt: which is probable.
Some Living Creatures live in two Elements, and find their meat in both, as
Bats or Flitter-mice, which catch Gnats in the Air, and plunder the flitch of
Bacon on Earth.

All these may again be included under three kinds, Birds, Fishes, and Land
Beasts. The Manucodiata (a Bird) lives only in the Air: In the Ocean of Brasile
there are Sea-Geese which live only in the Water, and never fly out, of a black
Color. In Mare del Zur, toward China, there are footless Birds, which never
forsake the Water. The Ostrich lives only on Land. The Hern lives on Water and
Land. The Bat lives in the Air and Earth; The Swan lives, but feeds not in all
three Elements.

Fishes that live in the Water and Land are the Polypus and Crabs. Those that
are in two are also in three; for they are in the Air, Water and Earth, that
are in the Earth and Water; for they cannot be on the Earth, but they must be
also in the Air.

Of Land Creatures which Aristotle terms Peza (which word cannot easily be
rendered in Latin) some live on the Land and Water, and seek their Food in both
Elements, as Otters; some which are very greedy after Fish cannot endure to
touch the Water, as Cats: some live only on the Earth.

Living Creatures are after another manner thus divided. By reason of their
Food, some are Land Creatures, and others of the Water. Those that live in the
Water, do either take in the Water, or they do not. Those Fishes take in the
Water that are fenced with Gils. Those which take not in the Water do draw in
the Air, or they do not draw it in. Those that draw in the Air and have Feet,
are the Otters, Crocodiles, and such like; of those that have not Feet and draw
in Air, is the Water-snake; such as of this kind have Wings, are the Cormorant,
Sea-gul, etc. Those that draw not in the Air are the Urtica, and all Shel-fish.
But of Land Creatures, all that have Blood and Lungs draw in Air; but Wasps,
Bees, and all Insects do not.

Again, of Land Creatures some fly as Birds, Bees; some go only on the Ground,
either with Feet or some other way.

Such as pass upon the Ground, are either Goers, or Creepers, or such as draw
their Bodies. Goers use Feet, amongst which Leapers are reckoned: But the
Creepers by twisting their long Bodies, and bearing on two sides, as
four-footed Beasts on two Legs of a side, do so move themselves. Such as draw
themselves, are those which put forth their former parts and draw their hinder
parts after them and so win Ground.

As to their Differences in the actions of their Life and Manners, The
Difference of Creatures in respect of their actions.
some Creatures live in Flocks and Companies, others live single and solitary,
and some live both solitary and in Companies. Birds that live in Companies are
Pigeons, Cranes: the solitary are all Birds that have crooked Talons, none of
which live in Companies. Among Fishes the Runners, the Tuny-fish, Whitings,
Makerels. Now Creatures live solitary being necessitated thereto for getting
their food. For though all kinds of living Creatures do fly those of another
kind and think they may live more safely with those of their own kind, being
allured by likeness: yet Beasts that have Scarcity of food, and meet seldom
with their Prey, as Birds with crooked Talons, cannot converse with many of
their own kind: For as some that meet with plenty of food, live in Flocks, as
Pigeons: so to these (and to these alone) by reason of the scarcity of their
food Nature has given both Strength of Body and Fierceness of Mind; and the
scarcity of their Foot compels them to Prey upon other Creatures.

Again whether they live in Flocks or Single, some do always inhabit the same
Country, some do go out of one into another, and return back again.

Again of those that live in Companies some are Political, others are not, but
mind only their own business. The Political are such as observe a civil Policy,
which requires that public works be orderly performed by all, and that there
be a Communion of the Profits acquired; and thus do the Bees, the Pismires, the
Doves; but the Sparrows observe no such Order. For though they fly in
Companies, yet each one by it self seeks its own livelihood, and labors not at
all for the whole Society, which the Bees and the Pismires or Ants do.

Again, some Creatures are Flesh-eaters, others feed on Grass; some are
Fish-eaters, others Worm-eaters, some All-eaters that will down with any thing,
some have a meat peculiar to themselves, as the Bees, of which we spoke before.

Moreover, some live in the open Air under the Canopy of Heaven, others live in
little holes or Nests. And some have their Nests above, others under Ground;
and of those that live under Ground, some make themselves holes, others shelter
themselves in furrows made to their hands. Those that live above Ground some
live in Walls and Rocks; others make themselves peculiar Houses and Nests.
Again some keep themselves in their Nests all day, and at night come out to
seek their food, and when it grows light they withdraw themselves into their
small Cottages: others again do what they have to do by day light, and mew
themselves up when night does come.

Again some Creatures are tame and gentle, others wild; and of the wild, some
are always so; but some may be and are tamed.

Living Creatures do also differ much in respect of their Voice. For some utter
a Vovce, The Difference of Creatures in respect of Voice. Sound, Voice, Speech,
how they differ.
others have no Voice at al. Those that have a Noise or Voice given them, have
it to the End to express their Passions or their Necessities. Now these three
differ, Sound, Voice, Speech. Sound is the most common of the three: for every
found is not a Voice, but only that sound which is made in Creatures, by help
of the Lungs, Chest, Wesand, and chiefly the Head thereof, which is the
immediate Iustrument of the Voice. Now some Voices are expressed by Letters,
and articulately distinct, other some cannot be expressed by Letters. The
latter is simply called a Voice, the former a Speech, which is proper to Man
alone: for although brute Beasts and irrational Creatures, can by Lowing,
Squeaking, Barking, Neighing, Crowing or any other way express their
Cheerfulness, Fear, Pain, Desire: yet Man alone is able to express all he feels
in his mind, with a Voice made up of Letters articulately distinct, and can
communicate the same to others whom he has been born to live with.

Howbeit, though there are many differences of Animals, Animals some perfect,
others imperfect.
they may be reduced to certain kinds, as is apparent from what has been said.
Some are imperfect, others perfect: and the perfect are Land Creatures, Fishes,
and Fowls. And if we were to speak of them all, we should pass from the
Imperfect to the Perfect, til we came to Man, the Perfection of all Living
Creatures.

Among Living Creatures Zoophyta or Plant-animals hold the first place,
Plant-Annimals.
because they are of a middle nature betwixt Plants and Animals, for in the
shape and figure of their Body they come near to Plants, but in their sense of
feeling, and a certain motion, they agree with Animals. For they have the sense
of feeling, and being touched do forcibly contract themselves. And though they
cannot pass from place to place: yet are they endowed with a power of
contracting and dilating themselves.

Of these some stick always in the Earth like Plants, The bashful Tree.
as a Tree which grows in the Country of Pudifeta, and seems to discern when
things approach thereto. For when a Man or other Creature draws near, it
shrinks in its Boughs; and when they go away, it spreads them forth again; and
therefore the Inhabitants call it the Bashful Tree. The sensitive Herb.
And Apollodorus the Scholar of Democritus writes of an Herb of like nature,
which he therefore calls Aeschinomene; because if you put your hand to it, it
would avoid the same by shrinking in its Leaves, as Scaliger Exercit. 181.
sect. 28. does write.

Also some cleave perpetually to the Stones or Sands; as the Pulmo Marinus, the
Sea-Nettle, the Spunges, the Holothuria or prickly Fish. Mytuli or Limpins.
And some stick so long to the roots and fibers of Trees, til they attain their
just growth, as the Mytuli or Limpins, which are said to grow on the Stalks of
Sea-weed, and to stick exceeding fast to them at first; and having attained
their full growth and just bigness they fall from their branches: but they are
not generated as other Shel-fish are of themselves.

Next, after these, and the most imperfect, are Creeping things which grow upon
live Animals, either without, as Crab-lice, Lice, Fleas, Ticks which trouble
Dogs; A Tick.
but they say that they are not bred upon them, but they catch them as they
hunt in the Woods; of which see Scaliger, Exercit. 195. sect. 7. or within, and
not only in their Guts, but in other parts also, for Physicians have observed
that there is scarce a part in the whole Body wherein Worms do not breed.

Hereto belong those Infects and small Animals which are bred out of the
Carcasses of other Creatures and out of Plants; as Worms, Wasps, Gurgulions,
Flies, Hornets, Coss-Worms, Wood-lice, Moths, Glowworms, Wig-lice, Hors-Flies,
Grass-Worms. of kin to which are Spiders, Phalangia, Tarantulae, Scorpions, and
such like.

Now among these kind of Creatures the most noble is the Be and the Silkworm;
Bees and Silkworms
the former making most sweet and useful Honey; the latter spinning Silk
wherewith the great ones pride themselves.

Then follow those kind of Locusts which John the Baptist fed upon: Nor is
there any need that we should interpret the word Acrides so as to signify the
tops of Trees, or any Shrub, or river Crabs; seeing we are informed likewise by
ancient Authors that some Nations did feed upon Locusts, as Strabo in Lib. 16.
in Descript. Arabiae; who also describes the manner how they caught them: and
Pliny in Lib. 11. Cap. 29. who say the Persians delight in them: and in Lib.
6. Cap. 30. that some People of Aethiopia have no other Meat but Locusts, which
he says they salt and dry in the Smoke to that end: and among late writers
Clenardus in his Epistles writes, that at Fez and Morocco whole Cartloads of
Locusts are daily set to sale.

Next to these come sundry sorts of Serpents, Frogs, Toads, Salamanders,
Locusts: To which are next in name and shape certain Sea-Insects, Flies,
Scolopendra, Caterpillars, Sea-Stars, and such like.

After them march the Shel-fish of two kinds, Shel-Fish Purple.
for some have their shells open but twined strangely about, such as the Purple,
and the Periwinkle, and an innumerable sort of Shel-fish, whose shells are
shaped like Turbants or Steeples; others shut their shells like two folding
doors, Oysters. Lobstars.
that they cannot be opened without great force, such are Oysters and others of
that kind, as Muscles, Cockles etc. of kin to which are Crabs, Lobstars,
Cray-fish, the Sea-Locust and such like.

Next come the other kinds of Fishes smooth and without scales; Fish.
then the scaly, the Prickly, the Sea, the River, the Lake-fish. Of Fishes
(besides others) read Scaliger, Eaeercit. 218. and Exercitat. 223.226.

After these come your Amphibia, Creatures which live in the water and on the
Land.
Creatures which live partly on Land and partly on the Water, as the Tortoise,
the water Salamander, the Scincus, the Crocodile, the Cordylus, The
Hippopotamus or River-Horse, the Castor or Bever, the River-Crab, the
Water-Moule and Rat. Amongst which there is none that is partly made like a
Fish and partly like a four-footed beast save the Bever.

After Fishes Birds must be explained. Birds.
Now every Animal that flies is not a Bird, but only that which has blood in
it, and is furnished with a Bil and Feathers. Hence Flies, Beetles, Bees,
Hornets, and such like are no Birds; as neither the Bat or Flitter-Mouse, which
is of a middle nature betwixt Birds and Mice, and may be termed the flying
Mouse.

Now there are sundry differences of Birds, The Swallow.
which Scaliger has collected in Exercit. 227. In the first place come
Swallows, which fly most swiftly of all others; of which also there is some
difference. These being commonly not fit to be eaten, neither can they
themselves in the winter find their own mear, viz. Flies and other Creatures
that glide about in the Air: after the end of Summer when flies are gone, they
fly from these parts of the world, Germany, France, England etc. unto the
shores of the Baltic Sea, and under huge high Rocks that hang over the Sea,
they hang mutually embracing one another until the Spring return, and then when
the Bird-Winds blow they return each to its own Country.

After the Swallows come the Sparrows, the Mag-pies, Chaffinch, Titmouse, and
the singing Birds, as the Nightingale, the Lark, Goldfinch, the Linet, the
Thrush, the Gnat-snapper, the Red-breast, the Bulfinch; also the prating Birds
as Patrots, Black-Birds, Mag-pies, Scarlings, Jack-daws, Jays or Gays.

After these come Pigeons, both tame and wild, as the Wood-Pigeon, the
Stock-Dove, the Turtle-Dove and others.

And then the kinds of Cocks and Hens, and Birds of kin to them, as the
Pheasant, the Partridg, the Woodcock, the Quail, the Ostrich, the Peacock.

Then follow Waterfowl, both the flat-footed, as the Swan, and several sorts
of Geese and Ducks, The Bittern, the Water-Crow, the Cormorant, the Sea-mew,
with the flat foot; and the cloven-footed, as the Hern, the Kings-fisher, and
the rest.

Then come the ravenous Birds, the Choughs, the Daws, the Crows, the kinds of
Vultures and Hawks, The Aegle.
the Kite, the Buzzard, the Owl; and finally the Eagle, the Queen of Birds.
Conterning Birds see Scaliger in his 227. Exercitat. and those that follow.

The Bat or Flitter-mouse is of a middle nature betwixt birds and beasts, the
Bat.
being a winged Mouse; which is of a wonderful greatness in some places: For
Scaliger writes in Exercit. 236. Sect. 3. That in Catigan an Island of Mare del
Zur there are Bats as big as Eagles, which the Natives eat, and they taste like
Hens. And that in Caves of Mount Atlas there are Bats as big as our Pigeons.

And here we must not omit to speak of the Basilisk or Cockatrice. The Basilisk
or Cockatrice
Now that there is such a Serpent called a Basilisk, is apparent from the holy
Scriptures, Proverbs 23. ver. 32. Esaias 11. ver. 8. and 14. verse 29. and 15.
verse 5. Jerem. 8. verse 7. As also from Pliny, Lib. 8. cap. 7. and Lib. 29.
cap. 4. Solinus chap. 30. Lucan Book 9. Dioscorides Lib. 6. cap. ult. Galen de
Theriaca ad Pisonem. Aetius Tetrab. 4. Sermon. 1. cap. 33. although Authors do
not accord in their Descriptions thereof.

But whether there be such a Basilisk as is hatched of the Egg of an old Cock
is doubtful: Whether there be such a creature as a Basilisk or Cockatrice.
Many count it for a fable: But it is commonly reported that there was once
such an one at Vienna in Austria, and that the Picture thereof is extant on the
wall of a certain house; as also at Bafil and Zwiccavia, as George Agricola
relates in his Book de Animalib. subterraneis. But there is a remarkable story
which Joh. Pincier in Lib. 5. Aenigmat. Aenigm. 23. relates from the report of
Dr. Mosanus chief Physician at Cassels: which because few (peradventure) have
read that Book, I shall here transcribe word for word. A memorable story of a
Basilisk or cockatrice.
At Warsovia in Poland it fell out in the Year, 1587. That the Son of a certain
Sword-Cutler, and the Daughter of a neighboring Citizen, being both of them
five years old apiece, with others their equals in years, not enduring to be
out of action, after the manner of children they would needs pass the time in
sports, and seek hiding holes where their playfellows should not find them out.
There was not far from the place where they played, a Cellar left desolate by
reason the House had been burnt which stood over it thirty years before; into
which by help of the half-rotten stairs one might make a shift to creep down.
Into the said Cellar the two foresaid children going down, they fell down on the
lower stairs and died. When Supper-time was at hand, the two Mothers each
enquiring for her child could hear no tidings thereof: And therefore the Wife
of the Sword-Cutler sent her Maid our, who having long sought them, at last
spied them upon the stairs of the Cellar as aforesaid, and presently she cried
out, See where they lie. But neither of the children stirring at al, she began
to suspect they were fallen asleep, and with a loud voice called by name,
sometimes the Boy, and sometimes the Girl; to see if by this means she might
waken them. But when she saw (though she cried til she were hoarse) it was to
no purpose, she also went down into the Cellar, thinking to awaken them by
jogging and pulling: But see what follows, presently also she falls down by the
children and dies. Her Mistress saw the Maid when she went down into the
Cellar, and perceiving that she staid over long, al amazed she ran unto the
Cellar, and sees the Maid lie on the ground with the children: Therefore she
also falls to call aloud sometimes upon the Maid, then upon the children. And when
she had done thus also in vain, and none of the three did either answer or
stir, she concluded they were dead. Presently a rumor flies about the Town, and
the Citizens come running, but know not what to do til the Magistrates and
Council of the City being made acquainted therewith, did command that their
bodies should be drawn out with long hooks, such as they use to pull down houses
in the time of fires. They being drawn out were found swollen like Drums, their
lips and tongues were swollen, their color was brown, their eyes stuck out of
their eye holes as big as half Eggs. There came to behold this sad Spectacle
the Palatine N. and an ancient man the Kings chief Physician, named Benedictus.
He conjectured that some most venomous Serpent did lurk in that desolate
Cellar, by whose deadly breath the air enclosed therein was infected, and that
the weak nature of man could not bear the same; and that therefore most like it
was that the children and maiden were thereby killed. Also that it might be
that a Basilisk or Cockatrice might there lie hid, which Naturalists say is
bred of a Cocks Egg hatched by a Toad, whose venom is so powerful that whoever
looks upon his eyes dies forthwith. Being demanded how the certainty might be
known, he made answer, That somebody must be sent into the Cellar covered round
with looking Glasses, the right sides of the Glasses being outward: For the
Basilisk if he saw but his own picture or image would presently die. There were
at the same time two Malefactors which three days after were to be executed,
the one being a Polander, the other a Silesian called Jobannes Jaurerus. To
them it was proffered, That he that would go down into the Cellar and hunt out
the Serpent should escape his allotted punishment. John presently accepted the
condition: And therefore he was covered al his body over with Leather, and
Glasses were tied before his eyes, which he could well see through; in one hand
he had an iron Rake, in the other a lighted Link; finally, to al parts of his
body before and behind Looking-glasses were fastened. Thus furnished he entered
into the Cellar, more than two thousand people looking on. After he had for
above an hour searched all the holes and corners of the Cellar, and could find
no Serpent, he called upon them to throw him down another link into the Cellar:
for there was another Cellar close by, but the way was so stopped up with rubbish
that he could not get in; but he would now see to clear the way, and search
there also. And as he was doing that, he chanced to turn his eyes to the left
side, and unawares espied the long looked for Beast in the shape of an Hen,
lying dead in a certain hole of the wall: which when he had declared by a shout
to them that were without, the Kings Doctor had him with his Rake to bring it
out into the light, which he presently did before all the people. The Doctor
presently judged that it was a Basilisk or Cockatrice. It was as big as an
ordinary Hen, its head was like that of a Turky-cock, his Comb resembling a
Crown was sprinkled partly with yellow, and partly with blue spots, and his
Chotters hanging under his Throat were of the same color. His Back was starred
with many eminent spots resembling Toads eyes, the colors of virulent Beasts
being every where sprinkled between, but chiefly yellow: The same colors also
were on the outside of his Wings: Under his Wings he was al yellow, as also
under his belly, where nevertheless blue and green and other wonderful colors
were intermingled. He had long Legs like the Legs of a Cock, and yellow as a
Quince-Apple; before and behind these two Legs there grew out other two Legs
like the Legs of a Toad in shortness and shape. His back; lower it was yellow,
and in the lowest part like a Toad in color. More may be seen concerning the
Basilisk, in the foresaid Book of Pincierus, and the place fore-alleadged.

Lastly, There are four-footed Beasts, which come nearest to a Man both in the
parts of their bodies, and the faculties of their souls. And among these are
such as chew the Cud, that is to say, the meat which they have eaten, and is
slipped into one Cavity of their stomach, they fetch it up again through their
throat and chew it over again, and so transmit it into the other cavity of
their stomach, better ground and prepared for further digestion: For what
Nature has denied them in the want of upper Teeth, that she makes amends for
by this double chewing.

Moreover, all these Creatures have coverings given them instead of clothes;
for some have hairs, some more, some sewer; others have bristles, others wool,
and some furr. Again, some have solid, others cloven hoofs.

The lowest and most imperfect kind of these Creatures are Moles, Mice,
Marmots, which Scaliger describes Exercit. 203. The more perfect are the sorts
of Weezels, Hedg-hogs, Cats, Dogs (of which see Lipsius in his Centuries of
Epistles, Cent. 1. ad Belgas Epist. 44.) Wolves, Sheep, Goats, Rams, Hares,
Foxes, Asses, Hogs, Oxen, Apes, Hearts, Bears, Elephants (of which see Scaliger,
Exercit, 204. And Lipsius in Epist. miscell. Ep. 50.) Horses, Elks. Cammels,
Loeprads, Rhinocerots, Unicorns, and others; finally, the King as it were of al
bruit Beasts, the Lion.

Only I must speak somewhat of the Unicorn, Whether there be such a heast as the
Unicorn?
of which sundry men are of several minds. Ambrose Parey in the 20. B. of his
Chyrurgacy, cap. 39. where he disputes largely of this matter, after he has
brought the Narrations of some Authors touching this Beast, and observes that
they agree not one with another, he concludes at last, That the word Unicorn is
not the name of a real Creature in the world existing, but only a Fiction
fained at the pleasure of Painters and Writers of Natural History, for the
delight of the Readers and beholders.

But in very deed this is an absurd Opinion of his; it is also a rash thing to
deny that which so many learned men affirm; and also the holy Scripture it
self, Job 39. verse 9. Esaias, 34. verse 7. Deuter. chap. 33. ver. 17. Psalm 22.
ver. 22. and Psalm 29. ver. 6, Numb. 23. ver. ^.^.

This rather is apparent from those manifold differing Narrations and
Descriptions, there are five kinds of unicorns.
That there is not only one Creature that beats a single Horn but diverse: For
in the places cited, the Unicorn is made to be a Beast swift of foot, fit to be
hunted; which is not true of the Rhinoceror, which is a thick beast with short
Legs. Moreover, the Horn of a Rhinocerote is much smaller in compass than that
which goes about for the Unicorns Horn. Also Caesar, Lib. 6. de Bello Gallico,
makes mention of an Ox in the Hercynian Forest, out of the middle of whose
forehead betwixt his Ears there grows one long Horn. And indeed there are Five
kinds of Beasts that are thus single-horned. the one horned Ox
The Ox with one Horn in the Hercynian Forest mentioned by Caesar; And Pliny
writes that such are found in the Indies Lib. 8. cap. 21. Secondly, The
Monocerote.
the same Pliny in the same place describes the Unicorn. The Rhinocerote.
Aelian Lib. 16. de animalib. cap. 20. in the third place describes a
Rhinocerote that has one black horn in his forehead as thick as the small of a
Man's Arm, of rare virtue against poison. Fourthly, the Indian Ass.
There is the Indian Ass, who also carries one horn in his forehead, of whom
Aristotle speaks in 2. de Hist. anim. cap. 8. and the 3. de part. Animal. cap.
2. Aelian in Lib. 4. de animal. cap. 5. Pliny Lib. 11. cap. 37. and 41. Fifthly,
Oryx
The same Aristotle in the same place, and Pliny makes mention of a Beast with
one Horn called Oryx. So that there is no doubt but there are Creatures that
have but one Horn: only the Question is, Which of these Creatures Horns they
are that are commonly given out for Unicorns Horns? For the variety of them
shows, that they are not al of one Beast: and therefore it cannot be known but
by the effect to be good against poison. Aelian attributes that virtue to the
Horn of the Indian Ass, rather than of the Monocerote, to be good against many
Diseases and Poisons.

But touching al Animals or living Creatures, to reckon them up in this
Compendium is impossible; and here again Nature is so vast of extent, that no
man's wit suffices to take a muster thereof. And the Nature of this work makes
us set Titles for Dishes before our Guests, which Scaliger taxes Pliny for in
Exercitat. 107. Let the Student of Natural Philosophy consult hereof with
Aristotle in his Book de Historia part. and generatione Animalium; Conradus
Gesnerus de Animalibus; Edvardus Wottonus de differentiis Animalium;
Rondeletius de Piscibus. And those that have written of some sorts, as Andreas
Libavius in his Book de Agno vegetabili Scithiae, of the Lamb that grows in
Scythia; his two Books of Silkworms; his two Books of Batrachiorum, of Frogs.
Baldus Angelus Abbatius, de Viperae Natura and facultatibus: and many other
Authors who have writ of Animals.

THE EIGHTH BOOK. Of MAN.
Chap. 1. Of the Rational Soul.
IT remains now that we should treat of MAN, who being the Rule and Measure of
al Living Creatures, and being compared with the rest, may be said to
comprehend them all, because he is furnished with all their faculties and
endowments; with the consideration therefore of Man we shall conclude our
Treatise of Natural Philosophy.

Now a Man (as other living Creatures) consists of a Body and a Soul. We shall
speak of his Soul in the first place. the Essential parts of Man.
And seeing every Soul may be considered under a twofold notion; first as a
Principle and one part of a Compound, or as the Form of the Body; Secondly as
the Efficient cause of al operations: We will treat thereof also under both
respects; and in the first place we will consider how the Rational Soul stands
in reference to the Body of Man: and afterward what operations it does work.

No sound Philosopher denies the Rational Soul to be the form of a man. Whether
the Rational Soul be the informing Form of a Man.
But seeing there is a twofold Form, one which is called the informing Form,
which is the Principle and one half of the Compound, and gives the thing its
specifical being, and as a difference distinguishes it from al other things:
another which is called the assisting Form, which does not give the specifical
being to a thing, but is added to a thing already constituted in its specifical
being, for the performance of some nobler operations, which of it self it
cannot perform; (such a form as the Mariner is to the Ship, who gives not the
Essence to the Saip, but is adjoined thereto after it is perfect in its
Essence, to cause it to sail, which it could not do of it self:) The Question
is, Whether the Rational soul be the informing form of a Man, and the half of
his Essence? or only an assistant form, which is added to a man after he is
perfect, and has his specific form to cause in him some more noble operation,
viz. Understanding.

Avenrois was of Opinion that the Cogitative Faculty (by him so called and
distinguished from the Fancy) was the form of a Man, and by virtue thereof a
Man became a particular sort of Living Creature; but that the Rational Soul was
only an assistant form. But most of the Latins hold the Rational Soul to be
the true form of a Man, and one of his constituting parts; which Opinion we
retain as the more true: For if the Rational Soul were not the informing form
of a Man, he could not rightly be called Rational; even as a Ship, though the
Sailet therein do reason, cannot be called Intelligent or Rational, which were
absurd. Or thus, which is the same in effect, that whereby any thing does
primarily operate, is the form of the thing to which the operation is
attributed. But to Man as Man Understanding is attributed: Therefore the
Intelligent Soul is the form of Man's Body. Nor does that answer satisfy, when
they say, That the Understanding is joined to a Man by the Phantasms or Images
of the Internal Senses: For the Phantasms are to the Understanding as colors to
the Eye. As therefore neither the Color, nor the Subject of colors do see; so
neither the Phantasms, nor the subject of the Phantasms do understand; but
rather are themselves understood. Thus therefore we conclude: That whereby one
thing differs specifically from another is the form thereof. But by the
Rational Soul a Man differs from alother living Creatures; that therefore is
the form of a Man. Aristotle also seems to have been of the same mind, as
appears out of the 2. de Anima, cap. 1. t. 7.8. cap 2. t. 24.25.26. cap. 4, t.
36.37. as Zabarella does show at large in his chap. 7. de Mente Humana.

From the Explication of this Question another Question may easily be answered,
Whether there be one Rational Soul in all Men.
viz. Whether the Rational Soul be one in number in all men? or there be in
every one a peculiar Soul? Some that hold the Rational Soul to be an assistant
form, do hold that it is not multiplied according to the number of Persons, but
that in all Mankind there is one only, which is the cause of Understanding in all Men. But in very deed this Opinion is many ways contrary to the truth: For
every informing Form, such as we have already showed the Rational Soul to be,
is multiplied according to the multiplication of particular persons. And if
there were only one Soul in all Men, al should be but one; for they should have
but one Form. Moreover, the operations, or understandings, or second acts, are
multiplied in Men according to the multitude of Individuals; and my
Understanding is one, and thine another, a third Man's another. Therefore the
Soul the first act is manifold: For the diversity of operations depends upon
the diversity of Forms. Finally, in one and the same Understanding there would
be contrary operations: for one man is of one Opinion, another of another about
the same thing.

And since we have averred the Rational Soul to be the Form of Man, Whether the
Rational soul be immortal?
here arises a Question, whether or no it be immortal? or, Whether it can
without perishing be separated from the Body? As for us, according to the
Tenets of our Religion we hold, that our Soul is immortal; and the Immortality
of the Soul is counted one of the Hinges upon which Christian Religion turns.
But whether or no it may be proved by Philosophical Reasons, and what
Aristotle's Opinion was concerning the same, has been carefully enquired into
by many.

In the first place, A thing two ways immortal.
this we must hold, as Scaliger has it, Exercit. 61. Sect. 5. and Exercit.
307. Sect. 20. that only God is truly immortal, and incorruptible. And
therefore a thing may be said to be immortal two ways; either because it
cannot perish at al, because it is most simple, and has its Essence of it
self, and depends upon none; and such is only God, and in respect o^ him al
other things may be called corruptible: For although Angels and the Rational
Soul, which are said to be immortal after the second way, are never actually
corrupted, have no contrary, and are separate from their subject; yet seeing
they are not without Cause, and they have not the Cause of their Essence from
themselves, but are by another, and by another may naturally come to be no
more. For every dependent may be changed by that on which it depends, if it be
a voluntary principle, and at the pleasure of the first principle it may be
deposed from its Essence wherein it was thereby instated. Now some things are
not corrupted, because the Creator will not have them so to be, who has created
nothing in them contrary, whereby they might be corrupted, nor has plunged
them so in matter, as they can neither be, nor operate without it. And that the
Soul of man is of this kind, and that it may be separated from the body without
corruption, Marsilius Ficinus endeavors to prove by many Arguments, de
Immortal. Anim. Lib. 5. Tolet. Lib. 3. de Anima, cap. 5. quest. 16. Franciscus
Piccolhomineus Lib. 2. de Humana Mente, Colleg. Conimbricens. in tract. de
anima separata, disp. 1. Artic. 3. and others.

We shall briefly thus determine the matter: Every thing is known by its
operations, and every form discovers it self what it is by its operations. And
therefore since the actions of Man are so noble that they cannot proceed from a
mortal substance wholly plunged in the matter; it is plainly to be hence
gathered, that the rational Soul from which they proceed is immortal and
separable from the matter: for the Understanding abstracts and severs things
from the matter, and knows without conditions of matter, without quantity,
without figure; it understands things tree from matter; it is not offended with
the multitude and vehemence of the Objects as the Sense is; it can conceive
things infinite; and although it knows very many things, it may always know
yet more, and can increase a number though never so great; and not only knows a
thing, but also knows it self, and understands that it understands what it does
understand; it can will and refuse, has an unsatiable appetite of eternity,
knowledge, happiness; which because it cannot be satisfied in this life, it is
credible that it shall enjoy another condition wherein those appetites shall be
satisfied; also it performs operations without corporeal Instruments. See
Franisc. Piccolhomineus de bumana Mente, cap. 6. Aristotle also seems to have
been of this opinion, as appears in his Physics, Lib. 7. cap. 3. text 20 1. de
Anima cap. 3. text 49. cap. 4. text 64, 65, 66. 2. de Anima, cap. 2. text 21.
3. de Anima, cap. 4. t. 3.4.7.12. cap. 5. text 19.20.7. de part. animal. cap.
1.12. Metaphys. t. 17. of which see Francisc. Piccolhom. Lib. 2. de humana
mente, cap. 2. et sequent.

Thus far we have showed how the rational Soul is reserred to the body of man:
we are now to explain the nature thereof, as it is a principle of operation.
Now Aristotle expresses the nature thereof, in this respect, in Lib. 3. de
Anima, when he says; The rational soul is unmixed.
that the rational soul is unmixed. Now the Soul must be unmixed two manner of
ways: first, in respect of the Objects, so that it must not have their nature
in its essence, but only a power to receive them. For because it ought to know
the Objects, and it knows them by receiving them, it must needs of it self be
free, unaffected and unmixed, since nothing receives that which it has
already; and that which is within hinders the ingress of another. And this
immixture (that I may so speak) is common to the rational Soul with the Senses,
which also have not their Objects actually in themselves, but only a power to
receive them: save that the senses are respectively uanffected and unmixed,
viz. with some sort of being, as the sight (for example sake) within color,
seeing they are not conversant about every kind of being: but the rational Soul
is quite free from the natures of al other things, as being directed to al
things, and its office being to understand all things.

Again, the rational Soul is after a peculiar manner free from Organs, nor
mixed therewith; that is to say, when it operates by understanding or willing,
it makes no use of the body, but performs those functions without it. For,
inasmuch as to perform the actions which are done in and by the body there is
required a certain temper of the qualities (seeing every body any ways
tempered and disposed does not receive every thing) and consequently also a
certain Organ; since the several parts of the body have several temperaments;
and the rational Soul is not tied to any temper of the first Qualities, nor any
ways affected by the qualities, not is there any proper Organ thereof in the
body: we must doubtless therefore believe that it depends not upon the body, in
respect of its operations, nor that it is after any such manner mixed therewith.

From this other immixture we may gather, what kind of operations those of the
foul are. The Operations of the rational soul are inorganical.
For since in its acting it is no way mixed with the body, and the actions of
the body have nothing to do with the action of the mind: it is manifest that
the Understanding and the Will are inorganical faculties, and act of themselves;
so that to understand and to will, are actions proper to the mind; nor does the
mind understand by the body, or any Organ of the body, as by a medium wherewith
it acts. The Soul indeed has need of a Phantasm; since the Soul while it is in
the Body never understands without a Phantasm, Lib. 3. de Anima, cap. 7. but it
uses the same not as an Organ, but as an object; because an intelligible
matter must be presented to the mind by the Senses. And therefore if any have
affirmed that the actions of the mind are organical, and that the rational Soul
does use the help of the Brain, Spirits, and Senses, as corporeal Organs, that
is not to be admitted save in this sense, viz. that the soul does not
understand while it is in the body, without the foregoing operation of the
Organs of the body, and before its own operation: or that in subordinate
operation^ it uses an organ, and needs the brain, and spirit: but while it is
in working of it self, or while it purely understands, and purely wills, it
needs them not, nor does it understand by organs, but this mind only is the
subject of understanding, as also of the act of willing, which out barbarous
Authors call volition, by a new necessary and fitting word, as Scaliger says,
Exercit. 307. sect. 3. and sect. 9. and though when the Brain is hurt Reason is
depraved: yet that is done for no other cause, but that the administering or the
subordinate faculties, which are organical and depend upon the constitution of
the Brain, are hurt.

And although the rational Soul be furnished with all those faculties which we
have hitherto attributed to the vegetative and sensitive Soul: The rational
Soul has two proper faculties.
yet has it besides two proper and peculiar faculties, whereby it excels
Plants and other Animals; the Understanding, whereby we apprehend and know
things; and the Will, whereby we are carried out to such things we understand to
be good. And there is a manifest difference betwixt these faculties, seeing it
is one thing to know, another thing to desire the thing known; and these two
are performed by a several way of working; the former by passion and reception
of the species, so that the things may be carried to the mind: but the latter
by following, so that the mind is carried and drawn to the object. Finally the
diversity of the object severs the power of knowing from the power of willing,
seeing we know things as Entia or Beings; but we desire them as good.

The Understanding is therefore actually none of all the other Beings that are:
the difference of the understanding.
yet it can spiritually receive and know them all. And although in respect of
its essence it is one and the same, as being an inorganical part of the soul,
which has no variety from the Organs: yet according to certain respects it is
divided into sundry differences. And in the first place Aristotle calls one the
active Understanding, another the passive, supposing that in our mind besides
that which is apt to be made every thing, viz. by understanding, and which is
as it were the matter, there is somewhat in the nature of a form which is apt to
make all things, that is to say, actually intelligible.

But what the active Understanding or the Intellectus agens is, What the active
understanding is.
is an obscure point in Philosophy. Very many hold that the active
understanding is God, or some Angel who is assistant to a man. But these men's
opinion seems to differ both from Aristotle and the Truth. For the Intent of
Aristotle (in Lib. de anima) is to speak of the humane understanding, and he
plainly in Lib. 3. de anima, chap. 5. calls the active understanding a
difference in the Soul. Again, that understanding which proceeds from the
Intellectus agens or active Intellective faculty is in our own power, nor does
it proceed immediately from God or any Intelligence or Angel. Moreover seeing
God when he first made our understanding could put as much light into it as he
pleased, there is no need that he should always be assisting the same, like
some Judge at the Assizes, as Scaliger says in Exercit. 307. sect. 19. But the
active understanding is (according to the opinion of the Philosopher) a
difference of our Soul not informing, which of things potentially intelligible
makes things actually understood. For as to a natural affect there is required
an agent of the same kind, and for artificial effects there is need of Art: so
for the work of the mind, viz. Understanding, an agent is required, not
separate from the Soul, but which is a part, or some difference of the soul.

And although this Agent Understanding seems to some unnecessary, who would
have it banished out of natural Philosophy: yet it seems altogether necessary
to hold an Agent Understanding, for this cause, seeing every thing that is done
is done by somewhat and in somewhat, so that that by, and that wherein, do
differ. Universals are made in the passive understanding, therefore there must
be besides it another power to make Universals. For since every Patient
requires some Agent, and nothing in nature brings it self from power to act;
and our understanding is constituted in a possibility actually to understand,
and by receiving intelligible objects does actually suffer: clear it is, that
holding a passive understanding, we must withal hold an active, and taking
away the latter we deny the former. The Agent understanding therefore is for
this cause necessary, that it may do or make all things, viz. as to their
intellectual being, that is, that it may transfer the object from one order to
another. For seting the Object or Phantasm is material, and so under an
opposite condition to the intellective faculty, which is abstract from all
matter; it cannot be by the said faculty understood, unless it be made
proportionate thereunto, viz. abstracted and immaterial: now this cannot be
done save by an abstract Virtue, and an Intelligent nature.

From whence it is apparent, that it is the Office of the active understanding
to act, The Office of the active understanding
that is to draw from power to act, and of things potentially intelligible to
make things actually intelligible. This Office of the understanding Aristotle
expresses by the analogy it bears to Art, Nature, Habit, Light. For it is as it
were the eye and sight of the mind, and it is to the Phantasms, as light to
colors. For it illustrates the Phantasms, being inveloped with material
conditions, which like darkness do hinder their being understood, so as they
may put on the nature of things intelligible, and may be diffused to the
passive understanding: even as Colors by means of Light do send forth a
Picture of themselves unto the sight: yet this illustration of the Phantasms is
not performed formally, so that any quality is imprinted upon them; nor
objectively only, but effectively; because the Agent understanding like
external light by imparting its Ray yet does actively elevate the Phantasms, to
the production of an Intelligible species; nor is the Agent Understanding
requisite only in respect of the object, but it has also another office, viz.
in reference to the passive understanding, that it may produce therein the act
of understanding, representing thereto an object in a species intelligible,
which it performs when together with the illustrated Phantasm it produces a
species of the thing to be understood, into the passive understanding.

Whence we may collect, upon what and how the Agent understanding does act. The
Subject
For it is requisite in respect of both action, v^z. that it may act upon the
Phantasms, and upon the passive understanding. But it acts upon these in a
different manner; for it is joined to the Phancasms before Intellection, and
indeed while they are yet in the Fancy, where illustrating them it becomes
their form, whereby they are made a moving object of the passive understanding:
afterward, the adjoined Phantasms being illuminated, it acts upon the passive
understanding, by producing therein an intelligible species or representation,
and by consequent the act it self of understanding: But the Agent understanding
it self as it is an Agent does not understand; since it does not receive the
intelligible speces or notions, though it produce them, nor is in aptitude to
understand; but the act of understanding is in the Passive Intellect, as in its
subject. This therefore is called formally the Intellect; the other only
effectively, because it makes the understanding or Intellection.

The Passive understanding is as it were the subject and matter, The passive
understanding what it is.
whereon the intelligible species are imprinted; and therefore it is called
Patient and Passive, because it suffers by receiving the species, through means
of the Phantasms. It is also called Intellectus possibilis, the possible
understanding, and the mind in power; because it may be made all things, though
it is actually none of them.

And here in the first place we must remember that the passive understanding is
indeed in respect of the object a passive power; seeing it acts upon no other
thing: but compared with the Intellection it is a power, both active, inasmuch
as it works Intellection; and also passive, inasmuch as it receives the said
Intellection. For an immanent action must be received in the same power by
which it is produced.

Moreover we must observe how that it is to be understood that the
understanding when it understands, is made all things, which in the most
elegant words of Scaliger, Exercit. 307. sect. 6. thus we explain. In the first
place (quoth he) I deny that the Philosopher says, that our understanding is
all things essentially or formally as they use to say. But it is all things,
subjectively, even as the first matter is, which is not made the Essence of an
Horse under the form of an Horse: but it remains that which it was, a certain
substance, of which and the form this thing is made. But the information of the
understanding is after another manner: for it is not a mere possibility, as the
first matter, which may be reduced to be actually this or that by the form. But
it is our form substantial, separable, incorruptible, eternal; of which as a
subject essentially perfect, and the species which it receives, is made the
formed intellect, not another from it self; save as Caesar being learned
differs from himself unlearned, by reception of accidental species. It is not
therefore made the understanding simply, nor is it made the species it self,
but under the species. So far Scaliger.

And so much shall suffice to have said of the first difference of the
understanding: The Agent and passive Intellect do not really differ.
where this again is to be observed: that the Agent and passive understanding
are not really and essentially distinguished, but only respectively; since two
internal forms are not knit together by new accidents, and to the receiving and
effecting of an immanent action (such as understanding is) such a principle is
requisite as is essentially one. And therefore we must conclude that the
Essence of the Agent and Passive Intellect is al one, and that one
Understanding in Essence, inasmuch as it makes things intelligible, or
illustrates the Phantasms, and reposits them in the Passive, is Agent; but
inasmuch as it is the subject receiving the abstract Phantasms, it is called
the Patient.

Besides the Differences reckoned up, the understanding in habit:
there are also other notions of the Understanding, as the Understanding in
habit, and the Understanding in act; which indeed are not diverse
Understandings, but one that has diverse degrees, which Aristotle calls
differences. For the Intellect in habit is that which has the Phantasm
reserved in the Fantasy; and it is in a more perfect degree than the possible
Intellect: for this is in aptitude to the first act, the other is in aptitude
to the second, or to the operation, and therefore is very like to him that has
science, and does not contemplate. Howbeit Zabarella seems to think otherwise
in this point, Lib. de specieb. Intellect. cap. 8. after this manner; That our
mind is first born rude and unfit for the knowledge of things; but afterward by
multiplied acts of Understanding it acquires a certain greater ability and
aptitude to understand things, so that it can without any labor when it
pleases turn to the Fancy, and presently understand a thing: and that the
Understanding being furnished with this ability is called the Intellect in
habit. But when the Passive Understanding does actually operate, and actually
perceives the thing offered, it is called the Intellect in act.

Finally, the speculative and practical understanding:
the Understanding is distinguished into Speculative and Practical; by which
terms nevertheless there are neither made two faculties of understanding, nor
are the differences and degrees of the same Faculty intimated; but each Faculty
of the Intellect is signified by the Theoretick or Speculative, the
Understanding properly so called, and by the Practical the Will. For seeing the
Understanding in respect of the apprehension of a thing, also in respect of
Affirmation and Negation of that which is true or false, cannot be otherwise
called than Speculative; of necessity that difference must arise in respect of
a third attribute of the Practical Understanding, viz. Desiring and avoiding,
which belong to the Will.

The operation of the Understanding to which all the Functions of its degrees do
tend, the Operation of the understanding:
is Intellection, which is not one and the same thing with the Intelligible
Species, but really differs therefrom, and is more rightly defined by reception
of Intelligible species (in which sense it is by Aristotle termed a kind of
Passion, 3. de Anima, cap. 4.) and passing judgment thereon. For the Intellect
exercises a twofold operation about its object; the former of which is simple
Apprehension and Cognition; but the other is termed Composition and Division,
and it is compound Apprehension and Judgment, which consists in Assent and
Dissent. Intellection is twofold:
And hence Intellection is said to be twofold; Simple when the Intellect knows
that which is simple and incomplex, as they call it: and Compound, when it knows
a proposition true or false.

The Object of Intellection which at once moves and terminates the intellect,
is a Being or thing Universally taken, comprehending things material and
immaterial. To which nevertheless some conditions must needs be added. And in
the first place Universality: For that a Being may be perceived by the
Intellect, it must be abstracted from al singularities. Then Secondly,
Intelligibility, or abstraction from the conditions of matter. Thirdly, Verity.
This Object as it is fitted and proportioned to the Mind by the Agent
Intellect, is called an Intelligible Species; as that which the Senses receive
is called a Sensible Species.

Now the Intelligible Species are illuminated Phantasms, Intelligible species
what they are.
that is to say, freed from the conditions of matter, and by the Agent
Intellect imprinted upon the Passive, and consequently spiritual and
indivisible accidents: For a Substance is not received into the Sense, as
Scaliger would have it, Exercit. 303. Sect. 7. but only accidents. And
therefore only accidents do make the Species or Image in the Intellect; amongst
which are both time and place, and the finite Unity of quantity, which being
removed by the operation of the Intellect it self, there remains an Universal
substantial Species: As if you see a man armed and disguised; first you
apprehend the Arms the disguise, and afterward having removed them you conceive
the Man himself.

And since we have just now asserted, Whether or no, and how the understanding
perceives particulars?
That such things as are offered to the Intellect, and received by it, must be
separated from matter and al particular conditions, the Question is; How the
Intellect understands particular things, or whether it be capable only of
universals? We answer, That the Mind of Man does also know particulars. For
since al knowing Faculties being subordinate, are so joined that the end of one
action is the beginning of another, and what ever is known by the Inferior
Faculty is also known by the Superior; and the Senses and Fancy know particular
things, the Mind also must needs know the same. And by means of this knowledge
it comes to pass that a man is able to compare a singular with an universal,
and that the mind can frame singular propositions, collect universals from
them, and frequently correct the judgment of the Senses about singular things,
viz. As often as they (by reason of an evil disposition of the Object) do commit
any error. Now the manner of knowing singulars is also by accidents; because
out of the proper singular accidents we draw out a notion or phantasm proper to
the single Objects; even as out of the notions proper to a sort we draw out a
notion proper to the same sort.

Intellection is commonly divided into direct and reflex. It is termed direct,
Understanding Direct.
when we only know somewhat, and make no further enquiry, but the Species gives
a stop to the Intellect, as when the Understanding stays at the first
apprehension of a Man, an Ox, an Horse, etc. but that is termed Reflex, or
doubled and reciprocal as it were, Reflex.
whereby the Mind knows it self, viz. That it knows, and has the power to know
and Understand; or when we understand the Intellection it self, and the
Understanding knows that it is an Understanding, viz. That it self is an
Essence and an unmixt one, and knows that it understands, because that it is
able to know it understands.

And here you must observe, what it is to abstract. What it is to abstract
Now Abstraction is the separation of one thing from another, and the
apprehension and understanding of one thing without the apprehension or
understanding of others. For in Abstraction al things are not known which are
in a thing, but that only which is abstracted: for examples sake; To abstract
the Living Creature from the Horse, is to consider only the Nature of a living
Creature in general, not regarding the particular Nature of an Horse.

Finally, The Will what it is.
The Will (that we may also speak briefly thereof) is the other Faculty of a
Rational Soul, whereby we follow or avoid such things as are known by the
Understanding; or (as Scaliger has it, Exercit. 307. S. 3.) The Will is the
Understanding extended to the having or doing what it knows. Others call it the
Rational Appetite. For as after the knowledge of Sense there follows a Sensitive
Appetite; so after the knowledge of the Mind an Appetite follows proper thereto,
which to difference it from the former, they call it Voluntas, the Will; and
that this Rational Appetite differs from the Sensible is hereby apparent,
because they are frequently at enmity one against another.

The Object of the Will, is Good known by the Understanding and presented to
the Will, The object of the Will. Its actions twofold. 1. Drawn out. 2 Commanded.
and the contrary Evil: Hence it follows the Good, and shuns the Evil. The
Actions of this Faculty are to Will or Desire, and to Nill or Refuse. Now the
Actions of the Will are twofold; Drawn out, and Commanded. The Drawn out, are
those which the Will puts forth and performs of it self, and not by the
inferior powers. The Commanded are those which the Will commands and enjoins
the inferior Faculties to perform. Now the Will has command over the
Locomotive Faculty, and the Sensitive Appetite: for at the word and command of
the Mind and Will we move and rest. But the command which the Will ought to
have over the Sensitive Appetite is much weakened by sin, and that same harmony
disturbed betwixt the two Appetites; so that many times the Sensitive Appetite
casts off the command of the Will and right Reason, and that saying becomes
true: Hurried the Coachman is, and the Coach away, by the Horses.

But the Will has no command over the Vegetative Faculty, and it acts merely
naturally, nor can we be nourished or grow according to our own will and
pleasure.

Chap. 2. Of the Body of Man, and its Functions.
NOW the Soul of Man, since it is the Rule (in a manner) of al things living,
as Scaliger, Exercit. 102. Sect. 5. has it; it must also of necessity have the
most noble Body of al; which ought now to be described, as the Rule of all the
rest. But since the dignity thereof, yea, and the necessity that there is of
its knowledge, has stirred up many to seek the knowledge thereof, so many Volums
are written concerning the same (wherein both its parts are accurately
described, and the uses of al of them laid open) that it is an impossible thing
to Epitomize the same. To name a few Authors: Galen has written many Books of
this subject; of the Dissection of the Muscles, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, vocal
Instruments, Womb, of the Bones, of Anatomical Administrations, 9 Books; of the
use of the Parts, 17 Books, and others. Very many men of this Age have
diligently written of Anatomy, amending and increasing the Doctrine of Galen.
And amongst them chiefly Vesalius, Fallopius, Columbus, Sylvius,
Piccolhomineus, Laurentius, Platerus, Bauhinus, Casserius, Fabricius, Riolanus,
Spigelius, and very many more, all whom to reckon up the Nature of this short
work will not permit. We shall therefore in this place only with brevity name the
Parts of the Body whereby all the actions thereof are performed; the Description
whereof may be seen in the Authors aforesaid, which are in the hands of every
one.

Now that the parts of our Bodies may be fit to perform their actions, the
disposition of the parts of the Body wherein it consists? the Constitution of
the similar parts. the temperament of a Man, twofold.
they must needs be rightly disposed. Now that disposition consists in three
things: For since the parts of our Body are considered either as similar only,
or as dissimilar and organical; in both of them Unity is required, and it is
necessary that every part be one and entire. Moreover, particularly in the
similar parts there is required temper; in the organical composition and
conformation, necessary for the actions of the Body; which is in diverse parts
different, according to the diversity of the actions by them to be performed.

Now what in general a Temperament is, and what are its differences, has been
already declared in Book 3. chap. 4. But as to what concerns the Temperament of
a Man, in him (as also in other Creatures, of whom he is as it were the Rule
and measure) is found a twofold Temperament; the one of a Body, considered
simply as a mixed Body; the other of a living Body. For when a man dies, that
temper which he had as a living body does withal vanish; yet in the Carcass til
it rot the parts do for a while retain the composition and temper which they
have from the Elements.

Concerning the Temper of a mixed Body we spoke before in the Book newly cited:
Each part has a peculiar temperament.
but the Temper of a living Man, which results out of a certain harmony of al
his parts, although it be hot and moist, and Life consists in Heat and
Moisture; yet there is a great diversity in the Parts. The Skin is the most
temperate, especially that in the Hand.

Among the Hot Parts the chief is the Heart: Hot parts:
after the Heart follows the Liver, the Spleen, the Flesh of the Muscles, the
Kidneys, the Lungs, a Vein, an Artery, Fat and Suet.

Among Cold Parts, Cold parts
the first are the Bones, then the Grisles, the Ligaments, the Tendons, the
Membranes, the Arteries, the Veins, the hard Nerves.

The Moist parts are, moist parts
Suet, Marrow, Brain, Spinal Marrow, Stones, Dugs, Lungs, Spleen, Kidneys,
Flesh of the Muscles, Tongue, Heart, loft Nerves.

The dry are, Dry parts.
Bones, Gristles, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, Arteries, Veins, hard Nerves.

Now this Temperament of a living Body is twofold, the inbred Heat whereof it
consists.
or consists in two things; Innate, and Influent Heat. Innate Heat is in that
which is the inbred hot juice natural: For by innate heat we understand not a
bare quality, but a quality with its subject. This Innate Heat consists of the
inbred Spirit and original moisture: and is nothing but the Primitive Moisture
filled in all parts with the implanted spirit and heat. For these three, Heat,
Spirit, and Radical Moisture, or Natural Balsam as some call it, are so joined
together, as that they cannot be easily separated. For this is that Body which
is more Divine than the Elements so called, and is a substance bearing
proportion to that of the Heavenly Bodies, as Aristotle terms it in his 2. de
generat. Animal. cap. 3. and by which the seeds of things are made fruitful, as
the same Aristotle informs us.

This inbred heat is principally in the Spermatick Parts, the Subject of the
inbred heat:
which are called the first Parts. But it is chiefly found in the Heart, which
therefore Galen calls the Hearth or Chimney of the inbred Heat. And this innate
Heat is the chief instrument of the Soul, whereby it performs and perfects al
actions. At the beginning of a Man's Life, and in his younger years, it is much
in quantity; and as he grows older, the Radical Moisture is gradually consumed
and dried up, til at last being quite spent, the Heat is also extinguished, and
natural Death follows.

Now this inbred Heat is cherished and fomented by the influent Heat, What the
spirits in the body are?
through means of the Spirits, which are a most thin, hot, and movable body,
bred of the most sincere and subtle part of the Blood; and being joined with
the inbred Heat they are the immediate and chief Instrument of the performance
of al actions, and are a cause that the faculties of the Soul exercise their
operations.

It Is commonly taught by many, they do not conveigh the faculties:
That these Spirits are the conveighers of the Faculties from the principal
Parts to the rest of the Body: but this is a false Opinion. For seeing the
Faculties are inseparable Properties of the Soul, and the Soul is in all the
parts, it is every where furnished with its Faculties, not borrowing the same
elsewhere.

Now touching the Number of these Spirits, the number of the Spirits:
several men are of several Opinions; and some make one, and others more. But
we have reason to hold that there are diverse Spirits. For although the more
subtle part of the Blood be the first matter of them all; yet they receive a
diverse form in sundry parts, and are fitted for diverse uses.

Now the Spirits are three, Natural, Vital, and Animal.

Touching the Natural many doubt. The Natural:
We although we admit them into the number of Spirits, yet we acknowledge no
small difference betwixt it and the other Spirits, and that the name of Spirits
does not so properly belong to them as to the others, nor that they have the
same Office. Now it is generated in the Liver, and is contained in the Veins,
and is the thinner and more spirituous part of the blood, bred of the
vaporation of the blood, and affords matter to make the Vital Spirits of.

All grant a Vital Spirit, the Vital:
which is generated in the left Ventricle of the Heart of the thinner part of
the Blood, or Natural Spirit, flowing into the Heart, and first of al
attenuated and elaborated in the right Ventricle; and of the Air drawn in by
breathing, and by the dilatation of the Arteries. This Spirit is not only in
the Heart the chief Instrument thereof, together with the inbred heat of the
Heart; but also being spread abroad through the Arteries into the whole Body, it
cherishes the inbred heat of all the parts, excites and increases the same, and
gives perfection as it were thereunto. And therefore some call it the influent
Heat. Also this Spirit affords matter for the Animal Spirits.

Many indeed deny the Animal Spirit; yet we have reason to admit the same, the
Animal:
seeing it is wrought in a peculiar Member, viz. The Brain, nor can the Vital
spirit perform those uses which the Animal does, and in a partful of Vital
Spirit we see sense and motion taken away for want of Animal Spirits, as in the
Apoplexy, Palsy, and stupidity.

For this Spirit is the immediate Instrument of Sense and Motion; and it is
generated of the putest part of the Vital Spirit, carried by the Carotick and
Cervical Arteries into the Basis of the Brain, and thence into the Brain it
self, and mingled with Air drawn in by the fetching of breath.

Moreover, The Organick parts have also their proper Constitution, viz. the
Constitution of the Organick parts:
A due composition and connection of the similar parts into one form and shape,
fit to exercise the action. Now there is required to the composition of
Organick parts; first a just number of parts compounding; secondly, the
greatness fit for the said parts; thirdly, a decent conformation, which
comprehends a sigure fit to perform the action, cavities and passages, and that
the surface be rough or smooth, as the Nature of the part requires; fourthly,
situation and connection with other parts.

These things whereof we have hitherto spoken being common to al parts, and
necessary for all actions; we will now furthermore briefly recite how and by
what parts the several actions are performed.

And seeing the Vegetative Faculty is the lowest, we will first treat thereof.
Now it contains under it, Nutrition, Augmentation, and Generation.

And as to Nutrition and Augmentation in the first place, seeing in them
Aliment is joined to the Body from elsewhere (and the Aliment is in the first
place unlike of substance) it must be elaborated by diverse Concoctions, and be
first made fit for the Body.

This Concoction is twofold; Private, which is performed in the several parts;
A double Concoction in the body private and public. the first Concoction
and Public, which is ordained for the use of the whole body, and is performed
in the stomach chiefly, and in the spleen.

The first Concoction therefore is performed in the stomach; and for the same
cause a double Appetite is given to the stomach; a Natural, whereby it desires
food for it self alone; and an Animal Appetite, whereby it desires food for the
whole body.

For by Appetite and hunger a Man is pricked on and provoked to eat, and then
the first preparation of the Meat is in the Mouth. For in the Mouth it is by
the Teeth broken and ground; which for that cause (although they serve also to
form the Speech) are given to a man commonly thirty two in number, in each Jaw
sixteen; of which some are called Cutters, others Dog-teeth, others Grinders.
The Cutters or foremost are four in each Jaw; the Dog-teeth two; the Grinders
ten. Moreover, by the Mouths heat, and the mixture of spittle, the meat is
altered. The Meat being thus broken, ground, and prepared in the Mouth, is by
the Tongues motion thrust down the gaping Throat into the Stomach, which the
stomach by help of the oblique fibers does embrace and retain til by the
Concoctive Faculty thereof and its proper heat it be turned into a Mass not
unlike Barley Cream, the making of Chyle.
which is called Chylus.

The Chyle being wrought in the stomach is sent out by the lower Orifice into
the Guts, Discribution of the Chyle:
and is by them still more elaborated. Now the Guts are of two sorts, the Thick
and the thin: The thin are three, Duodenum, Jejunum, Ileon; the thick also
three, Coecum, Colon, Rectum.

And seeing no Meat can be turned wholly into Nourishment, the Excrements of
the first digestion.
but has some parts in it unprofitable to nourish the Body: Nature in this, as
all other Concoctions, separates what is unprofitable, and breeds here a
twofold Excrement, the one thick, the other waterish.

The thicket Excrements are the Dung, the Dung
whose expulsion is through the Belly by stool: the Guts partly by their
circular and transverse fibers (with both which both their Coats are furnished)
contracting themselves above the same; partly by help of the Muscles of the
Belly, whereby the Belly is squeezed; and so the Excrements are forced
downwards.

The thin and waterish Excrement is not presently voided forth, The thin and
watery excrement.
but remains mixed with the Chyle, that it being thereby made thin may the more
easily pass the narrow Veins of the Mesentery and Liver.

The first Concoction being finished, The second Concoction, or blood-making.
the Chyle is received out of the Mesaraick Veins, (whose Orifices reach into
the Guts) is altered and changed a little, and is hence carried to the Roots of
Vena Porta and to the Liver.

And that the blood may be bred more pure in the Liver, after the Blood has
received some rudiment in the Mesaraick Veins, that which is therein thick and
dreggy is drawn by the Spleen through the Splenick Branch of the Porta, out of
the Trunk of the Mesaraick Veins before it pass to the Liver; where the Spleen
alters it as much as it can and the matter will bear, and thereof breeds for it
self and the ignoble parts in the Belly a thick and dreggy blood. But that
which is quite excrementitious, and cannot be turned into Aliment is evacuated,
partly by the Hemorrhoidal Veins and Porta's Trunk, and partly by the Splenick
Arteries.

The Chyle after it has received some rudiments of Blood in the Mesaraick
Veins, and is by help of the Spleen purged from the more dreggy parts thereof,
it receives the form of perfect Blood in the Liver; and is thence distributed
into all the parts of the Body to nourish the same.

And since in every digestion Excrements are bred, Excrements of the second
digestion. 1. Yellow Choler: 2 Urine
there is also in Sanguification a twofold Excrement; yellow Choler, which is
collected into the Gallbladder, and is thence voided by the Guts, exciting
them by its acrimony to purge themselves: and the serous or wheyish excrement,
which is drawn through the Emulgent Veins by the Kidneys, and is transmitted
through the Ureters into the Bladder, and is by it voided forth and called
Urine. For the Urine is nothing else but that watery moisture in the Chyle that
served to make it pass more easily, and the salt which was superfluous in the
meat and unsit to nourish the Body. Which appears not only by the taste, but
also because store of salt is drawn out of Urine, the watery moisture being
separated.

The Blood which is distributed into the whole Body to nourish the same, The
blood consists of diverse parts:
although it is contained under one form or shape, and is al useful to nourish
the Body; yet its parts are not quite alike, but some temperate, which are
peculiarly called blood; others hotter and drier, which are called Choleric
Blood; others colder and moister, which are called Phlegmatic Blood; others
colder and drier, which are called Melancholy Blood; but vulgarly these parts
are called, Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy.

And of these parts none is Excrementitious, but al are useful to nourish the
Body; and in the Body of a sound Man there is nothing Excrementitious, but only
Alimentary blood is contained in his Veins, and all the parts of our Bodies are
nourished only with blood.

This Blood in the several parts is elaborated according to the Nature of each
part, the third concoction
and at length assimilated to the said parts. And seeing in that elaboration
the blood undergoes some mutations, Physicians do say, that in the third
Concoction the four secondary humors are generated; whereof the one follows the
other, and by these mutations the blood is turned into the substance of the
Body. the secondary humors.
The first is called the Nameless, the second Dew, the third Glue, the fourth
Cambium.

In this Concoction two Excrements are generated, the Excrements of the 3d
Digestion.
the one more gross, which is the filth that gathers about the Skin; the other
more thin, which is discussed, partly by invisible transpiration, and partly by
sweat. For the evacuation of which excrements the Skin was furnished with pores.

Moreover, the generative faculty.
That a man might propagate and multiply himself, he received from the Creator
the Faculty of Generation. Now Generation is caused by seed elaborated in the
stones, unto which out of the rest of the Body the best part of blood, spirit,
and heat, is transmitted by the Veins, Arteries, and Nerves; and is by them
reduced into a white froathy body, full of spirits, which is called seed and is
a compendium as it were of all the Heat and Spirits in the Body.

This Seed is sent forth both by the Man and Woman: for seeing Women are
furnished with the same Instruments, both to make and vent Seed; and when they
are provoked by Lust they desire Copulation, and void seed: we must needs grant
that they contribute seed to Generation. And their seed goes to the making up
of the Child: for the male and female are not two sorts of Creatures: yet
neither of their seeds is alone sufficient for Generation, but this order is
appointed by the Creator, that of both their seeds as two partial causes, one
principle and one total cause should arise, from which one motion (though in a
certain orderly disposition) should further the production of the Child.

The Seeds conceived in the Womb are by the inbred faculty thereof cherished,
and the faculty lurking in the seed is stirred up, and the shape of the Organs
begins to be expressed; and so conception is said to be made, and then it is
termed a Conception. Now the membranes encompassing the Child are first formed,
in which the nobler part of the seed and spirit is included; and they are two,
one called Chorion compasses the whole Child, props up the umbilical vessels,
and by their their means it totally adheres to the Womb: the other immediately
compassing the Child is called Amnios; which Coats seeing in the Birth they
seem to be but one, are termed the Afterbirth, because they come away after
the Child.

Now the spermatick parts are first formed and that all at once. And afterward
every part is finished, as the dignity and necessity thereof requires. At first
there appear as it were three bubbles, and innumerable threads, being the
underwoof of the solid parts. These parts do afterward receive increase from
the mothers blood. And hereupon the Creator has ordained, that from the
fourteenth year commonly of a Woman's age, to the five and fiftieth, there
should be some superfluous blood as it were, bred in women, and afford matter
for the Child in women that have conceived: or if a woman be not with Child
that it should be sent unto the womb, and from thence purged away.

Since therefore the Child after it is once formed in the Seed is furnished
from the mother with all things it stands in need of, there were navil vessels
made, viz. a Vein, The Navil-vessels The Vein. The Arteries.
two Arteries and the Vrachus, which about the navil grow together into one.
The Vein is a branch of Vena Portae, to which it is contiguous, being the Nurse
(as it were) of the Infant: the two Arteries (branches of the Ramus Iliacus)
descending do spring from the Aorta; whereby arterial blood and spirit are
communicated to the Infant, and by which the Infant draws breath. The Vrachus
is carried from the bottom of the Bladder to the Navil; The Urachus.
when the Child is born, there being no longer use of these Instruments for
these intents, they grow together, and perform the office of the Ligaments as
it were.

Now the whole time from the Conception to the Birth is divided by Physicians
into two parts; the time of formation or shaping, The time of Formation.
from the Conception to the time the Child begins to stir; and the time of
perfection, which is from the time it begins to stir, to the time it is born:
yet others divide it into three parts, viz. into the time of Formation, which
Hippocrates, de natura pueri, determines to be of Girls in forty days, of
Males in thirty: The time of Motion.
the time of motion which is commonly said to be of Males in the third month,
of Girls in the fourth: and thirdly, the time of birth.

Now as to the time of birth, that is various in mankind: yet experience
teaches, The time of Birth.
that no Child is born alive before half a year be past. The Child born in the
seventh month may live: but no Child born in the eighth month can live
according to Hippocrates; yet some hold that the eighth months Child does
sometimes live. But the most orderly and frequent time of childing is the ninth
month, and most Children are brought forth from the 15. of the ninth month, to
the 15. of the tenth.

And although Physicians have observed that some have been born in the eleventh
month and after the eleventh month: How the months are reckoned.
yet such births are to be reckoned amongst rare accidents.

Now the months according to which the times of Childbirth are reckoned are
the solar months, or months of the Sun; from which nevertheless the lunar
Conjunctions (consisting of twenty nine days and twelve minutes) do not much
vary. Nor must this laborious frame of man's body be ried to such small
observances of time.

After the Natural faculty comes the Vital, being distinct from the Natural and
Animal, three faculties in the Heart
both in actions and peculiar organs, and has its seat in the Heart. Now under
the term of vital faculty diverse powers are comprehended; and there are in the
Heart three faculties, the Wrathful, the Breeder of spirit and vital Heat, and
Pulsing faculty which is subservient hereunto.

From the wrathful faculty proceed all the passions of the mind, the wrathful
faculty
Anger, Mansuetude, Boldness, Fear, Hope, Dejection, Joy, Sadness, and others
of this kind which follow the former. Now some of these are caused materially
(that I may so speak) or in way of an efficient cause, by expansion of the
Heat, Spirit and Blood, as Anger, Joy, and the like; some by the Concentration
or gathering inward of the said Blood and Spirits, as Fear, Sadness, and the
like: and formally they are all no other than Appetites; and these motions do
follow an appetite, either of prosecuting that which delights, or of avoiding
that which is hurtful; the former of which causes an expansion or spreading
abroad of the Heat and Blood, and the latter causes them to retire inwards.
Now these motions cannot be made, save by agitation of the Heart and Arteries,
and of fervent and spirituous Blood. Whence it is apparent why the wrathful
faculty needs a very hot Bowel, and which is in continual motion.

Now the Heart is seated in the middle region of the Body, viz. in the Chest,
that from it as a fountain the vital heat and spirit may readily be diffused
into the whole Body. Now the Heart has two Ventricles, the use of the Heart and
its Ventricles.
the right and left: the right Ventricle out of the wide mouth of the Vena cava
draws in Blood by its Diastole, which it perfectly concocts and attenuates: the
thinner portion whereof is transmitted into the left Ventricle of the Heart, by
those holes in the partition wall betwixt the two Ventricles; which
nevertheless some deny: but the remaining and greatest part passes through the
Vena arteriosa into the Lungs; some part whereof is spent in nourishing the
Lungs, but for the greatest part is carried through the arteria venosa into the
left Ventricle of the Heart.

Now these things are performed by a certain wonderful and perpetual motion of
the Heart, the motion of the Heart.
whereby in the Diastole its extreme parts are contracted, and the point of the
Heart is drawn to the Basis, and so the Heart becomes more short, but the sides
thereof are dilated: but in the Systole the Heart becomes longer, and narrower.
And seeing for the breeding of spirits and Arterial blood there is need both of
Air and Blood, and these two substances cannot be drawn with one motion:
besides the Ventricles which draw the Blood, on each side at the Basis of the
Heart there are two notable cavities, ending into the upper part of the
Ventricles, which by a peculiar motion of their own do draw to themselves Air
to cherish the Spirits and fan the vital Heat, which are termed the Hearts
Earlets. For although others say their use is to be as it were Storehouses of
the Blood and Air flowing in, and guard the Vena cava, and the Arteria venosa:
yet some conceive, that by a peculiar motion they draw in Air; and Hippocrates
himself, Lib. de cord, holds that they cool the Heart like a pair of Bellows.
the Pericardium.


And that the Heart may not be hindered in its motion, it has allotted unto it
a large and membranous Mansion, which they call Pericardium the Heart-bag, which
hinders any thing from pressing upon the Heart or troubling the same in its
motion.

But seeing nothing could go into or come out of the Heart unless it had been
furnished with certain conveighances: the four Vessels of the Heart.
therefore in the Basis of the Heart four remarkable Vessels are seen, two in
the right, and as many in the left Ventricle: In the right, the Vena cava, and
the Vena arteriosa; Vena cava
in the left, the Arteria magna, and the Arteria venosa. The Vena cava is at
the right Ventricle of the Heart, and pours Blood into the Heart, for the
Generation of arterial Blood and vital Spirit and the nourishment of the Lungs.
Howbeit others think the Blood which is wrought in this Ventricle is also
distributed through the whole Body. Vena Arteriosa. Arteria venosa Arteria magna:
Then there is the Vena arterialis, which carries blood out of the right
Ventricle to the Lungs for to nourish them, as also to become the matter of
arterial Blood and vital Spirit; the Arteria venosa carries Air from without
and prepared in the Lungs, and Blood brought out of the right Ventricle of the
Heart by the Vena arteriosa, into the left Ventricle, and expels smoaky
exhalations, and distributes a portion of the vital Spirit into the Lungs.
Finally there is the Aorta or Arteria magna, which distributes the vital Spirit
and Arterial Blood bred in the left Ventricle through the whole Body: And these
are (as Hippocrates says) Pegai Phusios Anthropou, the Fountains of the Nature
of Man. the Valves


And seeing these Vessels have each of them two uses (for examples sake, the
Arteria venalis does not only draw Air out of the Lungs into the left Ventricle
of the Heart, but it communicates vital spirit and arterial blood to the Lungs,
and expels smoaky vapors) lest the substances entering the Heart should fall back
the same way they came in before they have gained their perfection, or that
which is shed out of the Heart might return thither again, there are eleven
Valves placed in the orifices of the Vessels; three in the orifices of all the
other Vessels, and only two in the Arteria venosa: Of which Valves some are
open outward and shut inwards, namely those that pass the matter to the Heart;
others are open within, shut without, being such as pass matter from the Heart.
In the orifice of the Vena cava are three Valves, open outwardly, shut in
wardly; contrariwise, in the orifice of the Vena Arteriosa there are as many
open within, shut without: in the orifice of the Vena arteriosa there are as
many, open within shut without: in the orifice of the Arteria venosa there are
two, which are open without, shut within; in the orifice of the Arteria magna
are three Valves, open within shut without.

And because the Heart distributes Heat and Spirit through the Arteries into
the whole Body, there are passages made to carry the same, viz. the Branches of
the great Artery, the Branches of Arteria magna.
which themselves also are dilated and contracted, and by the pores of the Skin
draw in Air, expel smoaky vapors, and communicate to the whole body vital
Spirit, Heat, and Arterial Blood; and this motion of the Heart and Arteries is
termed the Pulse.

Now the Pulse consists of two motions, Systole and Diastole. Of what motions
the Pulse does consist.
By the Diastole or dilatation the Heart is filled, and draws Air and Blood out
of the Lungs by the Arteria venosa; and the Arteries by their orifices, which
end in the Skin, do draw some of the ambient Air: but by the Systole or
Compression the Heart distributes vital Spirit and Heat through the whole body,
by the Arteria magna, and expels fuliginous excrements to the Lungs, by the
Arteria venalis: also the Arteries expel fuliginous excrements by their
orifices, which action is termed adelos diapnoe, insensible Transpiration.

But because the Air, which is drawn by the Heart, was to be altered before it
came thither, the chief Organ of Respiration.
therefore the Lungs were given, and Respiration ordained. The chief Organ of
respiration is the Lungs. For although the Chest and other parts do also serve
for respiration: yet that motion is primarily performed by the Lungs, which
have a peculiar faculty to dilate and contract themselves, as the Heart and
Brain also have: which may easily be observed in the dissection of
Live-anatomies. Nor is respiration a voluntary motion, Respiration no voluntary
motion:
so that the Lungs should dilate themselves upon the motion of the Chest, to
avoid Vacuum; but the Lungs are moved by a proper power of their own, and the
Lungs and Chest are moved together, because they conspire both to one end. For
the Lungs by an inbred faculty are dilated: and that it might be done more
conveniently, and that it might have room wherein to dilate it self, when the
Lungs move, the animal faculty at the same time moves the Chest. And indeed
these two motions hold proportion one to another. Nor are the Lungs distended
because they are filled, as a Bladder that is blown up; because Air is not from
any place blown into the Lungs: but they are filled because they are dilated,
after the manner of a pair of Bellows.

Now respiration consists of two Motions, Inspiration and expiration.
Respiration made up of two motions:
By Inspiration the Lungs and Chest being widened, Air is drawn in by the Mouth
and Nostrils for to cool the Heart and to make vital Spirit: and by Expiration,
the Lungs and Chest being compressed, fuliginous excrements are voided at the
Mouth and Nostrils. Hence, that much Air might be attracted and retained
therein, the Lungs exceed all the Bowels in greatness, and have a rare and
porous substance.

And because the Air was to have an Ingress into the Lungs, the Aspera Arteria:
therefore was the Wesand [Aspera arteria] or Windpipe made; whose larger
Trunk might receive Air, partly by the Mouth and partly by the Nostrils; and
other branches innumerable are distributed into all the parts of the Lungs,
that they might be totally replenished with Air; which Air the Vessels coming
from the Heart to the Lungs, being large and great, do receive at their ends,
and carry it into the Ventricles of the Heart.

And because a man perpetually needs to draw in the Air, the Wesand is made of
solid grisly rings, that it may be kept perpetually wide and gaping.

But lest the Meat or Drink in passing over the Windpipe should fall
thereinto, the Epiglottis:
whereby a man's life might be endangered: on the top thereof a soft and
sharp-pointed Grisle is placed sticking out, which they call Epiglottis, which
covers the passage of the Windpipe, while Meat or Drink slips over it.

Now the Chest, the Chest:
since it was to be partly a defense of the vital parts and partly the
Instrument of Respiration; it was to be neither quite fleshy nor quite boney.
Therefore the Chest does consist of twelve pair of Ribs, Its Ribs and Muscles:
which that they might come and go to dilate and contract the Breast, sixty
five Muscles were made, thirty two whereof distend, and as many contract the
Chest.

But because there are no Ribs in the lower part of the Breast; the Midrif
that there might be in that place also a part that might be distended and
contracted, and might likewise separate the vital Organs from the lower Belly,
a certain partition wall is interposed of a musculous or fleshy substance,
which is called the Midrif, which when the Air is breathed forth is raised up,
but being loosened it is dilated, and depressed in Inspiration or drawing in of
the Air, or fetching wind. And because through the Diaphragma, neat the Back,
the Gullet, the Arteria magna, and Vena Cava do pass, lest by the perpetual
motion of the Diaphragma these parts should be straitened and agitated, the
middle of the Diaphragma is Membranous, and contains no fleshy substance, that
though the musculous part of the Diaphragme or Midrif is moved, yet that part
may not be contracted.

Having done with the Vital Function, it follows in the next place, that we
enquire by what means and with what Instruments the operations of the sensitive
faculty are performed. And in the first place, that the Instrument of seeling
which is the most common sense is a Membrane, The Skin is not the adequate
instrument of feeling.
has been said already in Book 7. Chap. 6. But as to the Skin, it is true
indeed that it is folded about the whole Body, not only that it may cloth the
whole Body, and defend the other parts from external injuries, and that it may
fasten and bind all the parts together; but also that it may be the Instrument
of feeling, and may perceive external objects and injuries every way incident.
And Galen rightly said 1. de temper. cap. 9. that the Skin, especially that in
the hand, is the Rule of al sensible objects, and an Instrument of feeling
properly fitted for so prudent a Creature as Man is. Yet nevertheless in that
the Skin feels, it does it because it is Membranous, or receives fibers and
lattle Nervous Memb^^^es from the parts beneath it.

The To gue is the Instrument of Tasting, The parts and use of the tongue
whose flesh is spungy, rare and loose, covered by a most thin Membrane, common
to the Mouth and Pallat, into which the Nerves of the th^^d and fourth
Conjugation are expanded. Now the Tongue has three pair of Nerves; the former
two are disseminated through the Coat thereof, and serve the Tasting Faculty:
the third is spread into the Muscles of the Tongue for to move the same.

That the O^gans of the Smell are the Mammillary Processes, was said before in
Book 7. chap. 4.

The adequate Organ of the Hearing is indeed the whole Ear. The Organ of
Hearing, its parts and use. the implanted air
But what is the chief part in the Ear that contributes to Hearing, Authors are
at great variance, while some say the implanted Air, others a certain Nerve is
the immediate Instrument of Hearing. But if we shall diligently weigh the
matter, these Opinions may be some ways reconciled, as was said Lib. 7. cap.
3. For it is altogether probable that a certain implanted Air or aerie substance
is required to cause the Sense of Hearing. For as to receive the visible
Species the Organ of Sight is shining and lightsom; so also to receive sounds,
it is credible that the Organ of Hearing is Aerial. But seeing the Organ of a
Sense ought to be a part similar and animated, simple Air cannot be the Organ
of Hearing; but it must be a certain Aerie substance, bred of the most pure and
Aerie part of the Seed and maternal blood, such as may have affinity with the
external Air, and may receive the sounds brought in. But whether this ingrafted
Air be in the expanded Nerve, or in some Cavity, can hardly be determined;
since Anatomy in this point affords little help, and after death we find
nothing obvious to the sight. Whence also it is that that same other Question
can hardly be resolved; Whether this Air be only an internal Medium, to receive
and transmit sounds to the true Organ of Hearing, which is the widened end of
the Auditory Nerve? or, Whether (which as the Opinion of Capivaccius) this Air
it self seated in the expanded Nerve be the Organ of Hearing?

All the other parts of the Ear have each their use in Hearing. the external Ear
The external Ears by their sticking out do receive the sound, and cause it to
rebound into the Auditory passage. Hence those that are crop-eared, or have
their Earlaps cut off, they do not hear exactly, but perceive sounds like
fluctuating Water.

From the out ward Ear or Earlap, the auditory passage or hole. the Drum.
the sound comes first into the Auditory hole, which is boney and covered with
a thin Skin compact and smooth, and which sticks exceeding fast to the bone,
fit to receive sounds. At the end of this hole or passage is a Membrane which
they call the Drum, made to this end, That the external Air might not slip into
the Cavity of the Ear, and so disturb the Hearing.

Now this Membrane is exceeding dry that it may rightly receive sounds: for
Instruments of Music teach us, that the driest things are most apt to sound.

No man can easily tell the use of the rest of the parts of the Ear, the three
little bones of the Bar
viz. The Cavities, the three little bones called the Mallet, the Anvil, the
stirrup; since we have no such helps here as Looking-Glasses, Optical Glasses,
and such like do afford us in out explication of the Instruments of sight.

Somewhat we have spoken concerning the sight, the parts of the Eye, and their
uses.
Book 7. chap. 2. Its Instrument is the Eye; which has many parts, each of
which has its peculiar use. The first is the Cornea Tunica, or Horny Coat of
the Eye, which is transparent and void of al color, that the visible species
may pass there-through into the Eye, and that pure and uninfected with any
strange color. It is thicket than the Air, that the species coming out of the
Air (a thinner Mediu^^) into a thicker might be refracted.

Bet wixt the Horny Coat, and the Cristalline Humor, the wa^^y humor.
the watery humor is placed in the middle, transparent and void of color for the
Reason aforesaid touching the Cornea. Now it is thinner than the Cornea, that
here also may be a new refraction of Rays.

Next the watery humor comes the Wea Tunica or Grape-skin Coat, the Wea tunica.
which is furnished with such a blackness as is not to be seen in all the body
besides, to the end the species might become more clear, and appear better in
the Cristalline humor. For weak Lights do more appear in an obscure datkish
place than in a lightsom. Also this Coat seems to have another End, viz. That
over much light which might enter in at the Apple of the Eye, and offend the
Eye and the sight, might by this black Coat be intercepted.

In the Wea or the Grape-skin Coat, the Apple of the Eye.
there is an hole which is called the Apple of the Eye, being the door as it
were by which the visible species do enter into the Eye. This hole (that the
sight may be more perfect and distinct) is much less than the compass of the
Cornea: Yet in some it is larger, in others narrower; and those that have it
narrower do see more sharply, those that have it broad are weak-sighted.

Now the Pupilla or Apple of the Eye is straitened and widened, Why it widens
and darrows.
and in a light place appears narrower, in an obscure place wider: For seeing
two much light hurts the sight, and a weak light is not sufficient for sight,
and in an obscu^e place the visible object is not sufficiently discerned; this
Window (as it were) is made in the entrance of the Eye, which may be widened
and narrowed, and by widening let in so much light in an obscure place as may
be sufficient for sight; and by narrowing exclude too much Light which may
offend the sight.

And in regard of this Constitution of the Wea Tunica, there are three natural
manners of sight; one is most perfect, being constituted in an indivisible
point, and whereby we discern distinctly the smallest things: The other is
persect, when we see visible objects at a just distance, and can distinguish
them though we do not discern the smallest part of every of them: The third is
imperfect and confused, whereby besides things just against us (which we see
perfectly) we do also confusedly discern things on either side of us; and for
this sights sake the Horny Coat is broader than the Wea or Grape-skin Coat, to
the intent that at one view we may behold diverse things, though not al
distinctly.

Now this is the Cause of this Difference. Seeing the comprehension of a
visible thing is made by a Pyramid; and the certification by its Axis; and only
that perpendicular Line which is called the Axis, and which is not refracted,
does effectually, plainly, and distinctly represent the thing; but other Rays,
by how much they are nearer to, or further from it, by so much the stronger or
weaker they are in representing: hence doubtless it comes to pass that when the
Apple of the Eye is narrower, only the perpendicular in the Pyramid of sight
does enter, or with it the Rays which are nearest the Axis; when the Apple is
wider, more Rays (oblique and refracted) do enter with the perpendicular.

Next the Wea is the Cristalline Humor, the Cristalline Humor.
which is not seated (as some imagine) in the Center of the Eye, but in the
fore part, and the Membrane compassing the same divides the Eye into two
unequal parts, the foremost whereof is fourfold lesser than the hindermost. And
as to the use and office of the Cristalline Humor, Authors do not a little
vary: Whether it be the c^ies Inst^ ument of sight?
For some (and the greatest part) do hold that this Humor is the chief
Instrument of sight, and that therein only the species are received and
discerned: Others (seeing that the Glassie Humor is also transparent, and much
greater than the Cristalline, and placed behind the same) are of Opinion that
the sight is not terminated in the Cristalline, but that the visible species
passing through the Cristalline are received in the Glassie Humor, and being
refracted are gathered into one point, and received by the Optic Nerve: which
Opinion seems to be very probable. For seeing refraction is exceeding necessary
to sight; all this furniture of the Eye, and the variety of transparent parts
therein was contrived, that diverse refractions might be made. And hence also
the Cristalline Humor is more compact than the Watery, that a new refraction
might be made therein.

This Cristalline Humor is seated in the fore part of the Glassie Humor, the
Gsassie Humor.
so called because it resembles melted Glass. Its substance is softer than the
Cristalline, and less fluid than the Watro. The Quantity hereof is so great,
that it takes up almost three quarters of the Cavities of the Eyes. Galen and
many others have hitherto thought, that this Humor was made to nourish the
Cristalline; but falsely: For what need was there of so great a quantity of the
Glaslie humor, if it were only to nourish the Cristalline? also the Cristalline
Humor might be nourished by a much readier way; nor needed so laborious a
contrivance of the Glassie Humor, if it were made only for nourishment: nor is
there any example in the whole Body of one part nourishing another, but they al
draw their nourishment from the Veins, whether they be white or red. The
Opinion therefore of others seems to be truer, who hold, That the Vitreous or
Glassie Humor has received this shape, place, and quantity, that therein the
visible Images or Rays being refracted out of the Cristalline into the
Glassie, which is less compact than the Cristalline, might meet together in one
point, and after that manner be offered to the sight.

The Optic Nerves arise from the hinder part of the Brain, the Optic Nerves.
and going forward a long way, they are at last inserted into the Eyes. These
Nerves after they are gone a little from their original are joined together,
not by sticking one to another, or crossing one another, but by an absolute
Union; but soon after they are again separated, and being divided, the right
goes to the right Eye, the left to the left. And some will have the reason to
be, lest visible objects should appear double because there are two eyes. But
seeing these Nerves are not joined in their beginning, but on their way, it is
more probable that the reason thereof is, That the Optic Spirit (when need is)
might be sent totally well near into one Eye, that so the sight may be stronger
in one Eye; which comes to pass when we shut one eye, that we may see a thing
more accurately with the other.

But since Sight is made right forward, if the Eyes were immovable, we should
be able to see only such things as are just against us. To the end therefore
the Eye might see more things and that distinctly, it is furnished with Muscles
whereby it may be moved. And because the Eye was not capable of all the
differences of motions; such as they want are supplied by the motion of the
Head. But that one thing seen by the two Eyes may not appear double, both the
Eyes are always naturally moved to the same differences of position: and
therefore the Nerves by which they are moved arise from the fore part of the
Spinal Marrow, joined together in one point as it were, that so they may agree
together in every motion.

There are also besides, the Eyelids:
certain outward parts ordained to assist the Sight, viz. Two Eyelids, the
upper and the lower: of which the upper is only movable; the use of which is to
defend the Eyes from external injuries, as Air, Wind, Smoke, Dust. Howbeit,
some add also another use, viz. To purify the Eyes: For since sight requires a
pure transparent body, and the Horny Coat is easily dimmed by reason of the
moisture which sweats out of the Kernel, as also by the external Air: in the
opening of the Eye they conceive the Eyelid wipes al foulness from the Cornea
Tunica.

After the external Senses come the internal, of which we have spoken, Book 7.
chap. 7. The immediate Instrument by which, and in which they are exercised, is
the Brain, which for the performance of these Functions is furnished with a
peculiar substance, the like whereof is not to be found in the whole Body again.

Now the Brain of a Man, the Brain:
the substance whereof is soft and white, in respect of the bulk of his body is
exceeding great; because Mankind is more exercised in Animal actions than
other living Creatures, and therefore needs great plenty of spirits, which
cannot be bred but of much matter, and in a large place.

Now the Brain is made to perform the actions of the inner Senses, Its use.
and of the Rational Faculty, and to generate Animal Spirits, which are the
immediate Instrument of these actions. And the Brain is moved by a Natural and
peculiar motion for the better generation of Animal Spirits, and like the Heart
in its Diastole it draws matter for the generation of spirits, and in its
Systole it pours out the Spirits into the Organs of the Senses.

Now the Brain is divided into three parts. Its parts.
And the first is divided by the Dura Matter into the foremost and hindermost
part: The foremost, in which the Spirits are chiefly generated, is called by
the name of the whole Cerebrum or the Brain: the latter Cerebellum, the Brainlet
or petty Brain. Moreover the Brain is again divided by the Dura Matter into two
equal parts, the Right and the Left. The Brain has also its Ventricles and
other parts, which are all most diligently described by Anatomists, nor can
they be here briefly recited, nor well understood without ocular inspection and
figures.

But let us here first enquire in what part of the Brain the Animal actions are
performed. In what part of the Brain the Animal functions are exercised.
The vulgar Opinion is, That they are performed in the Ventricles: in which
also they hold the Animal Spirits are generated of the Air drawn in and
setching breath, and carried into the Brain by the Organ of Smelling, and of
vital Spirit sent up from the Heart by the Carotick Arteries; and so they
commonly hold the Ventricles of the Brain to be the Store houses as it were of
the Spirits Animal. But late Anatomists having diligently weighed the
Conformation of the Brain, have left the said Opinion. For seeing nothing
reaches into the Ventricles of the Brain, besides the Kernels, and that they
have no passage save at the Tunnel and the kernel thereof (which by the consent
of al receives phlegm out of the Brain) it easily appears from hence, that those
two remarkable Cavities (which are called Ventricles) were made to receive the
excrements of the Brain: and that therefore they cannot also be the Shop and
place of Animal Spirits. And therefore more likely it is, That the Animal
Spirits are bread in the substance of the Brain it self, and that therein they
are contained and perform their Functions.

Moreover, it is also controverted; Whether the principal Faculties have
different places in the Brain:
Whether all the Functions which belong to the Brain are performed in one part
thereof? or whether they are exercised distinctly in dis^inct places? Some will
indeed have it, That the Faculties have several places, and they quarter the
Fancy in the fore part of the Brain, Reason in the middle, Memory behind. And
this makes them think so, because one action being hurt, the rest do remain
sound. Others quarter al these actions together, seeing they are exercised
about the same objects: Who indeed deny not that one action may be hurt, and
the rest unhurt; but they say, this does not therefore happen because they are
in several places, but because each action requires a peculiar disposition in
the Organ; whence it may happen, that one preternatural Disposition may hurt
one action more than another; as for examples sake, moisture is more hurtful to
the Memory than to the Fancy. The common sense in the fore pars.

The Memory, Fancy, and Reason not distinguished in their seats.

Ratiocination is performed without corporent Organs.




Now although it is hard to determine any thing in this Case, and we must needs
confess as in most other things, so in this, as Scaliger has it, Exercitat.
307. Sect. 21. We like the Wolf deluded by the Stork do lick the Glass, but
cannot touch the Gruel: yet it seems most probable that the common sense is
placed in the fore part of the Brain, seeing there all the external senses
concur, whose Center (as it were) the common sense is. But the other actions
seem not to differ in their sears, seeing they are conversant about the same
objects.

There remains the most noble and proper action of a Man, Ratiocination, or
Intellection, which is performed (doubtless) without the help of any Corporeal
Organs. For the Mind does not understand by the Body or any part thereof, as
the Medium wherewith. The Mind of Man indeed stands in need of a Phantasm
(because the Soul while it is in the Body never understands without a Phantasm)
but uses the same, not as an Organ, but as an Object: For if the Intellect were
tied to any Organ, by help whereof it acted, it could not understand al things:
but according to the determinate disposition thereof it should act and only
understand some things: as the Sight by the Eye perceives only colored things,
and nothing else.

And although after this manner we cannot assign any place to the Intellect:
the seat of the understanding.
yet by accident and consequentially a certain seat is ascribed thereto, viz.
That wherein the Imagination is made. Imagination and Ratiocination are joined
together in one Seat, and Reasoning is said to be performed in the Brain,
rather than in the Foot or Liver; because in the Brain Phantasms are offered
thereunto, which it contemplates, but not in the Foot or Liver.

After the knowing Faculty of the Soul, there remains yet Appetite and local
motion, the Instrument of Animal Motion.
of which we spoke in Book 7. chap. 8. where also it is said, That a Muscle is
the Instrument of voluntary motion. And seeing there are four motions of
Muscles, so that they are either contracted, or extended, or transferred, or
remain bent, as Galen teaches in Lib. 1. de motu muscul. cap. 8. Yet
Contraction, whereby a Muscle is drawn toward its head and proper Original, is
the proper action thereof, by which the parts are turned any way as occasion
requires. Now there is a great number of Muscles, by reason of the variety of
the parts to be moved, and their sundry motions; and some move the Thighs,
others the Arms and Hands, others the Back, Breast, Head, Jaws, and other Parts.

Motion flows from the same Principle that Sense does, viz. From the Brain;
howbeit, Its Fountain.
from the hinder part thereof peculiarly termed the Brainlet or Cerebellum; and
the Nerves arising therefrom are more solid, and are diffused through the
substance of the Muscles.

And that the Body might be transferred from place to place, the Legs.
a Man has Legs given him which are made of most strong Bones, to support the
whole Body, and carry it from place to place; which that they might not be too
heavy, are made hollow within.

And that a Man might stand firm and upright, and not totter as he goes, the
Feet.
he has Feet joined to his Legs, which are hollow in the middle, so that a Man
stays himself upon four props as it were: For when a Man moves forward, he
sets the former part of his Feet more firmly to the ground, and bears most upon
them.

And that the Feet may be variously moved, diverse articulations are made. their
joyntings.
For we go into low places by bending our Knee; after lying or sitting we raise
our selves up: which could not be if our Leg and Thigh were not joynted. So we
set our Foot more forward or backward, as the ground is up-hill or down-hill.
Also the hollow part of the Foot when we go upon pointed things, or uneven
bodies, lays hold on them as it were an hand; and after the same manner also
we go up a ladder. And therefore the Foot (as a Hand) is divided into sive
Toes, which when we go do fasten upon the ground like hooks; and are also the
cause that we can go upon rough and uneven places as well as those that are
plain and smooth. Now in the Toes of the Feet, the great Toe is not set against
the other four as in the Hand, but they are al placed on a tow after the same
manner. For the Hand being the Organ of taking hold, and the Foot of walking;
as in laying hold a great variety of motion, so in walking the firmness and
security of support is requisite. Moreover, that the Feet might accommodate
themselves to the variety of the ground whereon a Man goes; besides Toes they
are compounded of diverse Bones, in respect of which they are sometimes bended,
sometimes extended.

And because Man only of al living Creatures is endued with Reason, the Hand.
he also alone has an Instrument of laying hold or taking up, which are the
Hands, the Instruments of Instruments, by which only he can supply himself with
whatever other Creatures naturally have more than he, as to defend or cloth
themselves. Now two Hands are made, that if one will not serve to hold a thing,
both may. Again, they are variously distinguished, that we may take up great
things and little things, and bodies of what figure soever. Likewise against
the four Fingers the Thumb is placed opposite; because whatever we handle,
either we enclose it circularly with out hand, or fasten our Fingers upon it on
the opposite sides.

Moreover, Speech and the usefulness thereof.
from the Motion of the Will Speech has its original, wherewith we may
conclude this our Epitomy: which as it is proper to man alone; so is it most
profitable, and most highly necessary to preserve the Societies of Mankind:
For Speech was given us that we might demand of others such things as we
wanted; and signify what we had that we were willing to impart. And as
Scaliger says, in Exercitat. 256 from Aristotle: Reason is the Hand of the
Understanding; and Speech, of Reason; and the Hand, of Speech. For the Hands
perform what they are commanded; the Commands obey Reason: Reason is the force
of the Intellect.

Now the Instruments of the Voice and Speech, the remate Instruments of the
voice

the near or immediate Insiruments:


are some remote and common, others near and proper. The former are the
Instruments of Respiration, the Lungs and the Chest, and those parts pertaining
to these, the Midrif and the Intercostal Muscles; which do not frame the voice,
but afford Spirit and Air which are necessary to the formation thereof. Now the
near are the Wezand, the Larynx, the Muscles which open and shut the Larynx,
the recurrent Nerves, the Epiglottis and the Tongue. To which some others are
subservient, as the Palate and the Uvula. Amongst the most immediate are the
Larynx, and especially the Epiglottis, which is like the tongue of a pipe: For
a pipe without a tongue is useless, nor can the voice be framed unless the
passage of the spirit or air be made narrow.

For Air and Spirit are required as matter to frame the Voice: Instruments are
necessary to drive it forth, which are the Lungs and Chest: there is need of an
Instrument wherein it may be smitten, and wherein being smitten the Air may
sound; which is the Larynx, whose orifice being straitened, and the Air
smitten, the Voice is caused. And because the Case so required that a man was
not always to speak, but when he lifted, the Larynx has many Muscles, by
which the chink of the Larynx may be widened and straitened as we please, and
so sundry Voices framed.

But because the Voice of Man was to be articulate, to signify the conceptions
of his Mind, therefore his Tongue was framed with Muscles to move the same,
wherewith being moved it variously opposes it self to the voice issuing out of
the Larynx, and so frames an articulate speech: to the formation whereof the
Lips do also serve, which do themselves also oppose the voice, and with their
motion precede, accompany, or come after the motion of the Tongue, as the
Nature of the Articulated Speech requires.

FINIS.
NATURALPHILOSOPHICAL DISCOURSES.
The INTRODUCTION.
IT has been both by me and others elsewhere at large declared, That there are
two things which chiefly draw the minds of men from Truth, and hinder the
growth of all Disciplines; viz. A Servile kind of Credulity, and a rash desire
of Innovation. How much hurt both of these have done to other Disciplines, let
those speak that are skilled in them. That I may speak of Natural Philosophy
and Physic which belong to my Profession; it cannot be demed but that much
hurt has been done to both these, especially to Natural Philosophy, whiles
some Men little regarding Reason and Experience, have solely adhered to the
Authority of other Men; others out of a desire of novelty have endeavored
wholly to overthrow the foundations of ancient Discipline. From both these
courses I freely profess my self to have been always averse: For neither would
I be of the number of those rash Innovators, whether Paracelsians or Chemists,
or how ever otherwise called, who endeavor wholly to banish from the Schools
the ancient Philosophy, which is come to us chiefly from the Writings of
Aristotle: nor yet would I be reckoned amongst them who are not ashamed in this
Age of ours publicly to profess, that they had rather err with Aristotle and
Galen, than speak the Truth with any later Author. The Innowators aforesaid I
pass over at present. Touching these latter, I conceive Julius Caesar Scaliger
has well written in Exercit. 306. That those Wits are most unhappy which
stiffly maintain, That our Ancestors knew al things. I do not verily envy
Aristotle those praises wherewith the same Scaliger every where adorns him. Let
us grant that Aristotle is a man that has deserved more than all mortal men
besides, of all the parts of Humane Knowledge; that he is the Father and Captain
of our Wisdom; that he is the chief Dictator of Learning, the Emperor of
Philosophers; that he is the Eagle of the Philosophical Kingdom of Wisdom, and
Literary praise; that he is the Hercules, the Prince, the Tribunal of Truth;
that he is the god of Philosophers; and in a word, greater than all praise, and
above all Calumny: yet neither he nor any mortal Man can be made the Rule of
Truth. Let it be counted a comely and a decent thing to cite the Testimonies of
Aristotle as of a prime Philosopher for his Opinion, and to produce as many of
them as may be: but if weighty reasons be not added, a mind defirous of the
Truth will not be contented with these alone. Their Course therefore is by no
means approvable, who taking no care for reasons, contend only with
Authorities. Yet this is a fault common enough. For if we look into the
Writings of some Men we see nothing brought to prove their Matter, but the
Authorities of Hippocrates, Aristotle, and Galen, and oftentimes many
interpretations are alleged touching the sense of some one place, and all
those rejected, and at last another substituted, perhaps no better than the
former, and so in disputing thereabouts pro and con, so many Pages are taken
up, that he must have abundance of leisure that would read them all. And which
is a ridiculous thing, the contention is not so much about the mind of the
Author speaking in his own Language, as the Interpretation of a barbarous and
faulty translation, which is obtruded for the mind of the Author; and so they
play at Blind-mans Buff.

So much reverence ought indeed to be afforded Aristotle, that if any thing
seems by him inconveniently expressed, it be softened with a fit
Interpretation. But if the matter be plain, (only some opinion of Aristotle
does not agree with the truth) it is vain to labor to fix another sense upon
Aristotle. And that which is the top of all the mischief, you shall find such
opinions given out every where for Aristotelean, which are no where extant in
Aristotle, being the Inventions of Schoolmen, whose custom has been to
delight themselves in disputing al things pro and con.

Which thing, as I said, does not a little hinder the progress of al disciplne;
whiles both our time is lavishly wasted, and consumed without prosit, of which
we ought to be sparing Stewards, since life is short and Art is long; and we
wander from the way of sinding the truth. For there are two Principles only of
sinding out all truth, and Touch-stones of all opinions, Reason and Experience.
He that follows these two does not casily err: but they who neglecting these do
fly to that external Argument, viz. Authority, and like Slaves swear to the
sayings of one man, and of a Man make a kind of God, who cannot be deceived;
they easily slip into sundry Errors. Hence (to speak nothing of Physic or
other parts of Pinlosophy, but to keep me to natural Philosophy, for whose sake
I speak all this) amongst the Expounders of Aristotle (whom all the
Philosophers well nigh of all Nations for some ages last past have believed so
to have perfected this part of Philosophy, that there needs no further labor
but to understand his writings) so many dissentions and so many indissoluble
objections, to and fro, have arisen, which in so many ages of years have not
been ended, but that daily they have divided into many sects, while disputing
upon the suppositions of several sects, one man will maintain one way, another
man another; this man being for Averrhoes, a second for Thomas Aquinas, a third
for Scotus, a fourth for another; that you cannot tell whom to give credit to.
And that is true of Euripides, One man sees not all things. And no man has
ever been found, that has not erred and mistaken, or as Galen has it: It is
hard for him that is a Man not to offend in many things, viz. being quite
ignorant of some, judging amiss of others, and negligently setting down other
things in writing. And therefore when free and excellent wits, and prudent Men
had observed, that the Authorities of the Ancients had bitherto more bindered
than furthered the Advancement of Learning; and saw that thereby a Bridle was
cast upon the Understanding of Man, and upon many excellent wits; they
endeavored to cast off this yoke of Bondage, and to seek the knowledge of things
from the things themselves.

Yet they themselves also who have not followed only Authorities but weighed
the Things themselves have not al happily touched the white of Truth. For
seeing, as has been said, Reason and Experience is the Rule of Truth in
matters of Nature: Experience must of necessity precede, and when a thing is so
found out, Reason is to prove the same: wherein nevertheless many offend; for
seeing many neglect Experience, and rely only upon Reasons, and give too much
credit to their speculations, they must of necessity be very often deceived. Of
which thing we have every where remarkable Documents; some of old trusting to
certain slight reasons denied there were Antipodes; amongst whom was
Lactantius, who largely inveighs against those Philosophers who held there were
Antipodes, in Divin. Institur. Lab. 3. cap. 24 and counts those men fools who
believed there were such Antipodes who hung by their Legs, and whose Feet were
higher than their Heads: and calls it folly and vanity to hold there were Men in
the world who went with their Feet just against ours. And Augustine de Civitate
Dei Lib. 16. Cap. 9. counts it fabulous to believe, that there were men on the
other side of the Earth, who went with their Feet against ours. Yea and
Aventinus relates, that there was one Vigilius a learned Man, who could not
avoid the thunderbolt of Excommunication, for holding that Men lived about the
Globe of the Earth and went with their Feet one against another. For Pope
Zachary writ to Boniface, to drive Vigilius from the Church as an Heretic, and
to deprive him of his Priesthoed, unless he would abandon his perverse
Doctrine. So, in the foregoing ages some endeavored by sleight reasons to
persuade that the torrid Zone was not inhabited; both which Experience and late
Navigations have taught to be false. So some idle Monks and others of the last
ages preceding, taught many things, trusting to their speculations, concerning
the Body of Man, which Experience and Anatomy do show to be false. Jacobus
Z^barella a most learned Interpreter of Aristotle acknowledged this Error, who
in Lib. 2. de proposit. necess. cap. 17. thus writes: All these things are so
true, that all men ought to know them by Inspectionof the things themselves, if
in these days we had Philosophers, who Philosophised by searching diligently
into the Natures of things; and did not onlyaddict themselves to the words of
Aristotle, and those many times misunderstood, to which they are wont to
accommodate the things themselves; seeking nothing else but what Aristotle
says, and taking their Arguments for the knowledge and proof of all things,
only from his words. The Premises considered, not out of any desire to inveigh
against and carp at Artistotle (whom I reverence as much as any man can) or any
other Persons, but only out of desire to find out the Truth, I began more
diligently to examine certain things referring to some Controverted Heads of
natural Philosophy. For although somewhat above thirty years ago, I collected a
certain Epitomy of natural Philosophy, and afterward published the same: yet
the reading of other Authors and especially of Physicians (who have handled
natural Philosophy more diligently than other men, and are therefore called
Physicians, that is to say, Naturalists) the Consideration of natural things,
and exercise of chemical Operations, and in a word, Experience has taught me
many things; so that to use the words of the Comic Poet, Such things as I
thought I knew, I am ignorant of, and such things as I had an high conceit of,
Experience teaches me to reject. I conceive indeed, that the most things If
wrote in that small Epitomy are agreeable to Nature; but yet I suppose there are
some things which may be more rightly, or clearly expressed. Whereof, I think I
am not to be blamed for admonishing my Reader; since very many most learned men
have done the same before me, which therefore I thought fit briefly to comprize
and join as an auxiliary Appendix to the foresaid Epitomy, and those things
especially, which concern the Principles and Foundations of natural Philosophy,
not only general, but special also. For the chief cause why natural Philosophy
is so little improved, I conceive to be, that in the former Ages those who
accounted themselves the most acute, consumed the greatest part of their life
in those general Questions, concerning the first Matter, Form, Privation,
Motion, and such like, and wasted the time in repeating those Disputations over
and over again, after a most tedious manner; but things particular or the sorts
of natural things (out of the Observation whereof they ought nevertheless to
have constituted their principles) they never meddled withal to any purpose.
And hence it came to pass that so many Wainloads of Commentaries arose upon
Aristotle 's books of general natural Philosophy, filled for the most part with
Questions rather Metaphysical than Natural, and many times with vain
speculations. But few were found that would read or Comment upon Aristotle 's
books of Meteors, of the History of living things, of the Parts of living
things, of the Generation of living things, or of Plants; scarce so many in
number, As Gates of Thebes, or Heads of fruitful Nile.

And although I know, that by these my endeavors I shall lay my self open to the
Calumnies of many, and that I shall be counted an Innovator and an Inventer of
Paradoxes: yet. I have not thought fit therefore to forsake the study of truth.
For Aristotle well says in 1. Ethicorum cap. 4. It is a good thing, yea and our
Duty, for maintenance of Truth, to change and abolish out former Opinions and
Tenets. Which things he taught not only by word and writing, but by Deed and
Action. For although Aristotle heard Plato teach twenty years together; yet he
suffered not himself to be brought into bondage by the Authority of his Master,
but he freely enquired into the Tenets of him and al other Philosophers before
him, opposed them at pleasure and rejected them, substituting in their rooms
such things as he thought most probable. And therefore we that follow, do ow no
more Reverence to Aristotle than he did to his Predecessors; but we ought so to
follow Aristotle, as that we do not love him better than the Truth. Galen
boasts of himself that he was always of a free spirit, and preferred Truth
before the Doctrine of Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle, and the wits of other
Men. And are we all born Servants and Slaves to other Men's opinions? It Is
excellently spoke by Seneca: They have done many things who are gone before us,
but they have not done all. There remains yet much work behind, and much will
remain; nor shall any man born a thousand Ages since want occasion to add
somewhat. And above all things this shall be my endeavor, that all my Discourses
of Natural Philosophy may tend to the honor and Glory of the most good and
great God. Concerning whom I am admonished by St. Paul, Romans 2. verse 20. His
invisible things are seen by the Creation of the World, being understood by the
things which are made, viz. his Eternal Power and Godhead, to the end they
might be without excuse. And Mercurius Trismegistus: Man is made a Spectator of
the works of God, and he has wondered at them and acknowledged the Creator. And
again in his Book do Pietate and Philosophia: there can be no more true
Godliness than to Understand the things that are, and glorify the Creator for
them: and presently after; Be Godly O Son; he that is Godly is a Philosopher in
the highest degree. For it is impossible to be eminently Godly without
Philosophy. But he that learns what things there are in the World, how disposed
and by whom, and for whose sake, he will give thanks to the Work-Master as to a
good Father, tender Nurse, and faithful Steward: and he that gives thanks is
Godly. And he that is Godly will know where the Truth is, and what it is; and
the more he knows the more Godly he will be; viz. With such a kind of Godliness
as may be attained from the Principles of Natural Philosophy, Theoretical and
Practical. For who can choose but be Godly who truly discerns the immense
Omnipotency, Goodness, and Wisdom of God? For he is ( as Austin says) without
place, and in every place; invisible, and beholding all things; immutable and
changing all things; always working, and evermore quiet; he fills all things
and is not shut up; minds all things, and is not troubled; is great without
quantity, and therefore insinite; good without quality, and therefore good in
the highest degree.

THE FIRST DISCOURSE. Of the Principles of Natural Things.
Chap. 1. That it is necessary for a Natural Philosopher to know the Creation
of the World.
HE that would treat of Natural Things must make it his chiefest care to handle
the Principles of Nature; the Doctrine whereof being not rightly laid down, al
things built thereupon must needs fall to ground. Now two kinds of Principles of
Natural things must necessarily be considered and understood, Two manner of
Principles of Natural things.
viz. Those of their Original and first Creation, and those of their duration
or continuance. The first kind of Principles must by any means be diligently
considered, and he that enquires into the first Principles must necessarily
enquire into God himself. The Natural Philosopher must know God to be the first
Principle of all things:
For he is the First of all, and the Principle of al other Principles, having
created al things Natural, and preserving them when created; so that they
retain to this very day that Essence which he gave them at their first
Creation. And herein chiefly most of all the Heathen Philosophers are deficient
or very barren, and no mention at al (or but on the by) of God the first Author
of Nature; and they so describe the whole Course of Nature as if al were
performed without a first Cause, only by the action of second Causes, and
indeed contrary Principles. Socrates raised his mind a little higher, when a
little before his death, as Plato relates in his Phaedo, having heard out of a
certain Book of Anaxagoras, that there was a certain Mind which disposes and
rules al things, and is the Cause of all; he said he was much delighted with
this Cause; adding moreover, that those men exceedingly erred who rested in the
second Causes and neglected the first. And he calls the Mind, or God, the Cause
indeed; as without which the other Causes termed second Causes, are no Causes.

As to what concerns these second Causes, the second Causes:
or the Continuation and Conservation of things created; since some Natural
Things keep their Essence entire, such as they were created at the beginning of
the World without any mutation; but other things are preserved only in their
kinds, their particulars being subject to continual Corruption and Generation;
we must also consider the latter kind of Principles, viz. The Principles of
corruption and Generation.

As to the first kind of Principle, The World created by God:
since al things (as al in their Wits grant) are governed by the Providence of
God alone; they must also of necessity depend on him as their efficient; and
seeing before any Natural things were made, there could be nothing but the most
good and great God, we must needs hold that he is the first Author of all
Natural things; who, when there was nothing besides himself, and there was no
matter for him to work upon, by his Infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, he
commanded those things that were nor; to be made. Which thing also the more
sound Philosophers granted after their manner, although they did not clearly
enough explain the matter it self. Not to speak of others, Plato t^uly approved
of the Original of the World, although he withheld his assent from some things
concerning the same. For he constantly affirms, That the World did not proceed
from Nature, nor from Fortune, nor was made by Hap-hazard, but that it flowed
from the Will of God, not bound by any necessity. But whether from Eternity a
certain Matter did proceed from God, and was al at once formed into this
variety of things, or being at first unformed, after an infinite tract of Time,
he did adorn it with so many Forms, or, which is the only thing that remains,
he performed both in Time, he neither says nor denies, and reasons in such a
manner of the Original of the World, that which way soever you turn and wind all that Disputation which he makes thereof in his Timaeus, it will seem to savor al
these Opinions. Which also may be said of the Opinions of other Philosophers
before Plato. And hence it came to pass that the Philosophers which came after
Plato were of sundry Opinions hereabout. Aristotle truly, though he acknowledge
God to be the Maker of the World, when in the 2. de Generat. and Corrupt. cap.
10. text. 19. he writes; God has filled the Universe: and in the 30. Section
of his Problems, the 5. Problem; God has given us two Instruments in our
selves, by help of which we might make use of external Instruments: yet he
endeavors considently and openly by diverse Reasons to deny, That God made the
World new and in time; and to overthrow the Opinions of the Ancients touching
the Original of the World. And therefore though he acknowledge God the Author of
the World, yet herein learned men conceive he contradicts himself, since
Eternity is a duration proper to God alone, nor can a Creature be coeternal
with the Creator; not can there be two Infinites, nor will right Reason allow us
to make the World equal to God. And hence a grievous controversy has been
raised amongst the Peripateticks concerning the mind of Aristotle in this
point, nor have they as yet well decided the Controversy. For there are two
things principally which al Philosophers in a manner cannot understand, viz.
How the World could be made of nothing, and how it could be made in time; for
when they saw other Artificers make their Works by mixing some things, and
taking away other things; they imagined that God also had thus made the World.
And therefore though they granted God to be the Author of the World; yet they
held there were before the Original of the World certain bodies, either
floating up and down in the immense Space, or lying hid in a certain confused
Chaos and Medley. But they were both ignorant who made those bodies: The World
created of nothing
and if they grant God to be infinite, they might believe he could produce
something even of nothing; especially since there was nothing before any matter
imaginable, but he.

Another thing which offends them is, the World was made in time:
That they think it absurd that God should be so long a time idle before the
Worlds Creation, and at last set himself upon a new work. But since in Eternity
there is neither fore nor after, it could not be made before it was made,
unless it should be made from Eternity. But to be made, and to be made from
Eternity imply a contradiction. And if you ask why the World was made five
thousand years ago, and not twenty thousand years ago? I ask again, Supposing
it was created twenty thousand years ago, why not an hundred thousand years
ago? and if an hundred thousand years ago, why not an hundred thousand thousand
years, and so still forwards, unless it had been made from Eternity, which
cannot be? For Eternity is a point wherein there is no going before or coming
after. But the Philosophers could not by the reasons merely of Nature and their
own understandings, come to know the power of the most good and great God, who
acts above the powers of Nature. But we may know these things very well out of
the holy Scriptures, the Use of the holy Scriptures in natural Philosophy
the use whereof is by the goodness of God afforded unto us; and therefore
those things in which the Philosophers are defective must be supplied from
them. For though the holy Scriptures are not written to interpret the things of
Nature: yet inasmuch as those things which are written by Moses touching the
Creation of the World, were dictated by Inspiration of the holy Ghost; we must
needs think that al those things which we read in the History of the Creation
are most true: and that it is impious to suppose any thing there said to swerve
an hairs breadth from the Truth. And suppose (which I do not now dispute) that
every where in holy Scripture we meet with some things which are spoke
according to the Opinion of Men, and either Tropically or otherwise
Figuratively according to the Capacity of the common people: yet that cannot
any ways be said of the Creation of the World, because God would have that
made known to Men only as it is comprehended in this Writing of Moses, even to
the end of the World. And although the primary scope of the holy Scripture is
to propound the means to eternal Salvation: yet the History of the Creation of
the World is not to be excluded from those means, as the Apostle teaches in the
Romans, chap. 1. verse 20. seeing withal there are therein such Revelations of
Natural things, as to which no sharpness of Humane Wit could ever be able to
attain. An Example whereof the Creation of the World, and Aristotle himself, do
afford. For let us suppose as Julius Caesar Scaliger conceits, that Nature has
in Aristotle made ostentation of all the Wit Humane Kind is capable of; yet he
could never attain to know the Creation of the World, as the most learned
Peripatericks confess. And therefore to depart from the evident sense of
Scripture and to assent to Pagans, is neither Lawful nor Godly. And although it
be indifferent as to Eternal Life, what Opinion any Man holds in the things of
Nature, and in this darkness of the minds of mortal men it can be no prejudice
to a man's attainment of Eternal Life, if out of weakness of Understanding he
err in this point: yet if any man does wittingly contradict the holy
Scriptures, and esteems the Authority of an Heathen more than the holy Writ, I
conceive that questionless he sins very grievously. Truly Galen cannot (nor
ought he by any Christian Philosopher or Physician) be excused who in his
second Book of the difference of Pulses, chap. 4. carps at the School of Moses
and of Christ, as delivering Laws not founded upon any Demonstration. And in
his Book 11. de usu partium, where he disputes of the Hairs of the Eyebrows,
he derides Moses, as if God the Creator had commanded these Hairs alone to keep
always an even size, and that they as fearing the power of the prescriber, or
reverencing God himself that gave them that command, or being persuaded that it
was best to do thus, they did as they were commanded. And afterward he
reprehends Moses for supposing that God could make all things, although he
would make an Horse or an Ox of ashes; and he holds and determines that God
himself never undertakes any thing which Nature cannot effect, and affirms that
the Hairs of the Eyelids would not have been such as they are if they had
sprung out of the soft skin, though God should have willed and commanded the
same a thousand times. Well therefore did that same famous Philosopher and
Physician Franciscus Vallesius, who in the Proeme of his Book de sacra
Philosophia, is not ashamed ingenuously to confess, That when he was a young man
he wrote Matters Philosophical (viz. When he commented upon the Physics of
Aristotle) according to Opinion (that is the Mind of Aristotle and his
Interpreters) but that he writes these things according to the Truth, that is
to say, agreeable to the History of the Creation in holy Scripture, seeing
before he could have no certainty concerning the Principles of Natural things
before he knew them by reading the holy Scripture, to the reading whereof he
had consecrated his old Age. And I have been long of the mind, That he who not
knowing, or neglecting the Creation of the World, shall undertake a Dispute of
the things of Nature, he shalerr in many things; yea, and that many upon that
occasion have fallen into most grievous Errors.

Now Moses has described the History of the Creation in the first Chapter of
Genesis; Things to be observed in the explication of the History of the World
the Interpretation whereof to set down in this place, I count not worth the
while; since there are many large Commentaries extant thereupon, and amongst
the rest that of Franciscus Vallesius, which though it be short is none of the
worst. Only I shall advise you of one thing; That there are many who affix a
wrong Interpretation upon the Text of Moses, whiles they endeavor to expound
Moses, not by Moses, but from the Writings of Heathen, an unhappy and
intolerable design. For it is certain amongst al Christians, that al things
delivered in the holy Scriptures are true, and those delivered by Moses (being
plainly Historical) are to be understood according to the proper and genuine
sense of the words, as they are commonly understood in the Holy Scriptures; and
not to be explained according to pre-conceived Opinions sucked in by reading
Heathenish Authors: nor is the holy Scriptute to be wrested to such Opinions.
And therefore Augustine gives a good warning in the beginning of his second
Book upon Genesis, that we take heed lest we contend, not for the sense of the
holy Scripture, but for our own Opinion, so that we would make that to be the
Opinion of the Scripture which is our Opinion; whereas we should rather be
willing to make that our Opinion which is found to be the sense of the
Scripture. The History (truly) of the Creation is not repugnant to Nature, but
it is many times opposite to the fall Genceptions which Men have of Nature;
concerning which the same Augustine in his seventh Epistle to Marcellus thus
writes: If a reason be given contrary to the Authority of the holy Scriptures,
be it never so acute, yet does it deceive by an appearance or similitude of
Truth. For it cannot be true. Again, if a man does oppose the Authority (as it
were) of the holy Scriptures against most manifest and certain Reason, he that
does so understands not himself, and he does not object the sense of those
Scriptures which he cannot dive into, but his own sense against the Truth; nor
does he oppose what is in them, but what he sinds in himself in their stead as
it were. And therefore although it seems hard to many to abandon some
Hypotheses of Natural Philosophers, because they agree not with the History of
the Creation of the World: yet is it altogether necessary so to do, seeing
there are some things in Aristotle contrary to the History of the Creation of
the World. For as Benedictus Pererius (an excellent Aristotelean) has
ingenuously written, de Com. Rerum Not. princip. Lib. 5 cap. 7. nothing can be
found out or imagined which is more contrary to the Doctrine of Aristotle, and
which does more vehemently break al his Joints and Nerves, than the Creation of
the World. And a little before; When the Peripatericks perceived that a
Creation being allowed, most grievous inconveniences would follow against their
matter, they could by no means be induced to grant the same. And he who will
examme some Tenets of Aristotle shall easily perceive that Pererius was not
mistaken when he so thought and wrote. And he shall see the same (not to speak
now of the E^ernity of Motion, and of the World) who will but consider the
Doctrine of Aristotle concerning the Panciples of things Natural. But it is not
my purpose to produce all the Tenets of Arisiotle which may be called into
question, nor is it my design to subvert the Natural Philosophy of Aristotle,
but rather to show which way the same may be perfected. And therefore I shall
only hint a few things concerning the same.

Chap 2. Whether the Principles of Natural things are contrary.
ARistotle in the first of his Physics, chap. 6. Whether the Principles are
contrary?
presupposes this as a thing granted by all Men, That the Principles of Natural
things ought to be contraries. Now he was persuaded to hold this Opinion,
either because he believed that the generation of al Natural things was
performed by the action of Contraries, and that when one contrary overcomes
another, this thing perishes, and another is generated; or because he would
insist in that Method by him pointed out in Lib. 1. Physicor. and proceed from
things most known to us, to search out the Natures of things. But some
Expositors of Aristotle have long since told us that this proposition is not
universal, nor has place in all Physical things. For since the World has two
sorts of Parts, some that have remained incorruptible and unchangable to this
very day, viz. The Heaven and the Stars; some corruptible, whose Individuals
are generated and corrupted, yet the kind is preserved by a continual
succession of the said Individuals; it easily appears, how those principles
belong to the Heaven and Stars. the End and use of Matter.
As for Matter, it belongs indeed to the Heaven, but not by a definite
contrariety, but only affording Magnitude. For (which Aristotle will not deny)
the end of matter is to be the Receptacle of Forms, both substantial and
accidental; and therefore in 2. Phys. cap. 8. text. 81. he terms the Form the
End of the Matter; and the same Matter gives corpulency and an indeterminate
magnitude to things, and has an aptitude to receive Forms, and a determinate
figure, and of it self is no ways the Cause of Generation and corruption, but
receives those effects from some Agent, or as Scaliger writes in Exercitat. 61.
Sect. 1. Matter was not given primarily and of it self, for to cause a
transmutation to generation; so that where ever it is, there also Generation
should be; but to be the subject of the form of Corporiety in a substance, and
to receive Quantity and Figure: Quantity in regard of change of place; Figure,
because every body must and ought to be finite. And a little after, For these
Causes Matter (by a primary Council of God) was created; but secondarily, and
as to a less noble end, for Generation. And therefore although Matter belongs
to al Natural things; yet, that the Principles of Natural things should be
contrary does not belong to al; since in the Heavens and Stars (according to
the Opinion of Aristotle himself) there is no Generation, and no contrariety,
which might be the cause of Generation and Corruption. And therefore Principles
with a definite and determinate Contrariety are not the most general, but do
belong only to bodies subject to Generation and Corruption.

Moreover, they do not belong to al corruptible and mutable things neither, but
to such alone as are made by the action of contraries, and not to such as are
made of seed. And touching this very Contrariety of Principles, and concerning
them how they are contrary, the Peripateticks themselves are at great variance;
of which see their Commentaries. Howbeit, the most of them do not place a true
Contrariety in the first Principles, but such an opposition as is between the
Habit and Privation, as Zabarella writes in his first Book de materia prima,
cap. 2. and thus of an Egg which is no Chick, a Chick; and of Wood which is no
Statue, a Statue; and of Potters Clay a Pot they say is made, and that
Generation is a passage from a Privative to a Positive Essence.

But in good deed, thus going to work they have not sufficiently explained the
Doctrine of the Generation of things, nor have they sufficiently laid down the
Causes of Generation. For in the first place those examples which they bring of
Artificial things, as when a stool or statue is made of Wood, a Pot of Potters
Clay, a Globe of Wax, and such like, are all to be rejected: seeing they are
not produced by operation Natural, but are the works of Art. Moreover, although
we should admit a Contrariety in things Natural, in regard of their forms, by
which many actions and Sympathies and Antipathies are caused, as Water is
contrary to Fire, and Plants are killed by the Cold; yet from that very
Contrariety a Cause of the Generation of al things cannot be rendered, nor is
that Generation which is primarily intended, accomplished by the Action of
Contraries; and therefore it cannot be granted that contrary Principles must be
constituted for every Generation. For that a Sheep produces a Sheep, a Plum
produces a Plum, does not proceed from the Action of Contraries.

And therefore although the Expositors of Aristotle having canvassed the matter
to and fro concerning the Contrariety of Principles, do at last conclude, That
one Contrary is not made of another, as of the term from whence, but that one
Contrary is made after another; as for example, Cold after Hot; yet that term
infers no causality, and affords nothing to the production of the thing, and
therefore cannot be called a contrary Principle.

Chap. 3. Of the Form.
ANd therefore besides the Matter, the Form the principal Cause of Generation.
our great Care must be to find out a Principle which is the efficient Cause
and principal Agent in the Generation of al things. Verily (that I may not seem
injurious to Aristotle) I must needs confess, that he in Lib. 4. de Ort. and
Interit. cap. 9. text. 53. etc. as also in the end of the 4. of Meteors,
reprehends the Ancients, because they did teach the Generation of things to be
caused by the first Qualities, too instrumentally, omitting the Cause taken
from the Form, and doing just as if a man should attribute to the Saw, Hatchet,
and such like Instruments, the things made by them. But I could wish that in
the beginning of his Physics he had made larger mention of that Cause, or at
least that his Expositors had from other places of his Works explained what
Aristotle taught in his Acroamaticks concerning the Principles of Natural
things. For so doubtless they would have enquired thereinto, and would not have
been so content with the action of contrary Principles, and taught that the
Generations of things were so instrumentally performed by them. Yea, and it
were to be wished that Aristotle himself had been more sollicitous about that
Cause, or had more largely explained the same, and not extended too far the
action of the first Qualities. At the end indeed of the 4. of his Meteors he
plainly lays open his mind; where he attributes the Generation of similar
parts in Animals to the action of the first Qualities, but the Generation of
the dissimilar parts alone he attributes to a superior Agent, while he thus
writes: Such parts happen to be made by Heat and Cold and their motions; being
compacted by the power of Heat and Cold. Now I mean those parts which are
similar, as Flesh, Bones, Hairs, Nerves, and all that are like to these. For
they are al diffinguished by those differences which we mentioned before, viz.
Tension, Drawing, Comminution, Hardness, Softness, and others of the same kind.
For such parts I say are made by heat and cold and mixed motions. But no man can
imagine that the dissimilar parts, as the Head, or Hand, or Foot, are
constitured of them: but as the motion of Cold and Heat is the Cause why Brass
or Silver are made, but not of the making of a Saw, Glafsbottle, or Box; but of
these Art, of the other Nature, or some other Cause: and so it will be thought
to be the cause that those things are made. But whether this Doctrine of
Aristotle be perfectly current, I leave to the Reader to judge. Galen (truly)
and other Physicians ascribe not only the Formation of the dissimilar parts to
the Soul; but also they attribute thereto a blood-making, flesh-making,
bone-making, nerve-making Faculty; and doubtless they are therein in the right.
And who can believe that Gold, Silver, Iron, are generated principally and
solely by Heat and Cold; and that the efficiency of the Form is not added.
Moreover, neither has he sufficiently declared what that specific cause is in
the Generation of things, but neglecting the same he often runs to the
Universal Cause. For in his Book de Generat. and Corrup. cap. 10. and the
following Chapters, he makes no mention thereof, but after he has rejected the
Opinions of the Ancients, and would produce his own, he flies to the Motion of
the Heaven; and after he has taught that the Motion of Heaven is perpetual,
thence he concludes by way of Consequence, That rather that which is should be
the Cause of that which is not, than that which is not the Cause of that which
is; and that that which always is, should make and produce that which is not
and is generated. But at the beginning of the World, neither did the motion of
Heaven make things Sublunary, nor now being only an universal Cause does it
produce the sorts of things. For God in the first Creation gave to things their
Forms, The first Original of Forms.
by which the Order of Generation is continued and perfected; and these Forms
are justly held to be the Agent Principle, and as the Expositors of Aristotle
themselves do hold, have a power to multiply themselves; and all the Generation
of Natural things depends upon the multiplication and propagation of Souls, by
reason of the Faculty which by the Almighty power of God was put into them at
the first Creation, when God said, Genesis 1.11. Let the Earth bring forth Grass,
the Herb yielding seed, and the Fruit-tree yielding Fruit after his kind, whose
seed is in it self upon the Earth: and it was so. And the Earth brought forth
Grass, and the Herb yielding seed after his kind, and the Tree yielding Fruit,
whose seed was in it self, after its kind. And in verse 22. he said to the
Fishes and Birds; Increase and multiply, and fill the Waters in the Seas, and
let Fowl multiply in the Earth. And God made the Beast of the Earth after his
kind, and every thing that creeps on the Earth after his kind: and God saw
that it was good. And to Mankind he said, verse 28. Increase and multiply, and
fill the Earth. Also in verse 29. Bebold I have given you every Herb bearing
seed, which is upon the face of all the Earth, and every Tree in which is the
fruit of a Tree yielding seed, But as to the manner of Generation; The
generation of Plants and Animals does sufficiently declare, that their
Generation is not caused by the action of contraries one upon another, but by
the communication of Souls, or by Seed which perfects the Fabric of its own
body, not primarily by the action of contraries, but by attraction of things
friendly and of kin, and the expulsion of things having Enmity. For, that the
body of some Plant or Animal is made, does not come to pass by the only
concourse and fighting of the Elements. For except, as J. Caesar Scaliger, in
Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. rightly teaches, Those four Elements have a Governor,
they will both toss and be tossed rashly without manner or measure. For what is
that which mixes just so much Earth, and so much of the other Elements? But
there ought to be in every motion one first mover. For they cannot move
themselves to the Production of any work; but in Compounds they are moved by
the more excellent Form to Generation, and in imperfect mixed Bodies by an
external Principle they are moved to a mutual connection. For instance, when the
Seeds of Plants are cast into the ground, the Elements do not then begin to
fight that they may make the Body of a Plant, but each particular seed draws
out of the Earth such nourishment as is to its own Nature agreeable, some that
which is harsh, others that which is bitter, sweet, salt, as Hippocrates writes
in his Book de Natura Humana: whence the whole Plant is formed, nourished, and
attains to its growth.

Yea, and even Aristotle himself when he treats of Generation, The first
Qualities are only an instrumental Agent in Generation.
cannot rest in the first Qualities, but is compelled to ad an higher Agent,
viz. The Soul, even in the Generation of the similar parts, whiles in 2. de
Generat. Animal. cap. 1. he writes: Even as we do not say that an Hatchet or
other Instrument is made by the fire alone: So neither the Foot nor the Hand,
no nor so much as the Flesh. For it also has some office. Hardness therefore
and softness, clamminess, stifness, and whatever other dispositions are in the
parts animated, may be produced by heat and coldness: but that whereby it is
Flesh or a Bone cannot: but it is so made by a motion proceeding from the
Generator, which is actually that thing, which the thing whereof Generation is
made is potentially or by way of aptitude; as we see it is also in things
Artificial. For Iron is made bard or soft by cold or heat; but a Sword is made
by the motion of Artificial Instruments, which motion has in it the Nature of
the Art. For Art is the Principle and Form of that which is effected, but in
another. But the motion of Nature is in is self, proceeding from another
Nature, which has the Form actually. And as was said but even now, in 2. de
Generat. and Corrupt. cap. 9. text. 53, 54, 55. he reckons Heat, Cold, and such
like Qualities for Instruments, and says they generate after a very
Instrumental manner; and he writes that such as attribute Generation to them,
do just as if a man should make a Saw, Ax, or any other Instrument the Cause of
all those things made thereby.

And just so it is with the Elements. Whence the Elements have their forms.
For when God first created the Heaven and the Earth, he first separated the
Elements, and distinguished the Earth from the Water, and so gave the Elements
their forms. That therefore is false which Zabarella endeavors to teach out of
Aristotle Lib. 1. de Element. cap. 8. 9. (where he pitifully beats his Brains
and vexes himself, and yet cannot make it appear how the first Qualities which
flow from their forms can be before them; nor does he seek after Truth in the
thing it self, but how he may find such an Opinion as the words of Aristotle
can bear) that this Elementary world has nothing of it self but Aptitude or
Potentiality; and whatever it has of act, it receives from the Heavens; and
that the whole matter of this inferior world is potentially Hot, Cold, Moist,
Dry; but is actually made such by Immobility the motion and of the Heavens;
growing hot by the motion of Heaven, and cold by the want of that motion; and
that after the first Qualities (which are the preparations for the eduction of
Forms) the forms of the Elements do follow, and that so the Elements are made
and continue such (according to the Opinion of Aristotle) from Eternity. The
holy Scriptures, as has been said, do teach us better that the Elements were
created at the Beginning, and that all things have their matter and forms
whereby they differ one from another, and whereby they are able to operate,
from the first Creation, and preserve the same to this very day, by the good
will and pleasure of the good and great God.

From all which it appears, that God in the first Creation gave to all natural
Bodies their matter and Form. To which if some would afford their
Consideration, they would think otherwise than they do concerning the original
of Forms. For it is an opinion sufficiently common, Whether Forms are drawn out
of the aptitode of the Matter?
for which some plead as if their Life and Salvation lay on it, that forms are
drawn out of the power or aptitude of the Matter, which is nevertheless built
upon no sure Reasons, as I have showed in my Epitomy of Natural Philosophy,
Book 1. Chap. 3. and as I shall show hereafter in my Fourth Discourse touching
the Original of living things, chap. 4. Here I shall add nothing, but that this
Opinion had its original from the Ignorance of the Creation of the world. For
since they knew not whence all natural things should receive their forms, and
that they had by command of the Creator a power to multiply themselves; they
invented this original of them. Most indeed do give this out for an
Aristotelick tenet, but with Bon-Amicus and others, Dr. Casper Hofmannus, a man
excellently verl'd in Aristotle, says it is a tener of Averrboes, in Tract. de
Origin Form. near the end. Yet the said Hofmannus in the same place does
produce some texts out of Averrhoes, wherein he holds the efficient cause of
Generation to be the form contained in the Seed: so that the foresaid Tenet
seems rather to have had its original from the Schoolmen. Aristotle is verily
of another mind in this point, who though he admits the Heaven as an universal
Cause, yet he adds an immediate Cause, when he writes, that the Sun and Man
generate a man. And in 2. Phys. cap. 3. text 31. he has these words expressly
concerning Seed: The Seed and the Physician, and the Consulter, and whatever,
is Efficient, all these are the Causes whence the Beginning of Mutation, of
Rest and Motion does proceed. And Scaliger produces more such Places in
Exercit. 6. sect. 2. of which also mention is made hereafter, where we shall
speak of the Generation of Living things.

Now two things chiefly brought the Schoolmen into this Opinion: Whence that
Opinion arose, of drawing Forms out of the aptitude of the Matter.
the first it that they believed, as was said before from Zabarella, Lib. 1. de
Element. Qualitat. cap. 9. and as they indeed suppose, according to the mind of
Aristotle, Lib. 1. Meteor. cap. 4. that this Elementary world has nothing of
it self but aptitude or potentiality; and that whatever it has of act, it
receives from Heaven; and if at any time all the Elements were at first
generated, and began to be what they are, they were generated by the Heavens;
and because according to Aristotle Generation never began, that they are
perpetually made and preserved such by the Heavens.

The other is because they endeavored to prove their natural Principles by
examples drawn from the production of things natural (which kind of Examples
though Aristotle has used in his Physics and Metaphysics, yet we must think
he intends thereby only to illustrate, not to prove that Doctrine:) for when
they saw a Statue or Image made by the Carvers paring somewhat off, and adding
if need were somewhat, and that when the Artificer had done his work at last,
the very moment he leaves off the Form results from all that has been done:
they thought after the same manner, that by the action of some external Agent
(yet what that Agent should be they have not clearly enough explained, lurking
under the general term of Nature, whereas a specific cause ought to be rendered
of every specific Effect) some disposition was brought into the matter, upon
the final perfection whereof the form sprung up in a moment: and they said that
it was drawn out of the power or aptitude of the matter. But they were herein
in a very great Error: The difference betwixt Artificial and natural Effects.
For when of Wood a Bench is made, or a Statue; or a Jug is made of Earth, a
Globe of Wax, there is nothing induced but a certain Accident, Quality or
Shape, and there is then no power of the matter save obediential. But here the
Question is concerning the original of a Substance. Yet the Production of even
artificial things might have brought them to the knowledge of the generation of
natural things if they would have weighed the matter more accurately. For as
artificial things are produced by an actual Agent, according to a determinate
Idea in the mind of the Artificer, and so every thing is not made by every
Artist, but a Carver makes one kind of work, a Box-maker makes another kind: a
Carpenter makes another: so also to the generation of every natural thing a
determinate and specificial Agent is requisite, and one that is an Agent
actually which according to the Power given it by its Creator (as the Artist
works according to the Idea or Pattern in his mind) makes a work like it self.
Herein only is the difference, that the Artist in the artificial generation is
without the matter: but in things natural, the Artist is in the matter, and
diffused through the matter as Galen speaks, de Causis procat. and Causis
pulsuum. Nor can any external thing, whatever they shall seign, be admitted for
a determinate cause, since none is like unto and (as they say) univocal to the
thing generated, or has at least that similitude to the thing generated which
the Pattern in the mind of the Artist has to his work, be it Statue, Pot,
Bench, or what ever. For indeed Nature is an intrinsecal Art; Art an
extrinsecal Nature. Now Nature has this Art from God, the footsteps and
Prints of whose wildom appear every where, in Men, in Bees, in Primites, in the
leaves and flowers of Trees, and al natural things whatsoever upon which the
Creator has imprinted his Image when he gave them Forms. For every Form is a
participation and Image (after its manner) of the Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and Love of God: and every Being or thing, by its form, has a desire
to be, a Knowledge how to be, and a Power to be. And all things natural have by
their forms whatever they have, and from the form proceeds the whole Fabric of
the Body, and the ornament of Accidents; and many Qualities which are vulgarly
ill attributed to the mixture of the Elements and the temper of tangible
Qualities do flow from the Form, and all the furniture of the Body proceeds
from the Form, as I shall hereafter show more at large in the 4. and 6.
Discourses of this work.

And although in the Forms of things we meet with many Particulars worthy of
admiration: The Proprieties of Forms.
yet forms have chiefly three Proprieties which are diligently to be observed:
The first is, that the Form of it self has no Quantity, not can it be divided;
and the same can be as essentially entire and complete in a small Quantity, as
in a great Bulk; and in the smallest Atome or indivisible Particle of Fire, or
Water, is as perfect as in a great Quantity of either; and in a small Seed of
Poppy or Tobacco, as in a great Plant of either; or to avoid all occasion of
cavilling, in a little Sprig spouting from an Aco^^ set in the Ground, the form
of an Oak is as perfect and complete as in the tall and hard Oak afterward:
nor is the Soul which is in a small Seed or Shoot, lesser than that which is
afterward in a tall Tree: nor is that in an high Tree greater than that in a
small Seed or Branch.

Secondly, Yet is the form extended according to the extension of the Matter,
or rather the form fills its whole Matter: For whereas, that I may demonstrate
this by the Example of Plants, the whole Body of the Plant lives, is noutished,
grows; the soul which was as first in a small Twig, diffuses it self (its nature
becoming no bigger) into the nourishment newly adjoined; and where ever the
Body is which lives, there the Soul is rightly said to be; and the plenitude
(if I may so speak) or Replency of the Soul is just so great as the living
body, and the dimensions thereof. For since no act is performed without some
primary Agent; where ever there is nutrition, there of necessity the Soul must
be. And because Augmentation is made, when the pre-existent Soul communicates
it self to the affluent Aliment, whose Bulk reaches further than the Body which
is nourished, and diffuses or sheds is self abroad thereinto; of necessity it
must be present in every part of the whole Body. After the same manner the case
stands in Animals. For since they are nourished, increased, and endued with the
gift of feeling; the soul which is but one, must of necessity be in all parts
of the Body.

Thirdly, But although every form be of it self incapable of being divided or
parted, yet because it is coextended or stretched out together with a corporeal
body, which has Quantity, by the division thereof it becomes capable of
number, and is multiplied intomany Individuals, and every form has the Power
of self-multiplication. Howbeit the manner of that multiplication is not one
and the same. In some Plants in which the seminal matter is dispersed through
their whole Bodies, the soul though of it self not subject to Quantity, is
divided after a manner peculiar to it self according to the division of the
Matter, and being actually but one in number is manifold potentially, that it
has in it a fitness, power, or aptitude to become many and becomes actually
manifold, when its Body is divided into many parts; of one Vine many Vines, and
of one Willow or Withy many may be made. But in others this same Multiplication
is caused by Seed: of which we shall speak more at large in our Discourse of the
Generation of living Things.

Chap. 4. Of Privation.
I must here also ad somewhat concerning Privation, which is reckoned amongst
the Principles of natural things. Privation.
Since the original of the form is such, as has been explained just now, and
shall be hereafter explained more at large; Privation unless the nature thereof
be rightly opened, is in vain reckoned amongst the Principles of things
natural. The very Expositors (truly) of Aristotle themselves do grant, that
Privation is not a Principle, otherwise than by accident, if you regard the
thing it self constituted: but if you consider the Generation thereof, it is of
it self a Principle, viz. because it is as a Term from which, (since it is the
absence of the form in the immediate Matter) which has an aptitude to receive
the same: Which opinions if they are to be allowed, they do stand altogether in
need of a convenient explication. For that which is wont commonly to be said,
that Privation though it belong not of it self to the Essence of things to be
generated, yet it concurs of it self to natural Mutations, and from it all
natural Generation proceeds, so that the form does (as it were) arise thereout;
that is false. The absence of the form helps nothing to the Generation; but
besides the matter a disposition to receive the form is necessary. For every
Form and Soul, since from the divine Benediction it has a faculty to multiply
it self, it requires a matter wherein to be propagated, and it disposes and
fits the same for it self. Plants (for example sake) produce Seeds or bulbous
roots, and Eg-engendring Creatures produce Eggs, other living Creatures produce
seed, by which they are able to multiply themselves and to communicate somewhat
of their Essence. If they please to term this disposition Privation, they shall
have my consent. But they do not clearly enough explain how the Form follows
Privation, and whence it proceeds. The Conimbricensian Collegiates do say
indeed, Lib. 1. Phys. cap. 9. Quest. 9. art. 2. that the matter then only
attains an immediate and complete aptitude, when it is arrived to the Term and
Fullness of all the Accidents wherewith it is disposed and fitted by the Agent,
which term betides only in the very moment it self of Generation. And very true
(indeed) it is, that disposition of the matter whereby it is fit for the
multiplcation of the form is made in time, and at last perfected in a moment,
nor can the Seed of a Pear or an Apple be termed properly a Seed, til the
accomplishment of the accidents is present. But the Form is not absent while
these previous dispositions are made, so as to result, upon their
accomplishment; but it is already present, and it self according to the nature
of the Body whereof it is a form, fits the matter wherein it may multiply it
self, and elaborates the same, and in this elaboration some space of time is
spent, more or less according to the Nobleness or Baseness of the Forms: but
when it has introduced the utmost perfection and accomplishment into the
matter, just then the Form which before had a power to multiply it self, does
multiply it self actually; as for example sake, in a Poppy look how many seeds
are generated, so many times does the form of the Poppy multiply it self, and
so new Plants of Poppy are generated. The soul in an unripe seed is not
different from that in the same seed when it is ripe; but herein lies the
difference, that the seed unripe lives only with the soul of the Plant; and
being separated from the Plant wherein it was bred it cannot exist of it self:
but a perfect and ripe seed is so disposed, that though it may be separated
from the Plant wherein it is produced, yet it has the same soul in it self,
and lives now by its own soul, so that it can exist by it self. Of which matter
J. Caes. Scaliger says rightly, Exercit. 6. sect. 10. A Tree (says he)
engenders, when it produces seed. But the Tree is not then generated when it
sprouts out of the seed; but then that which was formerly engendered and
imperfect, is perfected. But if any man will thus explain the vulgar Doctrine of
Privation, and say that after the matter has received al its accomplishment of
Accidents, then there is a Privation, and that then afterward in a moment the
Form is introduced by an external Agent, that man is very much out, as shall
hereafter be largely declared in its place; and it is sufficiently proved by
Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 6. Sect. 5.

To be brief: In the first place, The Nature of Privation explaingd.
Privation (however it be explained) does not belong to al Natural things, but
to such alone in which there is Generation, and therefore it cannot be numbered
amongst the most general Principles of Natural things. For in the Heavens there
is no Privation properly so called. For since it supposes a subject having
aptitude to another Form, there is no such aptitude in Heaven.

Secondly, Privation (which also the Expositors of Aristotle themselves do
teach, as may be seen in Tolet. Lib. 1. Phys. cap. 9. Quest. 21.) is not a
Principle of Constitution, or which enters the thing generated, to help make it
up, but of Generation.

Thirdly, Though it should be admitted for a Principle of Generation; yet they
who maintain the Doctrine of the Eduction of Forms out of the aptitude of the
matter, cannot conveniently show what Privation is. But if we hold the
multiplication and propagation of Forms, Privation may (not unfitly) be
explained two manner of ways.

First of all, Since Forms are propagated not without Matter, but with it, and
every Form requires a peculiar matter; that same last disposition to the
reception and propagation of the Form may (not altogether unfitly) be called
Privation: and it may be thus defined. Privation is the absence of a Form in a
Matter which is immediately fitted to receive the same. To explain the thing by
Examples: In a Stone there is no aptitude to receive the form of an Apple, or
of a Dog; and therefore we do not say there is the Privation of the form of an
Apple or a Dog. So neither is the Soul of a Dog propagated with his Blood, nor
the form of an Apple with the pulp or meat thereof, but with the seed. And
seeing the seed is not generated in a moment; for examples sake: The seed in an
Apple is first white, and then it becomes black and ripe, and apt to receive
the Soul of an Apple into it, and also to retain the same, being separated from
the Tree: in the seed already ripe, and which has already in it the soul of an
Apple, Privation is not said to be because the Soul is already therein; but in
that same seed which is just ready to ripen and is immediately fitted to
receive the Soul, and to retain it, though it be separated from the Tree,
Privation is said to be; and then Privation is that same ultimate disposition
of the seed whereby it is fitted to receive and propagate the form of an Apple.

Secondly, Because nevertheless in that same ripe seed the Soul is present, at
least in its first act, and because it wants Organs is not vulgarly called an
Apple Tree, as an Egg is not called an Hen for the same Reason: If any man by
reason of the absence of those Organs necessary to perform the actions of an
Apple Tree or an Hen, shall call that disposition which is in the animated seed
and Egg, to receive the Organs, and exercise the actions by a second act,
Privation; and hold that in the Eg there is the Privation of an Hen, because
there is therein an immediate aptitude to become an Hen, consisting of a Soul
and perfect Body, I will not quarrel or contend with that man; provided he
grant, that in such a Seed and Egg there is not simply a privation of the Soul,
since it is there not the first act, but the Privation of a Soul surnished with
bodily Organs necessary to perform its actions.

And truly, I see the most learned Aristoteleans when they perceive the Tenet
of Aristotle cannot be otherwise explained or defended, they can find in their
hearts to embrace this Opinion. It is one and the same thing they say, which
Aristotle names Privation, and which also he names the Form, whose absence,
after its manner, is Privation, viz. In a diverse respect. Scaliger, Exercit. 6.
Sect. 5. There is in the Seed the forming Soul, going before the Soul for which
it prepartes that House; or as Zabarella, in his B. de facult. anim. cap. 11.
speaks, the animated seed is a certain Matter cut off by the Animal it self
which ingenders, retaining an active power able to generate a like Animal. For
the seed of a Man has an implanted force in it, whereby (as Aristotle says,
2. Phys.) the Humane Nature is not as it were a Form, but as an Artificer, or
immediate Agent. And therefore (in the former respect) it is an internal
Principle of the thing to be formed; and although it do not inform that
compound which yet is not; yet it informs the Seed so as to give it the name of
a Man's seed, a Dogs seed, an Horses seed, etc. And therefore Aristotle calls
Privation the Form as it were 2 Phys. cap. 1. t. 15. in respect of the form
considered after the latter manner, viz. of the Compound. Inasmuch therefore as
it disposes the Matter, and is the Architect of the parts to be formed out of
the seed, so far it is termed Privation. And it is in reality a substance, and
it is only termed a Non Ers, or a Non-being, in respect of the Form which shall
animate the parts generated out of the seed. For it has not yet the Office of
a form. So that passage in Lib. 2. de Generat. animal. cap. 1. is to be
understood with a grain of Salt, where Aristotle tells us, that the Soul is
potentially in the seed. For as the parts of the Body are not actually in the
seed: so neither is the Soul in the Seed as a Form, so as to give Essence to
the parts of the compound, which are to be framed out of the Seed. Mean while
it is actually in the Seed, as a principle of acting, that the living thing may
be generated, as Aristotle professedly discourses in the foresaid place. To
which purpose also Julius Caesar Scaliger in Exercitat 6. Sect. 5. thus writes.
Concerning this matter we are thus to think: That the Form is in the seed of a
Dog, in the aptitude whereof it is said to be; because the Seed is able to give
that Form which it has in it self. Now it is reduced out of that remote
aptitude which is the first act, to a near aptitude which is the second act,
viz. That the Form may be in the same Matter after such a manner as to need no
helps to enjoy its end for which the whole Compound is ordained. It must
therefore be declared after what manner it is brought forth by preparation; in
case the Form it self be author of that preparation. For the Form does both
alter the whole, and order the parts for its own accommodation. The Form
therefore should draw it self forth. Therefore they said not well; That when it
shall attain the greatest perfection of preparation, then also it shall arrive to
the substantial Form. For the Form it self exists before that: therefore it
does not arrive to it, but to the act thereof, whereby it may afterward enjoy
the use and benefit thereof. After which manner i^ any man will explain
Privation, I willingly shall allow thereof. Yet this is certain, That the vulgar
Doctrine of Education of Forms cannot stand with this Opinion.

Chap. 5. Of the Consent and Dissent of things Natural.
NOw as the Forms are the first Cause of al Actions; so in regard of their
Forms there is a Consent and Dissent of al Natural Things, There is a Consent
and Dissent of Natural things.
and some things have a friendly apperite one to another, and unite themselves;
others are averse one to another, and fly one from another. For things like do
exceedingly covet Union. For that which is not one is not at all. So, that
which is separated from its like seems also to defraud the same, and that it is
defrauded thereby of the compleatness (as it were) of its Essence; for I do not
say they are two fires, but one divided: As Scaliger writes, Exercit. 310 Sect.
2. Seeing therefore every thing requires its own Conservation; it attains the
same by shunning things contrary, by moving to things like, and by drawing like
things unto it self. Hence Fire uni^es to Fire, but flies from Water; and Water
unites to Water, but flies Fire. Hence Water sprinkled in the Air or on dust
gathers it self into round drops like balls to defend it self from the Earth
and Air. Hence a small flame is most swiftly drawn to a greater, or a little
flame does move it self to a greater. The same is done in the Air. Hence those
Bubbles which are made on the Water do move one to another, and so much the
faster by how much they are nearer. So (as Pliny writes, Lib. 2. cap. 105.)
Naphtha is of great kin to Fire, and the Fire leaps to it if it come near the
same. So they report Medea burnt het Rival, her Garland taking Fire as she came
to the Altar to Sacrifice. Hence we see that if Water be sprinkled into boiling
Oil or Tallow, or melted Lead or Antimony, the fire flies from the water as an
Enemy, raises a flame and mounts aloft; so that sometimes water poured into
boiling Oil or Tallow, has been the occasion of setting Houses on fire. And
here Hieronyinus Fracastorius is of a different mind, who in his Book de
Sympath. and Antipath. cap. 5. dentes that one thing is moved to another by
reason of similitude, so that it may be united hereto and preserved; because
the part separated can neither by knowledge, nor by Nature, be moved to its like
part. And that it knows not, he thinks it a clear case. But without Reason. A
Natural Appetite, and a Natural Knowledge.
For as there is a certain Natural Appetite which they commonly call Instinct
Natural: so there is a certain natural knowledge distinct from sense and
understanding. For nothing can seek after any thing as pleasing, or sly it as
displeasing, unless it have some natural knowledge of the gratefulness and
fitness of the one, and the ungratefulness and unfitness of the other. For
nothing is desired that is not first known. By this kind of knowledge Plants do
know such Nutriment as is fit for them, desire and draw the same to them; and
what is unconvenient for them they let alone; and that which they have drawn,
they turn some of it into Bark, other some into Fruit, other some into other
parts. Of which Hippocrates, de Not. humana, text. 31. Suco things as grow and
are sown, when they come into the Earth, every one draws that which in the
Earth is most familiar thereto, as there is bitter, sweet, sour, and all kinds.
So in the Crisis of Diseases, by a Natural Knowledge Nature knows and expels a
vicious humor, and retains the good and profitable. By this Natural Knowledge
Nature many times seeks strange and hidden ways to expel humors. And amongst
the principles of the Nature of things Galen re^ckons this also from
Hippocrates, 1. de facult. not. cap. 12. That Nature performs al things
artificially and justly, as being furnished with Faculties whereby all the small
particles do draw convenient juice to themselves, and when it is drawn they
make it grow and stick to every part, and at last assimilate the same; and what
in the mean while they have not been able to vanquish, and that which will
receive no alteration, nor become any ways like the thing which is to be
nourished; that they reject by another faculty, viz. the separative. And in the
same place, Lib. 3. cap. 13. he writes: That all the particles of the whole Body
have a power to draw to themselves that which is agreeable and friendly to
them, and to force back that which is burdensome and biting. And therefore
Fracastorius labors in vain to show how by a certain violence such things as
are separated one from another may be again joined together. Now although this
Natural Consent and Dissent of things does spring primarily from their forms:
yet because the Forms do act by Qualities; some things also consent or dissent
by manifest Qualities, as Water and Fire, and others by occult or secret
Qualities, of which we shall speak hereafter.

And from this Consent and Dissent of things Natural a reason may be given of
many things which happen in Chemistry and Physic, and every where in the
world. Examples of the Consent and Dissent of things.
Salt things are mixed with salt, and dissolved by salt things; Oils mingled
with Oily, Fat, and Sulphuteous things. For examples sake, Aqua fortis
dissolves Metals, yet can it not dissolve Brimstone: contrariwise, Brimstone is
dissolved in Oil which cannot dissolve Metals. So Gums and Sulphurous fatty
Tears of Plants are dissolved by Oil; but such things as are of a warry
substance are dissolved by Wine and Water, not by Oils. It Is a common Practice
for a man that has fouled his Hands with Pitch not to wash them in Water, but
in Oil or Grease, which will dissolve the Pitch. And every where in the
compostition of Medicaments such things occur, especially in the making
Plasters, which if the Apothecary be ignorant of, he will lose both his labor
and materials. Precipitation.
Also precipitations so called do afford a rare document hereof; when Gold,
Silver, Corals, Peatls, Crab's-eyes, and such like, are dissolved and
precipitated. To speak only of Corals and Pearls; for examples sake (for the
same reason holds in all) these Bodies are dissolved by the Salt of distilled
Vinegar, or the like sharp Liquor, whereunto that same Body in regard of
affinity is so joined and united by the most subtle Atoms, that it may be
strained through a brown paper. To this Liquor (containing in it the Body of
Corals and Pearls) if you drop in Oil of Tartar made by deliquium, or Oil of
Vitriol, the Salt of Solvent Liquor unites it self to the Oil of Tattar or
Vitriol by reason of affinity, and leaves the dissolved Body; which being so
left unto it self, descends to the bottom by its Natural heaviness, which they
call precipitating. Also how great the force of Gunpouder is there is no man
ignorant; and that proceeds only from the antipathy that is betwixt Brimstone
and Salt-peeter. From the same proceed Lightnings, Thunders, and Thunderbolts.
For if in the Globe of the Earth Sulphurous, Nitrous, and watery Vapors are at
once raised aloft, in the lowermost Region (truly) of the Air, where it
compasses us about, being dispersed into very small atoms, they fight not
together: but when in the Clouds the fiery atoms or particles are joined with
fiery, the sulphurous with sulphurous, the watery with watery, at last resuming
Courage on both fides they fight furiously, and both fly from, and chase away
their Enemy. Hence the Fire shunning the Water Lightens out of the Clouds. From
this Fight rumblings and Thunder-cracks are raised, and that same Fiery and
Sulphurous Spirit breaking out of the Clouds melts, burns, or throws down
whatever it meets with. Also there is a vulgar example hereof in Quicklime,
upon which if Water be poured, the fiery atoms which lay hid therein flying
the water as their Enemy do break forth. Whereupon being collected they have
raised so great heat, that they have been known to set on fire some wood that
was at hand. Also if you put Spirit of Nitre to Butter of Antimony, or Oil of
Vitriol to the filings of Steel or Iron, there arises a boiling and a noise,
yea, and a flame too. Where nevertheless it is to be noted, That it is credible
that this same boiling is not caused only by the fight of Contraries, but also
by the sudden motion of like parts to like. Also from this Consent and Dissent
of Natural things many Questions in Physic may be answered, The cure of
persons burnt, and such as are frozen with cold.
and Controversies composed. That Burns are cured by burning things, viz. by
holding ones burnt hand against the fire, or by smearing the burned parts with
Linseed Oil, or an Ointment made of Onions; and parts nummed with cold, by
rubbing them with Snow, or dipping them in cold water; and that Apples or Eggs
being frozen, are cured by putting them in cold Water: all these effects happen
because hot things draw hot things to themselves, and cold things draw cold
things. The temper of Camphire.
Also Physicians dispute about the temper of Camphire, while the Ancients say
it is cold, and most late Writers hold that it is hot. Howbeit the taste and its
aptness to burn do so manifestly convince it to be hot, that I wonder any man
can doubt thereof. The only thing which persuaded others that it was cold, is
because it does cool. But this it does, not of it self, but by accident, viz.
Whiles it draws the fiery and sulphurous atoms, out of the Body unto it self,
by reason of similitude: which the flowers and water of Elder do in the Rose or
fiery Inflammation so called, as also Oil mixed with Lie.

Chap. 6. Of the Matter of Natural Things.
NOw, as God created all the Forms, so he gave unto them Matter, such as was
fitting for every Form; and that there might be an interchangable course of
things, and always fit matter for sundry Forms, God created the Heaven and the
Elements. The Heavens, that by their Influence they might cherish and govern
the Generations of inferior Bodies; and the Elements as simple Bodies, which by
their actions might further the interchangable course of Generations and
Corruptions, also might afford matter to living Bodies.

But whether there are yet other simple Bodies besides the Elements, Whether
there is ^^y other matter of Bodies besides the Elements?
which may afford matter to living things, is made a Question, not without
cause. With the Peripateticks indeed it is out of question, that there are in
this sublunary World no simple Bodies but the Elements; and that of them al
others are compounded. Howbeit, many have doubted hereof, and that not without
cause. Johan. Francisc. Picus Mirandulanus, in his Book of Elements, chap. 3.
writes: If there be any that will not content themselves with the Opinion and
Authority of the Philosophers, and will maintain that there are yet some other
Elements mixed with those vulgarly known, which by a secret power of Nature
concur to the constitution of sublunary things, they can hardly be
substantially refuted. And Jacobus Schegkius, in his Book of the Power and
Efficacy of Heat, chap. 4. writes, That every Body is either an Element, or
compounded of Elements, or has some proportion and similitude with the Bodies
Celestial. And that he had out of Aristotle, who in 2. de Generat. Animal.
cap. 3. writes, That the heat in living things is neither fire, not has its
Original from fire, but is of analogy to the Heavenly Matter. But what the Body
is, and whence it had its Original, cannot be explained without the Creation of
the World. But from the Creation of the World all these things are clear. For
God did not at first command the Elements to fight together, to make up mixed
Bodies, of which afterward Plants and living things were to be made; but as he
gave to Plants and Animals their Forms and Souls, so he gave unto each of them
their peculiar Bodies. Which although (for I will not now dispute that point)
they may be constituted of the Elements as to their matter: yet that there
should be nothing in them but Elements, and that the forms of these Bodies are
Elementary, and that the Souls of Living Creatures are received in a Body
simply constituted of the Elements; and that so the Elements considered either
as simples, or as mixed Bodies, should be the immediate subject of Souls, there
is no firm demonstration to prove; not is it yet proved, That that which
Aristotle says holds proportion to the Element of the Stars is a mere compound
of the four Elements so called. For since more noble Forms do require a more
noble Matter (as Aristotle also teaches) the Creator gave to every Form a
convenient Body, each of which receives its nobility and activity from the
Form, which (as Scaliger speaks, Exercitat. 307. Sect. 20.) is a fifth Nature,
far differing from the four Elements. And in very deed, that Spirit which is
inbred in Animals and Plants is a wonderful thing, which first is in a small
quantity of feed, and afterward by means of the Blood flowing in at the first
formation of the young one, and then by the Aliments taken in it is increased to
a great bulk, and goes al over the whole body of an huge Animal, and warms and
enlivens the same so long as the Creature lives. And although this Spirit be of
its own Nature hot, yes, and heat it self, though the admixture of other things
with it makes that it is not discerned, yet is it really in them; and it may be
separated from them, as appears in Spirits made out of Plants. Where this is
also to be noted, That as nothing is nourished but what has life, as Aristotle
teaches, 2. de animal cap. 4. text. 46. so nothing can properly nourish, unless
is be a part, fruit, or effect of a thing animated or endued with a Soul; and
therefore in all aliments there ought to be some of that Spirit which they
vulgarly call Calidum innanem, or inbred heat; and their food does not only
restore the moisture, but the heat also.

Nor do other Bodies which seem to be only mixed and not animated arise from
the mutual fight of the Elements. It is a point of small discretion to believe
that Wine, Oil, Honey, Sugar, do arise from the mutual fight of the Elements.
The truth is, God did not create those things at the Beginning. For there is no
Wine before Vintage, nor Oil til the Olives are gathered, bruised, and pressed;
nor Honey before the Bees make it, nor Milk before living Creatures that bring
forth live young ones become with young. But God created such things in their
Principles, that is to say, he gave a power to the Vine to make such a Liquor
as Wine out of the nutriment it draws out of the Earth, the Olive tree such a
juice as the Oil, a Reed to breed such a juice as we call Sugar; and to the Bees
he gave power to gather juice out of Flowers, and thereof to make Honey; to the
Dugs a faculty to make Milk.

And here the Chemists bring in their Principles, concerning which I have
spoken largely in my Treatise of the Consent and Dissent of the Chemists with
the Galenists and Aristoteleans. That I may say a little of them in this place;
first of al, those who do not simply allow them as Elements, do grant them to
be the first mixed bodies. About which I will contend with no man, if I may but
obtain thus much, that in such a Sense they may be called Principles, because
in the resolution or separation of mixed bodies Art can hardly proceed any
further, yea, and perhaps Nature goes no further, which when she makes a mixed
body does not immediately constitute the same of the last Principles, but
rather of these first mixed bodies: whereof I shall speak more hereafter in my
Third Discourse concerning Mixture. And this is most of al manifest in the
Nourishment of Living Creatures. For neither is the Chylus made immediately of
the Elements, but of Bread, Flesh, Fish, etc. Nor is Blood made of the Elements
immediately, but of Chyle, as we shall show more at large when we come to speak
of Mixture.

Moreover, this also is worthy our Consideration, Whether those first mixed
bodies do consist of the Elements only? or whether they received from God in
the first Creation a Form different from the Forms of the Elements, since God
created not the first matter only, but also the second, and gave every Form its
proper matter and subject, by which they preserve themselves, and remain entire
in the sundry Vicissitudes of Generations, and being variously mixed do afford
matter to other natural things. Truly as the Expositors of Aristotle are too
long in their Disputations of Materia prima or the first matter, so are they
over-sparing in the Consideration of the second Matter, whereas every Form does
nevertheless require its peculiar matter or subject. For neither can every body
be the proper matter and subject of every form, especially of Souls, but in
living Creatures it must be so disposed of necessity as that it have an
immediate aptitude to receive a Soul, and to be converted into the substance of
a living body, and to be nourished by the nutritive faculty. Which disposition
proceeds from the peculiar Forms. Now that there are in Plants and in living
Creatures forms distinct from the Soul, which belong to the proper Constitution
of the Subject of Souls, is also sufficiently manifested by the wonderful
operations of dead Plants, and the parts of dead Creatures in Physic. For
since every action flows primarily from the form, and these actions are more
noble than that they can proceed from the forms of the Elements, There are
Forms super-added to the forms of mixed Bedies.
either simple or mixed; of necessity there are other forms besides the forms
of the Elements, from which these actions proceed; and I see no cause why I may
not call them with Scaliger, a fifth Essence, and the Body wherein they are, with
Aristotle and Schegkius, a thing answering to the Element of the Stars; And
some of Aristotle's Interpreters (among whom Zimara especially) do hold, That
not only Souls are super-added to the Forms of the Elements, but also that the
form of mistion is a fifth form really distinct from the forms of the four
Elements, and superadded to them.

Hence, Whereas they say, That some bodies are simple, others compound, and
that some are more, others less compound; that does not come to pass by reason
of the first matter and Elements, but in respect of the Forms. For since al
mixed Bodies consist of the four Elements, in that respect one is not more
compound than another. But because some forms do presuppose other some, and
cannot perform their operations save in a subject after a certain manner
disposed by other forms: such Bodies which contain diverse forms besides the
Elements are termed Compounds, such as are the Bodies of al living things.
Hence that form is most perfect which has most other forms under its Command.

THE SECOND DISCOURSE. Concerning the occult and hidden Qualities.
Chap. 1. What hidden Qualities are.
SInce to Know is to understand a thing by its Cause, we must labor with all
our might, that in the things of Nature also we may render the true and preper
Causes of all operations and effects. That there are indeed in nature four
Elements, and that they work by their first qualities (so called) which are
obvious to the Sense is a thing out of Question. But there are very many
Effects in Nature which can no ways be referred to those Qualities. And
therefore the most acute Julius Caesar Scaliger in Exercit. 218. sect. 8.
ingenuously and freely writes, that to reduce al Effects in nature to the first
qualities is extreme Impudence. And those who endeavor to do so, it happens to
them as Galen writes of Epicurus and Asclepiades, in Lib. 1. de natural.
facultat. cap. 14. that either they alleadg foolish and ridiculous reasons, or
deny those things which are confirmed even by Experience, and as Thomas Erastus
de occultis medica. proprietat. writes, they get nothing but to be derided by
all that are studious of the truth and knowing in the things of Nature. And
therefore Galen Lib. 11. de simp. med. facultat. when he treats of the virtue
of the ashes of River Crabs against the biting of mad Dogs, acknowledges their
said faculty proceeds altogether from their whole substance, and reprehends his
Master Pelops because he boasted very ambitiously, that he knew the Causes of
all such things; and promises that he would at one time or another write a Book
concerning such things as act by the propriety of their whole substance. And if
there were nothing else to persuade us how vainly and rashly many have
endeavored to reduce all things to the first qualitites, Poisons at least and
their remedies might teach us so much, as the same Scaliger tells us in the
place fore-alleadged. I for my part do freely and boldly pronounce, that there
is hardly any more pernicious opinion, and which has more wearied even the
best wits and worn them out with vain and fruitless labor, than that of those
men who endeavor to assign causes of all things which happen in nature from the
four Elements and natural Qualities. For whether you consider them as simples,
or however mixed and remixed, and however you may suppose their Qualities to be
tempered, nothing can proceed from them but what is Elementary. And it is al
one whether more or fewer come to sup without money, for they must all fast.
But this error has been hithereto sufficiently common, nor has it kept it
self within the bounds of natural Philosophy, but has also crept into Physic,
whiles many men have vainly endeavored to fetch the differences of all
Diseases, their Causes and Symptoms, with the virtues of medicaments, from the
first Qualities.

But in very deed, certain most experienced Physicians have long since
acknowledged this Error and warned others thereof, Fernelius defends occult
Qualities.
amongst the rest Johannes Fernelius, a most excellent Physician, who in two
Books de Abditis rerum Causis, has most learnedly demonstrated, that many
things are, and are performed in Physic, whose causes it is vain to draw from
the temper of the first Qualities. For which excellent pains nevertheless of
his he has gained nothing from some but reproach and backbiting. And no
wonder; for the world is governed by opinions: and many think it not very
honorable, yea and a foul disgrace too, to lay down the Errors they have
unwarily drunk in, and to admit and acknowledge the truth, though it dazzle their
Eyes with its most clear brightness; and therefore whatever they are ignorant
of they esteem as new and false. Mean while all more learned Philosophers and
Physicians have undertook to defend the truth, and have constantly taught, that
the Causes of many things in natural Philosophy and Physic do depend upon
hidden Qualities, and that we are glad oftentimes to fly to the saving
Sanctuary (as Scaliger Exercit. 218. sect. 8. names it) of an occult Propriety:
which whiles it is called ignorance by some, Whether occult Qualities be the
Refuge of Ignorance. The occult qualities cause science.
they rather accuse the weakness of our understandings to dive into the secrets
of Nature, then blame these hidden Qualities. For if the true Original of these
qualities be sought into, (whereof few have taken care) the knowledge thereof
will produce as certain science as that of the first Qualities. For the natural
Philosopher knows no more of Heat, but that it Heats, and that it flows from
and depends upon the form of Fire: which form is to man as unknown as those
forms from whence the hidden qualities arise. For as Scaliger Exercit. 307.
sect. 29. says, The Form is a divine thing, the perfect knowledge whereof is
hidden from us, and therefore to search further is the part of an unquiet and
over-busie mind. And therefore those who traduce these Qualities, by calling
them the Sanctuary of Ignorance are long since worthily refuted by Avicenna,
Lib. de virib. Cordis, tract. 1. cap. 10. when he thus writes: As he that knows
fire warms by reason of the heat therein, truly knows and is not Ignorant: so
he that knows the Lodestone draws Iron because it has a virtue in it whose
nature is to draw Iron, without doubt is knowing, and not Ignorant. And
afterward: The Ignorance of the Causes of this Virtue in the Lodestone is no
whit stranger than the Ignorance of the Causes disposing things be to red or
yellow, or the Body to the Soul. But admiration ceases in things we are used
to, and our mind neglects to enquire concerning them. But that which happens
seldom stirs us up to admiration, and moves us to enquire and contemplate the
causes thereof. And a little after: If that Fire were a thing hard to come by,
and brought from far Countries, People would more admire the properties thereof
than the properties of other Bodies, and more enquire into the Causes of its
proprieties than into the Causes of other Proprieties, because its proprieties
are very wonderful. For the presence thereof brings the sight from aptitude to
act, The wonderful properties of Fire.
and it will not suffer it self to be touched; also it mounts upwards, and
makes such things as it can master to ascend with it, and of a small quantity
thereof in the space of an hour a great quantity is bred; and it corrupts every
thing i^ meets with, and changes it into its own substance; nor is it lessened
though you take some from it. And these things are in truth more wonderful than
the drawing of Iron by the Lodestone, or than other Proprieties. But because
these are usual, and daily seen, we cease to admire them, nor are careful to
enquire into their Causes. But the action of the Loadstone, because it is rare
and unusual, induces to admiration, and provokes men to enquire after its
causes. And indeed if we enquire into the original of these hidden qualities,
there may be had of them as certain knowledge as of those that are manifest. For
in this darkness of humane understanding the form of the Fire is to us as
unknown as that of the Loadstone, and as the Poet sings. Nature's wont to hide
many things with a Sacred cover:
Nor is it fit that mortal men should come to the knowledge
Of all things, since that many are more fit for a wonder.
And so far the truth of things is set from our Eye sight,
That we may hardly be said to know the things we do handle.


Now these Qualities are called Occult, Hidden, Abstruse, the names of occult
Qualities and what they are.
to difference them from the manifest qualities which are discernable by the
external Senses, especially the Feeling; whereas contrariwise these are not
perceivable by the Sense, although their operations are. So we see the
attraction which is made by the Load stone; but we perceive not the qualities
which causes that motion of the Iron. So we perceive with out senses the
evacuation caused by purgative medicaments; but we do not perceive that quality
by which the purging medicaments do work that effect. After the same manner, we
perceive with our Senses the symptoms which Poisons do stir up in our Bodies;
but the qualities whereby they cause the said symptoms we perceive not by the
sense. By our Senses (for example sake) we perceive Heat in the Fire, by means
whereof it heats: but it is not so in those operations which are performed by
occult qualities. We perceive the Actions but not the qualities whereby they
are affected. Hence these qualities are termed hidden and specifical
proprieties, faculties proper to substance; and such Agents are by Galen called
things acted by their whole substance, or by a propriety and familiarity of
their whole substance, 6. Epidem. Com. 6. text. 5. 11. de simpl. med. facult.
and elsewhere.

Chap. 2. Whether there are occult Qualities, and things that act by their
whole Substance.
NOw that there are occult Qualities and actions proceeding from occult
Qualities, It Is moved that there are occult perlities.
is from two things chiefly apparent. The first is, That there are many actions
in Nature which totally differ from the actions of the Elements; The second is,
That the way and manner of the actings of such things as work by occult
Qualities, is far different from that of the Elements.

(...), The (...) ons of occult qualties different from these o^ the manifest
(...).
What the actions of the Elements are, is known, viz. To heat, to cool, to
(...), and such as follow them, to rarefie, make compact etc. But there are
(...) different from these. The Lodestone draws Iron; a Cat (though shut up
(...) does so work upon some people that they are ready to fall into a swoun;
(...) Quality of Opium stupifies a man and brings him into a dead sleep; what
mischief the biting (...) Vipe^, a mad Dog works in our Bodies, almen know;
what strange symp (...) of the Spider Tarantula cause; of which I have spoken
in the (...) my Practice, part. 2. cap. 17. And how great the force is of a
little pestilential Infection, many know to their sorrow. And these Venoms are
not cured by heaters, moist (...) coolers, dryers, but only by such things as
work by occult Qualities. And as was he^^^^ (...) Scaliger, If nothing else
could persuade how vainly and rashly many endeavor to reduce al effects to the
first qualities; at least Poisons and their Remedies might convince us. And a
thousand such actions are every where met with in the course of Nature. Since
therefore such actions are of a quite different kind from the actions of
Elementary Qualities, and surpass their faculties, we do therefore justly
distinguish these Qualities from those which are manifest to the Sense, and
term them occult. Galen knew this, who writes in his 6. Epidemic. Com. 6. text.
5. and 3. de temperament. cap. 4. expressly, that poisons do not at al act
after the self-same manner as fire and water, but by a contrariety of their
whole Nature. And Lib. 5. de simplic. medicam. facult. cap. 1.18, 19. he writes,
That there are some things contrary to us by their whole substance.

Again, Also the manner of acting is different.
The Elements have a much different manner of acting from that of those things
which work by occult Qualities. For the Elements (to exercise their Faculties)
require a sufficient bulk of Body, nor can they exercise their forces in a very
small quantity. For though fire be extremely hot, and Snow extremely cold; yet
as Galen well writes in his 1. de Temperamentis, cap. 4. a very small quantity of
either of these works no effect in our Bodies; yea, bodies so qualified do not
kill a man though taken in a good quantity, whether hot of cold; as Snow,
Pepper, cold Water. Again, they do not work such sudden mutations in the Body.
But some Poisons kill a man in the smallest quantity imaginable, or stir up most
grievous Symptoms, and that in a moment. Of which Galen, Lib. 1. de Semine,
cap. 16. thus writes, The smallest portion of a deadly poison being entered into
a man or other Creature, does change it totally in a moment of time, and
qualify the same with a disp^sition like it self. Again in his 3. de locis
affect is, cap. 7. he says, Who would believe that from the stinging of a
Scorpion, or of the Philangium (a Spider so called) the whole body should be so
exceedingly and unusually changed, unless he had often seen the same with his
Eyes, especially considering the sting of those Creatures is a very small thing.
And a little after: The sting of a Sea Turtle, as also of a Land Scorpion, does
end with an exceeding small point; where there is no hole through which the
poison might be cast in: yet we must needs suppose that there is some substance
in the Nature of a spirit, or of a Liquor, which though very small in bulk, yet
is very great in activity. And Aelian in his 9. B. de Animal. cap. 7. relates,
that the prints of the biting of an Asp are so exceeding small that they can
hardly be discerned by a sharp sight. And Jul. Caes. Scalig. in Exercit. 153.
Sect. 11. and Mercurialis in his Book de Venenis. cap. 16. do write, that in
Nubia, which is a part of Aethiopia beneath Egypt, there is poison, the tenth
part of a grain whereof will kill a man, or one grain ten men, within a quarter
of an hour: or if one man take one grain it kills him presently.

By which Reasons most learned men being moved, Occult qualities known and
asserted by learned Men.
have acknowledged and taught, that there are very many Qualities in Nature,
besides the Elementary. Galen (as we said before in the beginning of our first
chapter of this Discourse) in his 11. de simpl med. facult. cap. 14. where he
treats of the virtue of the Ashes of River Crabs against the biting of a mad
Dog, reprehends his Master Pelops that he vain-gloriously boasted that he knew
the causes of al such things: and in his first de not. facult. cap. 14.
concerning Epicurus and Asclepiades he writes, That those who endeavor to bring
manifest causes for all Diseases, it commonly falls out, that either they bring
foolish and ridiculous reasons, or deny those things which even experience it
self confirms. And in the third B. of the faculties of simple Medicaments,
chap. 3. he writes; And truly it is by us in other Treatises demonstrated, that
there are in all things certain Agreements and Repugnancies of Qualities, and
that which is familiar is readily assimilated, but that which is contrary kills
both Plants and Animals; also that these familiarities proceed from the
propriety of the whole substance. And in B. 5. de simpl. med. facult. cap. 2. we
have showed (says he) that Medicaments have a faculty to alter, either by one
quality, viz. By heating or cooling, moistening or drying, or by some of the
said qualities joined together, or by their whole substance; as most deadly
poisons, many Antidotes or amulets, and al Purgers. Which also he repeats in
the same Book, chap. 17, 18, 19, 23. The same he teaches in the 6. 8. and 9. de
simp. med. fac. the 1. de compos. med. secundum genera, cap. 16. the 8. de
compos. med. secundum loca, cap. 8. the 13. de Methodo medendi, cap. 6.
Alexander Aphrodisaeus writes in his Proceme to the Problems, that there are
infinite things in Nature, which can be known only by experience, and are
therefore by Physicians termed Hidden Properties; and he reproves those who
endeavor to render the Causes of such things from the qualities of the
Elements, and that they scurvily botch up certain solutions which are
altogether unprofitable and improbable: whom Mesues and other Arabians do
follow. But in the Age last past, Johannes Fernelius that most learned
Physician does largely and learnedly maintain these Qualities in his 2. Books
de Abditis Rerum causis; who in the Preface to his second Book thus writes.
Many indeed laugh at the Atoms of Democritus; but Democritus if he were to
rise from the dead would much more (after his manner) laugh at these Elements
we talk of, inasmuch as some endeavor to draw the causes of al things in Nature
from them. The most acute Jul. Caesar Scaliger, in his 218. Exercit. Sect. 8.
writes, That it is a point of extreme Impudence to refer al things to manifest
Qualities; and in Exercit. 101. Sect. 14. thus he bespeaks Cardan: What evil
Alexandrean spirit has so befotted thee that thou should pitifully believe
it possible that the Lodestone should draw Iron to it only by the mixture of
the Elements? And in his first Book of Plants, treating of Tastes, he has this
passage: But if any man shall say, That Taste is made by a conspiration of the
four first Qualities, let him tell me, Whether in any Element as an Element
there is any Taste? There is truly none at al. But as neither life proceeds from
the Elements, nor laughter, nor sense, nor understanding, nor voluntary motion,
but from other forms besides the Elementary; even so does Taste also. And though
there were no other thing to persuade us that there are other occult Qualities
besides the Elementary; we might be satisfied only by the consideration of
Poisons. The same Scaliger in Exercit. 218. Sect. 8. says: Many of them have
Proprieties different from the Elementary Qualities, which are concealed from
temperate minds, and delude the curious. And Thomas Erastus in his 4. chap. of
the Hidden properties of Medicaments (which place I alleged in the first
Chapter) says, That they who would reduce al effects to manifest Qualities do
gain nothing, but to be justly derided by all that are studious of the Truth,
and skilful in the things of Nature. Also Johan. Francisc. Vlmus has defended,
explained, and by many examples proved the said occult Qualities, in Lib. 4. de
occultis in re medic. proprietat.

That which Galen says happened to them that reduced al things to first
Qualities, that either they brought foolish and ridiculous Reasons, or denied
such things as were evident, that also happened to Sanctorius, who in his Lib.
8. Methodi Vitand. in Medicin. Error. endeavors to reduce hidden and occult
properties to manifest qualities: Whose Discourse of that Subject I think sit
briefly to propound and examine.

But at first, in cap. 3. by way of a Groundwork he premises that Question,
Sanctorius his Discourse of Hidden Qualities examined.
Whether the Faculties of the Soul do essentially differ from the substance of
the Soul? or Whether they are in the same predicament therewith, viz. in the
Predicament of substance; and he conceives the Fountain of that error
concerning occult qualities to be, that those who hold there are qualities of
the whole substance, do conceive that they belong to the predicament of
substance. For suppose indeed that some there were who conceived the Faculties
of the Soul differed not from the Essence thereof; yet they held an Error. And
herein we willingly assent to Sanctorius when he holds the powers of the Soul
are not substances; but that they differ from substances and are qualities. But
if such things are sometimes by Authors attributed to Faculties which are proper
to substances, there is an equivocation in the word Potentia, power or Faculty,
which sometimes (and that properly) is taken for a quality, but sometimes (though
improperly) for a substance, having a power or faculty to act. And such
substances are not only Souls, but also other forms, as that of the Lodestone.
For all forms are substances which have their powers of exercising certain
actions, all which they do not perform by manifest, but some by Hidden
Qualities. He labors therefore in vain chap. 6. Sanctorius his arguments
examined.
while both by Authorities out of Galen, by reasons and experiments, he
endeavors to prove, That hidden Qualities proceed not from the substance, but
from the manifest Qualities. For in the first place, that which he brings out
of Galen, 12. Method. Medend, and other places, that occult qualities have
their contraries, but substances have no contrary, is of no moment: for the
occult Qualities are not substances, but qualities flowing from their forms.
And if there be any other such arguments, they touch nor our Opinion, but that
of Fernelius, who holds Diseases of the Form. Moreover, that which he brings
out of Galen, Lib. de Constit. Artis, cap. 8. and 4. de simpl. med. cap. 15.
and 2. de locis affectis, cap. 8. dedu^ing unutterable proprieties from sundry
alterations, all that we grant. But if only the first qualities be mixed, no
occult qualities can arise from thence, but only a temperament of the first
qualities; though the degree of the temper or mixture cannot always be
sufficiently explained. So, when he says, that of bitterness, sweetness,
harshness, and acrimony mingled there arises a quality, which because it cannot
be expressed by one name, may be termed ineffable or unucterable, all that we
grant; but yet no occult quality, such as is in the Lodestone, Poisons, and
such like, does thence arise, but only a taste, being only a manifest quality
perceivable by the Tongue. Of the same moment is that which he alleadges as an
experiment, that our of diverse colors mixed peculiar colors arise. For whatever
colors are mixed, nothing arises therefrom but color; but no occult Quality.
And although of an hundred other altered qualities the determinate degree
cannot be known: yet the power of drawing Iron which (...) in the Lodestone
cannot be made thereof as he falsely conceives. Out of the first Qualities only
temperaments of tangible Qualities are made, though the determinate degree is
not always known; out of colors colors, out of Tastes Tastes are made. But never
out of the first qualities, or tastes, or colors, can be made the power of
drawing Iron, or of purging, or of stupifying like Opium, or such as is in the
Venom of the Pestilence. From al which it is manifest that Sanctorius has not
rightly formed the state of the Question, but dallied with the equivocation of
the words Ineffable and Occult Quality, and was ignorant what that Occult
Quality meant which is intended in the Question.

But whereas in the seventh chap. he labors to find out the differences of
Occult Qualities, Of the differences Occult dities.
therein he does well in that he labors to fetch them from the Subject; since
the condition of al qualities depends upon the first Subjects. But when he
endeavors to deduce them from the first manifest Qualities, and second, as
Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness, Rarity, Denfity, he makes himself a laughing
stock. For whereas in the first place he conceives the proper subjects whereby
the Qualities may be defined may be taken from a substance considered as
corporeal; he is exceedingly out. For from a Substance as Corporeal nothing
proceeds but quantity and dimensions. But on Bodies not considered as Bodies,
but as furnished with certain Forms, the occult qualities and all others
depend. Moreover, whereas he makes the Principle of al Passion to be Density
and Rarity, and deduces the qualities both first and second, hot, cold, moist,
dry, hard, soft, stiff, crumbly, tough, smooth, thick, thin, from Rarity and
Density, that therein he is in an error is so clear that it needs no proof. And
let it be granted (truly) that those Qualities proceed from Density and Rarity:
yet all these qualities are not occult, concerning which our question is, but
tangible qualities. And that is yet more absurd, that he endeavors to bring al
from Situation, and says that Situation is the general kind of al: For from
the Situation of the parts of a Body proceeds Rarity and Density, and from
Rarity and Density hot and cold, moist and dry, also hard and soft, with the
passions, and passive qualities.

And he becomes perfectly ridiculous when he writes chap. 10. Of the Antipathy
betwixt a Man and a Cat.
That he saw in Hungaria an Italian Gentleman, who when he was near a Cat
(though he saw it not) he presently swooned, and unless the Cat had been driven
away would have been choked; and he supposes the cause hereof was Compactness
and straitness. For that the Gentleman was narrow chested, and apt to a
Tissick, and in the Cat there were three destructive things for those in the
Tissick, viz. Its Brain, Breath, and Hair. Therefore he conceives it is no
marvel if of these a new stopping quality was bred which might by the
exhalation of the Cat be communicated to a man, and by condensing choke him.
But one absurdity being granted, a thousand follow. For I my self (and many
others) have known such as could not endure the Presence of a Cat, yet are they
not troubled with the Tissick. Moreover, if the destructive Faculty be in the
Brain, Breath, and Hairs, it is not Density. Thirdly, If Cats do this by their
thickning breath, why do Cars shut up in a Chest work the same effect?
Fourthly, Those that are troubled in this kind do not complain of the Asthma
and shortness of breath, but only of fainting fits.

But the best thing in this Discourse of his is that which he has in chap. 10.
That there are Occult Qualities which arise not from the first, proved by
certain Experiments.
where being convinced by the Truth it self, he proves by many reasons and
experiments, that there are Hidden qualities which do not arise from the first
qualities, whereof I shall ad only some, viz. Those which directly prove that
occult qualities do not flow from the first qualities.

The first Experiment is of the Lodestone, which is notoriously known to draw
Iron, which Faculty nevertheless cannot be reduced to any first quality.

Secondly, If Doronicum did kill Dogs by virtue of Heat or Cold, it could not
cure Men.

Thirdly, If Scorpions did kill by Heat, the drinking of pure unmixt Wine would
not cure their poison.

If a dram of Opium kills by its coldness, why will not an ounce of Ice (which is
colder) do as much?

But the rest of the Experiments which he brings do not prove that occult
qualities flow not from the first; yet against those who endeavor to derive al
qualities from the first, they prove there are qualities which flow not from
the first. For since alteration and the action proceeding from the first
qualities is not effected in a moment, but gradually and in time; and that
there are many mutations of qualities which happen in a moment, thence it
appears that there are qualities which are not made by mutation of the first
qualities. For if a red Glass be put before a blue Glass there arises therefrom
in a moment a Violet color; if a blue Glass be put upon a yellowish Glass,
there arises therefrom a green color; Water wherein Galls have boiled is clear,
but if Water be poured thereinto wherein Vitriol has been boiled, which is
also clear, there arises a black color in a moment; and there are many such
mixtures which produce a new quality in a moment.

Finally, Whereas in cap. 11. he writes, All things are not vain which are
reported of Occult Qualities.
That the maintainers of occult qualities have been too credulous to believe
the most vain reports; I confess indeed that many fabulous and superstitious
tales go up and down; but in the mean time, al things are not fabulous which
are spoken of the effects of occult qualities. Doubtless those reports of the
Loadstones Faculty to draw Iron, of the stupefactive faculty of Opium, of the
Faculties of Poisons and Antidores, of the Antipathy betwixt some people and
Cats, are al most true, and any one may daily experiment the same. And whereas
he accounts for fabulous all that is said of sundry things hung about the Neck,
or tied to the Body, he does it without cause; since those things which are
reported of Peony Root, the Elks Claw, the Nephritick Stone, and such like
things, are known by Experience to be really true. So also, those things which
are written of the Echeneis he can by no other reason confute save that it
cannot produce such an effect by hearing, or cooling, or rarefying, or rendering
compact, or the like qualities. Others there are who account the Natration
concerning the Echeneis to be fabulous; but Pliny, Lib. 32 cap. 1. confirms it
by Histories, thus writing: A Story of the Echeneis, Remora, or Stop fish
The Fish Echeneis or Remora, held the Praetorian Ship of Antony in the Actian
Sea. And a little after he says: It stopped also in our Memory the Ship or
Galley of Prince Caius as he was sailing from Astura to Antium. Nor was there
long wondering at that stay, for presently the cause being known, when of the
whole Fleet that Galley only did not stir, some leapt out into the water to seek
the cause, and they found the said Fish sticking to the Rudder, and showed it
to Caius, who stormed that so small a thing should stop his course, and
frustrate the endeavors of four hundred Rowers.

Therefore Franciscus Vallesius, Controvers. Med. and Philos. Lib. 8. cap. 5.
says, It Is ridiculous to deny a manifest effect because the causeis unknown.
That it is a ridiculous thing to deny that which is manifest by Experience,
because we cannot tell the reason thereof. As if it were impossible any thing
might happen in Nature of whose cause we are ignorant. We are ignorant of most
things. And therefore they that would in Natural Philosophy find out the Truth,
and not fall into wild and sophistical Opinions, they must begin with things
known to the Sense, and so proceed to the Causes, and having found them rejoice
in the Works of Nature; and not finding them, confess their own ignorance; but
by no means deny things that are manifest. For it is less shameful having found
out the effect to be ignorant of the Cause, which is frequently hid from the
most expert Philosophers, than together with the cause to be ignorant of the
effect, which when you deny, the common people will laugh at you, and prove it
by experience.

Chap. 3. Of the Original of Occult Qualities.
NOw to find out the Original of Occult Qualities is a very hard thing, nor are
all men of the same Opinion concerning their Rise. For in the first place, some
there are who being moved with the evidence of the thing it self, dare not deny
occult Qualities: but when they come to search out their Original, they fall
back to the Elements and their Qualities, and endeavor vainly to derive the
occult Qualities from their mixture and temperament: and conceive the hidden
proprieties of things do proceed from a peculiar temper of the first Qualities,
which therefore they term Idiosyncrasia. It is not (truly) sufficiently
apparent what Galen thought in this point, since that Book which in Lib. 11. de
simp. med. fac. he promised to write of things which operate by their whole
substance, and which he cites in the 6. Epidem. comm. 6. text. 5. is lost
through the injury of time; yet he seems to incline to this Opinion, and to
rest much in the first Qualities. For in the 1. de Element. cap. 7. he writes,
That cur Bodies are altered only by being heated, cooled, dried, moistened; for
that these Qualities only do totally change through their whole substance. And
when in Lib. 3. de Temper. cap. 3. he had said that the four Faculties of the
Body, Attractive, Retentive, Concoctive, and Expulsive, were in every Body
effects of the whole substance; he adds, that the said whole substance consists
of Hear, Cold, Moist and Dry, mingled together. And in Chap. 4. he teaches us
to observe for a Principle, that every body has a certain propriety of Temper,
which is convenient to this Nature, disagreeing to that. And hence he gives the
reason why several things are Food or Physic for several Creatures; as for
instance, Hemlock is Food for the Starling, and Hellebore for the Quail, which
are Medicaments for men; because the temper of the Starling and Quail can
assimilate the Hemlock and the Hellebore, which Man's Temper cannot do. Most
late Writers have been of the same Opinion, not being able to raise their Minds
beyond the Elements.

But in very deed the Occult Qualities which act beyond the power of Elementary
Qualities cannot proceed from the Elements however mixed, The mixture of the
first Qualities cannot produce the occult Qualities.
nor from their Qualities however tempered. Nor can a hidden way of Mixture
bring in new abilities, but which way soever the Elements be mixed and remixed,
and however their qualities be tempered, nothing arises therefrom but what is
Elementary. And the Proportion of manifest Qualities being unknown does not of
manifest make them occult, but only breeds a temper wherein the proportion of
the first Qualities is unknown to us. The Elementary Qualities are, and remain
even under the unknown measure of a Temperament; and as in the Temper the
Qualities do not change their Essence, so neither can they perform an action
transcending their Virtue and activity. For that is a Rule infallibly true,
That nothing acts beyond the powers of its own kind. And that Argument which
Jul. Caes. Scaliger, Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. uses to prove, That the Soul does
not arise from the Elements, is doubtless general and of use here. That (says
he) is in the powers of the Soul which was never in the power of any Element.
But there is nothing in any thing which was not actually in its Principles. For
the Principles are the acts of those things whereof they are Principles. Now in
the Soul there is a Faculty to move forward, backward, to the right hand, and
to the left, which is not in any Element. There are also other more illustrious
powers of the Soul, which are not in the Elements. For what Scaliger says of
the Faculties of the Soul, the same may we say of the Faculties of the
Lodestone, of purging Medicaments, of Poisons, and other things. For nothing
acts beyond the virtue of its own kind; and nothing can work as a Cause beyond
its own adequate Act; since it fills the virtue of the Power. And though other
virtues be in a mixture than are to be found in the simples singly considered:
yet those Virtues are no other than Elementary, and which the several Elements
joined together have in them; and they are the first Qualities broken and
allayed by their Contraries. For as I said before, if four or more come to sup
together without every man his shot, they must of necessity al fast. For
examples sake, If four colors be mixed, a color indeed different from each of
the four arises, but nothing else save a color; not such a faculty as is in
Scammony, Opium, and the like. After the same manner, if you mix the first
Qualities, and mix them again, other qualities indeed or temperaments will arise
different from simple Heat, Cold, Moisture, Dryness; but no other Quality will
arise from thence, save an Elementary Quality or Temperament.

Nor let any man think to escape by saying, That the manifest Qualities and
their Temperament do not indeed of themselves perform such noble actions, but
as they are guided by a more noble specific Form. For no Instrument acts
beyond the virtue of its kind, though it be directed by a superior Agent. And
therefore as an Artist uses sundry Tools, as the Carver his Compass, Saw,
Chizel, Scraper, every of which performs its use: so every Form uses its
Qualities to sundry actions. And as a Saw when the Carpenter uses it does saw
asunder, but does not hew or pare; even so Hotness wherever it is does
nothing but heat. Not does the Lodestone draw Iron, not Rhubarb purge by heat,
but by an hidden Quality, peculiar to themselves.

Nor is it credible (since the Forms of the Elements have their Qualities) that
those more noble Forms are barren, and produce no qualities, so as to stand in
need of borrowing the service of the Elementary Qualities. In a word, as things
differ in their Forms, so do they in their Operations and Instruments.

Nor do they bring any thing better or righter, who hold, Occult Qualities are
not drawn out of the power of the Matter.
That in every Mixture a new Form is drawn forth, and that there are always
new ones made, the degrees of the former remaining, and that with these there
spring forth new Qualities, and that Nature first brings forth the Universal
Forms, and by their help the particular ones, until at last she come to the
forms of Individuals; and that from this contemperation of Qualities arising
from diverse Forms and mixture of Bodies, which saving their forms do put on the
Nature of matter (as it were) or aptitude, there arises (they say) an
unexpressible propriety of temper, which may rightly in some sort be termed an
occult Quality. For, to pass over other Errors touching drawings out of Forms,
degrees of Forms, and such like; these Men also savor nothing but Elements, and
that which they had before rightly determined, viz. That an occult manner of
mixture does introduce no new faculties, they themselves afterward destroy.
For suppose that many mixtures are made, and that with these always new
Qualities arise: yet because the first mixture is only of Elements, and no
other temper arises from thence but of the first Qualities, though you remix
things mixed before an hundred, yea, a thousand times, nothing but what is
Elementary, and no Qualities but Elementary Qualities can arise therefrom, and
therefore nobler actions than those of the first Qualities cannot be by them
produced. And if Natural things should be generated after this manner, and by
the mediation of Forms (their degrees still remaining) a progress should be made
unto particular Forms, and at last to such as are individual; the forms of al
things living, as well living things as Plants, should be drawn out of the
Elements. Indeed that same Innovator, Whether the forms of Plants and Bruits
spring from the Elements^.
who dares vent the Dreams hatched in his own Brain to day or yester-day for
the Tenets of reverend Antiquity, accounts it no absurdity; who holds that the
Souls of living things, Plants, and Animals (excepting that of a Man only) are
made of the matter of the Elements, and that Plants and Animals (both as to
Matter and Form) were both at first produced out of the Elements, and at this
day have no other Nature, and remain through al Generations Elementary Bodies
in respect both of Matter and Form. But this gross and most absurd Opinion can
neither be by any reasons proved, nor can the invincible reasons of Julius
Caesar Scaliger against the same be answered. Which when he perceived, and that
he could not find any probable reason for his Opinion, no not to make a
flourish with, he flies to the holy Scriptures mis-understood, and endeavors to
set Moses against Scaliger, as if he had said, That al living and lifeless
things were so produced out of the Elements as to consist of Elementary
Materials, both in Matter and Form, and to arise therefrom at this day; because
God said, Let the Earth bring forth, let the Water bring forth the living
Creature; also, Increase and multiply. But although God said, let the Earth
produce, let the Water produce; yet by force of those words it no ways
follows, That Plants and Bruits were made of the Elements both Body and Soul,
and are generated of them at this day; since God then created perfect Plants
and Animals in the Earth and Water, which as Fr. Junius writes upon this place,
came out of the Earth and Water wherein they were created, as Children out of
the Womb. Nor does the Hebrew word Hotzi signify to give matter, but to make
and suffer to go out; as in Genesis 14. ver. 18. Exodus 8. ver. 18. chap. 20. ver.
2. Numb. 17.8. Psalm 68.8. Psalm 104.14. and very many more places of
Scripture, appears. Nor did God say to the Earth and Water, Increase and
multiply, but to living Creatures made by him, and having their seed in
themselves; whereof we shall also speak hereafter in our Fourth Discourse, Chap.
4. Julius Caesar Scaliger says much better in Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. Yea, and
I tell them withal, That the form of every perfectly mixed Body, although it be
no Soul (as that of the Diamond for instance) is a fifth Nature, far differing
from the four Elements. And in Exercit. 307. Sect. 12. If (says he) as these
Tormentors or Hangmen of Souls contend, the Souls were made of the Forms of
Elements, the Forms themselves corrupted could do more than they could when
they were in their Integrity. But in case they will have them remain entire in
the Compound, of necessity they must be by another power different from
themselves both mixed to certain ends and limited in certain bounds. For of
them actually existing there cannot be made a thing simply one, save by a
superior power, which Aristotle calls the Beginning of Living things. And all the Reasons which prove it, are most firm. For who is it that considers how in
Plants, the Roots, Trunks, Leaves, Flowers, Boughs, are so wonderfully and
vatiously shaped, according to the variety of sorts, in respect of magnitude,
figure, Situation, color, and with so much Art and constant Symmetry, as that
no Geometrician or Painter can express all that Art, will believe that al these
things are wrought by the Elementary matter? who will believe that the most
noble Fabric, not only of Men, but of Bruits, is produced by an Elementary
Nature? Who will derive the Sagacity of Dogs, the Prudence (that I may so speak)
of Elephants, the Craft of the Fox, the Magnanimity of the Lion, the wonderful
works of Bees, Pismites, and other Creatures, from the Elementary Nature? And
therefore from hence (as was said) Scaliger frames an invincible argument,
Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. That is in the power of the Soul which was never in the
power of any Element. But nothing is in any thing which was not actually in its
Principles. For the Principles are the acts of those things whereof they are
Principles. In the answering of which Argument, the foresaid Innovator takes
pains to no purpose. For first, he does seek to elude that same Axiom, That
Principles are the Acts of those things where of they are Principles, by saying
that Matter also is a Principle, and yet is not the act of a thing. But who
sees not that Scaliger speaks of the formal principle, the Cause of actions,
and that the form is often termed the Principle by way of Eminence. Nor yet is
it absurd to say, that even matter also in its way has an act. Indeed it is
not the act of the Compound which the Form affords, yet is it in the mean while
a substance by it self; and as Scaliger in Exercit. 5. speaks, it is that which
it is by an Essence proper to it self. And Exercit. 17. The Matter has its
quiddity whereby it is somewhat, and differs from other things. Whether there be
nothing in a thing which was not in its Principles.
And the Matter gives Quantity to al things. But against that other Axiom,
That there is nothing in any thing which was not actually in its Principles, he
can bring no reason. Verily that which one has not he cannot give to another
Man, and unless the Earth were heavy, the Fire hot, no mixed Body would be heavy
or hot. And doubtless, no affection can be in a Compound which may not be
referred either to the Matter or the Form. Yet he endeavors to evade the same
by some instances. And in the first place he objects the Heaven, how that it is
al things in respect of its working power. But (which himself confesses) the
Question is not concerning external efficient causes, but essential internal
Principles; and the enquiry is, Whether there be any thing in the Compound
which does not depend upon the internal essential Principles. Also the Heaven
it self is an universal, and not a particular Cause. Moreover he objects life
which is from the Soul, but not in the Soul. But he ought to have observed what
very many of Aristotle's Expositors do note upon the 2. Life, how many wais
taken.
de Anima, cap. 1. that Life is taken two manner of ways: First for
substantial Life, from which as a Fountain Vital actions proceed, which is in
the Soul, which is the Root of al vital Powers and Actions, in which sense
Aristotle himself takes Life, 2. de Anima, text. 37. when he writes, To live is
the Essence of living things. Secondly, it is taken for the Vital Operation, or
at least for the power of exercising those vital actions, whereof the foresaid
substantial Life is the Principle; which being an accident, is by many called
Vita accidentaria, accidentary Life. And therefore unless the Soul had life
actually it could not communicate the same to living Creatures. Here indeed the
Paradox-monger seeks an evasion to avoid this distinction by attributing this
essential Life only to the Rational Soul, and the other accidentary to Bruit
Beasts. But he brings no reason of this difference. Contrariwise, all the
Expositors of Aristotle do attribute Life in both Senses to al Living things.
And after the same manner, as there is in Man an Essential Life, from whence
proceeds an accidental (for a Man has not one Soul to make him a Man, and
another to make him a Living thing) even so in Bruits also and Plants from the
essential Life it self proceeds that accidentary Life. Yet there is this
difference, That in Man by Death the accidental Life is abolished, the
essential remaining; but in Beasts, both essential and accidental Life do
perish. Which things were necessary to be said in this place for defense of the
Truth.

Moreover, If Occult Qualities did flow from the Elements, there should be no
other simple qualities in Nature besides those first of the Elements, but al
should be tempers of the first, and so compounded, which is false. For the
occult Qualities are perfectly simple, and arise from their simple forms; since
those last forms are not barren and idle, but produce certain peculiar
Qualities. For as from the simple form of Fire flows heat; so from the form of
the Lodestone flows the Faculty of drawing Iron, which is a simple Quality;
from the Form in Rhubarb flows the Quality and Power of Purging Choler, which
is a simple quality; and the same holds in all other Occult qualities. For the
most good and great God has not drawn al Forms out of the power of the Matter,
but created al things, and gave them their Forms; and those not idle and
ineffectual, and void of Forces, but endued with their peculiar Qualities,
Proprieties, and Activities.

Some also there are who conceive these Qualities are infused from the Heavens.
Whether the occult Qualities flow from Heaven?
But since they cannot deny, That al Qualities and Proprieties do flow from
their Forms, they are forced to grant that these Qualities also though they
come from Heaven, yet it is not without the assistance of their Forms. But we
have elsewhere proved, that the Forms come not from Heaven.

Al which Conceits therefore being false, it is most rightly determined and
held, The true Original of Occult qualities. The differences of of Occult
qualities.
That as al other Faculties and Proprieties, so these also do flow from their
Forms. But what those Forms are we must now enquire. Which that we may do more
readily and Easily, we must first show the differences of these Qualities
according to their Subjects, or of the substances to which they belong, whereby
it will appear that they have not al one Original. Bodies are some Living,
others Liseless; and of the Liseless some have had life, as Rhubarb, Wormwood;
others neither have it, nor ever had. All which if they be distributed into
their Ranks as they ought, six differences there will arise of Occult
Qualities, in reference to their Original.

For in the first place there are certain hidden and wonderful Properties,
Occult qualities in certain sorts of living things.
which always are found in some sorts of living Creatures. An example of these
we have in the Echeners, Remora or Stop-ship, a Fish so called, whose strange
force (as others, so) Pliny admires in lib. 32. cap. 1. Let winds blow (says
he) and the storms rage, a very little Fish masters their fury, and bridles all
their strength, forcing the Ships to stand still in the Sea; which no Cables
could do, no massy Anchors. It curbs the violence, and tames the rage of the
wind without any pains to it self, not by holding the Ship, nor by any other
way than sticking to the same. This little Creature is so powerful against all
the strength of wind and Tide, as to stop the Ships in their way. But Armed
Fleets have Towers built upon them that they might fight in the Sea as from a
City wall. Alas for the vanity of Mankind! when a little Fish half a foot long
can arrest and hold in bondage their Men of War armed for the Fight with Brass
and Iron. So far Pliny. And this is performed by the said Fish only when it is
alive. Also 'cis well known what force the Torpedo has, viz. How it does not
only benum those that touch is, but it stupefies the hands of Fishermen
through the Net it self. And some relate when it swims away alive, if a man
stir the Water with his hand it nums his hand. And yet being dead the said Fish
is Food for some People. How admirable the forces of a live Basilisk are may be
seen in our Epitomy of Natural Philosophy, Book 7. Chap. 10. yet being dead it
may be handled without danger. Such Qualities are rightly derived from the
Forms of Animals, concerning the Original whereof we have spoken elsewhere more
largely, viz. how at the first Creation they were all created with Plants and
Animals, and are now multiplied in the generation of Plants and living things,
and have their Faculties implanted by the Creator.

Secondly, There are some individual Proprieties in living Creatures.
Individual Proprieties.
So some persons cannot abide Cheese, this or that Fish, or other meat or
drink; and Authors every where observe sundry sympathies and Antipathies of
sundry Creatures individual. These Properties (since they are not common to the
whole kind, but proper to some Individuals) do not arise from the specifical
form, nor do they belong to the Essential faculties which flow immediately from
the Form, and like the Form it self are immutable and incapable of degrees;
such as is in Man the Faculty of Reasoning, Laughing, Seeing, Hearing, etc. But
to Natural Powers and Impotencies they are to be referred, which flow from a
peculiar disposition of the Body, or its parts. Which disposition since it is
not essential to a Man, but variously mutable, a Natural Power, and a Natural
Impotency, may be changed one into another: for examples sake, It is the
Property of a Man among other things, to desire, digest, and be able to turn
meats good for his Body into nourishment. But in that some cannot away with
Cheese, others with a Pike-fish, others with Wine, that springs from a Natural
Impotency arising from a peculiar disposition of the stomach in this or that
man: which being not always perpetual (but sometimes in progress of years, or
for other causes it is changed) it many times falls out that he who in his
Childhood could not abide Cheese, nor to drink Wine, afterward being grown up
to man's estate he can away with both Wine and Cheese. Now whereas to Natural
Impotencies do belong al those things which belong to any sickly constitution;
those occult Qualities depend not upon distemper, or any Organink Disease, or
of Solution of Unity, but upon an hidden an unexplicable disposition. Indeed
for a Man not to be able to desire to eat, nor to concoct his meat, may proceed
from a manifest distemper of the stomach: but that he who can eat and digest al
other meats, only should not endure Cheese, or Bread, or this or that sort of
Flesh or Fish; this comes merely from an Occult Quality. Now these dispositions
are sometimes born with the party, and sometimes they happen afterward. Of those
which are born with the Party, some are Hereditary, which being before in the
Parents, are derived into the Child with the Principles themselves of
Generation: but others, though they were not in the Parents, yet are they
imprinted on the Child by the imagination of the Mother; whence it comes to
pass that Children cannot endure such meats as either their Mothers loathed
when they were with Child, or which they longed for, and could not obtain.
After Birth they are sometimes caused by loathing of some meat too often and too
plentifully eaten. In which case the power of the Imagination commonly bears
the greatest sway, of which I have treated in my Book of the Consent and
Dissent of the Chemists and Galenists, etc. chap. 14.

The third kind of Occult Qualities is of things which do not live, Of the
Occult Qualities of Jewels, Stones, and Metals.
but have nevertheless their specific Forms, differing from the Forms of the
Elements. So, by Reason of its Specific Form the Lodestone draws Iron. And
the several precious Stones, as also Metals and Minerals, have their Occult
Properties and Faculties, which flow from their Specific Forms; which
Specific Forms nevertheless (as al others) do be concealed from the knowledge
of Man.

Fourthly, Occult Qualities of dead things.
There are Occult Proprieties in Natural things which have formerly lived but
now do not live any more. Such as are every where to be seen in Plants and
Animals, which we use instead of Physic. For we use not ordinarily living
Plants or Animals, but only such as are dead. So we use dried Toads to draw out
Poison: the ashes of River-crabs or Cray-fish cures the biting of a mad Dog:
the Horns and Hoof of an Elk are good against the Falling Sickness: Hartshorn
and the Bone taken out of an Hearts Heart, are used against Poisons: Man's Skul
cures the Falling Sickness: Rhubarb, Agarick, Mechoacan, white and black
Hellebore, and other Plants, have a purging faculty: Peony Roots are good
against the Falling Sickness: Scordium is good against Poison: and there are
very many more rare Virtues of Plants. And to this Tribe in a word belong the
Virtues and Hidden Properties which are sought for in Plants and Animals after
they are dead.

Now certain it is, Whence they proceed.
That these Occult Properties do not flow immediately from the Soul and
Specific Form of Animals or Plants; since the Soul is no longer in those
Medicaments. Nor can they proceed from the Mixture of the Elements simply, and
the temper of the first Qualities; since their actions are of a quite different
kind from them, and above their activities, nor are they directed by the Soul,
as being no longer present. And since every Quality pre-supposes a Form, these
Qualities must also of necessity flow from, and depend on some Form. Now that
can be no other than that which was before the subject of the more noble
perfect and specific Form, after its manner, and as far as belonged thereto. I
say, after its manner, lest any should have occasion to quarrel. For that Form
with its matter does not quite make up the ultimate subject, which is corrupted
with the Form it self, or at least does not constitute a perfect Organ; since
in Animals there is also required an influent Heat, and in Plants somewhat which
holds proportion thereto. For seeing the more noble Form requires the more
noble Matter, and as Forms differ in nobility or baseness, so also those
matters differ, and are proper to several sorts and forms of things: the
difference and diversity of those matters cannot come but from different Forms
which constitute the proper subject of every Sp^cifick Form. Which Forms
(truly) considered by themselves are also true Forms, which do inform their
Matters; but in respect of the Soul and Specific Form they have the Nature of
an immediate matter; and so one thing does not subsist by two substantial acts,
but each has one specific Form. Now when the Specific F^rm goes away, these
Forms remain a while after, and perform the Office of Forms, and are the
Authors of those Faculties which are found in many things after they are dead,
but such as it is impossible they should proceed from the Qualities or Forms of
the Elements.

Now what the Original of these Forms should be, Whence the subordinate Forms
^roceed
is a Question hard enough, and few have enquired thereinto. And because I have
spoke largely thereof in my Institutions of Physic, Book 5. part 1. Sect. 1.
chapter 2. I will but briefly touch the same in this place. The most wise Creator,
as he gave in the first Creation to al things their specific Forms, so also he
gave them different matters, to each a proper one, and in that matter also
certain Forms proper to every Species; and that for two intents: The end of
those Forms.
First that the specific Forms might have subjects wherein to be, subsist, and
perform their actions. Secondly, That when the Soul or Specific Form is gone,
they might be useful to Man as Food or Physic. And as those Specific Forms
are multiplied and propagated; so also these subordinate Forms are propagated.
Or at least (which I see is the Opinion of some others) the Souls of living
things have an ability to produce such Forms as are necessary to constitute
their subject place or Mansion house, which also may remain when they are gone.

And forasmuch as every Form requires its Subject and adequate Matter with
which it is, The subject of these forms.
and perishes therewith, it is worth our Labor to enquite of the Subject of
these Forms. Now this in Plants and Animals seems to be no other than that same
implanted Spirit and Radical Moisture which jointly are called commonly Native
Hear, and by late Writers (especially Chemists) Natural Balsam. For Experience
it self teaches, That Plants and the parts of Animals, so long as they retain
that Balsamic Substance, do preserve their virtues entire: but as soon as they
lose the same, and become rotten or putrefied, they lose also their virtues, so
that the remaining Body becomes unprofitable. Which the Operations of Chemists
and Apothecaries do show. For if by boiling or steeping that part of the
substance be separated and extracted, wherein is the Purgative Faculty, an
useful Medicament is made; and the remaining Body becomes quite ineffectual.

Fifthly, Occult qualities in things which are naturally bred in Plants and
Animals.
There are occult o^ hidden Qualities in such things as are Naturally bred in
Plants and Animals; such as are the Poison of a Scorpion, an Asp, an Adder, the
Spider Tarantula, and other venomous Beasts; Bezoar stone, Musk, Civer,
Castoreum, and whatever other things there are of like kind Naturally bred in
Animals. Hither are to be referred the juyces of Plants, their Tears and Gums,
as Aloes, Scammony, Elaterium, Euphorbium, Gambugia, Opium, juice of Hemlock,
and many more of this kind. All which though they are to Men in place of
Medicament or Poison, yet are they Natural and kindly to their respective
Plants and Animals. Now al such Qualities and their effects do not proceed
immediately from the Soul or Specific Form of those living things, but from
their own proper Form; since being separated from the living things, they have
nevertheless their effects and operations. Now whence these Forms proceed,
though it is not very easy to declare; yet it seems most safe to hold, That
those things receive the said Forms from their own Souls, and that those Forms
are some way included in the Souls, or at least proceed from them. For as the
soul has a power to make Chyle, to make bones, and to make skin; even so other
Juyces are produced in other living things, as Oil in the Olive Tree, Wine in
the Vine; and after the same manner those Medicinal and venomous juyces
aforesaid are produced by the Soul proper to their respective kind. And as Wine
though no longer animated with the Soul of the Vine, yet retains many years
that same form which it received from the Vine as a Body Natural; so the juyces
lately mentioned do long retain their Forms and Virtues entire; yea, and they
have some affinity to, and correspondence (as it were) with the forms of that
kind, and perform motions answerable to their motions. Whence it is that Wine
in the Hogshead is wont to work when the Vines do blossom. For the reason of
all such things lies concealed in the seed; because (as Aristotle, 5. de Genesis
anim. cap. 7. says) Principles of things though small in Bulk, yet are
exceeding great in faculty and power, which is especially true of the seed; and
what Seneca said excellently, Lib. 3. quaest. not. cap. 29. concerning Man, is
true of al other living things. In the seed (says he) is contained all the
Nature of the future man; the Infant not born has in it the Principles of a
beard, and of Gray Hairs.

In the sixth place, are malignant Humors and Poisons, Occult qualities of
things preternaturally bred in the Bodies of Animals.
which are preternaturally bred in the bodies of Animals, and do al operate by
hidden Qualities. Such are those Humors whence the Falling Sickness,
Mother-sits, Malignant Dysenteries, Malignant and pestilential Fevers, yea,
the Plague it self, the Scurvy, the Leprosy, are generated; also the poison of
a Mad Dog. Of the Generation whereof we have treated in out sixth Book of
Practice, part the second.

Chap. 4. Of the Difference of Occult Qualities.
NOw Occult Qualities are not of one kind, The differences of occult qualities.
and the first difference appears from what has been said in the foregoing
Chapter, by which it is manifest that there are six kinds of them in reference
to their Original, touching which it is needless to add any more.

In the second place, There is another difference drawn from the manner of
inhering. Vulgarly, as also it appears from Scaliger, Exercit. 71. they say
some Qualities are real, others intentional. The greenness on the Tree they say
is a real Quality, the greenness cast by the Tree upon a wall, or on a man's
clothes, is an intentional Quality: the color of a Glass of Claret is a real
Quality, the redness thereby caused upon the Table-cloath is an intentional
quality, the light shining through the Glass of Wine. Where the thing it self
is truly declared, but the names are not convenient. For since that is properly
termed intentional which depends upon the operation of our mind, and is nothing
without the same: after this manner these Occult Qualities cannot be termed
intentional, nor are rightly opposed to real Qualities, since they themselves
are also real, and are found in Nature when we think not of them, and have real
effects. I conceive the color in the Tree, and the Wine in the Glass should be
more rightly called material qualities, seeing they are not separated from the
Matter; Material Qualities and spiritual species, how they differ.
but the other Spiritual Species or representations. And there is no small
difference betwixt those material qualities, and these Spiritual Species. For
the former are in their Subject, and are moved with it, and according to its
motion, nor are separable therefrom, and are successively received in their
Subject, nor are they diverse differing in number in the same Subject, not
confused but distinct. But those Spiritual Species are diffused from the Body
whence they arise round about in a right line like Rays, nor are moved with
the air wherein they are; in the same Subject they are many in number, not
confused, as appears by the sundry shadows made by several Candles; also many
of them pass through solid Bodies, as appears by sounds, and the virtue of the
Lodestone. Nor are they ineffectual, but have in them the virtues of those
things from which they flow; as Shine represents the Light; the Lodestone
draws Iron, the shadow of the Eugh tree is hurtful. And although these Species
are commonly reckoned only amongst Sensible Species; yet doubtless there are
many more of them than are discerned by Humane Senses. And by means of them
many Sympathies and Antipathies of things do happen, and wonderful actions and
operations, which are by some termed Magnetical. Which very thing Jul. Caes.
Scaliger acknowledges, who in Exercit. 344. Sect. 5. where he speaks of
Sympathy, at last concludes, That such things are done by Species, and that
those Species are like a continual Ray promoted, which is propagated through
and beyond the Body of the Glass.

But what these Spiritual Species are is not easy to say. What spiritual
species are.
They are commonly called Qualities; but this term likes not Fracastorius, Lib.
de Sympath. and Antip. cap. 5. who holds that they are Substances, and of the
same nature with those Forms whose Species they are, not differing from them
save in their manner of subsisting. For so far he says they are Material,
because they are in the matter by a certain gross existence, and require
certain limits. And since it is the innate property of al Forms to propagate
themselves, and these material Forms cannot propagate themselves after their
own manner of existence, they produce a thin and Superficial part or degree of
themselves, which they term Epipole, which by reason of its tenuity both has
no contrary, and is bred and propagated in a moment, as a kind of Brood. But
hardly will any man say, That the Light and Shine of the Sun are of the same
Essence one with another, much less that they are of the same Nature with the
Suns Form; or the color in a thing with that in its Image in a Looking-glass.
But how (in case they are Qualities) they should be generated in a moment and
propagated, not moved with the Air through which they are diffused, and that
diverse in number of the same sort should be in the same Air unconfounded or
jumbled together, there is hardly any man can well tell.

For the same obscurity we meet with in the sensible Species of Nature, we find
also in all other her Spiritual Species, which are many more than can be
discerned by our Senses, or is commonly believed.

According to this Difference of Qualities Occult Qualities also differ. Occult
material Qualities.
For first there are Occult Qualities which may be termed Material because they
are always propagated with the Matter and Subject wherein they are generated,
and do not diffuse themselves without the same. And though they may seem to
diffuse themselves into other bodies, and afar off; yet that is done by Atoms
and their smallest Corporeal Particles, which differ from the Bodies from
whence they flow only in Magnitude, and have the same Essence, Qualities, and
Faculties with them. Such are al those Occult Qualities by which contagious
Diseases are conveyed into other persons, as is seen in the Venereal Disease,
the Leprofie, Pestilential and Contagious Fevers, and the Plague it self. For
in all such Diseases certain very small particles flow from the sick body, which
being received by other bodies they raise in them the same Disease; as I have
showed at large in the Second of my Institutions, part 2. cap. 12. and my
Fourth Book of Fevers, Chap. 3. and my Sixth Book of Practice, p. 3. cap. 3.
For these are not Species carried right on as a Ray, but little Particles or
small Bodies which are themselves disorderly moved by the motion of the Air: nor
is any man infected either with the Plague, Venereal Pox, or Leprosy, unless
he receive into his Body some of those foresaid Particles or small Bodies.

Again, There are Occult Qualities which are justly termed spiritual Species,
Spiritual Qualities.
because they pass from their Body like a Ray continually thrust forward, being
circularly diffused, and have a certain Sphere of their activity, and some of
them do also pierce through other Bodies. So a Lodestone draws Iron though a
Board be betwixt them: a Cat shut up in a chest can affect a Man that has an
Antipathy against Cats; the Dog through the shut door by virtue of these
Qualities knows his Master to be there; the Torpedo benums the Fishermans hand
through the staff of an Eel-spear. And Avicenna and the Conciliator in Lib. 1.
de Venen. cap. 1. speak of a Serpent who intected and killed a Soldier through
a Spear, with the end whereof he touched it. So the Basilisk or Cockatrice kills
a Man by looking on him. Which things the foresaid Qualities adhering in the
matter cannot do. Nor can a Man sick of a contagious Disease infect another
through the door (being shut) since those small bodies cannot pierce the boards.

Thirdly, The third difference of Occult qualities.
There is yet another Difference of Occult Qualities observed as yet by very
few, viz. There are some Spiritual Qualities which flow from other things, are
received in some Bodies, and being received in them they have the same Faculty
as the others. Such a like thing is observed in the Lodestone. For the Virtue
thereof is received by Iron, whereupon the Iron also gains the faculty of
drawing Iron, and moving to the Poles. Not is this only done by rubbing upon
the Lodestone, and the communication of certain Atoms; seeing Iron shut up
and covered will receive virtue from the Lodestone, which I my self have
observed. For having once an Ivory-cover'd Sun-Dial made with a touched Needle,
in the same case or box with a greater Lodestone, the Needle of the Sun^dial
quite changed its faculty of turning to the Poles, and was moved with a new
kind of motion. So Dogs follow their Masters, and they hunt the Beasts by the
track of their feet, such species being doubtless printed upon the Earth and
Grass which they perceive by their smelling faculty. For it must needs be some
real thing that works upon their Smell, and yet not a material quality, which
with its small bodies has no fixed mansion, but is inordinately moved with the
motion of the Air. And I am confirmed in my Opinion by Nicolas Cabeus, in Lib.
3. of his Magnetic Philosophy, cap. 21. where he informs us, That Iron attains
its verticity or a faculty of turning toward the Poles, not only by touching
the Lodestone, but by being near the same also. Take (says he) a Needle which
has never touched a Lodestone; and hang it up by a thread, then hold it
toward the Lodestone, but so that it may move toward the Lodestone, but not
touch the same, nay, that it may be a pretty distance therefrom; I say, it will
so come to pass, that the Needle shall receive virtue from the Loadstone not
only by touching it, but also by approaching the same without touching: yea, it
would derive into it self the virtue of the Lodestone, although some other
Body were interposed betwixt the Needle and the Lodestone, as Wood, Stone, or
any other. This appears first by experience. For if (as I said) the Needle be
hung up so far off, that it aspires indeed to touch the Lodestone, but cannot
do it, either because it is held afar off, or because some other Body is
interposed betwixt it and the Lodestone; If afterward you take away the
Lodestone the hanging Needle will show all the magnetical Effects most clearly,
which before it did not show, even as if it had touched the Lodestone. For
balanced it will turn to the Poles, its point looking always to the North,
according to the magnetic Laws, and it will draw filed Iron; so that try it
which way you will, it will continually most clearly evidence its magnetic
Virtue, which did not appear before it had so made its approaches to the
Lodestone. Therefore the Lodestone conveighs its Verticity and Virtue into
the Iron not only by touching the same, but by its presence alone if it come
but near the same. Moreover, this is also apparent by Reason. For the Loadstone
has not only in it self a Magnetical Virtue, and consequently a Faculty in it
self to produce the same in Bodies having affinity thereto, but it also sheds
forth round about the said Virtue, and forms to it self a Sphere of activity.
And many other such like Species there are (doubtless) which pierce as easily
through the most solid Bodies, as through the thinnest Air. So far Cabeus.

Now such Qualities are received in any Body agreeable thereto. So the
magnetic Quality is received in the most pure Iron. Also the same Cabeus
writes, it is received in those Bricks which through vehement burning have
gained the color of Iron, and are therefore either from their color or hardness
called Iron Bricks. Lib. 2. Philosoph. Magnet. Cap. 8. and if you take a bit of
such a Brick, and touch it artificially upon a strong Lodestone, it receives
(he says) the Quality of turning to the two Poles of the World.

Fourthly, The fourth Difference.
Occult Qualities are also distinguished in respect to their effects, in regard
some cause Sympathy, others Antipathy, examples whereof are every where to be
seen in Nature, and they are collected by Fracastorius in his Book de Sympathia
and Antip. Marcellus Donatus, de Histor. Med. mirabil. Johan. Francisc. Ulmus,
de Occult. in art. med. proprietat. Andreus Libavius, part 2. singul. tr. 4.
Johannes Schenckius, Lib. 7. Observe. in sine. which I think needless to repeat
in this place.

Fifthly, The fist difference.
There is a certain difference which Galen reckons up, 6. Epidem. com. 6. text.
6. where he divides things which work by Propriety of their whole substance into
four kinds; Aliments, Occult quality of Aliments.
Medicaments, Poisons, and Antidotes, wherein are comprehended al things in
Nature, Minerals, Stones, Plants, Living things. And as to Aliments or Foods,
of necessity some likeness there must be and sympathy between the Food and that
which is nourished thereby; which consists not only in the first Qualities, and
their Temperament, but also in the whole substance and occult qualities; which
even hereby appears, in that there is not one Aliment of al living things, but
sundry Aliments. For several Plants growing in the same Field do each draw its
own proper Aliment, and as Hippocrates writes, Things that grow and are sown,
when they come into the ground each draws that which it finds in the Earth
suitable to its Nature. Now that is sour, and bitter, and sweet, and salt, and
all kinds of Juyces. And the same holds in Animals. For such things as are
poison to a Man are food to some Creatures; as Hellebore to the Quail, Hemlock
to the Starling, Frogs, Snakes, Toads to the Storks. Yea, and some men delight
in some kinds of Meats, and abhor other some.

Now it is a thing not to be doubted that most of the Virtues of Medicaments
proceed from occult Qualities. The quality of occult Medicaments.
Purgatives exercise their Operations by occult Qualities. And so do specifical
Medicaments, and those which are proper to several parts of the Body; also
Amulets, and al things that help or hurt the Body, externally applied. Hitherto
pertain Smells, Fumigations, and those hidden steams which work upon Man and
Beast; as it is very well known how Dogs follow their Masters and wild beasts
footing by the scent; and some cannot endure a Cat in the room though they see
it nor, as was said before: not to speak now of such things as mutually work
one upon another by seeing and hearing. Of al which Johannes Francisc. Vlmus
brings many examples in his whole Third Book de Occult. in art Medica
Proprietat.

And touching Poisons, The Occult qualities of Venoms.
it is so manifest that they act by occult Qualities, that Julius Caesar
Scaliger writes well in Exercit. 218. Sect. 8. If nothing else could persuade us
how vainly and rashly many endeavor to reduce al things to manifest Qualities,
at least poisons and their Remedies might teach us so much.

And the same may be said of Antidotes, Of Antidotes.
seeing they are opposed to Poisons, and therefore as Poisons are hurtful to
our body, nor by manifest, but by Hidden Qualities; so are these also contrary
to Poisons, not by manifest, but by Hidden Qualities.

And whoever shall observe what has been here said in general of Occult
Qualities, he may with little difficulty understand such things as he shall meet
with in the Writings of Natural Philosophers and Physicians concerning the said
Qualities.

THE THIRD DISCOURSE. Of Atoms and Mixture.
Chap. 1. Of Atoms.
NOT only Words (like Money) are current by use, but also Opinions; and those
Opinions of Philosophers which were in request in days of old, have been by
the springing up of other Opinions banished with the Writings of the said
Philosophers. There were anciently (by the Testimony of al Antiquity) most wise
men, Pythageras, Empedocles, Democritus, Socrates, Anaxagoras, Parmenides, and
very many more, whose Opinions nevertheless are either altogether unknown, or
such are attributed to them as seem more like old Wives Fables, than Opinions
becoming a wise man, as Fr. Titelmannus speaks, Lib. 5. Philos. not. cap. 15.
which if they were by us rightly understood, peradventure we should think them
not altogether to be rejected; which nevertheless now at the first appearance,
when they are not understood, are laughed at as absurdities, and rejected as
unworthy of Philosophers. Truly Aristotle in his Works, every where recounts
the Opinions of the Ancients, and sharply opposes the same; but Pererius
ingenuously confesses in Lib. Comment. de rer. nature. princip. cap. 16. That he
cannot deny but that Aristotle in making Inquisition into, and judgment upon
the Opinions of the Ancients, was too hard and severe a Judge and Arbitrator.
And in the same place he relates the Opinion of Simplicius, who conceived that
those ancient Philosophers were accustomed to hide their Opinions under
aenigmatical and allegorical obscurities: and therefore Plato and Aristotle,
fearing lest rude persons as were too dul-headed to understand their abstruse
sense, understanding them according to the first appearance should fall into
Error, did so handle their Opinions as that they might seem to common Readers
to dislike and reprove the same. Not to speak of others, Democritus who lived
when Hippocrates lived, The praise of Democritus.
as appears not only by the Epistles of Hippocrates, but also out of Diogenes
Laertius, and Pliny, Lib. 30. cap. 1. was a man most studious of Philosophy,
and diligently weighed the Opinions, not only of Anaxagoras (whose junior he
was by forty years, as is reported) but also of the Outlandish Philosophers,
and many years together (to attain Wisdom) he traveled strange Countries,
Chaldaea, India, Persia, Aethiopia, Egypt, and heard and consulted with the
great and wise men of those places, as it is to be seen in Aelian, de varia
Historia, Lib. 4. cap. 20 Diogenes Laertius in his Life, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Lib. 1. stromat. and Eulebius, de praeparat. Evangel. Lib. 10. cap. 2. Pliny,
Lib. 30. cap. 1. And during the long time of his L^e (for he died in the
hundred and ninth year of his age) he diligently examined al things, and did so
excel in Philosophy that he was called commonly Pentathlos, the Champion at
five Games, viz. Because he was eminent in Natural, Moral, Mathematical, and
other Disciplines; termed by Hippocrates in his Epistle to Damagetus, the
Wisest of Men, the most Wise Man, and in his Epistle to Democritus, The most
excellent Interpreter of Natu re and the World; and by Aristotle himself in 1.
de general. and corrupt. cap. 2. text. 5. he is preferred before al other
ancient Philosophers in the Science of Nature. And by the Senate and People of
Abdera he was so highly esteemed, that they write in their Epistle to
Hippocrates, That they feared if Democritus should be sick the City of Abdera
would become quite desolate; and in the same Epistle he is termed the Body of
Wisdom. Yea, they called him Philosophy it self, as Aelian relates in the place
fore-alleadged. And this alone argues his great care in the study of Nature,
that Pliny writes Lib. 14. cap. 2. Whereas there are innumerable and almost
infinite sorts of Vines, and almost as many as there are Fields, yet Democritus
was the only man that conceived their kinds might be numbered, professing he
knew all that grew in Greece. It is not therefore credible that so sagacious a
Philosopher, a most wise man (as Hippocrates called him) one so useful to
Humane Life (as Pliny calls him, Lib. 28. cap. 8.) should entertain such absurd
Opinions as are at this day fathered upon him; nor is it (indeed) likely (to
use the words of Pererius, Lib. 4. Phys. cap. 4.) that so discreet and wise a
man, so many water commended by Aristotle, should believe and reach things so
evidently false and absurd, not only secretly contrary to Reason, but likewise
openly against the very Verdict of the Senses.

Now amongst other Opinions ascribed to Democritus, The Dectrine of Atoms a
most ancient Doctrine.
Empedocles, and other most noble ancient Philosophers, is this; That they held
Atoms or individual Bodikies to be the Principles of Natural things, from the
various mixture whereof other Bodies have their Original. And this Opinion was
a most ancient Opinion, and is now attributed to one Mochus a Phaenician, who
is reputed to have flourished before the destruction of Troy; yea, and that it
was the common Opinion of Philosophers before Aristotle, is apparent from the
beginning of his Second Book de Generat. and Corrupt. Aristotle was the first
that relinquished this Opinion, and held that those Atoms or smallest Bodikies
were not only united in mixture, but also by mutual action and passion one upon
another so altered and wrought upon that they ceased to be what they were
before their mixture, and were changed into a Body so similar, that every
smallest part imaginable could be no longer called Fire, It Is founded on Reason.
Water, Air, or Earth, but a mixed Body. Of which we shall speak more largely
when we come to speak of Mixture. And although the Doctrine of A^omes and
Indivisible B^dikies be commonly set out after an odious manner; yet if rightly
explained it seems not absurd. Yea, the Reasons brought for this Opinion are
not light or foolish, but strong and urging, and which can hardly be answered,
as Aristotle himself confess, Lib. 1. de Generat. and Corrupt. cap. 2. text.
6. and which he cannot certainly promise to answer, but he would try what he
could do. And doubtless he knew he could not sollidly refute this Opinion, and
therefore he used not proper and Physical Reasons as he ought to have done, but
Mathematical and extravagant ones.

Now I conceive the Doctrine of Atoms may be thus explained. The Doctrine of
Atoms explained.
In Natural things subject to Generation and Corruption, because there is a
perpetual Interchange of Generating and corrupting, there must needs be certain
simple bodies, each of a nature by itself, out of which the Compounds may be
generated, and into which Compounds are again resolved. For Democritus seeing
that Bodies Natural were neither made of nothing, not made of Points, he was
forced to hold they were made of the smallest Bodikies. Where it is to be
noted, That Democritus did not enquire, Whether there were an individual
Mathematical Magnitude; but whether there were Natural Bodikies of an
indivisible smalness, out of a multitude of which gathered together a certain
surt of natural Body does arise. These Bodikies are therefore termed the
smallest particles in Nature, the manner of Atoms.
Atoms, Atoma corpuscula, indivisible Bodikies; because in the resolution of
Natural Bodies-there is no further progress to be made beyond these into any
thing smaller; and contrariwise Natural Bodies have their original from these.
Which Bodikies are indeed really in Nature, but are so sm^l as they cannot be
discerned by the Senses. Of them Plato in his Timaeus thus writes: Touching
these so small Bodikies we are thus to think, That if you take only one single
one of a kind, there is none of them can be seen by us in regard of its
smalness; but it many are collected together, their bulk and magnitude is
discernable. For neither are those little Bodikies we see floating up and down
in the Sunbeams such Atoms as we speak of, but compounded Bodies. Many have
held there are Atoms.
All the Learnedest Philosophers have acknowledged that there are such Atoms,
not to speak of Empedocles, Democritus, Epicurus, whole Doctrine is suspected,
perhaps because it is not understood. And Galen makes mention of them 1. de
Element. cap. 9. And indeed every where amongst Philosophers and Physicians
both Ancient and Modern, mention is made of these little Bodikies or Atoms,
that I wonder the Doctrine of Aromes should be traduced as a Novelty. That I
may not speak of others besides those whom I have already praised, who may be
suspected as Contemoers of the Ancient Philosophy, and desirous of Novelties;
Franciscus Aquilonius, Lib. 5. Opticae desin. 5. thus writes: Amongst
Elementary Qualities, the two which are termed passive are exceeding far from
the Nature of Light. For neither does Humidity signify a Quality, nor
Humectation an alteration. For humidity in the substance of Water is the same
thing that fattiness is in the substance of Oil; and as fat makes Greasy by
being smeared upon a thing, so moisture moistens only by sticking to a thing.
Again dryness is only the defect of moisture, and exsiccation the consumption
of Humor. And among the active Qualities Cold sends forth no coldness out of it
self: which though it may to some seem strange, yet is it agreeable to reason,
and experience manifestly demonstrates the same. For the coldest body that is
(to feel to) as Ice, does send forth no sense of coldness to ones hand that is
near it; but al cold things are perceived to be so only by handling them. Which
(to such as denied the same) I have often made appear by a pleasant experiment:
for their eyes being blinded and their hand held forth, I would ask them if
they felt the coldness of the Ice near their hand. For sometimes they would say
they felt somewhat when there was nothing near them; and otherwhiles they would
say they felt nothing when the Ice was so near their hand as it did almost
touch the same. And a while after he says; Heat seems to diffuse it self
abroad like Light. Moreover, I account it (truly) most likely that from the
kindled sewel a kindled vapor does fly abroad, which being secretly conveyed
through the Air does heat every thing it touches, and also burns the same if it
have any thickness. Hence it comes to pass that things set near a blazing fire
are burned though they do not touch the visible fire it self, which is often
seen in Paper and Tow; but much more apparently in Naphtha, Asphaltum, Amber,
and such like, which draw the flame to them from afar. Hence also it comes to
pass that the fire heats more strongly and fiercely aloft than beneath or on
the sides, viz. Because the inflamed vapor attenuited by Heat endeavors to
mount upwards. Which truly does not properly agree to a quality, but to a
substance. Nor can you rightly say Heat is Light, but that which is hot. For
that being by the force of heat rarefied becomes lighter; as that is heavier
which by condensation of the matter is brought into a narrower compass. Hence
also the true cause may be rendered, why in the Winter flames do blaze more
lustily: for the surrounding cold hinders the heat from spreading it self
abroad in the Air. And in the same Book, Proposit. 2. We must call to mind what
was said, definit. 5. of this Book, how that the Heat of the Fire is not
carried along by a continual action, but is secretly conveyed through the
Air, just as smells which breath out of odoriferous Bodies, and being received
in the th^n Air, and founded in a secret exhalation, are carried this way and
that way by habnab. So (I say) the fiery heat being carried in a certain
kindled Spirit is thrust strait along, as much as the power of the fire is
able; very speedily upwards, but the more slowly by how much the more
downwards. But being set at liberty it wanders more freely through the Air, and
is driven any way by the lightest motion, and by its sticking to them things
never grow warm, as those which are placed by odotiferous bodies do smell sweet
only by exhalations sticking to them. Soldiers in their Camps find this by
experience, when having cut down a great deal of Wood they pile it up and set
it on fire in the middle of a field, and stand round about the same. For they
that have the wind on their backs do feel hardly any heat although they stand
close by the fire, the fiery spirits being thereby carried unto the opposite
side; which the wind could not do if only a qu^^ty were carried through the
Air; for that being no body would give the wind a free passage through the Air.
Thus far Aquilonius.

But what need we Authorities when the matter is plain enough of it self? it is
proved that there are Atoms.
For if we consult with Experience, which Aristotle so commended in Democritus,
we shall find both the Generations and Corruptions of things to be made by
Atoms, and that there are every where in Nature examples of the uniting and
separating of Atoms. And since there is not only one kind of Atoms, but that
they are various according to the variety of Bodies, I conceive it will be best
to consider them both in respect to the Elements so called, and in respect to
bodies compound.

For in the first place, The Elements themselves are resolved into such Bodies,
and the soid Bodies joining again do make up not only Compounds, but also the
bulk it self of the Elements. Now these Atoms or indivisible Bodikies of the
Elements do arise both out of the resolution and corruption of Compounds, and
likewise out of the Terrene Globe (where in are al Elements) and are carried up
into the Air; whence proceed sundry mutations of the Air, and Generations and
Corruptions, which variously affect both Man and Beasts, and Plants. For it is
very true of the first Atoms or indivisible Bodikies, that if we take but one
Atome of a kind there are none of them visible: but if many of them be gathered
together their magnitude and bulk is discernable, which (as has been said)
Plato also teaches us in his Timaus. Since therefore these Bodies are most small
and subtle, they do both easily pierce into other Bodies, and afford matter
also to others.

Torun through al kinds of Natural Bodies, Fiery Atoms or Bodikies.
and first as to Elements; Fire insinuates it self into Iron and Water. The
same being insensibly in the Summer mixed with the Air makes soultry hot
weather; yea, and (as Experience shows) has burnt up Woods sometimes. It is
variously mingled also with other things, and according to its vatious
commixture makes sundry sorts of things. Fire indeed of it self (as Jul. Caes.
Scal. teaches) neither shines nor burns; but that it shines and burns it comes
to pass by the admixtute of another Body, and the propinquity of the parts, by
whose co-action in a smaller space the substance is greater, and therefore the
force is greater. But being rarefied it burns not, nor does it shine. That
smoke which ascends has much fire in it. Nor yet has it any burning Faculty,
nor shines it at al with any light: and such things as are roasted on Spits are
not touched by that fire which we see; yet are they so touched by fire, as that
they are sometimes burnt to a Coal. Yet is not that fire visible which burns
them. And the same Scaliger, Exercit. 325. Sect. 7. Fire is much more
transparent than the Air, because it is thinner. The Fire which we use is
yellow because of mixture. For there is fire in a vapor, in smoke, in burning
coals, in a flame; and Aristotle calls a flame burning smoke, and that not
amiss. For the flame seems to be no other thing than the meeting together and
union of the particles of fire, the heterogeneal substances being separated.
For whereas by reason of distance and commixture of Contraries the small bodies
of fire could not join together, the obstacle being taken away they begin to be
united. Hence it happens that if the chamber where fire is kept be close shut
the fire will not flame, but as soon as the Air is let in, and those
heterogeneal bodies are discussed, the flame breaks forth. Nor yet is flame
absolutely pure, but contains in it self some heterogeneal Matter, which the
color alone does show. But that fire which is above the flame is purer; and
therefore is not seen. For by reason of the different concourse of the Atoms
diverse bodies seem to arise which yet are of one Nature. The Fire is but one
thing, yet undergoes diverse names, according to the different concourse of its
small bodikies. The Concourse of many homogeneal bodikies of fire is requisite
to make fire in such a condition as to shine and burn; which two things though
fire does not, yet is it fire still.

Now Air is in all bodies almost. Aerial Atoms.
For since most Natural Bodies are porous, Air fills those empty spaces
naturally. Not to speak of other things, some Metals are sounding, others not.
And those which sound have Air in their pores, which is the subject of sound.
So Woods are apt to admit sound, which happens only by means of the Air
contained in them. And this is most frequent in dried Woods; because the watty
moisture being consumed, which was unfit to receive sounds, Air comes into its
place by its quality more fit to receive and advance sounds. And if a man touch
a stick at one end, and put the other end to his ear, be shall hear a sound.
Which comes to pass by means of the Air which is contained in them, seem they
never so solid. And Soldiers are wont to try whether their Enemies are coming
by clapping their Ears close to the Earth.

Water or moist Air (which is nothing but Air full of the vapors of water) does
so insinuate it self into wooden things that they will even be thereby swollen
in bulk. Watery Atoms or Bodikies.
And therefore folding doors many times when the Air is moist, will neither open
nor shut. And tubs that leak being laid in water come to hold again, because
the boards which were contracted and made chinks, are by the water distended.

Finally, Earthy Atoms or Bodikies.
The Earth though it be thick, yet it insinuates it self by its small bodikies
into other things, and is mixed with them. So we see in Baths, Icesickles, and
stoney substances grow to the Channels, so that a man might well wonder how such
a body could lie so long concealed in clear and transparent Water. If therefore
Air and Water can so insinuate themselves into solid Bodies, and Earth can be
so mingled in transparent Water as not to be discerned by the sight, why
therefore may not fire do the fame which is much more subtle? So that there is
now no need to dispute how red hot Iron burns, since really it contains in it
the Atoms or small bodies of fire, which vanishing away it returns to its
Natural actual coldness. For the same cause also Metals are melted, and
afterward growing cold become hard again. Of which we shall speak anon.

Which if a man diligently consider, Alteration what it is. What heating is.
he shall observe, That alterations commonly so called are not mutations only in
Qualities, but the participation of another Body: that the heating of water is
it a participation of fiery Atoms, by means of which also it has the power to
burn, which vanishing the water returns to its ancient coldness. Which also may
be known even by Experience; for hot water shut up in Peuter Pots will retain
its heat ten hours and longer in the Winter time; by which means Beds are
warmed in the Winter, and Gentlewomen traveling by Coach defend their feet
from the Winters cold. For if the water had contracted only heat from the fire,
that imprinted quality in a cold place, in a Vessel made of Metal, and in the
cold air, could not continue so long a time. There are therefore (doubtless)
fiery particles, which being shut up in a thick Metalline Vessel do for some
time abide therein, before they can al leisurely creep out through the pores of
a compact Body. So in the Summer time we are taught by this following
Experiment, That Wine and Beer do not only contract an hot quality in the
heated Air, but that they also receive into themselves fiery particles, viz. If
two Vessels be filled at the same time with Wine or Beer, and both be plunged a
good way into cold water, and then one be stopped, the other open, that Wine or
Beer in the open mouthed Vessel is sooner cooled than that in the stopped vessel;
which therefore happens because the fiery Atoms which did heat the Liquor
being compelled by the force of contrary coldness do sooner exhale when they
have a free passage than when by stopping the vessels mouth they are
restrained. Yea, and it is not absurd to say the Air in our stoves is not only
altered, but receives into it some of the substance of the fire. Nor is it
impossible that the fire should pierce through the furnace, since air (not so
subtle as fire) pierces both into Iron and stone Jugs. Yea, and the thing it
self restifies thus much; for we see paper, clothes, and other combustible
things being held near the hot stove do oftentimes take flame. And if those
supposed alterations are merely such, how can heat and cold be in the same part
of the water; and seeing no accident operates but by virtue of its form whence
it flows, how can that heat springing from the fire act both upon the cold and
upon other Bodies, the fire whence it came being now absent and quenched. Now
whether is more absurd to hold that in water there is also fire, from whence as
its proper subject heat flows? or to hold heat to be both in its own proper,
and in a strange subject? And that this is true many most learned men have
acknowledged, and amongst the rest Averrhoes, who in his B. de Anima, text.
115. writes: We must not think that water is heated remaining pure and meet
water, nor that Air is cooled remaining mere and pure Air; but this happens by
reason o^ hot or cold bodies being mixed with them. Also this is manifest in
the cold air, which nips Plants less being stirred with winds than if it be
still and quiet. For the cold Atoms mixed with the air and sticking to the
Plants do more hurt than when they are stirred. Julius Caesar Scaliger grants
as much, when in Exercit. 12. Sect. 3. he says that Brass becomes hot by the
parts of the fire entering into the pores thereof. The same Scaliger, Exercitat.
14. teaches us, That boiling water is fiery, or has in it fire and dryness;
and he writes that the fire exhales out of hot water: There is (says he) fire
and dryness in hot Water, which in the steam ascending we perceive by our
understanding, and by our sense also; for it burns. The heat which is in water
is fire mingled with its contrary. Yea, and Galen taught this long ago, who in
his 1. Book de Element. cap. 6. says, I say that be who in the time of frost
is warmed with the fire, does receive fire into his Body. And that the
substance of fire and air does penetrate into other bodies, this also argues
that the digestions which are performed in dung or hot water can never be
exactly accomplished in the Embers, whatever degree of heat you shall use; and
because in an hot and dry subject a thing is easily burned, but not in an hot
and moist. Also the Cure of burns, and of parts nummed with cold, as also other
things congealed with cold do show, that alterations hitherto so esteemed are
not mere alterations, but the mixture of a certain kind of Atoms. For if a man
shall put frozen Eggs or Apples into hot water (which should be done were it a
mere alteration) they will be spoiled: but if he plunge them in extreme cold
Water, the frost is drawn, and sticks like Ice upon the out side, and they are
preserved. So those that travel in the Winter, as is well known to the
Inhabitants of Norway and other Northern Countries (nor is it altogether
unknown to our people) and have their Members frozen as it were; if they come
presently to the fire or into an hot room, they are very much hurt and
exceedingly pained, ^^d many times the part becomes gangrenated, the cold parts
(I do not say the coldness, but the cold parts or atoms) piercing inward, and
extinguishing the natural heat. But if their Members are first rubbed with
Snow, or are plunged into cold water, the water or Snow do draw unto themselves
by reason of similitude those atoms and petty cold bodies which had gotten
into the part. Contrariwise, when any Member is any ways burnt, if it be
plunged into cold water (which the Law of alteration requires) it is most
certainly endangered. Contrarily 'twil be cured if it be put, not into cold but
hot water, which may by similitude draw to it self those hot bodikies: and if
the burning be not great, the Member may be held to the fire, or hot embers may
be applied thereto. Of which Fernelius, 6. de Method. Medendi, cap. 20. As the
fire, if a part which is burned be held near the same, becomes a cure of the
evil it self caused, and by drawing back the fire eases it of its pain; so some
things externally applied do by their hear draw out the heat of the fire, and
so by ceasing the Inflammation they cure burnings. For fire and hot things do
by similitude draw out the fiery Atoms. And for this very cause (as Aristotle
writes in the 13. Problem of the 24. Section) hot things are faster cooled in
the Sun than in the shade, because the beams of the Sun draw out the fiery
Atoms.

But that same Opinion of Thomas Fienus is altogether absurd, The Fire is no
Accident.
who in his Apology against Sanctacruz, Page 50. says, that this Fire of ours
which we use (he calls it artificial and earthly, unfitly; since it is most
natural and of the same substance with that Fire which is in other parts of the
world, although it be in a thicker matter) is an Accident; and he conceives
that those things which are said to be Fired, or those substances which men are
wont to call Fire, as Iron, Coals, Flame, are indeed Substances: but that which
is in them more than their own substance, by reason of which they are called
Fire, or are said to burn, he denies to be a substance, and thinks that the
fleriness adds nothing to the burning Iron, Wood, or Furnace, but an Accident,
viz. a most intense Heat, and that he endeavors thus to prove.

First, He says, a substance is not capable of more onless. That same firiness
in the Iron, Wood, Furnace, admits of more and less. Ergo it is no substance.

Secondly, When the Iron is red hot or the smoke flames, the whole Iron is
fired, and the fire is in all the parts thereof. If therefore the fire were a
substance, in all the parts of the burning Iron there would be another
substance, and consequently one substance should be in another, and so there
would be a penetration of dimensions; which is absurd.

Thirdly, He says: When the Iron becomes red hot, either the substance of the
fire comes into the Iron from without, or it is generated in the pores thereof.
he conceives neither of these can be: Not the first, because neither the Coal
of the fire because it is thick, and stics not, but lies still, nor the flame of
the fire, because of its extreme thinness and lightness, can enter into the
hard substance of the Iron. Moreover, if the fire entered into the Substance of
the Iron, when the Iron cools, the flame that went in should come out again:
but no man (he says) did ever see fire fly or go out of a cooling Iron. Also
(he says) the latter is impossible, because the substance of the Iron should
be turned into the substance of the Fire; which is false, because the Iron
remains Iron still.

Fourthly, If the Iron became fire, it should lose its Heaviness, Hardness, and
Consistency.

Fifthly, A Substance is a Being subsisting by it self, not existing in another
thing, nor inhering in any thing as its subject. But the fire by it self no
where subsists, but is always in some other thing, as in its subject, after
the manner of accidents; and its subject taken away wherein it sticks, there is
no such thing as Fire. Ergo it is an Accident.

Sixthly. Every Body of it self has Quantity: for Quantity springs from matter,
and the determination thereof from the form: But Fire has neither it self any
Quantity, nor has it any determinate figure, but it has only the Figure and
Quantity of the subject wherein it inheres, as other accidents. Therefore it is
no Body.

But this Error Julius Caesar Scaliger long since observed and resuted in
Cardan, Exercit. 10. For nothing is accidentally in any thing, which is not
essentially, primarily, and of it self in some other; since every accident
flows from a certain substance. And therefore since Heat is accidentally in the
Iron, of necessity there must be a substance wherein it is primarily, and by
which the Iron becomes hot: But such there can be none but the Fire. And if
fire be a Quality, its first and proper subject must be some substance. But
those reasons whereby Fienus was brought into that opinion are so slight, that
I wonder so learned a man should thereby be moved so to hold.

For, in the first place, we deny that the firiness in the Wood, Iron, Furnace,
Smoke, receives more and less. But that the fire sometimes burns more, sometimes
less, happens by reason of the application thereof to the Patient. For Virtue
united is stronger, and therefore Fire in a compact substance, as Iron, burns
more than in a thin substance, as Stubble or Straw.

To the second I answer: That Smiths can tell that Iron is porous; and
therefore the fire can easily insinuate it self thereinto. And whereas Fienus
denies the Iron to have pores; that is contrary to sense: for Smiths know how
to distinguish the sorts of Iron, and discern Iron from Steel by the variety of
the pores. Nor is that of any moment which he further objects, that if the fire
were only in the pores of the Iron, the solid parts thereof should not burn,
nor would the Iron be light all over, many parts thereof would be dark. For
indeed Fienus was ignorant of the nature of the small individual Bodikies or
Atoms, nor did he consider what daily happens in Nature. For if Water can so
penetrate into all the smallest parts of Wood, that there shall be no part
thereof which is not moistened; Why may not the moist subtle fire much more
pierce the Iron? And therefore to his third Argument we Answer, That the
substance of the Fire does certainly enter the Iron from without. For although
the Coal it self stir not, and enter not into the Iron; yet the fire which is
in the coal exhales in small Atoms, and insinuates it self into the Iron. And
the thinness of the flame does not hinder the same, but rather help it to enter
the hard substance of the Iron. And when the Iron cools again, then the fire
exhales out of it; which though it be not discerned by our bodily eyes (for who
can see the pure Elements of Fire and Air?) yet Philosophers discern it
sufficiently by the effect.

To the fourth I answer, the Iron is not made Fire, but it receives the same.
Which while it does, it loses indeed its hardness and consistency, so that it
may be bent and beaten by the Hammer, yea, and it may be melted.

To the fifth I say; It is false that Fire no where exists by it self, but is
always in some other thing as a subject; which the sense teaches. And although
fire be in the Iron; yet is it not there as an accident in its subject; just as
when water is in a Vessel, it is not there as in a Subject.

To the sixth I answer; That the Elements of themselves have no determinate
figure nor quantity, but they are determined and receive figure from the things
which compass them about.

Contrariwise, Cold Atoms having no hot body mixed with them, Refrigeration.
being abundant in the Air in the Winter time, they cause extreme cold, and
congeal al bodies whereinto they insinuate themselves.

Nor did the Ancients only teach, Of the Elementary Atoms mixture is made.
That these first Atoms of the Elements did variously spread themselves up and
down, and penetrate into other bodies; but that of them also mixed Bodies were
made; and they held them to be nevertheless immutable, and to retain their own
Nature how ever they were mixed, and being separated from the things wherewith
they were mixed they held their Nature entire as before. For thus Lucretus
writes in his Second Book. What came from Barth goes back to Earth again,
And Heavenly parts do fly to Heaven amain.
Nor does grim Death consume our Bodies so
As to destroy the Matter, but unsew
The joined Parts.


Most Meteors (truly) are no other than a mass of Elementary Atoms variously
congregated. For Exhalations and Vapors are not continued bodies, as is
commonly thought, The Meteors are made of Atoms.
but crowds of infinite Atoms; which is manifest from the vapors arising from
water which heats over the fire. For these though far off they seem to be a
continued body, yet he which is near at hand, or who walks on a Mountain top
when the Air is misty, may even discern with his eyes that these vapors are not
continued Bodies, but a throng of Atoms. A Cloud is nothing else but an
infinite multitude of Atoms. A Cloud.
For as when we see a smoke ascend from burning Pitch or any other thing, we
think afar off that it is a continued united body; but if we come neeter and
diligently look upon the smoke, we see that it is no continued, no nor
contiguous body neither; and so it is with Clouds, which until the small bodies
are again joined together (which happens in Rain and Snow) they are no
continued bodies, but many millions of millions of petty Atoms or smallest
bodies. And Clouds as they are of diverse kinds, so when they grow together
again diverse things are bred of them, as Rain, Snow, Hail, Winds, Lightnings,
and other Meteors so called. Sometimes nevertheless the Atoms of Bodies
perfectly mixed are mingled amongst the Meteors.

For there are (in the second place) Atoms of another kind besides the
Elementary (which if any man will term first mixed bodies, The second kind of
Atoms.
he may do as he please) into which as similar parts other compound bodies are
resolved. And indeed in the mixture of Natural things, or that which happens in
lifeless things, these bodies of which the mixed things consist are so broken
and divided into small particles, as that none of them can be discerned and
known by it self. Also in all fermentations and digestions and coctions, which
are made by Nature or Art, nothing is done but to reduce things into their
smallest parts, and unite them as nearly as may be. Contrariwise, the
Resolution of Natural Bodies, both that which is done by Nature, and that
performed by Art, is nothing but the resolving of them into their smallest
parts or Atoms.

But Chemical Resolutions do in a special manner discover that there are
Atoms, Chemical Operations prove Atoms.
and teach sufficiently what little bodies there are. So Spirit of Wine pierces
through writing paper four times double into the Alembick; and in Distillations
and Sublimations such Atoms are raised from Plants and Minerals into the
Alembick or Recipient, many missions whereof nevertheless when they join
together again do sometimes hardly make one drop or sensible quantity of Liquor.
Nor let any man here persuade himself when he sets a vapor rise out of water or
Spirit of wine, or a Smoke arise out of Pitch, Sulphur, or burning wood, that
these bodies are changed into Air; but the water, spirit of wine, and other
bodies, are resolved into the smallest Atoms, which when they join together
again, they turn to water, spirit of wine, or some other body again; which the
Alembicks of Chemists and their Recipients do teach. Also whiles spirit of
Vitriol and other Spirits are distilled, the Recipient Vessel is often full of
such small, but not yet smallest bodies for two or three days together, and
every moment some millions of such bodies are present and follow one another.
Yet a small quantity of Liquor comes of them when they meet and are condensed;
so that those Atoms which are present at the same moment, of which
nevertheless there are some millions, do hardly constitute one drop. We see the
same in other Resolutions. If a man set on sire a little bit of Pitch, and
suppress the flame, an huge space of Air is filled with the smoke thereof,
which is no one continued body, but a multitude of little Atoms or small
bodies. And what difference there is betwixt a body compact and resolved into
Atoms, we may learn only by the putting out of a Candle. For if one blow out a
burning Candle, the smoking Snuf, which is hardly so big as a Pease, does
presently send forth so great a quantity of Atoms that a great part of the Air
is filled therewith. So flower of Brimstone melts into Brimstone; Mercury
precipitate, or sublimate, or however resolved, does return again to living and
running Quicksilver. So the water wherein Metal is dissolved, although it seem
clear water, and is so exactly mixed that it will pass through a paper: yet the
Metal preserves its own nature therein entire, and is easily precipitated to
the bottom in form of a most very fine powder, which is afterward melted into
a Metal again. So also if one Mass be made of Gold and Silver melted together,
and they be so mingled in their smallest Atoms that no man would think them
but one simple body; yet in the mean while in those smallest Atoms each Metal
preserves its form and nature, and may be separated by Aqua fortis, and reduced
into its former Nature. Hence the cause of many Chemical Operations and things
done in Chemistry may be rendered. If to Lead any way calcined you pour
distilled Vinegar, the Lead is indeed dissolved in the Vinegar, but the salt of
the Vinegar unites its self to the Lead, so that if it be drawn off by
distilling, it comes away quite without taste, the salt of the Vinegar remaining
with the Lead, whence comes that same sweet mixed body which they call Saccharum
Saturni, Precipitation.
or Sugar of Lead. So if Crab's-eyes, Corals, Pearls, be dissolved by Vinegar or
other acid Liquors, and be reduced to powder, so that they may be also strained
through a paper, and the salt of those acid Liquors by reason of the similitude
joins it self with the bodies dissolved (so that if it be distilled it cannot
be separated without much ado) yet if into the solution you drop Oil of Tattar
made by Deliquium, the salt of Tartar does by similitude unite it self to the
salt of Vinegar, and the dissolved Pearl or Coral is precipitated to the
Bottom. So if to Quicksilver you pour Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, the
Quicksilver is dissolved in them, but the salt which is in those Spirits is
united to the Quicksilver, whence arises Mercury precipitate, which has
therefore such a corrosive faculty. Of Quicksilver, Vitriol, Salt, is made
Mercurius sublimatus. Of Mercury and Sulphur sublimed together, is made
Cinnabaris. Thus Metals are reduced into powder when being dissolved in
corrosive Liquors they are precipitated to the bottom. Yet they return and are
reduced into their former Nature, that Body or Salt being taken away which they
borrowed from the Solvent, Reduction.
which Operation is called Reduction. Which may be performed diverse ways.
Mercury precipitate if it be rubbed in a Mortar with Oil of Tartar or Salt of
Tartar dissolved per deliquium, the Salt which cleaves to the Mercury is united
to the Salt of Tartar, and forsakes the Mercury, whereupon it turns to Quick
silver again. So, if Mercury sublimate be mixed with Quicklime, and put into a
Retort, the Salt of Vitriol, and the common Salt which is in the sublimate,
sticks to the live or unslak'd Lime, and so the Mercury returns to its former
Nature, and becomes Quicksilver again. The Calces or Pouders of Metals are
turned into molten Metals when the Salt mixed therewith is dissipated by a
strong fire, yet it is done sooner if some of those Pouders they call melting
Pouders be mixed therewith. For the Salts of which those meking Pouders are
made do draw to them the Salt which adheres to the calcined Metal; from which
when they are freed, the Aromes of the Metal by reason of similitude unite
themselves, and so ^^^urn into their a^^ent Body and shape. And indeed, how
many external forms Bodies natural being mixed with others may put on (their
substantial form remaining safe and sound) even Mercury alone may teach us,
which puts on so many external forms, Manyshap'd Mercury.
that it may be well called Many-shap'd Mercury. It Is changed into a clear
water, into a Liquor like Butter; it is sublimated, precipitated, reduced into
powder, into Glass, the likeness of Lead, Gold, Silver, so that it may be
wrought into Plates, and I know not how many forms besides; al which
nevertheless it lays down, if that which is mingled with it be therefrom
separated.

This Doctrine also of Atoms is manifestly confirmed by anointings with
Mercury and Fumigations made thereof; wherein the Quicksilver being reduced
into small Atoms penetrates the whole Body to the very jaws and mouth where it
may be received by pieces of Gold held in the same. Yea, and it has been found
that after nointings with Mercury, Quicksilver has been collected in the
Cavities of the Veins and Bones.

Yea, There are Atoms not only of inanimate Bodies, but also of some animate
bodies: Atoms of Animate Bodies.
and the Soul it self may sometimes luik and preserve it self in such small
bodies; as we shall hereafter show when we treat of the Spontaneous Original of
living things; and upon this Doctrine of Atorues the most learned Fortunius
Licetus has built in a manner al his Treatise of the Spontaneous Original of
live things. Of which we shall speak in its place.

Plants (truly) do manifestly declare that there are Atoms. The Atoms of
Plants.
For who would believe that in clear and transparent Wine there were a stony
substance, unless it appeared by separation, whiles the Tartar separated from
the Wine sticks to the sides of the Vessels? And matter unfit to nourish the
body being thrust into the joints stirs up arthritick pains, and there at
length it grows into a kind of stoney substance. The Generation also of other
diseases shows the same: For seeing many superfluous things unfit to nourish
are taken in with our meat, they though they are bitter, and sour, and salt,
and otherwise pomaint, strong and different; yet (as Hippocrates says, de
Prisca Medicina) being mixed and mutually tempered together they are neither
perceived, nor do they hurt a man: but when any of them is separated and by it
self, then it becomes apparent, and troubles a Man.

Also the Atoms of Purging Medicaments do make the Milk purging, The Atoms of
purgatives
as also Hippocrates says in 6. Epidem. com. 5. text. 33. If a woman or a she
Goat eat Elaterium or the wild Cucumer, their young ones are purged. For
although as we have also said in our tr. de Dissens. chymicor. cum Aristotelic.
and Galen. a purging Plant eaten by a she Goat is digested in her stomach, and
mingled with the Chyle, that Chyle is turned to Blood, that Blood in the Goats
Dugs becomes Milk, this Milk is drunk by the Nurse, and there are so many
mutations: yet in all these the Atoms of the purging Plants remain entire, and
keep their Virtues.

Milk also it self, though it seem but one body, yet the Whey, Butter, and
Cheese do show being separated, that there were diverse small Bodies mingled
together therein. So the Blood of Animals, although it seems to be one
homogeneal Body, there are nevertheless therein not only diverse parts which
afford nourishment to different Members; but also if it be distilled, Volatile
Salt which before did not show it self sticks in great quantity to the
Receiver. Which also happens if the Horns and Bones of Animals be distilled.

Yea, and the consideration of whole entire Animals may bring us to the knowledge
of Atoms. Aristotle in the 5. Histor. Animal. cap. 3. writes that in old Wax
and in Wood a certain Animal is bred (which is the least of al living things)
called Acari. There are also a sort of Lice called Sirones, so small that they
cannot be seen but by a sharp sight, and in an augmenting Glass. Yet these are
Animals, ergo they have an animal, motive, nutritive, and sensitive faculty in
an Organical Body made up of very many Organs. They draw, concoct, assimilate
their nourishment, and are moved. They have therefore animal Spirits, and
natural, which are themselves also bodies; they have Organs wherein they are
generated, and wherein they are contained. And al these again if we divide them
into their first and smallest Atoms or bodies, how many thousand parts will
they make? and if the little Creature Acari, or a small Louse, be divided into
so many thousand parts, how very exceeding little must those parts be?

And although those Atoms be so exceeding small; Atoms retain the forms of
things.
yet the essential forms of things remain in them entire, as was lately said,
and experience it self does witness. For if Gold and Silver be melted together,
the Atoms of the Gold and Silver are so mingled in their smallest parts, that
no sense can discern the one from the other. Yet both of them do retain their
forms entire. Which appears hereby in that if you put Aqua fortis upon the said
Mass, the Silver melts and turns into the Liquor, but the Gold remains in form
of a Powder. If the dissolved Silver be precipitate it settles to the bottom in
form of a most delicate fine Powder. Each of these Pouders molten by themselves
do return into their former shapes of Gold and Silver. So if Quicksilver be
sublimed, precipitated, turned to water, and undergo other changes, according
to the various mixture of the Atoms whereinto it is resolved with other
things; yet it always retains its own essential form, is easily separated from
the Bodies wherewith it is mixed, and returns into its old shape of running
Quicksilver. Nor does this betide in Metals only, but also in Vegetables or
Plants. For when distilled Waters and Spirits are made by Chemists, insensible
Atoms arise out of the Plants, so that in the Cucurbita they cannot any ways
be discerned; but when they join together in the Alembick, and turn to Liquor,
they again show themselves in their likeness, whiles one is Spirit of Wine,
another of Juniper, etc. And if a Goat be nourished with certain purgative
Herbs, and a Nurse drink the Milk of the Goat, it will purge the Infant which
sucks that Nurses Milk; as was said before out of Hippocrates, 6. Epidem. com.
5. text. 33.

That most learned Peripatetick Jacobus Schegkius acknowledged the truth of
this thing, when in Lib. 2. de Occult. Medic. facult. cap. 1. he thus wrote,
The beating of a thing into a most fine powder does not necessarily corrupt the
substance thereof, seeing it is an accident of an accident for that which is
continual to be divided into very small bodies. And a little after; It does not
follow that the substance is abolished, if a man shall say that Medicaments
beaten into powder are effectual in our bodies.

Howbeit, Atoms are determinate.
Atoms have their Laws from Nature, and doubtless the Atoms of Fire are more
subtle than those of Earth, although we cannot difcern so much. For so the
case stands with Natural things that the forms consist not save in a certain
quantity; and as they diffuse not themselves beyond their Natural bounds; so
they cannot be conserved save in a certain quantity. This also Franciscus
Aguilonius observed, who in the 5. B. of his Optics, Proposit. 8. declared
this thing in the example of Light, when he wrote; Though there is not a
smallest in quantity, yet Light has a smallest in Nature, Things smallest in
Nature.
that is to say, so small a Light that it cannot be smaller without perishing.
After which manner there are also the smallest among Natural Bodies; which if
they be any more divided they lose their form and essence. For as Bodies
toward their natural subsistency do require some bulk of quantity, which is
nothing but the measure of corporeal substance; even so Qualities also (unless
they be in some degree of excellency) they perish of their own accord. And in
Propos. 15. We affirm that Light cannot of its own strength and by it self
exist solitarily in any degree whatsoever, but that there is a certain limit of
smalness, beyond which we cannot proceed by dividing without the destruction
thereof, which therefore we may not unfitly call the minimum natural of Light:
but if it be joined to a greater Light, although it be small, nothing hinders
but by help thereof it may be sustained, provided both together do at least
attain to the minimum natural, or smallest natural quantity of Light.
Moreover, this imbecility of subsisting is not proper to these Qualities
alone, which admit the diversity of greater and lesser, but also common to al
Bodies which vary their magnitude. For as these without some bulk, so they
without some degree of excellency cannot free themselves from destruction. For
being attenuated beyond their strength they fall to nothing and perish, no
contrary thing destroying them, but only through defect of that measure, which
being an indispensable Law of Nature, is requisite to the proper maintenance of
each one. But what he says of Qualities may be said much more of Forms from
which the Qualities flow.

Now those disputes against Atoms concerning the infinite division of that
which is continued of indivisible Lines, are disputed not from Natural but
Mathematical Principles. For the Question is not here (as was said before)
Whether a thing continued be perpetually divisible Mathematically? but, Whether
or no Nature in her Generation and resolution of Bodies does not stop at some
smallest Bodies, than which there are not, nor can be any smaller.

Chap. 2. Of Mixture.
SInce the Doctrine of Mixture is exceeding necessary rightly to understand the
Generation of al Natural Things, and the Foundation wel-neer of al Natural
Philosophy; it is worth our Labor duly to explain the same. Which that we may
the better do, we are to know in the first place that the term Mixture has
sundry acceptations. Mixture what it signifies.
For (as Thomas Erastus, Disput. 2. Contra Paracels. part 2. p. 195. writes)
sometimes it signifies an Heap and Mass of things blended together, as of Rye,
Wheat, and other such like things which keep their surface and Integrity.
Sometimes it signifies the composition of two or three, or more Bodies, so
confused together, that though each retain its own Nature, and they may be
separated again, yet one Body is made up of al. Such is Crama, which is made of
Wine and Water mixed; which is not one in Form, but in continuation only. For
although neither the Wine nor the Water be separable by their bounds, yet they
are both so contained under their Natural Form as Gold is in Silver, which may
be separated by Aqua fortis. Such a Body is Honey and Wine, Honey and Water,
and infinite others compounded by Art. Thirdly, it is taken for a Body
compounded of diverse things, so that of all one thing is made, of a different
Nature from all the Ingredients, and having a form quite different from their
forms. And things so mixed are truly said to be mixed bodies. The first mannet
(since there in no real mixture is made, but dry things are only blended
together, which makes no difficulty in our minds) Julius Caesar Scaliger omits,
and propounds other three, Exercitat. 101. Sect. 1. There are (says he) three
Manners, Degrees, or Sorts of Mixture. The first is of those things which after
they are blended may again be separated; as a mixture of water and wine. For
Pliny reports they are separated with Vessels of Ivy as he had it from Cato;
and we do it with a cloth. The other manner is as it happens in those bodies
natural which we call imperfectly mixed, of which there are two degrees: The
other more weak, as of a Cloud, Rain, Wind, Hail, Snow, Dew, Hoar-froast, and
such like. For they are exhalations mixed of diverse Elements which may easily be
dissolved. But they hang together more closely than those of the first sort.
The other degree is of a firmer union; as in clods of Earth and stones. For the
parts of these are not easily separated one from another. Yet they call them
rather mixed Bodies than by any other nobler Appellation, because they seem to
them to be things only begun. The third Mixture is of such things as some are
pleased after a peculiar manner to term Mixed Bodies. Such are Vegetable and
Sensitive things.

Now concerning these three Manners, the Question is, Whether they are in all
mixed bodies made after one and the same manner. What mixture it.
Which that we may rightly unfold we must know in the first place what Mixture
is. Now Aristotle defines it to be the Union of things mixable after they are
altered. And Scaliger in the place fore-alleadged; That it is the motion of
Atoms or smallest Particles of Bodies to a mutual Contact, so as they may
become one. And he further explains his meaning, and that rightly, how that
every thing that is, i^ one, not only by continuation and privation of pure
contiguity, but by act also, by virtue whereof it comes to pass that those
parts become one body. Now by Act he means the Form, by which it comes to pass
that those parts which by their own nature and aptitude might come together to
an Union, are become actually one. And he concludes rightly, That those things
which are not one Being formally, but by accident only (as an Heap of Beans
and Oats blended is one) are not properly mixtbodies, nor ought so to be
called, but things jumbled, as Wine and Water, Silver and Gold; since such
things are not formally one, but so many things as there are parts within and
without, and only one by accident; which though it be less manifest to the
senses, yet is it not hid to the understanding of wise Men; seeing they may
easily be separated, as Wine and Water by Ivy Vessels, and by clothes; and
Silver and Gold by Aqua fortis so called.

But by all that has been said the difficulty is not quite removed, nor the
Nature of Mixture sufficiently explained; but two knots do remain as yet to be
untied, which being rightly unfolded they bring great Light to Natural
Philosophy and Physic. For although we must needs grant, that nothing is truly
mixed but what is formally one; yet the question still remains: First, Whether
it be necessary that the mixable bodies which are united by virtue of oue Form,
and grow together into one mixed Body, should lose their own Forms? or, Whether
in the mixed body they may al under another form retain their own forms still?
Secondly, Whether the Elements only are mixable, and every resolution into the
smallest particles made in reference to Mixture does always proceed so far as
to the Elements? or whether other bodies more noble than the Elements may
properly be said to be mixed? Both which Questions must be explained.

As to the first Question, Whether things mixable do in the mixture ^etain
their ^o^ms?
That the same may be rightly explained, we will only enquire concerning the
Elements. For concerning them there is no doubt but that they are rightly
mixed; but as touching other Bodies the matter is questionable. But whatsoever
shall be said of the Elements, that has also undoubtedly place in all other
mixable bodies. Now there are chiefly two Opinions concerning Mixture; the one
held by well-nigh all the Ancients before Aristotle, as Empedocles, Democritus,
Anaxagoras, Hippocrates, yea, and by very many Philosophers since Aristotle,
who al held that Generation and Corruption are made by the Conjunction and
Separation of Atoms, and that the Bodies mixed do retain their forms entire in
the thing made up of them. Which manifestly appears out of Hippocrates, Lib. 1.
de Victus ratione, where he writes: What I mean by Generation and Corruption I
must explain for the sakes of many, viz. To be mixed and separated. Now thus
the matter stands: To be generated, and to be mingled are all one, and to be
separated and corrupted are all one. According to whose mind, as I said before,
Jul. Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 101. defines Mixtion; That it is the motion of
Atoms to the mutual contact one of another, that they may be united. The other
is the Definition of Aristotle. For he only separated from the Ancients in this
point. For thus in the 1. de Gener. and cor. cap. 10. he writes against
Empedocles: We must not say, That such things as are mixed are mingled by their
small parts, which still retain their own nature. For that would be a
composition, but not a temperature or mixture, nor would the part be of the
same nature with the whole. We say, That if a thing be mixed the parts thereof
are one like another, even as every part of water is water. But if mixture be a
composition according to the small parts, none of these things does happen, but
that is only a mixture so appearing to the sense, and that which a dim-sighted
man will account mixed, a quick sighted man will discern not to be mixed. He
teaches the same in the 2. de generat. and corrupt. cap. 7. page 47. the sense
of which place Toletus thus propounds: He reproves this manner of mixture
(which Empedocles supposed) because one inconvenience follows, viz. That out of
every part of the mixed body the four Elements could not be extracted, and so
every part of the mixed body is not mixed: the Consequence is cleared, because
as out of every part of a wall cannot be taken stones and bricks, because where
the one is, the other is not: so truly it will be in a mixed body, which is made
after the same manner of the Elements. And thus indeed Arisiotle opposes the
Opinion of the Ancients; but he so propounded his own Opinion that hitherto for
so many Ages there has been Civil War amongst his Expositors, what his Opinion
was, or how it is to be explained; whiles some (as Averrhoes) do hold that as
well the substantial Forms as the Qualities of the Elements do remain actually
in the body mixed, only broken, allaied, and reduced to a mediocrity. Others
(as Scotus) do teach that the forms and qualities of the Elements do quite
perish in the mixture, and that a new form of the mixed body is generated, and a
new quality, which is the temperature of the mixed body. Others (as most of the
Latins) do conceive, That the forms of the Elements are no ways preserved in
the mixed body, neither entire nor broken, yet they hold the Qualities remain in
the mixed body, but broken and reduced to a mediocrity. Whose contentions to set
down in this place is no part of my business. They may be read in Zabarella his
Book of Mixture, in Tolet. Lib. 1. de generat. et corrupt. cap. 10. and other
Expositors of Aristotle every where.

There have been found in the mean while most learned men of no small note, The
Opinion of those Authors who hold the Forms remain in the mixed ^edies.
who being moved with the evidence of the thing it self, have embraced the
Opinion of the Ancients, as Philoponus, Albertus, Aureolus, Zimara; and amongst
Physicians Avicenna, Fernelius, and very many more, who so stoutly defend the
Opinion of the Ancients that some of them write, Whoever read their Arguments
(if he be not a Mil-stone) will consent, and those that think otherwise play the
Sophisters, abuse the Works of Nature, and destroy and defile the Splendour of
the Ancient Discipline. And especially Avicenna comes up directly to the mind
of the Ancients, and holds, That the Elements in mixed Bodies do retain their
Forms perfect and entire, howbeit divided and cut into very small parts, so that
their particles composed and knit together in a certain order do mutually
cohere one with another. Fernelius follows Avicenna, who Lib. 2. Physiolog.
cap. 6. calls the Opinion of those that hold the contrary, a childish and vain,
nay, a monstrous Opinion; and he judges that those who so think have contemned
the Philosophy of the Ancients. And they do indeed al of them well, in that they
adhere firmly to the Opinion of the Ancients, being moved thereto by most firm
Reasons: but herein they take pains to no purpose, whiles they would make this
to have been the Opinion of Aristotle; since Aristotle in express words
relinquishes the Ancients in their Opinion, as appears in that place lately
alleged. Yea, and very many others who differ from the Ancients saw this
Truth, and nothing but the Authority of Aristotle hindered them from embracing
the same; and if the Authority of Aristotle be set aside, and the point debated
only by reason, and no vain labor bestowed how to reconcile this Doctrine with
Aristotle's words, that is, Truth with Falsehood, the case is very plain. Yea,
Aristotle himself comes to this Opinion against his will, whiles at the end of
his 1. Book de Ortu and Interitu, he defines Mixture to be the Union of things
mixable, being altered. For when he says the Union of things altered, he
intimates that the things mixed do not perish, but remain in the body mixed.
For if they are altered and mixed they do not perith. Nor does the word Union
oppose this Opinion, as Zabarella conceits in cap. 1. de Mist. but rather
confirms the same. For Union is the Copulation of such things as have a real
Being, but not of things that perish. And although of many things one be made:
yet neither is it necessary that those simples should perish, nor is it a mere
aggregation or blending, but the simples by a superior form are reduced into
one body. And this Doctrine of the Ancients, viz. That the Elements and simple
Bodies do keep their natures entire in the Compounds, is the key (in a manner)
to al Natural Philosophy, and the greatest part of Chemistry and Physic.

Contrariwise, That only Opinion of Aristotle, That the Simples do not retain
their Natures in mixed Bodies, has cast the Expositors of Aristotle into
Labyrinths and inextricable Controversies, and has been brought into Natural
Philosophy to the great damage of Physic; which being rejected all things
become plain and easy.

Arguments for this Opinion.
The ancient Philosophers, and late Authors which follow them, have been
induced to embrace this Opinion by very strong reasons. For first of al, the
Nature of Mixture shows as much, since ^^ings that perish cannot be said to be
mixed: which Aristotle himself in the end of Lib. 1. de Ortu and Interitu
acknowledges. Nor could he do otherwise. For since (as in Metaph. Lib. 5. text.
3.) he declares, That Elements are that of which existing things consist; it
must needs be that these Elements (if they were Elements) must abide and exist
in the mixed Body.

Moreover, Since Action presupposes Act, and in mixed bodies the actions of the
Elements are apparent; of necessity they must be actually in them. Not to speak
of others, Aristotle hunself, Lib. 1. de Caelo, writes, That a mixed Body is
moved according to the sway of the prevailing Element.

Finally, The Resolution of mixed Bodies into their Elements shows the same. For
mixed bodies are resolved into the Elements; and Aristotle himself in 1. de
generat. and corruptext. 84. says, That the things mixable may be separated
again from the mixed body. And if so, then were they actually in the mixed body.

The force of which Argument is such, That those who have labored to answer the
same, have shamefully foiled themselves. For the Conimbricensian Collegiates,
while they deny that while Woods are burnt they are resolved into the four
Elements, and deny that the water which drops out of the said wood, and
distilled waters, are true water, they resist not only Aristotle himself, and
other Peripateticks, but also their very Senses. For suppose that Liquor which
drops out of burning Wood, or from an Alembick, is not pure water: yet our
Senses, and the separation which is easily made, do witness that the greatest
part thereof is water. And after this reckoning there should be no Element of
Water in the whole World; since it is no where sound pure. But others lest they
should go against their own Senses, do indeed grant that mixed bodies are
resolved into the Elements, but they foolishly hold, that not the same Elements
in number, but only the same sort of Elements come out of the mixed body; which
is founded upon no reason, but is only hatched to palliate an absurd Opinion,
yea, and it is repugnant to Reason and Experience. For when they hold that
Elements return out of the mixed body by reason of the action of a like Element,
whereby they recover what they lost in the mixture; how I pray you, in
distillations and burnings can Water and Earth be excracted out of the
Compound? since Fire by acting upon the mixed body introduces nothing that is
watery or earthy, yea, the action of fire is adverse to water and earth, so far
is it from augmenting or perfecting the same. The only agent in combustions is
fire: and the force thereof equally affects all the parts of the mixed body, and
yet nevertheless it brings out some bot, others cold, others moist, others dry,
others bitter, others sweet, others other ways differing: which since they
cannot proceed from one only action of fire, verily we must believe they were
before in the mixed body.

And which way soever they turn themselves who hold the contrary Opinion, yet
they can no ways dis-intangle themselves. For either the Form remains in the
mixed body, or it does not remain. If it remain, it remains either entire, or
broken.

He who holds they remain entire, consents with the Ancients. But Averrhoes and
Zabarella hold they remain broken. But what they bring concerning the
Refraction or breaking of the Forms, is a mere figment; and their Opinion who
hold the forms of the Elements are capable of more or less are sufficiently
refuted from the Latins disputing against the Opinion of Averrhoes; nor have
they ever brought any so much as a probable reason for their Opinion, but have
only simply and barely affirmed, that Forms have certain degrees, some of which
may be taken away, and the rest remain. For the whole Nature of the Form
consists in that which cannot be divided, nor does any Form receive more or
less, but where ever it is, either it is totally there, or not at al.

But they which hold the Forms do not remain in the Body mixed, and that
nothing remains but the matter, are very absurd and almost ridiculous. For what
mixture is there where nothing remains? For since the Elements have no other
matter than the first, and the first matter is common to all the Elements, I
cannot say that one mixed body has more fire than air. For whatsoever is, is by
its form. And therefore if the Elements are not in the mixed body by their form,
they are not there at al. And thus a mixed Body in respect of the Elements
should be as simple as the Elements themselves; because although the matter be
from the four Elements; yet because the Matter of Fire, Air, Water, Earth, does
not differ, and the Form (according to their Opinion) of Fire, Air, Water,
Earth, should be no longer present, the mixed body so called must needs be
simple.

And that we may also consider what is wont to be objected to the contrary; if
any shall ask, What were the Motives which caused Aristotle to forsake the
Opinion of the Ancients commonly held in his time, we cannot find any of
moment, save that which he chiefly propounds, in 1. de Generat. and Corrupt.
cap. 7. and that is this: That he conceives from the Opinion of the Ancients
this absurdity follows, That every part of a mixed body should not be mixed, and
that out of every part of a mixed body the four Elements could not be extracted.
But the Ancients will answer, That this ought not to be done, and that this is
Aristotle's Hypothesis, and that he lays that as a Foundation which is the
matter in Controversy. For this Assertion seems contrary to the nature of
mixture. For if there be a mixture, those things which are mingled must needs
be simples. Nor is it necessary that those Simples should be mixed, but at last
in the resolution we must of necessity come to Simples.

Others also do ad other Reasons. Scaliger, Exercit. 16. Sect. 3. The Forms
remaining (says he) mixture (according to Aristotle) should be but an heap; as
it is in dry bodies. For the Natural Quantity of every small part follows the
existence thereof, but not continuation, for so should they be really the
Atoms of Democritus. But Scaliger whiles he regards sometimes truth, other
whiles Authority, contradicts himself, and answers this Argument, Exercit. 101.
while he writes; That these parts retain their forms, but lose the prescription
of their bounds, and so they are not a mere heap, but do make a mixed body. For
that is false which some object, That things of different sorts cannot be
continued. For whiles the Elements are united under the Dominion of one Form,
they are really continued. Nor is it absurd (as the same Scaliger writes in the
same place) to hold that there are many forms in one continued body. For these
forms are every one the act of its own Matter. Which matters because they are
by Nature ordained to a more labored composition, she has provided that their
forms as well as themselves should be mixed. But the ultimate and most excellent
forms, as of a man, since they are not ordained for any further work, they only
are not mixed.

Moreover, Neither is this of any great moment which some object; If the
Elements should remain perfect under the dominion of another Form, it would
follow that the Form of the mixed Body should be an accident; since what is
added to a perfect Being actually constituted is an accident. For the answer is
manifest from what has been answered to the former Objection. For as Scaliger
says there, those less noble Elements and Mixables are made for the sake of
the more noble, and therefore submit themselves to the Rule of the more noble
form, which suparvening obtains the Office, not of an accident, but of a
specific Form. But those things only which are added to those more noble
bodies, which are not ordained for any further composition, are accidents.

Now that many have not been able to attain the truth in this point, The
principal cause of mixture
and have erred in a matter plain enough, the chief cause is, That they knew
not the true and principal Cause of mixture, and thought that al sorts of
Natural Bodies did proceed only from the mutual fight of the Elements, and
their mutual action one upon another; and to use the words of Aristotle
himself, Lib. 2. de Generat. and Corrupt. Cap. 9. text. 54. they attributed
powers and virtues to Bodies (by which they generate most instrumentally)
neglecting the cause taken from the Form. But the fool concourse of Elements
makes very few sorts of natural things, and none of those more perfect Bodies:
and contrary to the mind of Aristotle, the Expositors father upon him, that he
brings the Generation of Natural Bodies only from the Elements. For he expressly
holds (as was said before, 2. de generat. and corrupt. text. 40.53. and
sequent.) that the Qualities of the Elements are only Instruments, and the
principal Cause is the specific form of every thing. The same thing Scaliger
teaches, Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. Unless (says he) the four Elements have a
Governor, they will vainly toss and be tossed. For what is it that shall mix so
much Earth with the rest? And there ought to be in every motion one first
Mover. For they cannot move themselves to any work, but in Compounds they are
moved to mutual connection by a more excellent Form, in bodies imperfectly mixed
by an external principle. Erastus was forced to acknowledge the same, The
Opinion of Erastus touching the Cause of Mixture.
who although in his Disputations against Paracelsus he writes, Part altera,
page 196. that there are no qualities in the whole world which can change whole
Bodies applied to them, besides heat and cold, moisture and dryness (and that
therefore these Qualities must necessarily be held the Principle of Mixtures)
yet compelled by the evidence of the thing it self he ads by and by: we do not
say that they are principles in such a sense, as if we held them to be the
principal Causes, but we say they are Instruments without which no form can
make a mixture. But being further demanded, What that form is which is the
worker of mixtures? he answers, It is the Divine Command whereby in the
Creation God commanded the Elements that they should orderly meet together for
the Generation of things; and that the Motion of the Heavens gives no small
assistance thereto. But this answer is partly from the purpose, partly false.
For the Question is not about the first Cause of things, but the immediate
Cause. Nor is it yet proved that God gave this Command to the Elements, but it
is the Office of the Form to marshal the Elements in a mixed body. And although
God created al things, and these lower Bodies are subject to the motions and
influx of the Heavens; yet God has given Nature, by which al things are
generated, which is the form of every thing, and the Soul of things animate. It
shapes it self its own body, Mixture how it is made.
and for the making thereof draws Elements and other Bodies, disposes, unites
and governs them; whence it follows that they are now formally one, and being
united under that which is actually one they become themselves actually one
which before were many. And therefore the Elements do not concur of themselves,
but are drawn by the Forms. Whereof Scaliger writes excellently in 1. de
Plantis: The Soul (says he) is Nature to a living thing. She shapes for her
self Hoofs, Teeth, Horns to defend life: Nature the Handmaid of God.
and therefore she uses them, and knows how to use them, without any object or
any fantasy. He that made the Soul gave certain precepts thereto, partly
general, partly special. Those are such as pertain to her preserving her union
with the Body: of which there was to be no outward Author. Careful therefore
hereof she moves the Heart, concocts in the Stomach, concocts again in the
Liver, perfects the nourishment in the Veins, digests in the Members, changes
it into the substance of the Body, bears it, unites it, restores it, repairs
it. Yea, he speaks Divinely in his 2. de Plantis: That (says he) which is
heavy, also ascends: For that work is performed by the distributing faculty,
which also lifts the Earth upwards, and drives or draws the air downwards;
being Lady of the Fire and Air, by the first Command of its Creator. For I
doubt not but you hold that there was not one Spirit-maker of all things, and
another the Preserver of them when made; nor that be which made all things of
himself, and cannot be absent from himself, can be absent from the things he
has made. God, God, my good friends, neither idle, nor busied, All things from
God.
neither in work nor out of work; but without work, the Head, Beginning,
Middle, End, and all of the Work, and that I may in one word dispatch, compass
in, and surmount all, He himself, who by his most simple and indivisible
Understanding of himself made the World; wherely all have attained their End
and Order.

Zabarella also saw the same Truth in part; but he could not reach the whole,
The Generation of a living and lifeless mixed Body does differ.
being hindered by a pre-conceived Opinion, whiles in his 1. de mist. Generat.
and Interitu, cap. 2. he distinguishes betwixt the generation of a mixed
animated body and an inanimate, and says rightly, That a living Creature is
not generated by the Elementary Virtue, but by Vital Heat implanted in the
seed, so that in the generation of a living thing all the Qualities of the
Elements are instead of matter, and the immediate Agent is the Vital Heat
implanted in the Seed, being proportionable to the Element of the Stars.

But whereas he says that a mixed Body as such is generated by Elementary heat
tempered by cold as the prime Worker, working upon the two passive Qualities as
Matter; that is liable to many difficulties. I say rather, hardly any perfectly
mixed body is generated after that manner as Zabarella supposes, and that there
is no such mixed thing in Nature. For what (as was lately alleged out of
Scaliger, Exercitat. 307. Sect. 20.) should thus collect certain portions of
Elements, and what should mingle so much Earth with so much Water? Nor is there
any reason to fly to the fire in this case, whereof Scaliger speaks in his
second de Plantis: If the Fire unites the three other Elements as parts, what
shall unite it to the three? But most likely it is, that al perfectly mixed
things are either parts of an animated Body, or sorts of Natural bodies made in
the first Creation, which either yet remain such in the Individuals, or are
continued by a new Generation; whereof Scaliger most rightly in the same
Exercitet. says, That every Form of every perfectly mixed body, although it be
not a Soul, as that of an Adamant, is a sift Essence far different from the
four Elements. For this form in Gold, Silver, and other Metals, in Jewels and
Stones, aptly disposes the Elements and such matter as is sit for it self. From
which it easily appears, that what is by Zabarella objected, de Mistione, cap.
9. is of no moment; where he writes, If in Mixture there were made a resolution
into the smallest parts natural, there must always be equal portions of the
mixable Ingredients, or they must hold the same proportion one to another. For
this is no ways necessary; but the Elements concur in an unequal and most
diverse proportion, according as the Constitution of the mixed body requires, or
as the mixture is directed by the superior Form. For a Gourd and a Cowcumber
draw more Water and less Fire; and a Pitch-Tree, a Pine Tree, and a Fir, draw
more Fire and less Water.

Moreover, Whether a fight of the Elements is requisite in Mixture?
This also was no small Cause (which yet agrees almost with the former) why many
erred from the Truth, because they supposed that the Elements did no otherwise
concur to Mixture than by their sighting one with another. For seeing mixed
bodies consist of contraries, and contraries do mutually fly one another; that
they may concur and friendly agree to make up a mixed body, some have thought
that this friendship and agreement could not be procured unless by sight
foregoing they were reduced to a mediocrity. Which agreement of the Elements
how it should be made they are at variance amongst themselves, whiles some hold
that it is sufficient that their first qualities be abated, though the forms
remain entire; others conceiving that both the forms and the qualities were
remitted and broken. But there is simply no need of this fight; it is
sufficient if they be reduced into Atoms. For then it is that things contrary
do fight together and shun one another, when notable magnitudes and portions of
them do concur. But when they are reduced into their smallest Particles or
Atoms, there is either none at al, or no considerable Skirmish. Which thing is
apparent by many experiments. When water is poured upon burning coals, a noise
intailed by the fight of those Contraries; but not when the fiery Atoms are
mingled with the Water, while the Water heats and is turned into vapors; where
by the confession of al men the Atoms both of Water and Fire are contained in
the Vapors, and keep the peace. So also, if water be gently heated, it receives
the fiery Atoms without any fighting: but if the water grow exceeding hot, and
the fiery Atoms come thronging into the Water, or particles of fire bigger
than atoms, there is fighting, and great bubbling and boiling. But when the
water is resolved into vapors and smallest atoms, although it be joined with
atoms of fire, yet no fight is observed. Oil admits no Water, nor is mixed
therewith, by reason of the contrariety of its Nature. Yet if Oil be reduced
into Atoms it will admit Water. For examples sake, distilled Oils do swim upon
Wine and distilled Waters, and mix not therewith; but if those Oils be first
mixed with Sugar, and the Sugar afterward dissolved in Wine or Water, the
Water receives the Oil being reduced into small atoms, and thereby a Medicinal
Wine or Water is made, having the smell, taste, and virtues of the said Oil.
After the same manner in the dissolving of Pearls, Corals, Metals, first there
arises a bubbling and a noise, the bubbles ascend; but when the Connection of
these Bodies is loosened, and they are divided into Atoms, al is quiet, nor do
they act any more one upon another, although each of these bodies remains under
its own form, as Precipitation and reduction teaches. So also in the
preparation of Tartarum Vitriolatum, if Spirit of Vitriol be mingled with Oil
or Salt of Tartar, there arises a mighty battle, a noise, heat, and boiling.
But when these two Fighters are duly mixed in their smallest parts, all the
Quartel ceases, nor is there any more noise or boiling. Nor let any man object,
That those smallest Atoms therefore fight not, because they are by their
mutual action one upon another tempered and reduced to moderation. For
separation and reduction do show the contrary, which teach us, that those
smallest Atoms do remain and subsist under their own proper Form, and are
easily (being joined together) reduced into their ancient body again. So the
Spirit of Vitriol and Salt of Tartar do in their very mixture retain their
Forms entire; which even distillation shows, by means whereof the Spirit of
Vitriol is again separated from the Salt of Tartar, and being separated it
subsists of it self with all its forces entire. Which if it be again poured upon
the Salt of Tartar it raises a new combat, until these Combatants (being
mingled in their smallest parts) come to a Friendly Agreement.

From al which it appears, Whether in mixture the Ingredients must needs be
reduced into Atoms?
That although contrary Principles do concur in the Generation and Nutrition of
mixed Bodies; yet for their uniting there is no prime necessity of a fight, but
it suffices that they concur in their smallest Atoms. And this is that which
Hippocrates writes in Lib. de Prisca Medicina: In a Man there are bitter, and
salt, and sweet, and sour, and harsh, and tastless parts, and an hundred other
sorts, which being mingled and mutually tempered together are neither
discerned, nor do they trouble a man; that is to say, when they are reduced to
their smallest Atoms, and so mingled together. But when they exist apart, that
is, when many Atoms of the same kind being separated from the rest are joined
together, so that they become a conspicuous coagulated Body, then they exercise
their Activity. And hereunto tend all the Digestions and Fermentations of the
Chemists, viz. That Bodies which in a greater bulk were contraries may be
reduced into their smallest Atoms, and afterward agree friendly together and
be united.

Finally, It has been also no small Cause of Error in many, The Eduction of
Forms is rejected.
that same vain Fiction of the Eduction of Forms, which we have elsewhere
rejected. For although herein (as was said before) Zabarella is in the right,
when he holds that the Vital Heat is the Agent in the Generation of living
things (though it be not the primary Agent which is the form, but its
Instrument) yet ever and anon he falls back into the common Opinion, and
endeavors to reduce the Generation of living things also unto the Concourse and
simple mixture of the Elements. For so ( Lib. 1. de Misti Generat. and
Interitu, cap. 3.) he writes, When five degrees of Heat, and six of Moisture
concur, it is a convenient proportion for to educe the form of Oil. Whereas
sure it is, That Oil is not generated by a simple concourse of Elements, but is
produced by the Olive Tree. Now Olives are the Fruit of the Olive Tree, which
the said Tree produces by its inbred Heat; out of them is pressed the Oil after
the same manner as out of Almonds, Nutmegs, Lin-seed, Poppy-seed, and Wine out
of Grapes.

As to that other Question, Whether the Elements alone are mixed? Whether the
Elements only are mixed.
or whether there are other small Bodies or Atoms which may truly be mixed? The
most (truly) of Aristotle's Expositors do conclude also from that supposition
of theirs whereby they hold, That al things are made by the mutual action of
the Elements one upon another; that only the Elements also are mixed, and that
there is no mixture in which there is not a resolution as far as to the
Elements. But he that shall diligently consider what is daily done in Nature,
will observe that this is not always necessary. The case (truly) is plain in
those less perfect Mixtures; since Natural Bodies do retain their perfect Forms
in them, as is clear in Metals dissolved in Aqua fortis. Nor yet is it
necessary in perfect Mistion. And I conceive that it is manifest in Plants and
Animals. For neither are they nourished with pure Elements, but with other mixed
bodies created for their sakes. A man is nourished with blood, and in that
Nutrition which is a true Mixture and substantial mutation blood is not first
turned into Elements, that of them flesh may be made, bones, etc. Blood is made
of Chyle, Chyle of the meats we eat. In which mutations there is no resolution
into Elements, but as the next matter of a Bone, Flesh, etc. is blood: so the
matter of Blood is Chyle; the matter of Chyle is Bread, etc. And there are many
Documents of this matter. For if in the stomach meat and drink were resolved
into the Elements, no Form or Quality of things which are used in meat would
remain; whereas nevertheless meats which have a purging faculty may turn to
blood, and so to Milk having the like purging Faculty, which qualities could
not remain in the simple Elements, if meats were resolved into them. And many
Diseases arising from the use of naughty meats do more than sufficiently
declare that there is no resolution as far as to the Elements in the corruption
of Meat and generation of Nutriment. For all the more ignoble mixed bodies are
matter for the more noble. Thus Hippocrates writes of Plants: Such things as
grow out of the Earth and are sown in the Earth, when they come into the ground
every one draws that which in the Earth is most suitable to its own nature. Now
there is in the Earth both tart, and bitter, and sweet, and salt, and such
like. First therefore it draws much thereout which is accommodate to its
nature, and then also it draws other parts.

Most renowned Philosophers and Physicians consent with Hippocrates. Not to
speak now of others, Thomas Erastus in defens. these. de saporibus writes; Al
Medicaments in a manner do not consist primarily of the Elements, but are
compounded of things formerly mixed, and that many times. Galen shows that the
body of Man is compounded, not of the four Elements, but of the four Humors, as
the immediate matter of its Generation. Now it is again apparent that these
Humors are made of the Meat and Drink, which are also themselves evidently made
of the Juyces of the Earth. For Animals are nourished by Plants, Plants draw
out of the Earth juice familiar to them, as bitter, sweet, sour, because of
them the Nature of each properly exists. The Seeds (truly) sown in the ground
while they draw to themselves profitable and convenient Nutriment they draw
only such juice as is compounded of the Elements.

And therefore those bodies also of which these are made, although they are
termed the smallest bodies, yet are they not absolutely such, but the smallest
of their kind, that is, such as to which those bodies when they are resolved do
return, and consequently not into Elements, but into those things of which they
immediately consist. Milk turns into Butter, Whey, and Cheese. So the same heat
acting upon the homogeneal meat changes it into diverse humors, according as it
is disposed, nor does it of any Particle form every thing. Wine I conceive is
rightly held to be not a thing blended and jumbled, but a perfectly mixed Body
infused. But if it be put in a Still and stilled, little Spirit that will burn is
drawn forth, much Water remains and a little Earth; because there is more Water
than either Fire or Earth in Wine; which yet would not so come to pass if out
of every smallest Particle, Fire, Air and Water might be drawn.

For indeed, Into what mixed bodies are resolved.
as hardly any mixed body is composed immediately of the Elements; so also mixed
bodies are rarely resolved into the Elements. Which is apparent by the
corruption and resolution of things, both violent by fire and burning, and
natural. That Plants and Animals when they are dead and putrify are not
resolved quite into the Elements, that smell and stink does sufficiently evince
which belongs to no Element but is proper to mixed bodies. And as of things
living some have one smell, and some another: so also is it with Plants and dead
Carcasses. Yea, and the pestilence has been frequently observed to arise from
the putrefying Carcasses of dead Animals. The same happens in violent
Resolutions which are made by Chemical Distillations and Sublimations.
Zabarella indeed Lib. 2. de Mistor. Generat. and Interitu, cap. 2. writes, That
Cumbustion is the mutation of a mixed body into one Element only, namely Fire,
some part of Earth excepted. Also many others do imagine, that if they see a
sum or vapor ascend out of any thing, that the said thing is resolved into the
Elements. But the matter goes far otherwise; for the fire retains its own, and
gives to others that which is theirs. Fire is used in Chemical Distillations
and Sublimations, sometimes gentler, other whiles stronger; yet neither of them
resolves things into the Elements. For although sumes and vapors ascend; yet if
they be received in Alembicks and Receivers, it is apparent that the resolution
is made only into Atoms of a peculiar kind; and some flowers are gathered of
Mercury, others of Sulphur, others of Sal Ammoniack. So in Distillations
although one kind of vapor seem to arise; yet if it be collected in an
Alembick, it appears to be Spirit of Wine, or Cherries, or Juniper, Aqua
fortis, or some other Compound. Yea, although they may ascend insensibly, so as
not to be discerned by the eyes, so as to pass through a thick paper four times
doubled: yet are they not changed into Air, but into a spirit of its own kind.
Yea, if Sulphur, or Pitchwood, or Pitch be set on fire, they turn not into
Elements, but their proper Oils are gathered therefrom.

And from what has been hitherto said, it is apparent that the primary
efficient Cause of that mixture in Plants and Animals, yea, and al perfectly
mixed bodies, as Stones, Jewels, Minerals, and Metals, to constitute their
Bodies, is that same specific form of a natural body, which draws matter fit
for it self, and disposes the same after a certain manner.

But al other Mixtures which are not directed by a superior form, Some Mistions
are made by consent and dissent of Atoms.
by what names soever called, proceed from the Consent and Dissent of Atoms,
by means of which like are moved to like, and like are assimilated to like. For
although this likeness and unlikeness of Bodies of a kind does not a little
help toward the more convenient mixture which is made in Animals, and is
governed by a more noble Form (as we see like meats are more easily digested
than unlike) yet this mixture has place chiefly in fermentations, either
natural or artificial, and in the preparations of Medicaments, as also in those
which are called fortuitous. And this similitude of the smallest Atoms of a
kind as it is the foundation of many mixtures, so is it of al Solutions. After
this manner the fermentation of Wine, Beer, and al Juyces is made, viz. whiles
such as are of the same Nature are united, and expel things different from
them, and drive them out as dregs; which is chiefly effected by help of that
same inbred spirit which penetrates into al parts; which also we see betide in
the fermentation or leavening of Bread.

What we should think of white and red Wine mingled of Honey and Wine, Whether
Wines, medicaments, Treacle, Mithridate, and distilled waters, are bodies
really mixed.
of Medicinal Wines, Treacle, Mithridate, distilled and compounded Waters, and
such like, whether they are true mixtures, or only things blended together, is
a question amongst Authors. Some hold they are but things jumbled together. So
Thomas Erastus, Disput. 2. contra Paracels. page 212. says, white and red Wine
mingled is but a jumbled thing, and adds this reason, Because our Taste tells us,
that the taste of either of them still remains, and that neither Wine has lost
its own nature, and it cannot be the redness should possess any but its own
proper subject. And concerning Treacle Zabarella writes, de Mist. cap. 13. That
Treacle has no true mixture, or if it has, that it is the mixture of the
Elements, and not of the Ingredients of the Treacle. But these Opinions are
founded upon a supposition not yet granted, viz. That nothing is mixed but the
Elements, which we have before proved to be false. And therefore if otherwise
it is sufficient to the Constitution of Natural Bodies that smallest Atoms of
several kinds should meet and be united; of which because sometimes these,
otherwhiles those are in greatest quantity, therefore the taste, smell, color,
and other qualities sometimes of these, otherwhiles of those do abound, as
otherwise in the mixture of Elements, the Qualities of the predominant Element
do excel the rest: verily I shall not deny, when such bodies are first blended,
they may be termed things jumbled, but when after Fermentation, or frequently
repeated distillations, they are united in their smallest Particles, I see no
cause why they may not be called bodies truly mixed. And if that cause were
sufficient which Erastus brings to prove that white and red Wine blended are no
truly mixed Body, most Wines should not be true mixtures; since most Wines are
made of several sorts of Grapes, and therefore sometimes they taste like one sort
of Wine, otherwhiles like another.

THE FOURTH DISCOURSE. Of the Generation of Live Things.
Chap. 1. Whether Souls are made?
SInce Plants and Animals do not last in their Individual or particular
Beeings, but some die, and others spring up in their place, and so the kinds
and sorts are preserved to the end of the World, and as long as it pleases God
the the Creator: it is altogether worth our Enquiry how this Generation of
Living things, and the preservation of their kinds by individuals continually
succeeding one another, is brought to pass; especially since renowned Men have
been carefully busied, The essential parts of living things.
and in doubt also concerning this matter. Now al living things consist of Soul
and Body. Whence they have their Body is clear enough; but whence they have
their Souls is not so evident. We are therefore now resolved to make that our
Enquiry. Which whiles we do, we shall consider the matter it self, and not
contend only with Authorities, nor shall we bring our selves into a Labyrinth
and Maze, wherein many wander about and can never get our, whiles one while
they follow Reason, another while Authority, and make it their business,
always to save the Authority of great Authors, and so vainly labor
(oftentimes) to reconcile Truth and a Lie together.

And although there are diverse sorts of Living things; yet since al of them
have life from the Soul, we shall speak in general whence living things receive
their Souls, and whence Souls have their Original.

In the first place, Some do here briefly quit themselves, and deny that forms
(such as the Soul is) are made. For thus says Toletus, Lib. 1. Phys. cap. 9.
qu. 19. We wholly deny with Aristotle, that Forms are made or produced; but
Compounds are made, not out of nothing, but of matter; but the Forms are
consequently made and comproduced: whence they are not created, because
Creation is an action whereby a thing is first made; but the Forms are not
first made. And this is the power granted to Natural Agents, that they might
produce a Compound, and also mediately the Forms withal, which is not to
create, nor have we any other Philosophy from Aristotle, and it is an excellent
one, and worthy to be noted. The same Author in the same place says thus: The
Form is not produced by it self, but it is comproduced upon the production of
the Compound, that is to say, the action is determinated primarily upon the
Compound it self, and consequently, and as it were by accident upon the Form.
The Conimbricensian Collegiates in Lib. 1. Phys. cap. 9. quaest. 12. artic. 6.
thus write: We answer, by saying in the first place, that no Form except a Man's
is properly made; because making is not incident save to a thing subsisting of
it self. And Ruvio Rodensis, Lib. 1. Phys. cap. 5. in quest. writes thus: We
deny that the form is made of the matter, or of Privation. For according to the
propriety of Nature the Form is neither generated nor made, but the Compound,
as Aristotle expressly teacher, Lib. 1. Phys. text. 64. in these words:
wherefore it is manifest from what has been said, That whatever is made, is
still the Compound. And Thomas Aquinas in their Exposition. And this Reason
proves: The making of a thing tends to the Being thereof. Therefore it belongs
to that only to be made, which has being: but the Form is not; but it is only
said to be the cause of being to the Compound, which is properly said to be.
Therefore the form is not made, but the Compound. Which if it be not made; ergo
it is not made of the Matter, nor of Privation, but the Compound is said to be
made of both, by means of the Form from which it has its being, and whose
Principles are Matter, Form, and Privation. Now to be drawn out of the Power of
the Matter is not to be made of it self, but to go into act, as the cause of
the Compounds Being, which of it self is generated and made. So far Ruvio.

Others contrariwise do oppose this foresaid Opinion as false and absurd. For
seeing to the Constitution of every Body, Matter, and especially Form which
gives the specifical being, is requisite, and daily some Individuals perish,
and others are generated; of necessity the matter and form which before were
not, must be made. But according to their reason which they propound without
proof (viz. That neither the Matter not the Form is made, but the Compound)
nothing should be made; since of the Matter and Form the Compound consists, and
the Compound is nothing but the Matter and Form. Nor to the making of any thing
is a complete Being requisite, but any Being is sufficient; and that which now
is what before it was not, is justly said to be made, whether it be an
incomplete Being, or a complete and Compound. And those are words and founds
without Sense, that Forms are not produced, but comproduced, and that they are
not primarily made, but by accident as it were produced upon the production of
the Compound. The Compound (truly) is primarily intended in the whole
Generation, but it cannot be accomplished unless al things are made which are
required to its Essence and Constitution. Yea, they themselves who deny that
Forms are made, forgetting themselves they say they are made, when they teach
that such things as are drawn out of the power of the Matter do depend upon the
matter in their being, making, and operation. Nor do they remove this doubt;
but they are forced to explain whence Souls proceed; and at last they are
forced to hold, That they are drawn out of the power of the Matter.

And therefore it cannot be simply denied, That Souls after their manner (for
whether it be a proper manner of speaking, when Souls are said to be made, even
the most learned Caspar Hofmannus, in tr. de formarum origin, at the beginning
doubts) are made. Souls are rather multiplied than made
Yet if we would speak more properly, they may rather be said to be multiplied
than made, according to that vulgar Saying; Every Form has a power to multiply
it self. For those things are properly said to be made which are not at al
before they be made. But that is said to be multiplied which whereas before it
was one in one Individual, it now becomes manifold, and many in number. Of
which I shall speak in Chap. 6.

Chap. 2. Whether Souls come from God, or from Heaven?
AVicenna held, That the Souls of living things did not proceed from their
Parents, The Souls not from God.
but from a certain Intelligence the Giver or (as Scaliger, Exercit. 97.
speaks) the Dispenser of Forms, which he terms Colcodea; and he teaches, That
this Heavenly Intelligence uses the Seed as an Instrument to produce the
Vegetative and Sensitive Soul, which when he has produced in a man by help of
the Seed, in process of time without the help of any Instrument the Rational
Soul is brought in, and into the Body informed with a Vegetative and sensitive
Soul he pours in out of himself a Rational Soul, free from the commerce of
Matter. And doubtless Avicenna drew this Opinion from Plato and the Platonists.
For they (as may be seen out of Plato in Epimenide and Timaeo, Marsilius
Ficinus super. Lib. Platonis de Sanctitate, and super Timaeum Platonis, cap.
37. And Alcinous, in Lib. de Doctrina Platonis, cap. 23.) do hold, That
Rational Souls do come from the most good and great God, and the irrational
Souls from the inferior gods, which are (according to them) either the
Celestial Bodies, or their Spirits, and moving Intelligences. But such things
as are said of those Intelligences in Natural Philosophy, since they are said
without any reason, they are worthily rejected by Philosophets. And if there
are any Heavenly, Causes at al, which make toward the Generation of things,
they are remote causes, and universal, as shall by and by be said concerning the
Opinion of Fernelius. And if by that first Intelligence they mean the most good
and great God, this Opinion is also false. How God concurs with second causes
to the generation of things.
For the Question is not here concerning the Creation, but the Generation of
things. But God after he once ceased from Creation, does create nothing unless
it be miraculously; but he has ordained Nature which performs the Course of
Generation and Corruption, and defends and observes the same. And now indeed,
God concurs as the first and universal Cause in the Generation of al things,
but the things produced are the immediate effects of the second Causes: And God
is said to be the Efficient Cause of al things, both because he first created
them, and because he gave to the Second Causes the force and ability to produce
their Effects. This indeed is true, That the second Causes cannot do any thing
without the first, viz. Because from it al created Agents depend and have their
Essence, and without the assistance whereof they could neither consist nor
perform any operation; and unless the first Cause concur to the Act, the second
cannot perform their operations. Yet the Second Causes do really act, and God
acts in all, so as that they may work also; whence Scaliger in Theophrast. de
Causis Plant. Lib. 5. cap. 1. writes, That Nature is the Power of God in second
Causes, to which he has prescribed certain Rules. And if the second Causes did
nothing, why should there be so various a Fabric in things created, and why
are so many Virtues and activities bestowed upon them? and why cannot lifeless
things perform the same Operation as living things? And therefore since in the
generation of other things we do not look simply to God, but join also the
second Causes; why should we reject them in the Generation of living things?
And if Souls should proceed from God alone and immediately, like could no ways
be said to generate its like, nor could that from whence the seed of a Plant or
Animal is taken be termed the Parent of the new Plant or Animal, but God. And
if they should say that God uses the seed as an Instrument: yet as an
Instrument, viz. a Chizel cannot be called the Efficient Cause of an Image, nor
the Image be said to be the effect of the Chizel: so neither can a living
Creature be said to be the Offspring or child of the seed. In a word, if any
superior Cause whatsoever, by Plato and the Platonists, or by Avicenna, shall be
held the Efficient Cause of Souls, there will be after this reckoning no
univocal Generation; whereas nevertheless most certain it is, nor needs it any
proof, That like begets its like, an Oak tree an Oak, a Horse an Horse, a Man a
Man.

And what the Platonists say touching the inferior gods, if they are to be
understood as the words intimate, any one may easily see that they are not only
said without al reason, but void of Truth.

Fernelius differs not much from them, Whether Souls come from Heaven?
who Lib. 1. de abdit. rerum causis, in many places eagerly defends that every
Soul comes from the Heaven, and that the Heaven sends every Soul into matter
prepared and fitted. For thus (in chap. 5. toward the end) he writes; In the
Generation of living Creatures the seed conceived is by the Virtue and benign
warmth of the Womb stirred up to action, The Opinion of Fernelius.
not that it might raise up out of it self a Soul, or the form of an Animal,
but only that the power and faculty thereof being first stirred up and
provoked, and afterward augmented, might furnish its subject matter with all
kind of preparation, that the substantial form may at last be received
thereinto from without. He propounds the same Opinion at large, chap. 7. and
afterward, chap. 10. he ads: The Heaven (says he) without any Seed brings
forth many Plants and Animals; but Seed breeds nothing without the Heaven. The
Seed does only neatly and decently prepare the Matter, the Heaven sends the
form into it when it is prepared, and the chief perfection, and stirs up life
in all. And at last he concludes: Whatsoever things God made of old in Heaven
or in Earth, he alone defends and governs them all, the Heavenly things indeed
by himself immediately; but living things and Plants, and other mortal
Creatures, by help and assistance of the Heavens on whom be has imposed the
Procreative and Conservative Laws of Nature. And therefore the only form of
Heaven does potentially contain the forms of Live Creatures, Plants, Stones,
Metals, all that ever have been or can be; and it being big as it were with
innumerable forms, engenders and pours all things out of it self: the only
power and faculty thereof contains in it all the faculties of mortal things
which ever have been, or shall be hereafter. And these Virtues the Soul of the
World shed into the whole Universe from Heaven bestows upon all things, as also
their form, and native, and vital beat, fit to generate and to conserve them.
It contains all things, and cherishes al things with heat and life, so that
there is not any where any thing not replenished with the fullness hereof. By
the virtue and means hereof both all lifeless things are by themselves, and al
animated things have such a Soul as belongs to their kind, some a nourishing,
others a sensitive, and others a rational. So she accommodates her self to
things, so subservient she is to the Natures of each one, that she gives as
much as the Nature and condition of every one desires, and as much as the
preparation it self of the subject can bear. The Sun though exceeding far off;
yet so bestow^ his light upon the bodies opposite unto him, that they are
bright and shine with splendour: but Water after one manner, a Stone after
another manner, Wood after another manner, Silver after another manner, Even
so, much after the same manner, that Virtue also which comes down from Heaven
is vital, yet so that upon some things it bestows only a Being, to others also
a Soul, and that either nourishing, sensitive, or rational: for it is not
received after one manner of all. But of this also I would lastly admonish the
Reader, That the said Celestial Virtue it self is not always alike, nor does
bear it self always alike to sublunary things, but differently at different
times, according to the manifold posture of the Stars, whose commixtion and
complexion does for the most part vary, although the Substance of the Soul of
the World (or carrying spirit) is unchangeably one. It cannot therefore come to
pass (as one man says) that the Soul of the World so imparts life and state to
all things as that it needs not the least help of the Stars. If this were so,
why I pray you should it not always generate like things, and after the same
manner, seeing it is always alike present to things. So far Fernelius.

Now the chief Arguments whereby he endeavors to prove his Opinion are these:
The first is, That of putrefying matter many Animals are bred, which since they
come of no Seed, and from no Patent, he concludes their Soul comes from Heaven;
and therefore since those more ignoble Animals receive their Souls from Heaven,
he thinks the more nobler Creatures, as a Man and a Lion, should much rather
receive their Souls from Heaven. Secondly, seeing Aristotle writ, That a Man
and the Sun beget a Man, he conceives they do not both concur after the same
manner to the generation of a Man, nor that the same thing is effected by both
of them; but since two things are required, the Matter and the Form, that by
Man as the more imperfect nature the Matter is prepared, and the Soul sent in
from Heaven. Thirdly, He disputes at large against the Eduction of Forms out of
the power of the matter. Fourthly, He produces many things touching the
nobility of the Heaven, and its action upon these lower bodies. Finally, Since
the Soul is united to the Body by help of an Heavenly kind of heat and spirit,
he holds the Soul it self must much rather be of a Celestial Original.

But in good deed this Opinion is far from the truth. Fernelius his Opinion of
the Original of Souls confuted.
For seeing that living things which are generated are of the same sort with
those by which they are generated, how can this be true if the Generator do
only dispose the matter to receive the Form, and do not impart the Form it
self? and al living things should rather be termed the Offspring of Heaven,
than of those things by which they are generated. And though there be a consent
of the upper and lower bodies, and the Heaven as an universal Cause does
further the Original of things; His Arguments.
yet it does not follow, That the Heaven gives Forms to so many several sorts
of things. And what need is there to derive the Souls of things from Heaven,
since God the Creator in the first Creation gave to al living things the power
to multiply themselves.

Nor are those Reasons which moved him to maintain this Opinion of any
strength. For in the first place, That living things Generated of themselves
have their cause here below shall be showed hereafter. Nor if there be any thing
noble here below must that needs be deduced from Heaven, but living things
themselves have their degree of dignity; and man the most noble of al is nobler
than the Heaven. Secondly, though Aristotle wrote that the Sun and Man
generates a Man; yet is not that to be otherwise understood than that the
Heaven as a remote and general Cause, and Man as the immediate Cause generates
a Man. Nor (as was said) is Man more ignoble than the Heaven, so that he only
should prepare the Matter, and the Heaven give the Form. Thirdly, He does
rightly oppose the Eduction of Forms out of Matter, and we shall do the same
hereafter: but it does not follow, If Forms are not educed out of the Matter,
that therefore they are procreated by the Heavens. For we shall hereafter
demonstrate another manner of their Original. And as in the fourth place we
grant the Nobility of the Heaven, and its action upon these lower bodies; yet
it no ways follows therefrom that it is the Author of al Forms. Finally,
although it were granted that the innate heat and spirit, which the forms of
living things use as their immediate Instrument, and which may therefore be
called the band of the Soul and Body, may after a sort be termed Celestial;
yet that only does thence follow, that the Souls themselves are more noble than
that spirit and inbred heat, but not that they proceed from Heaven. In a word,
as Thomas Erastus, de Occult. med. propriet. Lib. 1. cap. 17. does well write:
They that dare affirm the Forms of the sorts of things are infused by the Stars
will be laughed at by Philosophers; and by Christians also rightly judged
execrable. The Forms have received their Original not from Heaven, but from the
Creator, if they will rather believe the History of the Creation than lying
Fables. God commanded that every Species or sort of things should propagate it
self by multiplication of Individuals endued with the same Faculties; he di^
not command the Stars either to imprint their forms or virtues on the things
created.

Thus have we showed how some without Reason have endeavored to draw the
Origina^ of the Forms of Living things from the Heavens.

Chap. 3. Some other Opinions of the Original of Souls reckoned up, and a
vulgar Error taxed.
SInce therefore the Soul proceeds not from the Heaven and superior Causes,
many grant that like begets its like. Which yet most do understand only of
univocal Generation. A twofold Generatition of Living things.
For they hold a twofold Generation; one univocal, whereby like begets its
like; the other Equivocal, where the Ingenderer is of a different nature from
the thing engendered; which they say happens in such things as are bred of
themselves, and without Seed. But whether there be any such Equivocal
Generation, and what the Nature of the Spontaneous Original of living things
is, we shall show hereafter in its place. It suffices in this place that in
Univocal Generation so called, it is granted by most, and by all that do not
draw the forms from Heaven or a superior Cause, Four Opinions concerning the
Generation of Living things.
that like engenders its like. Yet in good deed, although al agree herein; yet
they differ much as touching the manner, and there are many and diverse Opinions
of Authors hereabouts, al which may nevertheless be (I conceive) reduced to
four Tribes. For first some hold the Seed to be inanimate; who are again
divided into two companies; whiles some hold the Seed communicated by the
Generator to be only instead of matter, out of the aptitude whereof the Soul is
educed by an external Agent: some say there is a formative Virtue communicated
to the Seed by the Generator, and they hold that it is the shaper of the Body
of the living thing; or they conceive the Generator uses the Seed as an
Instrument to beget its like. But others hold that the Seed is animated; yet
they are of two opinions; for some hold there is in all Seed (even that of a
Man) its proper Soul; but some conceive the Soul of Man (by reason of a
singular prerogative) is to be exempted, and that it comes into the Body after
it is formed from without; though they themselves differ about the time when
the Soul comes: Touching al which Opinions we are now to speak severally.

Howbeit the Reader must first be warned of a vulgar Error. The Original of the
soul in general is to be enquired into.
Since all living things are what they are chiefly by their Souls, and thereby
they differ from lifeless things; therefore with good reason our enquiry
touching the Original of Souls must be here so ordered that it may concern al
living things in general. In which thing nevertheless I see many offend, who
deliver what should be said of the original of the Soul, and formation of the
Body of a living thing in general, concerning a Man only, and so they offend
against the Law of Demonstration, endeavoring to demonstrate the affections
belonging to the whole kind of one sort only. I conceive it therefore more
convenient to propound in general whatsoever may be said of the Original of
living things, and of Souls in general; and afterward to apply them
particularly to Plants, Animals, and Mankind; and what these sorts of living
Creatures have peculiar, to set that down by it self.

Chap. 4. Whether Souls are drawn out of the aptitude of the Matter.
IN the first place therefore, Whether Souls are drawn out of the aptitude of
the matter
amongst those who hold the seed to be inanimate, it is a common opinion, that
all forms and consequently all Souls, except the rational soul of a man are
drawn out of the aptitude of the matter. But who was the first Author of this
Opinion, is not so certain. Most do indeed father it upon Aristotle; but I
doubt whether it can be demonstrated from his works. Some, and amongst them
Franciscus Bonamicus, do attribute to Averroes this Opinion; Who was the Author
of the Opinion of drawing of form out of th aptitude of the matter.
and some such words are found in his Books; but it many times happens, that
Expositors patch many things of their own upon Authors. But whether he held
what is vulgarly taught is a great question. For it is apparent, as from other
places, so from 7. Metaphys. text. 31. That he held the Cause of the Generation
of living things, or rather of the formation of a living Body, to be the form
lurking in the Seed. For seeing there Aristotle compares Artificial things with
Natural, and touching the Seed which is the Efficient, he says, It makes,
Averrhoes adds; the Seed geneates by a power it has like to an Artificer;
because the form of the thing generated is po^ntially in the Seed, and that of
which the Seed is agrees in name and nature with that which is any ways made
of the Seed. And a little after: In the matter of things generated the is an
aptitude that out of it may be bred a like thing by the power which is in the Sea.

But most of the Schoolmen and their followers have fiercely maintained this
Opinion of the education of Souls out of the aptitude of the matter, and have
handed it over to posterity without any clear sense, which a mind desirous of
truth might conceive; so that most of them seem rather to have transcribed the
words of their Masters, than to have understood the thing it self. And how
indeed could they understand where there was nothing to be understood?

But whoever was the Author of this Opinion, and whatever Patrons it has; it
must by all means be weighed and considered, since many contend for it as if
their life lay at the stake, and use it as an infallible Principle to decide
many Controversies. Now, two things these Authors do: First, they set down the
reasons moving them thus to think, or rather they oppose the Opinions of
others: and in the next place they endeavor to explain and declare their said
Opinion.

And in the first place (truly) as appears out of Fonseca, Comment. in 5. Met.
cap. 2. quaest. 4. Suarez, 12. Metaphys. disput. Sect. 1, 2. Bonamicus, Ruvius,
in 1. Phys. tract. 2. quaest. 1. and others, they bring hardly any evident
reasons for their own Opinion, but only endeavor to bring those that think
otherwise into some absurdity; which is a very suspicious way of dealing. For
it is the part of a good and Ingenuous Disputer first to prove his own Opinion
with firm Reasons, afterward to oppose the contrary. And nothing can be said
so true and manifest which by contentious wits may not be called in question. I
count it not worth the while to transcribe the places of Authors entire; seeing
they are in the hands of al, and most of them bring nothing new, but repeat the
same thing over and over again. But if any reasons may be gathered out of them,
they are these:

Reasons for the Eduction of forms out of the aptitude of the matter.
In the first place therefore, They would prove that Forms are drawn out of the
power of the Matter, because they depend upon the Matter in their making, their
being, and operation. But this is to beg the Question, and there is no
connection of the major. For we grant indeed that those inseparable Forms cannot
be made (or rather propagated) without the matter, and that they are, and work
in, and with the matter: but it does not hence follow, that the Form is drawn
out of the power of the Matter, and depends in its essence upon the matter,
which is merely passive. But the Question still remains, Whence those Forms
which can neither be made, nor be, nor operate without the matter, or out of
the matter, have their Original.

Secondly, Unless we hold that Forms are drawn out of the aptitude of the
matter, they conceive al Generation is taken away. Which argument whether it be
a direct proof, or a deduction to an absurdity, I leave to others to judge. For
either (say they) the Forms are something before Generation, or they are
nothing. If they were before Generation, there can be no Generation; if they
are nothing there will be a Creation, and so Generation is again taken away. But
this Dilemma is of no weight, nor is there any strength in either of its horns.
For since they were al for the most part Divines who thus wrote, they ought to
have considered what that text of Scripture imports, Increase and multiply;
yea, and how that axiom of Philosophers is to be understood, That every Form
can multiply it self. For if they had understood that Souls can multiply
themselves, How living things are generated.
they had understood withal that when any particular thing generates, a soul is
not created anew, but multiplied; and that the Souls of the first Individuals
of every sort, created by God at the beginning of the World, did and do suffice
to propagate all the Souls of all the Individuals that ever have been, or ever
shall be; and they had understood withal that when Souls which were before are
multiplied, generation is not taken away, but rather established. For though
the Soul were before, and only one in number; yet when it multiplies it self,
and diffuses it self into more Individuals, Generation is rightly said to be
made. when generation of living things is truly made
Where notwithstanding we must presently observe when Generation is truly made.
They indeed hold, when of a grain of Wheat there springs up a Wheat stalk and
ear, or when a Chick comes out of an Eg, then generation is made. And it may
indeed be granted, that after a sort Generation is then made. But if we would
speak properly, since Generation is (as Aristotle teaches, de respiratione,
cap. 18.) The first communication of the nutritive Soul together with the
inbred Heat; that communication is then performed when Seed is bred and
separated from the Generator: and then Plants, then Animals breed, when they
communicate their Soul together with their native heat unto the Seed, and cast
the same forth of themselves, but not when a Plant or Animal is produced of the
Seed. Which is hereby apparent, in that when Plants spring up out of the seed
the Plant that bred the seed may be destroyed, and when the Chick is hatched
out of the Egg, the Cock and Hen whence that Egg came may be both dead, and so
can neither communicate the Native Heat, nor the Soul. And therefore Julius
Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 6. Sect. 10. The Tree ingenders (says he) when it
produces Seed; but a Tree is not generated when it shoots up from the Seed; but
then that which was generated and imperfect is perfected. So a Dog does not
engender when the Whelps are brought forth, but when the Seed is bred.

But when they that hold Forms are drawn out of the power or aptitude of the
Matter would explain their Opinion, whether that Opinion of the eduction of
forms out of the power of matter can be explained.
they variously and miserably vex themselves and trouble their Brains to no
purpose; as is usual when there is nothing at the bottom; and while they
endeavor to explain the matter, they rather obscure and perplex the same, as
may be seen out of the Authors fore-alleadged, also from Tolet. 1. Physic. cap.
9. qu. 19. and 1. de generat. and corrupt. cap. 3. qu. 2. Benedictus Pererius,
Lib. 5. Phys. cap. 22. and others, whose words I think not fit to transcribe;
and at last when they have turned this way and that way with much anxiety, at
last they conclude with those words of Aquinas, Part. 1. Quest. 90. artic. 2.
for the Form to be drawn out of the aptitude of the matter is nothing else but
for a thing to become actually what it was before potentially. But whether this
can satisfy a mind that hungers after Truth, I leave to the Reader to judge.
Whence Tolet. 1. de Gener. and Corrupt. cap. 3. quest. 2. I confess (says he)
this is a wonderful Virtue which partakes of a creating power; but it is not a
creating power because it always works upon subjects. The Virtue also of the
matter is wonderful, out of the aptitude whereof are brought things which are
not actually. Where rather he should have admired at their stubborn headiness,
who would needs have it to be brought out of the matter which is impossible,
and is neither in the power of the Matter nor of the Agent, than at the
wonderful power of the Matter which is none at al. And Benedictus Pererius,
Lib. 14. cap. 9. at the end, where he treats of the Original of Forms, and
endeavors to answer some doubts, at last he concludes: Whether these Answers
are true, and whether they quite take away the difficulties proposed, I leave
to the judgment and consideration of learned men: they do not (truly) quite
take away my scruple, nor perfectly satisfy my mind. For they involve certain
things which seem either absolutely false, or more doubtful than that whereof
we now doubt; such as is, that there is an ultimum or last of Quality, which
may be brought in in an instant. Absurdities which follow the Opinion of
drawing the Forms out of the aptitude of the matter
And indeed they can no ways answer the doubts that are brought against their
Opinion. For if you ask them, what it is to be brought out of the power of the
matter? or what that power is? they answer, That it is the disposition of the
matter to a certain form, that when the ordinary power of the Agent or
efficient is added, a form grows and results therefrom. But when they
themselves grant, that this disposition belongs to the second matter (not to
the first, for that is indifferent to receive al forms, nor more determined to
one than another. And if the first matter should contain al forms in its bosom,
and the forms did owe their Original to the first matter, that matter were a
more noble principle than the form) since one disposition is required to the
form of an Oak, another to the form of a Chick, another to draw out the form of
a Horse; and the same Expounders of Aristotle determine, that the Matter
wherein such specific forms hang, is the Elements variously mixed and
disposed: it is demanded (since they hold the form is made actually, which was
there before potentially) Whether it be made of nothing? or whether that same
disposition and Qualities of the Matter, which are nothing but a certain temper
of a mixed body, or the very form it self of the mixed Body or Elements, is
changed into the form of an Oak, an Hen, or an Horse* None of which can be said
without absurdity; since neither an accident can be changed into a substance,
nor one form into another; nor can the forms of living things be compounded of
the Elements. And which way soever that disposition to the form can be
explained (since it is made successively by parts, and the last degree is of
the same kind and perfection with the former) it cannot make up the act of a
thing, nor give Essence to a Substance.

Moreover, Neither can they produce any thing of certainty concerning the
immediate and principal Efficient of that Form which they say is drawn out of
the power of the matter. The matter it self being a passive principle cannot be
the Efficient cause; nor the Sun, or other Stars (since they are only remote
and specifical, not universal causes, as was said before, Chap. 2.) Nor the
external Heat of the Air, Womb, Hen-sitting, Furnace, or any external thing
whatsoever. For so a substance should be produced by an accident. Moreover,
there could not be assigned a specifical Cause of a special Effect; but the
same special Effect should be produced by diverse Causes: as we see Plants
sprout out of the Seed both by the heat of the Sun and of a Stove, and the
Chickens of one Bird hatched by another Bird not of the same, but a different
kind; yea, and the seeds of Silkworms are hatched in the bosom of a Damsel, as
Vida relates in his Poem of the Silkworm. Moreover by the action of one Agent
most different Forms should be produced. For since in the same Garden most
different Plants do grow, they cannot al proceed from the same Agent, viz. The
external Heat. Moreover, according to this Opinion the things generated should
not have their form from the Generator, but only a disposition to the form,
which afterward of its own accord upon the action of an external Agent (as
Heat for example) should spring out of the power of the matter, the Agent
communicating nothing thereunto. And so according to this Opinion it cannot be
said that a living thing begets its like, not that every form does multiply it
self: which yet al sound Philosophers do grant. For if the Generator should
transfer nothing of its own Essence into the thing Generated, but should only
determine the matter to such a like form, and afterward the Efficient (which is
not of the same kind) should make it actually to break forth; how I pray you
can the form be said to multiply it self? Verily, if some Plant in the Indies
when it produces Seed gives nothing but the matter with a determinate aptitude
to receive a like form, out of which after a year, two, or three, the Plant it
self being now burnt or putrefied, the form should break out by virtue of heat,
not only of the Sun, but of the fire in a stove, as the Agent: that Plant
cannot be said to have bred its like, nor that form to have multiplied it self.
Nor is it enough to cause an univocal Generation, and the true production of a
like Essence, to afford a matter with some proclivity and propension to receive
the form. And after this reckoning the Agent heat (and that an accident) should
confer more toward the Generation than the Generator it self, since it makes
the form actually to arise which the Generator caused to be there only
potentially. And thus it remains yet unexplained, whence the substantial and
specific form of a thing, or that more excellent, more divine and chief part
of a thing has its Original. Mean while we grant that the disposition of the
matter is necessary to the Generation of living things, since every matter is
not fit to receive every form, but a determinate matter a determinate form: but
not that the form or soul should be made out of it; but that it may be
propagated thereinto, and afterward dwell therein, as shall be said hereafter.

Fortunius Licetus, de spont. vivent. ortu, Lib. 1. cap. 83. The Opinion of
Fortunius Licetus concerning the Eduction of Forms out of the aptitude of the
Matter.
endeavors to explain the Eduction of forms out of the power of the matter,
after this manner: We say (quoth he) that the Eduction of the form out of the
bosom of the matter is not the drawing out of that which lies hid into the open
view, but the conversion of aptitude into act. For the form which is produced
by the Agent only by the transmutation of the matter did potentially pre-exist
therein, out of which it is brought into act. Moreover, we deny that the Form
is made of nothing, and absolutely created, if it be granted that it is not
made of the matter as a principle, nor out of that in which it did actually
pre-exist. For in the first place, whatsoever things are truly created they are
made simply of nothing, and of no subject at al; but al forms under the Soul of
Man are made of nothing of their own, but not absolutely of nothing, as those
things which are created; since forms are made by the agent, by a transmutation
made in such a determinate subject, on which therefore the forms depend in
their Being, and by which added to their Essence they are defined according to
Aristotle. Again, if it were not so accidents also should be made of nothing,
and most properly created: for no heat did pre-exist in the water which is made
hot. But verily forms are not truly created, nor are they out of nothing of
their own, but properly out of the bosom of the Matter they are drawn, and out
of the aptitude thereof, because they are truly generated of some rudiment of
themselves pre-existing in the matter, which rudiment of the form is perfected
by the action of the Agent, and turns to a perfect Form. So far Licetus. But
this is a vain put-off. For let Licetus teach us what that Rudiment of a Form
is. Whether the substance of the matter it self, or some accident thereof. If
the former, (to which he seems to incline when he writes that the forms are
made by the agent, by a transmutation made in such a subject so determined)
then the matter should be changed into Form: if the latter, an accident must be
changed into a substance. Let him show us also, that there is any rudiment and
beginning of a form, since forms are indivisible, and have their Essence like
numbers; and therefore where they are they are totally, or not at al. Nor does
the same Fortunius Licetus explain this matter more happily, Lib. 4. de spont.
vivent. ortu, cap. 15. where he defines the Beginning of Forms, and holds that
in the matter there is pre-existing a rudiment of the future form, that the
generical nature of that form remains under the opposite privation, to which
the efficient cause joining the specifical difference of the form is said both
to constitute the form, and to further the Generation, and at once to generate
a substance compounded of matter and form. But that same pre-conceived Opinion
touching the eduction of forms out of the power of the matter seduced that man,
otherwise a most diligent searcher into Nature. For no form is capable of more
or less, but consists in an indivisible point, nor can it be remitted, since
remission is made by mixture of a contrary, nor is it possible that the form
should first have a generical Nature, and receive the specifical difference
from the Efficient. And whereas Licetus denies those axioms owned by all
Philosophers, and says they hold true only in compound substances, but not in
simple; this he does without Reason. For since compound substances become such
by reason of the simple of which they consist, if the simple substances,
matter, and form, may be remitted, also the compound might be remitted; and
since the form gives being to the thing by reason of the form the compound also
should be more or less such. Nor does Licetus agree with himself in this point,
since in the same Book, chap. 2. he writes, That those things which are said to
breed of themselves are not made by an external Agent, but by an Agent which
lies hid in the matter of the thing to be made, which does not generate a new
form different from it self, but exhibits it self thereto for a new form, that
is to say, communicates it self. Nor is there in the Soul (which is a most
simple Essence) any composition of sundry Essential parts, and in such a
manner, that like a Genus it might be present without a specifical difference.
The Soul is one most simple Essence, only furnished with sundry faculties. Nor
can he show how that remission is made. For whereas Licetus says, that only an
accidental remission or abatement is made by the mixture of a contrary, but not
an essential, such as he holds to be in forms, is asserted without any reason;
and it lies him in hand to prove, That (as he feigns) an essential remission
may be made without admixture of a contrary. And which way soever he turns
himself he falls into absurdities, and contradicts himself. For when he says
that that same rudiment of a form is no true form, but the generical Nature
thereof, and that the kinds have an Essence really distinct from their sorts,
he confounds Logical Conceptions with the Nature it self of things, The
difference of a Logical and a Natural kind.
or the Logical kind with the Natural. For the Logical kind is in the mind, and
is by the mind abstracted from the sorts; but the Physical Genus signifies a
common nature, which consists in the things themselves out of the Mind. And the
Logical kind indeed may by the mind be separated from the sorts; but the
Physical kind does not exist in Nature, save in its sorts, nor does the Animal
exist any where save in a Man, a Lion, a Horse, etc. And therefore it is a vain
figment to say that the Generical Nature is the Rudiment of the Form, and as it
were half the Form. And from this very Opinion it would follow, that like does
not engender its like. For since the specifical Form gives to every thing its
Nature, but not the Generical; if the Generator should only afford the matter
wherein the Generical form is, or a rudiment of the Form, or an half form, as
Licetus speaks; but the external agent as Heat should introduce the specific
difference; not the Generator which might die in the mean time before the
external agent come should be the Parent and Author of the thing generated, but
the external Agent; and that not univocal, but equivocal. Also I wonder a man
so exceeding learned should defend this Doctrine of the Eduction of Forms,
since he has no need thereof to explain his Opinion, as holding in 1. de
sponte vivent. ortu, cap. 125. That the seed is animated, and Lib. 4. cap. 32.
that it is an imperfect Animal: and he holds that such things as are said to be
generated of their own accord do not proceed from an external Agent, but from
an Agent that lies hid within the matter, as was lately said.

But which way soever they turn themselves, the matter comes to the same pass,
that they are fain to confess, that besides the disposition of the matter there
is somewhat formal in the Seed, the cause of action, and that besides the
disposition of the matter there needs somewhat else by which the thing may be
brought into its perfect act. And that power of which they speak they are
forced at last to explain to be meant not of a passive power, but an active,
which makes that that which is in the first act come to be in the second act,
or in an act simply; so that that Soul which was destitute of Instruments to
operate by is now furnished therewith, so that it is able to operate. Which
very thing also Aristotle taught; when in 7. Metaphys. cap. 9. tit. 31. he
writes: The Seed has the Form potentially in it self, which after a sort has
the same name with that from whence it came. And 2. de Generat. cap. 1. It is
all one whether you name the Seed, or that from whence it came. For the Sum of
the business is, That that Power which Aristotle speaks of is formal, as later
Writers phraze it, Whether the Eduction of the Form out of the aptitude of the
Matter he founded on the holy Scriptures
and differs not from the first act.

A certain late Writer (whose Understanding is capable of nothing but what is
Elementary) when he saw he could not defend the Eduction of Forms out of the
power of the Matter by any Philosophical reason, at last he flies to the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures. But he endeavors to introduce his own mind
and pre-conceived Opinion into the holy Scriptures, whiles he holds, that
Moses, Genesis 1. when he brings in God saying; Let the Earth bring forth, let the
Water bring forth the living Creature, does assert that the Souls of Plants and
Beasts were then by God produced, and do at this day arise from the Elementary
matter. And thus therefore he explains it, that the specifical Forms are not
made of the Elements, inasmuch as they are the matter of the mixtion, and the
conven^ent subjects of Forms; or that they are not made by mixture and
composition of the Elements, but that the Elements concur to the generation of
corruptible things as they contain an universal matter so affected, under the
matters of the Elements, that out of the aptitude thereof as out of a rich and
unexhaustible Treasure might be drawn and propagated to the end of the World
the sorts of al things, such and so many as the most good and great God would
have to exist for the accomplishment and ornament of this lower World. For
since the Elements contain no matter but the first, he must needs by that
universal matter understand the first matter. But who I pray you, either
Philosopher or Divine, did over so teach concerning the first Matter,
especially being considered without the Forms of the Elements? Did Aristotle
(whose Opinion he conceives this of the Eduction of Forms to be) know any thing
of that Divine Benediction given at the first Creation? And where do we read (I
pray you) in the Scriptures that God so blessed that Universal Matter? This
indeed we read in the first of Genesis, That God once commanded that the Earth
and Waters should bring forth Animals created by him; and when they being
created by God were come out of the Earth and Water like a Child out of the
Womb, as Franciscus Junius speaks in his Explication, we do not read that God
again commanded that the Earth and Water should produce Plants and Animals, and
that he blessed them to that intent; but thus we read, That the Earth brought
forth the green Herb bearing Seed, and the Tree bearing Fruit, and each thing
having seed according to its kind; and that God blessed the Fishes and Birds
being created, saying; Increase and multiply, and fill the Waters of the Sea,
and let Birds multiply upon the Earth.

Chap. 5. Of the Formative Principle, and the separated Instrument.
When other more solid Peripateticks saw these difficulties and encombrances
of this Opinion, they held that the Soul indeed it self did proceed from the
Generator, but not immediately. And therefore they denied that the Soul was in
the Seed; yet they taught that there was a virtue therein communicated from the
Generator, from whence came both the forming of the Body, and the Soul of the
thing generated. The Opinion of Albertus Magnus concerning the formative
Faculty.
Of this Opinion was Albertus Magnus, who taught that the Generator does indeed
communicate Seed, but not the Soul with the Seed, but that it only gives a
virtue to the seed, by means of which (though the Generator be dead) the Seed
gives a Soul to the thing generated, so that the seed which has not the Soul
in it does yet generate a living and animated thing, not of it self, but in the
virtue of the Generator. For as we ^ee in the motion of things hurled, that
they are moved not by themselves, but by the force imprinted by the Thrower,
although the Thrower and thing thrown are no longer together; and by the Hammer
an artificial thing is made, not by its own faculty, but that of him that works
with it: so by the Soul-less Seed a thing with a Soul is generated by a virtue
imprinted therein by the Generator.

That most learned Philosopher Jacobus Schegkius seems to be almost of the same
Opinion, who in Lib. 1. de Plast. sem. facultat. attributes a Formative
Principle to the Seed, The Opinion of Jacobus Schegkius.
and teaches, That he thereby understands a substantial Form, which could be
perceived by no sense, but by the mind and understanding. Howbeit, he holds
that the Seed and this substantial Form are not principal but instrumental
Agents, and form the animated Bodies like the Hand of an Artificer. He says,
That it is a substantial Act, separable from the substance of the first Act,
which has for its proper subject the Spermatical Humor. And again, that the
Seed is an Instrumental Cause, and a certain efficient Principle, but not an
efficient Material, making or generating the animated Body, and not being it
self animated, but a Medium interposed betwixt that which is animated and that
which is to be animated, without the information of any matter able to effect
as a certain second act or energie. But unless the Opinion of Schegkius be so
explained, that this Formative Principle is the Soul it self by which the Seed
is animated, and the Seed of such or such a Creature; and that the Formative
Power is a proper adjunct of the Soul, which it has when it is in the Seed,
and exercises the same when an Animal is generated; but inasmuch as there is
not in the Seed actually an Organical Body which the Soul may inform, in that
respect the Form may be said to be absent: then it cannot be admitted. For to
hold a Formative Principle which is not the Soul, is rashly to multiply things
more than needs. For since all the proprieties and operations of the Soul are
found in, and attributed to this Formative Principle, why should it not be
called the Soul? And seeing the Soul in the Seed is sufficient to perform al
these operations which are attributed to the formative Principle, why should we
hold that to be any other than the Soul? And Aristotle himself de generat.
Animal. cap. 1. names this Principle a part of the Animal, which is forthwith
in the Seed. And therefore we need not hold a Formative Principle as it were a
second act of another first act, and the Vicar as it were of the Generator in
the Seed, which when the motion of Generation is ceased, it self ceases. For to
hold that that which made either all or some parts of the Body is perished, is
an absurd thing. The Opinion of ^auctacruz concerning the Instrumenium
sedaratum.
The same Opinion (in a manner) Antonius Ponce Sanctacruz, the King of Spain's
Physician, holds, in opere supra primam 1. Canon. Avicennae, and de Hippoc.
Philosophia, as he is cited by Fienus in his Apology. For he holds the Seed to
be only an Instrument. But when he easily perceived many absurdities would
follow if the Seed should be counted simply as an Instrument, he distinguishes
betwixt an Instrument conjoined and separate. And he conceives that the
necessity of this distinction is taken from the diversity of the perfection of
Agents, and the Nature of the Order of things. For some operate with a Medium
and without a Medium as living things; others of an inferior Rank have not so
great perfection, and they work by themselves. He tells us therefore that
separate Instruments do work by a permanent Virtue which they have received
from the Agent; but the conjoined Instruments do successively receive the
Virtue of the Agent, and therefore operate with dependence upon the first
principal Agent. He explains the Nature of a separate Instrument by an Example
political. For a King or some Potentate operates in far distant places as if he
were present, by power derived from himself, which he confers upon the Laws and
Judges: but private men that live only for themselves must operate by
themselves. He brings afterward another example whereby he would prove his
Opinion, viz. Of Watches, Clocks, and Engines wherein many Wheels are orderly
moved in the absence of the Workman, yet by a virtue imprinted upon them by the
first direction of the Artist. The Nature of conjoined Instruments he explains
by the similitude of a Saw, which lying still has such a disposition that it
may receive motion in order to cutting; yet is it not an acting Instrument til
it receive guidance to motion and cutting from the Sawyer. That there is a
separate Instrument he also proves by the motion of hurling. For a stone hurled
will fly, though the thrower should presently fall down dead. And so he holds it
is in the matter or Seed, how that Animals Generate their Seed being cast out
of them, a derivative virtue continually remaining therein, that it can work,
and does actually work without any actual Influx from the Generator.

But this Opinion however explained and palliated is false and far from truth.
This Opinion refuted.
For Aristotle himself, 7. Metaphys. c. 9. t. 31. reckons the Seed amongst
univocal Agents. But al univocal Agents are not instrumental but principal
Causes. Again, al Instruments properly so called are joined with the principal
Agent, and as Schegkius himself speaks, an Instrument of it self has no
Efficacy, but only by the Use of the Principal Cause.

And those things which are brought by Antonius Ponce concerning a separate
Instrument (unless rightly explained) are false and feigned without reason,
There is no separate Instrument which acts by it self.
and therefore are not to be accounted a Metaphysical Principle, as he gives
them out to be. Indeed the Seed might be called a separate Instrument, viz.
Inasmuch as the Seed is not necessarily joined with the Generator, but is
subordinate thereunto, and has received from the Generator the same power,
yea, and the same Soul which the Generator it self has. But while he denies
the Soul to be in the Seed, he labors in vain when he calls the Seed a separate
Instrument. For although while an Instrument is not employed it may be really
separated from the principal Agent, as a Pencil from a Painter, an Ax from a
Carpenter, a Pen from a Writer: yet no Instrument can be named which in the
action it self operates by a power within it self (for so it should be a
principal Agent, not an Instrumental) but every Instrument in its operation
has no power of it self, but it depends upon, and is directed in its action by
the Principal Agent, and when it is separated it can no longer work by it self.

We must therefore distinguish betwixt the first and second act of an
Instrument. The first and second Act of an Instrument
That any thing may be an Instrument in the first act, it is sufficient that it
be shaped and fitted as an Instrument for some particular action. An Iron
Hammer in regard of its hardness, heaviness, and shape, is an Instrument fit to
beat Gold and other Metals, and to figure and form them into some certain
shape; but this is only in the first act. For an Hammer thus shaped will never
of it self beat out any metal, but the presence and motion of the Artificer is
necessary to dilate the same, and then the Hammer is an Instrument actu
secundo, by the second act. So native heat is an Instrument whereby Nature
digests Chyle, and forms Blood, Flesh, and Bones. But the heat cannot perform
this, unless the soul which is the principal Instrument concur. And it is the
nature of an Instrument to act above its own abilities, An Instrument directed
by the principal Cause Acts beyond its own Ability.
and to produce an effect more noble than it self, viz. inasmuch as it is
directed and moved by the principal Cause: which while it so directs and moves
does not imprint any virtue upon the Instrument, by which it may perform that
Action which belongs to the principal Agent. For neither does the Artist
necessarily make his Instruments, but he receives them made to his hand, either
by Nature or Art, and he makes use of them being by Nature or Art fitted to his
turn, as may be seen in the Saw used by the Joyner, which he had of the Smith,
and in the Cole or Chalk which the Painter uses. And therefore that political
example of a King working a great way off by Laws and Judges, as a moral
Instance, does not square with things natural. And the subordinate Judges are
rather Ministers than Instruments of the supreme Judge, nor do they act by any
Physical Virtue communicated. For neither do Instruments properly so called
perform the work of the principal cause as its Vicars or Substitutes, so as to
perform the same action with the principal Cause, though after a manner derived
and communicated from the said principal Cause; but they are only Con-causes
and Coworkers, and unless the Artist did work they should do nothing; and when
the motion of the principal Agent ceases, they also cease from their action.

As to the example about the motion and impulse of things hurled, The Cause of
the Motion of things hurled.
it does not sufficiently prove the force impressed upon Instruments. For after
what manner that motion of things hurled is caused, is not sufficiently
manifest, and much controverted amongst Philosophers. It is most likely that
this motion is made by the Air, or through means of the Air, and by the force
of the throw. For no man could yet ever tell what that virtue is impressed by
the Thrower, and how it can be imprinted by the local motion of the Arm,
sometimes immediately, otherwhiles mediately as by a Sling where it sticks; how
again it is so suddenly lost and destroyed. And there are doubtless more
absurdities which follow this Opinion, and therefore it cannot be allowed to
confirm the received Virtue of a separated Instrument.

And as to those examples of artificial Engines, as Clocks, Watches,
Waterworks; these things are artificial, in which the motive faculty it self,
which is wholly natural, is not communicated by Art to those Engines, as
appears by the weights hung on by the spring: but that motion is directed by
Wheels artificially made. But it is far otherwise with natural Agents.

Some do yet endeavor to declare the nature of a separate Instrument by the
Example of a red hot Iron, which sets Tow on fire. For they say, the Heat of
the Iron does produce fire Instrumentally, by virtue of that fire which heated
the Iron, and it acts now as its Instrument, no longer conjoined, but separate
therefrom. For that fire which heated the Iron may now be extinguished and put
out. But in good truth the hot Iron does not set the Tow on fire by a power
communicated from the absent fire, but by the fire which is in the hot Iron
having by its small Atoms insinuated it self.

And therefore these are words under which no truth is contained, Wherein the
nature of an Instrument consists.
that the principal Agent transmits its action by a virtue derived from it
self: but the whole nature of an Instrument consists herein, as has been said,
that it produces an effect more noble than it self, and that not like it self,
but the Artificer. And this is the common Condition of every Instrument. And
therefore an Instrument cannot be divided into a conjoined Instrument, which
acts and operates by something participated in a successive being; and a
separate Instrument which acts by somewhat participated inherent therein. For it
is the nature of every Instrument to operate by somewhat participated from the
principal Agent in a successive being. And as soon as that successive Influx of
the principal cause ceases, that whole instrumental action ceases also: but that
which acts and operates by some participated virtue inherent in it self is not
an Instrument, but operates now as a principal Agent; nor does it act above its
own ability, which is essential for an Instrument to do. In a word, that Agent
whose Effect answers and is equal to a virtue formally inherent in it self, is
a principal, not an Instrumental Agent; nor is there any Agent in Nature which
receives virtue from another thing permanently inherent in it self after the
manner of an Instrument, or which acts by a virtue communicated thereto, and
permanently inherent in it self as an Agent wherewith; but every thing that so
acts, acts as the Agent which, as the most learned Fienus rightly speaks to
this point. And therefore the Seed also sent forth by a Plant or Animal,
because by an implanted Virtue though it be no longer governed by another thing
it can shape the body of a Plant or Animal, is no Instrumental Agent, because
it acts not as an Instrument; but a principal Agent, because it acts as a
principal Cause. Now that this Virtue cannot flow from any thing but the Soul
implanted in the Seed shall be proved hereafter.

Chap. 6. That the Seed has the Soul in it, and that the Soul in the seed
shapes the Living Body.
ALL which things when the diligent Searchers of Nature had considered, That
the Seed is animated.
and knew that al things which were made by Nature or Art were made by that
which actually is, and that whatsoever moves ought to have an actual Being, nor
were ignorant that a thing unanimated could not be the principal Cause of an
animated Body, but that a thing animated was produced by that which is animated
as the principal Cause, and that such noble actions they saw could not be
attributed to an accident alone, not governed by the Soul, nor present
therewith: they concluded rightly that the Seed it self is animated, and has a
Soul in it. Nor is this Opinion first sprung up in this Age; and therefore it
is falsely traduced and opposed by some as a new Opinion: Authors who hold the
seed to be animated.
but the most excellent Philosophers and Physicians of al Ages have maintained
the same; Hippocrates, Lib. de Diaeta; Plato in his Timaeus; Aristotle, 2. de
generat. animal. cap. 1. and 3. (save that he says the Mind comes from
without) Galen, 1. de sem. cap. 7. and Lib. de marasmo, cap. 1. Themistius, 2.
de Anima, text. 6. Philoponus, Zimara, 2. de Anima, text. 43. Jacobus
Foroliviensis, 2. in Art. Medic. quest. 38. Jul. Caes. Scaliger, Exercitat. 6.
Cardanus, 2. Contradict. tr. 6. Contrad. 17. Argenterius in Artem parvam, tit.
de Temperam. Thomas a Vega, super Artem parvam, cap. 47. Christoph. a Vega,
Art. med. Lib. 1. cap. 3. Volchetus Coiter, Lib. 2. controvers. cap. 9.
Zabarella, de Animae facult. cap. 11. Mercatus, Lib. 1. part. 4. class 1.
quaest. 98. Capivaccius, Lib. de foet. format. Joubertus, in cap. 5. Lib. 1.
Galeni de facult. natural. Archangelus Piccol^omineut, Lib. 1. Praelect.
Anatom. praelect. 3. Fortumus Licetus every where in his Books de spontaneo
Viventium ortu.

And although (as was said before, Chap. 3.) Authors are here of two Opinions,
whiles some say the Souls of al Living things are communicated by the
Generators in the Seed, and others except the Humane Soul: yet it will be
sufficient if it can be proved in general of Plants and Animals; but whether or
no the same Reasons hold good in the generation of Man, and whether the
Generation of Man have any thing peculiar, we shall consider in the last place.

And for out better proceeding we must first say something of the Nature of
Seed, What is the Nature of the seed
and that not as the common fashion is, of the Seed of Man, but in general of
al Seed, inasmuch as Plants and Animals are propagated thereby. Touching the
Nature indeed of Seed there are diverse Opinions of Authors, and most hold that
it is an Excrement. For they say that Seed being a thing according to Nature,
is either a part of the Body, or an Aliment, or an Excrement of an Aliment.
That it is no part properly so called, nor an Aliment of the Body, it is so
manifest that there needs no enquity thereabouts. Therefore they conceive it
remains that it must be an Excrement. And therefore they say that the Seed is
the remainder of that Blood which is distributed into all the parts of the Body,
and can nourish al parts; and because it is voided forth they say it is an
Excrement. But this reasoning offends against the Laws of Demonstration; since
Seed is bred not only in Animals of Blood, but in Plants without Blood; and
though the Seed which in Animals is voided forth may in some sort be called an
Excrement, yet this does not betide al Seed, viz. the Seed of Plants. Moreover,
the Seed of Animals is not only the superfluity of Blood, which therefore
because it is superfluous (as the Menstruous Blood is an Excrement) it ought to
be expelled, but by a primary Intention of Nature, as a thing most necessary it
is made of the best Blood by the Sperm-making Faculty. And therefore in the
foregoing Argument there is an insufficient Enumeration, and besides the Part,
the Aliment, the Excrement, there is a fourth, viz. the Fruit. For the Seed is
the Fruit of a living Creature brought forth to that end that its like may
thereby be engendered. And therefore Epicurus (as Plutarch has it, de Placitis
Philosophor.) called it an abstract of the Body and Soul, and as the Author of
Medicinal definitions relates, Zeno Citions defined the Seed after this manner.
The Seed is the Abstract of a Man, and a Mixture of the Nature of his
Progenitors, which a man transmits with the moist part of his Soul; being such
a thing as that from whence it was voided. Yea, and the holy Scriptures teach,
That the Earth by the Divine Benediction brought forth the Herb-seeding Seed,
the Fruit-tree bearing Fruit, and every thing having its seed in it self,
according to its kind; where the Fruit and the Seed are one and the same thing.
And if any man esteem more of the Authority of Aristotle in this point than of
the holy Scriptures, let him consult with Aristotle, who in 1. de Generat.
Animal. cap. 18. writes, That the Fruit is either the Seed, or that which
contains the Seed in it. And since it is manifest in Plants, as also in Fishes
and Birds, that the Seed is not simply an Excrement, but somewhat produced by
the Generator, which has its own peculiar Quantity, Figure, and Conformation;
why should be Seed be counted an Excrement in other Animals, although it be
voided in a liquid and fluid Form; since the same proceeds from it which
proceeds from the Seed of Plants, Fishes, and Birds.

But if you will call the Seed before it goes away and is separated from the
Generator a part of the Animal, you shall commit no absurdity. For (which is
chiefly manifest in Plants) it both cleaves unto the whole Body, and is informed
by the same Soul whereby the whole Body is informed. Yet because it is generated
to that end, not that the Generator may be thereby constituted, but that it may
be separated from the whole, I conceive it may more fitly be called the Fruit.

Seed therefore as it belongs to al living Bodies is a Body formed by the
Generator, What Seed is.
full of inbred heat, profitable to propagate any sort of Soul; or, it is a
Body produced by the Generator, out of which a living Body arises of the same
sort with that from whence it came. And indeed in the Seed of Plants that same
innate Heat is in an Oily and Fatty Form, and hardly in any part of the Plant
is there more Oil than in the Seed: which appears at least hereby, in that from
the Seeds of Plants a great quantity of Oil may be stilled and pressed; as is
manifest in Line-seed, Poppy-seed, Hemp Seed, Juniper Berries, Almonds, and
other such like. In such Animals as breed Eggs it is represented in the form of
an Egg: in such Creatures as bring forth live young ones the innate Heat is in a
spirituous form, and therefore it easily exhales and is dissipated, unless it
be presently received or conceived by the Womb, and cherished by the warmth
thereof.

Here nevertheless it is to be observed that the name of Seed is taken,
sometimes more largely, other whiles more strictly. The Seed is largely taken
for all that Body which serves for the propagation and generation of a living
Creature. But strictly taken it is a most simple substance, or a certain spirit
in which the Soul and Formative Faculty is immediately seated, and containing
in it self the Idea or Model of that Organical Body from which it is taken, and
therefore having in it the Power to Form a Body like to that from whence it was
taken, and to perfect it self into an Individual of the same sort with the
Generator.

Now the Seed consists of two Substances, the Matter, and the Form. The Matter
is that same Body or bulk of the Seed, which is various in different Creatures,
and of another kind in Plants, and variously distinguished by the admirable
wisdom of the Creator, according to the Nature of every sort of living thing;
of one fashion in Fishes, another in Birds, another in other Animals. And that
matter again consists of two parts, of which one is a thick substance, another
spiritual, or (as Aristotle says) a Spirit and Nature answerable to the
Element of the Stars. And the Spermatick Faculty is as the Form being the
Original of motion, and which has so great a power, that Plutarch, (de Commun.
Notionib.) says of the Seed, that it is more magnificent and great than that
from whence it came, and of which it was bred; and that which Aristotle says
in general of Principles, 5. de generat. Animal. cap. 7. is chiefly true of the
Seed, viz. That Principles though small in bulk, yet are exceeding great in
faculty and ability. Which power of the Seed Seneca also admires, Lib. 2.
Quaest. not. cap. 6. Let us consider (says he) what a mighty power small Seeds
do secretly put forth; and those whose smalness does hardly take up any room
betwixt the joining of two stones, they grow so strong as to draw asunder huge
stones, and dissolve the Monuments of the dead. And Gregory the Great, in his
26. Homily upon the Evangelists, writes excellently of the wonderful nature of
Seed: Behold! in one grain of the smallest Seed lies the whole bulk of the Tree
that shall spring therefrom. For let us set before our eyes the greatness of a
Tree, and think with our selves what original it had which is grown so great;
we shall doubtless find its original to have been a small Seed. And now let us
consider where (in so small a grain) lies the strength of the Wood, the
roughness of the Bark, the greatness of the taste and smell, the plenty of
Fruits, the greenness of Leaves. For if you feel a grain of Seed it is not firm
or hard, whence then comes the hardness of the Wood? it is not rough, whence
then came the roughness of the Bark? it is not savory, whence then is the taste
of the Fruits? It has no smell, and how then came the Fruits to be so fragrant?
It has no greenness in it, whence then proceed the greenness of the Leaves?
All these therefore lie hid in the Seed at one and the same time; yet are they
not produced out of the Seed al at once. For out of the Seed the Root is
produced; out of the Root sprouts a Branch, out of the Branch grows Fruit, and
out of the Fruit is produced Seed again. Let us therefore ad that the Seed also
lies hid in the Seed.

Hence therefore some do not unfitly term the Souls Idea's or Patterns, because
in them as in a Prototype, the Nature and Fabric of al Visible Bodies which
they form and shape, and of al accidents which they produce in their Bodies, is
comprehended.

But that the Principal part of the Seed is the Soul, and that therefore the
Seed is animated, shall be anon proved by firm Arguments, wherewith a mind
desirous of Truth may be satisfied. But because I see that most men now adays
do not regard so much what is true as what is old, it were worth the while to
alleadg the Authorities of ancient Philosophers and Physicians; but we have
done that already in the beginning of this Chapter. Also the Authorities of
Divines (both Greek and Latins) might be produced; but because most of them
speak only of the Soul of Man, of which we shall speak hereafter, it shall
suffice in this place to alleadg only the Authority of Aristotle, who 2. de
Generat. Animal. c. 1. thus writes: All things whatever are made by Nature or
by Art are made by that which is actually out of that which is potentially such
or such. The Seed therefore is such a thing as has such a Motion and Principle
in it self that the motion being finished every part exists, and each part also
is animated. And in 2. Phys. cap. 3. text. 31. The Seed, and the Physician, and
he that advises with him, and every Efficient, are all of them Causes, whence
there is a Principle of Mutation, Rest, or Motion. And more such like places
Scaliger produces, Exercit. 6. Sect. 7. Also consider what follows, out of
which it manifestly appears that though Aristotle says the Soul is potentially
in the Seed, yet that he holds it is really there. Which appears by the example
of a Geometrician sleeping, waking, contemplating, which he makes use of. For
as the Geometrician sleeping and waking has the power to contemplate, the
former a remote power, the latter a nearer power, each of which notwithstanding
presupposes an Act, such as is not in all men, but only in a Geometrician; so in
a Tree (for examples sake) in the Winter time when it grows not there is a near
power to grow, because it has Organs necessary to cause it to grow already
perfect: but in the Seed there is a remote power, because it is as yet
destitute of Organs; yet each power pre-supposes an act, and neither the Seed
nor the Tree could be called potentially such, unless the Soul were present.

But it is demanded, What Soul is in the Seed.
What Soul is in the Seed? Aristotle indeed says, That the Generation of a
living thing is the participation of the first Nutritive Soul with the inbred
heat. And in 2. de generat. animal. cap. 3. he writes, That a Man lives first
the life of a Plant, then of an Animal, and lastly of a Man. But this is not so
to be understood as if three Souls came at distinct times. For every living
thing (even according to Aristotle) has but one Soul, whereby it is that which
it is. And therefore in all seed whatever there is presently the whole Soul, which
nevertheless does at first form the Instruments necessary for Nutrition; which
because it is chiefly and almost only conspicuous in Plants; a man is said to
live first the life of a Plant. Afterward in process of time the Instruments
both of Sense and Motion are formed in Animals; which being perfected, a Man is
then said to live the life of an Animal, and of a Man. For neither (as I also
showed in Lib. 6. Physicae, cap. 1.) the Vegetative and Sensitive, or the
Vegetative, Sensitive, and Rational, are peculiar and general Forms or three
Essences, but only general Conceptions arising and constituted from the
comparison and agreement of living things, which exist no where separated save
in the Mind of Man; nor is the Nature of any Plant perfected only by the
Vegetative Faculty, but every Plant has a specific Form, endued with a
vegetative power indeed, but yet with other Faculties also.

This Opinion of Aristotle (and indeed the very Truth) concerning the presence
of the Soul in the Seed most excellent Philosophers and Physicians of al Ages
have acknowledged, whom I cited in the beginning of this Chapter, and
especially Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 6. Sect. 7. et sequent, and amongst
later Writers, the most learned Fortunius Licetus, (who as elsewhere, so in
Lib. 4. de spont. vivent. ortu, cap. 32. propounding as it were the Sum of what
he had taught elsewhere) writes, That the Seed is an imperfect Animal, and that
a Lion and the Seed of a Lion are Univocals, and have the same Soul for their
Essential Form, and differ only in the Organization of their Bodies; and Lib.
1. cap. 74. That the Father then truly generates when he casts out his Seed,
his Soul being parted by partition of its subject, and of one being made two;
and that which remains in the Seed being cherished by the temper of the Womb
and obtaining a fit matter exercises its Faculties thereupon, and forms it self
a body fitted with those Organs it stands in need of, to perform the other
operations of life: so that the seed is an Animal and living, only wanting a
multitude of Organs; and the Fathers generation is not performed in the Womb
after the Fathers's death, but when he issues out his Seed.

But I will not contend only by Authorities, It Is proved that Seed is animated.
nor is it fitting to begin the proof of this point from the Generation of Man,
since that were contrary to the Laws of demonstration. For some do not a little
involve this point with obscurities, when they dispute whether the seed be
animated, not sufficiently explaining their mind, whether they understand the
Seed of Man, of brute Beasts, or of Plants; [or when they cannot satisfy
themselves, but remain doubtful, they affect obscurity on purpose that others
may not easily understand what they think. Lest therefore any doubt may remain
in a matter so serious, by a Living thing we understand a substance wherein
there is a Soul actually, and our Question is whether the seed be such a
substance] which they ought by any means to have declared. For there are some
who will not grant that any seed is actually animated; others that the seeds of
Plants indeed are animated, but they deny the seed of animals especially of Man
to be actually animated. But I conceive it most probable that al seed is
animated. And therefore we undertake to prove in general concerning all living
things, that their seeds are animated. Now those most evident and firm and
hitherto unanswered reasons which have induced most renowned Men to be of this
Opinion, are these. The first is this, that the operations of the soul are most
manifestly discerned in the seed. For it is a maxim granted by all
Philosophers; every thing that moves is actually in Being. And these three
follow one another necessarily; to be, to be able, to operate. And therefore
Operations bring us to a power, and a power to an Effence. For such powers do
flow from the very Essence of the soul, and they are ^^^eparable from the soul,
nor do they pass from one subject to another. And as Fienus speaks well, it is
so absurd as nothing can be imagined more absurd, to hold that conformation, as
also nutrition and augmentation, which begin with the soul it self, do flow
from a Principle which is not not vital. Nor can a vital power communicate its
Virtue to another thing which is not vital. Since therefore the operations of
the soul appear in the seed, we do thence rightly and necessarily conclude,
that there is therein a soul furnished with the powers to exercise these
operations. Now that the seed has Motion and Action is as manifest as that
which is most manifest, and so often inculcated by Aristotle, when he calls the
seed the Beginning of generation and Motion (1. de generat. Animal. 2. and 21.)
and the Beginning of the Form or Species, which works the Menstrual Blood into
its own proper shape. 1. De generat. 20. and 4. de generat. 1.

Now there are two operations in the seed which bring us most certainly to the
knowledge of the soul lying hid, The Operations of the Seed. The first
Vivification.
viz. The quickenning of the seed and Conception; and afterward the shaping of
all the parts necessary for the performance of the vital actions. For in the
first place, every seed (as is manifest in Plants) is preserved by its own
soul, and for a certain season remains fruitful, some the space of a year,
others two years or more according to the difference of sorts; and as long as
it is perfect and uncorrupted, and has gotten a fitting place, present
nutriment and external heat to excite the same, it is apt to grow up into a
Plant of its own kind. It seems indeed an absurdity to Libavius and some
others, that grains of Wheat lying in the Corn-loft should actually live, but
he shows no reason why it should be absurd. Contrarily it is more agreeable to
reason that seeds should live. For although in the seeds of Plants there is no
motion apparent to the sense: yet the soul lying hid within is not idle, but it
vivifies the seed: after the same manner as in Trees in the Winter time no
action appears to sense, and yet they are not destitute of their soul, but are
enlivened by the same concealed within them, which in the spring time by
manifest actions does again discover it self; and the same happens in seeds.
For Seeds whiles they live are fruitful and fit to be sowed; but those which
are dead are not fit to be sowed, nor will any Plant spring from them. And if
seeds were not alive, whence comes it to pass I pray you that being only
moistened and cherished by Heat they presently begin to sprout?

The second operation is the forming and shaping of the living Body: The
Second, the shaping of the Body.
an admirable work truly, and wherein as ( Galen speaks) there appears the
greatest Art and Wisdom imaginable. For if there be any work in nature
admirable, and wherein we must be fain to acknowledge our own Ignorance and to
admire the infinite Wisdom and Power of the Creator, it is the shaping of the
Child in the Womb, the Chick in the Egg, and the Body of a Plant out of the
seed thereof. For who does not admire that the Bodies of Plants and Animals are
so artificially framed, and in respect of Magnitude, Number, Figure, Order,
Situation, Color, Smell, and other things, so formed, as to transcend all the
Art and Iudustry of all the Artificers in the World? Hippocrates truly every
where, especially in Lib. de Alimentis, de Cord, de Articulis, in epidemiis,
calls Nature most Sagacious, most Just, most Artful, most Provident, most
Discreet. Aristotle compares her to a prudent Hous-holder rightly mannaging all
things, who in generation makes nothing superfluous, nor omits any thing
necessary, changes nothing, nor produces any thing sooner or later than need
requires, does nothing in vain; so that there is no member in a living body but
has its action, nor is there any action which wants its member or Instrument.
And 1. de part. Animal. chapter last, he admires the Wisdom and Power of Nature
even in the meanest things. Galen also in his 16. de Vsu partium, chapter 1. does
teach that distributive justice is in nature very eminent, and in 15. de Vsu
partium, chap. 1. that Man's words cannot express the wisdom of Nature; and in
the same Book, chapter 7. he says that Nature is more skilful than the skilfullest
Artist. Which in 17. de Vsu partium, cap. 6. he proves by example of Phidias,
who though he had with such admirable workmanship engraven in a Ring Phaeton in
his Chariot with four Horses, that the parts of the four Horses might be
discerned distinct one from another, and the sixteen Feet of the Horses were
visible: yet the workmanship of nature in the Thigh of a Gnat is more admirable
than that of Phidias, in all those members of the four Horses. For besides the
Articulation, there is found therein a faculty to move, nourish, and grow. And
how great the Wisdom and Power of Nature is, even a Plant the lowest sort of
living things does sufficiently show; Galen sings an Hymn to God the Creater.
in which there is so much variety and beauty, in figure, color, situation,
that no man can sufficiently admire, much less imitate the same. And from the
Praises of Nature Galen fitly raises himself in many places to praise the God
of Nature; and no Philosopher is more large in setting forth the praise of God,
and all his Books of the use of the Parts of the Body (as himself says) are
nothing but an Hymn in Praise of the Admirable works of God. But especially
Lib. 3. de Vsu part. cap. 10. he writes excellently indeed; But truly (^aies
he) if I should speak any more of these kind of Cattle, men better minded might
justly be offended at me perhaps, and say that I defiled that sacred discourse
which I frame as a true Hymn in praise of our Maker, and I conceive that
herein is true Piety, not to Sacrifice to him many hundreds of Oxen, or to burn
Callia Lignea and a thousand other sweet perfumes and Ointments, But if I first
know my self, and then declare to others what his Wisdom is, his Virtue and
Goodness. For in that he would adorn all things with convenient furniture, and
suffer nothing to be deprived of his benefits that I count as a token of most
perfect Goodness; and in this respect his Goodness must be celebrated by us
with Hymns. But to have invented all this, how and after what manner every
thing should be adorned, is a point of the highest Wisdom; and to have been
able to bring to pass all that he pleased, is an argument of an invincible and
unconquerable Virtue and Power. Thou must not therefore so admire the Sun,
Moon, and universal order of the other Stars, being so exceeding artificially
marshalled and disposed; nor let their Greatness, Beauty, perpetual Motion, or
so certainly described Circuits render thee so astonished as to think these
sublunary things mean in comparison, and void of all ornament. For here also
you shall find a like Wisdom, Power, and Providence. For do but consider the
matter whereof every thing is made, and do not vainly persuade thy self, that
of menstrual Blood and Seed an immortal Creature could be made, or one that is
impassible, or always movable, or as bright and fair as the Sun. But as you
estimate the Art of Phidias, so consider the Art of the Maker of all things.
But you may perhaps be astonished at the wonderful Ornaments of the Statue of
Jupiter Olympius, the bright Ivory, the store of Gold, the largeness of the
whole Image. But if you should see such an one of Clay, you will pass by the same
it may be with contempt. But so will not an Artist do nor one that is able to
judge of the works of Art, but he praises Phidias as much, if he see his
workmanship in common Wood, or Wax, or Clay. For a vulgar and unskilful Eye is
astonished at the richness of the matter, but an Artist is only amazed at the
Beauty of the workmanship. Come on therefore, be thou a skilful Naturalist,
that we may not term thee a rude Plebeian but a true Philosopher. Leave the
difference of matters, and consider the bare Art it self. When thou observest
the Fabric of the Eye, think that it is the Instrument of Seeing, and when
thou viewest the Foot, think that it is the Organ of Walking. But if thou
think of Eyes made of the substance of the Sun, and of Feet made of pure
Gold, thou forgettest the matter which is Bones, and Skin, and Flesh, whereof
they are made. Remembering that therefore consider whether light be an Heavenly
Substance, or an Earthly Slime: for so give me leave to call the Mothers Blood
flowing into the Womb. As therefore if you give Phidias Clay to make an Image
of, you will never require of him an Ivory Statue; after the same manner having
given Blood to the Work-master, you cannot receive from him a Sun, or a Moon,
or such a bright and beautiful Body. For those Bodies are divine and Heavenly,
and we but Statues or Images of Clay, and yet the Art of the Work-master is
equal in both. So far Galen.

Yea, and this Work can hardly be sufficiently admired, concerning which
Franciscus Titelmannus writes excellently and piously, Lib. 8. Physic. c. 11.
(I will give you the whole place) and thus he says. Is it not superadmirable
that of a small Seed (taken from some Herb or Tree) cast into the Earth, a green
Herb should spring up, or a Tree, and that the same in process of time drawing
its nourishment out of the bowels of the Earth should join to it self its just
quantity, and fit all its parts according to the condition of its own Nature,
with so beautiful a variety, so comely a disposition, and so admirable an order
that the wit of Man is not able to comprehend the Workmanship that is in one
small Herb? For consider as a Tree grows up from the Seed, how it sends its
Roots into the Earth beneath, and fixes them so fast, makes them stick so close
in the bowels of the Earth that after a little time it can hardly be stirred or
plucked up without great violence; how it sends its Stock and Trunk upwards,
which outwardly it clothes with Bark as with a Coat, against the inclemency of
the Air, and the injuries of cold and heat. And in the inmost part the marrow
is placed, and round about Veins great and small are dispersed through the body
of the whole Trunk; and they in an admirable order springing, the lesser from
the greater, through which all parts draw nourishment to themselves. And in the
upper part how wonderfully do the Leaves spring out of the Branches, wherein
also we behold a wonderful Connection of Veins and Arteries. Also the Leaves
have all the same shape, the same smoothness or roughness, a like longitude and
latitude well-neer, the same color, taste, and smell; and in every respect Trees
of the same kind are exceedingly one like another. I pass over the beauty of
the Flowers, the sweetness of the Fruits, and in both a wonderful Artifice And
all these Originally spring from the Virtue of one Seed. And in the Seed
likewise of a living thing, and consequently of a Man (out of which the Child
grows as to its Body) is not that alone exceeding wonderful, that by reason of
the Virtue which is inso exceeding vile altogether deformed and filthy matter,
such a decency of Members, so beautiful a composition, so convenient an order,
so effectual a disposition of Members, so rare a conjunction of parts should
arise? namely, That beneath a broad part should be shaped upon which the whole
body might firmly stand, and move from place to place; the extreme part whereof
should have a manifold dvvision, so that the matter should be carved as it were
into particles, viz. That the Feet should have Toes, and that these parts again
should have such an order that that which is in the first place should be
longer and thicker than the rest, and so to proceed gradually, as that the last
Toe is of all the smallest and the shortest. Likewise, That these parts at the
end of the foot should be so regularly and generally five in number, that he is
counted for a Monster that has six. Also that each of these parts has its
joints wherein they may be bowed, and the first and greatest has only one
joint in the middle, the rest every one two. And all these things are
manifestly apparent in the composition of the Foot and Hand to him that shall
look no further than the out side. And in the uppermost Part of the Body, how
there is framed with rare Artifice a round part, which is covered above with
the Skull, of so hard and indissolvable a boney substance that lying many years
together in the Earth it cannot be consumed. Which Skul is covered with flesh
and skin, whence flow the Hairs which cloth the part all over. But under this
Skul is formed a certain noble and most tender substance which we term the
Brain, and that in several parts variously formed that in might be a sit
receptacle for diverse Virtues, and the Organ of sundry noble Operations. In
which upper round part the Eyes also are placed, beautifully formed in their
sockets, yet so as they might be most readily moved, which also have their
Eyelids and Eyebrows. Under these the Nostrils, and on the sides the Ears; and
under the Nostrils the Mouth-hole to receive the Meat, and round about the
Jaw-bones full of Teeth; the foremost of which at the entrance are thin and
sharp to cut and mince the Meat, but the hinder are more than twice as thick,
which like Millstones grind what the other has cut into small particles, in
which regard they are also called Grinders. But on the backside of the Head
all is shut up, and no opening to be seen: but there are strong Nerves, and
wonderful Joints which fasten the Head (the upmost part) to the Sboulders
beneath, so that though the Head do not touch the Shoulders, yet it is
beautifully supported by them without burden by interposition of the Neck. And
hence from the Shoulders (as it were two Boughs) the Arms are stretched out for
the performance of any work, which in the midst (namely the Elbow) are made
to bend, and have their utmost parts orderly divided into Fingers, as was said
before of the Feet. Moreover that same most noble member the Heart is so
wonderfully seated in the midst of the Body, having the Lungs placed round
about to fan and temper its heat, drawing the Air continually in by their
respiration like a pair of Bellows, and so tempering its Heat: also having the
Liver its neighbor the Workhouse of Blood, and the Stomach as the Cook of the
whole Body, receiving the Nourishment of the whole: also the Spleen, the Kidneys,
the Guts, all wonderfully knit together and rolled about. That all these
things, I say, which we have only touched at, and other things hid within much
more wonderful, should be so orderly, so perpetually shaped in the Body of a
Man, yea, or of another Creature, by the power and ver^^e of so vile a
substance as the Seed, who can choose but count this the greatest miracle in the
World? Had not the Psalmist reason to say to the. O Lord, thy Knowledge is made
wonderful in me, and strengthened, and I cannot attain there unto? And have not
we had reason in the Preface of this Book to aver that Men carry Miracles
always about them more wonderful than all the Miracles in the World besides?
And truly it would not seem so great a wonder if we should aver, That God by
his Omnipotent Power of himself did frame all this connection and disposition of
Members which we see in our selves. If as in the beginning he created Adam of
the Earth, and Eve of his Rib without the power of any seed, taking only the
Earth sor matter, and administering all the power himself; so he himself also
should frame our bodies in their most beautiful dispesition and proportion.
Also, if as at the first be created Trees and Herbs without the Virtue of any
seed; so be should now by his all-powerful Command cause them to spring up out
of the Earth. For we know that to him nothing is impossible, and nothing
difficult. It is to us no news if he does great things, of whom it is written;
He alone does wonderful things. But that this disposition of the Body of Man
should proceed from the Virtue and Power which lies hid in the Parents seed (a
most silthy, and hardly to be named substance, which no man beholds without
abomination) and that therein so rare a virtue should lie concealed to make and
shape so admirable a body; that the whole efficacy of this wonderful
disposition of parts should really exist therein, this justly ads weight unto
our consideration above measure, this renders us amazed and astenished, and
compels us to cry out, and to confess with open mouth, that he is not only
great in himself, nor only great in great things, but that even in the most
abject, contemptible, and smallest things, he is full of Glory. So far
Titelmannus.

But since certain it is, The shapeing of the Body of (...) live creature is
the work of the Soul.
That God does not immediately and alone effect al these things which come to
pass in the Generation of Living things, but that Nature is constituted, which
is the ordinary Power of God, and which performs all the vicissitudes of
Generations; the Question now is, What is the immediate Author of this
admirable Fabric in living things, both Plants and Animals. And although Galen
despaired to find the cause by which al these things are done, and confesses
that he could find nothing so much as probable in this point, which made him
exceeding sad, Lib. de foetu formato, cap. 6. Yet if he had considered that
these Operations were proper to the Soul of every sort of living Creature, he
might without great difficulty have known that al these operations did proceed
from the Soul which lies hid in the Seed.

That these are the Operations of nothing but the Soul of every living thing,
he will easily understand who considers what it is which of a small Birth makes a
large Animal, preserves in Nutrition the same Figure of the Body, lest by the
continual growth of the parts it should be changed, restores the flesh lost,
breeds oftentimes large Veins. Which Galen says he saw in the Head of one,
Lib. de semine, repairs the teeth which young people do cast, restores every
year the fallen Leaves of Trees, brings forth the Flowers and Fruit, in
Peacocks and other Birds supplies new Feathers suitable to their kinds. For
since it is certain, that the Soul and form of every sort of living thing is
the specific cause of al these operations, and that hence every year each Tree
has its own Leaves restored, of one fashion to the Oak, of another to the
Pear Tree, of another to the Peach-tree, and Harts-horns to the Heart in room of
those are fallen off, but not the Horns of an Ox, Claws of a Crab, every one
according as suits with their particular Nature: What need is there I pray you
in the first structure of every living thing out of its Seed, to seek any other
cause of Formation than the Soul it self, which is one and the same in the
Seed, and in the living body formed? For it is altogether the same work, when
the Soul lying hid in the Seed, and drawing matter, shapes the body of a Plant,
and when the same Soul repairs the fallen Leaves, restores the Flowers,
produces new branches, boughs, and roots. And so since the same operations in
the Seed, and in the Plant, are seen in every respect absolutely perfect, they
show that there is the same Principle and Agent in both. And therefore since in
the seed it self are persormed the operations proper to the soul, why should we
deny the soul to be in the seed? For all the faculties of every form, and
especially of the soul, are properties inseparably flowing therefrom, and
therefore it may be most rightly concluded; Where the faculties and operations
of the Soul are found, there the Soul also it self is present, and we easily
come by the operations to the knowledge of the hidden Essence and Soul. For if
one Faculty were in the Seed, another in the grown body, of what form was that
the power, or when went it away, and whither, when the body was formed? It is
an absurd thing truly to hold, that the Formation of the Flesh, Membranes,
Bones, and other parts, is begun by one faculty, and continued and perfected by
another different therefrom; and that so as to continue the work begun with the
same thread without any Error. Doubtless one and the same continued Operation,
which lasts from the Beginning of Generation to the end of Life, cannot proceed
from diverse Principles.

This also confirms the same that in Plants we see a Root, or Branch, or also a
Leaf only, as in the Indian Fig Tree, being plucked from the Plant and stuck in
the ground, does grow into a complete and perfect Plant; which is the work of
nothing but the Soul present therein. And since the same thing is done in the
Seed, we justly conclude that the Soul is present and therein, and performs the
same work. Yea, and when we see the same Plant (as Rosemary for example)
propagated both from a Seed and Branch we acknowledge the same cause in both
cases. For otherwise there would be two different causes of one special effect,
and two conforming Facukies of one and the same Plant, which is false and
absurd.

To answer this Argument, Fienus (truly) labors and sweats hard, de from. foet.
quaest. 5. Fienus his Reason against the Animation of the seed of Plants.
Conclus. 6. but yet in vain. For he says that a new Plant is produced one way
out of the Root and Branches, another way out of the Seed. For of the former a
new Plant is not made, but they being severed from their stem are themselves a
new Plant; because being cut from the whole they have already a vegetative soul
multiplied, but do not acquire the same, by which they augment themselves and
attain to their perfection. Contrariwise, that the Seed is no new Plant,
because it has no soul, but it becomes a new Plant by the coming of a soul
into it after it is planted in the Earth; or by the soul which is newly
produced in the seed after it is put into the Earth.

But Fienus can by no means thus free himself. For in the first place, though
it seem another manner of propagation to the sense, that which is by the Root
or Branch, from that which is by the Seed: yet in respect of the principal
Efficient it is indeed one and the same, since it proceeds from the same soul.
Fienus denies indeed (by reason of a pre-conceived Opinion) that the soul of
the Plant is in the seed, but he proves it by no reason. Contrariwise, from the
operations of the Formative Faculty which are in both alike we firmly conclude
the same soul to be in both, viz. in the Seed (for examples sake of Rosemary)
and in the Branch thereof. Moreover in the same sense, as a Root, a Branch or a
Leas may be called a new Plant, the Seed may also be so called. For in each
there is its Soul, but in the Seed there is wanting the ultimate perfection
springing from the Organs. Thirdly, if he grants the whole soul may be in the
Slip of a Root, and in one Leaf of a Tree, and that by cutting off the soul is
multiplied, and that the soul which before was but one in number, viz. while
the said Root, or Branch, or Leaf did grow to the Plant, by cutting the same
off is multiplied; why does he not grant that the same multiplication may be
made by the seed? especially since al seeds are rarely fashioned, and some of
them have a more artificial shape than the Root of an Hop or any other Plant,
or the Leaf of an Indian Fig Tree? The same Operations in both do argue
(doubtless) the presence of the same Soul in both.

We do therefore rightly argue from this wonderful Fabric of the Body which is
made in and of the seed, that the soul is present therein. For, whatsoever is
made by Nature or by Art must be made by that which has an actual Being; and
that which moves must have an actual Being; and every immediate efficient Cause
must necessarily be joined with the Patient. And therefore in the generation
also of al living things that which forms the Body must be present, and must be
joined to that Body. And that which is yet more, the ministering powers
themselves which wait upon the Formative Faculty do al appear in the seed. For
the first Operation which is performed in the Seed is in a Plant the drawing of
nourishment from the Earth, and in Animals the drawing of the Mothers blood.
The second is the Vivification and Animation thereof, or Communication of the
Soul thereto. For the Nutriment drawn out of the Earth is inanimate, and the
blood also is of it self inanimate. But when of these the parts of a Plant and
of a Child are made, they must needs then be animated. But nothing can give a
Soul but that which has it, and therefore the Seed is animated. The third
Operation is the separative. Since the Liver is made of one kind of matter, the
Stomach of another, the Heart of another, the Brain of another; a Vein, a
Nerve, an Artery of another, the Soul in the Seed discerns and separates these
matters one from another. Fourthly, when these matters are severed by the same
Soul each is put in its own place, the Brain and Stomach in one place, the
Heart and Liver in another. The fifth is the Formative peculiarly so called, by
which its own shape, quantity, number, and the like, are allotted to each part.

Secondly, There is no ^gent in the seed except the soul.
There can be no other Agent here assigned save the seed. For first of al, the
Generator himself is many times absent. So in the Spring, when a Plant springs
from seed, the Plant which bare that seed is many times dead long before; and
whiles the Animal is in the Womb of the female receiving its shape, the Male
which engendered the same may happen to be dead.

Again, The innate Heat in the Seed is not the Principle of conformation.
Neither can the inbred Heat of the Seed be the Cause of Formation. For though
it cannot be denied, that the innate Heat is an Organ wherewith as other
actions in the body, so conformation is shaped, yet it is not the primary
Cause; since so admirable a work cannot be ascribed to a bare quality, as to
give to so many different parts almost infinite in number, each its peculiar
figure, quantity number, situation; but there is need of a far Diviner Agent.
Of which Scaliger, Exercitat. 6. Sect. 5. If (says he) the form comes from
without (as they tell us) and in the mean while the matter is furnished with all
kinds of perfection; of necessity both the Qualities and Quantities, the
numbers, orders, and scituations, must be provided and ordered by somewhat which
is within, and in conclusion the whole Body must be shaped by the same internal
Principle. Now this shaping of the body is performed, either by a substance, or
by an accident, or by both. Not by an accident alone. First of all, because no
accident works but in the virtue of its substance. Again, because no accident
has knowledge. But that same Virtue and Power which is Architect of so noble a
Temple has been judged by all Philosophers to be most exceeding wise. It must
be therefore framed and built by a substance. And this substance is the Form of
the Seed. Doubtless the form of the Seed if it be not a Soul it is a bruit
thing: and if it frame the body, it is equal to the Soul. But in growing and
restoring of wasted Flesh the soul it is which does all. There must be
therefore in the Seed a shaping Soul which comes before that Soul for which it
prepares its house. And therefore that former Soul is more wise and noble than
this latter. And a little before: The Form it self is the cause of this
preparation. For it both alters the whole, and disposes of the parts for its
ownuse. Nor when the body arrives to the perfection of its preparation, does it
then also arrive to the substantial Form. For the Form it self exists
beforehand. And therefore there is no progress made to it, but to its act,
that there may afterward be use made thereof.

Nor in Animals can the Virtue of the Mothers Womb be the cause of the
Conformation and shaping of the Body. The virtue of the Mothers Womb is not the
Cause of the formation of the young one.
For if the Formative Faculty were in the Womb, and not in the Seed, the Father
should confer nothing to the Conformation of the young one, and should afford
only a passive Principle, and consequently should not generate. Again, there
can be no cause assigned why the Child should be sometimes like the Father, and
why Females should not always be engendered. Thirdly, in Eg-bearing Animals the
Conformation is not performed by the Womb, but the Eggs are perfected into
Chicken, without the Body of the Hen; as neither the Earth (which to Plants is
as the Womb) has any power to shape the Plant, but all that Faculty is in the
Seed. Moreover, if heat brings (as they say) the power of the Seed into act, a
Quality engenders a substance. Nor can they avoid the force of this Argument
who answer, That this substantial Power is so ordered and disposed by the
Generator, that the said Quality being awakened it breaks forth into an act
like the Generator. For what I pray you is that substantial power? Certainly
unless it be the Soul it is a mere figment, which appears by their own rule,
when they say that the next power is reckoned for an act. For since a thing
cannot be at once both in act and power, if the next power be an act, certainly
it cannot be a pure passive power, but a formal one, and so the Soul it self.

Nor is that of any moment which Thomas Fienus brings against this argument,
The Objection of Fienus against the presence of the soul in the seed.
de form. foetus, quaest. 5. conclus. 6. For seeing he grants that there is no
other cause of the Conformation of an animat Body save the Soul, it is rightly
hence concluded; That whatever has in it the Efficient Cause of Formation has
in it the Soul: But the seed has in it the cause of the Conformation of an
animate Body. Ergo it has in it the Soul. Here indeed Fienus answers; I
acknowledge the Premises are true; but I deny the Consequence. It is indeed
rightly inferred that there is some Soul in the Seed, but not that it is the
Soul of the Seed. There is indeed a Soul brought into the Seed after that the
Seed is conceived in the Womb, or planted in the Earth, or the Eg is set under
the Hen, when al things are put into act; but that is not the Soul of the Seed,
or which did pre-exist in the Seed, or which was bred in the Stones, the Tree,
or the Hen, but the Soul of the young Conception which was afterward introduced
thereinto. But in very good deed, how can the Consequent be denied if both the
Premises be true? For in a Syllogism, that which is false cannot be inferred
from true Premises. He says nevertheless that the Minor is false, and he
denies that the soul which is the Cause of Conformation is the soul of the
seed: but falsely. For it must be showed, as hereafter shall be said, what is
the cause of those operations and of the conformation in the seed before the
soul is come, according to his opinion. Moreover since he says the soul is not
present til all things be actuated, he ought to show what is the Author of that
same actuation and conformation, in Plants, Eggs, Bruit Beasts, before the soul
comes. Thirdly he ought to have told us, whether the Souls also of Plants,
Birds, and Beasts, are introduced, and from what cause they proceed. Doubtless
when some Seed is cast into the Earth, or in any place is moistened with water
(without any other cause) first it puts forth a Root, and a little after it
begins to sprout. What I pray you is the cause of this operation and formation,
save the Soul already pre-existent in the Seed? Or if it be not the Soul
pre-existent in the Seed, Let Fienus show whence it should afterward come.

And this Argument which has hitherto been propounded and explained, drawn
from the operations of the Soul appearing in the Seed might alone suffice to
persuade a mind not pertinacious, but desirous of truth, that the Soul is in
the Seed: howbeit there are other Arguments evident enough to prove the same.

For in the second place, Like would not beget its like, if the Seed were not
animated,
whatsoever ingenders its like must needs communicate its Esence to the thing
engendered; otherwise it would not be essentially like it. But every living
Creature begets its like, Ergo it communicates its Essence to the thing
engendered; and consequently not only the matter, but also the form, whereby the
Essence of a thing is chiefly accomplished. And if this were not so there could
be no univocal Generation, and the Generator could give nothing but the matter,
nor could any man tell us whence the Soul should come; when frequently the
Generator before a Plant or Animal is made of the Seed may come to die, and
afterward nothing should be found to form the Plant or Animal save external
Heat. Thus the Seeds and bulbous Roots of Plants are sometimes kept many years
before any Plant grow therefrom, the Plant which bate the Seed or Bulb being
long since dead. So out of an Egg even by the Heat of a Furnace a Chick is
hatched, the Cock and Hen from whose copulation the Egg proceeded, being long
since killed and eaten. And questionless if there were not in the Seed an active
Principle communicated by the Parents, the Parents could not be truly said to
generate, since they should afford only the Matter.

Thomas Fienus indeed makes answer, de Format. Foet. quaest. 6. that the
Parents do herein really and actively generate, in that they afford the Seed
and Matter of Generation, and imprint thereupon all dispositions necessary for
the Introduction of a Soul. But this is the Begging of the Question. For we
deny that that which only affords the matter of Generation however disposed to
fit it for the reception of the form, does communicate an active principle and
truly Generate. For all these dispositions do belong to the matter, and he that
does not communicate the principle of acting, he cannot be said actively to
engender.

Thirdly, If the Seed had no Soul in it, A Thing Inanimate cannot engender that
which is Animate.
and yet should produce a Creature with a Soul in it, the more noble should be
produced by the less noble, and the Virtue of the Seed should produce a
Substance, which is absurd. For nothing acts beyond its ability; also that
which is not animated should perform actions proper to the Soul, Conformation,
Nutrition, Auction, Attraction; should make Bones, Flesh, Membranes: all which
actions are performed at the first conformation, which happens soon after the
Beginning of the Conception.

And though it be objected by some, that an Agent by virtue of another thing
may produce an effect more noble than of it self it were able to compass: yet
if this be done, it must be done when the principal Agent is present, and not
when it is absent, which does not happen in generation. For the Father may be
absent from the place where Generation is made, yea and he may be dead before
that time. So also the Mother may be absent or dead, as it happens in Chickens,
which are hatched by the Heat of a Furnace, or by some Fowl of another sort.

All the Premises therefore being considered, it is most rightly determined,
How Live things are generated.
that the soul it self is in the seed, and as Zabarella well says de Facult.
Anim. cap. 11. that Living things when they generate their like do communicate
some of their Matter and some of their Form, when they afford an animated seed
furnished with the same vital faculty which was in the Generator.

For though the Souls of living things of themselves have no Quantity nor are
divisible: Souls are co-extended with their Bedise.
yet according to the extension of the matter wherein they are they themselves
are extended, which Fortunius Licetus has proved in two Book de Animae
Coextensione Corpori, and when it is divided they are divided, or rather
multiplied, and yet they themselves are neither greater nor less than they
were. So the Soul which is in a small Twig that first shoots out of the Earth,
is no less than that which is afterward in a tall Oak; nor is the Soul of a
Calf less than that of an Ox. After the same manner the Soul diffuses it salf
into the Nutriment which is newly adjoined to the Body, and so according to the
extension of the Body which it informs it self is extended, and yet becomes not
greater than it was: as on the Contrary, when a Branch is plucked from a Tree,
the Soul of the Tree is not made less than it was. After the same manner it is
in Generation. For whereas before a Plant generates the soul is but one in
number, because it is but in one subject: yet now that the Plant generates
seed, viz. such a matter as wherein the soul which was before in one numerical
subject may now be multiplied in its existence; and that Seed being ripe is
separated from the Plant: in each seed though never so small the soul remains
entire, and now it lives by its own soul and subsists by it self; and since of
one Plant of Poppy more than an hundred seeds are bred, the same soul of the
Poppy exists entire in each seed; and then the Soul is said to multiply it
self: which when it does, it becomes no lesser than it was; since of it self it
has no Quantity.

But which way the soul it self remaining entire can communicate its Essence to
another, How the Soul multiplies it self.
this is that which has perplexed great Wits, and not being understood has
raised many disputes and bred many Errors. For Jul. Caesar Scaliger says
rightly concerning the Soul, Exercit. 307. sect. 29. We see the shallowness of
our Understandings. Who dares say he comprehends the species of substances? We
cannot attain to that exquisite knowledge, how of two things one is made; how
the Form is totally in the whole Body, and totally in every part. So divine a
thing is the Form, that being a substance it fills another substance full of it
self, so that of both one is made. Therefore to enquire further is the part of
an over curious and busy mind; for it is a part of humane Wisdom to be
contentedly ignorant of some things.

But chiefly that question has much troubled many, Whether the soul be
divisible.
whether the Soul he totally in the whole Body, and totally in every part
thereof: also how the Soul is divisible, whether in regard of its extension by
means of the Body. Where some hold that all the Souls of perfect Animals (and
they only) are indivisible and unextended: others hold that all the souls of
perfect Animals are divisible and extended, only the rational Soul of man
excepted. But the Conimbricensian Collegiates do hold both these Opinions to be
very probable, and therefore they answer the Arguments brought to prove both,
and so leave the Reader unresolved: yet they confess they had rather maintain
the former. Fortunius Li^etus, in his two Books of the Coextension of souls
with their bodies, holds that al souls, yea the rational, are co-extended with
the Body.

Hence also another controversy has risen, How souls are co-extened with the
Body:
how in the Augmentation of the parts of the Bodies of Animals which grow the
growing parts do receive the Soul; which is attended with exceeding great
difficulties, as Zabarella also confesses, and is so obscure, that it moved
Sebastianus Basso (a man otherwise quick-sighted enough in the things of
nature) to deny that there is any such thing as a substantial form, and
absurdly to hold that the form in a body natural is nothing but a certain
collection of particles of the same kind into an excellent kind of Harmony. Now
among others, Jacobus Zabarella has written largely of this Question, Lib. 1.
de Accretione, where having in Chap. 13. recited contrary Opinions, and rightly
rejected the Opinion of Scotus and others, who hold that the Soul flows with
the matter, and that in the parts of the matter bred of the Aliment particles
of the Soul are bred, and that so just the same soul does not last during the
life of the Animal; and had undertaken to defend the other Opinion, that the
Soul all the Life time remains the same in number, and when new matter comes is
extended to inform the same, Chap. 16. he propounds two very urgent doubts
against the same: The first is, That after this manner, when the Soul which is
in the old flesh passes over to inform the Flesh newly composed of Nutriment,
the Form seems to go out of one subject into another, which seems to be absurd.
The other is, That thus the Soul will seem to be movable of it self; whereas
Aristotle in the 6. Physic. teaches, that Bodies only are of themselves
movable; and that the Soul is movable only by accident according to the motion
of the Body, in 1. de Anima. But Zabarella rightly answers to the first, that
the Form in this manner does not totally forsake his subject but remains
therein, yet passes over to inform new matter, which transition, or diffusion
wants a proper name. And to the Second; That the Soul does not pass over to
inform new matter by motion, but after a certain manner to us hid and unknown.
Which things although Basso does laugh at, yet if rightly explained they are
most true. All the Errors which many run into in this point do proceed from
hence, because they attribute such things to the Form and Soul as belong only
to the Body, viz. Quantity, Divisibility, and parts. But that which Scaliger
writes concerning the motion of Angels, Exercit. 359. Sect. 12. is also true or
the Soul; Whether the soul move?
that it is extended without pred^camental Quantity, and moved not with
corporeal motion, by passing from place to place, but with the motion of a
thing incorporeal and extended by changing its Vbi. For as it is in Exercit.
307. Sect. 13. Whatever is moved is in a place. But the Soul is not in a place,
because it has no quantity. For that which has quantity cannot be at once in all the parts of a living thing that has quantity. (...) the Soul is in every
part of the body which has quantity. And a little after; The Soul it self
becomes no greater, by means whereof the body is made greater. And therefore he
himself calls it not motion properly so termed, but in the same place he writes:
When it is introduced into that part which is added to the body, the Soul which
before was in the magnitude (for example sake of a foot and an half, is
advanced half a foot. And a little after: The Soul is transferred by promotion
of it self, from it self to all that which is newly added to the body, even to
the utmost circumference, all the matter being mean while filled which lies
betwixt. For thus when the Nature of a thing is not very clear, neither is it
easy to invent names, and those names we use are equivocal, and taken from
things more known.

But that we may in some fore explain the Nature of the Soul as far as the
weakness of our Understanding will give leave, The nature of the soul declared.
and that we may declare how we are to understand what is commonly said, that
the Soul is a total Being, which may be divided, extended, multiplied, and that
some light may be given to all this Doctrine of the Generation of living things,
thus the case stands. The Body has quantity, it divisible, takes up place, i^
movable.

The soul of it self has no quantity, fills the body, is indivisible, is co
extended with the Body.

Three manners of being any where, two bodies cannot be tegether in the same
place.

What things are repletively any where.

God fills al things.

The soul fills the whole body:


All natural Bodies consest of Matter and Form, which in living things is the
Soul. The matter of the Body is of it self subject to Quantity, and divisible
into parts having Quantity, and a Body so takes up place that it will admit no
other body thereinto, and it is movable from place to place. But the form and
soul has no quantity, and therefore it fills and penetrates the whole Body, it
is indivisible of it self, yet is co-extended with the whole Body without
quantity. But fince (as the Schoolmen ^ghtly teach) a thing is said to be some
where three manner of ways, either Definitively, or Repletively, or
Circumscriptively and Locally: the Body only is circumscriptively in a place,
and so said to take up a place. For two Bodies having quantity can never be in
the same place, and that place which one body has taken up another cannot
possess unless the body first by local mutation pass into another. But
substances free from quantity (as also sensible species) c^n be either diverse
of them together, or with other bodies in some place; of which we have spoke
more largely in our 1. B. of Natural Philosophy, chap. 5, and 6. And although
the manner of existing any where repletively does properly belong to God, who
(as Damascen writes) is all, and totally every where, wholly in all, and wholly
above all, high, glorious, immense, incomparable, incomprehensible; but Souls
are not every where as God is, but are limited and contained within their own
Bodier; yet learned Men (and amongst the rest Johannes Faber stapulensis,
Dialog. 2. Physicarum Introduct.) do attribute the manner of being some where
repletively to the Soul also, and being carried aloft by the wings of their
Mind from the lowest plenitude to the highest and infinite, they acknowledge the
Image of God who fills al things, and exists totally in the World, and totally
without, even in Souls; and that rightly. For the Soul of al Animals fills the
whole Body which it informs, nor is it hindered though the Body have filled this
place before, but that it also can be in all the parts of the Body. And al
Dimensions being taken away, the form of any of us may be in the same Vbi with
that of another, nor would the presence of one hinder the presence of the
other. As we see many lights scattered through the same Air, nor does the
presence of one hinder the presence of another; and although there are many in
the same place, yet they are not mingled, which the shadows declare. Also we
may see the same Soul which at first fills the Body of a small Branch sprung up
from an Acorn, and of a small Infant; afterward when the said Branch is grown up
to a call Oak, and the Infant is become a large Man, yet it fills the same
Bodies though it self be not augmented.

And to apply what has been said to our present purpose; Now the soul can be
multiplied:
as when of a small Branch a tal Tree is grown up, or of a Calf an Ox is made,
of an Infant a strong wel-set Man; the soul in the Tree, Ox, Man, is not made
larger than when it was in the Branch, Calt, Infant: so the soul when by the
seed it gives Essence to diverse individual matters, it is not made lesser, nor
does it lose any thing, and the soul which is in the seed both by a tall Tree
is no less than that which is in the Tree it self.

By all which it appears that it is more proper to say the soul is multiplied
than divided. The soul properly is not divided: Whether the soul be co-extended
with the body?
For since nothing is divided but what has Quantity, and one part without
another, but the Soul has no quantity, nor has it one part without another,
properly it is not divided neither by it self, nor by accident. The body indeed
as having quantity and one part without or behind another, is divided, nor is
the part taken from the Body of the same Essence with the whole: but that part
of the soul which is separated from the Generator is of the same Essence with
the soul of the Generator; and although it be in a smaller body yet is it as
totally and entirely there, as the soul of the Generator is in this Body. And
that Extension may offend no man, nor cause him to think that the Soul because
it is ex^ended has parts; let him ponder with himself how that of Scaliger is
to be understood, Exercit. 359. Sect. 12. That the Soul is extended without
predicamental quantity. Where we must distinguish betwixr extension properly so
called, and extension taken only analogically. Extension properly belongs to
quantity and bodies which have parts to disposed that where one is the other is
not; for examples sake, where the Foot is there the Hand is not. But the Soul
although it be joined to the body, because it informs a body measured and
extended, and the plenitude and replency thereof (for so the Schoolmen term it
better than Extension, and Fortunius Licetus might better have used this word
in the Title of his Book de Coextensione Animarum cum Corpore) is as large as
the body it self, and its dimension, and sills it though it grow never so big,
no part being added thereto. Yet there is not one part of the Soul in the Eye,
another in the Foot, nor is the Soul in a Man greater than that in an Infant;
but as God is immense and infinite every where, not having part without part,
or behind or after part: so also after its fashion the soul fills the whole body,
not having part after part. Whereby we may easily answer that Objection which
has troubled many, and Bass^ amongst the rest; That if the Soul be totally in
the whole Body, it will follow that when a part of the body is cut off (as for
examples sake, the Hand) the Soul will be divided with the division of the Body.
For in such things truly in which the Seminal Principle is spread all the body
over, as in a Willow, the Soul is multiplied by cutting off a branch, or as
they commonly speak, is divided: but in Animals where Propagation is made by
Seed the soul temains entire in its body, though a part of the body be cut off;
as also in growing, although the soul communicates it self to the parts added
to the body, yet it does not pass out of one subject into another. A twosold
tutension
Fortunius Licetus also acknowledged thus much, Lib. 2. de animae Coextensione,
cap. 4. where he makes a twofold extension, one material belonging to
magnitude, which is only in a thing which has corporeal quantity; the other
formal and belonging to an incorporeal substance: and he rightly adds, That
although these two extersions, Material and Formal, have an analogy and
proportion one to another (viz. Because either of them bounds the thing defined
within certain limits: for God alone is torally every where) yet herein they
differ, That extension formal so called makes not the thing to which it belongs
to be subject to quantity, no^ necessarily divisible, either of it self, or by
accident: but material extension so called makes a thing both to have quantity
and divisibility. Sensible species do also afford an Image of this thing. For
if a bright shining thing be in some place, or any other image of a thing, and
there be only one man that sees it, or one Looking-glass to receive the
Representation; the whole Image of the visible thing is in the eyes of one Man,
or in one Glass. But if an hundred, or a thousand, or more men come, or a
thousand Glasses be set, the same image which was before received by one Man
and by one Glass, does now appear in a thousand Men, and a thousand
Looking-glasses; nor yet is the Species or Representation of that visible
Object divided into Quantitative parts.

And hence arose that famous Axiom of Philosophers; Every form can multiply it
self:
That every Form multiplies it self. Which although Zabarella quotes, de sensu
agente, cap. 5. where he treats of sensible Species: yet it does not therefore
follow (as one unskilfully imagines) that it is only true of accidental Forms.
Contrariwise, it is rather generally and primarily true of the substantial
forms, and only consequently of the accidental. For substantial forms are
really forms; but accidental forms are only their Images and shadows as it
were. And therefore if accidental forms have a power to multiply themselves,
much more have substantial forms the same power; since accidents do all that
they do by virtue of their forms. So that it is apparent that Zabarella
understood this Axiom of substantial forms, from Lib. de facultat. animae, cap.
11. where he w^ites, That it is the proper condition of the Vegetative Soul
that the Generator should afford some of his own matter and some of his own
form; and in that whole Chapter he teaches expressly, that that same vulgar
Opinion of the Eduction of Forms out of the aptitude of the matter by the
action of an external Agent has by no means place in living things. And
Aristotle also himself expressly teaches, 2. de Anima, cap. 2. text. 20. That
some Souls do multiply themselves, when he writes that some Plants divided and
separated do therefore seem to live because the Soul which is in them is
actually indeed one in every Plant, but potentially many; which also he grants
in some Animals. Many manners of the souls propagation.

The soul is multiplied in its proper subject.


Which if it be true in Plants which live divided, why should it not be true in
them also which are propagated by Seed, that so the Soul should be said to be
one, but potentially many, viz. by the Seed, as well as they can multiply
themselves by the division of their body?

Now this multiplication is performed diverse ways, as shall be said hereafer.
But this is common to al, that the Soul should have its proper subject wherein
it might cleave, and by which it might be separated from the Generator, and
might constitute a new Individual; which is the Seed, or somewhat analogical to
the Seed. Al four-footed Beasts do communicate their Souls by their seed;
Birds, Serpents, and Insects some of them, do bring forth Eggs, or somewhat
analogical to Eggs, and by them they multiply themselves. In Plants there is a
various manner of Propagation, as shall also be said hereafter. For some
propagate themselves by Seed, some by Branches, some by a Root or Bulb, and
some by diverse of these ways. For it is not in them as in Animals, where the
Soul is tied to the seed, or to somewhat which answers the Seed, but it is
diffused through the whole Plant, or through its parts, so that it can multiply
it self by any part if it be put into the ground, so that thence a new Plant
will arise. Nor are the Souls nevertheless divisible in Plants although it be
commonly so said; since they have not one part without another, but the body of
the Plant only is divided, and is made less by cutting off some bough, branch,
or Root: nor does it give part of it self to the Seed, the Branch, the Root,
but its whole self, and so multiplies it self.

Here also I must explain how that is to be understood which I have written in
Chap. 9. Whether the forms of Metals are multiplied.
de Consens. and Dissens. Chymicorum cum Aristot. and Galeno, that the forms
also of Metals are multiphed after their fashion; since a certain malignant
Person has charged me to hold that a stone begets a stone, and metal begets
metal. For I am not so blockish and foolish as to believe that this Lodestone,
this Diamond, this Crystal, this Gold does engender, as one Poppy breeds
another, and one Lettuce another. For multiplication taken in this sense do^^
properly belong to the living and Vegetative Soul; aed Generation is the Work
of a living body only. Yet this is true in the mean time, That Jewels and
precious stones were not al particularly made at the first Creation, but
Experience and Histories cited in the place aforesaid, do evince that the Mines
and Matrixes of Jewels and Metals being once exhausted are filled again, and
others succeed in the room of those that are dug up. How Metals are
generated.
This therefore is my Understanding, wherein I agree with Anselmus Boethius, and
other most learned men; that as in Plants and Animals, by the soul lying hid in
the seed is formed a Plant and an Animal; so also by a certain Gold-making,
Silver-making, Stone-making, Crystal-making Spirit, containing the
Architectonick form in it self, Stones, Jewels, and Metals are generated in the
Earth; and from it according to every ones kind, figure, color, and other
proper accidents are given to them; and that this Spirit diffuses it self into
the exhausted Mines and Quarries of Metals and Jewels, and there generates new
Metals and Jewels. But where that Spirit lies hid, and which is the seat
thereof (in this darkness of Humane Minds, and the ignorance we are in
concerning the Constitution of the inner parts of the Terrestrial Globe) is to
us unknown. This is certain, that those Architectonick Spirits are various
according to the sorts of Jewels and Metals, nor are they found in all parts of
the Earth, but in some places only. And so much by the by, concerning the
Generation (as it were) of Stones and Metals, I have said in this place to free
my self from Slander.

Now the Souls and several sorts of things received their Power of multiplying
themselves from the divine Benediction at the first Creation of the world, when
God said, whence souls have power to multiply themselves
Let the Earth bring forth the Herb seeding Seed, the Fruit Tree bearing Fruit
according to its kind, wherein is its own Seed upon the Earth. And Increase and
Multiply. For God did not only command, as Thomas Erastus well writes, de
occult. med. propr. cap. 15. that the things created should exist, but also
that they should so propagate themselves as he had created them. Nor was that
Command of his in vain, but very effectual. For when he commanded, he gave to
each a power whereby they were able to accomplish his Command. By virtue
therefore of this benedicton, and help of the Seed, Souls are propagated as one
Candle is lighted by another; and where ever they meet wi^^ fit matter wherein
they may subsist by themselves, such as is the body of the seed, they
c^^transfuse themselves thereinto, and as Scaliger says, cloth themselves
therewith, so that that part (if I may so call it, for it is not properly a
part) of the form has the same Essence with the whole form, which is in the
whole from whence it was separated, and afterward also it begins to perform the
same operations; and so the same Essence of the Soul which is in a tall Walout
Tree is in the Nut and that Sprout which arises from the Nur, and atterwards
also having obtained sitting matter whereby to augment it self it performs the
same operations, produces every year new Branches, and ingenders Nu^s. And thus
out of the first Individuals of all four-footed Beasts, creeping things, Birds,
Fishes, Plants, Ammals, at first created, the sorts and kinds have been since
continued, and all Beasts, Creeping things, Birds, Fishes, Plants, have been
generated by multiplication of their Souls.

Chap. 7. Arguments to the contrary Answered.
ANd although this is a plain case, so that a Mind not prepossessed with
Opinions may easily perceive the truth: yet as commonly happens in this
darkness of humane Minds, some are of another Mind, whose Opinions and
Arguments to the contrary come now to be examined.

The first thing which has troubled many so as they could not see the truth,
is, that neither in the seeds of Plants, not an Eggs, nor in an imperfect
Conception, those operations are to be seen which are performed by perfect
Plants and Ammals. The Soul is two ways in the Body
But they themselves are not ignorant that the first and second act do differ,
nor does an Argument hold from denial of the second act^o a demal of ^he first
act. For the Essence of the Soul is in the Seed by the first act, not can it be
proved by any reason that it should afterward receive the same from elsewhere:
only the second act is wanting to the Seed since it wants only express
Instruments necessary to perform its operations, which nevertheless it has a
power to prepare. And so the Seed wants only that perfection which belongs to
the Body and the structure of its parts, but not that which belong unto the
So^^. Nor can we argue in perfect Plants from the negation of the second act,
to the negation of the first, as may be seen in Trees and other Plants which
last all the Winter, in which there is no manifest operation: and yet the Soul
is really present in them.

Again, Those actions which proceed from the Soul are twofold, Organical or
Second, which are performed in a perfect Body, and Prince or Inorganical, viz,
the Vegetation of the Seed, the Formation of the Body, with its nutrition and
augmentation. For as soon as the Body begins to be formed, it begins to be
nourished. And although the Seed in the Corn-lost be not nourished, yet it has
a Vegetative and Nutritive faculty: after the same manner as Plants plucked up
are likewise not nourished, yet are really animated, and being transplanted
into another soil they are again nourished.

A other thing which troubles Galen, The force of Nature, whence it is.
is, that the Vegetative faculty being void of Wisdom and reason seems unable
to perform so wonderful a work, wherein the greatest Art and wisdom appears,
and which cannot be done but by a most wise and powerful Artist. But no man will
wonder at this who knows that the Soul is the Principle and immediate cause of
these operations, but yet that it has not its power from it self, but has
received the same from the most wise and powerful Creator; whence also Scaliger
Exercitat. 188. and 359. sect. 11. defines Nature to be the ordinary power of
God, and in Theophrast. de Causis Plant. cap. 1. the power of God in the second
causes, to which himself has prescribed certain rules to act by. What Nature
is.
For as Thomas Erastus writes, de occult. med. propriet. cap. 15. Nature is
nothing but that same command or God by which all things are what they are, and
perform that which they are commanded. For God did not only command them to
exist, but also to propagate themselves as they were created by him. And what
reason has Galen to admire that so w^nderful things are done by the formative
Faculty, since he might have observed things as strange in the Elements
themselves? The Elements are moved in a straight perpendicular Line, upwards
and downwards, although they know not what a perpendicular Line is, because God
has commanded them so to do.

A third thing which has moved many is this; Whether the soul cannot be but-in
an organical Body.
That they conceive nothing can be the subject of the Soul but an Organical
Body, [being moved thereto by Aristotle's definition, who defines the soul to
be the act of an Organical body. But Aristotle did not define the soul simply
considered in its Essence, but in ^^er and respect to the Body. Which
nevertheless, simce it finds not, but forms and shapes ^or it self, it must
needs at first be in an inorganical Body.] But that an organical Body is not
necessary to receive the Soul into, many things do show. For in the first
place, since to an organical constitution is required a certain Quantity,
Number, Figure and situation of parts; all these things are not necessary for
the reception of Forms. For Forms (such as souls are) having of themselves no
quantity, are received into matter without Quantity or Figure. And this we see
manifestly in Plants, in which the Quantity and Figure are variously changed
the same soul remaining. For the Quantity and Form of a Branch springing up
from a Seed is one, and of the same grown to a tall Tree, another. The stalks
of many die in the Winter, the Root remaining alive, and in it the Soul. Again,
the figure of bodies is an Effect of the Forms and Souls. And therefore it is
not a previous disposition foregoing them. The Form deteamines the Quantities
and Figures.
For the Form it self is that which determines the Quantity of its own body,
and each Soul brings in a determinate Figure into its own Body, and preserves
the same in Nutrition and Augmentation; hence there are so many figures and
magnitudes of living bodies as there are differences of souls, and a Rose has
one magnitude and figure, an Oak another, a Fir Tree another; a Partrich has
one, an Hen another, a Peacock another. Thirdly, the Soul is of it self and
primarily in the parts as they are similar, The Soul is in the parts as they
are similar.
and not as they are organical. But the similar parts as such have no certain
figure: and therefore the soul is not in them as they have a certain figure, or
quantity, but only as they are such similar parts. And it is in the organical
parts, only as they consist of similar parts. So that the Soul is not in the
Bone, as it is a Tooth, a Shank, an Arm-bone, or an Anklebone, but only as it
is a Bone, and it is equally in all Bones. And therefore in fractures in which
the Bones have many times another figure than naturally they should have the
Soul remains nevertheless, and is as much in a great Callus as it was before in
the sound Bone. And therefore in Nutrition it is brought into the aliment which
has no figure; and it suffices that it has this or that temperament and
similary Constitution. And so the organical disposition is not necessary for
the first act, but only for the second act, or to perform the operations. Nor
is the body as it is organical simply the adequate subject of the Soul; but
then only an organical body when the body is now perfect, and ought to operate,
and by its operations to preserve it self alive. And the Organs are required
for operation and not to simple being; and then only are necessary to being
when the being cannot be preserved without operations; which happens when the
Body is already brought to a perfect state. But the figure and organization (as
some speak) is after the Soul and not before it; and therefore it is not a
disposition necessary to the reception of the Soul. Moreover the dispositions
to the form are immutable: but the figure and organization in living things are
not immutable. Both is apparent in Animals and Plants. The fortieth day is the
longest term set by those that hold the Soul is infused. But then the parts are
only rudely delineated. And what shall be said of bruits whose Souls none hold
to be infused? Is not the Soul there presently on the first days of the
Conception? And this happens much more in Plants. For in the first days when
Plants begin to shoot and sprout out of their seeds the shape of the Plant is
yet so rude that it cannot be known (save by most skilful Herbarists) to be
this or that Plant, which afterward in process of time is many ways changed.

Nor is that of any moment which Sanctacruzius objects here; since Souls are
more noble than the forms of Elements and Bodies simply mixed, they require
also a noble configuration and formation, and by how much living things are
more noble, by so much the more noble body they require, and hence the so many
sundry figures of Plants and Animals have their original. True it is indeed,
that all living things by reason of the diverse operations they are to perform
do require diverse organs; and therefore Plants have one manner of shape,
Animals another, and every sort is differently figured according to the
nobility of the forms. But it does not from thence follow, that those figures
are required for the fabric of the organs, before the introduction of the
Soul, and that they are a disposition necessarily foregoing the Introduction of
the Soul; because (as has been said) that same formation of all the Organs is
not necessary to simple being, but only for the better being and performance of
operations. And if those that contend so eagerly that the body must be
organized before the soul can come into it did but observe such things as daily
happen in Nature they would think far otherwise. Fortunius Licetus the most
renowned professor at Padua has taught sufficiently, de spont. Vivent. Ortu,
that the soul may remain sat and sure in a matter far more vile and ignoble
than any seed can be thought to be, although it be destitute of such things as
are requifite to its second Act; which at last having attained a fitting matter
does rouse it self up and becomes a Plant or Animal. Of which I shall speak
bereafter in my Discourse of the spontaneous original of living things.

Fifthly, Some do also use this Argument, which is also the fifth Argument of
Thomas Fienus, quaest. 6. de format. foetus, which Alphonzus a Caranza, a
Spanish Lawyer, does so highly esteem, in tract. de partu naturali and
legitimo, cap. 1. page 44. that he calls it a singular and irreprehensible
Argument, and which quite over throws the contrary Opinion, and therefore he
thinks fit to set it down word for word; whose words I will also transcribe
entire, that the Reader may see whether the force of this Argument be so great
as Caranza imagines. Whether the seed acts upon it self?
Now thus says Fienus. If in the seed there were an active Principle of
Conformation or Generation (as others confound them) the seed should act upon
it self; but nothing acts upon it self, as Aristotle teaches, 1. de Generat.
and Corrupt. cap. 7. Ergo. Because if any thing should act upon it self, the
same thing should be Agent and Patient, in act and power in respect of the
same; which is impossible. Secondly, because it would be destructive to it
self, especially the seed: because that action thereof should tend of it self
to its destruction. For it would tend to the Generation of a living thing,
which cannot be done without the destruction of the seed. Scotus in 2. sentent.
distinct. 18. in sine, after he had said that the seed is not the active
principle of the last form, viz. the rational soul, he enquires whether it can
be the previous alt^ative Principle of an Organical body which is generated;
and he concludes that it cannot, and brings this reason among others; because
(says he) this absurdity would follow, that somewhat should act upon it self:
which argument he counted so strong, that he said, to find the principle of
Conformation we must be forced to fly to the Action of God, and of the Heavens.
To answer this argument it is commonly said that in the seed there are two
diverse substances; the one thin and spirituous, the other gross and
terrestrial. That in the former resides the Activity, and the latter is the
matter and passive principle; and that the active virtue out of the spiri^uous
part does act upon the thicker part of the seed as upon matter; and that for
this reason one and the same thing does not act upon it self, but on a
different subject; not that one and the same thing has the notion of an active
and passive principle in respect of one and the same thing, but only in respect
of diverse things; which is not absurd. That that same active principle or
virtue does reside in the seed, Aristotle teaches in 2. de Generat. cap. 3. in
these words: There is in the seed that which makes it to be fruitful, viz. That
which is called Heat; and that not fire, nor any such faculty, but a spirit
which is contained in the froathy body of the seed, and that nature which is in
the seed having affinity with the Element of the Stars. Thomas Aquinas teaches
the self same thing, 1. Part, quaest. 118. art. 4. in these words: And
therefore there is no need that that same active faculty should have any organ
in act, but that it be founded in the spirit it self enclosed in the seed,
which is froathy, as the whiteness thereof shows. And the very same be says,
2. contra gentes, cap. 89. and in some other places. But this Answer is not
worth a button, and in very truth, is no other than a mere evasion invented to
shun the force of the argument. Because it is not true that such a virtue
resides in the spirit of the seed. Which is proved first, because the spirit
which is in the seed is either an essential part thereof, or it is not. If it
be, it will follow that one essential part of a being is destructive to the
other essential part of the said being. This cannot be, first because infinite
things are found in the World consisting of diverse and hererogeneal parts, in
which nevertheless we never find that the one destroys the other. For if one
were ordained to destroy the other, it would follow that it were ordained for
the destruction of the whole, and consequently of it self. For one essential
part of a thing being destroyed the whole thing is destroyed. But the contrary
is true; because the essential parts of one Being are not made to fight one
against another, or to destroy one another, but that they may be friendly
united, and by their friendly union be able to sustain the form; and the form
again is ordained to hold those parts united, and to govern them, that they may
not part asunder, nor mutually destroy each other. For if it were not so, the
form could never persist and abide in things heterogeneal, no not the smallest
time imaginable. Add hereunto, that all action proceeds from a total being, and
a perfect being; but the essential parts of one being are not the whole being,
nor a perfect being; and consequently they act not by themselves. So far Fienus.

But this Argument is not so strong as Caranza does imagine. The soul is the
first Agent in the seed.

Two parts in the seed.


For in the first place we must know, that to speak properly the seed is not
the cause of Conformation, but the soul in the seed. And so when a living body
is formed out of seed, the same thing does not act upon it self. For there are
in the seed two parts; the soul and the body of the seed. Now the first Agent
is the soul, which does not act upon it self, but upon the subject matter, viz.
the body of the seed, and also upon the Mothers blood, which in Animals it
draws to form the young one, and in Plants upon that Aliment which it draws out
of the Earth. And although when a Plant or Animal is generated the seed ceases
to be: yet that Generation is no corruption but perfection, and that body which
is called Seed whiles it turns to a Plant or Animal it is brought into a more
noble state and perfected; nor (as Jul. Caes. Scaliger speaks, Exercitat. 268.)
is the Seed otherwise said to be corrupted than that it ceases to be as it was
before, viz. in aptitude, and becomes as it was not, viz. in act. Now it is the
same matter with the same formal Principle, to which nothing else is added than
the expression of the Organs which were before confused. And thus while of the
Seed is made a Plant or Animal, the Body of the Seed does not transser it self
into another condition, but by the Soul lying hid therein it is thereto
advanced. Nor (as Fienus thinks) will he that shall diligently weigh al these
things use that answer which Fienus brings and endeavors to resute, that there
are two diverse substances in the Seed, the one thin and spirituous, the other
gross and earthy; and in the former resides the active virtue, the latter being
the matter and passive principle. Such a spirit there is indeed in Seed, but it
is not the primary cause of conformation, but the Instrumental; but the Soul
which uses that spirit is the primary cause. And whereas he dares deny that
there is a spirit in the seed, I can scarce sufficiently admire it, and the
reasons whereby he would prove it are very slight. For in the first place that
spirit which is in the seed as an Essential part tends not to the destruction
but to the perfection thereof. Also it is false that every action proceeds from
a total being. For is there no action of the soul upon the body which it
informs? And whereas he denies there is a spirit in the seeds of other living
things, we shall refute that hereafter.

Fifthly, Whether the Efficient Cause be always external?
This also offends some that they suppose that thus the distinction is taken
away betwixt the internal and external Causes: of which the former are the
matter and form, the latter the Efficient and End: and they aver that no
Efficient Cause does ever go into the Essence of the Effect, and that Animals
in Generation do not produce seed either out of their own matter, or out of
their own form; but that the seed is generated of the mixture of blood and
spirit in the stones, and that a man does not generate by communication of his
Essence, but by his form as an Efficient Cause. But in very deed, this Doctrine
of the propagation of Souls does no ways take away the distinction of Causes.
For it is known even to Novices in Philosophy, that the same Essence may be
both the Form and the Efficient Cause, the Form as it informs the Matter, the
Efficient as it is the cause of al Operations performed in the compound. The
rest are but Beggings of the Question, and are said, not proved. I like
Zabarella's Opinion better, who writes, de facultat. animae, cap. 11. That
living things when they generate their like do confer and bestow some of their
matter, and some of their form, inasmuch as they confer an animated seed, and
endued with the same vital faculty which was in the Generator. For although
they communicate no part of their own body, yet they communicate that self same
matter of which they are nourished, but changed into a more noble substance.
But that which has brought very many into this Error is this, The difference
betwert Nature and an Artificer.

Whether the soul goes out of one subject into another.


Because they conceit living things are generated after the same manner as
artificial things are produced by an external Agent. But there is a great
difference betwixt Artificial and Natural things. For every Artificer
communicates nothing of his own: but living things which beget their like
cannot do the same unless they communicate their own Essence.

Sixthly, Neither is that of any moment that they suppose if Generation should
be made by tranimission of the soul, that then the soul should pass into
another matter as a new subject, or should be of it self divisible. For as in
Augmentation, and when of an Acorn a tal Oak grows up, the Soul when it
communicates it self to new matter does not pass from one subject to another,
but remaining still the same communicates it self to new matter: so when the
soul communicates it self to the seed it does not pass from one subject to
another, but remaining the same in the Generator it diffuses it self into the
seed. Nor is it therefore of it self divisible. For as when a root or branch is
plucked from a Plant, The soul is not divisible.
of which (being set in the ground) a new Plant arises, the soul of the former
Plant is not diminished, but remains entirely the same: so also when a soul is
communicated by the Generator to the seed, the soul of the Generator is not
made lesser, but remains the same it was. Nor is there here any difference
betwixt the Root and the brauch plucked from the Plant and the Seed. For there
are several ways of propagating Plants. And that the root and branch is
animated, but not the seed, is only said, but not proved. For though the Seed
be not a part as the root and branch is; yet it is the fruit of the Plant which
is animated as much as the parts are, yes, and contains the soul after a more
excellent manner.

Seventhly, Many do also object this, That if the seed of the Plant were
animated it should be already essentially a Plant. But if it were essentially a
Plant when it grows out of the ground, whether the seed be a Plant?
there would be no Generation of a Plant, and so in the Tree and that Herb in
which the Seed was produced there should be a generation, and a Tree or Herb
should be generated in a Tree or Herb, and not in the Earth; which is absurd.
But the whole argument is granted in its sense, and that which is counted absurd
is no ways absurd indeed, provided it be rightly explained. what things are
required to generation.
For truly the generation of the seed in a living thing does not finish the
Generation; how beit the principal and chief work which is necessary to
Generation is the Elaboration of the seminal matter that it may be a fit
subject wherewith the soul may be propagated, and the communication of the Soul
to the matter so elaborated. Howbeit this also afterard belongs to Generation,
that the seed which has received the Soul from the Generator may no longer
adhere to the Generator, but may be separated therefrom, and that that which
before was but one individual of the same kind may now become more than one.
when Generation is made.
Which when it is performed a Tree or Herb is truly said to generate, but not
when the Plant grows up out of the Earth. And when a Plant shoots up out of the
Earth that is not its generation, but it is the bringing of a Plant which is in
its imperfect act to its perfect act. Nor is it considerable, as Fienus himself
writes, quaest. 5. conclus. 6. (though he be otherwise of a contrary Opinion in
this Question) what the common People call Generation, or what not; nor what
agrees with their understanding, but what is suitable to right reason and to
truth. For the common people are ignorant of Philosophy, and know not when or
where the true production of a Plant is made, and its Essential Generation; and
know not how to distinguish betwixt the first and the second act; betwixt that
which is imperfect and that which is perfect, and therefore takes one for
another, and conceits that a Plant is then generated when it is perfected and
operates, and when it brings forth roots and Leaves, whose production is not
the very Generation of the Plant, but the operation and perfection thereof
being already generated. And Aristotle himself calls the seed and that out of
which it is bred, How many ways the form is in a thing.
Synonyma's; We must therefore distinguish betwixt the Entitive and Formal Act,
and that which is simply Formal, and respectively. For then is the Form said to
be present in a perfect act when it has al its Organs necessary to perform its
actions, but not when it is in a part, or in the matter of the seed, and that
not yet fitted with all its Organs. For otherwise the branch of a Fir Tree (in
which it cannot be denied that the soul is) should be called a Fir Tree; and
the Foot of a Man should be called a Man. And therefore we cannot argue from
the presence of the Form to the denomination of the thing formed, but then a
thing is rightly said to be an Animal or other living body when the soul is in
its subject rightly disposed, or can perform the Operations belonging to its
kind.

Eighthly, whether the seed be an Animal
Out of which their Objection may easily be answered, who say, If the seed were
actually animated, the seed of a Poppy were a Poppy, and the seed of a Dog
would be a Dog. For the sorts of Natural things are not denominated from the
Essence which the Form gives, but from that Constitution whereby they are
sensible species of the World. And therefore though in respect of the Form the
Essence of a Dog and of the seed of a Dog is one and the same; yet since the
Constitution of the seed and the Dog differ in respect of the Corporeal and
sensible parts, the seed is not called a Dog, but the seed of a Dog. After the
same manner though there be one and the same Soul in the Butter-fly and the
Silkworm, yet the Silkworm is not called a Butter-fly till it has wings and
can fly.

Ninthly, whether the seed^ lives?
They say, if the seed were animated it should live, if it lived it would grow,
for every living thing is nourished as long as it lives, as Aristotle testifies
de Respirat. cap. ult. But because seeds lying in Corn-lofts and granaties, or
shut up in Chests and Boxes are not nourished, therefore they do not live, and
consequently they have no soul in them. But life is taken two manner of ways,
How many ways life is taken?
either for the first act, or the essence it self of living things, or for the
second act or operation. Seeds live by the first act, but not necessarily by
the second act, nor do they necessarily perform the actions of living things.
And that place of Aristotle is only to be understood of living things perfectly
formed. But in the mean while the soul in the seed is not quite idle, but it
keeps the seed alive, and therefore seeds are so long fruitful as they retain
the soul in them: but after they have lost the soul they become dead and
unfruitful. Nor are the Operations of the Soul confined to nutrition only, but
there are also other Operations thereof, as Conformation. Yet as soon as any
Conformation is made, and as soon as the seed has attained a fit place and
matter, the soul presently draws nourishment for the formation and nutrition of
its body.

And thus I conceive it is proved in general, That the soul is in the seed, and
that it is the Cause of the Conformation of the Body animate, and I conceive al
Objections are fully answered. Howbeit some when they can hardly object any
solid reason against our Opinion do fly to the Authority of Aristotle, but
miss-understood, and they say that Aristotle writes that the seed is
potentially animated, and that therefore there is not actually any soul in the
seed. But here the most renowned Casparus Hofmannus rightly answers, tract.
Whether the seed be potentially animated?
de origin formarum, that Aristotle does so often attribute an act to the
seed, that it is the part of a man very unskilful to urge only those places
wherein he says it is an aptitude. Howbeit, more Reasons shall be produced in
the following Chapters, wherein we shall treat particularly of the generation of
living things, viz. Plants and Animals: and what has hitherto been alleged
shall be explained and confirmed, and such objections as may yet be made shall be
answered.

See also of this Subject the lately commended Doctor, Casper Hofmannus, who in
tract. de form. origin. joined to his Books of the Generation of Man, proves
the same Opinion by most firm reasons, and solidly refutes the contrary Opinion
of Bonamicus, the Conimbricensian Collegiates, Peter Fonseca, Franc. Suarez,
Ant. Ruvio, Benedictus Pererius, Franciscus Vicomercatus, Fridericus Pendasius.
And in good deed the judgment which he makes of the Conimbricensian Collegiates
is most true of al those who defend the Eduction of the Soul out of the
aptitude of the matter, and deny that seeds are actually animated. Not to say
(quoth he) that they mix many things not belonging to Natural Philosophy, they
invent distinctions little less than foolish, they put conditions where they
ought not to be, the greatest difficulties they touch not so much as with their
little finger: in a word, they entangle and obscure, but do not explain the
Question.

But the Soul frequently uses the Spirit (in its shaping the Body) which is in
the seed, The soul uses the spirit when it shapes the body.

Whether there be a spirit in the seeds of Plants.


and makes it to be fruitful, and resembles the Element of the Stars, as
Aristotle tells us 2. de generat. cap. 3. And as long as that spirit is in the
Seeds, so long the soul is as it were in its proper subject: but as soon as
that spirit vanishes, the Soul can bide no longer in the seed, and the seed
becomes unfruitful. Which spirit I admire that Fienus could not discern.
Certainly if he had seen a spirit drawn by Chemical distillation out of dry
seeds which will take flame, he would not have written, de format. mat. quaest.
6: what spirituous substance can there be in the seeds of Plants, kept a long
time in a Box, and dry, but yes fruitful?

He indeed objects in Apolog. Adversus Sanctacruzium, page 99. If there are
(quoth he) Spirits in Plants, in what place are they generated? For there
ought, as in Animals, so in Plants some place be assigned, in which they
spring, and from which they flow into the Plant. Again, he says; there is no
actual Heat. But in Plants there seems to be no actual Heat. For if there were
it would be perceived some way or other. For a tangible quality is the proper
object of the sense of feeling. Therefore where it is it must needs be
perceived. How comes it therefore that in a great heap of Herbs, and a great
heap of Seeds, Corn, Pulse, there is not at least some small heat perceived.
Thirdly, heat and cold are contrary qualities, and mutually destroy one
another, and the greater and more intense does overcome and corrupt the lesser;
how can it therefore be that this heat in so many Plants which last all the
Winter, should not be extinguished. For the Heat of infinite living Creatures
being much greater, is extinguished by the Winter cold, and why should not that
of Plants be extinguished if they have any?

But these are toies unworthy so famous a man. For, first there needs no place
nor cavity in Plants for this spirit to breed in as there is in Animals: for as
they have not any thing answering to the stomach or Liver of Animals, wherein
their nutriment is bred, but that nutritive power is spread through their whole
body: even so that spirit is bred in the whole body of the Plant. And if any man
shall hold, that in the root or trunk rather, as the nutriment so the spirit
also is chiefly elaborated, he will hold nothing that is absurd. And that there
is such a part in Plants that are tender is manifest, as in the Colewort and
many more. For although the cold and frost do so hurt the Leaves that they die:
yet if that part which is in the middle, which the Germans call the Heart,
remain safe and sound, the Plant recollects it self and grows again. But if
that part be also hurt the whole Plant dies. For although (as Fienus objects)
branches cut from the Tree do grow; yet that makes not against our Assertion.
For as those souls according to the division of their subject, are in some sort
divisible: so also the spirits are which make the proper subject of the Soul.

Secondly, That also is of no moment which he says: where there is no Heat,
there is no Spirit; and where Heat is it must needs be felt. Is there not I
pray you Heat in the Spirit of Wine? and is it actually felt? Is there not fire
in all mixed bodies? and yet are they al actually hot? by no means. For as
Zabarella rightly teaches, Lib. 2. de mist. generat. and Interit. the Qualities
in mixed bodies are after a sort hidden by the tempering of contraries, so that
neither of them can be distinctly discerned. Nor is that objection of any force
if it be not felt in one Plant, it ought to be felt in a great Heap of Plants.
For the Nature and proportion of mixture is one and the same in a great Heap of
Plants as it is in one Plant. But has Fienus never seen what an Heat is raised
when such an heap of Plants comes to putrify, or when an heap of Corn begins
to sprout? Certainly in Granaries even in the coldest time of Winter, heaps of
Corn which have lain long unstirred do conceive no small Heat, which a man may
feel with his Hand. Yea and the Corn it self if it lie long unstirred does
sprout.

Thirdly, That this same Spirit and Heat in some Plants (for all do not outlast
the Winters cold) is extinguished, comes from the nature of mixture. For there
is a several mixture in several Animals and in several Plants. Geese go
barefoot in the cold Ice which men cannot do. Rosemary is hurt with a small
cold, but so is not the Fir Tree. But I easily agree with Fienus that some
hidden Quality of kin to the Element of the Stars does concur.

Chap. 8. Of the Generation and Propagation of Plants.
ANd so much may suffice to be said of the Original of Souls in General: and it
has been sufficiently declared that all living things do multiply themselves
by their seeds, and that in the seed is the Soul which is is transfused from
the Generator into the thing generated. For the cleerer manifestation whereof I
think it best to declare the same particularly with reference to the several
kinds of live things. How many kinds of live things
Now there are two kinds of live things, Plants and Animals, or living
creatures: which have also a different way of propagation. For there is in some
living Creatures sexes, in others not. In such as have no sexes one seed is
sufficient, which is a body so elaborate and disposed by the Generator, that
when it is perfect it may be separated from the Generator, subsist entire by it
self, and with it the soul of the Generator may be transferred into the thing
generated. And then a Tree ingenders as ( Scaliger says, The seed of Plants is
animaced.
Exercit. 6. sect. 10.) when it produces seed. And that this seed is animated,
appears from the reasons propounded in the foregoing Chapter; and it is so
manifest, that Joh. Gallego de la serna a Spaniard, was forced to grant that
the seeds of Plants were animated, de Princip Generat. Lib. 2. cap. 6.
(although he denies that the seeds of Animals are animated) and writes that
this opinion is so founded upon the most firm reasons of Philosophy, that they
being understood no true Philofopher can deny the same. And the reasons are
indeed most strong whereby it is proved that the seed of Plants is animated.
For in the first place since when the seed was in the Plants it was animated as
being a part of the Plant, surely when it is separated it must be animated;
since no cause can be assigned which drove out the soul, nor can separation
alone do that, for even in the separated seed also the actions of a soul
appear, and therefore as Branches, Roots, Buds, Bulbs, by avulsion do not lose
their soul, but grow and flourish: it is also so ordered that the seed being
separated from the Generator can subsist entire and fresh, although some seed a
longer, other some a shorter while, which other parts plucked from Plants do not
commonly do, but presently die. Moreover as soon as by the Heat of the Sun, yea
and of the Fire in the Winter time, it is but warmed in a stove, and finds fit
matter, or but a little Water if it be moistened therewith as is seen in the
making of Mair, it begins to display it self, and first thrusts out a Root, by
which afterward it draws nourishment, and forms the body of a Plant like that
it came from: which formation of the bodies of Plants is no less wonderful than
the Generation of Animals. For so it attracts matter fit for every part, The
wonderful Geration of Plants.
Roots, Flowers, Fruits, and gives all parts their Magnitude, Figure,
Situation, Color, in a certain measured proportion, that no Geometrician or
Painter can imitate its workmanship. Moreover, since we see that Plants not
only by their Roots, but also by a small Branch of a Willow, a bit of an Hop or
Acorns Root cut off do grow up into a like Plant, the Soul being plucked away
with the part; and it is manifest that of a branch of a Willow or a Vine, or of
another Tree, although in it there is no Root, nor all the parts of a Plant,
yea of a Lease only of an Indian Fig Tree an whole entire Plant is formed; and
no other cause can be assigned of the formation of this new Plant than the soul
plucked away from the former Plant with a part thereof: why should we not
conclude that a Plant is formed of the seed after the same manner? Nor is it
credible that all the other productions of Plants are made by the communication
of the soul from the former Plant and only that made by the seed should be
performed without the presence of the soul in the seed. But more likely it is
that as when Roots, Bulbs, Branches, Boughs are put in the Earth they do not
from thence receive their soul, but that with the soul which they actually had
they perfect themselves by producing necessary parts and organs: that in the
same mannet also it is in seed. Nay we have more reason to think that this
should happen in seed, because it is generated by the Plant to this very
Intent, and has a much more perfect disposition necessary for the conservation
of the soul and its propagation than the Roots or Branches; since the wonderful
artifice of Nature is apparent in many seeds. There is indeed one man who
conceives that this does not declare the manner of the souls propagation, for
this reason, because in Growing whatever grows on the Plant is a part of its
body, and the part ought to have the same soul that the whole has: but the seed
is no part of the body nor grows fast to the same. But although it cannot be
denied that the seed of a Plant since it is not generated to that end to abide
upon the Plant, nor does always stick to the same, but may be separated
therefrom, is not after the same manner a part of the Plant: yet because while
it is in the Plant it lives by the common soul of the Plant, in that sense also
it may be called a part of the Plant. But since it is made to be separated
therefrom, it may most conveniently (as was said in Cap. 6.) be termed the
fruit. Which is equally animated with, yea and after a more noble manner than
the parts, viz. inasmuch as thereby the soul may be propagated, which in
Animals by the parts it cannot be. Sure it is in the mean while, that as when
the Soul is diffused into new matter it becomes neither greater nor lesser: so
also when the soul is propagated with the Seed; the soul of the Parent is not
diminished thereby.

For here it is to be noted, Sundry manners of the propagation of Plants.
That there is not one and the same manner of propagation in Plants; which
being observed that may easily be cleared which has scrupled some, and among
the rest also Franciscus Vallesius, de sacra Philosoph, cap. 1. how that should
be true which we find written in Genesis 1. verse 11. that God commanded that
the Earth should bring forth Herbs or Plants, having Seed in themselves
according to their kind; when as the Willow, Fern, and very many Plants
besides, do beat no seed. For the seminal nature in Plants is not one and the
same, nor does it confine the seed to Fruits and Cods only; but this happens to
some alone; but in others the seminal Virtue is adherent in other parts,
sometimes in one, sometimes in more, and sometimes in different parts. For
examples sake, Poppy is propagated only by its seed, not by its toor, stalk, or
leaf. And so it is with Lettuce and very many more. Rosemary is propagated both
by seed and branch, and so are Pear Trees and Apple Trees; the Hop by its toor;
the Indian Fig Tree by its leaf; Onions and most bulbed Plants by root and seed
both; such as bear buds, goslings, or palms, are propagated by their branches,
as the Vine, Willow, and others. Also some have their seminal virtue in the
tears or liquor which drops from them. For as the souls are more or less noble;
so for the multiplication of themselves they require a more or less noble
matter wherein to propagate their seminal virtue. And hence it comes to pass
that Mushroms or Toadstools being the most ignoble of al Plants are propagated
only by pouring then decoction about the Roots of Trees. Yea, Plants propagated
by Inundations of water, and by rains.
the seminal matter of Plants may be transferred in inundations of Water, and
in Rains, as Theophrastus, Lib. 1. de Causis plant. cap. 5. relates, how by
reason of a certain thick shower of Rain, Laserpitium sprung up in Apturea,
whereas it had never grown in that part of the World before; and that there a
great Wood has grown up where there never was any before. So that it may
rightly be said of such things which are believed to spring out of the Earth of
their own accord, that the nature seminal rather hes hid than is not, as shall
be said hereafter when we handle the Original of things which spring of
themselves. Nor am I inclined to say with Vallesius, that there are either
Animals or Plants, which though as the first they were not created, yet they
might afterward grow naturally from the Elements of the World. For the
Elements of the World have no virtue to produce such a seed. Nor let any man
attribute this Formation of Plants to the Suns Hear. For this Formation is not
only made when a Plant is cherished by the Heat of the Sun, but by the Heat of
the Fire also. The formation of Plants not caused by the Sun.
And it belongs to the Form and not to the Sun to determine Quantities. For
Nature uses Hear as a Minister or Instrument, not as a Lawgiver or
Work-master. Otherwise in all Plants that same Quantity would be produced, and
the same figure. For the Sun is the same to al; and the storehouse of Mother
Earth is the same; and the contrary is seen to happen, as Julius Caesar
Scaliger writes in 1. de Plantis.

Not let that trouble any man in this place which Thomas Fienus aledges de
format. foet. quest. 5. as also was said before that a Plant is produced after
one manner from a Root, a Branch, or Leaf, and after another manner from the
seed. That out of the former a new Plant is not produced, but they themselves
when cut off from the Plant are new Plants, because by the cutting from the
whole, they have already the vegetative soul multiplied by division, but that
the contrary happens in seed. For that the seed is not a new plant, because it
has no soul, but it becomes a new Plant by the souls coming into it after it
is planted in the Earth. But here is no diversity of propagation; for the Root,
the Branch, the Leaf, is not an entire Plant, and after the same manner as by
the cuttting off of these from the Plant, the soul is multiplied by division;
so also by the Generation and emission of seed the soul is multiplied. And
whereas he grants the Soul is in the Root, the Branch, the Leaf, and denies it
to be in the Seed, he does it without Reason. For since in it the same
Operations appear as in those; why should we not grant the soul to be as well in
it? And if in the Seed cast into the Earth there is no Soul, whence I pray you
is it afterward produced therein, and whence communicated? Also that is false
which he writes, That the Soul which is in the Branch or the Root planted, is
the same numerically with that which is in the Tree or whole Plant. Indeed it
was the same in number while the root or branch was on the Tree; but after it
was cut from the Tree it began to exist by it self; and was made different in
number from that in the Tree. I wonder also that Fienus should deny the Seed of
Plants to be animated, since nevertheless in the Chapter foregoing, quaest. 5.
Conclus. 6. he expres^y holds that the Conformation of the Seed in the Earth is
not an essential Generation, but only the perfection of a new Plant already
constituted and generated in the Tree. For there is no other Generation of a
Plant in the Tree, save when seed is generated.

But concerning the Seed of Plants, The wonderfulmnltiplication of Plants.
two things are here to be observed: the first is, That that same
multiplication whereby the Soul diffuses it self into the new Plant, is most of
all manifest in Plants, and almost infinite. Not to spewak of Poppy, Turkey
Wheat, and very many others; Tobacco does so mukiply it self, that he who first
by numbering, and then by weighing (for it were an endless labor to number all the seeds) will take a scantling and compute the number of the seeds, he shall
find that of one Seed more than three hundred thousand seeds do spring, and if
the product of these be sown the third year, he shall find an increase of an
hundred thousand Mytiads (a myriad containing ten thousand.) So powerful was
that Divine Benediction; Increase and multiply.

Moreover, Two parts of the seed in Plants.
This also is to be noted touching the seed of Plants, That in them as in all
seeds there are two parts; the one primary and which is only worthy of the name
of seed; and another which serves only as a covering. The former consiste of
the Soul, which is the Author of the lif^ and formation of a Plant, and the
matter, of which the first rudiments of the Plant, viz. the Root and the first
Sprouts are constituted. For the Seeds of Plants in what ever place moistened
and cherished with heat, even without the Earth, do first gape and thrust out
their roots, and afterward their first sproutings: but the body of the perfect
Plant cannot be entirely formed, unless aliment be drawn from the Earth by the
first small roots. And so in these there is not the same Agent and Patient, but
the Soul is the Cause of Formation, I say the Efficient and Agent Cause, and
the Matter is the Patient on which it works. But that which is in Plants is
properly the Seed, and has the soul and matter out of which the first
Rudiments of the Plants are framed is only that pulp which contains in it the
Idea and delineation of the whole Plant. The pulp of the seed.
And indeed the whole pulp of the Seed is not animated, but only that part
thereof which is commonly called Corculum. Which part if it be corrupted, the
seed will not grow. And therefore the Pismires are reported to gnaw that part of
the seed that when it is by them hoorded up it may not sprout. Contrariwise,
although the rest of the Body be gnawn by worms, yet it grows, provided the
Heart be safe, as we see in Beans and Pease, and French-bean^. But the rest and
greatest part of the Pulp is not made in vain, but is in place of Nutriment as
it were for the tender Plant which is immediately produced of the seed most
properly so called, as i^ easy to see in French Beans, which being set in the
ground, when they begin to shoot one part goes downwards and makes a root, the
other goes upward and makes the rest of the Body of the Plant. On one side of
this tender Plant lies the rest of the body of the seed, out of which a channel
or pipe of Conveyance goes into the tender Plant, by which alimentary juice is
carried thereinto, until it grows up and gets strength of it self to draw
alimentary juice out of the Earth to it self, The Bark of seed why made
and to elaborate the same. In respect therefore of the pulp of seeds it
happens that the remaining part of the seed so called, viz. the external Bark,
is only the Case (as it were) of the true seed which defends the pulp or true
seed against external injuries, and that external Bark to the Barks, and Shells,
and Membranes of Eggs. For since the seeds of Plants are not presently cast
into the Mothers Womb as the seed of Creatures that bring forth live young ones
is, but are many times kept long out of the Earth which is their Matrix, this
Bark defends that same internal seed against the external injuries, lest before
it begins to sprout, or in the very sprouting, it should be hurt by external
occurrent causes.

From which it appears, although (as was said before cap. 6.) the seed may also
be called Fruit: yet that there is some difference betwixt Fruit and Seed. For
that is properly seed which is simply necessary to generation such as is the
marrow of the seed, which also nevertheless because it is produced by the
Generator it may also be termed the Fruit. But because the Creator has
compassed some seeds with Pulps which are not necessary for the generation of
that species, but serve for meat for man or for other uses, as in Cherries,
Apples, Pears, Peaches, Grapes, all that wherein the Seed is it commonly called
the Fruit. And so according to nature the Fruit is either Seed, or that which
contains seed in it, as Aristotle writes, 1. de generat. Animalium, cap. 18.
Yet by Art it may come to pass that the fruit so called may be without seed: as
Cherries without Cherry stones, and the Berries of Grapes without stones: which
is performed by taking the marrow out of the Branch. From which it appears that
the Marrow in Trees does thiefly make toward Generation.

Chap. 9. Of the Generation and Propagation of Animals in General, and of
Bruits in Special.
HAving said thus much in general of the Original of living things, and then
more especially of Plants; in the next place we are to treat of the propagation
of live things, and first of Bruits. Where in the first place we are to give
warning that some think too meanly, yea, and grossly of the Souls of bruit
Beasts. Whether the Souls of Bruits spring from the Elements?
For some (truly) there are whose understanding is so plunged in the Elements
that they can understand nothing above them; and therefore they endeavor to
deduce al things out of the Elements, and date to write that the first
individuals of bruit Beasts were totally and according to either part ( viz.
their matter and form) produced of the Elements, and that al bruit Animals both
in respect of their body and their soul are in all generations Elementary, and
shall continue such to al Generations. But Scaliger was much more in the right,
Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. judging of the Souls of Bruits from their actions which
are far above the forces of the Elements. For admirable and wonderful actions
appear in Bruits, which can proceed from no Element nor Elementary nature, but
depend upon a more noble Principle. the wonderful understanding of Bruits.
Such wonderful things are related of the wit and capacity of Elephants, that
they seem to transcend all belief, unless they were related by credible
Persons, Pliny, Lib. 8. cap. 3.4.5. Christopher Acosta, and at large by Justus
Lipsius, Cent. 1. Epist. 50. What wonderful things in Peace, what admirable
things in War an Horse performs, the same Lipsius shows plentifully; Century 3.
ad Belgas, Epist. 56. What happened to the Sybarites who could dance both they
and their Horses, Histories testify. And who will not believe the most credible
Scaliger being an Eye Witness, who relates a strange story of the
apprehensiveness of an Horse, Exercit. 209. concerning Alexanders Horse
Bucephalus who does not read strange things both out of Gellius, and many other
Historians? Also what the Sagacity of Dogs is, and their sidelity to their
Masters, and their aptness to learn any thing may be learned from Pliny,
Scaliger, Camerarius, and Lipsius, Cent. sing. ad Italos and Hispanos, Epist.
59. and Cent. 1. ad Belgas, Epist. 44. yea, and it is manisest by daily
Experience. What tricks Apes play, and how they counterfeit men's actions, is
unknown to none. That an Hare learned to keep company among Dogs without fear,
and would go on hunting with them (among many other such things) Julius Caesar
Scaliger testifies, Exercitat. 224. Among Birds Justus Lipsius reckons the
Letter-carrying Pridgeons, in Epist. 59. Cent. sing. ad Italos and Hispanos.
Who knows not that Parrots will learn to speak as men speak; yea, that the
Mag-pie, Nightingale, and Thrush will do as much, Martial, Plutarch, Ovid,
Pliny, and many others witness. That Cranes journey with a certain Discipline
and keep watch, is averred by those that write the History of Birds. The wit
and industry of Bees and Pismires is vulgarly known. Every Cottage is full of
the Artificial Works of the Spider. Beasts know their own strength and Arms and
their own weakness; and have their familiar Medicines which they are acquainted
with. Which wonderful abilities and works of Bruits they that endeavor to
derive from an Elementary principle do but wash the Blackmore.

And as the Operations of Animals are more various and wonderful than those of
Plants; so their propagation is more labored and curious. It is not my intent
in this place to propound all that may be said of their differences and various
Originals, but only as much as shall suffice to declare the propagation of their
souls. The Sexes in Animols
Now to the Generation of perfect Animals there is required a double Generator,
and neither is of it self sufficient to Generation; though there is a
controversy as touching the manner. For I know the disputes betwixt the
Aristoteleans and Physicians concerning this point, whiles the former conceive
that the seed of the Male is the only efficient, and that the Female affords
nothing but matter: but the latter hold that the Female affords seed also which
is both effectual and fruitful. Which great Controversy being prolixe I think
not fit to handle the same in this place. Certain it is that neither Male
alone, nor the Female alone is sufficient to generate a living Creature, but
both of them contribute their share whatever it is to the constitution of an
Animal. Whence Empedocles also (as appears in Aristotle, 1. de gener. animal.
c. 18.) said, That it is the joint concribution of the male and female, but the
whole proceeds from neither of them. The (...) of the (...) (...)
They indeed that hold that the Seed of the male only does concur actually to
ge^^^ation may easily free themselves from many Objections urged against their
Opinion. But most Physicians think the contrary, who hold that the formative
virtue is as well in the Seed of the Female as of the Male; and they conceive
they have reason so to think, as for other causes, so because of the likeness
of the young ones, sometime to the Father, sometime to the Mother, and sometime to
both: not only when Animals are generated by Animals of the same sort; but then
also when Generation is made by Animals of different sorts, wherein the work of
the Fathers and Mothers soul does manifestly appear. So a Mule is made of a
Mare and a he Ass, a Mulet of a stone Horse and a she Ass; of an Ox and an
Ass the strongest sort of Mules; the Indian Dog of a Tiger and a Bitch; the
Dog-lyon of a Lion and a Bitch; a strong Dog of a Wolf and a Bitch; the
Laconick Dogs of a Dog and a she Fox; of the Pard and Lyoness the Leopard; a
Musmus of a she Goat and a Ram; and many other Animals: of which see Johannes
Baptista Porta, Lib. 2. Mag. Natural. Yea, and Histories record that a Woman
coupling with a Beast has brought forth a Creature like her self. Yet these
men can easily free themselves from dubious objections. For this Law has been
established by the Creator, that as it were from two partial causes one
principle and one total cause should arise, from whence one motion and
efficiency should arise to the production of the young Animal, The mixture of
Forms is possible.
but in a certain Order and Method. Nor should the Mixture of Souls or Forms
offend any one in this case, by reason of some feigned Metaphysical Axioms, For
the Male and Female are of the same sort, and therefore it is as little absurd
that the soul of the two seeds should be conjoined as for two flames to be
united. Hippocrates did not count the mixture of souls so absurd a thing, as
appears by that Speech of his, Lib. 1. de Vict. rat. text. 61. If any man
cannot think that souls are mingled, he is void of reason. Here Fienus objects
in his 6. Quaest. de form. foet. If the Seeds should be mixed, and the actions
of both should concur, their effect would always be mixed, and always half
Masculine and half Feminine, and no young one would ever perfectly resemble the
Father or the Mother, but always partly one, and partly the other. Also he
thinks it impossible that those two virtues can always so evenly conspire to
one effect, but that they should often err, and instead of one part make two;
or instead of two one, one formative virtue making one in this place, and of
this part of the seed, and the other making another in another place and of
another part of the seed; so that Monsters would be frequently engendered.
Averrboes and others do easily answer this Objection who hold there is no
active Principle in the Seed of the Female. But they also who hold that there
is an active Principle, and a formative Faculty in the Females seed, have an
answer for this Objection. How that God made two Sexes, and in all Animals
created both Male and Female is a sure thing; but why he made Sexes is known to
his own Wisdom. Plato relates a Fable in Symposio, That in the beginning there
was no difference of Sexes amongst Men, and that al were then Hermaphrodites,
but because of their Pride and Arrogance God cut Men asunder, and established
the two Sexes distinct one from another, so that one could do nothing toward
its own preservation without the other. But Sexes are not in Mankind alone,
but in other Animals also.

But to the Objections of Fienus it may be answered, That there always appears
a sign of the conjunction of both souls, and there is no creature but the young
one does resemble both the Parents, either in the external form of Body, or the
dispositions of the mind, or in both. Yet it is not necessary that they should
always equally resemble both Parents. For if either of the seeds be stronger
than the other the young will most resemble the Parent which that seed came from.
The Conjunction of souls absurd.
Not is it any way necessary that an Error should be committed in conformation
if the souls be conjoined. For they are of the same species and like as when
two flames are united they perform one inseparable effect, so two souls joined
together do conspire to make up one effect. And there are also examples hereof
in Plants; whereof Scaliger Exercit. 106. sect. 6. thus writes: I will tell you a
greater matter which will more advantage you in searching out the manner of
Generation, than to know all unprofitable rules and Laws of Cylinders. Set
three Date Stones, and so many Palms will thence grow up, and so distinct, as
the Stones themselves were; and these three branches will grow togeher and
become one Palm with one Stock. And of these Stones no otherwise set than
aforesaid springs the Palm Tree as Theophrastus informs us: one stock in number
arising from three Trunks, separated in Original, Matter, Quantity and Place.
So far Scaliger. For every stem and each palm first springing out of the Earth
has its own soul: yet nevertheless these three Palms grow into one numerical
Palm; which is not only to be seen in the palm, but in the Ingrasting of all
Plants in which the Stock on which the Branch is ingrafted has its own soul,
also the Branch has its soul: of the branch and stock one Plant and Tree is
made and furnished with one only soul. And not only of the same sort, but
different souls are also joined, as was said, and may be seen in the generation
of a Mule, in which the souls of an Horse and a she Ass are joined, as is
manifest by the shaping of its parts; also in the ingrafting of a Pear upon an
Apple, and of other Trees of several sorts. For where the power and faculty of
the soul is, there is the soul it self: but in the conformation of a Mule the
actions of each soul, both of the Horse and the Ass, are apparent. And therefore
here also with Scaliger in Lib. 1. de Plantis, we must say, where the thing it
self is apparent, if Opinion contradicts the same, we must seek a reason, and
not be Ignorant of the thing. And therefore whatever objections are made
concerning one seed whether of the Male or Female, they are of no moment. For
neither is one seed alone sufficient for Generation, but both are necessary.

Now the Generation of Animals is twofold; The Generation of living Creatures
twofold.
for some bring forth Eggs out of which living things are hatched; others
conceive live things within themselves and afterward bring them forth. To each
of these Generations the seed of the Male and Female are requisite, and of them
joined together the Conception is made in which the soul is the principal cause
of the shaping of the young Creature. For all the reasons which prove that the
seed of Plants is animated, the same do also firmly prove that the seed of
Animals is animated; and the reasons which prove that generation is made in
Plants by the animated seed, the same reasons demonstrate the same thing in
Animals. Some indeed do o^unt it a vain way of reasoning, The Seed of Animals
is animated.
to argue and demonstrate the Generation of Animals from the Generation of
Plants. But in my judgment they are therein much deceived. For since Generation
is an action of the vegetative faculty, or of the natural faculty as Physicians
call it, and that faculty is most vigorous in Plants, the way of generation in
Animals may thereby well be proved. For since all Generation is performed by
communication of the Soul and the Body, or as Zabarella speaks, every Generator
when it Generates does communicate some of its matter and some of its form, and
this communication of matter and soul is most conspicuous in Plants, so that it
can no ways be demed that Plants communicate their souls by Seeds, Branches,
and roots, and that no Generation is made without the soul be communicated by
the Generator, Why should I not hold that it betides after the same mannerin
Animals? And since in Plants the presence of the form in the subject is
collected by firm demonstration from their operations; and in the seed of
Animals the operations of the soul, Attraction, Formation, Augmentation are
found, we justly conclude that the soul is present therein. And since no Agent
can immediately concur to the production of a living Creature, but it must have
the same degree of life formally; and the seed of Animals by its own proper
virtue, without any new assistance of the Generator, or any motion or direction
thereof, yea separated therefrom in place, and many times also in time, does
produce a living Animal, and is the principal and ^mmediate Agent in the
production of the young one; it must of necessity have formally a like and
univocal Soul. And this appears both in such as breed Eggs, and living things.

For in the first place, as concerning Eggs, Eggs have a soul in them.
that the soul of the future Animal is already in them, this shows, that as
soon as Eggs are cherished by a convenient Heat the soul in them begins to
rouse it self and forms an Animal, like that from whence the Eggs came. Nor can
the Generator be the cause of this form; since it is many times dead when the
Eggs are hatched; nor can any other univocal cause be so much as imagined. That
the Eggs of Silkworms are hatched by a temperate heat, Hieronymus Vida does
testify in the first Book of his Poem of Silkworms. Nor are the Silkworms
Eggs batched one way
Alone, for some do in the Sunshine lay
The little seeds, until they batched are.
Nor should thou be ashamed, O! Lady fair,
To give them (wrapped up in thy Lilly Breast)
Betwixt thy Rosy Nipples awarm Nest:
If thou do love to wear a brave silk Gown:
For in a day or two, thou up and down
Shall see the wondrous little Worms to creep,
Who in their Eggs did lie before asleep.


It Is commonly known that Hens Eggs are hatched by Ducks, and Ducks Eggs by
Hens. Yea and Jul. Caes. Scaliger relates that in the City of Grand Cairo
Chicken are hatched by the Heat of a Furnace. In all which ways there can be no
univocal Agent assigned, but the soul which lies hid in the Egg. Eggs compared
to the seeds of Plants.
For the Eggs of Animals being of a middle nature betwixt the seeds of Plants
and Animals do agree with both in some things, and in other things they differ:
they answer to the seeds of Plants herein, because they contain in them both
the soul and the matter of the future young one; moreover the true seed is
covered with a Bark and Membranes: but herein is the difference, that the seeds
of Plants when they are committed to the Ground, from it they draw the matter
which is necessary to form the body, and of the matter of the seed the first
small Roots and sprouts only are framed, the other parts of matter being drawn
out of the Earth: but in Eggs since the soul is so barricadoed and shut up in
Skins and Shells, that it can draw nothingfrom without, and in the mean while
the young one is in a manner perfectly formed in the Egg. Eggs do not only
contain soul and matter fit to shape the first rudiments of the young Creature,
but also matter necessary to shape so perfect a Body and to nourish the same.
And with the seeds of Animals they do herein agree, that the seed is first of
all bred in the Stones or the parts analogical to the Stones, and that the seed
is perfectly cast by the Male into the Womb of the Female, which is not so in
Plants whose seeds are exposed to many external Injuries, being out of the
Earth their Nurse. And herein such as breed Eggs differ from those which bring
forth living Creatures, in that the seed of the Egg-bearers is not perfected in
the Womb of the Females, as the seed of such as beat live young ones is, but is
perfect^^ without, and therefore their seed does not remain liquid like that of
the others, but had need to be governed by an external help and receptacle.

Now the Generation of living Creatures from Eggs is not after one manner. For
some are excluded by the Females while they are Eggs, and after become Animals
being cherished by external Heat. But in Crabs the Eggs stick fast to the
Mother, and Crabs are generated in them whiles they are there sticking. Animals
which bring forth quick joung ones.


But such Creatures as engender within themselves or in their Wombs, do all
generate by the meeting together of the seed of the Male and the Female; which
seeds as soon as they are conceived in the Womb the souls displaies it self and
begins to frame it self a fitting mansion house, which being perfected is
called a living Soul Live-wight or Animal. Now the seed of both the Parents
although it has the soul in it, and therewith lives of it self, yet is it no
Animal, nor can an Animal be made thereof unless both are joined together. That
thing is animated which has a soul in it, and lives thereby of it self: and
that is an Animal or living thing which is furnished with a Soul and Body that
has all the Organs requisite to such a Creature. But the seed of the Male or
Female alone cannot become an Animal, but the Conception which consists of both
seeds, or of the seed and menstrual Blood, becomes an Animal. And therefore the
Male does neither Generate in himself, nor does he engender an Animal
essentially perfect, The Seed of Animals is animated.
nor does he engender alone.

Now that this seed of Animals is animated or has the soul in it, the
Conformation or shaping of the young one shows. For either the young is formed by
a cause without the seed, or within it. Not without it, for none can be
imagined; or if any, it must be the Womb. But that formation does not spring
from the Womb is the common opinion of learned men, nor is it destitute of
reasons to just fie the same.

Among late Writers (^fuly) Johannes Gallego de la Serna, de princip. generat.
Lib. 3. The young ones of Animals are not shaped by the Womb.
cap. 20. endeavors to prove that the Soul of the Mother is the principal cause
of the Organization and Animation in other Animals, and of the formation and
union in Man. And to prove his own Opinion he alleadges certain Authorities of
some Philosophers and Physicians; but contrary to their own evident
Understanding, which therefore I list not to set down in this place: And the
Reasons which he uses are evidently frivolous.

The first is, That there is no Organ in our Body, which by its own similitude
and natural Inclination has the power of attracting any useful substance for
attractions sake alone, but to enjoy the same, and consequently to change the
same; but the Womb has a power and most vehement Inclination to draw to it
self the matter of the child; ergo it draws it not only for attractions sake,
but to enjoy, and consequently to change the same. But I answer to the minor,
that it is false that the Womb in Creatures that have blood does draw to it
self blood necessary to form the young one; but the soul which is in the Seed
draws the same, and therefore also changes the same. For as in Plants the seed
cast into the Earth, or a branch of bu^^ set therein, does first form and
produce roots by which it draws nourishment out of the Earth; so the soul in
the young one in the Womb forms the umbilical Vessels, by which it draws blood
and spirits.

Moreover he conceives the Generative Faculty has need of a peculiar Organ,
and that the Womb is that Organ, since in the whole body there is none like it
so accommodated for such an action.

But both of these suppositions are salfe. For in the first place the changing
faculty is not Organical, not is it performed in a part as it is Organical, but
as it is similar, and furnished with its innate heat. And although the stomach
and Liver, and other parts, which do change and generate some substance are
Organical: yet they change not nor generate any thing as they are Organical but
as they are similary. But they have their Organical constitution for their more
convement Reception, Retension, and Expulsion. So the stomach has the upper
Orifice which receives the meat and drink, the Cavity wherein it holds the same
the lower Orifice, by which the generated Chylus is sent forth. But Concoction
is performed in the stomach inasmuch as it is a similar part, and furnished
with its Natural Heat. Again, that presupposition is false, That the Womb does
change and inform that blood which comes in for the formation of the Child;
since that is done by the soul in the seed. For as when the young one is formed
it has in it self a nutritive and growing faculty which does not proceed from
without: so it is also in the formation or shaping of the said young one. But
the Womb only affords the place wherein the formation is made, and all the
Organical Constitution thereof is contrived to that intent and purpose.

On the contrary, There are most evident Reasons which prove that the Womb of
the Mother does not perform the shaping of the Child, and that it does not give
the soul to the Child, For in the first place, if the Womb did shape the Child
or young one whatever, the Male should not communicate the active Principle of
Generation, but only the passive. Yea, and the Female alone should be the cause
of Generation, as bestowing both matter and form, and so the female might
conceive in het self without a male. Secondly, no reason could be given why the
young one should be sometimes like the Sire of Father. Thirdly, why should not
Females be always generated, and how comes there to be Males? Fourthly, That
which performs the work Formation must needs immediately touch the Child or
young one: but the Womb does not iminediately touch the young one, but Membranes
come betwixt it and the Womb, and those watery Excrements contained in the
Membranes. For whereas Joh. Gallego conceives it conveighs its virtue to the
young one through the Membranes themselves, it is absurd, nor are the Membranes
parts of the young one, as Gallego would have it. Much less can that virtue pass
through the Excrements. Nor is that of any moment which he says of the
Torpedoes benumming a Man's hand who touches is only with the end of a very long
rope, and that the Lodestone moves Iron through a thick board. For those
actions are performed by spiritual Species, as was said before in the Second
Discourse, chap. 4. of this Treatise, which are as a Ray continually thrust
forth, as Jul. Caesar Scaliger, Eaercit. 344. Sect. 5. speak^. But the
concocting and changing and forming Faculty is immanent, no^ does it pass from
one subject to another, and remaining in its own proper subject, performs its
operations, but does not transmit its force through the Membranes and
excrements ou^ of the Womb. Indeed Johannes Gallego conceits that it is the
part of a blockhead to doubt, Whether the Soul of the Mother can animate the
internal parts of the child, although they are covered with Membranes. But I am
of Opinion the quickest wit in the World cannot conceive how the Soul being
absent and distant in place, can animate the young one. For suppose the Womb
could work some alteration thereupon, through the Membranes and Excrements of
Water, yet could it not cause animation.

Therefore we must needs hold that the Cause of Conformation is in the seed it
self. In the seed it self is the Cause of Conformation.
Which is the common Opinion of learned Men, viz. of Aristotle, 2. de generat.
animal. cap. 1.3.20. 1. de generat. animal. cap. 20.21. 4. de generat. animal.
cap. 1. and el^ewhere. Galen, Lib. de format. foetu. cap. 2.3.5.14. Lib. 1. de
sem. cap. 8.18. 2. de sem. cap. 1.2.5.14. de usu partium, cap. 7.8. and others.
And it has questionless strong reasons to support the same. For in the first
place, since Conformation is a Natural act, it proceeds from an Internal
principle, not an external. Secondly, conformation begins in the seed equally,
and all the parts within and without are equally conformed. Thirdly, since in
Birds which breed Eggs the principle of Conformation is internal, no reason can
be showed why it should not be so in all other Animals.

And if you now enquire what that internal Principle is, The soul is the cause
of the shaping of an Animal.
no other can be assigned save the Soul. Some say it is logos Plasticos, or a
formatwe Understanding or Faculty: but unless thereby they understand the soul
it self furnished with a formative Faculty, this Opinion cannot hold, and has
been sufficiently refuted before, chap. 5. Others hold it is the Native Heat:
but neither is that the principal Cause of Formation. For so noble an action
which al Philosophers cannot sufficiently admire, can only be ascribed to a
quality. And heat is only a common Instrument, nor can it give to al parts
their quantity, figure, and number, and out of question no quality can act
unless it be directed by a principal and superior faculty, of which there is
need in this case.

Nothing else therefore remains which can be the cause of Conformation in the
Seed, save the Soul it self. Which while Thomas Fienus denies he is in great
Error, quaest. 5. conclus. 6. and in the first place he has not indeed rightly
stated the Controversy. The Controversy touching the formation of the young
^ne stated.
For whereas he ought to have disputed concerning al Souls living, or al
Animals, he contrary to the Rules of Demonstration. goes about to demonstrate
an adjunct of the whole kind of Animals, touching one sort, viz. Mankind. For
it is not a thing proper to Man alone to generate from seed cast into the Womb,
but common to al Creatures which bring forth young ones alive. And in the
beginning of Quest. 5. he does not rightly form the Question, where he writes.
The Question here is not, Whether the Soul brought into the Seed after
Conception is the Efficient Cause of Conformation? but whether the Soul
pre-existing in the Seed before the Conception, and bred in the Testicles of
the Parents is the Cause. For there is no Question concerning the latter; but
this is the Question in controversy; Whether the seeds of the Male and Female
joined together in the Womb, have an intrinsecal formative Faculty (which he
grants) and consequently a Soul (for that necessarily follows) in them.

For let us put the case that in a Man the Soul is introduced and confused by
God: yet since in Bruits there can be no such Infusion it must needs be
presently in the seed, and that communicated from the Parents. And this is
sufficiently proved by one Argument which Fienus himself brings, It Is proved
that the soul in the seed is the Cause of Conformation.
so that there is need of no more, and that is this; that which shapes the body
is within the Seed, as he proved, Conclusion the third. That which shapes is
some Soul; for shaping is a proper power of the Soul. Ergo, there is a Soul
within the Seed, or a Soul of the Seed: for that which he answers (as was said
before, chap. 6.) is of no moment. I confess (says he) the Premises are true.
But I deny the Consequence. It is indeed rightly inferred that there is some
Soul in the Seed, but not that it is the soul of the Seed. There is indeed a
Soul brought into the Seed after that the Seed is conceived in the Womb, or
planted in the Earth, or the Egg set under the Hen, when all things are put
into act; but that is not the Soul of the Seed, or which did pre-exist in the
Seed, or which was bred in the Stones, the Tree, or the Hen, but the Soul of
the young one conceived being afterward introduced thereinto. For suppose
indeed that the Soul is introduced into humane Seed; yet into the Seeds of
Plants, the Eggs of Hens, and the seeds of Bruits, it is false to hold that the
Soul is afterward introduced, For what introduces the Soul into the seed
thrown in the ground, what introduces it into an Hens Eggs whiles a Duck sits
over them, or while they are hatched by the heat of a furnace? Here can be no
cause assigned by which the Soul should be introduced. And if the Parents
should not give the Soul, but some external thing, like should not engender its
like. And what need is there I pray you (in this case) tomultiply things to no
end, and to hold two Souls; one which is the Soul of the Seed, or which did
pre-inexist in the Seed, and was bred in the Stones, or the Tree, or the Hen,
and another introduced afterward. When a Plant is generated.
And he contradicts himself in this point, whiles in Conclul. 6. he writes:
That the shaping of the Seed in the Earth is not essential generation it self,
but only the perfection of the new Plant already constituted and generated upon
the Tree; and the bringing thereof now to a perfect act, which was before
constituted only in an imperfect act; nor is it any matter what the vulgar
people think or call Generation, or what they do not so call; nor what agrees
to their understanding, but what agrees to the Truth. For the common people are
ignorant of Philosophy, and knows not when and where a Plants form is truly
produced, nor when is the Essential generation of a Plant; and knows not how to
distinguish between the first act and the second, betwixt that which is
imperfect, and that which is perfect: and therefore they take one for another;
and conceive that a Plant is then first generated when it is perfected and
operates, and when it brings forth Roots and Leaves; whose production is not
the Generation of the Plant, but the operation and perfection thereof, being
generated before. So fat Fienus. And in very deed if Fienus as he rightly
understood the presence of the Seed when Conformation it made, so he had also
known the propagation and original thereof he might easily have freed himself
from al^ doubts besides. For the truth in that point being discerned al doubts
are easily resolved.

For although they that think otherwise do alleadg many things: yet they can
bring nothing solid and firm for their Opinion: which knowing, that they might
abuse the Reader contrary to the Laws of Demonstration, such things as they
should dispute of the seed and formation of Animals in general, those they
dispute in particular touching the Soul and formation of Man; which when they
are examined in general and in their own place they prove of no force. For many
being of Opinion that the soul of Man is not propagated from his Parents, but
infused by God when the body is formed, and the same being also immortal; al
those absurdities which are objected against the Animation of Seed from the
Prerogative of the Humane Soul do fall to the ground if they be propounded in
general so as to concern bruit Beasts also. For they are not able to show
whence proceeds the soul and formation of the Body of an Horse, a Lion, a Dog,
unless the Soul be derived from the Parents with the Seed; nor can they tell us
who it is that begins the Delineation of the young one in all Animals, or why it
should be necessary that the said Information should be begun by one, and
perfected by another. But especially they are not able to show how out of the
Eggs of Birds young ones of the same kind are hatched, especially by a Bird of
another kind sitting on the said Eggs, or when they are hatched by the heat of
a Furnace, unless the Soul were already in the Egg. And therefore since in
Bruit Animals those Arguments are of no force, the most of those also which are
urged concerning the Generation of Man will also be of no force. And although
some distinguish betwixt the Conception and the Seed, and call that white
substance bred in the stones the Seed, which is shed into the Womb in the time
of Copulation; and that Body bred of the Seed in the Womb the Conception,
wherein there are some lineaments of the future Animal already drawn; yet they
themselves cannot show a Reason whence the Soul in Bruits (for here we will set
aside the Humane Soul, thence thereabouts, for the reasons aforesaid there is a
peculiar dispute) should come into the Conception, if it were not in the Seed
before; nor tell us what cause began that first delineation and figuration of
the parts of every Animal. For whereas Johannes Gallego de la Serna, says it
proceeds from the Womb, that is altogether false. For so the Female should only
generate, since she alone gives the soul, and the Male affords only the matter.

But let us see their Objections. In the first place many indeed Object, and
therein also triumph, That nothing is animated but a body and its parts; but
the Seed is an Excrement and a certain superfluous moisture bred in the stones,
being just like the Chyle in the stomach, the blood in the Liver and Heart, and
the milk in the Dugs. But in good deed this Argument of theirs is of no weight,
as shall be also shown hereafter in Chap. 14. A refut^tion of arguments brought
against the presence of the soul in the seed of Animals. The seed is not an
excrement.
For in the first place, they beg the Question, and this very thing is a part
thereof, whether only the parts of the body, or the seed also be animated. For
although the Seed is bred in the stones, as Chyle in the stomach, and is no
nutriment of the body; yet it does not thence follow that it is an Excrement.
For there is a third thing generated in living Creatures, viz. the fruit or
seed, call it which you please, which the seed of Plants does evidently declare.
For some do make exceptions and say, that there is a difference betwixt the
seeds of Plants and Animals, and that the Seed of Plants is not like the seed
of Animals, but like the Conception made in the Wombs of Animals. But suppose
it so to be; yet thereby is proved, that there is also somewhat bred in Animals
which is neither a part of their Body, nor a Nutriment, nor an Excrement. Nor
does that prove the contrary which Johannes Gallego de la Serna objects, de
princip. generat. Lib. 2. cap. 5. while he writes that the seed of Animals
cannot attain to that ultimate disposition to the Introduction of the Soul,
which those parts of the same substances have attained, which have been turned
into the substance of the parts; and that the seed has only received from its
organ assimilation, such as the concoctive Faculty was able to give it, and
such as Milk has received, and that therefore it remains inanimate. For they
are meet beggings of the Question, and the seed of Plants does demonstrate the
contrary. For if the seed of Plants could receive that disposition necessary
for the propagation of Plants; why cannot the seed of Animals receive the same?
And milk it self which Johannes Gallego brings for an example, evidently
declares that somewhat may be engendered in the bodies of Animals which is no
part of the body nor its Aliment (for the Mother is not noufished with the Milk
she breeds) nor a mere Excrement: such as seed also is, which is not therefore
bred in the stones by the concoctive Faculty only that it might be voided forth
as al Excrements are, but therefore and to this end that by it a new Individual
might be generated, How the Seed is (...) anima^^^
and so the kind might be preserved. And therefore though the Concoctive
Faculty does not animate the Seed, as neither in other parts does the aliment
receive the Soul from the Coctive Faculty: yet after the Seed has received
from the Concoctive Faculty such a disposition that it can be a fit subject for
the Soul, the soul which is in the animate body does communicate it self
thereto as well in Plants as Animals: which after it is separated from the
Parent, by virtue and power of the soul which it possesses and has received
from the Generator it is able to constitute a new individual, or particular
dist^^ct live thing. For in them also the seed is first elaborated by the
Concoctive Faculty; and when the seed is well wrought and ripe, then the soul
communicates it self thereto. The same comes to pass in Animals, nor is there
any reason to show that it is otherwise; save that in Ammals as being more
perfect there is a more labored preparation, and both the male and the female
communicates somewhat to the Constitution of the young one; nor is the seed cast
into the Earth, The difference of the seed of Plants and Animals.
but into the Womb. Nor let that trouble any one that the seed of Animals which
bring forth quick young ones, is of a different Nature from the seed of Plants,
and that the seeds of Plants are wonderously and variously shaped: but the
seeds of Animals represent only a Liquor like milk. For seeing the seeds of
Animals are presently cast into the womb of the Mother, and cherished thereby,
and therein receive blood necessary to nourish the young one; there was no need
that they should be senced against external Injuries, by external coverings as
the seeds of Plants and Eggs also are.

Howbeit in the Womb it self the Seeds of Animals do frame many things which
are necessary for the Formation and augmentation of the young one; such as are
the Coats which infold the same, the Umbilical or Navel Vessels, and such
things as belong to these. Finally, in such Creatures as produce Eggs, because
the Eggs were to be kept long before the Chicken are hatched, and that is not
performed by the heat of the Womb, but by an external Heat, yet they are
covered with shells after the same manner as the seeds of Plants. For Eggs do
herein agree with the seeds of Plants, that as in Plants to the marrow or pap
which is properly the seed, other things are added either to guard the seed, or
to make food for Mankind, or for other uses; so also in Eggs other things are
found besides the true seed. Which does even hereby appear, That the Eggs which
the Hens lay untrodden by the Cock have all that is food in Eggs, yet are they
unfruitful because they want the seed of the male. Which happens also in
Insects. Al female Silkworms without difference yield Eggs: but such as have
not coupled with the male al their Eggs or seeds are unfruitful. Yet this
difference there is betwixt the seeds of Plants and Eggs, that of those things
which are added to the true seed, the Plant is neither formed, nor noutished,
nor augmented; but the seed draws nourishment to it self out of the ground,
save that (as was said before in Chap. 8.) the first rudiments of the tender
Plant do draw their Nutriment out of some part of the Pulp; but Eggs, because
without the Womb and out of the Earth, they become a perfect Animal, and the
seed (of which at first the Chick is formed) is covered with a shel that it can
draw nothing from without: in the Egg there lies already so much matter as may
suffice to perfect the Chick til such time as it is hatched.

Secondly, The Objectians of Joh. Gallego.
Johan. Gallego de la Serna, Lib. 3. de princip. sem. cap. 5. promises that he
will prove that the Seed is only a material principle of Generation, that no man
unless he be blockish and stubborn, will hereafter dare to deny the same. But he
performs not his great Promises, In what sense the seed is more Imperfect than
the Generator.
and those are slight Arguments which he brings. For in the first place he
says that the Seed is much more imperfect than the Generator, and the young one
to be generated. For it is a certain Excrement of the Generator. But I answer,
That the seed also of Plants which he grants to be animated, is more imperfect
than the Generator and the Plants generated therefrom, not because it has no
soul, but because it has no formed Organs which lie hid nevertheless
aptitudinally in the seed, which contains in it an Idea or Platform of them,
and they are fabricated by the Soul it self. But that the Seed should be only
an Excrement was before refuted.

Again, He conceits that the virtue of the same sort cannot be received in a
matter of a distinct sort. But the form of the seed differs from the form of
any Individual of what sort soever. But he does not rightly understand the
nature of Seed. True indeed it is the soul cannot persist in a perfect manner,
nor last long save in a body fit for it, and furnished with such Organs as it
has need of, but that it cannot be propagated by a different body, viz. the
seed, and abide therein so long til it have generated and built a Body for it
self, experience it self teaches that to be false, and he himself granted as
much before in Plants. For there is indeed one soul in the seed, and in the
Animal engendered thereby: but yet that which is in the Animal differs not from
that in the seed, save in the accommodation and perfection of Organs. Verily
neither the seeds of Plants, nor the Bulbs, nor the Roots, nor the Branches
(if you consider the perfection of Organs) are of the same condition with
perfect Plants, for example sake, the seed and bulb of an Onion after a sort is
not a perfect Onion; the seed of Poppy after a sort is not an entire Poppy
Plant; the Branch of a Pear Tree is not a perfect Pear Tree: yet in all these
there is the perfect soul belonging to that sort of Plant. Nor is the matter in
the seed and that in the young one of a different but of one and the same sort.

Thirdly, Gallego does also very much urge this Argument, 1. de princip.
Generat. Lib. 3. Whether the Organs introduce the soul.
Cap. 18. when a thing is by Nature and Art so made for some other thing that
the latter cannot exist without the former, it must needs be that that which is
made for the necessity of another should go before it in time. But the matter
and all its dispositions are for the form: Ergo they ought to precede the same
in time. For the form should never be united to the matter save for the
Instrumental actions, Ergo the Organs and necessary Instruments ought to
precede before the Introduction of the form, and the whole preparation of the
matter necessary for the actions of the soul cannot any ways be made by the
same form whose actions they are, but by the Agent to which the whole work of
Generation is committed. For to the same Agent to which it belongs to Introduce
the form into the new matter, it belongs also before its Introduction so to
prepare the matter that by no means it can be received in another, nor the
matter it self can receive the active form. But both the Major simply taken and
the Minor are untrue, and the proof thereof is false. That the Minor is false,
both the formation of the Body of Plants, and Nutrition and Augmentation of
Animals do teach. For first of all, when the seed of a Plant is cast into the
Earth, or a Branch or Root or Bulb is set therein, there is no other Agent
which can first form the Body and Instruments sit for the soul, but the soul in
the Seed, Bulb or Branch, does first form the Roots, by which it draws out of
the Earth convenient matter to form a body fit for it self, and of it forms the
parts of its own body. Why then should not the same thing be done in Animals?
Yea the thing it self tells us that the same is done. For the seed being
received into the Womb, the Soul first forms the Membranes in which the seed is
included, and then the umbilical Vessels by which it draws blood necessary to
form the body withal. Which thing also Eggs do testify, which being cherished
by any heat whatsoever Birds are thence produced. Where no cause can be so much
as imagined which should fit the matter to receive the soul save the soul it
self which is in the Egg. Again, The proof of the Minor is false, which builds
upon that never granted Hypothesis, that after the ultimate disposition of the
matter then the soul is educed and springs forth. This indeed is true, that all the organization (as he phrases it) is for the form, that is to say, that the
form may have sit Instruments whereby to act; but that the soul could not be
there in its first act before it can perfectly operate by the Organs can no
ways be proved.

Fourthly, Others object that if the seed of an Animal (for example of an
Horse) has actually the soul in it, the seed of an Horse is an Horse; since
the form of a thing being supposed, three things are supposed, the Essence of
that thing, the Name, and the Operation thereof. But here is no consequence at
all. We grant indeed that the Essence of a thing does chiefly depend upon the
Soul, and consequently the denomination, and that from it the operations flow:
yet the soul is not the whole thing, but a part thereof. And therefore the other
part being wanting, viz. the organical body, the soul cannot be called an
Animal.

Fifthly, Some do Glory in this Argument, viz. that it is a metaphysical
Principle, Whether the seed be actually animated?
that the same thing cannot be at once actually and potentially. Since
therefore the seed is potentially an Animal, it cannot be actually an Animal.
But there is no strength in this Argument. For not to dispute in this place of
the genuine sense of that metaphysical Axiom, since the same thing in diverse
respects may be said to be both actually and potentially: I shall only speak to
that, whereas the seed is said to be potentially an Animal; and I Answer, That
this Argument is drawn from Authority, and that which upon a like occasion the
most learned Thomas Fienus said from Plato's Charmides; it is not to be
regarded what any man says, but whether he speaks true or not. Again saving
the Authority of Aristotle, the most renowned Casparus Hofmannus has well
written, as before we hinted more than once, In tract. de formarum Origin,
rat. 2. Aristotle has so often said that the seed is an Act, that it is the
part of a very unskilful Person to urge only those places where he says it is
potential. For seeing (as was said before) that which moves is actually, but
the animated seed actually moves, certainly the seed must have a certain act
which moves. This act is that same beginning of Generation and Motion (as
Aristotle calls it) 1. de Generat. An. cap. 2. and the beginning of the shape
which turns the Courses into its own likeness. 1. de gener. animal. cap. 20.
and 4. de Genesis cap. 1. 1. de part. animal cap. 1. And left any should feign I
know not what spermatick Principle (of which we spoke cap. 5.) different from
the Soul, he terms this Punciple, a member or part of the Animal, which is
immediately in the Seed, 2. de genesis anim. cap. 1. And whereas Aristotle
sometimes says, that the seed is potentially animated; this he therefore said,
as Scaliger well observes Exercit. 6. sect. 7. not because it needs another
substance to draw forth and perfect the same (for so it were but begun) but
because it wants perfect Instruments which are in its power to make. Which also
Zabarella held, who ( de Mente humana cap 9) expressly writes, that the Seed
has a Soul potentially, because its soul does not yet work by its proper
Organs.

Sixthly, They say if the Soul frames its own Mansion house, (as is asserted)
Why does it not presently frame the same in the seminary Vessels? But let them
tell us, why the Soul of a Dog does not see in the Dogs Tail, nor produce Seed,
nor form a Body in the same place. For where the Place and Organ is wanting,
there no Operation can be performed.

Seventhly, What is the most common action of the soul.
They say if the seed is actually animated, why is there no nutrition discerned
therein, which is the most common action of the Soul? But it is denied that
nutrition is the most common action of the soul, for vivification is its most
common action. For Nutrition belongs only to the Body already formed, and when
Nutriment is at hand. Hence the seed of Barley, Whear, or other Grain lives in
the Granary, which Johannes Gallego does grant, but it is not nourished,
because it is not in a convenient place wherein it may be cherished and receive
aliment.

Eighthly, Whether souls are united.
They object if the seed be animated and both the Parents contribute the same,
the soul will be a thing compounded of the soul of the Father, and the soul of
the Mother. But mixtion and composition as has formerly been said does only
belong to things of different sorts; but if things join which are of the self
same sort there is no composition; nor is the fire which arises from many
flames united called compound: and the example of Palms was formerly alleged
out of Scaliger. And that example also Fort. Licetus ( de perfecta
constitutione hominis in utero chap. 8.) alleadges; that by ingrafting when a
branch is put into the trunk of a Tree, two and sometimes more souls do join,
and yet the Tree is but one, and has but one soul. Whence that falls to ground
which some do urge touching the Commigration of two Essences, and the
subsistence of two Essences in one, which they count absurd. For all these
things are true only of complete Essences and which can sub. sift of
themselves; but not of those which are ordanied to make up the perfection of
one thing.

Ninthly, Whether the Parent in generation loses any of his soul:
Whereas they count it absurd that many souls should proceed from one Parent,
and that the Parent in every time of copulation should lose a part of his soul,
all this proceeds from their ignorance of the nature of the soul. The soul (as
has been said before) has no parts properly so called, and it is deprived of
no part thereof, but remaining still the same does variously multiply it self.
For though one Tree in one Summer do produce a thousand Apples, and each Apple
has sundry seeds, and out of each of them a like Apple Tree will grow: yet the
soul of the Apple Tree is not diminished but remains totally the same. And the
same holds in Animals. And therefore it is more decent to search and admire the
wonderful works of God than to calumniate the same. And all those absurdities
which are objected against the wonderful work of Generation are nothing but
disparagements of the works of God proceeding from Ignorance.

Finally, That the seed is animated, Thomas Fienus does ( de format. faet.
quest. 5.) thus Impugn: Neither the Blood (says he) nor the Spirits are
animated: ergo, not the Seed. He proves the Consequence because they are
produced in parts much more noble than the Stones are, viz. in the Heart, the
Brain, the Liver, which if they could not impart the soul to the Blood and
Spirits, neither can the stones. But the Principal parts have their dignity.
And therefore although the Liver, Heart, Brain, do generate Blood and Spirits:
yet for the Generation of Animals the stones have a peculiar seed-making
faculty, such as no other parts have, that of the blood and spirits bred in
other parts they may form a peculiar matter which is the fit subject for the
soul to be propagated in, which is termed Seed, which is much more excellent
than the Blood fince it is the fruit of an Animal, and the Blood is only the
nutriment.

Chap. 10. Of the Propagation of the Humane Soul.
ANd hitherto we have demonstrated by firm reasons (as I conceive) that Plants
and bruit Animals are generated by Seed which has a Soul in it communicated
from the Generator; which lying hid in the Seed forms it self a fit Mansion
house according to the kind of Plant or Animal from whence it came. It remains
that we speak of the Generation of Man, Diverse Opinions touching the original
of the Soul of Man. The proposition of what is to be said of the originnal of
humant souls.
concerning which Authors are of diverse Opinons. Some had rather suspend their
Judgments than determine any thing in so difficult a matter. Others hold that
as the Body, so the Soul of Man is propagated from the Parents into the
Children by virtue of the Divine Benediction. Others conceive that new Souls
are created for every person by God, and infused into their Bodies aster they
are formed, and so they ascribe the production of Souls immediately to God. As
to the first Opinion, I acknowledge indeed the difficulty of the matter, and I
confess that it is here dangerous to determine any thing. Howbeit since in
matters difficult it is praiseworthy to do a man's endeavor, and we ought to
labor with all our might to know the Truth, setting aside the first Opinion we
shall examine and weigh the two latter. And in the first place I am not indeed
ignorant what Privileges the Soul of Man has, viz. To it alone immortality is
granted by God, which is denied to the Beasts, and it alone shall be partaker or
eternal Blessedness. But whether the Propagation thereof by the Seed can
derogate any thing from this Prerogative of Man's Soul is a question. Nor would
I (truly) hereabouts hatefully contend with any man, but I allow every man to
abound in his own sense, and to enjoy his own Understanding; but if I may speak
my own mind, there are three things which lie me in hand to prove. First that
it is more probable and likely that the Soul of Man is propagated from his
Parents by virtue of the Divine Benediction. The Second is, That whether we
hold the Soul to be created and infused, or to be propagated and traduced from
the Parents; yet nevertheless we must hold that the Soul is present in the Seed
at the first conception, and when the seed of the Father and Mother are joined
together in the Womb and retained, and as soon as ever the work of shaping the
Body begins, and that no other efficient Cause can be assigned which performs
the work of Conformation, saving the Humane Soul it self. Thirdly, though I
know great Authors differ in this point, yet (if setting aside Authority,
Reason shall be only considered) I shall demonstrate, That scarce any solid
Reason can be brought against the Propagation of the Humane Soul by the Seed.
And whereas this point is disputed both with Philosophical and Theological
Reasons, I shall not put my Sickle into other Men's Corn, but use only
Philosophical Arguments. And if any man will defend the other Opinion by
Theological Reasons it concerns him to see and show how these Arguments may be
answered. Which if he shall do I will not be wilful in defending mine own
Opinion, but shall willingly follow him that shows me better. In the mean time,
and til that be done, as far as I am able to judge in this darkness and weakness
of Humane Understanding I cannot think otherwise. But I give others free leave
to think otherwise. For I desire not to be a Dictator, but only to propound my
Opinion as well as others do theirs.

Now that the Soul is propagated from the Parents into the Children by the Seed
is first hereby proved, in that (as was said before) like begets its like. The
Humane soul is propagated into the children by the seed.
Which Aristotle evidently shows, 2. de Anima, chap. 4. text. 34. where he thus
speaks: This Operation is of all others most natural to living things; I mean
to such living things as are perfect, not maimed, and which are not born
without seed: every thing I say to beget another like it self, an Animal an
Animal, a Plant a Plant, that thus they may continue always, and attain as
much as may be a Divine Condition. For since God made every thing in its kind
perfect, but Man most perfect of al; verily he could not be called perfect, but
should according to Aristotle be reckoned amongst maimed things if he could not
beget another like himself, and that entire. And therefore both according to
Philosophers and Divines, Man ingenders Man, and the whole Man an whole Man,
which could not be if the Generator did not communicate the Soul. For since a
Man consists of Body and Soul, if the Soul should not be communicated by the
Parents, a Man should not engender a Man. Also that a Man communicates his soul
to his Child is altogether agreeable to the holy Scriptures. For God, Genesis
1.18. said to Man (as well as other Creatures) when he blessed him, Increase ye
and multiply: by virtue of which Benediction the whole Man ingenders an whole
Man; which could not be if the Soul were infused from without. Of which more
largely in Chap. 11. For what ever pertains to the Essential Integrity of a Man
that is propagated by Generation. But not only the Body, but the Soul pertains
to the Integrity or entire being of a Man. And therefore the Soul also is
propagated by Generation. Whence also Damascen, Lib 4. de Orthodoxa fide, cap.
7. defines Generation to be the Procreation of an Individual of like substance
by the Copulation of a Man and a Woman. Nor is the beginning of the Soul of Man
to be fetched from Creation. For every thing that is created is not immortal.
Yea, rather whatever is created is of it self mortal. And that some things are
mortal, others immortal, proceeds not from the condition of Nature, but from
the most free good pleasure of God; who created what he pleased, when he
pleased, and how he pleased. And such is the Nature of Man, as God would have
it to be; and it is so propagated, retaining its Essence given by God, even as
he pleased.

But let every man hold here as he pleases, The humane soul is present at the
beginning of the Conception.
and let him believe that the soul is infused on propagated: yet this (in the
second place) I conceive to be most certain, That the Soul is present
immediately upon the first Conception as soon as the seed of the Man and Woman
are joined and retained in the Mothers Womb, and the body begins to be shaped;
and he that holds the contrary, whether he stand for the Propagation, or for
the Infusion of the Soul, he is in an Error. For there are in the first place
some of them who hold that the Rational Soul is not immediately created and
infused by God, The humane soul is not educed out of the power of the matter.
but propagated from the Parents, who notwithstanding slip back into that
vulgar Opinion of the Schoolmen concerning the Eduction of Forms, and hold,
That the Soul does not at first lie hid in the Seed actually, but only
potentially, and when the seed is somewhat wrought, and the members of the body
are in some measure delineated, that then at last by the formative faculty
inherent in the seed the Soul is educed out of the power of the matter excited
and kindled, so that whereas before it only lay hid potentially, now it begins
actually to be, to live, and to inform its body.

But all which has been formerly alleged, Chap. 4. and 5. against the
Eduction of Forms out of the power of matter and the formative Principle in the
seed do make also against this Opinion, which it is needless to repeat in this
place; only I think fit to produce here what is alleged by Balthazar
Meisnerus, in Philosoph. sobr. part. 1. sect. 3. cap. 6. quaest. 1. And to omit
his other Theological Reasons which he brings, many Inconveniences and
absurdities follow from this Opinion. For in the first place an accident, viz
The formative power which is in the second rank of Qualities should produce so
noble and excellent a substance, which is absurd. Secondly, the formative
faculty should be without a subject. For the Prolifick Faculty is not a faculty
of the seed, but of the soul. And therefore where there is no soul there can be
no prolifick faculty unless we would have an accident to be without its
subject. Again, this faculty in the seed is either corruptible, or not. If you
say it is not, then the seed being corrupted either it passes into the soul
newly produced, or else to some other place. But neither of these can be. Not
the former, because the powers inherent in the soul are produced thereby, but
do not produce it. How absurd were it therefore to say that the formative
faculty does first raise the Soul out of the seed, and afterward insinuate it
self thereinto, and flow therefrom? Not the latter, because either it would go
away by it self, or pass into another subject. The former is contrary to the
Nature of accidents which do not subsist separated: and the latter is
improbable, because no subject can be named to which it mixes it self.
Therefore that Formative Faculty must needs be corruptible; which being
granted, it follows that the Soul it self is corruptible and mortal: for an
incorruptible thing cannot be generated out of a corruptible.

But those who hold the Creation and Infusion of the Soul do al of them
conceive that the Soul is not infused at the first Conception, but when the
body is formed.

But they who setting aside Authority and anticipated Opinions are willing
diligently to weigh and consider the matter it self, cannot otherwise hold than
that the soul of man is present immediately after the first Conception, The
soul of a Man is present at the first conception.
and as soon as a Man's body begins to be formed. And for the proof thereof I
will use the same Argument which formerly I used in general to prove the
presence of the Soul in the Seed. viz. Where ever the operations of the Humane
Soul are, there that must of necessity be present. But at the first Conception
the operations of the Humane Soul are forthwith present: ergo the Humane Soul
is there also. Now these Operations are first the formation of the membranes
which infold the Child, and afterward the shaping of the Child is self, which
(as afterward shall be said) begins at the first Conception. Afterward the
augmentation of the Child it self. For sure it is, as soon as the parts of the
Child are delineated they begin to grow. But in growing the Soul is
communicated to the parts which are added to the Body. Therefore also in the
first augmentation the parts which accrue must needs be animated. And absurd it
were that the child being born should be augmented by one Soul, and in the Womb
by another.

The most renowned Thomas Fienus, Professor of Physic in the University of
Lovaine, The Opinion of Thomas Fienus concerning the presence of the soul in a
child in the womb. The Coats of the child in the womb are formed by the soul
was moved ( de form. foet. quaest. 8. Conclus. 11.) by the force (doubtless)
of this Argument to dissent from al those who hold the soul to be infused, and
that not til about the fortieth day after Conception, and to hold that the
Rational Soul is infused the third day after the Conception of the Seed: which
he proves by these Arguments. First, That which shapes the child shapes the
membranes; but that which shapes the membranes ought to be the third day in the
Seed. Therefore the Rational Soul ought to be about the third day in the Seed.
For that which shapes the membranes ought to be in the seed before they be
shaped, or at the same time when they begin to be shaped; since every Efficient
Cause is in time before, or together with the Effect. But the membranes are
shaped at the furthest on the fifth or sixth day. Therefore they begin to be
shaped on the third day at least; and therefore the Rational Soul ought to be
in the seed at least on the third day. For two or three days at least seem
requisite to perfect the same; since they have a structure artificial enough,
and little Veins and Arteries running through their substance which cannot be
formed in a moment of time.

Now that what forms the Child does also form the membranes, he thus proves:
Beings are not rashly and without necessity to be multiplied. Now one and the
same soul can perform all the Conformation which is requisite to the seed. For all parts are begun at one and the same time though al do not so soon appear
perfect. And therefore more than one Soul to shape is needless. Nor can any
other soul or virtue be assigned which might form these membranes save the
Rational Soul in the seed, which in quaest. 8. he proves at large. Yea, and he
further shows that it is the Office of the same formative faculty which makes
the child to make the membranes also. For in the first place the membranes are
shaped for the child's sake, and the Seed is covered with them lest it should be
defiled by the filth of the Womb, and the Menstrual blood, lest the seed should
run about and slip out of the Womb, and that the spirits therein might not
exhale. Secondly, the Membranes are formed of the same matter that the child is
formed of, viz. of the seed, and consequently of the same formative Faculty.
Thirdly, the membranes live, ergo are formed by the same soul wherewith they
live. Fourthly, the Navel Vessels are formed by the same cause the child is
formed by; ergo the membranes also. For the Membranes ought fitly to be joined
to the Navel Vessels, and the Navel Vessels ought to be clothed by them, and
to perforate and go through them. But that union and connection cannot be made
by different formative faculties. And ridiculous it were to think that the
membranes are not made by any formative faculty, but are only bred by the heat
of the womb as the crust of a Loaf by the Ovens heat, and the skin upon milk by
the heat of the fire. For the generation of the membranes and their conjunction
and connection with the Navel Vessels is far more artificial than that it can be
caused only by the drying of the fire; nor is it made by necessity of the
matter, but it is specialcially intended by Nature, as without which there
could be no Child made of the Seed.

Nowthat the Membranes are made the fifth or sixth day, Experience it self, The
membranes are made presently upon the beginning of the conception.
and the observation of Physicians does witness; as appears from Hippocrates,
Lib. de Natura pueri, where he speaks of the dancing Wench who cast a
Conception out of her Womb the fixed day after it was conceived being covered
with a Membrane; Galen, 1. de sem. cap. 4. where he writes that frequently
three or four days after Conception the seed it self comes away covered with a
Coat: And Macrobius, in some. Scipionis, Lib. 1. cap. 6. and al observations of
later Physicians confirm the same. Secondly, he proves the same hereby, because
toward the Introduction of the Soul (he speaks according to his own
supposition, or else he would have said propagation) there needs no other
action then that seeds should be mixed in the womb by the virtue and heat
thereof, and be there fermented and actuated. And to such a mixture
fermentation and actuation there needs no long delay of time. For Nature
(truly) is not idle a moment, but begins to work as soon as the seed is
conceived. And when the last dispositions (he speaks again according to his own
Hypothesis) are induced to the Introduction of the Soul, there is no further
need of any other great alteration or elaboration thereof in the Womb. Which he
proves by the example of the Seeds of Plants upon which the ultimate
dispositions are so imprinted that often of their own accord they begin to
sp^out on the boatded floors where they he.

Touching which Opinion of that most learned Man that I may give my sense; The
Authors judgment concerning the Opinion of Fienus.
he writ most diligently and accurately above al others touching this matter;
and serting aside Authorities, he freely and ingenuously propounded his own
Opinion, and confirmed it with reasons, and for the most part held the truth.
For in the first Conclusion he ^ightly proves, That neither God, nor
Intelligences, nor the Soul of the World, were the efficient Causes of
Conformation; in the second, That the formative faculty is not in the Womb; in
the third. That the conformative faculty is in the Seed, and that it is
intrinsecal thereunto; in the fourth, That the Native heat is not the principal
efficient cause of Conformation; in the fifth, That the Generative Faculty of
the Parents is not the efficient cause of the conformation or changing of the
seed in the Womb; in the ninth, That the Rational Soul is the first and only
Soul in the Seed, and that no other does precede the same; in the tenth, That
the Rational Soul in Man does shape its own body, and give the same its form;
in the eleventh, That the Rational Soul is present about the third day after
Conception. And thus from the formation of the Child he perceived evidently and
clearly, that the whole formation thereof was begun, continued, and perfectly
accomplished by one and the same soul about the third day, yea, in the end of
the second, or rather (since Nature is not a moment idle) as soon as ever the
seeds are mixed in the Womb. Which is a thing so manifest that al who hold the
contrary must needs fall into most absurd Opinions.

But since even before the third day (as we shall show anon) certain operations
and some formation is made, Wherein Flenus comes short.
he does not show what causes that formation, either in Man, or in Bruits.
Moreover, his Arguments do only prove, That the Rational Soul of a man is
present soon after the beginning of Formation: but they do not prove, That the
Soul of a Man is about the third day infused, or rather (as he phrazes it)
increated by God. For although it be sufficiently demonstrated, That the
Rational Soul of a Man is present at the beginning of the shaping of the child;
yet another Question does now arise, viz. Whether it be propagated? or whether
it be infused by God, and by him created in the seed disposed for it. Fienus
his alse Conclusion.
Where he brings no Arguments nor Reasons for his Opinion, and his other
Propositions wherein he differs from my Opinion, viz. The sixth, That the Soul
of the Seed is not the efficient Cause of Conformation; the seventh, That in
the Seed as it is Seed, and as it is in the Stones, and before it has received
the Soul in the Womb, there is no active virtue of Conformation or Generation;
and that the Seed is not an Instrument in Generation, or an efficient, but only
a material Cause; and that in neither of the Parents seed there is any active
principle of generation, but only passive; the Eighth, That the Efficient of
Conformation is the soul which comes into the seed after Conception: al these I
say spring from that Hypothesis, viz. That the Rational is infused by God: had
it not been for which he would doubtless have acknowledged the presence of the
Soul in the Seed. Which Hypothesis nevertheless is built upon Authorities and
no sound Reason, as shall hereafter appear; nor do the Patrons thereof bring any
substantial proof for it, but only fly to that of Justus Lipsius, who when (
Lib. 3. Physiolog. Stoic. cap. 7.) he had produced the Authority of Tertullian
and many Latins, who held that the Soul was bred in the seed, and did not
enter into the same, and had praised Gregory Nyssen, who said none in his wits
could think that the original of the Soul was later than the Constitution of
the Body, he concludes: That it was an Opinion which might be maintained, had
not the Church the purer sort of Divines agreed to believe otherwise: and
therefore we must obey.

And that which moved Lipsius to deny the propagation of the Humane soul by the
seed, and rather to hold that it was infused, that doubtless has moved others
also, and amongst them the renowned Marcus Marci, who if he would have
contended only with Physical Reasons, questionless he would have granted the
propagation of the Humane Soul by seed. Which appears in that, in Lib. 1. Ideae
Idearum operatric. cap. 4. he writes: And if any one would bring a reason of
this diversity (viz. That the souls of Bruits are propagated with the seed, and
not of Men) I refer that man to the Omnipotency of the Creator, who gives to al
things not only such a faculty as is agreeable to their nature, but also their
manner, time, number, order, and certain limits. But the Question is not here
what God can do, yea, and what he has done. But it is only pre-supposed and
not proved, that God will not have the Soul of Man propagated by seed; nor if
that were held, does it import any absurdity; which does even by that appear
which he afterward adds. But nothing hindered if the Creator had so thought
fit, but that the Soul of Man might have been so fastened to the seed that it
also might be frequently multiplied and born again as it were in particular
persons. But the reasons formerly produced do prove, That it so pleased the
Creator, nor are there any sufficient reasons to prove, that God would not have
it so. Marcus Marci endeavors indeed to prove that, when he adds: Yet because
it was inconvenient that a Man should be so born, and disagreeable to the end
for which he was created, the omnipotent goodness would not have it so. For the
souls of Bruits tend only to adorn this world, and because through their
corruptible Nature they cannot hold out in one Individual they diffuse
themselves into many, that one succeeding another, that variety may be
preserved. But the soul of Man does not only adorn this temporary Scene of the
World, but is coheir with the blessed Spirits of the Eternal World to come.
Whence of necessity (the act of this life being finished) it is transferred
into that same eternal Life which will make it either happy or miserable. And in
case there were but one soul in all, the same at the resurrection of the body
should be happy and miserable, beloved and hated of God. But I conceive these
reasons are not of sufficient weight. Nor does the propagation of the humane
Soul by the Seed make it incapable of another life, nor does it thence follow
that there should be one soul of al either now or hereafter. For he himself
grants that the Creator could have caused the humane soul to be multiplied in
the Individuals. But the holy Scriptures show that God nor only could, but
would have it so, when they teach that God commanded that not only other
Animals but Man also should beget his like, and multiply himself into
Individuals; and the actions themselves which appear in the seed, and other
reasons fore-alleadged do prove that several Individual persons have their
several Souls, which being immortal shall neither be abolished after death, nor
shall grow into one, but each at the last day shall be restored to its Body.

And if (as I hinted before) Fienus and other learned men who have written of
the formation of the young one had sought the cause of the formation of a living
body, The shaping of a living bedy common to all living things.
not in Man as being too narrow a subject, but in general in all living things,
Plants, and Animals, they had more easily found out the truth. For when (Quest.
5.) Fienus was necessitated to grant that the seed o^ Plants is animated he
ought in the next place to have enquired how it is with the seed of Bruits
whether it is animated or not, and what therein is the cause of the
Conformation of an animate body. And since he himself grants that Conformation
begins presently after Conception is made (and he solidly proves there is no
other cause of Conformation but the soul, and the soul of Bruits is not infused
from Heaven) he might thence have easily collected both that the seed of Bruits
is animated, and that the soul therein is the Cause of the Conformation of the
body. But seeing those things which he objects against the presence of the
Humane Soul in the Seed do also oppose that of the seed of Bruits, he ought to
have considered how they should be answered. For if he had done this he would
easily have seen how those doubts which are objected against the presence of
the Humane Soul in the seed might have been answered. One thing only had
remained for him to enquite into, viz. Whether in the point of propagation the
Humane Soul has any thing peculiar to it self, which the bruit Animals have
not: and since the formation of the members (which himself makes an argument of
the presence of the Soul) begins not on the third day, but at the first moment
of Conception, he ought to have proved why that formation should not be a sign
of the souls presence.

Moreover, neither do the Arguments of Fienus prove this, Fienus dots not prove
that the Soul is not in the Seed before the third day.
that the soul is not present in the seed before the third day. For seeing as
he grants, Nature is not idle a moment; but begins to work as soon as the seed
is conceived and the operations begin to be performed in the seed after the
first moment of Conception immediately, and as Galen has it 1. de sem. cap. 4.
three or four days after the Conception the seed is already enclosed in a
Membrane, and the Membranes (as Fienus proves) are formed by the same soul: it
is truly necessarily concluded, that the soul was present before the third day,
and had begun the work of her formation of the humane body. The observations of
Abortions do conclude the same. Hippocrates de not. Pueri, writes that he saw a
Conception retained six days in the Womb, and then came away, which was thus
qualified, as if a man should take off the outward hard shel from a raw Egg, so
that the humor contained within might be discerned through the thin skin. After
this manner was that liquor disposed, and it was morever red and round. Also
there were seen white and thin sibres contained in the Membrane, with a red
thick bloody water, and the Membrane it self on the outside was died with blood
resembling the color of such as have stained faces. In the midst whereof there
was a certain small extant which seemed to me to be the Navil, and that it first
breathed therethrough, and from thence was drawn a Membrane which embraced the
whole seed. And the same Hippocrates in his Book de Carnibus, says that he
Conception has upon the seventh day all that it becomes the Body to have; and
that an Abortion made at this time being put into water does show to him that
shall diligently view all things the rudiments of all the parts of the Body. In
like manner Felix Platerus writes in Quaest. med. quaest. 1. that for many
years he had seen many abortions which in the first week were just after that
manner: First of all (says he) that same procreative faculty which lay hid in
the seed does rouse it self and disposes those more remarkable portions of the
seed which flowed from the three Principal parts of the Parents into three
Bladders as it were, swelling with spirits, which are Rudiments of the Brain,
Heart, and Liver, shut up in a small body: and the other portions adhering
thereunto it rudely separates into Limbs and Members growing thereto, which are
commonly perfected in the first week, so that the Embryon being at that time
cast out by abortion, such a shapeless small lump made up as it were of
congealed seed, round and rould together, appears dishinguished with the three
Bubbles aforesaid. Such as Hippocrates observed to come from that same dancing
Wencb, who caused abortion by her violent Dancing. And I my self saw such a
kind of an Abortion like a round white Ball of the bigness of an Hazel Nut,
which came from a certain Woman who every year almost did suffer Abortion not
many days after she had conceived: and I took it out of the thin coat Amnios
wherein it did float, and when I pulled it asunder, I observed three such like
Bubbles, the lower of which expressing a rudiment of the Liver was somewhat
pale, but not red, also four portions to frame the Arms and Legs, and (which
was pleasant to behold) I saw two very little black points marked out for Eyes;
which as in others, so I observed the same in a certain Gentlewoman who for two
whole years together (which was wonderful and not heard of before) did miscarry
every month, and often sent me such an Abortion that I might judge what it was,
and I always found them after the same manner.

Which things being so, That the shaping of the Child does begin presently
after the first moment of Conception. Conception when it begins.
it easily appears that the Conformation of the Child does begin at the first
moment of Conception. Whence Macrobius in his 1. Book in somn. Scipionis cap.
6. writes: that Seed which after it is cast into the Womb does not come back
again in the space of seven hours is held to be a due Conception. And a little
after: that Conception which any Woman holds beyond seven hours is created for
life. And Ludovicus Mercatus Lib. 3. de morb. Mulier. cap. 6. writes; when the
seeds abide in the Womb, and seven hours after are not cast forth, if they be
conserved and regulated by the heat of the Womb, it is to be believed that a
Woman has conceived. Hence Hippocrates tells us, that the beginning of
Conception is to reckoned from that day in which the seed was retained and not
from the seventh day, when in his Book de genitura he says, If a Woman be
acquainted with Childbearing, and marks when the Seed does not come away, but
abide in her Womb, she may know on what day she conceived.

With which reasons Tertullian (Lib. de Anima) and with him many of the Latin
Fathers being moved held, The Opinions of the Fathers concerning the formation
of the Child.
that a man is sowed or planted in himself or by himself, and that the Seed is
alive from the very beginning. And among the Greek Fathers Gregory Nyssen, de
anima and resurrectione writes; no man that is well in his wits will imagine that
the original of souls is later and newer than that of bodies; since manifest it
is, that no inanimate thing has in it self a power to move it self, and also
to grow. But of young ones conceived in the Womb there is no question made of
their growing and increasing; nor of their motion from Place to Place. It
remains therefore for us to hold, that the beginning of the Constitution of the
Soul and Body is one and the same. And even as the Earth if it receive a Branch
plucked from the Root, it makes thereof a Tree not contributing thereto the
faculty of growing, but only the matter of the growth: so we say, that also
which is plucks from a Man (the Seed) to sow a Man, it also is after a sort an
Animal, and of an animate thing an animate thing. And moreover he says, that
all the faculties of the Soul are in the Seed, yet they lie hidden; whichin
time and order rouse themselves up, and set themselves on work.

Chap. 11. Whether Like may be said to engender its like if the Soul be not
communicated with the Seed?
ANd thus we have proved that it is most agreeable to truth, that the Soul is
propagated with the Seed: Secondly it has been showed, that the Soul whether
it be propagated or infused is present at the first Conception, and is the
Builder of its own House. And they that hold the contrary, do two things
principally: First, they oppose the reasons brought to prove the traduction of
the Soul from Father to Son, and the propagation thereof by the Seed. Secondly,
they endeavor to bring reasons to prove the Contrary.

For in the first place, whereas it bath been said, Whether, unless a man
communicate the Soul in his Seed he can be said to beget his like.
unless the Parent communicate the soul to his Child in the Seed, like should
not generate his like, nor should a Man Generate a Man, but an irrational
Creature: many have several ways endeavored to answer this Argument but in
vain. For in the first place, whereas some say, a Man may be said to beget his
like, if he communicate the immediate matter fitted to receive the Soul; that
is of no moment. For Matter does not suffice to constitute his like. And he
which does not give the form of a Man, he does not beget a Man. For a Man
without his form (which is his Soul) is no Man. And therefore if the Parents do
not give the form of a man, they do not beget a man. Yea, and if the Father do
not confer the Soul, the Child should neither have Body nor Soul from the
Parent according to this Opinion. For Aristotle 1. de gener. animal. cap. 2.20
and 21. and 4. de gener. animal. cap. 4. denies that the Seed of the Father
contributes any part of the matter to the Body of the Child. Which although
Physicians deny: yet this is certain, if from the Seed any part of the Body
proceeds, that is very little and only the first lineaments of the Body; and
Aristotle w^ites that the Body is formed of the Mothers Blood, and that the
Father does rather conser the Soul, 1. de Generat. anim. cap. 20. The Male
yields the form and the Principle of Motion, but the Female the Body and
Matter. And what we said before in gentral of the Original of souls, the same
must be here repeated, viz. If we hold that the soul is infused into the Body
after it is shaped, it follows that they that are dead do generate. For since
Generation is the union of the Soul with the Body, and according to their
Opinion who hold that the Soul being created is infused by God, it may be
infused upon the fortieth day or later, and in the mean while the Father may
die: either the Father cannot be said to have begot that Child, or he must be
said to have begot it after he was dead. The Birth does not confer the likeness
of Sort, but the Generation.


Again, Some conceit that a Man begets his like in respect of the species or
sort, inasmuch as the end of Generation is the perfect nature of Man, and
inasmuch as he is not born not comes into the Light according to the order
appointed by God, save with a body and a rational Soul. But this Answer
suffices not. For if the rational Soul comes from without, the vital conception
is not perfected into a Man, but there is nothing engendered save an Irrational
Animal. Nor is the Question concerning the birth of a Man, but his Generation;
which is not performed in the birth, but in the due Conjunction of a Man and
Woman according to the Ordination of God. Nor does a man only come into the
world, but a Man is also conceived, as it is said of Cain, Genes. 4. ver. 1.
Adam knew his Wife and she conceived and bare Cain. Nor is their objection more
strong but the same with this, who say, that if that which is generated by a
man is in its time perfected into a man, a man begets his like. For if he has
not his Form and Rationality from his Parents, but from some other, Like is not
engendered by its like.

Thirdly, Whereas some say that Axiom [Every Animal when it generates gives
both the Body and Soul to its Issue] is to be understood only of those souls
which are drawn out of the power of the Matter, but the rational soul is not
drawn out of the Matter, The Souls of Bruits are not drawn out of the power of
the Matter. The nobility of man's Soul may Island with the propagation thereof.
nor depends upon the Body, as to its Essence; that also is of no great moment.
For it is falsely and without all Reason presupposed, that the souls of Bruits
are drawn out of the Power of the Matter, and depend upon the matter as to
their Essence; seeing by Virtue of the divine benediction they are propagated
by the Parents to their young ones. Nor does the nobility of our understanding
both in respect of its Essence and Operations show any other. For so it pleased
the Creator to associate a most noble substance to the Body. And therefore if a
rational immortal soul can long abide in a mortal Body, Why may it not also be
propagared with the Seed? Which if we affirm no absurdity will follow, as we
shall show hereafter.

Fifthly, Some say, a man does so far beget his like, inasmuch as he generates a
sensitive Soul, yea and the inclinations of his Parents of Virtues and Vices,
and which is more, Original sin also (they say) is transfuted by means of this
sensitive soul from the Parents into the Children. But this is only said and
not proved, that there is in Man a sensitive Soul existing of it self besides
the rational: And if there were, yet a man by communicating the same should not
engender his like. For the Essence of a man is not completed by a sensitive
soul but by a rational. But whether Original sin in our first Parents did stick
only in the sensitive soul, and not in the rational also, I leave to the
judgment of Divines.

Chap. 12. Whether God, or some Formative Faculty does shape the Body of Man.
MOreover, Whether God he the Cause of the formation of Man's Body.
since that which prevails most against those who deny the soul to be in the
seed is the Formation of the body of Man, and yet they will not be content to
submit to the Truth, several men seek several excuses. For since none can deny
that same admirable structure of our bodies, they severally invent several
Causes to which to attribute the same rather than to the soul immediately
present in the Seed. And here some fly in the first place to God the first
Cause of al things. So Alphonsus Caranza a Spanish Lawyer, tract. de part.
nature. and legit. cap. 1. when he had rejected all the Causes which others
produce, at length he determines the first Cause of the Formation of Man to be
God, and the Divine Power and Wisdom, and for his Opinion he brings that in
Psalm 118. verse 73. Thy Hands have made and fashioned me. And that of Job,
chap. 10. Thy Hands have fashioned me. Have thou not poured me forth like Milk,
and curdled me as Cheese? Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and
covered me with Bones and Sinews. But in very truth the Wisdom and Power of God
is sufficiently seen in the shaping of our Bodies: but that is not therefore to
be accounted the immediate and sole Cause of our Conformation. For the same
power and wisdom is seen in the Formation of Animals, yea, and of Plants too.
And concerning the Lillies of the Field our Savior says Matthew 6.30. That God
has clothed them. As therefore it must not be thence concluded, that God only
is the Cause of the Formation of Plants and Animals; so neither may we conclude
that he is the immediate Cause of the Body of Man. For God is not the Physical
Cause, but the first and universal Cause, not by Natural Motion, but after an
eminent and unexpressible manner, as by his presence he conserves al things,
cherishes them, and governs them in their actions. Who though at first he
created the World and all that is therein; yet he appointed Nature which is the
ordinary power of God, according to the Rules whereof the Generation of things
is now perfected. That Wisdom (truly) and infinite Power is primarily in the
Creator; yet has he given Power to Second Causes to perform artificial Works,
which they also themselves do really accomplish (as was showed before in chap.
2.) And therefore though it cannot be denied that God concurs in this work as
the first and universal Cause (of which Concurrency of God as the first Cause
with the second I spoke in the foresaid Chapter) yet that he is not the proper
Cause does hereby appear, in that Errors do sometimes happen in the Conformation
of living Bodies; which would not be if God were the immediate Cause of
Conformation. For he never errs in his Actings. Nor could Natural Causes be
rendered of those Errors, which nevertheless Physicians do render either from
the fault of the Matter, or inconveniency of the Place, or Imagination of the
Mother. But the Actions of God cannot be corrupted or marred either through
fault of the Matter, or Inconveniency of the Place, or Imagination of the
Mother.

Others seek the Cause in the Seed it self; Whether a Formative Principle be
the Cause of shaping the Child in the Womb.
amongst whom some hold there is a Formative Principle which shapes the Child,
and that the Parents use the seed as an Instrument in producing their young
ones. But this Opinion has been sufficiently exammed before, and refuted,
unless by the Formative Principle they understand the Soul it self. And to ad
this one thing more, a certain late Writer conceits he may avoid al
difficulties, if he holds that the Formative Power does not immediately follow
the Essence of the Soul, but that by the Divine Benediction it was given to the
soul to raise up in the seed a Formative Faculty, which the Seed afterward
being shut up in its place does faithfully retain; and that this faculty does
produce a substance, not by its proper virtue, but by that virtue it has
received from the Rational Soul; and that this Faculty when its work is
finished does remain joined to the Soul til the young one be grown up, and then
it puts it self forth again, and infuses into the seed a formative virtue like
it self.

But that which is wont commonly to fall out [that they who hold a false Opinion
while they strive to shun one absurdity they fall into many] the same has
happened here. Whether any formative faculty can be in the seed without the
soul.
For in the first place, whereas every accident requires its subject, and is in
the subject by its form: I demand, By what form (if the seed is not animated)
this faculty can be in the seed. Which since there can be none assigned there
would be an accident without a substance and subject. Secondly, since
proprieties are only in one and their own subject, this Formative power should
first be in the seed as one subject, and after it should be joined to the Soul
as another subject. Thirdly, Whereas the Formative Faculty (as by the
augmentation of the body, and the regeneration of parts lost, and chiefly in
Plants and Animals does appear) is a proper power of the Soul, it can be no
where save where the Soul is, and where it is we may firmly and demonstratively
conclude that there the Soul is. Fourthly, it is said but not proved, that an
accident by a virtue communicated may produce a substance. For no accident can
so much as act, much less produce a substance unless it be directed by the Form
from whence it flows, and from which it has its power of acting, as has been
sufficiently declared before in Chap. 5. concerning the separate Instrument.
But which way soever they explain this formative faculty, unless they hold the
soul to be in the seed, they involve themselves into inexplicable difficulties.
For if they hold it to be a substance they multiply Entities in vain. And since
al things belong thereto which are proper to the Soul, why should it not be the
Soul? But if it be an accident it can have no subject, and it will act beyond
its abilities.

Chap. 13. Whether there are more Souls in a Man than one?
BUt others when they cannot deny the presence of the Soul in the Seed, and are
forced to confess that the body of the Child is thereby shaped, Whether there
are diverse souls in a Man?
and yet will not grant that the Rational Soul is present at the first
Conception, they fancy diverse Souls to be in a Man, not building upon solid
reasons, but chiefly induced by the Authority of Aristotle, whom in 2. de
gener. animal. cap. 3. teaches, That a man first lives with a Vegetative Soul,
then with a Sensitive, and at last receives a Rational Soul. The words of
Aristotle may be seen in the place alleged. But what the sense of those words
of Aristotle should be, is as great a question as any amongst the Expositors.

For in the first place, Some hold that every Soul is a simple substance, and
that therefore there does not first come a Vegetative, then a Sensitive, and
lastly a Rational Soul; but that one and the same Soul in the Conception does
first perform the Operations of growing, then of feeling and moving, and lastly
of reasoning. For since the Soul cannot exercise its Faculties unless it be
furnished with sitting Instruments, and does first perform the most necessary
actions, and to Nutrition few Instruments are required, and that is in the
first place most necessary, therefore that is begun in the first place to be
practiced; but since Sense and Reason does require many Instruments, they teach
that the operations thereof are exercised in process of time, when the Organs
of the Body are more perfect.

Others on the contrary do reject this Interpretation, and say that it is not
agreeing to the words of Aristotle, while in the place alleged he expressly
writes that the Vegetative Soul is first had in the Conception; and that the
Sensitive Soul whereby he is an Animal is received after that, as also the
Rational by which he is a Man, and that this only comes from without.

Since therefore the Expositors themselves of Aristotle are doubtful of his
meaning, the surest way is to set aside Authority, as is altogether most fit in
the search of Truth, and to consider the matter it self, and manage our
business with reasons only. Which doing we shall find that it is most suitable
to truth to hold that there is only one Soul in Man, There is one soul in a Man.
viz. The Rational Soul, yet furnished with the abilities of the inferior
Souls, and beguifted with a Vegetative and Sensitive Faculty. And if the words
of Aristotle admit this sense, of which I dispute not, it is a sense convenient
enough. For (which we are to note in the first place) the Soul is a simple
Essence, and there is one only Soul in every living thing, but furnished with
diverse faculties. Diverse faculties and actions flow from one foul.
In every Plant there is a specific Soul; yet that has sundry Faculties, it
nourishes, augments, ingenders Seed, and also performs the proper actions of
its own kind; and the properties and actions of a Rose are of one sort, of
Rosemary of another, of Rhubarb of another, of Hellebore of another, of the
Eugh-tree of another. Every Animal is nourished, augmented, begets its like,
has sundry Senses, is moved, and finally performs that which is proper to its
kind; and a Be has one sort of properties and actions, a Pismire another, a
Sheep another, a Crow another, an Elephant another, an Ape another: which are
not indeed Rational, yet as the Understanding is the specifical propriety of a
Man; so those also (besides sense and motion, which are actions common to al
Animals) have somewhat specifical. And if it be not absurd in a Plant or Animal
for diverse Faculties and Actions to proceed from one Soul, why should it be
absurd to hold the same in Man?

Reasons to prove that there is but one soul in a Man.
And that we should hold that there is but one Soul in every Animal from whence
diverse faculties and actions do proceed, and not diverse souls, many reasons
there are that persuade us. For in the first place, If there were diverse souls
in a man every man should not be one Animal, but should have diverse operations
from diverse forms and acts. Whereof Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 307. Sect.
5. has treated largely. There is no reason (says he) which can persuade me
that our Soul (an immaterial substance, and a certain particle as it were of
God) should be any ways compounded, especially of two things actually
contrary. For I do not think Water is so contrary to Fire, as that which is
Rational is to that which is Irrational. The Soul which is totally in every
part of the Body, how can it have at once two parts actually contrary one to
another? And a little after: For a Man should be so one as an heap of several
things laid together, no true Man but a Geryon, and true Chymera or Monster.
Nor can those who hold the contrary avoid the force of this Argument, by
saying, That there is in Man only one first specific form, and that the rest
are generical and subordinate to the specifical, and that the rational soul in
Man as the chief does only perform the office of a form; but the rest though of
their own Nature they are forms, and are actually in the living Creature, yet
being compared with the principal they are more like matter than acts. We may
indeed grant that there may be diverse forms in one Individual, of which only
one is specifical, and the rest pertain to the disposition of the matter; yet
all those forms as they belong to the matter are passively disposed, and the
specific form as the primary Agent uses them as its subject and primary
Instrument; and they do not perform such actions as determine and constitute
any Individual to be of such or such a sort. But the Vegetative and Sensitive
Faculty (they call it Soul) do not pertain to the disposition of the matter, but
are primary faculties; and according to their Opinion, the Sensitive performs
the office of a specific form, before the coming of the Rational. And
therefore if before the coming of the sensitive soul the vegetative, and before
the coming of the rational soul the sensitive should constitute the same
Individual, one numerical Individuum should at diverse times be informed with
diverse specific forms; which is absurd: and so if an Individual should contain
diverse perfect beings in it self, it would be one by accident, and an heap of
things.

Secondly, If a man should in process of time receive diverse souls, this
absurdity would follow, That there are diverse living Individuals which should
belong to no sort of live Creatures. For while a man lives only by the
vegetative soul he must be a Plant, not yet should he belong to any sort of
Plants; while he lives with a sensitive soul he must be an Animal, but yet not
belonging to any sort of Animals. There is no vegetative thing but pertains to
some sort of vegetables.
To which reason although some endeavor to answer; yet they alleadg nothing
that is of any moment. Joh. Gallego allows the answer of Tolet. 2. de Anima,
cap. 3. who says, That such an Individual is not essentially a Plant, and
therefore is nor under any kind or sort of Plants; but that it is contained
under the kind of an Embryo, and under some sort of the same kind; and that
Nature bath made two distinct sorts of Vegetations, the one of which is a
Plant, and the other an Embryo or young Conception; and that this kind of
Embryo's does contain under i^ so many sorts of Embryo's as there are of
perfect Animals, and that the sort of Humane Embryo's has a Nature by it self,
which as the Instrument of the Generator makes an Organization convenient to
receive the Humane soul created by God. But one absurdity being granted a
thousand follow, and thus one absurdity is heaped upon another. For if this
vegetative degree is common to Plants and Animals, how comes it to pass that
from that vegetative soul which is in the Embryo an Horse is brought forth, and
not a Rose, or a Dog? And since they make so many sorts of Embryo's as there
are sorts of perfect Animals, it must needs be that one Embryo, if it be of a
different sort from another, it must differ by some specifical form. But that
is of no moment which the same Gallego says, that the vegetative form of an
Embryo produced by the Womb of a Woman does not make the Organization of a
Plant, nor of another Animal, but rather that of a Man; both because it is
directed by the soul of the Woman having the same Organization; and also
because of it self it has a natural Inclination to make such an Organization.
For in the first place, false it is, and not yet proved, That the soul of the
woman directs that Organization, as was showed before. Moreover, whence has it
that inclination to such an Organization? Certainly it cannot have it from the
common and generical form, but every determination is from the specific form.
And what will it be then when it comes beyond the degree of a vegetative, to the
degree of a sensitive Embryo? For since it is then neither a man nor any other
Animal (for the sensitive faculty constitutes no particular sort of Animal)
what I pray you must it be, since it is constituted in no sort of Animals as
wanting a specific form? Therefore it must needs come to this, That the Soul
which is in a perfect Child is also in the Embeyo, and that which finishes the
work is the same which began it: viz. That the Soul of a Lion forms it self a
convenient body, the Soul of an Horse forms a body fit for it self; and that in
the Embryo of a Lion there is no form distinct from other Animals but the Soul
of a Lion; and that the form of an Embryo (as it is described by Tolet and
Gallego) is a mere figment.

And except this be granted, a reason of the formation of an Humane Conception,
of its nutrition and augmentation, and of all the operations performed therein
cannot be rendered. For the formation of the child in the Womb, and of al its
parts and Organs, as also its nutrition and growth, are quite different from
other Animals. For no sort is constituted by diverse forms, either at the same
or a different time, but by one only, which thence also has its name, and is
called specifical. It does shape it self such a body as answers the Idea
thereof in it self, and by such a body performs such actions as by which it is
distinguished from other sorts. Hence a man from his own specific form or soul
has such a body as no other Animal has, and performs such actions as no other
Animal does.

Thirdly, If first the Vegetative soul should inform the body, afterward the
sensitive, at last the rational, a Man should be compounded of a Plant, a
Bruit, and an Animal. And this absurdity would also follow, That if the
sensitive and rational did flow from diverse forms, it would be no essential
axiom or declaration, when we say a man is an Animal or living thing; for the
Nature of the Animal should not flow from the form of Man. But if from both
souls the same Attribute should slow, a Man should not be one Animal, but two;
viz. An irrational Animal in respect, or by virtue of his sensitive Soul, and a
rational in respect of his rational soul.

Nor are the Objections made to the contrary of any weight. Whether a Man has
three Essences?
For in the first place they say, That many and diverse beings cannot proceed
from the same Form, nor can the same being proceed from diverse and distinct
Forms since the Form is the adequate Cause of the Essence. And therefore since
the same subject is a Man, an Animal, a living thing, he cannot have these
diverse beings from one form, but from diverse. And contrariwise, Because Man,
bruit Ammals, and Plants, are living things, and that distinct in their forms,
that which is common to al of them cannot proceed from the forms by which they
differ, but from that form which is equally in them al. But we deny that the
vegetative, sensitive, and rational, are three distinct Beings proceeding from
diverse forms; but they are only the powers of one and the same soul. And that
which has deceived many is this, That they hold that in some body there may be
the vegetative soul alone, The Vegetative soul constitutes no Plant of it self.
in another the sensitive, and that by it an Individual may be constituted. For
the Vegetative soul constitutes no Plant, or other sort of living thing, but
nutrition and augmentation are cominon to al living things, and Plants differ
specifically one from another as well as Animals do, and there is one form and
specifical soul of a Rose, another of Rosemary, another of an Oalt, another of
a Pear Tree, another of an Apple Tree; whence, though a Rose, and Rosemary, and
an Oak, and a Pear Tree, and an Apple Tree are nourished and augmented; yet
they are augmented after a different manner, and each draws a different
Aliment, and produce leaves, flowers, fruits, after a different manner; some of
them grow to a great height, Sense and motion do constitute no sort of Animals.
others creep by the ground, or at least grow not very high. After the same
manner sense and motion does constitute no Animal, but al sorts of Animals have
their specific forms or souls, by reason of which sense and motion are in all
sorts of Animals different, and the external senses are in several sorts
different, as also motion; some creep, others fly, others walk. Howbeit,
besides sense and motion they perform actions proper to their kind; a Dog is
quick-scented and faithful; an Horse is courageous, and after his fashion
proud; an Elephant is discreet in its way; of which see Justius Lipsius, Cent.
1. Epist. 50. the Spider weaves its nets; the Be makes Honey-combs, etc. For
in all living things there is a nourishing, growing, and generating faculty; but
these faculties and actions do constitute no sort of Plants; but in each Plant
there appear yet other actions which flow from the specifical form as such, and
by which Plants differ one from another. In all perfect Animals there is sense
and motion, but sense and motion do constitute no particular sort of Animal;
but besides sense and motion there are in every sort of Animal other powers and
actions which proceed from the specific soul as such, and whereby Animals
differ one from another. Nor are the vegetative or sensitive, or the
vegetative, sensitive, and rational, certain peculiar forms distinctly
existing, and three Essences. For although they are really somewhat in Nature:
yet they subsist not by themselves apart, nor are they any where, or at any
time separately existing save in the mind, just as a Being, a substance, and a
body; and therefore they do not multiply the Essence of a thing.

Secondly, From one soul flow all the saculties of the same sort of Animal.
They object, that if in a man there be not a vegetative and sensitive Soul,
but only their faculties, then there will be a power of a power. But this does
not follow, nor does the vegerative faculty flow from the sensitive, nor the
sensitive from the rational, but all the three faculties flow immediately from
one soul, as from the same form of Fire Heat and Lightness do proceed.

Thirdly they say: Where there is the operation of any form there is the form
it self; but in Men besides his understanding there are the operations propet
to other souls, therefore there are in him other souls also. But the answer is
the same we gave to the first argument. Nor are the vegetative or sensitive
faculties, Powers which proceed from any peculiar and specific form. A Rose,
Violet, Willow, Oak, Dog, Lion, Ox, are counted so many sorts of living things,
but there is no where existent a vegerative faculty which does constitute any
species by it self: but the vegetative and sensitive (as was said before)
though they may be conceived and considered distinct in our minds, yet they do
not any where or at any time exist distinct in nature. And what will they answer
concerning Bruits, of which the same question may have place? For when an Horse
is formed, that action pertains to the vegetative faculty, and is a work of the
formative faculty; but that vegetative faculty is no peculiar soul different
from the sensitive and the specific which Neighs (for by this mark the unknown
specific form of an Horse is commonly described) but these are faculties of
the same soul, which in the first place forms the Organs of Nutrition, as being
in the first place necessary, and afterward the rest.

Fourthly, they object: Where there are operations differing in kind, there
also are different forms; but in a Man there are operations differing in kind,
Vegetation, Sensation, Intellection: Ergo also souls differing in kind. But
different operations do only argue diverse forms where the subjects are diverse.
But in one subject different operations may proceed from the same form.

Fifthly, How a Man is at once a Man, an Animal, A Vegetable.
they object: If the humane soul were a simple Nature not compounded of a
rational Essence and of a sensitive and vegetative soul, by the same very soul
a Man should be a Man, a Beast, a Plant; and seeing whatever belongs to a man
that belongs to him of it self and primarily by virture of his specific form,
a Man should be primarily and of himself, a Man, an Animal, a Vegetable. But a
man can no ways be said to be primarily and of himself a vegetable, or
sensitive Creature; both because vegetation is a proper passion of an animate
body, which is the remote Genus of a man, common to every sublunary living
thing, and Sensation is the property of an Animal common even to Bruit Beasts.
And therefore the adjunct of a kind does not of it self primarily belong to a
sort of that kind. But out of our Answer to the first Argument an Answer may
easily be brought to this also. For that which they count absurd is not so,
viz. that by the same soul a man should be a man, and an Animal, and a
Vegetable; or to say better, should both understand, move, and grow. For
neither is an Animal or Vegetable, any thing distinctly subsisting in nature;
but as a man by one and the same soul is a Being, and a Substance: so is be
also a Living, Sensitive, Moving. Mean while, because these Conceptions are
different, some Generical, others Specifical, some most special, we may not
attribute the adjuncts of a Being or Substance to the soul of Man as it is
rational, and as he differs from all other animals.

Sixthly, Nothing Corruptible in the soul of Man.
they say: Corruptible and Incorruptible differ in kind. But the rational soul
is incorruptible, the rest corruptible. Therefore they cannot be in one
subject. I grant the whole Argument. For neither is the soul of man compounded
of a corruptible and incorruptible, either substance or faculty: but the
sensitive and vegetative faculty in man are as incorruptible as the rational,
since they flow from the same soul.

Sevently, Whereas Plato and those who follow him, do therefore conceive they
ought to hold diverse souls in a man, because there is a certain fight betwixt
the rational part of the soul and that part which is subject to passions; since
nothing fights against it self: that by Christians is easily Refuted, who know,
that that same fight betwixt the diverse faculties of the soul is not Essential
thereunto, but came in by the sin of our first Parents.

Let us therefore constantly retain the Opinion of most learned Men, which is
guarded with strong reasons, and against which nothing solid can be alleged;
that the soul in every living thing is only one, but furnished with diverse
faculties which in every Plant performs the acts of Nutrition, Augmentation and
Generation, but in each after a peculiar manner, and moreover performs that
which is proper to every Plant; whence a Rose differs from an Oak and a Vine:
and that in Animals there is somewhat which besides Nutrition, Motion and Sense,
performs that which is proper to every Animal. For no Animal is perfected by
sense and motion only; but as understanding is proper to a Man, so in every
Animal (beside the moving and sensitive faculty) there is a proper faculty,
which answers to ratiocination in a man, and by which one Animal differs from
another.

Now the Soul does not perform all these operations together at the first
Generation of an Animal, but those in the first place which are most necessary,
Why the soul presently upon its Rise does not propagate all its operations
together.
and therefore she does in the first place finish the Organs of the said most
necessary actions. For not to speak now of the Child in the Womb, but of the
Infant when it is born; that it has a perfect Soul is out of Question; yet it
does not presently Go, it does not Speak, it does not Reason: but in process of
time it performs all these things; but it is presently nourished and augmented:
but when the Organs necessary for those other actions are finished and
perfected it performs all those things. And hence also it happens, that
although Generation pertains to the vegetative faculty yet it does not show it
self before the twelfth or fourteenth year; although the operations of the
sensitive and rational soul do sooner exercise themselves.

And suppose we should grant that the rational soul has somewhat peculiar: yet
no cause can be assigned, why as in Plants (which cannot be denied) all actions
proceed from one soul, they may not do so in all other living things, and why
the specifical soul of every Animal may not forthwith be present with all its
faculties. Not can they alleadg at least one probable reason whereby to prove
that in a Dog, or Lion, at first there is only a vegetative soul, and that the
sensitive and motive faculties do come afterward. For as it does not follow,
that the moving soul is not in a Whelp, because it does not run as soon as it
is born, or in a Chicken or Pigeon because it does not fly: so also we cannot
conclude that in the seed there is not present the sensitive and motive soul,
because those actions are not performed by the Seed.

And verily those who think otherwise do involve themselves into many
difficulties; and whiles they build, now upon Reason, now on Authorities and
false suppositions, and endeavor to reconcile Truth and Falsehood, they involve
themselves in Labyrinths and Mazes inextricable.

For in the first place, Aquinas grants out of Aristotle, That first there is
only the vegetative soul, and that afterward the sensitive comes, and then
follows the rational. But he holds that the vegetative soul perishes when the
sensitive comes, and that the sensitive perishes when the raional comes; and
that because (5. Phys. text. 38.) he finds written, that one numerical thing
has only one numerical Act, and that consq^uently diverse forms cannot be in
one subject, and therefore he thought, when the later form comes the former
must perish.

Aquinas was in the right in judging that one thing has but one form; and if
he had held, that presently upon the first original there is only one soul in
every living thing, he might have easily acquitted himself. But while he
endeavors to reconcile this true opinion with a false one, viz. that at
different times different souls are produced and come into a man, he falls into
absurdities. For thus the Child in the Womb will not remain the same in number,
but will be a different thing; being one kind of thing when in the first days
it is nourished and augmented by the vegetative soul; afterward another when
it is governed by the sensitive soul; and again another when the rational soul
comes into it. And if the soul or specific form of another Animal, after it
comes, is sufficient for Nutrition, Augmentation, Sense, Motion, and to perform
that which is proper and specifical to every Animal, Why may not the same also
in Man presently upon the first Conception be the Cause of Nutrition? And what
great need is there to multiply Beings, since one soul is sufficient to perform
all the actions which belong to every Animal?

And the very shaping of our Body does sufficiently show the absurdity of this
Opinion; The Child is shaped only by the Soul.
and that formation is begun and perfected only by one soul there are many
things which prove. For in the first place (as was also said before) there is
no vegetative or sensitive soul simply existing, which is not determined to
some certain species. In Plants indeed there is a vegetative soul, and in the
Conceptions of Animals. As the vegetative is in Plants and Animals after a
different manner, so is the sensitive in Animals.
But the Vegetative in Plants is so ordered by Nature that it draws nourishment
out of the Earth and fastens it to the Plant: contrariwise the vegetative of
Animals draws it not out of the Earth, but in the Womb from the Mother, and
after the Child is born out of its Veins. In like manner the sensitive faculty
is in a Dog, in an Ox, in a Man. But in an Ox it delights in Hay, not in a Dog,
not in a Man. Mean while, since according to these men's opinions there are the
operations of a vegetative and sensitive soul in the Child in the Womb before
the rational soul be present, there should then be operations which should
proceed from no soul. For there could not be in the Child in the Womb the soul
of any imaginable Plant, not of any Animal that can be named.

Secondly, Since presently after Conception Conformation begins, that should be
performed by the Vegetative Soul which is first present. But since that
according to the Opinion of Aquinas it is soon extinguished, and its
conformative faculty is withal abolished (for a faculty cannot pass out of one
foul into another) and nevertheless Conformation is continued, it must needs be
that the sensitive must finish the same, and when that also is abolished the
rational. But it is absurd, that one numerical Conformation should be made by
three powers of distinct sorts, or (as they say) specifically different, or the
faculties of three souls specifically distinct. And how will they explain the
Conformation of Bruits in which (according to their Opinion) there is no such
succession not introduction of diverse Souls? And therefore as in bruit Animals
by the same faculty the young one is nourished, the tenth day, the twentieth,
the thirtieth, and all the months of Gestation, or while it is in the Mothers
Womb, yea, and all the rest of its life; and al those acts or nutrition do make
up one numerical entrition continued from the beginning to the end of the
Creatures lise: so also no cause can be given, for which the Child also in a
Woman's Womb should not be nourished the tenth, twentieth, thirtieth day, all the
months of its being in the womb, yea, and al^ts life time by one Soul.

Thirdly, If the soul which is first introduced is the cause of the
Conformation of the parts for the introduction of the following soul it should
act beyond its forces. For the vegetative soul has not the ability to form
parts necessary for the following soul being sensitive; nor has the sensitive
soul (I speak according to their imagination of three distinct souls) power to
form parts necessary for the rational soul. It Is therefore better to hold with
Themistius that each soul is the builder of her own house.

Secondly, Alphonsus a Caranza when he saw that he could not hold diverse souls
in one Man, he sought another starting-hole, and de part. not. et legit. cap.
1. parag. 2. de animatione, holds a twofold Animation, answering to the double
formation of a Man, the imperfect and the perfect; and he teaches, That in the
first time of that ruder formation the child lives with the life of Plants,
Whether Plants do truly live?
and in the second time with a perfect life, or with a sensitive and rational
Soul at once. Now he teaches that by the life of a Plant we are to understand a
certain vital and nutritive faculty, but not a true life which is not in
Plants; since Philosophers in this manner of speaking do not understand a true
life, nor do speak properly, but improperly and by way of similitude. Forasmuch
as there is only one soul in man, and one life, and that there is no concourse
of souls, following one after another in the same subject, but one soul which
is infused after the utmost perfection of the body. And he writes, That
Aristotle being moved by this reason wrote in 7. Politic. c. 16. That to avoid
over-abundance of Children (according to the Gentiles Custom) it is lawful to
endeavor Abortion, provided it be done presently after the Conception, when the
Child lives the life of a Plant; but that after the coming of the rational Soul
it is wickedness to do it.

But in good deed, these things are thus said without al reason, and do contain
many falsities. For in the first place, it is false that the Plants do not
truly live. For though others do otherwise define life, yet which way soever it
be defined it properly belongs to Plants as their operations do testify. And
where there is life there is a Soul, and there is no life without a Soul. Since
therefore he acknowledges vital Operations in that former and rude formation
(and it cannot also indeed be denied) he must needs acknowledge the soul to have
been long since present; or let him show us that subject to which those
faculties belong which perform those Operations of nourishing, augmenting, and
forming. And therefore secondly, if the rational Soul is not infused (as he
holds) before the perfect Formation of the body, I desire him to show us what
it is which forms the body til the thirtieth or fortieth day.

CHAP. XIV. The Contrary Objections Answered.
NOW that some should think the contrary, Such things answered as are brought
against the propagation of the Humane soul.
and neither allow of the Propagation of the Soul from the Parent to the Child,
nor of the presence thereof in the Seed, they are moved with diverse Reasons,
and most do chiefly urge the prerogative of the Humane Soul; and use three
Reasons drawn therefrom, which they fetch out of Aristotle, 2. de generat.
animal. cap. 3. The first is; That cannot be without a body, the action of
whose Principles is corporeal, for examples sake to walk without Feet: but the
mind alone comes from without, because the corporeal action communicates
nothing therewith. But let us indeed grant that the soul separated from the
body does communicate no more with the body and bodily actions, and uses no
bodily Organ: Whether the human soul participate with bodily actions
yet that the soul when it is in the body has nothing to do with bodily
actions, subsists by it self, and therefore is in the generation of a Man
created, is false. For the Question is not now concerning the Soul, which
hereafter (being separate from the body) shall persist by it self through the
singular pleasure of God, as shall hereafter be said; but concerning the work of
Generation our Question is, and concerning the Humane Soul as it shapes and
informs the body. That this Soul in this life has no communion with the body
cannot be granted. Indeed if the Rational Soul in Man were a peculiar soul
distinct from the vegetative and sensitive, this reason would have some
probability. But since there is only one Soul in a Man, having a vegetative,
sensitive, and rational Faculty, as was proved in the foregoing Chapter, and
the Soul of a Man does not only understand and reason, but also informs the
body (not of an Heart, or a Lion, but a Man) nourishes it, augments it,
conserves it, and makes it enjoy sense and motion, and that not after the
manner of Bruits, but of Men; it is most manifest that it cannot want corporeal
Instruments, and that when it informs the body, and performs these Organical
actions, it communicates simply with the body. And although in respect of the
rational Faculty some of its actions are inorganical, as when it understands
the intelligible species without a species, and when it refects upon it self,
and knows that it understands that it is able to know it understands, also when
it wills; and indeed the mind does not understand by the body as the means and
Organ wherewith; yet because while it is in the body it needs a Phantasm for
its object, and as Aristotle himself (3. de Anima, text. 39.) speaks, the
Intellect needs to contemplate the Phantasms; and nothing is in the
Understanding which was not in the Sense: certainly the Understanding must
needs communicate with the Fancy. Which is sufficiently declared by sundry
sorts of mad men, in whom Ratiocination also it self is hurt, by reason of the
society it has with the disposition of the body and bodily Instruments; as
also the variety of Wits, whiles some are excellent for sharpness of wit, and
others are blockish, proceeds from the same cause. All which things being so,
and though the Understanding do not use the body to understand withal: yet
since it is necessary that it should speculate the Phantasms, there is no cause
why we should so absolve the Understanding from communicating with the body as
long as it is therein. Much less is there any cause why at last when the body
is perfectly shaped it should come in from without.

But especially all that have followed this Opinion have been deceived by that
false Hypothesis, touching the Education of Forms and Souls out of the power of
the matter. The souls of Bruits are not drawn out of the power of the matter.
For since they believed the souls of Bruits were drawn out of the power of the
matter; they would not ascribe so ignoble an original to the Humane Soul, and
therefore they argue; The Rational Soul is not drawn out of the power of the
matter, ergo it is created. Or, Whatsoever is not made of a pre-supposed matter
or subject, that is created; but the Rational soul is not made of another
matter or subject, ergo it is created. That is the false Hypothesis (I say)
which they build upon, That some souls are drawn out of the power of the
matter. If (truly) those souls of bruit Animals and Plants did spring out of
the power of the matter, it were not absurd to ascribe a more noble beginning
to the Soul of Man; but since that Hypothesis is false, and no souls of any
kind are (to speak properly) drawn out of the power of the matter; but souls
were put into al living things, and received from the Divine Benediction a
power to multiply and propagate themselves, nor are they made of the seed as of
matter, but are propagated with and in the seed: if the same original be
attributed to the Humane Soul, no absurdity will follow: if namely we shall hold,
That being in the first Creation made by the most good and great God, and
implanted in the body of Man, by virtue of that Command Increase and multiply
it has received a faculty to propagate and multiply it self in and by the
Seed. Not is the Rational Soul an Essence complete by it self, as the Angels
are, which subsists alone by it self; but it is the one half of a Man which
informs the Humane Body, and therefore as its society with the Body derogates
nothing from its nobility and immortality, no more does the propagation thereof
with the Seed.

Secondly, Whether if the Human soul be propagated from the Father to the Son,
it should be therefore mortal.
Many have been moved to hold that the Humane Soul comes from Heaven and from
without into the body, because they conceit that if it were propagated with the
seed, it must needs be mortal. And in good deed (to speak ingenuously) this is
a very promising Argument, and by many variously urged and aggravated. For
since the seed is sundry ways shed so that no Conception follows (as when a
man spils it out of wantonness; in the Gonorrhea; when a man couples with a
woman with child, or with a barren woman, and indeed many ways the seed is
often so shed that no formation follows) they conceit it should come to pass
that so often the soul of Man (which is otherwise counted immortal) should
perish, and manslaughter should be committed. And therefore by this Argument
which they count invincible and unanswerable, being moved, many have held the
infusion of souls; and seeing they did acknowledge it necessary that the
formation of the child should begin presently after the first Conception, and
yet they durst not attribute the same to the Rational Soul, some invented one,
others another cause of formation, and attributed the same to a formative
Faculty, or to the Womb, or absurdly to a certain sensitive soul present before
the rational, the vanity whereof has been showed before. But the strength of
this Argument is not so great as is imagined. For as Scaliger rightly teaches,
Exercitat. 61. Sect. 5. and Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. God alone is truly immortal
and incorruptible, because he only has his being from himself, and depends on
none; but in respect to God al created things are mortal and corruptible, which
at the pleasure of the Creator may be deposed from that being wherein they are
constituted. Yet some of them are not corrupted, as Angels and the rational
Soul, because the Creator will not have them corrupted, and has made nothing
contrary to them whereby they might be corrupted, nor has so plunged them in
matter as that they cannot subsist nor operate without the same: and so they
are immortal not by Nature, but by Grace and special favor, as Damascen speaks,
de Orthodoxa fide, cap. 3. And questionless (as was said in the answer to the
foregoing argument) there is great difference betwixt Angels and Men. They have
never had any thing to do with matter, nor shall have. But the Humane Soul
(while it is in the body) does necessarily use corporeal organs, and therefore
it is not propagated without matter. And therefore that is false which they
say, if the Humane Soul exist after death by it self without matter, therefore
it is also produced without and free from matter. For as it pleased God that
the Humane Soul should not subsist without the body, but should naturally have
its subsistence in an Humane body; so it is also his pleasure that it should be
propagated in and with the seed. In a word: the manner of Generation makes
nothing to the corruptibility or incorruptibility of an Essence, but that
depends simply upon the will of the Creator who made al things of nothing when
they did not exist, and by his power preserves them so long and after such
manner as he pleases from sliding back into nothing again. Without which Divine
pleasure and peculiar Grace to Mankind, the forms of men should have perished
as well as those of Bruits. It is therefore no consequence, if the Humane Soul
whose natural habitation by the will of the Creator is an humane body, being
separated therefrom by death can subsist by the Divine pleasure, therefore of
necessity it did subsist out of the body before it was associated thereto. And
whereas they who assert the Creation and infusion of the soul do hold that God
makes Humane Souls immediately without seed: it is impious to say that God
could not also make them immortal by means of the seed. And to those other
things that are brought to aggravate this argument, touching the effusion of
seed without any conception following: I answer, That the Divine benediction,
and those gifts of Grace which God by his free pleasure and ordination has
granted to the seed and soul of both Parents joined together in Conception,
must by no means be attributed to the seed of one Parent alone, not shed after
such a manner as is necessary to Generation. Yea, and since neither in other
Animals the seed of one Parent has such perfection that one alone is
sufficient to make a Conception, and those attributes which are rightly
attributed to the seeds joined may not be attributed to the seed of either by
it self; that is much more true in Man.

But why God made Sexes in Animals must be ascribed to his divine Windom and
Pleasure. God if he pleased could have created more Worlds, ye the created but
one. Why God made Sex^^^ia Animals.
For God does not always that which is absolutely most perfect, or seems so to
us, but that which is best in respect to the End by him aimed at. And therefore
though God had created one man more perfect, and who might have had in him the
perfection of ho^h ^exes, yet had not the World been thereby more perfect,
whose perfection consists in the wonderful consent of al Essences, and in their
coordination and conspiration to one End. For one sex being wanting, the life
and Society of mankind would be less pleasant (which consists in Wedlock) and
less firm. And therefore the most good and great God made a double sex that
each might have what to love out of it self, and so not only represent the
wisdom of God by knowing, but his goodness also by loving.

Thirdly, they object that the seed is an excrement of the third digestion,
Whether the Seed be an Excrement.
and therefore not so noble as to be capable of the rational soul; but that
only a perfect Body and furnished with all its Instruments is apt to receive the
rational soul. Of this Argument we have spoken in the Chapter foregoing, and in
Chap. 6. and 7. where I have demonstrated that the seed is not an Instrument
properly so called, nor that any unprofitable thing is generated in the Body;
yet in that sense it may be called an excrement inasmuch as it is voided forth
of the Body. Otherwise and of its own nature it is the most noble substance of
the whole Body, and an Epitomy (as it were) and fruit of the whole Man, as has
been said. Much less is it an excrement of the third concoction: but is bred of
venous and arterial Blood, and vital spirits in their vessels, that it may be a
sit receptacle to receive the soul. And there in all sorts of Animals it is
capable of the soul. And if the rational soul may be received by a Body formed
of the Seed and menstrual Blood, Why may it not also be received in the seed?

Besides these three Reasons, some do use diverse general Arguments against the
presence of the soul in the seed propounded before, especially in Chap. 7. as
also the 8th and 9th, which it is needless here to repeat, since they concern
not the seed and soul of Man in particular, but the seeds and souls also of
Plants and Animals; and Fienus himself confessor they are but weak, and also
answers them, de format foet. quaest 5. But because he adds two which he counts
more strong, I must not let them pass. The first (and so the fourth objection
which also we propounded before Chap. 9.) is this: Neither the Blood nor the
Spirits are animated, Ergo, consequently not the Seed. He proves the
Consequence, because the former are produced in parts much more noble than the
Stones, viz. the Heart, Brain, Livet; which if they could not bestow a soul
upon the Blood and Spirits, neither can the Stones do it. But it is there also
answered, that the seed is the fruit of a living body, and far more noble and
excellent than the Blood and Spirit.

His second Argument and so the fifth objection is: if in the seed of a Man
there were a soul it should be either Rational, Sensitive, or Vegetative. But
it can be none of chese. That it cannot be Rational is proved, First, Because
if it were rational, the seed of a Man being in his Testicles or Parastate
should be a Man. Secondly, The spilling of a Man's Seed upon the ground should
be Manslaughter. Thirdly, The Seed cast upon the ground must be Baptized, lest
the soul should be damned eternally. Fourthly, if the seed were animted with a
rational soul, the seed of a Woman should be no less animated than the seed of
a Man: and if the seed of a Woman were animated she might engender by her self.
Fifthly, if the rational soul were in the seed, either it should be the soul of
the Parents extended in the seed, and divided and multiplied according to the
division of the seed, or it should be some soul bred anew and produced in the
feed or infused by God. But al these things he counts to be absurd. First he
conceives that the soul of the Parents cannot be multiplied, because then it
would follow, that the rational soul is divisible and consequently mortal, and
that all Men have one soul, and that our soul should be a particle of our
Fathers soul; and the soul of our Father a particle of the soul of our
Grandsire; and at last al our souls shall be particles of the first man, and so
communicated by Generation. Al which things he counts to be false and different
from the Catholic Religion. Also he says the soul cannot be produced afresh
from the soul of the Father, for so it should be drawn out of the power of the
matter and become moreal: nor that it is infused by God, and Created in the
Testicles; because there it could neves come to a perfect state, etc. Nor does
he conceive the Soul to be in the seed, because since a Man has two Testicles
and a Woman has also two, if in Copulation animated seed should fall from four
Testicles, four souls should be united, or one should be coagulated of four
glewed together. Secondly, Because then the seed of Animals should be a Plant;
and a Man before he should arrive to a rational soul ought to pass through the
form of a Plant, and afterward through the Form of a Bruit, and be once an Ass
or a Dog. Thirdly, Because that Vegetative Soul should be produced by a
Rational soul existent in the Testicles, which cannot be, because the Rational
Soul cannot have the power to produce a Vegetative Soul, since those souls are
species distinct one from another. And many other absurdities he objects in
case we shall say that the Vegetative Soul is in the Seed, which for brevities
sake I omit.

But I wonder that so renowned a man, and who in the beginning of the foresaid
Book writes, that no man had found out the efficient cause of shaping a man in
the Womb, or if some few had smelt it our, they had neither clearly opened nor
by any reasons maintained the same, but that he would prove his opinion with
such firm and evident reasons, that no man should afterward have occasion to
doubt, should use such frivolous and light reasons in so serious a matter. For
first of all intending to write accurately of the Efficient cause of the Child's
formation, he ought to have remembered that a Physician must borrow many things
of the natural Philosopher, that he may attain to the knowledge of the Subject
he is to work upon; but because he does not equal Causes with their Effects,
nor adjuncts with their proper subjects, viz. such to which they belong
primarily and of themselves, and inasmuch as they are such, his discourse
breeds no true knowledge, as Jacobus Zabarella Lib. 2. de Method. cap. 11.
teaches. For since it is not Man alone that is formed in the Womb, but also
other Animals which bring forth live young ones; moreover Animals are hatched
out of Eggs, Plants are formed out of their Seeds: he ought to have enquired in
general of the Generation of all Animals, yea of all living things, and what
Cause did shape both Plants and all Animals; and the Cause being found, to
consider whether it belong to a Man also, or whether we are to hold a peculiar
Cause of the Conformation in a Man, and to render a Reason why that power which
forms other Animals has not place in a Man, but that another ought to be
sought out. Again, he ought to demonstrate and not barely suppose it as a thing
granted, that there are three sorts of souls in a man, and not one furnished
with diverse Faculties. Thirdly, he ought also to have noted this, that not the
Seed of the Man or Woman alone does suffice to produce the Child, nor is the
seed called a Conception whiles it is in the Testicles, but when both Seeds are
joined in the Womb, which things being observed he might easily have answered
all his own Reasons. For in the first place, he might easily have marked that
the Seed of a Man whiles it is in the Testicles does not suffice to Generation,
and that therefore when it is shed upon the ground it needs not be Baptized,
nor does the Woman's Seed alone suffice for Generation. And whereas he conceits
that it is false, absurd, and different from the Catholic Religion, that the
Soul should be propagated from the Father to the Son; indeed it is not
agreeable to the Doctrines of the Schoolmen, but it is nevertheless most true
and agrees with the holy Scriptures. For how shall that Precept Increase and
Multiply be fulfilled, unless from the first Man and Animals at first Created
all the Men and Animals that do live and have ever lived unto this day had
received their Souls? And in Genes. 46.26. it is said that Sixty six Souls came
out of the Thigh of Jacob; and Exodus 1.4. that the Souls that came out of the
Thigh of Jacob were Seventy, which I nevertheless do leave to the consideration
of Divines. Nor does it hence follow that al men have one Soul or that the Soul
is mortal. The first Man had one Soul from whence al came. Nor is there any
reason that the Soul of Man if it be multiplied should be mortal: for the
Creator commanded that it should be multiplied, and nevertheless it was his
pleasure it should be immortal. Which things being granted, all the rest falls to
the ground, so that there is no need of an Answer. Also it will appear from what
shall be said against the sixth and seventh Objection, what is to be answered to
the rest; and that though the Soul be communicated from the Father and Mother,
that yet it is not compounded.

Sixthly, With what Soul the Seed is animated.
Some late Writers do thus argue; Either the Seed is ammated by the Soul of the
Parent, or by its own proper Soul. Not by that of the Parent: for then the Soul
of the Parent should become the Soul of the Son; and should go out of the
Parents Body with the Seed. Nor with its own Soul; because since both Parents
contribute Seed, the Son should then have a double Soul, or one should grow to
the other and it should be compounded.

But if this Argument were objected against the Generation of Plants and brute
Animals, that which a man should then Answer may here also serve for an Answer.
Moreover, I say in general that both in Plants, Bruits, and Mankind, the Seed
is animated with the Soul of the Parent, viz. according to the sort; for
otherwise like would not beget its like. Also true it is, that the Seed has
its own Soul, and that numerically different from the Soul of the Parent. Yet
thence it does not follow, that after this manner the Soul passes out of the
Patents Body with the Parents Seed. For the Soul of the Parent remains perfect
and entire, although it multiplies it self. And as it does not follow, when in
augmentation and in the shooting forth of the new Boughs on a Tree the Soul
diffuses it self into the new matter and clothes it self therewith, that it
goes out of the former Body: so it does not follow when it communicates it self
to the Sed, that it goes out of the Generator. For this is the force of the
Divine Benediction, that the same Soul remaining perfect and entire should be
able to multiply it ^el^. And whereas it is said that the Soul of the Son
should be double, or compounded, this may easily be answered by those who hold,
that the Seed of the Father or the Mother only is prolifical. Not do they want
an Answer, who say that the Seed of both the Parents is prolifical; and before
cap. 9. we have answered thereto, viz. how that the Souls being of the same
fort when they are joined together do not make a compound; and it has been
said before Chap. 9. out of Scaligers Exercit. 106. sect. 6. that of three
stems of a Palm joining together one Palm Tree is made, and a flame made of ten
Torches or Links is called but one flame, and not a compounded flame. And if it
be commonly said without absurdity that the soul is totally in the whole body,
and totally many part; why should it be absurd to hold that the soul is totally
in the Man's feed, and totally in the Woman's? And moreover, as the whole soul is
said to be in the Eye, the Bram, the Heart, nor does it therefore follow that
one soul is compounded of many souls; but this continues still a truth, That it
is one Soul which informs the whole and al its parts: so although it be said
that the leed both of the Man and Woman is ammated, it does not therefore
follow that one soul is compounded of two souls, or one made up of two.

Another forms the same Objection after this manner: if the Soul of a man be
propagated, The soul of the Parent in generation remains entire.
it is done either by cutting off some part of the soul of the Parents, or by
the instrumental efficiency of the seed, or the soul of the child is
immediately produced from the soul of the Parents, so that the seed ha^^ no
hand in the production of the soul, but only causes the dispositions, or at
most is the Vehiculum of the soul by which it is carried from the soul of the
Parents into the Child.

But al these Objections arise from ignorance, because they know not the nature
of the soul, nor how that saying is to be understood, that every form and soul
does multiply it self, and how that Divine Benediction, Increase and multiply,
has hitherto been effected, and is still effected: but if they did diligently
consider, and in the first place search out how souls are multiplied in Plants
and Animals, also the manner how the same is done in Mankind, if (I say) they
understood these things as far as they may be known in this darkness of our
Minds, they would not invent so many absurdities. The Traduction of the Soul
what it is.
For the last (if rightly explained) is true, viz. That the seed (understand
the body of the seed) is the Vehiculum or carriage, by which the Soul is
communicated from the Parents to their issue: which action is called traduction
or delivering over, the word being borrowed from Plants. For as in Trees in
which the seminal faculty is disfused through their whole bodies, if any part be
cut off, and grafted upon another Tree, the soul of that Tree from whence the
branch was taken is communicated to the Tree upon which it is ingrafted: so
with the Seed the soul of Animals is transplanted into the womb of the Female,
and so from that seed endued with its soul a perfect Animal does spring up. But
as, when a branch is cut from the Tree with its Soul in it, that Tree neither
loses its soul, nor does that soul become less: even so when the soul of the
Parent in the seed is delivered over unto the issue, the soul of the Parent
remains entire. And as when in augmentation the soul is communicated to the
aliment flowing in, the soul which is in the rest of the body does not become
lesser; and as when from a root or stem of a Vine, or the root of an Hop, many
and long branches grow up in one Summer, all which receive their souls from the
root and stem, and yet the soul is totally in the young branches, and totally
remains in the old stock or root, not being made lesser: so also the soul of
the Parent is transplanted with the seed into the child, it self nevertheless
remaining entire. And this multiplication of souls presents an image of the
immense and infinite God, who (as Julius Caesar Scaliger speaks) reigns every
where without place, al without al things, and the whole without parts. I said
an Image. For God the Beginning of al things is an infinite fullness, filling al
things, whom neither the Heavens nor Earth do contain, totally existing within
the World, totally without, and yet restrained within no limits. But our soul
indeed is joined together by dimensions, and its fullness is only so large as
the body is, and bodily dimensions: yet though we should suppose a body to grow
from the smallest quantity to the greatest bulk, the same soul would fill it al
remaining the same without any Addition. Also in like manner, though an Animal
generate often, and the soul multiplies it self, and communicates it self to
the issue, it is not diminished of any of its parts as having none. Of which we
have spoke more largely before, Chap. 9. Which things it were better attently
to consider, than to oppose the truth though far out of sight.

Eighthly, Neither are those things of any great moment which Aphonsus Caranza
here objects, and whereby he would prove, That the Rational Soul is infused at
the last when the body is perfected. For in the first place, as to that place
in Exodus, 21. which he cites out of the Septuagint, and proves afterward from
Philo, Lib. de spectal. leg. viz. If the Infant were not shaped he that struck
the Mother so as to cause Abortion should be fined, but if it were shaped he
was to be punished as a Manslayer. I (^uly) will not put my sickle into other
men's Corn; yet thus much I say, That which he alleadges is not in the Hebrew
text, nor can it be proved thereby that the soul is not present at the
beginning of Conception. And let us suppose there was such a difference of
penalties, and let the Civil Laws and Lawyers here quoted by Caranza retain
their Authority: yet thence it no ways follows that the Seed is not animated
presently upon the Conception. The Lawgivers perhaps, and the Lawyers had
their Causes known at home, into which I shall not now enquire, and which I
leave to their place, why they would otherwise punish him who destroys a
Conception perfectly shaped, than they would do him that destroys one less
perfect; and this perhaps amongst the rest was not the least, that before the
Child begins to be moved there is no such great certainty of its life, and many
things might happen to it in the Womb, although no external cause was added,
which might take away its life before it came to full perfection; so that what
Hippocrates says of the Child born in the eighth month, it is not, and it is,
that may much rather be said of such an imperfect Conception; and therefore
they would inflict a greater punishment upon him who should destroy a perfect
Child, and upon him a less that destroyed an imperfect one of less hope, and
subject to more casualties. Mean while I conceive it never entered into the
thoughts of the Law yers, that by their Laws they would de^^^a^e from the
principles of Nature, and oppose such things as Natural Philosophers and
Physicians (to whom in such Questions they always appeal, and whose Authority
they reverence) do demonstrate by most firm reasons to be true. Which appears
most evidently by Augustus, constitut. quart. part. 4. whereby it is macted
that he should not be punished by the Sword, but according to the discretion of
the Judge, who gave a Medicine to procute Abortion, if the Child were not yet
quick, and was cast forth before the middle time, reckoning from the
Conception. No man (certainly) will say that a Child is not quick at the end of
the fourth month, and at the middle of the time her wixt the Conception and the
Birth, since al men count the fortieth day the longest term in the space
whereof the child receives the Soul. Yea, and before the Nativity the Lawyers
count not the child a man, per text in L. cum inter Veteres, Codice de sidei
commiss. But what Natural Philosopher will say an Infant is not a Man til he is
born? And therefore by a vital child the Civil Laws understand such an one in
which the manifest signs of life appear, especially from the motion thereof,
which first happens about the middle time of Conception. Concerning which thing
Thomas Fienus does also well write in Apolog. advers. Sanctacruz, That he who
kills an animated Conception, however small or imperfectly organized, wanting yet
sense and motion, is a murderer no less than if it were perfect; but it does
not thence follow that al homicide ought to be punished alike; since though
both are alike perfect essentially, yet are they not alike accidentally
perfect. Would not (adds he) any man think that a greater injury was done him
by him who had hewn him down a very tall and fruitful Peartree, than by him
that should pluck out of the Earth and break a small branch only, a foot high,
newly planted, and that therefore he is worthy of greater correction, and more
stripes.

Nor is that argument which he brings in the Second place, of any great moment;
whereby he concludes, Because God made Adam of the slime of the Earth, and when
he was formed and fashioned, breathed into his face the breath of Life; that
therefore in Generation also the Rational Soul is not infused before the
formation of the body. But Creation and Generation are of a different Nature.
The Woman was created of the Rib of the Man, yet is she not so generated.

But in the third place, I admire that a Christian should endeavor to prove by
that action of Hippocrates, de Not. pueri, That the Rational Soul is not in the
Child the first days. For inasmuch as Hippocrates advised the Dancing Wench
with child, that within the sixth day she might cast out the seed by dancing,
he conceives that Hippocrates thought that the seed retained so long in the
Womb had not the rational soul in it; for otherwise he would not have persuaded
her to cause Abortion. Moreover he brings for the same the Authority of
Aristotle, who Lib. 7. polit. cap. 16. allows the destruction of a child in the
Womb as long as it is not furnished with sense and life, as if he did suppose
that the Conception was without life some notable space of time. But Johannes
Baptista Sylvaticus, because of this very place, does conceive (and that not
without cause) that the Book was not written by Hippocrates, Controvers. 32.
and if it were written by him, yet this Counsel of his is by no means to be
allowed, but is to be reckoned amongst the foolish Imaginations and
Ratiocinations of the Pagans, of which St. Paul speaks Romans 1.21. And the
like reckoning we are to make of that same destroying of Conceptions used by
the Heathen, of which Aristotle speaks, Lib. 7. politic. cap. 16. And therefore
also that Decrea of the Canon Law, in Decreto in cap. sicut ex Literarum, de
Homicidio, where a Monk by whose assistance a woman had procured her self
Abortion, is not counted irregular, and is allowed to say Divine Service,
because the Child (as was thought) did not live, is by Franciscus Ranchinus, a
most learned Physician, in his Commentary on Hippocrates his Oath, rightly
termed unjust, and that distinction faulty.

If yet any further Objections may be made against our Opinion, their
Refutation is sufficiently apparent from what has been said. The sum whereof
comprehended in the words of a certain great Divine, is this: An whole Man
according to the Primitive Ordination of God begets an whole Man. An whole Man
Ical a Male and Female, who are made into one flesh, or become one flesh,
Genes. 2.24. Matthew. 19.6. Ephesians. 5.31. Now the Parents generate inasmuch as
they are men, that is, according to that which belongs to the whole species or
sort of Man's Nature, in virtue of that Divine Word, Genesis 1.28. God blessed
them, and said, bring forth fruit, and multiply and replenish the Earth. And
they generate by the conjugal conjunction. Nor does the male engender alone,
nor the semale engender alone, not the Body only, nor the Soul only, but the
whole Man, viz. Male and Female coupled according to the Ordination of God, And
therefore a Son or a Daughter proceeds not from the Father alone, or from the
Mother alone; but the Son and the Daughter is from the whole Father, and the
whole Mother, and equally the Son and Daughter of the one as of the other; and
as the Generation of the Patents is common, so the work of Child-making or
Filiation, is common to both as to Nature.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND thus I conceive I have delivered the true Opinion concerning the
Generation of living things, and the propagation of Souls by the seed from the
Parents to the Issue, both in Plants and Animals, yea, and in Man himself; and
established the same by firm reasons, and refuted the Objections of those that
are contrary minded. In the mean while by the admonition of Scaliger, Exercit.
297. I see, observe, and remember, how weak the sight of our mind is, to search
into the secret Closets of Nature; and I hear al learned men in a manner
(especially in the Question of the Original of the Humane Soul) complain of the
obscurity and difficulty thereof. And therefore I also (peradventure) may be
deceived and err. Yet this I conceive I have demonstrated by a most firm reason
from the Act to the Power, and from the Power to the Act, or Form and Soul,
that there is the Soul in the seed both of Plants, and of Animals, and of Man
himself (whether it be propagated by the Parents, or sent in by God) as soon as
ever the formation of the living body begins. And this Tenet I shall so long
maintain til it shall be to me demonstrated how without the souls presence this
work of the formation of a living body can be performed. Which unless it can be
done it will be the part of a mind studious of the Truth not to labor how to
oppose that most firm demonstration by certain Objections, and so to render it
suspected, but rat her to be careful how to answer his own doubts. For Julius
Caesar Scaliger, in Lib. 1. de Plantis, writes from Aristotle; where the thing
it self is apparent, and Opinion opposes the thing, we must seek a Reason, but
not be ignorant of the thing. Now that thing is apparent which is demonstrated
by most firm Reasons. And here at last I solemnly protest that I acknowledge and
confess the Excellency and Eminency of the Humane Soul, and its difference from
the Souls of Bruits; that it alone bears the Image of God, is separable from
the Body, and immortal. And therefore, if I have said any thing (as I hope I
have not) which may really oppose this Prerogative of the Soul, I wish it were
unsaid. But whether the propagation thereof from the Father to the Son, do
that, and whether therefore it must necessarily be held to be immediately
infused into our Bodies by God; I leave that to the Judgment of every Man. What
seems to me most probable I have freely declared.

THE FIFTH DISCOURSE. Concerning the Spontaneous Generation of Live Things.
Chap. 1. False Opinions concerning the Spontaneous Original of Living Things.
BEsides the Generation of Living Things of which we have hitherto spoken, and
which, The generation of Live things how manifold.
because like evidently Generates its like, is commonly termed univocal
Generation, there is yet another, which because there in like is not thought to
generate its like, it is called vulgarly Spontaneous and equivocal. So, of
Hors-Dung those flies are Generated which we call Beetles, of Corn a certain
Worm called in some places a Wibble, of Beans another sort of Worms, of Wood
another, of the foulness of the Skin and Garments Lice and Fleas, as also out
of Cheese and Flesh and other putrefying things Worms and Insects commonly so
called, of sundry sorts do arise, as shall afterward particularly appear, The
consideration of the Generation of which kind of Living Things is necessary and
not unworthy the Cognizance of a Natural Philosopher; which very thing
Aristotle did hint, when 1 de Part. Animal. Cap. 5. he thus wrote: With a
certain Childish scornfulness to despise the disputation and Consideration
which may be had concerning the meanest Animals, and to count it tedious, is no
way beseeming a Philosopher; since there is nothing in Nature in which there is
not somewhat to be admired. And as it is reported that Heraclitus said to those
that came to speakwith him, and because they happened to find him sitting by
chance in a Bakers Cottage to Warm him at the Oven, they would not go to him,
as abashed at his bomly manner of sitting in such a place: for he bid them
enter boldly, since even this place (quoth he) is not void of the presence of
the immortal Gods: the very same may be said touching the Inquisition into the
Nature of Animals. For we ought to contemplate and discuss all things without
shame; since in all things the Divinity of Nature and her Honorable and
Beautiful contrivance is conspicuous. And that so much the more diligently,
inasmuch as sew have written any thing that is solid and agreeable to truth,
concerning this subject. Above all others the most Renowned Fortunius Licetus
Professor at Padua has written most diligently and largly of this Matter, in
his 4. Books of the Spontaneous Origmal of Live Things. As for me, though I
acknowledge the difficulty of the matter, and am well aware that it is dangerous
to hold any thing different from the vulgar opinions, and liable to detraction,
especially in this subject: yet I had rather freely show my judgment in an
obscure matter and contribute mine assistance, then to cease from the
investigation of truth Let every one follow what Opinion he pleases. I obtrude
mine upon no man. And if any man will show me better, I shall willingly assent
unto him.

Now this Generation, as has been said, Spontaneous Generation what it is.
is by some called Spontaneous ( Aristotle 1 de Generat. Animal. Cap. 1. says
that such Creatures are Generated by Nature working of her own accord, and
thence Julius Caesar Scaliger borrows the Phrase of Automatismos, production of
it own accord, Exercitat. 168.) the word being tranfferred from moral actions
to Natural. For Scaliger conceives, Exercitat. 77 Sect. 1. that this Adverbe
Sponte, (of it own accord) was derived ex sponsionibus, from promises. Now all
promises are voluntary and free. And the same Scaliger concerves Exercitat.
140. that it cannot be accurately or properly said, that a Tree grows Sponte of
its own accord. But the word seems to be more general, and to be opposed to
that which is against ones will, or to that which is not done save by an
external Agent, and contrary to Natural Inclination. And therefore, as it is
attributed to other actions which are performed by an internal Agent, no
external Cause concurring, so also it is attributed to Natural Generation.
Whence Virgil.

Such Fruit he plucks as the free ground affords,
And gentle Trees bear of their own accords.
But in more special manner it is attributed to those Generations, the
efficient cause whereof lies concealed in the thing it self, and is not so
manifest to the senses, and when that which is Generated breaks out of its own
accord as it were without Seed. Of which Virgil. For somethings grow even of
their own accord without man's Labor. And,
Such things as of their own accord do grow.


Equivocal generation
It is vulgarly called Equivocal Generation, viz. Because the cause of such
Living things is not thought to be of the same kind with the thing engendered.

But what things they are which be thus Generated of their own accord is a
question. What things are Generated of their own accord.
It was an old Opinion, that all Brutes, Yea and Man himself, did at first grow
out of the Earth. Which Plato teaches in Menexenus, as also other Philosophers
much Ancienter then Plato: after whom followed the Poets in this Opinion.
Lucretius has these Verses. Hardly small Creatures now She makes at last
Who all things made and Beasts with Bodies vast.
It is not therefore without Reason good
The Barth should bear the Name of Mother-hood.
For she mankind out of her Bowels Spun,
And all the Beasts that on the Mountains Run
Her teeming Womb did at fit Season Bear,
And many fashioned Birds that fly in the Air.
But since 'twas fit that She some end should make
Of teeming Labors, and her Quiet take;
She now leaves off like Wife worn out with Age.


And Juvenal, Satyr the 6. For in the Earth's Nonage, under Heavens new Frame,
They stricter lived who from the Oaks Rupture came,
And Clay-born had no Parents.


And Virgil in the Second Book of his Husbandry. When first all Cattle their
Beginning had,
When of the Barth mankinds hard race was made.


But these Opinions had their Original from the History of the Creation of the
World. For having doubtless hard somewhat thereof, from the writings of Moses,
they turned the truth into these Fables; and since in the Creations History it
is said, that God commanded the Earth should bring forth the Living Creature in
general after its kind, the Beasts and Creeping Things, with Cattle according
to their kind, and that God made Man of the Clay of the Earth; (but they in the
mean while knew not the Creator:) they thence invented this same Spontaneous
Original of things out of the Earth. Whether Avicenna held that Men could grow
out of the Earth.
This Opinion is also by some attributed to Avicenna. But it is not credible
that Avicenna so great a Philosopher should follow so Fahulous an opinion.
Avicen indeed writes Lib. 15. de Animalib. Cap. 1. As men might cut themselves
off from Generation, either by their own free will, or by Pestilential Air and
so come all to die, and then if a man should be made he would Generate, and so
the kind would be renewed: and making and engendring would mutually assist one
the other, in preserving the kind. But the sense of those words is this: if all
Men should perish, either voluntarily, forbearing to Generate, or Slain by
Pestilence, if after the Death of all Men a new man should be made, which way
soever, whether by Gods Creation or any other means; he being a new man cannot
be thought to want the power of engendring other Men like himself, by which the
kind might be maintained.

Now concerning the original and efficient Cause of such living Things, The
efficient Cause of Living things Generated of themselves
Authors do very much dissent. Cardanus Lib. 9. de Subtle. says that such
things as are said to be Generated of their own accord are Generated by Fortune
and Chance. But therein he is out. For Chance and Fortune have no hand in
Natural things, and whatsoever things are made by Chance and Fortuitously, they
are not always engendered of the same principles and after the same manner. But
things which grow up of their own accord are always bred of the same
Principles, and after the same manner, and have certain efficient Causes, which
also act for a certain ends sake, and produce certain effects. So, of Hors-Dung
Beetles are bred, and not Earewigs; out of Cheese Mites, and other kind of
Worms out of flesh, and in general, always things determinate breed of such
and such things; Yea, and they are born at a certain Season too; and the kinds
of flies, Ear-wigs, Worms, Beetles and Butter-Flies do all spring and perish at
their certain Seasons. And although as Cardanus Objects, in sundry places on
the Earth, in the Waters, in dead Carcasses and elsewhere, we see the same
things bred: yet they are Generated of a determinate matter, which may be found
in diverse places frequently. And although it may happen, that the matter which
is fit for the Spontaneous original of things may in some places be collected
by Chance: yet that matter is determined, nor are living things made thereof by
Chance, but the next efficient is determined, and always acts after the same
manner. Nor matters it that such things as arise Spontaneously are less perfect
(an Argument whereof they take to be their not Generating) and therefore cannot
have the notion of an end, and so seem to be made by chance. For though
compared to others they are somewhat imperfect: yet in respect of their own
essence they are perfect, are Nourished, Augmented, Moved, and perform
operations besitting their species. But that conceit of theirs is false, when
as they imagine such things do not Generate; since even the very least and most
ignoble of these kind of Creatures do couple and Generate, as Aristotle teaches
every where, and especially in his 5. de Histor. Animal: and Experience also it
self does testify as much. And although in comparison of other Creatures they
seem ignoble, yet are they necessary for the perfection of the whole Universe,
as shall be said anon from the Exercitation 250. of Jul. Caesar Scaliger: and
that Avicenna wrote well when he said it was better Lice should be bred, then
that putrid matter should remain in that condition, is the Opinion of Learned
men, who acknowledge a rare piece of workmanship even in the structure of a
Louse. For if in the first place we consider the prime Work-Master of all
things, he that he might discover his infinite Wisdom and Omnipotency, had
rather that living Creatures should be multiplied in the world, then corrupt
and putrified matter void of Life; and it is his pleasure, that the bodies of
more perfect living Creatures, when they are corrupted should not turn simply
to putrid matter, but into more ignoble Aniruals. Hence, from the parts and
Excrements of Animals, from Plants and their fruits sundry sorts of living
Things do proceed, and from such and such determinate Things such and such
determinate Creatures arise and no other. So thought and wrote Jul. Caesar
Scaliger, who in the forecited place thus writes: Man was made for God, the
world for Man. And soon after: Man is the Prince of Animals. Now man should not
have been Prince, if he had not been made as he is, viz. in the middle. Nor
could he be in the middle, unless betwixt extremes. They were therefore made
for the Mediums sake. Now if any of the extremes, or of those things which are
seated betwixt the middle and the extremes, were wanting, there would be a
vacuum amongst the forms. Which would be a greater fault in Nature, then a
Vacuum in Quantity without a Body. For what is more absurd then a middle
without Extremes? which Austin also taught long ago, de Civitate Dei Lib. 12.
Cap. 4. It were Ridiculous (says he) to imagine that the faults of Cattle and
Trees, and other Mutable and Mortal things, which want either understanding or
Sense or Life, should be damnable: since those Creatures have received that
manner by the appointment of God, that by giving way and succeeding they might
accomplish the lowest pulchritude of times, in their kind, agreeing to those
parts of the World. And a little after: the comeliness of which order therefore
does not delight us, because we according to this our mortal condition being
Woven in as a part thereof, we are not able to discern the whole, to which
those particles which offend us do very aptly and decently agree. And again:
Nature considered in it self and not with reference to our commodity or
discommodity, gives Glory to its Work-Master.

Others though they do not hold that such things are bred by Chance or Fortune;
Whether things generated of them are produced only by the common Cause.
yet they conceive they have no other immediate Cause efficient, but only the
common and remote one, in which opinion is the Conciliato, who Differ. 29. does
make this difference betwixt other Living Creatures and those which breed of
themselves, because the former besides the Universal agent, viz. The Heaven, do
also require a particular one, since the Sun and Man Generates a Man; But the
latter want an immediate Cause, and are produced without a particular agent.
And the Name it self seems to say as much. For since they are said to arise of
their own accord, that seems to hint that they have no external immediate
efficient Cause distinct from themselves: for else they would not be said to be
Generated of themselves. But in very truth, there ought always to be a
proportion betwixt Causes and Effects, that Universal Effects may have
Universal Causes, and Particular Effects Particular Causes, and General
General, and Special Special. And if it were not so, no demonstration could be
made; which is not made by the immediate Cause, and so no demonstration nor
science can be had of such thing as are generated of themselves. Moreover, the
common and remote Causes are all external and manifest. But that such things as
grow of themselves do arise from an internal Cause lying hid in the matter, we
shall show anon sufficiently. Moreover, since there is a great variety of
things which breed of themselves, and differences, and certain sorts, they
verily cannot all proceed a like from one common Cause, but to every sort its
next special Causes must be assigned. And that those common Causes do not
suffice does hereby also appear, that which way so ever they turn themselves
who defend this Opinion, they cannot disintangle themselves. Whence they are
divided into sundry Opinions concerning that remote Cause

Scotus held that the Souls of these kind of Creatures do proceed from the most
high God immediately. Whether they receive their Soul from God
But the Generation of al living Things is Natural. And therefore a Ratural
Cause ought also to be sought out; nor must we presently run to God, who having
created and constituted Nature, does now produce nothing immediately and
miraculously. And since the original of Plants and other brute Animal is from
their Parents by means of Seed, but not from God, save as a remote and
universal Cause, shall God be the immediate Cause of such Ignoble Animals? Nor
do the two Reasons which John Duns Scotus brings for his Opinion any ways
prove that God may rather be said to be the Cause of these Spontaneous things
then of such as arise from Seed; as Fortunius Licetus does prolixly examine his
Opinions, Lib. 1. de Spont. Vivent. Art. a Cap. 77. ad 84. Nor do I think fit
to spend time in a plain Case.

Luther upon Genes. Chap. 1. verse 20. A place out of Luther concerning the
generation of these kind of Creatures.
thus writes: If you ask by what virtue this Generation is caused, which they
term Equivocal, Aristotle answers, that the putrified Humor is cherished by the
Suns heat, and so a live Creature is produced. But I doubt whether this be a
sufficient Reason. For the Sun heats, but generates nothing, unless God say by
his divine power, let a Mouse come out of that putrefaction. A Mouse therefore
is also a Creature of Gods making etc. and a little after: therefore we do here
also admire the Creature and work of God. And the same may be said of Flies.

From this Opinion Johannes Gallego de la Serna the Spaniard dissents not, de
Princip. Generat. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. who holds God alone to be the principal cause
in this kind of Generation, and writes, that though every Univocal cause cannot
produce its individuals, unless God as the first cause concur with its action:
yet God concurs with each after a different fashion, according as the
Generation differs more or less from the Equivocal kind, in which God alone
operates as the principal Cause And in Chap. 4. he adds, that these weak kinds
of living Creatures do need a more vehement concourse of God then those that
have a greater ability to bege^ their like.

But the most good and great God, (after he had made Nature, How God concurs to
the generation of things.
which is his ordinary power) is not alone the next and immediate efficient
cause of any thing, but by his universal Concourse conserves all Natural
things, and regulates their Generation; which concourse of his to restrain to
one thing, (especially being more vile and Ignoble) more then to another, and
to hold that he is more vehemently and painfully busied in some imperfect base
thing, then in others that are more perfect and noble, is very absurd. Scaliger
says far more rightly and divinely, Exercit. 1. That power (says he) of God
took no more pains in building this universe, then in making the basest tree:
nor did it express more subtilty when it made that by its Virtue the Lodestone
should have a cause in it self restraining the efficiency of attraction, then
when he gave to the first matter the form of Air, that it might ascend. For in
his works there is the greatest Equality. And in 2. de Plantis. God. neither
idle nor laboring; neither in nor without work; but without work the Head of
the work, the beginning, the Middle, the End, the whole; and that in one word I
may Express all, Compass all, Transcend all: He himself, by whose most simple
and indivisible understanding of himself all the Worlds were made: so that all
have their own End and Order.

Nor does Francisous Suaresius think any righter, Who, in Disput. 18. de Causis
Proxim. Effic. Sect. 2, Number. 33. writes: that the Heaven indeed by its own
proper Virtue cannot make Souls; yet that it makes them by the power of God, as
the Author and general provisor of Nature, who by his greater assistance can
supply whatever virtue is wanting in the immediate Causes. But the answer is
the same which was given to the other Opinion. For since God created all things
very good, he also furnished them al with necessary forces, and consequently
here is no defect, no weakness, which need to be supplied either from Heaven,
or by the extraordinary assistance of God.

Others therefore take pains indeed to find out this immediate cause, but all
unhappily, whiles they seek the same out of the matter, and not in the matter,
and define Equivocal Generation to be that in which the efficient out of matter
which came not from nor out of it self, but is of a quite different Nature,
generates a thing specifically unlike it self and its own form. But none of
them has been able without Absurdity to say or show what that efficient is,
and how it could Generate a thing specifically unlike it self, and its own form.

Avicenna held that an Intelligence Subordinate to God, Whether the form of
these Creatures is made by Intelligences.
whom he calls Colcodea, does produce the Souls of these things. But it is not
yet proved, that there are such Intelligences from which things Natural
proceed. For from God alone as the first cause of all things, and Nature, all
Natural things proceed. Nor is Creation to be attributed to any other thing but
God Omnipotent. But the immediate efficient Cause of Generation ought to be
like, either in sort, or in the next kind, to that which is Generated. And
therefore these Spontaneous live Things cannot arise from a Cause of a quite
different kind from themselves, since they are Natural Bodies.

Thirdly, Whether they are generated by the Heaven.
Others hold the immediate efficient Cause of these Bodies to be the Heaven.
But this Opinion will not hold Water, more then the other. For in the first
place, the Heaven is the common cause of all things Sublunary, as Subservient
to their Generation: and therefore it cannot be said to be only the immediate
cause of these Spontaneous Creatures, for the Heaven after its fashion advances
the Generation of these kind of Creatures, and of such as engender one another,
all a like; nor can any Reason be assigned, why it should rather advance the
Generation of Spontaneous things then of others. For if they will run to Heaven
for want of an immediate Cause, we shall declare sufficiently hereafter, that it
is not wanting neither, in the Generation of these Spontaneous Creatures.
Moreover, although they that hold the Heaven to be the Cause of this Generation
do sundry ways endeavor to declare the same: yet none of them do sufficiently
explain the matter: For some, as Averroes, do hold that the heat of Heaven is
the efficient Cause of these Creatures: or that these Creatures are produced by
the Heaven, by help of its heat. Others (as Albertus Magnus) do hold that the
light of Heaven is the immediate Cause of the Original of things; others, the
motion of Heaven, as Thomas Aquinas; (...), the occult influences, as
Fernelius. But which way soever they turn themselves, they help themselves not,
but are still pressed with the same difficulty. (...) the Heaven which way so
ever it acts, as was said before, is but a remote and universal Cause. Whether
the Heaven be also a Particular Cause.
But every effect requires an immediate Cause, and a special effect a special
Cause. Moreover, Heat, Light, Motion, and occult Influences are accidents. But
no substance, such as the Souls of these creatures are, can be produced by an
accident. Some indeed do hold, that Heaven is not only an universal Cause,
inasmuch as it affects all Sublunary things, but also a Particular, in as much
as by a Peculiar Virtue it concurs mediately or immediately to the generation
of all things. But neither is the knot thus loosed. Indeed I grant, that after
its fashion the Heaven does also particularly concur to the making of all
things Sublunary, and that not one face of Heaven nor posture of the Stars, and
influence thence proceeding, and seasons thereon depending, but sundry, are
necessary for several Plants, when they grow, when their flowers ripen, when
their fruit comes forth; and that some things spring at certain positions of
the Heaven, and die away at other positions, and that doubtless there is a
Peculiar Sympathy betwixt some certain sorts of things and some Stars. But the
question is whether the heaven gives the forms which constitute those species:
which we deny, and hold that the Heaven by its influx does only stir up some
first qualities in the Air, and also by an occult influence excite the forms of
living Things, and cause them to buckle themselves to their proper operations.
And so, as the Heaven in Univocal Generation so called, while the Sun and a Man
do generate a Man, is not the next and immediate, but the remote and mediate
cause: so also, in this Spontaneous original, it is not the immediate and next,
but the remote and mediate cause. Which in Plants and Eggs is hereby manifest,
in that even the heat also raised from Elementary Fire does often perform as
much. So the heat of a Stove can in the Winter cause, that forms which lie hid
in Seeds will begin to rouse themselves up and sprout. After the very same
manner Flesh also in the Winter time kept in an hot place will putrify and
breed Worms, as well as in Summer. And as the Dugs of Virgins whiles by their
heat they hatch the Silkworms Eggs do not give a form to the Silkworms, nor
the heat of the furnace does not give to Eggs the form of Chicken: even so the
Heaven does not either by its heat or hidden influx give the form to these
Spontaneous Creatures; but as it cannot engender a Man without a man's help, so,
unless there lie hid in the matter a seminal principle it can engender nothing
therefrom. For the Heaven indeed may hold its course without inferior causes:
but in the things themselves below it alone can engender nothing without the
concourse of inferior causes, they being in every Generation the immediate and
principal agents.

Alexander, Whether these spontaneous Creatures do spring from heat.
Olympiodorus, Cardan 9. de Subtle. Libel. de Animal. quae ex putred. Oriuntur,
(whom Caesalpinus Lib. 6. de Not. Rerum, Cap. 21. and others do follow) hold
that the Spontaneous Generation of living Things does proceed from the warmth
of the Ambient Air, either as from an instrument of the Subcoelestial Nature,
or as from a primary efficient cause. But since heat is an accident, it cannot
act beyond its own forces, so as to produce a substance. Moreover, heat is only
the instrument of vital actions; and therefore no primary agent.

Others, Whether they proceed from the Soul of the world.
as Philoponus, Themistius, and the Platonists most of them, do suppose that
the Soul of the World is the efficient cause of these Spontaneus living Things.
For so Themistius 1 de Anima Cap. 24. That there is (says he) an only and
Universal Soul of the world, which gives to all living Bodies their Soul, or
life if you will so call it, which is nothing but a certain vital and
generative faculty, passing through all things Natural, those Animals which are
Spontaneously bred of putrid matter do most clearly prove. And Marsilius
Ficinus, Lib. 4. Theolog. Platon. Cap. 1. writes, that the Soul of the World
every where through Land and Water contains in it self spiritual and Vivifical
Seeds, and generates of it self, wherever Corporeal Seeds are wanting, also it
cherishes the Seeds left by Animals, and of a putrid Grape-seed it can generate
a various orderly and precious Vine-Tree; and wherever a generator is wanting,
and accidental qualities do only show themselves, it performs generation, and
undergoes the office of a generative substance. But in good deed, we have
elsewhere showed, that there is no Soul of the World. For though in Animals
sundry actions proceed from one Soul: yet it is not proved, that the world is
after such a manner one as an Animal is one. And if the world indeed had a
Soul, it should be only an universal cause, not an immediate, nor could any
Reason be given why Spontaneous things should rather proceed therefrom then
non-spontaneous: and of necessity a cause must be which in Spontaneous things
should determine the same to this action, as there are specifical causes in the
Generation of other living Things. Nor was it therefore to be constituted, that
it might supply the defect of a next Cause, in things of Spontaneous original.
For we shall hereafter show that such a cause is not wanting in the Generation
of those things. And how can so many sorts of things Spontaneously generated
proceed from one Soul?

The Opinion of Cicero and Seneca differs not much from the foresaid opinion,
Whether from the Soul of the Earth.
who attribute that which the Platonists ascribe to the Soul of the World, unto
the Soul of the Earth and Water, or of the Terrene Globe especially. For so
Cicero, 2. de Natura Deorum writes: And if so be those things which are
contained in Plants of the Earth do live and grow by the Art of Nature, verily
the Earth it self is contained and held in by the same force and Art of Nature:
forasmuch as she being full of the Seeds of things, engenders al things, and
pours plants out of her self, embraces, nourishes and increases them: and the
her self likewise is nourished by the upper and extreme Natures. And Seneca, 6.
Quaest. Natural Cap. 16. It Is evident says he, that the Earth has a Soul. I
do not mean that Soul only whereby she holds her self, and joins her parts
together, which is even in Stones and Dead Bodies: but I mean a vital vigorous
Soul which nourishes all things. If She had not this Soul, how should she
infuse Spirit into so many Trees which have their life from nothing else, and
into so many Herbs? How should she be able to foster so many Roots, so
different, in so various manners buried in het, some creeping in her surface,
others growing deep downwards, unless she had plenty of Spirit, which generates
so many and vatious things, and affords nourishment to the same? And Marsilius
Ficinus, Lib. 4. de Immortal. Animae Cap. 1. We know for a certain (says he)
where nutrition and augmentation follows Generation, there is Life and Soul.
But we see the Earth by her own Seeds Generate, nourish and cause to grow
innumerable Trees and living Creatures. Also she cause Stones to grow, as it
were her Teeth, and Herbs as it were her hairs, as long as they stick fast by
their Roots, which if they be plucked up and rooted out of the Earth they do
not grow. Who will say, the Womb of this Mother is void of Life, which of its
own accord brings forth and nourishes so many Children; which sustains its
self, whose back brings forth Teeth and Hairs? The same may be said of the Body
of the Water. The Water therefore and the Earth has a Soul, unless perhaps
some man will say, that those living Creatures which we (because they seem to
have no Seeds of their own) say are generated by the Soul of the Earth, are not
bred of the said Soul, but from the influences of Heavenly Spirits.

But as this Opinion differs not much from the former, so after the same manner
it is easily refuted. It is truly manifest that much Air and Spirit is
contained in the Bowels of the Earth. But that the said Air and Spirit is the
Soul of the Earth cannot be proved. Nor are those Spontaneous living Things we
speak of Generated only in the Earth and Water, but also in Animals and Plants,
as sundry sorts of Worms. And if in the Earth there were such a Soul, she would
not be less noble then her effects, but would also be nourished, grow, and
exercise Senses. Also no necessity forced them to suppose such a Soul in the
Earth. For it is most known that all other living Things have their Seed from
whence they are Generated: and we shall hereafter show that Spontaneous things
are not without their immediate cause neither. And if there were indeed such a
Soul, since it would be but one, it could not produce so many different sorts
of Creatures, but of a determinate specifical Effect a determinate Cause is
requisite. And though the Earth as a common Storehouse does afford nourishment
to Plants and certain Animals: Yet it follows not, that she gives them their
Souls. The Plants are first constituted by their Souls, before they draw
nourishment out of the Earth. Nor does the Earth of Her own substance afford
nourishment to Plants, but only as a Storehouse, in which are many mixed
Bodies, which prove nourishment for Plants.

Erastus dissents not much from this Opinion, Whether Plants Spring up of their
own second by (...) of (...) ty ^^planted (...) Earth.
Part. 2. Disput. Contra Paracels. who makes the divine power implanted by God
in the whole matter at the first Creation the Author of such effects. But he
does not prove that ever God gave to the whole matter such a power. God
produced Plants and Animals out of the Earth and Water, and put into all of
them their forms, and commanded every sort of Plants and Animals to multiply
themselves, and to bring forth Seed and Fruits according to their kind: but
that God gave the whole matter out of the sorts and kinds of things a power to
produce Living Things, is no where read in Scripture. But whether this Opinion
may any way be tolerated shall be expressed in the following Chapter.

Franciscus Picolhomineus, whether from a spirit produced from Heaven?
concerning things springing from putrid matter, Chap. 3. held that living
Things which spring of their own accord without Seed do arise from a spirit
produced out of Heaven. For thus he writes, among other things: Toward the
Generation of Animals which arise out of putrid matter, the Sun or Heaven
performs after a sort the office not only of a common but also of a proper
cause, in as much as by its light and motion is constituted the spirit which
immediately forms Animals and gives them life, which answers by way of
proportion to that Spirit by which Seeds are made Fruitful, and the Child is
formed. Which Spirit, although it has its vitality from the emment life of
Heaven; yet that it may produce this or that life, it has from Heaven, as it
is Heaven, but as it is received in a determinate matter with a a determinate
measure, suitable to the determinate sorts of living Things.

But these things are said, not proved, nor do they make appear that the Heaven
lives, and that such a vital Spirit is sent from the Heaven into these lower
Bodies. And if this same spirit be the immediate Cause, what needs a
determinate matter? Which being necessary, we should therein rather seek the
Cause of Spontaneous living Things. But the Heaven can be only a common Cause,
as it is in those things which are generated of Seed: and because it has only
one uniform faculty, it is no more disposed to breed a Fly, then a Wasp, or
Flea, and therefore it cannot be the proper cause whereof we treat in this
place.

Others therefore, The efficient Cause of Spontaneous live things lies hid in
the matter.
seeing it was in Vain to search out of the matter for the efficient Cause of
such live Things, they have sought the same in the matter and that rightly. Nor
could that move them, of which we spoke in the foregoing Discourse, that some
conceive that the form and matter are internal causes, the efficient and the
end external. For it is false, that the efficient Cause should be always
reckoned amongst external causes; but the form it self, as Aristotle testifies,
is many times one and the same with the efficient. But some have sought this
Cause one way, some another. The most do hold putrefaction alone to be the
cause of the Generation of Spontaneous live Things. whether putrefaction be the
Cause?
And with what Authorities they endeavor to prove this their Opinion, I regard
not, in case I prove it to be False. Which by this only Reason may be proved,
in that the whole Nature of putrefaction consists herein, that it is the
corruption of a mixed Body, considered as such. And if any thing else proceed
from putrefaction, it is by accident. Moreover, experience shows that many
Plants and other things are generated of their own accord without putrefaction.
And of worms sundry flying infects are bred without putrefaction. And in Cyprus
in the Brass Fornaces Pyraustae or Fire-flies are bred without putrefaction.
And therefore we must hold concerning other living Things, that they are not
bred of putrefied matter, although sometimes in a putrid thing, and out of the
part thereof which putrifies

Others seeing that putrefaction could not be the Cause of these Creatures held
that concoction was the Cause. Or from Concoction
But in good truth, Coction is only an alteration and perfection of the
Temperament, and induces no change save in qualities, and therefore of it self
can produce no substance, but tends only to perfect a thing already constituted
by its form. Or if any Coction precede the Spontaneous Generation, it it only a
Previous disposition of the matter, which being attained, the Latent form
begins to rouse it self, and begins to form its own body. And although
Aristotle 5. de Histor. Animal. Cap. 19. writes, that it is common to all
Worms, and such Animals as spring from Worms, to receive the beginning of their
Generation from the Sun or Spirit; yet that is not to be understood of the
communication of the Soul, but only of the disposition of the matter to receive
the form under the notion of a Soul, which is caused by heat.

Some again, whether from putrefaction and the Heaven?
not being likewise able to find a sufficient cause of this kind of Generation
in putrefaction do again fly to the power of the Heaven, and write; that this
Generation is made out of putrefaction, by force of the Heaven and Stars
exciting the putrid heat, and directing that which is unnatural to the Garkass
to become Natural and a certain primary efficient, to induce the forms of some
peculiar Animals out of the subject matter. But this will not help a bad Cause.
For in the first place, not the heat of the Stars only, but any other heat will
serve to raise putrefaction in plants and Animals. Moreover it is a begging of
the Question to affirm that forms are drawn out of the power of the matter.
Moreover they must show, how heat which is a quality can act beyond its
abilities, and not only as an Instrument of a more noble agent, but as the
chief efficient, produce a substance, and that such an one as the Soul of an
Animal.

Chap. 2. The true Opinion concerning the Spontaneous Original and Efficient
Cause of these Living Things.
SInce therefore the Generation of Spontaneous living Things cannot proceed
from the Causes hitherto specified (concerning which thing Licetus treates
largely and laboriously in his whole 1 Book de Spon. Vivent. Ortu.) another
cause must be sought after. For the right finding whereof, we must first
enquire what is the difference betwixt the Generation of living things which
breed of their own accord and of such as arise from Seed, and what living
Things are properly said to be Spontaneous. And we must know in General, that
those things are sand to be generated Spontaneously, which are generated
without any evident and manifest cause. So Hippocrates in the 1 Book of
Aphorisms, Aphorism 2. calls those fluxes of the Belly and vomiting
Spontaneous, which happen without the use of Medicaments, and Lib. 2. Aphoris.
5. he calls those wearinesses Spontaneous, which proceed not from motions and
exercises, but from some hidden fault of Humors. So also Plants which grow
without the care and labor of the Husbandman are called Spontaneous. Of which
Virgil in his 2 Book of his Husbandry. Nature on Trees does different Births
bestow;
Some of themselves without Man's aid do grow,
And round the fields, and crooked Rivers come,
As Limber Osiers, Poplars, tender Broom,
And Grey-leav'd Willows.


And Animals which spring from Copulation of their Patents are not called
Spontaneous; but such as are generated without the help of Parents are called
Spontaneous. Thus Pliny Lib. 9. Cap. 51. writes of Frogs: It Is wonderful bow
after six months life they turn to slime, no man discerning; and again in the
Spring they are regenerated after the same secret manner, and this happens
every year. Also Limpins and Scallops do breed of their own accord in sandy
places. But yet from the premises it is not sufficiently apparent, what those
living Things are which be said to spring of their own accord. For although
many plants grow without the Care and Labor of Men: yet they do not all grow
without Seed; since many sow themselves, and cast their Seeds into the Earth,
or Propagate themselves by Roots. We are therefore now to enquire the
difference betwixt things that are generated of their own accord and such as
are not.

Fortunius Licetus, Lib. 2. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 2. holds, that the
Spontaneous Original of living Things proceeds from an Occult Principle which
lies hid in the matter wherein the Generation is to be made, The opinion of
Fortunius Licetus.
and therefore from a principle internal to the thing generated, though Latent.
But the Spontaneous original of things is not thus sufficiently differenced
from the non-Spontaneous; since also in the non-Spontaneous original of
living-Things the hidden principle of the thing to be generated lies lutking in
the matter or Seed. For the principle of generation is equally hidden to the
sense, in an head of Garlic, an Onion, or a Corn of Wheat, as in Hors-Dung,
whence the beetle arises. This rather ought, I conceive, to be accounted the
difference: The true difference.
that such things as are not Spontaneously generated do proceed from a Seed, or
Bulb, or some other thing answering to Seed, manifestly produced by a plant of
the same kind: but such living things as Spring of their own accord are
produced without a manifest generator of the same sort. Truly when generation
it self is made, or rather the formation of an organical Body, the generation
of a Spontaneous living Thing differs not from that of a non-Spontaneous. For
in both the motion and the formation of the Body is made by an agent, which
lies concealed in the matter. But herein they differ, in that, before the parts
begin to be formed, the Soul in its essence, and as such, and as it performs
the office of a Soul, is in the Seed or matter in the non-Spontaneous
generation: but in Spontaneous generation, although the Soul be in some sort in
the matter of which the living thing is made; yet the Body of a Carcass, or
what ever other matter, does not participate the same under the notion of a
Soul; because a Carcass is not properly animated, nor yet under the notion of
an efficient cause, because as yet it is dull and Stirs not.

Howbeit, The differences of Spontaneous living Things.
in this thing, there is still no small difference. For some things are really
engendered of matter specifically different; as the Beetle of Hors-dung, worms
of Cheese or flesh; but some things seem only to the sense to be generated
without seed, and of a thing specifically different, when as indeed they are
made of seed, or of somewhat answering to Seed: as some Plants are said to grow
of their own accord, after Rains or Inundations of Water, when as in truth they
are made of Seeds mingled with Rains or Waters. So of Swines dung, Carduus, and
Sow-Thistle and other Plants do grow, not as Beetles do out of Hors-Dung, or
Worms out of Cheese, but because some of the Seed of these plants unchanged by
digestion are voided afterward with the Dung. Which two differences of
Spontaneous Generation must needs b^ observed.

And though there be some difference of Spontaneously Generated live Things:
Places of Aristotle where he teaches that all things are Generated by an
univocal Agent.
yet they all proceed from an univocal agent and not from an Equivocal: which
Aristotle teaches in many places (nine of which Fortunius Licetus quotes) in all
which he tells us, that all substances are generated by an efficient actually of
the same Nature univocal. The First is, 1 de Generat. et Cor. Text 30. The
Second, 1 Magnor. Moral. Cap. 10. The Third, 1 de Part Animal. Cap. 1. The
Fourth, 7 Metaphysic. Text 22. The Fifth, in the same Book, Text 30. The Sixth,
in the same Book Text 31. The Seventh, in the same Book, Text 32. The Eighth,
in the 12. Metaphys. Cap. 13. The Ninth, in the same place, Text 18. all which
may be seen in his works. We shall only produce one or two. For Aristotle in 1
de Generat. and corrupt. Text 30. 1 Magnorum Moralium, Cap. 10. 1 de Part.
Animal. Cap. 1. writes, that even those things which are said to breed of their
own accord have a like efficient cause preceding, as well as things produced by
Art. And in the 7. Metaphys. Text 22. and Text 32. he writes expressly, that it
is proper to a substance for to have necessarily another like substance
actually preexisting, whereby it may be Generated. And in the 12 Metaphys. Text
13. and Text 18. he therefore rejects the Platonical Ideas, because all things
both Natural and artificial have like univocal causes by which they are
produced.

Although therefore it is to be granted, How spontaneous living Things are
generated by an Univocal generator.
that even the Spontaneous Generation of living Creatures is after a fort
univocal; Yet I shall not deny that Generation is an Analogical kind; and that
Univocal Generation is more evident in non-Spontaneous, then in Spontaneous
living things. Which Aristotle himself seems to hint, who in the place but now
allege, 7 Metaphs. Text 30. says that all things are made after a sort by an
Univocal agent. And indeed the Nature of the Generation of Plants which proceed
from Seed properly so called, (such as that is of non-Spontaneous live Things,
as also of those things which arise from a latentseed) is different from that
of those live things which are most properly said to arise Spontaneously and
Equivocally. For in the former, the Seed of which they are Generated, viz.
Herbs, has actually a Soul in it already: but in these latter, the matter of
which the living thing is Generated has not actually in it the Soul of the
thing generated; suppose a worm. Yet the form lying hid in the matter is apt to
be turned into a Soul, so as to communicate it self to the matter, in notion of
a Soul, and thereout to frame a living Body. Whence that difference betwixt
Seneca, Scaliger, and Licetus, concerning the Seed, may easily be compounded.
For Seneca 3. de Beneficiis Chapter 29. and Scaliger in Theophrast. de Plantis Lib.
1. Chapter 5. teach that al things have their Seeds. But Licetus, de Spont. Vivent.
Ortu, Lib. 4. Cap. 2. denies that al things have their Seeds, and holds that
some things are propagated by no Seed properly so called, though they have
somewhat answering to seed by way of proportion. For an answer may be made out
of the very words of Licetus; viz. Seed is taken properly, and improperly. Seed
taken properly and improperly
Seed properly so called is a Body, which as the proper subject contains in it
self a Soul, in the first formal act; which comes to pass in such things as are
not generated of their own accord: but improperly that may be called a Seed, or
at least somewhat answering to a Seed, which has not indeed a Soul actually,
yet contains a principle or form, which attaining a fit disposition of matter
begins to exercise the Office of a Soul. Whence, the Carcasses of Plants and
Animals out of which Worms are Generated do not contain in them the Seed of
Worms, yet they have in them a form, which does afterward advance it self into
a Soul. Mean while this also is true, that such things are not altogether
Equivocally Generated as is vulgarly imagined: which appears even hereby, that
those living things which are thought to be generated of themselves and
Equivocally, are of the same sort with those which are not so Generated: which
thing is manfest from Generation it self. For although some things
Spontaneously bred do not generate, as Toad-stools, and Vine-Worms, and other
vile creepers: yet most of them engender a living Thing like themselves, as
Experience testifies. Theophrastus writes 1. de Cause. Plant. Chapter 1. and 5. and
Scaliger upon him, that a Plant Sprung of its own accord has by its Seed
produced another like it self. So Laserpitium which grew up naturally of its
own accord, and a whole Wood of Trees, where never were any before, did produce
Plants that bare Seed. Bees bred out of a Bull are fruitful. And Avicen, 15. de
Animal. Cap. 1. does testify, that he had a friend who made Scorpions, either
by burying the Juice of Basil, or by some other means, and they afterward
generated other Scorpions. And that in a certain City of the Saracens, called
Scealikam, after a great Rain, Silkworms were seen to cover the ground many
miles together, and every Worm made Silk, and afterward they flew away and
made Seed.

Now that the univocal Agent by which Spontaneous living Things are bred is a
Soul of the same sort with that whereby they are constituted in their being,
The efficient of spontaneous live Things it the Soul.
and vivisied, Fortunius Licetus teaches Lib. 2. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap.
26. For fince, as Aristotle both in other places and in 1 Magn. Moral. Cap. 10
teaches, Plants and Animals arise from Seed as an univocal principle, but the
Seed is not univocal to the Animal or Plant to be generated, save as it
participates a Soul of the same sort; it seems from thence apparent, that the
Univocal efficient from whence Animals have their original which are
Spontaneously generated, is a Soul of the same Nature with that wherewith they
are enlivened. And questionless the case is plain. For since it is most Natural
and proper to the Soul to generate live things; nothing can Naturally procreate
living Things which has not a Soul in it.

Now that the Soul of these living Creatures is in the matter, and that we are
not to seek their efficient Cause out of their matter, the Generation of Worms
out of Flesh does show, in which no external Cause helping, unless the heat of
the Ambient Air, Worms break out of the Flesh of their own accord.

Now whence this Soul which is the efficient Cause of these Spontaneous Animals
does come into the matter, of which they arise, is further to be enquired into.
Whence the soul comes which Causes Spontaneous Generation?
And although this be a very difficult point, and one of the obscurest in
Nature, and it is also hazardous for a man to propound his opinion herein: yet
will I freely propound my mind, which if it shall not please all men, yet such
as are studious of the truth will acknowledge thus much, that it comes nearer
the truth then that Opinion of the Eduction of forms out of the power of the
matter, which is an Opinion that paies a man with words, but has nothing in it
to satisfy a studious mind, as is sufficiently declared in the 4. Chap. of the
foregoing Discourse. Spontaneous live Things grow only out of Things living.
And first of all we must hold (which I conceive to be out of question) that
nothing can contribute such a matter nor consequently the Soul, unless it be a
Living thing, or proceed from a living Thing; and that therefore Spontaneous
living Things do only proceed from living Things or such as have lived: which
also experience teaches. For it was never yet known, that of the simple
Elements, of Metals, Minerals, Jewels, as such, any Animal or living Thing has
been bred, but every thing of which such Animals are Generated is either a
living Body, has lived, or has proceeded from a living Body.

Now to find out the manner of this generation, How many ways the Soul may be
in the matter? A twofold Act of the soul.

Essential Accidental

A double operation of the soul.


in the first place we must enquire, how many ways the Soul may be in a thing.
For in the first place, which no man denies, there is a twofold act of the
Soul: one Essential, called the first Act, and is the bare Essence of the Soul:
the other accidental, which is called the Second, and is the operation
proceeding from the Soul. And therefore the participation of the Soul is also
twofold, the first is the Participation of the simple substance of the Soul, as
of a form perfecting its matter; the Second is the Participation of the Soul
operating. The Second participation is when Organs are provided for the
performance of the actions; to the first there needs only a disposition of the
matter, that the Soul may thereby be fit to perform the Office of an Efficient
Cause and to form the Body.

But besides these two manners, there is yet a Third, and the Soul may yet
after another manner be in some kind of matter, A soul may be in a matter and
not inform it.
so as neither to inform the same and vivifie it, nor to perform the proper
operations of such a living Thing. So the Seeds of Plants and Animals may be in
the Water and in the Earth, and the Soul may be in them, and yet they neither
inform nor Vivisie the Water nor the Earth. Hence Aristotle said, not without
reason, 3. de Genesis Animal. Cap. 11. that all things are full of Souls, while he
thus writes: Now Animals and Plants are bred in the Earth and Water, because
there is moisture in the Earth, Spirit in the Water, Animal Heat in the
Universe, so that all things are in some sortful of Souls. And therefore they
come speedily to a Consistence, when that heat is comprehended or received.
Which very thing manifestly appears from things putrid, out of which sundry
kinds of Worms are every where bred, and in Plants which grow in Common Fields
and Gardens where no Seed has been cast. And scarce any place is so barren but
that Plants and Animals will breed therein of their own accord. How all things
are full of souls.
Now this speech of Aristotle is thus to be understood, not that all things do
live and are animated; for which cause he did not simply say, that all things
are full of Souls, but in some sort, viz. in all things in a manner there is
such a like substance, which when all impediments being removed it has got a
sitting matter, it rouses it self and performs the Office of a Soul. What it is
to live.
For, to live, is not to have and contain a Soul after any fashion; but to
participate the same and to be informed by it, and as that which frames and
preserves the organical Body. For, as Aristotle teaches, Animal heat, and
consequently that which has the Soul adjoined thereto, is truly in all the
lower part of the world, the Air, Water and Earth: but not as their essential
part or attribute; since the Earth and Water are of their own Nature cold, and
neither of them are informed by any Soul: but as a thing placed in a place or
Vessel, viz. because the Earth, Water and Air, do contain the Carcasses parts
and Excrements of Living Things, in which are Atoms and small Bodies having
Souls in them. And so the Generation of things Spontaneous is then caused, when
the Souls (as Fort. Licetus speaks) are now by the benefit of heat united and
associated to such things in which they were contained only as in a place or
Vessel, under the notion of a Cause efficient, forming an organical Body; or as
Aristotle speaks, when the matter shall comprehend that same heat of Animals
and the Soul with it, and shall make it proper to it self; presently by way of
Spontaneous Generation that matter receives the Consistency of a living Nature,
putting on the Soul in Nature of a Form, which before it contained distinct
from its Nature, like a Vessel.

Concerning which thing Fort. The soul is two ways in the matter
Licetus treats at large, Lib. 2. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 11.28. et Seq.
and endeavors with much labor to prove, that the form and Soul is two ways in
the matter, viz. as an act and perfection in its proper subject, and then as a
thing contained in a Vessel, not belonging at al thereto, or as an accident in
the subject. And this distinction is the foundation of his whole Doctrine of
the original of these kind of Creatures. It Is not worth while to cite here all
that he there alleadges. For sure it is, the Fire with its form is in the Iron,
is in the hot Water, is in Rain, is in the Earth, and yet does not inform them.
And which is a most clear example, Gold resolved into its smallest Atoms is in
Aqua Regia, and Silver in Aqua Fortis; yet so as to retain their forms entire,
as appears by their Reduction; yet they do not inform those Waters, but the
Form of Gold and Silver is in the Waters, as in a place. The same appears in
the Souls of living Things. For the Seed cast into the Earth is therein as in a
place, nor is the Earth informed by the form of the Seed. Yea and which is much
more wonderful, the Form of a Plant will sometimes remain in dry Wood, as Virgil
writes of the Wood of an Olive Tree, in the Second of his Husbandry. And
(Wondrous to be told) an Olive Tree
Out from a dry cut drunk often springs we See.
Of which we shall speak more at large in Chap. 7.

But whether Souls may properly be said to be in a place, and whether all the
Souls of Spontaneous Creatures are thus in the things whence they spring, I
doubt. Truly if Seed, or a Body answering to Seed consisting of matter and
form, may be said to be in a place, as Frogs spawn, or that Seminal Body out of
which after Rain Plants do Spring, it is rightly said to be in a place. But
whether the Soul it self which is therein, in the Water, or Rain, may properly
be said to be in a place, I doubt. But let us thus take the Soul with its
proper subject, and let it in this manner be said to be in a place: yet whether
after the same manner in a Pine, out of which Ear-wigs, or in other woods
whence worms spring, or in Corn whence the Wibbles are Generated, that Soul of
the living Creature be present, may be justly doubted. For the Atoms of Gold
and Silver consisting of their matter and Form, are in the Aqua Regia or Aqua
Fortis, as in a place: and the Seed of some Plant or Frog, consisting of a Soul
and matter, wherein the Soul is as in its proper subject, may be in the Earth
or Water, as in a Vessel or place, but by means of the matter or Body wherein
it is. But when of Wood or Flesh a live Animal is bred, there the Soul which of
it self is in no place, has no matter wherein it may be as its own proper
subject, and in respect of which it may be said to be, in Wood or Flesh, as in
a place or Vessel; but the proper subject of that Soul is that same thing or
Flesh, wherein nevertheless it is not formally, but only really, nor has the
notion of a Soul, but then begins to be formally, and to be separated from the
Wood and Flesh, and to live and exist by it self, and to have the notion of a
Soul, and to exercise living operations, when through putrefaction or rather
the heat joined to the putrefaction, that matter is so elaborated that it may
become a fit subject wherein the Soul may formally exist.

And therefore as was said before, Spontaneous Generation how manisold?
there is not only one way of Generation of Plants and Animals which are
Generated of their own accord. For some are indeed Generated from Seed bred by
a living Creature of the same kind, although they seem to be Generated of their
own accord. So, after overflowings of water, after Rains and Winds, Plants do
sometimes spring of themselves, of Swines dung Thistles and Sow-Thistles are
bred. In which there is no other difference betwixt the Spontaneous and non
Spontaneous, save that in the former the Seed lies hidden, in the latter it is
manifest. And there are Seeds of different Nature. For some unless they be
diligently looked to and manured they lose their Seminal faculty and their Soul.
Others although they seem corrupted, yet in a certain Juice or in some Atoms
the Seminal faculty is preserved. Again there are other Spontaneous live Things
which are bred without Seed, as when of Cheese, Flesh or Wood, Worms are bred,
in which there is no such Seed found as is in the Waters and in the Earth.

Now concerning the original of the latter kind, the question is very
difficult, The opinion of Fort. Licetus of the original of spontaneous live
things properly so called.
wherein to determine any thing is very liable to blame. Fortunius Licetus,
Lib. 2. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 36. holds that the efficient Generating
Cause of Spontaneous Animal, is a Soul of the same Nature with that whereby
such Animals are constituted in their being, but not quickening nor any ways
actuating the subject wherein it is, but lying concealed, as in a vessel, in
that Carcass out of which these Animals are Generated: and that the Soul which
is in the Carcass is the same with that which did constitute the Animal or
other living thing, but impaired, not having the notion of an actuating form,
and perfecting that wherein it is, but of privation; since such an impairing
deprives the Soul of its Ancient perfection, which was to quicken and perfect
its subject Body. For as a sensitive and seeing Soul is an habit in an Animal
that is found; but in one that is blind, it being evervated by the marring of
the Organ it degenerates into Privation: so also he holds that after Death the
Soul of an Animal which remains in the Carcass degenerates into Privation, and
being weakened it Creates Spontaneous imperfect Animals.

Now how the Soul is cast down from that perfection, he teaches in the same
Book Cap. 37. and sets down two ways, by which the matter of the Carcass
obtains a non-Quickening Soul. The first is; that when the Live-Creature dies,
all the heat necessary to life is not abolished, but so much of it remains as
suffices to retain the Soul in the Body, as in a Vessel. In which case, he
writes, that as it may happen frequently, that together with the weakening of
the heat and Death of the living Thing, the substance of the vegetable and
sensitive Soul supported by that heat may suffer an Essential Empairement,
whereby it may come to degenerate into a more imperfect nature and a baser kind
of Soul; so he conceives it may sometimes come to pass, that retaining its
Ancient Essence it may put forth its weakened forces. The other manner he makes
to be this: because, says he, while the old living Creature dies, and while
the Excrement is driven out of the Body of the living Creature, its Soul yet
remaining may introduce a new Soul into the next matter lately bereft of the
same Soul, with a small heat in the first instant of Nature, not yet able to
vivifie its subject Body, but may be bred therein as in a Vessel, sometimes of
the very same sort with the generating Soul; but most frequently imperfecter
and Baser: both because of the imperfection of the matter, which cannot receive
so perfect a Soul, as also by Reason of the Infirmity and Debility of the
forces of the Soul Generating, which in the Death of the former Animal either
perishes, or is very much weakened, that it cannot engender one like it self,
but is able to produce one inferior to it self. Of which he treates at large to
the 39. Chapter; wherein at last he concludes his Opinion in these words: the
immediate efficient Cause of the original of Spontaneous living Things from
which they immediately receive their Soul and all Spontaneous living Things are
generated, is nothing else but a vegetable or sensitive Soul, abiding in the
Carcass, or in the Excrement proceeding from living Creatures, as in a Vessel,
lying hid with a weak heat, not actuating the same, nor any ways perfecting
it, sometimes of the same sort, or also Numerically the same with that which was
formerly in those living things: yet many times of a different sort and a more
base Nature, and imperfecter substance; into which with the decay of the Body
and heat, the former Soul is degenerated: which Soul in the Carcass or
Excrements, proceeding from the former living Creature not quickening its
subject Body, it remains therein, not exercising the actions of life, not as a
form in its subject, but as in a place, and in a vessel, as it were by
necessity of the matter, or at last by the total vanishing of the heat whereby
it is supported, it self perishing; or with the augmentation of the said heat
and vigor acquired from the Warmth of the Ambient Air, communicating it self
to its subject Body, as a form and quickening Soul, and performing the functions
of life, as shaping of a Body and generating of a Spontaneous live thing.

But in very good deed, the opinion of Licetus examined.
it seems hard to hold, that the former Soul remains in the Carcass; and to
affirm it in a man, is most absurd: whereas nevertheless worms are as well bred
of the Carcass of a man, as of other Animals. Indeed, Lib. 2. Cap. 39. Licetus
excepts the rational Soul, and writes that only the Sensitive and Vegetative
Souls remain. But it is only affirmed and not proved, that there are three
Souls in a Man, of which the Sensitive and Vegetative may remain after his
Death. Yea and in Brutes that same degenerating of nobler forms unto less noble
is absurd, and is propounded without Reason. Rather the Constitution of Body
and various operations do show, that Spontaneous Animals which are Generated
out of dead Bodies do differ in kind and Form from those Creatures out of which
they are bred. Nor does he show any Reason, why the Soul of the living Creature
should degenerate into the Soul of this creeper rather then another: since we
see that every Spontaneous Animal is not bred of every living thing, but
certain Animals are bred of certain Bodies. Nor in a blind Man does the seeing
Soul degenerate into a Privation; but in the Eye, because of the disease
thereof, Privation of sight is introduced; but the soul it self has the same
perfection it had before, and the disease being removed fees again; nor while a
man is blind does it perform other operations. Yea, and the Soul while it lives
informs the blind Eye, although it cannot cause sight therein by reason of its
disease. And if the soul should remain in the eye of a blind man, as it does in
a Carkas, contributing nothing thereto, the Eye would be mortified and
Sphacelated; but we see the contrary. And although it is true that some part of
innate heat and Radical moisture remains in the Carcasses of Plants and
Animals, which is not destroyed save by Putrefaction and Rottenness which many
times happens long after Death; yet that temper and heat of the living Thing
does not remain, and therefore neither can the specific Soul of the living
thing remain; seeing the death of an Animal and of a live Thing is the
extinction of that Vital heat, and thereby Souls are separated from their
Bodies, but the Soul does no way suffer any essential impairment (for the
Essence of forms is indivisible) whereby it can degenerate into a more
imperfect Nature. And when a living Thing is Generated of the Excrements of
Animals, it is not credible that the Soul remains in the Excrements; since in
the living Body, the Soul was never in the Excrements.

But to me it seems more agreeable to truth, The opinion of the Author
concerning the original of Spontaneous Live things properly so called.
that in living Things there are diverse Auxiliary and subordinate forms, yet so
that one is principal and Queen, which informs the living Creature, and from
which the living thing has its Name, viz. The Soul it self of every living
Thing; and the rest are Servants as it were, which as long as that superior and
Lady Soul is present, do pertain to the disposition and condition of the
matter, and therefore they do after a sort inform the said matter, that it may
be a sit subject for the specific form, and they have also actions of their
own, yet they do not animate the same, nor do they give it the Name of a living
thing; which is the Office of a specific Soul only. There are subordinate
souls.
Nor let any man hatefully traduce this Doctrine of subordinate forms as new.
Most learned men have delivered the same, and have taught that these forms do
constitute the Seminal matter as it were of live Things. Jul. Caes. Scalig.
Exercit. 59. Sect. 2. writes: As in the Earth Plants are changed one into
another; so above ground they breed Animals out of themselves. And that not out
of putrefaction, but cherishing in themselves certain Seeds for Generation. The
same Scaliger, Exercitation, 190. Animals (Says he,) Are not bred of putrid
Plants, but are the Offspring of Remaining Vigor which is in them. For it is
certain that beans are not putrified, when Animals breed in them. He also Lib.
2. de Plantis, p. 389. rightly teaches, that it is manifest that Fir-Wood and
straw or Chaf have in them the Natural rudiments of Wig-Lice. Also he writes in
the same place, that it is commonly reported, that of Wig-Lice broken Wig-Lice
do also engender. Which he counts unlikely. But that from the same original
whence those that are broken did arise, new ones are Generated in the same
place. But I see no cause why those rudiments of the Wig-Lice may not remain in
those that are rubbed in pieces. Shegkius the German, Aristotle, de Occultis
Med. Facult. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Page 103. in my Edition, says, it will be no
absurdity, if we shall say that diverse forms are in one substance. And
afterward, he proves in Plants, that the specifical form being abolished,
there remains not only the temperament, but also the substantial form, and that
it is the Author of Occult Faculties. Zabarella also, Lib. de Generat. and
Interitu, Cap 4. writes, that the form of a mixed Body in a living Creature does
not perform the Office of a form, in respect of the whole living Creature, but
rather of Matter. But that the Soul being taken away, the same Form of mixture
begins to perform the Office of a Form, and to constitute that Body
specifically. And this he declares in the same place by an example. Just as,
(says he) if when a King is dead some Servant be made King, he was also before
during the Kings Life, but he was not as King; and therefore if any shall ask
whether a new King be created or no, answer ought doubtless to be made, that a
new King is created, and the King is changed. Even so, at the Death of a living
Creature, a new Form is acquired, inasmuch as that which was before as a
Condition of the matter, being subject to a more noble Form, does now begin to
be a Form to constitute the compound, and to bear Rule. And that which
Zabarella speaks only of the forms of mixed bodies, that is to be understood of
all Forms excepting the Elements, which are necessary to the Constitution of a
living Body. And that there are such Forms, is proved before in the Second
Discourse of this work. Nor does it import any absurdity, that besides the
specifical Forms there should be other subordinate Forms: but as Zabarella,
Lib. 1. de Generat. and Interit. Cap. 2. writes, if it be not against Reason
there should be two, neither is it that there should be four or an hundred
together in the same subject.

There is one who argues here, Whether the subordinate forms are specifical.
that subordinate Forms are also specifical. But either he understands not what
a specifical Form is, or he cavils Maliciously; and in the mean time he grants
in the same living thing diverse forms. Verily, There is no form, which by it
self considered may not be termed specifical. So the form of fire, where ever
fire is, is specifical: but when Fire is in a man, it is not the specific form
of a Man, but the rational Soul is man's specific Form. He Fights therefore
with shadows, and Toies with cavillations, who denies subordinate Forms, and
thinks they are not to be distinguished from specific forms, because they also
are specific. The Form (says he) of the Earth is under the command of a
specific Form, yet it is in its proper matter, and retains the Nature of a
specific Form, although it be under another Specific Form. For it is not the
Specific form of that thing to the Form whereof it is subject, but of that
matter whose Form it is, with which it abides, comes and goes. But if the form
of the Earth be subject to another Form, why shall I not term the same (with
Zabarella) a subordinate Form? But in a Man to hold both the Form of Earth, and
the Humane Form to be specifical, is most absurd. For there is no Natural thing
which has two specific Forms. Yet those specific Forms which whiles they are
in the living Thing do belong to the matter, the specifical form departing, do
become specifical, as the same Zabarella teaches, and perform the operations of
a specifical Form. So that Form from whence there arises out of a Carcass a
Beetle, a Wasp, a Be, while it is in the Horse, or other living Animal, it
cannot be called the form of a Wasp, a Beetle or a Be; since then it performs
not the Office of a Form, but is in place of matter. But when it performs the
Office of a Form, it can then multiply it self, and beget its like. And indeed
the Nature of a Form is far different when it is subordinate and in the place
of matter, from what it is when it becomes specifical. Therefore also
subordinate Forms do not give a Name to their subject, nor can I say that in a
man there are Worms, in an Heyfer fed with Mulberry Leaves there are
Silkworms, but at last when the Specifical Form departs, they begin to perform
the Office of a specific Form, and give a Name to the thing.

Whence also that is of no moment which some Object, if the Soul of a Worm were
in a Plant, the same substance would be a Plant and an Animal; since the Form
gives as well the Name as being to a thing. For the species or Forms of Things,
truly, are not simply known or defined by us according to their Essence, but so
far forth, as being sensibly parts of the World, by their Bodies and actions
they fall under our sense; and a Name is given them, not from their essential
act, but from their faculties and actions which they exercise in such a
subject. For indeed, the Seed of a Dog does not essentially differ from a Dog:
yet because by the term Dog we do not understand simply the Soul of a Dog with
any kind of matter, but a four footed barking Beast, the Form of a Dog in the
Seed is not called a Dog, before it have shaped a Body fit for it self. After
the same manner, in a Silkworm and Butter-Fly, there is one and the same Soul,
yet is it not termed a Butter-Fly, til it is changed into a Winged Creature. So
also, in a Plant, though there is the Soul of a Worm, yet the plant is not
termed an Animal, but the Government of the Plants form ceasing, and another
Soul receiving and exercising the Sovereignty, it is termed an Animal.

Nor can it be hence concluded (as some object and think it may) that there are
in man and sundry other Animals Worms, How subordinate forms are in thing.
or that this or that living Creature has Worms or other live Things in it.
For to the Constitution of such Animals, as of all other Natural Bodies, there
is requisite not only a Form, but also a matter, and the Form ought to inform
the said matter. But those Forms, though they are really in other living
things, yet are they not therein in the Nature of forms, nor do they perform
the Office of Forms, nor Animate the matter, nor quicken the Body, nor exercise
the operations of life therein, but all these things are performed by the more
noble and specific Form, or Soul of the living Thing: but they themselves
belong to the disposition and determination of the matter. But when that
specific and more noble Form or Soul goes away, they being stirred up by the
ambient heat, and having gained a fit disposition are advanced into the quality
of Forms, and communicate themseves to the Body as vivifying Souls, and in the
first place they set themselves to shape Bodies fit for them, but afterward
they begin to exercise therein the functions of Life. One Internal form may put
on diverse external ones
Yea and the same Forms do lie hid under different external Figures, and so
pass into the Theater of Nature. It Is a clear case in the Palmer Worms, in
which one Soul puts on diverse Bodies, and as Aristotle 5 de Hist. Animal. Cap.
19. and Pliny, Lib. 11. Not. Hist. Cap. 22. says, there is a various
succession of Forms, viz. external ones. For the internal remains the same.
Which though it may seem to some absurd: yet is it no ways absurd, but it is
easy for any one to make observation of the truth thereof. For first of all,
of the Egg of a kind of Butter-Fly is made a Palmer Worm; this Worm, according
as Libavius diligently has observed, Singular. Part. 2. Bombycior. Lib. 1.
Cap. 21. in a months space changes its Skin four times. And who will say, that
here the internal form is changed; unless he will say when Snakes cast their
Skin that a new Generation is made. Afterward, it becomes a Silkworm; where
again there is no essential mutation, for a Silkworm is no other then a Palmer
Worm grown up. And when afterward it becomes a Nymph, there is again no
essential mutation, but the internal form only working it becomes a Butter-Fly.
Nor does this happen only in the Palmer Worm and Silkworm, but in all
Egg-bearers, as for example in the Chick of an Hen. For look as, while by the
heat of a Bird of another kind, or also of the Fire, a Chick is hatched out of
the Egg of an Hen, there cannot so much as any thing be imagined which should
give the Soul to the Chick, unless it had been before in the Egg: so also when
by the Warmth of Women's Dugs the Eggs of Silkworms are hatched, and there
comes out Silkworms, nothing can be assigned which might generate the Soul.
And that one Soul can assume various Bodies the degeneration also of Plants
does show, whiles Rye and Barley do turn to Wheat, and Wheat again into Rye and
Barley, the same internal Form remaining, and the external duly changed.

Hitherto also belongs the degeneration of Plants into other Plants; The
degeneration of Plants.
which happens in those Plants whose Seeds are either ambiguous, and contain
diverse forms in them, yet so as that one Rules and the other serves; unless
upon occasion another alteration be made; or whose Soul is disposed to receive
diverse forms external, as appears in Silkworms, yea and Bees too. For as the
same essence of a Form does in them remain under diverse external shapes, and
first there is a Palmer Worm, then a Silkworm, then a Butter-Fly: so also in
Plants, there is the same transmutation of the external Form. Which also Julius
Caesar Scaliger does grant, when in 1 de Plantis, (says he) there are the
confused principles of diverse things in Seeds, as of Rapes, Cole-worts, and
others Licetus indeed Lib. 2. Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 14. writes, that a Form
upon great mutations of the matter is changed into another species, and
depressed into a more inferior degree. But this degeneration upon the mutation
of the matter is made not only into an inferior degree but also into a
Superior: which experience does testify. Wheat degenerates into Darnel;
Watercresses into Mints; Rape into Radish; Basil into running Betony; the
white Vine into the black, and the black into the white; Barley into Wheat, and
again Wheat into Barley. If in Hungaria they sow German Rye it turns into
Wheat. If a Field be somewhat barren, our White Oats (as they call them)
degenerate into black; if the same Seed be sowed some years together, it grows
more base. And therefore after some years the Husbandmen are forced to change
their Seed. Contrariwise, if black Oats be sowed in a fat Soil, white Oats
will Spring up therfrom. Gilly-flowers, Roses, Violets, do often change their
Colors. Whence Virgil writes of Seeds. Choice Seeds and with much Labor
culled out
Do yet degenerate.


And Galen writes of his Father, in 2. de Ele. Facultatibus, Class. 2. Page 30.
that, when in his declining Age he was delighted with Husbandry he sometimes
sowed Wheat and Barley, and picked out al other kinds of Seeds that were mingled
with them, that he might certainly know whether Cockle and wild Barley would
proceed from the change of the said grains, or whether they had a proper Seed
of their own. He therefore found among the Wheat frequent Darnel, and amongst
the Barley wild Barley or wild Oats; and made the same experiment in other
Seeds. He therefore found in Lentils also, that they were changed into hard and
round Vetches and Ax-wort, also Goof-grass grow therefrom. If some would now
adays use the like diligence, they should merit most worthy commendations. For
so they would not so frequently become laughing stocks for Country Clowns. And
this experience would tend more to the gaining of the knowledge of Natural
Philosophy, then those Vain speculations, and more base then Ditch-Water, so
much in request. I shall say more of the degeneration of Plants beneath. Chap.
7.

And so much may suffice to have said of the primary efficient cause of the
Generation of Spontaneous live Things. Only this one thing is yet to be noted,
that these degenerations are not properly Spontaneous Generations, since they
are made of Seed and that evidently: although those Forms, according to the
diverse disposition of the matter, have the power to shape sundry figures of the
external Body. Also the Ambient heat, especially that of the Sun and Moon, do
concur to their Generation: but that heat is not the primary agent, but only
stirs up the Soul which lies secretly hidden, and prepares and affords fitting
matter to the same. And therefore that what we have said of the Spontaneous
original of living things may be more apparent, we must speak yet somewhat
concerning their matter.

Chap. 3. Of the Matter of Spontaneous living Things.
ANd indeed the chiefest difference betwixt live Things of Spontaneous and
non-Spontaneous original, The matter of spontaneous live things.
is in their Matter. For both Animals and Plants which are not Spontaneous do
so Spring out of their Seeds, that it is manifest to every one whence they
proceed. But the principle of Spontaneous live things lies hidden, and so they
arise of their own accord, as it were without any Generator. Yet they have also
their principle. For every one of these is not bred of every matter, but such
and such a sort of such and such a matter, as shall hereafter more particularly
appear.

And whereas we said before, The v^^^ous propagation of Plants.
that some things seem to be generated of their own accord, which yet are
indeed generated out of a Seminal principle, by a living Creature of the same
sort; others proceed from Bodies specifically different; we must know, that the
Seminal principle is not in all things tied to the same matter; which also
appears from Plants, which do not spring of their own accords. For all Plants
do not proceed from Seeds peculiarly so called, but some are propagated without
Seed by Roots, others by bulbes, others by branches plucked from the whole, and
others by Leaves plucked off, as the Indian Fig Tree. And therefore it is no
wonder, if the Seminal principle may be preserved entire even in Waters, in
Rains, yea and in the dung of Animals, as shall be hereafter more particularly
expressed. Yea, and in more Ignoble Animals, the Seed is after the same manner
preserved in the Earth and in the Water, as shall hereafter be declared. So
that Aristotle, 3 de Generat. Anim. Cap. 11. said that al things were full of
Souls. For there is Scarce any Body from which such Spontaneous Creatures do
not arise. Licetus indeed Lib. Whether Animals Spring from ^odies imperfectly
mixed.
2. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 13. holds that such living Things are not bred of
Bodies imperfectly mixed: but that must be rightly explained. For sure it is
that of Rains, Mists, Dew, sundry kinds of Worms are bred, and experience does
testify the same. Which though they are imperfectly mixed bodies if they be
considered in their own Nature, and in them some Element is predominant, as in
Dew and Rain Water: yet among these Bodies other Bodies perfectly mixed are
mingled in their smallest Aromes, in which as in Seeds there are the Souls of
living Things, and out of which Worms are also Generated afterward. And
therefore Worms are not bred of every Rain, nor of every Dew, but of some only.

Touching this immediate material cause of Spontaneous live Things, Fortunius
Licetus treats, The Opinion of Licetus concerning the matter of Spontaneous
live things.
Lib. 2. de Spont. Vivent. Ort. Cap. 13, 14, 15, 16. the Sum whereof is this.
He says the Spontaneous and non-Spontaneous Generation of live Things do
herein agree, that each is made of a perfectly mixed Body being very near of a
temperate complexion, having in it self the last disposition and immediate
aptitude to receive a Soul for its Form; and that the preceding disposition or
that same privation both in the non-Spontaneous and the Spontaneous generation
is nothing else but a temperament just under the degree of the Soul, not having
the Soul any ways adjoined thereto, and that it is a certain degree of heat.
But that the difference is herein, that the non-Spontaneous Generation of a
living thing is caused by an external agent, first preparing the matter for it
self by previous alteration, and afterward when it is prepared, by way of
Generation furnishing the same with a Soul: but contrariwise, the Spontaneous
Generation of living things is caused by an agent lurking within the matter,
prepared by virtue of the Ambient Air. And that consequently the disposition
of the matter subservient to the Spontaneous Original of living things is
nothing else but Coction by the Ambient Heat. Moreover he lays down two
attributes of the immediate matter of Spontaneous live Things. The first is,
that no Animal can be Spontaneously generated, save of a matter which was also
before in some sort living, and Animated, either in the rank of Plants or of
Animals, whether it be the part of a living Thing, or the Fruit, or the
Excrement, or somewhat else belonging thereto; which nevertheless has not now
its Soul any longer as a form, but contains it as a Vessel, forasmuch as it
belongs not to the essence of the Carcass wherein it is contained. Another is,
that it must be immediately collected and prepared by the heat of the Ambient
Air, that it may put on the Soul and Nature of a living Creature, either of
the same sort with the former, or of another sort. For when the matter has
comprehended a natural heat and made it its own, presently it attains a living
Nature, and puts on a Soul under the notion of a Form, which before it
contained only as a Vessel, being distinct from its Nature.

But in good truth, this Opinion needs a convenient Explication and Limitation.
The opinion of Licetus examined.
For in the first place, we must needs here repeat what we said before, that
there is not one manner of Generation of Spontaneous living Things, but some
proceed from a concealed seed of the same kind, as when of a secret Seed a
Plant is Generated after Rain, even out of Stones; and others do Spring from
dead Carcasses. And therefore, the first attribute of the matter of Spontaneous
live Things, viz. that it is a Carcass, wherein there is a Soul as in a Vessel,
not Animating, does agree only to the second kind. But if, as he himself holds
Lib. 3. Cap. 117. some powder or Juice of a plant, having in it a Seminal
principle, shall creep into the Chink of some Stone, being brought thither by
Rain, there truly a Plant does not grow out of a Carcass, but out of a Seed of
the same fort. Which also happens out of the Dung and excrements of Animals, in
which there is either undigested Seed, or some Seminal Juice. For, as was said
before, the Seminal principle is not in all Plants Seed peculiarly so called,
which is Generated in a certain part of the Plant endued with a certain Form
external, but in some it is diffused through the whole Plant, as in the Wllow,
and therefore a Willow may be generated by a bough plucked off from the Tree and
Planted in the ground. When therefore of such a Seed or such a Seminal Juice a
Plant is bred, either in the Earth, or in a Stone, or in another Tree, there
the plant is not made of a Carcass, but of Seed. Moreover, this also wants
explanation; when he writes, that the matter of which such a Generation is made
must be very near temperate. For this indeed is true of the efficient cause.
For neither a faint heat nor a burning heat can dispose the matter to receive a
soul, but it ought to be moderate and of a digestive Nature. But I think it is
not necessary, that the matter which is bred by that digestion should be
temperate in all. For there is a great difference in respect of temper in the
Bodies Generated. For worms are bred of Cole-worts, Wormwood, Pitch wood,
Flesh, which have most different Temperaments.

But as to the difference betwixt Spontaneous and non-Spontaneous Generation,
The difference betwixt Spontaneous and non-spontax^^^ generati^^^.
true indeed it is, that in the non-Spontaneous Generation of living Things, or
that which is caused by Seed, the matter is Elaborated by the Soul of the
living Thing in the Body thereof, and is so prepared, that that which before
was not (for neither is the Blood in Animals nor the Alimentary Juice in Plants
Animated) becomes a fit subject for a Soul, and the Soul communicates it self
thereto, and then it is called Seed, out of which afterward when it is
cherished by the heat of the Womb or the Sun, or some other thing, and the
Latent Soul stirred up, a living Creature of the same kind springs forth. But
after this manner the first kind of Spontaneous live Things does not differ in
manner of their Generation from that lately declared. For since, as Jul. Caes.
Scaliger says rightly, Exercit. 6. Sect. 10. a Tree or Plant generates when it
produces seed, but not when the Tree or Plant Springs up out of the Seed, but
then the thing generated which was before imperfect becomes perfect. That
Seminal principle, out of which either in the Water or in the Earth or out of
Stones, Plants Spring without the culture of man, was Generated in Plants of
the same kind, and did for a season lie hid in the Water, Earth, or Stone, til
it obtained a fit matter whereof to frame it self a Body. And then if that
production of a Plant shall be counted a generation, it is also performed by an
internal principle. But in the other kind of Spontaneous living things, when
Worms are bred of the Carcasses or Excrements of Plants, the Soul is also
present in the Carcass, although not under the notion of a specifical Form, yet
realy notwithstanding. But it cannot proceed into act, and exercise the Office
of a Form and Soul, nor can it prepare a matter whereto to communicate it self,
which is done in Plants and Animals, but there is need of the Heat either of
the Ambient air, or that which arises from pu^refaction, that the matter may be
fitly prepared and disposed; which when it has obtained the said form begins
to put it self forth, and to exercise the function of a Soul. Also the influx
of the Heaven and especially of the Moon, does not a little assist toward the
introduction of such a disposition. For experience teaches that Wood which is
cut a little before the new moon is not easily infested with Worms;
contrariwise, such as is cut about the full-Moon is most subject to Worms. So
out of mud which is dug up about the New Mood to make furnaces and Hearths, The
matter of spontaneous live things
Crickets are easily bred. Now the Bodies in which these Souls lie hid are
either the Carcasses of Living things, or parts of the said Carcasses, or the
fruits or Excrements of living Things, of which very things Aristotle 2 de
Generat. Animal. Cap. 3. expressly writes, that they have a vital principle; and
those Souls did pertain to the disposition of the matter which was the proper
subject of that living thing. Hence it is, as Aristotle says well, that every
form requires its proper matter, that as the Souls of living things differ, so
also those subordinate Forms which constitute the proper matter for every Soul
must differ, and therefore every Animal is not bred of every Carcass, or of
every part of a living or dead Body, or of every Excrement, but determinate
Animals are bred of determinate matter. Of Flesh one kind of Worms and none
else is bred; of Cheese Mites proper thereto and no other: of the Leaves of
Herbs Palmer-Worms; of the Pine the Buprestes and Pityocampe, and no other
Worms; of Horse dung a particular sort of Beetles; Long-worms bred in the Guts;
Lice and Fleas in the soil of the Skin; a certain kind of Worms and Beetles
under the Shoes, of the silth of the Feet.

Fortunius Licetus indeed, Whether one Form is changed into another.
Lib. 2. de Spo^t. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 14. thinks otherwise in this point, (as
also has been said before) and is of opinion that the Soul which he conceives
lies hid in the Carcass, as a thing placed in its place, is the same form which
was before in the living Creature; and that it remains in the Carcass with some
degree of heat, although it belongs not at all to the substance thereof, and
that upon a great mutation of the matter it is changed into another sort, and
thrust down into a lower degree. But this is a great supposition, that a soul
should remain in the Carcass of an Animal after its Death; as also that these
Forms should be changed into other species. Nor is it truly credible, that the
soul of a Pitch-Tree, or a Pine Tree should be changed into a worm, or the soul
of an Horse into a Wasp. And when Worms are bred of the Excrements of Animals.
Whence has the soul its Original in such a case? Yet we grant, that the soul
or seminal principle of such things as have been once generated of their own
accord, their body being corrupted, may stick in some matter, and come to live
again. So Flies and Frogs may melt in the mud, and of that corrupt matter in
the spring time other Flies and Frogs may breed. But all these things shall be
hereafter made more manifest, in our Particular Discourse of the Original of
Spontaneous live Things, where we shall speak of all the sorts of them.

To conclude therefore this present subject, The matter of spontaneous live
things
this I conceive may be most probably held concerning the matter of these kind
of Creatures: (since there are two kinds of Spontaneous live Things, as was
said before;) that in the former the Seminal matter, as the proper subject of
the soul, is communicated from the Generator it self, and that so disposed,
that it can retain the soul though it be divided never so small. Nor is this
absurd; Forms remain in Atoms.
but that forms may be contained in the smallest Atoms and incomprehensible to
the senses, even Metals do show, which are dissolved into their smallest
particles by Aqua Fortis and Aqua Regia, so as they may be strained through a
paper, and yet nevertheless they retain their Essence entire in those small
particles, as by reduction does appear. Whereof we have spoke at large in the
Third Discourse, Chap. 1. of this Work. But in the other kind, as in dead
Carcasses, the Soul has that subject wherein it was in the living Body, while
it was in place of an immediate matter to the superior Form. But as the Seeds
of non-Spontaneous Live Things although they are cast into the ground do not
always put forth their inbred Virtue, but are corrupted, sometimes by cold,
sometimes by heat, or through want of fit nutriment, and so come to die, or to
rest a long time before they put themselves into action; (as many Seeds rest all the Winter in the ground, until by the heat of the Ambient Air they be
cherished, and can draw fit nourishment out of the Earth:) so also in those
things which are said to arise Spontaneously, the Seminal virtue rests, til it
obtain a fit matter out of which to frame it self a Body, and be roused up by
the heat of the Ambient Air, and cherished: whence it comes to pass, that
Animals which arise of their own accord are not generated in the Winter, unless
sometimes under Dung, where the cold cannot come, but in the Spring, Summer and
Autumn, viz. When by the heat of the Ambient Air caused chiefly by the Sun and
Moon, a fit matter is afforded, out of which the Latent Soul may frame it self
a Body, and the Soul it self may be set on work. But sometimes this same Seminal
Virtue does quite perish and die. Nor would I have any Man carp at what I have
hitherto said and shall hereafter say concerning Souls, and the Seminal Virtue
in Atoms and smallest bodies, and charge me as if I held that such souls,
because in so many mutations they remain entire, are immortal. For, The Seminal
virtue sometimes dies.
as the seeds of non-Spontaneous Plants do many times remain long entire, and
yet at last die: the same may also happen in the Spontaneous, viz. if they meet
with some contrary, or the matter be too much divided. Concerning which thing
Francisc. Aguilonius, Lib. 5. de Optic. Propos. 8. thus writes: although there
is no smallest quantity, yet there is the smallest light Natural, that is, a
light so weak and thin, that it cannot be made thinner without perishing. After
which manner there are also the smallest parts of Natural Bodies; viz. which if
they be further divided they lose their Form and Essence. And Propos. 15. And
this Imbecility of Subsistency is common not only to these qualities which
admit the diversity of greater and lesser, but also to al Bodies which vary
their magnitude. For as these without some bulk, so the other without some
degree of excellency cannot preserve themselves from perishing. For their
forces being further attenuated do perish and come to nothing, not destroyed by
any contrary, but only through want of measure, which is a necessary condition
by the irrefragable law of Nature required for the proper maintenance of every
one. For that which Aguilonius speaks here concerning qualities must also be
understood of Forms from whence the qualities do flow.

Now one there is, who from this Doctrine endeavors to Calumniate me, The souls
of Brute Beasts are not immortal.
as if I held that all the Forms of Beasts are separable, and may exsist in the
first act, out of their matter, and that therefore they are immortal. For this
never came into my mind, but I have held with all Philosophers, that no Form
saving the Humane is separable from its matter, but does perish therewith. Yet
this we must hold, that al Forms are not of the same kind, but some so coupled
to their Bodies and perfect, that the said Bodies perishing, they also perish,
such as are the Forms of an Ox, a Lion, a Goose, a Crow, and of other perfect
Animals. Nor can it be that the Body of a Lion, an Horse, a Goose, a Crow,
being destroyed, the Souls of the said Animals should remain alive. But it is
otherwise in plants, wherein the Soul may remain in the Root, Seed, branch,
Leaf, yea and as shall be shown hereafter, in the Juice. And the same holds in
Insects, whose Soul may be preserved in base matter unfurnished with Organs.
Yet these Forms cannot exist any where, but though they are not in an Organical
Body, yet they are in a proper matter, and indeed the very same which was their
matter in an Organical Body. Much less are they immortal, but that matter
perishing or being corrupted, they also are abolished, as was lately said.

Chap. 4. Of the End of Spontaneous Live Things.
THere remains yet one thing to be explained in General, Sundry opinions
concerning the end of Spontaneous livethings.
viz. to what end Spontaneous living Things are Generated. For that such Things
are not made by Chance or Fortune, was said before. But concerning the end of
these things several men are of several minds. Some are of Opinion, that they
are therefore generated, that putrid matter might be consumed, and the Air by
that means purged. For since out of putrid Bodies many bad exhalations are
lifted up, which defile the Air, whereby afterward more perfect Animals are
hurt and become diseased; to prevent this, and to provide for the health of men
and other perfect Animals, they hold that Nature produces these petty
Creatures, and spends the matter both in their Generation and nutrition. But in
good deed, these petty Animals are neither generated of putrid matter as such,
nor are they nourished therewith. For although they are made of matter which
putrifies, yet are they not made thereof as it is putrid, but rather of the
digested and better part thereof being Separated from the putrid. And therefore
after the Generation of Worms and such like Animals, putrid matter remains,
which pollutes the Air no less then it did before. Nor are these petty Animals
which are Generated out of putrefying matter nourished by putrid matter, but
seek their food upon other Creatures, as Plants and live Animals. Nor are those
Countries or places where these Creatures are plentifully bred, more healthful,
but for the most part more unhealthful then other places.

Others are of this Opinion, that as other created things, so these also are
made for the sake of Man. But Julius Caesar Scaliger, Exercit. 250. Sect. 1.
does justly laugh at them who say that Fleas were created for man's sake, to
suck out his unprofitable Blood, or that Wig-Lice are sent by Nature to wake us
out of our sleep in the nights, that we might pray to God. For are not Dogs
also and other brutes full of Fleas and Lice?

Others, as Avicenna, do hold that it is better that Lice should be bred, then
that the putrid matter should so remain; and they acknowledge rate workmanship
in the structure of such petty Animals. Others conceive such Animals were made
for the perfection of the Universe, and that not only perfect Animals, but also
such imperfect ones as these do make for the Pulchritude and Integrity thereof.
Which Scaliger seems to have taught, who in the place forecited thus writes:
Man for God, and the World is made for man. And a little after: Man is the
Prince of Animals. Now man should not have been Prince, if he had not been such
as he is; viz. in the middle. He could not be in the middle, save betwixt
extremes. Extremes were therefore made, that he might be in the midst. They
were therefore made for the sake of the middlemost. Now if any of the extremes,
or of those which are betwixt the middle and the extremes were wanting, there
would be a Vacuity or Empty space among the forms. Which would be a greater
fault in Nature, then an empty space without a Body. For what is more absurd
then a middle without extremes?

Which two last Opinions seem not much different, The true Opinion.
and are convenient enough, if rightly explained. For God the Work-Master of
all things would every where discover his Wisdom and power, and therefore was
rather willing that living Creatures should be multiplied in Nature, then
corrupt and putrid matter; and that the Bodies of perfect Animals when they are
corrupted should rather turn to Ignoble Animals, then mere putrid matter. Which
kind of Animals are various, yet determinate, and every one according to their
kind. For seeing, as Aristotle well writes, that as Souls differ one from
another in Nobleness and baseness, so also the Nature of that Body wherein they
are, and which is the proper subject of every Soul, does differ: this
difference must needs proced from some Form, which although in the living Body
of perfect Animals it is instead of matter; yet afterward, the Soul departing,
it rouses it self up, and performs that which is in its power to do. Hence,
look how many sorts of perfect Bodies there are, so many sorts there are also
of Animals arising from them; of which also Austin, Lib. 12. de Civitate Dei.
Cap. 4. to count (says he) the faults of Beasts, and Trees, The Glory of God
shines in the smallest Creatures.
and other mutable and mortal things, wanting either understanding, or Sense,
or Life, to be damnable, is a ridiculous Thing: since those Creatures have by
the will of the Creater received that manner of being, that by going and coming
they might perfect the lowest Pulchritude of times, agreeable to the parts of
this world, according to their kind. And a little after: the beauty of which
order therefore delights us not, because in this condition of our mortality
being interwoven therein we cannot discern the whole, to which the particles
which offend us are decently and aptly fitted. And Again: Nature considered in
her self and not with reference to our commodity or discommodity Glorisies her
Work-Master. For living Things make a nobler degree of Bodies, then things
simply mixed. And Aristotle himself 1 de Part. Animal Cap. 5. (which place also
we cited before) acknowledges the Wisdom of the most good and great God, in
such petty Animals, while he thus writes: With a Childish scornfulness to
despise and be troubled at the disputation and consideration of the meaner sort
of Animals, is an unworthy thing: since there is nothing in Nature which has
not some wonder in it. And that which Heraclitus is reported to have said to
those who coming to speak with him, and because they found him fitting in a
Bakers Shop Warming him at the Oven, they stepped back and would not go to him;
come in boldly quoth he, and be not ashamed, for the Immortal Gods are even in
this place also. The same must be done in the searching out of the Nature of
Animals. For we ought to attempt every thing, without any shame since the
Divinity of Nature is in them all, and her comely and beautiful Artifice. For
that is every where chiefty joined to the works of Nature, where nothing is
done rashly and by chance, but all to some end and purpose. Now the end for
which any thing is, or was made, has in it the Notion of goodness and Honesty.
But if any man think the contemplation of other Animals to be Base and Vile, be
must needs think the same of himself also, for we cannot behold without much
loathing those things whereof the Body of man consists, as Blood, Flesh, Bones,
Veins, and such like. So far Aristotle. Fortunius Licetus indeed, Lib. 1. de
Spont. Vivent. Ort. Cap. 11. opposes their Opinion who hold that such things
are Generated for the perfection of the universe, with this reason chiefly,
because the universe is before them in Nature, and furnished with its own
perfection, which no Generationof Spontaneous things can increase, and because
it many times happens, that some sort of these Spontaneous Creatures is wanting
in the world, and yet the world is not therefore imperfect. But although the
universe were perfect before some such Spontaneous Animal was bred, and
granting (whereas nevertheless if they are not in one place, they are commonly
always in another) that some sort of these Creatures is wanting in the world:
yet the forms from whence they proced never have been nor never are wanting.
And he himself grants, that Souls may lurk in other Bodies, as in a Vessel, so
as neither to have the notion of an efficient; nor of a Soul.

Chap. 5. The Sum of what has been said concerning the Spontaneous Original of
Living Things.
AND that we may contract what hitherto has been said concerning the
Spontaneous Original of live Things, into a small compass; A brief of the
opinion concerning the original of spontaneous live things.
Spontaneous live things are Generated, when either the Seed, or Seminal
principle, and the Soul it self of live things, being somwhere secretly hidden,
having obtained a fitting matter, and stirred up by the heat of some Ambient
Body, does put it self forth and begins to exercise vital operations: or when
the Form which was necessary to the constitution of the subject of some more
Noble living thing, the former Soul departing, becomes its own Master, and
being excited by the Ambient heat or the heat of putrefaction, and having
obtained a new disposition sit to exercise Vital actions, it rouzes it self,
and becomes an actuating and Vivifying Form to the subject matter, and begins
to exercise the actions of a living thing.

From whence it is apparent, Spontaneous live things spring only from live
things.
that all matter which is necessary to Spontaneous Generation, and which
contains secretly in it self the Form and Cause of a new and Spontaneous Body,
proceeds from living Things, and it is either Seed, or somewhat answering to
Seed, either the whole Carcass or part of the Carcass of a living Thing, or an
excrement, or somewhat that some way proceeds from a live thing, and contains in
it self a vital principle. For, as was said before, the Seed and Seminal
principle, and that which answers to Seed, may long lie hid in Atoms, diverse
matters, powders, dry things, and in the Earth. Yea and the more Ignoble sort
of Animals some of them, although they sometimes seem deprived of life, and to
exercise no Second act of the Soul, as it happens in Flies, Frogs and some
other Animals, which lie all Winter long as it were dead: yet the Soul lying
hid even in vile matter does vivifie the same, and being in the Spring
cherished and awakened by the Ambient heat, it exercises vital actions by the
Second act, and is then said to revive again. Moreover there is no living
thing, out of whose Carcass Excrements, Urine, Sweat, Vapors, and steams going
out of the Body, and filth gathered in the Skin and Garments sundry kinds of
Worms are not produced; so that Aristotle said rightly, that all things were
after a sort full of Souls. Now the Soul which lies hid in such things as
proceed from perfect Animals, and afterward proceeds from them, is always of
an inferior degree and sort, but never of the same or an higher, unless they be
some imperfect Animals, as was newly said of Flies and Frogs. For the same Soul
cannot inform Bodies of diverse sorts, nor cannot any thing act beyond its
strength. And although as was also said before, Fortunius Licetus, Lib. 2.
Chap. 17. teaches that the same Soul, or of the same sort and condition with
the Soul of the former live thing, is in Spontaneous live things: yet that may
not be allowed, for the cause aforesaid. And the Nature of Degeneration is far
different from that of the Spontaneous Original of living Things. For in
degeneration, as also in Silkworms and Butter-Flies, it may happen, that the
same Soul may be in diverse bodies, and so be naturally disposed to put on
diverse external Forms, as when Rye is turned into Wheat, and of the Egg is made
a Palmer-worm, then a Silkworm, then a Butter-Fly: but in Spontaneous
Generation, properly so called and of the second kind, it is impossible, that a
more noble Form should remain in the Carcass or Excrements. But these things
will be more clearly understood, now we come to particulars.

Chap. 6. Of the Spontaneous Original of Plants, and first of the Generation of
Mushroms.
NOw al living things Spontaneously generated whether of the first or second
order, Spontaneous live things how manifold they are.

The Generation of Mushroms and Puckfists.


do belong either to Vegetables or to Animals. And both of these again are
twofold: Vegetables are Mushroms, Puck Fists, Moss, and perfect Plants; Animals
are Plant-Animals, and true Animals.

In the first place all Puckfists are generated without any tillage or manifest
Seed, which as Scaliger says are to themselves Root, Stem and Fruit; also
Mushroms, and Toad-stools, which spring up so swiftly that they are generated
in one Night, and attain that greatness which belongs to their Nature. For they
neither afford any Seed of which to be generated, nor are they procreated and
multiplied by setting any part of them into the ground. Since therefore they
are bred of their own accord, they must needs have the common way of generation
with other Spontaneous Live things of which we spoke before. For whereas
Matthiolus writes, that the Earth by an hidden faculty does breed Puck-fists,
and Mushroms in her self, that must be fitly explained. For the Earth is not in
it self and by its own Nature the efficient Cause of Puck-fists and
Toad-Stools, but a Soul lying hid in the Earth, or in some Juice mingled with
the Earth. But whence that Soul proceeds is not so manifest.

Fortunius Licetus, Whence toad-stools have their Soul.
Lib. 3. de Spont. Viv. Ort Cap. 4. thus writes thereof: the Spontaneous
Original of Puck-sists and all Toad-stools in general, is, when the Soul of a
more perfect living thing, Plant or Animal, abiding in the Carcass, as in a
Vessel, being much impaired, and having gotten a matter not exactly disposed,
and having none of the best instruments for the Organization of the parts,
communicates it self for a Form and quickening Soul to the subject matter,
first disposed by the moist warmth or heat of the Ambient Air, which works
chiefly upon the Earth in the Spring and Autumn, with Thunder and Rain, or
rather with the Sun, after Rain. The same Licetus, Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent.
Ort. Cap. 5. conceives that the matter of Toad-stools is an aliment fit to
nourish plants, falling upon the ground from the Carcasses either of other
Plants or of Animals, which when the neighboring Plants do not draw to nourish
themselves, the Soul of its own accord turns it into Toad-stools and Puck-fists.

But in very deed, there is not only one kind of Toad-stools, The kinds of
toadstools or Mushroms
as hereafter will appear when we speak of their differences. Some grow to
Trees, some Spring out of the Earth. The former proceeds from the Soul in the
Body of the Tree, nustaking by reason of the unfitness of the matter it works
upon, but not from the Soul weakened. And as in Man certain Toad-stools are
bred, sundry sorts of Warts, Wens and other Excrescences, by reason of Vicious
Aliment, which Nature changes into the best Form it can, and such as the Nature
of the place will bear: so also in Trees, especially those that are aged, when
either vicious Aliment flows in, or in a weak part it is not well digested,
Nature generates such like Toad-stools. The rest have their nourishment in the
Earth, but not all that which Licetus would have. For if all that which Licetus
would have were the immediate matter of Toad-stools, they would grow every
where in Fields and Gardens; since there is such matter in all places: which
nevertheless does not come to pass. Nor has it ever been observed, that Toad
stools and Puck-fists were bred out of Animals; as for those which are said to
breed upon men, they are only so called by way of similitude.

And therefore I conceive it is more probable that Puck-fists do arise and grow
only upon and out of Plants. All toadstools or Mushroms arise from Plants.
And that in the Earth they are generated out of the Roots and Barks of Trees
and Shrubs, either Putrified and Corrupted, or sending some Juice out of
themselves, and consequently of such matter which was the proper and immediate
subject of the Soul of the Plant, and contains in it a subordinate Form, which
being afterward stirred up by heat, and having got a fitting matter it turns
to a Toad-stool to which it is Naturally disposed. For when somewhat is
separated and divided from the Tree, and is no longer governed by the Form of a
plant, then that concealed Form is stired up by the moist Heat of the Earth
about it, and begins to exercise the Function of a Soul, and of its subject
matter being disposed thereto it forms the Body of an imperfect or half Plant.
Whence it is that after Thunder and Showers great store of Toad-stools are wont
to Spring up. and that which Rains especially coming down with Thunder do
perform by their Warm moisture, that also Leaven mixed with Blood-warm water can
effect. And Matthiolus writes, in Lib. 1. Dioscorid. Cap. 93. Toadstools from a
white poplar tree.
that a white Poplar Tree cut off close by the ground to the very Root, and
Sprinkled with hot Water wherein Leaven is dissolved, within four days brings
forth store of Mushroms or Toad-stools very pleasant to Eat.

And because Toad stools are speedily Generated and grow up, Why toadstools are
so suddenly Generated.
Licetus holds Lib. 3. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 10. that there must needs come
together at once many such Atoms as are fit to Generate Toad stools, so as to
make up a sensible bulk; because the Soul of one Atome is so weak, that it
cannot vivifie nor shape the matter of a Toad-stool, nor perform that which the
Souls of many Atoms flowing together into one Body and becoming one, can do.
But there is some doubt in this point. For wonderful, truly, is the Nature of
Forms and Souls, which of it self has no quantity, and has the same force in
a small Body which it has in a great. Nor does the bulk of a Toad-stool prove
that which he says; since we see of an exceeding small Seed a great Plant does
arise, matter being drawn out of the Earth for the formation and Augmentation
thereof. The most swift increase of Toad-stools does rather seem to persuade
what Licetus thinks; since it is not credible, that in so short a space of time
a Soul lurking in so small a Body can draw to it so great a quantity of matter.
Unless any man will peradventure say, that the matter is prepared by little and
little by the Soul of the Toad stool, and afterward it suddenly Springs up.

The Differences or Sorts of Mushroms or Toad-stools, and of Puck-fists.
And although all Toad-stools do arise from plants, and the Roots, Branches,
The differences of toadstools.
Stocks, and Barks of Trees and shrubs: yet there is great difference amongst
them, in regard of diversity of their matter. For some grow to Trees and Wood,
some grow under Trees and in the ground. Nor is it easy to find a Toad-stool
where there is not or has not been some Tree or Wood. The original of toad
stools which grow upon Trees.
And the matter, truly, of such as grow upon Trees and Wood proceeds in the
first place from the substance it self of the Trees, or that matter which is
the proper subject of the Soul of the Tree. But a Toad-stool is not made
thereof, so long as it is under the dominion of the Soul of the Tree, or Shrub,
but when it is deserted thereby, and either the whole Plant, or some part
thereof comes to die. And therefore we see that Toad-stools for the most part
do not grow upon sound and uncorruped Trees, but on such as are old, and in
some part decayed. Secondly, The vicious Aliment of the Tree or Shrub. Thirdly,
some Excrement shed from the Tree or Bark; whence Pliny, Lib. 22. C. 23. writes
that Toad-stools are bred of the Phlegm of Trees. And indeed, it is credible
that Toad-stools which grow on living Treees by means of the two last causes
and manners are the works of the Soul it self of the Tree. For like as,
according to what was formerly said, Toad-stools and Warts are generated on the
Body of Man, while Nature, which is never idle, turns and Forms the vicious and
superfluous Humor (which breaking through the Membranes and Pores, it cannot
change into the substance of the part, by reason of the unfitness of the matter
and the weakness of the part) into such a substance; so credible it is, that
the same does happen in trees.

The matter of those which Spring out of the Earth is either some part of a
Root, Toadstools Springing out of the Earth.
or a Bark, or some other part separate from the Tree. And therefore where
Toadstools are bred, there for the most part you shall find the Barks and parts
of Trees, which when they are corrupted and Rot, by Rain falling upon them they
are covered in the Earth, and being cherished with the Heat thereof are changed
into Toadstools. Out of a poplar tree

Out of a Fig Tree.


And that also may be artificially procured. So of the Leaves of Poplar Trees
cut in pieces and buried in the ground Toad-stools do arise, as Scaliger
observes Exercit. 104. Sect. 17. the same happens of a Fig Tree buried
underground, as Athenaeus, Lib. 2. Cites from Nicander, whose Words are these.
Cover a Fig Tree under store of Dung,
And Water't well, then store of Mushrooms Young
Will Spring apace.


Hitherto also may be referred the Toad-stools which grow out of Tree branches
burnt, Out of tree branches Wither^d.
of which Cardan, Lib. 13. de Subtle. Page 509. you shall have Mushroms when
you burn dry sticks, and Rain falls upon them, or (in case it Rain not) if you
sprinkle Water upon the remainders. And that this is so, not only when the
sticks are burnt, but also when they are not burnt, any one may easily try. For
when I had used to manure my Garden with Earth that had small fragments of
sticks mingled therewith, the second year there grew up store of small Mushroms
or Toad-stools al about.

Again though no part of the Tree or Shrub be found evidently corrupted in the
ground: yet of them Toad-stools are bred, when the Juyces or Excrements of
Trees lie hid in the ground. For such is the Nature of these more Ignoble
Forms, that even in the smallest Atoms and Juyces they can remain entire,
which afterward gaining a convenient place, and being stirred up by the heat
of some Ambient Body, they rouse themselves, and Form and shape the Body of a
Toad-stool. For since a Soul can abide in the smallest Seeds of Plants, and
when it gets place and matter it can Form a great Plant: why may not these
Forms much more Ignoble be preserved entire in the small Bodies or Atoms of
Plants?

Now the chief cause of the variety of Toad-stools is the diversity of Trees
and Shrubs from whence they arise; The variety of Toad stools.
for some forts grow upon or under some kind of Trees or Shrubs, and some upon
or under others. So, those great and very white Toad-stools like a man's Skul,
which Surgeons use to stop Blood, and are called Crepitus Lupi, do hardly
grow any where but in Vineyards, and they grow out of Vine Branches dead and
corrupted. Also the variety of the Parts themselves of the Trees.

Howbeit, I am apt to believe that the variety of Toad-stools does not only
depend upon the diversity of the matter which Trees afford them, but also upon
the variety of matter which is otherwise found in the Earth. For seeing certain
it is that all this great bulk of some Toad-stools does not come from the Tree,
doubtless the form or Soul communicated by the Tree does in the Earth associate
such matter as it meets with, and thereof frames to it self a convenient Body;
as also we see that small Seeds do draw matter and aliment out of the Earth, and
that thence great Plants grow up. And that the Soul of the Toad-stool does
snatch any Obvious matter, and thereof shape a Toad-stool, appears even hereby,
that Pliny Lib. 19. Chap. 2. writes: We know what happened to Laertius Licinius a
Pretorian, being Judge at Carthage in Spain, a few years since; who biting a
Mushrom had his fore Teeth loosned by a Brass Farthing that was therein.

Of the Hearts Toad-stool or Boletus Cervinus so called.
And since among other Toad-stools, both in regard of the shape and strong
smell, the Fungus Cervinus or Hearts Toad-stool is remarkable, Now Matthiolus
writes thereof, as of a thing by himself lately found out, Lib. 3. Epist. Vlt.
ad Julium Moderatum in these words: seeing I know that you are much delighted
with novelties, I have sent you with these my Letters a certain Subterranean
Puck-fist, which the Bohemians call Hearts Mushrom. For I conceive it is a thing
you never heard of before, because no Ancient nor late writers make any mention
thereof; and because it is not to be found, save in those Woods where there are
many Hearts and Hunters, who know these secrets of Nature: but because these
things are unheard of in your parts, I will not have you any longer
unacquainted with the History and Virtue of this Toad-stool. Now Hunters relate
that this Toad-stool after the manner of ordinary puck-fists grows under the
ground, where the Earth is infected with the Hearts Sperm falling thereupon.
Which many times happens when the Male draws his Yard out of the Genitals of
the Female containing Seed in the passage, by reason of the Females withdrawing
her self from the Violence of the Male. And perhaps no man could ever find this
Toad-stool, did not the Hearts themselves at a certain season of the year
discover the place where they grow. For led by a Natural Instinct they scrape
with their fore Feet upon the ground whereunder the said Toad stool grows which
they are said to discern by the smell. For the Toadstool has a very strong
smell, especially when it is first dug up. Hunters and Countrymen which are
acquainted with the Secret and frequent the Woods diligently observe the
places, being drawn by the Hearts Feet, and digging the pit they take out the
Toad-stools and sell them to the Apothecaries, who cut them in pieces, draw them
upon Threads, and dry them afterward in the shadow, and keep them for Medicinal
uses. They are of the same shape (for the most part) which we see in other
Puck-fists, yet all are round like Globes and uneven. The outmost thin Rind is
swarthy somewhat, but the fleshy Fungus substance is white. Some say there is a
certain kind of these Puck-fists resembling a man's Yard Erected, with the Nut
uncovered, and at the other end certain Knobs resembling Testicles. But that
vulgar Opinion of the Hunts-Men touching the Original of these Toad-stools
sounds like a Fable, into which perhaps the strong smell, and in the latter sort
the shape, might bring them. Whereof Thomas Jordanus, de Pest. Phaen. Tract. 3.
P. 605. The Hearts toad-stool is not bred of Har^^ Seed
They exceedingly commend the Hearts Toad stool so called, bred of the Sperm of
that Beast, and found by the Goats Scraping up of the Earth. They are found
truly in such places where in the Memory of Man there was never any Heart seen.
At Trenzine a Famous town of Hungary about the Clifts of Carpathus they are
very plentiful; in Mountanous places, and dark Woods, where though you may find
Hearts, yet is there not so great plenty, as to suffice for the Generation of
Wain-Loads of these Puckfists, if that were to be thought true which is related
of their Generation. Also I have as touching the latter kind been brought into
a suspicion by what I observed here at Wittenberge, in the year 1626. For the
Trench being to be repaired and the City to be fortified, the Captain of the
Garrison walking accidentally in the Ditch, drawn by the smell* he found one of
these Puck-sists having the form of a Man's Yard, and wondering (for he had from
Hunters drunk in the foresaid Opinion concerning the Original thereof) how in a
place where no Heart had been this Toadstool could be Generated, he brought me
to the place, and being some spaces distant I also perceived that same
exceeding strong smell proper to this kind, and under an Elder Shrub I found ten
such Puck-fists. But seeing it is certain, that there never came any Heart into
that place, probable it is, that such Puck-fists are not Generated of the Hearts
Sperm, but of the Juice or corruption of some Plant, and matter determined to
this kind of Toad-stool, arising from some certain Plant.

Toad-stools growing out of Stones.
Moreover this is also worthy of consideration whether Toad-stools or
Puck-fists grow out of Stones. Toadstools out of Stones.
Many learned men affirm the same, and hold that there are Mushroms fit to Eat
growing out of Stones. Jul. Caesar Scal. Exercit. 173. Sect. 2. writes: The
Particular Nature of a certain Stone is to be reckoned amongst the most
wonderful. This Stone is highly esteemed by the Romans. I saw one at Naples, in
which Kingdom they say they are found* It has a thick crust. Which being
covered with Earth nine inches deep, and sprinkled with warm Water, the fourth
day after it sends forth Mushroms. And Cardan, Lib. 13. de Subtilitate, says:
Mushroms grow from certain broad Stones buried underground, after the manner of
measures, four inches underground within four days Water being sprinkled
thereupon. They abound in groves and grow speedily: for they require a dry
heat, and therefore those stones must have some adustion, for the Generation of
Mushroms is speedy, and as it were without a Root, for nothing grows without a
Root indeed. For if is draw aliment, if it live, or grow though it live not, it
draws out of the Earth; now that which draws must be Joined to that whereout it
draws; and the part whereby it is Joined is the Root. And Matthiolus upon
Dioscorides, Lib. 4. Cap. 78. has these Words: Mushroms are at this day in so
great request at the Tables of Italy, (where they are most frequently Eaten)
that at Naples stones are found, which being Dug up and carried into Wine
Cellars, covered a little with Earth, and now and then sprinkled with
Blood-Warm Water, within four days they produce pleasant Mushroms. These
Stones I have seen at Rome and Naples; where they are kept with great
diligence, because by help of them they can Eat Mushroms when they please.
Which is confirmed by Johannes Baptista Porta the Neapolitan in Sua Villa Lib.
10. Cap. 70. The last kind of Mushroms (quoth he) are Bred out of Stones. They
are cropped off to be Eaten, and fresh one^ grow up, by a continual fruitfulness,
They grow to their perfection in seven days; fixtimes a year they cut them
off; the Stone is covered with nine inches depth of Earth. The Stones are
brought to Naples from the Mountain Vesuvius; to Surrentum from Fagetus the
highest Mountain of that Tract; to Abellinum from the Parthenian Mount; in
Apulia, from Garganus and the highest part of the Mountains; for when they once
perceive the stones have born Mushroms, they dig them up, and expose them to
sale. Sometimes they do not grow in the fashion of Caps, but like Tendrels or in
the shape of Asparagus, and divided into branches. And Fortunius Licetus Lib.
3. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 11. relates, that Jacobus Antonius Marta a
Neapolitan told him, that the Parthenian Mount aforesaid, the highest of all
the Mounts in the Territory of Naples, in the top thereof has store of Stones
of a wonderful Nature, which being put under the droppings of the Wine
Spiggots, and drinking in the drops of Wine do in the morning afford Mushroms,
sprung up the night before, delightful to the taste, and not prejudicial to
Health.

But, What kind of Stones they are out of which Musheoms grow.
forasmuch as the said Licetus, in the place cited, relates, that he saw at
Padua, in the Garden of Benedictus Sylvaticus a Famous Physician, three such
Mushroms bearing Stones, sent him from the Country of Naples, and that he did
Eat Mushroms which grew upon them; and adds, that those Stones were very soft,
yielding to the touch, so that they seemed rather pieces of Wood then Stones;
we may justly conclude, that Mushroms never grow out of true Stones, but that
these Neapolitan Stones so accounted are pieces of wood, by a Stone-making
Juice hardened into the Similitude of Stones; or as Licetus would have it, that
these Stones had their original from Earth, which being full of the parts and
Juyces of Plants was by a stone making juice hardened. Which Woods or parts of
Plants containing in them the Form of a Mushrom, when by the pouring on of Wine
or warm Water they come to be softired, and to be mingled with the juice of the
Earth about them, and by the heat of wine or warm water to be digested, the
Form lying hid within breaks into act and Forms the Body of a Mushrom. But
those Mushroms which are bred by Wine dropping upon the stone do owe their
original chiefly to the Wine. Mushroms growing from wine dropping upon the
Stone.
Yet the Clay which is there found, or is Generated by the continual dropping
of the Wine upon the Stone may be mingled therewith.

Chap. 7. Of Plants which grow up of themselves.
NOW several Men are of several minds as concerning the manner how Plants come
to grow of their own accord. Plants, how they grow up of themselves
Some follow the Opinion of Erastus propounded Chap. 1. and hold, that every
Earth is endued with a peculiar faculty of producing Peculiar Plants, or that
it has a Seminal power communicated by the blessing of God at the first
Creation, which is brought into act by the Sun and influx of the Stars. And
they are induced so to think, because, if Earth dug out of the deepest Pit
or Well be placed upon the highest turret, it produces Plants. And Johannes
Baptist. Port. writes Lib. 2. Phytognom. Cap. 1. That when he had gotten Earth
out of the deepest Cellars of certain Houses, that there might be no suspicion
of Seed, and had set it in the open Air on the top of his House, lest the wind
should bring seeds into it from elsewhere, not many days after out of the
several sorts of Earth in so many baskets several kinds of Plants Sprung up,
but such as usually grow in the Neapolitan Soil. For clayish ground did bring
forth one sort, the Pateolan Mould another, gravelly Earth another. And Porta
adds that in the Island of Crete, whithersoever a man carry the Earth, unless
somewhat else be sowed therein, it presently brings forth Cypress. And most
certain it is, that in Fields and Meadows some Plants are Natural to one Field
or Meadow, some to another. Which Opinion if any man will follow, I shall not
quarrel with him. Yet these doubts occur in this Opinion: first, that God did
once command the Earth, at the Creation, to produce Plants, and it was
accordingly done: And he blessed the Plants, and commanded them to produce
their Seeds, whereby they might multiply themselves, but he did not bless the
Earth. Which doubt whether it can be answered by saying, that it is not to be
understood of simple Earth, but of the kinds of Earth, of which Questionless
there are many, and they mixed Bodies, and that these mixed Earths have a Seminal
faculty put into them by the Creator whereby they produce Plants; I leave to
the Judgment of the Reader. St. Ambrose seems to incline to this Opinion, who
in Lib. 4. Hexamer. Writes thus concerning this matter: That first word of God
whereby he created all Creatures, is the Law of Nature, which has continued
ever since in the Earth, giving a rule to Future succession. Another doubt is,
that this Earth does not bring forth Plants before it is moistened with Rain.
So that the Seminal Virtue may seem rather to be communicated thereto by
Showers of Rain, then to be Naturally implanted therein.

But suppose, indeed, The manner of the Spontaneous generation of Plant
that this is one manner of the Spontaneous Generation of Plants; Yet is it not
the only manner: but that oftentimes Seed is communicated from elsewhere to an
Earth of it self barren, appears even hereby, in that it has been observed
that after Rains and inundations of Water new Plants have sprung up in certain
places. But how this comes to pass, is not very apparent. I conceive that all
this Spontaneous Generation of Plants, may be reduced to those two manners,
which I formerly propounded in General. For some plants although they are not
Generated of Seed manifest to our senses, nor spring from branches set in the
Earth, yet they really proceed from another Plant of the same sort, and from
the Seed thereof; which although it be not in a visible Body, yet is it in the
smallest Particles or Atoms containing the Soul of the same sort, which
Particles may lie concealed in Rain or in the ground; whose Soul having
afterward gained a fit place, and being provoked by the heat of the Ambient
Air, it displaies it self. Licetus indeed. Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent. Ort. Cap.
13. Whether Atoms containing the Soul may be called Seed
does grant that these Atoms perform the Office of Seed, and answer to Seed by
way of proportion, but he denies that they are really seed: but I see no cause
why he should do so, unless peradventure inasmuch as this Seed has no external
Figure as other Seeds have; meanwhile it may well be called a Seminal Principle.
For an external Figure and a certain manner of Formation does nor primarily
constitute Seed, but the Soul lying hid in the same with that same implanted
Spirit which is said to answer to the Element of the Stars, and makes the Seeds
fruitful: which because they with their subject may be in the smallest Atoms,
there is no cause why they may not be called a peculiar sort of Seeds, or a
Seminal Principle. And although the Soul which lies hid in such small Bodies or
Atoms does not inform the Earth or Water wherein it is contained, but lies
therein concealed as in a Vessel; yet those little Bodies it informs wherein it
is as its proper subject, and is in them according to its first Act, and it
then comes to its Second Act when it has got a convenient place.

But other Plants are more properly said to be Spontaneously Generated, when
they proceed not from a Seed or Soul of the same sort, but from that Form which
in a more noble Plant was instead of the next matter, and the subject of its
specifical Soul, just as Toad-stools (whereof we treated in the former Chapter)
and moss do grow upon Trees.

Now Moss grows upon sundry Trees, as on the Cedar, Poplar, Oak, and
Pitch-Tree, from which in the Mountains of the Valley of Anania above Trent,
The generation of Moss.
Matthiolus says he had frequently gathered very long Hairy moss, much sweeter
and fairer then that which grows upon the Poplar and Oak, in 1 Dioscorid. C.
20. Yea, and there is hardly any Tree but when it is old it bears Moss, and it
is a token of a Trees being Old, when it begins to be covered with Moss. Also
Fab. Columna has described sundry sorts of Moss, Minus Cognitar. Stirp. Lib.
10. Cap. 158, 159, 160.

To Mosses belong the kinds of Liver-wort, which although, as Dioscorides Lib.
4. Cap. 48. writes, it grows familiarly on Stones, as on Rocks, the Stones of
Wells, the Tiles of Houses: yet the same Fabius Columna tells us they grow also
upon the stumps of Trees, in moist and Champian Countries especially, in the
foresaid Book, Cap. 154. Yea in our Countries also that same kind of Moss which
they call Tree-lung-wort does grow upon Trees.

Nor must we here pass over that singular Opinion of Fortunius Licetus, The
Generation of Plants out of dried Plants.
which will seem a Paradox to some, touching the Generation of Plants out of
dried Plants, which are commonly thought to be dead and void of all Soul. We
have in General, indeed, spoken somewhat hereof before: yet I think fit more
Particularly in this place to repeat the said Question, and more clearly to
explain the same. Now Fortunius Licetus is of this Opinion, that the same Soul
which did constitute the Living Creature does remain in the dead Carcass, but
does not inform the same: Yet that it does again rouse it self, and is able
again to perform the Office of a Form; and that two manner of Ways. For
sometimes the same Soul (he says) being decayed and weakened does procreate
imperfect things: and sometimes again, as he shows Lib. 3. de his qui diu sine
Alimentis Vivunt, Cap. 7. out of the Body which is accounted for dead a new
plant is produced. Forasmuch as Plants plucked up out of the Earth, or broken
off from their Roots or trunks, do not presently die, only being destitute of a
fit place out of which they may draw Aliment they cannot grow, and they cease
bearing branches, leaves, and Fruits; yet in the mean time the self same Soul
does Vegetate that Body: as seeds that are kept in the Winter time show no
other sign of a Soul in them, but that their Body is thereby kept alive; whence
it is, that the said seed is fit to be sown and to be used in Physic: but when
it is no more animated but corrupted, it becomes both unfit to be sown, and
loses all its virtue in Physic: If the Wood of an Olive (says he) be simply
dry, it will live no longer; since life consists in moisture, and dryness
according to Aristotle is the Death of Plants; but there will be the Carcass of
an Olive Tree, wherein with some degree of Heat, and some Footsteps of the
former temper, (if the Soul be yet contained in it as in a Vessel; not
quickening the Wood) when it is dug up and has gained a fitting heat for
life from the Ambient Air, and like its former temperament, then it becomes fit
for the Soul again therein as the constituting Form of an Olive Tree to show it
self: A dry alive stock will sprout again.
but if the Olive Wood were not exactly dry, but still had life in it, it would
sprout of it self, and produce an Olive Tree, by a non-Spontaneous Generation.
Now this chiefly brought him into that Opinion, in that Woods do last many
Years and preserve their strength. Yea, and which is strange, it has been
observed that they have sprouted the Second time and performed the operations
of the Soul. Of Which Virgil, 2 Georgic. Some need no Roots; the Pruner Young
Slips cuts,
And them into the Earth securely Puts.
And (wondrous to be told) an Olive Tree
Out from a dry cut Trunk often Springs we see.


Which Verse although some interpret concerning ingrafting: yet they do it
contrary to the mind of Virgil, who treats of ingrafting in the verse
following. And why should that be counted a wonder? But Servius has rightly
interpreted this Verse. That (says he) which is here said is true of the Olive
and Myrtle, whose dry stocks are cut to the middle or pith, and so put under
ground, and from them Trees do shoot forth, which is strange indeed.
Theophrastus taught the same thing Lib. 3. de Cause. Plant. Cap 4. who writes,
that in an ordinanry course of Nature the dry wood of an Olive Tree will sprout
again. For those Woods also, says he, which sprout of their own accord, as the
Olive-Tree-Wood, and all such like, which they reckon for Miracles and Wonders,
have their Reason in Nature. For they are Naturally long lived and apt to
sprout, because of their thickness and moisture, and therefore as soon as they
are sensible of any Liquor from without, presently they send forth branches. In
very deed, for the most part Wood covered with Earth and laid in moist places
does Sprout; besides that, a bough cut off has been seen to shoot forth Twigs
soon after, because it had in it moisture enough, and the Spring was at Hand,
the like whereof happens to the Squil or Sea-Onion, and such other Plants as
Sprout after they are hanged up in the House. And the said Theophrastus in Lib.
5. de Hist. Plant. Cap. 10. writes, that the Wood of the Olive Tree does above
all other Woods Sprout and send forth Twigs, both rude, or rough and when it is
wrought into some work, if it be sensible of any moisture and have attained a
moist place, so that a part of a folding door has been said to Sprout, and a
wooden Cup which fell into the Dirt. So, credible Authors relate that Hercules
his Club which was made of Olive-Tree-Wood did Sprout. Hercules his Club did
sprous.
And Fortunius Licetus, in the place fore alleged Lib. 3. de his qui diu
vivunt fine Alimento, Cap. 7. writes that he saw at Rechum in the Garden of his
Uncle Bartholomew Licetus, the stock of an Olive Tree which had been Planted,
and was now near dried up and had been Naked ten years together, and of it self
separated from the Trunk, and never after that Planted in the Earth; which
being thrust into the ground near a Well to prop up some other Wood, and Nailed
to the Wood which it bore up with Iron Nails, it budded and branched many
Olive branches laden with Leaves and Fruit, and afterward bare in like manner,
many years. Johannes Ludovicus de la Cerda confirms the same, who, upon that
Verse of Virgil aforesaid, commenting, thus writes: the Eyes of many most
skilful Husbandmen have been witnesses, of whom I made enquiry: the Art it
self is a Witness, which is now much in request in Spain, where at present I
live. The Husbandmen cut the stock of an Olive Tree (whose Root and branches
are taken away) into many parcels, and so they bury it in the ground, which
forms first a Root and then a Tree, which Virgil wonders at; for it is really a
wonderful thing.

Other Trees also besides the Olive have been observed to do as much. Yea
Aristotle himself grants, 2. Phys. Cap. 1. The spear of Romnlus being made of
ash sprouted.
that a Wooden Bed-sted buried in the ground may Sprout. They report as much of
the Male wild Ash, of which Romulus his spear was made, which Plutarch in the
Life of Romulus writes that it took Root again, and sprouted. Which Ovid
confirms Lib. 1. Metamorph. And as Astonished Romulus of Old
Did on Mount Palatine his Lance behold
To flourish with green Leaves: the fixed Foot
Stood not on Steel, but on a living Root.
Which now no weapon, spreading Arms displaid;
And gave Admirers unexpected shade.


And Jalius Caesar Scaliger, in Theophrast. de Causs. Plant. Lib. 5. Cap. 1.
Writes, that he has seen Willow Rods carelessly thrown away, and not so much as
stuck into the Earth, to sprout, yea and a great Trunk of a Poplar long after
it was cut off.

The premises therefore being such, and confirmed by the Testimony of most
learned men, Yea, by experience it self, upon which the Judgment of Licetus is
founded, although his Opinion seem Paradoxical, yet it is not simply to be
rejected, but to be dexterously explained and limited. All Plants do not die as
soon as they are plucked out of the Earth.
This in the first place is certain; that all Plants plucked up out of the
ground do not presently die, as may be seen in the Squil and the American
Sempervivum. But that all Plants plucked up out of the Earth and dried should
retain their Souls and live, and that only nutrition in some sort ceases in
them, this cannot easily be granted, especially if the Root being cut off, and
the bark taken away, they be cut in pieces. Much less can it be granted, that
the Carcasses of Animals do retain their former Soul. For every Soul requires
its proper subject, viz. Innate Heat, consisting of the implanted and influent
heat, in Animals; but in Plants, likewise, a temperament so and so disposed,
which because in dried Plants it is changed, so they come also to lose their
Life.

But because the former experience cannot be denied, Which way a dry Olive tree
may come to sprout again.
we are now to enqure how it has and may come to pass, that the Wood of a dry
Olive Tree should Sprout again. Which though it be hard to find out, yet
because it is not Miraculous but Natural, I will propound my Opinion: let every
man follow what Opinion he likes best. And in the first place, this must be
remembered, as has been many times said before, Sundry ways of the Propagation
of Plants.
that there is not one manner of the Propagation of Plants. For all Plants are
not propagated by Seed formed after a certain fashion, and included in one
part, but that same juice containing in it the Seminal principle is in many
d^^fused through the whole Plant; so that those Plants may be propagated by a
sl^p or branch pulled off, or by their Roots, and so multiply themselves; and
after this manner the Seminal faculty communicated either from Seed properly so
called, or from a Root, or any other way from a Plant of the same sort, may
many times lie long hidden. Jul. Caesar Scaliger relates, that the Seed of
Bears-Foot has thus lain hid in the Earth eight years together, Exercitat.
140. In my little Garden (says he) which is next my study, I planted
Bears-Foot, I kept it a long time diligently. Some Thievish Herb gatherers,
from whom nothing can be kept, had to my thinking plucked it all away by the
Roots. For above eight years there was no appearance thereof. A Berberry was set
near that place. The place it self was dug and raked, and sowed with
patience Seed, which they here falsely count to be Raved. The Patience grew and
filled the bed and was gathered. I falling sick, that plat lay wast and was not
stirred for three years together. This present year I find the remainder of my
Bears-Foot, viz. two Plants with most beautiful neat leaves, a large stalk and
fairly flowred. And therefore as in Wheat, Barley, Oats, and other dead
Plants, the Seed may remain in the straw shut up in its Chaffie cases: so also,
that same juice containing the Seminal Principle, diffused through the whole
Plant, may in some Plants dead and dried last for a season. And as
(nevertheless) he should not say truly who should say that dried Oats or dried
Wheat in the barn does live, although in the dried straw a living Seed is
contained: so also it must not be said that the foresaid wood does live, but
only that it contains in it self a Seminal principle. Yet few Plants once
dried do recover that same Ancient Seminal disposition which was necessary to
the exercise of the Second Act. That it sometimes so happens in the Olive Tree
has been observed, since it above all others abounds with that same Fat
Balsamic Juice. That the same has happened in an Ash and Poplar has been said
before. Herbs that Root, revive again
But that Herbs after they are rotten and corrupted may revive again, daily
experience shows, while in Fields and Gardens manured with Dung those Plants
which have putrified in the Dung are Generated, the Juice which contains the
Seminal principle having remained unhurt. And al Husbandmen know, Of Hogs-dung
Sow-Thistles are bred.
that of Hogs-Dung Sow-Thistle is bred, in Vine-yards, Gardens and Fields. This
Thistle is a Familiar food to Swine, and therefore the Germans call it
Soew-Diestel, Sow-Thistle. And al these things although they seem wonderful and
almost incredible: yet that they are true appears even hereby, in that also of
the Tears and Gums of Plants Plants are generated, as shall be said hereafter.

But although these things are true of Plants: The Souls of Brutes Mortal.
yet the Souls of perfect brute Animals cannot survive after Death. And whereas
out of the Carcasses of Animals such Ignoble petty Animals are bred as
aforesaid, that does not happen because the Soul of the Animal remaining the
same being reduced to a more Ignoble degree does produce worms (for the Soul of
a Man, a Lion, an Ox, does not go into such Animals) but because the
subordinate Form lying hid does then rowze it self up, as was said before.

Moreover, after both the manners before propounded sundry Plants do
Spontaneously arise. For in the first place, out of the Ground although never
sowed with any Seed some Plants do spring up of themselves, as Virgil said of
Trees. Some Plants without Man's labor freely come.

Now this does nor only happen when (which belongs not to this place) the Seeds
themselves entire are carried by force of Winds or overflowings of Waters into
some other place; but also when those little Bodies containing seed in them are
carried thither either by Winds, Rain, or inundations of Water, or when some
Plant of the same kind has putrified in that place, and yet has there left
its Seminal rudiments. Laserpitium bred by a shower.
And thus Pliny writes concerning the Spontaneous Original of the herb
Laserpitium, Lib. 19. Cap. 3. We find, (says he) in most credible Greek
Authors, that this Herb suddenly sprung up after the Earth had been moistened
with a Pitchy shower, about the Gardens of the Hesperides, and the greater
Syrtis, seven years before the building of Cyrena, which was built 143. years
after our City. And the force of the shower reached four thousand African
furlongs. Doubtless that same shower, so thick, black, and Pitchy as it were,
did contain many small Seminal Atoms of Laserpitium, containing in them the
rudiments of that Plant, which being forced into the ground produced that Herb
all along that tract of Land aforesaid. And after this manner, viz. How plants
are propagated by Rains.
those little particles containing in them the Seed being brought from elsewhere
by showets, Winds, inundation of Waters, whole Woods have sometimes sprung up of
themselves, as Theophrastus does witness, Lib. 1. de Causis Plant. Cap. 5. Also
after this manner, in Earth dug deep out of the ground, and containing no
Seeds in it, being exposed to the Air and Rain, Plants do Spring up. Unless any
man will follow their Opinion which we mentioned at the beginning of this
Chapter, who hold, that the Earth by Virtue of the divine Benediction given at
the Creation has a peculiar faculty to produce certain peculiar Plants.

Moreover, Another manner of the Spontaneous Generation of Plants is, Plants
bred of Plants of a differente sort.
when a pl^n^ is generated out of another Plant of a several sort, in the
Earth. The Generation of which Plants is the same with that of Mushroms, viz.
When an inferior form which was formerly under the superior Form in the notion
of matter, now the superior Form is lost, is set at liberty, and shapes a
convenient House for it self. Thus Moss grows upon Trees. Unless any man will
here also hold, that when the Soul through fault of its Organs (which happens
in aged Trees) or badness of the Aliment, cannot change it into such parts as
it ought to do, that it may not be idle it Generates Moss and such like Things.

Hither may be referred the degeneration of Plants, The degeneration of Plants.
of which we spoke also before Cap. 2. when a Plant springs indeed from Seed,
but of a different kind from it self; when Water-Mint turns to mint; Wheat to
Darnel; Barley to Oats, Basil into running Betony; a rape into a redish; a
white Vine into a black; a black into a white; Barley in Wheat; Wheat into
Barley, and other Plants degenerate into others, Whereof Scaliger has a rare
example, Exercit. 140. I sowed with mine own Hand the Seed of the Vulgar
Smallage, which they commonly but falsely call Persley, by a Wall which would
defend it from the Summers heat; that growing up and preserved by the shadow it
might serve for the Kitchins use. But it never sprung up according to the usual
manner: but another Plant quite different therefrom, to my admiration. It was
that which the more learned call Scorodotis and has been hitherto falsely taken
to be Scordium by many. Its leaves when it is young (if you look on it at a
distance) are like Violet Leaves, it has a white flower, with the Smell and
Taste of Garlic. [This should be that we call Jack by the Hedge, or sauce alone,
and our Herbals All^aria.] in which case nevertheless a man must take heed that
he be not deceived, and think that Plant which springs up from some secretly
hidden Seed to arise from the degeneration of another. We spoke before of
Bears-Foot from Scaliger, in the place lately cited, how that when he thought
it was Rooted al up, and had not appeared for about eleven years, at length it
sprung up again.

Now how this degeneration comes to pass is doubtful: How it comes to pass.
Fortunius Licetus, indeed, Lib. 4. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 35. and elsewhere,
holds that Forms do also degenerate whiles they are weakened, and through
weakness come to degenerate into weaker Forms. Now he writes that they are
weakened, either by a contrary agent working upon them by it self; or upon the
mutation of the subject upon which they depend as to their Essence; or from
both causes together. So the Soul of a Calf when it dies degenerates into the
Souls of Worms and Bees, which Spontaneously breed out of the Carcass thereof;
so the Essence of Wheat is changed into the substance of Darnel and Oats; so
heat Fainting away degenerates into Luke-warmness, so that not only the Forms
of the substances but of the accidents also are changed, as he writes. But as
was said before, this degeneration of forms, so that the form of a calf should
degenerate into the form of worms, is not agreeable to Reason. Rather there is
a certain kndred of Forms, as Matthiolus speaks in his preface upon
Dioscorides, and some Seeds are Equivocal, that is, common as it were to diverse
sorts. And as the fame internal Form Bears one while the Form of a Palmer Worm,
another while of a Butter Fly, another while of another Worm, and then of a
Silk Worm: so also in Plants, some Souls are so constituted, that, according to
the disposition of the matter they may form now this, now that shape of Body;
or they are so subordinate that one is Lady and the other a Servant, and the
Lady exercises her Sovereignty so long as the matter of which the Plant is
formed and nourished is well disposed; but when there is any deficiency therein,
the Hand Maid takes the Sovereignty.

Theophrastus disputes whether Plants degenerate in the Seed or in the Root,
The Degeneration of plants where caused.
4. de Cause. Plant. Cap. 6. and denies that it is made in the Root, because the
Nature of the stalk, Leaves and Seed, do always follow the Nature of the Root;
and he concludes that it is made in the Seed, and that it grows fruit less
either through penury or superfluity of nourishment. Johan. Gallego de la Serna
de Princ. Generat. Lib. 2. Cap. 7. conceives that these degenerations of plants
may happen two manner of ways, either because the Soul of the Seed weakened by
faultiness of the matter could not produce its proper issue, and bred a
monster, as happens in Animals; or because the form of Wheat, for example, is
quite corrupted, and upon the corruption the matter remains so disposed, that
by the universal cause the form of Darnel or Spelt may forthwith be produced in
it. But neither of these ways may be simply allowed. For, as to the first,
this is true, that through fault of the matter the Soul cannot produce that
which it is ordinarily accustomed to do, otherwise. Yet that Body which it
produces is not always a monster. And the generation of Monsters is ried to no
certain Rules. But the degeneration of Plants is made certain ways, and such
Plants degenerate into such and no other, or not into any at least. But the
second manner is absolutely false, viz. That the Soul is corrupted, and from
the disposition of the matter remaining the universal Cause produces another.
For the Universal cause does not produce any specifical effect. And he
acknowledges, that the said effect is not indefinite and indeterminate, and
that of Wheat Turnep or Cole-wort is never made, but only Darnel or Spelt. As
also of the Carcasses of Animals only some sorts of Animals arise, and not any
whatsoever. This therefore is more likely, that the Creator has given to those
forms the faculty to shape themselves sundry Bodies; so that when the matter is
rightly disposed it makes some kind of Bodies; and so of Wheat grows commonly
Wheat, but when the matter is ill disposed, yet that Nature may not be idle it
has the power to produce another Body; for examples sake, when the Soul of
Wheat has matter indisposed, it makes the Body of Darnel or Spelt. And it is
here much after the same manner as was said before concerning Palmer Worms and
Butter-flies, where the same form at sundry times makes sundry Bodies. And that
the Soul does not perish appears even hereby, in that after Spelt is sprung
form Wheat, black Oats from white, if it find again a convenient soil it will
return to Wheat and white Oats again.

And although all Spontaneous Generation of Plants may be reduced to these two
manners, whether it be properly or improperly so called: yet that the thing may
be more Plain, I think fit to explain this business according to the matter and
subjects in which these Plants Spontaneously arise.

Secondly therefore, Plants arising from dung.
what has been newly said of the Earth is much more true of Dung; since
therein lie hid and Jumbled together the Seeds, parts and juyces of sundry
Plants, and other things, and all the causes of Spontaneous Generation in the
Earth may be found much more in Dung.

Thirdly, That many Plants Spring up in the Waters, Duck-weeds, Plants breeding
in the waters
Water Lillies, Water Caltrops, and many others, is most notoriously known. Now
such Plants are not all of them Spontaneously Generated (to speak properly) but
the Roots of some are divided out of which new ones spring up, others sheed the
Seed which they generate into the Waters, whereof Plants of the same sort are
bred, and the Seeds of Plants by the Wind and Inundations of Waters are brought
in from other places. But those which are so Spontaneously bred that they
spring not from entire Seed, are Generated either from Plants putrefying in the
Waters, or from Atoms or small Bodies having Souls in them, falling into the
Water in Rain showers; which may also be caused by the Winds, when they blow
into the Water amongst the Dust such petty small Bodies containing the Souls of
Plants in them; or because from the Roots of Trees some Juice or Excrement
containing in it a Seminal principle is shed into the Water. For by all these
manner of ways those petty Bodies containing the Souls of Plants, or at least
their forms which will turn to Souls when they meet with fit matter in the
Water, (which chiefly comes to pass in standing Waters) and are cherished by
the ambient heat; they are rouzed up, and generate such a plant as they are
Naturally fitted for.

Fourthly, Some hold that Plants are also bred out of the Snow. Plants out of
Snow.
But more credible it is, they grow under the Snow. For although it may come to
pass, though seldom, (for that cannot easily happen in Snow which happens in
Rain) that petty Bodies (with the rudiments of Plants in them) may descend with
the Snow: yet the heat by which they might be brought into act is wanting
therein, and therefore very seldom or never, if by chance the Snow begin to be
warmed and Melt with the heat of the Sun, or if that part of the Snow
especially being deep which is next the Earth do begin to be warm through hot
Exhalations Springing out of the Earth, and the Soul lurking there be rouzed up
and brought into act, Plants are bred out of the Snow.

Fifthly, It Is also found that some Plants grow upon other plants. So, Plants
growing upon other plants.
many times, upon Willows great Celandine, Bitter-sweet and sometimes Elder does
grow, yea and Services and other Plants. Which happens, either because whole
Seeds are brought thither by the Winds (which yet is not Spontaneous Generation
properly so called) or small Bodies containing in them the Seed of Plants are
brought by the Rain or Wind. Now this happens chiefly in those Trees in which
part of the Tree begins to Rot, and turn to dust as it were: which often
happens in old Willows cut off about the Head as they call it. For since there
is found matter fit to Form and Augment a Plant, the Soul of a Plant can easily
display it self therein. And therefore in such Generations the Tree which grows
in the Earth affords only a place to the Plant which grows upon it.

Sixthly, It Is also very well known that Plants do grow upon Rocks and Stones,
Plants growing on Rocks. Whether Corals grow spontaneously.
as a kind of Moss does every where grow upon Stones, and Coral grows out of
Sticks upon Rocks in the Sea, and Sea-Moss grows upon Rocks and upon
Shell-Fishes. But I doubt whether Corals do grow of their own accord. For
although no Body Plants it in the Sea: yet because it is a certain sort of
Natural thing, which is no where else Found save on the Rocks of the Sea, (nor
can it be said to grow from the Corruption of any other Plant or Animal;) this
doubtless is its Natural place, and it was doubtless created upon these Rocks
at the first Creation, on which it is propagated, either by Roots or by some
juice containing in it the principles of this Plant. But as to other plants,
they grow upon stones, when showers fall upon them, which contain either petty
Bodies with the Forms of plants in them, or small Bodies separated by the
corruption of other plants, yet fit to produce plants. And this happens more
easily, if upon the Rains any Clay or Earth stick upon the said Stones. For
then those Seeds find a more convenient place to display themselves. The same
also may happen by the Excrements of Birds falling upon the Stones; since also
in those very Excrements the Forms of plants may remain unchanged. But it often
falls out, that not perfect Plants, but only some Moss grows on Stones. For
since by Reason of defect of Aliment that same Soul cannot make what it would,
it makes what it can, and rather then be out of employment it frames Moss.

And whereas Plants seem to grow sometimes, not only on the surface of Stones,
but also to spring out of the depth of them; the cause (doubtless) is, that
those Stones have Clifts not discernable by our Eyesight, into which those
petty Bodies or Atoms, containing in them the form of a Plant do insinuate
themselves with the Rain, which Form being wakened by the Heat of the Ambient
Air does at last rouse it self up and fall to work.

And whereas Plants do sometimes grow out of Brick or Stone Walls Joined with
Mortar, Yea, and Shrubs and Trees; it is no wonder. For their Original is the
same with Plants that grow out of the Earth, when as either in the Sand which
is mixed in the Mortar the Seed of some Plant is mixed, or is brought thither
by Birds, or by the force of Winds, and insinuates it self into the chinks of
the Walls (which nevertheless is not Spontaneous Generation properly so called)
or when with the Excrements of Birds or Rain petty Bodies containing in them
the form of Plants are brought thither, and creep into the Chinks, and so in
time Sptout forth.

Also Theophrastus teaches, Plants from the tears of plants.
Lib. 1. de Causis Plant. Cap. 4. that Plants do also grow out of the Tears and
Gums of Plants. Which Generation although Licetus says it is Spontaneous, Lib.
3. Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 25. yet I had rather hold that this is no Spontaneous
Original; since they are produced in a manner of Seeds, and that of the same
sort; and Theophrastus himself says, that the Generation from Tears does
plainly answer to that which proceeds from stalks; which questionless is not
Spontaneous. And he teaches that there is a fruitful principle in the Tears,
when he writes: But that is a most peculiar way of Generation which proceeds
from Tears, as that of Horse-smallage, Lillies and some other Plants. Nor is a
Reason wanting, but this plainly answers to Stalks. For the tears have in them
a fruitful principle, and that is all the cause. And whereas Licetus holds a
threefold fruitful principle, viz. Seed, a bodily part of the plant, as a Root,
or stalk, and the Soul, he is out. For he does ill to ad the Soul, as a
different manner of propagation from the others; since all propagation is made
by the Soul, and the soul is never propagated without the Body. And whereas he
propounds the subjects or Bodies wherein the Soul is, and by which it is
propagated, to be the Seed, and Root, and Stalk, he errs therein also. For the
Soul may also be in the Tears themselves, which Julius Caesar Scaliger
causelessly opposes, when upon the forecited place of Theophrastus, he writes,
if of a Gum sowed a plant is bred, the Gum cannot be the excrement but must be
a part of the plant, wherein there is a vigorous generative principle. For all
know that the word Excrement is taken equivocally when it is attributed to the
Dung of the Belly, Urin, and other Excrements properly so called, and
afterward to the Seed. But as Theophrastus hints, al plants will not spring
from Tears, but only some certain kinds.

But those plants which spring from plants of a different sort are properly
said to grow of themselves. Plants from plants of a several sort.
So sundry sorts of Moss do grow upon trees. So Misselto grows upon the Oak,
the Hazel, the Apple Tree, Pear Tree, plum-tree, Birchtree, but grows no where
by it self. That other Herbs and Shrubs grow upon trees, as has been said, is
not unknown. But that is not Spontaneous Generation; since they grow not out of
the Trees, but only upon the Trees, from their own Seeds, and the Tree which
sticks in the Earth does only afford the place; which chiefly, comes to pass
when some part thereof is putrified and turned to Earth as it were, whereof we
have already spoken.

Now Licetus propounds four manner of ways whereby plants of a different scart
are bred of other plants, The four manners of Licetus.
de Spont. Viv. Ort. Lib. 3. Cap. 27. two Spontaneous and two non-Spontaneous.
The first he makes to be, when the Soul of an old plant in a matter some ways
within it self procreates a new Soul different from it self, which constitutes
a new plant of a different sort, and less perfect then it self. The second is,
when the seed of any plant does any ways fall upon another plant. Of which
second manner there is no doubt, but the first can hardly be allowed. Nor is it
credible that a Soul should procreate another Soul different from it self. More
likely it is that the generation of a new and different plant does proceed from
a subordinate form; as has been said concerning Worms bred out of plants. But
that manner is properly Spontaneous.

The Third manner, and that not Spontaneous, he makes to be; when in the chinks
and passages of an old Plant the powder of Animals and Plants containing in it
the Soul, as in a Vessel, are by the heat of the Ambient Air disposed to life.
But, since those pouders do contain in them a Seminal principle, we have
formerly showed in what sense this generation caused by them is Spontaneous.
For Moss does not belong to this manner of Generation, as he imagins with
Costaeus. For Moss is not made of the poudery matter of Moss cast upon the
Trees from elsewhere, but out of the barks themselves of Trees when they now
begin to be corrupted, as was said before.

The fourth manner is, when sundry Excrements of an old Plant, (the former Soul
that had Animated the same being put off by Death, but yet contained in them as
in a Vessel) when they come by the heat of the Ambient Air to be digested they
are disposed to a new life, and take to themselves again the weakened Soul,
degenerating from its old species or sort, so as to become a new vivifying
Form, constituting a new Plant.

Peculiarly, as to what concerns the Generation of Missleto, The generation of
Bird-lime.
Julius Caes. Scaliger treats largely thereof Exercit. 168. where first he
relates the Opinion of the Ancients, imagining, that the Berries of Missleto
being Eaten by Thrushes, the pulp thereof is concocted; but the Seed comes away
indigested with the dung, and falls on the boughs of those Trees whereon the
Thrushes are wont to settle. But he conceives this Opinion is therefore to be
rejected, because it is not any where planted or sowed, nor grows upon every
sort of Tree, nor is it credible the Seed can enter into the hardest boughs so
as to cleave the Bark, and become one with them without any Roots; that it
proceeds out of some branches where no dung could ever rest nor no Seed stick;
nor could he ever find any grains of Misselto in the Crops or Guts of Thrushes,
having nourished them with the berries thereof on purpose, and afterward cut
them up. But he holds, that as horns (as it were) grow out of the Bones of
Animals, so Missleto grows out of Trees, and that the unshaped principles of
Missleto being cherished by the inward heat, assisted by the outward, in a
Juice con-natural thereto, it grows into this Plant. And therefore there is one
Wood of both, nor is the Missleto inserted into the bough of the Tree like a
Pant thrust into the Earth. Which Opinion is so far true, as it holds that the
principle of the Missleto is in the Trees on which which it grows, and does not
come from without, but is Generated within the same, and proceeds from
superfluous matter, as horns in Animals. Yet herein is a difference, in that
Missleto is not bred on all such Trees, as all Animals of the same sort bear
horns, but on some Particular Trees only. There must therefore, doubtless, some
peculiar disposition concur in some sorts of Trees, and in some Individual
Trees of those sorts, by reason of which this superfluous Humor may be
generated, which the Soul of the Tree does afterward drive into the outward
parts, and thereof Generates Missleto. And whereas it may be objected, that
because it grows upon Trees of several sorts it cannot proceed from one and the
same principle but if it came from the inward Nature of the Tree the Leaves of
the Missleto should differ according to the difference of the Tree: to that
Scaliger answers, that it is not necessary that the Excrements of different
Bodies should differ in outward appearance, but it suffices if they be
rationally or respectively different, as we see in the Tears of Plants. And
although the external face is one and the same, yet the Nature it self is
different, and the Missleto of the Oak has far other Virtues then that of the
Apple Tree. As also Galls are bred on sundry Plants, as shall be anon declared.
And this Juice has one peculiar property, that though the leaves of the Tree
fall off, yet the Missleto keeps his Leaves all the year. Theophrastus indeed,
in 2. de Causs. Plant. writes that Missleto holds its Leaves all the year, upon
such Trees as hold their Leaves, but loses them if it grow on Trees that shed
their Leaves. But Scaliger rightly accuses this of falsity. For every where in
the Woods we see Missleto at all times green, upon the Oak, the Apple Tree, the
Birth-Tree, the Bullas-Tree, when those Trees have lost their Leaves. Yet is
not this Humor simply superfluous, but either part of the Alimentary or Seminal
Juice of the Tree, which the tree wantonizing (as it were) does thrust out: and
therefore those Trees on which Missletoes do grow do for the most part die.

After the same manner as Missleto does grow on diverse Trees, Galls.
so also Gals do grow upon the Oak, the Holme, the Beech; yea and Scaliger
writes in the forealleadged place that he saw Galls grow upon Sage, of an Ashy
color; and he relates also that Italian Merchants trading to Aleppo and other
parts of Asia informed him, that there is such Apple-bearing Sage to be seen in
many parts of Asia.

Whether Plants breed of Animals is doubtful. Whether plants breed of Animals.
Licetus indeed every where affirms that Plants are bred of corrupted Animals.
But I scarce think there are any examples to be found of such a thing, and that
of the substance of Animals and their Excrements Plants should be generated, as
Worms are; unless peradventure the Seeds of Plants, or a Juice containing in it
the Seminal principle of Plants be contained in the Excrements of Animals. And
the examples which are brought of Plants bred out of Animals do hardly prove
any thing else, then that the Seeds or rudiments of Plants may stick outwardly
to the Bodies of Animals, and grow out of them and be augmented. Now Plants are
bred either in living Animals or dead ones. How plants grow in Animals
As for live Animals, Aristotle, in 9. de Hist. Animal. Cap. 5. And
Theophrastus, 2. de Causs. Plant. Cap. 23. do relate, that an Heart was caught,
with green Ivy growing in his Horns, which (as Aristotle well adds) being
accidentally thrust into the tender horn, as it were into a green Tree, became
incorporated therewith. Which both Pliny confirms, Lib. 5. Cap. 32. as also
Julius Caesar Scaliger, who in his Comment upon that place of Theophrastus,
writes, that in the budding of his Horns the Heart rubbing them against some Ivy
had broken a branch with a Root at it, which fastened it self into some tender
part. Licetus indeed adds also two other manners, Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent.
Ort. Cap. 28. The former whereof is, that a dusty matter being blown into the
Roots of the Horns near the Hair, and mixed with a various Humor, either
proceeding from the Body of the Heart, (in form of sweat or some other
Excrement, or from the Air in form of dew or some other matter) did stick unto
the Horns, to which poudery matter the form which had long lain therein as in a
Vessel being stirred up by the Heat of the Ambient Body does now adjoyn it self
as a quickening and Jvy-making form. The other is this. He holds, that out of
the Body it self of the Heart an Excrementitious substance, bred chiefly by
eating of Ivy, by the concoctive and expulsive faculty separated and expelled
with other Excrements of the third digestion to the Roots of the Horns, and by
reason of its own clamminess or some other glutinous matter sticking there
fast, it is by the ambient heat digested into a new living Plant. But neither
of these ways is probable. For as to the former, if so great a quantity of
dusty matter might be collected at the Roots of Horns in the Hairs, that
therein as in the Earth Ivy might grow, other plants might also grow there. Nor
can any reason be showed, why that poudery Humor gathered at the Roots of the
Harts-Horns should be collected only from Ivy. Again, it cannot easily be
showed, how the Soul of the Ivy through so many digestions can arrive safely to
the Horns of the Heart; nor can any reason be showed, why other Plants also
should not grow on the Harts-Horns.

But on the back of Shellfish and Whales mossie Herbs grow out of the Mud and
Scum of the Sea, Moss growing on Shel-fish and on the Backs of Whales.
sticking to the Backs of these Fishes, which contain in them the Seeds or
Seminal rudiments of Moss and other Plants. But that other manner added by
Licetus of Excrements driven from the inner parts of the Beast into the surface
is less probable then the former. For it is not credible, that Whales feed upon
Moss and Plants. And if this manner were true, other Fishes which are known to
feed upon Grass, Moss and Plants, should have mossie Plants growing upon their
Backs. Whether plants grow out of the dead Bodies of Animals. Moss bred on the
bones of men.


Now it is worthy our consideration to examine, whether Plants do grow also out
of the Carcasses of Animals. Licetus says they do, and that it is no news,
Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent. Ort. Cap. 32. But this must be fitly explained. For I
cannot believe, that as Worms are bred of the very substance of dead Carcasses,
so also Plants are Generated of the same substance; nor does experience confirm
the same. Upon the Skuls and Bones of Men Moss is bred. But since it grows not
upon such bones as lie under a roof or covering, but on such only as lie in the
open Air and are wet by the Rain, the original thereof is rather to be
attributed to the Rain, like that which grows upon Stones. For since, as was
said before, the principles of the Seeds of Plants are mixed with Rain, if they
fall upon bones, especially such as are Rotten and begin to turn to dust, the
said Seminal principle sticking in them and finding matter to work on, and
cherished by the Ambient heat, if it do not make other Plants, it will at least
generate Moss.

Some also relate that Coral has grown in the Sea upon a dead man's Skul. Coral
growing on a man's skul.
Yet it is impossible that it should grow out of the substance of the Skul:
But, questionless, in the Sea some matter having the Rudiments of Coral in it
stuck fast to the Skul out of which afterward the Coral grew.

It is an old Story that Asparagus grows on Rams-Horns, Whether Asparagus do
grow upon the horns of a Ram.
but Fabulous without doubt; nor does experience confirm the same. Fortunius
Licetus indeed, in the place fore alleged, endeavors to defend it by four
Reasons, but all in Vain. For First he sa^es Plan's grow out of Stones, much
more may they grow out of Horns. But as was said before Plants grow not out of
the very substance of Stones, but of seed or a Seminal matter which sticks to
them.

The other is, because Animals are bred of the Carcass of Plants, Namely worms
out of Wood, whereas nevertheless the Carcasses of Plants are more imperfect
then the Carkall^s of Animal. And seeing that it is much easier for a thing to
procreate that which is more imperfect then it self, then to act beyond its
forces by breeding that which is more perfect: credible therefore it is, that
Asparagus may grow upon the Horns of a Ram. But Carcasses do not as the
efficient causes breed any thing of themselves, but we must look to the
disposition of the matter, and consult with experience, what may be made out of
those subordinate forms. Moreover, although Worms are Animals, yet it is a
question whether they are more perfect then perfect Plants. Nor does any reason
enforce, that as out of an Animal another Animal though of a different sort may
be generated, so also a Plant may be bred thereby.

His Third Reason is, because it has been observed that in the Sea Coral has
grown out of a dead-mans Skul. If therefore Coral were bred out of a Skul,
Asparagus may also grow out of horns. But how Coral may grow upon a Skull,
(which notwithstanding is very rare) has been lately showed.

Fourthly, Since Ivy has been found to grow upon the Horns of an Heart;
Asparagus may in like manner grow upon a Rams horns. But the case is different.
That Ivy did not grow out of the substance of the horns, but the Root of Ivy
stuck thereupon, as was said before. And therefore, warily, Lib. 1. Cap. 18. he
recites indeed the Ancient Opinion, but he makes it not his own, where he
writes; it is also reported, that Asparagus has grown upon the horns of Beasts
being bruised, and buried in the ground.

Much less are Plants generated out of Metals, Whether plants grow out of
Metals.
for there is in them no disposition toward the Generation of Plants. And if
plants have grown upon Brazen Statues, as Pliny reports Lib. 17. Cap. 25. And
Lib. 24. Cap. 19. that was not caused by the Metal, but the Seminal principle
of some plant was by the Rain, or Winds, or birds, or by some other means cast
thereupon.

J^lius Caes. Scal. Exercit. 307. Sect. 29. Whether the souls of plants and
brutes do perish by Death and come to nothing.
does well complain of the shallowness of Human understanding, as being unable
to comprehend the Essences and Forms of substances. And he concludes at last:
that it is a part of Man's Wisdom to be contentedly ignorant of some things.
Which difficulty and obscurity has deterred many from making any further
search into the Nature of Forms. Whence it comes to pass, that little is to be
found (and that of small solidity) in the writings of Naturalists concerning the
Nature of Forms and Souls. But because beautiful things are always difficult;
the hardness ought not to discourage us from searching into so noble a subject.
And having spoken somewhat in the former part of this Treatise of the Or^ginal
and Nature of Souls, I shall here undertake the explication of one question of
sufficient difficulty and explained by few: Whether they perish.
viz. whether the Souls of plants and brutes when they die do perish and turn
to nothing.

Some deny it, and hold it for an axiom and principle, that Naturally nothing
is made of nothing, and again, that something does not turn simply to nothing.
And to believe it they are persuaded by these Arguments, propounded also by
Scaliger, Exercit. 307. Sect. 14. If says he, any substance can be so
corrupted as to become nothing, then on the other side some substance may
naturally be made of nothing; Ecclesiast. Cap. 3. v. 14. the Preacher says, I
know that all the works which God has made do endure for ever.

But since these men acknowledge the difference betwixt the rational Soul and
the Souls of Plants and Brutes; and do grant that every form besides the
rational Soul cannot subsist of it self and by its own power, out of and
without the help of the matter; and that they depend upon the matter in their
making, being and operation; I cannot see, how they can so simply deny this.
Especially since they themselves cannot tell us where these Souls remain after
Death. Some say they turn to somewhat which was before and simpler then
themselves. But they cannot make out what that former and simpler thing is, nor
prove that those Souls were compounded of any thing existing before them; since
they are Naturally most simple essence. For if, as Jul. Caes. Scaliger rightly
says Exercit. 307. Sect. 20. every Soul is the perfection of the Body, and the
Act of the matter, and the matter nothing but the four Elements; the Soul must
needs be a sift Essence, and that most simple, having nothing before it whereof
it could be compounded.

Some of the later Chemists, The opinion of the Chemists.
and amongst them Severinus, do hold that they go into the Chaos, Orcus, or
Abyssus, or Night, (which Hippocrates terms Hades, Orpheus calls Night; Hermes
Trism gistus, (...), the invisible Region; as also Dionysius the Areopagite, in
Eccl-siastica Hierarchia, Cap. 2. Apollomus Thyaneus, Ousian, the substance;
Seneca Cap. 36. Nature; Servius upon the 8. of the Eneid^ the Generality) and
to their Fountains, from whence at their appointed times taking new bodies they
enter again upon the stage of the World. For which opinion they cite a place of
Hippocrates, Lib. 1. de Diaeta; Whereof we have spoken in our Book of the
Consent and Dissent of the Chemists with Galen and Aristotle. But the Heathens
could not explain what that same Orcus, (or Generality of things) is, or where
it is; and al these opinions have arose from the Ignorance of the Creation of
the World, and of the Conservation thereof.

Johannes Marcus Marci, John Marcus Marci.
in Defen. Idaearum suarum, Prefat. Loco Tract it. Premissa, teaches, that such
Forms divided from the society of matter, because they are impassible do need
no place. Yet because a finite Essence is necessarily desined to be in some
part of an imaginary place, he holds, that it abides in that part of a place
where it is separated from its subjuct, and is neither by it self nor by
accident Locally moved. And in Chap. 4. of the same Treatise, he writes that
such Souls, the Corporeal number failing, (into which they had degenerated by
the fellowship of matter) being freed from Corporeal Laws they return to the
unity of the simple essence in which they were at first created. Yea, he
conceives that they are not to perish at the last day, but that the form of
this world being passed, they shall not at all be subject to those vicissitudes,
nor reassume any Bodies, but passing the time in eternal silence they shall as
well as the Elements distinguish and adorn the world with a wonderful variety
of Essences, without sensible Figures, the world being no less absolute and
perfect then now it is. But these things are only said and not proved, nor do
the Reasons before alleged for this opinion sufficiently prove the same. To
which before we make answer, that is to be noted in the first place which
Scaliger has, Excrcitat 207. Sect. 20. All that is (says he) is either the
first principle or proceeding from the first. There is but one first, therefore
the rest depend thereupon. Therefore all things, but one, are in their own
Nature corruptible. For although beings are free from subject and Term; yet are
they not free from cause. They are therefore by another and from another. But
every thing dependent may be changed by that on which it depends if it be
voluntary. And therefore the immaterial minds themselves as they depend upon
the first Principle, at the Pleasure of the first they may be deposed from that
Essence wherein they are placed by him. For if they could not, they must have
in them another principle resisting his infinite power. And then he should not
be the first principle. But they are not corrupted, because it is not his
pleasure.

And Johannes Serranus upon the Timaeus of Plato, writes according to Platos
opinion: God only truly is, and therefore he only is truly eternal, and the
Foundation of all created things, all which have this common adjunct, that they
had a beginning; yet the Nature of things created is not one, but various and
manifold. For some by the pleasure and power of the Workmaster have a more firm
and constant essence, and therefore compared with other things they have a kind
of eternity, given them by favor of the Creator: yet are they not truly
eternal; since they did proceed from a certain beginning, and when the
Work-master shall please may have an End. For the glorious God is only
independent and simply immutable. But all the parts of the World being created
by God, as by a voluntary Principle, do depend upon him in their Essence and
conservation; or they have their Essence in God, and are preserved by him. But
Angels and the Human Soul, inasmuch as they are immortal, they have not their
immortality of themselves and their own Nature, but by the Favor of God, by
whose power they are preserved. God only has immortality and immutability
communicated from no other: but the Human Soul and Angels have immortality
indeed, but communicated from God, by whose Favor and grace it is that they
have in themselves no inclination to non-being, but may also be conserved and
subsist without matter. Whereof Damascenus, Orthodox. Fid. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Angelos Athanatos, ou Phusei, alla Chariti: an Angel is immortal not by Nature
but by Grace. Now God has afforded this Grace and Favor, not to all Creatures,
but only to Angels and the Human Soul; but all other forms and Souls are so
subject to the will of the Creator, or so immersed into this matter, that out
of it they cannot be preserved, but their subject perishing they have a natural
inclination to not being, and being destitute of their subject they are
annihilated.

Out of which it is easy to answer to the Arguments for their opinion who
hold, The former arguments answered.
that the Souls of Brutes and Plants cannot be Annihilated. For First, whereas
they say, that what ever is created by God cannot by any creature be
Annihilated,

Secondly,

Thirdly, All sorts indeed of things tend to the perfection of the world,

Fourthly, Ecclesiastes must be understood of the sorts and not of the
Individuals of Animals and Plants.

Fifthly,

Now this therefore happens, because those forms do not require for their
simple being a matter so noble, variously elaborated, and furnished with so
many Organs, but can many times lie hid for a Season in some place. But this is
not always, for they also are at last abolished. But in more perfect Animals,
where the Seeds if they must be perserved must of necessity be forthwith
received into the Womb, the Soul cannot be perserved out of its Body and out of
its Seed. And let them show us but the least sign or token, whereby it may
appear that the Soul of a Lion, an Ox, an Horse, a Dog, did ever live after the
Death of the said Animals.

Chap. 8. Of the Spontaneous Original of Animals.
NOW of Animals that breed of themselves there are sundry kinds. Animals which
breed of themselves
The Weezel lives upon Corn; the Worm Midas feeds upon Beans, Trox a Worm so
called Eats Pease; There is a Worm which feeds upon the Vine, which Pliny
calls Volvox, Columella calls it Volucra; the Worm Cossus and Teredo Eats Wood,
especially that of the Pitch^^^ree; the Moath Eats Garments, the Worm called
Terms breeds in Dogs. And there are almost innumerable more of this kind of
Worms, whose differences we shall explain by and by, being drawn from the Bodies
wherein they breed. Now touching the Generation of little Animals and insects,
I could wish more were extant written by others then there is; and I wonder
that Vlysse^ Aldrovandus a most Learned man (in that most laborious work
concerning Insects) relates many other petty matters concerning them, but
mentions very little about their Generation. For although most insects do
couple, and bring forth somewhat resembling Eggs; of which see Aristotle, de
Histor. Animal. Lib. 5. Cap. 8. and 19. yet since it is certain that such
insects are also Spontaneously generated; the first question is, which were
first, those that are Spontaneously Generated, or those which spring from
Copulation and Seed. Austin touched this question Lib. 1. de Genesis, Whether
Spontaneo^^ Animals were made at the first Christion.
when he wrote: it is a question, whether any of these petty Animals were made
at the first Creation, or whether they were a consequent to Creation, or bred
of the corruption of Carcasses, and some of the Corruption of Woods and Herbs,
and some of the Corruption of fruits. Now this question Eucherius answers,
Lib. 1. de Genesis, where he determines that the forms of al things were extant
at the beginning, but some Actually, others Potentially. Touching the smallest
sorts of Animals (says he) we must believe, that whatever of them are bred out
of the Waters and the Earth, were made at the first Creation, but the rest that
are bred of the corruption and putrefaction of Bodies, Woods or Carcasses, were
not then created in Specie, but there was present in their Bodies a Seminary
original, that in process of time out of their corruptions several kinds might
arise. So far Eucherius. Wherein he is in the right and thinks the same with
us, so that there is no reason that I should be accounted the first Innovator
and Broacher of Paradoxes. For we are indeed to believe that all petty Animals
how small soever, which are not bred of the corruption of other things, were
created and had actual existency at the beginning of the world; but such as now
proceed from the corruption of others, they were not made at the first Creation
so as actually to exist, but their form was already present in other bodies,
although not actually, nor performing the office of a form, but subordinate to
the other more noble forms, and affording to them a matter and fit subject. The
original of spontane^^ live things
And thus what was before said of the original of live things in general is
true also in the original of Spontaneous Animals; and the most Famous
Philosophers and Physicians who have diligently weighed the matter have
acknowledged that such Animals can by no means proceed from putrefaction, nor
yet from that Heat which is joined to putrefaction. Amongst the Ancients is
Theophrastus, who de Causis Plant. Cap. 13. writes, as in other things
putrefying a certain kind of Animal is generated: so in these also (among the
rest he speaks of the wild Fig Tree) there is a certain Animal-making Nature.
Which Jul. Caes. Scalig. in Comment. approves, and Ulysses Aldrovandus Lib. 3.
de Insect. Cap. 5. confesses, that he likes well of this Opinion, which holds
that there is in Herbs certain principles tending to the Generation of Animals,
and that it is fit to explain the mind of many of the ancients. Eustachius
Rudius consents also with them, who in Lib. 2. Pract. Cap. 27. concerning the
Generation of Worms thus writes: because, (says he) simple heat being an
accident cannot by its own power make a substance and that a living one (for
heat in living Creatures nourishes by Virtue of the Soul and of the Aliment
begets a substance) hence it is that this Heat was to be lively and strong, and
endued with a vital faculty. Nor ought we to refer this force to the simple
Intention of heat, as Galen did, 3. Aphorism. 20. who propounds no faculty
above heat. For although heat concurs to the production of living things; yet
unless a superior vital cause does concur, it cannot of it self produce an
Animal. And whereas afterward he makes that Cause to be the Celestial Bodies,
therein he is out; since he does not propound an univocal and proper Cause, as
was said before in Chap. 1. The Opinion of Thomas Minadous long since a
renowned professor in the University of Padua was more true and accurate, who
in his Treatile De humani Corporis Turpitudinibus, Lib. 2. Cap. 9. Treating of
the Generation of Lice (and the case is the same with such like petty Animals)
thus writes: Here (says he) the understanding of man is dimsighted, and dazzled
at the knowledge of this and such like things, as the Eyes of an Owl at the
Sun-light. And a little after when he had related their Opinion who held heat
to be the efficient Cause, he adds: but on the other side, since it seems
impossible, that the introduction of a Form and shaping of an whole Animal
should be the effect of bare heat, but that it depends upon some provident
action of a certain Artificer working with discourse and prudence; the mind is
forced to seek out another agent besides heat, which can moderate all things in
the forming of an Animal with Council and Choice. For heat alone has never
learnt to shape an Arm, a Leg, an Eye, with its own shape, nor has it been
accustomed to use the Discipline of some Master; but acting always after the
same manner converts it self to sundry things, sets it self about sundry
formations, according as the builder and Architect of all the parts directs and
moves the same. Nor does Minadous attribute the generation of perfect Animals
alone to a superior power, but of Lice also. For although Galen considering the
Generation of Wig-Lice, Lice, Fleas, and the like petty Animals, durst not
ascribe their Generation to this div^ne formative faculty, not being able to
understand, how so excellent and noble an agent is able to abase himself to so
mean employment, without diminution of his Majesty: yet he counts it better to
conclude, that the same mind moderates the generation of these petty Animals
and those more perfect; and to hold that it is by a common providence the
orderer of the smallest matters, rather then to say it is like a stepdame,
making difference of her Children, so as to contemn some and leave them only
to Fortune and Chance, but to regard others as her own; when as nevertheless
none of them can be finished and duly accomplished without the Providence and
Counsel of the Work-Master.

Also what has been said before Chap. 4. concerning the final End or use of
Spontaneous live things, does belong to this place.

This also is to be observed in General, of which we spoke also before in Chap.
2. Spontaneously bred Animals dogenerate
although these petty Animals and insects are generated of the corruption of
Plants and Animals: yet most of them do afterward lay Eggs or things
resembling Eggs, whence more of the kind do afterward spring, as shall
hereafter be showed particularly.

Now, I think fit to propound the differences of these Animals, The difference
of Spontaneous Animals. Flies that live in the Fire.
according to the variety of things from whence they spring. In the first
place, which is to be admired, in the very fire, in the Isle of Cyprus, in the
Copper Furnaces, winged petty Animals are generated, a little bigger then our
largest flies, which fly and leap through the Fire, and die when they are
removed therefrom, as Aristotle 5. de Histor. Animal. Cap. 19. Pliny B. 11.
Cap. 36. Seneca Lib. 5. Quaest. Not. cap. 6. Jul. Caes. Scaliger, Exercit. 23.
and other credible witnesses, yea and such as have seen them with their own
Eyes do testify. Not generated in the Fire.
Yet are they not generated in the Fire nor by the Fire. For a pure and simple
Element cannot produce an Animal. Fortunius Licetus, Lib. 3. de Spontan.
Vivent. Ort. cap. 38. imagines these Pyraustae or Fire-slies aforesaid are bred
of the Smoke of Wood, especially green Wood, which ascends from the burning.
But seeing Wood is burnt every where, and no such Animals are bred, save in the
Copper furnaces of Cyprus, the cause must needs be proper and peculiar to those
furnaces. Now Aristotle seems to point at it, when he writes, that in Copper
Furnaces Fire-flies are bred, Whene^ bred.
where the Stone Cha^citis is thrown in and burnt many days together. Now
Copper is molten in Cyprus out of its proper Vein or Oar, which Aristotle here
calls a Stone; Galen names it sometimes a Stone, sometimes Earth, viz. because it
is hard as a Stone, but crumbly, and when it is burning it rises into bubbles.
And therefore without doubt that same stone contains in it some kind of Earth
tempered with moisture, in which moisture doubtless the form is, which is
afterward actuated by the force of Heat, and being rouzed ingenders this
Animal; as in other furnaces and about Bakers Ovens Crickets are engendered of
the Mortar. And these Fire-flies have a different matter from all other
Spontaneous Animals; viz. a most dry sooty vapor raised from adust matter and
cleaving to the sides of the Furnaces, wherein the form lies hid, which is by
the strongest Heat disposed to formation, but dies with cold.

That Animals are also bred in the Snow Aristotle teaches, Animals bred out of
the Snow.
5. de Hist. Anim. Cap. 19. Yea also, says he, in those things which can
suffer no corruption, we have known Animals to breed, as reddish hairy Worms in
old Snow. But in the Snow of Media greater and Whiter are found; they are all
sluggish and move very hardly. He relates also the same thing in 2. de Plantis,
Cap. 1. And Pliny Lib. 11. Cap. 35. writes. In old white Snow Worms are found;
in the midst of the Snows thickness reddish (for the Snow it self looks red
with Age) hairy, large, and Lazy. And Olaus Magnus, Lib. 2. de Hist. Septentr.
reg. cap. 8. says thus: in the most vast deserts of Iseland, especially under
Juniper Trees, and great heaps of Chaff or Straws, although the Sun be in the
Scorching sign of Leo, there is snow lying, wherein in the Summer time they
keep Wine and Beer who desire to drink Luxuriously; but no Body mingles the
Snow with his Wine or Beer, because of its Clamminess and Impurity. For Worms
and Moths are found in it, just as in Clothes ill laid up.

Mercurialis indeed, Lib. 3. Variar. Lect. cap. 4. does altogether question the
truth hereof, because Heat is required for the Generation of Animals which is
not in Snow, and because the Snow is wont to kill such petty Animals in the
Earth as are wont to hurt the fruits thereof. And if any Worms are seen in
Snow, he conceives they came out of the Earth, and so entered into the Snow. But
these Reasons are not sufficient to make us reject the testimonies of so many
Learned Men. For there is some heat in Snow. Although Snow of its own Nature is
exceeding cold, yet it may receive Warmth from the Sun and from the Earth;
especially out of the Earth many hot exhalations do arise, which the Snow
retains within it Self. And therefore husband men do in the Winter wish for
Snow to cover their sowed Lands; because experience has taught them, that the
Corn is sooner hurt by the coldness of the Winter Air if it be not covered with
Snow, then when it is so covered; not that the Snow it self does warm the Corn,
but because it keeps in and retains the exhalations which spring out of the
Earth, and hinders the coldness of the Air from piercing to the Corn.

Now these Worms are bred in the Snow, How Worms are bred in the snow.
not as it is simply Snow or Rain congealed with cold but inasmuch as Pouders,
Juyces, or Excrements of Plants or Animals disposed to the production of such
Worms are mixed therewith; and then Worms are bred of Snow after the same
manner as of Rain, of which we shall speak hereafter. Again the same
Exhalations and Atoms may ascend out of the Earth, being full of them, when it
is covered with Snow, and may so be mingled with the Snow. Yea and dust
containing in it the Rudiments of such Animals may by the winds be brought from
elsewhere, and mixed with the Snow; which chiefly happens in Snow that has lain
long. Now this matter which way soever it comes to be mingled with the Snow,
when after it comes to be cherished by the Ambient heat, raised partly by the
Sun, partly from hot Vapors exhaling out of the Ground, the concealed form
displaies it self and produces Worms. Now, this seldom happens in the upper
part of the Snow, since the heat exhaling out of the Earth, necessary to excite
the Form, does hardly rise so high, nor can long continue there, seeing it is
easily dissipated by the cold Winds.

It is also well known to Husbandmen, From Rain, Dew Mists.
that out of Rain, Dew, and Mists, sundry petty Animals are bred in those
Plants which they fall upon; as they often find to their great damage. For by
the Heat of the Sun Vapors out of all kinds of Sublunary Bodies are carried
from the Earth up into the Air: wherein there being Atoms containing in them
forms disposed to breed such petty Animals, or an Animal-making Nature, as
Theophrastus calls it; when they are cherished by the Ambient heat, and gain
that disposition of matter which is necessary to the performance of operations
sundry sorts of Worms are generated. And these Worms are either generated in
the Plants themselves, viz. Trees and Herbs wherefore sometimes after Rains,
especially those small showers which fall the Sky being clear, and are termed
heat drops, and after Mists and Dew a great quantity of Palmer Worms
Caterpillars and such like Creepers are found: or as some think, they are found
in the Air it self.

For it has been also observed that petty Animals have fallen down with Rain.
Animals falling down with Rain.
So Olaus Magnus, de Histor. Septentr. Lib. 18. Cap. 16. writes: Not only in
Norway, says he, but also in Hestingia, and in many other Provinces of the
Diocese of Vpsal certain small four-footed Creatures called Lemnars, of the
bigness of Mice, with a party colored Skin, do fall down with the Rain; and it
is yet unknown whence they come, whether brought by the Winds from the
neighboring or other remoter Islands, or bred rather in the clouds. Yet this
is well known, that some of them having been cut open as soon as they fell down
were found to have raw Herbs in their stomach, as yet undigested. These falling
down like Locusts in Huge quantities destroy all green things, and infect
whatever they touch with their mouths, and they live till they taste the Second
sprouting of the Herbs and go away all together, like swallows taking their
flight; but at a certain set time they die in great multitudes, exceedingly
infecting the Earth and Air, which becomes pestilential; whereby men are taken
with dizziness in their Heads and with the Yellow Jaundize. So far Olaus
Magnus. But it is scarce credible that Animals can be bred in the Air. For
suppose it, that Animals have fallen out of the Air: Yet, it is doubtful
whether they were bred there; seeing Winds and whirle Winds carry many things
from the Earth into the Air which owe their original not to the Air but to the
Earth. And since there are sundry winged Animals in the Summer time flying in
the Air, if they should be surprised with a sudden thick shower, or beaten down
with the weight of great drops of Rain, or should be hindered from flying by the
wetness of their Wings, they might well fall down with the Rain, though they
were not Generated in the Air. Nor is it probable that they could be bred in
the Air. For, since all Animals are heavy, and rise not up into the Air, unless
by Leaping or Flying, or except they are detained therein some other way; they
do by their weight all tend unto the Earth, and rest themselves upon the
surface thereof, and consequently cannot be generated in the Air. Animals are
not bred in the Air. The Lemmer of Norway.
For the shaping of parts which accompanies generation since it cannot be done
in an instant, but in process of time, the Animal not yet perfectly shaped so
as to be able to susta in it self by slight cannot be held in the Air, and
therefore must needs fall down rude and imperfect. And as to that greater Animal
called Lemmer, Fortunius Licetus indeed conceives Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent.
Ortu. Cap. 40. that it is generated of putrid Clouds, or rather of the Vapors
of pucrid Carcasses carried aloft, and brought into Norway by force of Winds.
But that Clouds being rare Bodies should so putrify as for Animals to be bred
of them; or that vapors from Carcasses, (few being drawn up in those cold
Countries) should be carried aloft and putrify in a cold place, and be turned
into Animals, is not probable; but likely it is, that in some Isle, or other
neighboring place unknown (as there are many unknown places in those Regions)
those Animals were bred, and by force of Winds like Locusts were brought into
Norway. Which may be known hereby, that when the said Animals were cut up
presently upon their falling raw Herbs were found in their Stomachs undigested,
which doubtless they had eaten in some other place, and not in the Clouds.

Experience teaches that sundry Animals are bred in the Waters, Animals bred in
the Water.

Water-spiders or Tipula.


especially in standing Waters. Concerning the Tipulae or Water-spiders that
run upon the top of the Water Aristotle writes, Lib. 5. Histor. Animal. Cap.
19. Water-Spiders are commonly bred in Wells and Pits, wherever the Water
stands, and there is an Earthy Muddiness settled in the bottom. First of all the
Mud it self putrefying becomes whitish, afterward blackish, then
Bloody-colord. Whereupon little reddish things come out, which for a time
cleaving to their original are moved, then they become perfect and move through
the Water, being called Tipulae; then a few days after they rear themselves on
the top of the Water, being hard and immovable; a while after the Shel being
broken, a gnat arises and sits thereon, til being moved by the Sun or Wind it
falls a flying. Also Spiders, and sundry other petty Animals are found in the
Waters in the Summer time.

Now, Animals bred in the Water sundry ways.
Animals are bred in the Waters sundry ways. For some though they seem to be
engendered Spontaneously: yet properly they are not Spontaneous, but are bred of
Seed, and by Animals of the same sort, as Frogs. For as Fishes cast their Eggs
into the Water, which afterward become Fishes of the same sort; so Frogs and
other like petty Ignoble Animals do shed their Seeds into the Water, which
afterward by the heat of the Sun are cherished and awakened. Moreover of the
Juyces and Excrements of Animals and Plants, being corrupted, sundry sorts of
Animals are bred in the Waters; which being not of the same sort with those
things out of which they are Generated are rightly said to be of Spontaneous
original; and they are generated after the same manner as Animals which breed
of dead Bodies corrupted, and of Plants.

Many Animals are also bred out of the Earth. Animals bred out of the Earth
But not out of pure Earth, but that which is slimy, and Muddy. That Frogs are
bred of the Dust of the Earth moistened by Summer showers, is very well known.
And in some places also Frogs grow out of the Earth it self, whereof Ovid has
a verse: The Earth has Seeds which Generate green Frogs.

Also certain kinds of Fleas are bred out of the Earth in the Summer time, when
there is want of Rain, which Eat young plants, and the Buds of Hops, which the
Germans call Erdflaehe, Earth-Flea. Also that Worms are bred in the Earth,
especially under dung, is commonly known. But especially after the overflowings
of the River Nilus sundry sorts of Animals are bred out of the ground, whereof
Ovid in the 1. of his Metamorphosis thus writes: So, when seven Channeld Nile
forsakes the Plain,
When ancient Bounds retiring Streams contain,
And late-left Slime ethereal Fervors burn,
Men Various Creatures with the Gleab up turn:
Of those some in their very time of Birth;
Some Lame, and others half alive, half Earth.
Which passage of Ovid is rarely imitated by the Prince of English Poets and
Glory of London his Native City, Edmund Spenser, in the 1. Canto of his Faery
Queen and the 21. Stanza, where our Thames-Swan thus Chaunts it: As when old
Father Nilus gins to swel
With timely pride above the Egyptian Vale,
His fatty Waves do fertile Slime out well,
And over flows each Plain and lowly Dale:
But when his later Ebb gins to a Vale,
Huge beapes of Mud he leaves, wherein there breed
Ten thousand kinds of Creatures, partly Male,
And partly Female, of his fruitful Seed;
Such Ugly Monstrous shapes elsewhere may no man read.


That Fishes are dug out of the Earth, Earth Fishes.
even where no Waters are, Aristotle tells us, de admirand. Auscult. cap. 69,
70, 71. Strabo in Lib. 4. Pliny Lib. 9. cap. 57. also Theophrastus in Lib. de
Piscibus, where he writes: but besides these, there is another thing of a
peculiar Nature, and needs to be examined, viz. how they are said in
Paphlagonia to dig Fishes out of the ground in great quantity and very good;
which they dig deep out of the Earth where there is no standing water, nor does
any River run through the place, by which (as we said before) Eggs and
principles of generation might be brought and left; so that they must needs
breed of themselves, and that frequently, for they cannot couple: and if it be
true, we must conclude also that that ground is moist and fruitful and fit to
engender such Animals; or else that some moisture is brought thither from
elsewhere, containing in it the principles of Generation; and that the place is
fit to receive and nourish the same. For we can hardly think of any other way
besides. Also those Fishes are known which our Countrymen call Peissker, and
some Earth-Weazels, which George Agricola describes in his Book of underground
Animals Chap. 16. Which are really Earth-Fishes. For in puddlish and Muddy
places, where the Summer has dried up the Water which had been there collected
in the Winter, they are dug up out of the Mud. And concerning Eeles it is
reported, as we read in Aristotle, Lib. 6. The Generation of Eeles.
de Histor. Animal. Cap. 16. that they are neither bred by Copulation, nor do
breed any Eggs, nor was there ever any Eele caught having any row, Eggs or
Seed, or any passage for Seed to come out at; and that in some Muddy Ponds all
the Water being let out, and the mud cast away, Eeles have bred again after
Rain had fallen. But I cannot believe that Eeles have no Seminal principles;
seeing they are caught in Rivers, as well as in Muddy Ponds, it is credible those
that are taken do leave some Seminal principle behind them, out of which
afterward others are generated: and some conceive that Eeles do grow of the
slime, which the former Eeles cast from their outsides, as the Snake casts his
Skin. Of which Scaliger also writes Exercit. 15. Eeles are thought to generate
nothing within themselves, but by their mutual twining and twistings one about
another they are thought to make a kind of Slime, of which young ones are
generated without.

Oisters also and all Shel-Fish are bred of Slime, concerning which Opianus, in
his Poem of Fishes, Lib. 1. thus writes: They couple not nor bring forth any
young,
But of themselves they breed the Mud among,
As Oisters do, Glib Oisters that no Male
Nor Female have.


Yet some aver that Snailes do also couple, and that they have seen them Join
together, and sticking one to another, so as to send forth a slimy froth, which
after a day or two was changed into the shape of a Snail. Nor is it absurd,
that they may be bred both ways, so that when many have been generated
Spontaneously, those may afterwrads generate more by Copulation of Male and
Female.

Moreover the Vrticae, Purpurae, Plant-Animals
Vngues (Plant Animals so called) and all such as stick fast in the Earth, seem
to be of Spontaneous Original, and are so accounted by Licetus Lib. 3. de
Spont. Vivent. Ort. Cap. 35. For since they remain fastened to their places,
they exercise no Copulation, nor do they seem like Plants to shed any Seed. But
this may be doubted of. For although they have no sex, yet they may have Seed,
since they are Plant-Animals, and belong partly to Plants, wherein also there
is not properly any Sex; and therefore it is not absurd to think they may send
forth Seed, which sticking to the Rocks may be formed into a Body like the
Generator; which way soever this emission of Seed is caused, whether by Seed
properly so called, or by some other thing Analogical to Seed.

And inasmuch as so many Animals are bred out of the Earth, Aristotle said very
well, that all things are after a sort full of Souls. For every where almost
smallest Bodies or Petty Atoms are found, severed from the Bodies of Animals,
wherein there is a Soul but Latent, and not exercising the second Act or
Functions of a Soul. For those more Ignoble Animals do not send forth seed as
the perfect Animals do, but a Seminal principle dispersed through their whole
Body, as it is in some Plants. And therefore it is no wonder, that the Bodies
of such Animals being turned to Dust should be like Seed, and having afterward
attained a sitting place should again produce Animals. Pliny knew thus much,
who Lib. 9. Cap. 51. writes thus of Frogs: It Is strange (says he) how after
six Months time of Life they are turned into Slime and no man perceives it, and
in the Spring they are again regenerated in the Water, after the same secret
manner, and this happens every year.

Also sundry Animals are bred of Plants, and some of Plants that are yet
living, and others of dead Plants: yet every Worm is not bred of every Plant,
but certain Worms of certain Plants; as also the same worms do not breed out of
all Carcasses of Animals, but some out of one sort, some out of another, and
the forms of such insects seem to be subordinate to the forms of Animals and of
Plants. Which Scaliger also teaches, Exercit. 59. Sect. 2. and Exercit. 190.
But which are generated from which, we shall hereafter show when we come to
speak more particularly. Concerning which Aristotle has many excellent things
well worth the reading in 5. Hist. Animal. especially in the 19. Chap. Where he
teaches in general, that Worms and Caterpillars are bred of Plants, and of them
Chrysalides Golden-Worms, and of them butter-flies and other Winged Animals are
bred. For not only Butter-flies, but other winged Animals also are bred of
Plants, as Flies, Beetles and such like. The Spontaneous Original of Flies.
Concerning the Spontaneous Original of Flies Ulysses Aldrevandus writes, Lib.
3. de Insectis, Cap. 1. some do suppose, that they spring partly from corrupted
fruits, and rotten Carcasses of Animals, and partly from the Corruption of the
Air, as Ovid shows Lib. 5. Metamorphos. but that their chief matter is Earth.
I, as I will not deny but Flies may be generated out of any putrid matter, and
out of the Carcasses of Animals, (and I have showed before that out of the
putrefying flesh of other Animals as well as of Bulls Bees are generated as from
the most fitting matter) yet I conceive they are bred for the most part of
Plants, and I have observed an example thereof. For when, some years agone, in
the Winter time, when no other green Herbs were to be had, I did beat red
Cole-worts, and kept them in a stove til they bred Worms, the Worms generated
thereof turned into Golden Caterpillars, which when I had kept shut in a Box,
and afterward came to open the same, a troop of small Flies made their escape,
which were bred of the Caterpillars, and broke out of their Cracked Skins.

But to come to Particular sorts; Animals bred of Mushroms
in the first place, truly, it is very well known that of Mushroms which are the
lowest sort of Plants, Worms are bred. Of the Generation where of Fortunius
Licetus disputes Lib. 3. de Spont. Viv Ort. cap. 44. and conceives that they
cannot be produced by the Soul of the Toad-stool or Mushrom, because it is in
the lowest rank of vegetables and cannot act beyond its power, so as to
procreate a sensible Soul more noble then the vegerable. And that also for the
same reason the Soul of a Mushrom cannot be changed into a sensitive Soul. But
he himself holds that Worms are bred of Mushroms, because in the substance of a
Puck-fist, a Toad-stool or Mushrom, many petty Bodies or Atoms are contained,
which came from the Bodies of Animals either living or dead, in which Bodies a
Portion of the old sensitive Soul does remain as in a vessel, which the
Toad-stool coming to wither, and it having by the heat of the ambient Air
attained dispositions necessary to life, it is Spontaneously animated and turns
to little Worms. But this opinion of Licetus has been often propounded and
examined. In this place, we shall first observe this doubt therein, whether or
no those little Worms which are of the kind of Animals are simply more noble
then Plants: of which there seems no necessity. For the Creator did not in the
first place intend and create those Worms, but the Plants as we showed before,
cap. 4. speaking of the final end of these kind of Creatures. Again it has
been often said, that that Hypothesis of Licetus will hardly be granted, that
the form of nobler Animals should be changed into the form of Ignoble Worms.
Moreover Toad-stools are often bred upon Trees, and under Trees in Woods, where
it is scarce credible that there has been any Carcass of an Animal. Yea and
they are bred every year. And although peradventure Animals have discharged
their Excrements in those places, yet the Soul of an Animal was not in them.

Moreover worms are bred out of sundry perfect plants, Worms out of living
Plants.
whiles are they living. Pliny Lib. 13. cap. 6. writes, The Turpentine Tree
bears certain Bladderkies, out of which certain gnats or other Animals do
spring. And Jul. Caes. Scalig. Exercit. 59. Sect. 2. nor are these petty
Animals bred only in fruits alone, such as Wivels or Wibbles which breed in
Wheat, Maggots in Nuts, and other petty Animals in others, of which see
Theophrastus; but also of the bladders of a Lentisch Tree, which it bears
besides its berries, like Cods: so that they seem contrived on purpose by
Nature, to be first the Wombs and soon after the Cottages of these small winged
Animals. As in the Cods of Elmes there are bred much such like. And therefore
the Arabians are wont to call the Elm the Tree of Wig-Lice. or lowly Tree. So
out of the pith of the Fullers Thistle when it is ripe a small Worm grows: which
Dioscorides truly reports to be good against the Quartan Ague. Such Bladders
also the Turpentine Tree bears, wherein are a certain Liquor and Gnats. It is
exceeding well known that Worms are bred in Hasel-Nuts, Cherries, Apples, and
Plums. Upon the Leaves of Oaks little Apples grow like Galls, in which about
the beginning o^ Autunme, either a little Worm, or a Fly, or a Spider is found:
each of which are thought to be Prognostications of the year following, and
that the Worm signifies Plenty, the Fly scarcity, and the Spider Pestilence. On
wild Rose bushes hairy Apples grow, called Spunges of Roses, which have a Worm
within them. In a word, as Julius Caes. Scaliger upon Theophrastus rightly
says, every Worna grows in his own Tree or Plant.

But especially of living plants sundry sorts of Caterpillars and Palmet Worms,
The generation of Caterpillars and Butterflies
and out of them diverse kinds of Butter-flies are bred. And Ulysses Aldrovandus
describes near an hundred sorts of Caterpillars or Palmer Worms, Lib. 2. de
Insectis Cap. 4. and more then an hundred sorts of Butter-flies, in the same
Book Chap. 1. And that which was said before in general is also true of
Caterpillars, that every sort grows out of its own Plant. Which also Fabius
Columna confirms by his own experience, in observat. Lib Minus Cognit. and
Rarior. Stirpium addit. Page 87. where he says, that Caterpillars and other
petty Animals do not only breed of certain plants, but that a Caterpillar bred
of one Plant does not feed upon another, but only upon its own out of which it
was generated: as for example, if a Caterpillar were bred out of a Plant of
Rue, it will feed upon other the like Plants of Rue, but not on all that bear
the Name of Rue, as Goats Rue and Dogs Rue, by late Authors so called, nor on
the Leaves of any other Plant unless it be of the same Nature, and quality. And
those that are bred upon the Radish will Eat the Leaves of Radish, but of no
other plant, unless peradventure it be a Plant of the same kind, as Cole-worts,
Rapes, Navews and such like. From which observation of the feeding of
Caterpillars I conceive a man may know the qualities of the Plants they feed
upon. For Silkworms we know eat the Leaves of Brambles and Mulberries, our
People when the Worms are little lay Bramble Leaves upon them for their food,
and when they are greater the Leaves of the black Mulberry Tree, which are
question less of the same Nature with the bramble leaves, for they do does bind
and color, as Dioscorides testifies: so that from the food of these
Caterpillars and Butter-flies we may know what Plants are of like Nature. For
if Caterpillars or Butter-flies feed upon diverse Plants of the same kind, it is
Credible they have like Virtues and qualities. So far Fabius Columna.

But touching the Generation of Caterpillars and Butter-Flies Authors agree
not. How Caterpillars and Butter flies are Generated
Aristotle, Lib. 9. de Histor. Animal. cap. 19. thus writes thereof:
Butter-Flies (says he) are bred of Caterpillars; Caterpillars of living Leaves
of Plants, especially of the Cole-wort. First of all a small Seed less then
Millet lies upon the leaf, soon after of that Seed small Worms are bred and
grow, then within three days they become small Caterpillars; which being
augmented cease moving, and change their shape, and are for a small time called
Chrysalides, as if you would say Golden Worms. They are covered with an hard
Shel stirring when you touch them, and full of little pores. They have no
mouth, nor other member discernable. A long time after the Shel being broken,
out Flies a parcel of winged Creatures which we call Butter Flies. And
therefore at first whiles they are Caterpillars they are nourished by food, and
void Excrements. But when they are turned into those Aureliae or Golden-worms,
they neither Eat nor void any thing. And concerning the Generation of the
Silkworm, in the same place; It is made of a certain large worm, which thrusts
out two horns as it were, and is of a kind by it self, which is first wholly
changed into a Caterpillar, then it becomes a Fly like a Butter-Fly, and
afterward it is called Necydalus. Which various succession of Forms is
accomplished in the space of six Months.

But Ulysses Aldrovandus in the place fore alleged dissents from Aristotle,
and thus he describes the Generation of these Creatures: every Butter-fly is
bred of the Worm called Chrysalis the Chrysalis of a Caterpillar, the
Caterpillar of the Eggs of Butterflies; whose end is not to breed Caterpillars
or Gold-Worms, but other Butter-flies. But he blames Aristotle for not having
observed that the seed on the leaf was the seed of a Butter-fly; and for not
understanding, that those little Worms which first break out of the Eggs are
small Caterpillars. But in good deed, although it cannot be denied, that some
Caterpillars are bred of the Seed of Butter-flies (which I doubt whether
Aristotle were ignorant of) and that the Seed on the Leaves of Plants, less
then that of Millet, is the Seed of Butter-flies: yet the question now is,
whether Butterflies are only bred of Seed, or whether they are not also
Spontaneously generated: since certain it is that many Animals Spontaneously
generated do send forth Seed. And experience shows that such Worms and
Caterpillars are bred out of Dew and Rains falling down upon Plants. For in the
spring time for the most part Caterpillars are thus bred before Butterflies are
seen; and therefore since these Caterpillars come before Butterflies, it is a
sign that they are not bred of the Seed of Butterflies, but of corrupted
Plants. Which Aldrovandus himself was forced to confess, when he relates
afterward, that those Caterpillars which are turned into Butterflies are not
all bred of Butterflies Eggs, but some of them of the corruption of Plants.
Which experience also does Testify, whence it is manifest, that frequently
Caterpillars are bred of the corruption of Plants, and of the Caterpillars
Butterflies are bred, which bring forth Eggs, out of which again Caterpillars
are bred, and of them again Butterflies. In the same place Aldrovandus denies
that all Butterflies are bred of Caterpillars, but some, he says, are
generated of Worms; and he writes that if Corn be over moist it breeds Worms,
which turn to Gold-Worms, and they to Butterflies. He writes also, that he has
seen Butterflies come out of hollow Trees especially Willows, with their Skins
wherein they were bred scarce off. But here it is to be inquired, whether or no
those Worms were not Caterpillars, which were afterward changed into
Gold-worms, and they into Butterflies. Nor are Caterpillars all of one kind,
but some are bred of Living Plants, others of Corn, others out of Wood. And
those Caterpillars of which Silkworms are engendered do not retain the same
Figure, but change their Coats four several times. Whereof see Libavius Lib. 1.
Bombyctor. who has written most diligently concerning this matter. This is
general, that all those little worms which hide themselves in down, or wrap
themselves in the Leaves of Trees, after some changes of their outward shapes
are changed into a flying Creature, like to that by which the Eggs were laid

This I have also observed in Caterpillars bred of Indian Watercresses, which
they frequently feed upon, being kept in a Glass; that out of their Bellies
live Creatures did come forth, which died soon after, and would question less
revive again the next Spring, and the Caterpillars themselves also died, no
Butter flies being of them generated. Wherein I was confirmed by that which
Aldrovandus relates Lib. 4. de Insectis, Cap. 1. how that such as have written
of the wonders of the new World do report concerning Pismires, how that out of
the Body of the dead Parent innumerable little Worms arise, which live after a
wonderful manner, until being winged they fly out of their underground
Habitations; although the Parents do sometimes bring forth during their Life.

We conceive that Gnats also are bred of the corruption of living, The
generation of Gnats.
or withered Plants. For although Gnats are generated out of Water and Vinegar:
yet that happens, because they contain in them either the parts or Juyces of
Plants. For although, as Aristotle relates, de Histor. Animal. Lib. 5. Cap. 19.
they are also bred of Water, especially standing Water: yet there is no
question but many things are bred therein by the corruption of Plants. And
those which are Generated of a sour Humor Aristotle calls Conopas; and of them
Pliny relates, Lib. 9. Cap. 51. that they are generated of a tart Humor; and
Lib. 10. Cap. 70. that they fly to and feed on sour things, but care not for
what is sweet. Yet they are not immediately Generated of the acid Humor, but of
a Worm which is first bred of the said Humor. So that the Original of all these
petty flying Animals is from some peculiar kind of Worm.

More Particularly, Gnats generated of a wild sigtree.
Gnats are bred of the wild Fig Tree, whereof Aristotle, 2. Histor. Animal.
Cap. 32. The wild Fig Tree generates certain Fig-Gnats out of its Apples; first
there is a Worm, soon after the Skin breaks and out Flies a Gnat, and changing
its place it goes to the unripe Figs, whereinto insinuating it self it keeps
them from falling. Theophrastus, 2 de Caussis Plantarum, adds that they are
bred of the Seeds, a sign whereof is, that after they are fled away there are
scarce any Seeds in the Figs. For they fly away maimed, leaving a Feather or a
Foot in the Apple. Which Pliny comfirms, Lib. 17. Cap. 27.

Fortunius Licetus holds a fourfold Original of such as spring from living
Plants, A fourfold original of Animals that breed of living Plants. The First
Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 46. The first he says is of the
Excrements of Plants. For seeing Plants are nourished by an Earthy Juice, with
which a great quantity of dung and mixed matter is mingled proceeding from the
Bodies of Animals living or dead, he holds that there is therein remaining some
portion of the former sensitive Soul, and that the said matter is carried for
the more abundant nourishment of the Plant to the flours, or Fruits, leaves,
or Barks, or elsewhere, which when it is digested by the heat of the Ambient
Air, and acquires dispositions necessary to life presently the Soul which lay
hid therein does display it self, and sometimes a Caterpillar, sometimes a Wi^el,
otherwhiles a Moth, otherwhiles a Worm, somwhiles a Goose, other whiles a Duck
is bred, and sometimes another Animal. But this manner is scarce agreeable to
reason; especially that Geese and Ducks should be thus bred. For it is not
credible that the Souls of such perfect Animals should be able to remain
perfect and entire under so many Mutations. Nor does the sensitive Soul
constitute any Animal in its kind; and every Animal, as for example a Lion, an
Ox, a Goose, an Hare, has not only a sensitive Soul but a specifical Soul of
its own, differing from the Souls of all other Animals.

The Second manner he makes to be of Atoms, The Second.
which have flowed from the Bodies of Animals, flying in the Air, and driven
into the substance of Plants and sticking thereto by the clamminess of Dew, and
being driven within the Porous matter, or the Downy corpulency; which in fit
season being digested by the concoctive faculty of the ambient Air, and
prepared for another life, they become living Creatures, viz. Caterpillars,
Spiders, Cantharides, Geese and such like Animals. But neither is this manner
probable unless it be limited. For that Geese should be generated of Atoms
flying in the Air, and sticking to Plants, as it is a thing unheard of, so any
one may easily understand that it is impossible. But this we grant, that with
the Rain and Dew a matter falls upon Plants, and cleaves to them, out of which
Caterpillars are generated, and other such like Insects. Nor do we deny, that
Atoms in which the Seeds of such living Creatures do stick may descend with
Rain or Dew upon Plants: Yet we do not think that this is always necessary
since the Excrements of Plants and Animals and their corrupted parts have this
power, and the Seminal principles of these Animals are fastened upon Plants by
the dew and Rain.

The Third manner he makes to be, when Atoms or Juyces of the same kind, The
third.
being any ways slipped out of the Bodies of Animals, and by the Earth
communicated to a Plant, are by the heat of the ambient Air awakened and
enlivened. Nor yet is it necessary that this should be done, but the parts of
Plants themselves if they be corrupted may turn to such petty Animals. And if
after this manner Animals should be bred of living Plants, many more would be
generated then are: How beit certain Animals are nevertheless bred of certain
Plants.

The fourth manner he makes to be proper to those which are bred in the Water,
The fourth
viz. when of the Juice, Atoms, or Excrements of Plants mingled with the
Water, and cleaving to the substance of Plants which grow in the Water, Animals
are bred.

Two manners therefore are altogether sufficient. The First is, Two manners of
the generation of Animals out of living Plants
when of the corrupted parts of Plants Animals are bred, as of the Barks of
Pine Trees corrupted Pine Caterpillars are bred. The other is, when Atoms
containing the Forms of such Animals do with the Dew or Rain fall upon Plants;
which happens most frequently when few little drops fall as the Sun shines,
which we call heat Drops. For with these not only the Leaves of Plants (as it
is well known) are corrupted, but also Husbandmen know, that by this shower
little Animals are bred in them.

Animals are also bred of dead and dry Plants; and that Moths, and Wood-Lice,
Animals bred of dead plants.
Coss-worms, and sundry sorts of Worms are bred in rotten Wood, every body
knows. Aristotle, Lib. 5. de Hist. Animal. Cap. 19. writes that the Beetles
called Bulls are bred of the Worms which are generated out of dry Wood; and in
the same Book, Chap. 32. he relates, that the smallest creature in the world,
called Acari, is bred not only in old wax, but also in white Wood.

Among Animals that breed out of rotten Wood, The Cadworm.
we must reckon that little worm which is called Xulophthoros, and which
Arissotle, 5. Histor. Animal. Cap. 32. describes. Which I take to be no other
then that which our Germans call Stoch-wurm that this Stick-worm, and we in
England, if I mistake not, call them Cad worms, which is bred in the Water of
Rotten sticks and Stocks of Trees, being a River Worm, and taken in the Spring
time with River Gudgions. But Aristotle seems to have described this Worm,
rather when it puts on the Form of a Gold-worm, then when it lives in the
Water. The same Aristotle writes, that he had not yet experimented what Animal
was bred thereof. But experience shows that it is changed into that commonly
known infect which Ulysses Ald^ovandus (2 de Insectis Cap. 10.) calls Perlas,
the Silesians term it Schneider, those of Misnia Boltzen.

Whence the Cimiees Wig-lice or Wall-lice so called are bred, Wall-Lice.
is doubtful. Most are of Opinion they are bred of the filth proceeding from
mankind; and Aristotle, 5. de Hist. Animal. Cap. 31. says: they are bred of
the Humor which is in the upper parts of the Bodies of Animals. But if this
were true, why should they not be bred in the Skin, hairs, or Garments of Men
and Women, as Lice and Fleas are? And therefore it is more likely, and
experience does witness the same, that they are bred in Bedsteads [understand
Dutch Beadsteads] and especially in their chinks, and in the Wood of the Walls
next the Bed, which is their proper place. And if they are found elsewhere in
the Straw, or in Garments, they have crept thither from the Bed-steads.
Howbeit, there is assistant to their Generation the filth or rather the Vapors
of Men and Women sleeping, which sticking to the Wood corrupt the same and
cause it to breed these Vermin. Now they are chiefly bred in Wood of the Fir
and Poplar Trees. Whereof Julius Caes. Scaliger does well write (save that he
holds they are bred in straw likewise) in Lib. 2. de Plantis; That certain
Woods, as the Fir, and Straws, have in them Natural Rudiments of these Animals.

Concerning the Scotch Geese called Brant-Geese.
Hither some refer the Stotch Geese called Barnacles, which some write are bred
of rotten Wood. Because Authors Dissent hereabouts, I think here sitting to
speak somewhat Particularly thereof. Most, as has been said, are of Opinion,
that they are not bred of Eggs, but in the Sea, out of rotten Wood; although
some say in one place some in another. Munster says in the Islands called
Orcades, others in Ireland, others in Scotland, others in the Islands called
Hebrides; some say they breed in any Sea if the Ships be made of Wood which
grew in Scotland, and therefore some do not ascribe the place of their breeding
to one part, but to all that tract betwixt the Orcades and Scotland, and
betwixt the Hebridae and Ireland. Moreover, there is a controversy whereof
they are bred. For some suppose, that in the Orcades upon the Banks of the
Rivers there is a Tree which bears a fruit resembling Ducks, which when it is
ripe falls off, and if it light upon the water it presently conceives life, and
becomes a bird, but if it fall upon the Land it putrifies. Others write that of
the pieces of Ship Masts floating in the Ocean there is first of all somewhat
thrust forth, and that afterward at the Sea-weed (or Sea-grass called W^^r or
Wear) sticking with the pitch to those pieces of wood, there hang little
Shel-fish like Cockles or Muscles, which in process of time receive wings and
Fly through the Air, or fall into the water and Swim. Others think that these
Geese are bred, neither of rotten wood, nor on Trees, but out of Shells. Others
conceive they are bred none of these ways, but that they are hatched of Eggs,
as other Animals are.

But I think it will be best to set down the Relations of Authors themselves
concerning this matter. Fortunius Licetus produces this follwing Account (in
Lib. 3. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 47.) out of Turner. The former Goose is termed
by our countrymen a Brand Goose and a Barnacle; it is less then a wild Goose,
on the breast partly black, on the Rest of the Body of an Ash-color. It Flies
and cries like wild Geese, frequents standing Waters, and devours standing
Corn. The flesh of this kind is somewhat unpleasant, and not in request amongst
the Rich. No man ever saw the Nest or Egg of a Barnacle; which is no wonder:
because they are without the help of any parent, Spontaneously bred after this
manner. When the mast, or some Fir-boards of a Ship have lain Rotting for a
time in the Sea, there grows thereout, at first, certain Mushroms as it were;
in which in process of time the manifest Forms of Birds are to be seen, which
are afterward clothed with Feathers, and at last quicken and fly. And I would
not have any one think that this is a Fable, for besides the common Testimony
of all People living upon the Seacoasts of England, Scotland and Ireland, that
same Fam us Historian Gyraldus, who has wrote the History of Ireland, (more
happily much then could be expected in the Age wherein he lived) does testify
that Barnacles are Generated no otherwise then as we have said. But counting it
not safe to believe vulgar reports, and not crediting Gyraldus by reason of the
Novelty of the matter, while I was ruminating upon this subject whereof I now
write, I made enquiry of a certain Irish Divine Named Octavianus, whom I knew
by experience to be a very honest and credible Person; whether he conceived a
man might believe Gyraldus in this point: whose answer was (swearing by the
Gospel he did profess) that what Gyraldus had reported concerning the
Generation of this Bird was most true; and that he had seen with his own Eyes,
and handled with his hands some of these fowl before they were come to
perfection; and that if I would tarry a month or two longer at London, be would
ere long cause some of the imperfest Birds to be brought to me. I am therefore
by the credible report of honest and learned men who were Eye witnesses
persuaded, that it is a real truth, that Brand Geese or Barnacles, are bred out
of the rotten Masts of Ships, after the manner of Mushroms. In Wales, which is
a part of England, in Ireland and Scotland, these Birds are found up and down
upon the Sea-shores imperfect and unfeathered, but having the true and proper
shapes of Birds.

Hector Boethius in his description of the Kingdom of Scotland, thus writes
concerning this matter: It remains (says he) that we should declare what
(after long and diligent search into the matter) we certainly know and
understand concerning the Scostish Geese which they call Clack-Gees, and which
are commonly but falsely thought to grow upon Trees in these Islands. For I
conceive that the Virtue which breeds them is rather in the Seas which flow
betwixt these Islands, then in any other thing. For we have seen them Generated
sundry ways, but evermore in the Sea. For if you cast a piece of Timber into
that Sea, in process of time, there are first of all Worms bred, the Wood being
hollowed, which by little and little have Heads shaped, and then Legs and
Wings, and at last are covered with Feathers: Finally growing as large as
Geese, when they are come to their full ripeness of Age they fly in the Air like
other fowl, which was evidently seen in Buthphan by many spectators, in the
year of our Lord 1490. For when as in that Island at the Castle of Pechslege a
great log of this kind of Wood was brought a shore by the Sea Waves, those that
first espied it, being astonishe^ at the Novelty of the thing, ran to the Lord
of that place and acquainted him with the news. He coming caused the Log to be
sawed asunder, which being done, presently there appeared an huge Multitude,
partly of Worms, of which some were yet unshaped, others had some members
formed; and partly of Birds perfectly shaped, of which some bad Feathers,
others bad none. Being therefore astonished at the strangeness of the thing, at
the command of the Lord they carry the Log into the Church of St. Andrew at
Tyra (a Village so called) where it remains at this day bored through as it
were with Worms. The like Log in the Isle Taum was cast ashore by the working
of the Sea, at the Castle of Bruthe, two years after, which was showed to many
that came running of purpose to see it. Nor was that any other which two years
after the former was seen by all the people in Lethe a port of Edin-burge, For
an huge Ship whose name and Badge was St. Christopher, when it had Lien at
Anchor three years together by one of the Hebrides Islands, and was brought
bither again and laid in Dock, the Beams being eaten asunder as sar as it had
lien in the Water, there were seen therein a great number, partly of such rude
Worms, not yet having their perfect shape, and partly of fowls fully perfected.
But some may cavil and say, that there is such a virtue in the Wood of the
Trees which grow in those Islands: and that the Ship Christopher was made of
Timber which had grown in the Islands Hebrides: Therefore I shall not think it
tedious to set down, what I my self saw seven years ago. Alexander Gallowid the
Pastor of Kilkenny, a man besides his singular honesty incomparably studious
after Rarities, having drawn out some Sea-weeds, and seeing betwixt the stalk
and the branches, from the bottom to the top, certain Shellfish growing, he was
amazed at the Novelty of the thing; but when presently for his further
satisfaction he opened the Shells be stood much more astonished then before.
For he found no Fish in the Shells, but (strange to tell) a Bird, and according
to the bigness thereof, he observed the Shells to be bigger or lesser.
Wherefore he speeds him to me forthwith, whom he knew of old to be exceedingly
desirous of the knowledge of such things, and acquaints me with the whole
business, being no less astonished at the strangeness of the thing, then
delighted with a Spectacle so strange and unheard of. Now I conceive it is
sufficiently apparent, that these Seeds of breeding these fowls are not in the
Trunks or Boughs of Trees, but in the Ocean it self, which Virgil and Homer do
not without cause term the Parent of things. But when they saw that Apples
falling from Trees that grew upon the Seashore, in process of time, the like
Birds came out of them, they were brought to conceive that the Apples were
changed into such Birds; but they were mistaken. For in time by the Seas virtue
Worms grew to the Apples, and they increasing, and the Apples rot^ing by the
moisture and vanishing, they through want of good heed imagined that the Apples
were turned into these kinds of Fowls. So far Hector Boethius.

Julius Caesar Scaliger, The relation of Jul. Caes. Sealiger.
Exercit. 59. Sect. 2. thus writes concerning this matter: You may rather
wonder that in the Britannick Ocean, a Bird unknown in your parts hangs by the
Beak in the Timber of rotten Ships, till it grow to perfection, and swim away,
being fashioned like a Duck, and living upon Fish. I have also seen one of
these Fowls. The Gascoigns inhabiting by the Sea side call them Crabrans, but
the Britanies Bearnacles. And a little after: There was brought to the most
excellent and great King Francis, a Shelfish as it seemed, not very large, in
which there was a young Bird almost perfected, with the tops of the Wings, the
Bill and Feet, sticking to the farthest parts of the Shell

Petrus Pena, Of P. Pena and M. Lobel.
and Matthias Lobelius, In their Observations of Plants, near the end, write
thus concerning these Geese. This example of Natures endeavoring to draw some
good even out of corruption makes us now willing to believe many things which
else we should have laughed at, if we had read them in the Historians of the
Northern parts of the World. Although they relate the matter somewhat
differently, that this is only found in Scotland, or in the ^slands of O^cades,
anciently conquered by the Roman Navy. But we have not only from Scotland, but
here also, in the River Thames where it runs by the City of London, Shells
which have been plucked from the Bottom of an old Ship, with thick rugged
stalks. They are very small, as round in a manner as Cockles, white without,
shining, Smooth, as thin and Brittle as Egg shells, opening with two sides like
Limpins, of the size of an Almond Nut compressed: now these hung on the outside
of the Belly of a large Ship, upon which being half rotten with Moss and Mud
there grew as it were the stalks of Mushroms, resembling the Navil-strings, the
ends whereof after the manner of Fruits were inserted into the broad end or
Basis of the Cockles, as if the little Birds were thence to draw their life and
nourishment, the rudiments of which Birds were to be seen in the upper sides of
the Cockles which gaped. These stalks Historians report to grow first out of
Worms, which we could not discern, nor do we yet believe it to be so: although
we know that such kind of Cockles most neatly shaped do grow on pieces of Wood
cast up by the working of the Sea. And such of them as fall upon the dry land
dye; but such as remain in the Water do hatch a Duck or a Foul of that kind.
The English and Welsh eat them Barnacles; the Scots call them Clack-Geese, and
there are many of them in Scotland, where they are caught, when the standing
Waters are fro^en with Ice. When we did eat of them, we conceived that they
tasted like a Duck, or wild Goose.

Among the Germans, Of Michael Mejer.
Michael Mejer, in his Treatise de Volucri Arborea Chap. 3. himself being an
Eye witness relates, that out of Shells like Cockles such Geese are bred, and
that he had seen wellnigh an hundred such Cockles, which being opened, there
were small young birds in them, ready as it were to come out of the Egg, with
all members necessary to fly with, some of which Birds he had in his own hands.
Thus he describes them: if at any time a piece of a Ship-mast smeared with
pitch fall into the Sea which runs betwixt the O^cades and Hebrides Islands,
and lies there for some considerable time, it grows not only rotten by reason
of Worms bred within it, but it is covered all over with Sea-weeds, store of
which grow in those garts, and upon any wood that is in the Water, especially
if it sweat forth a Pitchy fatness, as the Masts of Ships made of Fir or
Pitch-Tree, and abounding naturally with Rosin, and pitched over for the
service of the Ship, that the sails may be swiftly hoised up and let fall, and
not stick any where. Now the Sea bears these weeds on the bottom thereof,
whence at a certain season it rises up to the top, being as it were plucked up
or cut off by the Waves. This weed being bred in the Water does not easily
putrify, having much saltness in it; and therefore in North-Holand, and many
other places, they make Dams thereof very strong against the Violence of the
Ocean, so as they fetch a remedy from whence the Disease comes. The foresaid
pieces of Wood therefore being covered with this weed, which insinuates it self
into the small holes which remain by reason of the rottenness thereof; in
process of time, at the other End of the said weed small Cockles as it were do
grow, which are whitish, or of the color of a Man's Nail, and in shape much
resembling the Nail of ones little Finger, and the two Shells being so joined
together, that they stick close, on the upper and more pointed sides they
receive the Sea-weeds end, and are firmly shut on the broader sides, which are
afterward opened, that the fruit being ripe may go out of its own accord to
fly. After this manner thousands of ^^al Shells more or less do stick, each
Shell at the end of a Weed, the other end of the said Weed (as has been said)
being fastened to the pitched Logs of Wood, and that so many in number that the
Wood can scarcely be seen: which pieces of Weeds are hardly above twelve
Fingers breadths long, and strong, as if they were thongs of Leather. Sometimes
they are cer^a^n feet long.

Carolus Clusius, in Auctario Exoticorum, thus writes concerning them: Of
Carolus Clusius.
The Clack-Geese so called by the Scots, which the English call Parnacles, the
Highland^rs Rot geese, is a kind of Fowl seen only in the Autumn and the Winter
resembling a Duck. The Original of these Fowls being unknown, it came to pass
that the common people imagined their first Rudiment to be certain Shells of
whitish col^ur growing to the Trunks or fragments of Wood, which are wont in
these parts to be driven on shore by the flowing in of the Sea, where the Wood
does not otherwise Grow, and resembles in some manner the shape of these Birds.
But that he ever saw a living and perfect bird come out of those Shells, no man
dares aver. So far Hoierus. Moreover, these are not the Birds which are
commonly thought to grow upon Trees in the Orcades Isles, and are called
Barnacles, or Rot Geese; but Birds commonly not less then a Duck, which I have
sometimes s^en, yea and tasted of their flesh. And all is found to be fables
which has been reported of them by the Hollanders, who some few years since
sailed to Nova Zembla, and past beyond the Bay of Nassou, commonly called
Weygaz. For they observed those Birds sitting upon their Eggs in the Rocks, and
brought many of their Eggs into the Ship, to satisfy their Hunger. So far
Clusius.

Which is confirmed by Gerhardus de Vera, of Amsterdam, in the Navigation to
China: Then rowing, (says he) to the Island which was middlemost, there we
found many Eggs of Barnacles (which the Hollanders call Rot-Gansen or
Rot-Geese) and the Fowls themselves sitting in their nests; which being chased
away, did cry Rot, R^t, Rot, (whence they have their name of Rot-Geese) and by
the throw of a Stone we killed one of them, which we did boil and Eat, with
about threescore Eggr, which we carried with us to the Ship. These Geese or
Barnacles were true Rot-Geese, such as in great Quantity do hant every year and
are caught about Weiringen in Holland; which where they laid their Eggs (this
man never read Albertus Magnus) and hatched their young, has been hitherto
unknown. Whence it came to pass, that some Authors have dared to write, that
they grow out of Trees in Scotland, from the branches whereof hanging over the
Water, if the fruit fall into the Water young Geese are thereout generated; but
if they fall on the ground, they perish and come not to perfection: which
appears now to be false. Nor is it any wonder that it has been hitherto
unknown where these Birds laid their Eggs, since it is most certain, that none
was ever heard to have come to the eightieth degree of Latitude before, nor was
that part of the Country (which I conceive to be Groenland) ever known before,
much less were those Geese ever found sitting upon their Eggs.

Out of all which Narrations it is manifest, The true Opinion concerning these
Scottish Geese.
that these Geese are not bred out of rotten Wood, but out of certain Shells,
which by means of Sea-weed are fastened to the holes of rotten wood, as the
foresaid Mejer writes. Those Cockles as it were with black Shells are always
found sticking to wood lying in the Water, as to the wooden foundations of
Bridges, and to Ships sunk under the water. Now they stick to the wood by
certain thrids of Hair or Snevil as it were, or else by Seaweed. And Mejerus
adds this also in their description, that if the Cockles open themselves, those
small young Birds appear, like Chickens in their Eggs, which have a Bill, Eyes,
Feet, Wings, also the Hairy Rudiments of Feathers. And as they increase, so
their Shells increase, as it is with all Shel-fish and Snailes. And credible it
is, that these Cockles do draw nourishment out of the fat and clammy substance
of rotten wood, by those pieces of Grass or Sea-weed, that goes between them,
as by Navil-Vessels. And as to the relation of the Hollanders who found these
Geese sitting upon Eggs, it may thus be reconciled with the rest, by saying
that some were first bred in England and Scotland, out of the Shells, which
might fly to other places: of the number of which were those Geese, which the
Hollanders saw upon the Rocks in their Voyage to Nova Zembla. For since the
greatest part of Insects being Spontaneously bred do afterward couple and
Generate: why may not these Fowls being Animals much more perfect do the same?

Now there is nothing of certainty to be found in Authors concerning the
Generation of these Geese. The Generation of these Scottish Geese
The said Mejer Chap. 5. attributes the Generation of these kind of Shells and
Birds to the Heaven, and conceits they proceed from I know not what imaginative
Virtue in the Heaven. But, as we have said elsewhere, the Heaven is only an
universal Cause; whereas here our question is about the next and immediate
cause. Nor do I conceive that the Generation of these Fowls is Spontaneous, but
I conceive they are bred as other Cockles or Shel-sish are.

And if any one shall wonder that a Bird should spring out of a Cockle or
Shelsish, let him think with himself that it was as easy for the Creator to
make a Cockle bring forth a Bird as another Cockle; and let him consider how
many other wonderful things do happen in Nature. Amongst which is that Relation
concerning the Lamb which in Tartaria grows out of the ground, which Sigismund
Baron of Herberstein (in Rerum Muscoviticarum Commentariis) thus describes: The
Vege table Lamb of Muscovia.
Not far, (says he) from the Caspian Sea, betwixt the Rivers Volga and Jaik,
there dwelt once the Sawolhensian Kings of whom I shall speak hereafter. Among
these Tartarians, Demetrius Danielis (as he was counted among the Barbarians, a
grave and credible Man) told me a wonderful and scarce credible thing; How that
his Father being once sent from the Duke of Muscovia to the Zawolhensian King;
while he was upon this Embassage he saw a Seed a little greater and rounder
then the Seed of a Musk-Melon, but otherwise not unlike the same: out of which
being set in the ground there grew up a thing very like a Lamb five hands high,
which they called in their speech Boramez, or the little Lamb: For it has an
Head, and Eyes, and Ears, and all other parts like a Lamb newly brought forth,
also a delicate fine Skin, which many use in that Country to line their Caps
withal. He said moreover, that this Plant, (if it may be called a Plant) has
blood indeed, but no flesh: but instead of flesh a substance very like that of
the flesh of Crabs. Moreover it had little hoofs, not horny like those of a
Lamb, but Clothed with hairs resembling horn: the Root thereof was at the
Navil or the middle Belly. And it lived so long, til having eaten all the grass
round about it, the Root it self for want of nourishment withered away. And
this Plant was exceeding sweet, so that Wolves and other Ravenous Beasts did
exceedingly delight to Eat thereof. This Relation is confirmed by others.
Fortunius Licetus, Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 45. has this Relation
out of the Journey of Odoricus Vtinensis to the great Cham of Tartary. I write,
(says he) a wonderful thing, not seen by my self, but which has been told me
by very credible persons, who say that in a certain Kingdom there are Mountains
called Capesci, where grow very great Pompions, which being ripe do open, and
therein is found an Animal like a small Lamb, which has flesh and the substance
of a Pompion together; and although this may seem incredible, yet as there are
Trees in Ireland which bring forth Birds, so may there in that place be such
Pompions as we speak of. And in another place he reports the same thing saying.
One day I saw a beast, as big as a Lamb, white as Snow, whose Wool being like
Cotton might easily be pulled off from its Skin; the bystanders being asked
told me, that it was given by a certain Baron to the great Cham, as the best
flesh in the World for a Man to feed upon: and they said withal, that there was
a Mountain called Capsium, in which there grew great Pompions, which when they
are ripe do gape, and put forth such an Animal. Julius Caesar Scaliger,
approves the same in Exercit. 181. Sect. 29. The things aforesaid (quoth he)
are but toies in comparison of that wonderful Tartarean plant. Zavolla is a
prime Country of Tartaria Famous as the seat of their most ancient nobility. In
that Country they plant a Seed, very like the Seed of a Melon, but rounder.
From whence arise a plant which they call Boramez, or the Lamb. For it grows in
the shape of a Lamb, about three foot above the ground, having Feet, Hoofs,
Ears, and the whole head like a Lamb, only it is without horns. Instead of
borns it has hair resembling an horn. It has a very thin skin whereof the
inhabitants make Caps to cover their Heads. They say the inner pulp is like the
flesh of a Crab, and of an admirable sweetness. A Root grows out of the ground
fastened to its Navil. And which makes the wonder greater; as long as any Herbs
grow about it, it lives like a Lamb in a good pasture: But when they are
consumed it pines away and dies. Which happens not only by chance, and in tract
of time, but also when the grass is taken away, for experiment sake. And to
increase the miracle, it is desired by Wolves, but not by any other Beasts
which live upon Flesh. See concerning this thing, Andreas Libavius, 2. Part.
Singular. Exercit. de Agno Vegetabili Scithiae.

But how Animals should grow out of dried Plants, is a doubtful question.
Animals Springing from dried Plants.
Fortunius Licetus, Lib. 3. Cap. 48. does blame Jul. Caesar Scaliger, Exercit.
59. Sect. 2. for holding that Plants do generate Animals out of themselves,
because a living piece of Wood contains only a vegetative Soul, and therefore
cannot produce a sensitive Soul more noble then it self, whereby to constitute
an Animal, nor change its own Soul into a sensitive. Their manner of Generation
according to Licetus. First.
But he himself holds (which is the first manner according to his reckoning)
that a Spontaneous Animal is bred out of the Excrements which yet remain in the
rotten Wood, together with the Aliment drawn out of the Earth, made up of the
dung and Juyces out of the Bodies of sundry Animals; which afterward from some
external agent receives a disposition at last, to put on the Nature of an
Animal; and the Soul being present as in a Vessel presently displaies it self,
and gives it self thereto, as an Essential and Quickening form.

But although I leave every man's Opinion free to himself, yet the Opinion of
Scaliger is more agreeable to truth. For the vegetable Soul does not produce
the Soul of an Animal nor is changed thereinto, but contains under it another
Soul of an Animal, which does belong to the disposition of the matter, which
afterward being set at liberty displaies it self. And therefore Scaliger said
not absurdly, that Plants contain in them certain Seeds for the Generation of
Animals. Nor is it sufficiently proved, that such insects and imperfect Animals
are more noble then the noblest Plants; seeing both the Plants themselves have
more noble faculties, and are of longer life then such petty Animals; nor were
they produced at the beginning of the World by the first intention of the
Creator, as other sorts of Living things; but were only bred out of the
Corruption of other things. And if the Opinion of Licetus were true, a great
many more sorts of Animals would be bred of Woods, seeing the Excrements which
Plants draw are various, and therefore of the same Wood sundry Animals should
be bred; whereas nevertheless only certain Animals are bred of certain Plants.

Afterward Licetus propounds three other manners, The second manner.
according to which Animals are bred out of the Carcasses of plants. The Second
manner he makes to be, when Animals are bred of the Carcasses of Plants in the
Waters; and that he says comes to pass, when the Juyces, Excrements or
Particles of Animals contained upon any occasion in the Waters, have in
themselves (as in a Vessel) some weakened part of the former sensitive Soul,
with a small degree of heat, and so cleave to Plants, and sink into them
through some pores or Chinks, and being digested by the ambient heat they are
prepared for life again, whereupon the Soul as lying hid in the Form begins to
be a substantial and quickening Form, and to constitute an Animal. But though it
is not to be denied, that sundry Excrements of Animals with their Juyces and
parts are contained in the Water, and may there cleave unto Plants: yet if this
manner should be allowed, sundry Animals answering to the several froms of
Animals should be bred of woods in the waters, which nevertheless is not so.
And therefore after this manner also lately declared, I hold that Animals are
bred in the Waters out of dry Plants, and that the Water contributes nothing,
save that it disposes the dead Plants to putrefaction, and supplies heat
necessary to actuate the hidden form.

He makes the Third manner to be, when as out of the water, The Third
in the surface of wood, Atoms or Juyces which have flowed from the Bodies of
Animals, living or dead, and fly in the Air, do light upon logs of wood, when
they are come to a due quantity, and have from the Ambient Air attained a
disposition necessary for Life. For then the sensitive Soul which before lay
hid in them as in a Vessel, gives it self to them in the Nature of a quickening
Form. And thus he holds that Moths, Flies, Worms, and other such Animals, are
bred in the rotten boughs of Trees, which touch neither the Earth nor the
water. But those little Animals are Generated, not so much out of the woods, as
out of the things which did stick to the said woods: and if they are generated
of the substance it self of the rotten woods, they belong unto the first manner.

Finally, He makes the fourth manner to be, The fourth
when out of the shavings and juyces of Animals shed from their Bodies upon the
Earth, and from the Earth some ways chrust into the Bodies of dead Plants,
being digested by the ambient heat, and prepared for life, an Animal is bred.
But this manner seems not much to differ from the Third.

Animals are also bred of the Juyces of Plants; Animals bred of the juyces of
Plants.
as is seen by Vinegar and Wine, and other Juyces, and Aristotle makes mention
of wine gnats 5. Histor. Animal. Cap. 19. to which also Honey may be referred.
For Animals are also bred thereof, especially if bread be mingled therewith.
Now Licetus makes a twofold original of these Animals, Lib. 3. de Spont.
Vivent. Ortu, Cap. 49. The First is, when in particles long since fallen from
the Body of an Animal, and infected with Dung and Onions, and pressed out with
Wine or Juice of Onions and Basil (for of the Juice of Onions and Basil he
conceives Scorpions are bred) some degree of the former Soul remains, which
when by the ambient heat it is cherished and disposed to life; the sensitive
Soul lying hid as in a Vessel joins it self thereto as a quickening form, by
which the Worms are first Animated. But Licetus has recourse to the same
manner, which he never proved, as if it were impossible that an Animal could be
bred of other then an Animal; whereas nevertheless experience teaches, that
such Ignoble petty Animals are bred of the matter which in living Plants was
the proper subject of the specific Form of the Plants. And if Animals were
bred of juyces after this manner, not only Flies and Wine gnats would breed out
of Wine, but other Animals also; since it is not credible that the forms of
Flies only are contained in the dung wherewith Vines are manured. And whereas
many things are every where reported by Authors concerning the breeding of
Scorpions out of Basil, (concerning which experience must be consulted) it is
not credible that all Basil Plants have drawn with their Aliment the particles
of Scorpions; since in many places Basil grows, where there are no Scorpions.
It is more credible, that since of certain Juyces not any Animals but only a
certain sort is bred; the Creator being rather willing that of the Corruption
of Plants an Animal should be made, then a putrid Body, has given to the
Bodies of Plants a power for the production of such determinate Forms.

Moreover it is well known, Some Animals generate without Copulation Female
Mice engender of themselves without the Male
that most Animals are generated by the Copulation of Male and Femal, or of the
Seeds of Male and Female Joined together. Yet it is also observed that some
Animals are Generated without the Congress of Male and Female. Female Mice
engender of themselves, and thence it is they are so speedily and plentifully
generated. So, Aristotle 6. de Histor. Animalium relates, Cap. 37. that a Mouse
with young being shut up in a Barrel of Milet, a while after the Vessel being
opened, an hundred and twenty young Mice were found therein. And a little after
he writes, that in a part of Persia, a Mouse with young being cut up, the Female
Mice in her Belly were found to have young ones in them: and that there are some
who stand stiffly in it, that if Mice lick Salt they breed young without
Copulation. So that a man may (not without Reason) doubt, whether that is true
which is reported of Mice being bred of rubbish. For since Mice can be so
easily generated, if some Mice do but Leap to seek Food out of an old Ship into
a new one, they may easily grow to a great multitude. Eeles have no Male nor
Female
So Aristotle tells us that Eels have no Male nor Female 4. Histor. Animal.
Cap. 11. and that they have neither Seed nor Eggs, but they are generated of a
slimy matter coming from the whole surface of the old Eele, as Snakes Skins
come from them. And he tells the same thing in 6. de Histor. Animal. Cap. 14.
and 16.

From the premises it is easy to answer to the objection of some men, The
Seminal principal of same Animals may lie hid in sundry Bodies.
who cannot understand how the Seminal matter may lie hid in rubbish, ( viz.
Such as mice are said to be bred of, if so be they are so bred as has been
said) can be of the same specific Nature with the Seed of the Male and Female,
of which they are otherwise generated. For we must observe that in such more
Ignoble Animals Generation is not so strictly tied to the Seed of Male and
Female, as in perfect Animals, but that one sex alone may also generate. And as
some Seeds of Plants can consist and abide even in a base matter, as in Rain:
So also the Seminal matter of these Animals can lie hid in rubbish, or other
base matter.

Fortunius Licetus reckons this kind of Generation, The Generation of Animals
without sex is not Spontaneous.
when an Animal is bred of another Animal of the same sort, but without Seed,
or without the Seed of the Male, to be a Spontaneous Generation, Lib. 3. de
Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 50. But I conce^ve this to be no Spontaneous Generation
properly so called. And as the Generation of Plants which have no sex by their
Seed, or by a branch or Root, is therefore termed non-Spontaneous, because it
is made by the same sort, and by Seed, or part containing in it the Seminal
principle: so also Mice, if they breed Seed in themselves without the Male, or
if Eeles are produced out of the slime containing in it the Seminal principle,
they are not properly said to be of Spontaneous Original.

Those Animals are more properly said to be Spontaneous, A threefold Original
of spontaneous Animals
which are generated out of Animals of a different sort. Now this comes to pass
three manner of ways. For sometimes petty Animals are generated in Living
Animals; and sometimes Animals proceed from the Excrements of Living Animals,
and sometimes out of the Bodies of such as are dead. And of such as are bred in
live Animals, some are bred in the very substance of the living parts, and some
in the Cavities. And because both these kinds proceed from Excrementitious
Humors, we shall treat of them together. Dragon-worms.
Hitherto pertain those little Dragons which are bred in the external habit of
the Body of such as dwell in the Eastern parts of the world. Of these P.
Aegineta does write, Lib. 4. cap. 59. In the Indies (says he) and the upper
parts of Egypt, little Dragons are Generated, or certain Animals resembling
Worms, in the Musculous parts of the Body, as in the Arms, Thighs, Legs; and
they creep along the sides of Children, under the Skin, so as they are plainly
seen to move. Moreover when some relics of a Dragon have remained long in a
place, the place suppurates, and the Skin being opened, the Head thereof comes
forth; when it is drawn it causes pain, especially if it be broken off.
Diodorus Siculus also mentions the same Disease, Lib. 4. Cap. 3. and Straboin
Lib. 6. who writes that this Disease happens to the Ethiopians who are next to
the Silli who live upon Locusts; and Plutarch 8. Sympos. Quaest. 9. in these
words: those that inhabit about the red Sea, when they are sick (as
Agacharehides relates) as they are vexed with other unbeard of Symptoms; so
also with little Snakes, which breed in their Arms and Thighs and put out their
Heads to eat the flesh, and being touched enter into the Flesh again, and
creeping through the Musculous parts cause intolerable inflammations; which
kind of Disease was never heard of before, or since, in any other people. Also
Amatus Lusitanus treates of this Disease in Cent. 6. Curat. 64. [ I have beard
here in England strange stories of People that have had Wolves in their flesh
which they were fain daily to feed with raw beef. Which I allwaies reckond for
Fables. I knew a Woman in Amsterdam that pretended one in her breast, but upon
visitation I sound it an Imposture, to move pity, and that the Meat which was
given her to feed the Wolf she might Eat her self.

Fortunius Licetus, Lib. de Spont. Viv. Ort. cap. 51. The Serpents sent by God
amongst the Israelites in the wilderness were not these little Dragons.
makes the fiery Serpents which God sent amongst the Israelites, Numb. 21. to
be these kind of Dragons aforesaid, and reprehends Vallesius, for that in his
Philosophia Sacra where he handles such like subjects, he did not observe and
signify as much; and holds that really out of the Bodies of the living
Israelites little Serpents and Worms were generated, of so Malignant a Nature
that they did cruelly eat their Members, and exceedingly inflamed the same,
raising most sharp and burning pains, whence they were called fiery Serpents.
But he reproves Vallesius without cause, and his Opinion does not agree with
the text of the Bible, from which it is manifestly apparent, that as by the
sight of the Brazen Serpent the stinging of those Serpents were cured, so God
for to punish the People of Israel had sent amongst them such Serpents as did
bite them without, but were not bred in their Bodies.

It has been observed that Worms grow under the Tongue of an Heart, Worms under
the tongue of Hearts and Dogs:
and Aristotle says as much, 2. de Histor. Animal. Cap. 15. And Hunts-men
relate, that mad Dogs have a great Worm in the loose parts under their Tongues,
bred of black blood, whereof that Vein is full, which being shut up in a little
bag sends Poisonous vapors into the brain and makes the Dogs mad; which Worm
being taken out in time prevents their madness. Pliny makes mention thereof,
Lib. 29. Cap. 5. and writes that the Greeks call this Worm Lytta.

That certain Vermin called Ricini and Cynorrhaistae or Tykes are bred in the
Skins of Dogs, Sheep, Oxen and Hearts, is very well known. Ricini or tykes,
worms so called:
That Worms are bred in almost all the parts of a Man's Body, I have showed, in
Lib. 2. Instit. Medic. Part. 3. Sect. 1. Cap. 11. which happens also in other
Animals. For in them are bred Fleas and Lice. Aristotle makes mention of the
Acari. And Julius Caesar Scaliger speaks of an Animal much lesser, Exercit.
194. Sect. 7. which the Piceni call Pedicellus; the Taurini, Scirus; the
Gascoignes a Brigant. They are vulgarly called Sirones or Chirones. And he
writes that it is wonderful, that they have no express shape, save of a Globe,
and that they are scarce discernable by the Eyesight, and so little that they
seem not to be made of Atoms, but to be themselves the Atoms of Epicurus; it
quarters so under the Skin, that by making holes it breeds a burning pain.

As to their Generation, Animals Breed in Animals after a threefold manner,
according to Licetus.
Licetus propounds a threefold way and manner, Lib. 3. de Spont. Vivent. Ortu,
Cap. 51. The First is when the Soul of the old Animal begets another Soul in
the Excrements contained within the Body subject thereto, not like it self, but
much more imperfect; being hindered by the imperfection of the matter; as the
Seed of an Horse coupled with an Ass does not generate the Soul of an Horse,
but one of a far inferior Nature, by Reason of the baseness of the matter.

The Second manner he makes to be out of the Excrements separated from the
Aliment, wherein (as in a Vessel) there is a portion of the former living
Creature from whence the Aliment came. For such Excrements being digested in
the Body of the Animal by the heat of the Ambient Bowels, and by digestion
having attained dispositions necessary to Life, they come to receive the Latent
Soul, in the notion of a quickening form. And after this manner Worms (he says)
are frequently bred in the Belly of Man, out of the Excrements of the first
digestion brought thither.

The Third manner he holds to be of Excrements into which by the action of heat
the substance of that living thing is turned, in which such Animals are
Spontaneously generated, in which Excrements there is yet remaining some
portion of the former Soul, as in a Vessel; which when by the digestive heat of
the Ambient Air it has attained dispositions necessary to Life, it gives it
self to its subject matter in the Nature of a quickening Soul, which constitutes
diverse kinds of Animals; for that the former Soul is so impaired as to
degenerate into an Essence much more imperfect then it was before. And that
after this manner a Serpent may Spontaneously breed in the Womb of a Woman, a
Flea or Louse in the Skin of a man, or a Crab-Louse within the pores of the
Skin.

But in very deed, as to his first manner of Generation, it is hardly agreeable
to truth. For it is not yet proved that one Soul can beget another of a
different sort. The forms indeed by the indisposition of the matter are so
hindered that they cannot attain their end, so that sometimes Monsters are bred;
and that one Soul may put on different Bodies, was said before: but that it may
produce another Soul, is not agreeable to truth. Every Soul indeed can multiply
it self, not by generating another out of or in the subject matter, but by
multiplying it self, by the divine Benediction, and by communicating some of
its Essence, without Diminution of its self. Nor does a Mule Generate, because
the Soul of an Horse acting upon the matter of an Ass does produce the Soul of
a Mule, as baser then it self; but the Horse communicates his Soul, which being
mixed with the Seed and Soul of the Ass does not produce an Ass, but a Mule,
equally participating of the Nature of an Horse and an Ass.

Also the Second manner cannot take place. Nor when Worms are bred in the Guts,
was there a portion of the Soul divided from the Worm; but such was the
disposition of the matter, that thereof a Worm might be bred.

Thirdly, In Excrements indeed into which the substance of some part is turned,
Worm are bred, as happens sometimes in Ulcers: but who can believe that the Soul
of a man (for that there is but one Soul in a Man we proved before) should so
degenerate as to turn into the Soul of a Worm? And to let pass that question
concerning the Soul of a Man; Worms often breed in the Ulcers of Horses, but
who will believe that the Soul of an Horse is turned into the Soul of a Worm? I
hold to that which I have said in my 12. Chap. de Consens. and Disen. Chymic.
cum Galen. And I have said before in general, that of the matter which is the
subject of the specific Form such Animals are bred; and therefore as that
matter is various, so also various Animals are generated, and determinate
Animals of such and such matter; in Ulcers Worms, not Lice or Fleas, of the
filth of the Skin Lice and Fleas, not Worms. For just as Plants (as Scaliger
writes, Exercitat. 59.) breed Animals, not by putrefaction, but cherishing
certain Seeds within themselves; and in Exercit. 100. Animals are not bred in
putrid Plants, but are the work of the remaining vigor of the said Plants; so
is it in Animals: and as he writes in 1. de Causs. Plant. Cap. 5. in
Spontaneous living things there are certain most secret Seeds.

Moreover Animals are bred of the Excrements of Animals of the same sort.
Animals bred of the Excrements of Animals.
Pliny Lib. 9. Cap. 51. writes concerning Fregs, that they are dissolved into
slime, and in the Spring time breed again in the Waters. That dead Flies and
Bees revive again, is most known; and of dead Bodies little Animals of the same
sort are generated. Concerning Silkworms it is ^^^ed Case, of which Hieronymus
Vida in his 1 Book of his Poem of Silkworms, has these Verses: Go luckie
Souls, and in your labors blessed,
That die with courage; when you are at rese
Venus of pity shall new Bodier give,
And you in open Air again shall Live.


And Paulus Zacchias writes concerning this matter, Quaest. Medico-Legal. Lib.
4. Tit. 1. Quaest. Vlt. Also that Worms and Beetles, and many Bodies of
Insects, are oftentimes changed, and do many times live again, and take new
shapes, any one that will may easily experiment, and the most industrious
Physician Petrus Castellus has a thousand times experimented. Which it would
also become others to experiment, before they did deny things contrary to
manifest experience, yea and traduce them as absurdities. This indeed is
strange, but experience manifests it to be true. For the more Ignoble Forms are
so ordered by Nature, that they can lie hid under matter of a different sort as
to external Form, and their Soul can retain its Essence entire without the
operations of Life. Some Animals after they are dead revive again:
Where it is to be noted that such insects sometimes do not really die, but only
because they are ill disposed they lie as it were dead, exercising no manifest
operations: in which manner, Flies lie in cold Chambers as it were dead in the
Winter time, but as soon as the Chambers are heated they begin to Fly again.
But sometimes they die really, which comes to pass when Frogs are turned into
Mud as it were, or such insects are so broken to pieces that there is no more
disposition to Life; where nevertheless the Latent Soul having gotten fit
matter it shapes it self a Body like the Former.

Fourthly, It Is very well known, Animals of a different sort out of the
Carcasses of Animals:
that Animals of a different sort are bred out ^f the Carcasses of Animals.
That Bees may be generated out of the Carcass of an Heiser Columella relates
from Democritus, Magus, and Virgil, de Re Rustic. Lib. 9. Cap. (...). That of
the Carcass of an Ass drones are bred, and Hornets of the Carcass of a Mule,
and Waspes of the Carcass of an Horse, many Authors relate. Hieronymus Vida
tells us that Silkworms are bred of the Body of a young Heifer fed with Mulberry
Leaves, Bombyc. Lib. 2. And many like things are related, concerning the truth
whereof we must consult with experience. Many report that a Toad will breed of
the Carcass of a Duck. And diverse give out, that of the marrow of a Man's Body
lying in the Grave Serpents are bred, of which the Poet; When a^ Man's Backbone
in the Grave does Rot
Some think a Snake is of his Marrow got.


And Pliny. Lib. 10. Cap. 66. reports from many Authors, that a Snake is bred
of the marrow of a Man's Backbone. But this is doubtless Fabulous, nor does
experience confirm the same. Ovid writes that Scorpions are bred of Crabs: From
a Land-Crab taking his Claws away,
If what remains under the Ground you lay,
Out comes a Scorpion with his hooked Tail
Threatening to sting you, if he can prevail.


Concerning these things therefore we must consult with experience. For all
such Animals are not bred of every Animal; but some of one only, some of
another.

Nor does it follow from our Opinion, How worms are bred of the Bodies of
Animals:
as one man cavils, that the Bodies of Serpents, or Serpents themselves, Frogs,
Toads, Lizards, do go to the constitution of our Bodies, and that we are
actually made up of such things as are destructive to our Natures. For no man
ever saw such Creatures bred of the Body of a Man. And although such things
have been bred in Men's Bodies, yet have they not been bred of the Body it self,
but of vicious matter brought into the Body from elsewhere. Yet is our Body so
disposed that some Worms may breed thereof, which nevertheless were not
actually in the Body, but that matter had a disposition that Worms might be
made thereof. Where nevertheless this is also to be considered, seeing our Body
may be considered as in health, and as being sick, we must mark whether these
Worms are bred in the Body being sick or in health. And it is most credible
that such Worms are bred in Man's Body being sickly, but not as it is sound; but
rather of vicious Aliment, and Excrementitious Humors, as in Arabia the
foresaid little Dragons are reported to be bred of Excrementitious Humors in
living Bodies; and little Worms breed in the back of Infants, of which we spoke
before. Johannes Marci in his Idea Idearum Operatric. makes the cause thereof
to be the eating of Locusts. For since those people Eat Locusts frequently
(from whence they are termed Acridophagi) in process of time there grows an
itching and putrefaction in their members, and their flesh is changed into a
kind of insect not unlike a Locust, whereupon they pine away and die. For he
writes, that in the Chile and blood, yea and in the flesh it self, strange
forms are contained and may be preserved, because in all those Mutations
nothing is generated contrary to them. For the latter Form approaching does not
change the whole substance and abolish the former Forms, but takes away only
such as are contrary to its own faculties. So, that same subordination of forms
must not be stretched too far, nor must we if any thing be bred of the Body of
an Animal presently conclude, that it proceeds from the Natural matter thereof;
since it may be bred from the Aliment and Excrementitious Humors therein. So I
do not conceive, that the Form which shapes the Body of a Silkworm in the
Carcass of an Heiser is a form subordinate to the form of an Ox, but that it
lay concealed in the Mulberry leaves, as appears out of these Verses of
Hieronymus Vida, in the 2. Book of his Poem of Silkworms. But if your stock of
Silkworms should decay,
And all your Seed should chance to die away,
By wrath of Jove: As Bees they say are bred
From Heifers Body, killed and buried;
From the same Body, only with more care,
Your missed Silkworms Generated are.
For twice ten days, and twice ten Nights, at first
Keep her from Grass, nor let her quench her thirst
With any Water. But in Stable shut
Mulberry Twigs and Leaves see that you put
Into the Crib: no other Meat or Drink;
Then kill and let her Carcass Rot and stink:
When lo a Lusty swarm of Silkworms small
Out of her Sides and Back you will see to Crawle.


The manner of Generation is the same, which we have formerly declared
conterning Plants.

Now this is also to be noted, The difference of Spontaneous Animals.
that there is some difference betwixt Spontaneous Animals. For some are
altogether base, which generate nothing, as the Wine Gnats and such like Worms;
other somewhat more perfect do not Generate living young ones, but produce little
Worms, or somewhat like an Egg in Nature, out of which afterward petry Animals
of the same sort are Generated. So Flies engender little Worms, which grow to
be Flies; which also Julius Caesar Scaliger observed, as he relates, Exercit.
191. Sect. 2. Lice breed Nits, which also turn to Lice; although some falsely
deny the same; as we have showed in our Tract de morb, Infant. Part. 2. Cap. 5.
de Phthiriasi. Others produce Animals of their own sort, as is well known of
Mice; provided it be certain that they are Spontaneously generated. And truly I
conceive there are few Animals Spontaneously Generated, which do not afterward
generate such as themselves. Aristotle in Lib. v. de Hist. Animal. Cap. (...)
tells us that Glowworms are Generated out of a certain kind of hairy
Palmer-worms. Yet Fabius Columna relates, in Observe. Lib. min. Cognit. et Rar
Starp. Addit. that Carolus Vintimillias the Panormita: observed in Sicily, that
Glowworms are some Male and some Female. For keeping diverse naked ones in a
Glass: Glowworms do (...)
for his pleasure, and delighting to see them thine in the night, (for which
cause he fed them with moistened bread) as he was at Supper, a winged one came
flying about the Candle, which he caused to be caught and put into the Glass
unto the rest, which presently (he looking on) one Trod one of them and stuck
to her, as the Silkworm is wont to do, and being Plucked from her he Trod
another and another: and the day following they laid their Eggs, resembling
Milet Seed in shape and color.

This only we shall add by way of Conclusion, Al things full of souls
that we conceive Aristotle to have been in the right when he wrote, that all
things in some sort are full of Souls. Which though they do not allwaies Animate
and inform the things wherein they are, no nor act at all, yet they lie
concealed in them; and when they find their time and have gained fit matter
they display their forces. And therefore again, Julius Caesar Scaliger did well
write, in 1 de Plantis, that there are most secretly hidden Seeds of
Spontaneous live things. And therefore, if we list to speak accurately, nothing
can properly be said to be Spontaneously generated; but every thing is bred of
its own Seed, though hidden and not discernable by our senses, or at least of a
principle answering to Seed. And this is all the difference betwixt Spontaneous
things and non-Spontaneous, that the latter have a manifest Seed, the former an
hidden secret Seed, or somewhat equivalent thereto. For we list not here to
contend about words. Only this must be remembered, that those things which are
said to be Spontaneously generated do not proceed from an external equivocal
agent, but from an internal principle; which if any man will call Seed, or a
Seminal principle, or somewhat answering to Seed, he shall have my Consent. For
although Licetus, Lib. 4. de Spont. Viv. Ort. Cap. 2. denies that all things
have their Seeds: yet there he grants, that those things which are said to be
of Spontaneous original have somewhat answering to Seed. Now the manner of their
Generation is this; as an Animal is said to nourish and augment it self, whiles
the common principle and first cause of nutrition and augmentation communicates
it self to the assimilated Aliment, and insinuates it self thereinto, but does
not make a Soul like it self in the ^liment: so the Spontaneous original of
live things is effected, whiles the agent lying hid within the matter, and not
yet manifestly performing the operations of a Soul, having gained a matter
rightly fitted and disposed, communicates it self thereto, and begins to
perform therein the operations proper to it self, and to exercise the function
of a Soul, but does not produce another Soul in the matter.

THE CONCLUSION.
AND so much shall suffice to have spoken (though but briefly) of a most
exceeding hard and obscure subject. It had been easy to have discoursed more
largely of more sorts of Spontaneous living things: but my purpose is not in
this place to write a natural History, but only to propound the manner of the
original of Spontaneous living things, and to declare the same by certain
examples. And although I know many things may be objected against that manner
of the Generation of these things which seems to me most probable: yet this I
know withal, that it is easier to oppose the truth then to declare the same;
and that a right line is the measure of it self and a croaked line too; and who
ever shall rightly discern the truth may easily answer all objections, of which
a thousand may be invented. Nevertheless if any thing obscure and doubtful
shall occur in an Argument handled by few Authors, it is not fit to reject or
condemn the same, before somewhat better shall be substituted in the place
thereof. And therefore, friendly Reader, If ought thou know, which is then
this more true,
Write is; if not, Use this: and so Adieu.


SUch is the Acuteness and Solidity of this Excellent Philosophical Treatise,
wherein out learned Author has in my Opinion performed his Master piece, that
he and the Englisher thereof may well say in the words of Ovid: And now the
work is ended, which Jover rage
Nor Fire nor Sword shall raze, nor Eating Age.
Come when it will my deaths uncertain hour,
Which of this Body only bath a power:
Yet shall my better part transcend the Sky
And my immortal name shall never die.
For wheresoere the British Peoples spread
Their conquering Arms, I shall of all be Read.


FINIS.

