THE SIXTH BOOK OF Practical Physic. Of Occult or Hidden Diseases; IN NINE
PARTS Part I. Of Diseases from Occult Qualities in General. Part II. Of Occult,
Malignant, and Venomous Diseases arising from the Internal Fault of the Humors.
Part III. Of Occult Diseases from Water, Air, and Infections, and of infectious
Diseases. Part IV. Of the Venereal Pox. Part V. Of Outward Poisons in General
Part VI. Of Poisons from Minerals and Metals. Part VII. Of Poisons from Plants.
Part VIII. Of Poisons that come from Living Creatures. Part IX. Of Diseases by
Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charms.
By Daniel Sennertus, N Culpeper, And Abdiah Cole, DOCTORS OF PHYSIC

London, Printed by Peter Cole, Printer and Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Printing-press in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1662.

Books Printed by Peter Cole and Edward Cole, Printers and Booksellers of
London at the Exchange.
Several Physic Books of Nich. Culpeper, Physician and Astrologer, and Abdiah
Cole Doctor of Physic commonly called, The Physitian's Library, containing all
the Wor^s in English of Riverius, Sennertus, Platerus, Rio a^us, Bartholinus.
Viz.
1. A GOLDEN Practice of Physic: after a new, easy and plain Method of
knowing, foretelling preventing, and curing all Diseases incident to the body
of Man. Full of proper Observations and Remedies, both of Ancient and Modern
Physicians. Being the fruit of one and thirty years Travel, and fifty years
Practice of Physic. By Dr. Plater, Dr. Cole, and Nich. Culpeper. 2.
Bartholinus Anatomy, with very many larger Brass Figures, than any other
Anatomy in English. 3. Sennertus thirteen Books of Natural Philosophy: Oi the
Nature of all things in the world. 4. Sennertus Practical Physic; the first
Book in three Parts. 1. Of the Head. 2. Of the Hurt of the internal senses. 3.
Of the external Senses, in five Sections. 5. Sennertus Practical Physic; the
second Book, in four Parts. 1. Of the Iaws and Mouth. 2. Of the Breast. 3. Of
the Lungs. 4. Of the Heart. 6. Sennertus Third Book of Practical Physic in
fourteen Parts, treating, 1. Of the Stomach and Gullet. 2. Of the Guts. 3. Of
the Mesentery, Sweetbread and Om^ntum. 4. Of the Spleen. 5. Of the Sides. 6. Of
the Scurvey. 7 and 8. Of the Liver. 9 Of the Ureters. 10. Of the Kidneys. 11.
and 12. Of the Bladder. 13. and 14. Of the Privities and Generation in men. 7.
Sennertus fourth Book of Practical Physic in three Parts. Part ^. Of the
Diseases in the Privities of women. The first Section. Of Diseases of the
Privy Part, and the Neck of the Womb. The second Section. Of the Diseases of
the Womb. Part 2. Of the Symptoms in the Womb, and from the Womb. The second
Section. Of the Symptoms in the Terms and other Fluxes of the Womb. The third
Section. Of the Symptoms that befall al Virgins and Women in their Wombs, after
they are ripe of Age. The fourth Section. Of the Symptoms which are in
Conception. The fifth Section. Of the Government of Women with Child, and
preternatural Distempers in Women with Child. The sixth Section. Of Symptoms
that happen in Childbearing The seventh Section. Of the Government of Women in
Childbed, and of the Diseases that come after Travel The first Section. Of
Diseases of the Breasts. The second Section. Of the Symptoms of the B^e^sts.

To which is added a Tractate of the Cure of Infants. Part 1. Of the Diet and
Government of Infants. The second Section. Of Diseases and Symptoms in Children.

8. Sennertus fifth Book of Practical Physic, Or the Art of Chyrurgery in six
Parts. 1. Of Tumors. 2. Of Ulcers. 3. Of the Skin, Hair and Nails. 4. Of
Wounds, with an excellent Treatise of the Weapon Salve. 5. Of Fractures. 6. Of
Luxations. 9. Sennertus two Treatises. 1. Of the Pox. 2. Of the Gout. 10.
Sennertus sixth and last Book of Practical Physic in nine Parts. 1. Of
Diseases from occult Qualities in general. 2. O^ occult, malignant, and
venomous Diseases arising from the internal sault of the humors. 3. Of occult
Diseases from water, air, and infections, and of infectious diseases. 4. Of the
Venereal Pox. 5. Of outward Poisons in general. 6. Of Poisons from Minerals and
Metals. 7. Of Poisons from Plants. 8. Of Poisons that come from Living
Creatures. 9. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charms. 11. Idea o^
Practical P^^sick in twelve Books. 12. Twenty four Books of the Practice of
Pay^^^k, being the Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor Lazarus Riverius
Physician and Counselor to the late King* etc. 13. Veslingus Anatomy of the
Body of Man 14. A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the College of
Physicians of London, in Folio and in Octavo. Whereunto is added, The Key of
Galen's Method of Physic. 15. A Directory for Midwives, or a guide for women
16. Galens Art of Physic. 17. A new Method both of studying and practicing
Physic. 1^. A T^eatise of the Ri^kets. 19. Medicaments for the Poor: Or,
Physic for (...) Common People. 20. Health for the Rich and Poor, by Diet
without Physic 21. One thousand New, Famous and Rare Cures, in Folio and
Octavo. 22. A Treatise o^ Pulses and Urins. 23. A Treatise of Bloodletting, and
Cures performed thereby. 24. A Treatise of S^arification, and Cu^es performed
thereby. 25. Riolanus Anatomy. 26. The English Physician enlarged. The London
Dispensatory in Folio, of a great Caracter in Latin.
Divinity Books Printed by Peter Cole, etc. Buroughs WORKS, viz. on Matthew. 11.
1 Christ's Call to all those that are weary and heavy laden, to come to him for
re^t. 2 Christ the great Teacher of Souls that come to hi^ 3 Christ the Humble
Teacher of those that come to him. 4 The only easy way to Heaven. 5 The
Excellency of Holy Courage in Evil times. 6 Gospel Reconciliation. 7 The Rare
Jewel o^ Christian Contentment. 8 Gospel Worship. 9 Gospel-Conversation. 10 A
Treatise of Earthly Mindedness, and of Heavenly Mindedness, and Walking with
God. 11 An Exposition of the Prophecy of Hoseah. 12 The Evil of Evils, or the
exceeding sinfulness of Sin. 13 Of Precious Faith 14 Of Hope. 15 Of Walking by
Faith, and not by Sight. 16 The Christians living to Christ upon 2 Cor. 5.15.
17 A Catechism. 18 (...)
Twenty one several Books of Mr. Willi^^ (...), Collected into two Volumes, Viz.
1 Scripture light, the most sure Light. 2. Christ in Travel 3 A lifting up to
the cast down 4 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 5 Sins of Infirmity. 6 The false
Apostle tried and discovered. 7 The good and means of Establishment. 8 The
great things Faith can do. 9 The great things Faith can suffer. 10 The great
Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and applied from
Christ's Priestly Office. 11 Satan's power to tempt and Christ's Love to, and Ca^e
of his People under Temptation. 12 Thankfulness required in every Condition 13
Grace for Grace. 14 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 15 Evangelical Repentance 16 The Spiritual Life, and In^^^ing
of Christ in all Believers. 17 The Woman of Can^^h. 18 The Saints Hiding place,
etc. 19 Christ coming, etc. 20 A Vindication of Gospel Ordinances. 21 Grace and
Love beyond Gifts.
THE Contents OF THE SIXTH BOOK. Of occult or hidden Diseases
THE FIRST PART. Of the Diseases from occult Qualities in General.
Page CHap. 1. Whether there are actions from the whole substance, or from
occult Qualities 1 Chap. 2. Of the Names and Nature of occult Diseases 2 (...)
and venomous Diseases that arise from Humors 17 Chap. 5 Of the Differences of
Diseases that come from the internal fault of the Humors 19 Chap. 6 Of the
Signs of diseases that come from malignant venomous Humors that are bred in our
Bodies 20 Chap. 7 Of the Preservation from, and Cure of these Diseases ibid
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD PART. Of occult Diseases from Water, Air, and
Infections, and of-Infectious Diseases.
Chap. 1 Of occult and malignant Diseases, and Venom that arise from Waters 22
Chap. 2 Of malignant Diseases from the Air 23 Chap. 3 Of (...) 24 Chap. 4 Of
the Differences of infectious Diseases 26
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH PART. Of outward Poisons in General.
Chap. 1 Of the Naure of Poison 27 Chap. 2 Of the Differences of Poisons 2^
Chap. 3 Of the Signs 32 Chap. 4 Of the Prognostics 33 Chap. 5 Of Preservation
from Poison 34
THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVENTH PART. Of Poisons from Plants.
Page CHap. 1 Of Opium 54 Chap. 2 Of Mushrooms. 56 Chap. 3. Of Napellas. 57
Chap. 4 Of Aconitum 58 Chap. 5. Of Toxicum and Pharicum ibid. Chap. 6 Of
Hemlock 59 Chap. 7 Of the Colchian Ephemerum. ib. Chap. 8 Of Fleabane 60 Chap.
9 Of mad Nightshade and Dorycnium ibid. Chap. 10 Of the Mandrake. 61 Chap. 11.
Of Smallage of Laughter, or the Sardonick Herb. 62 Chap. 12 Of Coriander ibid.
Chap. 13 Of Ixia and Camaleon. 63 Chap. 14 Of Taxus the Ewtree. ibid. Chap. 15
Of Euphorbium. 64 Chap. 16 Of the Nut called M^tella ibid. Chap. 17 Of Spurge
45 Chap. 18 Of Hellebore 66
THE CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH PART. Of Poisons that come from Anim^ls, or living
^rea^ures.
Chap. 1 Of Poisons from Animals in General 67 Chap. 2 Of Serpents in general
69 Chap. 3 Of the Aspi^ or Adder. 71 Chap. 4 Of Cerastes 72 Chap. 5 Of
Haemorrhous ibid. Chap. 6 Of Dipsas 73 Chap. 7 Of Amphisbena and Scitale ibid.
Chap. 8 Of a Basilisk 74 Chap. 9 Of the Viper ibid. Chap. 10 Of the Scorpion 76
Chap. 11 Of a Crocodile 77 Chap. 12. Of Stellio or a Lizard so called ibid.
Chap. 13 Of the Salamander. 78 Chap. 14 Of the Spider. ibid. Chap. 15 Of
Cantharides, or Span^sh-flies 79 Chap. 16 Of Flies, Bees and Waspes 80 Chap. 17
Of the Poison of a mad Dog 81 Chap. 18 Of the Brain and Blood of a Cat ibid.
Chap. 19 Of Diseases and Symptoms which Poisons leave behind them. 82
THE Contents OF THE NINTH PART. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and
Charms.
Page Chap. 1 Of Fascination or Witchcraft, and whether any Diseases come
thereby. 84 Chap. 2 What Enchantments, poisonous Witchcraft, and Magic are 86
Chap. 3. Many affirm that Diseases may be from Witchcraft and Charms 88 Chap.
4. Uv^erus denies that Diseases may come by Witchcraft. 90 Chap. 5 The
Controversy is decided, and it (...) showed whence diseases are made that are
from Witches ibid. Chap. 6 Of the Signs of diseases from Witchcraft 96 Chap. 7
Of Preservation against Witchcraft 96 Chap. 8 Of the Care of diseases made by
Witchcraft, and first of the Magical Cure 97 Chap. 9 Of the Natural Cure of
Witchcraft 98 Chap. 10 Of the Divine Cure of Witchcraft 100
Also Two Eistles of that Excellent and Famous man Balthas^^ Han Doctor of
Physic, and chief Physician to the Elect^r of Saxo^y.

THE SIXTH BOOK. Of occult or hidden Diseases.
THE FIRST PART. Of the Diseases from occult Qualities in General.
Chap. 1. Whether there are actions from the whole substance, or from occult
Qualities.
SOME confess that there are in nature hidden faculties: ^. De not. fac. c. 14.
Lib. ^1. d^ sumpt. facult.
but how many sorts, and from whence they come is not sufficiently explained.
Galen calls them the Qualities of the whole substance, and reproves the Teacher
P^lops, that bragged more ambitiously then learnedly, that he knew the causes
of all things. For they who endeavor to know that, bring foolish rediculous
reasons, or deny things confirmed by experience.

Libris de abed. rerum cau. exer. cit. 218.
Fernelius in the last age learnedly defended occult qualities. And Julius
Caesar Scalig^r says it is great impudency to bring all things to manifest
qualities, And I suppose that there is no more foolish and detestable opinion
in Physic, then to determine that the causes of all things which happen
naturally, are to be fetched from manifest causes and Elements.

For who is so foolish or impudent, that will impute the action of the
Loadstone drawing iron to qualities fetched from the Elements? Some hate Cats,
that if they be present (though they see them not) they fall into cold sweats,
and faint, and cannot endure any Cupboard that contains them*

Also purging Medicines that purge much in a small quantity, and the action of
poisons testify the same. And the meanest Physicians know of what narcotick
quality a few grains of Opium are.

From which, and six hundred more Arguments, I conclude that these actions are
far different from the actions of manifest qualities.

Chap. 2. Of the Names and Nature of occult Diseases.
THey are called occult Qualities, because their force is known only by their
operation and effect; but we know them not by sense, because they affect the
body privately. 5. Simpl. c. 1. Com. in lib. Gal. de constable. art.
By Galen they are said to act from the whole substance which Valeriola says,
is when there can be no reason given of the acting, but the substantial form,
as the elementary qualities flow from their forms.

Nor a^e occult qualities to be contemned, therefore as the refuge of
ignorance, but rather our weakness of understanding. Avi^en. de virib. cord.
And as he that knows that fire warms from its heat, knows truly, and is not
ignorant. So he that knows that a Loadstone draws iron, because it has a
virtue so to do, is truly knowing, and not ignorant. And in this our darkness,
the form of fire and of the Loadstone, is alike unknown unto us, for the form
is a Divine thing, and works, whole exquisite knowledge is hid from us;
therefore it is the part of a fool to search after it. Scali. exer. cit. 307.
sec. 29.
For it is a part of humane Wisdom to be content to be ignorant of some
things. And the true knowledge of all things is only in Eternal Wisdom.

Chap. 3. Of the Original of occult Qualities.
IT is hard and tried by few, to know the original of occult qualities: for
they come not from the first qualities, which way soever mixed or tempered, for
they cannot produce such actions as are in Purges, Poisons and Antidotes,
either being simple or mixed, so that occult qualities should produce effects
above the power and condition of the Elements. Nor are they from the peculiar
mixture or unknown measure of the temper of the Elements, for these mi^^ures do
not change Nature, nor exalt the essence: for it is an undoubted truth, that
nothing acts beyond the strength of its kind.

Therefore occult qualities flow from their forms, which must be sought for.
Let us search into the differences of the substances in which these qualities
are, and then it will appear that all have not the same original: for some are
alive, others not, of those that live not, some have had life, as Rhubarb,
Wormwood. Some have not, as Stones, Metals.

1. Therefore occult qualities that come from living creatures, are in all the
particular Individuums of every kind, only as long as they live; as force to
stop a Ship, is the Remora, while alive, not dead. This quality is from the
form of the fish living, and so it is in the Torpedo.

2. There are other occult qualities proper to some living, but not to all of
that kind, as some hate cheese or wine, or Cats present, though not seen. These
qualities depend not upon the form, but upon the peculiar disposition of the
body.

3. Occult qualities are in things without life, and depend upon their
specifical form, as the force of the Loadstone to draw i^^n, or (...) it in the
air, or to move toward the pole, or the virtues of Jewels, Metals and Minerals.

4. There are occult qualities in natural things that have lived, and do not,
as in Plants and Animals which are used in Physic, as in Rhubarb to purge
choler, in the Elkes hoo^ against the Epilepsie etc.

5. There are occult qualities bred according to Nature in living things, both
plants and beasts, as the venom of a Scorpion, Adder, Tarantula.

6. They are in living Creatures against Nature, as the venom of a mad Dog,
and of the Plague.

These are the diverse subjects of occult qualities.

Chap. 4. Whether do occult Qualities belong to Health?
NOt only the elementary qualities concern man's health, but the occult; for
whatsoever conduces to the natural disposition of the parts of man's body,
belongs to the health of it. For health is as a natural power to exercise
natural actions, depending upon the constitution of the parts according to
Nature; or a natural disposition of the parts of the body, that has power to
exercise natural actions. But to the constitution of the parts of man's body,
occult properties do belong, and many actions are done by them. Therefore
occult qualities belong to the health of man.

Chap. 5. Whether are there other Diseases then Distemper in the similar Parts.
FErnelius only (as I know) said that similar parts had other diseases besides
distemper, 3. Path. ^^ 2. de abd. rerum c^^. c. 10. 1.2. de abd. rer. ^^u. (...)
for three reasons. 1. In a similar part, besides the distemper, are found
things that make up its constitution, for there is matter and form which may be
the subjects of a disease, as temper; for the whole substance is the perfection
and integrity, by which every thing subsists. Therefore whatsoever destroys the
matter and form, are diseases of the whole substance; some are manifest, some
are hid. The manifest demolish the substance of the parts by manifest
qualities. The occult oppose the whole substance from occult causes.

But Fernels reasons only prove that there are diseases from occult qualities,
and to be cured by the same. As for the first kind, the change and corruption
of substance causes not a disease, but the destruction of the part, but a
corrupt thing neither suffers a disease nor health. If the corruption is not
perfect, but beginning, it is a disease of distemper or alteration.

If this destruction of substance come from an occult cause, it belongs to
diseases of occult qualities therefore it is not the corruption of the form.

The second reason of Fernel, is from curing: Medicines are given, that work by
occult qualities, that is from the whole substance; therefore there are
diseases answerable to them: for if there were no occult diseases, remedies had
been invented in vain, which oppose the actions of them with their whole
substance, as vonemous diseases, and the plague. To this I answer, a
preternatural disposition from an occult quality, is more properly to be called
diseases of occult qualities, then diseases of the whole substance or form: for
it is not affected immediately, only the noble qualities are affected, which
the form uses for to act by.

Fernels third Argument is from actions hurt: for says he, all actions hurt,
are either from the disease of the part acting, or from an external error, but
there are actions which are neither referred to diseases of distemper, nor to
external error. It follows that there are others from whence these actions
arise, as in malignant and pestilent fevers, in which there is often no
distemper to be observed, and yet strength is so dejected, that they often
kill. Therefore every poison of it self, as it is poison, works by an occult
force, and puts an evil disposition into the body, that cannot be cured but by
Antidotes But it must not be called a disease of the whole substance, but a
disease of occult qualities.

Chap. 6. What Diseases are in similar Parts, besides Distemper?
SOme Learned men having examined Fernels reasons mentioned for diseases of
matter and form, have seen some falsities in him, and therefore have rejected
his truths also. I shall give my opinion.

If any with Fernel will call them diseases of the whole substance or form, that
have a hidden cause, because they destroy the substance and form of the part,
it cannot be allowed, because they affect not the form immediately, as I
showed. But they shall say truly, if they shall say that they change those
noble qualities, which the form uses besides the first qualities, and bring in
the contrary.

That there are such occult qualities and evil dispositions appears by what is
said, and they bring the same into our body, and so alter it, that after many
years that malignant quality has been observed to revive.

They say so of the English sweating disease, that many which escaped it, had a
great palpitation of the heart two or three years after, others all their
lives. The same you may see in other venomous diseases, and the French pox. For
many have been seemingly cured, and after twenty or thirty years have relapsed,
which shows a malignant disposition that remained. Gal^n knew this Saying. The
least part of deadly poison getting into the body, changes it all in a moment,
and alters it with a disease like it self.

Chap. 7. Of the Causes and Differences of occult Diseases in General.
OCcult diseases are preternatural dispositions, stamped upon the body of man
from occult qualities, acting otherways then by the first qualities, and are
cured by remedies that act occultly. These occult causes are diverse, and
produce diverse diseases, as fevers with a cough, not deadly, but contagious;
so there is an occult venom in the French pox, that kills not presently* but
tormenteth men long. So the Lepers die not presently: and there are malignant
fevers, with, or without the p^^gue.

The causes of occult diseases, are sometimes without the body, from the air
corrupted by vapors, and corrupts the humors, which causes occult diseases; or
when they stay with them that have an infection, as the Scurvey, Elephantiasis,
and venom of a mad Dog, the Pox, and the like, by which, contagion is carried
to others. Also poison from Plants, Minerals, Animals taken in do the same.

Or conveyed by a bite or sting of a beast, as of a Scorpion, Tarantula,
Basilisk. To these you may refer diseases by Witchcraft.

There is another difference taken from the parts in which the occult qualities
lie, by which a man is not presently killed, because poison does not suddenly
go to the heart, but to some other part, as Spanish flies go to the bladder,
Opium and evil malignant air to the brain, making an Epilepsie; the Sea-hare to
the lungs, and the French pox to the liver.

Some differences are from the manner and force of the action: for-deletery
poisons have forms, which are the principles of acting, but the instruments are
the hidden virtues that flow from these forms, which are unknown to us, except
only by the effect. Also they act without the help of the first qualities, and
cure distinguished from them.

Chap. 8. Of the Signs of occult and venomous Diseases in General.
IF he have been with them that have a contagious disease, or has taken
poison, The Signs.
or been bitten or stung by a venomous beast. 2. If no Sympto^ can be referred
to the quality. If they be gre^^, and not usual in other diseases. 3. If they
^e only cured with Antidotes that work by an occult quality.

You may know if the cause of an occult disease be bred in, or brought to the
body by the die^ before, and by his conversing with such as had the like
disease.

The Symptoms show what part is chiefly affected. If the heart he suddenly
smitten, the vital faculty is dejected; the pulse is weak, the heart beats, the
mind is troubled, there is fainting. If the brain be affected, there is hurt of
sense and motion presently, watching and raving. If the liver, the color all
over is changed there are spots and pustles all over, the urin is changed in
color and substance.

The Prognostic.
The stronger the malignant cause acts, the shorter is the disease. Whatsoever
gets quickly to the heart, is dangerous. Every occult disease is to be
suspected, and also malignant and venomous are worse then such as act by
manifest qualities.

The greater the Symptoms, the more the danger.

Chap. 9. Of the Cure of malignant, venomous, and occult Diseases in General.
YOu must preserve or cure.

Preservatives are excellent in contagions, of which hereafter. In diseases
that come from humors gathered inwardly, you must evacuate presently. Poisons
that come by chance, can scarce be prevented, except you do as Mithridates King
of Ponius that used Mithridate often, of which Cardanus.

If the malignant venom has pressed the body, take it presently away, or abate
its force: if it be by a humor bred in the body, use Purges or Sweats* If
poison be drunk, and still in the stomach, vomit it up with Oil or Fat. If it
be gotten from the stomach to the guts, purge, or give Clysters: if it be in
the liver, sweat: if it come by a little sting or touch, draw it out presently,
that it pierce not in, of which before.

Give Antidotes in all cases, or proper or common, if it be not known.

In sharp poisons taken it, use fat Oils, but in such diseases, look more to
the occult then the manifest qualities.

If there be other diseases also, as plethory, cacochymy or obstruction, give
not Antidotes before those causes be removed, and it must be done very quickly
in great poisons. For those causes nourish the hidden venom, and oppose the
strength of Antidotes.

This was the opinion of Eustach Rudius, Eust. Rud. l. de morb. occult. etc. 12.
which I suspect, for you must oppose what is worst and urges most; therefore
give things at first against poison.

Against venomous diseases, we give Antidotes simple or compound, called
Alexiteria. Simple are Angelica roots, Valerian, Swallow-wort, Contrayerva,
Tormentil, Zedoary, Burnet, Scorz^^era, white Dittany, Masterwort, Snakeweed,
Citron peels, Ashen bark, Carduus, Rue, Scordium, Sorrel, Galangal, Paul's
Bettony. Compounds are Mithridate, Treacle, powder of Saxon, Diascordium.
Mathiolus his Antidote. Amulets by Fernel and Palmar, and the like.

THE SECOND PART. Of Occult, Malignant, and venomous Diseases, arising from the
internal fault of the Humors.
Chap. 1. Of Malignity and Venom in general.
THAT is malignant that has worse symptoms, and is harder to be cured then
ordinary. Malignity is an adventitious quality to a disease that makes beyond
its nature more difficult or dangerous.

It is from manifest or occult qualities, as when an ulcer is in a part only
distempered by a manifest quality, it may be cacoethick, or of an ill
condition, but that is only from manifest qualities. On the contrary, if a part
be stung by a venomous beast, or bitten, there will be an ulcer also, but such
as is from an occult quality: here we shall speak only of malignity that flows
from occult qualities.

Hence it is clear that malignity differs from poison, for malignity comes
after another disease, but poison by i^s pernicious force brings a hidden
disease without another disease, so the Plague poison can kill without a fever
of it self, and so will Hemlock, Napellus.

Poison therefore is that which of its own force by an occult way does
vehemently and immediately afflict the body and endanger life, but the doubt is
whether it be a quality or a substance, therefore distinguish it, sometimes it
is taken for the thing poisoned, sometimes for the form of action and hurting
our bodies privately. If it be taken for the thing poisoned, it is of a double
nature: some are bodies and act by a bodily contract, and though they touch not
all with their own body, yet they send forth Atoms and small bodies that
infect, and move to and fro in the air in the time of contagion. Others act by
intentional species, that is, spiritual qualities that kill, as the poison of
the Torpedo that ben^^^s the hand of the Fisher through the Spear. If poison be
taken for the venemosity it self, it is an occult and dangerous quality.

The differences of malignant and venomous diseases are from the effects and
causes, for we are ignorant of their forms, therefore we shall describe every
poison in its proper place by it^ proper signs: but here we shall propound the
differences of occult diseases fetched from their causes* they are bred in or
without the body; from evil humors bred in the body are diverse sorts of
malignant fevers, and pestilent fevers, and the plague.

The causes without the body are diverse both malignant and venomous. 1. The air
drawn in, Inspiration sent out by transpiration. 2. Bad water drunk. 3.
Contagion or Infection any way communicated to the body hurts secretly. 4.
Poisons taken have power to corrupt the body. 5. The stingings and bitings of
venomous creatures, either piercing the body, or any other ways hurting, as by
sight, hissing, venomous breath, or spiritual species. Also venomous ointments
with which darts or swords are infected: all these poisons are taken from
Plants, Animals, or Minerals; of which in order.

Chap. 2. Whether malignant venomous humors are bred in our bodies.
MErcurialis denies it, Fernelius affirms it; and they both bring unsatisfying
Arguments.

But Rudius decides the controversy in saying, they are properly poisons which
are such of their own nature, and not such as by conception become enemies to
our bodies. And true poison is only that which is bred without the body.

6. De lo. aff. c. 5.
Galen seems to favor Fernel* against Mercurialis, when he says that poison
is bred in Dogs when they are mad, which is very infectious, and a pestilent
venom breeds of dead carcasses, and if poison breed in a Dog, why not in a man*
nor is the external agent only requisite for generation, but the disposition of
the matter is more then the outward acting Instrument.

Chap. 3. How are malignant and venomous humors bred in men's Bodies?
THerefore since poison is bred in our bodies the difficulty is, how it is bred.

Note first that all the corruptions of our bodies are not to be imputed to the
matter alone, or to the efficient. Sometimes the efficient produces it, when
the venomous quality or disposition is so fixed that it infects the humors that
flow to it: but usually venomous humors are bred in respect of the matter, and
they afterward turn malignant.

Note secondly that there are diverse concoctions in our body, in which new
mixtures are made, nor is there a resolution as far as the first matter in
every mutation or corruption, but when any thing corrupts, only the form, and
the determinate temper of that form, or the subjects with its accidents perish,
and others that are subordinate remain, some with their accidents: hence it is
that often some form is manifest which lay hid before. And what Hippocrates
spoke of the powers of humors I find true in the nature of poison. Lib. de vet.
medici.
In man (says he) there is bitter, sweet, salt and sour, and six hundred more
qualities, which according to their plenty and strength have other faculties,
by mixture of the mutual contemperation, nor are these seen, nor do they
molest, but any of these are separated, and is alone, then it is evident, and
molesteth a man, etc. thus must we dispute concerning poisons. A man feeds upon
diverse Creatures and Plants; the Plants are fed by dung of Animals and showers,
or by floods, and we may find everywhere things contrary to our bodies in the
dung and excrements of Animals, in the earth, rain and rivers, which are
carried with the nourishment into the body, and there exercise their force.

6. Epid. com. 5. tex. 25.
Hippocrates gives an Example of this, As when a Woman or a Goat eats wild
Cowcumbers, the child or the Kid will be purged, because the milk is made
purging. And though it be first made chyle, then blood, and thirdly milk, yet
the purging quality is kept after so many changes, when the infant has sucked.

From whence it is easy to conclude, that many things get into our bodies with
the nourishment, that have venomous and malignant qualities. For how many men
do feed upon Mushrooms, Melons, and the like, which breed bad juice? How many
malignant showers fall upon the Plants that feed the Cattle? How many beasts
that are man's food, eat venomous Plants and Creatures? The Stork eats Hemlock,
the Quail Hellebore, the Ducks Toads which nourish them. Hens eat Scorpions and
Serpents, and when man eats these meats, it is no wonder if that poison which
feed them (though after diverse concoctions it took diverse forms) become hurtful
unto man, and be a kind of poison in him.

Chap. 4. Of the Causes of occult and venomous Diseases that arise from Humors.
THese Causes are efficient or material. As to the efficients, in regard diverse
concoctions are made, there must be diverse excrements, according to the variety
of the parts, one in the liver, another in the heart, another in the stones,
womb, and the veins and arteries that contain blood and Spirits, when they are
distempered, suffer the blood and Spirits to corrupt, and they are distempered
by excess or occult malignity, by which the solid parts are often corrupted, as
appears in soul ulcers, gangrens and sphacels.

This evil disposition is sometimes from the parents to the children, and they
produce evil humors, which cause the malignant Scab or Elephantiasis. Sometimes
it is from meat and drink, and venomous medicines that exceed in the first
qualities, and secretly hurt the body.

The Stars may do the same. For though they usually nourish the earth with
benign influences, yet by accident they may hurt this or that person by occult
influences, Lib. 4. de febr. c. 4. 3. Apho. 1.
except they keep a proportion, of which hereafter.

Hippocrates shows how much the air conduces to the breeding of diseases,
saying: That change of seas^ns does chiefly breed diseases, and they are either
breathed in, or sent into the body by the pores, and the plague comes from the
air.

Also imagination and passions may be counted efficient causes: for frights and
anger have caused great diseases. And I observed about six times, that when the
plague was here where I live as Professor, that many fell into the plague by
anger, which (though it be hard to be explained) is probable to me. For many
bodies are of constitutions subject to the plague, either by the air or other
cause, rather then to another disease; and if imagination, fear or anger come
upon them, this disposition is easily brought into act, and the good humors may
be corrupted by those passions, as Mercurialis shows.

In lectionibus de pestil. c. 22. 1. de ven. c. 6.
Cardan mentions hatred among these causes, it is a passion made of anger and
sadness, and corrupts the humors.

The other cause that corrupts the humors is material, and makes them
malignant or venomous, and the plague is often bred from bad diet in time of
famine, Gal. lib. de cib. lo. and. mal. suc.
which Galen saw under Commodus the Emperor. Also Cowcumbers and Pompions
produce humors as bad as poison, if they lie long in the body.

Also good meat not well digested in the stomach, may cause bad chyle, and good
blood is never made of bad chyle, but a humor or green choler, which is burnt
and corrupted in the liver, and mixed with the blood, and when it rests in the
veins, it is scarce perceived, but when it is stirred by the motion of the body
or mind, it is worse, and corrupts more, and is separated from the good humors,
and brings great diseases, and sudden death.

But meats that have in themselves a malignant venomous quality, as Mushrooms*
Froggs do this much more.

Chap. 5. Of the differences of Diseases that come from the internal fault of
the Humors.
THere are two chief differences of Diseases from internal humors. The first
are malignant, but kill not, only cause greater Symptoms then the first
qualities can produce, with these a man may live long.

The second are such as presently kill, and are well called Venomous.

Of the first sort are the humors that cause an Epilepsie, fear of water,
dancing, madness, Scurvey, Colic, and malignant Dysenteries, Elephantiasis,
Gangrene, and simply malignant Feve^s. Of the second sort, are the humors that
beget pestilent fevers, and the plague.

As for the first sort, the Epilepsie and the other diseases are not the
evident causes, or from obstruction of the ventricles of the brain, nor is fe^^
of water, from the biting of a mad Dog. But this Epilepsie is from a humor or
vapor that hurts the membranes of the brain, and the nerves especially. And
fear of water may come from internal humors without the biting of any mad
creature. Mercellus Donatus has five Examples of this, Lib. de hist. med.
mirabil.
and the diseases mentioned are not from manifest qualities, but from
malignant, occult and venomous causes.

As for the second kind, the humors are so corrupted, that they do not only
turn malignant, but breed deadly diseases, that kill like poison, as pestilent
Fevers and the Plague, Buboes and Carbun^les, of which before.

Chap. 6. Of the Signs of diseases that come from malignant venomous Humors
that are bred in our Bodies.
THe signs of these diseases are from the causes mentioned in the fourth
Chapter, especially from the air, which if it keep not its natural
constitution, the humors must needs be corrupted, as experience confirms.

Another sign is when famine has been either by scarcity or siege, and men
have had an ill diet, the inward humors are corrupt.

The third is, when no manifest Cause went before, and the man had not to do
with any man of the like disease, and there are the signs of malignity and
venom, Gal. lib. 1. c^ diss. seb. ^. 4.
it shows that it is from the internal fault of the humors.

And by comparing the strength with the disease, you may know the event of the
disease.

Chap. 7. Of the Preservation from, and Cure of these Diseases.
WE have showed the Cure largely before, only if there be a malignant or
Epidemical disease stirring, either from air or bad diet, or the like, let it
be removed by convenient Evacuations, lest the humors corrupt. And observe from
what cause the fault is, that you man apply sit remedies: as Pills de Tribus,
Rhubarb, and Syrup of Roses, and the like. These must be repeated at a
distance, and good Antidotes used.

After purging, it is good to sweat, and take heed of anger, fear or passions,
which stir up the hum^^s that he still and close, and make a plague without any
society with them of the plague.

See for the Cure Lib. 4. de feb. Cap. 6.

THE THIRD PART. Of occult Diseases from Water, Air, and Infections, and of
infectious Diseases.
Chap. 1. Of occult and malignant Diseases, and Venom that arise from Waters.
MANY Diseases come from bad waters, as Dysentery and Dropsy and malignant
Diseases also, as the Scurvey. Marsh standing Pools easily corrupt, and the
drinking thereof in Armies, causes malignant pestilent Fevers, because they
are infected by Froggs, Toads and Serpents, and other venomous Creatures.

Also Waters are unwholsom, in which Flax or Hemp are steeped. And some
Fountains have killed them that have drunk thereof, and therefore the Waters of
the River Styx are so odious, among Poe^s. Pausanias and other Historians
mention of many poisons that will infect waters

You may cure these Waters by boiling the^ or quenching steel, or stone, or
iron in them when you are in Armies, or on a Journey, and cannot boil them, at
least you may strain them.

And if any have drunk such Waters, let him presently take an Antidote.

Chap. 2. Of malignant Diseases from the Air.
AIr as it is a pure Element, neither corrupts, nor is infectious; Paraeus lib
10. c. 13.
but it may be corrupted by other things.

Paris is seldom free from the Plague, by reason of inundations, for besides
the stink of the mud, all the Jakes of the City are full of stinking water,
that go not into the Common-shore, but to the Gates of the City, and cause a
stink, especially in hot weather.

Also malignant vapors arise from Dens and Caves, says Mercurialis, De ven. c.
13.
he had seen many Caves near Rome, into which, if either man or beast go, they
presently die.

The air becomes pestilent, when the small bodies that use to be in the air
(that of themselves are not venomous) do corrupt.

These are all dangerous diseases, and none can be secure from them, for none
can live without air. Therefore let such as by reason of their employments, or
the like, cannot fly, never go abroad, but with good Antidotes in their mouths
and anointed about their noses.

Chap. 3. Of Contagion.
IN contagious diseases. 1. There is the disease which is called Contagious,
because it infects another with the same disease. 2. There is the Medium by
which the like disease is produced in another. 3. There is the action by which
the like disease is produced in another. And lastly the disease which is
produced in another* A contagion is an infection, or a body sent from a sick
body, that can produce the like disease in another.

To clear this. 1. Consider the contagious body. 2. The infection by which it
does infect another. 3. The body that is infected.

1. The contagious body is not only a man, but an Ox or Sow, or the like. And
that is only contagious that can breed any thing in it self, which being sent
to another of the same kind, produces the like disease.

2. When that Contagion passes to another body, with which it has some
likeness, the passage is by infection or seed, in which there is force to act
by the quality that flows from the force. But we are ignorant of that quality
and the form from whence it flows: therefore it is truly called an occult
Quality. For this quality and form are in as small a body as an Atome, and is so
called; and as one says, The infection of diseases is multiplied by little
bodies, that like seeds, comprehend the whole essence of the disease.

Now the quality by which the infection acts so powerfully, is not manifest;
for no manifest quality has such force; but it is occult, and not sensible,
but known only by the effect. Nor can you say that this infection is the effect
of rottenness, for that putrefaction be made many alteration are required, and
long time. But Contagion taken in suddenly infecteth, and often kills, and
begets the like contagious humor in the party; and works like contagious poison
before there is any putrefaction wrought, as appears in the Plague.

This Miasma or Contagion is spread and sowed about, by the pores of the skin.
Sometimes it comes forth with the sweat, or sticks to the skin with a thicker
excrement or filth. Sometimes it goes out of the body by the breath: sometimes by
matter or quittor that comes out of the ulcers. Sometimes those Atoms fly
about in the air, and therefore the seeds of the Plague are sowed far about.

A Contagion or Miasma is sowed and spread abroad two ways, either by fuel
alone, or by the air, and by its fuel. This fuel is not the subject of that
form, but gives a place to the contagi^^. Such are all things that are porous
and thin, as wool, flax, cotton, feathers, hairy beasts skins, and walls may
receive Contagion, as experience shows: and some solider things, as stones and
Metals, but then they are soul, for when they a^e clean from silth, they cannot
receive it so easily.

3. The body that is infected, and receives the same disease thereby, is
somewhat like it. For it is received into garments, wool, but the like disease
is not produ^ed in them, because they have no Analogy with the body infecting.
Nor does the same Contagion infect all alike, for the Plague which in Sows
infects not men nor Ox^n, and that which infects men, in^ects not ^ogs nor
Oxen. And all men, and are disposed to receive all Contagions, but the kindred
are most sit to receive, by reason of the agreement of humors.

Chap. 4. Of the Differences of infectious Diseases.
IN co^tagious diseases there is an excreme^t bred which like a vapor or little
body, or by silth, infects another body with the same disease. Catarrhs are
often contagious, and malignant pestilent Fevers, sore Eyes, Consumption,
Dysenteri^s, Scurvey, Scabs, Itch, scald Heads, Arabian Leprosy, Dogs madness,
the French pox, of which we spoke before in a Treatise in Folio in English.

THE FIFTH PART. Of outward Poisons in General.
Chap. 1. Of the Nature of Poison.
I Had thought to have concluded this Epitome with the French pox; but when I
found many things remarkable concerning poison, I thought good to set them
forth. There are many Authors of the same, but they follow not the Method of
Sennertus.

First, what things are accounted poisons? Eusiach. Rud. lib. 1. de morb.
occul. c. 40.
Some think Bezoardick Medicines and Purges are to be reckoned among poisons.
For the understanding of this:

Observe first, that Galen used the word deadly for that which may kill, or that
which may do good sometimes, though it may kill by accident.

Note secondly, that some Medicines always hurt, and never do good; these are
poison, and so must be called. But they which sometimes do hurt, are not to be
accounted poisons, and they which sometimes do good, are not to be excluded from
the number of poisons. For there is a difference of things hu^tful in general,
as Saffron chears the heart. But if you take too much of it in meat, it hurts.
As a Merchant who bought a great deal of Saffron, and cast a great deal into
the porridg-pot against supper, and after he had supped, sell into such a
laughter, that he almost died thereby. The same is to be thought of some purges
and Bezoardicks, that have no occult quality against the body, which by the
excess of good qualities, do hurt: these are not to be counted poisons.

Therefore poison is whatsoever is apt to hurt us much by an occult quality.
Card. 1. de ven. c. 1. and 4.
Or thus, it is that which corrupts the complexion, not only by a quality, but
by a propriety; for it is necessary to the Nature of poison always to kill
men, Avicen. doctr. 2. c. 15.
but to hurt much only.

They define not poison rightly, that say it is that which can kill a man
presently by an occult quality, or that can by a property corrupt the heart
suddenly. Some are enemies to the brain, and cause madness: others are enemies
to other parts.

Lib. de ven. c. 3.
But how comes poison to the heart? It is either drawn by the heart, or goes to
it being carried by its hurtful quality, or by both. It is probable that all
poison being active from the destructive form it has against the heart, turns
every thing it touches in man's body into poison, and multiplies it self, for
spiritual things have great force to multiply by Species or Atoms, as appears
in Musk; but it chiefly hurts that part with which it has the g^eatest
Antipathy.

Have poisons power to nourish? Aerr. lib. de there. c. 2.
Some deny it, and bring reasons against experience. For the Egyptians eat
Vipers; and there are a people that are Serpent-eaters near the red Sea called
Candaeans. And the Maid that fed upon Napellus, that she might kill Kings that
lay with her, Avic. l. 4. Fen. 6. ^r.
and the like show the truth of this. And he that takes these for fables, makes
himself a fable.

There are diverse poisons, some have no nourishment at all, but are wholly
contrary to Nature, as Arsenick. Some have nourishing parts that are taken with
the poison, these may nourish, especially if they be accustomed by degrees to
them. And Galen gives no other reasons, but that Nature may be made acquainted
with poison by degrees, and be nourished by them.

Chap. 2. Of the Differences of Poisons.
SOme are poisons in their own Nature. Others are so by corruption, as rotten
fish and stinking flesh. 3. There are poisons made by art, by boiling and
sublimation, we shall speak only of those that are of their own Nature poisons.

Some are Minerals or Metals, as Arsenick. Others are Plants, as Napellus.
Others are from Animals, as Scorpions, Vipers.

Secondly, they either act by the first qualities, or by hidden qualities, or
by both together, but this division i^ ^^lse. For poisons are not to be judged
by their first qualities, Gal. de temp. c. 4. and alibi.
but by their contrariety in the whole substance. Moreover they are all enemies
to the heart or some determinate part, but as they are hot, cold, moist or dry,
they hurt all, but not as poisons. For though manifest and occult qualities may
be in the same subject, yet their effects must not be confounded. For with
their manifest qualities they heat, cool, dry, or moisten, but kill with the
occult qualities, or hurt very much.

The third difference, is from the effects, for their forms are hidden from us,
and show them selves by their operations Hence some are enemies to the heart,
and kill men presently. Others are enemies to the brain, as furious Nightshade,
Gal. de purg. med. fac. c. 4.
Dogs poison. Others hurt the Liver, as the plant that purges blood. And some
poison has Antipathy against all parts.

The fourth difference; some poisons are deadly, others not. Nor is it true,
that all poisons either kill or make fit for death, for as it is in Chap. 1.
Mercuria. lib. 1. de vene. c. 5.
Many do but hurt greatly, and cause only folly and doting, so that with them
they may live long. Some kill sooner or later, by hurting greatly a member that
is simply necessary to life, as the heart, liver, lungs or stomach, etc.

Fifthly, some kill presently, others at distance, as a grain of Nubia, which
being divided among ten men, kills them all in a quarter of an hour, such is
Arsenick and the poison of an Adder. Among them that kill at a distance,
S^alig. and (...).
is the poison of a mad Dog that often lies hidden many yea^^.

Question. Whether are there such Poisons by Art or Nature, that can kill a man
at a certain time?

I think it cannot be, for though all natural things have their circuits, and
that there are the beginnings and ends of actions, they are for the most part
unknown, and cannot be determined in this darkness of man's mind. Moreover the
agent and patient concur in every action, and because the actions of active
things are not out in a disposed patient, and the man's body, in respect of the
circumstances, has more or less power to resist, it cannot be that the same
poison should kill sometimes sooner, sometimes later.

The sixth difference, is from the manner of poisons getting in: some are taken
at the mouth with meat: some come from without, many ways. Some venomous
beasts leave their poisons upon Plants; as it was reported of a young man that
was talking with his Sweetheart, Mizal. memo. cen^. 1. e Ioa. Bocatio.
and rubbed his gums with Sage, and fell down dead. The Gardner found a great
Toad under the Sage that infected it.

Some poisons hurt by touch, rubbing, or anointing. The Turks have a poison so
strong, that by touching only, it kills a man the same day. Card. l. de ven.
c. 15. Scal. ever. 157.
It is reported of the Son of the King of Cambaia, that was nourished with such
poison, that he was all over poison, so that the flies that touched his skin*
swelled and died.

It is a que^^i^n how poisons should kill only by the vapo^: it is either from
the material qua^^ty, or the s^^rital species that poison, kills. For (...)
poisons, like Atoms and little bodies, exercise their force, whether it be in
fume, vapor^ or dust, or in a Juice or Ointment, and the venomous quality is in
that little body, as in a subject. For when such a quality depends upon its
form, it cannot be moved but with the same.

Chap. 3. Of the Signs.
Poison is either taken unawares, or given by subtility and stealth by wicked
men. And this is a common sign, it presently makes a great change in the body,
by which it differs from those that are bred from humors in the body by
putrefaction. For in poison bred in the body, the symptoms arise by degrees,
not altogether, but by succession; but in poison taken from without, many
Symptoms appear together from Nature stirred up by the poison with horrid and
turbulent vomiting, overturns all that she may send out her enemy.

And we may suspect poison, when a sound man bred up well without foul humors,
Gal. 5. de lo. affec. ^. 1.
shall suddenly have his actions and things voided, and retained, altered, and
the qualities, presently the motion of the heart and pulse is disorderly,
without any other apparent cause. The strength fails, the pulse is either
depraved or abolished, with beating of the heart, fainting and death. Some have
Megrims, Convulsions, Trembling, Hickets, biting, stomach-pain, and guts
griping-stoppage stoppage of urin, vomiting of choler, or the like, sometimes
looseness of belly. Cold sweats, and chilness, swollen tongue, black and
inf^amed lips, swollen belly, and body often, with spots. All these Symptoms
are worse then such as come from poison bred with in.

Poison from biting or stinging of venomous beasts have other signs, there is
presently pain in the part. It is inflamed, and rots, and mortifies, except you
have present remedies.

Poisons at a distance called Temporary, have their conjectures, though no
certain signs, by the effects. There are often long diseases without reason: or
folly, madness, or Epilepsie, running pains, and Consumption. But the poisons
that affect the lungs, cause a dry cough and tongue, thirst, spitting of blood,
and Consumption, and other poisons that hurt other parts, are known by the
actions of those parts hurt.

Whether may one killed by poison be discovered certainly? Galen thought they
might be known to be poisoned, when he writes thus: A man of his own nature
abounding with good humors, and well educated, and fed, when he dies suddenly
(as they use to do that take deadly poison) If his body be blew or blackish, or
of diverse colors, (...) stink, they say he is poisoned. From which words we
may gather, Joan. Baptist. Sylvat.
that Galen thought that men poisoned, might be discovered. But the best way to
make it manifest, is to open the body, and have an expert and wise Physician.

Chap. 4. Of the Prognostics.
TO prognosticate artificially, consider the Nature of poisons, and
differences. Some hurt more, others less; some sooner, some later.

1. They that set upon the heart kill presently, or are overcome. They that
assault the liver or lungs, last longer. They which hinder breathin^, quite
kill presently.

The second difference is from the great, mean or small quantity of the poison.

3. The more and the greater the Symptoms, the sooner and certainer is death,
as sounding, chilness, cold sweat, turning of the eyes. If these come together,
there is no hope, and the more they increase, the worse it is. If they
decrease, there is some hope.

4. It is a sign of death, if after the poison is taken, there is no vomiting,
or purging, or voiding any thing, though means have been used. There are other
prognostics which are manifest from what has been said.

Chap. 5. Of Preservation from Poison.
THey that will be preserved from poison, let them keep close to Cardans Rules.
Lib. 3. de ven. c. 1.


The safest way is to use Antidotes, as Mithridates did Mithridate, so that he
could not be poisoned. There are diverse Antidotes internal and external.
Albertus Magnus speaks of the external, as the Diamond, Topas, Smaragd worn
constantly upon the bare skin, no poison can hurt that man. Anthelmus Boet.
lib. 2. de gem. c. 175. Lib. death. ad. pis. c. 16. and ad pamph.
Some precious stones keep men from infectious air. These are worn for Amulets:
and if poison be near, they sweat.

Treacle and Mithridate are the best inward, and Galen says that none can be
poisoned that take as much as a Bean every day of Treacle and bids them use it
in time of health. And experience shows that you may safely give preservatives
against poison to sound bodies, and by them they get an incredible propriety to
resist poison

Some of these Antidotes are without any excess of quality, as Bezoar stone,
sealed Earth, Bole, Harts-^orn, Smaragds, and the like. These are given safely
to all bodies. Mithridate and Treacle, though they be less hot, by reason of
the fermentation, yet take heed that by the too much use, you do hurt thereby.

Chap. 6. Of the Cure of Poison in General.
SOme make differences between Bezoardicks and Antidotes, and say that
Bezoardicks act not against poison, but only strengthen the body to expel it:
and they help only by accident. Some say that Bezoardicks fight against poison,
Eustach. rad. de morb. oc. lib. 2. c. 7.
and are wholly against them.

Antidotes are hurtful in too great a quantity, and are in some sort against
the heart, but both by use are good in venomous diseases; us all Cordials,
Bezoar stone, Hearts and Unicornshorn, etc.

Some Antidotes are proper against some peculiar poisons, and all strengthen
the heart to resist poison: as Tormen^il roots, white Dittany, Borage, Bugloss,
Sorrel, Scabious, Borage and Bugloss ^^owers, Violets, Roses, Waterlillies,
Gilli^^owers, Citron and Basil seeds, Wood-alo^s, juice of Citrons,
Pom^granates, Oranges, Quinces, Saffron, Cinnamon, Cloves, Hartshorn, bone of
a Stags heart, Ivory, Pearl, Musk, Amber, Coral, Hyacint^s, Smaragds, Saphirs,
sealed Earth, Bole. Many of them resist poison, and Compounds made of them.

And though h^t must be given against cold and cold against hot poisons, yet
you must not so much look at the manifest qualities as to that force which is
in medicines, to oppose poison in the whole substance. Therefore in hot poisons
you may give Treacle and Mithridate: and if the poison will give leave, first
abate the Cacochymy.

Lastly, let him that has taken poison, either at the mouth, or other ways,
sleep but little; for he must constantly take medicines, and observe whether
the Symptoms increase, or abate by the Bezoardicks, more of which hereafter.

Chap. 7. Of the Cure of Poison taken in at the mouth.
WHen any one thinks he has taken poison, let him presently have a Vomit,
before the poison exercise its cruelty, and let it be repeated often, and made
of things that may dull the sharpness of the poison; as of fat Broaths, Oil,
Butter-milk boiled, Broom, Dill, Iesamine flowers, Radishes, and the like, to
which you may add Bezoardicks, so that they stop not vomiting. Therefore make
choice of things that bind not, as Hartshorn, Bezoar stone.

If the poison get to the stomach and guts, give Clysters. As, Take Mallows,
Pellitory, Althaea, each two handfuls; boil them in water, strain them, to a
pint and half, add Oil six ounces, Electuary of Fleabane two drams, make a
Clyster. And purge thus: Take Scorzon^ra roots two drams, Sorrel half a
handful, Agarick two drams, Zedoary, Citron seeds, each a scruple; Cordial
flowers a pugil: hoyl them, strain, and ad to four ounces, Manna two ounces,
strain it again, and add Syrup of Citronpeels.

While these are doing, anoint every third hour the heart, feet, hands and
temples, and places where you feel the arteries beat, with Oil of Scorpions, of
which Mathiolus, it is excellent.

Let the relics of the poison be driven from the heart and bowels by sweats,
and leave not sweating til the evil disposition be quite conquered.

For diet, give Milk for meat and drink, and fat meats, Butter and Oil, Borage,
Bugloss, Figs with Cordials, Hartshorn, Coral, Pearl, Hyacinths, Smaragds,
Zedoary, Saffron, Citron peels.

Chap. 8. Of the Cure of Poison from without.
THat poison may not creep in, draw it out presently by Medicines and
Surgery. As, Take Galbanum, Sagapenum, Mirrh, Pellitory, each half an ounce;
Pigeons dung three ounces, Calamints a dram, dissolve the Gums in Vinegar, and
with Honey and Oil make a Cataplasm.

Or apply Chickens or Kids cut in two hot to the part where the poison is.

These laid on, work by a hidden quality, oil of Scorpions, Spiders, and the
Creatures that poisoned applied to the part. Gal. de ^^ pis c. ^0.
Galen says that he knew the biting of a Crocodile cured by the grease of a
Crocodile, and the sting of a Scorpion, by the Scorpion applied to the part.
These act by the likeness of substance.

You must continue the use of things that draw out poison, till pain, evil
color, and other Symptoms cease, and there is laudable quittor in the part.
And to keep the poison from running inward or about, tie the vessels above: then
cut off the part that is poisoned, if it may be done with safety. Give
Antidotes at first to drive poison from the heart, and kill it, and to take away
the venomous quality that is in the body. And (...) ulcer follow a bite or
venomous sting, keep it long open, scarifie it, and burn it as shall be showed.

Poison taken by scent, must be opposed by contrary scent, as Mirrh, Amber,
Musk, Ambergreece, Civet, Rue, Asphaltum, Wood-aloes, Sanders, Cloves, Saffron,
Storax, and the mouth being shut, you must take the scent of these at the nose.
Of these we shall speak in the special or particular Cure of Poisons.

Sennertus concludes this general Doctrine of poisons, with relation of
diseases that come from fear and frights, because they are like poisons, and he
reports out of Cardan, Lib. 3. de ven. c. 14.
that when a man is frighted by Ghosts, or the like, the heat is drawn in, and
the mind is troubled, and he becomes dumb; and if the fright be great, the
outward parts are cold, and contracted, and the hair falls off, and if the body
be cacochymick, he is very sick, and if strength fails, he dies. This he
confirms by many Histories which I have left out, only I shall relate one of
which I was an eye witness. When I studied in Physic in Oxitan, Anno 1617. a
woman that grew melancholic from anger, hung her self, the Crowner sitting
upon her, sentenced her to be hung in gibets, about a mile from the City.
Another woman that was her familiar acquaintance, seeing her ^ut of a window,
neat the place, cried out, and fell into a great Diarrhaea suddenly, with a
constant dotage that could not be cured. From whence I conclude, that in these
diseases from terror, the heart is not only affected, as Cardanus thought, but
the brain also. Hence they usually give Epileptick Waters: this is good for
children. Take Tile-flower water, Piony, black Cherry water, each an ounce and
half; ^earl prepared, Coral and Har^s-horn, each a scruple; Fecula of Piony
half a scruple.

THE SIXTH PART. Of Poisons from Minerals and Metals.
Chap. 1. Of unsleaked Lime.
VNSLEAKED Lime has some venom in it, though it is a stone, and may be
reckoned among poisons for its malignant quality; also it has fire in it, that
will burn.

Symptoms and Signs.
This taken into the body, afflicts grievously, for it corrodes and vexes
the stomach and guts, and causes unquenchable thirst, bitterness of mouth and
tongue, ^oughness, cough, Ama. Lusit. c. 5. cur. 91.
want of breath, Dysentery, stoppage of urin, swounding and choking. A child
of eight years old supposed it to be Chalk, and eat much, and died the sixth
day with these symptoms.

The Cure.
Provoke vomit with things that abate the sharpness of the Lime: give the warm
Decoction of Violets, Mallows, Althaea, Lineseed, Rice, Oil, fresh Butter, and
Mucilages of Lineseed, Mallows, Althaea, Fleabane, and keep the belly open with
Cassia, or a Clyster with Barley water, and Mallows roots and all* Mucilage of
Fleabane, Cassia lignea, Waterlillies, and the like.

The Antidotes are, the gal of a Kid, from a scruple to a dram, and the gall of
an Heart or Deer a scruple drunk with warm Water, Earth of Lemnos two drams with
Milk.

Give fresh Butter and sat Broaths in which Mallows is boiled.

Chap. 2. Of Gipsum.
THey who have drunk of this or eaten it with Wheat flour, have all died.

The Signs and Symptoms.
A great cough, dryness of tongue and jaws, great pain about the stomach,
hickets, stretching of the Hypochondria, binding of the belly, dullness and
dotage, fainting, and they die choked.

Give warm Water with much Butter, The Cure.
or Oil of sweet Almonds, or Oil of Lillies which will make them vomit it up.
But because it sticks fast, give stronger Vomits, as Hellebore. If it be gotten
to the guts, give emollient Clysters. Rhas. ad Almans. c. pr.
Some give a dram of Scammony, with two drams of Fleabane in a Iulep. Then give
Fats to make the passage slippery; as the Decoction of Mallo^s, Althaea,
Faenugreek seed, fat Broaths, Goats milk, juice of Mallows, Decoction of Dates
and Figs.

These are specific, Organ given in Vinegar and honied Wine, Li^ivium of Vine
ashes or Figtree ashes, with sweet Wine and Treacle, or Mithridate, from half a
dram, to two drams in Sa^k.

Chap. 2. Of Vitriol.
Diof. li. 5. c. 74.
AMong Salts we reckon Vitriol, Chalcitis, Misy, Sorry, Melanteria, it
participates of the nature of Brass or Iron, and mineral Clay: this is not
properly poison, for good medicines are made of it, in which there are no signs
of venom, and if it be given a dram with Honey it kills the flat worms, Dioscor.
and with water it is the Antidote against Mushrooms.

The Symptoms and Signs.
It causes loathing and vomiting, and corrodes the stomach, except it be
perfectly cast up it torments the guts, and causes a Dysentery and great
thirst.

The Cure.
Let it be presently vomited up with the Decoction or Oil of Dill, or Wormwood
water, after vomiting, take much Butter or warm Milk with Sugar; if there be a
gnawing in the guts, give Clysters of Barley water, Mallows and oil of Roses.
If you suspect malignity, give Earth of Lemnos or sealed Earth, with mucilage
of Quince seeds a dram, with Barley water, or red Coral with Wine.

Chap. 4. Of Aqua fortis.
THis kills by corroding rather then by poison, it is used by Goldsmiths to
separate and corrode metals.

Symptoms and Signs.
It pierces so that it burns the tongue like fire, and corrodes the tunicles
of the Stomach and Guts, a Maid died by it in great torment.

The mucilage of Quince seeds is good, for it lenifies and keeps the parts from
corrosion by its sliminess. Or the eclegma of the mucilage of Althaea and
Quince seeds, Gum traganth made with Rose water, Honey of Roses and Violets: Or
a Gargarism of Quince seed, Althaea, Cowcumber seed, Roses, Violets and Moulin,
and of Self-heal, Lungwort, Sanicle boiled in water with Honey of Roses. Epist.
9.
By this a Mariner was cured when he had dangerous symptoms from Aqua fortis.

Chap. 5. Of Antimony.
ANtimony is reckoned by many among poisons from its moving of such horrible
vomiting of water, and because it leaves such great weakness after it, but good
medicines are made of it though it be not free from malignity, as appears by
the vapors that fly from it when it is melted.

The Signs and Symptoms.
For when the Chemists melt it, if the vapor be taken in at the nose, it
causes Suffocation, Palsy, and Epilepsie, and other symptoms: If it be taken
crude, it causes Vomiting, Convulsion, Colicks, and fainting*

To keep evil vapors from hurting such as use Antimony, let them eat Bread and
Rue. Or, The Cure
take Bezoat water with Bole. Or this, Take Walnuts a handful, beat them with
Honey, add Treacle an ounce, Zedoary half an ounce, Clov^^, Nutmeg, each two
drams; with Honey make an Electuary, this is a preservative, and it may be used
to anoint the nostrils.

If it be given crude or ill prepared, it causes evil symptoms, then give
Bailey water with syrup of Roses, to cleanse, and clensing Clysters: then
strengthen the Guts and Stomach, with Wine wherein Cloves and Mastich is
boiled: the Antidotes are Treacle and Bole Armeniack two scruples.

Chap. 6. Of the Lodestone.
Gar. ab hor. aro. lib. 1. cap. 56.
SOme reckon the Loadstone among poisons, others say it makes people youthful,
but that I believe not* because it is a mineral and has the nature of a metal:
and if it lie long in the body, you must do as has been showed in other cases;
as if it stop in the Stomach, vomit; if in the Guts, use lenitive Clysters, and
then give Antidote, as the Smaragd to be drank in Wine thrice in nine days,
with Hartshorn and Coral. Also Treacle is good.

Chap. 7. Of the Diamond.
THere is the same reason for the Diamond, as for the Loadstone of which we
spoke but there are more that think it not to be poison, of this we spoke Lib.
3. Part 2. Sect. 2. Chapter 7* Quest. 2. now I shall speak of the Symptoms and Cure
of such as have taken Diamonds into their bodies.

Signs and Symptoms.
After taking Diamonds there is a vehement pain in the Stomach and Guts, and
then follows fainting and death.

The Cure.
It is by vomiting, as the other, then give Goats blood, with fat Broth, and
then from a scruple to two drams of natural Balsom, and if these prevail not,
use the general Antidotes.

Chap. 8. Of Lapis Lazuli.
MAny say that Lapis Lazuli burns and ulcerates, and putresies, Mosu. lib. de
simpl.
it is therefore not to be reckoned among things that are simply poison, but
among those Purgers that are not without malignity, because they are vehement.
The Arabians say it purges melancholy, strengthens, and cleereth, and
therefore it is put into Confection Alkermes, but then it must be well prepared.

Symptoms and Signs.
This Stone not well prepared, or taken in too great a quantity, causes turning
of the Stomach Vomiting, want of appetite, and pain of the belly, sadness and
Sorrow.

It is cured as other corroding poison, by Vomits and clensing emollient
Clysters. The Cure.
The corroding quality is taken away by Asses milk warm drunk for seven days
together. Conciliat.
Two drams of Amber is the Bezoar or Antidote against this Stone.

Chap. 9. Of Arsenick, Orpiment, Sandarach, and Realgar or Ratsbane.
Arsenick both natural and artificial, yellow and red is of the same faculty.
Yellow Arseni^k and Sandarach by sublimation make white Arsenick or Ratsbane.
Realgal and Risagallum are made of Orpiment and Sulphur with quick Lime and
Salt.

Signs and Symptoms.
For As. lib. 3. obs. 8.
All the kinds of Arsenick bring grievous symptoms, which kill presently except
they be opposed, as griping of belly and guts, vomiting, unquenchable thirst,
dryness of tongue, jaws and throat, and roughness, and then Dysentery and
stoppage of urin, Cramp and Palsy, and Death, the white Arsenick is most
dangerous.

Histories confirm that Arsnick does not only destroy by being taken in but
hurts by being carried about. Amatus Lusit. cent. 2. cur. 34.


Therefore they that have taken it are in great danger, The Prognostic.
or they that handle it carelessly or apply it to cure the itch, or for other
causes, for they either die, or run mad, or have a Cachexy.

Provoke Vomit presently and often, with fat things, The Cure.
and such as obtund or allay the sharpness of the poison as Butter, with warm
water, or decoction of Turnep seeds, Arrage, with fresh Butter, oil of Linseed
or Roses, or other fat broth in great quantity. If the belly be griped, give
Clysters of Mallows, Althaea, Violets, Vervain, Line seed, with Cassea and oil
of Violets, or of fat Broth, cream of P^isan, Asses milk, and mucilage of
Fleabane seed. And after give Milk in great quantity and Butter and oil of
sweet Almonds, fat Broth, Rice boiled in Milk.

The specific Antidotes against Arsenick are a dram of powder of Crystal with
oil of sweet Almonds, or three drams of oil of Pine kernels Or* Pet. Appon.G
avne. Ma
Take Pine nuts beaten four ounces, infuse them in a pint of water; strain and
give it to be drank, Or give ten grains of oriental Bez^a^.

Chap. 10. Of Brass, and its Verdigreece, and burnt Brass.
IF meat be kept in a Brass-vessel (with Vinegar or Wine) and eaten, it
disturbeth the stomach, causes vomiting, and dryness of tongue, and corrosion,
and fluxes. And Brass it self taken, causes moreover difficult breathing,
ul^ers of the guts, and suffocation.

Burnt Brass, flour of Brass, scales of Brass, Diosco. lib. 5. c. 47.
and Verdigreece, are all poisonous; for burnt Brass taken, turns the stomach,
makes fluxes, and pain.

And so does flour of Brass, and also it straitneth the lungs, and suffocates.

Verdigreece taken, is a deadly poison, as Arsenick, it causes pricking,
grievous pain and corrosion in the throat, and stomach, and guts, and constant
vomiting, and Dysentery, and stoppage of urin, and straitneth the throat, and
stops the wind, and suffocateth. It kills in one day, Bases in conti. c. 2.
in the quantity of a dram.

It must be cured by Vomit, with warm Water, and Oil of Dill, or Butter; and by
Clysters; The Cure.
of Mallows, Violets, Barley, Althaea, Faenugreek seeds, Fleabane, with Honey,
Oil of Roses and sweet Almonds. Then give Milk, fat Broth, fresh Butter,
Faenugreek, Lineseed, Fleabane, Althaea and Mallow seeds. Some commend Sheeps
suet, and advise that the bottom of the belly be anointed with hot Oil of
Roses, and of Mastich.

For Antidotes, use a dram of Bole, or sealed Earth, with Wine, juice of Mints,
or Small age two drams. Or juice of Acorus roots two or three drams with (...)*
or two drams with Treacle.

Chap. 11. Of Aurichalcum, and Bell-metal.
IT is most of Brass, and therefore is poison, and communicates to meat and
drink boiled in it, which eaten, brings the same Symptoms, and must have the
same Cure.

Bells are made of Brass and other Metals, and the rust of them does the same.
Horstius writes that a Noble woman that had taken the filings of Bells in red
Wine, In comme^t. ad sem. de occul. not. miracul.
by the advice of an old woman that promised her health by it, vomited
violently, and her belly rose up, and swelled her body as if poisoned, and then
she had headache, Megrim, and pricking, and fell into a Frenzy, and when she
came to her self, her stomach was corroded, as if there were needles in it. The
rust was purged out of her, which many saw. And if this happen, you must cure
it as you cure Brass.

Chap. 12. Of Iron, and its Rust and Scales.
IRon is not poison, except you take it in too great a quantity, or stay too
long in the body, and then it hurts not as poison, but causes belly-ach, and
dryness of mouth, and inflammation of the body, and vomiting.

The Cure.
It is as that of Brass by Vomits and Clysters, that are lenitive and clensing,
and by Manna, and Stomach-pills, and then Milk, Butter, and fat Broth. The
Loadstone is instead of Bezoar against it.

Chap. 13. Of Lead.
IF Lead be swallowed whole, and voided, it does no hurt; but if it be small,
and stay in the body long, and melt, De lue. ven. c. 7.
it causes great Symptoms. Fernelius shows how it hurts.

In Lead not burnt, when it gets to the guts, The Cure.
and shows its malignity, it is sufficient to abate sharpness, and cleanse by
Asses milk, and other Milk. Or the Decoction of Mallows, Althaea, Linseed,
Hydromel, Oil of sweet Almonds. The Antidote against burnt Lead, is Quince
seeds bruised after they are husked with Wine two drams, and two drams of
Treacle every day with honied Water and Wine.

Chap. 14. Of Ceruss.
IT is made of Lead by corrosion, with the vapor of Vinegar, and causes the
same Symptoms, which are these. If it be taken into the body; the tongue, gums
and teeth are white, there is hickets, and desire to vomit, dryness of tongue
and roughness of the mouth, a cough, pricking in the stomach and belly,
stretching at the heart, difficult breathing, bleeding by stool, needing, the
head is troubled, and strange things fly before the eyes. They are drowsy and
dull, cannot move hand or foot, the urin is black or bloody, the limbs are
cold, and they die.

Vomit presently with the Decoction of Arageseed and Rape seed, Mallows, Figs,
The Cure.
Water and Honey, O^l of Lillies, Orris, Iesamine, etc.

And give Clysters of Coleworts, Pellitory, Cardu^^, Centaury, Diaphaenicon,
Oil of Lillies.

Then allay the sharpness of the poison, with hot Milk, Decoction of Figs,
Mallow seeds, Althaea, Mucilages of Line and Faenugreek seed, Fleabane,
Mallows, Oil of sweet Almonds, Lillies, Iesamine. Then use Clensers and
Diuretics with Antidotes. A Lie of Vine ashes, and Ash leaves, Walnuts, Oil of
Angelica, Treacle, Mithridate.

Chap. 15. Of red Lead.
IT is made of common Lead, and is of the same force with it, and Ceruss and
Litharge, and causes the same Symptoms.

Symptoms and Signs.
It hurts the stomach and guts, causes belching, loathing, vomiting, fluxes,
and other Symptoms mentioned.

The Cure.
Give a Vomit presently, of Rape seed, Arage with Butter and Oil. Then give the
Clysters mentioned; or two drams of the Antidote of burnt Ivory in Wine, or
Treacle, or Mithridate.

Chap. 16. Of Litharge.
A Gricola mentions five sorts of Litharge, but we have only white and red, and
from their color are called Litharge of gold and of silver.

Symptoms and Signs.
Dioscorides shows the signs from Litharge taken; as heaviness of the stomach
and guts, Lib. 7. c. 27.
with great pains. The guts are wounded, the urine stopped, the body puffed up,
and like Lead. The joints burn, AEtius and Avic.
the guts are ulcerated, and there is a flux of blood, sometimes the gut comes
out. The tongue is heavy, there is iliack passion, and the tongue is faltering.
They foam at the mouth, the breath is stopped, the tongue inflamed, the body is
blew, and the patient is choked.

Vomit presently to prevent corrosion, The Cure.
and oppose malignity, with the Decoction of Dill F^gs, Dates, with Butter or
Oil: do it often. To Conquer all Infirmities Study my Sennertus, Platerus,
Riverius, Bartholinus and Riolanus, of the last Editions.
Then give Clysters of Hydromel, Centaury, Dill, St. Iohnswort, Hiera picra,
Oil of Rue, Hens grease, etc.

Resist malignity, and provoke urine with Mirrh, Wormwood, Hysop, Smallage
seed. Or, Take Smallage seed, Mirrh, each equal parts, Wormwood half as much
with Wine.

Chap. 17. Of Quicksilver, crude or sublimated, or precipitated.
WE have spoken of the occult and manifest qualities of Quicksilver, we shall
here show how it is poison. It may be taken in crude, sublimated, or
precipitated: to the crude belongs a vapor that rises from it.

Symptoms and Signs.
If Quicksilver taken in, stick in any cavity, or be mixed with any medicine
that may keep it in the body, it causes great evils, and death. So does the
fume of it taken in at the mouth: or if it be anointed outwardly, and pierce
into the body, it does hurt. Precipitate is worse, but Sublimate worst of all.

For Quicksilver not killed, by its corroding malignity causes wind, and pain
of the stomach and guts, heaviness of body and stomach. If it be kept long,
there is stoppage of urin, and the whole body swells, and the color is of a
Lead blew. It causes Palsy in the member where it is, Epilepsie, Apoplexy,
Syncope and death.

By its fume comes trembling, contraction of nerves, weakness of joints,
palsy, hurt of senses, especially of the sight and hearing, Ferd. Ponzetus 2.
de ven. c. 21. Fern. de lue ven. c. 7.
stinking breath and ulcers of the mouth, and the like, as the Quicksilver does
produce.

Precipitate causes the same, but worse, and Sublimate the worst of all, and
by its touch like fire, it destroys whatsoever is near: with inflammation,
Fondr. Bac in proleg. vin. valor. lib. 1. ob.
burning of tongue, and swelling of the mouth, fainting, stoppage of urin,
difficult breath, bloody flux, and death.

Some vomit first. I think it best to purge first, for if it rise upwards, The
Cure.
it is easily divided into small parts, and so cannot be expelled by vomit:
therefore purge strongly. First, give a Clyster of Hiera picra, Oil of Hydromel,
and Hens grease. Then purge, Council. and Guayne.
and give filings of Gold, or Leaf-gold; or Costus with Wine, juice of Burnet,
or three drams of Mirrh, with Honey; Wine after it.

When the fume of Quicksilver is taken in at the nose or mouth, give Sage or
Zedoary water. Sweat in a hot House, and rub the parts that are weak, with a
bag of Sage, Groundpine, Bettony, Lavender, and Iuniper-berries boiled in Wine.

If Sublimate or Precipitate be taken, they are cured as corroding poisons by
Vomit, Clysters, and new Milk, with Fleabane seeds.

The powder of Cristal is the Antidote against Quicksilver, a dram with Oil of
sweet Almonds, or Oil of Tartar, or two drams of Salt of Wormwood. Strengthen
the heart with Diamargariton frigid, and de Gemmis. If urin be stopped (as it is
often) use a Bath of hot Water for the Pecten, with a Sponge wet in the
Decoction of Juniper berries, and Smallage seed. And anoint after with Oil of
Rue or Juniper.

Chap. 18. Of Cinnabar.
I Speak of that Cinnabar which is made of Quicksilver and Sulphur sublimed,
and is common. The Symptoms caused by it* are the same with those of
Quicksilver. Fernel in his Book of the Pox, Chap. 7. and Schenk^us in his 7.
Book of Observations, speak of it from the relation of Dr. John Physician ^amic.

Cure it as Quicksilver, The Cure.
for the same Symptoms require the same helps.

Spodium is held the best Antidote against Cinnabar, made of burnt Ivory, and
given, two drams. Pet. Appon. to. de ven.
Others say Spodium of Cane roots two drams, is better. Also the other
Antidotes mentioned in the former Chapter, are good.

THE SEVENTH PART. Of Poisons from Plants.
Chap. 1. Of Opium.
I SHALL speak of four things concerning Opium. 1. Whether Opium may truly be
reckoned among poisons? 2. Whether it be hot or cold, whether it cause sleep,
or do hurt by manifest or occult qualities? 3. What are the signs and Symptoms
of Opium taken in? 4. How they are to be cured that have taken too much Opium?
And how Opium may be corrected, that it may be a profitable medicine.

The learnedest Writers say it is poison. The new juice of the black Poppy
being crude, and not corrected, must be counted a poison. For experience shows
it, though many, Dios. lib. 6. Gal. 3. de tem. c. 4. Avic. l. 4. fen. 6. tr. 1
and omnes fere in eum comm. and alij plur.
as Turks and Egyptians eat Opium without hurt; for men by custom may be so
familiar with poison, that it may not hurt them. But hence it follows, not that
Opium is not poison, and works as poisons by hidden qualities, though I shall
show, it may work also by manifest qualities.

For the second: there are many Arguments that Opium is hot, which Scaliger
Exercit. 175* affirms, calling it by the Name of Amphiam or Aphioure, and also
Vesalius Mercurialis, and Capivaccius, and Erastus, and they confirm it by
reasons. 1. Its inflaming and burning quality. 2. Its strong scent. 3. The
bitter taste. 4. Its burning the mouth and lips. 5. Its causing thirst. 6. Its
heating the mind. 7. It provokes Venery. 8. It causes itching. 9 It causes
sweat. Dr. Michael Dor. and Daniel Vuinckeerus.
All these are signs of great heat, as the Learned show in their Tractates of
Opium.

Therefore in regard Opium is not cold, and does not cause sleep or death from
thence, nor from heat, because other hot things have not the same effect, we
conclude that Opium does it by an occult quality and propriety. First, they
that work by manifest qualities, are not more contrary to one part of the body
then another. But Opium is chiefly hurtful to the brain, nerves, and animal
spirits; therefore it does not work by a manifest, but hidden quality.

Secondly, the effects of Opium are so wonderful (as shall be showed) that they
cannot be referred to manifest qualities. It kills a man in so small a
quantity, as no pure Element can do the like, much less a mixed body* Lastly,
if Opium hurt only by its coldness, or by its quality* as Pepper and Saffron.
The Physicians and Chemists need not study so much to correct, but only give it
in a less quantity, as they do Ginger and Pepper.

Thirdly, let the Symptoms be reckoned that follow; after Opium is taken, none
can give Opium unknown to the receiver, by reason of its unpleasant scent,
though it has been taken instead of another medicine.

After it is taken, there follows great sleep, and a Megrim, and Itching over
the whole body, which is so great, that it raises a man from sleep: there is a
strong scent over all the body like Opium; the lips swel, there is hickets,
little breathing, the eyes are dim, the nose is awry, and there are Convulsions
sometimes.

The Prognostic.
If it be not prevented speedily, it ki^s suddenly, as Histories mention.

The Cure.
After general Evacuation, as in other poisons by Vomits and sharp Clysters,
give the proper Antidotes against Opium, Dios. lib. 6. c. proprio.
as Assa ferida, Castor or Organ, and Castor boiled in Wine: of these
Dioscorides.

Chap. 2. Of Mushrooms.
SOme Mushrooms are venomous by experience, for some have died by them, and
even whole families. Seneca called them a Voluptuous Poison. They kill not
only when they are eaten, but when they are smelt.

The Symptoms are when they are taken in too great a plenty, they cause
strangling, or when they are not not well boiled or prepared; they also puff up
the belly, cause hickets, ulcerate the guts, suppress the urin, and cause
horror, cold sweat, Syncope, and sometimes Epilepsies, pain, and madness, and
death.

Those Mush^ooms that of their own Nature are poison, The Prognostic.
are more dangerous then such as by plenty eaten, or by ill preparation do hurt.

Vomit presently: Take Broom flowers, The Cure.
Elder-flowers, each two pugils; bark of Dan^wort two drams, Radish, Dill,
Arage seed, each a dram; Agarick half a dram: boil them in Hydromel, add to the
straining, Oil of Rue an ounce, make a Potion.

Make Clysters of Organ, Hysop, Rue, Calamints, Scordium, Hiera, with Agarick,
Honey of Roses, Oil of Rue. These resist malignity, Calamus, Organ, Hysop, Rue,
Watercresses, Wormwood, Birthwort, Garlic.

Treacle, Mithridate, Oxymel simple, and of Squils. But Honey is the proper
Antidote against Mushrooms.

Chap. 3. Of Napellus*
IT is sudden poison; for after it is taken, the lips and mouth swell, and are
inflamed, Mathi. in. Dios. lib. 4
with the tongue also, so that it can scarce be thrust out. There are
Convulsions, Faintings and Megrim; the eyes are twitched, the legs are weak,
the pulse is faint, and death follows.

Few escape after it, and if they do, The Prognostic.
they fall into a Consumption.

After Vomiting and Clysters, The Cure.
give B^oarstone, sealed Earth, with Butter and Aqua men's, or two drams of
Smaragds, or Bo^^ Arme^nc^: this is excellent.

Take the Flies of Napellus twenty, (...), Bole, each a dram; make a Powder,
give it with Rue-water; Oil of Scorpions of Mathiolus must anoint the head.

Chap. 4. Of Aconitum.
A Conitum, Cycoctonon and Lycoctonon so called, because it kills Dogs and
Wolves, is like Pardalianches, which kills the Panther. To these the other
kinds may be referred: the juice of the Root is worst; and they are like
Napellus.

Symptoms and Signs.
It is sweet upon the tongue, then it grows brackish, and stricks into the
head, and causes heaviness, Megrim, Convulsion of the temporal muscles,
dotage, trembling, involuntary tears, red eyes, side-pain, heaviness of breast,
difficult breathing, biting at the Pilorus, swelling as in a Dropsy and death.

The Prognostic.
Pliny says it is the worst of poisons. Others think Napellus worse. They are
worst in the Indies.

The Cure.
First vomit, if it be gone lower, purge or give Clysters, then give Antidotes,
as Rue, Southornwood, Centaury, Organ, Horehound, Groundpine, long Birthwort,
Hares and Kids Runnet, with Wine and Vinegar, Eryngus, Castor, Treacle,
Mithridate, Opobalsom a dram, and use Oil of Scorpions outwardly.

Chap. 5. Of Toxicum and Pharicum.
VVRiters do not explain these; they are Plants, with the juice of which they
poison their Arrows. Some have used Napellus and Aconitum for the same.

Chap. 6. Of Hemlock.
THey record that Socrates was killed with Hemlock: for it acts not only by
cold, but by its whole substance and occult quality; therefore it causes dim
sight and madness, sometimes difficult breath, Hickets, Astonishment and death.

It is more deadly in some countries then in others. The Prognostic.


After vomiting or purging give proper Antidotes, As, Rue, Dictany, young
Laurel leaves, Carrot, Gentian, Pepper, Amomum, Cardamons, Ne^^e seed,
Wormwood, Castor, with Wine, Treacle or Mithridate two drams. Give Wine, warm
the body, especially the heart, make him move and run.

Chap. 7. Of the Colchian Ephemerum.
IT is called so from the Ephemerum that is not poison: it is a plant in every
part of it hurtful to man, and grows much in Colchos.

The Symptoms.
If taken, it presently corrodes and ulcers the lips and stomach, and choaks as
the Mushroom, if it go to the guts, it ulcerates and inflames them so that
shavings of the guts are voided, like washings of flesh, and makes the whole
body itch.

The Cure.
After vomiting and purging, give Milk to drink. Dioscorides says that alone
will cure.

Chap. 8. Of Fle^bane.
THere are diverse sorts, and all enemies to the animal spirits, they cause
madness like d^^cards, and they rail and think they are whipped, and they cry,
and bray like Asses, or neigh like Horses, and have a giddiness and trembling
of the whole body: they toss to and fro or fall in an Epilepsie, or faint, they
breath not, and are seldom suffocated.

The Prognostic.
It yields easily to medicines while the party is strong, and the medicines
proper.

The Cure.
Vomit with Hydromel and oil of R^e: Or give a Clyster, and then the Antidotes,
as Pistacha^s, Castor, Rue, Wormwood, Bay leaves and berries, Ne^tle seed,
Garlic, Treacle, Mith^id^^e: Give with meat Radishes, Mustard seed, Garlic,
Oni^ns, Watercresses, fresh Butter, Pepper, Pistachaes, drink Wormwood-win^ and
provoke (...)

Chap. 9. Of mad Nightshade and Dorycnium.
Hiero-tra-gus hist. stir. l. 3. c. 24.
TWo Boys were killed with b^rries of Nightshade. And though there are many
sorts of it, they are all poison, especially that called Bella donna, but mad
Nightshade is worst.

Symptoms and Signs.
Dios. lib. 4. c. 69.
A dram of the root of mad Nightshade, caus^th strange imaginations not
unpleasant, if you take as much more, it alienates the mind, and four times as
much kills.

Honey'd water drunk plentifully, or Milk, The Cure.
and then Bole, sealed E^rth, Rue, Treacle and Mithridate: and things good
against Opium, and use Castor and Rue to the Nose.

Dorycnium is not the same, for that is like milk, sweet upon the tongue, and
when it is in the stomach, it causes constant Hickets and fainting, the guts
are ulcerated, and they vomit blood. You must vomit here as in other poisons,
but Honey water is best here, and Milk, sweet Wine warm, with Aniseed; and all
Shellfish are good raw or boiled.

Chap. 10. Of the Mandrake.
THe Mandrake and its Apples are also dangerous, and though they hurt only by
cold as some think, yet their bitter taste, and strong scent, itching and
burning in the skin, and dryness of the mouth, persuade the contrary: for all
these are from venom: besides they cause sleep, Lethargies, and when they are
awaked, they roar and and sleep again presently, they ar^ sad and dull, and
sometimes mad, their eyes swel, they are red with swollen faces: there is
^urning the whole body, the mouth and tongue a^e dry.

As for the Prognostic, it kills slowly, but if (...) be not opposed, they die
by Convulsions.

^ et the Mandrakes be presently vomited or void^d by stool, then give
P^nnyroyal, Wormwood, O^g^n, R^e, S^^rdium, Castor, ^it^ Vinega^ (...) a
D^^^ction, or in Powder* o^ give Treacle, (...), with Salt three days.

(...) ^ouse hi^, ^ive (...) E^thi^s of Castor, Rue, as in a Lethargy. Let the
drink be sweet, or Wormwood wine.

Chap. 11. Of Smallage of Laughter, or the Sardonick Herb.
THese being taken, because they hurt the nerves, they make the mouth awry, for
the muscles that move the lips, are contracted, so that they seem to laugh. The
Signs.
There is a heat in the guts, and stomach, and throat, and the whole body; they
are mad, and some laugh constantly.

The Cure.
After Vomiting and Purging, give Hydromel, Milk, Butter, and fat broaths
plentifully. Emulsions of sweet Almonds, the great cold Seeds, Poppy seeds,
with Barley and Lettice water, and Plantane water. The Antidote is juice of
Balm, with Vinegar, Bole and Whey. Anoint the neck with Oil of Costus, Castor,
Foxes, St. Iohns-wort, Aragon Ointment, etc. Some make them drunk, that they
may sleep it out.

Chap. 12. Of Coriander.
THe venom of Coriander is not to be sought in the first qualities, for it is
hot, but you must consider its malignity: when green, and the ripe seed is not
without fault, and must be prepared for Physic, Signa and sympto.
for it causes a mad dotage, so that they talk like drunkards obscoenly, with
a shrill voice, they are sleepy, and giddy, and their body smells like green
Coriander.

Vomit with warm Water, or Decoction of Dill, The Cur^.
Oil of Orris, or Lillies, Wormwood wine,: give fat broaths, with Salt and
Pepper. The Antidote is Root of Smallow-wort, with Win^ or Treacle. Give rear
Eggs, with P^pper and Salt.

Chap. 13. Of Ixia and Camaeleon.
The Symptoms and Signs.
IXia smells and tastes like Basil, it inflames and exasperates, Aeti. and Dios.
lib. 6. c. 27.
causes madness and want of breath, binds the belly, causes pain, itching,
and fainting.

Give the decoction of Wormwood, Goats-organ, The Cure.
in Wine or Vinegar or Hydromel, ^ft^r a Vomit or a Clyster. Or give the Roo^
of Silphium, or Indian Spikenard, Castor, Treacle and Mithridate. Then
strength^n the vital spirits, as in Chap. of swounding, l. 2. p. 4. c. 6.

Chap. 14. Of Taxus the Ewtree.
The Symptoms and Signs.
THey that sleep under this Tree, or eat of its fruit die (though in England it
is innocent) yet they that are infected in other Countries, are all over, and
fear choking, Petr. p^na in a^ver. p. 490.
have a Dysentery, and often die suddenly.

After Vomiting and fitting Purging, The C^re.
give ^ormwood wine plentifully, or Ge^^ian, and Orris roots, with Oxymel or
Treacle. Against the Dysentery give sealed Earth, Bole, Bezoar, Coral,
Tormensil roots, Juice and Syrup of Pomegranates, and of Currants.

Chap. 15. Of Euphorbium.
THough Euphorbium be used physically, yet if it be given in a great quantity,
or not corrected, it is poison: and does not only hurt by its burning, but by
an occult quality. For it causes sudden fainting that kills suddenly.

The Symptoms and Signs.
It being taken, burns the stomach, and corrodes the guts, causes hickets and
vomiting, inflames the body, and causes thirst, and overpurging and Dysentery,
cold sweats, fainting, and oftentimes sudden death.

The Cure.
Give a Vomit of warm Water, or the Decoction of Violets or Mallows, with Oil of
Violets, or Roses, or sweet Almonds, and a Clyster of Althaea-roots, Violets,
Mallows, Endive, Lettice, Plantane, flowers of Chamomil, Moulin, cold Seeds,
Mucilage of Fleabane. And then give now Milk and fat broaths. The proper
Antidote is seeds of Citro^s in Win^, and roots of Elicampane boiled, or sealed
Earth, Smaragds, Crystal calcin^d, Species liberantis, Treac^e.

Chap. 16. Of the Nut called Metella.
Lib. 3. de ven. c 5. Symp^o^^at^^.
CArdan writes that it is of a mean, between Opium and Hemlock, and kills in a
day, being taken in the quantity of a d^am. It causes deep sleep, from which
the party that took it can scarce be roused; cold breath, swollen lips, pale
body, blew nails, cold sweat, and death.

Vomit with Walnut shells green boiled in Wine. Give a Clyster of Centaury,
Rue* Sc^rdium, The (...)
Castor and Hydromel: and then a D^coction of Wormwood, Organ, wild Rue,
Gentian, Elicampane in Wine; or Castor, Pellitory Ba^berries, Cinnamon,
Treacle, Diagalangal, Diagingiber. Raise him from sleep by strong Ligatures,
Errhins; and if he can walk, let him stir till he sweat. Let him drink new
Milk, or new Wine.

Chap. 17. Of Spurge.
The Symptoms and Signs.
IT is not simply poison, Esulae symptomata and signa.
for being rightly prepared and given in a small dose, it is a purge, otherwise
it causes loathing and vomiting, and troubles the heart, and destroys the
temper of the liver, makes the belly-ake, and flux, which produces Convulsions
and Death.

Provoke Vomit: after they begin to vomit, The Cure.
that the whole venom may be evacuated, with warm Barley water, Oil of Dill or
Violets Then give a cooling Clyster of emollient Herbs, cold Seeds, Mucilage of
Fleabane, Oil of Roses and Violets, and the yolk of an Eg. Give Antidotes as
against Euphorbium, and Gum Arabic, Traganth, fresh Butter, Cream of Ptisan,
sweet Almonds, and the like.

Chap. 18. Of Hellebore.
THe question is chiefly of white Hellebore. Some would have it not to be
mustered among medicines. Others highly commend it, but this controversy may
be ended thus. Poisons are either simply so, and hurt all men always: or they
are given by art and made Physic. Hellebore is of the last sort, and though
many have perished by the use of Hellebore, yet it was by reason of the great
quantity, or want of preparation.

Symptoms and Signs.
If it be taken in ^r^at quantity without preparation; it purges violently
upwards and downwards, and causes great pains in the stomach and guts,
hickets, suffocation, difficult breathing, trouble of mind, sudden weakness,
heart-beating, and they die by Convulsions or Suffocation.

The Cure.
Though Hellebore cause vomiting, it must not be suddenly stop^, but furthered
with a decoction of Radishes, Dill and Arage seed in Hydromel often given. Give
a Clyster of the decoc^ion of small C^ntaury, Rue, Plantane, Althaea, with Oil
of Dil, and yolks of Eggs. For Antidotes, give powder of ^aterlilly roots or
flowers, or Parsnep seed two drams, with Wine, or Treacle and Mithridate. To
prevent strangling, give half a dram of Galbanum. Against the bellyach, make a
bag of Bran, Salt, Cummi^, Pennyroyal, Lib. 3. pract. p. 2. and p. 1. and lib.
1. p. 2. ^. 28,
Mints, Rue, Bayberries boiled in Wi^^ or Milk. We have showed elsewhere how
overpurging Hi^kets and Convulsions are cured.

THE EIGHT PART. Of Poisons that come from Animals, or living Creatures.
Chap. 1. Of Poisons from Animals in General.
ANIMALS do conveigh poison to men diverse ways. First, by biting, as the
Viper, and all kinds of Serpents; the Mouse, the Spider, Scolopendra, and Dogs
and all mad Cr^atures. By stinging, as the Scorpion, Spider, Wasp, and the fish
called Pastinaca marina. Others by spittle, as ptyas. Others by urin, as
Dormice that make malignant ulcers by pissing. Others communicate poison by a
Me^ium, as the Torpedo by the spear of the fisherman, benumes or stupisies his
b^^d* So Mathiolus reports a Vine-dresser was killed by a Serpent, others by
touching the body with poison: but poison is most dangerous when malicious
people give it in meat or drink. Also the gall of Venomous beasts is deadly;
Gal. 5. de symp. med. facul.
for all venomous beasts, or beasts that live upon poison have the poison
chiefly in the Gall.

Animals are either of their own nature venomous, as the Scorpion, Toad, or
become such by their venomous food, of which sort was the King of Cambaia of
who^ we spoke. Therefore you may well suspect creatures that feed upon poison,
as the Ducks that eat Water-toads, and the Quails that feed upon Hellebore: For
in Athens they who sed high upon Quails, died of Convulsions, and others also.

Hence we may conclude that venomous creatures, if they live upon poison are
worse; so the stinging of Wasps is worse if they have lived upon Serpents:
hence we may w^l question whether it be lawful to eat creatures that have been
killed by poison. Gal. lib. de therc. ad pis.
Galen says that the Daci and Dalmatians rubbed the points of their weapons
with Elicampane, with which they killed Deer, and then they never hurt them
that eat them; therefore disting^ish thus: If the poison that the weapon is
touched with, is only a poison that kills a beast and not a man, the beast may
be eaten.

The Symptoms and Signs.
You may know it from the Patients relation, or by a part stung or bitten, that
swells presently, is inflamed, and has great pain, with other symptoms that
poison.

The Prognostic.
I^ a bite or sting hurt the Artery, the wound is worse, because the poison gets
sooner to the he^rt, and there is a deadly Syncope: Also if a nerve be hurt the
brain consents and there is the like danger; if a vein be only hurt there is
less danger, for it threatens only the corruption of humors.

We spoke of the cure: Par. 5. c. 7.
but now I shall show the proper Antidote against every venomous creature.

Chap. 2. Of Serpents in general.
THe Serpents are such as have Eggs, or bring forth quick Serpents, as the
Vipers.

We shall not dispute the temperame^t of a serpent because his poison is not in
the first qualities: But the Serpents communicate poison to men diverse ways,
1. By a horrid look that frights them, and by a deadly bite. 2. By Spittle. 3.
By breath though they touch not, but by a Medium as a Spear. 4. By touch only
without biting, Avic. l. 4. f^u. 6. math. in praef. ad l. 6. dios.
as Gesner writes Hist 1. 4. of the poison of German Darts. 5. Their blood
poisons when they are cut or wounded. Moreover they creep in at the mouth when
people lie sleeping.

The Symptoms and Signs
There is from the biting of a Serpent a tumor, pain and heat in the part,
first good blood flows out, then matter or serum that stinks, the face is
yellow and blew, after two or three days the whole body is whiter, and the
hair falls off, and commonly they die on the fou^th day. Also many die that are
poisoned by breath, when a part is infected by spittle or blood, there are red
spots and the flesh is corroded.

First let the part be bound hard above the bite, The Cu^^
and the part bitten be s^a^i^ied deep, and c^pped to draw out the blood and
poison, then wash the wound with spirit of Wine, with Treacle and Mithridate
dissolved in it, or apply young Pigeons split to the part, or Fi^s, or Garlic
bruised*: or Serpents grease, ^ or the head of the Serpent bruised; or the gall
of the Serpent, which is best.

Also in the mean time give Antidotes, and provoke sweat with Treacle and
Mithridate. Some give Strawberry roots and leaves, and Paul's Bettony boiled in
Wine, or a dram of Castor with Cardus-water

Or, Take Gentian, long Birthwor^, Bayberries, Myrrh, each two drams; bitter
Costus, Rue, each a dram; Spike two scruples, Saffron a scruple, make a powder,
and with Honey an Electuary give a dram or two, keep the Patient from deep
sleep, least the spirits being drawn in, the poyso^ go with them.

If poison be from breath do accordingly. If any part be infected by spittle or
blood, sprinkle this powder often upon it.

Take herb Cancer gathered in June an ounce and half, Ashes of a Mole an ounce,
two Snakes skins make a powder, sprinkle it often upon the part. If a Serpent
get in at the mouth, or be in the Guts or Stomach, you must tempt him out with
the vapor of sweet milk, and he will come up by the Gullet, if the Patient bend
forward with his head down; when he is in the Guts, give a decoction of Ash
roots, small Centaury, Carduus, Wormwood and Scordi^m, and other bitter herbs,
and Clyster of warm milk.

Chap. 3. Of the Aspi^ or Adder.
Whether he be hot or cold. I shall not argue, for he hurts by an occult
quality; the wound is no bigger then that made with a needle, yet it kills a
man presently with little pain, and he kills not only by biting, but by
spittle. Gal^n writes ^hus. The Adder called Ptyas lifts up his neck, Lib. de
theriac. ad pis. c. 6.
and with a pause as if he were rational, without any fear spits venom upon you.

Symptoms and Signs.
They who are bitten by an Adder, have heaviness of head, dim sight, dull
senses, astonishment, slowness, sleepiness, pale faces, chilness of body,
cramp, convulsion, and die in three hours time except they have remedies. The
symptoms that follow the spitting of a Viper are the same but more gentle.

The Swallow-Adder kills presently, the Earthy Adder kills in three hours, The
Prognostic.
and the Ptyas or spitting Adder kills slower or at longer distance.

Draw the poison out at the wound by ligatures and Scarifications, The Cure
and apply green Centaury bruised with Mirth: or Treacle beaten with Rue; or a
clout dipped in Spurge milky juice. Give Treacle also.

Or, Take round Birthwort, Gentian, each a dram; Rue two pugils, Castor, Cassia
Lignea, each two drams; Anise, Citron seeds peeled* ea^h a dr^m and half, make
a Powder, give a s^ruple or a dram with Wine or Vinegar. If the part be spit
upon, wash it with spirit of Wine and Treacle. Let them that are bitten by
Adders, sleep little.

Chap. 4. Of Cerastes.
TH^s Serpent has two horns like a Snail, the ^ound he makes is not painful
but deadly, by the violent poison though it continue nine days.

Symptoms and Signs
There is a tumor like a nail and matter comes out at the wound, pale or black,
there are blew pustles and sometimes the whole body is blew, the lips swel, the
mind is troubled, the strength fails, the yard stands, and Death follows.

The Cure.
If it may be, the best way is to cut off the member hurt, otherwise cut off the
flesh about the p^rt, scarifie and cup, and wash it with spirit of Wine and
Treacle. Or use a Cataplasm of Orobus meal, Squils, Figs, Garlic, Salt and
Pitch, give things internal as before.

Chap. 5. Of Haemorrhous.
THe name signifies a flux of blood, and he gives a deadly wound, which is
known by a violent flux to be from him, for the wound does not only bleed, or
the Haemorrhoids, Nose, Womb, but the Ears and corners of the Eyes, the Gums,
the roots o^ the Nails, the mouth, by vomit and coughing and all the p^res of
the body, as Lucan shows, The Veins in all the members are full found,
And all the body is but one great wound.


Also the part bitten is black, and there is great pain at the stomach,
difficulty of breathing, the voice is stopped, the teeth fall out, and at length
they faint and die.

There is little hope, The Cure.
therefore take off the member if it may be, or cup and scarifie: or burn the
part: Aetius.
or use a Pultis of Vine leaves boiled in Honey and Purslane with Bran. Apply
medicines to stanch blood, As, Tormentil, Shepheards-purse, Purslane, Plantane,
Bole, sealed Earth, Bloodstone, with a little Treacle. Or use Garlic* Treacle,
Raisons and Raspberries, or Bramble berries.

Chap. 6. Of Dipsas.
THey that are bitten by this have a great thirst, and all parts are inflamed,
and though they drink much, they find it not quenched. Because the uretery
passages are dried up, and the drink cannot pass, but lies in the cavity of the
belly, so that it breaks to the Groyns, and the Patient dies thirsting.

It is as that of other Serpents; The Cure.
only give Diuretics also, of the cold seeds, and opening roots, Restharrow,
Chervil, Shepheards-purse, Peach kernels, Barley, and the like; and Clysters to
purge water, see Aetius

Chap. 7. Of Amphisbena and Scytale.
THese Serpents are so like that they are scarce to be distinguished* only
Amp^ishena moves forward and backward, but ^^^tale only forward, both hurt the
same way, with a very little wound, which makes inflammation, pain and redness,
and sometimes an Imposthume and other symptoms like those of a Viper.

The Cure.
See the cure of the biting of a Viper.

Chap. 8. Of a Basilisk.
GAlen in his Book of Treacle to Piso c. 8. describes him thus. He is a S^rpent
a little yellow, with tumors in his head, and kills those that see or hear him
when he hisseth, and if any creature touch him when he is dead it dies
presently.

Cardan says th^se are fables, because Galen 1. Simpt. med. f. c. 1. says he
never saw it, and knew none that did. But Dioscorides lib. 6. cap. ult.
describes the biting of it, and says the wound is a Gold-colour, and was cured
by three drams of Castor drunk.

Therefore let none deny that there is such a Serpent, though not so bad as
reported, yet very venomous, that if any touch him with a Spear he kills him.

The Symptoms and Signs.
After the biting of a Basilisk, there follows great inflammation of the whole
body, and the part affected is yellow, the flesh melts away and falls off by
piecemeals, and he dies in a short space.

The Cure.
Aetius thinks it in vain to prescribe medicines against such a sudden killing
poison.

Chap. 9. Of the Viper.
THough a Viper be a kind of Serpent, yet he differs from them all, because
they lay Eggs, but the Viper brings forth young, the male Viper differs from the
female, for she has four teeth with which she squirts out poison when she
bites, but the male has only two; and they are hollow, and lie at length in
the Gums, and are only lifted up when they void the poison by biting.

Symptoms and Signs.
After the wound is made, the first blood is pure, the next is mattery froathy
like Verdugrease: the part bitten and the whole body swel suddenly, red, or
green, or black, or purple, as the humors are: there is pain that runs about,
great heat, with black pustles about the part: there is vomiting of choler,
Hickets, Megrim, Astonishment, Fevers, stoppage of urin, Bleeding, cold
sweats, Trembling, Fainting, difficult breathing, and death.

In some countries it is not very deadly, The Pr^gnostick.
but in ^ot Countries and in Summer, and when the Viper is provoked and angry,
it kills in seven hours. If any swound or bleed at the ears, or be struck as
with hail, death is at hand

Presently draw out the poison at the part bitten, as before with the same
remedies: The Cur^.
the flesh of the Viper is the best remedy inwardly or outwardly taken, Treacle
or troches of Vipers, or oil of Vipers, Rue, Garlic, give Antidotes presently.
Costus is the Bezoar against this poison, a dram with Wormwood-wine. To all
Antidotes, add Rue to make them stronger.

Treacle and Mithridate are good, two drams with four ounces of strong wine
Mathiolus lib. 6. see Dioscorides for his famous water against all poison.

Chap. 10. Of the Scorpion.
THere are many sorts, and all kill by a sting which squirts out poison, they
are more dangerous in some countries then in other.

Symptoms and Signs.
Gal. de lo. aff. c. 5.
The Sting is small, but very deadly, for pain, inflammation and tumors follow
in the part affected and the whole body, pustles arise about the wound like
warts, and all the body is as struck with hail, there is cold sweat, with
paleness and sweat, the hair stands an end, the face is drawn aside, they weep,
filth comes from the eyes in the corners like glue, they foam at the mouth, and
the body sometimes has black spots all over.

Women and Virgins chiefly are killed by Scorpions, and men when they are stung
in the morning. The Prognostic.


I have found by experience that if the same Scorpion be bruised and laid to
the part, The Cure.
or if it be anointed with oil of Scorpions, it is speedily cured; which is
done by similitude, for like will to like, a Garden-Snail bruised with the sh^l
and applied allaies pain presently. Or Earthworms, Calamints, Garlic, wild
Rue, Scorpion-grass, bruised often, renewed after the part is washed with the
decoction of wild Rue, Sulphur, Bayleaves, and the like, Of compounds the best
ar^ Venice Treacle Diatessaron.

Aetius commends this. Take Castor, Succi Ciren^ici, Pepper, each half an
ounce; Costus, Spikenard, Saffron, juice of Centaury, each two drams; with
clarified Honey make an Electuary, take the quantity of a Walnut.

Let him eat Butter often, and drink old wine as much as he can, and eat no
Smallage.

Chap. 11. Of a Crocodile.
HE has a large mouth, and causes great pain by tearing. First the blood that
comes out is pure, then it is mattery and stinking, and there is tumor and
inflammation, with black pustles, vomiting, ^eaver, cold sweat, fainting, and
great symptoms, and Death.

First, draw out the poison, The Cure.
then wash the wound with Pickle, or spirit of Wine with Treacle or Mithridate,
or Vinegar and Salt-peeter. Anoint with Crocodiles grease, or apply Niter,
Deers Suet, or Goose grease, Putte^ and Honey, and use the Antidotes mentioned.

Chap. 12. Of Stellio or a Lizard so called.
IT is a Lizard with Star-like spots on his back, and the poison of it is
conveyed by biting or taken in, to the hurt of man or beast.

Signs and Symptoms.
If his flesh be eaten or the liquor drunk in which he has been, the stomach
and guts are afflicted, as the Bladder is by Spanish flies taken, with pain and
burning, with vomiting, the tongue is inflamed, the sight is dim, the head
aches, and there are spots in the face, and the flesh is blew about the hurt if
there be a bite, with other symptoms.

The Cure.
Giv^ Vomits and Clysters presently, if there be a bite, apply Onions and
Garlic, and let them be eaten and wine drunk after, and use Antidotes as
before.

Chap. 13. Of the Salamander.
IT is a deadly destroying poison, for if he get into a Tree, ^e in^ects the
fruit, and kills them that eat it; for the poison infects herbs and waters, if
he fall in, as well as when he bites.

Symptoms and Signs.
The part bitten loses natural heat, and is black, stinks, and voids filth,
and the hair falls off, the internal parts a^e inflamed, the speech falters,
and the senses fail, the body swells, and trembles, fainting and Death follows.

The Cure.
Scarifie presently, and draw out the poison with Garlic, Onions, Rue, Salt and
Honey, or ^ith a Hogs dung or Goa^^, with Vinegar hot. ^f you eat any thing the
Salamander has spit upon, vomit. Omit not Antidotes, as Mithridate, Treacle,
Pine Rosin is good, or Galbanum with Honey. Or, Take Juniper berries, Assa
f^^da, black Pepper, each two drams; with Honey make an Electuary, give a dram
or two with old Wine, which may be his drink, or new milk

Chap. 14. Of the Spider.
THere are diverse sorts, some are worse poison then others, one sort hurts if
he be burnt, by the scent of him, and in Vasc^nia, the Spider sends venom
through the soles of their shoes.

Symptoms and Signs.
If the poison be taken in, or you be stung, there is a numness in the part
bitten, with chilness, the belly swells, the face is pale, there is wind in the
guts, cold sweats, a desire to piss, but in vain; they vomit or piss things
like Spiders.

If a Spider be taken in, first vomit thus. The Cure.
Take Spurge roots, Asarum, each two drams; Dill and Broom flowers, each a
pugil: boil them, to four ounces straine^, add a dram of Honey, make a Vomit.

Then give Antidotes, provoke sweat, by a hot house, with two drams of Treacle,
and Carduus, or Scordium water and Wine. Or give Bole and Vinegar: Fracast.
lib. 2. d^ morb. c^nt. c. 2.
this cured a man that was stung in the neck, and was swollen, and could not
speak. Or, Take Assa faetida two drams, Mirrh, Ga^lick, Pepper, Castor, each
half a dram; make a powder for four doses with Wine before bathing, every day.

If th^re be ^ bite, wash it with Salt Water often, or with a Sponge dipped in
warm Vinegar, or the milkie juice of Fig leaves, and give Antidotes.

Chap. 15. Of Cantharides, or Spanish-flies.
THis poison is chiefly against the bladder; it corrodes all parts from the
mouth to the bladder, and inflames, and causes a feave^, loathing, dysentery,
^ainting, megrim and madness. But the chief burning and excoriation is in the
bladder, the yard stands, and there is a strangury: and then a gangrene and
death.

The Cure.
Vomit, and give Clysters, vomit with Hogshead broth, or of a Lambs or Goats
head, with Oil of Violets often. Give Clysters of Barley, Mallows, Mercury,
Pellitory, Faenugreek, Linseed, Rice, Oil of Lillies, and Diaphoenicon.

For the passage of urin, a Decoction of Althaea, Linseed and Mallows, with Oil
of Violets. Then give Goats mil^* fat Broaths Rice with Milk, fresh Butter, fat
Meat, Lettice, Purslane boiled with Barley. Emulsions of the four great cold
Seeds, and Lettice water. Pennyroyal is the proper Antidote. Or, Take Troches
of sealed Earth, Alkekengi, each half a dram; give them with Breastmilk.

Use Baths of Mallows, Althaea, Violets, Lettice, Purslane, seeds of
Faenugr^ek, Line, and Epithems of Lettice, Purslane, Cowcumber, Melon, juyce^
and Oil of Violets laid to the parts pained.

Chap. 16. Of Flies, Bees and Waspes.
GReat flies are poison, if ^hey set upon the carcasses of venomous beasts.
Waspes that have fed upon Serpents, are most dangerous. Bees sting worse when
they swarm, and fall upon any creature, they have killed a Horse.

Symptoms and Signs.
Great pain till the sting be drawn out with swelling, redness and pustles.

Draw out the sting, with a Plaster of Ashes, Oil and Leaven; The Cure.
if they do not, then suck long, and wash with Salt Water. Then use a Pultis of
Barley meal, Mallows, and Plantane, and Vinegar, or Bole, and Vinegar, and Oil:
the Bees stamped and applied, draw out all venom. If there be heat, cure it as
in malignant fevers.

Chap. 17. Of the Poison of a mad Dog.
SEE Lib. 1. Pract. p. 2. c. 16.

Chap. 18. Of the Brain and Blood of a Cat.
SOme are frighted at a Cat in the Room, though they see her not, and have cold
sweats and faint, if the Cat be not removed.

Some say the brain and blood of a Cat are poison, Ponzet. lib. 2. de ven. tr.
6. c. 3. Mathio. in 6. Dios. In proemio lib. 1. Thenz.
and a History confirms that a Girl that had an Epilepsie, was persuaded to
take the blood of a Cat, which made her of the nature of a Cat in voice,
mewing, and leaping, and creeping, as a Cat when she mouseth.

Avenzoar says that the breath of a Cat infects the spirits, and causes
Marasmus.

Symptoms and Signs.
After the taking of the brain of a Cat, there is a megrim, astonishment and
madness.

If it be in the stomach, vomit it up; The Cure.
if it be distributed, purge with a scruple of the Extract of Hellebore, then
give half a scruple of Musk every week, or give Diamoschu dulce. Or, Take
Conserve of Rosemary flowers two ounces, Pionyseeds, Caraway, Cubebs, each half
a dram; Diamoschu dulce, a dram, with Syrup of Bettony, make (...)

Chap. 19. Of Diseases and Symptoms which Poisons leave behind them.
SOme poisons have greater antipathy to some parts: and therefore the evil
disposition remains sometimes in one part, sometimes in another, as Cardan
mentions. Cardan. lib. 3. de. ven. cap. ult.
Sometimes there is after poison an evil habit of the whole body,
Leucophlegmacy, Jaundies, Consumption, Strangling and Quinzie; the teeth drop
out, there is melancholy, sadness, watching, madness, bad concoction, the belly
bound, pain in the guts and stomach, Dysentery, spleen swollen, difficult
breath, resolution of members, or palsy, hardness of joints, fevers,
fainting, weakness of eyes, or stareing, convulsion, pain of the whole body,
burning of urin, and stoppage, megrim, loathing, forgetfulness, and the like.

The Cure consists in two things. 1. By giving proper medicines to the evil
disposition, if it be known. 2. By taking away the venomous quality, which
cherishes that evil disposition, or correcting it at the least. For the
relics of the poison are to be taken away, before you use the ordinary Cure.
So after the French pox there are Symptoms, as dropping of urin, and the like,
which cannot be cured, except you regard the malignant disposition. If the kind
of poison be ^ot known, give ordinary Antidotes, with things that oppose the
manifest disease.

THE NINTH PART. Of Diseases by Witchcraft, Incantation, and Charms.
The PREFACE.
AMatus Lusitanus shows that Physicians ought to know these Diseases, Cent. 6.
cura. 87
because such come to them for Cure.

I shall from Philosophers, Physicians, Lawyers, and Divines, take such things
as concern us; and divide thi^ Tractate into four Chapters. 1. Whether there
are Diseases from Witchcraft? 2. How they come? 3. How they are known? 4. How
they are cured.

Chap. 1. Of Fascination or Witchcraft, and whether any Diseases come thereby.
FIrst the word Fascination is to be explained, it comes from the Greek word
(...), which signifies to envy, because the Vulgar people suppose that envious
people hurt others by their looks chiefly. It is a sort of enchantment by which
through looks or by commendations, not only infants and men, but also Lambs,
Hens, Horses, and other beasts, and also flourishing corn and plants are
praised, till they are killed, Arist. sect. 20. c. 34. probl.
or grow weak and feeble. This Witchcraft is extended also to other things,
some fear when they eat g^eedily, and others look steadfastly upon them, and
give part of their meat to them that so look upon them, saying, Do not bewitch
me. Some extend this to things without life.

Secondly, Fascination is not only by sight, but by tongue and voice, of which
the Latin Poet Virgil, Eclog. 7.

When thou art praised, let Baccar crown thy Head
For evil tongues have Prophets murdered.
Lib. 7. c. 2.
This Pliny observed, writing that in Africa there are families of Witches, by
whose praise and commendations hopeful things perish, trees grow dry, and
infants die.

Hence I gather a threefold Fascination; the first is Poetical or Vulgar; the
second is Philosophical; and the third Magical. The two first I deny, for the
Poetical Witchcraft is fabulous, and delivered from hand to hand, rather
superstitiously then truly, according to which infants are said to be
bewitched, and other things, only by the active look of the Witch, as when any
one praised another, or looks maliciously upon him whom he hates: Mothers and
Nurses hang Amulets about their childrens necks to prevent this. And the Poet
Theotritus teaches against this Fascination, That they should spit thrice into
their own bosoms that fear it.

Spit thrice in thy breast,
And Witches detest.
I suppose this Fascination is not only fabulous but superstitious, and Divines
have cursed the users and the allowers of it. And reason shows, that there is
no force in this Fascination, for nothing is sent out of the eye that may carry
it, because sight from the best Philosophers, is not by sending forth any thing
from the eye, but by receiving of species into the eye; though another Poet
has written thus.

I know not what eye
Made my Lambs for to die. Virg. in Egl^gis.

Certainly the horrid aspect of an ugly old woman may terrify an infant, so
that the humors being raised, they may complain as if displeased. So Tiberius
the Emperor by a terrible look, as^^nisht a Soldier, and killed him with
trembling, but this from the event, and therefore I conclude that this
Witchcraft is plainly fabulous.

2. The Philosophical Witchcraft is not properly Fascination, but to speak
properly a^ infection or contagion, for one is hurt often times by another
looks: so that Saying is true.

If ^hou on sore look with sound eyes,
Infection from the same shall rise.
For the opinions of Avicen and Algaselis agree, that is, that no alteration
can be made in another by sight, as it is merely sight; but the alteration is
made by a venomous quality that remains in the putrid humors, or in the
distemper of him that beholds. This evil quality infects the air about it with
its poison, and one part of the air in^ects another, and so it comes to the eye
to be infected; and this according to sound Philosophy. But these being left,
we shall come to the third kind of Fascination, which is our business.

Chap. 2. What Enchantments, poisonous Witchcraft, and Magic are.
INcantation and Veneficium signify in general an action by which a man that
has made a League with the Devil, does something above the course of Nature, by
the help of the same Devil. These actions, and they that practice them, have
diverse names by the Latins, Incantationes, Veneficia, Arts magicae;
Enchantments, Poisoning, and Magic Arts, and they are called Incantatrices
Enchanters, Veneficae Poysoners, Maleficae evil Actors, Magi Magicians, Sagae,
Lamiae, Striges, Witches of diverse sorts.

The first are called Inchanters and Enchantments. These are either Verses,
good or bad: the good verses or spells, or charms are such as are used for
curing diseases, as when they speak certainwords in the time they gather herbs
to make them more powerful. The evil Charms and Charmers are such as hurts men
and beasts.

2. They are called Veneficae, because they gather poisons or hurtful herbs to
do mischief.

3. They are called Maleficae, because they have a desire to hurt, by the
Instrument of the Devil, either man or beast.

4. They are called Magi or Magicians which belongs not to them, for in the
Scripture the Magi were three wise Kings that worshipped Christ at his birth* And
sometimes it is used to signify such as are led by evil Angels; for it cannot
be denied, in regard the mind of man is not to be satisfied with knowledge, that
the Chaldaeans and Egyptians when they could not understand all things they
desired, sought to the Devil for aid, hence the name of a Magician is infamous,
although those men do labor to destroy Diabolike operations by the strength of
nature.

5. They are called Sagae from knowing much, these profess to know and do much,
and from a league with the Devil, can raise Storms, and hurt man and beasts and
corn. And for this purpose they use charms, images and characters.

6. They are called Lamiae from the Heathengods which could hurt or do good by
the diverse shapes they took: therefore because Witches in our days feast and
sport with Ghosts, and have also copulation with them, they are called Lamiae.

7. They are called Striges from a bird so called, which Poets say would by
night take children out of their cradles: And because the Witches were thought
to do the same they have that name. And these are the chief names that are
given to such as from a contract with the Devil and by his help can do things
above the strength of nature, whether this contract be express or plain, or
implicit. They are such as are so mad, that forswearing the omnipotent Lord of
all things, make a covenant with the Devil, and deliver themselves wholly to
his power: and though some enter not into an express covenant with the Devil;
yet they use those things that implicitly show the same, namely characters,
words, or the like, which are received from others who have been in covenant
with the Devil.

Chap. 3. Many affirm that Diseases may be from Witchcraft and Charms.
THe question then is, whether it be so or no?

If any doubt it we have Eyewitnesses to prove it: Lib. 1. epist 38.
And besides the reports of John Langius of things done 1539. in the Bishop of
Eistetens street, and the relations of Anthony Benivensis in his Book of hidden
causes of blood and diseases Chap. 8. who reports that a woman o^ sixteen years
old fell suddenly into a horrid skreeking, and her belly so swelled, that she
seem to have been eight months gone with child, and she was so taken with
Convulsions, that her soals of her feet would touch her neck, and at length she
vomited wood, crooked nails, and Brass needles with wax and hair mixed in
balls, and a piece of bread so big that none could swallow it whole this she
did often.

Cornelius Gemma mentioned another, Lib. 2. de divi. not. car.
of which he was an eyewitness, beyond all admiration, so that there is no
doubting of this question.

Forestue reports that he saw a cloth, nails, bits of iron, hair, and bones
vomited. Lib. 18. obser. 16. in scho.
And Francis Heidelshem page 186. reports that a melancholic man vomited iron,
bullets, gunpowder, and other strange things.

And what is more wonderful, some have lo^^ their privities by witchcraft, Lib.
3. de mor. vex. c. 5.
of which Baptista Codronchius, who says a young man envied a young woman, and
desiring to leave her, lost his privities. And when another woman had taught
him to use fair words and promises, and if need required, threatenings and
force to compel her to restore them. He took her counsel, and at evening in a
convenient place found out his Mistress, and when neither by prayers, nor any
fair promises he could not persuade her, he put a towel about her neck, and
almost choked her; nor did he lose till she promised him help. Then she put
her hand between his thighs, and took away the enchantment.

There are so many Histories to confirm this from credible Authors, that it
would be tedious to relate all. And it is manifest every where that Witches
have confessed before the Judges, that they have made some blind, others lame,
others to have the Palsy, and others great pain, and to have caused many
diseases. Hence it is manifest that diseases may come by Witchcraft.

Chap. 4. Vuierus denies that Diseases may come by Witchcraft.
FRom what has been said, you may easily see the vain defense by Vuierus of
Witches; he takes all these for fables, and cannot be brought to believe that
there are Witches. And he supposes that all things which Witches think they do,
are mere dreams and Phantasmes: and he affirms that the fancy of Witches is
only deluded by the Devil, Lib. de lamiis c. 5.
so that they confess they have done, which they neither could, nor nature
could suffer to be done: and he says many other things which will fall of
themselves by what shall be written hereafter.

Chap. 5. The Controversy is decided, and it is showed whence Diseases are
made that are from Witches.
TO decide this Controversy in short, we must do it by some conclusions.

The first is, It is the Witches purpose to hurt men by diseases, and many men
have been so hurt. The Histories in Chap. 3. prove this conclusion: and
Sprengerus has many more in his hammer against Witches. And though Vuierus
takes these for fables, yet History is not so rashly to be deluded: that the
Witches do act therein is manifest, because the instruments of Witchcraft being
taken away, or the Witches burnt or dead, the patients grow sound, and the
charms cease.

The second Conclusion, Although Witches determine to hurt men, yet neither do
it, nor can they do it. The Witches are not the first causes of such
operations, but the Devil: the Witches are his work-fellows, at whose request
by Gods permission, he afflicts men with such diseases. Therefore the Devil and
the Witch must agree to cause Witchcraft formally. We deny not but the Devil
may in dreams suggest what the Witches may think true when awake, as appears by
many histories in Baptista porta and Vuierus, as that of a woman which anointed
her self and slept, and awaking, affirmed that she had been at Sea, and flew
over mountains. There are many the like of women, which stirred not out of
their bed that night, yet affirmed that they did wonders in strange places.

Moreover, it is pleasing to the Devil to have Witches obedient to him, and he
persuades them that they may do good or hurt to whom they please: To this end
he gives them instruments, as pouders which may cause diseases or death, by
putting them into meat or drink, or rubbing their bodies therewith; which if
they cannot do, it will be sufficient to sprinkle them only upon their clothes.
To kill, it is a black powder; to cause a disease, it is ash-colored,
sometimes red, to cure it is white, either to be sprinkled upon them, or to be
given in meat or drink. Daemonosag. lib. 1. lib. 1. c. 2.
Nicolaus Remigius proves this by diverse Histories.

The third Conclusion, The Devil by Gods permission brings diseases by
natural Cause^. For he well understands all the force of Sy^pathy, and what is
good or bad for a man's ^ea^^h. But how are these diseases brought upon men? If
the disease be in the humors, the Devil by the command of the Witch moves the
internal causes, especially melancholy, and so causes melancholy diseases;
therefore ^he rejoices at the disposition of Epilepticks, and gets into them:
for first he gathers all the black choler together, and then moves it, and
sends the smoke of it into the cells of the internal senses, and if they be
sharp as usually they are, it causes the Falling Sickness, when he gathers a
thick slimy matter into the inward substance of the nerves he causes a Palsy,
deafness and blindness, by putting evil excrements into the Organs.: oftentimes
hatred and love and other passions. Hence the Poet.

Thou make the dearest brothers for to jarr. That he may hurt speedily, he
takes the spiritual substance of the blood, and purges it, and separateth it
from the gross. Or he makes a quintessence of poisons, as Chemists do of Gold,
and with that infects the vital spirits, which works so strongly that it cannot
be overcome by natural means and causes death certainly.

It is wonderful what he does by Witches to disturb wedlock, to hinder
propagation of mankind, to which he is a deadly enemy, this is called, the
tying of the point, this he does by prohibiting the breeding of seed, or
hindering of erection of the yard, while it dries and will not be spent. He
does the same to women by making a preternatural disease in their privities, so
that they cannot receive a man.

To this are referred the Philtres or Love potions which may cause Lechery, but
cannot cause the love of any particular man, but instead of love causes
madness, Lib. disguis magi^. 3.
of which see Martin Delrio, and of which the Poet.

In threefold colors knit three knots, and cry (O Amarillis) Venus knots I tie.

The fourth conclusion. Sometimes the Devil without causes and natural means in
man's body, hurts men only by his own power and sudden violence at the request
of the Witch.

For the Witch will not do it her self for fear of discovery or the like, but
commits the whole matter to the Devil, and what she commands he presently does.
This is plain from a story in Nicolas Remigius, that one cursed another that
wronged him, Lib. dem^nola. saga. c. 12.
and he was taken up with a wind, and thrown down again, and made lame of one
leg, so that he could not go; this he told the Shepherds that brought him
home. He mentions two other Stories which clear the truth of this.

The ^ifth conclusion. Sometimes the Devil deludes men and persuades them to
diseases they have not. This is proved Chap. 3. out of Baptista Codronchius
concerning the taking off of the privities; for it is not in the Devils power
to restore members when taken off.

The sixth Conclusion. Although diseases and other evils which Witches think
they lay upon men come from the Devil as the imediate cause, and the Witch does
nothing; yet are they in fault, by reason of their covenant with the Devil,
that hurts men at their request, and by reason of their will to hurt, they are
gulty of it. This is contrary to Uverius who defending Witches, as in Chap. 4.
we showed, says That what the Witches do is but a fancy and mere delusion,
and whatsoever is spoken of contracts with the Devil from the best Authors. It
is a wonder I cannot conceive how a christian should so cast off all piety,
that he should forget his Creator and Redeemer, and his Covenant with them in
Baptism and go into the Devils ways, and profess himself an open enemy to his
Creator and Lord who can presently destroy him in Hell fire, and join himself
to the enemy of mankind the Devil: This has been and is yet done, as appears
by many Histories and confessions of Witches without torments.

And how can these be mere Phantasms when the Witches have marks of their
slavery which they willingly sufferred to be made by the Devil upon their
bodies, visible to all men's eyes. And it is plain that the Devil made them, for
if you prick them with needles they feel no pain, nor do they bleed the least
drop, as Nicolas Remigius affirms by Histories.

Demonosag. lib. l. cap. 5.
The sixth Conclusion. Though the power of the Devil be great, yet he can hurt
none by the Witches power with him but by Gods permission. This is manifest
from the history of Job, whom the Devil never afflicted without Gods consent
and permission. 2. The Gospel shows that he could not enter into the Swine or
hurt them without Gods permission, nor does a hair fall from the head without
Gods will and permission. Therefore the Devil promises to do what the Witch
commands him, they cannot have their desire except God permit. Mag. demon. lib.
2. c. 28.
And Bodinus writes there are not two in a hundred that witchcraft can hurt.
And it is known to be true from the voluntary confe^sion of Witches.

Chap. 6. Of the Signs of diseases from Witchcraft.
IT is very hard to know these diseases, and we must be very industrious to
discover them. This is because the Devil does so warily get into natural causes
that it is not easily discerned, what comes from natural causes and what from
the Devil. Fernelius gives an example of this in a young Knight which had a
shaking and Convulsion by fits; which by diverse remedies given for some months
could not be removed, but in the third month the Author of the disease was
known, by voices and unusual words and sentences, Greek and Latin, which was
the Devil, 2. de aba. re. cause. c. 16.
and more plainly when he discovered the secrets of those that stood by, and of
the Physicians, scoffing at them for their vain medicines, by which they had
almost killed the party.

The first sign then is of diseases from the Devil, when practiced Physicians
doubt of the signs, and cannot satisfy themselves, and all things are given in
vain and to no purpose.

Another sign is, because ordinary diseases come by degrees and have their
times and seasons, and come to their state, but these are in their vigor
without any apparent causes.

Thirdly they have extraordinary symptoms and convulsions, no cause aforegoing
that appears: some say that if the Witch comes to see the Patient he is worse,
and trembles or is otherwise altered: but the certain sign is when a knife or a
needle, or the like is ^o ^i^ed or purged forth, or come from ulcers that breed
not naturally in the body.

Some have another sign which to me is superstitious, they wash the Patient
with the decoction of Vervain, and if nothing be sound in the decoction, or its
color not changed, they say there is no Witchcraft: but if many of his hairs
be found in it, it is a sign of Witchcraft, this I say is superstitious though
Vervain is commonly thought to discover Witchcraft.

One think I suppose proves Witchcraft when married people formerly loving very
well, hate one another without any evident cause.

There are many Histories to confirm this.

From whence we may gather this Prognostic. That all diseases from Witchcraft
are long and uncurable but by the great mercy of God.

Chap. 7. Of Preservation against Witchcraft.
I Can say nothing to this certainly, nor can heathenish medicines please me
that are used against it, as that of Rhamnus whose branches in the windows or
doors they say defend from Witchcraft: Dios. lib. 1. c. 104.
Nor does Lions foot take away the force o^ Love-potions: Nor a Horse-shoe
nailed to a Threshold, nor a thousand other things which are used against
Witchcraft, for how can these being natural drive away diseases which are
caused by the Devil, who is without a body and has no organs of sense, and
therefore can neither be touched with natural bodies nor can be either pleased
or disturbed thereby. Although we wll not deny that God who is above all
nature, can give power to natural things to work upon incorporeal.

Nor is it lawful for a Christian by any means to go to any Witch, and pray her
or persuade her that she hurt not, or that she should take away any mischief
done; for so he should pray to the Devil who did the mischief, and not the
Witch, as I showed at large.

It remains therefore that we only turn to Almighty God heartily, and implore
the good Angels his Ministers, to defend us from those evils which the Devil
besets us with both sleepin^ and waking.

Chap. 8. Of the Cure of Diseases made by Witchcraft, and first of the Magical
Cure.
ALbeit Witches promise to cure such diseases by Words, Characters,
Enchantments and Adjurations: yet these and the like have no force, as we
showed, against Paracelsus and others which we shall not farther declare. Libro
de cons. and dissen.
And since it is certain, that the Devil chiefly causes these evils, it is
wicked and unbeseeming a Christian, to desire any thing from him who is the
implacable enemy of mankind.

Concerning this, there are two questions: first, Whether it is lawful upon
suspicion of ^itchcraft, to ask or compel Witches to remove ^itchcraft and
diseases which they, or others have caused?

O^ this there are diverse opinions, and they desire to resolve it by diverse
distinctions, which well examined, I think thus: He that desires by force to
compel a Witch to cure a disease, believes in, and hopes for help from the
Devil, which he should seek from the Lord, who severely prohibited asking
counsel of Magicians. The Soul (says he) in Leviticus that goes after Witches
or Soothsayers, Levit. 20. verse. 6.
I will set my Face against, and cut him off from the midst of my People. Hence
St. Chrysostom writes, That a Christian had better die then redeem his life by
bondage to the Devil. Homi. 8. in epist. ad Coloss.
For there are other remedies, and the Devil is not stronger then God: and
though there be no hope of life, it is better to die, then to be cured by sin;
for the Salva^i^n of the Soul is better then the health of the body. And the
Glory of God which by so doing is neglected, is to be preferred before all
things.

Another Question is, Whether it be lawful to sear^h into any means or
instruments used by Witches to cause diseases, and to remove them when found,
burn them or any ways destroy them?

This Question little concerns Physic, of which see Martin Delrio, that
decides the reasons on both sides very well, and confirms his own judgment by
Histories: but we shall speak of things more profitable.

Chap. 9. Of the Natural Cure of Witchcraft.
THerefore it is not lawful to seek help from the Devil or Witches, because we
have lawful mea^s sufficient, na^ely Natural and Divine: of Divine we shall
speak in the Chapter following; in this only of the Natural.

And since in Part IX. Chap. 1. we showed three sorts of Witchcraft, namely
Poetical or Vulgar, Philosophical, and Magic. The Poetical is no ways
Witchcraft. The second which is Philosophical, comes by natural causes,
sometimes with the Devil concurring, who corrupts and alters the constitution o^
the body (God so permitting) that he may please the Witches that desire it of
him* Diseases so caused, may be well cured by natural remedies, but not simply;
for in such diseases there are two causes namely Natural and Diabolical, and if
the Devil cease no^ to act or hurt, there can be no perfect cure.

The Natural medicines are twofold, either such as evacuate foul humors, which
the Devil uses to cause diseases, or Alterers and Antidotes which are against
the dispositions brought in by the Devil. For Evacuation Vomits are good^punc;
for Experience shows that stubborn diseases, whose cause is in the stomach
mesentery, and about the liver and spleen* which could not be evacuated by
ordinary purging, have been cured by Vomits. And so Ruland cured Diabolical
diseases, and it is observed that some have been so cured that have vomited
knives, hair, glass, and the like with putrid humors* But let the vomit be
proper, and Purges must not be neglected*

Also use Alterers and Antidotes, external and internal; the internal are
mentioned, as Herb True-love, round Birthwort and long, St. Iohnsor ^, and many
others.

The outward are Ointments, and Fumes, and Baths, as Ointment of Viscus Colurus
or Misleto, experienced in a Maid bewitched* Henr. ab Hoer. in obs. med. raris
obs. 8.
thus made

Take Dogs grease four ounces, Bears grease eight ounces, Capons grease twenty
four ounces, Viscus Colurus Mislero green three branches, cut and bruise them
till they are moist, Wood-leaves and berries, (...) is them all into a glass;
set it in the Sun nine weeks, and you shall have a green Balsom; ^o Con^er all
^firmities ^udy my ^nnertus, ^laterus, ^overius, ^artholi^us and ^iolanus, of
the last ^ditions.
with these b^dies bewit^hed, especially in the pained parts and the joints are
to be anointed, and the patient shall be cured, it is a certain Experiment.

The Ancient and Modern Physicians used Fumes of Bays, Rue, St. John wort,
Sage, Rosemary, Roses, Wood aloes, Asphalium. Sanders, Citron peels,
Frankincense, Mastich, Storax Calamite, Labdanum, Musk, Sulphur which
strengthen the heart and brain, and discuss malign^nt and cold humors.

Baths do both, by insensible Evacuation and altering, in which boil Rue, St.
Iohns-wort, Mugwort, Vervain, Palma Christi, and the like mentioned.

But these are mixed without Superstition or Ceremony, pronouncing of words,
and the like, and we must trust only to Natural means, and leave the rest to
God.

Chap. 10. Of the Divine Cure of Witchcraft.
BEcause the Devil can hinder the force of natural things, if God permit, we
must have recourse to a Divine Cure, not only in diseases from Witchcraft, but
also in all the calamities of this miserable life. And for this cause, for the
prevention and cure of these diseases the Church which is the Spouse of Christ,
has constituted Exor^ist^, which every one knows have power in this thing:
therefore we must put our whole confidence in God, and call upon him by a firm
and sincere Faith; yet we must take heed least under the show of a Divine Cure,
any thing be done supe^stitiously, or against the Honor of God.

It is good against the same to appoint a Perigrination to a Holy place, that
we may obtain that by the Merits of the Saints, which we cannot immediately by
our selves obtain from God. This is approved by daily experience among
Christians and true Catholics: therefore to him be

Praise, Honor, and Glory, and Thanksgiving for Ever.
Two EPISTLES of that Excellent and Famous Man Balthazar Han Doctor of Physic,
and chief Elector of Saxony.
The First Epistle.
MOst Renowned, Excellent and most experienced Sir, my Godfather and much
honored Friend. I prefent thee with a miserable but admirable Physical History
(which I lastly told you in short) as I had it chiefly from mine own
observation written with mine own hand.

A certain honest godly woman twenty two years old, of a laudable temper,
somewhat inclining to melancholy, in the year 1634. the 8 th of November being
Saturday, was troubled at evening with an unusual stopping and heaviness at the
breast, she went to bed at her accustomed hour with desire to sleep, and though
she obtained her desire presently, yet was grievously troubled, by which means
after twelve of the clock, she was heard often to groan sadly, but they
supposed she dreamed, and called her; but she awaked not til she had often
groned: being awaked she often lifted up her eyes, but kept them not long open,
but presently composed her self for sleep again, and spoke not above three
words. In the morning being Sunday, and the the 9 th of November, she arose at
six of the clock thinking upon the Church, and how she might according to her
promise bring a young maid to be married to a Minister of the Church. But on a
sudden she beheld two blew spots in both hands, which crept up from the wrists
to the bending of the Arm, not in one continued line, and above both the
bendings of the arms, there were diverse letters, among which were these two N
B. joined together, and many crosses of this form she being undaunted continued
her holy resolution, and by Gods assistance she went to Church at 8. in the
morning, and was very merry at the wedding-dinner, til four in the afternoon,
and perceived no disturbance that day nor that night, but monday morning
following being Novem. 10. she observed the number of crosses increased about
her neck, breast and belly to the bottom of it. And all that day she felt great
straitness and troubles, one fit followed another, and she had so great a
desire to sleep, which was the forerunner of a fit, and more works and crosses
that she could not be kept awake, at which time (to the terror and admiration
of the beholders) the characters mentioned most like crosses were in most parts
of her body, so that in seven days time she was all over before and behind,
from head to foot, marked as if she had been whipped with rods or thorns; at
first her face was not marked, but afterward it was with the same, but
smaller, and more superficially in the scarf-skin, at night she went to bed and
slept an hour after which she was troubled, and groaned, and folded her hands
close. The standers by observing that awaked her, and parted her hands, and
they sound a Needle stuck in the palm of her hand, and they drew it out; they
bent it and put it in the fire unknown to her* and keep it still. The 11th of
November being Tuesday she was better but not without some fits, but gentle:
this night she dreamt that she should find a needle under her bed, which she
should put into the fire presently and so be cured. The 12th of November being
Wednesday at noon she remembered her dream, and commanded her Maid to search
diligently for a needle under the bed, the Maid returning brought a long
Tailors needle, she cast it into the fire, often, this done she went to bed at
her usual hour, and espied a Ghost like a woman going into a Study, and hiding
her self in a corner, at which she was much frighted, and trembled, and began
to be sleepy as formerly, which by reason of her pain she resisted, And lo an
illfavoured old woman very terrible with her wrinkled face stood by her bed
side, having a thick cudgel with which she smote her violently upon the legs,
and being very angry she repeated these words, Give me my Needle, Give me my
Needle. At which she cried out aloud, and the old woman vanished, and from that
night, till Saturday after, which was the 15th of November ^he did not suffer
any thing, but then about night walking about she pulled out another Needle
from the soal of her foot with great pain, lamentation, and loss of blood, and
showed it to the standers by, she slept well that night, and the following day
being Sunday the 16th of November, she put on her b^st clothes and went to
Church cheerfully, from which day she was not troubled, only she was sometimes
found under the Table at night taken out of her bed, to which she went every
night at her usual hour, after prayer and signing her self with the sign of the
Cross, without any hurt, and at certain times the third, fourth, sixth and
tenth day, she had new marks of crosses with other marks as of hearts and
Astronomical characters of the Planets and co^figurations, as. and of
Planets..... and some of chemical medicines, as {nitre}. {salt}.. (for she was
not ignorant of Astronomy and Chimistry with which she refreshed her self by
reading and calculating beyond ordinary women) were as it were cut in the skin,
she continued ind^fferent well in this state to the twenty seventh of January
1635. and her fi^s were very little, and in a manner quite gone, at which time
she went to see her neighbor to pa^s her time with her in reading or sewing,
or discourse: in the midst of their discourse she had on her right hand the
shape of a Rose, and on her left, of Three-leaved grass, with the year of our
Lord 16^^, gently painted and so artificially that Ap^lles the best of Painters
could not mend it. Under these figures without pain were painted to the
admiration of the Beholders a wounded heart, the picture of a fool, and the
German word Narr. and nescio with diverse crosses. The 27th of February just at
noon her trouble returned with more greater fits: And from that day to this, by
Gods Grace she never had any, whom I desire by prayer to defend her from these
delusions of Satan, and to give her health, and be with us all to whom be
Praise, Honor, and Glory for Evermore. This is that miserable History which I
promised you, read it with your divine ingenuity, and consider it; and leave
your opi^ion of such passions to posterity. For you^ Books of Practical
Physic, written from long and infallible Experience, with great pains and
ingenuity, which all Learned men admire, may well contain it. In the mean while
farewell, and be certain that I am most ready to serve you.

Dated from the Electors Camp, the 5. of November. 1635.
THE SECOND EPISTLE.
IN my last Letter, Renowned Sir, my most Experienced Godfather, and very good
Friend, I sent you a lamentable History of a Physical case: now I send you the
opinion of the Famous and Excellent Physician Dr. Ioachimus Colbius concerning
it. But by your leave I shall a little digress, and a little mention what was
done, and what medicines were given without many flourishing words. That this
trick or delusion was from Satan, there is no doubt in me. Some suppose that
she gave him this opportunity by givin^ a smock to an old woman which was
manifest to be the Witch. For this is a Maxim, not only among the Devils
Slaves the Witches* but also among Common people; that if a Witch get any silk
or linen that has been worn next the skin of any* then she can hurt any part
of them that wore it, by pricking, striking, tying, twisting more or less when,
and where she pleases. The crosses of which I spoke, were not always of the
same form, but some longer, some shorter, sometimes very long; some were deeper,
and caused pain and itching; some came to matter* and left marks behind them
above a month, in some did not. But why crosses, roses and three leaved grass
so artificially painted, and Characters which she knew, and things she
delighted in? The cause of these, was the Devils hatred to mankind for she
signed herself with the sign of the cross, morning and evening against Satan's
force, and loved Needle Work, and Astronomy, and Chemistry, which by her friend
leave she learned of a famous Doctor that live^ in the house; the Devil
therefore labored to tak^ off her faith, and the force of her prayers, an^ mock
them with the sign of the cross, and mak^ her melancholy by scoffing at her
recreations and so to destroy body and soul together. Thi^ may be probably and
Religiously supposed t^ be true, in regard we cannot pierce more into the
inward causes. The medicines applied we^^ few and gentle, which purged the
belly of melancholy, and did alter the humor, with some temperate Cordials, and
things experimentally good for the womb, she had sent her from Hala an Amulet
of herbs, and seeds rightly gathered at certain times, which had much. Camphire
in it; but she refused it, least she should purchase the displeasure of
Almighty God, by vainly laboring against the hatred of the Devil, wh^ is a
Spirit, and cannot be touched by corporeal medicines. She used nothing to drive
the Devil, but prayer and Divine worship, and Sacraments very cheerfully and
courageously. Let this be sufficient to be spoken of this matter in the time of
war, and while the guns roar and thunder, where the Muses in vain seek for
their friend silence. Accept of it kindly, and suspend not your judgment, but
give your opinion concerning these things* and declare them speedily to the
Learned. Farewell worthy Sir, and continue to be my Friend, who am much your
Servant.

Given from the Electoral Army, November the 30th 1635.
FINIS.

