THE SCHISM OF THE Church of England etc. Demonstrated in Four ARGUMENTS.

Formerly Proposed to Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson, the late Bishops of Ely and
Chester, by Two Catholic Disputants, in a Celebrated Conference upon that
Point.

OXON. Printed by Henry Cruttenden, One of His Majesty's Printers. MDCLXXXVIII.

The SCHISM of the Church of England Demonstrated in Four Arguments, etc.
The Definition of Schism.
Schism is a Voluntary Separation of One Part from the Whole, True, Visible,
[Hierarchical] CHURCH of CHRIST.

The First Argument.
WHosoever make a voluntary separation of themselves from the whole, true,
visible Church of Christ, are Schismatiques;

But all those of the English Protestant party, make a voluntary separation of
themselves from the whole true visible Church of Christ:

Therefore all those of the English Protestant party are Schismatiques.

The first Proposition is evident, and granted by our Adversaries when they
allowed our Definition to be a true Proposition. We prove the second
Proposition.

Whosoever voluntarily separate themselves from all particular visible
Christian Churches in the world of the same time with them, make a voluntary
separation of themselves from the whole true visible Church of Christ;

But all those who are of the English Protestant party, voluntarily, separate
themselves from all the particular visible Christian Churches in the world of
the same time with them:

Therefore all those of the English Protestant party make a voluntary
separation from the whole true visible Church of Christ.

The first Proposition is manifest: For in the extent of all the true visible
Christian Churches in the world, must be contained the whole true visible
Church of Christ. The second Proposition we prove:

Whosoever voluntarily separate themselves from the present Eastern and Western
Churches, and all Churches in their Communion, voluntarily separate themselves
from all the particular Christian visible Churches in the world, of the same
time with them;

But all those of the English Protestant Party voluntarily separate themselves
from the present Eastern and Western Churches, and all Churches in their
Communion:

Therefore all those of the English Protestant party voluntarily separate
themselves from all the particular visible Christian Churches in the world, of
the same time with them.

The first Proposition is certainly true. For no Assembly or Congregation of
Christians can be named (which is not manifestly Heretical) that is not
contained in this Proposition. We prove the second by enumeration:

If they do not so separate themselves, let that Church be nominated amongst
the forementioned, from which they do not voluntarily separate themselves. It
is not (confessedly) the Roman; for they all profess themselves not to be of
her Communion: Nor the Greek, under obedience to the Patriarch of
Constantinople; for they have as little dependence, or agreement with that,
either in Doctrine, Subjection, Discipline, Rites, or Communion, as they have
with the Roman; our Adversaries producing but four Points wherein they seemed
to agree with Protestants against us; and those either not of Faith, or clearly
mistaken, or not as they are controverted betwixt us. And the same reason
proceeds of all Churches in actual Communion with them. Ergo, The second
Proposition is true.

It will avail nothing to allege here, that English Protestants communicate
with many other Reformed Churches beyond Sea; for all those are comprehended
under our terms the English Protestant Party; and it is as evident, that each
of those voluntarily separate themselves from all other Churches, as it is that
these of England separate.

Neither will it excuse them to say, that they only refined that Church, which
they found corrupted and defiled; which notwithstanding remains still amongst
them the very same in substance that it was before. For it is evident, that all
of them, whether English or others, separated themselves from all those
National Churches and the Pastors of them, who were in quiet possession of
Church Government immediately before they begun; rejected in all Countries
respectively, where they entered, their Authority, dispossessing them of their
Sees and Cures, intruding themselves into their places, and gathering
tumultuously among themselves particular Congregations and Conventicles,
instituting new and unheard of Rites and Ceremonies, without dependence of any,
who were in possession of Church Government immediately before them through the
whole world: and all this as notoriously, and undeniably, as any Schismatiques
ever did before their time: In all which particulars we appeal to the
Historians on both parts, who have writ the Records of these two last Ages.

The Second Argument.
Whosoever adhere to Schismatical Pastors ( as Schismatical is understood in
our Definition) are Schismatiques.

But all English Protestants adhere to Schismatical Pastors, as Schismatical is
understood in our Definition:

Therefore all English Protestants are Schismatiques.

The first proposition is evident. For those being only such as separate
themselves from the whole true visible Church of Christ, all who adhere to
them, must also separate with them, and thereby become Schismatiques. The
second proposition we prove.

Whosoever adhere to those, who are successively Ordained by such Schismatical
Pastors, maintaining the same cause which they begun, adhere to Schismatical
Pastors, as Schismatical is understood in our Definition;

But all English Protestants adhere to those, who were successively Ordained by
such Schismatical Pastors, maintaining the same cause which they begun:

Therefore all English Protestants adhere to Schismatical Pastors, as
schismatical, is understood in our Definition.

The first Proposition needs no proof, as being clear ex terminis: The second,
viz. that those, whom we say were so Ordained, maintain the same cause, which
was begun by those who Ordained them, is also clear: it remains therefore only
to prove, that they were Ordained successively by Schismatiques, understood in
the sense of our Definition: which we thus prove:

Whosoever adhere to those, who were successively Ordained by Matthew Parker,
and the other first Protestant Bishops of his time, adhere to those, who were
successively Ordained by such Schismatical Pastors;

But all English Protestants adhere to such, as were successively Ordained by
Matthew Parker, and the first Protestant Bishops of his time:

Therefore all English Protestants adhere to those, who were successively
Ordained by such schismatical Pastors.

The second Proposition is clear, and confessed by all: We thus prove the first:

If Matthew Parker, and the rest were such schismatical Pastors, then whosoever
adhere to those, who were Ordained by them, adhere to those who were Ordained
successively by such Schismatical Pastors;

But Matthew Parker, and the rest were such Schismatical Pastors.

Therefore all those, who adhere to those, who were successively Ordained by
them, adhere to those who were Ordained by such Schismatical Pastors.

The first proposition is clear: we prove the second.

Whosoever either Possess the Sees and Offices of lawful Bishops, those lawful
Bishops yet living, or unite themselves to such as possess them, are such
schismatical Pastors;

But Matthew Parker, and other first Protestant Bishops of his time, either
possessed the Sees and Offices of lawful Bishops, those lawful Bishops yet
living, or united themselves to such as possessed them:

Therefore Matthew Parker, and all the first Protestant Bishops of his time,
were such schismatical Pastors.

The first proposition is evident of it self. The first part of the second
proposition, That the Sees, etc. of living Bishops were possessed, and that
others of these new Bishops united themselves to such as possessed them, is also
clear, as matter of fact, out of Stow, Speed, Cambden, Mason, Goodwin, Fern,
etc. The second part, viz. that those living Bishops were lawful Bishops, even
when they were deprived, we prove thus:

Whosoever were once lawful Bishops, and never did any thing after, whereby
they became unlawful, remained still lawful Bishops;

But those deprived Bishops were once lawful Bishops, and never did any thing
after, whereby they became unlawful:

Therefore those Bishops remained still lawful Bishops.

The first proposition is evident. The first part of the second proposition,
viz. that they were once lawful Bishops, we prove thus:

No National Church can be a true particular Church of Christ, unless those who
have the place of Bishops in it be lawful Bishops;

But the National Church of England in Queen Mary's time was a true particular
Church of Christ:

Therefore those, who had the place of Bishops in it, were lawful Bishops. Now
I subsume. But those, who had then the place of Bishops in that National
Church, were those deprived Bishops: Ergo.

The first proposition is clear. For no true Church can unite it self to
unlawful Pastors. The second proposition is also clear from the confession of
our Adversaries, who grant, That the Church of Rome, and all those of her
Communion are true Churches of Christ. See Bramhall and Fern upon this Subject.

We prove now the second part of the second Proposition, That those Bishops did
nothing, whereby they became unlawful Bishops.

If those lawful Bishops did any thing, whereby they became unlawful Bishops,
it must be supposed to be that for which they were deprived;

But that for which they were deprived, did not make them unlawful Bishops:

Therefore they did nothing, whereby they became unlawful Bishops.

The first proposition seems evident. For no prudent man can suppose, that they
would deprive them for that which made them not unlawful Bishops, if they had
been convinced to have done any other thing which might make them unlawful
Bishops. The second we prove:

All the reasons, for which they were deprived, was resisting the pretended
Reformation, and refusing the Oath of Supremacy;

But those could not make them unlawful Bishops: Therefore the causes, for
which they were deprived, could not make them unlawful Bishops.

The first proposition being matter of fact, is witnessed by Cambden, Goodwin,
and others. The second proposition we prove thus:

No proceeding in practice, according to the common Tenets, the holding whereof
made them not unlawful Bishops, can make them unlawful Bishops;

But resisting the pretended Reformation, and refusing the Oath of Supremacy,
was only a proceeding according to the common Tenets, the holding whereof made
them not unlawful Bishops:

Therefore resisting that Reformation, and refusing that Oath could not make
them unlawful Bishops.

The first proposition is clear in it self: For no man can be thought to become
an unlawful Bishop, v. g. by praying for the souls in Purgatory, if the holding
that such prayers are lawful, make him not an unlawful Bishop; and so of the
rest.

The second proposition is also evident. For whilst they were lawful Bishops in
Queen Mary's time, they held it a common necessary point of Religion to resist
that Reformation, and refuse that Oath of Supremacy.

If it should be replied, that as the Queen had power to deprive lawful
temporal Officers at her pleasure, so might she also deprive at her pleasure
lawful Ecclesiastical Officers and Bishops, as being no less chief Governor of
the Church then of the Commonwealth; we answer, even that admitted (not
granted) yet this second she could not do: For the Kings and Queens of England
pretended only to succeed into those prerogatives of Church Government, which
the Pope had before them, as is clear in King Henry the 8th. But the Pope
himself had no power to dispossess a lawful Bishop remaining a lawful Bishop at
his pleasure. Therefore neither had the Queen any such power.

The Third Argument.
We prove in this Argument, by another medium, that Matthew Parker and his
Associates, and consequently all who adhered to them, or adhere to their
Successors were and are Schismatiques, separate from the whole true visible
Church of Christ.

Matthew Parker was a Shismatique, voluntarily separate from the whole true
visible Church of Christ:

Therefore all those, who were willingly consecrated by him, and all their
Successors and Adherents, were such Schismatiques.

The Consequence is clear, as appears in the former Argument: The Antecedent we
prove.

Whosoever was willingly consecrated by Schismatiques, voluntarily separate
from the whole true visible Church of Christ, is himself a Schismatique,
voluntarily separate from the whole true visible Church of Christ;

But Matthew Parker was willingly consecrated by Schismatiques, voluntarily
separate from the whole true visible Church of Christ:

Therefore Matthew Parker was a Schismatique, voluntarily separated from the
whole true visible Church of Christ.

The first proposition is already proved. For to be willingly consecrated by
such Schismatiques is schismatical, and therefore separating from the whole
true visible Church of Christ.

The second proposition we prove, as matter of fact.

Goodwin in the different lives of Barlow, Coverdale, Scory, and Hodgkins, who
were the Consecrators of Parker, acknowledges, that the three first were
possessed of the Sees and Offices of other Catholic Bishops living. Barlow was
intruded into the place of Christopherson, Bishop of Chicester, Dec. 20. 1559,
and elect to it, before he consecrated Parker, as appears by the Queens
Letters, Gulielmo Barlow, nunc Cicestriensi electo. Scory was put by King
Edward the 6th into Day's place, then being Bishop of Chicester. Coverdale into
Vecey's place, by King Edward the 6th, Aug. 30. 1551, which B. Vecey was forced
to resign, as appears by his being willing to be restored (as he was
afterward) by Queen Mary. Hodgkins was only a Suffragan; but communicated with
these three in this Consecration; and thereby became Schismatique.

The Fourth Argument.
Whosoever subject themselves unto these, as to their lawful Pastors, who have
no true jurisdiction over them, are Schismatiques; But English Protestants,
ever since Qu. Elizebeth's time, have subjected themselves to those, as to
their lawful Pastors, who have no true jurisdiction over them: Therefore
English Protestants, ever since Qu. Elizabeth's time, are Schismatiques.

The first proposition is clear, from 1 Timothy 4. 3. where describing Heretics,
etc. S. Paul says, Ad sua desideria coacervabant sibi Magistros, etc. according
to their own fancies they shall heap up Teachers, or Masters, that is,
confusedly and tumultuously, without power or authority. And from To. 10. 15.
Quomodo praedicabunt, nisi mittantur? How shall they preach, unless they be
sent? Eor their adhering to such, supposes the rejection of all those who are
legally authorized to govern them, which is formal Schism.

The second proposition we prove by Enumeration.

They could not have true Jurisdiction over the particular Bishoprics and
Cures of England; neither by the force of Orders which they received, (if they
had any such) for one may have true Order without any true Jurisdiction, as
appears in the Act of K. Henry 8th, concerning Suffragans, who had true
Episcopal Order, and yet had not Episcopal Jurisdiction, as the Act expressly
says; and many are made Ministers in the Universities, before they have any
Jurisdiction over any particular Parishes. Neither could they have it from
those who consecrated them; for never a one of them had any themselves, as
being either Suffragans, or not design^d to any See, or elected, and not
invested. Neither was there then any Primate in England to give it them.
Neither had they it by general consent of the Bishops of England; for they all
resisted. Neither would they have it from the Pope, or Patriarch of
Constantinople; nor would either of them give it them: Much less had they
either from a General Council; for that was against them: Nor from the general
Consent of Catholic Bishops, either of the Eastern or Western Church; for all
oppos d them. Neither did their fellowsuperintendents beyond Sea, or could they
confer Jurisdiction upon them; for they were all as void of Jurisdiction as
these themselves were. Neither could they have it from the Queen or Parliament;
for that had been an heaping up of Teachers to themselves, 2 Timothy 4. 3. now
cited. And Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction being a Spiritual Government, is
declared 1 Cor. 12. 28. to be a supernatural gift, and Institution of God in
his Church; and ver. 6. Prophesying, that is, the Power of Preaching, is
declared to be a Gift of the Holy Ghost; and therefore are above the politic
power of Magistrates of any Commonwealth. And Act. 20. 28. the Holy Ghost is
said to appoint Bishops to govern the Church of God; and so the giving
Jurisdiction to them must be supernatural, coming from the Holy Ghost, and
above the reach of politic Governors. And if Kings, Queens, or Parliaments,
who are under the number of Scholars and Subjects in matters of Religion, could
communicate Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to their Prelates, they would be
Governors of their Governors, and Masters of their Masters, which is quite
contrary to Mat. 10. 24. Non est Discipulus supra Magistrum, The Disciple is
not above his Master, i. e. in those things wherein he is his Master, which is
here in Church Government. As therefore our Savior Joh. 20. and Mat. 28. sent
his Apostles with power of Governing and Preaching, and the Apostles gave that
Spiritual Jurisdiction to others, whom they sent to diverse particular
Provinces, and those Ecclesiastical Persons only amongst all Orthodox
Christians, still communicated the like Jurisdiction to others, both in the
primitive and after ages; and never did any Catholic Prince, or State, pretend
to confer Jurisdiction upon their own Bishops, or Pastors: It is most manifest,
that neither Qu. Elizabeth, nor her Parliament, had any such power: And
consequently it follows from this Enumeration of parts that those Elizabeth
Bishops and Pastors had no Jurisdiction at all, or any of their Successors; and
therefore, That all English Protestants, attributing such Jurisdiction to them
and adhering to them as their lawful Bishops and Pastors are Formal
Schismatiques.

FINIS.

