NOTES AND OBSERVATIONS On the Empress of Morocco REVISED. WITH Some few
Errata's to be Printed instead of the Postscript, with the next Edition of the
Conquest of Granada.

Impune ergo mihi recitaverit ille Togatas?
Hic Elegos?
-- Juven. LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head in the Lower*
Walk of the New Exchange in the Strand. 1674.

THE PREFACE.
CAsting my Eye upon a Pamphlet entitled Notes and Observations on the Empress
of Morocco; and finding no Authors name to it, I used my best endeavor? to get
that knowledge by my Examination of the Style, which the unkind Printer had
denied me. But that information was quickly obtained: For perusing but the
First Page of the Preface, and finding such an Appellation as [Arrogant Upstare
and Illiterate Scribler,] with this Allusion at the Tail on^t, [This Fellow
comes amongst the Poets like one of the Earth-born Brethren, and his first
business in the World is to Attacque and Murder all his Fellows;] I presently
recollected the same Fancy, spoken on the same subject, in the Epilogue to
Cambyses.

Like the Issue of the Dragons Teeth, one Brother
In a Poetic fury falls on tll' other.
In the next Page I (...) him strutting, and impudently comparing himself to
Ben Johnson. [I knew that to write against him was to do him too much honor:
But I considered Ben Johnson had done it before to Deeker our Author
Predecessor, etc.]

And thereupon with very little Conjuration, by those three remarkable
Qualities of R^iling, Boasting and Thieving I fo^nd a Dryden in the
Frontispiece. Then going through the Pre^ace, I observed the drawing of a Fools
Picture to be the des^gn of the whole piece, and reflecting on the Painter I
considered, that probably his Pamphlet might be like his Plays, not to be
written without help. And according to expectation I discovered the Author of
Epsome-Wells, and the Author of Pandion and Amphigen^a lent their assistance.
How* Three to One thought I? and Three Gentlemen of such disagreeing
Qualifications in one Club: The First a Man that (...) had wit, but it ^^st it;
the Second that ha^ it, if be can keep it, and the Third that neither has, nor
is ever like to have it. Then boldly on I went, and fortified with patience (as
I found it required) for a full perusal, I wonderd the less at the Deformity of
the piece, when such different hands went to the composure. The first of these
is the only person that pretends an injury receiv^d from a Satyrick Line or two
in the Epistle to Morocco: Such as the Author never designed for a particular
reflection, and such as I am sure Elkanah would have thanked him for, provided
like them, as they had been true, they had been harmless too. And consequently
I conclude him the promoter of so Ile-natur'd, and so scurrulous a retort. The
Second I suppose only putting his Comical hand to the Work, to help forward
with the mirth of so ridiculous a Libel: and the Third perhaps out of a Vain
Glory of being in Print, knowing himself to be so little a Reptile in Poetry,
that he is beholding to a Lampoon for giving the World to know, that there is
such a writer in being. Some have advised me in answering these Notes, to
retort upon all Thr^e: But that would be a tedious work, besides the
inconvenience of it. The two last had not the same ends in writing, nor are
they so fair marks as the First, O^e having no Heroicks in Print, and the other
such as cannot well be Attacqued; his Plays being fortified against Objections.
For like the Leper that from Head to Foot was all Deformity, I defy any man to
meet with above one fault in a whole Play of his. And therefore in defending
Elkanahs writings, to examine His, I think not worth the while, a whole Play
being too long for a Repartee. But in taking Elkanahs part, I answer but half
the Pamp^let: For through the piece I find the whole Town censured; at lest all
that have seen that Play, being by the modest Commentatour Dignified by the
Title of Town-Fops and City Fools, this wholesome advice being given you in the
Preface, [It will be for the benefit of Mankind to observe what People frequent
this Play, that men of common sense may know whom to shun.] Now the calling all
Mankind Fools, one would think were the boldest Drydenism that e're came in
Print. But to convince you that there is worse behind, this Rude, unmannerly,
ill-bred, saucy and overgrown Rayler cannot forbear calling the Ladies Fools
too, when he says, [I am not ignorant that his admirers, who are most commonly
Women, will ressent this ill, etc.] if therefore through the Examination of his
Notes, I reply in his Dialect, and use that Billingsgate Style, which is but
Aping of him, and much against my own nature, I declare that it is a Language
that his Inimitable Impudence more than his Quarrel with Morocco, or his Abuses
on the Author have extorted from me.

The Reader is desired to take notice in the following Discourse, that all
Lines with this Mark -- " -- before them are Mr. Drydens; taken out of several
of his Poems: And all Discourse in an Italick Character within these Figures []
are His words in his Notes upon Morocco, or in his Conquest of Granada.

ACT* The First.
COndemned to Fetters and to Scepters horn^. [Here the first accusation is
writing Nonsense in the first Line; Alas poor Elkanah. Muly Labas in Chains,
Before he is in Swadling-Cloaths, in Fetters before he is born.] Now with
Reverence would I ask Mr. Dryden (amongst all his undeniable Laws of Action,
Time and Place, those insallible guides of Poetry, in which he has done Reason
to himself, and Honor to the World, in being that Kind Great Master to the
Minor, Poets) by what Rule Men are obliged to reflect on their past State,
before their present. And how is it Nonsense to name what is, before we
mention what was. How many Examples of this-kind occurr in Common Discourse, as
we say Ered and Born, Men and Angels. Besides, I think Muly Labas may say I am
condemned to Fetters and am [not was] born to Scepters, for Men say in the
Present Tense they are born to such or such an Estate, till they are in
possession of it; But I perceive Mr. Dryden is so little obliged to
Birthright, and so weakly entitled to Patrimonies, that it is very pardonable
in him to mistake in an expression of this kind: Nay, he is so far from a Guilt
in this, that were he to discribe himself, I doubt not but he would tell you what
he has been, before what he is, viz. that he once could write an Indian
Emperor, and a Tyrannick Love: But now by his own confession in his Epilogue
to Granada.

" When Forty comes if e're he Lives to see
" That wretched Fumbling Age of Poetry.
Where by the way you must know he was Eight and Thirty Years Old when he wrote
that, and it is now Three Years since the writing: you must then expect now no
more of that Stamp, his last fury being spent in his Love in a `Nunnery. And to
convince you of this truth, he is now grown as Ill-natured as Old Women in
their decay of Beauty, who make it their business to rail against all that is
young. Thus the best Title he can allow this Stripling Poet, is to call him [
Great Boy] and indeed that is his Fault, if it be one To be but a few Years
past Twenty, and to show how much he thinks him a Boy, as one not able to
answer for himself; he quibbles upon his Godfathers, and at every pinch to
make out a feeble Jest, he cries [ Oh Elkanah. well said Elkanah, read
Philosophy Elkanah,] As if he supposed the Reader would be infinitely taken
with the Novelty of such a Name as Elkanah. But hold what have I done! Indeed I
was too much to blame to tell the World he is Old! When Mr. Dryd^n, as he has
declared himself, designs to please none but his fair Admirers, the Female
part of his Audience; and for them to know he is in Years is very severe,
however, in the same Epilogue he answers for himself and says:

" But yet he hopes he is young enough to Love.
It Is in this Garb unhappy Princes mourn
To pass by his Impertinent question, [ are Fetters, the Crape or the Purple
that Princes mourn in,] here he says [ Muly Labas confesses himself a man of
mean Courage;] and his reason is this, because if a man mourns or complains, he
must be a coward Now whether he takes mourning for blubbering or howling I
cannot tell, but certainly to make a Prince sad and concerned for a King and
Fathers unjust displeasure, his being the cause of a Mistress Imprisonment, and
the occasion of a War between her Father and his, might be pardonable in any
man's writings; but he who dares reflect on Mr. Dryden. But he is so far from
being a Coward that others think the Poet in the whole Speech proves the quite
contrary, and wonder Mr. Dryden should be so ill a Judge.

Yet Fortune to great Courages is kind:
It Is he wants Liberty whose Soul's confined.
My thoughts out-fly etc --
[ Great Courages are here the same thing with unconfined Souls, and the sense
is, Great Courages or unconfined Souls are unconfined by the kindness of
Fortune; that is, Great Courages are valiant by chance or by good luck] Now
every man but our Commentator, that is every Rational man, and one that had but
Brains enough to carry the Sense of two Lines in his head; would have construed
it thus, yet Fortune that reduces Princes to Fetters is kind to those of Great
Courages, for as the following Lines express, it gives them an occasion of
manifesting their Courage.

To the short Walk of one poor Globe enslaved.
[A walk of a Globe. Now by Mr. Settles Leave, a Globe is a round thing, and a
thing improper to be walked upon: for a woman on a Globe is the Emblem of
Fortunes Inconstancy.]

Well argued witty Mr. Dryden. If he means such a kind of of Globe, Alexander
was enslaved to, Aristotle was very unkind to give his Pupil the trouble of
Conquering a World, when an Astronomers Library might have satisfied his
Ambition. But we must suppose Mr. Dryden to be of his Indians Belief, that the
World is no Globe, and that the Earth is like a Trencher, and the Heavens a
Dish whelmed over it, when he says,

" -- My Eyes no Object met
" But distant Skies that in the Ocean set.
Or if he will allow the World to be round, perhaps he may have the same
opinion of Alexanders expedition, as some Old Women have of Captain Drakes
Navigation (for I shrewdly suspect his Faith to be as Ridiculous as his Reason)
and having heard him called Alexander the Great, supposes him to have been some
huge, heavy, monstrous creature; that the Earth shook under him, and
consequently 'twas not a Globe fit, or safe for him to walk on. But to judge
more favorably of him (for this is most to his advantage) it may be he tells
us a Globe is a round thing, to show us his Skill in Mathematics.

My Soul mounts higher, and Fa^^s Power disdains,
And makes me reign a Monarch in my Chains, etc.
[ But then wherein do his thoughts out fly Alexanders, Alexanders thoughts
were too big for a World; and Muly Labas his for a Prison, as if he should say,
he scornd the World, but I scorn a Jayle, I am a greater man than he, because
he was a greater man than I.]

This Argument is one of the best he has in all his Notes: for the generality
of them neither are, nor look like Arguments. But this is a little degree
advanced above the Crowd, for this looks like an argument though it be none.
For, first he mistakes the whole design of the speech, in mistaking what
thoughts those are of Muly Labes and Alexander which the Poet makes, his
comparison upon. Because des^res of greatness and ambition are thoughts,
therefore there can be no other thoughts, or at lest the Poet can mean no
other. But the whole speech proves that the Poet makes the comparison between
the thoughts of their (...), and the satisfaction of their Souls, not the
extent of their wishes, dominions, or prisons: which was the more satisfied,
not which was the greater Man.

Alexander thought himself confined in a World, and Muly Labas thought himself
free in a Prison. He was a Slave in Empires, and this a Monarch in Chains.

Thy rage, brave Prince, mean Subjects does despise;
None but thy Son shall be thy Sacrifice.
[ Here his Old Emperor is a brave Prince, and why? Because he is so
Bloody-minded a man that for Recreation of killing he must pick out ^his son
for his Sacrifice].

I would fain ask him if it had not been famous in Solomon, when he strangled
Mustapha, had Mustapha real'y been that Traitor he suspected him. This dazzling
Object my weak sight invades:
[That is, comes before my weak sight.] Ever since " A horrid stilness does
invade my Ear.


After so excellent a Line, [ Invade] will be sense no where else. Such Beauty
would make Dungeons loose their shades.
[Shades for darkness I] Why not Sir Positive. When I fond Woman in a borrowed
shape,
Was a Conspiratour in my (...) Rape.


[ Here Morena repents of her hard ^argain,] and why? Because she calls her
self fond woman, but I should think that a woman of a perfect Character, ^ow
great or reasonable soever her passion was, may in modesty call her self fond,
for running away from her Father on any soore. But Mr. Dryden can make his
perfect Characters, fond, Bawdy and Impudent, and not know they are so, or at
lest never blush for their being so, as for Example, His beloved Almahide. Who
being present amongst other Granadin Damsels, at the Famous Trial of Skill,
alias the Bull-baiting, and seeing the Butcher-like discords that arose between
the Bear-garden assembly of the Zegryes and the Abencerrages, where for a
quarrel raised at this merry-meeting, they proceed to a national contention,
and as he says,

" -- prepare
" For all the last extremities of War.
The prettiest way of setting a whole Nation together by the ears, (next to
falling out at Hot-cockles,) that e're I read of: This fair Almahide (I say)

" (Who did with weeping Ejes these discords se^,
" And fears the Omen may unlucky be)
" Prepares a Zambra to be danced to Night.
" In hopes soft pleasures may their minds unite.
Which Entertainment is as follows, First it begins with a (...) more Baw^^
then,

" The Nymp^ died more quick, and the Shepherd more slow, (...).
Where after a great deal of other amorous stuff, you come to

" -- Thus, (...), she cried,
" You use a harm^ess Maid, -- and so she dyed.
" I waked and straight I knew
" I Loved so well, it made my Dream pr^^e tru^.
" Fancy the kinder Mistress of the two,
" Fancy had done what Phyllis would not do etc.
After such a plentiful treat of rank Bawdy, of Almabides preparing. I (...)
describe (...). But perhaps Mr. Dryden will answer that a woman of her (...)
might keep a (...), and the Bawdy entertainment was her (...) fault; or else he
may tell us, that he wrote this to please the Age, who are best delighted with
languishing Songs in this Style. And therefore the making a Woman of Honor, or
a Iil^ in a Comedy, talk Bawdy, or take pleasure in hearing it (...) alike to
him.

Next for her Zambra, which in a Marginal Note is a Dance Here he makes a
Company of Moors Dance, and make adoration to a Statue of Jupiter. How
agreeing Images are to the Mahumetan Worship, and what League Jupiter and
Mahomet can have, I leave to the judicious to censure: But now for Atmahides
modesty. This Scene is the first time that Almanzor and Almahide come to a
conference, he having never seen her before, nor she him but in a Crowd, at the
aforesaid Bull-baiting, where you must understand after such a Trial of
Strength, as his cutting off a Bulls head with his Sword at one blow, and that
so quick, that the head bellowed after it was off.

" Making imperfect bellowings as it went.
She saw enough to charm any woman of her constitution that fancied a good
Woman's man, [a terrible man,] and one [ Roughly noble] as she calls him; and
therefore at the first sight of Almanzor she falls at his feet and cries.

" Stay Mighty Conq'rour, turn your face this way;
" Do not refuse to hear the wretched pray.
Then unvailing she desires him to [ lay Thunder by,] and look more kindly on
her. When alter a long and Loving Hara^gue he being smitten at first sight, as
well he might, she tells him [ she is promised to (...)] and petitions him [to
protect her against the ^utrage of insulting men.] Now wherein she was
wretched,] (...) as yet they had not, [no Sword will hurt the fair.] Besides
had she been taken Prisoner by the adverse party, she would have had the
comfort to have been eased of her disrelisht Boabdelin which would have made
some amends for her Captivity, but at worst to prevent the fear, you see how
she compounds before hand with Almanzor for her Ransom.

He infinitely pleased with this kind coming Beauty, makes a Thundering deal of
Love. But she tells him.

-- " It Is but in vain
" Fate for each other did not us ordain.
" The chances of this day too plainly show
" That Heaven took care what it should not be so.
The reasonable meaning of which is, she is sorry his Coke is dough, and that
he came not soon enough to speed, for [but this very day she had past her
promise to Boabdelin] and that [ Their Love was tied by holy vows above.]

Where you must note her Breach of a Contract made in the face of Heaven, and
her disobedience to her Parents are no stops to hinder her from making Love at
first meeting to Alman^or. Now to compl^in of her Contracted (...) before she
had lain with him; and to a stranger in my esteem is very comical. Nay to
contemn a King too, for the sake of one who might have been but a Butcher or a
Car-man for ought she knew, is very loving. But Love pardons all that, she has
seen Almanzor, and she likes him, and by her own quick apprehension finding him
to be somewhat rough, and of an [ unfashi^ned nature] she speaks her mind
freely, fearing least giving him too little glimpse of her kindness at the
first interview, he should prove such a block-head as not to understand her
meaning, or if he did, might be so blunt a Courtier as not to have the patience
to lay a long seige to a fair Lady, and therefore it is policy in her to secure
him: and though as before she told him she was to be married and consequently
not fit for his turn that way, yet this first kind meeting would make Mr.
Drydens reader* believe she would grant him Dufoys kindness, be his friend upon
occasion. Had not his darling Conquest of Granada had the start of the
Mamamouchi the World would have suspected he had stolen his Almahide from Mr.
Jordans German Princess, who just at this rate runs away from Mr Jordan to fly
to the protection of the worthy Knight Sir Simon Softhead.

Was a Conspiratour in my own rape.
[ A Conspirator in her own rape is nonsense, for consent makes it no rape.]

Now will I be hanged if he has ever heard of any other ki^d of rape, than
downright Ravishing. I thought stealing Women from their Parents, Husbands, or
Guardians had been Rapes, though with their own Consents. If Mr. La^reat had
not been above the Learning of a School Boy, and had ever read (...) the
Grecian Wars, he might have heard of the Rape of Helene, who conspired with
Paris to (...) away from her Husband, and yet for some thousands of years, the
World has been so foolish as to call it a Rape. If such dull objections against
Morocco, are Mr. Drydens Malice, it is the feeblest that ever wrote Satyr, but
if he knows ^o better, and his Ignorance makes such gross Errors, I may say in
his own wo^ds as M^ Millesent does to Sr. Martia. ^hey are the foolishest
mistakes of a witty man that ever I heard of.

Heir only now to an unkind Fathers Frown;
His witty Observa^ion [ that frowns are at best but goods and chattels,] and
afterward ( no shapes of ill can come within ^er Sphere) Hi (...) [ what part
of a woman is her Sphear] (where by the way I might as well ask him what kind
of gentle fall his Abdulla means, when he says of Lyndaraxa.

" While she is mine I have not yet lost all
" ^ut in ber arms shall have a gentle fall
And in the Fourth Act his greasy Jest [ He Churne him] for -- I Will work him
from the Town up to the Camp. These and several other of his smart Quibbles in
his Cambridge Dialect, put together, are richly worth the credit of a Suit of
Clothes, if his Taylour in the Wild Gallant had the making of them.

Our Amorous flights like threatening Comets are
Which thus draw after them a train of Blood.
[ An amorous thing is compared to a threatening thing; a flight to a Comet, a
fault so great that there are scarce so many Syllables in his Lines as Non
sensical meanings] but now if both of them are forerunners of Blood, I think
they may be comp^^ed, and the Simile so firm that if the Amorous flights had
been called Threatening flights* it had been Sense, when she was like to dy^ for
her flight. But all this Scriblets Similes want so many Grains of Mr. Drydens
weight, that they are every Syllable Nonsense, though for no other reason. But
now for a taste of his. His Placidius having Valerias promise of Marriage, and
being conscious that though he was like to possess her, P^rphyrius had her
Heart, says.

" He like a subtle Worm has eat his way
" And Lodged within does on the Kernel prey.
" I Creep without, and doubtless to remove
" Him hence, wait only for the Husk of Love.
A very passionate Simile, besides the Poets flight to compare his Hero to a
Maggot, a thought so low that were he as he calls this young Author a School
Boy, he would not have dared to write so meanly for fear of whipping. But now
for the sense. He like a Subtle Maggot is got to the Kernel, now it would not be
ami^s to ask him, (as he says of Morenas Sphere) what part of Valeria is her
Maggot eaten Kernel? But to go on, I creep without, etc. That is, I another
Magot not so subtle as Porphyrius creep without the Shell, waiting till he has
left it to creep into the Empty Hi^sk. Which by his favor, besides the
nauseousness of the Simile, is no true Position: For who believes that one
Magot waits for the Nutshel another ha^ left. He talks in one of his Prologues
of servilely creeping after sense: If this be not servilely creeping, I am much
mistaken. But the sense in it he must find out. But no matter for that, this
Unimitable Laureat has an infinite charming way of Allegories, and Kernel of
Affection, and Husk of Love are delicate; but so much for his Creeping. Now for
his soaring; (which you must understand he seldom ventures at, for indeed in
Airy walks, (which he did well to make remarks on) he is out of his Element. But
when he does mount, like some heavy Fowl that is much troubled to rise, yet
when once up has a very strong Wing, he stretches to purpose. Almanzor to
Almahide. [Pag. 144.]

" When e're you speak
" Were my wounds mortal they should still bleed on;
" And I would listen till my Life were gone.
" My Soul should even for your last accent stay,
" And then shoot out, and with such speed obey,
" It should not bait at Heaven to stop its way.
Now would I ask him i^ Heaven be but a Baiting place in Almanzors way,
(besides the Comical Metaphor of Souls baiting) where is his Souls journi^s
end. If this be sense. -- But perhaps Mr. Dryden will answer, that he makes him
speak this, to keep up his Character even after death, and as he scorned
Empires, and was above his King when he lived, when he dies his Soul shall
scorn Heaven, and be above his God. But where that shall be the Laurcat must
fi^d out. But then what does he mean by [ with such speed obey] If f^r a ^otch
I Am satisfied; But if for sense: Does he mean Almahides command! No, for she
desires him to have his wounds dressed, and to live for her sake. Well, if he
cannot rare piece of activity, the aforesaid flight. That indeed with a
subintelligitur may be sense, but then it is the first time that Almanzor ever
owned Obedience to any thing but Almabide. But what is a greater fau^t then
either of these in this speech (for these, being but gross overfights, in a
man's Dotage are pardonable) he uses a Metaphorical expression for his Souls
flight, that is, [ shoot out] taken from an Arrow, and then in (...) same
sentence he takes another from a Traveller and a Road, and alludes to Baiting
by the way. This great pretender to Learning has not wit enough to make an
Allegory, but Violates the common School boy Rules of sense, and puts two
disagreeing Metaphors into one sentence: and ^o Almanzors Soul* (the Allusion
made out;) sets out an Arrow, and comes to Heaven a Traveller. Perhaps he will say
he uses [ ^aiting] in a Faulconers sense and so it alludes to a Hawk. But an
Arrow and a Hawk is as Ridiculous.

As Purgatory does make way for Heaven.
[ As if the Mabumetans beli^v'd a Purgatory] a very learned remark.

Read History Mr. Historiographer, and be better informed, and prethy blunder
no m^re at this da^^able rate. But considering the Crime of his Epistle it is
just Elkanah should suffer gentle Correction, as he calls it; and indeed if
this be his Correction it is the gentlest that sinner e're suffer^d yet.

And has my Father -- shall we then -- and are
Our Love and Hopes, etc. -- and afterward
Has he -- it cannot be -- Has he decreed --
Morena must not -- no she shall not bleed.
Here Muly Labas for speaking half Sentences, at his sudden and unexpected
surprise of hearing he shall poss^ss his Mistress, and afterward his hearing
of her death, i^ sh^rply reproved for stammering a kind of Poetical Nonsense.
His Almanzor on a less surprise then either of these two says to Almahide, you
ere -- you shall -- and I can scarce forbear; and his Maximin But you shall
find -- have take her from my fight. Examples of which are very frequent in all
Writers; but Witty and Elegant in none but Mr. Dryden.

And the same Jealousy that made his Breath
Decree your Chains, makes him pronounce your Death.
Here he is infinitely angry that the Poet gives an Emperors Breath the power
of decreeing a man's Imprisonment, and says [ He perverts the who^e order of
nature, and makes men see with their Ears, and hear with their Noses] but how
he has not ^old us.

[ O Breath! Wonderful Breath! ^reath is so beloved a word with Mr. Settle,
that it does all things with him, it decrees, nay in the next page it writes,
paints, guilds, prints, or something lik^ it] His witty Antagonist has found
the word [ Breath] u^ed a Do^z^n times in one Play, that is i^ 2300 Lines, a
very great Indecorum. Nay in his Observations on the Epistle he found the word
[ Smiles] four times in Cambyses and Morocco, and therefore, [ Smiles] must be
wonderful, as well as his Favorite Breath: If I should count how many times
his Vivarambla and Mirador, and other sustian words of Bulk enough, to be more
powerful then Breath, are repeated in Granada, You Would think the Author very
affect^d, that he cannot name a Balcone ^r a Market place but it must run in
Spanish, Mira^or and Vivarambla And why? Because his Scene lies there. Nay he
makes Almanzors Ginnet, Poetically Ic^ep'd Fiery Arab --

" (Who, while his Rider every stand surveyed
" Sprung loose; and flew into an Escapade.)
In Compliment to the Scene of the Play, keep the Rules of Heroic, and Prance
in Spanish.

Or should I count how many times he uses that damned canting abso 'ere word [
Host] for Army in one Play. [ Granada p. 73.]

" A Braver man I had not in my Host --
" Had we not too ^n Host of Lovers here, etc.
page 75. You would not think him that man of high conversation he pretends to
he, (...) such are his fashionable English words. I confess the Incomparable
Cowley a friend that Mr. Dryd^n makes bold with very often, uses the word in
his Davideis, but then it is on a Jewish story where the subject, and the
Translation of the Scripture has naturalized. the word.

Her gentle Breath already from just fame,
Has kindly entertained your glorious name.
[ Here Breath hears] But how the words mean so, he would have done well to
have informed us. I should have guest that her gentle ^eath, kindly
entertaining his name, had signified she had spoke kindly of him. Sure [
entertain] is a strange word in thy Nomenclature. If all manner of
entertainments with thee can gratify only the Ear: If a Miss, Bottle, and
Fidle, can please none of thy senses but Hearing, take my word, (old friend)
the best of thy senses are impaired, and thy best days done, (Dear Heart.) She
gave him Breath by which he does command.

Spoke to in the Third Act.

-- Whose Courageous Breath,
Can set such glorious Characters on Death.
This being the only [ Breath] in the next Page (as thou said before) after.
-- And the same jealousy that made his Breath, etc. Must Guild, Paint, Print,
Write, etc. To set a good or ill Character on a thing would be construed to
speak in praise or dispraise of a thing by any body but him, but with him it
signifies to Paint, Write, Guild, Print, etc.

[ Nay he makes Breath transmigrate like Souls, and subsist after a man's death
in Parchment and Paper.]

Act. Third. For this Guilt our Prophets Breath,
Has in his sacred Laws pronounced your Death.
Take my advice, and if thy Book be worth reprinting, leave out [ transmigrate
like Souls:] They are hard words thou do not understand. If the P^ophets
Breath did transmigrate like souls, (as thou say,) it could ^e're have
subsisted in Paper nor Parchment, unlese Parchment and Paper, are sensitive
crtatures in thy Philosophy.

But where is the fault in saying the Prophets Breath in his Sacred Laws
pronounces death on such or such an offender?

Why may not the Mahumetans have as great a veneration for their Faith, as the
Christians and Jews for theirs, who for thousands of Years have called that the
Word, which was but the Ins^iration of a Divinity. And h^ will is it (if they
believe their Prophet from his own mouth (...) his Law ^hen he lived upon
Earth, and allow it still to have the same power;) to say what his Breath
uttered once, it does still.

-- When e're she bleeds,
He no severer a Damnation needs,
That dares prono^nce the Sentence of her Death;
Than the infection that attends that Breath.
This Fellow that world speak sense if he could, when he would make an
objection and say, The Queen must die first, and be condemned afterward, puts
his meaning down in these words. [ The Sentence is not to be pronounced till
the condemned party bleeds; (that is) she must be ^xecuted first, and sentenced
after] which is in other words. The party must not be condemned till the
condemned party bleeds, (that is) the party must bleed first, and be condemned
after. Did ever man make so many stumbles in so little a way? In the first part
he says, [ the sentence is not to be pronounced till the condemned party (which
is that has been sentenced) bleeds,] there being confounded between two words [
sentence] and [ condemned] he makes as great a blunder as if a man should say
the five Vowels are not five yet, but shall be. But leaving out [ condemned]
and saying, the sentence is not to be pronounced till the party bleeds, then he
means it must be pronounced when the party bleeds, which he to illustrate says,
[ that is, after the party has bled] viz. [ she must be Executed first, and
sentenced after.] Was ever such a Disputant: But gran^ing what he would say, if
he had sense. How is the sentence past after the Execution? At worst he can but
argue, that the sentence is given at the same time she bleeds, not after it:
For dares pronounce, bleeds, and needs, are all one tense. But now for the
blind-side of this great Master in English: He who dares pronounce her
Sentence, (which may as well be given this Minute, as any other time,) when
ever she bleeds, which is when she shall bleed, for [ when ever] makes a
present tense have a future signification, and implies the bleeding is to come,
otherwise it must have been [ now she bleeds.] Then the sense is, he who dares
pronounce her death when she shall bleed, shall need no greater torment, etc.
For [ needs] is of a future signification, as well as [ bleeds] for wherever [
when] is expressed [ then] must be either expressed, or understood; and so the
principle Verb [ needs] must necessarily be of the same tense with [ bleeds*]
But now for the [ liberal Mess of Nonsense] which to prepare your Stomachs for,
[ h^ tells you is a coming.]

For when we are dead, and our freed Souls enlarged,
Of natures grosser burdens we are discharged.
Then gentle as a happy Lovers Sigh,
Like wandering Meteors through the Air we will fly.
And in our Airy Walk as subtle Guests,
We Will steal into our cruel Fathers Breasts,
There read their Souls, and track each Passions Sphere,
See how revenge moves there, Ambition here.
And in their Orbs view the dark Characters,
Of Seiges, Ruins, Murders, Blood, and Wars.
We Will blot out all those Hideous Draughts, and write
Pure and white forms; we will with a radiant light
Their Breasts incircle till their Passions be
Gentle as Nature in its Infancy.
'Till softn'd by our Charms their Furies ccase,
And their Revenge dissolves into a Peace.
Thus by our Deaths appeased, their Quarrel ends;
Whom living we made Foes, Dead we will make Friends.
The d^sign of which is an Airy Discourse of what their Souls shall do when
they are dead, by stealing into their cruel Fathers breasts, and reconciling
the Emnities between 'em. Now if she says more than she can do, that is not the
matter. [ But wandering Meteors, hideous Draughts, dark Characters, rad^ant
Lights, white Forms, and a great deal of such insignificant stuff is damned
Nonsense.] This is the first time Mr. Dryden has been in the right: Such a
parcel of confused words put together without ever a word between them to make
them sense, would indeed be very insignificant. However sense or Nonsense the
Render is obliged to this Speech for its being occasion of so Poetical a fancy
as his [ Will in a Wisp, Madge with a Candle, Jack in a Lanthorn, etc.] A
Discourse so jauntee that it is the first you have met with yet, that has been
all clear wit, and no Billinsgate. I remember a Speech of Berenice to
Porphyrius, where she says what she will do when she comes [ all Soul and Spirit
to Porphyrius Love,] where amongst the rest she cries,

" At Night I will within your Curtains peep,
" With empty arms embrace you when you sleep.
And pray why may not Morena's soul play at Bo peep in her Fathers bosom, as
well as Berenices at Porphyrius bedside. But to embrace a man with empty arms
that indeed none but Mr. Drydens Berenice can do: But truly I thought good
Porphyrius a I^stier Lover then so, to appear nothing in her arms. So witty an
expression would make me run into the Authors praise in his own Phrase, and
say, he has an empty head, full of excellent fancies.

-- Through the Air we will fly;
And in our Airy walk, etc.
Here he has a more particular Objection against Airy walk. [An Airy walk of a
flyer.]

A Wittier Poet then e're Mr. Dryden was or can hope to be (though his own
arrogance will admit of no equal) was not guilty of Nonsense, when he said in
his Second Book of Metamorphosis, speaking of the winged Horses of the Sun,
when Pha^ton drove them.

-- Tritumque relinq^^nt
Quadrijugi spatium --
Now if winged Horses could fly in a beaten track, I guess an Airy walk for a
Soul to fly in, is no Nonsense. I Am certain an Airy walk for a place of flight
is less Poetical, then his featherd sons; for young Birds in his Rival Ladies.

" -- Birds never impose
" A rich plumed Mistress on their featherd Sons.
The Ancient World did but too modest prove,
In giving a Divinity to Love.
[A Divinity is a trifling thing! Love ought to have been something above a
Divinity. Though what that thing is no body can tell, nor is there any such
thing, yet that thing Love is.]

The Poets plain meaning of these Lines is: That the World in calling Love a
Divinity, gave it an Attribute below it, for Love he says afterward has a
Power above that of a Divinity. But then the Commentatour desires you to think
that he means it is so infinitely above it, that a Divinity is but a trifle. As
if a man in saying a Diamond is worth more than a Ruby, must needs infer a Ruby
is worth nothing. Next being told Love is above a Divinity, he asks what that
thing is that is above a Divinity, for he knows nothing that is or can be so. A
very pretty Question! How many are the Ten Commandments. But for his more
reasonable Question, [ How is Love, or the Power of Love above that of a
Divinity.]

Heaven but Creates, but Love refines our Souls.
[As if refining were a greater work than Creation.]

Well said Elkanah.
Now of all places I wonder he should stick here: I durst lay a wager that if a
^an should make any comparison between a Hundred such unrefined Souls as Poet
Settles, and the Soul of one Poet Dryden, he would take it for a greater affront,
than an Epistle to Morocco. But to come nearer to the purpose, he that takes
Mr. Drydens argument, and holds the Creation of Souls above the refining of
them, may like the old Proverb compare Sus Minervae, or believe a Cornish Bore,
or a wild Arabian, a better man than a Fully or an Aristotle.

Another fault is. [ Crimalhaz and Laula do not agree in any part of their two
descriptions of the old Emperors death, and they being both professed Liars who
must be believed;] I observe through his whole Pamphlet to make his accusation
true, [ that there are not four Lines together sense in the whole Play. ^ To
prove every thing Nonsense he will have so, he either implicitly begs his
Readers to believe the Authors meaning to be thus, or thus, contrary to their
Reason or the Poets design, for his own purpose; or else by never taking notice
of the dependence of what goes before, or what follows, gives a plausible
argument against this or that expression, when the Props of all sense in a
Discourse, Connection and Circumstance are taken away. Or when these fail, tells
you how such or such a thing may be alterd to be made Nonsense. As for
example, here should the Contrivers and Actors of the Emperors Murder have
held in one Tale, in public and private, as he finds fault they don't: And
have told Muly Labas the same thing they owned amongst themselves of his
Fathers Murder, they would certainly have been greater Fools than he would make
you believe Muly Labas is.

Then with his dying Breath his Soul retired,
And in a sullen sigh his Life expired.
[That is, just as he dyed, he dyed, and when he dyed, his Soul expired and his
Life retired, and he dyed.]

I have been told that before a man's life be ended, his Breath and Soul must be
gone, and that all this had been but once dying, but all Malice and no Wit, has
found out it is dying fix times over.

Another fault is, [Muly Labas at the news of his Fathers Death, and the
enjoying of Morena, in his surprise makes his grief and joy play at Leap-Frog.]

For those just tears which nature ought t'employ
To pay my last Debt to his Memory,
The Crowning of my passion disallows;
Grief slightly sits on happy Lovers Brows.
[Here he is so overjoyed for Morena, he has little sense of his Fathers Death;
in his next speech he absolutely contradicts it.]

Enjoy a Throne and my Morena wed.
A joy too great were not my Father dead.
[Here his great sorrow for his fathers Death, allays his joy for Morena.]

Now for Mr. Drydens Logic, a great sense of sorrow and a little sense of
sorrow are [ absolute contradictions] with him, I thought sorrow and no sorrow
had been contradictions. The poorest Freshman in the University would be
sconced for half so great a blunder, but Mr. Dryden is a great professor of
Learning, if you will believe himself or his flatterers, and so cannot sin.

Delirant Reges, plectuntur Achivi.
But g^anting this mistake in our Laureat to be nothing, as for my part if
you will all agree I am very willing to grant it, and can as easily forgive the
Non sense he writes now for the sense he has writ, as some charitable people
cherish old ^ame Horses for their past services, and the strength they have
had: But now I am in the pardoning humor, I Will examine his natural Philosophy
in this Argument, and now my hand is in, forgive his mistakes in that too. If
he be against [ Muly Labas his joy jumping over his grief, and his grief
jumping over his joy [(as he calls it,] then he must be for their not jumping
one over another, unless he be like Mr. Jordan that would have his Language
neither in Verse nor Prose. First he will grant Muly Labas had reason to be joyful
for the enjoyment of his Mistress, and sorry for his Fathers death, and at
these two surprises he must either think and reflect upon them severally or
together, but together he cannot; for it is a Maxim in nature that no man can
think of two things, much less two such contraries as Joy and Grief, at on^ and
the same Moment. and words being the description of thoughts, to speak them so
as is imp^ssible. If then they cannot Iump but by turns, Tarbox Muly Labas is
not the Fool this bou^. But now for [ the most unintelligible pie^e of
Nonsense has been me^ with yet.]

Heaven fits our swelling passions to our souls.
[ If every word had been Spears, Orbs, Infection, White Forms, etc. the sense
had been as good.] But now for this Gordian, Heaven predest^ns nothing for any
man that should raise him to an excess of joy or grief, or any other passion
more than what he can bear, which I think is fitting passions to our Souls: The
Soul being the seat of Passions. But though it be not Nonsense, yet
unintelligible I Will grant it is, viz. with Mr. Commentatour* Sense and
Understanding I confess have been formerly of his acquaintance, but he has long
since shook hand with them, I assure you. And indeed I commend him for it, he
consults his own ease in it, as a man ought to do at his Years, and why should
he burd^n himself more than his occasion requires.

When some great fortune to Mankind's conveyed,
Such blessings are by Providence allayed.
Thus Nature to the World a Sun creates,
But with cold Winds his pointed rays rebates.
[ Cool winds allay the blessing of the scorching Sun.] Why the scorching Sun?
O, yes, the blessing of the scorching Sun looks like a Contradiction; and
therefore [ scorching] is the word for thy turn.

Well to humor the Child [ scorching] shall be the word: But then sure the
heat of the Sun that scorches men, produces Plants and Fruits, etc. and though
it offends their Bodies, it maintains their Lives, and if this be not a
blessing, Notes is infallible: Nay, where the heat of the Sun is so excessive
that it makes the Earth barren, as to the production of plants, yet there it
operates another way, and produces Gold. And there are those who (say Bays what
he can) will think that a blessing too.

Thy early growth we in thy Chains had crushed,
And mixed thy Ashes with thy Fathers dust.
[A strange Engine it must be that can crush a man to Ashes, and as strange a
Poison that can turn a man to Dust in two hours time, for it could be no
longer since the Emperor dyed.]

Bear up briskly Laureat, there you have him: For the Poet lies Divellishly if
he tells you that his Emperor can be really Dust and Ashes in so little a
time. But if Mr. Dryden had ever had a friend worth following to the Grave, he
would have heard e're this time of Dust to Dust and Ashes to Ashes, said of
those that had been neither of them. How common a Figure is this in Discourse.
Does his Montezuma (when he says of Cortez.

" Grant only he who has such honor shown,
" When I am dust may fill my empty throne.)
Desire that Cortez may not enjoy his Throne immediately after his Death, but
stay till he is Dust first: See what mistakes his malice makes, though to his
own disadvantage. He has two more observations of the same kind in the Fifth
Act. page 55. His Blood shall pay what to your Brothers dust I owe, [He turned
Dust very quickly in a Country which preserves Mummy 3000. years.]

Page 57. So may my Body rot when I am dead,
'Till my rank Dust has such contagion bred,
My Grave may dart forth Plagues, as may strike Death
Through the infected Air where thou drawst Breath.
[ By that time it is Dust, it will cease to be rank, and consequently breed no
contagion, if it bred none before.] Well but to make it sense in Bays his Style
let it run thus.

So may my Body rot when I am dead,
'Till my rank Putrefaction, or rank Corruption, or Filth, Nastiness or the
like -- How delicately this would run in Heroic Verse, and how proper and
pleasant would it be for a Gentleman to speak, and an Audience to hear. If the
Author had used [ Dust] in a strict sense, (as Bays to make it Nonsense would
have you believe he does) he should nor have said, so may my body rot when I am
dead, till my rank Dust, etc. but thus. After my Body has done rotting may my
rank Dust, etc. for I take it, the Rotting must be over before it be really
Dust. This Positive Critic sure would find infinite fault, with such an
expression as [ the Turkish Crown] and to bring it to his sense, alter it, and
say Turkish Turbant, for they wear no Crowns.

Poisoned my Husband, Sir, and if there need,
Examples to instruct you in the deed,
I Will make my actions plainer understood,
Copying his Death on all the Royal Blood.
[ She will instruct him by an Example to do a deed that is done, and by an
Example that must be copyed after his Example, which he again is to copy, etc.]
A great deal more pudder he makes about a Copy and a Copy and a Copy, etc. This
Objection has a little of the Polish in it, for he talks of a Copy much at the
rate of the Cloak-bag: But now to the Argument. [ she will instruct him to do a
deed that is done,etc.] Here he is at his old way of Begging the meaning, but a
wiser Body would have guest her meaning to have been, that for his better
understanding what she had already done, she would give him more examples of
the same kind for his instruction.

I am a Convert, Madam, for kind Heaven,
Has to Mankind immortal Spirits given,
And Courage is their Life: but when that sinks,
And to tame Fears and Coward faintness shrinks,
[Which he writes into tame Fears, etc. which quite alters the sense.]

We the great work of that bright frame destroy,
And show the world that even our Souls can die.
[ The Poet is at his Mock Reasons,] But I am afraid the Commentatour is, [
Crimalhaz is converted to Villainy for the very Reasons he should be honest.] If
Crimalhaz be beyond the fear of damnation and is possessed that in being
Ambitious, Villainous, and Bloody, he does well and nobly, it is Nonsense for
him to call himself otherwise then a convert to Villainy for Conversion and
A^ostacy are sense only as they respect the Opinion or Faith of him that speaks
'em. A Roman Catholic shall tell you of such Protestants made Converts to his
Religion, and a Protestant of such Converts of Catholics to his, and so with
Turks and Christians, etc. And yet they all speak sense. If any good Character
in the Play that believed Crimalhaz his Tenants ill had said he had been
converted to Villainy, it had been Nonsense: But hang consideration, Mr.
Dryden's above it. But for his next Objection, [ Riddle my riddle, can Courage
become Cowardice, or Immortality mortal,] What pretty Sophistry is this? A
Courageous man it is possible may turn a Coward, which is the sense of the very
words, for when Courage in a man sinks and gives way to fear and Cowardice,
that Courageous man turns a Coward, but not his Courage Cowardice; No more then
I can say of any thing that was white once, and is now dyed black that the
whiteness is become blackness. But his Objections are many of them built upon
this falacy to make reflections upon Incoherence in qualities instead of
persons and things. But then how does Crimalhaz say Immortality becomes mortal?
He says, Heaven has given immortal Souls to Men, viz. to those men whose
Courages are so, Courage as he thinks being the Life of the Soul. But those,
whose Courages can fade, be corrupted and dye, their Souls by consequence can
do so too. So he affirms that true Courage, viz. that which cannot decline
makes Souls immortal, but Cowardice mortal.

And by such subtilties his Breast infect,
'Till he his Generals Loyalty suspect.
[ No body can infect another with a disease which he has not himself, or
carries not about him some way or other. Hametalhaz then must have suspicion of
the Generals Loyalty, or carry the Disease about him, else he cannot infect the
King with it.] Did ever any man make such a pudder for nothing. First [ Infect]
is Lasht, as Beggars for straggling, it transgresses its bounds, and therefore
Mr. Critic by Constable Law confines it home to the place of its Nativity. It
must be sense no where but where it refers to a Disease: Well to compliment him
it shall be so confined. [But then no body can infect another with a Disease he
has not himself, or carries not about him some way or other.] Dear heart thou
art in the right. What do thou think of Nurses: Nay, Cats or Dogs in a Plague
time that have carried infection with them, yet have not had the Disease
themselves. So Hametalhaz had something or other (as thou say) about him, to
make the King jealous of his General though he was not so himself. Never was
such stuff -- but it is his Talent and there is an end.

And to that pitch his heightened Virtues raise,
That their perfection shall appear their Crime,
As Giants by their Height do Monsters seem.
[ Here he makes Giantickness the perfection of Humane Stature, and says,
Giants are not Monsters, only seem so to Mankind: By consequence all that are
not Giants are imperfect if not Monsters.] The Poet makes Giantickness, etc.
and says, etc. That is Mr. Dryden makes and says it for him, for he neither
says nor implies any such thing; Crimalhaz tells the Queen Mother he will extol
Muly Hamets Virtues so highly that their perfection shall appear their crime,
as Giants appear or seem Monsters for their height But how he says or infers, [
Giants are not Monsters, and but only se^m so to Mankind.] You have only Mr.
Drydens word for, and how much that has been worth hitherto in his
Observations, I leave his Readers to Judge. Though indeed some are apt to think
that Giants are not really Monsters though received so, a Monster in its true
definition being a Creature that either wants or has more parts than Nature
requires to make up true proportions and Symetry. And yet a Giant, how much
greater soever than an ordinary man, may have all parts proportionable, nor
have more or less Arms or Legs, or a^y other particular. However if the
reception of a Monster be more large, and Giants are Monsters, to say a thing
seems to be what it is, no Nonsense.

Brave Crimalhaz thy Breast and mine agree.
[ How Breasts can agree or quarrel any more than Arms or Legs I cannot tell.]
And truly we believe him; but if he cannot tell what [ agreeing] signifies
besides being friends, he is not the best Commentatour I have met with.

We'll Act his Death in State.
[ Will she have a Play made on it, and Act her self in it.] Now why nothing
can be Acted but in a Play I cannot tell neither: I am afraid he is not so
Critical in his own writings. Almah. to Almanz. page 51.

" You bound and freed me; but the difference is,
" That showed your Valor, but your Virtue this.
As if Valor were no Virtue. though it be none of his Virtues, others are
pleased to compliment it with the title of a Virtue, when they made Fortitude
one of the Cardinal Virtues. But perhaps he will distinguish, between Valor in
one degree, and Valor in another, for Valor is not always a Virtue, there is
a Brutish Valor (though very improperly, for in Brutes it is Courage.) Yes,
that answer is for his purpose, for these two Lines are spoken of Almanzor.

We Will Act his Death in State,
And dash his Blood against his Palace gate.
[ A stately thing to dash a Pail full of Blood against a Palace gate.] This
Commentator, like Eustathius upon Homer, observes more in every Line than the
Poet e're thought on, for I durst swear for him, he never considered just how
much the Emperors Veins held; which Mr. Dryden has politickly found to be a
Pail-full: But I am afraid in observing the quantity he forgot the quality,
that it was the Blood of a King when he infers by his observation how
inconsiderable the dashing so much Blood against a Palace Gate would be. But he
comments, and these are Notes and so forth.

Now for the [ most rumbling piece of Non sense that has come yet.]

To flattering lightning our feignd smiles conform,
Which backed with Thunder do but guild a storm.
[ Flattering Lightning! no, Lightning sure is a threatening thing.] But he has
answer^d for me in his Royal Martyr.

" About the place did nimble Lightning play,
" Which offered us by fits and snatched the day.
If it has so brisk a Light that in a dark storm it can make an appearance of
day, which in a moment vanishes again, it certainly is a very flattering thing
to make such splendid illusions to so little purpose. But backed with Thunder
much offends him, and a great deal of do he makes about [ a Trooper on
Horseback.] I took [ backt] to be more frequently used for attended: An
allusion taken from a Leader and his forces, which in all reason would have
better agreed with Lightning which immediately precedes the Thunder. But then
he has a long dispute against guilding a storm.

Now to say that Lightning (which for a moment changes the whole face of
Heaven, and makes a glittering Light where so much darkness was before,) guilds
a storm, I think a pardonable Metaphor: but then he will tell you that it is [ do
guild] not [ does guild] a storm, and so as a Plural Verb it refers to [
Smiles.]

To answer that it should be [ does guild] and that it was an oversight in the
correction of the Press, which though it be true, and is, and has been always
spoken in Acting [ does guild a storm.] Yet since it looks like Mr. Drydens
reprinting, Follow Fate which would too fast pursue instead of does too fast
pursue: I will not make that Apology, for it is sense both ways. It Is an usual
custom in Similes to apply the Analogy, either Rei Analoganti or Rei
Analog^ae. I Will go no farther than his own writings: Almahide says of Almanzor
Page 31.

" Mark but how terrible his Eyes appear,
" And yet there is something roughly noble there;
" Which in unfashion'd nature, seems divine;
" And like a Gemme does in the quarry shine.
Here something in Almanzors unfashion'd nature like a Gemme shines in the
quarry; what quarry has he in him, if he goes to the strictness of the sense,
for it to shine in? [ how can Smiles guild a storm?] If he will admit of no
Allegories why does he make them? It should have been Lightning guilds the
storm, so for the same reason he should have said Almanzor had something in him
roughly noble, which seemed Divine, and like a Gemme which in the quarry
shines; for the Gemme he means shines in the quarry. But because he told you [
the Act ended with such rumbling Non sense] it shall do so; and therefore you
shall have one of his Granada Similes. He compares Almanzors Bull to a Monarch,
and says of him.

" That Monarch like he ranged the lifted fields,
" Some tossed, some goar'd, some trampling down he killed.
He has the strangest Notion of Monarchs that ever I heard of, if ranging,
goaring, tossing and trampling be their qualities, I am afraid this Simile has
a little of his Signpost Painting in his preface [the Lion is very like a Rose]
He tells you of something like a Monarch, but by all I can perceive by his
ranging, tossing, etc. it is no more than a Bull when all is done.

ACT The Second.
GReat sir, Your Royal Fathers general
Prince Muly Hamet's Fleet does Homewards Sail.
[ Here he makes Muly Hamet 's Fleet to be the old Emperors General, etc.]

[ General] and [Prince Muly Hamet] I think are near enough to be better
acquainted.

In a Solemn and Triumphant pride.
[ In a Triumphant pride! Then the pride was Victorious before, so the Ships
conquered with their pride.] How will this Line.

The Conquerors Triumphant Chariot grace Escape. Did the Chariots conquer?
Besides if so impertinent a question were worth answering, by his favor what
is Triumph but pride, the vain glory a Conqueror takes after Victory.

Their Course up the great River Tensist guide.
[ They guide their course, that is they steer themselves.] I hope the Helm
that is a part of the Ship guides the Ship, though (as Adlepate gives us to
understand) the Pilot steers.

Whose gilded Currents do new Glories take
From the reflection his bright Streamers make.
[ If the Currents (...) gilded when they take new glories, then the Currents
are double Hatched.] At him again Bays; In the Ma^k in the Fourth Act.

And his tortured Entralls s^ing.
[ If his Entrails were (...) or before, why should they be s^ung afterward.]
These two objections are so like one another, and both so sillily made, that
it is pity to part them. [ Guilded] in the first refers to [ new glories] and [
tortur'd] in the last to [ stung,] and to prove how proper the Authors
expressing of it is. In the first Book of Mr. Cowleys Davide^, speaking of his
desisting from writing of his Mistress, to write a Sacred Poem. I meet this
Line.

My well-chang'd Muse, I a chaste Vestal make.
Now a man as impertinent as Mr. Noses, (but Heaven forbid there should be such
another Creature in nature; for it is pity such a rarity should be match^)
would ask if his Muse was well changed before, what need she be made a chaste
Vestal now. But a man of sense, and one that had none of Bays his Wind-(...) in
his head, would tell ye, that the making her a chaste Vestal was the well
changing of his Muse.

From the reflection his Bright Streamers make.
[ I thought the Water had made the reflection not the Streamers.] I thought if
the Streamers had not been there, the Water could not have made the reflection
of them. If it had been from the reflection which those Currents make: If the
Currents made the reflection, why was it not made before the Ships came? That
supposition would be almost as great a Bull, as the two first Lines in his
Indian Emperor.

" On what now happy Climate are we thrown,
" So long kept secret, and so lately known.
A new Climate long kept. Oh! but Notes will answer it was new to Cortez, for
he never was there before, which he would have done well to have expressed, for
as it is, it is as good sense, as if a man should put on an old cast Suit of
another man's, and say it is new because he never wo^e it before.

The Waves a Masque of Martial Pageants yield.
[ The Masque is made of the Waves, a new kind of Ship^ built of Wa^^r.]
Hud^^^^^ every Inch.

-- By force
Of Argument a Man's no Horse.
I am afraid if there had not been Waves, or Water, or something to that
purpose to help toward it, the motion of these Pag^ants had been spoild.

A flying Army on a floating Field.
[ Flying is an excellent. Epithet for a Victori^^^ Army.] Flying on or off,
is all alike to Mr. Commen^^tour, I wonder what he thinks of Alexanders Army,
which was called a Flying Army, for his expedition in overrunning Asia, and
yet as I take it there is no Record of Alexanders running away from an Enemy.

[ But now the Martial Pageants which I took to be Ships are a flying Army: Our
Fleet is sunk already, and turned into a^ Army.] Is it so A very pretty kind of
Notes his L^gerdemain.

Order and Harmony in each appear.
[ In each? In what? In the flying Army, the Waves, the Masque, or the floating
Field.] And how many things do all these amount to, but Water and Ships? If he
can make any more of them, it is the first time I took him for a Conjurer.

Their lofty Bulks the foaming Billows b^ar.
[ Now the Ships are Buoyed up again.] Hocus again. [ It is no great news to
(...) in England that Water bears Ships.] It Is well he tells us he believes so,
for by the shallowness of his reason hitherto, a little matter would make him
believe any thing.

In state they move, and on the Waves rebound,
[ To rebound on the Waves is to leap up from the water into the Air.] He Is at
Descriptions again. But by the way let me ask him, if Leaping off the Waves, be
rebounding on them.

As if they danced to their own Trumpets sound:
[ Merry Ships to cut Capers as they Sail.] Why that Ships may do, if they are
such Creatures as this fresh Water Soldier believes they are, that have Legs
and Hands, [that can put off their Caps, and make Legs] as he says. Granada
p.49. Benzayda.

" Death with our meeting Planets danced above.
I am afraid to make Planets, nay Death too such merry grigs as to cut Capers
and turn Dancers is a little Burlesquo, whatever Ships may be fancied to do.

By Winds inspired, with lively Grace they roll
[ Ships never Roll but in Calms.] I judged that in Calms they had lain still.
Either he takes all seasons to be Calms or Storms, and so fresh Gales are Calms
with him, or else he believes that Ships have really those Souls which
Hametalhaz alludes to, if in still water, without help of Wind or Tide, they
can Roll of themselves.

As if that Breath and motion lent a Soul.
[ Here he makes the effect produce the cause; whereas it is a Soul that lends
Breath and motion, he makes Breath and motion lend a Soul, as if sight could
lend Eyes, if so, then sight must be before Eyes.]

Now why the Soul is the cause of Breath and motion I believe he cannot resolve
us, for it is much disputed whether the Soul be any thing else but Breath and
motion, viz. in Irrational Creatures; all senses being made by a flux or motion
of Spirits through several Organs to the Brain. And so the Soul is but a notion
or term of Art used to signify that Breath and motion: And if Don Critic
makes this learned Discant that the cause is prior natura than the effect; by
his own argument, Things are before Names; and by his rules of priority, Breath
and motion cause a Soul.

And with that Soul, they seem taught Duty too,
[ Here this Soul is lent by instruction they are taught a Soul, and with it
taught Duty.]

Why taught a Soul! what does the Pronoun [ that] point to* but the lent Soul
in the foregoing Line.

Their Topsails lowered their heads with Reverence bow.
As if they would their Generals worth enhance.,
From him, by instinct ta^ght Allegiance.
[ The Ship learns by instinct, that is, it learns from another, by having it
naturally of it self.]

Why it learns from another? Let the question be answered out of the Authors
words, by what taught Allegiance? By instinct. From whom? From him? viz. the
General, and then pray examine the reception of instinct, and find this Line
Nonsense dear heart, and eris mihi magnus Apollo, though Instinct in all cases
be what a man has naturally in himself, yet that instinct never produces
actions, but from some circumstance or cause, extra hominem. For example, some
men have an ^^tipathy against a Cat, and by instinct, though they see her not,
shall tremble and sweat, or the like when they come near her, and though by
nature they have this Antipathy, yet it is from the presence of the Cat, that
instinct operates, they would not tremble were she not there. If the Poets*
Ships, (which he by his [As if] in the first Line, only fancies of them not
affirms of them, for the affirmative would be Non sense, Instinct and Allegiance
being inconsillent with inanimate Creatures.) If his Ships, I say, are fancied
to have a Sympathy with their General, and by instinct can express their
Allegiance when he expresses his; certainly though their supposed innate Virtue
of expressing their Allegiance be in themselves, yet the Power of expressing it
is from him: For if he did not express His, they could not exercise their
Sympathetick quality, and express Theirs with him. But perhaps he will find fault
with the English, and tell us to say, That such a thing is taught to do this or
that by instinct, does not please him. But as for that, let it pass: If he be
so hard to please, he is not worth the humouring.

Whilst she loud Cannons echo from the shore,
Their flaming Breaths salute you Emperor.
From their deep mouths he does your Glory sing.
[ He (...) his Glory and with their mouths] that is the Cannons Mouths, Which
is like its fellows, Nonsense. [ For no man can sing with another man's mouth.]
Therefore not with a Cannons mouth: a very Poetical reason. I hope the modest
Commentatour will tell us,) as he tells the Poet he studied this Nonsense with
another man's Brains,) that here he had the help of the Breathen, for no less
then a Triumviri of Poets could have produced so weighty a --

With Thunder, and with Lightning, greets his King.
[ But two Lines since he called it salute an Emperor, and thus these mannerly
Ships salute an Emperor, but greet a King, and in saluting, (he says) ^hey but
flash in the Pan only.] If Cannons were so well bred in his Metaphor as only to
flash in the Pan, I dare lay an even wager that Mr. Dryden durst venture to
Sea. [ But when Greet's the word, then the Thunder and Lightning comes.] I
observe which is very often objected through the Play, he finds fault that in a
Scene or a Speech the Poet uses the words Monarch, King, Prince, Sovereign,
Emperor, and all for the same person, another time, Destiny, Fate and
Providence for the same thing, as here [ salute] and [ greet] and this forsooth
is impardonable. I believe he means to bring Poetry to the rules of the Law,
and having once spoke of a King we must cry at next occasion to name him the
aforesaid, or abovenamed King party to these presents. I wonder where the
excellency of a tongue would be, which lies in the copiousness of words to
express the same thing by, if this Confinement were imposed on its^^reest
subject Poetry. But I find he has clearly designed the Authors ^verthrow, and
being possessed with an absolute certainty of his Ruin by this fatal blow,
prescribes him Laws after the rate of severe Conquerours to Vanquished Enemies
such as they would be unwilling to be tied to themselves.

Thus to express his Ioys in a loud Quire.
[ He s^renaded the King with a Quire of Guns: S^renading and greeting are
proper Sea term.] I have looked over the Speech and can find no such term as [
s^renading] in it, but that is no matter, the sense and terms of expressions are
all one in his Dictionary, [Greet] indeed is crept in, very timely for a lash,
and though it signifies saluting, however it is no Seamans word, and therefore
Nonsense. There indeed he was too blame for making his Hametalhaz a Courtier
and no Tarpolin; Larbord and Starbord with a score more of such words, would
have made excellent Drydenism and no Bombast, and the Ships had been Ships, [
which here they are not.]

And consort of winged Messengers of fire
[ Singers sure and not Messengers make a Consort.] To answer him in his own
s^renading Phrase, if by his argument a Gentleman should play on a Violin under
a Ladies Window, he must Ipso facto turn Fiddler and no Gentleman, for he can be
nothing but a Fiddler that plays on a Fidle: But then if I should call him a
Fine Gentleman it is worse Nonsense still, for it is not his fin^ Clothes but his
Fingers that play on his Instrument, [ as it is the Voices, not the wings that
make this Consort,] give it Sugar-Plums, give it Sugar-Plums.

[ But how are they Messengers of Fire? Did the Fire blow the Guns up into the
Air, or was every Corn of Powder a winged Messenger? Then their Wings were very
small.] To distinguish particular Corns of Powder in the Discharge of a Cannon
requires a younger Eyesight than Mr. Commentatours. Had thou Brains in thy
Head, dear Heart, when thou could talk of writing Volumes, and labor like
Mons Parturiens with no more then this? but how are they winged Messengers, the
next Lines will inform you.

He has his Tribute sent and Homage given:
As men in Inconse send up Vows to Heaven.
[ A Tributary Subject.] I cannot find the Poet speaks any thing of a Tributary
Subject: he calls indeed his loud expressing of his joys a tribute to his
Prince: If this be sin, Heaven help the wicked. But then [ can thoughts be
carried up in Smoke? He as well may say he will Bake thoughts or Roast thoughts
as Smoke them,] then he compares Thunder, Lightning, and Roaring of Guns to
Incense, and says he expresses his loud joys in a consort of Thundering Guns,
as men send up silent Vows in gentle Incense, if this description is not
plentifully supplied with Nonsense, I Will refer my self to the Reader] and I to
mine. It Is plentifully supplied indeed, for Mr. Commentatour has given us Ample
Testimonies of his stock of Nonsense, in his over kindness to this Authors
wants, in furnishing him with so large s^pplies of it: It Is well he has so much
to spare, that he can afford his very Enemies such quantity. I assure you were
it a thing I much delighted in, I should Court his friendship above any man's I
know. But how little delight soever I take in it, to show you I am not an
absolute Nonsense hater, I Will return to his last Argument.

[ Can thoughts go up in Smoke, or be Baked or Roasted?] How Common an
expression, sending up Vows to Heaven in Incense and sacrifice is, I leave to
the judgment of those that have a great deal less conversation in Books, such
as have read less, but understood more sense than Mr. Dryden. Now for the
Simile, which in plain sense runs thus; the General expressed his devotion to the
King in fire and smoke as men send up Vows to Heaven in Incense. But then Sir
Politic Would be has found out [ that Canons make a roaring fire, and Incense
a gentle silent fire,] he might as well have gone on, and said that Incense
makes a sweet fire, and Gunpowder a stinking fire; therefore his devotion
s^inks, and it is no Simile. Besides, Canons are m^de of Iron or Brass, and
Altars on which Incense is burnt of Stone or brick, no Simile again. At this
Senseless Rate will I make the best Simile that can be writ Nonsense. And for
example take, a rarity, a Simile with sense in it. In his Granada

Almanzor says of Boabdelin.

" But at my ease, thy destiny I send,
" By ceasing from this Hour to be thy friend.
" Like Heaven I need but only to stand still,
" And not concurring to thy Life I kill.
Here if I Would be as impertinent as he, I should ask how can Almanzors standing
still be like Heavens standing still. If he means That Heaven in which the fixed
Stars are, and be of Copernicus opinion, the supposition of his Simile is
Nonsense: But if of Ptolemys, and supposing Heaven should desist from motion
and influence, he must infer the destruction of Day and Night, and seasons, and
by consequence the ruin of all Mankind: or if he mean^ by Heaven the Divinity
that rules the world 'twould be as bad. How then can Almanzors standing still
which threatens but the ruin of a poor Pigmey King Boabd^lin, be compared to
the standing still of Heaven which ruins a World.

By this extravagant reasoning, I Will prove the best thing he ever wrote
Nonsense. And what with Larding of part Quibble, and part Sophistry imitate his
way of arguing, and make his description of Ships every Line Nonsense, and
demonstrate it so plainly, that if my Pamphlet Readers be but half so much
Fools as I suppose he thought his would be, I shall Infallibly bring them to my
side.

" I went in order Sir to your command,
" To view the utmost limits of the Land.
Then Gyomar must be supposed to have rode round the Land for his Fathers
Kingdom had its utmost limits on all sides as well as on that side, where
Cortez his Fleet landed. But Gyomar in the following Lines tells you he had
been but one way, and therefore the utmost limits of the Land is Nonsense.

" To that Sea shore where no more world is found;
" But foaming Billows breaking on the ground.
Here he makes two absolute contradictions in two Lines, in the first, he tells
you of a place where no world was, and in the next he says in the same place
was world, for if Billows and Ground which is Earth and Water be no part of the
World in Mr. Drydens Cosmography, his Philosophy will get him less credit then
his Notes upon Morocco.

" Where for a while my Eyes no object met,
" But distant Skies that in the Occan set.
His Eyes no object met but Skies? How did the Skies meet his Eyes, did his
Eyes go half way, and the Skies come the other half toward him, Oh, kind and
coming Skies. like page 27.

His Death to tears their Crystal Orbs would melt.
[ Would the Orbs cry at Muly Hamets death, O kind, good ^^ur'd Orbs, cry your
Eyes out for Muly Hamet.] His Eyes met Skies: then they were like Elkanab's
Pilgrims.

Pilgrims whose zeal's more blessed though less divine,
Go meet their Saints, but I must fly from mine.
[I thought the Saints had staid for them in their shrines, but Mr. Settles
Saints are civiller than any other.]

But then why distans skies which in the Ocean set! If the Indians believed the
Skies to terminate where they seem to do, I Am sure the extremity of a man's
sight on the Sea cannot be 40. Miles, and if the Sky had set where it appears
to do, Gyomar who had traveled above 1000 Miles by his Fathers command for no
other reason but to view the limits of the Land, which Journey the Poet found
out for a Prince of his Quality for no other cause than putting his description
in a Principal Characters mouth, this Gyomar of all Mankind should never have
called the Skies but at Forty Miles off distant skies.

" And low-bung Clouds that dipped themselves in Rain,
" To shake their fleeces on the Earth again.
Clouds that dipped themselves in Rain! I thought it had never been rain till it
fell from the Clouds, This is the greatest piece of Drydenian Nonsense that I
have met with yet, to call the exhalation of watery vapors which makes rain,
Rain before it is made. But Mr. Dryden is a Scholar, and can tell you it was
Rain in potentia, and that he meant it for pluvia pluvians, not pluvia pluviata
as a learnd Commentatour once prated of natura naturans, and natura naturata,
p. 40.

" To shake their fleeces on the Earth again.
Why did they ever shake them before? Be like his Clouds were good three-piled
lasting Clouds, that could hold wetting and shaking so often, and neither wear
out* nor grow threadbare* like

( Page 31. Unravel their own Scenes of Love,
[This implies the Scenes were knit.]
These Clouds were stronger sure than Pitchers for they come not so often to
the Well, but they are broken at last. But then why Fleeces? were they Woollen
Clouds? Sure the Authors Brains went a Wool-gathering.

Like page 13. To Flattering Lightning our feigned smiles conform,
Which backed with Thunder does but guild a storm.
[Sure the Poet wrote these two Lines aboard some s^ach in a storm, and being
Sea-sick spued up a good Lump of clotted Nonsense at once.]

" At last, as far as I could cast my Eyes
" Upon the Sea --
At first then his Eyes were for meeting of Objects, but now at last for fear
of not reaching them soon enough, he casts his Eyes at them. But then how did he
get at them again when they were cast upon the Sea, sure Gyomar was an excellent
swimmer for such an exploit, and like Mr. Settles ships a rare instinct animal
to find his Eyes again. But when he had found them, could he put them in again and
see with them. I have heard of glass Eyes being taken out of peoples heads, and
put in again, but ^ever of natural Eyes before. p. 39.

She is a Beauty and that names her guard.
[I have heard of a Hound-bitch, but never of a Princess so called before.]

" -- something methought did rise,
" Like bluish Mists which still appearing more,
" Took dreadful shapes and moved toward the shore.
Why something like Bluish mists? Why did he not think them really bluish
mists, by his own confession at first, he thought they looked like mists, and
how could he tell they were other than what they appeared at that distance. Oh,
but Gyomar was a Conjurer, and had the spirit of Prophecy; he knew before hand
there was something more in them than mists, and though he had a mist before his
Eyes, yet his understanding was clear. [Oh foolish Poet that did not take the
hint and pursue Gyomar's Character of a Conjurer, he lost a good opportunity of
gracing his Play with flyings and Machins.] But then why something like mists,
why not something like a mist.

Then gentle as a happy Lovers sigh, page 7.
[They two like one sigh.]
" Which still appearing more,
" Took dreadful shapes and moved toward the shore.
Appearing more!

More what? more misty or more bluish, no that is impossible for the nearer
they came they appeard less blew and less like mists. [ Thou wretched
Blunderhead how confoundedly do thou entangle thy Brain, and cannot wind off
it one clear thread of sense?]

" Took dreadful shapes.
Why took dreadful shapes! If they could take dreadful shapes, we must suppose
they had not dreadful shapes before, and therefore this was but a Copy of their
countenance, they did it only to look grim upon Gyomar, to put him in a fright,
and make him beray himself, page 24.

I can no less then shrink at horrors which my honor stain.
[ How could his horrors stain his honor, perhaps it might make him stain his
Breeches.] I doubt not but the Poet gave Cortez his Ships this power of taking
what shapes they pleased, that like his friend the King of Brandfords Army they
might go in disguise: And moved toward the shore. Was his moving toward the
shore like Mr. Settles, (guide their course.) Did they steer themselves? And
why moved?

[No doubt motion may be pleasant like Mr. Settles rouling, page 15. As the
posture may be managed.]

At this insipid rate the most wretched Scribler in the World, nay one that had
the Soul but of a Pandion and Amphigenia, might write Volumes of Errata on a
Virgil or a Cowley; Nay and better than on a Polish Princess: at the same rate
as Beauty and Majesty may be Libeld. The greatness of the Subject heightens the
profanation, but then at the same time the profanation does not les^en their
Divinity.

I could have gone through his description of Ships at this senseless Rate, but
I confess my self not so bold a writer as Mr. Dryden: And though he had the
impudence to trouble you with a Comment on a whole Play in this Style, I think
the examination of 20. Lines with such dull, idle and impertinent Remarks upon
them would tire you. But Mr. Dryden has past the Rubicon, and has over and over
again in his Prefaces told you he has had the happiness to please an age; and
though, as he declares he loves to spread his Gold thin, Witness his Love in a
Nunnery; yet you are bound to like whatever he writes.

But after all his Gigantick Arguments against Mr. Settles Ships, [he has daubd
him with his own puddle] as he calls it, that is, with a Witless parcel of
Rhimes in imitation of his description; and because Mr. Dryden shall say he is
Aped for something. I Will give him such another on the first speech of Maximin,
which I assure him is much more to his purpose, and though perhaps it has less
Poetry in it then His, that is, more Truth, yet If I should not be thought to
play booty, I would bestow it on him, and desire him to place it as a
supplement to the other.

Maxim. " Thus far my Arms have with success been Crowned,
" And found no stop, or vanquished what they found,
" The German Lakes my Legions have over past
" With all the Bars that Art or Nature cast.
" My Foes, in watery Fastnesses enclosed,
" I sought, alone to their whole War exposed.
" Did first the depth of trembling Marshes sound,
" And fixed my Eagl^s in unfaithful ground.
" By force, submitted to the Roman sway,
" Fierce Nations, and unknowing to obey.
" And now for my Reward ungrateful Rome,
" For which I fought abroad, Rebels at home.

Bays: " Thus far my Pamplet with success is Crowned,
" And found no stop, or vanquished what it found.
" My Mighty Notes Morocco have over past,
" With all the Bars, that Sense or Reason cast.
" His faults in slippery Fatnesses enclosed,
" Him I Have in Print to the whole Town exposed.
" Did first the depth of every Sentence sound,
" And Played the Critic on unfaithful Ground.
" By force of Nibling, Quibling, Scribbling Wit,
" Madet' unknown Reasons, unknown faults submit.
" And now for my Reward the ungrateful Town,
" For must'ring up His Nonsense, cries Mine down.

But now for a greater blow than this man of words has given yet. [ Morocco is
an Inland City, and Tensift never bore any Ships, etc. Therefore the Poet has
cut this passage up to Morocco, for no other reason than to make an idle
description of Ships, etc. And how likely is it that a General should bring
home his Landforces in a Fleet Sailing up a River, etc.] If Morocco be an
Inland City, so is London too, and yet the River Thames which runs by it, (as
Tensift does by Morocco, a River held as great as the Thames, and as
Navigable,) can bear Ships, and bring up a Fleet near enough to be seen from
any Tower in London, and why Tensift must be prohibited from doing the like,
Mr. Notes must resolve us. But then why a Fleet for Landforces, if he had ever
read Geography, he had found some of the places which the Poet makes Muly Hamet
Conquer Maritime Towns, as Salli for example, a place which our Coffeehouse
friend, with no greater reading than a Gazet, by the name of Salli men of War,
might have guest had been near the Sea. Nor indeed, are any that the Poet
mentions very far from the Sea. But then the prettiest of all is, he is angry
the General comes not home by Land: that indeed had been very Comical to have
deserted a Fleet, and set his Ships a Float, that his Forces might travel so
many Miles home by Land, and in so hot a Country too as Morocco. But granting
Ships could not come so near Morocco: It Is very likely the King of Morocco
might have a Fleet, (which Notes find fault with him for having) since his
whole Kingdom lay on one side upon the Atlantic Ocean, though his Metropolis
(granting Mr. Commentatours assertion true) had been a hundred miles farther
from the Sea than it is. I Will give him as good an argument as this, nearer home
in his own Style. The French have no Ships, for Paris is an Inland City, and
some hundred miles from Sea.

But now [ For the Land of Gotham where we meet nothing but Fools and Nonsense]

Says the King to his Victorious General.

Welcome true owner of that Fame you bring,
A Conqueror is a Guardian to a King.
Conquest and Monarchy consistent are,
It Is Victory secures the Crowns we wear.
[ Welcome true owner. As if a man could be a false owner or have a wrong right
to a thing.] A wrong right to a thing! He takes all the care possible to twist
contradictions together, to make every thing appear Nonsense. Nay, confutes the
opinion he desires you to have of his high conversation, when he wilfully seems
not to understand expressions that a man must meet every day in discourse. Has
not he heard of the true or right owner of such or such a thing: For my part I
blush for him to think what great structures his malice has designed, where his
foundations are so shallow.

A Conqueror is a Guardian to a King.
[ Poor King! The Poet makes thee here confess thy self fit to be begged for a
Fool, and so ^^use Muly Hamet for thy Guardian.] And so with a great deal of
other stuff in pursuance of Estate, Fool and Guardian, he mawls the Poet and
his King. If none but Fools have estates as his argument implies: Mr. Dryden
has politickly given you to understand the chief Reason why he is a Wi^, and
whether or no it abuses the Po^t, it is no matter it flatters the Commentatour.
[ And the last two Lines, ^he says) rise and are more foolish one than the
other.] But how! Heaven knows: for he has so hudled together a parcel of stuff,
in which contrary to all his former objections, he neither aims at argument nor
wit, as [ A Conqueror is a brave fellow, and serves his King, and it is
possible he may be an honest fellow, and his King and him to agree, etc.] which
no body denies: that I cannot tell what he would be at. Then I must answer to
what I think he meant* and since his business is to make every thing Nonsense,
we must suppose that Victory cannot secure Crowns, nor had Muly Hamets
Conquests, and Muly Labas his Monarchy and consistence.

Muly Hamet is returned from Reducing some revolted places to their obedience
from retaking Towns from the Usurper Gayland, and after the vanquishing of the
Kings enemies, says Notes, he neither serves his Crown, nor has the
establishing of a Kings Right and suppression of usurpation, nor the enlarging
his Dominions any consistence with Monarchy. I am very glad our dear friend has
got stage preferment, and that the State has mist him, as for a Play-wright he
may pass, but God bless him for a Statesman.

My Actions all are on your name enrol'd.
[What it is t'enroul upon Parchment I know, but not upon names.]

The meanest Citizen in Town, and the poorest Servitour in the University would
tell him that putting so much upon a man's name, had signified placing so much
to his account.

With burning ships made Beacons on the Sea.
[He fired Beacons after the Victory.]

Preethy take the foregoing Line a^ong with thee.

I made their Fleet to Conquest light my way,
With burning ships made ^cacons on the Sea.
To light his way to Conquest, is in Notes his Observations to light his way
after Conquest.

Whose very looks so much your foes surprise,
That you like Beauty conquer with your Eyes.
[ Here he gives Eyes to a Notion, etc.] and so on he runs for half a dozen
Lines with [ the Eyes of Features, the Eyes of ones Nose, the Eyes of ones
Mouth.] But then he checks himself, and says, [ no, perhaps he means you like a
Beauty conquer, etc. and then it is an Heroic Epithet to call a General a
Beauty, and tell him he conquered with his Eyes like a pretty Wench.] How Beauty
is a^ Epithet here, he should have told us.

It Is his usual way of making a great many Lines to show how such a thing taken
in such a sense would be Nonsense. But then he cuts himself off and says the
Poet means otherwise; and then it is Nonsense this way or that way: If the Poets
fault lies here not there, to what purpose signifies his first accusation? Yes,
it signifies much, for he is so kind to his Readers that he will not let them
have all Elkanabs Nonsense, but some of Mr. Commentatours.

But then [ to say the General conquered with his Eyes like a pretty Wench is
not Heroic.] Yes indeed had [ pretty Wench] been put in instead of [ Beauty]
it had not been very Heroic, but as it is, it must pass.

No Madam, War has taught my hand to aim,
At Glory to deserve a Lovers name.
[ Here he makes hands to aim, in another place he makes them give a blast.]
Blasted with the hand of Heaven. Which a younger Eyesight would have read page
52. of Morocco. Blasted by the hand of Heaven, which quite alters the sense.

Why not aim at Glory with his hand! if he conquers with his hand, why not aim
at Glory by it. Perhaps he would have had him aimed at Glory, Almanzors way
which was to look men dead, who knew his strength so great that he could
threaten to kill Boabdelins Guards when he was disarmed. page 67.

" Here take me, bind me, carry me away,
" Kill me, I Will kill you if you disobey.
But Muly Hamets Glory was a work of a greater labor to him. But Blasted by
the hand of Heaven. The common acception of the hand of Heaven so long used for
Heavens exercising its power in any manner, Elkanah need not beg his Reader to
justify for him.

Though Mariamnes Love appeared before
The highest happiness Fate had in store,
Yet when I view it, as an Offering
Made by the hand of an obliging King,
It takes new Charms, looks brighter, lends new beat.
No Objects are so glorious or so great,
But what may still a greater form put on,
As Optic Glasses magnify the Sun.
Here Bays makes a long harange, to prove that [ Muly Hamet is a jearing
Companion and by craft abuses the King and his Sister, calling the King but a
pitiful Optic Glass, a thing to see through, and telling Mariamne that her
Love seen through that Optic Glass called a King, seems to be a greater
happiness than indeed it is*]

The Commentatour, it is to be feared, is more crafty than either Muly Hamet or
Mr. Settles Audience: For I must suspect, that the jeer Muly Hamet designed the
King and his Sister was never discovered till now, and that seeing the Sun
through a Telescope, implies that the King is a pitiful Optic Glass, a thing
to see through, I doubt are as little of kin, as Mr. Drydens Notes and Morocco.
A great deal of pudder he makes to prove the Authors words affirm that the Sun
looks bigger than it is through an Optic Glass, which you will find made out at
the old rate, for he is as constant to his way of Reasoning as he says Mr.
Settle is to writing Nonsense.

Muly Hamet says, No Objects are so glorious or so great,
But what may still a greater form put on.

What can that [ Form] mean but the visible form of a thing for the word [
objects] proves it meant so, if the Author had said nothing is so glorious,
etc. there had been some pretense for an Objection. But an Object is so
glorious or so great signifies such a thing appears so glorious or so great,
and then where is this wondrous Nonsense, when he says no Object is so glorious
or so great, but may appear a greater Object still, as the Sun appears a
greater Object, when seen through an Optic Glass, than it appeared before.

Your Subjects wait with eager joys to pay,
Their Tribute to your Coronation day.
[Tributary Subjects again. But the King is begged, and so they only give him
Tribute: I suppose a small Allowance for an acknowledgment, witness these two
following Lines.]

Whilst they behold Triumphant on one Throne,
The Wearer and defender of a Crown.
[It is something unusual for a Subject to sit on a Throne with a King, but it
is his Guardian, whose authority sways all, as it appears by the next words.]

King: Lead on --
Muly Hamet. Lead on, and all that kneel to you,
Shall bow to me. This conquest makes it due.
[ The Kings word of command signifies nothing, he is but a Cipher, and
therefore his Protector Muly Hamet gives it.]

The Kings Subjects must be Tributary Subjects, because the Poet calls their
public expressing of their joy a Tribute to his Coronation day.

A Subject and a King on one Throne is unusual? What does he take a Throne for,
a Wooden Horse, or a Joint Stool? just enough for one man's Breech and no more.
I thought that Kings at a public Solemnity, how high soever their Seats of
State were erected, were so good natured to let their Brothers and Sisters sit
by them, though perhaps there might be some distinction in the very place they
sat on. But to sit by a King with Mr. Dryden, is to Rob him of all his
authority and sway all, as he tells you it appears in the next words [ Lead on.]

Muly Hamet [ Lead on] The King is a Cipher, his command worth nothing] Now in
my simple Judgment had a les^ man then Muly Hamet took such a mighty word of
Command as [ Lead on] out of a Kings mouth, though he had been but a Gentleman
of his Bedchamber, or a less man then that, the Majesty of a King had not at
all been impaired, his Power endangered, nor he made a Cipher. Surely the
Laureat (who I think has little reason for it) has the left and most Comical
Notions of Kings that e're I met with.

No Music like that which Loyalty sings,
A Consort of hearts at the Crowning of Kings.
[Loyalty sings music, and sings a consort of Hearts, etc.]

I thought [ A consort of Hearts] had been put by apposition in the same case
with [ Loyalty] and not followed the Verb, [ sings.]

There Is no such delightful and ravishing Strain,
As the Echoes and shouts of Long Live and Reign.
Here Notes objects [ that Echoes are made only in Concave places and Woods.]
Elkan^h then shall grant that Nonsense, for this Solemnity was made in a City,
and a City you know has no Concave places in it.

No Music like that which from Loyalty springs.
[Like that which from -- is a soft Line for a Song.]

[And Loyalty was Music before, and now it is Homage, etc.]

Before Loyalty sung Music, therefore says Notes, it was Music. Now Homage
springs from Loyalty, therefore again Loyalty is Homage. I may as well tell him
that the Notes upon Morocco are Mr. Dryden, and perhaps with better reason, for
they are both but a Farce.

But then how came [ that which from] hi^her which he says is a soft Line for a
song? Preethy honest Old friend take my advice, and do not betray thy frailty:
why should thou let the World know thou want Spectacles; preethy read that
passage by daylight, and thou^^t find it no Music like what from Loyalty
springs, or if thou think that they who read thy Pamphlet, never read the
Play, were I as thee, I'd^ pal^ some better cheat upon them than such a slight
fiction.

No raising of Altars, like Long Live and Reign.
[ This Long Live and Reign, raises Altars: Sure Long Live and Reign built the
Theban Walls. ^ Why, Man of large imagination does Long Live and Reign, raise
Altars: Take the whole Stanza.

No Homage like what from Loyalty springs,
We Will kneel to our Gods, but we will dye for our Kings:
We Will pay that Devotion our Lives shall maintain,
No raising of Altars like Long Live and Reign.
Sure the Poets plain meaning is no Devotion to Gods, is like (viz. equal,) to
that they pay to Kings. And though [ Long Live and Reign,] be but the words
they use in their expressing their Devotion to their King, yet I think it a
more pardonable expression then this.

Alman. " I will not hear one word but Almahide.

If this be not much a bolder Figure, I am infinitely mistaken; For if Almanzor
as he says, will hear no word, but Almahide, and means what he says, sure he
takes a strange course of hearing the Queens impeachment, if he will have only
Alma^ide, Almahide, Almahide buz'd in his Ears, I much rather suspect he bid
her accusers keep close to their matter, and that he will hear no discourse but
of her.

Turns Vassal to a smile, a looks disguise.
[ As if a smiling look mere not a look as well as other sort of looks,] so
have all disguises looks too, if the Critic had not been Lazy, he would have found
out that too. For it had been to his purpose as much as the generality of his
Arguments. But in a strict sense a man's natural look is, what hi Aspect appears
when it is not alterd by Passions, but smiling and frowning or the like, being
the effect of passions, the look a man then bears may not improperly be called
the disguises of a look considering how like disguises they are put on or off
in a moment,

Oh Charming Sex! --
How vast a Circle does thy Magic take?
The highest Spirits humblest Lovers make.
All that Heroic Greatness, which but now
Made haughty Foes and stubborn Nations bow,
Turns Vassal to a Smile, a Looks disguise,
Who conquer Thousands are one Woman's Prize.
Fate sets Commanding Beauty in their way,
Beauty that has more God-like Power than they:
Love over the Hearts of yielding Heroes sports;
Who Are Conquerours in Camps, are Slaves in Courts,
I have put the whole speech down as necessary to tell how fallaciously he
imposes upon his Reader, what is not in Sense nor nature. He picks out these
two Lines in the Speech.

Fate sets commanding Beauty in their way,
Beauty that has more God-like power than they.
And says [ Fate sets Beauty in their way, that has more power than it, here he
puts false Grammar for Rhimes sake; and Fate sets Beauty in their way, which
has more power than it self. By consequence it is not of Fates setting, but of
its own; for without its own consent Fate could never set it, if it has more
power than Fate,] If he had not designed to have took Po^t Nynnyes way of
distributing the Copyes of his Pamplet to so many hundred of his particular
Friends, who would have cried up what ever he wrote right or wrong, he could
not sure but imagine that if it came to an impartial hand his blind-side would
certainly be discovered. But perhaps he had not so much policy.

Any Man sure that could read English would have found in these words [their
way,] that there was something pointed at more than Beauty or Fate, which are
singulars: but he cunni^gly cut of the connection to co^ceal all things else
that might be understood in this Speech, but ignorantly forgot to change [their
way] into [its way] or [the way] which would have contributed to his design.
But since he was so overseen, we will ask him in whose way does Fate set
commanding Beauty? in their way, who conquer Thousands, and whose Heroic
greatness makes haughty Foes, and stubborn Nations bow, etc. as before. And who
then are they who have a less God like Power than Beauty? Conquerours, who
though they can do such mighty actions, as to make stubborn Nations bow, etc.
are Vassals to a woman's smile. For what dispute is here, but between Heroes and
Beauty: if it had been only [Beauty comes in their way] and [ Fate sets it] had
been left out, the sense and meaning of the speech had been still entire. But
such is the Reasoning of a man of Seven years standing in Cambridge, and twice
as many in Covent Garden Coffee-House.

ACT The Third.
IT IS now our Royal Mothers Breath must bind
That sacred tie of Love my King has signed,
And Providence has sealed: Make her but kind --
[ The King has signed, and Providence has scaled it: The deed being signed and
sealed, how is the Mother to bind all with Breath. In witness it is s^^th, is
she to bite the wax with her Tooth, or to puff the Parchment into his hands?
the Queen has a strong Blast.] what a first class Schoolboys Questions are
here: Why may not the Queen Mothers consent be a further confirmation of their
Love, or at lest a satisfaction to the Lovers, Though the Brother had given him
his right in her, and Providence had seemed to conspire, a Mother sure might
put in a word or else 'twas hard.

-- Has Lust such Charms,
Can make her fly to an Adulterers arms.
[ Can Lust make her a Whore.] If Lust has more Charms then her Honor, or more
Power over her, than the fear of that punishment or shame, that may attend an
(...) Love, perhaps it can. But for a Virtuous Character to wonder at it i^ a
woman of her Quality and reputed Virtue; Elkanah has the confidence to think no
Sin.

I Will right her wrongs, but I Will conceal her shame.
[ This Muly Hamet is an impertinent fellow, he will kill a man for lying with
the Queen, though for ought he knows it may be her Husband, and lying with her,
though with her own consent he calls wronging of her.]

How is it likely he should be her Husband, she was very much in have when her
other Husband dyed but two days since; or how is it likely they should Marry
and he not know of it? what an obscure person does he take a Queen for. The
marriage of a Maid of Honor, would be blown over the Court in a less time: But
perhaps they married privately, and so they had need if they were so hasty. But
if Muly Hamet had thought so, he had greater reason to call Crimalhaz to
account then before, for he that could be a Queens second husband so nimbly,
might be very reasonably asked how he got the first removed.

Well, but for ought Mr. Commentatour knows, he might be her husband for all
this: But then how could he wrong her when she consented to it? Preethy why
did not go on, and to show thy Learning tell us Volenti non fit injuri^. But
observe what a Virtuous Character in the Play calls a wrong, the debauching of
a Queen. Consent makes a thing no wrong, only incases where people have a just
and free Liberty to consent. As if a man stand^ still to have his Pocket picked,
he is not wronged because his money is at h^s own free disposal. But it is very
reasonably suspected that a woman ought not to have a free disposal of her
Honor, when not only her self but her Family suffers by the loss.

[ But then he carrying away Crimalhaz 's his sword as witness of his Crime,
the King meeting him immediat^ly, (as it is the nature of Fools to be
inquisitive,) would needs see what Muly Hamet had got, and cries, Muly Hamet
stay, what have you there. Iust] ack Adams like, Cudden! What have you under
your Coat Cudden,] but by his favor, as I remember 'twas not under his Coat;
but let that pass. The King seeing Muly Hamet with a drawn Sword in his hand at
his Mothers Bedchamber door, and asking him what have you there, is a Jack
Adams: Had he not asked him, I will agree with him he had been so. Well there is
but a right and a wrong, and if he be a Fool one way it is no matter which, with
good natured Mr. Commentatour.

But she is my Mother, and I dare not guess --
Yet she is a Woman, and I can no less
Than start at horrors which my honor stain.
[ The Women are much beholding to the Poet, for the good Character he gives
'em. His King can no less than guess his own Mother to be a Whore, because
she is a Woman.] He Is in his old ro^d of reasoning without circumstances, yet
she is a Woman, and I can no less than start at deeds of horror, as a Queens
entertaining of a Man privately in a Seraglio, to (...) it is death to enter
without the Kings Signet, which had been said fix Lines before; prithee Old
acquaintance read History, and understand a little better the Mahometans severe
rules of honor on their Women's score, nay go no farther than Spain, and
thou wilt find how jealous they are of their Women's honor there: And how Capital
a Crime it is for a Woman to keep company in private with any Man but her
Husband. But the Men and Women both are much beholding to Poet Dryden, who has
such honorable thoughts of them, and such good opinion of Mankind though Turk
or Span^ard.

I Will make him infamous, low and contemned.
[ He will disgrace Crimalhaz for lying with his Mother, he will tell all the
world and make him ashamed of it.]

I Am much mistaken if the immediate Lines do not convince him that the King
will be guiltless of any such tales.

Disrobed of all his Titles he shall bleed,
Like a Crowned Victim to an Altar led.
Whose Wreath and Garlands to the Fire are cast
And then the naked Sacrifice falls last.
That sinking Statesman undergoes the worst
Of deaths, whose honors and whose power dye first.
Is not the loss of his honor, interest, and power, enough to make him
infamous, low, and contemned without the divulging his Crime? Besides if before
he wrote his bundle of Errata's he had but read, he might have found that the
way of the Arbitrary Mahumetan Kings had not been to bring great Men to trial
and publish their Crimes, but to send their Mutes, to save the trouble of a
Process; and to take 'em off, without giving them satisfaction of knowing their
offense before their death. Indeed I confess Mr. Drydens Mohammedan King is
something singular, and takes a more public way of process on such an account
as this: which for your diversion I Will entertain you with.

Boabdelin startled at Lyndaraxa, Zulima and Hamets impeaching his Queen of
unchastity, of being Whored by Abdelmedeck, like a Cunning Politician to find
out his horns takes this way of trial: he immediately commands the Vivarambla,
viz. the Market place to be cleared, that is, the Shambles and Stalls to be
pulled down, and a Stage or Scaffold to be built upon the place. Which done,
the Adulterer and the Queen are led bound by the hands of his Common-Guards to
the Stage. Her Majesty thus Ushered, and thus Seated, and her Gallant by her;
all the Windows round the place, like, Cheapside at a Lord Majors Show, being
pulled down, and the Area crowded with such company as you may imagine so
public a place afforded, her trial is as follows. The two Accusers challenge
two of her friends, of which Almanzor is one and Ozmyn the other, who appearing
on the Stage and stripping themselves to their Shirts much after the manner of
our Beargarden Duullers, the Trumpets sound. Then the Town Crier, or some
Officer much like, having aloud asked the Accusers their names and their
business gives them their Oath, who downright swear the Queen is an Adulteress,
and that they saw Rem in Re, then the other Party, having given the Accusers
the lie in the face of the aforesaid Spectatours, justify the Queens
Innocence, and swear by the Alcoran too, that their cause is right. Which by
the way is a pretty way of swearing to what they neither of them knew. For they
neither of them saw what past between the Queen and Abdelmedeck. She might be a
Whore for ought they knew. Oh but they had a mental reservation, She was no
Whore to their best judgment. Besides osmin was her Brother and Almanzor her
Lover, and though in the Scene before he had said [ he knew her false.]

" She was as faithless as her sex could be, etc.
" Could she holily my flames remove,
" And fall that hour to Abdelmelcks Love, etc.
Yet he is a Man of Honor, and to swear and lie for the Honor of his Mistress,
I have heard has been pardonable in a Comedy. The Combatants then advance and
fight, and judgment is asked of every thrust they make, which ended the
surviving party or parties of one side carry the Cause, if Almanzor and Ozmin
had fain, the Spectators had had the Liberty of crying a Whore, a Whore, a
Whore, but they surviving, the Queen is as Innocent as Child in Womb, all is
well and the contended man has his goods again. If this be not an excellent
decision of a Mahumetan piece of Justice, who have the fame above Christians in
that Virtue, I leave the World to Judge. But the Chance of a duel is enough to
satisfy so soft a pate as Boabdelins in the dispute of his Wives Chasti^y.
This is as Comical a proof of a Woman's Virtue as the Madd Lovers Lion was of a
Princess. This is the Great and only Turn of ten Acts of a Play. Prithee dear
heart set up for Operas such Knight Errantry and Romantic Turns may pass
there, but Faith thy Talent of late years does not lie in Heroicks.

But perhaps he will Swear us down that at Granada this Ceremony was in fashion,
which by his favor, he will hardly persuade any man of reason: but if it were
their custom, the Author was infinitely mistaken in his Subject to Write a
Tragedy of what was a Story fit only for a Farce.

Yet nothing is so bright but has some Scars,
Men can through Glasses find out spo^^ in Stars.
Yet nothing, etc --
[ He opposes Scars to brightness,] but how, he has not told us, [ and makes
his Heroc a ridiculous Coxcomb, that is vexed he is not faultless and
immaculate.] In the foregoing Lines he says,

Oh weak foundations of a glorious name!
I from the Fi^ld do a Crowned Conqu'rour come,
To turn a base Informer here at home.
Here I must confess he is vexed at a fault, and indeed that is a sin against
the principles of Mr. Drydens Heroos. His commit greater crimes unconcerned.
His Philocles takes his Queen Prisoner, and his Porphyrius comes in the
disguise of a Moor to kill his King treacherously* an excellent piece of Roman
Glory.

Love acts the part of Tributary Kings:
As they pay homage to their Conqueror;
Our kind Embraces (...) but Offerings
Of Tribute to triumphant Beauty's Power.
[ Why does not Love as well act the part of Undersheriff^ or Bumbayliffs as
they pay F^es to the high Sherif.] Truly had it lain in our Commentatours way,
he would have made this choice before the other. For I observe he has a very
great humility in Similes.

" He Like a Subtle Maggot eats his way, etc.
In Granada page 63. " As flies in Winter, when they miss the Sun.
Infects and Reptiles are Comparisons for his Heroes* But now [for the boldest
piece of settlian Nonsense.]

It Is Blasphemy to name, nay understand
What Prince^ act --
[If their actions be good, to name 'em is to speak well of Princes, yet with
him it is Blasphemy; that is, it is speaking ill of 'em, to speak well of them.]

Who says this? the Queen Mother, surpised in the arms of Crimalhaz, who being
told of the danger of a discovery, says, Who 'ere has seen us knows I am a
Queen. That powerful word his silence does demand: It Is Blasphemy to name, nay
understand what Princes act. What actions? and of what Princes is it Blasphemy
to name, but of such as her self, and what she had commi^ted? what has she to
do in this exigence to refl^ct^on the good deeds of Princes? or why must [ what
Princes act] be all that Princes act good or bad. But how is it Blasphemy to
understand a thing? If to understand a thing, be to have a true and perfect
Idea of a thing in ones thoughts. I Will ask him why may not thoughts be guilty
of Blasphemy as well as thoughts commit Adultery. And so if to name the ill
actions of Princes be a sin, why not the thinking of them.

Know, Traitor, I am Mother to a King:
His Power subordinate from me does spring.
My Orders therefore should unquestioned stand,
Who gave him Breath, by which he does Command.
[ How is the Kings Power subordinate to her because shes his Mother] I do not
believe the Poet could think a Kings Power sprung from his Mother, nor could he
suppose Laula thought so when she said so. No more then his Benzaida, (when she
said to the two Servants of her Father that were entrusted to see Osmin
d^spatch^d.

" Say that to kill the guiltless, you were loath,
" Or if you did, say I would kill you both.)
Could think her Father would believe, if that had been their excuse, that two
men could be frighted out of obedience, by one poor harmless Woman's Threatening
both their Deaths. And yet her saying so was not improper. If people in an
exigence especially such whose guilt has left 'em no just argument for their
desence, should be silent, or say nothing but truth in their own behalf, all
ill Characters would be suspected to have a tangue of Fool as well as Knave.

Is it not pity now --
That grave Religion and dull s^ber Law,
Should the high flights of Sportive Lovers aw.
[ A very Heroic expression! Is it not pity now, that there is a Law against
Wenching the recreation is so sportive.] Yes indeed I am of thy mind it is pity
[the sporting couple tossed and flung extremely if they had such high flights.]
viz tossing and ^^^^ging are flights.

The recreation indeed may be sportive, but some calamities that may attend
such kind of flinging and tossing may lessen the pleasure: as Breaking shins in
Coaches to get Maiden-heads, especially if the Shins were crazed before: and
twenty other worse misfortunes.

No, though I loose that head which I before
Designed, should the Morocco-Crown have wore.
[Wore for worn.] Amongst his false Grammars as he calls them, he has observed
through the Play; that the Author uses [wore] [bore] [besel] [shook] [took]
[mistook] and [so sook] in the Preterperfect tense, and that they should be
[worn] [born] [taken] [shaken] [mistaken] [forsaken] and [befaln,] so that [I
have mistook] or [I have forsook] is Nonsense. For he says they are only used
in the Aorist: For this I only appeal to the customary reception of the words,
and though [worn] [born] [shaken, etc.] Be only Preterperfects, yet [wore]
[bore] [shook] etc. are used both in the Aorist and Preterperfect tense, and
several other words, [I have eat] or [I have eaten] or [I have beat] or
[beaten.].

Yet what is the fear of Tortures, Death, Hell? Death,
Like a faint Lust, can only stop the Breath.
Tortures weak Engines that can run us down,
Or skrew us up till we are out, of tune.
[ Down and Tune are excellent Rhyme:] And are like to be so.

And Hell, a feeble, puny cramp of Souls:
Such infant pains may serve to frighten Fools.
[A mess of absurd stuff.]

[ To stop the Breath properly implies a Death by smothering, choking or
strangling, so that he is for hanging Crimalhaz with a Hatchet.] Is he so? No
Faith, I Would have him behead him with a Hatchet; and if it be so, that beheading
will not stop his Breath, let him Breath on a Gods name.

[ And why a faint Lust? it is a strong Lust that stops the Breath.] Preethy
old Soldier recollect thy self, the strength of it is past when the Breath is
stopped.

[Tortures can run us down, or skrew us up, that is, Break all our Nerves and
Arteries, Sinews and Bones in short, they can only Torture us.] I know it good
Sir. But when Crimalhaz says they can only skrew us up or run us down, his
business is not to tell you the manner of torturing, but his sense of the pain
of it.

[Then what is Hell, a feeble puny cramp, an infant pain, he allows a Hell, and
yet he says it is no Hell, it is but a cramp: he calls a place a Disease.] How,
does he say it is no Hell? I thought in describing what Hell had been according
to his sense of it, in saying 'twas a feeble puny cramp of Souls, He had
employed that such a thing was. Ah! but a place cannot be a Disease. I thought
Hell had signified the Torments of Hell, oftener then it is used for the place of
torments.

[ To write the Nonsense he stuffs in every Line would put the cramp in my
fingers.] Well said Tom Thimble, Snip, Snap, Repartee. I hope the Nonsense thou
have written came from thee with less pain, or thou would never had the
Courage to have wrote so much on it.

Since you have sullied thus our Royal Blood,
The Grounds and Rise of this past Crime relate.
That having your Offenses understood,
We, what we cannot recall, may expiate.
[ That is, come since you have lain with my Mother, tell the Truth how it
was,] to give the reason why he lay with her, is not the description of the
Circumstances how he lay with her; to have described those indeed had been
perfect Drydenism.

A Woman's frailty from a Woman's Tongue
[ As if it was a frailty to be Ravished: She like the young Queen confesses her
self a Conspiratour in her own Rape,etc.]

Read but the immediate Lines.

Whilst pensively I in my Closet sat.
My Eyes paid Tribute to my Husbands Fate,
And whilst those thoughts my sinking Spirits scis'd
His Entrance my dejected Courage raised
The sudden Object did new thoughts produce,
My Griefs suspended, lent my Tears a truce.
For then I otherwise employed my Eyes,
Whilst in his Aspect I read Victories --
And afterward,
Having a while upon each other gazed,
He at my silence, I his Eyes amazed --
Now let me ask him why such a Woman as she that desired to appear a Saint, may
not call it a Frailty to desist from her Tears, and be diverted from her
sorrows for her husband that dyed but Yesterday, by her sudden admiration of
any object whatever.

But, Muly Hamet then your cruel Breast --
[He ravished her with his Breast, having a white Skin, etc.]

Muly Hamet was so unkind to cut off the Queen Mothers Speech in the middle,
and this kind Botcher is pleased to piece it out. But why [ Ravisht] Sir Pol,
could no other Verb have followed [ Breast.] The Queen does not talk of
Ravishing 'till twelve Lines after this; and sure Muly Hamet was not so hot,
but he might stay a thinking while before the Sport began, and so Muly Hamets
Cruel Breast might be first supposed to have harbored some thoughts to her
dishonor, and some desires to be doing, before he fell to it.

-- His altered Brow
Wore such fierce looks, as had more proper been
To lead an Army with, than Court a Queen.
[ He places a man's looks on his Brow, and says, his Brow wore looks, etc.] In
the last act the Queen says,

I should meet Death with Smiles upon my Brow.
This is so notorious an Error, that it is not a sufferer in the common Crowd,
but is Arraigned amongst the Capital sins of the Epistle. This Common Barrater
in Poetry is resolved to jar and quarrel with every thing: Surely he has lived
long enough to understand better, (one would think) Has not he heard [ Brow]
used for the whole Face or Aspect of a man oftener than in a stricter sense?
Nay, has he not in Granada said " I cannot clear my mind, but must my Brow, If
[ the Brow] be taken strictly, then Boabdelin has liberty to make mouths at
Almanzor, provided his Brow be clear still. I wonder how fronti nulla fides
would escape with him, if the Latin Authour^ had the honor to be examined by
him. But for Mr. Drydens sake, for once I Will alter these two Lines, and express
their designed sense in words at large, and no Synecdoche. 1. His altered
Countenance wore such fierce looks, etc. 2. I should meet Death with Dimples in
my Che^k, or with wrinckles in my Chin; for that is smiling: This would be
almost as good as the incomparable Line of Almerias.

" Killed in my Limbs, reviving in my mind.
And as a Ravisher, I abhorred him more
In that black form, than I admired before.
[ She abhorrd him as a Ravisher in a black form, etc. this no body can make
any thing of.] Let it be in [ that black form still,] and any body will tell
you what to make of it by what the word [ that] points to.

Our ^oly Prophet dares not see him fall,
I Am sure, had he my Eyes --
[ As if changing of Ey^s would alter ones mind.] What says thy Lyndaraxa to
this.

Page 93. " Fortune at last has chosen with my Eyes,
" And where I would have given it placed the Prize.
How often do expressions of this kind signify Eyes and inclination too? Sure
this Coffee-House Oracle, thinks all Mankind his Cullies, If he expects to be
cried up for such stuff as this.

The Powers above would shrink at what he felt.
[ He has felt nothing yet as I know, but her, etc.] Sure the King had told
him; that for his offense the Law required his death, and what means the Queen
Mothers pleading for him, but that, supposing that Law were executed on him,
the powers above would shrink at what he felt.

Here bind the Traitor, and convey him strait
To Prison, there to linger out his Fate:
Till his hard Lodging and his slender Food
Allay the Fury of his Lustful Blood.
[ That is, here take this Letcherous fellow away, carry him to Prison,
mortify him, and take down his Mettle, that my Mother and my Women may live in
quiet for him.] Since he'^ so good at Burlesquing; I may as properly apply it
to Mr. Commentatour. He^e take this wretched Scribler away, carry him to School
again, lash him, and mortisy his Letchery of writing Nonsense, that the Town and
the Press may be at quiet for him.

My Soul! Dull Man, what has my Soul to do
In such mean Acts as my betraying you?
Murder and T^eason --
Without the help of Souls, (when I think good,)
Such Toys I act, as I Am but flesh and blood.
[ This is written like one that thinks without a Soul as his Queen Mother
does. Such Villainies I act and think, as I Am but flesh and blood, etc.] She
says indeed she will act Villainies without the help of her Soul, as she is but
flesh and blood, but for thinking without her Soul I cannot find any thing like
it. For [ when I think good] which indeed, is no more than (when I please,)
reflects not at all, upon the designing or managing of her Treasons, or the
acting of her Villainies, but only upon the time when she resolves to be
Vil^anous. As if she had said, let me but once resolve to be Treacherous, and
the acting of Treason is so customary to me, that it comes easy and unstudied.

Hell! No, of that I scorn to be afraid.
Betray, and kill, and damn to that degree,
I Will crowd up Hell, till there is no Room for me.
[ This is the principal huff of the Play, and by consequence thickest of
Nonsense, etc.] But you shall see how he proves it. [ The Queen Mother says she
scorns to be afraid of Hell, yet she plainly confesses she is afraid of it, for
she will kill and damn to a horrible degree to avoid it.] At this rate every
man that draws his Sword to defend himself, and offend his enemy, must be
afraid of him. For her killing and damning to fill Hell till there is no room
for her, is her Guard against the Power of Hell, as a man's sword is his against
an enemy. And so why the is not afraid of Hell, she proves in the following
Lines, for she shows that she need not fear it; but then this mighty man of
morals disputes the dimensions of Hell, and the cause of damnation, and says [
she is the liker to come to Hell her self, than send others thither.] Oh! then
the Queen Mother tells a lie, and threatens to do what she cannot do; and
therefore the Poet writes Nonsense. O thou Great Master of little wit, if all
were Nonsense that persons in plays say more than they can do, I am afraid thy
Granada must suffer a great Lop to be squared into sense.

Thy beloved Almanzors rants would dwindle much to come within the compass of
possibility; nay his large actions too, which the Poet will force the audience
to be^ieve performed, would suffer much correction, to be brought to standard
measure. And so his Picture of Achilles, would be much defaced by it. But
'twere no great matter, Achilles would be but a little sufferer for the
execution that was done him in effigy: for like the piece of painting with the
superscription of this is the Dog, and this is the Hare, had he not told us he
meant Achilles, the features and lineaments he has made of him, like Hugh Clod
pates representing the King, would never have discovered the original without a
marginal note. As I take it, I have heard that Tamberlane and Bajazet at the
Red Bull, the four London Prentices, and the seven Champions of England Club'd
their Talents to make up an Almanzor. But I rather think he had a more modern
Original, and that Sir Arthur Addles Masty Dog was his sire, for he is very
like him, when he is let loose, he flies upon all persons without distinction
and where he lays hold he worries. But this is hi^ lest fault in pretending
Achilles was his Almanzors pattern, for he might read in Iuvenals first Satyr
-- Nulli gravis est percussus Achilles. But his impudent profanation in his
Epistle to that play, has arrogated a greater Divinity for the production of so
unshap'd a Monster.

Next he says.

Betray and kill and damn to that degree.
[ There he puts degree for number, and for Rhyme sake makes it palpable
nonsense; For whatever there is in betraying and damning, in killing there is
no degree, no man can be more or less killed. In betraying and damning there
may be degrees, but then it r^lat^s not to the number of the damned, but to the
excess of their punishment.] Observe what arti^ice he has used to cheat you
with an argument: he leaves out the line that follows.

Hell! No of that I scorn to be afraid,
I Will send such throngs to the infernal shade, viz.
For that ruined his objection. I Will send such throngs, (which was as good as
numbers in any Poetical Dictionary) would have spoiled all, for then [to that
degree] would have related to the excess of the aforesaid throngs, and not to
the excess of Punishment [But then why must all she kills be damned, etc. Poor
innocent People would be hardly dealt with, to be killed and damned too, etc.]
suppose here again, the says more than she can do: So did Catiline. I Will Plough
the Alps to dust, and lave the Tyrrhene Ocean into Clouds, etc. And yet Ben did
not write nonsense in this expression. But it is possible that his Empress might
murder and damn too; but not innocent people, as commentator thrusts in to help
on with the Impossibility.

How often the great Designers of Treason, have seduced other inferior
Ministers to their assistance, and when their ends have been accomplished, have
for their own defense betrayed and cut off the instruments of their design, he
need not fly far to History to defend him: and if the making People Traitors,
and cutting them off in the height of their Treason, do not give a great stroke
toward their damnation too, I am much out.

Monarchs do nothing ill, unless when they
By their own Acts of Grace their Lives betray.
When favors they too genrously afford,
And in a Treacherous Hand misplace their Sword,
Their Bounties in their Ruin are employed:
Kings only by their Virtues are destroyed.
[ They do not ill then it seems, to betray their Lives, provided they do not
do it by Acts of Grace. Ingeniously inferred.]

Prithee Mr. Dryden, why would thou have Alkanahs Hero tell his King to his
face, that a King may be a Knave, and can do ill things. Pray how ungentleman
like is it in thy sense of honor for a perfect Character to say to his Prince,
Kings can commit no faults but where their excess of Virtue is their crime. In
the last Act, our good Friends is angry at

Kings are Immortal, and from Life remove,
From their lower Thrones to wear new Crowns above.
And says, [ that Abdelcador, (who says this to Muly Hamet his King and Friend)
in saying that all Kings go to Heaven speaks ill Divinity. Then to have spoken
better Divinity, he should have told his King, that a King might be damned.
Indeed I confess Mr. Settle might have made his Heroes tell their Kings to
their Faces, that a King might be a Knave, or damned, or the like; but then he
must have intrencht upon Granada, and have made all his Heroes Almanzors, and
his Kings Boabdelins. 'Twill seem Ridiculous to give you an instance out of his
Granada, because we all know it is the foundation of his Play, to have his King
called fool, sot, and Puppy, or what is as bad, by his saucy and masterly
Companion Almanzor. Yet for once I Will venture.

In Granada Page 146. Boabd. " How changed, and what a Monster am I male,
" My Love and Honor ruined and betrayed!

Alman. " Your Love and Honor? Mine are ruined worse.
" Furies and Hell, what right have you to c^rse!
" Dull Husband as you are --
" What can your Love, or what your Honor be?
" I am her Lover, and she is false to me.

The King is aflicted for hearing his beloved Queen is strumpeted, for which
Almanzor calls him dull Husband, what right have you to curse, what Love or
Honor have you! No, that only is my right, I am her Humble Servant, and she is
false to Me. Mr. Dryden, it is true, has told us in Print that his Almahide is a
perfect Character, and consequently no strumpet, and the Audience had heard
Almahide through the Play say She would be honest. And of any downright
debauchery I acknowledge she is Innocent; making Love at first sight to
Almanzor, and Baudy Songs to entertain the King and Court, being but a little
harmless Gallantry, and no hindrance to the perfection of her Character, as you
have been told before. But then how much more guilty is Almanzor to abuse an
Innocent Ladies Honor. Had he enjoyed her, and boasted of her favors, it had
been a little more pardonable; yet not according to the rules of Honor, it
being something Drydenish, Illnatured and unjauntee I should have said, to fair
well, and c^y Roastmeat, especially to a Husbands face. But as it is, it is
unsufferable. To tell the King his wife was false to Almanzor, cannot but imply
that she had promised him to be constant to her Intrigue, and by consequence
lie with none but Almanzor, or else how is she false to him? But Cuckold which
may be an honest man's case is the lest aspersion Almanzor gives him, for in
calling him dull Husband, what can your Love and what your Honor be, he does as
good as call him Eunuch, and sot, and Cully, for if his wives debauching be no
loss of his Honor, he is no better then the keeper of her small wares, and a
Rascally Wittall. But after all this the King takes no notice, not so much as
to make a repartee, nor has the Galless animal so much Courage as Poet Ninny to
cry, you are a Son of a Whore as well as my self. But there is good reason for
it. The Author no doubt made him a Pattern of Virtue, and perhaps a piece of a
Scholar too, that had read Fortitudo consistit ferendo magis quam feriendo.

Your Counsels weakly do my Ears attract.
[ What is it to attract ones Ears; shall Counsels lug him by the Ears.] It
must be this or Nonsense,] His Dilemmas are like the rest of his Logic.

Live then, till time this sense of Horror brings,
What it is to ravish Queens, and injure Kings.
[ What sense? for no body can tell] it is a sign he keeps up his old good
opinion of himself, that he is the Wisest of mankind, and if he cannot tell the
sense of a thing no body else can.

You see the Fates do their Allegiance know,
[ As if she was Queen of Fates. Rather by her Character she is Queen of
sluts,] Queen of Fairies, and Queen of Gypsies, all is one. But [ Sluts] came
first and it is Authentic but now for one of his Queens in Granada.

Benzaida. " Blind Queen of Chance, to Lovers too severe,
" Thou rul'st mankind, but art a Tyrant here.

I thought that Lovers had been part of mankind. Does he make Demigods or
Monsters of them, that they come not in the list with mankind. But then in the
second line, Thou rul'st mankind, But -- he implies some great distinction
between ruling mankind, and being a Tyrant; but I vow to God I cannot find it
out; for the Dev^l's in it if I do not think that Tyrants rule, and rule mankind
too, though perhaps not so mildly as other Kings; I must confess if his verse
could have held it, thou rulest the rest of mankind mildly but art, etc. there
had been some appearance of sense; but no matter, it is wrapped up in Rhim^, and I
doubt not but Mr. Dryden has met with a Swallowing Audience as well as Mr.
Settle.

Blind King of Poets, thou art too severe,
A Wit with all men, but a block-head here.
Our gilded Treason thus like Coral seems;
Which appears Black within it is native Streams:
But when Disclosed, it sees the open Air;
It changes Color, and looks Fresh and Fair.
[ He makes a gilded thig look like Coral and like a thing which first looks
Black, and then looks fair.] What wonderful Similes the Author makes. But our
Commentator out-throws him a Bars length.

Alman. page 22. " Whom pomp and greatness sit so close about,
" That he wants Majesty to fill 'em out.
As I take it, if his pomp and greatness sat close about him, they were filled
out to his hand, without giving Majesty that trouble.

Disrobed of all at once! what turns more strange
Can Ages, if an hour can make such Change?
[ Why what can Ages do more than rob one of all, etc.] Yes ages can rob two or
three of all. And if an hour could destroy the second man in a Kingdom, Ages
might destroy whole Kingdoms.

The Daughters easy Breast would ill confer
A kindness on her Mothers Ravisher.
[ What do you think I would be kind to a man that is kind to my Mother] Honest
Poetaster let it be [ unkind to my Mother.] Unless Ravishing be a kindness in
thy Morals.

-- Cruel Princess to whom Heaven
Has all its Titles but its knowledge given.
[ Here he makes knowledge a title] Yes of Heaven dear heart,

Where I that Savage Ravisher I seem,
I still might Father this imputed Crime:
[ The sense is, were I that real ravisher I seem, then I might seem the real
ravisher I was] Were I a ravisher before I might be one now, might have past as
well. But Mr. Notes has an excellent knack at illustrations, and 'twere pity
he should be contradicted.

This Prison, and our private Interview,
Giving me power t'Attempt that force on you.
[ Mariamne hearing him talk of attempting her is much pleased with him, and
thinks him a Virtuous man presently]

Virtue never dies, where so much Love does live.
[ Nay and will huff the Gods in his behalf, what will she not do for a man so
lusty.]

-- I Will correct the Stars, etc.
I see our kind Friend improves. Before he ventured at discarding one line in a
Speech, but here he has modestly snipt off eighteen. Sure Mariamnes kind answer
came not so hasty. As I take it, she listened a little longer to some other
discourse before she past him the Compliment of Virtuous.

Fly these infected Walls, this barbarous Town.
[ The walls are infected with Barbarity. Then supposing they were cured they
would be civil well bred walls] I Am sure thou art infected with Malice: But so
past all cure, that I cannot suppose so great a Miracle as thy Recovery.

Yes, in my Memory.
Absent you shall in my Remembrance Reign,
[ He shall not only reign in her Memory, but in her Remembrance] He Is a happy
man then, and no doubt as he has her Kernel now, sh^l have her husk to when
they meet again.

To make you share those Frowns which threatened Me.
[ What knack have they in Morocco of ^ickling of Frowns, did these Lovers
divide a Barrel of pickled Frowns] Before he was for making the Emperors vei^es
hold a Paleful, and now he is for a Barrel of Frowns: a man that had been bred
a Clark, and served seven years to an Exciseman, could not have had so
Mathematical a headpiece [as his Poscript says of Poets] at gaging of measures*

If his rash passions natures bonds should quit,
And make him both my Sex, and Birth forget;
Remember that you wear a Sword, and you
As you're my Servant, be my Champion too.
[ This Poet shows an excellent judgment in his choice of Characters.] And why,
because Mariamne desires her Lover, if her Brother should be as unjustly cruel
to her as he was to him, to rescue her from his cruelty. I scarce believe the
best and most Virtuous of her Sex, would think the Laws of honor so strict, to
tie her to a Prison in compliment to a Tyrannick Brothers Humor. Such an
obedience to a Father perhaps the Laws of Heroicks might exact.

How dare you, Rebel, with things sacred sport:
Ravish the Mother, and the Daughter Court?
[ Just as Citizens carry their Wives to see Madfolks in Bedlam, the King
brings his Wife, his Mother and his whole Family to see Muly Hamet in Prison,
and as it happened caught him Courting his Sister, and very like himself falls
a railing, and asks him how he dare sport with sacred things, Ravishing and
Courting are the same things with him, both but sporting.]

To see Madfolks in Bedlam -- the Lions in the Tower, or the Tombs at
Westminster, it had been as much to the purpose, he is no unimitable man at
Similes. then his whole Family. Sure the Bing of Morocco kept a very thin
Court, if he had but Six in Family, for there abouts was the number of Muly
Hamets visitants: But if he means his whole Royal Family, then he must have
included his Sister who came not with him, and Muly Hamet would have put in for
a Cousin too: Therefore he could not mean the whole Royal Family. Mr.
Commentatour then is not so expert in counting, as he was at measuring. But let
that pass: Meaning he has if I were so learned a Clerk as to find it out; but
since I cannot, I Will leave the Notes and examine the Scene in the Play. For I
guess he would say for a King and Queen to visit a Prisoner is absurd. Truly I
think Muly Hamets eminent services to his King and Country, and his near
alliance to his King, might have extorted such a private visit without the
violation of Majesty; But then Ravishing and Courting are both but sporting.
[How dare you with things sacred sport] does not refer immediately to the
Ravishing the Mother and Courting the Daughter but to the affront done to their
greatness in the attempts. How often Ludere sacris has signified profaning
things Divine, I need not beg my Readers for my advocates.

Since Prisons no restraint over Lust can have,
Why did I not confine him to a grave?
[ Since nothing can rule this Town-bull, I will have his Brains knocked out:
This Discourse must needs move pity.] I Am sorry then Elkanah had the hint no
sooner, but put in these two foolish Lines, when so moving a thought might have
been had for asking.

Not circled in a Chain, but in a Crown.
[ To be circled in a Crown as men are in Chains, is to wear a Crown about his
middle, or upon his Legs.] Faith Mr. Bays is in the right. He hits the Nail but
seldom, but when he does, you would swear he is an excellent Marksman.

Sir, You mistake a Dungeon for a Throne.
[ A very foolish mistake, as if one should mistake a Room for a Ioynt-stool.]
a very foolish one indeed, but such a one as is nothing to hundreds in Bays his
(...)* But take the foregoing Line with thee,

-- I designed she should
Be in a Palace, not a Prison, wooed:
Nor circled in a Chain but in a Crown.
Sir, You mistake a Dungeon for a Throne.
Sure the mistake lies in his taking a Dungeon for the place to Court his
Sister in, not in taking a Room for a Joynt-stool.

These Prison-walls have Echoed to your Sighs,
[ That Prison was built in imitation sure of the whispering place in
Gloucester, else it could never Echo to a sigh.] Observe his Hyperboles, as his
Almanz.

" And then I Will Thunder in your Ears -- you shall --
And his Duke of Arcos p. 151.

" He lifted up his Thundering arm again.
And then judge whether the saying Muly Lab^s his Sighs were so loud that they
made an Echo, or Almanzors voice and his arm could rant, and strike so loud as
Thunder, be the more strained Hyperbole.

Tortures nor Chains, shall not my Love rebate.
[ As if it were a worse thing to be Chained than tortured.] Why must Chains be
worse than tortures? Yes, he is for Climaxes, and (ever since his

" My Heart's not made of Marble nor of Brass)
It Is hard to please him.

These Traitors walk, like Madmen, in a Trance,
Seem not to understand the Crimes they Act.
[ Mad men in trances are most still, and do le^t harm.]

Put the Comma after Madmen, which was overseen in the Press, and then where is
the fault to say, these Traitors walk in a trance like Madmen; and if there be
any fault it is comparing madness to a trance.

From Springs so deep shall sink thee down to Hell.
[ I have heard of sinking of a Well, but never of sinking people with springs
before.] I thought our wise Coffee-drinker had heard of every thing.

I shed my Tears as Rain in Egypt falls,
Sent for no common cause, but to foretell
Destructions, Ruins, Plagues, and Funeral^.
I never draw Tears, but when those Tears draw Blood.
[Then they are not sent like Rain in Egypt to foretell: Omens do not use to
accompany or cause mischiefs, but threaten them: Our Poets Omens foretell things
after they are come to pass.]

Did ever any man of common sense crowd so much nonsense in so few words. He
finds fault here that the Poets Omens do not do as Omens use to do* Omens use
to threaten, not to accompany or cause mischiefs, viz* as the Poets Omens, he
infers, do; which he afterward proves thus. For the Poets Omens foretell things
after they are come to pass; which, between these three terms [ accompany]
[cause] and [ foretell after things are come to pass] is; the Poets Omens come
with things, or before things, for they come after things.

-- View that Br^w, that Charming Eye:
See there the Grace and Mien of Majesty.
Can you to Exile then that Man enjoin,
Whose Soul must, like his Aspect, be Divine?
[She accuses him of Ravishing her, and yet pleads for his pardon, and says he
has a Divine Soul, a charming Countenance, delicate Eyebrows, fine rolling
Eye^, and has a lovely Mien, is an excellent Dancer. Words that before any one
but such a Fool as Muly Labas would clear him.] Which Muly Labas, does he mean,
Muly Labas in the Play, or Muly Labas in the Notes; he of the Poets making, or
the Commentatours? [Charming Countenance, delicate Eyebrows, rolling Eyes,
lovely Mien, and excellent dancer] I confess have had so much favor with Bays,
as to appear and plead for Muly Hamets restoration. But the Author of the Play
was more unkind to his Hero, to deny them appearance: But how does she accuse
him of Ravishing her? As I take it, that accusation had been over two hundred
Lines before* Oh! but she once did, and therefore she does now.

Be gone, and fly to some infected Air,
Where Poisons brood, where men derive their Crimes,
Their Lusts, their Rapes, and Murt^ers, from their Climes:
And all that Venom which their Soils do want,
May the Contagion of your Presence grant.
[Hee's for infecting the Air with poison,] Air dear heart in a civil way. [and
deriving Crimes from Climes.] Yes, Child of grace do thee a kindness: Have not
thou hea^d of national inclinations, of such people naturally jealous, and such
proud and the like. [Their (...)? The soyles of the infected Air, or the soyls
of the Climes.] neither, old Boy, neither. Men derive their Crimes from their
Climes; [their] in this Line refers to [Men] and why may not [their] in the
next have the same privilege. [The whole is thus: Go to infected Air, and
there piss venom like a Toad, till the contagion fills the soyls of their
Climes with Venom, and for the Letchery thou have shown, may thou infect
infected Places with all the Rapes and Murders they want. a most wise d^om]
Yes* as Commentatour has worded it.

Since in your Kindoms limits I Am denied
A seat, may your great Empire spread so wide,
Till its vast largness does reverse my doom;
And for my Banishment the World wants room.
[These are the only Lines in the Play, that have any tolerable fancy, but like
a Suit sent to a Botcher to finish; see how they are bungled together.]

[Since I am banished your Kingdoms, Heaven's blessing on your Empire.] What he
drives at here I cannot tell, unless he will not a^low that Kingdoms may make
an Empire, for I may well guess he has the same understanding of Empires as he
had before of Kings. May your great Empire spread so wide, till its vast
largness. [Bombazeen in abundance -- May your great Empire grow so great, till
its great greatness, or till its vast vastness, or large largeness.] This
indeed is Bombazeen in abundance; thanks to the Courteous Laureat for his
obliging kindness in helping us to it: which in a Marginal Note is, thanks to
the Courteous Laureat for his courteous courtesy, or kind Kindness, or
obliging obligation; Bombazeen in abundance too. How harmlesly does this Cynick
bite.

He Lives, though he be banished; and the Great
Are never fully darkened, till they Set.
[That is, great Links are never dark till they are out, as if little Links
were out, before they were out.]

Why must [ the great,] be meant great Links? Why not a Christmas Candle, Will
in a Wisp, Jack in a Lanthorn, any thing, it is all alike to thee: Did ever any
man of parts Scrible at this rate. Well, he has been a Wit in his Time, and so
forth, but see what Age can do; it is pity his Mercury should be evaporated,
it is huge pity, but Age Age as I told you before.

This work, which we so roughly do begin
Zeal and Religion may perhaps call Sin.
No; the more Barbarous garb our Deeds assume,
We nearer to our first perfection come.
Since Nature first made Man wild, savage, strong,
And his Blood hot; then when the world was Young:
If Infant-times such Rising valors bore,
Why should not Riper Ages now do more?
But whilst our Souls wax Tame, and Spirits Cold,
We only show th'unactive World grows old.
[Now if in^ant times had such perfection, why should not riper ages go beyond
perfection, that is, if the World was so old, and perfect whilst it was youngr
why should it not grow younger and more perfect now it is old! an ingenious
inference.]

If infant times had a great perfection, why may not riper Ages have a greater?
he has never heard of greater or less perfection. But mark his last
observation.

[If the World was so old and perfect when 'twas young*] The Poet had told you,
in the Infancy of times men were Savage, strong, hot blooded, etc. that is, as
Bays has it, were old and perfect. I wonder how [old] got in. Prithee do not
flatter thy self, [dear heart, old and perfect] (unless you mean malice and
nonsense he perfection) will not go together in thy Sphere. Then the Poet says
when the World was young, mankind was so or so. But he looses [ Mankind] on
which the discourse is built, and says when the World was young the World was
so or so. Was ever such a Rapsody of Impertinence Printed, Nay and what is worse,
owned by the man that calls himself the greatest Wit in the Nation. I am afraid
the apparent magnitude of his Wit, will dwindle like his Sun in Annus Mirabilis
stanza, 100.

" That happy Sun, said he, will rise again
" Who twice Victorious did our Navy see,
" And I alone must view him rise in vain,
" Without one ray of all his Star for Me.
I much suspect the Squire ( for I think that was his Title when his Annus
Micabilis came out) was like his Silkworm in Granada

" Lost in his own web of thought;
When he made the Sun a Star: like Hamlets Cloud first a Whale and then a
Wezel. But perhaps this man of learning avoided the Reading Astronomy, as
Elkanah he says, did reading the Bible, for fear of spoiling his Fancy: and
indeed it had been pity such a Fancy as this should have gone lame, though
Astronomy had been made a Cripple by it. But no matter the Poet has heard the
Sun and Moon are Planets: and all planets you know are Stars. But (laying aside
his Astronomy and granting the Sun a Star,) the Sun has not one ray in all his
Star for me if he makes this English, or sense, Mr. Settle shall resign all
interest in the Apollo over the Kings Box, and compliment Bays his sweet face
with the place.

To him, who Climbs by Blood, no track seems hard:
The sense of crimes is lost in the reward:
A spirers neither Guilt nor danger dread,
No path so rough Ambition dares not tread.
These lines he had little to say to, but that [they are tag'd with hard words,
and end the act.]

ACT The Fourth.
HOw! Crimalhaz up to the Mountains fled,
And with him the Morocco Forces led.
Oh Rebel!
[Oh Rebel! being all he says of him, is as Comical as if he had called him
arch wag.] Well but as I take it, the King and his Lords said a great deal more
of this arch wag, then these two lines. Aye, but they had as good have held
their tongues, for they said nothing to the purpose, his King should have gone
on, if our Billinsgate Friend had the Instructing of him. With oh damned Son of
a Whore run away with my Army, you Dog, you Rascal, you Rogue, bring it back
again, when on the Contrary our Poet makes him [leave off his Quarrel to
Crimalhaz and abuse poor Innocent Gold Inhumanely.]

The nameless Lord. Sir he only does pursue
That Treason which you lent him Power to do:
He was your Treasurer, and has made bold
To be too strict a Guardian of your Gold.

[ He makes a Thief a Guardian] I wonder he did not pursue his hint in the
second act, and affirm that Muly Labas his Gold was as great a fool as himself,
and so chose this arch wag for its Guardian. It had been very witty: but no
matter, thy Ramphlet is so well stockt with Wit a ready that it does not want
it.

Encamped on Atlas skirts, he by your Gold
Has Raised new Forces, and Confirmed the Old,
[In the last Scene of the last act Crimathaz was in Morocco. A pretty leap
Elkanah makes him take from thence to Atlas, 130. miles.] read, Friend, read,
and thou wilt find thy mistake here as great as in the River Tensi^t before. The
skirts of Atlas come within 12 leagues of Morocco, Which in the notes is 130
miles. But here lies his mistake, the skirts of a Hill, and the top of a Hill
is all one to him: sure he takes a Hill for a Mole upon the face of the earth,
as a Poet and Kinsman of his in the maid in the Mill has it, and if one part be
a hundred Miles off, the whole cannot be much less. It Is well Geography did not
lie in his way, what sufferers would the Alps and the Apennines or the Mountain
Taurus have been, if our bold friend had had but a Ship at their Tails too. But
Heaven be praised though Sense and Poetry have felt his heavy hand, Geography
escaped.

But now for [Poor Gold which the King falls upon so Satyrically.] First, our
Commentatour will not grant the inveying against Gold or Ambition which
animated Crimalhaz to be a Rebel, to be allowable in the King, or at lest to
have any affinity with his displeasure against Crimalhaz. I Would ask him why does
his Almahide make a long Harangue upon opportunity.

" Thou vain seducer opportunity,
" Of womankind half are undone by thee, etc.
When she ought to have exclaimed against Almanzor that made use of that
opportunity to her disadvantage, and not abused poor opportunity. How
frequent^y in this manner are reflections. on the Causes of things for the
effects used in Poetry, and Oratory, in all Languages. But next for the
nonsense.

Oh profane Gold, which from infectious earth,
From Sulfurous and contagious Mines takes Blrth.
[Gold is profane because it takes birth from infectious earth, viz. Infection
is profaness] Why [because] cannot it be profane and infectious too, but it
must be one because it is the other. Cannot thy Malicious Pamphlet be
nonsensical but nonsense must be Malice? [Then rakes birth. to be borne h^s a
passive signification, and to take Birth, an active one, and one that takes
Birth, is author of his own Birth.] He that r^ads Bays his Pamphlet though a
stranger to his Person and his style might swear a Poet wrote it, for his
observations are much like the growing of the Plot of a Play in the fourth act.
The nonsense grows as the notes do, and here it begins to thicken The lowest
Boy in Westminster would have told him that [to be borne] was a passive verb,
and [to take] an active, but [to take Birth] is as far from a Passive,
signification, as his notes on Mor^c^o are from the sense or meaning of the
Author. Nor is be that takes birth Author of his own Birth, any more then Mr.
Dryden is of his own Plays; his kind Friends History Poetry and Romance ( as
the Boy that was asked who made him said of his Father and Mother;) found stuff
toward the making of them. I thought that the Womb that produces such or such
a thing gives it Birth, and the thing that is born takes it, and yet it is not
its own Author.

[Then he makes the same thing Sulphurous and Contagious, whereas Sulphur is
one of the best things in the World against Contagion. Did ever any man of
experience in the World talk so ridiculously of Physic. If he had understood
Minerals ( as I wonder he does not) he would have known that Mercury, Sulphur,
etc. Are Medicinal when sublimated, or used according to art, but in their own
nature in the Mine, or in excess their very vapors are mortal.

It grew from Poisons, and has left behind
Its native V^^ome to insect Mankind.
Here Mr. Critic writes [it grows from Poysons] which in the Copy is [it grew
from Poysons] which varyes the sense. [Gold has left Venom behind has no
Construction in it unless Gold has first fsed away and left mankind its
v^nome.] [ Has left behind] I esteem as good sense, as [still retains.] What
does he mean by " Had I yet left a Country to maintain. [ has] is the verb, and
[left] a Participle, and not [left] the V^rb and [has] the sign of the
Preterperfect tense. Which in Latin would be better distinguished by the
difference between Reliquit, and habet sibi relictum.

Rape^, Murders, Treasons -- what has Gold not done?
[What Verb governs Rapes, Murders, Treasons.]

" You are -- you shall -- and I can scarce forbear.
what is the Substantive after [you are] and what is the Verb -- after [you
shall?]

If it has ever any Glory won,
Given to reward a Virtue, on decrced
T'a Pious use, or Charitable deed;
That Sacr^d Powr's but borrowed, which it bears,
Lent from their Royal Images it wears.
[Here he in^ers that no Gold can be given to a Pio^^ us^ but stamped Gold,
viz. money. Ingots or Plate can do nothing, or are worth nothing, the
intrinsic value of Gold being in the stamp.] Why does the Poet inf^r that no
Gold can be given to a Pious use but stamped money? Because the King having
lost his Treasure all his money being stol^, from him, reflects upon the (...)
that Gold has been the Auther of, therefore his discourse must refer to all
Gold in all shapes Ingots Plate, Chains, Collars of Esses, Rings, T^rimbles*
Bodkins, or any thing, for they may be given to ^ Pious or Charitable use; as
if he had not been strangely forgetful he might have recollected from the
Public Faith in the days of the Committee. B^t great Wits have bad Memories.

But if [E^kanah, as Notes says, has but little acquaintance with Gold, by his
mistakes in it.] I Will do him the favor to examine his acquaintance with it, by
his larger understanding of it.

In the Indian Emperou^, the first Scene.

" Methinks we walk in Dreams on Fairy Land,
" Where Golden Ore lies mixed with common Sand;
" Each downfall of a flood the Mountains pour
" From their rich Bowels, rolls a silver shower.
A silver shower made of golden Ore, is the prettiest Poetical piece of
Chimistry that has been heard of. But perhaps he will tell you that to convert
gold Ore into silver, he allays it with common Sand, and that both of them
together make a silver shower; indeed so miraculous a composition may do much.
And take it Gentlemen which way you will, the expression is so excellent in
either sense, that Handy Dandy, it is no matter which you choose.

But to show you the Squire was not altogether unacquainted with Gold sub tenui
panno in his Muses Minority, viz. in his anno aetatis, thirty and a Way-bit:
You shall hear what he says of it then, in his annus Mirabillis.

Stanza 139. " As those who unripe Veins in Mines explore,
" On the rich Bed again the warm Turs lay,
" Till time digests the yet imperfect Ore;
" And know it will be Gold another day.
If Gold lay no deeper in the Mine than that the taking up of a Turf would come
at it, surely the world has been much mistaken, in representing the slavery and
toil of those who dig Gold: if it lay so shallow, as he imagins, the digging up
of a Radish, or a Daizy Root would be the harder piece of work of the two. I am
afraid the rich Bed as he has described it, is little less Poetical, then
Parsly-beds for the conception of Children.

And the covering a Gold Mine with a warm Turf, is much about the excellence of
the Poetry upon the Two Children in the Wood, and the Robin Red breasts that
covered them with Leaves. You may see by our Authors Notions, at what Age he
began to write man: But the perfection of so immense a wit like the production
of Hercules required a longer time than ordinary. And though upstart and
illiterate Scriblers, as his Preface says of Elkanah, might Cruise upon the
Coasts of Poetry at twenty, (pardon the Allegory; for ever since [Husk of Love]
Poetica licentia will make bold.) But such a prodigious Sun and Star in Poetry
[Husk agen] ascended not so soon into his Orb [Web of thought, as our friend
has it] -- Kindness will show it self. I could go on now Allegorically, but
shooting out, and never stopping to bait at. Heaven has been before, etc.

Kings Bounties act like the Suns Courteous smiles,
Whose rays produce kind Flowers on fruitful Soyls:
But cast on ba^ren Sands, and baser Earth,
Only breed Poisons, and give Monsters Birth.
[Bounties are very like smiles. etc.] and in his examination of the Epistle,
on the same Li^es he says, [the Poet calls a smile Courteous, and says a Kings
Bounty acts like a smile: It had been more like sense to have said Kings in
their Bounties act like smiles, and yet it had been ridiculous enough to
compare a King to a smile, etc.] No man sure but one that had been drunk when
he wrote it, and never sober afterward to peruse it, between the time it was
writ, and the day it was published, could have exposed himself to the world so
senselesly malicious, and so wilfully dull as this Farce of a man has done.

The Poet says,

Kings* Bounties act like the Suns smiles.
Therefore says Notes [a Kings Bounty acts like a smile.] Prithee take the Sun
in, and be not more unkind to him here, than in your Annus mirabilis: to shrink
him into a Star was severe, but to make a Cipher of him is a little too hard.
Then he says [Bounties are very like smiles.] Nay now King and Sun are both
lost, and the dispute lies between ^ounties and smiles, and they too are like
one another, not act like one another; the comparison being in their
resemblance not in their effects. Did ever any man so chop and change, and
confound things and qualities, actions and beings so dully and to so little
purpose; then his Epistle makes one more remark, that [ those Sands are not
properly barren that produce Monsters and poisons.] I cannot say they are
strictly barren, but I can say that this is not the first time they have been
called so: But I am certain Sands that produce nothing else, can as improperly
be called fruitful for the production of Monsters, as a Dutch-woman can be so
called for the Birth of a Sooterkin, or Land so called that bears nothing but
Weeds. I am certain such Sands are more properly barren, than Granada could be
empty when Almanzor and Almahide were out of it.

Almanz. " We leave the City empty when we go.

But you shall see what Mr. Dryden calls Barren: In his first Page of the
Indian Emperor he says of Mexico.

" Corn, Wine, and Oil, are wanting to this Ground,
" In which our Countries fruitfully abound.
And twelve Lines after he says.

" No kindly showers fall on our Barren earth,
" To hatch the seasons in a timely Birth.
Here he calls Spain a Barren Earth, which in the first two Lines was a more
fruitful Country than Mexico, producing Corn Wine and Oil, which Mexico did
not: How much more barren then must Mexico be? and yet he told you that was a
happy Climate in the first Line.

" On what new happy Climate are we thrown.
But a Barren Country fruitfully abounding with Corn, Wine, and Oil, shall and
must be sense: for it is very unreasonable that our Grand master in Poetry
should be less Authentic, then Aristotle in Philosophy: Why not Dixit Dryden,
as well as Dixit Aristoteles.

Perhaps you have mis-interpreted his Breast.
[ This Phrase is not very proper.] Proper enough for so modest a Poet.

He who forced Favour^ both from Fate, and Fame;
Made War a Sport, and Conquest but a Game.
[ Forcing Fate is altering on it, which is ill Divinity in Morocco.] Pray what
Religion was Zulema of, when he said page 19.

" Would you so please, Fate yet a way would find,
" Man makes his Fate according to his mind.
Was not he a Mahumetan too: And what says Abdelmedeck speaking of Almanzor.
page 17.

" Fate after him below with pain did move,
" And Victory could scarce keep pace above.
Which last two Lines if he can show me any sense or thought in, or any thing
but bombast and noise, he shall make me believe every word in his Observations
on Morocco sense.

[ A nameless Lord would persuade the King that Crimalhaz has put a very
honorable trick upon him, with running away to Atlas with his Army, which
should defend Morocco against Taffalette, as he says a while after, and that
honest Crimalhaz.

-- Has from the common rout,
Of the worlds Beauties singled honor out.
The common rout of Beauties is excellent sense:] If he that speaks it be of
opinion that honor is the worlds greatest Beauty, I think it pardonable in him
to call inferior Beautys the common rout of Beautys in comparison of that: But
now for the greater fault the Lords persuading the King that Crimalhaz, etc. I
wonder where the fault lies for the Lord to judge of the intentions of
Crimalhaz, which he gives you his reason for, and tells you how he may possibly
mean honestly.

You know that Crimalhaz his high Command
Was formerly in Muly Hamets hand:
He who forced Favors both from Fate, and Fame;
Made War a Sport, and Conquest but a Game.
And therefore he, perhaps, to act some Deed
Which Muly Hamets glory may exceed,
Has for his Mistress from the common Rout
Of the worlds Beauties singled Honor out.
And that which makes him his Designs disguise,
He Will make his flight of Honor a surprise.
-- as showers Luxurious grown.
[ The Luxury of showers I never understood, but that Rain takes no pleasure in
its Luxury I am certain.] Then he has heard Luxury in Men is their taking
pleasure in such or such an excess, which showers cannot do. is Luxury used in
no larger sense. Has not he heard of Luxurious Branches of Trees, and yet
though Trees are as little. Epicures in taking pleasure as Rain; yet [
Luxurious Branches] is not Nonsense.

As Mountains Bulwarks are at Land, but Rocks at Sea.
[ That is, Mountains if any body should misplace 'em, and wh^p 'em up, and
carry 'em into the Sea would turn Rocks, ipso facto.] Why must these Mountains
at Land be thrown into the Sea? are there not enough there already? Let those
serve turn and save him that trouble.

Outface his Treason e're its rise begin,
Men bashful are ^'th' nonage of a sin.
[ That is, outface that which is now Treason before it be Treason] He Is at
his Politics again, just at the old rate. Why is not Treason, Treason, till it
is set a foot, and put in action, I was of opinion that a resolution or a
design of Rebelling against a King, might be Treason; but as before he would
not allow thoughts could be guilty of Bl^sphemy, now thoughts cannot be guilty
of Treason. [Besides the English of its rise beginning is naught, Treasons rise
cannot begin of it self.] No I am of his mind: but if Crimalhaz designed to be
a Traitor no doubt he would be so kind to lend his helping hand to put his Treason
forwards.

Your thoughts cannot reach the flights which Treason takes.
[ If he means by flight the Wit of Treason, it must be thus, Treason's a witty
thing you do not understand, he takes her for as errant a fool as himself.]

Whatever the Poet means by the flights of Treason, if he had made his King
tell his Mother, whom he supposed virtuous, she had understood the flights or
subtleties of Treason, it would have been as gross a Compliment, as to tell a
chaste Woman, Madam you understand the tricks, and intrigues of Iilts and
Wh^res. I think that the Complimenting the Queens Knowledge and understanding
in Treason would have reflected upon her conversation and experience in it. But
no matter, he would have every Body as little Complimental as his Almanzor; and
because he makes no respect of Persons, like the Fox in the Fable, etc.

Kings that want Arms, do not want Majesty.
Heaven is still Heaven, though it lays its Thunder by.
Which he Prints [Heav'n is not Heaven.] He made an Errata at the end of his
Epistle. But why his Eyes should be so dimm or his Spectacles so dull, as to
let such as these slip without the lest mentioning them amongst their fellows I
cannot guess, unless he designed them: for in several places he quite varies
the Authors words and sense, and builds some of his Arguments on the mistakes
he has imposed upon him. [ As if any Fool ^elieved Thunder made it Heav'n] As
if any Fool believed the Author either said or meant so, for he says Heaven is
still Heaven without it. [Here he compares his having his Army taken from him
to Heavens Voluntary laying its Thunder by, for if is wanted Thunder as he
Arms, or could be robbed of it; it were no Heaven as certainly as Mr. Settle is
no Poet.] O then the Simile does not come within the bounds of Logic, and
because Heaven Voluntarily lays its Thunder by, and the King perforce wanted
Arms, therefore his want of Arms, and Heavens of Thunder, have not comparison
enough for a Simile. If he be so strict I Will examine one of his best Similes at
the same ra^e.

" My Soul is soft, which you may gently lay
" In your loose Palm; but when it is pressed to stay,
" Like Water it deludes your Grasp, and slides away.
Now methinks (under his strict laws of Similes) to lay a Soul in the Palm of a
man's hand is a very pretty Poetical Art, but no doubt the Laureat has read
Philosophy, and heard that a Thousand Souls may lie on the point of a Needle,
and therefore a man's hand is no confinement. But then to make a Soul as soft as
water, would have raised a discourse of forty li^es, in Mr. Granada's
Observations, if Mr. Morocco had been the Author. But Heaven forbid Poetry
should be so circumscribed, be once in thy life good Natured; Veniam petimus
dabimusque vicissim.

Go easy Fool, and Dye, and when you Bleed,
Remember I was Author of the Deed.
[ Here she bids him dye first, and thou Bleed.]

I thought [ bleed] and [ dye] had referred to the same thing. Go dye but when
you are dying remember, etc. but the Poet must keep to his word.

[ Here he makes bleeding an action. Bleeding is a suffering and no action by
the Poets leave.] But by Notes his leave though bleeding be a suffering in Muly
Labas, It is an action in the Queen, if she or others by her contrivance give
him that wound by which he bleeds. Never was little Wit better employed.

T'enlarge Fates black records, search but my Soul:
There ye Infernal Furies read a scrowl
Of deeds which you want Courage to Invent;
Of which Hells Legends want a President.
[ Here he supposes fate that necessitates all actions records 'em done, which
is nonsense.] How many hundred times has the Book of Fate and the records of
Fate the registers of Fate or the like been used.

Alman. " Kind Heaven thy book of Fate before me lay,
" But to tear out the Iournal of this day.

But then why does he suppose Fate that necessitates all actions records 'em
don: If he will make us go to the strictness of proveing what Records Fate has,
where kept, and by whom wrote: Why may-not we suppose Subminsters of the Fates
to write their actions, some under Clarks to the Committee of Destinies. Or why
must it be nonsense if we suppose the Fates take the trouble on themselves and
write their own Journals.

[ But reading of a Soul is Nonsense.]

He Would take it ill if I should at the same rate say, " a Scrowl with this
inscription Berenices Soul were Nonsense.

Did ever any man take such freedom in Poetry and allow so little.

Such storms as these this Climate never knew.
A shower of Hail's an Object strang^ and new.
[Such storms as one shower is admirable English.]

Why such storms as one shower? I read it such storms as these, and not such
storms as this; and the foregoing Line relates to showers of Hall in general,
which that Climate, never knew, and [a shower of Hall] in the second Line to
that particular shower that then fell. As if it were false English to say, such
arguments as thine are all malice but no sense, for an argument of thy making
has neither wit nor reason in it. If this be false English so let it be, but I
am sure it is true demonstration.

My Country Princess and my King forsook.
[ Forsook is false English.] Why not [ forsook] the passive participle as well
as [ forsaken.]

These Tempests, Sir, are to my sufferings due,
When my King frowns, it is just that Heaven frown too.
[ When my King frowns it is just that it should Hail.] Muly Hamet makes this
answer to Abdelcador, who surprised at so unknown a storm in that Country tells
him.

I fear it does portend some ill event,
That waits upon your fatal Banishment.
Sure then Heavens frowning was not in the Hail, but the Ills that it
portended. [Mariamne having alone found out Muly Hamet says]

Winged by that zeal united Souls do bear
Those Stars that smile on Lovers, brought me here.
[ That is first carried upon wings of zeal, and then upon Stars; besides the
single zeal of her one Soul is that which two Souls bear.]

But first, why did Mariamne find him out alone. In the same Scene a Chariot
that brought her thither is mentioned.

In her own Chariot to Morocco forced.
And sure she did not drive her Chariot her self: and if the Chariot could have
been brought upon the Stage, no doubt the Poet would have lent her some
attendants to appear with her.

But why upon Stars! If the Stars had took her up on their backs to bring her
thither the Stars sure had long arms to set her down gently again without
letting her fall. But why may not the Stars be supposed to have influence or
power enough to bring her thither without the trouble of thy Trumpeter Hornets

" That slide on the back of a new falling Star.
I must confess the Poet if he had thought on it, might have introduced her by a
Machin, and have had the opportunity of a song like Nakar and Damilcars with
never a word of sense in it, but it is too late now, and it must e'ne pass
without that Decoration. But then why is the single zeal of her soul that which
two souls bear? Yes by Bays his reason. If her Soul has the same zeal that all
united Lovers souls have, therefore her single Soul has all the zeal of those
Lovers, and those Lovers themselves have none.

I for your sake my wandering steps engage*
Devotion is the rise of Pilgrimage.
[ This Princess is no better then she should be to ^ellone whom she (...) not
Married to that she adores him, etc.] certainly Devotion, and adoration are
removed many Degrees. Devotion amongst Lovers, is as P^^^y between Fathers and
Children, ^r the like, it is no ^doring, nor deifying one another. But if (...)
be profane, as he calls nor, for her Pilgrimage, in leaving the Court to follow
her Lover I wonder how much more profan^ is his Benzaida, whose devotion to
Ozmin proceeds farther then being a Pilgrim for his ^ake, she offers to dye for
him, and fall a Sacrifice for Ozmins safety. Doe^ she adore, Selin, or make him
a God, if she falls a sacrifice to appease his anger.

None of my Actions can (...) Judges b^,
But they who have soul enough to love like me.
[ He, by [they] and [soul,] which are of different numbers would infer that
many men have but one soul.]

None of thy reasons o^n fit I^dges be,
Bus they who are dull enough to prate like thee.
I Am certain he that reads this Pamphlet; and believes there went three head
pieces toward the production of this Rarity, will infer that one rational soul
will over stock twenty such Scriblers.

No Sir, thou do belie his Name.
[ He calls him Sir first, and then gives him the lie, and wrongfully: For he
does not belie his name, when be calls him his Proph^^.] As I take it there was
something else said about the Prophet besides his name, in which he belyed him.
But Notes is a Courtier and has found out that, [ Sir,] is a compliment, and [
the lye] an affront and therefore this Line is faulty, or the Character of Muly
Hamet, that Scharomaucio -like, flatters and abuses in one breath. [ Am is the
Rhyme to Nam^ to^, it should be Nam. But Hameralhaz takes no notice but goes
on:] He was not so witty at observations as Bays, or no doubt he had stopped to
have taken notice of so great a fault.

Your Mistress too must your misfortune find.
[That could not be, she could not loose a Mistress.]

This is almost as Politic a reason as (...) page. (...). of a Pr^nce and a
Rival.

If a Prince Court her, whom I adore,
He is my Rival, and a Prince no more.
Well here is one excellency in Bays, it is a perfection in a Poet to keep
constant to his style, and I assure you this does, for his Plays and (...)
Notes are all of a piece.

[ Besides he says it is his Fate, and his Prophet has doomed him into the
Bargain, yet calls it his misfortue, as if that happened by chance that were
necessitated.]

How many hundred times has misfortune and Fate been indifferently used,
without relating to the chance of the one and the necessity of the other.

No Titles his eternal will confute.
[Here he makes the will which is (...) facultas to be opinion, for nothing can
be confuted but opinion. It had been nearer sense, though it had not been
sense, if he had said confute understanding] Because the W^ll in men subject to
passions is caeca facultas, therefore the eternal will of a Divinity is caena
facultas with Mr. Commentatour: It had been more for his purpose to have
affirmed that the understanding, (that is, if measured by his) had been (...)
facultas; for his has not the best Optics I have met with.

She is a Beauty, and that Name's ^er guard.
[ Here he makes the Quality of a Woman to be her name.] If I should say thou
art a wit, as a complem at it might pass, but for a name, 't would be severe,
for it is the greatest Nickname that was ever put upon thee.

But then why nothing confuted but opinion! I thought argument might be
confuted, and yet men may hold arguments quit^ contrary to their knowledge or
opinions, as I doubt not but thou have done many, or thy Pamphlet had never
swelled so big.

Good Fate^x as due should be to Beauty given:
[ Give a Debt is none of the best sense,] but give a man his due will be
sense, as long as thou writest Nonsense, and art laughed at for it.

Beauty which decks our Earth, and props his Heaven.
[ Whose Heaven? Mahomet is not spoke of in five Lines.] But I am satisfied he
is spoke of, and to what can [ his] refer to but Mahomet* [then how Beauty
props Heaven he must tell us; for most think is sends more to Hell then
Heaven.] If thy great reading in so many Years has not informed thee, how
Beauty props the Mahumetan Paradise, Thou art too old now to learn.

When Heaven to Beauty is propitious,
It pays those Favors it but lends to us.
[ Heaven pays favors to Beauties but lends them to men.]

[ Favors are gifts: He gave debts before, and now he lends gifts.] Why must
Favors be always gifts? He might have gone on and said, that the Poet pays
gifts, for be talks of paying favors as well as lending them. But I perceive
the modest Commentatour thought his argument had Nonsense enough before, and
therefore to have proceeded any further would have been superfluous.

With patience hear the Language of the Sky.
Heaven when on Earth it does some Change sore she^,
Does (...) above what we must read below.
[ Here for want of Philosophy he calls Heaven the sky; and the Language of the
sky as he discribes presently is Hail, a fine white Language; which Hail be
thinks engendered in the sky: he has never heard of the middle Region.]

If Hail (because the Poet calls it the Language of Heaven, viz. An omen of
^ill in Morocco as is afterward expressed,) must necessarily be engendered in
Heaven, I may as well tell Bays that his Bundle of Errata's are Written in his
forehead, and no where else.

The ethereal walk was uninhabited.
[ No walk was ever inhabited.] What does he take inhabiting for, sitting lying
and sleeping? I thought Gardens and galleries had been part of Habitations, as
well as Bedchambers, or Closets.

A Mourning Garb of thick black Clouds it wore.
[ Penance is done in White, and that white is no Garb, besides garb includes
motion and mien, etc.]

Because for one offense Penance is done in white, therefore there must be no
other doing of Penance, or no Penance can be done, but in white; Then white is
no garb. he should be a great Wit by his ill Memory. In the first Act, he asked
if Fetters were the crape or the Purple that Princes mourn in, which was as
much as to say that dress only could be a garb, but here garb has a larger
commission and includes motion and mien. But then why crape and Purple should
be garbs, and not white crape or any other sort of white dress is too nice a
criticism for my understanding.

The clouds disheveled from their crusted Locks,
Something like Gems coined out of Crystal Rocks.
[ Besides the nonsense of crusted locks of Clouds, disheveled is never made a
verb, but if it were, to dishevell Gems from locks is nonsense, but it is as
proper as coining of Gems, no body stamps Jewels.]

Why not Crusted locks of Clouds as pardonable an allegory as fleeces of Clouds
in his description of Ships. I Am certain [ dishevel'd] is a more pardonable
verb, then [elemented] an Adjective.

" Thy Mortal Elemented son, in Granada.
Then because Jewels cant be stampd therefore Gems cant be properly called
coined out of Crystal Rocks. What does he think of money that has been run in
a mould is not that coin as well as stamped money. Why then must the verb
[Coine] signify only to [stamp.^

Of those I reached a Grain, which to my sense
Appeared as cool as Virgin innocence:
And like that too (which chiefly I admired)
Its ravished Whiteness with a touch expired.
[ Here is no manner of sense?] which he proves thus.

[ Nothing appears but to fight.] why may not [appear] be proper to all senses
as well as [seem] which in its true derivation to seem quasi to be seen as in
Latin [ videri] is more properly related to fight, yet we say suo^ a thing
seems loud, delicious, sweet, painful, etc.

[ But why cool as Innocence? Virgins are far from being cooler then other
women; I Am sure, they have less reason having parted with less of their heat]
how wretchedly does he quibble. So have chaste women: yet chastity has been
called cold. He might as well ask why Innocence is called white, when a black
woman may be as Innocent as a fair. With a touch expired. [Nothing can expire
unless it breath first, does a color breath?] what do thou think of [ time
is expir'd] does time breath? oh thy intolerable tangue of impertinence.

Which chiefly I admired. [A fine Botch.] Sure so strange a thing as he had
never seen before might be admired, and the Author no Botcher.

Almah. 96. " These are the day dreams which wild Fancy yields,
" Empty as shadows are that fly over Fields.
Why [ fly over Fields] dear heart, but to make up a Rhyme? [ The nonsense of
touching witeneness is admirable.] Sure his touching the Grein he reached had
made the whiteness of it expire. Ravished whiteness: [Is a woman the less
Innocent for being Ravished.] No but her Innocence is taken from her as well as
the whiteness of Elkanahs Hayle, with too warm a touch. which I think, sense
enough for a Simile, Its Ravished whiteness being immediately related to the
Hayle not to the Woman.

Though Shou'rs of Hail Morocco never see,
Which he Prints, those shour's of Hail, etc. which makes it false concord in
Grammar, and then tells ye.

[ That it should be Morocco never saw.]

But as it is in the Play, I hope [ see] is the third person in the subjunctive
Mood. But the greatest part of Elkanahs lines which Mr. Notes has made bold
with, have met much the same kindness, from him, as young Bear-cubs, they
Fancy, receive from their dams. The beastly Commentatour has licks 'em into
deformity.

And all the story which the Slave did frame,
Was only to gain time to take his aim.
[ He makes '^m ill Marksmen for no man could have been so long aiming at a
Wren, as they were at a Man.] Here he finds fault at the conduct of the Poet.
First [ to make a description of twenty lines to say it Haild which the
audience knew before is inartificial.] Then his description of Ships, is
inartificial, for the audience knew before that Cortez and his Retinue had
Landed, and that they came thither in Ships and not on Horseback. Neither is
is description of Hail inartificial though Muly Hamet knew it Hailed before,
for Hametalhaz describes it as an omen, and like Gyomar, as one that had never
seen such a thing before. [ Then Hametalhaz having a great many men in Ambush
comes in the habit of a Priest to disguise himself from two men and a Woman.]
And why not? Does he think half a dozen hirelings or half a score, which is
more then either the Author or Audience supposed Hametalhaz had, would openly
assault too men of Courage: whereas though they might expect success, yet they
could not but be certain of lofeing some of their own lives in the assault,
when an Ambuscade might do more safely and as well. But then they are ill
marksmen to be so long about it. surely there was more to be done than bare
taking ^im. It had been said before.

Pursue him out of Town, and in disguise
With some dissembling tale his cares surprise.
Till your confed'rate party has gained time
To lay an ambuscade and murder him:
For what intelligence could they have of the particular way Muly Hamet would
take, so as to lay their ambuscade before hand. So that his longdiscourse gave
them time to draw up near him, as well as discharge at him.

But missing of your Blood, your brave Escape
Changed his intended murder to a Rape.
[ A Horse may as soon be changed into a Poet, as Murder into a Rape.]

Here he is at his old fallacy: What was [ his] viz. Hametalhaz his intended
murder, but his design of murder, [but he Prints it] [ changed the intended
murder,] and though murder cannot be changed into a Rape, yet one design may be
changed to another, though not into another design.

I should have fought till I my Princess freed,
Though I had waded through the blood I shed.
[ He should have freed his Mistress, though after be had shed Blood, he had
waded through it, and spoiled his Shoes and Stockings: Well said Elkanah, to
make the sum of his daring to wade.] But sure the daring lay as well in the
shedding so much Blood as in the wading through it. I must confess I have heard
of more Heroic daring, than either of these two.

" Nay more these arms shall throw my head at thine.
Sure Porphyrius his throwing his head at Maximin after it was cut off, is
something more Heroic and Poetical than Elkanah's Queen's crouding up Hell,
etc.

As profane sinners are from Altars driven,
Banished the Temple to be Banished Heaven.
Horrors and Tortures now my Iaylours be,
Who paints damnation needs but Copy me;
For if mankind the pains of Hell e're knew,
It Is when they lose a Mistress as I do.
[ At the same time to be banished and a Prisoner is a Bull. I thought the
banishment related to his Person, and the Horrors and Tortures to the freedom
of his mind: but however had they both related to the same thing, they had been
^ense, for Banishment is a larger kind of Imprisonment, for it is confining men
to such or such Countries, the freedom of their native Country being taken from
them. Paints damnation. [Can a man paint pain, or can a man be like
damnation.] No: but a man may describe damnation which is as good, and may not
unlawfully call it painting damnation, and it is supposed when he says [ Copy
me] he means describe me with all my miseries that attend me.

But now for the dullest objections that he has made yet. In his Observations
on the Mask he says* [ He thinks they never understood recitative Music nor
Masks in Morocco. Nor did Taffalet take delight in the represented spoils

Of Cyrus, Caesar and Aeneas Toils.
If the true Characters and customs of Moors in Morocco or Granada, or of
Indians in Mexic^ were to be exactly represented in Plays on those Subjects I
fear Mr. Dryden has been as great a Transgressor as he would make you believe
Elkanah is. To follow truth exact^y in the representations of foreign stories,
would be as Ridiculous as to imitate their habits exactly. How ill and foolish
would the dressing a Roman with naked Arms and Legs, be, or making a Solomon or
an Almanzor, and Almahide, sit Cross Legged like Tailors* or dressing Moors in
Boots and Moorish Women in trouses. Nay there ought to be the same care in
representing Characters as dresses. How senselesly and inartificially has he
made a long and idle description of Almanzors Gallantry, by his encountering a
Bull, which though we all know is in use and in esteem at Granada, how little
and impertinent does the narrative of it appear here. All Heroic actions of
Virtue or Gallantry on the Stage, being rated and valued by the rules of the
place and Age they are presented in, not by the sense of the Age or place when
and where they were first performed.

I Have been an actor in such Comic sport,
When in my Father Taffaletta's Court.
He took delight in the represented spoils
Of Cyrus, Caesar and Aeneas Toils.
[ Observe what she calls Comic. Cyrus, Caesar, and Aeneas Toils.]

Would thou have had her called them Tragic or Pastoral?

[ The Queen Mother persuades Morena to go in Masquerade, which Morena thinks a
very valiant thing, saying.]

-- I dare do any thing, to show
TO a Throne I change of Place, not Passions owe.
[A generous brave thing to go in Masquerade.]

If thou can make out that what ever a man dares do must be very valiant,
Generous, and brave, the ten sheets of nonsense thou had the confidence to
write are much to thy advantage, and have past a very great compliment on thee.

Traitors rarely look like what they act.
[ Can the looks of Traitors be like Treason? indeed as like as any of his
Similitudes.] But not so like as some of Commentatours: For Bays has a very
pretty po^tical way of invention: when he has occasion for a simile, not
contented with such common things as are in sense or nature; such as the dull
scriblers, who, as he says, never reach an Excellence, take allusions from, he
forms more Airy notions, and so makes his Flights more sublime. As page 23.
Abdalla of Lyndaraxa.

" Her tears, her smiles, her every look's a net.
" Her voice is like a Sirens of the Land,
" And bloody hearts lie panting in her hand.
A Sirens of the Land! That is a Land-Mermaid: A pretty fancied creature, a
Land Sea Monster: I have heard of a whole Book in this style; such another kind
of Volume as Tom Thumb, that would have done him a courtesy in this nature
being richly furnished wi^h many such fancies and excellencies, as a
she-waterman, an Iron Par^tree, a Wind-watermil and the like. And though Bays
has a perfection above others in that Mercurial art of filching; yet I hope my
instructions, though to a man so well versed already, may not be wholly
disacceptable. Besides, her look's a net; is so old a Phrase, so stale an
allusion that it has been in twenty third-Form Schoolboys Exercises.

But perhaps the Reader, what ever his other Thefts are, will conclude his
similitudes his own by their marks: Yet to convince you, there is not the lest
thing he will not steal, his Almanzor says p. 69.

" You dash like Water back, when thrown against the Wind.
The Host in the Villain. Slander returns back into the slanderers face, as a
man that pisseth against the Wind. But such Petty Larceny is not wo^th an
Arraignment, nor would his Brethren envy at his stolen Treasures -- Omnia si sic

Dixisset. --
Poisoned! How was this Murder hid till now,
And by what Arts was it disclosed by you.
Enter Queen Mother. [ Here she enters abruptly, and answers to what she did
not hear.]

That were too long to tell, the unhappy Son,
This Night too must the Fathers Fortune run.
O, then the unkind Printer has mistaken her Entrance, which should have been
two Lines sooner, which in the Acting I am sure is not mistakes. [ And within
three Lines she contradicts her self, saying to him,]

I Will save your Life, your Empress, and your Throne.
O does she contradict her self, so let her; but where is the fault to say, Sir
you will be killed to night. How killed? yes, unless you take my Counsel, which
if you will follow, I Will save your life, etc. Which are almost the very words in
the Play.

On this Foundation I Have this Structure laid.
[ To lay a house upon a Foundation is not English.] Therefore to lay a
structure on a Foundation must not be English. Though all Houses be structures,
yet I hope all structures are not Ho^ses: one stone laid upon another is a
structure.

Knowing how ill your kindness he will requite,
If he should find you Author of my flight.
[ He will if he should is false English, etc.]

A very great oversight [hee'l requite] for [hee'd requite] he might as well
have accused the Poet for letting.

My fair Eurdice, my fair Eurdice, instead of Euridice. Page 47. escape or at
lest go Unmentioned in his Errata, for it is a heinous oversight, viz. a
litteral fault.

Leave that to Providence: but grant he should --
He would not sure attempt a Woman's Blood.
At least when he considers how it was don:
A Mothers Piety to save a Son.
[ Excellent Grammar. When he considers how 'twas done, to find me Author of
your flight, a Mothers Piety to save a Son. How ^'was done, a Mothers Piety.]

But Prithee let us know why [ To find me Author of your flight] got in
between the other two lines. Why? to make the Grammar a little more excellent.
Thanks kind Commentatour. But then wherein lies the great fault in the two last
lives of the Speech. Where is thy excellent Grammar in Granada, Page 3.

" But what the stranger did was more than man.
If he puts [man] for [humane] it is a very bold Drydenism; but if he means what
the stranger did was more then man could do. Then where is the fault to say.

When he considers how 'twas don:
A Mother Piety to save a Son did it.
If this Liberty be prohibited, how many excellent Grammars will I find in
Granada.

" Must I then kill Benzaida, or must loose, Gran. page 117.
" It Is better once to die then still to fear. page 81.
" And though I cannot break 'em I Will divide. page 108.
" My mind shall teach my body how to bear. Ibid.
Loose what? and bear what? fear what? and divide what? where are the
Accusative cases to [loose] and [bear] [fear] and [divide] which are all Active
Verbs.

I Will lead you where you may all eyes escape,
And privately put on this borrowed shape.
[ What need he put on a borrowed shape after he had escaped all eyes] Was ever
such an Impertinent question ask? Though the King could escape all eyes for so
much time as to put on a disguise, sure it does not follow that a disguise must
be unnecessary, or that his escaping all eyes for a quarter of an hour must
inter he could lie concealed a whole night.

Whilst with the noise of Drums, and Trumpets sound --
[ (...), noise and sound, viz. Noise and noise.] If [Noyse] without [sound]
will make it ^e^se, noise of Trumpets is a pretty t^rm of Art of Mr.
Commentatours.

Inhumane Monster: such ^ bloody fact
No mortal sure can think, much less dares act.
[to think a fact is nonsense, any one but Mr. Settle thinks thoughts not
facts. I suppose if he has any meaning it is think on such a fact.]

Any one but Mr. Commentator, I take it, can make facts the object of his
thoughts, and to them that think 'em facts are thoughts. But why think on a
fact? why may not [think] govern an Accusative case. If thy litlle head-peice
can make this line in Mustapha nonsense,

When they dare act what Monarchs scorn to think, thou shall have my vote for
the Chair at next Sessions of Apollo.

In your defense act your own Champions part,
With your drawn Dagger stab him to the Hedrt.
[To stab him to the heart in her defense, was not to act her own Champions
part, but to be her own Champion. But Laula subtly advises it be done with a
drawn dagge^ Morena else might have been such a fool as to have stabbed at him
with a sheathed Dagger.] Oh thou subtle Worm.

Granada page 4. " Shund and rece^v'd him on his pointed Spear.
Subtly contrived too, if Almanzors Spear had not been pointed how could it
have received the Bull upon it.

-- To take
This brave resolve for your fair Virtues sake;
[Resolve for resolution. The Verb is never used Substantively by any but
affected fools who understand not good English.]

Ill English there will be, and affected fools too as long as you and I live
deat heart, take it from me.

And this Heroic act looks brave and great.
[A very Heroic brave and great thing to stab! well said Elkanah] and well
Commented Bays. Sure for a Woman and one of her Quality and Character to stab a
Villan, and a Ravisher, for the protection of her own Honor, and the safety of
her Husbands life and Crown, is not I take it against the Laws of Heroicks.

My deeds above their reach and power aspire:
[The doer may aspire but not the deeds.]

This is like out face his Treason e're its rise begin.

[Treasons rise cant begin of it self.] as Notes said before.

My Bosom holds more rage, than all Hell Fire.
[This is foolishly unnatural: none ever loved and gloried in wickedness for
wickedness sake.] But to be a little positive with Mr. Notes, I am of opinion
none ever loved and gloried in wickedness but for wickedness sake: for the very
satisfaction and pleasure which men take in the doing of wickedness; and for
which end they commit wickedness, is wicked as well as the doing it. But if he
means the Queen is (...) unnatural, and kills for no other end but the bare
pleasure of killing, he abuses ^er: for all the Murders, and Treasons she
commits through the Play, are either for her own safety, or her favorite
Crimalhaz his advancement to the Crown.

[But now for the splendid Mask with never a word of sense in it. In which he
cannot refrain from nonsense in the very direction.]

The Scene opened is presented a Hell.
[ viz. The opened Scene is presented a Hell very good English.]

Another body would have made it English thus, The Scene opened, viz. The Scene
being opened a Hell is presented, [And a Hell as if there were more then one.]

Though Mr. Commentatour (it he believes there is any) believes there is but one,
yet he will allow sure that several Religions varied in their opinions of that
one Hell. And it is not nonsense to say the Christians Hell, and the H^athens
Hell, besides [a Hell] which would not have been sense spoken in the Play,
refers here in the direction to the Picture of Hell. The Scene being opened is
presented a painted Hell.

Pluto, Proserpine, and other women Spirits, etc.
As if Pluto and Proserpine were women Spirits if the Authors words had been
Proserpine, Pluto, and other women Spirits, yet then it had been sense.

[ Besides it is nonsensc to say women Spirits, as if Spirits had Sexes] I know
it is nonsense to say women Spirits, and I know dear heart, as thou do, that
Spirits have no Sexes. But this being in the direction is spoken in reference
to the Actors that were women not the Characters they presented. For if the
description only related to the persons or buisness in the Play; then it should
not have been the [Scene open'd] but [ the Tent opened;] is presented, etc. nor
should it have been [the Stage is filled on both sides with Crimalhaz, etc.]
for this Mask is supposed performed in a Pavilion, in a Camp. But all marginal
descriptions or entryes in Plays refer indifferently to the real place or
Persons, as to the represented Characters.

Orpheus. The groans of Ghosts and sighs of Souls,
Infernal Echoes, and the Houles
Of Tortured Spirits cease:
A gentle Gust
Has all things Hushed;
And Hell in spit^ of Vengeance is at Peace:
Whilst Ravished by my warbling Strings,
The Vultures moult their Wings;
The Furys from their Heads will shake
Each useless Snake,
The Scorpions loose their Stings,
And Hell it self forget their Tyrant Kings.

His objection that [sighs of Souls] is nonsense, alias Poetical, souls having
no lungs] and his observation [that a gentle Gust is a bull, a Gust being a
sudden violent storm of Wind] ( which by the way is the first time that [Gust]
was ever so defined) and his quarrelling [with warbling strings, voices being
the only thing, he says, that warbl^.] and his finding fault [with moulting of
Wings as an improper Phrase, when be says moulting of Feathers, but not wings,
is sense: moulting of wings is very new.] ( which by the way too is not so
over-new. Annas Mirabilis Stanza 143.

" His Navies moulted wings he imps once more.)
These idle remarks are so very silly, that letting them pass, or laughing at
'em is the best answering of them. Give our Commentator but Rope, and he hangs
himself. The Proverb is something musty, but no matter.

But then for a more murdering observation.

[ Hell forgets its its Tyrant Kings] would be true Grammar though not very
good sense. [Hell forget their Kings,] is such false Grammar, that the lowest
Boy in Westminster School would be ashamed to write.] It Is well thou art past a
School Boy, and so past all shame, or else thou had never had the impudence
to expose such a line as Hell forgets tyrant Kings,] for Grammar. If thou
meanest Hell for the place of Torments it is palpable nonsense to suppose a
place or pain can forget or Remember. But if thou designest it for sense, and
take it that way the Author meant it, that is for the Inhabitants of Hell
(which is the only way he could intend it for, by the foregoing discourse of
Vultures Scorpions and Furies which are supposed to be part of them, and in
which sense it is very often used, as

Flectere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo.
[ Acheronta] for [Inferos]) certainly thou art the most mistaken in Grammar of
any man of thy Years, and great parts (if such thou have, that is, if all thou
say be true) that e're I met with. [Its] for a Pronoune to a Noun of
Multitude is excellent. Pray which is the truest Grammar to say. Troy held out
ten years against its enemies the Graecians, or against Their enemies the
Gr^cians. But one thing I should not omit, he takes no notice of the three
lines before this.

viz. The Furies from their Heads will shake
Each useless Snake;
The Scorpions loose their stings,
And Hell it self forget, etc.
And so makes it false concord in Grammar, [Hell will forget] is Grammar,
though [Hell forget] is not. For [will] is not only the sign of the Future
tense before [shake] in the first line, but before [loose] and [forget] in the
two last.

Whence Mortal does thy Courage grow,
To dare to take a walk so low. Says Pl^to.
To which Orpheus answers.

To tell thee God thou art a Ravisher,
No Tears nor Prayer,
Your unresisted Will controuls;
Who commit Force on Virtue, Rapes on Souls.
[Pluto asks, whence does thy Courage grow? Orpheus answers, from to tell thee
God thou art a Ravisher.] If Pluto had ended there, it had been something: But
put in to dare to take a walk so low; and then examine the connection? [ Besides
Orphens came a great Journey to tell Pluto very great news: viz. that he was a
Ravisher, as if he did not know that before.] What if he did know it before, is
Orpheus his upbraiding him of what he had done nonsense? Or is all Discourse
but telling news nonsense? Then the Poet says Plutoes unresisted will cannot be
controuled, and Notes asks him. [ How can a thing be controuled that is never
resisted?] Aye! How indeed? But sure [unresisted] has the same signification
with [irresistible] what [ cannot be resisted, not what is not resisted. But
then this blundering Grammation; says, [ your unresisted will who commit, etc.
[will] being the proximum antecedens to [who] makes it, false English, [who]
for [which] and [commit] for [commits.] If it be [which commits,] and so true
Grammar it is nonsense: For Pluto's will does not commit Rapes, it only inclines
him to commit rapes on Souls.] Well, Grammar and Philosophy are things that buz
much in Commentatours head, especially in this fourth Act; but by the insipid
rate he talks of them, I durst lay an even wager that such another as ^ripple
in Epsome wells, with his Laws of the Maids and Parsons, and his castigo to non
quod odio habem sed quod amem; shall bafle him in both: By the damnable
stumbles Mr. Notes makes in them, he is quite different from Aretine in his
Preface, who rayld not against God because he did not know him, for he on the
contrary abuses poor Grammar and Philosophy, for no other reason but because he
never understood them. Let him alter it thus and see his mistake. The will of
you who commit, and then let him examine the propriety of the English; Is not [
your will] and [ the will of you] the same thing?

Dares a weak Animal of Mortal Race,
A^^ront a God ^ his Face;
And of a Crime impeach a Deity?
[ An Animal of Mortal race is very elegant, as much as to say, an Animal of
Animal race, or a Mortal of Mortal race: there being no animal but what is
mortal.] I Believe the Schoolboy Elkanah, when he wrote this, had learning
enough too as well as pays to tell him that an animal was of mortal race, and
yet for all that he has a little of Bays his confidence too, to believe this
Line more elegant, than our Ironick friend is pleased to think it. For had he
said dares a weak animal affront and impeach a God, 'twould have been as dull
and flat (if possible) as a Scene in the Polish Princess, or the Five Acts of
Charles the Eight.

[The other Line is Burlesque.]

Thy ^reath has damned thee, thou shall dye.
[First he is damned, and afterward he shall dye: Here is Breath again, which
is every thing, and does every thing with Elkanah; nay, breath that makes
others live, shall make Orpheus dye.]

If a man should tell me that any Creature living had patience to read thy
Pamphlet out at once sitting, I should swear the story of the Famous Grizil
were nothing to him. Nay he deserves to be Canonized as much as she; and to make
his Memory live like hers in such another Pindarick, as

Full ^i^teen Winters she lived still contented,
No wrong she thought upon, etc.
I know a friend of mine, that if he would be so kind and strain hard, might do
this man the same favor, and in the same style Rhyme him into immortality.

But how prettily so ever this Objection is worded, as [ first he is damned,
and ^fterwards dies.] First let me ask him if Men's sins do not damn them; and
then when sins are committed before men dye, or after death? I wonder where is
the nonsense to say such a man's ambition, or such a man's blasphemy damned him;
and wherein is Pluto's fault to tell Orpheus that his words had damned him, and
he should dye. But then this overcurious Sophister has turned [ damn'd] into a
Passive Verb, [he is damned,] which relates to the suffering of damnation: For
to say a man is damned, implies he is dead, and his soul in Hell, and thereon
he builds his seeming argument; but to say in the Active sense such a sin damns
a man, implies (as the word is used,) that damnation will certainly follow as a
reward of that sin after his death: But his pitiful snarling objection, that [
Breath which makes others live makes Orpheus dye,] is so Phlegmatic a thought,
that none but our senseless man of Gall but would be ashamed of.

Unloose your twisted Crests of Snakes:
Into his Breast those swift Totmentors fling,
And his tortured Entrals Sting.
[ Twisted Crests of Snakes (viz. upon the Furies heads) I take to be nonsense
and sustian. ^ Ay prithee do, take it so and welcome: Thou have such a pretty
way of taking things, that it is pity to baulk thee: I dare swear for Elkanah,
that he would not be unwilling that thou should take all the Plays he has or
shall write, provided thou would use them so harmlesly as thou have done
this. [But, why swift Snakes? Snakes (as he takes it again) are far from being
swift Creatures.] Well, if the Snakes on the Furies heads as the Poets feigned,
were the tormentours the Furies used to fling into the Bosoms of men, and our
Commentatour will take Furies and their instruments of vengeance to slow
creeping things, how can we help it. But I shrewdly guess, what some people
would say of such an expression, as a slow Snake flung from a Furies head.

Oh Sir, his fatal Doom recall,
Dispel your furious anger;
Let not such noble worth your Victim fall:
Be kind both to a Lover and a Stranger.
[Here Pros^rpine calls a God, Sir: It Is a very new Title for a God; she might
as well have said, your worship.] I think not quite so well. I Am afraid a
certain newmade Rhimer would take it very heinously, if I should tell him that
his Amphitrite. My Lord Great Neptune, etc. might have been as well Your
Lordship Great Neptune. [Then how can worth fall a Victim; a worthy man may,
but worth cannot.] How often [Worth] [Virtue] [Innocence] and the like, are
used for [Worthy] [Virtuous] and [Innocent people] need not be asked: I wonder
how [wrong'd Virtue,] and [injur'd innocence] escaped him in the Examination of
the Third Act.

I have a Mistress in your Sphere,
Forced from my Arms
By Deaths Alarm's:
My Martyred Saint brings me a Pilgrim here.
[The Sphere of Hell is Nonsense.]

In the last Act.

I Will travel then to some remoter Sphere,
Till I find out new Worlds, and Crown you there.
[ I believe our learned Author takes a Sphere for a Country: The Sphere of
Morocco, as if Morocco were the Globe of Earth and Water; but a Globe is no
Sphere neither by his leave, etc.] Commentatour is as cruel here to [Sphear] as
he was to [infect] in the First Act, which he would allow to have relation to
nothing but a disease: So [Sphear] here must not be sense, unless it relate to
a circular motion about a Globe, in which sense the Astronomers use it: I would
desire him to expound these Lines in Granada. page 29.

Lyndar. " I Will to the Turrets of the Palace go,
" And add new fire to those that fight below.
" Thence Hero-like with Torches by my side
" (Far be the Omen though) my Love I Will guide.
" No, like his better Fortune I Will appear,
" With open arms, loose Vail, and flowing Hair,
" Just flying forward from my rolling Sphere.

I wonder if he be so strict, how he dares make so bold with [Sphear] himself
and be so Critical in other men's writings. Fortune is fancied standing on a
Globe not on a Sphere, as he told us in the first Act.

But then he says, [ Nothing is forced by Alarm's, an Alarm being but a
preparation to force.] If our Nice Critic, Mr. Bays will have an Alarm (viz.
before a Battle) to be but a preparation for force, I doubt he mistakes it, for
if he were in an Army, (pardon the supposition, for what should he do there?) I
much suspect that an Alarm would be a thing of more force with him, then an
ordinary man.

Oh take me down to her, or send her back to me.
[ Here Orphous speaks as if he were upon the Stage, and not in Hell: Would he
have himself taken down from Hell to Hell, or her brought back from Hell to
Hell.]

Surely there is a great difference between his being down in Hell, and his
being taken down to Hell.

Take me down to her, or send her back to me.
Signifies, entertain me down with her, or if I cannot be entertained here,
send her back to me when I am gone from hence. For if a man should come into
another company, he may not improperly say, Sir pray take me into your
company, though he be in it before he says so. Besides Orp^eus was in Plutoes
Palace, and sure 'twas not ill in him, to suppose the seat of his Euridice in
Hell to be somewhat inferior to the Throne of the God of Hell. And so [ take
me down] is more proper than Notes is pleased to judge it.

But with thee thy fair Treasure take,
Releast by Love from that eternal chain,
Which destined Kings and Conquerours cannot break.
[Releas'd from an eternal Chain is a Bull. If her chain had been ^ternal, she
could never have broken it.] But certainly thy weak headpiece cannot mean this
for an argument: For the Poet says the Chain was Eternal to Kings and
Conquerours not to her: And when he says she was releast from that Eternal
Chain which Kings and Conquerours can never break, he makes no Bull at all, for
her Chain, viz. of Death and Hell was the same with theirs, only she wore hers
but for a time, and they were doomed to wear theirs for ever.

To th'wondring World he in soft Aires may tell,
Mercy as well as Justice rules in Hell.
[How shall the world hear soft tunes. They had need be loud ones one would
think] To tell the World then is to tell all the World and all the World at
once. This observation is so wonderful witty, that none but this Arch wag could
have hit on it.

No law there nor here, no God so Severe,
But love can Repeal, and Beauty can tame.
[He repeals a God] No Saturnine friend. Let it be [repeal a] Law and [tame a
God.]

[The Emperor being stabbed by Morena, says the Queen Mother.]

My Son killed by her hand!
Crim. Call my Physicians. Bid my Guards appear.
The Emperor Stabbed, the Queen his Murderer!
[Says Crimalhaz since he is killed, since as he says the Emperor stabbed, the
Queen his Murderer. Call my Physicians, a Physician is very useful to a dead
man] Why since he is killed?

Though as thou say, Crimalhaz had said [kill'd] which he does not, yet sure
to say a man is killed, does not absolutely imply he is dead as soon as ever
the wound is given that kills him: nor is it unmannerly or impertinent to call
his Physicians to the assistance of a wounded King, though in all probability
he might not live a quarter of an hour, nor could their assistance defer his
death. It had been very pretty to have said the King is stabbed, let us see if
he will bleed to death, if he does not, I Will send for Surgeons that shall cure
him.

But though your hand, has your adorer killed.
'T has reached his heart, but not the Love it held.
Your Image cannot from my Soul retire;
My Lov's immortal though my life expire.
[ How could a hand touch Love, or a dagger stab Love.] How could any fellow
but Notes ask such a question? though a hand cannot touch Love, nor a Dagger
stab Love, as thou callst it, yet sure 'twas not ungenerous in the King to tell
her, that hand that killed him could not destroy his Love to her that gave him
his death, which very probably it might have don.

Moren. Good, Gentle, Kind, give me the Dagger back;
For mine -- for his -- For Heaven -- and Justice sake.
Cannot my Tears nor Prayers your heart overcome?
If my requests appear too burdensome,
Grant but this one -- that pointed Steel restore,
And I Will not live to ask you any more.

[ That is give me the Dagger back, or if my request appear (for appears) too
burdensome give me the Dagger] If thou would have took the pains to have
looked into the Printed Errata at the end of the Play, thou might have found
page 50 line 6 for request read requests. But this act has so many willful
oversights, that it is intolerable.

O^ cruel Queen, what has your fury done,
That made you lose a Husband, me a Son;
This Realm a King, the World a Virtue, grown
Too sit for Heaven, but not to go so soon?
[ The Question is an answer to it self, she asks what her fury had done, that
made her lose a Husband, etc. Why it answers to it self, it made one lose a
Husband, the other a Son.] Sure her fu^y had done something more then all this.
If the King had died in his bed, one would have lost a Husband, and the other a
Son, And Morocco a King, etc. But certainly it might be supposed his Murder
might be the occasion of more Calamiti^s then his natural death would have
been. They might expect a Vengeance that would attend his Murder, besides the
concern and sorrow of a Nation for so fatal a blow, which her fury was Author
of. But this unmerciful fellow keeps up his old little thoughts of Kings. Such
a word as [Lead on] shall rob 'em of all authority, and make Ciphers of them
whilst they live, and when they are dead, dye which way soever, like Cats and
Dogs, there is an end of them.

[Too fit for Heaven is a bull, nothing can be too fit for the end it is
designed for, much less for Heaven.] But relatively a thing may be very
properly so called. Her saying he was too sit for Heaven but not to go so soon,
Implied as much as if she had said he was so good and so Virtuous that he was
too fit for Heaven, that is, in so much he was so Virtuous mankind did not
deserve him: but not fit to go so soon, considering what loss mankind would
have of him, by his going thither too soon.

Was it not you that armed me to this guilt,
Told me I should a Ravishers blood have spilt?
[ I should have spilt before she did it, is nonsense: it must be, I should
spill.] But now she had don, to say she should have done otherwise may be
sense. Had it been [I should spill] it had scarce been so. His telling her, and
the deed being both past, it is more properly said of her [I should have split.]
For it is a praeterperfect in relation to [now she speaks it] not [when it was
told her first.] For if he be so strict as to examine in what tense her
spilling a Ravishers blood was first spoke to her, 'twas neither [I should
spill] nor [I should have spilt.] For when the Queen Mother set her a work it is
likely she said Madam do as I tell ye and you shall spill a Ravishers blood.
But such pitiful observations raise more words then they are worth.

But madness always us^ers in great Sins.
[Madness takes away all sin. Mad men cannot sin.]

These are two of Commentators sentences, and the application of 'em is
excellent. Because a fellow that is Lunatic, or a Man that is absolutely
divested of Reason and understanding commits no sin, Therefore, madness cannot
be accused of ^in. I hope he designs this excuse for writing his Pamphlet,
that he was Frantic when he writ it, for indeed he that reads it would guess
as much, and his sentence too holds Good here. For Elkanah I dare swear for him
thinks his Pamphlet so far from a sin or an offense, that nothing could please
him better. But I wonder at Mr. Commentators rateing of madness, how cruel our
English Law is that hangs a Man when he is sober for a crime committed when he
was drunk, whereas if the man had had his right senses and not a tangue of
frenzy occasioned by his Wine, it is likely he had not committed it. And it so he
sin not in the committing it, why is he punished.

She moved -- star'd -- walked -- stormed -- raged -- cursed -- raved and damned.
[She moved and walked, as if any body could walk without moving.] But sure one
may move without walking.

The Author has Printed it [she moved star'd walk'd] not [she walked star'd
moved,] and it is imagined that people may move before they walk. [storm'd raged
raved that is raged, raged, raged.] Well now I do not wonder at Mr.
Commentators blunders in Grammar, by his ignorance in English. For it is a
received opinion that the rules a man makes of what he does not understand may
very possibly be faulty. If his great education and greater conversation has
taught him no distinction between storming, raving and raging, certainly two
great blessings have been thrown away upon him.

This is no news to that which she has done;
[ Done news] Why done news: Was ever such a construction made. That which she
had done might be News, without making [News] the Accusative case to [don.]

Her face discolored grew to a deep red,
[That is, either her red face grew red, or her tauny or black and blew face.]
Any color but the right will serve thy turn. Nothing but sense comes amiss to
thee.

Then with an infant Rage, more soft, and mild,
She played with madness, leaped, sung, danced and smild.
[She played, leaped, sung, danced, and smild: these are pretty effects of rage.
But it is an infant rage. Little or moderate rage, that is, moderate excess is a
bull.] But sure a less or more moderate rage spoken in comparison to a greater
that was mentioned before, is no bull.

Observe how idly her wild fancies walk,
But she who acts so ill, as ill may talk,
Who'd think a thing so young, so soft, and fair,
Could be so kind a Husbands Murderer?
But see when Heaven commands its gifts away,
The Wits and senses lost, the Soul may stray.
[The Poet thinks his own fancy flies, but his Queens but walks.] What ever the
Poets may do, fly or walk. I Am certain the Commentators fancy does but creep,
and so humbly too, that Placidius's maggot and that may go together; one for
the husk of Lo^^, and the other for the husk of sense. But then

The Wits and senses lost, the Soul may s^ray.
[That is, when the Wits and senses are gone, it is possible to be mad.] Never
was man so unlucky at sentences as I (...).] Never was man so lucky at 'em as
Bays, Thy wits and senses gone* it is certain thou art little less then mad. But
thine is such an innocent madness such an infant rage, as Elkanah has it,
thanks to thy Saturnine humor, as thou calst it, for why tamer qualification,
that thy Dogs days are not so hot as otherwise might have been expected.

Is It not enough that my dear Lord I slew,
But must he actor, and designer too.
[It should be [I must,] I being as necessary as any word in the verse.] I
wonder thou did not tell us that [she moved, stared, etc.] should have been,
[she moved, she star'd, she walked, she stormed, she raged* she cursed, she
raved.] [ She] being as necessary there as [I must] here, after [I shew] in the
line before.

Morena's hand shall wash the stain She wears;
As Condemned men turn Exe^utioners.
[Morena must execute her self, as condemned men execute others, and she must
wash the stain off her self, as condemn men wash the stain off themselves by
being Hang men.] In the first place Mr. Bays do not deal so unnaturally and
ungentleman like, to treat so honorable a man as a Hangman so rudely:
consider, dear heart, consider, a Hangman is a Squire. Now wherein lies the
wondrous fault to say Morena will wash off her stain, as condemnd men do
theirs, that is, by turning Executioners. But then our canting Commentator runs
on to no purpose and tells you that they execute others and she her self. But
because [Elkanahs Similes are the most unlike things to what they are compared
in the World.] I Will venture to start a Simile in his Annus Mirabilis* he gives
this Poetical description of the Ship called the London.

Stanza. 151. " The Goodly London in her Gallant trim,
" The Phaenix Daughter of the Vanquished old,
" Like a rich Bride does to the Ocean swim*
" And on her shadow rides in floating Gold,
Stanza. 152. " Her Flag aloft spread rufling in the wind,
" And Sanguine Stream^rs seemed the flood to fire,
" The Weaver charmed with what his Loom designed,
" Goes on to Sea and knows not to retire.
Stanza. 153. " With Roomy Decks, her Guns of mighty strength,
" Whose low-laid mouths each mounting Billow Laves,
" Deep in her draught, and Warlike in her length,
" She seems a Sea-Wa^p flying on the Waves.
What a wonderful pudder is here, to make all these Poetical Beautifications of
a ship; that is a Phaenix in the first Stanza, and but a Wasp in the last? Nay,
to make his humble comparison of a Wasp more ridiculous, he does not say it
flew upon the waves as nimbly as a Wasp, or the like, but it seemed a Wasp. But
our Author at the writing of this was not in his Altitudes, to compare Ships to
floating Palaces a comparison to the purpose, was a perfection he did not
arrive to, till his Indian Emperors days: But perhaps his Similitude has more
in it than we imagine. This Ship had a great many Guns in her, and they put all
together, made the sting in the Wasps tail; for this is all the reason I can
guess why it seemed a Wasp. But because we will allow him all we can to help
out, let it be a Ph^nix Sea-Wasp, and the rarity of such an Animal may do much
toward the heighining the ^ancy: But to give you an instance of another
excellent fancy. In his Observations on this Act d^signing to pass a Compliment
on Mrs. Johnson that Acted Morena, speaking of the Poet and her he says, [ Her
action exceeds his Poetry, as much as her Beauty and Mien does his.] He might
as well have said, Madam, you are infinitely a more beautiful Woman than Poet
Settle. Hansomeness in a man I have heard of, though Poet and Commentatour have
none of it, but never of Beauty before; but granting it to be that compliment
it was intended, to tell the world she is a Beauty is much like Commentatours
Observations on Orpheus his going to Hell to tell Pluto he was a Ravisher; he
tells us very great news, as if the world did not know it before.

But to finish in our Com^entatours words: Thus ends the most tedious insipid
dull Comment on an Act I ever read.

ACT The Fifth.
IN this Act our Waspish Commentatour has a little of the drone in him, and
though God knows his sting before has been but ^eeble, yet here he seems to
have lost it. For here his Observations are so wondrous silly, that I rather
think he comments upon his own want of understanding then Elkanahs.

for thus he begins.

Crim. Though on the Blood of Kings my Throne I Have built,
The World my Glory sees, but not my Guilt.
Mysterious Majesty best fits a Throne.
They Virtuous seem whose^ Vices are unknown.
Men have adored and have made Offerings
To unknown Gods, why not to unknown Kings.

[Why Myst^rious Majesty becomes a ^hrone better, then plain Majesty is to me a
mysterious Riddle.] Make Offerings! No man makes the Sheep and Oxen he
Sacrifices.] Unknown King! He was no unknown King, though he was an Usurper.
They all saw him, knew him, and were forced to acknowledge him.] It Is great
pity that a mysterious Riddle should come in Mr. Drydens way, for believe me
Gentlemen as Terence says, Davus est non Oedipus: He Is no Alexander at untying
of knots, Such another Riddle as is Fabulously fathered upon Homer, and the
Beggars that fat ^ousing themselves, put upon the Laureat though with a promise
of (...) mi^i magnus Apollo for answering of it, would no doubt be solved much
at Homers rate. If our Commentatour does not understand wherein Crimalhaz his
advantage lay, in not appearing plainly the traitor he really was; certainly
he has a Skull so thick, that if all his other parts were answerable to it, he
might be as stout as Hercules. But then why men cannot make sacrifices and
offerings is to me a mysterious Riddle. Ay but he infer, because men cannot
make sheep and Oxen; therefore they cannot make sheep and Oxen sacrifices. This
is a Riddle i^deed, but it may be answered as the ^oy did the Parson, when he
had asked him who made these Oxen: God made 'em Bulls, but my Father made '^m
Oxen. [But Crimalhaz was no unknown KIng. If the full kowledge of a King or an
Usurper lay in the remarkableness of his Persons; Olivers Nose was no doubt a
wonderful intelligencer. Another parcel of faults he f^^ds against Crimalhaz.

I thank him for this War he has begun,
The numbers of my Foes enhance my Crown,
It does a worth on Kings as Beauties set,
To have our Rivals numerous and Great.
[Numbers of Foes most commonly pull down Crowns.] And afterward,

Crim. Kind Taffalet does for my presence call,
I am invited to his Funeral.
The little Champion with impatience waits,
To beg a Tomb before Morocco's Gates.
And rather than his lingering Fate delay,
I Will with my Army take a walk that way.
His heat of blood, and lust of Crowns shall cease;
Lasht to a Calm and cooled into a Peace.

[He was a kind man to invi^e him ^o his Funeral; but believe it who will. I
can never think Taffalet would come with an Army only to beg a Tomb before
Morocco's Gates, etc. Besides Crimalhaz was very uncivil to fly upon a man that
came so kindly, etc.] What a wonderful belief has Mr. Bays. these are much like
the objections in the Third Act against

Tortures weak Engines that can run us down,
Or skrew us up till we are out of Tune.
And Hell a feeble puny cramp of souls, etc.
Because the Poet makes his Villain a Fellow that speaks scornfully of things,
and ^^syes every thing that opposes him as little and inconsiderable therefore
he writes nonsense: But something more he drives at in the two last Lines, and
says, [ the Poet does as good as sar I will not only murder him, but lash him
and cool him into a Peace, a Climax much like that of showers of Arrows and of
Rain.] Now how the Poet does as good a^ say so, or how he makes a Climax in his
speech, all my study cannot search out.

I think his Lashing him into a Calm, and cooling his heat of blood, is of a
piece with the rest: And may as well signify he will cool his blood by letting
it out, and calm his Ambition by cutting his Throat, as well as this Line. I Will
with my Army take a walk that way, may signify he intends to fight him. Just at
this rate he finds fault with the last Lines of the Fourth Act.

Moren. Then with a gentle gale of dying sighs,
I Will breath my flying soul into the Skies.
Winged by my Love, I will my passage steer,
Nor can I miss my way when you shine there.

And says. [ His reason why he cannot miss his way is excellent and
undeniable.] Nor is his observation on six lines in the latter end of the act,
after Crimalhaz his execution, spoken by Abd^lcador much unlike.

See the reward of Treason; Death's the thing
Distinguishes the Usurper from the King.
Kings are immortal, and from life remove,
From their lower Thrones to wear new Crowns above:
But Heaven for him has scarce that bliss in store:
When an Usurper dies, he raigns no more.
Here the Poet describes the difference of Kings from Usurpers, by their reward
after death, and Mr. Impertinent tells us [ it is nonsense; for death makes all
men equal] I may as well say that Mr. Drydens Notes upon Morocco, and Mr.
Cowleys Davideis are equal (pardon the profanation for neither the Authors nor
their writings are to be named. '^'th the same breath) and prove it thus: they
are both but paper and Ink, and therefore not different. If the Poets discourse
tended to nothing but the corruption of their bodies, I am of his opinion that
Death makes a King and an Usurper equal: But this worthy Gentleman keeps
constant to his Notions of Kings, and as he has not only made so great a Fool
of a King in his Boabd^lin, but by his sense of them through his Notes made out
his opinion of them in general, to be the same or worse then he has charactered
there: I wonder not at all at a Tenent that has been so long cherisht by him. [
Another sentence, Kings are immortal and yet dye.] The Poet is so far from such
a contradiction that he calls it only removing from Life: Yet if he had used
Sir Positives own words, the sense had been entire; considering how the whole
Speech affirms that Kings leave this Temporal Life for an immortal one. But for
[ a more glorious sentence, when a man dies he raigns no more.] Certainly a
King's a man, and yet the Author had said they raignd again after they dye. But
I grow tired, and wonder for what cause he could crowd such a Rabble of Iingles
and Blunders together, unless he courted the favor to be ridiculous: which he
of all mankind might have had without this trouble, though perhaps not so
Plentifully. But I perceive our Laureat has done writing of Plays, and though
impotent yet desirous to be fumbling still, like Old sinners worn from their
delight as one of this Prologues has it, he desires to be wh^pt to appetite. It
had been much more to his purpose, if he had designed to render the Authors
Play little, to have searc'd for some such Pedantry as this.

Lyndaraxa page 17. " Two ifs scarce make one Possibility.
Zulema p. 19. " If Justice will take all and nothing give,
" Justice methinks is not Distributive.
Benzayd. p. 48. " To dye on kill you is ah' Alternative,
" Rather than take your Live I will not live.
Observe how prettily our Author chops Logic in Heroic Ve^se. Three such
sustian canting words as [ Distributive] [ Alternative] and [ two ^fs,] No man
but himself would have come within the noise of. But he is a man of general
Learning and all comes into his Plays.

'T would have done well too, if he could have met with a rant or two worth the
observation: Such as.

Alman. page 156. " Move swiftly Sun and fly a Lovers pace,
" Leave Months and Weeks behind thee in thy race.

\ But surely the Sun whether he flies a Lovers or not a Lovers pace leaves
Weeks and Months, nay Years too behind him in his race.

Poor Robin or any other of the Philomathematicks would have given him
satisfaction in the point.

Almanz. page. 56. to Abdalla. " If I would kill thee now, thy Fate's so low
" That I must stoop e're I can give the blow.
" But mine is sixth so far above thy Crown,
" That all thy men
" Pil'd on thy Back can never pull it down.

Now where that is Almanzors sa^e is fixed I cannot guess: But wherever it is I
believe Almanzor, and think that all Abda^las Subjects piled upon one another
might not ^ull down his Fate so well as without piling; besides I think Abdalla
so wise a man, that if Almanzor had to ^d him, piling his men upon his back
might do the feat, he would scarce bear such a weight for the pleasure of the
exploit: But it is a huff, and let Abdalla do it if he dare.

But though your hand did of his murder miss;
However his Exile has restrained his power.
[ But though, and however signify both one thing.] Sir I kiss your hand; it is
the first time I ever heard so much before. [ He fi^ls a Verse as Masons do
Brick walls, with broken pieces in the middle,] Pardon me Sir, if I quible with
your Similitude, [ But though] and [ However,] are not in the middle, but the
beginning of the Verse.

In common Murders blood for blood may pay.
But when a Martyrd Monarch dies, we may
His Murderers Condemn; but that is not all.
A vengeance hangs over Nations where they fall.
[ What does a vengeance hang over Nations where Murderers of Kings are
punished.] [where they fall] to what does [they] relate? if to martyrd Monarchs
it is false Grammar.] If [ they] may not relate to martyrd Kings in general, the
last Line being a distinct sentence from the rest, Mr. Bays has reason.

No Prologues to her Death, let it be done.
[ Let what be done: Let her Death be done!]

No let her Execution be done.

Thy poysond Husband, and thy murdered Son,
This injured Empress and Morocco's Throne
Which thy accursed hand so often has shook,
Deserves --
A blow more fierce than Justice ever struck.
[ Deserves is false Grammar for deserve.] And afterward.

Whose Fortune and whose Sword has wonders done.
There he finds the same fault [ has for have.] And in another place.

And though your hand and hers no Scepter bears.
[ Bears for bear.] Here our Old Friend has met with Grammar again, but he
keeps his old humor, and treats it as uncivilly as before.

A Boy that had never arrived beyond the construing Qui mihi discipulus, etc.
Would tell him that the Verb after more Nominative Cases than one may agree
with them all, or only with the last at pleasure. What does he think of this
expression in Ovid.

Quum mare quum Tellus, correptaque Regia Coeli
Ardeat. --
[ But how does her poisoned Husband deserve a blow, and why does her murdered
Son deserve another?] I can tell him how the Poisoning of her Husband, and the
Murdering of her Son deserves one: But if the Poet has taken too much Liberty
in the expr^ssing of it, he begs his pardon. But this way of speaking is very
common, as we say, I Will revenge his blood. There [ his blood] is taken for [
the shedding of his blood.]

" I will not hear one word but Almahide.
Is not the name of Almahide here meant for [ a discourse upon Almahide] as had
been said before.

-- Stop her poisoned Breath,
And check her growing outrage by her death.
[ To check a man by death is a very civil reprehension, ^he'l stop her
poisoned Breath with a Hatchet.] A Bowstring would do as well.

Guilt only thus to guilty Minds appears:
As Sirens do to drowning Mariners.
Seen only by their Eyes whose Deaths are nigh.
We rarely see our Crimes before we dye.
[ Here he makes a false Allusion. For Syre^ appear not like Porpoises before a
storm, or in it; but if you will believe Homer in a Calm, enticeing Mariners to
the Rocks by their songs, who may escape 'em as Ulysses did.]

I hope Bays hold, up to his complaint in the third act that to write too much
would put the cramp in his fingers. For I much suspect the Cramp or Gout or
something got into them by that time they came to examine the fifth act, for
never did fingers put Pen to Paper so fumblingly, nor make such wretched blurs
as this superannuated scriblers have d^n. First he says [ it is no true allusion
because Sirens appear not before or in storms like porpoises, but in clams.]
Therefore (as he reasons,) they do not appear to drowning Mariners, for no man
(he implies,) can be drowned but in a storm. Why look ye, Gentlemen, was ever
more solid reason given, could an Oracle have spoken better? If this do not
satisfy ye, the Devil's in ye. But man of learning, recollect thy memory for
once, and take the Poetical description of Sirens.

The Sirens were supposed to be Daughters of Achelous and Calliope creatures
half fish, and half flesh, who by their charming voices so enticed Mariners as
to make 'em leap overboard, wh^ allured by their songs and their Beauties,
pursued them till they were drowned, which don the Sirens dragged 'em to the
Rocks and devoured them. But because Ulisses Mi^aculo^sly escaped them;
therefore says J. D. Sirens never appear to drowning Mariners. I must confess
this allusion is faulty, and why because it is quite contrary to Mr. Drydens.
And to reform it to his sense it should be thus.

Guilt only thus to guilty minds appears:
As Sirens of the Land to drowning Waggoners:
viz. Land Mariners in his stylo novo*
Well Reader, though our Commentator has not performed his promise, I Will treat
you with a parcel of Allusions, as delicate as you could with. I in the Royal
Martyr.

" Such fatal bounty once the Gauls did show,
" They threw their Rings, but thr^w their Targets too.
Now according to our Schoolboy Elkanahs reading it was the Sabines that threw
their Rings and their Targets.

But Gauls and Sabines, all is one in an Allusion.

Celadon in the maiden Queen.

There Is another puff in my Voyage has blown me as far as to the North of
Scotland. A pretty puff from Sicily, where his Scene lies. I am afraid our
Author's fancy Rambled home to England for that expression.

Granada page 38. Abenamar. " The people like a headlong torrent go,
" And every damm they break or overflow,
" But unoppos'd they either loose their force,
" Or wind in Volums to their former course.
A very pretty Allusion, contrary to all sense or Reason. Torrents I take it,
let 'em wind never so much, can never return to their former course, unless he
can suppose that fountains can go upwards, which is impossible: nay more in the
foregoing page he tells us so too. A trick of a very unfaithful memory.

" But can no more then fountains upwards flow.
page 37. Which of a Torrent which signifies a Rapid stream is much more
impossible. Besides if he goes to quibble and lay that it is possible by Art
water may be made return, and the same water run twice in one and the same
Channel: Then he quite confutes what he says, for it is by being opposed that it
runs into its former course, for all Engines that make water so return, do it
by compulsion and opposition. Or if he means a headlong torrent for a tide
which would be ridiculous, Yet Tides do not wind in Volumnes, but come directly
back (if their current lies straight) to their former course, and that by
opposition of the Sea water that drives 'em back again.

In his Annus Mirabilis he says of the Fire of London.

Stanza 217. " In this deep quiet, from what source unknown,
" Those see is of fire, their fatal birth disclose.
" And first, few scattering sparks about were blown,
" Big with the flames that to our ruin rose.
A spark of fire big with a flame, is such damned nonsense that it is
unsufferab^e. But his blundering mistake lies in applying an allusion to the
seed that generates with is proper only of the Womb that produces. I am of
opinion that a spark of fire that lights but a farthing Candle is as big with
fl^me (as our Authors words it.) as a spark of that fire which burnt London. I
expect to hear him talk of Acorns big with Oaks, and kernals of Apples big
with trees. It Is much of a piece with sparks of fire big with flames.

But to lard his gross oversights with some more pardonable mistakes. In
Granada page second he speaks of one of his Champion Bulls.

" Who with high Nostrils s^u^^ing up the wind.
Now if the Bull held his Nostrils upwards, he did not snuff up, but snuff down
the wind.

Abd. page 57. " I Will to the Spanish King; and try if he,
" To count nance his own right will succor me,
" There is more faith in Christian Dogs then thee.
What a damned rude and rascally expression has he put into the mouth (...)
^rince, a man of courage, and one that through the Play aims at a Crown (...)
To make him call a King, because he is not of his Faith, Dog: and yet at (...)
same time Fly to his protection.

Almanz. Speaking of ^oabdclin page, 101.

" He like a Devil among the blessed above,
" Can take no pleasure in your Heaven of love.
What a pretty fancied allusion I here. A Devil in Heaven. But granting we
could suppose such a Creature there, which by the way must destroy that opinion
of the Beatifick Presence, yet I guess that a Devil is not so in love with Hell
and his damned estate, but he could take pleasure in Heaven and that blessed
estate from which he fell, if he had the honor to be there again.

One thing I observe in the generallity of his allusions, his Allegories are so
bold that taking his Liberty I Will turn one of his Similes twenty w^ys to the
same purpose, on the same Subject, an^ not vary from his fancy. As for example
I Will take the forementioned lines in Maximin.

" He like a subtle worm has eat his way,
" And log'd within does on the Kernel prey.
" I creep without, and hopeless to remove
" Him hence, wait only for the Husk of Love.
And turning it to a Rat in a Venison Pasty, mark if the Simile be not firm,
and of the two the Fancy the more lofty.

He like a subtle Rat has eat his way,
And lodged within does on the Venison prey.
I creep without, and hopeless to remove
Him hence, wait only for the Crust of Love.
And so a Mouse in a Cheese would do pretty well, turning the Allegory to the
Rind of Love.

And if at any time he takes a flight, it is ten to one it is not to the purpose.

As for example.

" Alman to Almah. When e're you speak.
" Were my wounds Mortal they should still bleed on,
" And I would listen till my listen till my life were gone.
" My Soul should even for your last accent stay.
" And then shoot out, and with such speed obey;
" It should not bait at Heaven to stop its way.
Now if these last lines were sense which has been proved to the contrary yet
they would be absolutely mal a propos: for Almanzor, that designed Compliment
to Almahide mistakes his Cue infinitely. He tells her in the first lines how
long he would listen to her charming voice: but in the last in a Rapture he
tells her, how nimbly his Soul should post away from her to Heaven. If she had
been there it had been something to have said how bri^kly he could mount to
Heaven after her. But she being still upon Earth, it had been a Compliment to
have told her How tardy his soul should be when it left her though to meet
Heaven.

And for fancy when he lights of any thing like i^, it is a wonder, if it be not
borrowed. As here for example of, I find this fanciful thought in his Annus
Mirabilis.

Stanza 232. Speaking of the Fire of London. " Old Father Thames raised up his
reverend head,
" But feared the fate of Sim^eis would return:
" Deep in his O^ze he sought his sedgy bed;
" And shrunk his waters back into his Urne.
This is stolen from Cowleys Davide is page 9.

Swift Jordan started, and strait backward fled,
Hiding amongst thick Reeds his Aged Head.
Here with a little addition of his own fancy, and turning [aged head] into
[reverend head^ and [thick reeds] into [Ooze and Sedgy bed,] and [starting and
flying backward,] into [shrinking his waters back,] he has not only given us to
understand he has judgment, but how he uses it too.

But one thing I forget in his remarks on the four forementioned lines of the
Author, he says [by Guilt appears] in the first line, and [seen only by their
eyes whose deaths are nigh,] that the Poet affirms Guilts appears to dying men,
yet in the very next he contradicts himself]

We rarely see our crimes before we dye.
What a wry faced contradiction is here? The Poet affirms that Guilt appears to
men when their deaths are nigh, and that men rarely see their crimes before
they come to dye, which in my opinion looks more like a Tautology than a
Contradiction. He says in one place [ the Poet makes so many faults that a
Critic can make no clear riddance.] But he was a little wide there, for if he
does not make clear riddance by such Criticisms as these, the Devil's in him.

But since my Dagger has so feebly done,
Missing thy Breast I Have sent it to my own.
[ To send a thing is to part with the possession of it, but she it seems sends
the Dagger to her self.] To scrible like thee, is to part with all sense and
every thing that is like it. To send a Dagger to a Man's heart is an expression
older than thou art.

Curse on weak nature with my Rage unmanned,
A Masculine heart linkt with a female hand.
[ What reason has she to fall foul upon Nature for not making her a man.] Ay
what reason indeed: But for her to curse nature for not lending her an Arm as
strong as a Man's, that her rage might have done more manly actions is not
improper.

Your Courteous Arm retrived mine from a Guilt.
Morenas hand, Morenas blood had spilt,
[ To retrive an arm from guilt is Metaphorical nonsense.] But to reprive an
arm from a guilt is not, which is the word that is spoken, though the other
escaped the Press.

Is this your thanks, etc.
[ Here is excellent Grammar between [is] and [thanks] what Grammar soever
it is, I am s^re it is a propriety the word [thanks] has in English. Are these
your thanks* is never said. [Thank^] is commonly a familiar word that
com^^hends something understood; as w^ say [thank Sir,] for [Sir I give you
thanks.] Is this your thanks: Is this your giving me thanks, or making me a
requital.

Your Armie's routed e're the Wars begun,
The City taken and your Empire won.
[ To rout an Army presupposes fighting, but this was intended a flight.] Pray
what was this intended for.

Almanz. page 22. " An^ when the Spaniards their assault begin,
" At once beat those without, and these within.

This Almanzor speaks of himself, and sure for one man to conquer an Army
within the City, and another without the City at once is something difficult,
but this flight is pardonable to some we meet in Granada. Osmin page 13.
speaking of Almanzor.

" Who like a Tempest that outrides the wind,
" Made a just battle e're the bodies joined.
Pray what does this Honorable person mean by a Tempest that outrides the
wind. A Tempest that outrides it self: To suppose a Tempest without wind is as
bad as supp^sing a man to walk without Feet; for if h^ supposes the Tempest to
be something distinct from the wind, yet as being the effect of wind only, to
come before the cause is a little preposterous, so that if he takes it one way,
or if he takes it the other, those two i^s will scarce make one possibility.

-- Muly Hamet was never taught,
To back, but lead those Armies where be sought.
[ Though Muly Hamet had a Back as broad as Hercules, yet he could scarce back
whole Armies with it.] What cannot a nimble witted Commentatour find out.

His blood dear Prince shall pay for shedding thine.
[ Did his blood shed the others blood.] If I should tell thee, this Pamphlet
shall make th^e amends for the writing of thine, would thou say, did this
Pamphlet write the other.

To expiate thy blood I Will let out mine.
[ His blood was good and had no crime in it] But the shedding his blood was
none of the best deeds.

-- He by no force withstood,
Comes now this way to sacrifice your blood.
[ To Sacrifice blood is improper.] But for thee to write nonsense is not.

Immured within the walls of this strong Tower.
[ That is walled within the walls.] That^s, anything to please thee.

Draw up my Forces raise my Guards.
[ The Usurper had been just told that his Army was revolted and that Muly
Hamet was Proclaimed King, yet he talks of drawing up his forces and rayseing
his Guards afterward.]

I am afraid Commentator not Crimalhaz talks too much. Though his Army that was
sent out to fight Taffalet was revolted, yet it is not to be supposed but the
Imperial Palace in Morocco, which writers have related to be the greatest
place of strength in that City, had some forces in it to defend it; But how few
soever Crimalhaz had there, yet for a man of Courage to oppose a power that he
knew would take off his head, though with little hopes of success, is not so
great a wonder as Hum Buz takes it for.

-- There Is not one dart
In Heaven, that would not s^rike the Murdrers heart
Before his hand should touch her sacred breast.
[ Pray answer me one civil question: how could he be a Murderer before his
hand bad touched her sacred breast?] This Question may as civilly be answered,
as his objection against Treason e're it is begin in the fourth act, The
resolved intention of Murder, is enough to give the man that designs it the
name of Murderer I wonder how Ben and Shakes^ear ventured in several of their
Tragedies, as one for example in Macbeth, to write [ enter Murtherer^] at the
beginning of a Scene, when the Murder for which they were so called was not
committed till after their entrance.

Though I am fallen so low,
My fortune lost I may a Beggar grow.
[ That is, though my fortune be lost I may grow poor.]

As if every man that is poor must needs Beg.

I Will to a Thousand deaths my life expose,
Before I will one inch of Empire loose.
[ How many lives had she to expose to a thousand deaths]

How many years have thou lived and not heard such an expression as I Will die a
thousand deaths before I Will do so or so. [An Inch of Empire is no great matter,
but she is a woman that speaks it, and an Inch might be somewhat to her.]

Well said Archwag: there he hits it. A Smooty quibble tickles him, and is so
much in his Element, that I doubt not, but a shrug and a smile attended the
conception of this jest.

But I Will ask him why Mariamne may not be as unwilling to part with an Inch of
Empire as Almanzor was to part with one stone out of Granada's walls.

page 12. " And he shall buy it dear what his he calls,
" We will not give one stone from out these walls.
Now to repartee upon him in his own-beloved style. A stone out of a City Wall
is no great matter, but he is a man who speaks it, and a stone might be some
what with him. Well now let our Gomical friend say he is aped for something,
for this bald^rdash is ^o like him, tha^ Imitation I fear will be the lest
thing my Reader will accute me of, for so facetious a thought.

I Will sing my funeral obsequies in these Arms.
I Will Ravish her --
Then throw my self and her into the Fire,
And Arm in Arm together weel expire.
[ He sings after he is dead] No sure he says he will sing before he dies. And
though Funeral Obsequies are generally sung after men's deaths, what if
Crimalhaz is pleased to be particular, and sing his himself before his death.

What Miracle of honor has fate sent?
Sure Heaven acts Wonders! Wonders! no it is none --
What have the high'r Powers to do but to take care,
Of so much Virtue and a Face so Fair?
[ Sure Heaven acts Wonders, Wonders! No it is none. That is the wonders is no
wonder. A rare Grammarian.]

Let it be put in the plural number* Sure Heaven acts wonders, wonders! No they
are none. What are no wonders? Though in his admiration he says in the Plural
number, Sure Heaven acts wonders. Yet when it more particularly relates to the
saving of his Mistress, both the foregoing line, and the following lines show
the necessity of a singular number to express it by.

Sure Heaven acts wonders, wonders! No the saving of my Mistress is none. For
what have the higher powers to do but to take care of so great a beauty, etc.

Subjects my homage pay but Monarchs thine.
[ To pay my homage, is to pay that homage which is my due to another person:
But he means subjects pay me homage, and I pay thee.] Is it not English for a
Creditour to say to a Debtour, Pay me my debt? why may not pay me my homage
signify the homage that is due to me as well.

And saves her blood to be allied to yours.
[ By this alliance he means marriage; but to be married and allied are as
different, as Cousin and Husband.] Because we say Husband and Wife are married,
therefore we are bound, if we come to particulars, to say their bloods are
married too, and their hands are married.

A nobler Passion story never writ,
That turned a Traitor to a Proselite.
[ How could story write.] But Historians can write though story cannot. And if
he finds fault with this expression, how will he be reconciled with such a one
as this? Fame reports: or fame says such a thing. Fame can no more speak than
story can write; for Fame is not what speaks, but what is spoken of a man: As
story is not what writes, but is written of a man.

[ But a Proselyte is one that changes his Religion, and he is the likest to
make a Traitor.] A very Substantial Apothegme: A man that out of a principle
of Piery is converted from a Religion that he thinks erroneous, to one he
thinks the true, is the likest to prove a Traitor; which is as much as to say,
a man that does his best endeavor to be good and honest, is the likest to be a
Rogue. Besides in Hametalhaz's case Love converted him from a Villain to an
honest man: Therefore says Notes, he is the likest to be a Villain. But his
impertinence draws toward a conclusion, and indeed it is high time.

Ham. I from those Eyes for ever will remove,
I cannot stand the sight of hopeless love.

In his next Speech he says.

To what e're place my wandering steps incline,
I Will fancy Empires for I Will think her mine.
[ His Love is hopeless, and yet he will think her his.] As if his Love were ever
the less hopeless for his thinking her his. If a man's thinking a woman his
could make his Love cease to be hopeless, there needs not be such a thing as a
despairing Lover in Nature: For if a Cobbler were in Love with a Queen, if
thinking her his own would give him hopes, who could hinder his thoughts: But
if Commentatour will have it otherwise, I am his Humble Servant.

Raigning's a whole Life's toil, the work of Years.
[ Reigning is neither a whole Life's toil, if the King be not Crowned in his
Cradle; nor the work of Years in case he reign but one Year.] How severely
would Elkanah have been handled if he were really guilty, and all Commentatours
Objections were sense and reason. How will he reconcile this expression in his
preface. [ This upstart and illiterate scribler comes amongst the Poets, like
one of the Earth-born Brethren, and his first business in the world is to
attacque and murder all his Fellows.]

Now I am of belief that Elkanahs first business in the world (if you will ask his
Nurse) was rather as Commentatour says in the Fourth Act [ To Bite, stamp, cry
and roar] then to murder Poets. If he began to attacque and murder Poets in his
Cradle, he was no doubt an upstart scribler indeed.

My Iustite ended; now I Will meet a Crown.
[ Then it seems he intends to do Justice no longer, now he is King, but to
turn Rogue like Crimalhaz, or Fool like Muly Labas.]

His Justice upon Crimalhaz, I am of opinion, was ended when Crimalhaz was
Executed, and yet he might be just still, and neither Fool nor Rogue,

In Love, a Day, an Hour, a Minutes bliss,
Is all flight, ra^tur^, flame, and Exta^ies.
[ Is and Ecstasies are of several numbers,] are they, so: If I were as thee I
would not take it at the Poets hands. More Ecstasies than one in a minutes
happiness is too much.

Loves livelyer joys so quick and active move,
An Age in Empire's but an hour in Love.
[ How an Age in Empire is but an hour in Love I cannot understand.] And in
troth I believe thee, for why thy understanding should be any clearer here than
it has been all along through the Play I cannot imagine. But to quicken thy
apprehension, that thou may understand this last Line of the Play, I Will beg
the favor of thee to construe these two Lines in Cowley.

It Is so with man, when once a Crown he wears,
The Coronation day's more than a Thousand Years.
On the Conduct or Plot of the Play.
THis being much of a piece with the Notes on the Play, a man may start into
the matter without the trouble of a formal Introduction.

He tells you first [ On what foundation of nonsense this Play is built. Morena
runs away with Muly Labas from her Fathers Court, for which they are both
imprisoned by his Father, and to be put to death for stealing one another. Yet
in the mean time her Father is so far offended, that he is wageing War against
His, and coming with an Army against Morocco. In the first place she relates a
thing to one who knows it her self.] And upbraids him with what she suffered
for his sake.] A pret^y Character of his Heroine to make her an illnaturd
fool.] This is his first objection, but in the next page he contradicts
himself, and says [ Morena gives him a reason for this relation, and said it
not to upbraid him.] Very well: she does and she does not: she is an illnaturd,
and she is not an illnaturd fool. Well argued Laureat. But next says he [ why
should Muly Labas steal he^^ away, she was her equal, and therefore her Father
ought to have given his consent to the Marriage.] At him again Bays. Because
they we^^ equals must there be an absolute necessity of her Fathers consent?
Wh^^ if he designed her for some other Prince, Muly Labas his superior, and a
person whose alliance might be more for his interest. Or how if she was
contracted to some other Prince whom ^he liked not, and forced by state
interest, (a great Mat^h-maker among Princes,) against her inclination, and
therefore for Love of Muly Labas ran away with him to avoid the other. Where
lies the impossibility. How many more reasons might there be for his stealing
her; which if the Poet had occasion to have mentiond you should have heard of.
But then why does Muly Labas his Father put his Son in Prison at his return?
Why did Solomon strangle Mustapha? does not the Play tell him why? for a
suspicion of an attempt against his Empire. [ But why will he kill them both.
Yes mark the Poets reasons. He will present her Father with her head, a good
way to pacify him, and make him withdraw the Siege. Sending the Lady back
might have avoided the inconveniency of the War.] A very pretty King he would
make of him the whilst, to say. Here Sir take your daughter again, I Will rid my
hands of the Baggage, she shall come no more within my doors: let us be
friends for I do not like bloody noses, and pray deparat in peace if you love
me, and you will much oblige yours to command King of Morocco.

This is the Character Mr. Dryden likes. But what if Elkanahs King is a little
more rough and will fight him, and cares neither for his Army nor him neither:
But will cut his Daughte^s head off, and his too if he can come at it? [ But
why Muly Labas a Traitor, he a Traitor. I wonder his Father knew him no better
then to suspect him of so much Wit as goes to the making one, etc.]

Muly Labas is a Fool, a Fool, a Fool, the Parrat has so over and over again
repeated in the Play, that it is high time to clear him. Muly Labas in the true
story was but twelve years of age when he came to the Crown: and through the
whole Play, the Author has made him, though no great part, yet a man that does
nothing but what reason and Circumstances would convince a Iuditious man ought
to be don: and if he has any fault it is his believing his Mother Honest; and if
at any time he is missed by her, it is by a credulity that might very probably be
imposed by a Mother upon a Son; she having to his knowledge acted nothing that
should make him believe otherwise.

But I wonder of all objections how this came from him, knowing how guilty he
has been in the Character of a Boabdelin, a man that is not only a Coward, and
one that in his Armies head dares not touch an insolent Fellow that he fears
Cuckolds him, nay one whom he is certain his Wi^e Loves better then himself,
and for sooth out of a fear of his subjects displeasure. But that fear might be
taken off, (a very pretty King the wh^lst^^ by exposing Almanzors insolence to
his Army, who though they loved his Conduct, and Courage, would certainly
consent or at lest pardon their dutiful and humble King, for a piece of Justice
don on so arrogant an abuser of Majesty.

But another fault he finds against Muly Labas his demonstration of his
Innocence to Morena.

-- Can he think so soul
A thought as Treason harbors in his Soul
Which does Morena's Sacred Image bear?
No shape of ill can come within her Sphere.
[ He was in Love with Morena therefore Innocent.] What a mighty offender
against sense and reason is his King for Complimenting his Mistress.

[ Then enters Queen Mother, an^ tells Muly Labas, his Father is dead suddenly,
and relates the manner of it, with all the Circumstances; yet afterward being
alone with Crimalhaz whom she procured to poison her Husband, she desires him
to relate the manner, of it, of which she could not be ignorant. She who was
whored by him, and set him on, could not but know the Circumstances also.] Here
in our Commentators Phrase Impertinence is pretty thick sown. First because the
Queen gives her Son a f^rged relalation of her Husbands death, therefore she
must needs know the true circumstances: and next because she set Crimalhaz a
work therefore she must know all particulars of his dying within half an hour
after his death. The particulars of the contrivance I grant ^he understood, but
how could she know the particulars of the success of it, unless she had singled
out Crimalhaz privately for the knowledge. But how if the public concern for
the sudden death of the King gave 'em no opportunity till now. For as I take it
the Queen did not ask him. How did you contrive his death?

But. How died the King, how did the poison take?
[ But mark how ridiculously he contrives in the person of this great Plotter
the Queen Mother. First she makes a politic speech to say her Son is not ripe
for ruin till they have undermind his absent General. The General was absent
his return uncertain.] That is his Navy came in disguise up the River Tensist,
for he enterd Morocco the next Morning, which was more then they could know he
would do, so long beforehand.

[Besides her Son being in Prison, and the City at her disposing, she and her
Gallant had a much fairer game to play if they immediately possessed themselves
of the Crown now in their reach, then if they waited for the Generals return,
who was a friend to the King, and whom they were not certain they could render
suspected to him.]

Oh wonde^ful Politician, what does he mean by possessing themselves of the
Crown now in their reach! They might break open the old Emperors Closet, and
Seize his Turbat and his Robes, and dress Crimalhaz in his habit, is that
setting up for a King? If he means by the Crown the Imperial power it is
nonsense. How could he set himself up for a King when all the Forces of
Morocco, were under Muly Hamets Conduct, and he entering into the City, who
besides his being Friend to Muly Labas, was himself a nearer heir to the Crown
then Crimalhaz and no doubt would have been far from complimenting him with
what was his own right, especially being so many thousand strong as he was to
argue the case with him, if occasion had been. But our Commentators opinion of
King^ and Crowns moves excentrick to every bodies e^se. What Puppets does he
make of them. But the silliness of this remark shall be past by, for the
Introduction of another so much beyond it, that nothing can be more ridiculous.
[The second act (he says) has little business in it except Muly Hamets r^turn
with the Fleet]

But now for Elkanahs Thefts from his Cotemporaries as was urged against him in
the Pre^ac^.

[ His Muly Hamets Character is an imitation of Porphirius.] And why? because
they both bring home an Army to their Kings aid: [ Compare the verses and the
Theft will be visible.]

Maxim. " Porphy^ius, whom you Aegypts Praetor made
" Is come from Alexandria to your aid.

Morocco* Hearing whose force Morocco will invade
I have brought home your Army to your aid, etc.

[ His Hametalhaz is likewise as plainly stolen from Placidius: Placidius envied
Porphy^ius, Hametalhaz, Muly Hamet.]

Placid. " May all the Curses envy ever know
" Or could invent, Porphyrius pursue.

Ham. But in Morocco his high pride may find
His name less Glorious, and his Stars less kind.

But by the way where lies Hametalhaz his envy, could not he conspire against
Muly Hamet, to make his name less Glorious, but it must be done out of Envy?
Hametalhaz was but a Subminister to Crimalhaz, and acted only for reward, if
there was Envy in the case twa^ between Crima^haz and Muly Hamet, not him and
Muly Hamet.

[ The Image of Morena is taken from Cydaria: They both desire their Fathers
should be spared in the Battle: And Cortez and Muly Hamets answer are the same
in effect.]

Cortez. " The edge of War I Will from the battle take,
" And spare your Fathers Subjects for your sake.

Morocco. But the rough hand of War more gentle make;
And spare his blood for his Morena's sake:

Muly H. We only do aspire to this great end
To make your Father not our Prize but friend.

Muly Hamet will spare her Father for her sake. And Cortez her Fathers
Subjects. But that is the same thing sparing a King, or his Subjects.

What a discovery has this Manslayer of a Critic found. Because two Generals
bring home their Kings Armies to their assistance, and because Hame^alhaz has a
spite against Muly Hamet, and Placidius against Porphyrius, therefore Elkanahs
Characters are stolen from Mr. Drydens. And because Morena says pray Sir take
care you hurt not my Father, and Cydaria says the same; therefore their
Characters too are the same. Does this grave Scribler that talks so much of
judgment, make an expression of two lines a Character? at that rate I may say
all men have one Character; for it is ten to one but you shall hear 'em at one
time or other say the same thing. Suppose one man should say what a Clock is
it, and another, what time of day is it, are their Characters the same then?
But to prate like him, you shall see whence his Characters are taken. Almanzor
is a Copy of Sir Martin Marral, mark but their expressions and the theft will
be visible. Almanzor was said to be of a Rough and unfashion'd nature, that is,
he was not bred up to singing and dancing, but was an excellent Warrior. So
Sir Martin understood neither singing, dancing, Music no^ Poetry, but when he
beats the Bailiffs, he Cries, Victoria, Victoria, Mr. Mi^^sent must acknowledge
him for a Sword-man. Besides Almanzor when he heard Almahide accused of
Adultery, says,

" It Is false: she is not ill, nor can she be,
" She must be chaste because she is loved by me.
And when Sir Martin heard Mrs. Millisent had been accused of unchastity by
Warner, he says, Come hither you wicked Varlet fruitful in nothing but lies,
how durst you cast your Venom on such a Saint as Mrs Millisent, to traduce her
Virtue and say is was Adulterate.

His Cortez and Abdalla in Granada are the same Characters, for Cortez des^^es
to get into the Tower whore Almeria and his Mistress Cydaria were together. And
Abdalla desires Lyndaraxa to open the Albayzin Gate to let him in to her: and
both are but borrowed from the Ballat of Sweet open the door and let me come in.

Nay his Berenice, and his Cydaria, are exactly the same, Berenice Loves
Porphyrius, who is a General, and Cydaria loves Cortez who is another. His
Boabdelin and Almahide are the same with Biscuit and his Wife in Epsom Wells,
with a little alteration. Boabdelin makes his wife send for her Gallant
Almanzor, and Mrs. Biscuit sends her Husband for Mr. Rains, to come and Play at
Cribbidge with her. Only Biscuit is but a City Pimp, and Boabdelin a Pimp Royal.

Another fault he finds that [^^ kanah has given into his Heroes hands the
Conquest of a Town more then is his right] What if there had never been such a
man as Muly Hamet, and the Poet had raised up a Character and given twice as
much into his hands, the fault had not been impardonable, especially when he
sees his Elder make bold with one Maximin Emperor of Rome for another.

Muly Labas. Lead on

Muly Hamet. Lead on: and all that kneel to you
Shall bow to me; this Conquest makes it due

[ It Is not very Heroic in his Hero to assume to himself the Conquest of his
Mistress, nor savours of good manners to tell the Emperor it is his due.] As for
good manners to a King that I wonder he took notice of, since Almanzor makes so
little Ceremony with Kings. But if his Conquering his Mistress be not Heroic
what is this?

Page 95 Enter to Almanzor Queen Almahide wearing a Scarf. Almanz. " So Venus
moves when to the Thunderer,
" In Smiles and tears she would some suit prefer,
" When with her Cestos girt,
" And drawn by Doves, she cuts the yielding Skies
" And kindles gentle fires where e're she flies.
" To every eye a Goddest is confessed,
" By all the Heavenly Nation she is blessed:
" And each with secret joy admits her to his breast.
" Madam your new Commands I come to know, [ to her bowing]
" If yet you can have any where I go:
" If to the Regions of the dead they be,
" You take the speediest course to send by Me.

Here Almanzor is a little Heroic to compare himself to Jupiter and his
Mistress to a maudlin Venus that comes a whining to him. But observe the rising
of the Fancy: Almanzor is the Thunderer, in the first lines, and his Mistress
^he petitioning Venus. But in the last she is the Thunderer, and he the Venus:
there he begs her commands, nay and is so far from the God he was in the first
line, that poor mortal he is goi^g to the Regions of the dead. But one thing I
must not pass by of the Authors Plot here. This Scarf which she wears she
gives Almanzor, which makes the buisiness of a whole act with Iealousies, and
rants, and Conundrums in Boabdelins Pate who first gave it her as a token of
his Love, A very great present from a King to a Queen. A Hood a suite of knots,
or a pare of Pendants had been as noble. But he remembered a jealousy occasiond
by a Handkercher in the Moor of Venice: and so enlarged upon that foundation as
wittily as a man could desire.

[Muly Hamet has a Ring given him by virtue of which he visits the Queen Mother
where he surprises Crimalhaz and her a sleep together. First `tis to be
considerd that the Emperor, gave this Ring in public, so the Queen and
Crimalhaz had fair warning of their danger.]

The Emperors Signet was given him in the presence of his Queen his Sister and
some Nobility that attended him, now would I ask Mr. Commentator which of these
was Crimalhaz, his confident in his Intrigue with Laula, or which should be the
P^mp to give him this warning, besides `tis not fix Minutes after the recept of
this Ring before he visits the Queen, and he must be very nimble that should
carry the Intelligence before him, [ But then how could Muly. Hamet get into
the Queens Lodgings without the notice of some of her Attendants,] now pray why
must all her Attendants be privy to hers and Crimalhaz his interview. The
Author tells you that Achmat the Eunuch introduced him. But says he [ why did
he not stop him he knew what was doing within,] Now does he think such a Fellow
at the Surprise of so great a person, and so Commanding an Authority as the
Kings Signet d^rst oppose his Entrance. [ But how came Crimalhaz to the Queens
rescue he had not the Emperors Signet too. Did he drop from the Clouds] what
does this Critic take a Seraglio for, a Pesthouse: a building set out of the
Common walk of mankind? the Seraglio was an apartment in the Palace. How
impossible then is it that Crimalhaz might fortunately be within the heareing
of the Queens supposd out^c^y: and wherein lies the impossibility of a
Gentleman's running in to a Ladys rescue though on forbidden ground. [ But Muly
Hamet says nothing in his defense to the purpose,] what should he say? he tells
you.

My single voice a vain defense will make,
Where so much witness and a Mother speak.
[A very well bred Hero to be hanged in pure respect to her who accused him.]

Believe me her intended Ravisher,
Appearing so I take the guilt from her.
Their false Impeachments do this comfort bring,
That I may wear that Cloud would shade a King.
Now wherein is his fault in desiring to appear guilty for the saving of a
Kings Honor? or wherein has he any probable means of clearing himself,
pleading but in his own cause, against the Chastity of the Kings Mother too.

[But Muly Hamet offers the duel to Crimalhaz in these words.]

To this Adulterer you leave afford,
To vindicate his Treason by his Sword:
That Justice by my hand may give him death,
And stiffle with his blood his perjured breath.
[The King who always takes things in the wrong instead of granting the Combat
to Muly Hamet, thinks his offering it a proof of his guilt, in these words.]

If you this rash attempt pursue,
You Will make me credit what he says is true.
[ That is, if you will offer to clear your self I shall conclude you guilty:
admirably argued.] Yes indeed admirably. As if his Conquering Crimalhaz (if the
duel had been granted) had been a confirmation of his Innoc^nce. He Is for his
Knight-errantry again, amongst his Zulema, and Hamet, Almanzor, and Osmyn. This
is a great proof of a man's Innocence. Then all Valiant men can commit no
Capital crime, if the daring to fight may clear 'em. For if they are Innocent
they are fools if they do not fight their Accusers: if guilty they are madmen;
for if they submit to the Law they must dies: but in a Duel they have an even
chance for their lives, besides if they fall in a Duel, they dye more
honorably then by a sentence.

[But why should the Queen Mother, be the woman that should save Muly Hamet,
against her own Character and ^nterest.]

But hold! the King will then my cheat descry:
I wish his death, who tamely see him dye.
[ What reason had she to care if the King knew she desired Muly Hamets death
for attempting a rape upon her.] Yes dear heart, it is both agreeing with her
Character and Interest to save him. First to make his attempt of Ravishing her
more probable, she did not say that Muly Hamet flew upon her without any
provocation, [as B^ys observes] for she confesses she used him so kindly (as
above twenty lines, which she speaks, affirm) that she was partly an accessory
to his attempt, by his mistaking her kind usage for Lov^ which was only
Civility: and therefore by the rules of her Character which was to appear a
Saint to her Son, she would not seem consenting to the Punishment of a Crime
will she had in some respect been Instrument to. Besides it was much for the
clearing her Innocence to beg her accusers life, for by that she seemed to
defy all Arguments that possible he if he lived might make out toward the
clearing himself, and the impeaching her.

[ But Mariamnes freeing Muly Hamet in Prison because he had been false to
Love, and would have Ravished her Mother is a senseless Generosity.] The reason
the Poet gives you in the Play is not so senseless.

Mar. Sir you mistake my kindness. I have lent
Your freedom only as your Banishment,
That being releast you might Morocco fly,
Removed at once both from my heart and eye, etc.

[But how knew she he was in Prison, she was not by when he was committed, and
yes within twelve lines has bribed his Taylour for his Delivery.]

What a mighty leap is here. Pray let me know how Cortez when he found Orbel^an
in his Tent, could be supposed with only changing the Scene, and not one word
spoken, to go out of his Pavilion, and reenter far enough from the Camp for a
General to fight a Duel; especially when `tis supposed a Generals Tent lies in
the heart of the Camp, and the Taxallans Army was so numerous. But when all is
done, [ here is a Babel for a Morocco] and to have made it a greater heap of
confusion he tells you in a reprinted Errata, that there should be more of his
Notes, a whole sheet being lost at the Press; but `tis such a loss that his
Generous Reader no doubt will pardon, which is a favor those sheets which are
not lost can hardly expect.

POSTSCRIPT.
TO talk in our Authors Postscript style of such Jimeracks as [Mathematical
Philosophical, and Musical headpeices for the completing an excellent Poet;]
or to answer him in Trigonometrical, Metaphysical, and Monochordical Fustian is
not to the purpose. Nor is the answering of his Errata on the Epistle worth the
while, there being so little appearance of sense in it, except his proveing a
trifle, and a Libel to be the same thing, which is the chief head of the
Discourse, most part of his objections against particular lines through the
Play, being before examined amongst their Neighbors. All the Apology I have to
make is to beg some of my Readers pardons for the length of the Book, most part
of mankind being before convinced of the invalidity of most of his idle Cavils,
who consequently will esteem the examination of the whole superfluous, But all
I can say for the tediousness of this Pamphlet is, that (as Mr. Dryden says of
Elkanahs Play, [ several people are delighted with the sound of Robustuous
nonsense]) so some few that read his Pamphlet may take the same pleasure in
Feeble nonsense, and for ought I know be cheated into an esteem of any thing
that comes from so received an Author as a Dryden. And therefore to disabuse
them, has been the occasion of swelling the Book. In all the faults I have
mustred against Mr. Drydens Granada, or any other of his writings I declare I
have not objected any thing but what I think a gross mistake Bombast, or humble
nonsense. Had I retorted like him, I might have made such an examination of a
whole Play as I have done of his Description of Ships in the Indian Emperor,
and no doubt it might have met with the same success as his Notes upon Morocco.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN the Second Page of the Preface Line the 8. for retort upon read reply to.
ibid. l. 29. r. abuses to, p. 6. l. 6. for doubtless r. hopeless, p. 15. l. 1.
and l. 3. r. Gigantickness, p. 30. l. 26. r. Looks, p. 34. l. 24. Dele. yet
nothing, etc. p. 36. l. 25. r. in Gods name, p. 39. l. 40. for England ^.
Christendom, p. 40. l. 8. place viz. at the beginning of the Line, p. 43. l. 7.
for where r. were, p. 44. l. 20. r. King, ^. 49. l. 8. r. his Pamphlet, p. 51.
l. 35. r. yet such, p. 60. l. 27. r. A much different kindness from him to
what, ibid. 37. r. is his, p. 77. l. 20. Dele. the, p. 80. l. 26. r. In the, p.
81. l. 7. r. Yet Tides do not wind in Volumes, but come directly back (if their
Current lies straight.) This Errata is corrected through half the Impression,
p. 83. l. 24. r. which for with, 84. l. 1. for wars r. war's.


