THE CONQUEST OF CHINA, By the Tartars.

A TRAGEDY Acted at the DUKE's THEATER.

Written by Elkanah Settle, Servant to His MAJESTY.

-- Multum sudet frustraque laboret Ausus idem, tantum series juncturaque
pollet. Hor. LONDON,

Printed by T. M. for W. Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower-Walk of the
New-Exchange, in the Strand, 1676.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD Castle-Rizing.
My Lord,

THough the Presentation of a Play is the usual Return of Poets for Favors
from Persons of Quality; and Custom has as good as rendered it Current Payment,
since their Patrons expect no other from them: Yet had I the common Vanity of
our Tribe, to believe such a Tribute satisfactory, I should want the Confidence
to think it so here. It Is true, such a trifle as a Play, were it Excellent in
its Kind, like the Crow that was presented Caesar, might be acceptable. But
this Poem wants that Perfection to make it so. For, to deviate from the general
Style of my Brethren, without imputing its ill success to Malice, I acknowledge
it Faulty. However, though it be so, I venture to persecute your Lordship with
it: For, indeed Impudence in Poets, is a Frailty that most of us cannot R^sist.
Yet my Lord, as I know You are sensible, that those Sins are most Pardonable,
where the Temptations are most Powerful; my Presumption in this Dedication has
some Excuse. For whilst I devote it here, the experienced Goodness I have
already met with in Your Noble Family, animates my Boldness; for I have ^inn'd
There before, and have been Forgiven. Nor are my hopes of Pardon my only
Encouragement; when I lay it at Your Feet, I consider I give Your Lordship an
Occasion of practicing that Patience which Your growing Greatness promises will
be often exercised ^y the Applications of Poetry. The Pens of Poets will be
continually employed in so fair a subject, as That Virtue and Greatness equally
Illustrious, of which Your Lordships Birth and Merit has has so large a
Prospect: But since the Glory of Your Renowned Ancestry is so well known
already, that it needs no Orator; my Design, in this Address, is not of
publishing Your Honor, but my Pride, in being

Your Lordships Most humble, most obliged, and most obedient Servant E. Settle.

PROLOGUE.
WHen your Forefathers did our ^udges sit,
And Spite and Malice, were not counted Wit;
Men's Appetites lay quite a different Way;
They came t'a Play*House then, to like a Play:
They came to meet Diversion from the Stage:
But, it is not that, that brings you here this Age.
Since Custom amongst the Gallants of the Pit,
Has made Confed*racy the Badg of Wit;
That Mode of Liking Plays is as much out,
As it is to go to Church to be Devout.
Fancy, and Wit, can no more please you here,
Than Faith, and Reason, can Convert you There.
Incorrigible, you resolve, you will be;
And Prayers have no more Power than Poetry.
And faith, to make Comparisons in both Cases,
Much the same Business brings you to both Places:
It Is not the Plays invite you, nor the Poet;
Good Company, and Assignations do it.
And so you come too to a Pulpit Treat,
To like the Guests, more then the Fare you meet.
And Gad, I think, the Cause is much at one,
Why you the Poet, as the Priests run down.
In a Smart Prologue, or Satyrick Play,
He tells you of your Sins, as well as They.
But since you're Desperate, and you defy us*
To make you Kind, and them to make you Pious:
For, your Lost State, which will be best, to pray
In the Huffing Authors, or Mild Parsons way;
And cry with this, have Mercy on you Heaven,
Grant you more Grace, and be your Sins forgiven:
Or else with the other, in an angry style;
Death cannot Wit, nor Sense deserve a Smile?
If no good usage, cost, nor pains can make ye
Less spightful, and more kind, the Devil take ye.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Lee. WEll; a Romantic, and a Slaught'ring Lass,
With th'Hectours of the Pit, will never pass.
I said as much; but the Insipid Ass
Would needs Write on; and told me that his Muse
Had History and Truth for her Excuse.
Nay, if he would have it so, what*s that to me?
I told him, I loved Fighting more than he.
And would refuse no Honorable Terms:
And so --
From Stripling Cupid, grew a Man of Arms.
And though these Martial Dresses are not common,
Well Armed, you will find it hard to Foil a Woman.
Think not our Courage, for our Sex less bold;
Nor us so Brittle, but our Strength can hold.
For Fighting Gallants, when you led the Dance,
Some of our Sex went after You to France:
And Female Bully into Breeches got,
Some say, The Last Sea Fight stood Cannon Shot.
Why may not Women have as Generous Ends
In Conquering Enemies, as Obliging Friends?
So Fair a Theme I could with Ease pursue:
But, so much for Ours; now for the Poet's due:
Our Author, as the Humble Fop^ still say,
Begs You Would be Favorable to His Play:
But I say no: Do not your Censures spare.
Be ill- Natured, do; and Damn it, -- if you dare.
Come hither, -- To Mr. Smith
Does not that Whispering Wry-faced Gang, that is got in
Yon Corner, look as if they were a Plotting
Against the Play?

Mr. Smith Yes, what th^n?


Mrs. Lee. Do they so?
Death, I Will be with them.

Offers to Draw Mr. Smith. Hold, hold.


Stays her Mrs. Lee. Let me go:
Is It not enough that they run Poets down,
And damn You and your Plays for their Half Crown?
But they must stare, look big, and Hectour Us!
Are all our Kindnesses requited thus!
Did not the Boys Act Women's Parts Last Age?
Till We in pity to the Barren Stage
Came to Reform your Eyes that went astray,
And taught you Passion the true English Way.
Have not the Women of the Stage done this?
Nay, took all Shapes, and used most means to Please.
How many on's, you naughty Men, you know,
Have used you but too well? nay and some few,
(But not too much of that) been Constant too.
And if to damn us now is our Reward,
I say no more; but - Faith it is very hard.

ERRATA.
Occasioned by the Oversight, and ill VVriting of the Transcriber.
PAge 7. line 21, and l. 22. read. Presence. p. 11. l. 13. r. that Tie. ibid l.
21. r. our Laws. p. 16. l. 4. Love is our. p. 19. l. 8. r. Love controuls. ib.
l. 19. r. meeting Eyes. p. 21: l. ult. ^. thy Fate. p. 22. l. 7. r. Monarch's
Ear. p. 22. l. 32* r. in different. p. 25. l. 24. r. to have chose. p. 30. l.
30. r. too quick. p. 31. l. 15. r. Ear or Eye. p. 35. l. 15. r. your Power. p.
36. l. 25. r. Twill my Life. p. 38. l. 6. r. a Prize. p. 49. l. 6. r. all
night. p. 50. l. 5. r. too Prodigal. ^b. l. 10. r. Rival. p. 51. l. 9. r.
commands. p. 52. l 15. r. exit Lycungus. p. 54. l. 15. r. Fancy hangs. p. 55.
l. 18. r. Pow'r's the s^e. ib. l. 29. r. Worth less. p. 57. l. 14. r. thy King.
p. 55. l. 32. r: Tra^tour s^rowd. p. 64. l. 2. r. boldly.

Actors Names.
Tartars.
Theinmingus, King of Tartary. Mr Gillow Zungteus, his Son. Mr Harris Palexus,
Zungteus his Confident. Mr Norris
Chinese.
King of China. Mr Medbourn Quitazo, a Prince of China. Mr Smith Lycungus, a
Prince of China. Mr Sandford Legozun a Prince of China. A Villain of Lycungus's
Party.
Women.
Orunda, only Child of the King of China. Mrs. Batterton Alcinda, an Innocent
Lady, engaged by Contract to Quitazo. Mrs. Corer Amavanga, a Queen of a
Province in China, in the Disguise of a Soldier Mrs. Mary Lee Vangona, her
Confident, in the same Habit. Mrs. Spencer Maskers, Messengers, Lords, Ladies,
Guards, and other Attendants.
THE CONQUEST OF CHINA, By the TARTARS.
ACT the First.
SCENE the First.
A Camp.
Theinmingus, Zungteus, Palexus, and Tartars attending. Zung. NOw is the time,
The Indulgent Suns kind Ray,
Does only on the Southern World look gay:
And glancing on our Climes with half an Eye,
At a neglectful distance passes by.
Whose powerful heat, and God* like influence gone,
The Rebel Earth takes forces of its own:
And has it self from his weak power secured,
With Mounts of Snow, and Rocks of Ice immured.
Yet those strong Bars have not your Arms with-stood;
The Gods that froze your Climate, warmed your Blood.

Pal. Over China's Icy Lake, your flying Train
Of swift Tartarian Horse have forced their way;
And leading a Field-Army over the Main,
Triumphant ma^cht on a Campaign of Sea.

Zung. Our Arms the News of our success out-fly*
We give (...) F^es* but* time to star^* and dye.
Our Swords (...) with so quick a doom,
They feel their Fate, before they see it come.
And where the Winter does our passage stay,
We burn down Citys till we melt our way.

Thein. But t^ose few Millions we have yet vanquished, are
A bare dumb show of a poor Pageant war.
Our Honor now for greater Action (...),
To aim our V^ngeance against Pequins ^alls.
Imperial Heads in Blood, and Thrones in Dust,
Are the only Vengeance that can make Me just.
The ^alls of Kings, and Martyred City's flames:
Revenge is Childrens sport at lesser games.
Whose soaring wings at Crowns, and Conquest fly,
Act little, till they st^ike at Majesty.
To Right my Murdered Fathers death, I must
With Royal Blood, appease a Royal Ghost.

After a sound of Trumpets, enter a Messenger, Who delivers a Message to
Theinmingus. Mess. Sir, an Ambassador from the China's King desires Admittance.


Thein. Go, Conduct him in -- Exit Mess*
Now for some Bribe to court me to lay down
My Arms; a kind Petition for a Crown:
No Terms of Peace, nor Golden Mountains shall*
The Vengeance of my Sacred Rage recall.
My Fathers groaning Spirit hangs in air,
Denied admission to the blessed abode,
Till Blood and Ruin his loud wrongs Repair,
And my Revenge has shaped him for a God.

Enter, introduced by Trumpets, Amavanga, Vangona, and Attendants. Am. Is It no^
enough, ye Gods, our Bleeding Land Aside.
Groans at the wounds from an Invaders hand?
Is It not enough to an Insulting Foe,
His Thunder kills before men hear the blow.
But must his Pride, with his Success, take wing,
And cast the name of Coward on a King:
An Infamy so loud, as would awake Aside.
A Woman's Rage: for thy wronged Honors sake,
Pardon, great King, if I assume the Name
of thy Ambassador, to Right thy Fame:
Before his Blasphemy be spread too wide,
I will give check to the proud Tartars Pride. Am. continues to Theinm.
Hear my great Masters pleasure from my breath;
He justifies your Conquered Fathers death.
He and the day together saw him bleed:
He ^aw it, and he triumph't in the deed.
Nor did, nor could the Night his Conquest end: (Still going on)
In blood, he saw the Alarmed Sun descend.
The Sun set red, and from the purple gore,
Blush't that he had shed so much; He, that he had shed no more.
And when the gloomy Eye of Heaven grew dim,
And drew black Curtains 'twixt his fame and him,
Scorning to be by Heaven it self opposed;
With new-made Rays he drooping Nature Roused.
Still with gay Light did his bright Cannons play,
And with fresh fires, kept in the frighted day.
This did my King, and guided by the Will
And Power to act on; this he dares do still.

Zung. Heaven, this is all my wishes could implore:
Make our Foes Valiant, and I ask no more.
A Cowards blood but stains a Sword. Then Fate
Is kind, when Glory does on Triumph wait.

Am. Nor are his thoughts less mighty than his Arms*
That Rage he breaths, his inspired Empire warm's.
His Subjects, at the name of Arms, a*round
Him press, and greedy catch the pleasing sound.
Revenge, they cry; our lives nor fortunes spare:
Together tuned, they speak, and the loud Consort's, Wa^*
Him they their King, his Soul their God they make:
But if that God can his bright Throne forsake,
So may he perish, and his Empire sink,
When he from Glory but one thought can shrink.

Thein. My wishes join with his, may he be Great,
And have a Soul inspired with all that heat,
And Gallantry, which you so loud proclaim:
All his own fears can wish, or pride can frame.
That I may meet, what here I have not found,
My Arms, as with Success, with Honor Crowned.
That when he by the hand of Justice dies,
I may find work for Conquest, not Surprise.
Zungteus, instantly for an Assault
Prepare: this talking looks too like a hault.
Revenge, whilst it is disputed, is delayed
Disputes should be by Priests, not Monarchs made.

Exit Attendants. Vang. Me-thoughts while you discours't, I did descry
A searching wonder in the Princes Eye.
Take heed, dear Madam, lest Zungteus may, To Amav*
Through your disguise, his Mrs. Face betray.

Amav. No: Amavanga in this borrowed shape,
Will The Eye of a deluded World escape:
All danger of discovery I defy.
I Will look, and speak, and act a part so high,
Shall cheat an Empire.

Palex. Th'expecting World on your performance waits*


Zung. For Honor then: lead on, to Pequins Gates.


Amav. Hold Royal Sir, oblige me with your stay:
Envying at what Fame to your Sword does pay,
I Have a Request to make.
Sir, when your Forces give their first Alarms,
I humbly beg We two may meet in Arms.
For since the narrow World no room can spare,
To let two Foes, so haughty, breath one Air*
To gratify my Pride, I beg to try,
If it is my Honor by your hand to dye.

Zung* So kind a Champion let my Arms embrace: Embraces him.
Brave Youth, thy Courage pleads with such a Grace.
Ha! There Is Enchantment there, and something stole.
Though that soft Circle, has surpised my Soul.
I cannot fear, and yet methinks I quake:
Dared by that breath, my trembling Spirits shake.
Great God's! what sudden Chill has seized my blood;
Something -- no matter what; be it ill, or good,
I blush for it, and it is gone. Kind Challenger,
I Will meet you in the Field.

Amav. I Will meet you there.
And Sir, to merit what this grace imparts,
I Will practice deaths upon your Subjects hearts.
Deep in the Tartars blood I Will dye my Sword;
To mak't a Weapon fit t'attacque their Lord.

Zung. But Generous Enemy,
Something I feel so Sacred at thy sight,
That-makes me wish I might avoid this Fight.
But if we must, for mine and thine own sake,
Be Death far distant from the Wounds I make:
All hostile Rage must at that Scene lie by;
I Would Conquer with a bloodless Victory. Embraces him again.
The Magic works afresh -- Enchanter hence --
I feel such changes in my startled sense,
As tell me I have talked too long. What strange
Miraculous influence has made this change?
If supernatural power this terror draws,
And he is
Some Tutelar Saint that aid's the Chinan Cause;
For less cannot make me shake, If in that form
Some Divine power has humane likeness worn;
If he has ought of Charm, or aid of Gods,
To guard him, when we meet, he has the Odds.
To match my Arm with his, He must lend mine
Divinity, or must his own resign. Aside

Vang. So nigh approach, and so long conference,
Has half recovered his enlightened sense.
Retire whilst you are safe.

To Amav* Am. I Am gone: How ill
Great Prince am I thy Challenger; I will
In Arms, and if I can, in Glory shine.
I Will aim my Vengeance against all hearts but Thine,

Vang. For what then did you Challenge him?


Am. To try his Courage, and his Gallantry,
The only merit that can Conquer Me,
And I Have my wish: A General, and yield
T'expose his Royal Person in the Field,
Singly against a private unknown hand!
Such Gallantry I cannot enough admire.
My King and Country's Cause, my Sword require;
But by a former, and more powerful tie,
My Soul adores my Countries Enemy.
I Love Zungteus, and with secret joy,
Admire that hand which China does destroy.

Exeunt Amav. and Vang. Manent only Zungteus and Palexus. Zung. When Peace the
prop of sluggish Kings secu^'d
The Chinan Empire from the Tartars Sword:
And Heaven did by that Charm this Crown support,
I went a Guest to the Taymingian Court.
And in the Chinan Empire spent those years,
Where Child wears ^ut, and growing Man appears.
When I felt something in my heart take seat,
Which wrote in my enlivned blood, Be Great.
There I first thought the heir t'an Empire bound,
To Have his hand active ere his head were Crowned.
And Chanquincungus, his Rebellion first
Taught me in blood to satisfy that thirst.
Thus Tartary does the less Title claim,
That but to me gave Birth, but China to my Fame.
Now by a Turn of State, their Foes I head,
My Valor now to their destruction led,
Does prey upon that Empire where 'twas bred.

Palex. Revenge and Justice for their Ruin speak;
No Ties so strong but Injuries can break.

Zung. But Oh, methinks, an inward Voice I hear;
Forbear bold man, thou have a Princess there!
My Amavanga does a Crown enjoy
Within that Empire, which my Arms destroy.
Gods! Was your World so Barren, that it could
Affo^d my Arms no better scene of blood,
But where my sury must my Saint dethrone?

Palex. Your Vengeance aims at the Imperial Crown:
And though her Province in this Empire lie,
War points out what shall Live, as well as Dye.

Zung. How vainly you mistake; you know her power
Is borrowed from the Chinan Emperor;
The Patron and Protector of her Seat.
Since then my fury does his Ruin threat,
Her Interest is to his (...) Wedd:
The limbs of Empire suffer in the Head.
A Sacred horror does my sense awake,
And bids me be less bloody for her sake.
Kind Messenger of Heaven, thou art obeyed:
I Will instantly to my great Father plead
Th'injustice of his Arms, till his Rage cease,
And he return in a Triumphant Peace.

Pal. Consider Sir, before this Pause is made,
Your Ancestors here basely were betrayed.
And Ruin in all forms is but too small
To purge the infected air where Monarchs fall.

Zung. Had China Crimes
More loud than Heaven durst hear, or Hell durst own?
Her Pretense would a Kingdoms sins Atone.

Palex. What though her pretense does this Empire bless,
She by your Arms will greater grow, not less.
The more your Victories in China spread,
You win but Crowns to plant them on Her head.

Zung. But how if she should this occasion choose,
And her own person to the War expose.
Remember when the Scene of Civil War,
Was in her Fathers Kingdom laid, how far
Her Courage led her; in a Masc'line shape
She from her Father's Court made an Escape.
Amongst the thickest dangers still she flew;
And Honors reaped where they were great, and new,
Her own disguise could not her Glory's shroud:
Fighting, she spoke in Thunder from her Cloud.
And when the Conquering Chanquincungus stood
On her dead Brothers Neck, his yet warm blood
She at one stroke Revenged; and at one blow,
A Rebel, and his Army, did overthrow.
By her, his life, the Vanquished Conq'rour lost,
A Victim to her Brothers new-made Ghost.

Palex. All this I know.


Zung. And think you there are Charms
In Conquering Rebels, more than bearing Arms
Against an Invading Enemy, whose Sword,
Her Countries Bowels has so deeply goar'd.
So great a Courage, and a Cause so great,
I Am too certain will infuse that heat,
As must be quenched with Blood, and what e're veil
Her disguised Sex, and beauty does conceal,
She Will be in the *Battle; nay she is, she must be there,
Who knows then but wild Chance in heat of War,
May make my hand my Mrs. Murderer.
Rather than so, I Will take this Nobler way,
I Will strait my Fathers Orders disobey:
Renounce my Conquest, and remove the War,
And for her sake, a sinking Empire spare.

Palex. Shall one rash act shame all your past Renown.


Zung. What are the spoils of War, Fame, or a Crown,
Compared with her fair Eyes? I Will fight no more:
Our Swords ill strike at what our Hearts adore.
The famous Giants that with love made War,
Had never stormed Heaven, had they paid homage there.

Palex. In these Resolves, your Father you betray;
And in that act, from Natures bonds you stray.

Zung. A stronger force weak Natures power controles:
Nature makes ties of Blood, but Love of Souls.

Palex. In this unmanly, and so mean design,
From Duty and from Honor you decline.
And she for Virtue, has a Zeal so great,
You Are lost, should you but think of a Retreat:
If out of Honors paths one step you move,
She Will hate you, and abhor your worthless Love.
If over her heart you would Victorious grow,
You must fight on her Bleeding Countries Foe.

Zung. If then through Blood I must my Mrs. win,
F^te and Necessity take off the Sin.
Like Providence I can act nothing ill,
Insallible, cause it is my Princess will.
If naught can ch^rm her breast but Fight and Wars,
I Will tear Their hea^ts out to secure me Hers.
And that her Love no rest nor pause may take,
With Drums and Trumpets sounds I Will keep't awake.
Nor shall my stains of Blood my worth impair;
A Comet is as glorious as a Star.
Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
The Second ACT.
The Scene opened, discovers the Royal Palace of Pequin the King of China, and
Orunda, seated with Attendants of Women and Eunuchs. King. THe Mighty will from
whence all power does grow,
That placed the Sun above, and me below;
That gave me all that I could wish beside,
Has to my Royal Blood a Son denied.
But you, fair Daughter, must supply that want
The tardy Fates dispute before they grant.
This day you must my Successor declare,
Choose me a Son, and China's Crown an heir.

Orand. Oh how extravagant is greatness grown!
All other Beauties are by Courtship won.
But the Imperial Daughters are obliged
To yield their hearts before they are besieged.
We must Court first; for since that Mortal dies,
That dares but offer homage to our Eyes;
Custom has rendered that great, and sublime,
Which were in all but us, our Sexes crime.

King. You by the Chinan Laws have understood,
That from the twelve next Princes of the blood,
Our Royal Daughter must two men prefer,
The most deserving of a Crown and her.
One of which two, your Father must design,
The happy Man shall share your Love and mine.
In Pomp conduct the Rival Princes in,
And let this Royal Scene of Love begin.

Enter twelve Princes in Masquerade, masked, Quitazo and Licungus being of
them, a Maskal Dance is performed; which ended, the Princes unmask, and the
King and Princes rise. King. From this great Train, now Daughter, let your Eyes
Mark out that worth, which best deserves to rise;
And make such choice as may become her part,
Who founds an Empire where she gives a heart.

Here Orunda having viewed around, stands, stands with her Eye fixed on Quitazo.
Orund. So sudden, and so sure! Do I want sense,
Or have too much? My Eyes my greatness wrong:
They ought to visit, but not dwell so long.
That Look, that Form -- Hold heart one minutes stay.
No, it is too great a Rebel to obey.
Like Vessels Stranded on a shallow Coast,
I Am fixed, and cannot move 'till I am lost.
Yet from my heart this favor I receive,
It gives me warning e're it takes its leave.
And on my Fetters I my glory build:
For now I shall be Conquered ere I yield.

King. Daughter, your kindest thoughts:


Orund. Since in one Sphere
Love ought to fix, my wandering thoughts rest here. pointing to Quitazo.
For since my Birth does no mean choice allow,
The^'s something seems Imperial in his brow.

King. Sure Daughter you your favors do misplace:
For in the Characters of his gloomy Face,
Wrapped in an angry and disdainful frown,
I read a Sullenness that scorns a Crown:
And certainly that Honor you designed,
Deserved a brow more calm, and look more kind.
Were I assured he did the grace despise,
H^s Head, not Heart, should be your Sacrifice.
But choose again, and your mistake retrieve,
Whils^ I the forfeit of his Head forgive:
That his severer punishment may be
To live, and feel the loss of You, and Me.

Orund. What fatal fury does your passion raise,
To judge that his offense, which is his praise.
His Gallantry is in that Look expressed.
They take gifts coldest, who deserve them best.
A Modesty in his dark brow I find;
The noblest mark of an Illustrious mind.
He seems to tell me in his looks cast down,
That my kind hand must raise him to a Crown.
Then blame not that which shows him great and good:
His merits are the brighter for the Cloud
His darkened Visage wears.

King. But name the second man, and then I Will bind
That the Eternal Providence has signed:
Your destiny from my high pleasure springs;
The will of Heaven speaks in the breath of Kings.

Orund. The cruel rigor of our Laws Revoke:
Orunda only can Quitazo choose:
And for his sake must all mankind refuse.

King. A Father, and a King, you ill mistrust:
I to your Love can be both kind and just.

Orund. Sir, I obey you, since your Laws design
I must name two, may the kind Gods incline aside.
My Fathers fancy to conspire with mine.
Sir, for his Second I Lycungus choose,
The only man I would with scorn refuse.
Him as Quitazo's foil I set; his dark,
Harsh, and ill-featur'd look, seems more the mark
Of Policy, -- then Love. If with my Eyes
My Father sees, he must that face despise. Aside.
And for my Arms my nobler choice ordain;
A sweetness fit to Love, and Majesty to Reign.
-- Your Sentence Royal Sir.

King. They seem to Worth so equally allied,
My fancy must survey e're it decide.

Orund. How can your wandering fancy stray so far,
That your weak Eyes their merit can compare.
Look on that brow, what forms of horror dwell;
Where hate and rage like meeting Tempests swell.
But see what charms his softer looks impart,
Worthy to rule your Empire, and my Heart.
What winning goodness does that frame adorn;
With all its gayest dress of greatness worn.

King. Daughter, you are born too near a Crown to Err:
Quitazo then I to your Grace prefer:
And if He yet wants what your praises speak,
He Will soon be all you wish him for your sake:
That merit which you do not find, you will make.

After a Sound of Trumpets from a distance, Enter a Messenger, who delivers a
Memorial in a Scroule of Parchment to the King; whilst he reads, one of the
attending Princes speaks. Prince. The Emperor is disturbed, his altered look,
Does seem to say his mighty mind is shook.
Whence should proceed this fear?

Lycung. Sir, you mistake:
He is a Monarch, and his mind cannot shake.
Fears the Convulsion of Ignoble Souls,
Whose awed power some Superior force controles,
But he that is absolute, and depends on none,
Is above Terror; and that Right alone
Belongs to Kings. The life of Majesty,
But one unalterable Scene should be.
Unmoved by storms, a wa^k of State untrod
By all but Kings, and boundless as a God.
It should not stop, nor any change admit*
Inconstancy and ^bbs are only fit
For those, whose Luster's small, or not their own:
The Moon admits of wains, but not the Sun.

King. Read there new Subjects of a Monarchs care;
I must Engage in a defensive War.
The Bloo^y Tartars have Incursions made,
And their dead Kings Revenge too fully paid.

Orund. How Sir! are you betrayed, or have they past
That mighty Bar which your great Fathers cast?
That Wall whose length does in a stately Pride
Your China from their Tartary divide?

King. No, with a power of Horse by Winters aid,
He over the Ice our Country does Invade.
And fierce Zungteus Heads this Barbarous Train,
Whose fury has so many thousands slain;
My Subjects by his Conquering power overcome,
Meet both their Murder, and their Martyrdom.
My Men he Massacres, my Towns he Burns;
And into Funeral Piles whole Cities turns.
But thanks to that brave Youth of unknown name,
The kind Defender of his Sovereigns fame;
Who in defiance of the Tartars power,
Went to the King as my Ambassador:
That War he has Proclaimed, I will pursue;
And paint my Glory by the lines he drew.

Orund. Your Father did by War gain his Renown,
Succeed him in his Courage, as his Crown.

King. Yes Daughter,
Though Kings in Death, the unkind Gods think good,
Should levelled be with common flesh and blood:
Though they debased us to Mortal^ty,
They gave us hearts which tamely scorn to dye.
Quitazo, and Lycungus, though you may
No equal share in Loves Dominion sway.
Though to my Blood but one can be Allied;
Between you both I will my power divide.
Our Military conduct I commend
To your high Trust, Our dearest Son and F^end;
He in the Camp shall Reign, and you at home:
All my State-Mandats through your hands shall come.
My Royal Signet's yours; to guard my Crown,
To him I grant the Sword, to you the Gown.
Open our Treasur's, and with golden Charms,
(Gold's the Religion and the Saint of Arms)
Raise all the Force that Interest can sway:
All who that powerful Leader will obey.
Who in distress an Empire would uphold,
Must build his hopes next to his Gods, on Gold:
Our Treasur's and success consistent are;
Kings may speak Vengeance, but their Gold makes War.

Here the King enters in dispute with Orunda and Quitazo in dumb show. Lycung.
A Gown's not that my ^oaring wishes want: Aside.
The Sword had been the more obliging grant.
The Sword in prudent hands has power to raise,
More fruit from Victory than wreaths of Bays.
Wise Conquerors this Charity still own,
When Crowns and Diadems are weighty grown;
Ease their Kings brows, and plant them on their own. asid^
But my dull Office does that power deny,
A lazy Gown-man rarely mounts so high.
It Is true, in Wars, that Treason in a Gown
May sell a Kingdom, but not wear a Crown.

King. Daughter, perhaps it may appear unkind,
To part two Lovers wh'are so lately joined:
But as my Son, it is Honor calls him forth,
I must retard his bliss, to advance his worth.

Exeunt omnes, but Orunda and Quitazo. Quitaz. Oh unkind King, you act a cruel
part,
Thus to engage my hand against my heart.
How shall I meet her kindness, with what face?
To Counterfeit a Love, is poor and base:
In that a Princess I betray, and one,
Who with her Love presents me with a Crown.
And if I in the path of Honor tread,
And owning my aversion, lose my Head;
Though to meet Death, be nothing to the brave;
Yet when I think what is buried in a Grave:
To lose Alcinda, checks that bravery.
Such a Damnation makes me fear to dye.
Lovers like Sinners do resign their breath:
The loss of Heaven is the greatest fear in death.
Direct me Gods.

Orund. -- So, we are alone, and now
That sullen Cloud that hung upon his brow,
No doubt my presence will with ease exhale;
I Am su^e if Love can do'^, it shall not fail.
Who knows but all that ^ullenness might be
His scorn of Rivals, and his Pride of me.
It Is little transports that a Voice assume:
The Ecstasy is h^ghest when it is dumb.

Quitazo. I must approach her: with what eager eye
She darts these smiles by which my peace must dye. Aside.
Her dangerous kindness how can I escape?
Was ever Ru^ne in so fair a shape!
Let your poor Slave thus low his homage pay, Kneels.
You and the Gods should be adored one way.
The blessings you both shower, one current take;
Powered on Mankind, who no return can make.

Orund. How! no return!


Quit. Yes, Prayers and Offerings.
Desertless Mortal this poor Tribute brings*
Up to his Gods his Eyes and Vows may lift,
But what is the breath ador's them but their gift:
What precious Gums with which we Altars Crown
But Fruits produced by their own Rain and Sun!

Orund. Strain not your Rhetoric to a point too high;
To accept your Vows, I Will lay my Godhead by.
Though there are no Returns made to a God;
Let this blush say, there are to flesh and blood.
Rise, rise my Lord; cease these ill-timed amors:
My Fate, my King and Love have made Me yours.
Kneeling's a posture fawning Courtship gives
To proud and scornful Mistresses, not Wives.

Quit. That word has death in it. Aside.
But whom you raise to Honors so sublime,
Should by degrees to that high glory climb.
Consider first what Bliss that Grace designed:
And banish next from his aspiring ^ind
His own poor distant state, and humble Birth.
They who reach Heaven, shake off the thoughts of Earth.
Then his enlightened brow, and ravished sense
Prepare, to entertain such Excellence:
So make all gay without, all rich within,
To take the Royal Guest, the mighty Conqueror in.

Orund. This Gallantry does but new flames inspire. Aside.
Oh Love! the Charm winds up still higher and higher.
Why all this distance? why this State to me?
What need of Parly's after Victory?
United hearts should no distinctions know:
Love finds all equal, or else leav's 'em so.
Then Sir, this generous Gallantry give over:
Talk of high Blood, Descents, and Births, no more.
Our Births are things of many years ago:
Here is our business now.

Quit. -- What shall I do? Aside.
Her fatal kindness still increases more:
Alas my Ruin was too sure before.
But Madam, whilst your Influence I survey,
And think how Nations must your power Obey:
Can you imagine, I, of all Mankind,
The most obliged, raised by your smiles, designed
To share your Throne, should think no homage due
To your great Name, when the world pays it you?

Orund. Still of my Birth, let this that thought remove gives him her hand.
I shall Rule Empires, but I Will yield to Love.

Quit. What Devil but my self would be unmoved -- Aside.
By so much Charm thus Honored, and thus Loved,
To see a Courting Majesty denied.
Madam, my Soul I can no longer hide.
To Heaven Religiously this Vow I made:
That when it was my fate to Love, t'invade
My Mistress heart, and lay a glorious Siege,
I Would act some Deed extravagantly great,
Both to deserve and to confirm that Seat.
Since then the Tartar War has showed the way:
Let me my debt to Heaven and Beauty pay.
First shine in Wars, and when your Vassal treads
Upon your Foes the Conquered Tartars Heads,
He to the World his passion may proclaim,
When he has done Deeds worthy a Lovers Name.

Orund. Being in my Debt, you will Bankrupt seem and poor,
T'engage with Honor e're you pay Loves sco^e.

Quit. Madam, I Have sworn, and my King bids me go.
And Majesty's as Sacred as my Vow.
He calls me hence; besides, I should not dare
Aspire to Mirtles, till I Laurels wear.

Orund. Hold Generous Sir, that fond pursuit give over:
To act your Vow, already you have done more
Than Conquered Armies; for you have Conquered me.
And sure there is some distance, or should be
'Twixt sending of poor Soldiers to their Graves,
Hirelings bred up for Death, and born for Slaves:
And the subduing of a Princess heart.
If killing is such an Heroic part,
And so much worth from giving Deaths accrue,
Then Plagues and Famines have more worth than you.

Quit. Madam I must be gone. A stay so long,
Does both your Greatness and your Beauty wrong.
Unworthily I have approacht too n^gh,
An excellence so sacred and so high:
A greater distance fits my humble state;
Th'unworthy should in outward Temples wait,
Whilst the inner steps which to high Alta^s lead,
None but the Holy and inspired should tread:
Whilst meaner worths more awfully forbear,
In Reverence to The Almighty presence there.
Ex^.
Orund. If this be Love, it is brave: must Victory
And Glory be the steps t'ascend to me.
In such a Lover, Oh how blessed -- but hold,
A sudden check makes my faint Blood run cold.
To His Mistress Arms a V^ctor he returns,
Suppose he for some other Mistress burns.
Oh Jealousy, my thoughts take hideous ^ormes*
I fear those Clouds he wore will end in storms.
If all this Gallantry should prove but Art,
Oh, the sad Ruins of a wounded heart!
But why should I suspect, it is all mistake:
But to shun dangers I Will this refuge take.
Mine and my Fathers power shall keep him here,
Till Law and Sacred Rites remove my fear.
Then when I Have made him, and his Soul, my own*
Have made him Lord of Me, my Love, and Crown,
I Will fear no Rivals; but securely trust
My Eyes and Charms to keep him kind and just.
Devotion is by unbelief destroyed:
None are Apostates who have Heaven enjoyed. Enter Lycungus.
Yet I Will remove all doubt: Lycungus stay,
You have Convers't with Fame; what does it say,
Of my Quitazo.

Lyc. -- What it says of things,
'Twixt men and Gods, what it should say of Kings.

Orund. But what do you think of him?


Lyc. -- As I ought;
All of him that can come in reach of thought.
But the vast Bliss which your high favors give,
None but the rich Possessor can conceive.

Orund. Hold, you mistake the thing which I demand:
My power and its effects I understand.
It is his native Virtues I enquire;
Not my own Creatures, those which I inspire.
I have a trust, which to your private care
I would commit; search out his Character,
Observe his Actions, and his Looks survey;
And for my Thanks, I will my Friendship pay.

Lyc. So paid, my Loyalty you need not fear.
At half that price you would buy my life too dear.

Orund. This Curiosity's a Venial part,
Where I bestow an Empire, and a Heart.

Lyc. Madam, I Will bring him drawn to'th' life; I Will use
All a^ts and means, that may his Soul disclose.
And the large Mirror shall be clear and true;
I Will be his Pa^nter and Historian too. Exit Orunda.
Why all this search? Its depth I cannot sound:
However, I like the Structure, though the ground
I understand not. The Employment's brave:
And Princess, I am thy Obedient Slave.
My Services shall such Reward deserve,
That I Will take care my labor shall not starve.
Allegiance can do much, but Interest more:
States* men serve Princes, not as Slaves dig over
In Mines, t'en^ich their Masters, and themselves be Poor:
In toil and sweat, like them, we spend our hours:
But search the Mine to make the Treasure ours.

Exit. The Scene changes. Enter Quitazo. Quit. What haunting fury did my Life
pursue?
That me to this accurs't Election drew!
Forced by that Law this Court has long obeyed;
When any of the Imperial Daughters Wedd,
The Chinan Custom does her choice design,
Out of the twelve next Princes of the Line:
And he whose Birth within that limit lies,
Must break all past, though never so sacred ties;
Or that Imperial grace refused, he dies.
Laws, Virtues, Fetters, a strict Tie, which still
Makes those good only, who want power for ill
Actions which Honor prompts, and Love fulfils,
Are humane deeds by passions framed, and wills.
But they are Bruits whom only Love controles:
For there our senses act without our Souls.
She Is here, now must I speak that which I know;
When it takes breath, will give a mortal blow.
But to take off some horror of the wound,
I will prepare her for the killing sound.

Enter Alcinda. Alc. Returned from Court; kind Heaven, his presence here
Removes my dangers, and dispels my fear.
My dearest Lord, here take me in your Arms.
They embrace.
Enter Lycungus. Lycung. So close a conference, and such melting eyes, aside.
Pray Heaven I guess but right.

Quit. Ha, a Surprise! what brings him here?


Alc. What unkind man is this,
Thus to intrude and interrupt my bliss!
Dear Sir, I will retire till he is gone:
My e^ger joys admit no lookers on.
Exit.
Lyc. Well, well my Lord, you feel the growth of State:
All Eyes look smiling on your rising Fate.
The Cause that brought that Lady, brings me too.
No doubt all Sexes are your Suppliants now.

Quit. What does he mean.

aside.
Lyc. -- Has She obtained a grant?


Quit. Of what! -- Oh Torture!

aside.
Lyc. -- Nay I know you want
No power t'oblige; and by the view I took,
I read Petitions in her very Look.
Assist me Wit.
aside.
Quit. -- Death! how he startles me.

aside.
Lyc. If her request, some Crown, some Kingdom be,
Do not deny her, think how large a power
Is seated in a Chinan Emperor.
So many Coronets wait on your Crown,
That petty Kingdoms are an easy Boon.
You from the Princess smiles more greatness have engrost,
Then any thing beneath a God can boast.

Quit. He has eased my staggering Soul of half its fear:
It Is flattery, not malice, brings him here:
He saw her last kind Looks, but thanks to his aside*
False light, he read Petitions only in her eyes.
And it is a happy Error; but to make
All safe, I will comply with the mistake.
You guest that Suppliant Ladys business right:
Her Father ^ell in the late Rebels Fight.
Great were her Countries sufferings, great were her own;
And to repair what Fire and Sword has done;
She humbly from my bounty does implore
My Interest, her greatness to restore.

Lyc. As I could wish aside*
-- I knew her Father well:
'Twas by a poisoned Arrow that he fell.
And to pursue the Story, did not that
Afflicted Lady, forced by her hard ^ate,
A Captive on the Conqueror's Triumphs wait?
Who by the Eyes of his fair Prey subd ^'d,
With Threats of Death his furious Love pursued;
Till the poor ^righted Lady lost the Field;
For her Life's Ransom did her Honor yield:
But weakness did at last decide the strife,
And 'twas a Sacrifice to save a Life.

Quit. Horror! and Death! was ever suc^ a Lie?
And not one Blush at the impiety!
She yield her Honor! God's, can you hear this!
But if your Thunder's not awake, mine is: Draws*
For this loud Blasphemy thou dyest.

Lyc. Hold Sir,
Have I affronted you, or injured her?
If she has lost her Honor, where is The Offense
To tell you so?

Quit. -- Oh savage Impudence!
Thy deserved Sentence I too long de^er;
And thy one minut's Life wrongs Heaven and Her.

Lyc. Yet Sir be patient, and your Error know:
Pray Sir, is not her Name Lycanza?

Quit. -- No.


Lyc. Oh death! I am mistaken in the Face.
Sir, if my Penitence may obtain a Grace,
Pardon the Injury I never meant:
For ought I know I have abused a Saint.
And by delusion of my wandering sense,
Have cast a stain on Virgin Innocence.
Shame from your sight does the Offender take,
To blush in private for th'unkind mistake.
Exit*
Quit. Death on my blasted hopes; too late I find
This seeming Innocent Error was designed.
My Love's suspected, and this cursed spy
Has work't me to a full discovery.
My fury in her Cause all doubt removes;
To right her Honor, I Have betrayed our Loves.
He wrought so subtly on my tenderest part;
I grew too fierce for Love, to think of Art.
Rage raised the Storm, and by blind Passion tossed,
I could not see the Rock t^ll I was lost.
This News ^to The King and Princess Ears, is gone*
I dread that Vengeance which I Will strive to shun.
But to the Camp I must with speed repair,
And in disguise my Love shall meet me there.
Thus Armed, I Will both our sinking Fortunes prop,
And stem the Impetuous Tide I cannot stop.
Exit.
Re-enter Lycungus. Lyc. Th^Embraces were too close, and I Have made bold
Kind Amorous Lover to cut off your hold.
Thy Mistress is secure -- *
I took a silent and the safest way:
To Have roused the Lion, were to have lost the prey*
All goes as I could wish. This Prize shall strait
To'th'Princess: I Will incense her to that height,
Her sligh^ed smiles shall into Vengeance turn:
What kindness cannot warm, distain shall burn,
But if she prove too tardy in her hate:
If one impression cannot seal the Fate,
The King shall hear the story of thy Pride,
With some enlargement of my own beside,
As though Alcinda be not Born t'a Crown*
He Will use his Sword to seat her in a Throne.
What though it is false, it is enough it bears
My sense: States men are Kings Interpreters.
All that approaches to a Monarchs fear,
Carrys no sense, but what we let it bear.
And when we rise, Truths must be Strangers there.
His Army must be mine, t'adorn my head,
Thy Love, Life, Power, all at one stroke falls dead.
Then if my Sword grow wanton in my hand,
I shall but over-doe a Kings Command.
Exit.
The Third ACT.
Scene the First.
After a sound of Trumpets, Enter Theinmingus, Zungteus, Palexus, and Tartars
with drawn Swords as from Battle. Theinmingus. IN this days Action we have
Glory bought:
Now the Chinese have been kind, and fought.
Zung. That brave Young Man, the late Ambassador,
Who in defiance of your threatening Power,
Did to your Face the C^inan War proclaim;
His Hand makes work for Graves, his Praise for Fame.
Renown in all the Miracles of this
Great day, is dumb to any Name, but His.
He and his small Brigade so fierce engage,
They Have in one day made Story for an Age.
Breaking our Ranks, he Fate distributes round;
Wounds on each stroke attend, Death on each Wound.
He Kills with such a gay undaunted Port;
Fighting seems not his business, but his Sport.
His Looks and Actions speak indifferent styles.
Rage frowns in others Brows, in his it smiles.
That makes him in this more than humane Task,
Seem both to act a Slaughter, and a Mask.

Thein. Praising a Foe in such a style as this,
You prove your glory in describing his.
Hero's from Hero's tongues, no Fame e're lost:
They give praise frankest who deserve it most.

Zung. Sir, I remember this brisk Youth, when he
His charge to you delivered, challenged me.
And I by th'Envy of his actions brought,
Through the whole Battle have the Champion sought.
But I observe, and wonder for what cause,
He from that place where-e're I come, with-draws.
Yet still, to show, he makes a brave Retreat;
When almost within reach of Swords we meet,
Lays Crowds of slaughtered Soldiers at my feet.
As if he meant
By his own Trophies to have my Chase withheld,
And barred our meeting by the heaps he killed.

Thein. Charge him once more, and your first Chase renew,
And try -- If above man he be immortal too.

Zung. Now if Fate favors me, His Sword I Will try.
Yet one thing startles me, I know not why;
When e're I meet him, Armed with all the fire
That Envy can a Soldiers breast inspire,
His looks disarm me, and my Rage divert:
I Have a desire to vanquish, but not hurt.
Sure some Divinity restrains my will:
He Is the only man I Would Conquer, but not Kill.
Exeunt.
After several Excursions, and continued sounds of Trumpets, Enter Amavanga,
Vangona, and Women in Men's habit. Am. Fate, kind Companions of our glorious
Toyls,
On our great Cause and greater Conduct smiles.
In this day's Action we have Honor won:
And though our Sex wears Clouds, our Fame wears none.
Fame th'airy Magic of the great, whose breath
Does make our Names like Ghosts, walk after death.
Which to great spirits does this Faith convey:
To live to morrow, is to dye to day.

Enter Lycungus. Lyc. Sir, my great Masters Will I here proclaim,
Who wishes you Immortal, as your Fame.
The King by his Imperial Charge concerned,
At what he from this Bloody day has learned;
To the proud Tartar has a Herald sent;
The Fate of lingering Sieges to prevent.
T'accept a Duel, and their great debate,
End by a single hand; to finish what
The tardy Chance of War but longer draws:
War the Tribunal of a Monarchs Cause:
Where Might speaks Reason, and where force pleads Law.
Where often Suits so slow t'a period draw;
E're the Cause ends, the Pleaders meet their Fates;
And the Dispute out-lives the Advocates.
The Tartar his Proposals does accept;
And since Fame has on you such Honors heaped:
Our Gracious King excited by the Charm
Of what Success waits on your Conquering Arm.
On your brave hand confers this high Renown,
To win a Laurel where it saves a Crown.

Am. Oh my kind Stars, go let your ha^t take wings,
And bear my Thanks back to the best of Kings.
My Laurels blossom on my Brows -- But stay
With my most humble thanks my Pride convey.
Tell him a greater and more glorious task
He could not grant, nor my Ambition ask.

Lyc. Quitazo, his great General implored
This favor from his hand, t'accept a Sword.
But his entreaties did succesless prove,
Urged by the fondness of the Princess Love.
Who would not trust her dear Quitazo's Fate,
To the bold chance of such a strict debate.
Which glorious Charge, your Valor juster due,
His Suit rejected, he assigns to you.
Exit.
Am. His thronging favors too Excessive grow.
Fate never was a Prodigal till now.

After Shouts heard from a distance, Enter a Messenger. Mess. Fortune still
lays new Honor at your Feet:
You shall a Noble Adversary meet.
The Tartars in these Shouts speak their applause;
Proud that their Prince Zungteus weds their Cause.
Linked to his Fate, or yours, 'twixt two brave hands
The Balance of this mighty Empire stands.

Am. Zungteus, Oh the Gods! what have I done!
The only man whom I in Arms would shun.
Overtake the Herald in his hasty flight,
And bid him tell the King I will not Fight.

Vang. Not Fight?


Am. -- Not with Zungteus, call him back.


Vang. -- No, stay.


Am. How?


Vang. -- Love Commands what Honor cannot obey.
Would you a generous King so ill requite,
And check that Fame which takes so high a flight?

Am. Oh thou rash Honor, whose too eager Zeal,
Made me t'a Contract not looked over set S^al;
Honor a frantic Lust in Souls sublime,
Of leaping over what Prudence stays to climb!
The King I hope by this time understands,
That my fierce Answer came from feeble hands.
And will conclude from my too brisk reply,
I talk too much to fit a part so high.

Vang. Your quick acceptance merits his applause;
To Have asked your Foe, e're you embraced the Cause,
That were to have those where safely you might strike:
Great Valor weighs all Enemies alike.
You in your swift Compliance have expressed
Such Gallantry, the King will trust the rest.
His Confidence no further trial needs:
He builds his Faith upon your former Deeds.

Am. If in my former Deeds I Am so much blessed;
My Fame and I may now sit down and rest.
And since I have so many Laurels wore,
Tell him I Am modest, and will win no more.

Vang. In this Retreat you would your Fame deface,
And show you had begun a glorious Race;
But wanted Courage to pursue the Chase;

Am. I Will tell him I Am a Woman, and resign
To a manly hand, which is too great for mine.

Vang. You ought great deeds the rather to pursue;
As from a Woman they are more rare, and new.

Am. I Will tell him I Am a Lover.


Vang. -- That Excuse
A dangerous suspicion would produce
Both of your Courage and Allegiance too.
To own a Love for China's mortal Foe,
Would sound but harshly to the Emperors Ear.
As if your private fancy you prefer
Before your Countries Cause: It Is a less blot
To be an ill Lover, than bad Patriot.

Am. I Will tell him then I am --


Vang. -- A Coward.


Am. -- How?


Vang. If your fond thoughts to this tame faintness bow,
Your honor all is at one blast expired:
They Will say e're half your Race was run, you tired,
And it is far less ignoble not to have
Been ever famed, then not continue brave.

Am. A Coward!
Who but appea^'s a Coward, though abused,
Is sentenced in his being but accused.
The Name's almost as heinous as the guilt*
That Title ruins all my Honor built.
And if my shrinking thoughts too lowly move,
I Am impudent if I pretend to Love.
Coward and Lover are of different kind:
Love's the most daring passion of the mind.
It Is a Majesti^k and a Royal Guest,
And scorns to Lodge in an unhallowed breast.
Whom Cowardice insects, Love's fire never felt:
It is the dro^s of Souls and cannot melt.
I Will meet him then, and do my self this Right.
I Will show that I can Love, 'cause I dare Fight.
Since I admire a Man so high in Fame,
I Will keep up Glory to support my flame.
Exeunt.
SCENE the Third.
Enter Lycungus and Orunda. Orund. Quitazo false!
My greatness and my Love despised! and his
P^fidious heart the fair Alcinda's prize!

Lyc. Their settled Loves Ambition cannot shake;
Nor all the assaults that Power or Death can make.

Orund. Oh my hard fortune: Born so near a Crown,
And carry no more Thunder in my Frown!
False and dim Lights, boast your faint Charms no more,
And feeble greatness thy fallen State deplore. pointing to her Eyes.
Weak Majesty, and weaker Beauty too!
A heart I cannot shake I cannot bow!
None but thy Ruin shall my Rage appease:
No storms like those which injured Lovers raise.
Poor and Effeminate Revenge stand by:
No common furies can my Gall supply: Is going.
Rivals best pleasure, Rivals when they dye.

Lyc. Stay Injured Princess, though in you just Heaven
To the World Copies of it self has given:
Should all adore you, Gods were then too kind,
And have
For you more homage than themselves designed.
Beauty like Heaven so large a sway never bears,
To make all men Religious worshippers.
Let my devotion Expiate his Crimes:
Let me adore what his disdain Blasphemes.

Orund. How Sir! Dares your aspiring fancy rove
So high, t'assault my Ear, attempt my Love!
My kindness to Quitazo so soon cold.
Were his heart guarded more than Misers gold,
Or fighting Monarchs Crowns, his Breast more Steel
Than Lightning ever would melt, yet he shall feel
The fierce Attaque my mighty power shall make.
But if Love, Rage, Fate and Death's powr's too weak:
If after all, I cannot overcome,
But by her Murder, and his Martyrdom;
Were his Ingratitude greater than it is,
Yet still I scorn all other Love but his.
Exit.
Lyc. Well, what my slighted passion cannot do,
That end I by Ambition will pursue.
In sluggish Breasts Love's idle frenzy rules:
Ambition is the Lust of all great Souls.

The Scene opens and discovers the King of China on a Throne, Orunda by him.
Orund. Justice, great Sir, on a wronged Daughters score,
From a kind Father I this grace Implore.
That Justice as a King you cannot deny;
Which lends Heaven Thunder, and you Majesty.
The flase Quitazo my just right denis;
He does my Love and your Commands despise:
And pays his homage to Alcinda's Eyes.

Lycun. Whatsoever doom your Justice shall decree,
She is secured, and waits her destiny.

King. Is Insolence so high, and King so low?
That to my will his Pride disdains to bow!
My Power by a Mortal and a Subject dared
Kings, and outlive that minute we are feared!
Crafty Quitazo does my Army lead:
That shelter for a while protects his Head.
But for his guilt to their quick Graves I Will send
All that but call him Brother, Son, or Friend.
I Will punish his Affront on his whole Race,
And from Mankind his hated Name deface.
Alcind^'s Blood first Expiates her sin:
Her strangled Pride shall the first Scene begin:
And to confirm my Rage, I Will pluck out all
Their Eyes, that shed a Tear to see her fall.
Whispers to one of his Attendants. Exit.
Orund. This is too much: So many Bleed? How high
Does th'anger of Affronted Monarchs fly?
Whole Fam^lies dest^oy'd! his Rage so loud!
Her Murder will be lost in such a Crowd.

Lyc. But in that Crowd your hated Rival dies.


Orund. Yes, to his Rage, not mine, a Sacrifice.


Enter Alcinda pu^sned by Mutes, who entering kneels to the King. Alc. Of your
displeasure what can be the cause?
^ am too young to break Imperial Law^.

King. Why tardy Slaves this insolent delay*
T^ke her and strangle her.

Orund. -- No, great Sir, stay*
Revenge and Justice in this Cause are mine.
And though my thoughts no mercy do design,
My Anger's yet too cold to see her fall.
To my Remembrance first his scorn I Will call:
Then sound her heart; and when
I from her Bosom have those Secrets drawn,
Which yours and my Divinity profane.
When my racked Ears have heard all that may swell
My Vengeance to the highest Rage on this side Hell:
Then when my heated Pride to Fury turns,
Her breath shall blow that fire in which she burns.
They best the dictates of Revenge fulfill,
Who Sentence in hot Blood, and raging Kill.

King. Your Courage pleads so well, and nobly too;
That Justice I designed, I leave to you.
But dare not see it acted, but retire,
Lest I should envy what I now admire.
Exit. King.
Orund. Madam, you have Beauty which should hearts engage,
And claim the spoils due to a blooming Age.
And amongst the Captives, which your Fetters wear,
Quitazo pays his humble homage there.

Alc. Quitazo! Oh what Bliss dwells in that Name!
Quitazo is a Prince deserv's more Fame
Than Conquered Crowns, or Conquered Hearts can yield.
But if he never so large an Empire held,
Over Souls more Proud, and Beautys more Divine;
He Would triumph only, that he Raigns in mine.

Orund. I have my wish; she has not learnt the Art, aside.
To mask her thoughts, I shall disclose her heart,
And Madam as you're blessed with Youth and Charms,
And softness fit for a young Lovers Arms:
No doubt you finding Providence so kind,
Know ^or what use such Blessings are designed.
Does not a silent wish; and warm desire
Tell you it is pity so much Youthful fire,
To distant Gazers that approach no nigher,
Should rise each Morning, and each Evening set,
And wast in giving only light, not heat?
And so your yielding kindness does ordain,
Quitazo shall that Vanquished Empire gain.

Alc. I understand not what desires you mean.
I know I have a heart does entertain
All that may make him happy, all that may
In Love's bright Temple shine, in meeting Souls look gay.
All that may make me wish --

Orund. Oh she Stabs me.


aside. Alc. -- You would forgive,
I only for his sake desire to live.

Orund. Yes you shall live --
-- A minute, and that is all, aside.
If I hold out so long before her fall.
But what return has your affection had?

Alcind. The best and kindest that Mankind ever made.
He tells me of armed Deities that fly
Invisible betwixt my Lip and Eye;
Of young winged Boys, and felt but unseen fire;
Of little pains which against his Rest conspire.
And yet we feel no pains but what we make:
And those are pleasant for their Author's sake.
And thus with all that our full joys can raise,
We Gaze and Languish, Talk, and Sigh whole days.
But when the Night, the Night draws on --

Orund. -- What then?


Alcind. We part as if we never should meet again.


Orund. Revenge thou have enough. Fond Girl, how dare
You reach at Glory's I design to wear?
But your own breath's your Sentence. Slaves go on.
To the Mutes.
Alcin. Oh Madam, save my Life --


Orund. -- Let it be done,
She cannot dye quick, you kill too soon.

Alc. Hold, Villains, hold; low at your Feet I lie.
Ah Madam, I can Love, but cannot dye.

Orund. No more.


Alc. -- First hear me*


Orund. -- Well, what can you say?


Alcind. All just Commands for Life I will obey.


Orund. Will you Resign? --


Alcind. -- Resign! -- I Will yield you shall
Have all Quitazo's breast can grant ye. All
His Friendship, Gratitude --

Orund. -- And Love?


Alcind. -- And Love can pay.
You shall his humble hearts Allegiance sway.
And what no disobedience can destroy,
You shall his kindness and his smiles enjoy.

Orund. And is this all?


Alcind. No, you shall sit and gaze, and at his sight
See day in his calm brow, a full clear light.
Where bright and gentle Beams, and wanton Darts,
Shall sport, and play, and steal from eyes to hearts:
Then you shall hear him speak words so refined,
Language so Ravishing, a style so kind,
That in the Raptures of a Bliss so high,
You Will doubt which tastes most Heaven, your Face or Eye.
And after all, you shall enjoy these Charms,
To Love him -- and admire him -- in my Arms.

Orund. Your Arms! Oh Rage!


Alcind. My Arms! why then you did design*
That he should rest in any Arms but mine;
Oh no! you said it but to fright me sure;
You cannot wish him so unkind. He Swore
He Would rest in none but mine; and those, they say,
Who do their Sacred Vows and Oaths betray,
Shall meet with Curses, and black frightful things,
And horrid fear which perjured Bosoms stings.
But since his Vow's performance will remove
Those ills, and you pretend to so much Love:
Your Love is not so mean, nor Cruel sure,
To let him suffer Ills, which I can Cure.

Orund. It Is done, Revenge at last has got the day:
Her Innocence shall no more her Death delay.
Here Kill, Stab, Strangle, any thing --

Alcind. Murdrers, come:
I Have vanquished fear, and I embrace my Doom.
Here Villains, Kill, Stab, Strangle; all
Is for his Love a Sacrifice too small.
Now all the Trophy your high Pride shall have,
Shall be to walk Triumphant over my Grave.
I value his least look so high --
That Love and Fear shall be no more at strife*
I will not quit a Smile to save a Life.
Here Ministers of Fate, make have --

Orund. -- No, Live.
I for your Courage do your Crime forgive.
None but your height of Love has saved your Head.
Live, and Love on; for it shall never be said,
Orunda could perform so mean a part,
To kill a Rival to subdue a Heart.
I Will take a harder, but a nobler course:
And though, as the King's Daughter, I by force
Could make him yield; that intrest I Will resign:
My Merit, not my Power, shall make him mine.
Use all your Arts, all your united powers:
My Love and kindness shall out-ballance yours.
No injured Lover could so generous be,
To save a Sentenced Rivals Life like me.
Yet in that Siege I Will lay to his proud breast,
Of my great deeds thy pardon is the least.
Go then and Love him; but acquaint your feet
With such Bypath, that we may never meet.
Take hence that sight. Those Eyes too clearly shine,
And that, which lights his Bosom, darkens mine. Exit Alcinda.
Say, Sir, my mercy how do you approve?
It Is for my Honor, and I hope my Love.
Quitaezo, if he ought that is brave regard,
This generous Act must gratefully reward.

Lyc. Yes, doubt it not, you will not find him rude:
Nor is he guilty of Ingratitude.
He will requite your kindness and your charms.

Orun. But when? --


Lyc. -- This day


Orun. -- Where?


Lyc. -- In Alcinda's Arms.
Her Woman, Madam, is my Confiden^;
And has but now this private Message sent:
Quitazo has an Assignation made,
To meet his Mistress in a silent shade;
The place where the Scene's laid.
The Pagode-Grove upon the Sacred Mount*
Without the Eastern gate, and this account
It Is brings him there to defy King, Laws, Fate,
And all that may disturb their happy State.
And thus removed, her person he will secure
From danger of an Angry Rival's power.

Orun. Why was this Cursed News no sooner told*
Does she her Life from my high Bounty hold?
Did I permit her Love, nay and command it too?
And can she treacherously her Love pursue?
I gave her leave to Conquer but not steal.
Mercy, henceforth the Attribute of Hell,
Have thou betrayed me?
Revenge shall in thy Room this Seat Supply:
Alcinda by Orunda's Hand shall Dye.
Tell me Lycungus by what means I may
My Fury to her Trembling Soul display:
This Woman in his Fond Embrace Surprise,
And tear her Heart before her Lovers Eyes.

Lyc. Should your Hand execute a Criminal's Doom*
'Twould not your Greatness nor your Sex become:
That Justice then t'a meaner Hand resign:
Be yours the Glory, let the Toil be mine.
Trust it to me.

Orun. -- Do It then, but do it so,
I may applaud and envy at the Blow.

Lyc. Whilst they sit dallying in a Close Embrace;
In The Grove an Ambush of Armed Men I Will place,
Who from his Arms his amorous Prey shall snatch,
And down her Throat a poisonous Draught dispatch,
To summon out her Soul to that lower Shade,
Where Wrongs of injured Majesty are paid.

Orun. See instantly the Fatal Draught prepared:
And-take a Princess thanks for a Reward.
Exit.
Lyc. Ye Gods of China, if you are such tame
And inoffensive things, as our Priests frame,
Whose Pious Ears and Eyes and tender Sense
Delights in naught but Good and Innocence:
Draw back your Sun, and vele your selves in night*
I shall Act Deeds, which all weak Eyes will fright.
But if the Nature of your God - Heads be
Courageous, savage, feirce and bold like me.
Heaven wear no Clouds, and Gods take a ful^ view:
Look and Admire at what my Hand dares do.
Exit.
Re-enter Orunda. Orun. Poisoned and I not there! Though Modesty
T'a Female Hand that Vengeance does deny;
In a Disguise I Will meet 'em in the Grove
Spectatour to this Horrid Scene of Love.
And if the weaker Potion cannot suffice,
I will make up the Poison from my Eyes. Exit. Enter Quitazo and Alcinda.
What angry Murmur does disturb your Mind,
To blame a Fate so Glorious and so Kind
Raised to an Empire and a Princess Arms,
Beyond the Reach of my more Humble Charms?
What saucy Trouble dares Create your Frown.
Can Sighs or Sorrow dwell so near a Crown?

Quit. Do not so Cruelly my Misfortunes treat,
Who owe my Ruin to my being Great.
Though a King's Heir, and Empire's Favorite,
I am not brighter for such Rays of Light.
I Am darkened by the Luster I have won;
As Moors are Black by being too near the Sun.
But do not fear that Seat your Power secur's,
His Empire Madam shall not Ruin yours.
My heart shall wear no Chain's, but what you gave,
Kings may our Bodies not our Souls Enslave.

Alcin. Boast not that Constancy your Soul will keep
For when Quitazo in her Arms shall sleep;
You nor your Dreams so kind will scarcely prove,
To loose one Thought on my forgotten Love.
Though me, poor me, you with unkindness kill,
Yet my good Wishes wait upon you still.
And when --
In her high Arms I veiw you from a far,
A Princess Husband, and an Empires Heir:
I^le Mourn to quit you, but be Proud to see
You Happy, though for ever lost to me.

Quit. Why did you suffer me to go, when I
With Tears implored your leave to stay and die?
Let Law and King have done the worst they could:
It had been juster to have exposed my Blood,
Than but the hazard of your Loss have stood.

Alcin. Talk not of Death -- the Death of my Dear Lord.
Oh it is half dying but to hear the Word!
I love your Life so well, that, Sir, you know
To save your Life 'twas I that bid you go.
I knew at worst 'twould a less Torture be
To see you live for her than dye for me.
Besides all Women choose not with one voice.
She in that number might have mist my Choice.
But Oh! she saw you in a Fatal Hour:
And since your Love or Life's not in my Power:
Dear Sir choose Life; Do not my Victime fall.
Be she and her Crown yours: they must they shall --
I beg you would live.

Quit. -- Ah Madam! and can you
Command me to be false?

Alcin. -- Yes Sir I do.
Owe her your Life; Live hers, and happy Reign.
I bid you do it -- as much as e're I can.

Quit. I rather will the utmost hazard Run,
Than yield to be by Loyalty undone.
No, for my Constancy this way I Will choose,
This Day he must his Empire save or loose.
If Fate, as, ye kind Powers, I hope it will,
On his just cause and his great Champion smile:
His Peace recovered, my Comm^ssion dies.
And when I have no further Services
T'oblige my Country or defend my King,
Then Conqu'^ing Beauty shall it is Triumph Sing.
Retired from Court we will to some Cell remove,
And what we loose in Greatness gain in Love.
But if (which Heaven forbid) he is O'rthrown,
Then I more Safely may my passion own,
And stand his Anger when his Thunder's gone.

Alcin. If you prove true (a Work I fear too hard)
Your Faith I shall admire, and Heaven Reward.
But if the Love, which once to me you gave,
Must in her Kind Embraces find a Grave:
I Will borrow Life enough on Earth to stay,
Till I have seen your Fatal Nuptial Day.
And at that Minute when the Sacred Rite
(My title Cancelled) does your Hands unite,
What I want Breath to speak, my Looks shall tell,
And take --
Of your departing Love a long Farewell.
Then, if my Heart --
Be not quite broke, to your Bedside I Will come,
And wait on your dead Kindness to it is Tomb.
Then from my Rival I Will this favor win,
Which both of you may grant without a Sin,
I will sleep by you, -- but never wake agin.
I Love so well, I can your Crime forgive:
But Love too well, that pardon to Outlive.
But lest my Ghastly Looks, --
When I am dead, should your New Mistress fright,
And Rob you of one Minute of Delight:
I Will dress my Brow so gay, I Will* Death beguile,
Breath out my Soul, expiring in a Smile.

Quit. Oh my dear Princess, if my King Decree
I must his Son or else his Martyr be:
I^will my self but not my Love resign:
I Will Set in Glory, where I cannot Shine,
And Fate so Charming -- but what Bliss more High
Is'^ to live yours, if it is so great to dye.
Exeunt.
The Fourth ACT.
Scene the First.
Enter Amavanga and Vangona. Amav. WHy has hard Fate so strange a Subject chose,
To Make two Lovers meet like Mortal Foes?
I by Z^gteus Hand, or he by mine,
Must on this place our dying Breaths Resign.

Vang. But she, whose Hand dares in a Single Fight
Maintain her Countries and an Empires Right,
Deserves the best and bravest of Mankind.
And though wild Chance him for your Foe designed:
The Glory of the Deed takes off the Crime:
Fighting your Lover you best merit him.

Am. Well since it is past Retreat --
I Will make this Glorious Trial of my Love;
If Amavanga's Arm Victorious prove,
My King Revenged, and China's Peace restored,
I Will find this Second Subject for my Sword. Points to her heart.
And if it be his Fate to kill, I Will try
If after me h'has Love enough to die:
Then to the Skies together we will take Flight,
As Conqu'rours, and be Crowned with Wreaths of Light.
Since for our Loves the World no Room has given,
Dying we will Remove the Scene to Heaven.
We Will Shine the brightest Pair that Reign Above;
No such twin-Stars, as those that die in Love.

Enter Theinmingus, Zungteus, Palexus, and Tartars on one side. King of China,
Quitazo, Licungus, and Guards of Chinese on the other side. Amavanga, Vangona,
Zungteus, and Palexus with drawn Swords advance into the middle of the Stage. A
Herald with a large Parchment-Roll at the further end of the Stage faces the
Audience. Thein. In Presence of both Armies, Heaven, and you^
I solemnly my former Oath Renew:
That at his Victory,, and our Defeat
I from your Empire will in Peace Retreat:
To all those Articl^s contained I yield:
All your Demolish't Citys I Will rebuild.

King of China If in this Fight Fate on our Champion frown,
We Are Tributaries to the Tartar Crown

Thein. The next thing is, it lies in your free Choice
To fight with Seconds, or without. --

Zung. -- Your Voice?
Are you for Seconds?

Amav. -- Seconds! -- are Men grown
Such Cowards that they dare not die alone?
Beasts fight in herds: and when Men are so Rude
To decide Quarrels by a Multitude;
When snatched at by so many Hands, a way
So Savage, Honor's not a Price, but Prey.

Palex. But Sir by Custom, and by ^riendship's Laws,
We plead a Seconds Right in a Friends Cause.

Am. Such Men true Friendship never understood,
Who basely with their own mix their Friends Blood.
Seconds! th'Invention of some Coward Hand,
By Customary Barb'rousness maintained;
Which all Heroic Spirits must disown,
Who borrow others Courage doubt their own.
Decrepit Age may with Brisk Seconds fight,
And Wink and Conquer, if their Arms hit right.
No Sir, I beg yours and these Monarchs leave,
That from our Single Hands they would their Fates receive.

Zung. Agreed. Thein. and King of China.
Agreed.

Thein. Draw off, and at the Trumpets sound
Prepare your Entries first, then choose your Ground.

Am. Sir I request your Promise, if I fall
To let him give me Private Funeral.
Pointing to Van.
After the Sound of Trumpets they Fight, and Amavanga falls. The Tartars Shout.
Am. Draw nearer, Sir, and know these Closing Eyes:
'Twou'^ be unkind to dye in a Disguise.
Empty of Blood my Veins with Love are fi^'d;
I Am Charmed even by that Courage -- I am killed.

Zung. My Amavanga dead! and by my Hand!
Oh! Envious Gods with f^tal Planet Reigned
Ore this Black Day. Could any thing, but Hate
And Scorn to me, make you Embrace this Fate,
To Choose your Murder from no Hand but this?

Am. Hold Sir, t'accuse now I Am dying is
A Sound too harsh t^a breaking Lover's Heart.
So long a Farewell and unkindly Part!
Do not Repine at this Unhappy Blow;
Think what Devotion to my King I owe.
Nothing but Loyalty and Honou^'s Laws
Engaged me in this Great but Fatal Cause.
Do not Deplore my Fate, it is a Grace too High;
I Have lost an Empire and deserve to die.
My Conscious Soul does all my stains recount,
And blush to look on Heaven, where it would mount,
But if Heavens Mercy any Room can spare,
To let a Worthless Guest inhabit there;
My Soul shall bear thy Image to the Sky,
I Will grasp thee till I reach Eternity;
And when I Am there; if Love so far can view:
Look up to me; as I Will look down to you.
dies.
Zung. Her Sacrilegious Murder does present
All Horrors, that Distraction can invent,
Or Tortu^'s yield: My stagg'ring Frame's ill built;
And takes Convulsions from the Wounds she fel^*

Palex. Restrain your Passion, Let it never be said,
You played the Lover in an Armies Head.

Zung. Gods! --


Thein. Now by the Justice of our stronger Cause
You must submit to obey your Conqu'rours Laws. K. of China.
What I have sworn, I never dare ^ll back.

Zung. Then Sir that Oath you swore, it is I dare break.
Be still a Monarch -- Tears the Articles
You shall not shrink thus tamely from a Throne,
Nor quit one Gemm that sparkles in a Crown.

Thein. How T^aytor!


Zung. -- No, I Am China's Mortal Foe:
But it is a Debt I to my Honor owe
To give him back the forfeit of his Crown*
And to maintain his and my own Renown,
I Will stake my Life and Soul, and lend my Sword
To Guard that Throne my bounty has restored.

Thein. Great Gods! what black Offenses have I done,
To find so great a Traitor in a Son?
The Name of Son he has too long possessed;
Direct your Swords at the bold Rebels Breast.

Zung. First hear me Sir, and then my Life I Will yield.*
To my Disgrace I have a Woman killed.

Alc. A Woman!


Zung. But it shall never stain my past Renow^
To say I fought with Women for a Crown.
I set such Rate on Kings, though Enemies,
That though my mounting Pride at Empire flies:
Yet my Ambition has this Virtue taught,
I scorn to wear a Crown so cheaply bought.
Once more then for my Honor and your own
Choose out a Manly Hand to Guard your Throne.
Choose out a Champion from your Armies Head;
With him once more my former Cause I Will plead.
Let our too Swords renew this great debate:
And turn the Scale of Empires by our Fate.

Quit. Sir, Let my Hand that glorious Cause decide.

King of China. Quitazo hold; that Suite must be denied.
No, I have found his Virtue so Sublime,
I dare not trust my Cause a Second time.
Zungteus has a mind so God-like, great,
And Generous, he can no Equal meet.
When ever he fights, unmatch't he has the Odds;
Who fights with him makes War against the Gods.
For sure their Deities must take his side,
Whose Soul is to their Heaven so near allied.
I Will trust my Fate to no more single Hands:
But bow to what this Conqu'rour Commands.

Zung. If then you dare not trust a single Sword,
Be in you Palace* Walls again secured.
The former Truce we made remains this Night:
And the next Morning's Sun Renews the Fight.
If through the Camp you doubt in your Retreat
Your Person's safety to the City Gate:
To You --
I and my Army shall this Homage pay,
Your Foes to morrow, but your Guards to day.

Ring of China. Brave Conqu'rour --
Had you of this Days Fate The Advantage took,
You from my Hand had China's Scepter struck.
But they to the highest Pitch of Conquest Rise,
Who the Reward of Conquest can despise.
Exit King of China attended.
Thein. Zungteus Deeds, and Glories are above
The Payment of a King and Fathers Love.
I could call back my Youth, and wish to be
Thy Brother only, to act Deeds like thee.

Manent only Zungteus, Palexus, Vangona, who offers t^ carry off Amavanga.
Zung. Hold your Rude Hands, --
And take me with her.

Vang. 'Twas our Queen's Last Will,
Which you are bound by Promise to fulfill,
That if 'twere by your Sword her Chance to fall,
My hand should give her private Funeral.

Zung. Spite of my Vow, I Will follow her; for him,
Who commits Murder, Perjury's no Crime.
Nor is this all I Will do; for when I have
Attended my Dead Princess ^o her Grave,
By the same In^trument her Death has given,
I Will send my Soul to wait on her to Heaven.
But if the Stubborn God's refuse t'admit
A Profane Murderer into Heaven's blessed Seat;
A Banished Ghost I Will wander through the Sky,
And Proclaim them worse Murderers than I.
Unknown my Hand did this black Crime commit,
But they both knew, and saw, and suffered it.
I Will follow her though all. --
Enter a Tartar.
Tart. Zungteus Hold.
Your Kindness by your Father is Controlled.
He for to Morrow's Fight does now prepare,
Has called a Counsel and expects you there.
You straight to his Pavilion must retire.

Zung. My Duty does against my Love conspire.
My Father is too Old to understand
That Force which does a Lover's thoughts command.
Farewell brave Maid; a Grave's too narrow Room;
Oh that I thus might make my Arms thy Tomb!
Exit Vangona and her Attendants, carrying out Amavanga She gone, my Rage
swells higher than before.
Now Love Commands, and Duty Raigns no more:
Love Calls, and Fathers now must wait: I Will be
Both Priest and Offering, great Saint, to thee.
Offers to fall upon his Sword.
Palex. Reflect on your Great Deeds, and as Great Birth;
And think how much it will Eclipse your Worth,
When you give Fame or Envy leave to say,
That Grief a Woman's Passion had the Power
To kill a General and a Conqueror.
Whilst his Faint Soul shrunk to the lowest Ebb of Fear,
Chose Death to ease the Torment of a Tear.

Zung. You know it is false, and the World knows it too,
Fame to my Death will give a name more due;
A Just and Expiating Sacrifice,
When by my Hand my Mistress Murderer dies.

Pal. T'excuse your Crime think how her Fall was wrought:
Her Death was here is, and not Zungteus Fault.
You sought but Conquest of an unknown Foe:
But since she did your Love and Person know,
And with that Knowledge with Zungteus fought,
She for your Murder, not your Conquest sought.
Death justly then her Malice does conclude,
As a Reward of her Ingratitude.

Zung. How, impio^s man! Gods! do I live to find
Worse Monsters than my self amongst Mankind?
Unknown I to her heart a passage found:
Thy pro^ane Breath her Living Fame does wound.
Draw then thy Traitor's Sword, as I do mine.
Two greater Villains^ne'r could Combat join.
Dear Amavanga, now look down and see
Me fall for Murder, him* for Blasphemy.

Palex. If any thing within my Heart you doubt,
Open my Veins, kind Sir, and let it out.
If ought you l^ke not lodge within this Breast,
Destroy the Seat, that h^rbour's that ill Guest.

Zung. No: you have di^arm'd my Rage, and now I find
Your Love to me made you to her unkind.
But speak such words no more; Oh! do not wound
My ^rembling Sense with such another sound.
When next into your Bosom some Blessed thought
Has Amavanga's Glorious Image brought,
Think nothing of her but what is great, and good.
Think of her as my Queen, that set in Blood.
Your Friend this Justice to her Fame implores,
Do not profane that Saint your Friend adores.
To so much Heaven your pity nor your praise,
Can never a too Glorious Altar raise.
No Language is too kind, nor style too high,
To speak the Fame of Beauties, when they die.

Enter Theinmingus. Thein. With Admiration I Have a Witness been,
Of your loud Passion for the Vanquished Queen.
Astonished Fame speaks high --

Zung. -- To speak more high,
I loved that Queen, and for her Love must die.

Thein. --
Traitor! Is this a Language for my Son?
Where Is all the martial Tartar's Greatnefs gone?
Such an Effeminate design will shame
Thy sleeping Ancestors untainted Fame.
This Action, thy more Masc'line mothers Ghost
Will Blush at, and disturb her Crumbling Dust.

Zung. Oh my hard Fate! is this a fathers Voice?


Thein. Bid Crowns farewell, Embrace thy humbler Choice*
Thy poor low spirited Design, to Die
Killed by a Wound -- given by a Ladies Eye*
A Death worthy a Soldier.

Zung. -- Sir no more.
Can you place Crimes upon Devotions Score?
Am I the first Raised Altars to a Face?
And are none Lovers but the Vile and Base?
Think you Love's Power the Valiant cannot touch?

Thein. The Great and Valiant feel't, but not too much.
None but a Fool a dangerous Stranger takes,
And yields that Seat which his own Tyrant makes.

Zung. It is a lawful Power not Tyranny,
That Sentences a Criminal to Die.
*It Was I that Killed her, Sir, and is my Blood
T'attone hers a Sacrifice too good?
Or is that Justice by your hand withstood?

Thein. Thy Death withheld by me? No, it is a Sin,
To have that base corrupted Blood kept in.
After the Merit of so mean a Thought,
Oblige the World and me, and let it out.
And when *it is mixed with dust, may thy just Fame
To thy lost Courage and thy slighted Name
With Pain keep up thy Memory, and say,
Thou could a Father and a King betray.
Desert a just Revenge, and Royal Cause,
And break thy Duty, Honor, Natures Laws;
And from a Conqueror turn a Woman's slave,
To sleep with a cold Mistress in a Grave.

Zung. Must all these stains be mine? No, Love retreat.
Duty and Honor now shall fill your Seat.
Love's Power grows weak in -- its declining Cause,
From my barred Heart the Vanquished Lord with-draws.
Now see your God-like Power, a Fathers Right:
Try my new modeled Soul, show me that ^light,
I dare not take, that Path I dare not tread,
Dangers I will not meet, and Glories lead.
Sound Loud your Trumpets, Wave your Ensigns high,
Go on, for my new Mistres, Victory;
Ruin and Blood shall all soft thoughts remove;
I Will be as great in Vengeance as in Love.
Exeunt.
SCENE the Second, a GROVE.
Enter Orunda in Disguise* Orun. By the assistance of this borrowed shape
I from the Court have made a safe Escape.
I hope Lycungus follows my Command,
And the Ambuscade of Murd'rer's are at hand.
This is the appointed Hour, and this the Grove.
Alcinda once I bid thee Live and Love.
But now to meet him basely in Disguise,
To gain a Victory by a Surprise.
My Mercy has destroyed, and you shall Die.
And though I to so mean a Justice Fly,
That I to take thy Life thy Poisoner prove,
I Kill not half so poorly, as you Love.
Enter Quitazo, leading Alcinda in a Shepheardess's Habit. Oh this blessed
Minute, they are already here!
What Wings has Love -- when Love's Reward is near?
Well are they come, I will unseen retire,
And Laugh to see my subtle Train take Fire. Retreats within.
We, when our Jealousiy has Raised a Storm, Retreats within.
Can stare on Ruin in the blackest Form.

Alc. I Have heard our Priests relate the wondrous Loves
Of Nimphs and Rural Gods in Woods and Groves;
Made God's by Love, for ever Fair and Young,
And made Immortal only to Love long.
If there Inhabit here such Powers as these,
Whose gloomy Temples are those shady Trees;
Sure they will be kind to us who hither come
Led by that influence, whence they assume
Their God-heads.

Quit. -- Oh Dear Madam do not fear
Their Frowns, the Deities are gentle here.
They are the Gods of Courts that Lovers spite,
Such as our Priests do paint in forms that fright,
Fitter to force Devotion than invite:
But here they are all mild obliging Powers,
They Will Treat our Loves with favorable Hours.
They cannot do less: No Gods or Saints design,
To hurt what comes a Pilgrim to their shrine.

Alc. But in this Dress do I not fond appear,
Thus to disguise my self to meet you here?

Quit. Oh no; that signal favor you have given,
Shows that your Kindness is allied to Heaven.
For thus in borrowed Shapes the Gods of old
In Masquerade did their Love-Parleys hold.
In this Disguise you may securely Fly
From a Kings Power and Jealous Princess Eye.
Farwell the Alliance to a Throne; for now
Love Crowns the Soul, and Honor but the Brow.

Exeunt Quitazo and Alcinda, and Re-enter Orund. Orund. Am I suspected that
they are gone so soon?
But where are all these Lazy Poisone^s gone?
Perfidions Villains, mercenary Slaves,
Had ye half that Rage, with which your Princess Raves,
You Would use more Have to execute my will;
They will be gone ere I have Power to Kill.
Ho! Poysoners, Rebels, Slaves; Ye Gods be kind,
And to my Arm one Dart of Lightning lend,
That I may Reach her ere she is gone too far.

Enter a Company of Villains. 1 Vill. Yonder she is --
-- That must be she, that Face
Has Woman in it; Besides the Garb and Place
Confirm it; and it is now the safest Time:
The Silence of the Place protects the Crime.
Advance toward her.
Orund. Why, Tardy Slaves, did you the Deed defer?
Or is it the Name of Murder makes you fear?
Traitors make have.

1 Vill. Well Madam, you shall know,
We are not in the Execution slow.

Orund. Let it be quickly done, ere it is too late:
This happy Deed I with Impatience wait.

1 Vill. If you're in Have of Heaven, we should be rude
And guilty of a strange Ingratitude,
To stay you; rather than your Patience wrong,
Here take that Happiness, for which you long.
Offers her a Bowl of Poison.
Orun. Heavens! --


1 Vil. Do you Pause? Madam, I understand
Your Modesty permits not your own Hand,
To do that Friendly Office; since you are
So Critical, we will ease you of that care.

Orun. Am I your sport? Rebels expound this Mask,
Or is the abuse of Majesty a task --
For such Low Slaves?

1 Vil. -- Nay, Madam, if we thought
Your Curious Appe^ite disliked this Draught,
We Will find some Instrument that is more Gentile;
If you dis-relish Poison, we have Steel.
They draw their Daggers.
Orun. I am your Princess, Murderer's, you will find
That Present for Alcinda was designed.

1 Vil. Yes, and Alcinda shall this Present take.


Orun. And am I she? Dull Slaves, are you awake?


1 Vil. We are too well rewarded to mistake.
We know Life's sweet, and you (if we will believe)
Are Prince or Princess, any thing to live.

Orun. Will you not know me? then are you thus dressed
In Earnest?

1 Vil. Why is Poisoning a Jest?


Orun. Can your Blind Rage? --


1 Vil. You have no time to Pause;
Madam, your Life's too short t'enquire the Cause.

Orun. I am your Queen; Rude Savage Villains, hold.


1 Vil. Madam, we own no Sovereign but Gold.


Orun. Traitors, stand off, help, Murder, Monsters, stay.


1 Vill. We have no Will nor Leisure to obey.
If you Resist --

Orun. I Will give you such Rewards, let me but Live --


1 Vill. In vain you Ask what we want time to give.


Orund. Oh do but hear; by all that is great and good.


1 Vill. No: Prayers are things we never understood.


Orun. Oh let me Speak --


1 Vill. -- You Have Spoke your last.
If you will speak more, first Die,
Then send your Ghost to make us a Reply.

Orund. Give me the Poison: Rather than I will
Permit such mean hands should their Princess Kill,
I Will in my Murder my own Hand Engage,
Thus quench my Thirst of Blood, and end my Rage. Drinks the Poison, The
Villains Run away,
Ha, are the Poysoners gone? Can their Eyes shun
The Horror of that Deed their hands have done?
Thus they, who some high Tower have undermined,
The Train once fired, and the great Blow designed,
Fly from the danger of its shaking walls,
Lest they should be Crushed with it, when it Falls.
The subtle Poison through my Veins distills,
It sets me all on Flames, and burning kills.
But though my Life does in this Heat expire,
My Hearts a Martyr to a Nobler Fire.
Here in Quitazo's fancied Arms she Lies,
Who shuts his Image in her Closing Eyes.
Alcinda's Passion I in Death Outvie,
Who Blessed but with Imaginary Bliss ca^ die.

Enter Lycungus with the former Villains. 1 Vil. See the Works done; there is
your Command ^fill'd.


Lyc. It Is well -- Oh Curse! they have th'Princ^ ^kill'd.


1 Vill. The Princess -- It Is a Woman in disgu^se,
And it is by that Description that she Dies.
But if you have misguided us --
And it is some other Friend that wants a Grave,
You need but show me her, I am your Slave.

Lyc. By her rash Zeal to see her Rival bleed,
Fate by mistake has her own Death Decreed.

1 Vil. But what Acquaintance had I with that Face,
^o know distinctions in so nice a Case?

Lyc. From her own Mouth could you not understand?
Did she not bid you hold your Barbarous hand?
Check your fierce Rage, she was the Princess?

1 Vill. True -- But
Had you been in her Case, if that would do,
You would have said, you would been a Princess too.

Orun. Oh false Lycungus --


Lycun. I am not Author of this dire mischance,
But those dull Villains brutish Ignorance.

1 Vill. Yes Madam, but your Pardon I implore:
You're the first Princess I ere killed before.
Though murdering I have my profession made;
No Artist but may fail once in his Trade.
A damned dull, foolish -- but Hanged let it die:
It Is a mistake not worth your Memory.

Lyc. This fatal Chance --


Orun. -- No more; I Am too near Heaven,
Not to have Mercy now; your Crime's forgiven,
If you will but grant this last Request, and I
T'express my Gratitude will smiling die.
Quitazo is not yet far from this place.
Through this Close Walk his wandering footsteps trace,
And bring him hither: Could I bless my sight
One Minute more ere it is all dark but night.

Lyc. Madam I Will Find him out.


Orund. But quick, make haste,
Ere the last Summons of my Death are past.

Enter Quitazo and Alcinda behind the Trees in the SCENE.
Lyc. Kind Stars, yonder he walks.

Exit with the Villains.
Orund. Quitazo Stay,
In thy Loved Arms, let but my Soul take Wing,
And Death and Poison then shall want their sting.
If you will direct but one kind Look this way,
My Gain's in Death my Loss of Life shall pay.

Enter Lycungus with Quitazo and Alcinda. Quit. Poisoned by her own Hand, and
for my sake!


Lyc. Yes Sir, by all the Guess that I can make.
Despair in Love does at no Horrors shake.

Orun. Quitazo, my Quitazo. --


Quit. Madam tell
By what Misfortunes so much Beauty fell.
What fatal Reason, nay what God durst see
And suffer such a Barbarous Cruelty?
Her fainting Breath's retired again.

Orun. No, I
Have Breath enough to tell you that I die;
And though my little beauty wanted power
To be the unkind Quitazo's Conqueror,
When I am Dying be not Cruel now;
Let me your Heart b^t for one hour subdue.
And Dead I shall not claim your being true.
Hers must your Love, and hers your pleasures be,
But dedicate a Sigh, a Tear, to me.
Kind Heaven, he weeps -- Thus happy in the Charms
Of dying in my dear Quitazo's Arms;
My parting Soul, when it does upwards go,
Shall keep the impression which it took below.
Filled with the Bliss from this soft pity given,
I Will by my Joys on Earth make up my Heaven.
Dies.
Quit. Unhappy Princess, to bestow a heart
On one that had none left for thee; No part
Of thy two Prodigal Smiles paid back again!
She that deserved so much, so little win!
Thy Fall was Cruel, and my Fate was hard
To want the Power such Kindness to Reward.
Such Pious Griefs I Will pay thy Sacred Name;
Such Tears, as even thy Rival shall not blame.

Alc. No, shed a thousand Tears, Dear Sir, You must.
It will indear my Love to see you just.
You cannot enough Deplore her wretched Fate.
Bow down in Grief, and Sink under the Weight;
And when you're Drowned in Sorrow, be the Pain
And Pleasure mine, to Raise you up again.
Farewell Dear Princess: when such Virtue dies,
It forces Pity from a Rivalls Eyes.
You for Quitazo Die, and in that Deed
My weaker Love and Merit do Exceed.
As you my Pity, so my Envy share.
When Story both our Passions shall Compare,
Fame on your Love must set the higher Rate,
As most Deserving, though less Fortunate.

Lyc. There, seize the Poisoner. I Have too long been blind: The Villains rush
from behind the Scenes, and disarme and seize Quitazo and Alcinda.
Curse on my Innocence, that I could find
This Cheat no sooner --

Quit. Heavens! What do I hear?


Lyc. The truth; thou art th'Princes Murderer.


Quit. I Traitor!


Lyc. Yes, you Traitor, tell me how
She of this Close and private Meeting knew?
How came she here, if not seduced by you?

Quit. Mistaken Devil; I her Murderer!
What ever Fate or Planet brought her here,
I had no Knowledge of her coming.

Lyc. No?
You love Life better, than to say you know.
No common Project could a General lead,
A Walk so far out of his Army's Head.

1 Vill. It Is very well, the Plot was wondrous fine,
This close dark Place for such a Black Design.

Lyc. Curse on false Tears. Inhumane Prisoner, could
Your barbarous Hand attempt your Princess Blood?

Quit. No, Monster, but would Fate my Sword Resign,
And free my Arm, I Would make Attempts on thine.

Lyc. Alcinda in Disguise an Actor too!
What man would ever read Murder in that Brow?
How strangely Providence our Fates Command!
The Worlds great Princess Falls by such mean Hands.
Treason and Guilt over Virtue getts the Odds,
And yet we must believe, that there are God's.

Quit. Yes, there are Gods, and such as do design
Vengeance and Tortures for such Crimes as thine.

Lycun. See my Commands with care Performed, and guard
This Prisoner to that Dungeon I prepared.
And be his Jaylors with strict Eyes till Night.
I dare not trust his Person to the Light.
His Sufferings his Army would Enrage,
And for his Rescue th'Alarm'd Camp Engage:
But Night will aid what is unsafe by Day.
The Princess Body to the King Convey,
With her this Poysoner. From his Breath you shall
Receive your Sentence, and together fall
A Bloody Victim at her Funeral.

Quit. Hold, Cruel Sir, Revoke that harsh Decree.
I was the Princess-Murderer, not she.
Let me meet Tortures for my damned Offense,
But spare, Oh spare her injured Innocence.

Lyc. He owns the Guilt. Who, but a loving fool,
Would Damn his own to save a woman's Soul?

Alc. How from that Breath can such strange Words proceed?
No, Sir, it is false, he durst not think that Deed.
I know his Fancy's free from such ill Theames:
His thoughts as guiltless as an Infants dreams.
I know his Heart; for since it lodges here,
It can no Stranger be that dwells so near.

Quit. Believe her not, Fond Woman as she is,
The poisoned Princess fell my Sacrifice,
Aim all your Justice and Revenge at me;
But let her Youth and pitied Virtue be,
As from my Guilt, so from my Sentence free.

Luc. Fond Lover as you are, to save her head,
Your Kindness not her Innocence does plead,
The Acts of Lovers hold together still,
As Stars are in Conjunction good or ill,

Quit What could her hand? Heaven in her sex never built
So weak a Frame to lodge such weighty Guilt.
What Crimes has she to expiate? what stayn?
Unless her Love to me, to me perfidious Man,
Who wanted Eyes and Ears to be her Guard
Against thy Rage.

Lyc. Her Death's too long deferred.
Away with them.

Quit. Hold.


I Will. Go.


Quit Take her not hence.
Your black Commission surely may dispense
This Charity to Martyred Innocence,
T'allow one Minute ere to Death we go.

Vill. Aye Sir, As if I had nothing else to do;
A man of Business and Concern's like mine,
Should stay to hear two blub'ring Lovers whine.
Away.

Quit. Hold Barbarous Dog: When thy damned Soul,
Shall in just Hells Eternal Torments howl,
In Vengeance may thy greatest Sufferings be,
To want that Pity thou deny'st to me.

I Will. Are you so Brisk? Hence take her from his sight,
You and your Bugbear Hell, you see, cannot fright.
Vengeance, and Hell, and Devils did you say?

Quit. Oh! no Sir; grant her but one Minutes stay,
And I Will Recall that Word: bless but our Eyes
With one kind pa^ting Look before she Dies:
And when our Souls shall Meet above; we will pay
You Back this favor: To the Gods we will say
Such kind things of you, speak your praise so high,
Till all your Murders, Treasons, Villainy,
Till all, were they a thousand more, by Heaven
For this one pious Act shall be forgiven.

I. Vil. Well, for so Short a stay I will be wonn:
Go, fool away a Minute, and have done
The Villains let them loose.
Quit. Farewell, most Injured of thy Sex, farewell.
When Shrieks of Screech Owls, or some fiend from Hell
Shall to my Ears thy Savage Murder tell:
Oh the fierce Horrors which must Seize my Soul:
When all this sweetness Dies, these Soft fires cool,
These Roses wither, and that charming breath
Stopped and untuned by the harsh Hand of Death,
Shall all delight, all Harmony give ore!
When those Fair Eyes, take and give light no more;
Then, Oh! then what harsh doom's ordained for me?
Yet in that Plague this comfort I foresee;
Quitazo's destiny shall follow thine,
I too shall set that hour you cease to shine.

Alcin. To make Death lighter yet, expect to see
Half of the well-come burden Borne by me.
When Death takes you, I Will follow my dear Lord;
With open Arms I Will rush upon the Sword,
Though it in Tortures comes, fates power desy;
On Constancy and me look Back, and Die.

Exit, forced out by Villains. Quit. Others on Heaven in their Misfortunes call,
T'ask pardon for their Sins that Cause their fall:
But when my fortune a just Lover bears,
The Gods should ask his pardon, not he their's:
For it is a stain to their Eternal State
To Order such a Beauty such a Fate
Exeunt
Enter King of China, and Lycungus. King of China. My Daughter poisoned for
Alcinda's sake!
Could desperare Love this Barbarous progress take?
But since, kind Sir, you have disclosed the fact,
And Seized the Savage Poysoners in the Act;
See the Disguised Alcinda be secured;
Her distiny shall be a while deferred;
Then Publicly let False Quitazo be
Proclaimed a Traitor to the State and me.
And in his Room to you my worthy Friend
I the whole Charge of China's power Commend.
When thus Degraded all his fame's expired,
His Sword rebated, and his power retired,
Let him be brought to me; Then for this fact
These Lovers shall be both together rackt.
Then, Dear Orunda, from thy Heaven look down,
And see that Vengeance which attends my frown.
Exit
Lyc. A Saucy Murmur does my peace molest,
And Greatness preach to my uneasiy breast.
Why am I not already great? my hand points to his Sword.
Bears this, and I an army do Command.
True; But we rarely our own greatness Spy,
When we see greater than our selves Stand by.
At that damp thought my greatness Hangs her wing
I am a General, but not a King.
But how are we less than Kings?
Or, Whence can they more Sense of Glory feel?
There Is Brightness in a Crown, but Edge in Steel.
These Can Raise Majesty, Or pluck it down.
Swords have Securer titles than a Crown.
But though we Soldiers through the World strike Awe;
We make Obedience, but Kings give it Law.
And all the Trophies of a Conquering Sword
Do but build Temples, where their Name's adored.
Men dread the Voice of Thunder, but admire,
And Reverence the Gods that lend it fire.
Well, whether an Armed hand or a Crowned Head
Be best or worst, if my designs succeed,
I will aspire to both; To ease my doubt,
Wear Sword and Crown, and find the difference out.
It Is he puts Reason to the Surest Test,
Who tryes, and not disputes, which is the best.
Exit
The Fifth ACT.
Scene the Camp.
Enter Zungteus attended, Vangona in Disguise. Zungteus. WHat! do I Live to
hear, my Father Dead
By a Gangrene from a Poisoned Arrows head?

Vang. Call it not Death, when Monarchs leave mankind,
But a Translation t'an Immortal Throne:
All of him that was King in you is left behind,
And all of him that is God, to its proper seat is gone.

Zung. In Heaven, great Saint, Oblige thy mourning Son;
My Amavanga's Constellation find,
('It Is easy found, for it is the brightest there,)
And Represent to her enlightened mind
The Torment of a Lover in Despair.
Tell her from me, when her you meet above,
That it is my Piety Controles my Love.
Thou badst me quit Love's Race to follow Fame,
And, dread Sir, even in Death thy Power the same.
Thee gone, I Will pay my Duty to thy Name.
Revenge by a double Ty directs my hand:
Thy Blood calls louder, now than thy Command.

Enter Palexus and Quitazo, Quitazo kneels to Zungteus. Palex. Sir, the
Degraded Chiness General
Does at your Feet an Humble Suppliant fall.

Zung. Rise Worthy Sir, you are my Friend: Distress
Does not make Distance greater, or Worthless.
Your deprest Virtue such strong Bonds has tied;
Thou can not ask that thing shall be denied:
T'oblige desert's, my Study and my Pride.

Quit. That God-like Mercy banisheth Despair:
Now I dare speak, when you are pleased to hear:
And Pardoned Sinners make the Boldest Prayer.
I have a Mistress Sir. --

Zung. And so had I, aside.
-- 'Till this Cursed Hand. --

Quit. But Fate and Cruelty
Have so Conspired. --

Zung. She Is injured, is she not?


Quit. Yes Royal Sir, by one too that has got
Power to perform, what his Wild Rage decrees.

Zung. And you want Arms to right her Injuries?


Quit. Your Goodness has with Heaven this Virtue shared,
To know my Wants before my Prayers are heard.

Zung Call all your own, what ever Love can implore:
Divide thy Sorrows, and command my Pow'^.
A Nobler Cause cannot my Sword oblige:
Is it a Town or Kingdom you would besiege?
Say, Sir, Is this fair Sufferer
Immured in City - Walls, Towers, Mountains? Speak;
And let my Thunder the Vast Gordian break.

Quit. Sir, T'express my Gratitude, take this true
Description of a Soul, that bows to you.
I was your Enemy, and should be still,
Had I a King to obey, or Foes to kill.
But now you're China's Friend; your Sword employed
Against that Power, which has a King destroyed.
My Princess and Love's Sufferings plead alike:
In their Cause at th'Usurpers Heart I Would strike.
A Mistress and a Sovereign's Cause I Would Right:
Under your Banners, I beg leave to Fight.
The Grant of this Request, Great Sir, will be
As kind in you, as it is just in me.
For though my Sword aims at my Countrie's blood,
I make but the will Veins bleed, to save the Good.

Zung. Share half my Power, take me your Rival too;
I owe as much of Vengeance there, as you.
Then in Revenge let us try, which shall pay most,
Thou to a King and Love, I to a Fathers Ghost.
Valiant I know you, Just I Am sure you will prove,
I never doubt Honor, where I meet with Love.

Vang. Which way soe'r Fame calls your Conquering sword,
Let your poor Slave attend his honored Lord:
Be near you when you Fight, with greedy Eye
Grasp your great Conquests, see your Enemies Die,
Admire your Arm: and though I cannot repay
This Grace, I can Adore you more than they,
Who have more Worth to pay the mighty Debt.
The Poor are as Religious as the Great.

Zung. Yes, kind unknown, thou shal't: but whence proceeds
This Zeal? Is It Love or Envy of my Deeds?
Thou, like my Genius, haunt'st me where I go,
Admirest my Victories, and shar'st'em too.
Kind Boy, there is something in thy forward Zeal,
Says thou art more than what thy Looks reveal.
I must find out from whence these Wonders spring,
Draw back the Curtain, and Oblige this King.
Exeunt Vangona, making a low Obeisance.
SCENE the Second: The PALACE
A Table and Chaires set out, with Pen, Ink, and Paper. Enter King of China,
and Legozun. King. Lycungus King!
Ye High Eternal Powers, if you have Decreed,
My Crown must flourish on a Traitors Head;
Whilst true forgotten Majesty lies Dead:
If such loud Crimes must Rule the World, lay by
Those sparkling Gems, that do adorn the Sky.
Govern your Heaven, as you Earth's Empire sway:
No Stars adorn your Night, no Sun the Day.
Spangled with Bloody Comets may the Air
All hung with Black, the Garb of Horror wear.
Your Heaven, and you more Night, more Darkness need,
To be the fit Spectatours of this Deed.

Leg. At once your Sword and Scepter he engrost;
By that unhappy Bounty you are lost. Shout within.
They only for his Coronation stay;
And in these Shouts do their new Homage pay.

King. I should not meet my Fate with so much Scorn*
To see my Crown by an Usurper worn;
Could I in Glory set, and die a King.
But whilst I hear my Treacherous Subjects Sing
A Rebel's Triumphs, and with Joy, Applause,
And ecchoing Shouts defend a Traytor's Cause.
The Homage gone, the Name of King retires;
My Majesty before my Life Expires.

Leg. Hence it is your Subjects, do so loud appear;
Some by Reward are led, and some by Fear.
He by such Arts, does his great Ends pursue;
Acts both the Patron, and the Tyrant too.
Since first he did The Imperial Title gain,
Eight Chief Taymingian Princes he has Slain.
He called a Council for some strange pretended Cause,
Of Sixteen Thousand Students of our Laws.
Who being met, he to the School set Fire,
And made 'em on one Funeral Pile Expire.
And this was all he for that Deed could say,
Learning should light the World, and so did they.

King. This Massacre all Chronicle exceeds.


Leg. This is not half of his Inhumane Deeds.
He, to oblige the Common Multitude,
Confer's all Honors on Ignoble Blood.

King. There, there I Am lost.
When high Blood floats, and th'advanc'd Rabble treads
On Ruined Greatness, and their Nobles Heads:
Then Usurpation seems Divine;
And in the Crowds of Proselytes it draws;
Wants neither Prayers, nor Swords, to aid its Cause.
Yet there is one Glorious Guard against all ill,
Will prove you Princes, me a Monarch still.
We Will show that we have Souls too Great and Proud,
To see a Royal Robe a Traitor's Shroud.
Though this False Rebel has disturbed our Peace,
Our Swords shall from his Power our Lives Release.
Our Souls together in one Trayn shall fly;
We Will Sally out, and take Eternity.

Leg. A Nobler Course you cannot undertake,
Than in your Death your Sanctuary make.
Nor can I better speak my Loyalty,
Than when my King Commands to obey and die.

King. But I in Heaven, shall small Contentment find,
If I my Dearest Treasures leave behind;
My Wives to be the Objects of his Lust.
No Sex should to a Tyrant's Mercy trust.
Go then Legozun, tell 'em my Design:
Tell 'em, I beg they in my Fate would join:
But work their Falls, as you would pity mine.
Speak to 'em gently of their Deaths: express
None of the Pain, but all the Happiness.
Talk not of Bleeding in too Harsh a tone:
Invite 'em to take Wounds, but give'em none.
And when you have the Vanquished Field possessed,
Say it is their dying Sovereign's last Request,
That for his sake, who once that Crown did wear,
In whose bright Glory they once bore a share,
That for his sake they would Die to meet above,
There to Confirm new Articles of Love. Exit Legozun.
I know they are Loyal, and it is Just we should,
Who shared in Pleasures, now unite in Blood.

Enter a second Prince. 2 Prince. Oh Sir, prepare your Ears for such a sound,
Would make a Fury startle, and Confound
The fiercest Foe of Heaven; a Doom which Fate,
Trembles to give, as I must to relate.
I come to speak things, which I durst not give
A Name, if I intended to Outlive
The speaking it.

King. What is this wondrous thing?


2 Prin. It Is, Royal Sir, the Murder of a King.
Lycungus in a Fierce and wanton Rage
Will in your Murder his own Hand Engage,
And is already here to see i^ done.

King. Is not deposing of a King alone
Enough without the Wading in his Blood?
Men may Renounce Religion, and a God;
But few so Impious to that Fury swell,
To Raze those. Temples, where they scorn to Kneel.

2 Prin. And to appear more Insolent and High,
He calls his Bloody Treason Charity.
To ease you of your Life after your Power,
And Cut the Stalk, now he has Cropped the Flower.
At such unknown outrageous Blasphemy
I Am all Astonishment.

King. So am not I.
Where Is the surprise? Is Impudence a thing,
To be admired in him that Kills a King?
Go on, What said he more?

2 Prin. All this he will do,
If your Fear does not Rob him of the Blow.

King. Nay, now I Have heard too Loud a Blasphemy.
Dares he think Fear can make a Monatch Die?
T'assert my Fame, I Will Live, and show the Effects
Of that high Courage his low Soul suspects.
In Blood he shall my righted Honor read:
I Will brave those Numbers, which protect his Head.
Traitor! I Will sell that Life I cannot save,
And Fighting, Cut my passage to my Grave.
My Orders therefore instantly Recall,
And bid my Queens Live to behold my Fall.

Enter Legozun. Leg. Hold Sir, This Vain Reprieve will come too late:
See there the Ruins of your sinking State. The Scene opens, and is discovered
a Number of Murdered Women, some with Daggers in their Breasts, some thrust
through with Swords, some strangled, and others Poisoned; with several other
Forms of Death.
When first your Queens your designed Death had heard;
Their Pity in all Garbs of Grief appeared.
But when they heard your Summons, how they all
Invited were t'accompany your Fall;
A Gust of Courage checked their Female Fears,
Hardened their Pity, and Congealed their Tears;
And then they boldly cried; Though Treason bring
Thy Fate, and make thee Lesser than a King,
We Will make thee Greater than a God: We may
To Common God-heads Common Victims pay.
We Will offer Greater Sacrifice to thee;
A Throne and Palace shall thy Altars be:
And we thy Offerings. Here take a Flood,
Great Prince, of thy own Dearest Royal Blood.
Then their own Murder each bold hand performs,
Embracing Death in all those Various Forms.

King. Honor forbids, that we on Earth should stay,
When thus a Female Trayn has led the way.
In Death above their Sex they have a Courage shown;
And shall We be less Manly in our own?
No, we will die: but lest a Traytor's Tongue,
By unjust Stains our Memory may wrong;
This from a King I Will let him understand
I scorned, nor feared to fall by a Traitor's Hand. Stabs himself in the Left
Arm. Sits down, and writes in the Blood.
In this I Will write the Causes of our Death;
And to Zungteus China's Crown bequeath.
And that his Arm Lycungus may defeat,
That he may safely Rise into my Seat,
T'assist him I Will Conjure the Higher Powers,
And choose the Gods for my Executors,
To see the true Performance of my Will,
And by his Arm my Just Revenge fulfill.

Leg. Nobly Re^olv'd. A Monarch should bestow
His Empire rather on a Foreign Foe,
Than on a Traitor. Treason has more Guilt,
Than a^l the Blood, that is by Invasion spilt.
Usurpers basely do a Throne Assail:
Invaders win the Crowns Usurpers steal.

King. This, as my Last Memorial, I will leave,
Which th'abus'd World may fully undeceive: They all fall on their Swords.
And show, on what just score these Strokes are given,
Which thus convey our Enlarged Souls to Heaven.
Which of the Gods soe'r thou art, whose Ears
Devoted are to Dying Monarch's Prayers,
Grant in my Second Reign I may Enjoy
Such secure Peace, as Treason cannot destroy.
And to my Soul such Entertainment show,
As may express what I have been below.
Die Om^es.
Enter Lycungus attended. Lyc. By a Voluntary Death my Arm Repelled!
I but pronounced the Doom, and my Breath Killed.
See there the Trophies of a Mighty Name:
My Lightning blasted ere my Thunder came.
What Is here? his Last Memorial writ in Blood!
His Empire on the Tartar King bestowed! Flings down the Paper.
A Pretty Legacy.
King, now you are gone to Heaven; were I as you,
I Would be bequeathing Constellations too.
No, King, they who of Crowns Possession give,
To seal those Deeds, must ask their Tenants leave.

Atten. But in their Deaths their Courage they declare.


Lyc. So are all Cowards Valiant in Despair.
No; China's Crown has 'till my Reign been worn
By Lazy Kings, with Female Spirits born;
Guarded by Eunuch's, bred in Palaces,
Nurtured in Lusts, the Progeny of Peace:
But now is the time, Fate grants the High Command
Of this Great Empire to a Martial Hand.
And to confirm my Interest with Heaven,
The Gods to my Just Cause success have given.
The Old Tartar's Dead, and the Proud Boy shall see,
The Father's Fate is the Son's Destiny.

Enter Three Soldiers, forcing in the Chief Villain Lycungus his Confident. 1
Sold. Sir, I have seized this V^llain: From his Hand
Released Quitazo has his Freedom gained.
And for Protection to the Tartar fled,
Resolves to lead their Army against your Head.

Vil. All that this Fool would says, I Have took Bribes twice:
He bought his Life, and he out-bid your price.
For Gold 'twas I betrayed him, and for Gold
I have Released him.

Lyc. Is the Slave so bold,
To Triumph in that Crime his Life must cost?

Vil. I scorn my Life, because I know it is lost.


Lyc. Kill him.


Vil. Death I expect, and it is my due:
Were your Case mine, I so betrayed by you,
I Would cut your Throat for half so much.
-- I know
No Fault, but wanting Wit, to avoid the blow.

Lyc. Hence with him, and let out his forfeit Blood.


Vil. This comes of Villains, when they will needs be good,
Quitazo's Rescue was the first good Deed
I ever Committed, and Fate has Decreed
It should be th'last. Curse on my Virtue. Well,
Could I my doom this fatal hour Repel,
I Would take more care, and the angry Fates defy;
For ere being dam'n'd again by Honesty.
Exit guarded
Enter a Messenger. Mess. A party of some desperate Tartars led
By Prince Quitazo fighting in their Head,
Advance this way.

Lyc. Let him come on. Those Empires happy are,
Whose Monarchs dare defend the Crowns they wear.

After a sound of Trumpets, Enter Quitazo and Tartars. Quit. Now, Monster, to
your Tortured Soul recall
Thy proud Ambition, and this Empires fall:
And with these Thoughts to thy remembrance bring
My Ravished Mistress, and thy Murdered King.
Spite of thy Treasons heaven has had this care,
To save me for thy Executioner.
Thou from my hand shall thus much honored be,
Both to be Killed, and to be Damned, by me.

Lyc. You by your Punishment shall understand,
Kings are not Conquered by so mean a hand.

They fight with Quitazo's Party; after a hot dispute, Quitazo* is surounded
and is taken prisoner. Lyc. Pursue the fight, Complete my Victory:
Quitazo's Veins have Blood enough for me.
Now I Will Requite your kindness as I ought;
See the Disguised Alcinda hither brought.

Quit. Though I am by your Numbers Over-borne,
Yet in your Chains your Power and Pride I scorn.
Mean Coward, I am by Treachery Overthrown:
You gained your Conquest, as you did your Crown.

Lyc. I never, Sir, received such Language yet,
But made that Breath his last that Uttered it.

Quit. Rebel, My Courage is not taught so ill,
But I dare die as badly as you kill.
The only fault I in my death can find
Is, that my Shortened Arm leaves thee behind.

Lyc. Do not Repine at dying without me. Enter Alcinda guarded.
See there, You shall have better Company.

Quit. Alcinda!


Lyc. Yes, this favor shall be given,
To introduce you, when you die, to Heaven.
I Will be so kind to let her Soul mount first:
With your drawn Swords let her Soft breast be pierced;
Then --

Quit. Savage Infidel, can you believe,
That there are Gods, and such a sentence give?

Lyc. I will find out a Nobler Death for thee.
Thou with thy Mistress Blood shall poisoned be.
When you Alcinda's Sentence have dispatched,
Of her hot Blood let a ^ull draught be Caught;
Then let that Bloody drench (mixed with the worst
Of Poisons) down this Traytor's Throat be forced.
Then whilst the Poyson's Tortures do begin,
And on his burning Entralls feed within,
His flesh without from his racked body tear,
And every wound with burning Irons Sear.

Quit. Search all the Registers of Hell, and find
Ten thousand tortures more, and Crueller:
And Let them all be for my Death design'^
Spare but her life, and let my blood save he^.

Lyc. Fond fool, to Save her life in vain you strive.
Your Treason Murders her.

Quit. Let her but Live;
I Will call you kind, I Will call you any thing;
My Friend, my Patron, nay, and more, my King.

Lyc. No more, she Dies.


Quit. How can I expiate
This Crime, that with my own pull down thy fate?

Alc. No, should you Dye without me, you would force
Cur long-united Souls to a divorse.
When you, my Happ^ness, on Earth are gone,
^ would be a Punishment to Live alone:
Accept my Thanks, great Sir, that you have Decreed
Alcinda shall with her Quitazo Bleed:
Make haste then, and be Courteous in the Deed.
Since your Eyes only the rough wounds have seen
Of fighting men in Wars and Battles slain,
My softer Veins may better please your Eye:
A Virgins Blood will be a Novelty.

Lic. Make have, the Execution moves too slow.


Quit. May Heaven Revenge what I want Arms to do:
And when just Fate thy Murder shall decree,
May thou meet Executioners like Thee.

Lyc. Make have, show your Allegiance by your Speed.


Quit. Must I then tamely see my M^stris Bleed?

Gets loose from the Guards, but is seized again.
Enter a Messenger. Mess. Sir, Your scattered Forces fly.
A Party by Quitazo's friendship made,
Have to the Tartar, Pequin's Gates betrayed:
And great Zungteus such Success has found,
That he wants nothing now but being Crowned.

Lyc. And had Quitazo in this deed a part?
Thus I Will Revenge my Wrongs upon thy heart.
Thus Traitor -- Enter Zungteus and Soldiers.

Zung. Traitor, thy own Life defend,
It Is here my Conquests and thy Crimes I Will end.
What Object's this? shall I the Glory have,
That in thy Death I shall Quitazo save?
Thy Vengeance aimed too at a woman's heart!
Thou, whose Vile hand dares Act so mean a part,
Usurper, know thou have as little Claim,
T'a Soldier's, as thou have to a Monarch's name.

Lyc. My sinking Throne shall be this day rebuilt,
When by my hand I have Chastis'd thy Guilt.
And though my Royalty has weakly stood:
I will new Scarlets wear died in thy blood.

They fight, and Lycungus is Killed. After se^eral shouts, and Lycungus Party
being beat off, the Soldiers Cry, Long live Zungteus Emperor of China. Zung.
Now I am great indeed: it is more Renown,
To save a Friend, than it is to win a Crown.

Quit. Above my Thanks, for my own safety due,
Zungteus has the Gods his Debtors too.
The greatest Ornament which Heaven ere gave
The World, with mine, this Ladies Life you save.

Zung. My Arm in War more Nobly could not shine.
But that hand saved his Mistress, murdered mine. ^side.
But I forget: Honor's my Province; say,
How goes the work of this Triumphant day?

Pal. All your Opposers hopes but weakly stood*
And now are drowned in their lost Leaders blood.
Joy's only active now: all Arms laid down,
You're absolutely Lord of China's Crown.

Zung. Enough: so Father, now thou art Obeyed.
I Have signalized my Hand, and Crowned my Head.
I have done all Glory calls Great or Good:
Performed thy Funeral Obsequies in Blood.
And now I Have all that Greatness, Victory,
And Crowns can give me: Love, I Am fit for thee.
I Fought, Obeyed, and Conquered, and survived
My Mistress Murder: and 'twas just I lived;
For to have Dyed great Saint less than a King,
Had been to Thee too mean an Offering.
But all Love's wants my Victories complete:
Thus perfect made, look down from thy bright Sea^,
And see a Love ripe for thy Altars grown,
Who for thy Love resigns both Life and Crown. Offers t^ stab himself, is staid
by Vangona.

Vang. Hold your fierce Hand, and your fond Rage lay by;


Zung. Intruding Boy.


Vang. No Monarch, Sir, must die,
When I can buy his Life.

Quit. Great Sir, forbear.


Va^g. Look, Royal Sir, see your Life's Ransom there.


Enter Amavanga. Zung. Ha! has some God turned Thief, and stole that Face?
If such you are, and are come here to grace
A Lover's Fune^al; You cannot Converse
With Mankind in a brighter Form than hers.
No, it is her self; no Image I embrace:
There are no Copies of so fair a Face.
My Amavanga! --

Amav. Yes, --
She whom your hand amongst the Stars had placed;
Had not The High Powers thought Heaven would be disgraced
By a Guest so mean; then as my Juster due,
They changed my Doom, and let me live for you.

Zung. To see your Life Restored -- Oh! let me know,
To what God you this Resurrection ow.

Am. T'a God that smiled on Love. When by your Hand I bled,
My Soul Possession kept, though my Sense fled.
My Wounds by care, and your kind Influence cured,
I am to Life, to Health, to Love restored.

Zung. My Ravished Sense 'twixt Wonder and Delight
Feels too impetuous Joys, and Rays too bright.

Am. Now Modestly, I may proclaim my Pride,
To say, I have your Love and Honor tried:
And without blushing own their Conquering Powers:
Accept a Heart by Fate and Justice yours.

Zung. Nor shall our Loves be Fortunate alone:
Be yours blessed too, yours is the Tartar Crown. To Quit.
Your Milder Presence will auspicious be,
And Civilize my Rougher Tartary.
And whilst the Chinans pay Allegiance here:
I Will Teach their softer Natures Arms and War.

Am. Nor think I loved you less, because I held
A Sword against your Life; I was Compelled,
And Snared by Glory to that Fatal Fight:
But not to have wronged Love by Honor's Right:
I was Resolved, if I had Conquered you,
Not to have Outlived your Fall.

Zung. To a Love so true
The Chinan Throne pay's Homage at your Feet.
Now for our Nuptial Charms, where I shall meet
A Greater Scene of Bliss, Glories more Gay
Than Triumph, and a Coronation Day.

( Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

