SEVERAL LETTERS FROM IRELAND Read in PARLIAMENT The Sixth of July 1652.
Concerning the Affairs there.

Tuesday the Sixth of July, 1652.

ORdered by the Parliament, That, these Letters be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1652.

A Letter from the Commissioners of the Parliament in Ireland, of the Four and
twentieth of June, 1652.
Mr. Speaker,
SInce the late Agreement at Kilkenny, the Lord of Muskerry in the south, and
the Lord Clanriccard in the north, have not only declared themselves not to
accept of that Capitulation, but have gathered together considerable Bodies of
the Irish in both places; as to Clanriccard, since the reducing of
Balleshannon, Sir Charles Coot with his own and part of Commissary General
Reynolds party, have reduced Sleigo, and since that the Commissary General is
come to him, and as we hear from the Commissary General of the Eighteenth
instant, from the Camp before Ballemote, are now before that Castle, being the
Castle of the Lord Taaff in the county of Catrim: Colonel Venables with his
Party are at Belturbet in Cavan, a place very considerable to be made a
Garrison in order to the reducing of the County of Cavan, and those Fastnesses
thereabouts; and we do believe, part of the Leimster Forces are with Venables,
or near to him; and Clanriccard does lie in Fastnesses between Ballimote and
Belturbet, with Four thousand Horse and Foot, but has refused to engage with
either party of ours, but has sent for a Treaty, and has sent to the
Lieutenant General and to us to appoint Commissioners, and has sent Articles
to the Commissary General; our Answer thereto we send enclosed, and have
advised the Commissary General to that purpose: And Grace, another of the Irish
Rebels, has gathered a Body of the Irish that formerly were of the Leimster
Rebels; and being beaten from his Fastnesses in Leimster by Colonel Axtel and
Colonel Sankey, got over the Shannon and have burnt the Town of Portumney, and
threatened the Castle of Portumney; but Colonel Ingoldsby from Limerick going to
assist our Friends there, heard that Grace had joined with Burk, and were about
Lough-Reagh, and were about Three thousand Horse and Foot, and so Colonel
Ingoldsby fell on the Enemy; and as we heard from Major Smith from Limerick the
Twenty second instant, That certain Intelligence was come to him, that
Ingoldsby had totally routed the enemies horse and foot, being got into a Bog,
he had encompassed the same with his Horse and Dragoons; and was in that
posture when the Messenger came from him to Limerick. As to the Enemy with the
Lord Muskerry in Kerry, the Lieu: General and the Major General with what Party
could be spared from other Parts, are marched to Ross, the chief Hold of the
Enemy there, and having left two Troops of Horse, one of Dragoons, and Four
hundred Foot in a Fort before Ross: The Lieutenant General with the Body of his
Brigade did the thirteenth instant meet with a Party of the Enemy and routed
them, and took some Fifty Horse and some Prey, and Abbey called Killara, where
they found some Four barrels of Powder: And in those parts they have been till
the Boats and other necessaries sent them from Kingsale came to them; and on
the Nineteenth instant we received Letters from them, that that day they
marched up with their Party to the Fort near Ross Castle, and thither they have
sent the Boats and Provisions; but on the Eighteenth instant Muskerry sent for
a New Treaty, but the Lieutenant General has limited it to conclude on the
One and twentieth instant at six in the night, and in the mean time are
preparing their Boats for service; but this last Sabbath being twentieth
instant, a Party of Muskerry's Forces having joined with other the Rebels Party
that lie in the Bogs and Mountains of Cork, did come into this county to drive
the Cattle about Macroom, to carry them into their Quarters; but the Lord
Broghil, who is left behind to secure the Quarters, after a March of Twenty
Miles, fell on the Enemy who were more then double in number to the Lord
Broghil's Party, but the Enemy would not Engage, so as the Lord Broghil's Party
on the Rere of the Enemies Body, took about Eighty Horse, killed about Fifty,
took Lieutenant Colonel Supple that commanded the Rere-guard of the Enemy, and
got Two Colors and some good quantity of Arms, and regained two hundred Cattle
the Enemy were carrying away, and the rest of the Enemy by the favor of a Mist;
and our Party being much spent with a long March before the Skirmish, and the
Impassableness of those parts, could not follow them above a Mile or two.
Colonel Clark's Regiment is safely arrived at Waterford, which does come very
seasonable to strengthen our Forces in these parts. These Wonder-workings of
our God we hope will appear glorious in your eyes, and we hope will clearly
evidence unto you the Diligence and Fidelity of your poor Servants here, who in
order to your Service are dispersed into all parts of the Land, and yet their
small scattered Parties (through the Goodness and Help of the Lord) have put to
flight the Armies and great Bodies of the Enemy. We shall only add that we
are,

Your most humble Servants, Miles Corbet. Jo: Jones.

Cork 24 June. 1652. Since the writing hereof we have received Letters from the
Lieutenant General of the 23d instant, from the Camp before Ross, concerning
the Rendering of Ross, and Submission of that Enemy: A Copy of that Letter we
send also enclosed.



An Answer to the Lord of Clanrickard's Letter, directed to the Commissioners
of Parliament.
MY LORD,
YOurs of the third of June was delivered to us at Cork the seventeenth
instant, and as to the considerable Forces therein mentioned, gathered together
for your Reception and your powerful Union with other Forces, for the Recovery
of the Nation, and by Arms to obtain Conditions for themselves, and those
different Duties in your Lordship to discharge the high Trusts and Authorities
reposed in you, that are not to be so freely exposed to Hazards and Affronts,
as by your Lordship is therein expressed: We have little to say thereunto; But
notwithstanding all such Gatherings together, Authorities and Combinations,
shall go in the discharge of that Duty committed to us, to take all
Opportunities God shall please to put into our hands, to revenge the innocent
Blood that has been spilt in this Nation upon the Actors thereof; and on all
such that after so many Warnings to them given, do still abett and justify
those Murders and Massacres, and withhold the Authors and Actors therein from
the hand of Justice. And as for Provision to be made for such as are still in
Arms with you by a new Treaty, We do not hold it safe and consistant with the
present Posture of Affairs, to entertain further Treaties then what was lately
agreed on at Kilkenny, whereof we doubt not but your Lordship has had notice,
and your Lordship and those now with you might have taken advantage thereof;
and for such as have not in time submitted thereunto, there is still power left
in all Commanders in Chief in the several Precincts, to accept of and receive
into protection all that shall lay down Arms and submit to that Power God has
placed over them in this Nation before the first of July next ensuing; and such
as are not guilty of the said Blood and Massacres, whose hearts God shall
incline thereunto and shall timely submit, shall enjoy such Terms of Favor as
the Parliament shall hold out to others of the like Qualification: The
Acceptance or Refusal whereof we leave to the Consideration of your Lordship
and such others of your Party that are now with you; and do rest,

MY LORD, Your humble Servants, Miles Corbet. Jo: Jones.
Cork 13 June. 1652.
To the Lord of Clanrickard.
A True Copy of the Lieutenant General's Letter to the Commissioners of
Parliament, Dated 23 June, 1652.
Truly Honorable,
I Have received your plentiful Supply, as to use and comfort, both Officers
and Soldiers are very sensible of your kindness to them and care of them. The
Lord has at length inclined the Enemy to a Submission upon Terms, not much
differing with those with Leimster, only we have left out the Clause for
Mediation with the Parliament touching their Real Estates. Ross is to be
delivered on Saturday next at noon: I signed the Articles even now. The Lord of
Muskerry's son and his Uncle Sir Daniel O Brien, I expect to be sent
immediately to me as Hostages; his Forces abroad are to lay down Arms on the
Fifth of July. Those in Kerry at Killarney, those toward Cork at Macroom,
those toward Limerick at Kilmallock. As soon as I can see things settled here,
that so I may know what Force can be spared hence for the Northern Service, I
shall march with them up to you, which I hope to do some time next week. The
Lord direct and protect you, and give us thankful hearts under these his
gracious Dispensations.

Dear Friends, Your most affectionate and humble Servant,Edmund Ludlow.
From the Camp before Ross, this 23d of June, 1652.
A Letter from the Commissioners of Ireland from Cork of the 25th of June, 1652.
Mr. Speaker,
SInce the closing up of our Packet, the enclosed Letters came to hand, which
gives you an Account of the further Success the Lord has given your Forces
with Colonel Ingoldsby in Conaught, and your Forces with Colonel Venables in
Cavan. We have not else at present to add, but humbly take leave and remain,

Your most humble Servants, Miles Corbet. Jo: Jones.

Colonel Venables Letter to the ScoutMaster General, of 17 June, 1652.
SIR,
HAving carried on our fortification at this place unto some good forwardness,
we thought it fitting to be attempting upon the Enemy as our intelligence
should guide us, and accordingly yester-evening Sir Theophilus Jones was
designed with six Troops of Horse and one of Dragoons, and about three hundred
commanded Foot, which were judged sufficient to bring in some Cows (our men
being in some want of Provisions) and if any advantage offered it self to do
service upon the Enemy; he marched all night, and the next morning the Enemy
had notice of him (they being forth upon the same occasion with twelve hundred
Horse and Foot) and striving to gain a Pass betwixt them and home, got betwixt
a Party of ours (that had some Cows) and him, both sides finding themselves
engaged prepared to fight; the Enemy had the advantage of higher ground and
numbers, ours of wind and sun; the charge was very gallantly performed by the
Enemy, who disputed it with the Swords point and push of Pike: but the Lord who
ever stands by us in all our difficulties showed himself a Man of War, and by
a third part of their number (many of ours being abroad in Parties) quite brake
them, there being about three hundred of them slain, some prisoners, and
Letters found with the Dead assure us, that there was one Colonel, one
Lieutenant Colonel, three Majors, and ten Captains slain, besides inferior
Officers; We hope this will much discourage them and cause them to disperse,
however we desire unfeignedly to bless God for the same, looking upon it as the
earnest of a greater Mercy, if the Enemy do engage, as they absolutely affirm
they will: We lost not one Officer, and only one Lieutenant wounded, and Major
Meredith has a slight Scar on the Chin; I cannot yet hear of one Man of ours
that was slain, but above sixty wounded with Sword and Pike; both sides being
so eager to fight, that they had almost forgot to fire. I have here enclosed
sent you a Copy of a Letter from Philip Mac Hughe to Clanrickard, being found
in Colonel Garret Moors Pocket, I doubt not but the Commissioners of
Parliament, will make good use of it, I have no more to add, save that I am,

SIR, Your affectionate humble servant,R. Venables.
Belterbert, June 17. 1652. I forbear to name the gallantry of our officers,
knowing the desire, that God, not themselves, might have the Honor; besides,
all have deserved so well, that I cannot name any but I must omit others
(except I name all) that have in their respective places behaved themselves
with Honor and Gallantry; Sir Theophilus Jones and Major Meredith were both
engaged in the midst of the Enemy, but both are come off safe.



A Letter from Colonel Richards, to the Commissioners of Parliament, the Twenty
third of June, 1652.
Right Honorable,
Just now came to my hands the certain Intelligence of a fresh Mercy cast in by
our gracious Father: A Party commanded by Colonel Abbot sent from Colonel
Sankey, joined with a Party from Limerick, commanded, as I am informed, by
Colonel Ingoldsby, fell upon Grace and others joined with him, and killed and
took full One thousand, some Intelligence says One thousand was slain; but if
it be so many slain and taken, it is an exceeding Mercy, and so much you may
believe to be true; so soon as the Particulars come, I shall present them to
you: I dispatched a large Packet this day by a Party of Horse, some of them
came from England, others were brought from Dublin by a Footman, who would not
deliver them but against his will, he is gone with them to get Answer. I am

Your Honors most faithful and very humble Servant, J: Richards.
Clonmel, June 23. 1652.
Major Smiths Letter to the Commissioners of Parliament, the Twenty third of
June, 1652.
Dear and therefore much Honored,
YOurs of the One and twentieth instant I have received; the good news therein
I heartily bless God with you for; I shall, God willing, faithfully observe
what has been hinted in your Honors Letter: Just now I have received a Letter
from Colonel Ingoldsby, who is on his march from Loughreagh, and he is bearing
his Sheaves, blessed be God, who does still appear for us in all places: He
lighted on Graces Party in a great hastiness after he was beaten off from
Loughreagh, which he attempted to storm, but missed, and left there about
Eighty men, but Colonel Ingoldsby's Party disputed the Pass into the Fastness
as abovesaid near half an hour, which was justified with Twelve hundred Foot
and One hundred and fifty Horse of the Enemies; but at length forced them, and
killed upwards of two hundred, about sixty Horse taken, Grace himself escaped
over the Shannon, Colonel Redman Hurk and Colonel Mac Gawly are killed and some
other field Officers, besides six or seven Captains, some few Prisoners were
taken, which are with Colonel Abbot to Exchange; we lost but three more that we
can yet here of, and nine Dragoons wounded with some few Troopers. I trust
these renewed Mercies will be renewed Engagements on all our hearts, to be more
through, and close, and upright hearted with our God, who is daily seen in the
Mount; may it please you to take notice that we are exceedingly straightned, in
doing many things of high importance to your Affairs in this Place for want of
Incident Money, as for Lading and Unlading Ships, for fitting some little
Friggots and Boats that we have constant use for on the Shannon. I hope within
these two days fifteen hundred Irish will be shipped for Spain, which we have
had much ado to furnish with a Months pay given there by their Articles, and
have wholly undone the County of Clare for that end; so that it is not possible
for your Forces to get the one third of the eight hundred pounds per Mensem
laid on that County; the people dye under every Hedge there, and is the saddest
place (reported by all that are there) as ever was seen, the good Lord help
your Honors to be sensible thereof, and carry you on in the undergoing the
great burden laid on you; give me leave to tell you that my heart is much
drawn out (without any vanity I speak it) to bless God for you, that he has
endued you with Zeal and Unweariedness, Faith, Tenderness, and Conscieous of
doing the work of the Lord, which I am Confident all Godly ones shall in due
time have their Mouths filled with praise to the name of their God; Sir,
pardon I beseech you my prolixity, my heart is full,

I am your Honors most humble servant indeed, Bry. Smith.
Limerick, June 23. 1652.
FINIS.

