AN ELEGY On the late FIRE And Ruins of LONDON,

By E. Settle. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, in the Strand. 1667.

AN ELEGY On the late Fire of London.
WHat weep in Verse? Yes, yes, taught by this Fire
When burnt to Mourn, but burning to admire.
Distilled by measure? A Poetic tear?
There Is more of Chemistry then nature there.
Poets here needless are, unless the Charm
In verse had been sufficient to disarm
The force and power of fire, if that could do it
Each Loyal Subject would have then turned Poet.
But since a rude confused draught fits best,
As like the effects of fire, let me expressed.
Decaying Trophies, and declining States,
And what the series of Age relates*
Joined with the Wonders of the World, and all
That we may height, or worth, or greatness call,
Like Troy entombed in Iliads, story shows
The compass of a Nutshel may enclose*
Or like deceased Potentates of old
The narrow volume of a Sheet may hold.
Thus Londons Beauty, Pomp, Varieties
Their only being in a Catalogue lies:
Preserved by memory maintained by Fame
Lives only in the story and the name.
Is Poetry a Rage? Yes justly styled
But were it a Fury too, 'twere here too mild:
Were it distracted too, A passionate
Distraction only makes it imitate.
For hark the cries the frights and the complaints
Of London's poor deplored Inhabitants.
Here an united multitude combine
Together all their helpless succor join:
As many there distressed in an amaze
Beset with tears as sad spectatours gaze
But Argus Eyes, joynd with Briareus hands
Are too too weak supplies to countermand
So great a force, which like a torrent gorwes
When stopped the greater, and with unlimited measure overflowes.
The face of Heaven with an unusual veil
Is over spread, while the proud fires exhale
Innumerous Clouds of smoke, that they appear
To make themselves another Hemispheare.
That seems to each approaching dazzled sight
Both Fire and Smoke, both Hell and Heaven unite.
Some the next Church their Sanctuary make
And that as Common Treasury partake,
But for defense in vain their Wealth remove
When for their own their Sanctuaries prove
Too weak; in brief it is but a short Repreive
Surprised at last only a while survive,
One Merchant swears the Elements conspire
Rescued from Water to be wrackt by Fire.
Finding more mercy in the rageing Waves
Whose sinking billows but present their Graves
Which here too true he finds: His Merchandise
In a confused Chaos buried lies.
His Arabian wealth serves but for one Perfume:
His Indian, Gold and Silver, reasume
Their first Original, and in the Earth,
Make that their Tomb whence they received their Birth:
Once more, dispersed in a liquid train
Both Or and Argent turn into a Vein.
Others who once their Honor and Estate
In the same Balance weighed, by the common fate
Like German Emp'rours youngest sons, now are,
Or like declining Kings but Titular.
But when I weigh the general loss, I swear
If Riches ever yet had wings 'twas there.
Here are those Planets influence of late
Which in the Fiery Trigon met, and that
Since the great Monarch Caesar wore the Bays
But once and then in Carolus Magnus days:
One Planet rule a greater? London far
Exceeds the power of every weaker Star,
For this, to feel its loss, imparts from hence
Through the whole Kingdom its sad Influence.
Nay threatens Heaven. At this deep Tragedy
The Sun's spectator but with half an Eye,
Whilst his diminishing and weaker Rays
In such a fainting manner he displayes,
That what was totally then threatened here
Some part of an Eclipse they seem to bear.
That 'twas a Planet too, a wandering Fire
Its swift extent and motion did require.
But if these Stars rule here, let them complete
Their yet continued Aspect, as great
As was the former that there may ensue
As did the last a Carolus Magnus too.
That London may arise and daily higher
With its triumphant Monarch may aspire.
But as for those professed Astrologers,
(Beyond our Sphere,) Heavens Privy Counselors
Who know by Signs the very Stars intent,
Give reason for it (above my Element.)
As if they would foretell what is past. TO apply
Portents to a foregoing destiny
That Is base: The nobler way's, search future Fate
Help build another, then foretell of that.
But hark (me thinks) I hear some say it is just
That Londons Pride is humbled in the dust.
Alas thus fire and smoke have left behind
This its one property to make men blind
Too like this Justice that they plead, unless
Ambition height, and Beauty Pride express.
Away dark blindness, it is the only part
Of Ignorance to censure the desert
By the event as if that fortune could,
Because that, Justice is by merit ruled.
Nay were its guilt the highest, who, but mad denies
Twere, thus absolved, too great a sacrifice?
And would not cry, quench, quench the Fire, it is time
Such Incense more then expiates a crime?
With Arts variety, and natures pride,
And all the Ornaments in the world beside;
Englands Metropolis once seemed to be
A lesser World in an Epitome.
But now from such variety is grown
So poor reduced to nothing, or but one,
And that a Spectacle of sad confusion
Whole Ages labor, but one days conclusion.
That it might be, and not absurd, affirmed,
A disunited union justly termed.
Nor does it in this sad and desolate case
Seem only to have changed its state, but place
For thus transformed so great a change has wrought
That each Spectatour's to a nonplus brought.
That the late fire might worthily seem thus
converted to an Ignis fatuus;
Only that men, but this makes Reason stray*
And Knowledge too to err as well as they.
Such an amaze and horror does surprise,
That the beholder credits not his eyes.
It Is changd, without a Metaphor, I may say
From Terr' del' foego to Incognita.
It Is now made destitute, wast, and forlorn,
And now in more then Ashes forced to mourn.
Here stands a naked Church that is now become
Its own and that an Universal Tomb
Whose Stone and Pillars are alone survived
Being of all other Neighborhood deprived.
As if the fury of the fire had meant
At once Urne, Funeral and Monument.
So that its Coat of Arms, if but the Sword
Excluded were, would properly accord
With its last State, what Herald would not yield
'Twere then like London left an Open Field?
Were I for any man to choose a Curse
Or Banishment, I could not think a worse,
Though 'twere his home (were I but to assign him
His doom) then hither damn him and confine him.
The Fates thus in a Title we may see
Or in a Name may write a Destiny.
Is Fate Hereditary? Can the line
That joyneth the descent the Fortune join;
For Troynovant thus Ruind from the same
Derives its Fortune, whence it took its Name
Only the milder Fates ordein by fire
This to Revive, but Troy for to Expire,
The Ship was burnt which late bore Londons Name
As the forerunner of its Authors Flame.
Whilst Fate in Red Character together
Decreed to write the Destines of either.
The like Disaster Chronicles scarce tell
But in our Conqu'rour Williams days befell,
When London in like sort from Gate to Gate
Seemed like a ruind Monument of State.
When I consider both, I dare presage
The only difference is in the Age:
Which to complete each Loyal Subject prays
May't likewise happen in a Conqu'rours days,
Whilst our Victorious Charles proves to our Eyes
A Phoenix may out of her Ashes rise.
An Anagram on The City London,
The City London when I now behold it
In its true Anagram Then I Condole it.
But when it revives, whose Triumph shall transcend
Turning the Anagram, Let Joy contend.
Postscript.
Amongst the effects of Fire this one there is
To force a Blush, The Author fears it is his.
His Labor too that is here Produced, he fears
As an Abortive to each sight appears
While riper Wits and each judicious Eye
Its Imperfections and Defaults descry:
Yet begs your Pardon that it came to light
Abortive why? Conceived in an affright.
Imprimatur

R. L' Estrange*
FINIS.

