STRANGE News indeed: FROM MITCHAM in SURRY.

Of the Treacherous and Barbarous Proceedings, of Master Robert Cranmer
Merchant of London; against Master Anthony Sadler, VICAR of MITCHAM.

How that well known Minister, for prosecuting that enough known Merchant, in a
Suite at Civil Law; for the Vindication of the Churches Rights: and for
Presenting him into the Ecclesiastical Court; for the Vindication of the
Churches Discipline: Has been (of late) Defamed, Imprisoned, and Complotted to
be Ruined, by HIM and his PARTY.

AS, Is very briefly, but very truly Related, in this Letter and Petition, to
the Lord Bishop of Winton.

-- Oppression makes Men Mad; at least so Bold;
To Cry for Justice; -- when their Tale is Told.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1664.

News with a Witness.
That the World may know, how (no less Unchristianly, then Undeservedly) the
Vicar of Mitcham in Surry (Master Sadler) has been Consulted upon, and
Conspired against; for his dutiful Ambition to Preach up, the Regal Authority,
the Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the Churches Discipline: to Keep up, the
Kingdoms Peace, the Peoples Good, and the Joy of All.

This following Letter, and Petition (in Order to his Appeall, unto the King)
were Directed to the Lord Bishop of Winton, Humbly to Crave, the Episcopal
Assistance, against the Injury and Insolence of a Contumacious Party; against
the Rights and Discipline of the Church of England.

Right Reverend Father in God.
The Letter.
IN Matters of the Church, I am bound to be Firm and Impartial in their
Vindication; This has made me to Prosecute Master Cranmer, in a Case of
Delapidations and Sacrilege; and that the Churches Freehold may be Preserved;
to Endanger my Self, to the utmost of Endamagement: The Trial (I am sure) will
manifest my Innocence; and, that nothing but Duty to the Church my Mother; has
made me thus conscientiously forward, for the Oblieg'd Averment of her known
Rights.

This also (the Churchwardens of my Parish, wilfully refusing to observe the
Archdeacons Directions; Dr. Peirson.
which, at his Visiting of Mitcham, for the Decency of the Church, and the
Order of my Parish, were before Doctor Harris, and my Self, given to One of
them then present) Edward Bristock.
has made me to Present the said Churchwardens, and the Things and Persons
Faulty (as by the Canon I am to do.)

Insomuch, that upon the 24th day of November last past, I went in Person to
Witness my said Presentment, to be both Lawful and Expedient.

The Court Rising, I went with Doctor Floyd, and the Register to Dinner, and
being but entered into the House, (where Master Cranmer, The said Mr. Cranmer.
it seems, and the rest were) He sends Three Sergeants to Arrest me, upon an
Action of Trespass of Five Hundred Pound; He Arrested also Master Richardson
(Your Lordships Register, and my Procter; as we conceive) for Presenting him
into the Ecclesiastical Court: -- Surely my Lord, there is a Canon to save us
Harmless from Trespass, Suite, and Trouble, in the Case of Presentiments.

However, I am at present under Custody, at great Charge, most injuriously
debarred from my Family, my Study, and the Duty of my Place; not knowing any
Reason why, but the Malice of Master Cranmer.

Good my Lord, I most Humbly Beseech You, for God, and the Gospel sake, let me
find that Christian Favor; that ( As a Son of the Church of England, and in
Your Lordships Diocese) Your Lordship would send for Master Cranmer, and
Enforce that Equity, that I may have Proceedings Legal, and not be thus
Overborn, and Undone, by the Power, and Prejudice of a Combination.

So Says, -- In all Duty most Oblieg'd -- Your Lordships Servant, ANTHONY
SADLER.
From the Burrough-Prison, Novem. 25. 1664.
To the Right Reverend Father in GOD, GEORGE, LORD BISHOP of WINCHESTER.
The Humble Petition of Anthony Sadler; The Author of Inquisitio Anglicana
against the Triers, 1654.
Most Humbly Shows,
The Petition.
THat whereas in a Just Vindication, of His Majesty's Authority, in, and over,
the Episcopal Jurisdiction; to preserve the Churches Discipline, from Disorder
and Disdain, and to preserve the Churches Freehold, from Dilapidations and
Sacrilege: Your Lordships Petitioner has Commenced a Suite in Law against,
and made a Presentment of, Master Robert Cranmer; as being a Person, very
Injurious against the Churches Freehold, and Disobedient, to the Churches
Discipline.

And whereas, the said Master Cranmer, is (by the common outcry of the
Country, credibly devulg'd, and now by Your Lordships Petitioner, is credibly
attested, to be a public Oppressor, and notorious in Oppression: -- Because,
when Your Lordships Petitioner, had been Two Years and a Half, enforced to be
in Law, with, and against the said Master Cranmer, in a Case of Dilapidations
and Sacrilege; and had brought the said Case, upon the point of Trial, in the
Court of Arches: --

And Secondly, because when Your Lordships Petitioner Appeared in Person, in
Your Lordships Court, to Prosecute the Presentment of the said Master Cranmer,
for his Public Contumancy, against the Act of Uniformity; Your Lordships
Petitioner, was at the same time Arrested, by the said Master Cranmer, in an
Action of Trespass of Five Hundred Pound; the Proctor also of Your poor
Petitioner (being the Register of the said Court) the said Master Cranmer
Arrested, in an Action of Trespass, of Five Hundred Pound, -- not knowing any
Reason why, but the malice and purpose of the said Master Cranmer, to debase
our Persons, to discourage our Friends, to discompose our Minds, to stop the
said Presentment, and to stifle the said Trial of the Case depending.

Your Lordships Petitioner was forthwith cast into Prison, and there lay, that
Day, that Night, and the Day following: -- That Night Master Cranmer, and his
Common Lawyer (Master Cornelius Hooker) came to Your Petitioner, in the said
Prison, and they offer him Bail, and Freedom, if he would Engage, to give up
his Presentation, to his Patron, the said Master Cranmer.

Your Petitioner (for his Liberty and Healths-sake) yielded to any thing they
said; insomuch, that the said Common Lawyer, caused your Over-griev'd, and
under-min'd Petitioner, to Subscribe and Seal a Bond of Five Hundred Pound; and
also (to the best Remembrance of Your Lordships Petitioner) to Subscribe and
Seal, a blank paper or papers; which paper or papers, the said Master Cranmer,
and his Common Lawyer, report now (to the utter undoing of Your poor
Petitioner, his Wife, and Children) to be a Judgment, and a Warrant to the
payment of Five Hundred Pound, as if due from Your Petitioner, to the said
Master Cranmer: Your Petitioner not owing him the worth of a penny; but He
owing Your Petitioner his Dues and Tithes, for these Three Years and a Half,
last past.

Wherefore Your Lordships Petitioner, most humbly submits his very Sad
Condition, to the Christian Consideration, and Compassion of Your Right
Reverend, and Well-disposed Self: Most Humbly Imploring, no other Favor, but
what becomes Your Lordship, in Your Petitioners now Appeal to the King and
Council; That the said Papers may be produced before that Right Honorable
Table; and in whatsoever, Your Lordships Petitioner, is a Debtor or Trespasser,
he may be Legally Impleaded, and not be thus Treacherously Ruined by
clandestine Proceedings: -- To the Dishonouring of Religion Oppressing the
Subject, Adulterating the Law, Debasing of Church Discipline, and the open
discouraging of the Subordinate Clergy, from their Dutiful Obedience, unto
Just Authority.

So Says, -- in all Duty and Devotion, The much Censured, the more Scandall'd,
and most Abused Son, of the Church of ENGLAND: Your Lordships -- Most Obliged,
ANTHONY SADLER.

FINIS.

