THE Triumphs of London. Performed on Saturday, October. 29. 1692. FOR THE
Entertainment of the Right Honorable Sir John Fleet, Knight. LORD MAYOR of the
City of LONDON.

CONTAINING A True Description of the Several Pageants; with the Speeches
Spoken on each PAGEANT. All set forth, at the proper Costs and Charges of the
WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of GROCERS.

Together, with An Exact Relation of the most Splendid Entertainments, prepared
for the Reception of Their Sacred MAJESTY'S.

By E. S.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by James Orme; And are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1692.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Fleet, Knight. LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
MY LORD,
AS it lies in my Duty to Congratulate Your Lordships Accession to the
Pretorian Chair; amongst the many unquestioned Merits that have promoted You to
that Dignity, I must join with the Acclamations of all that have the Honor to
know Your Lordship, that You stand so qualified for Magistracy, that I may
truly say, in Your Advance to the Seat of Justice, You come Experienced to the
Balance You hold: Your Commerce with the World, and indeed Your whole Life has
been such, that the Scales of Justice have been Your constant Standart.

The Dealings of Your Lordship with all Mankind, have always stood that Test,
That a hard Bargain, an Overreach, a Rigor or Extremity, those too common,
and indeed reputed Venials in Trade and Traffic, have been so utterly Stranger
to You, that from Your Equality, down to the poorest Person concerned with You,
You never made a Murmurer. A hard Word of Sir John Fleet is a sound that never
came near You^ Gates: The common Voice that speaks Your true Worth and Goodness
is, without an Exception, Universal: And if it is possibl^ Your Lordship can
have an Enemy, he that is so, must renounc^ common Humanity, and write
Barbarian to qualify for that Name

Your known Integrity has been so remarkably signal, that Chaffering or
Factoring have been thought so unnecessary Preliminaries in dealing with Sir
John Fleet, that it is enough You are the Mouth and Oracle both of Buyer and
Seller: Equity and Justice are left to Your own Decree; insomuch that You sit
Chancellor, when You trade Merchant.

And, that so fair a Character of Your Lordship is no artful nor borrowed
Colors, but Your Natural and Substantial Complexion; besides the Concurrence
of all Tongues to give You this Right, we have the particular Smiles of
Providence to join in the Testimonial; Your extraordinary Affluence of
Blessings, and so early and quick an Advance to such a Mass of Prosperity,
being undoubtedly the peculiar Showrs of Heaven in Reward of so much deserving
Virtue.

But now, my Lord, to usher Your Lordship to Your Inauguration, and the public
Manifestation of the General Applause that waits Your Lordships Enstallment;
here, as too humble an Intruder, I leave You to Your VVorthier Train of
Votaries. But, in all the Honors of the Day, the proudest of Your Triumph is
Your Reception of Your Royal Guests; and the Richest of Their Feast, the hearty
Zeal that entertains Them; it being indeed (to sum Your Merits) no little
Pride to all Good Men, to have Two such Princes served by such a Magistrate: In
which Post of Glory I leave Your Lordship, being in all Humility,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Dutiful Servant, E. SETTLE.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF GROCERS.
Gentlemen,
WHEN I appear before You, and, entered under so Spacious a Roof, presume on
one Hand to survey the Worthy and Numerous Members of Your Honorable Society;
or on the other hand the more large Extent of your Commerce and Traffic,
(either of which Contemplations are a Province above me) I shall content my
self to sum up my Speculation on so inviting a Subject, by giving You this Due.

Gentlemen, The whole World is but your Garden, and Nature your Confectioner,
whilst all the Richest Sweets and Spices, and all the Treasures of your own
Phoenix Nest are so entirely Yours, that I may justly say, the softest Dew of
Heaven falls for Your sakes, and the warmest Beams of Day smile and cherish for
You, whilst the noblest Fruits and Products of the Earth only furnish your
Granary: And if the Creation, since the shut Gates of Eden, and the flaming
Sword before it, has any Remains of Paradise left, it is only in your Hands.

To tell the World, how many Monarchs have vouchsafed to make themselves
Members of the Grocers Company; for Instance, the Second Charles, and our
present Gracious William, (not to mention the several Nobility that have been
proud of being enrolled in the same List) too plainly intimates your Particular
Worth and Deserts, when the Inclinations of so many Crown'd-Heads have singled
out Your Favorite Society their Particular Election and Choice.

And when we look into the Records of Your Numerous Patrons and Benefactors,
methinks they stand a perfect Emulation of Piety and Bounty. Nor has your own
continued Splendor any ways derogated from the Luster of Your Great Founders.
Your Magnificence, on all Occasions, sometimes perhaps even to a Fault, (if
Glory can be one, and poor I may dare to call it so,) has ever been
Extraordinary. And if the Particular Gallantry designed for this Day fall any
ways short of your Intended Entertainment of his Lordship, the Misfortune lies
only in the Shortness of the Preparation, occasioned by his Lordships
Translation to your Society, not early enough to supply the Artists Hands with
Time sufficient for a more sumptuous Cavalcade.

I have a very ample Field before me; but in recounting the many Honorus so
justly Your Due, alas! I make you but a very slender Oblation, when the Incense
I offer is all your own; for the Grandeur of so Honorable a Company challenges
both that Eminence and Antiquity, that the little Oratory of so poor a Pen, is
but a very feeble Illustration to Merits and Virtues so Conspicuous.

I shall therefore conclude, with only one hearty Wish: As You have been blessed
with so many Noble Founders, may the Honorable Living be inspired by the
Example of the Great Dead; and may you never want, what You shall always
deserve, the kindest of Benefactors: Which shall be the Prayer of,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Devoted humble Servant, E. SETTLE.

The Movements of the Morning.
Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company designed for the Duty
of the Day, meet at Grocers-Hall. 1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in
Gowns saced with Foins, and their Hoods. 2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced
with Budg* and their Hoods. 3. Forty Foyns Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet
Hoods. 4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods. 5. Forty Gentlemen
Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about his Shoulder, and a
White Staff in his Hand. 6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the
Colors of the Company in their Hats, Crimson and White. 7. The Sergeant
Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are their Majesty's, the
Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Crimson; and a White. 8. The Drum-Major
to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies Colors, with others of
Their Majesty's Drums and Fifes. 9. The Two City Marshals, each of them Mounted
on Horseback, with Rich Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroidered: Six
Servitors likewise Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colors of the
Companies. 10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six attendants in Colors.
11. The Master of Defense with the same Scarf and Colors, Eight Persons of the
same Science to attend him. 12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed
in carrying Standards and Banners.


This ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in seven Divisions, and ranked all two by
two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard-Bearers. In the head of
them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentlemen, bearing the Companies
Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

In the Center of them, fall two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesty's, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen-Ushers, followed by the Budg-Batchelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Batchelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Grocers-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Elect attended from Clothworkers Hall joins with the Old
Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all of them in this Order march through
Kingstreet down to Three Crane-Wharf, there entering into their several Barges
which are gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship and this
Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the Exchequer-Bar;
there having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties, and taken the
Oaths to Their Majesty's, he returns again by Water to Black-Fryers-Stairs,
with Drums Beating, Trumpets Sounding, Music Playing, etc.

There his Lordship, and the several Companys Landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendents that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap Side, where
his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant.

The First Pageant.
ON a Large Stage is mounted a Golden Camel upon a Pedestal most richly
Ornamented, with Carved Works of Gold and Silver, being a proper Basis for so
Noble a Creature, as the Honorable Crest of the Worshipful Company of GROCERS.

On the Back of this Magnificent Creature, between two Frails of Fruits, as
Raisins, and Almonds, Dates, Spices, and Gumms of all sorts, sits a Negro
habited according to the Indian Manner, in one Hand the King's Banner, with the
other liberally distributing the Bountiful Product of his Country, his Bridle
and Trappings being Crimson, as the proper Colors of the Ancient Company of
GROCERS.

On a Descent beneath, sits placed four Cardinal Virtues, Justice, Temperance,
Prudence, and Fortitude, Habited with their proper Ornaments; as Justice in a
Robe of white S lk to show her Innocence; in one Hand a large Banner of my
Lords Arms, in the other a Sword of Justice, and a pair of Golden Scales; which
Young Virgin makes a Speech to the Lord Mayor, as his first Entertainment in
Cheapside.

The reason why Justice is expressed by a Young Virgin, to show that Judges and
Administrators of the Law ought to be Incorrupt and free from Bribes,
Partiality, or Flattery, but constant and sincere.

On the four Corners of the Stage are Erected four Pyramids of Honor,
Ornamented with the Coats of Arms of the Worthy Benefactors and Freemen of the
Virtuous Company of GROCERS, as a true Emblem of their Justice and Piety.

The Speech Spoken by JUSTICE.
BEhold Proud Londons Great Praetorian Lord
Commands at once my Balance, and my Sword.
Yes, Sir, with Triumph I my Wreaths resign:
So well my Chaplets must Those Brows entwine.
Justice to You must Tributary be:
My Balance weighs the World, and You weigh Me.
Justice! -- How nobly must you fill that Sphere,
When Sacred William mounts and Plants You there?
When Greatness, Honor, Truth, so all Divine,
It Is He that lends those Rays with which you shine;
Whilst from his Hand You hold Your rolling Year,
Drive on, Great Sir, a Glorious Charioteer.
A Fairer Circle You can never run,
Nor can You borrow from a Warmer Sun.
The Two following Pageants.
ARe Two Griffons, erected on two large Stages, being the Ancient Supporters of
the Arms of the Company of GROCERS, Elaborated, Gilded, and Painted according
to their proper Bearings. On the Backs of these two stately Creatures, between
their Wings sit mounted on two large Frails of Fruit and Spice, two Tawny Moors
richly adorned, and arrayed in choice Indian Silks, the Habit befitting the
Degree and Quality of the Figures, in all the gayest Finery suitable to the
Occasion. In their Right Hands they hold the King's Bannor, and the Cities; in
their Left, a Shield, with the Arms of the Company. On their Heads are Coronets
of Feathers, beset with Pearls and Jewels.

On the 8 Corners of the two Stages, sit eight Figures, intimating eight more
Virtues, as Love and Honor, Industry and Vigilance, Truth and Mercy, Hope and
Piety. All Habited according to the Ancients Description, with Bannors Flying,
and Trumpets Sounding, in Honor to the Worthy Magistrate, the Right Honorable
Sir John Fleet.

The Fourth Pageant. The Triumphal Temple of PALLAS.
THis Temple is most exquisitly contrived, and beautified with all the
Ornaments and Embellishments imaginable, the Composure of the Fabric being of
the most stately Ancient Architecture.

In the Contrivance of this Temple are four Arches or Neiches, wherein are
placed four Figures, Representing four Poetical Deities, all most richly
Habited.

First Pallus the Goddess of Wisdom, Arts and Arms, according to her three
Titles of Pallas, Minerva and Bellona; her Habit is a Robe of Purple, with a
Silver Headpiece, and a plume of Red and White Feathers; in her Right Hand she
holds a Banner of the City-Arms, and in her Left a Spear and Shield charged
with a Gorgons Head.

The second Figure is Neptune the God of the Sea, in a Seagreen silken Robe,
his Coronet of Shells and Corals, in one Hand the King's-Banner, in the other a
Trident, intimating his Sovereignty of the Seas.

The third Figure Thetis the Goddess of the Sea, in a watchet color silk Robe,
and a Coronet of Flowers.

The fourth Figure is Mercury the God of Wit in a Skycolour'd Robe, on his Head
a Silver Cap with two small Silver Wings, in one Hand his Caduce, in the other
the Banner of the Companies.

The whole Temple is Dedicated to the Honor of the GROCERS, in intimating
these four Gods and Goddesses, the Wisdom and Wit requisite for the Management
of their Traffic through all parts of the Universe; and the Ocean the proper
Scene of their Commerce, as importing from thence all their Spices and Fruits
from the remotest Plantations of the World. And the whole likewise applicable
to his Lordship, the Goddess of Wisdom being the principal Figure in the Front
of the Temple, implying the necessity of Wisdom to preside at the Helm, in
governing the Metropolis of England.

The Speech spoken by PALLAS.
WHen Arts, Arms, Wisdom, in one Goddess join,
By such proud Attributes enstall'd Divine,
How bright must the Illustrious Pallas shine?
But hold; why do I fill this borrowed Throne?
And arrogate those Plumes are not my own?
To You, Great Sir, I all my Laurels owe;
Thy're only Plants which from Your Garden grow.
Arts Glorious Patron, and their Founder too,
Are Titles, Sir, alone belong to You.
Arms too are Yours. Does the shrill Trumpet sound
To Battle? is the conquering Hero Crowned!
It Is Wealth, the Nerve of War, the Soldier fires,
And the Rich City the rough Camp Inspires.
And Wisdom, Sir, that is doubly Yours, that fair
And brightest Jewel that adorns Your Chair;
The Merit that advanced, and fixed You there.
Let that, Great Magistrate, Your Councils guide,
And win all Hearts, the Cities Love and Pride.
Then, what Rich Blessings from Your power shall flow?
For, Oh, what Wonders cannot Wisdom do!
When Wisdom steers the Helm, and rules the Stage,
She Plants a Golden, 'midst an Iron, Age.
Hence the Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, the Aldermen and this whole Honorable
Train, move to Guildhall; where they finish the Triumphs of the Day, in the
Honor they receive of attending on Their Majesty's at Dinner.

The Preparations for whose Reception, are as follows.
UPon the Hustings, at the Upper-end of the Hall, is erected a stately
Structure of the Corinthian Order.

This Structure is supported first by two noble Columns of Egyptian Marble,
whose Bases and Capitals are Gold.

On the top of these are advanced two Pyramids of Modern Trophies, as Banners,
Head-pieces, etc.

Between these two Columns is planted an Arch, on which is erected the
King's-Arms, in a most noble Shield, with Festoons of Silver on each side, and
the Cities Arms beneath it.

On the Right and Left of these Columns, stand four Pilasters of Lapis Lazari,
with Capitals and Bases of Gold, Ornamented with Festoons and Shields of
Silver. On the tops of these Pilasters are erected Neptune and Pallas.

On the other two Pilasters, are two Pyramids of Ancient Military Trophies, as
Helmets, Plumes, Bows, Quivers, etc.

Over all is a large Etableture of Silver, in the middle of which, between the
Pilasters and Columns, are planted eight Shields, or Targets, bearing the Arms
of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, interchanged.

The other four, the Kings, the Cities, the Lord Mayors, and the Grocers,
likewise interchanged.

Round the Columns are twisted this Motto, relating to the Poetical Story of
Perseus and Andromeda.

Huc volat, hoc fugat, hanc solvens cupiente potitur. Thus Englisht.

Hither he flew, this Monster he destroyed,
And his dear Care the grateful Nymph enjoyed.
On the Front of all, annexed to the Etableture, are four Shields.

Two of which contain the King and Queens Effigies, and the other two the late
Memorable Fight at Sea, with these Motto's.

FIDEI STATORES. Thus Paraphrased,

TO our Faiths Defenders let our Homage bow,
Those Titular Names are solid Glories now.
Imperium Oceano Famam non terminet Astris. Let the wide Ocean his Dominion
bound,
But his loud Fame beyond the Stars resound.
Nassoviae nil non efficient Manus. What Glories are for Nassau's Arms decreed,
His own Steel Pen shall Write, and Ages Read.
In the two Naval Targets, under the French Fleet, is written this Motto.

Extincto sole, victa invincibili. When Power meets Pride, thus Insolence
pursued,
Their Sun extinct, Invincible subdued.
Under this Structure adorned with all other state and Magnificence suitable,
Dine their Majesty's and the Ladies of the Bedchamber.

On Their Right Hand, on the Northside of the Hall, on a raised Work
sumptuously covered, Dine the Foreign Agents, and Principal Ministers of State.

On Their Left, on a raised Work, equally adorned, Dine Their Majesty's Privy
Council, and the other Lords Spiritual and Temporal.

On a second raised Work, on the same side, are seated the Commissioners of the
Treasury and Custom-House, etc.

Right over against Their Majesty's Table, at the West end of the Hall, sit the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen; and beneath, on either hand, Dine the Livery.

In the Lord Mayors Court above, Dine the Lady Mayoress, and the Aldermens
Ladies: And after Them, at the same Table, new spread, are the Queens Maids of
Honor are entertained.

In the Old Council Chamger, are seated all the Judges and Sergeants at Law.
And in the Orphans Court, all the Clerks and their Retinue.

And in the Irish Chamber, all those Honorable Attendants that wait on the
King at Dinner.

The Entertainment is furnished with three Sets of Music, Their Majesty's
private Music on a scaffold over the Hustings: The King's and City Music in
the Gallery of the Hall, and the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, etc. on a stage at
the Lower end of the Hall, the Serjeant-Trumpet on all occasions giving the
Signal to the Trumpets and Kettle-Drums of Their Majesty's and the Lord Mayor's
Health, from either Table.

Having thus far introduced my Reader into this glittering Scene of Gallantry,
I shall not pretend to give him any farther Particulars, either in setting
forth the Tables, or Marshalling the Dishes: I Will omit that unnecessary
Relation. I believe there needs but little Description of that Feast, where the
Lord Mayor, the Sheriffs, and the Court of Aldermen, etc. are the Founders. I
leave my Reader therefore to his own Imagination to think, how such Royal
Guests may be entertained by such Inviters.

But among these gay and Jovial Guests I had almost forgotten a very important
part of our Good Company, viz. the numerous Crowd of Gazers and Spectators of
both Sexes, who though not altogether so well provided for, as the other seated
Guests, and perhaps their Mouths go not so cheerfully, will have nevertheless
all the rest of their Senses so highly Banqueted, that undoubtedly they will
receive that entire content and satisfaction, as to depart with little less
than the whole Pleasure and Riot of a perfect Festival.

And, Gentlemen, You that do me the Honor to peruse this short, but exact
Narration I have here made you, being indeed no more than the Feast in
Miniature, were I that Artist, as Apelles with his Grapes, to give your well
pleased Fancy any Relish or Taste of so glorious an Entertainment, I should not
a little pride my self, in adding my Readers to the Number of the Guests.

Here leaving the City to their Pride and Glory, in their humblest Tenders of
their Loyalty and Zeal to their Royal Guests, and Their Majesty's Themselves to
the unquestioned Delight they shall receive from the Loyal Hearts and Knees
that wait them there; in all this Splendor, and all the Honor and Quality
that swell the Grandeur of the Day; I beg the Readers leave, in drawing to a
Conclusion, to thrust in my self so far a Sharer and Participater of the Feast,
as to join both with the Guests and Spectators in, at least, one of the
chearfullest parts of the Entertainment, viz. in the Universal Acclamations of

Long Live our Gracious Sovereigns, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY; And ever
Flourish the Honorable City of LONDON.
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
FAtal Friendship: Or, the Drunkards Misery. Being a Satyr against that
Pernicious Vice of Excessive and Hard Drinking. With the Dangerous Consequences
attending it, both as to Body and Soul: Offered to the Consideration of all;
but more especially, the Younger sort. Written by way of Essay, by the Author
of The Search after Claret. Printed for and sold by Randal Tailor near
Stationers' Hall.

Price Stitched, Six Pence.


