Lo this is the man that took not god for his strenght but trusted unto the
multitude of his riches and strengthened himself in his wickedness Ps: 52: 7 *

Jeroboam

Regno

Regna^i

(...)

Sis Sine regno

Sold at the greyhound in St Paul's Church yeard



THE SUBJECTS JOY FOR The Kings Restoration, Cheerfully made known IN A Sacred
MASQUE: Gratefully made public FOR His saCRed Majesty.

By the Author of INQVISITIO ANGLICANA.

2 KING. XI. 12. And he brought forth the Kings Son, and put the Crown upon
him; and gave him the Testimony, and they made him King; and Anointed him, and
clapped their hands, and said -- God save the KING. LONDON: Printed, in the year
of Grace, for James Davis, and are to be sold at the Greyhound in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

To His EXCELLENCY The Lord General MONCK.
Heroic Sir,
THE present affairs of this Kingdom, are, so providentially managed, by God;
so prudentially, by You; and so happily -- opportunely, for the building up,
the Ruins; and repairing of the Breaches, both in Church, and State: that, the
Factionist, malignes; the Temporist, admires; and Royallist, congratulates; so
hopeful a beginning.

Let it not then displease (my Lord) if now, one of those poor grateful
Royallists; has (in this spring of hope) so cheerful a boldness, as to beg the
favor of your Excellency, to Patronize this Piece.

This Piece (I confess) is Theatrical, New, and Strange; Strange, but yet
Pertinent; New, but yet Serious; and Theatrical, but yet Sacred.

Nor am I in This, either singular, or affected; while Apollinarius and
Nazianzen (two ancient Fathers of the Primitive Church) are known to be
exemplary in this very way.

The truth is, I am now upon the well-tuned Put (with my Palm, and my Psalm) to
chant an Hosanna for the Kings Reception.

I am now upon the joyful Stage, to play the devout Comaedian; and by a new
Triumphal, to court the affections, of the most Disloyal.

Upon the Stage I am, that (as by a true reflection, to show the radiancy of my
divine zeal) so, I might (by congruous Divinity) render Corah (notwithstanding
his holy Plea) Rebellious: and Treason (notwithstanding Garnet's Straw, and
Becket's Canonization) in the Abstract, hateful, both to God, and man.

Religion and Allegience, are the wings of the soul, to mount her unto Heaven:
and the present Masque, is, but to preserve the Beauty, of so fair an
Allegation; and to attest before the world, my utter abhorrency of the least
Confederation, against the Higher Powers.

Oh Sir! may the Higher Powers be, as safe, as sacred: and may That SaCRed
Person, into whose hands, God, by his Grace; Nature, by Descent; and the Law,
by Right; have successively given the Globe and the Scepter: may, He, -- ah may
He be, as happy, as He is Good; and as Good, as He is Great: the Best of Men,
crowned with the Best of Blessings.

Sir -- your Excellency is now, the Renowned Instrument, of wonderful
Transactions: In the name of God, go on, and prosper.

Certainly (my Lord) if your auspicious self, shall (with this hopefully-happy
Parliament) go on, to Act for God; and the good of his distressed People:

By Enthroning, The most Illustrious Prince, And Our Lawful King, Charles the
Second:

For the Settling, of the State:
For the Reforming, of the Church:
For the Establishing, of the Laws:
And the Maintaining, our Reiigion;
That most true, Protestant Religion,
Of the Church of England:
I am confident, -- You shall as surely Prosper, in having,

The Holy Spirit of God, to be Your Guide:
The holy Angels of God, to be Your Guard:
Here, to be Famous; and Hereafter, to be Glorious; as there is a God, in
Heaven.
So Believes, and Affirms; -- Ever Devoted -- To God: -- His Prince: -- And
Country, Anthony Sadler.

TO THE Candid Reader.
THis is the Month, this is That Month of Marth,
Which Tunes our Noats to sing our Princes Birth.
This is that Month, this is The Month of May,
Which Loyal London calls her Holy Day.
The Prince (as now new Born) from the womb,
Of Hardest Travail, is Delivered. -- Come --
The Midwifery of Heaven, does Present
A saCRed Monarch, to the Parliament:
And That, to Us; and We, to Heaven again,
Present our Thanks, and Bless our Sovereign.
Rejoice (my soul) to see the Prince of Worth,
(The Worlds wonder) brought so Timely forth.
Rejoice Blessed Prince, thy Throne is blessed with Peace:
Thy welcome Income, makes our Wars to cease.
Rejoice my Fellow Subjects, All, as One,
Congratulate the Rising of This Son;
Whose Royal Luster has dispelled our Fears,
And Clouds of Grief, to drop with Joyful Tears.
Anthony Sadler.

In this MASQVE are

6. Shows. 10. Speeches. 3. Songs.
The Persons in the several Shows, Speaking the several Speeches,
Are
Psyche. King David. King Abijah. His Queen Mother. Two Dukes, his Brothers.
The High Priest. The Lord General. The Prophet Shemaiah.
The Scene,
For the Land is Canaan. For the Place is Bethel. For the Person is Jeroboam.

A Divine Masque.
The private Speech OF The AVTHOR In Society with his Friends, to entertain the
Time before the Masque begun.
YOu know (Dear Friends)

That, Video, Vindico; is God's Motto upon Traitors: but it is our duty to wait
Gods time; for, he that shall come, will: and he that will come, is; to the
help of his Anointed.

God (has in mercy) made his people to return, return to their duty, of
Praying for the King.

His very Name now, is precious; his Presence, longed for; and a General joy,
attends the hope, to see him, in his Throne.

So that now (seeing) the Royal Son, begin to rise; and my Loyal fancy, to be
as lucky, as divine:

My heart revived, my Muse rejoiced, to bring,
Her Offspring out, to welcome in, the King.
Two Virgins (dressed in Print) with blessed accord,
To give a Salve, unto our Sovereign Lord.
The Elder, is a Sybillian; and to acheer the King) does (by a Prophetic Pen)
write a Praediction, in a Lamentation.

The Younger, is a Masquer; and she also (to acheer the King) does (by pretty
Scenes) praesagingly-praeact, his (just) Inauguration.

They are Both, the Issue, of one Parent; Legitimate, and Loyal: but -- upon
the very Conception of the Masquer; much troubled I was; on whom, and where,
and how, to lay the Scene.

I once thought to have made England, the Nation; Westminster, the Place; and
then --

My purpose was, the Powder-traitors Plot;
For to have made my Subject; and their Lot,
(To Ruin cast) have shown. I had thought,
To Have made their way, a Warning; and had brought,
Examples, pertinent; profane, but ture;
To make their shame, as fearful, as its due.
But, this not fully reaching, to the aim,
Of what I would; I then, begun again;
Consulted God, and took my Object higher;
I made my Subject, sacred; and came nigher,
To show a Traitors Doom from Scripture: then --
I pitched on Zedekiah. --
Knowing well,
That, Zedekiah when he did Rebel,
Against the Covenant, made; and Oath, he took;
To be the King of Babels Viceroy -- look.
Oh how the faithful God, did take to heart;
The wrong, thus offered, unto Either Part:
His (1) Name; the Heathens (2) Right, and Isreal's (3) Law:
Made (1) Vain; as (2) Void; and (3) Vile: by Zedekiah.
Treasons abhord: and God would make him know it;
And (maugre Egypt, and all is Force) did show it.
The Caldee Army came at length, to prove,
A Traitors tongue, calls Vengance from Above;
And God, and Man, to right such wrongs does move.
Jerusalem, -- that strong and stately City,
Is close besieged; without regard, or pity,
Of either Place, or Persons; want, within;
And Fear, without; makes every face look thin.
Within, they faint; without the walls, they fall;
The City's broken up; the King, and All,
Fly for their Lives: -- but, whither shall they fly,
Whom God pursues, with his Anger's Hue and Cry?
King Zedekiah (now the woeful scorn,
Of the Chaldean Army) is forlorn:
(Pursude, and taken) he is Vilifi'd;
To Riblah hurried: and there justly tried:
Tried by the Prince abused; and the same King,
Who gave him leave to Rule, as Underling;
He is his Judge; and rightfully condemns,
His Treasons, and his Traitrous stratagems.
He slayes his Sons before him; makes him see,
His Sin has ruind his Posterity.
Then puts he out his Eyes, as having been,
The Visible Contrivers of that Scene.
At last he (bound in Chains) in Prison lies;
And (living Poor, and Blind) there (wretched) dies.
And here, I stopped; --
Two Subjects more (more fit)
Courting my Fancy; thus my Fancy writ.
Zimri would be King of Israel:
And so would Shallum too:
Two Subjects: but, Both, Traitors:
Both, Murderers: and Murdered:
A wicked Pair well met; and truly matched;
For Fate, and Fortune, equal: strangely hatched.
Each, was a King:
In Name; but, not by Right:
Not by Succession; but, by Treachery:
Not by Choice; but, Usurpation:
Not by Conquest; but, Rebellion:
They mattered not which way;
So the End were gotten.
But, -- ah how soon,
Is the Head of Ambition, turned round?
With what prodigious speed,
Does the short time, of their Tryumphing fly?
A certain shame,
Waits on, their fickle glory;
And their deceitful Glass,
Of false-reflecting-Beauty
While it is but looked upon, it is broken.
Though Presumption leads the Van;
Despair, brings up the Rear;
Of all their Squadrons.
Zimri, is scarce seated in the Throne;
But, Vengeance follows him:
His seven days Reign, is dearly bought;
And his End, is as dreadful, as his Treason.
He saves the Executioner, a labor;
And by a Strange Device,
To put his Ashes in a Royal Urn,
He Fires the Palace, and Himself does burn.
And was not Shallum haunted,
With as ill Success, in as high a Fortune?
Past Grace, past Shame.
He dares Heaven to defend the King:
While he conspires to Murder him.
Not because, Zachariah was as Bad, as Any;
But because, He was Above All:
He had the Supremacy;
And Shallum longs for it:
And now, his Pride;
Admits no Obstacle, -- as legal:
The Thirst of his Ambition,
Must be quenched with Blood;
Not Popular; but Royal;
Not of Any Prince; but his Own;
Not a in Private; but a Public way;
Not by Others; but his Own hands:
Thus, he contrives to Kill;
And Kills, to Reign;
And Reign, he does; --
A Rebel, -- but no Sovereign.
Yet now, -- (as arrogant as the Devil)
The Glory of the world's His:
He won it, by the Sword;
And by the Sword, he will keep it.
A Traitors Plea right:
He that set him, to this School;
Taught him his Lesson well.
But, -- the Feet of wool, have Hands of Iron:
God, is Slow, but Sure:
Shallum (with a vengance) finds it;
He finds it: but --
Not so much Slow -- and -- Sure,
As Sure -- and -- Sudden.
Shallum killed his Lord;
And the Servant, killed Shallum.
Zimri was destroyed by Himself:
Shallum, by Another:
Zimri, at a Weeks End:
And Shallum, at a Months.
Thus, he that Kills his Prince, to wear his Crown;
To warm his Fingers, burns a Palace down:
Deludes, destroys himself; and while he venters,
To round, a seeming Heaven; Hell, concenters.
Villain forbear: do'nt suck thy Princes Blood:
Forbidden meat, is no fit meat for Food.
And here (notwithstanding the time I had spent; and model, I had made; and had
(as in a manner) laid the Scene, upon these Persons, and this Piece, of thus
revenged Treason: yet,) my mind was farther pressed, to take another, and to
begin a new.

At last, the Needle left her trembling Round:
And my Magnetic Fancy, fixed I found.
I found my Subject: and when All is done,
My Subject's Jeroboam, Nebat's Son.
Jeroboam

Whose Hope, though (at the last) it was deceived; and his Policy, defeated;
and his Pride, debased; and his Person, destroyed; (for,

The Lord struck him, and he died.) Yet, this Catastrophe, -- Of That Ominous
Politician:

Was (for many years) as really Improbable; as was, the Settlement of Abijah,
seemingly Impossible. --

But stay, This ruder Piece, is dedicated to the public view; and the
contingency of censure: I will (therefore) no longer detain you, from your
Places; nor anticipate your fancy.

My good wishes, wait upon your favor; and the better Omen of the Masque, upon
your Persons, and your Fortunes.

So we All arose, and went into the Theater; where (we being Sat) four
Trumpeters did enter; and having sounded a Victoria, a Levite presents himself,
and speaks --

The Argument.
In the days of Rehoboam (the Son of Solomon) 1 King. 11. 26.
did Jeroboam (the Son of Nebat) rebel against his King.

In which Rebellion, when he had continued 1 King, 12. 19. 2 Chronicles. 13 ^.
eighteen years: then began Abijah (the Son of Rehoboam) to reign over Juda.

In the third year of whose Reign, he waged war; Ver. 2.
and set the Battle in Array, against Jeroboam: who, when he had played Rex, so
long a time, as two and 1 King. 14. 20.
twenty years: and had an Army, so Great, as of Eight hundred Thousand, chosen
men, being mighty 2 Chronicles. 13. 3.
men of Valor: yet then, even then; was the Lord pleased, to make his Arm,
bare; his Justice, known; the Truth, prevalent; and his Name, glorious.

For, this so successful Treason, this numerous Army, and
unhappily-happy-Traitor; were, in their best Condition; and their greatest
Confidence, totally 2 Chronicles. 13. 13. 15. 16. 17. 19. 20.
subdued, and fearfully overthrown; five hundred thousand of them slain: their
General enforced to fly; and (as a Warning to all Rebels) exemplarily struck
dead by the Hand of the Lord.

In a grateful Commemoration, of which Signal Victory; and in an holy
Preomination of the years succeeding, Fortunate, to the Truth and Loyalty; was,
this new-mysterious Masque first made; -- wherein --

Abijah, and King's Cause;
Jeroboam, and the Rebels;
(With the justice, and success, of Both) are timously made obvious; to The
Comfort, and Encouragement, Of All Loyal Subjects.

I my self (says the Royal Prophet) have seen Psalm. 37. 36, 37.
the Ungodly in great power, and flourishing like a green Bay Tree:

And I went by, and lo, he was gone; I sought him, but his Place could no where
be found.

An Unwise man (says the same Author) does not Psalm. 92. 6, 7.
well consider This; and a fool does not understand it.

When the Ungodly are green, as the Grass; and when all the workers of
wickedness, do flourish; then shall they be Destroyed for ever.

For (says Ignatius Martyr) Nemo qui se contra Epis. 3.
Praestantiorem extulit; impunitus unquam abiit.

With that (he going off the Stage) a young Prince Enters; wearing a Purple
Robe, and his head, Crowned: in the one hand, holding an Olive branch; in the
other, a Palm; and speaks --

The Prologue.
What means this Dress, He walks stately; and looks upon himself.

And to what purpose, thus;
Am I Attired?
The manners ominous;
A true Praesage, of strange Events; to come,
On After Ages; by a Present Doom.
What means this Place,
What Persons do I see?
I see, great Persons; and their Places, be,
Upon Sesostris wheel:
My Sovereign's Crown,
In's Grand-child's time's usurpt; and Rebels own.
I see again,
By Scripture, and by Reason;
An End, both Sad, and sure; attends on Treason:
His Sin is Fatal, who his Fall laments not;
His Fall, is Final; who his Sin repents not.
Traitors, as Witches are;
And Witches never,
Become Converted, but Condemned ever.
When Loyal Subjects,
(Howsoere they Fare)
As Blessed Angels (Angels blessed) are.
Their hope -- and -- love espouse,
And faith does ty,
Their true Allegiance, fast, to Sovereignty.
It Is not the Tempest of the roughest Crosses,
Can shipwreck their Obedience, with their Losses.
It Is so observed:
And Psyche (by the way)
Is Staid, and Prayed, their Banner to display;
And here it is done, in a Triumphant Story;
Which flouts, and routs, all traitors shameful-glory.
This is the Subject, of the Sequel Masque;
Which Psyche now, makes Mine; and I, your Task:
I, to resume; and You, for to revolve;
And Each, by Application, to resolve;
That this Sad-Sacred-pleasing-Scene, is laid;
To make the Good, rejoice; the Bad, afraid.
But hark --
The Music sounds;
To my preventing:
May All, have Mirth: and Psyche --
True contenting.
Exit. The loud Music sounds And The First Shows Presented Being
A Landscape in form of a Square; having in the one Angle, a Promontory; whereon
the rural Nymphs were sporting, and under it, the Sea; wherein, was a gallant
Navy sailing.

In another Angle, was a Garden; giving all the delight that dainty flowers;
pleasant walks; and Musical waterworks could yield.

In the Third Angle, was a Castle, strongly, and bravely fortified; in the face
whereof, was an Army completely Armed, marching in Array.

In the fourth Angle, was a Park; well-wooded, and stored with Deer: Gallants a
hunting, and the Hounds upon a full Cry.

In the middle of this Quadrangle, was a Grove of Cedars; out of which came a
Shepherdess, in a green Gown, and a Garland on her Head; attended by a Swain,
in a Shepherds Coat, and a Pipe in his Hand: Each then, saluting other; the One
Plays; and Both, Dance: which done -- they pull off their Disguises, and
discover themselves, to be, an Angel, and Psyche: Psyche then (instructed by
the Angel) making an humble Address, and due Observance to R. A. the King.
Kneels down, and Speaks.

The first Speech.
Dread Sir -- I crave your Pardon;
Which, if You,
Shall please to grant;
I crave your Patience too,
Which, if you promise;
Then I crave your Ear;
Which, if you deign;
Then, let your Highness hear.
What was that Heathen, that he should out-brave, Galiah.

God's Cause, and Army, and a Challenge crave?
Or, what is this Traitor, that the Gauntlet throws,
In scorn of God, and does the King oppose? Jeroboam.

At length, -- Abijah.

A Youth, but with a Stone and Sling; David.

Answered, and Conquered, that fell Phylistine.
And so, ere long,
As mean a Means, may Be,
The Scenes to Act this Villains Tragedy.
Believe it' King Abijah,
You shall find;
The fall of Jeroboam is designed.
Not from that Giant; but, this Rebel;
I -- --
Foresee the Sequel, by Imparitie:
For, True that Monster was;
And his Strange Pride,
Did Vaunt but's Valor, to advance his Side.
But This,
-- Was monstrous False:
And's frantic Zeal,
To turn a Kingdom, to a Commonweal;
Prays, and Betrays;
Swears, and Forswears; to further,
-- The King in's Throne:
-- The King at's Gate, to Murder.
Corah's was nothing, if compared to This;
-- This perjured Changling's Metamorphosis:
The Way, was worse;
And may a worser Fate,
Then Corah's, or Goliah's;
Antedate -- the Transformation:
Prodigious Stars, portend his Fall;
By Famine, Plague, or Wars.
May Loyalty, be blessed:
Your Highness, Crowned:
And God, Convert; or else your Foes Confound.
May you obtrude Intruders, from the Keys;
And keep them Sacred to Divine Decrees.
May Aarons Rod still flourish: and You be,
A Nursing Father, both to It, and Me.
Still may the Lord, your Majesty defend;
And Peace, or Patience, to your Subjects send.
Long may you live, --
And live so long, to Reign;
Till Treason be Revenged, and Traitors slain.
This, This I ask, --
Which granted, I Will give ore:
And Bless my God, and You; --
And ask no more.
The King then drew off his Glove, and (holding out his hand) Psyche rose up;
and (kneeling down again) she kissed it.

The Queen then (observing Psyche, to have a curious Voice) desired her to
Sing: and (without denial, or reply) her good Angel standing by her, playing on
a Lute, she sung --

The first Song.
1.
No more, no more, to ask,
Of God, and King,
Too sad's a Task,
In this glad Masque;
To undertake, and sing.
2.
But, since my Loyal tongue;
Has Royal greeting;
'Twere double wrong,
A single Song,
For to deny this Meeting.
3.
Angels, and Men, shall know;
And All, hold forth;
The Zeal I ow,
And love I show,
Unto my Princes worth.
4.
And now, in grateful-wise,
I Will kneel again; She kneels.

To Sympathize,
The Peoples Cries,
God save the King. Amen.
With that (an Acclamation being made) the Scene, upon a sudden, changed; and
then (the loud Music sounding a second time.)

The Second Shows presented being
A pleasant Plain, encompassed with Hills: in the middle of which Plain, was a
fair City; and in the City a glorious Temple; and in the Temple, a goodly
Jerusalem. King David.
Person: Which Person (having on, a Robe of fine linen; and a curious Ephod
upon the Robe; and a golden Girdle upon the Ephod) walks into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, with the Book of the Law, in his hand, and thus speaks --

The Second Speech.
In this Asytum --
Does (for certain) dwell,
God, and my Devotions Oracle.
Hence am I Taught;
And Here I am; to know;
The Reason why, the wicked Prosper so?
I know, the Lord is Just:
But yet, -- his ways,
Seem very strange, and many doubtings raise.
For, -- he fulfils the wicked man's request;
And more then is Vote, does correspond his Breast.
He fears not Death:
Nor does his Body feel,
The darts of Sickness, or the Sword of Steel.
His Arm is brawny;
And his Army's stout;
And bravely Valiant, when he Marches out.
They -- deck themselves with Pride, as with a chain,
And as a Garment, so they wear Disdain.
They Drink: they Drab:
And live licentious Lives:
They mock at God:
And yet -- their Doing thrives.
They kill -- their King:
Their Brethren, they Enslave:
They Rob, and Spoil: and no Religion have.
As Beasts of Prey, they have devouring Paws:
As bloody Tyrants, they have broke all Laws:
The Laws of God:
Of Nature:
And the Land:
And Crowned their Treason, with Supreme Command.
Yet -- God's not moved:
Except, it be to Bless;
Such Ill Proceedings, with a good Success.
At night,
He guards them, in their safe Reposes;
And when it is Day,
He trims their Heads with Roses.
This, -- makes them bragg;
Their Cause, is most Divine:
And Stately Fortune, makes their Cause to Shine.
This, -- makes Me grieve;
For This, I come, to know;
The Reason why, the wicked Prosper so?
With that,
Asoft-small-voyce, deep silence brake;
And thus,
This Answer, to the Question spoke.
The Oracle.
Let God be true, and every man a Liar:
The Bramble-bush, is but (at best) a Bryar;
It cannot be a Cedar.
The wicked may,
Walk in the broader; but, not safer way.
To stand upon a Pinnacle in pride;
Is very vain, and perilous beside.
The more the wicked have; the more's their score;
Upon the Audit-Book to reckon for.
They are the less excused, in having thus,
All as they would, exceeding prosperous.
Their prosperous State, is as a Chance that is cast;
And lucky Chances, do not always last.
Their only Portion, on the Earth is given;
Excluded ever, from a part in Heaven.
They are the Rods of God; and when his turn
Is served upon his Children, he will burn.
Their seeming Crystal is but real Ice;
They slide, and fall, and perish in a trice.
Their former Honor shall be quite forgot;
And Jeroboam, with his fame, shall rot.
He and all Rebels do ride post to Hell;
And this for Truth the Oracle does tell.
Then -- let thy Faith, and Hope, and Love, be firm;
(Whoere's aboard, it is God that sits at th'Stern.
He will thee guide with Council;
If thou love him:
And never fail thee,
Whensoere thou prov'st him.
Continue constant in thy fervent praying;
He Will Crown thy Expectation --
And my saying.
Then was a noise of cheerful Music heard,
And sights of Joy (and Angels seen) appeared;
And therewithal --
The Third Shows presented, being
A stately Palace, wherein, was a Room of Alablaster (hanged with Cloth of
Gold, richly and curiously Embroydered, with the lively, and Embossed Imagery
of David and Solomon; with the History of both: in the Hangings, were several
Rows of Jewels; whose Luster was irradiant; and as so many Stars enlightened
all the Room) whereinto (attended by Fifty Persons, all clothed alike, in Coats
of Crimson Velvet, with green Satin sleeves; their Stockings green Silk; with
Garters and Roses, of Gold and Crimson) came --

The King of Judah,
The Queen his Mother,
Two Dukes, his Brothers,
The High Priest,
The Levites,
The General of the Army,
And the Captain of the Guard.
The King, Queen, and Princes, sat in their Chairs of State: All the rest at a
distance sat bare-headed.

Then the King (lifting up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven) smote upon his Breast;
and thus his mind expressed -- in --

The Third Speech.
It makes us sport, to play with Easy Cares;
When, Heavier, make us Dumb.
The Greater Fears,
Put Speech it self to silence; and the Ears,
To hear no Language but the Voice of Tears.
Yet I --
The Unhappy Grand-Sonne of that King;
Whose Wealth, and Wisdom;
Power, and Peace; do ring,
With Everlasting Fame:
I -- -- I am He --
Must hear such Fame blasphemed by Obloquie:
Must Hear't, and do;
And Speak on it too.
Was ever Grief like mine? I am the Object, wrongfully displaced:
Of Honor shamed: and Majesty debased:
Of Favor, much despised: of Power, made weak:
Of SaC Red Peace, made Civil Peace to break.
Was ever Case like mine? My Kingdome's Ravished:
And my Virgin Throne,
Basely's Deflowered by Rebellion:
My Royal Robe is rent:
My Scepter, broke:
My Crown, is fallen:
And the Loyal Yoke,
Of Legal Tribute (to my greater cross)
With scorn, is torn, to my greatest loss.
Was ever wrong like mine? The Traitors fury is without respect,
Of Persons, and of Duty:
Their neglect --
Does know no Bounds:
They will do, as they say;
Their Will's their Law; and with their Swords they sway.
Were ever Foes like mine? These --
With their Old Projector (to our woe)
Have caused our grief, and grievous overthrow:
These --
Fought to kill -- my Father:
And can I --
Expect good Quarter, from such Soldiery?
Alas! they are in human;
And no means,
Of Princely Favor;
Shining from the Beams,
Of Majesty it self;
Can make them know,
Or once acknowledge,
They subjection owe,
To any, but the stronger:
These be they --
Whom self-advantage turns any way:
Were ever Foes like mine? And such as, these; --
Or rather just the same;
Were some that fled, and to our Party came;
Came, -- but, as Spies;
And so it proved at length;
We lost their duty when we lost our strength:
Were ever Friends like mine? This, --
In my Fathers Reign was sadly -- true;
And what can I against so false a Crew?
They have disclaimed my Right:
And few, or none;
But only God's my Consolation.
I am by SaCRed and by Civil claim;
To all the Tribes, the Lawful Sovereign:
Yet I -- their KING --
Must see my Right, made Void;
And all Allegiance to my Crown destroyed:
Was ever Realm like mine? What shall I say?
I am an Exile driven,
To Foreign parts, --
And of my Home bereaven.
What shall I do?
-- Alas, wherere I go;
My Life's in danger by a cruel Foe:
I know not whom to trust:
And all my care,
Is, -- how my Subjects in my Fate will fare.
Ah me -- forsaken -- and -- forlorn!
Nor Realm, nor Wrongs,
Nor Case, nor Grief,
Nor Foes, nor Friends:
Were ever like to mine. With that he sighed; and ceased.
And then begun,
The Mother Queen;
And thus bespake her Son, in
The Fourth Speech.
My dearest Son, and Sovereign;
Hear I pray --
A Mothers Counsel, and her words obey.
It Is true --
Your Case, so sad; and Grief, so deep;
O'reflowes the tears of Mourners (hired to weep)
Your Verbal Friends, but Real Foes in Deeds;
The deepest Grief, and saddest Case exceeds.
Your Realm's in Common --
And in Chief, your wrong;
Outvyes the Cries of Hadadrimmons tongue.
Yet --
May Not base Fear, your Noble heart surprise;
For, we do'nt know, nor may, the mysteries,
Of God's permissive Providence: -- Oh no;
His winding Feet, upon the Waters go:
There is no Tract, nor Line, nor Rule, whereby,
His Paths to find; or Footsteps to descry.
Yet --
In an hopeful wonder, see it is Day,
Although the Sun's Eclipsed,
His Lightsome Ray,
Will pierce, ere long, the darkest Clouds.
Your Crown --
And Throne, and Scepter, may be hurled down:
Your Forces, beaten:
And your Self, made fly,
With dreadful speed for your security:
In outward show, past Help:
Admit -- yet then,
The Lord of Hosts, can Rally up again.
By Him, Kings Reign:
And upon whom, he please;
He Crowns the Issues of his close Decrees.
His Prescience, is a Secret;
And we must,
Submit (in Duty) to His Will;
And trust his Word Revealed:
For why? we cannot tell,
How soon the Traitor shall be dragged to Hell.
God has his Time:
Then use what means you can;
To Repossesse your Rights;
It Is God not Man;
By many, or by few, the Conquest gives;
Before the Traitor his Reproach outlives.
Serve God, in truth:
And when his Time is come,
He can advance you to a Peaceful Throne.
He is the same, he was:
In Mercy still, most infinite;
If It be his Holy Will,
He can, and may Enthrone you; -- howsoere,
Let not your Hope, be overcome by Fear.
No (says the Duke) and (with a pretty smile)
Thus Courts the King, his Brother: -- in
The Fifth Speech.
We --
(For consolation met)
Are, in Consultation set,
That comfort, and assistance might,
Be given for your Native Right:
And (lo) an Angel does appear,
Which puts us in a Hopeful -- fear.
A bright Cloud is seen, and an Angel in the Cloud: his face shining like the
Sun: and armed like a man of War, and having in the one hand a Golden Crown; in
the other, a Flaming Sword; he brandishes the Sword, then sets the Crown upon
the Kings head, and so vanishes, being

The Fourth Show.
Whereupon the Prince proceeds; and says,

See, see, --
A Vision does foretell,
The Rebels woe, my Sovereigns weal.
Not he, that girds his Harness on;
But, puts it off; the Field has won.
The men of Al prevailed at first,
And forced Gods Forces to the worst:
While Achan plundered, there could be;
No hope, of any Victory:
But found, and punished; God returns:
Defeats the Foe: the City Burns:
God's Cause, and Captain, did (at last) prevail;
And so shall ever, though a while they fail.
Ah Sir! I know, we have Offended:
And what is Amiss, must be Amended:
Some Person, or some Thing, there is;
God Plagues, with such Calamities.
Let Us search, and try our ways; and then,
God will lead In, and Out, your Men:
Your Cause, is Good; and in the End,
The Vision does your Good portend:
Cheer up (dear Sir) and trust the King of Kings,
You shall prevail, and do the highest things.
Yea, said the other Duke, in --
The Sixth Speech.
-- -- -- And so You shall,
Rise most Tryumphant, from your lowest Fall.
You shall --
For, God Rewards; and will, ere long;
The bloody Actors, of a Princes wrong.
We find the end, of Shimei; who Reviled
His Sovereign Lord; And Traitorously Styled,
The King; a man of Belial: though the same,
He did Confess; and for his Pardon came,
With all Submission; yet -- he guilty stood,
And's hoary Head, went to the Grave, in Blood.
God owns Kings so, that, who so wrongs their right,
Out-faces God, and does his Power despite.
For solo Deo minor, is the King;
And He is Gods Immediate Underling.
There Is no Coercive Power under heaven,
Against the King; but what is Directive given.
All Kings, are Sacred: and their Unction, is;
Oyl-Holy -- Gods: and All, mysterious Ties,
From Evil, in the Heart; and Tongue; and Hand;
Against their Persons, and their just Command.
Hence (sure) it was, that Absolon, was so;
With fatal Arrows, smitten three times through:
For's Heart, and Hand, and Tongue, did all, go on;
To Act a threefold Treason; All in One.
Or else because, that Rebels are the Foes;
Which do the blessed Trinity oppose.
Or else because, they do resist the Way;
Of God's: of States: and of the Churches Sway.
A wretched End he had: twixt Heaven and Earth,
Hanged by his Hair, as in a Snare for death:
In's height of Sin, and in his strength of Treason;
He Is slain, untimely; in a timely Season.
Most Timely, as for David;
Though untimely, as for Absolon.
Then said Shemaiah,
Speaking The Seventh Speech.
We must not think, unequal are God's ways;
Or, He denies us, when he us Delays:
We must not think, because he does forbear;
That he forgets, what Sins, and Sinners are.
God cannot be, but what he is: most True:
Most Mighty: Wise: and what is most Just, will do.
The Soul that Sins; shall Dye. God's only Son,
(As one that Sinned) before the Judge must come:
Not for to Plead, yet can; nor strive, yet able;
Both to confute, and to confound, the Rabble:
But, as made Sin for Us; that Sinned; that so --
We that so Sinned, may be (as Just) let go:
Him, as for Us; Us, as in Him; God tries:
He bears our blame; and for our Sins he dies.
Because Christ took our Nature; to become,
Our Pledge; our Price; and our Redemption:
God is so Just, he will not spare his Son,
But Sinful made -- by Imputation:
The Soul that Sins shall dye. And will God then,
Excuse the sinfull'st of the Sons of Men?
The Father's Sin, shall not ly upon the Son;
And shall the Subjects, on the King; and's Throne?
Shall Rebels be unpunisht, or shall they --
That have condemned, -- and made their King away,
By an unheard-of-murder? shall they be
Exempt from Justice, as by Law made Free?
Shall They, that have despised the Son of God;
And's Word, and's Will, (as under foot) have trod?
Shall They be ever Green? and shall the Bays,
Of such Offenses, flourish to their Praise?
Then, is our Faith in vain; and all our Hope,
Of Retribution, as a Sandy Rope.
We cleanse our hearts, and wash our hands, for naught,
But Inward Peace; which now as nothing's thought.
We suffer much, and All, to Little end;
If All to Loss, and to Misfortune tend.
Why then did Moses, leave the Princely Sport,
Of such a Palace, as was Pharaohs Court?
Or, why did Joseph shun the Courting Stream,
Of Stolen waters, from his Princely Dame?
Why were the Scriptures writ? and what ado --
Is there of Judgment, and Damnation too?
What do we talk of God, of Heaven, or Hell,
If they be best, that in the Worst excel.
'Twere vain indeed, the General says,
The Eight Speech.
'Twere boot; --
To Rant, and Rore; and have a Requiem to it.
But it as True, as Old; and each one knows;
That, Traitors Tryumphs, have their overthrows.
Though Haggith's Son, with Royal wings does fly;
And Joab, and Abiather stand by:
Though He (by Them) have All, and Each, as Vile,
Besides Himself; Himself admires awhile.
Though's Colors fly: and Drums in triumph beat:
And Sounding Trumpets serve, to serve in's meat:
Though All seem well; and naught as Ill, to see;
What ere He does, and where so ere He be:
Though Horse, and Chariots, and his fifty Boys,
Do run before his Kingship: -- All, are Toys.
For fall He shall: and fall He did; that Day,
He made's Request, He made his Life away.
Thus, -- its as true, as old; and Each one Knows;
A Traitors weal, is Usher to his Woes.
Unlawful Acts, by means unlawful done;
Are thin, and weak; and by the Spider spun.
You Sacred Sir, can tell.
I can: and Here;
By Sacred Story, it shall plain appear,
Says the High Priest -- in --
The Ninth Speech.
When Corah's craft, had blear'd the Peoples Eyes,
And made so many of the Princes Rise:
The chiefest men; the men of most renown:
Famous, for Birth; and for their Worth, made known:
He as the Best; and only man for Zeal;
Becomes the Speaker, for the public Weal:
And (by a kind of hellish witchcraft led)
They all submit to this Rebellious Head:
Who, having thus, such Members to assist him;
He goes to Moses; and does thus resist him.
You -- you, Sir Moses and your Brother too: Corah.

Must All of Us, be trampled, on by You?
What is the Reason, of Advancing thus,
Your selves above your Brethren? God's with Us,
As well as You: and All of Us (as One)
Are Holy, in the Congregation.
We Will not be Fooled into a Regal way;
And You, Command; and we (forsooth) Obey.
What have you done (quoth Dathan) thus to be, Dathan.

The only Two, for your Supremacy?
Is It not enough, that from a wealthy Land
(With Milk and Honey flowing) thy Command, --
Has led Us hither, to this barren Place;
To be the Food, for Famine, and Disgrace:
Except Thou be our Prince: and make Us bow,
And yield our Necks, to thy Subjuging too?
Yes (quoth Abiram -- Abiram.

-- Where are those Fruitful fields;
That Milk and Honey, and such plenty yields?
What will thou do? Do think, we do not see;
Thy proud Intention, what thou meanst to be?
No, no, we will not come up: call -- call again;
Let Them come up, that know no Stratagem.
We Will make you know your Princedom's not so great,
But we are able to defeat your Feat.
There Is Corah come, and tell Him truly now,
(Or we will make you) why ye make Us bow.
Thus what with words, and mixing Threars withal,
Moses and Aaron on their Faces Fall:
As strangely shamed: or zealously affear'd:
To see the Lightning, from such Thunder heard.
They could not speak, as yet: but ere awhile;
Moses does tell them, in a fair-foul Style;
What they should do; and should from thence infer;
What Stars, were fixed; and what, Erratique were.
They soon should know who were the good, or bad;
That God Secluded, or Selected had,
To Minister before him: They should see
Who Holy were, and who Unholy be.
The Rebels then, they took (as Moses said)
Censers, and Fire; and thereon Incense laid:
And then (with Moses and with Aaron) stood,
Before the Place, where God his Glory showed.
Before (their Prince and Priest, and now) the Lord,
They stand (presuming upon Corah's word)
And dare Appeal (as free from All Offense)
To God's strict Justice, and Omniscience.
Thus, -- damned Pride, leads Traitors to the worst,
Of wilful Sins, to make them most Accursed:
From One Sin, to Another; still they go;
And fear no Evil, till they feel the Blow:
Which, shall so Sudden, and so Dismal be;
As, by the Vengeance; you, their Sin shall see.
This -- God, to Moses: He, the People shows;
Who, Corahs Tents, and Congregation views.
They touch not, ought, is Theirs: but again,
Review, for Separation: Moses then,
Bespeaks them thus.
Now, shall you hereby know;
Both who I am, and whence, and what I do,
Is all from God: and what a Horrid Sin,
ReBellion is, the way that Corah's in.
If you shall see, the Earth in sunder cleave;
And all these men, and whatsoever they have;
Be swallowed, quick; and go alive, to Hell;
Then, by the Vengeance; you, their Sin may tell.
And as he spoke, it was: a dismal Grave,
Did them, their Tents and all their Goods receave:
And (nothing left) the Earth did close again,
To be awarning for Rebellious Men,
Who, but for speaking, though they did not Do;
The murderous Act, of bloody Treason too:
Yet, -- see how strictly, God in fury smites,
The mouthy Tauntings, of the SaCRed Rites:
The Earth, destroys: the Fire, does devour:
The bold Blasphemers, of the Higher Power.
With that all the Levites stood up, and having each of them an Instrument of
Music in his hand: They make Obeisance to the King,
And then they Play, and thus they sing.
The Second Song.
Sir, wait awhile; while God your Patience tries,
By suffering Traitors, in their Villainies:
For, there are woes
For your Foes,
Prepared:
Not a Common Visitation, shall,
Bold-bloody-Rebels, at the last befall,
Then let not Those,
That Oppose,
Be feared.
Chorus.
Though Pharaoh Boast,
He Will Israel confound:
Yet Pharoh's crossed,
And he and's Host are Drowned.
Sir be content; as Moses was, by you:
Moses foretold: and may your Highness too:
That, there are woes,
For your Foes,
Prepared:
As Moses did: So shall your Highness see,
In Corah's, Jeroboam's Destiny:
Then, let not Those,
That Oppose,
Be feared.
Chorus.
Though Pharaoh boast,
He Will Israel confound;
Yet Pharoh's crossed,
And He, and's Host are Drowned.
Then, as they made a Warbling Close, both of their Song, and Music; Behold,

The Fifth Shows presented; Being
A spacious Field, and two Armies, in Array; the Kings, and the Rebels: and
joining Battle, the Kings side prevails.

Whereupon (all crying Victoria, Victoria) an Old man (wearing a Mantle of
Camels Hair, girt about with a Lethern Girdle) presents Himself before the
King; to whom (being demanded who he was, and what he would) he said --

The Tenth Speech.
What needed Endors Witch, by Magic Spell,
To make the Devil, a Prophet; and to tell --
The fatal State of Saul?
For, (first) his cursed sparing Agag's Self: 1.

Then (secondly) his Lying for the Pelf: 2.

Thirdly, his killing the Lord's Priests: 3.

And (fourthly) Hunting for -- 4.

The precious Life of David:
(Whose worth, the Virgins, in a Dance did Sing;
And next to Saul, was the Anointed King.)
Fifthly, (despairing) his presuming Folly, 5.

In Samuel's place, to be (unholy) Holy:
Lastly, from God, unto a Witch, he going;
Resolves the Question (to his just Undoing.)
That Vengeance waits on Sinners: such, as still;
Resist the Good, and do persist in Ill:
Sin, with delight; and in their Spite, Oppose,
God's way, and Will: God will (at last) Depose.
What needed Endors Witch,
By Magic Spell, --
To make the Devil, a Prophet?
This Truth, this Day, is with a Sunbeam writ;
And These, and Aftertimes shall witness it.
For the blood, of many hundred thousands shed;
The hideous Cries, of thousands, almost dead:
The total-strange Defeat: and direful Fate,
Of Jeroboam; -- In his tenfold State:
His two and twenty years Possession:
His mighty Host: Eight hundred thousand strong;
His cunning Ambush: and his Forces, double:
(Flouted, and routed; to his treble trouble.)
Then, -- his sad Exit, from the Stage of war;
Show, -- what the Issues of Rebellion are.
See, how the Field is staind with Blood: and then --
Observe the number: rally up again,
Thy thankful thoughts; don't wonder; in such ways,
(Although so long permitted; --) that, their days;
(At longest) are but short; and bad (at Best)
Not all their Pomp, can give one hour of Rest.
Their Guards are vain: their strongest Bars, are weak:
Their Sentinels, by night, and day, do speak,
Their Guilt, and Fear. Where Is Jeroboam now?
(The Old Commander) unto whom, did bow;
So many, and they All;
(The Sons of Belial.)
Where Is his Calf -- Gods,
And Idol (self-made) Priests,
Where Is all his double-odds?
Oh how is Israel, bewitched, with Treason!
Though God himself, be Captain for his King;
And lead the van: and Angels, either Wing:
Yet, -- join they Battle; and their shooting to it:
Till God draws out, and breaks through Horse and Foot,
Disranks, Disorders, and Destroys the Foe,
And gives at once, an utter Overthrow.
I see it now, -- and now, upon the Day;
I come, the Tribute of my thanks to pay;
To pay, devoutly tendered unto God;
Who with his Holy Arm; and Iron Rod;
Has made the Truth, most timously to bring,
Praise, to his Name: and Safety, to his King.
Upon this, was an Allarm from within; and lamentable outcries made; and
thereupon,

The Sixth, and last Shows presented, Being
Two Cities, Dan, and Bethel: and in Bethel, the Juncto-Council; wherein, sat
Jeroboam, in a Chair of State: Hell, under him; the Devil, behind him: and King
Abijah in a Throne, above him: whom when the Rebel saw; he cries out -- O
Treason, Treason: what have I done, and how was I bewitch't. O Treason,
Treason: ceasing, to be Loyal; I left to be Religious; I first, forsook my
King: and then my God:

Thus, by degrees I fell; and now, I fall;
To be more wretched, then Accursed Saul.
With that, the Devil tares him in pieces, and throws him into Hell.
Whereupon, the Party for Abijah, clap their hands: and (praising God, and
Praying for the King) the Levites take again their several Instruments of
Music; and (one holding ap the Picture of Jeroboam, in a frame of Gold.) thy
sung

The Third and last song.
As they began, there came in six Masquers; each in green silk; wrought over
with gold spangles: their Temples wreathed with Bays; their Vizards all
different, but beautiful and smiling.

These six (at the close of every Eight verses) dance the Antique; and Dancing,
sing the Chorus.)

1.
The Person, and his Power's gone:
What Is worth your Contemplation?
This Picture? or this fairer Frame?
(Deserving better then it is Name)
No, no, the memory, the Sight;
Each Part, and Faculty, that is right;
Abhors the Shadow of the fairest, Paint, He throws the Picture down, and
breaks it.

Which makes the foulest Devil seem a Saint.
The CHORUS.
Come, dance we may,
It Is Psyche's Play;
And Holy Day,
At Court,
At Court;
And Holy Day,
At Court:
Traitors (though Crowned,
And most Renowned)
God will confound,
With sport,
With sport;
God will confound,
With sport.
2.
God did, and does, and ere will Bless,
The Better Cause, with Best Success.
Traitors may speed awhile; and bring;
A shameful EXIT, on their King:
Rebels may Rule, until their Sins,
Be ripe for Judgment: then begins,
The just Observer of the Prince's wrongs;
To plead their Rights, in spite of Rebels tongues.
CHORUS.
With Music choice,
Of Hand and Voice;
Sing and rejoice;
We may,
We may;
Sing, and rejoice,
We may:
The Traitors Crown,
And all is Renown,
Is fallen down,
To day,
To day,
Is fallen down
To day.
3.
The Lord of Hosts, the King is for;
And Regicide does most abhor:
He Will fright, and smire the proudest He,
That Is guilty of Disloyalty.
The Scepter, from Usurpers hands,
Shall fall by horrid Countermands.
And all the Guiltless Blood, that has bin spilt;
Shall (to their torment) be their Endless Guilt.
CHORUS.
Come, dance, we may,
It Is Psyche's Play,
And Holy Day,
At Court,
At Court;
And Holy Day,
At Court:
Traitors (though Crowned,
And most Renowned)
God will confound,
With sport,
With sport:
God will confound,
With sport.
4.
Here Is Jeroboam, who of late,
Did Check the King; has now Check mate,
And all his Chosen men of War,
Eight hundred thousand strong; yet are,
Defeated, and destroyed so,
With such a fearfull-fatall blow:
The Highest Traitor may his Downfall see;
And in's Rebellion find a Prodigy.
CHORUS.
With Music choice,
Of Hand, and Voice;
Sing, and rejoice,
We may,
We may,
Sing, and rejoice,
We may.
The Traitors Crown,
And all is Renown,
Is fallen down,
To day,
To day,
Is fallen down,
To day,
With that, there was a Sound of Drums and Trumpets: and Psyche (with an
observant haste) goes, to present the King, with the Masque, in writing. Which
done, Psyche' s good Angel be speaks her thus;

Come prithee Psyche haste away,
Upon the Earth,
Is no long mirth:
And I am gone, nor may You stay.
She hears, she answers; and she cries,
Let none think much,
Our mirth is such;
And by an Echo, He replies.
as follows, in
The EPILOGUE.
Psyche. Angel.

Ah woe is me (unhappy One)
And is my Guide, and Guard, thus gone?
ECHO. Gone.
But hark, ye'nt That, the Music choice,
Of his fair Hand, and warbling Voice?
O^^es.
The Eccho's His: ah could I know,
But whether I am mocked, or no?
Noe.
Psyche. Angel.

Oh (my dearest) were I there,
Or (my dearest) were you here.
ECHO. U -- here.
Descend I prithee, and fulfill,
Or mine, or Thine; what is yours my Will.
I -- will.
Oh haste, I faint; what shall I say?
What shall I do? Oh speak, I pray.
Pray.
The Duty's just; and I Will persever,
(If thou will Teach me) in It ever.
Ever.
With that, she Bows, and Kneels; and (Kneeling) prays:
The Angel comes, and each (Ascending) says:
Farewell,
Farewell:
-- Yea, Welfare may our Farewell be,
To his most saCRed Majesty.
The (1) Oak, the (2) Olive, and the (3) Vine,
Their Boughs, as well as Roots, entwine.
The (1) stately; (2) cheerful, (3) fruitful Trees.
Emblematize Prosperity:
That; (1) Power, (2) Peace, (3) and Plenty, may --
Be still our Pillars, for our Stay.
Enough, -- now, our Divining Masque is done:
We must attend upon the Rising Sun.
Leaving Good Times, to prove our Better News,
As True, as Told, in Speeches, Songs, and Shemes.
THE END.

