GLORY's RESURRECTION; BEING THE Triumphs of London REVIVED, For the
Inauguration of the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir Francis Child, Knight. Lord Mayor of the
City of London.

CONTAINING The Description (and also the Sculptures) of the Pageants, and the
whole Solemnity of the Day.

All set forth at the proper Cost and Charge of the Honorable Company of
GOLDSMITHS.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for P. Barnham in Little Britain, School.

To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Child, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
MY LORD,
IN Your Lordship's Accession to the CHAIR, advanced by so many Eminent Merits
to that High Post, there needs but a very little Spirit of Prophecy to foretell
with what true Glory Your Lordship will execute that Honorable Trust. To say,
Your Lordship will answer the Expectation of the World, speaks too little:
There Is something more than Expectation, an Universal Assurance and Confidence
of Your Lordship's Performance.

And whilst the Worshipful Company of GOLDSMITHS, have, after a three Years
Cessation, revived the Customary Splendour of the City on this Solemn Occasion,
I dare not say, it is wholly their own Natural Grandeur and Magnificence, so
much as their Gratitude that furnishes the Entertainment. Your Lordship makes
so considerable a Luster, and gives that Ornament to their Society; that this
Public Triumph, on Your Inauguration-Day, is not so much a Present they make
You, as a Debt they pay You.

Of all Your Lordship's numerous Virtues, the truly Noble Train that attend You
thither, Your Unshaken Constancy to Your Native Altars seems to carry the
Leading Glory. Your Lordship's truly Christian Undivided Knees, pay that
greater and more entire Adoration to an Eternal Throne, than to make at one
time a Cain's, and, at another, an Abel's Sacrifice. Your Lordship would start
at so poor a Prevarication with Omnipotence, as to bring a Sheaf of Stubhle to
Your Morning Oblation, and a Lamb to Your Evening one.

Nor are Your Lordship's Moral Perfections less Conspicuous: You ascend to this
Metropolitan Dignity, wholly untainted with the too common Avarice of
Greatness. No, my Lord, You come not thither to Gather, but Shower the Gold;
whilst warmed and animated by Your own innate. Principles both of Charity and
Hospitality, those two Illustrious Ornaments of Magistracy, Your Lordship has
resolved to recall from their late Banishment: And indeed those truly radiant
Virtues could never appear on the Praetorian Chair with nobler Luster than now;
considering they will so immediately break forth in that full Glory there,
after so total an Eclipse before. It Is thus Your Lordship designs in Your
Administration of Your Mayoralty to waken and revive the late drooping and
languishing Honor of the City: And indeed to give a new Resurrection to the
Grandeur of the Chair; which I may honestly say has some time lain buried. It Is
thus, my Lord, the Shades behind You will illustrate Your own Glories before
You; Or, to speak in the Goldsmiths Dialect, Those Foils will set off Your
Diamond.

But what has yet more nobly signalized Your Lordship; In the late Suppression
of the Defaced and Adulterated Coin, at the time when all the Private and
Public Banks of England, and indeed the whole Currency of Exchequers and
Treasury's stood almost entirely stopped; at that time when 'twas no forfeited
Credit even for the proudest Court or City Heads to play the Insolvents; 'twas
then Your Lordship's Particular, I might say, Only Pride, that when all the
other Golden Veins of the Nation were stagnated, Yours alone kept their whole
open Circulation: You answered all Bills with the same prompt and entire
Satisfaction, perhaps to the Wonder, at least to the Envy of the World. And
though the then general Examples all round Ye, might have excused You from that
Stretch of Payment; yet Your Lordship so valued Your Reputation, as to do
Justice even to a Supererrogation.

And here methinks Your Lordship's very Coat of Arms, the long Hereditary
Escutcheon of Your Family, by a kind of Prophetical Herauldry seems to blazon
the very Virtues of Your Lordship that bears them; when Your Lordship's Argent
Eagles truly soard, whilst your Neighbors flagg'd and drooped.

But in enumerating Your Lordship's singular Worth and Deserts, I am entered
into too large a Field, and therefore shall modestly retire, with subscribing
my Self,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Devoted and most Dutiful Servant, E. SETTLE.

TO THE Worshipful Company OF GOLDSMITHS.
AS we are all naturally Ambitious to serve the Noblest Masters, You may
believe, Gentlemen, that my humble Muse takes no common Pride in being called
up to entertain You. For besides the particular commanding Merits of so many
Honorable Members of Your Society, I cannot but consider what extraordinary
dazzling Luster even Your Profession it self carries with it.

When I enter into the Goldsmiths Laboratory, methinks I see even Sovereignty
it self shine there: The very Strongest Nerves of War, and the Richest
Blessings of Peace, in effect the only Product of Your Forge, are all Your own.
Nay, even Crowned Heads hold their very Thrones but by a Precarious Tenure,
without Your Mints of Gold to support 'em.

The famous Columbus in his Peruvian Discovery, found out a New World for
little more than only to supply Your Furnace: Nay, the very Sun himself is but
the Goldsmiths Fellow Laborer, whilst his most vigorous Beams warm the rich
Beds, and impregnate all the whole Mineral Veins, to furnish Your Shops of
Gold. Gold, I may honestly say, (Your Handiwork) does all Things, nay indeed
is all Things, or at least makes all Things its own. It Is from the Golden Mine
that the Palaces of Monarchs, nay the very Temples and Altars of Heaven,
receive not only their Noblest Ornaments, but even their very Foundation.

And though, it is true, that sometimes that too fatal Mineral, may be the
Temptation of Vice, or the Purchase of Shame and Injustice; yet to
overbalance those more unhappy Influences, it is no less the highest Reward of
Virtue. Industry, Study, Labor, and all the honest Toils of Life sweat only
for that Prize: In short, we are all Smiths at Your Anvile, and only hammer for
the Gold. Thus, tho the Golden Shower may sometimes fall into a wanton Danae's
Lap, yet it is that very glittering Metal too, that wreaths the Bracelets, and
moulds the very Coronets for a Diana.

But, Gentlemen, not to expatiate upon so voluminous a Subject, it is enough to
Congratulate Your present Pride and Glory, in having the fairest Royal (or at
least Deputy Royal) Collar of SS's, and the Richest Gold Chain of England,
among You: To whom wishing all Continuance of Honor, and Your Selves of
Happiness, I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant, E. S.

The Procession and whole Solemnity, as follows; performed on Saturday October
29th, School.
THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in
the Morning at Goldsmiths Hall, viz.

1. The Wardens and Assistants in Gowns faced with Foyns. 2. The Livery in
Gowns with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Foyns and Budge Batchelors in Gowns
and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each a Chain of
Gold about his Shoulders, and a white Staff in his Hand. 5. Thirty other
Gentlemen carrying Banners and Colors. 6. The Serjeant-Trumpet wearing two
Scarfs, one of the Lord Mayors Colors, and the other of the Companies, with 36
more Trumpets, whereof 16 are His Majesty's. 7. His Majesty's Drum-Major,
wearing a Scarf of the Company's Colors, with four more of his Majesty's Drums
and Fifes. 8. Seven other Drums and two Fifes with Scarfs. 9. The two City
Marshals riding on Horseback, and six Persons attending with Scarfs and Colors
of the Companies. 10. The Foot Marshal and six Attendants with like Scarfs,
etc. 11. The Master of Defense and his Retinue in like Scarfs, etc. 12. Several
Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, bearing Standarts and Banners. 13. Other
Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, carrying each a Javelin in one Hand, and Target
in the other, having the Arms of the Company's Founders and Benefactors.
All these Ranked by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's
Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums
and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with
Standarts; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six
Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Batchelors concluding the Second Division. Six
Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bearing the City's, the other the Company's Arms.
Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Batchelors make the Third
Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and
then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City
and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, etc. Four
Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, four Gentlemen and four
Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear.

In this Order they march from Goldsmiths Hall, attending his Lordship, who
joins the old Lord Mayor at Queen Street end, where the whole Company move
through Cheap Side to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
Livery, and part of the Gentlemen Ushers take their Barge for Westminster,
whither his Lordship is attended, with the several Barges of the respective
Companies, with Flags, Streamers, several Pleasure-Boats, with Hautboys,
Flutes, Trumpets, and all manner of Music. etc.

His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer,
returns with the same Attendants and Splendour to Dorset Stairs, where, at his
Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Martial Ornaments
in Buff and Silver Head-Pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves
forward toward Cheap Side. In his March, he is first entertained with this
Pageant.

The First PAGEANT, The Amphitheatre of UNION.
A Large Fabric, designed after the Corinthian Order, elevated with four
Marble Columns fluited with Gold, and twisted round with Laurels of Flowers.
Above the Etableture of Gold and Silver are erected four Noble Golden Cups,
being part of the Bearing of the Company's Arms. In the middle of all this
Noble Building, on a Quadrangular Seat, sits UNION in Chief; with a Chaplet of
Flowers on a Golden Headpiece, and a Laurel of Oak, signifying Love and
Wisdom. The Attributes or Graces attending on UNION, are three other Persons
richly habited with their proper Ornamento, being Piety, Harmony, and
Diligence, with the Ensigns and Banners of the Company's Arms.

UNION thus addresses his Lordship.
UNION' s Speech. WHen sacred UNION holds her Seat Divine,
The sweetest Harmony of Power is Mine.
By Me is the Great Hinge of Empire moved,
The Magistrate obeyed, and Prince beloved.
But when true UNION joins all Hearts and Hands,
It Is only when some Darling Head commands.
So Rules Great WILLIAM: So, my Lord, shall You;
A Copy from that Great Original so true,
As Caesar to His Throne; You to Your Chair,
Have brought the Universal Darling there.

depiction of Union

S. DUNSTAN.
depiction of St. Dunstan

The Second PAGEANT, The GOLDSMITHS Laboratory.
A Large and Spacious Work-shop of several Artificers, distinct in their proper
Apartments for the several Operators in the Mystery of the Goldsmiths,
containing Forges, Anvils, Hammers, and other Instruments of Art, etc. In the
middle of this Laboratory, on a rich Golden Chair of State, is seated St.
Dunstan, the ancient Patron and Guardian of the Company, arrayed in his
Pontifical Ornaments, expressing his Prelatical Dignity, in a Surplice of white
Lawn, over which he wears a large Cope, etc. On his Reverend Hoary Head, a
Golden Mitre beset with precious Stones and Pearls of great Value: In his Left
Hand he holds a Golden Crosier; in his Right Hand a Pair of Goldsmiths Tongs,
an Emblem of his Patronage; and under his Feet lies the Devil.

On each side this Noble Seat is placed Apollo and Esculapius his Son, in their
proper Habits, bearing the City's and Company's Banners, and playing on several
Melodious Instruments, as well for his Lordship's Diversion, as to preserve a
Harmony and Decorum among the Artificers.

Beneath the Steps of Ascension to the Canonical Chair, in opposition to the
Patron, is placed a Goldsmiths Forge, with Fire and Crucibles filled with Gold;
a Boy blowing the Bellows. On either Hand, in the Front of this Shop, is set up
a large Press of Gold and Silver Plate, with Compters, etc. representing a
formal Shop of Trade: On each side are Jewellers at Work, with Anvils, Hammers,
Stones, Sparks; besides a Planisher, a Raiser, a Drawer and Chacer, etc.
Several Artificers beating out Plate, and fashioning several Vessels of Gold
and Silver: Likewise an Essay-Master with his Class, Frame and Balance, for
trying of Gold and Silver by the Standard. In another Apartment is Disgrossing,
Flatting and Drawing of Gold and Silver Wire. In another are included Finers
and Refiners, Melting, Smelting, Fining, Refining and Separating Gold and
Silver, both by Fire and Water; and the Master-Forger and three other Workmen
making a Massy Piece of Plate, Singing and keeping Time on the Anvil.

Here His Lordship is addressed by St. Dunstan.

St. Dunstan. THE Triumphs of this Day, deserved so well,
When Fame shall in Recorded Story tell,
Those Oracles of Truth --

Devil. Can You speak Truth?

St. Dunstan. Peace, snarling Devil! Thus I Will stop your Mouth.
[Catches him by the Nose.] Down to thy Hell, there croak, thou Fiend accursed,
See this great Day, and swelled with Envy, burst.
In ancient Times when Saints were once adored,
St. Dunstan was the Goldsmiths Patron Lord:
And whilst on this proud glittering Stage I stand,
With all this shining Treasure on each Hand;
What though the World worships the Saint no more,
Still there is whole Thousands that my Shrine adore
A thousand homaging Eyes this Sight behold;
Not me their Idol, but my Shop of Gold.
But let that Superstition end: Here Is all
That does a juster Righteous Homage call;
Whilst your Illustrious Triumphs to attend,
Both Shrine and Saint to You, my Lord, must bend.
That Nobler Luster my pleased Eyes behold,
Your Richer Virtues far outshine my Gold.

The Third PAGEANT, A Triumphant CHARIOT of Gold.
ASTRAEA, the Goddess of Justice, in a long Robe of Silver, a Crimson Mantle
fringed with Silver, a Veil of Silver fringed with Gold; on her Head a Plume of
white Feathers set with precious Stones: In her Right Hand a Touchstone; in
her Left a Golden Balance with Silver Scales.

At a Descent beneath this Goddess are placed Charity and Concord, as the
necessary Supporters of Justice; and on a Seat remote, sits another Virtue,
called Truth, supporting the Reins, and guiding the Chariot of Justice. This
stately Chariot is drawn by two Unicorns, most exquisitely Carved and Gilded
with equal Proportion to the Life. On the Backs of these two Unicorns are
mounted two Beautiful Young Princes, one a Barbarian, the other an European,
sounding forth the Fame of the Honorable Company of Goldsmiths. At the Feet of
these most Noble Creatures is seated four other Virtues, as Prudence,
Temperance, Courage, and Conduct, all properly attired, each holding a Banner
displayed with the Kings, the Lord Mayors, the City's and Company's Arms.

ASTRAEA thus Salutes His Lordship.
JUstice of old by long Oppression driven,
Left the Tyrannick World and flew to Heaven.
But when Great NASSAW, Albion's Scepter bore,
Our Laws and Rights sent kindly to restore,
She visited the Albion World once more.
Thus whilst our Caesar yields a Trust so large,
As proud Augusta to Your Guardian Charge.
As He from Heaven His Sovereign Justice drew;
He Is Heavens Vicegerent, His Vicegerent, You.
Astraea then must here her Power resign,
Her brightest Glories in Your Hand shall shine.
You Will best, my Lord, my Righteous Balance hold,
No Poise so even as in the Scales of Gold.
The Chariot of Iustise.
depiction of the Chariot of Justice

TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE COMPANY OF GOLDSMITHS;

The Prints of these Pageants as a lasting Monument of this year's Triumphs,
are humbly dedicated.

depiction of Honor

The Fourth and Last PAGEANT, The Temple of HONOR.
THIS Pageant being the Representation of the true Merit that has raised His
Lordship to that Honorable Dignity; in the chief Seat in Front sits a noble
Figure personating HONOR, with the Banner of the City's; on his Head a Silver
Headpiece and a stately Plume of Crimson Feathers, his Vest embroidered with
Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; a Robe of Scarlet enriched with Embroidery
of Tissue, with Buskins, and a Silken Scarf fringed with Gold.

On the same Basis, in three other Seats, are planted Peace, Plenty, and
Liberality, properly dressed, as the suitable Attributes and Attendants on
HONOR. At the Feet of these are laid the four Principal Rivers of Trade, as
Tiber, Nile, Danube, and Thames, with their several Hierogliphicks, in Rich
Habits, with Garlands of Flowers, and Banners flying, etc.

Ths Structure is formed of the Compositive Order, most nobly set forth with
Painting and Carving in Gold and Silver to an infinite Luster, being made of
that precious Stone called Lapis Lazuli. On the upper part over each Pilaster
are four Pyramids of Trophies of Armor, Bows, Quivers, etc. being the ancient
Emblem of Honor, Love and Virtue, and crowned with the Four Imperial Crowns of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.

Honor's Speech.
WHilst my best Wreath decks those Deserving Brows,
To her loved Lord the pleased Augusta bows:
Augusta, who Your humble Suppliant, calls
Once more for her old Hospitable Walls:
She wants to see her ancient Greatness reign,
When her proud CHAIR did all that State maintain;
That Visiting Princes filled her PRAETOR's Train.
Why do I court You to perform that Task,
When that is already granted e're I ask?
Doubt not her ancient Grandeur You Will restore,
You Will be Your SELF, and she needs ask no more.
His Lordship here moves to Guild Hall to Dinner, being Graced by the Lords of
the Council, the Judges, and the chief Nobility of England, His Honorable
Guests; where the Solemnity of the Day is concluded with all the Festival
Magnificence and Splendour suitable to so most Noble an Entertainment.

SONG.
TO Britain's Dread Caesar, we'll tune up our Joy:
To Caesar, and Caesar's Great City-Viceroy:
It Is Caesar has lent him the Scales and the Sword,
And Augusta salutes him her Guardian Lord.
Whilst the World all around her,
'Twixt Envy and Wonder,
Shall see her proud Chair like the Throne shine in Gold.
Of War he has ended the Toil and the Pain;
And WILLIAM's Work now is to Smile and to Reign.
In the soft Sweets of Peace, in one Olive Bower,
The Crown and the Chair, the whole Scepter of Power,
All blooming like Aaron's old Wand we behold;
Whilst calmly possessing
The Halcyon Blessing,
We'll merrily troll round the Goblets of Gold.
The Ermin and Fir, the Robe and the Gown,
On this side the Chaplet, on that side the Crown,
Together shall taste that General Joy,
Which the whole Power of Hell shall never destroy:
Our Albion thus blessed, this Scene to behold,
The Day shall shine brighter,
The Sun gallop lighter,
And Phoebus new-burnish his Chariot of Gold.
FINIS.

