PASTOR FIDO: OR, THE Faithful Shepherd. A PASTORAL. As it is Acted at the
DUKE's Theater.

Sylvestrem resonare doces Amaryllida Sylvas.

Virg. Licensed,

December. the 26th. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk of
the New Exchange in the Strand, 1677.

TO THE Right Honorable, THE LADY ELIZABETH DELAVAL.
SInce your Ladyship has such great Advantages of Fortune in those particular
Blessings, Wit and Beauty, the best Companions of Quality; this Trouble is no
more than what in Reason ought to be expected: For Dedications are but little
better than Prologues and Epilogues; the general Subject of 'em is, to
Persecute the Witty and the Fair. Your Ladyships Perfections give me an ample
Theme, and your Kindness to this Poem gives me boldness to make use of it. But
Virtues in Persons so Nobly descended, are but things Necessitated; your
Ladyships* Merits could not be less, since they are derived from such
Illustrious Parents. The Loyal Earl of Newbrogh, by his Personal Actions in the
Wars, and his constant following the Kings Fate beyondSea, made himself so
considerable an Enemy to the Rebellious Party, that they used all their Arts,
and laid all the Baits of Interest to have made him their Friend; but their
Impious Cause, and their slighted proffers appeard so detestable, that he
proved his Valor and Fidelity equally Impregnable. And to sum up his
Character, he was a Person that made the Field his Temple, Majesty his
Divinity, and his Life and Fortunes, the Sacrifices he offered: Nor were his
Heroic Virtues unmatcht in the Famous Lady Aubeny, whose Industrious Loyalty,
and more than Female Courage, renderd her so Conspicuous, that, though Success
and Victory were the Rebels constant Slaves, and the spite of Fate had made
'em continually Prosperous, both in their Councels and their Arms; yet such
were her Indefatigable Services to the Royal Cause, as made her Admired by the
World, and Feared even by the Invincible: witness her Imprisonment in the
Tower, from whence by a miraculous Escape from her Confinement, and her
threatened Martyrdom, as she lived a Champion for Loyalty, she dyed an Exile
for it. Nor is your Ladyship less Indebted to Providence for your Education
than your Birth, in the Affinity and Patronage of the Lady Stanhope, a Person
of so much Worth and Honor, so truly Generous, and so excellently Good. But my
design is not that of a Herald, but a Petitioner. The Faithful Shepherd begs
Acceptance, and the better to obtain that Favor, I may without a Crime boast
of some Merit in the Present I make, since it borrows its Value from the
Esteemed Guarini; and I have one encouragment more to devote it here, knowing
it has formerly been your Ladyships Diversion. If I am Censured by the Admirers
of Pastor Fido for being so bold with so received a Poem, I only make this
Apology, that Plays are so strictly tied up to Fashion, that like costly
Habits, they are not Beautiful without it. I confess I have taken a great deal
of Liberty in the Characters of Sylvano and Corisca, because they were not kept
up in the Author: The first of which, in the Translated Pastor Fido (for I am a
Stranger to the Italian) flag'd in the second Act, and was wholly lost in the
two last. And the part of Dorinda was made up new to fit it for the person
designed to Act it: And the two last Acts which have so little of the Authors,
have still his design, only that I have represented what was but Narrative in
the Original. But whatever advantages I may have received from so famed a
Story, and so good a Foundation, my greatest is, the occasion it gives me of
expressing my self,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Obedient and most Devoted Servant, Elkanah Settle.

PROLOGUE.
VVEli Gallants, when we tell you we have been just
To the Renowned Guarinies sacred Dust;
And to secure your good Opinions, say
We Have broug^t an admired Relic into play:
Methinks I hear a young brisk Critic Swear,
O^nds, do they think we are Antiquaries here.
R^t the dull Rhiming Fops of the last Age:
Damn 'em, they will bring the British Bards o'th'Stage.
There Is your Condemning Vote. Of all Man kind,
Unhappy Writers the lest mercy find.
A Play, but for one fault in the Design;
A hobling Verse, dull Thought, or a flat Line,
Is lost beyond the power of a Reprieve.
Yet there are greater faults you can forgive.
As for example, some of you by Fate,
And your kind Parents, get a great Estate;
And having other ways t'empl^y your Wit,
Then in the foolish care of keeping it:
Straight a Grave, Sober, Guardian-Steward come^
To read your Pape^s, and to count your Sums.
Wh^m me (...) see by Industry and Care,
Out of his threescore pounds allowance, clear
In seven years space, a thousand pound a year.
Yet he good honest Man shall be forgiven.
Another keeps a Miss the modish way;
And when poor Duns, quite weary, will not stay,
The hopeless Squire's into Alsatia driven;
Yet pretty Charming Sinner is forgiven.
And yet these very Men for three hours spent
At a dull Play, what Rage and Fire they will vent.
Since greater Losses go so easily down;
Faith Gallants do not pine for Half a Crown.
Actors Names.
MOntano, High Priest of Diana. Mr. Medbourn Sylvio, his Son. Mr. Crosby.
Mirtillo, in Love with Amaryllis. Mr. Smith. Titiro, Father to Amaryllis. Mr.
John Lee. Sylvano, A discontented Shepherd. Mr. Batterton. Ergasto, Friend to
Mirtillo. Mr. Norris. Carino, Foster-Father to Mirtillo. Mr. Perseval. Dameta,
An old Shepherd, Servant to Mirtillo. Mr. Ric^ards. Lynco, An old Shepherd and
Governor to Sylvio. Mr. Gillo. Dorco, Attendant to Sylvano. Amaryllis,
Daughter to Titiro. Mrs. Batterton. Corisca, In Love with Mirtillo. Mrs. Mary
Lee. Dorinda, A young Nymph in Love with Sylvio. Mrs. Petty. Gerana, Her
Governess. Mrs. Hughes. Celia, Confident to Corisca. Mrs. Napier.
Singers, Dancers, Nymphs, Shepherd's, Hunts*men, Priests, Guards, Heads-man.

The Scene ARCADIA.

Pastor Fido.
ACT the First.
After a sound of Horns, and cry of Hunts-men, Enter Silvio and Lynco. Silvio.
There Is Music in this sound, Life, Soul, and Charm.
What Breast so frozen, but this sport can warm?
Deserted Woods, and unfrequented Plains,
And you, your Countries shame, poor frighted Swayns,
I am your Champion; it is by Me decreed,
The long disturber of your Peace shall bleed.
This Savage Bore must Dye.

Lynco. "Oh Silvio,
"Had I thy fresh and blooming Cheek, adieu
"I Would say to Beasts, and nobler Game pursue.

Silv. A Game more noble? what more Sacred task,
Could Fortune grant, or his Ambition ask,
Who for his Country does with Monsters fight,
And the VVo^ Terror makes his dear delight?

Lync. This Savage Chase leave t'an Ignobler hand:
A fairer Prize does your pursuit demand.
For which --
No less does the Arcadian safety call,
Then for this Erymanthian Monsters fall.
Have not our Oracles long since designed
From Silvios Nuptials, we our Peace should find?
"And thou
"To have a Nymph so fair, that not a Swain
"So proud, but sighs for her, and sighs in vain:
"To have this matchless bright Divinity
"By Destiny and Gods reserved for Thee;
"Nay thrown into thy Arms without one sigh or tear;
"And thou (unworthy) not to value her?

Silv. Love, the dull Fetter of all slavish souls;
No such weak power my freeborn mind controuls.

Lync. "Oh Silvio, had thou tried Love once, and found
"In Mutual Lovers, what true Joys abound,
"I know thou would say, Oh Love, the sweetest Guest,
"Why have thou been a stranger to this Breast?
"Leave, leave the Woods; leave following Beasts, fond Boy,
"And follow Love.

Silv. Love, an unmanly Joy!
"Keep they those Pleasures to themselves alone
"Who find a Soul in 'em, for I find none.

"Lync. No Soul in Love, the Worlds great Soul! Dull Youth
"Too soon (beleiv't) thou wilt find this powerful Truth;
"Perchance too late; for he will be sure, before
"We dye, to make us all once feel his power.
"And be assured, worse torment none can prove,
"Than in old Limbs, the Youthful Itch of Love.
"Old Men
"In Love are doubly wrackt, both with the sense
"Of their Youths Pride, and Ages Impotence.

Silv. Must then my Youth for glorious actions lent,
Be on dull Woman, prodigally spent?
"For those Chimeras in a Lovers head,
"Those strange Elysiums by Men's Feavours bred?

Lync. "Tell me, if in this pleasing month of May,
"When Earth is dressed in all her rich array,
"Instead of bladed Fields, Brooks uncontrol'd,
"Green Woods, and painted Meads, thou should behold,
"Bald Fields and Meads, Brooks bound with Ice; the Pine,
"The Beech, the Ash, the Oak, the Elm, the Vine,
"And Poplar-like inverted Sceletons
"Stand desolate, rattling their naked bones:
"Would thou not say, Nature is out of Tune,
"The World is sick, and like to dye in June?
Now turn thy Eyes into thy self, and see
How ill thy Passions, with thy Youth, agree:
"Behold a much more monstrous Novelty
"Then this would seem in Nature. Courteous Heaven
"To every Age has proper humors given.
"And as in Old Men, Love absurdly shows;
"So Young Men, Enemies to Love, oppose
"Nature and Heaven. Look Silvio round about,
"Examine this whole Universe throughout;
"All that is fair or good, here or above,
"Is either Lover, or the work of Love.

Sylv. How can thou with such treacherous Arts persuade:
And thus the freedom of my Soul invade?
"Was it for this I had my tender years
"Committed to the care of thy gray hairs?
"That thou should thus Effemin^te my heart
"With Love? Know who I am, or who thou ar^?

Lynco. "Thou art a Man, or should be one, and I
"Another; what I teach Humanity.
"And if thou scornest that name, which is thy Pride,
"Take heed, instead of being Deified,
"Thou turn not Beast.

Silv. "That Monster-taming King,
"From whom my lofty Pedigree I bring,
"Had never been thus Valiant, nor thus Famed,
"If first the Monster Love he had not tamed,
And his great deeds by Glorys Standart framed.

Lync. See foolish Youth, how weak thy Reasons prove;
"Had great Alcides never been in Love,
"How then had thou been born? If he o're*came
"Monsters and Men, to Love impute his Fame;
"To Love his Conquests. Souls like his untamed,
"In their own Nature rough, when once inflamed
"With generous Love, and with its Sweets allayd,
"Are clearer, apter for great actions made.
"If thou^t Ambitious then to imitate
"Great Hercules, and not degenerate
"From thy high blood* since Woods thou do affect,
"Follow the Woods, but do not Love neglect.
Not that I Would have thee thy mean thoughts debase
To poor Dorindas Love of low-born race.
Thy Amaryllis is of race Divine;
Besides by Contract, she is already thine.
Thy Wife already.

Silv. Heaven defend me!


Lync. How?


Silv. My Wife?


Lync. Can Silvio forget his Vow?
Your mutual promi^es received, and given?
"Take heed, bold Youth, how you dare sport with Heaven.

Silv. "Man's freedom is Heavens gift, which does not take
"Us at our words, when a forced Vow we make.

Lync. "I; but (unless our Hopes and Judgments fail)
"Heaven made this Match, and promised to Entayl
"A thousand blessings on it.

Silv. "'It Is like that there
"Is nothing else to do. A proper care
"To vex the calm rest of the Gods above.
Lynco, I scorn both Lovers Oaths, and Love.
Exit.
Lynco. "Thou sprung from Heaven, harsh Boy? nor of Divine
"Can I say suppose thee, nor of humane line.
" Alectoes Poison thy cold Limbs did fashion;
"Fair Venus had no hand in thy Creation.
Exit.
SCENE the Second.
Enter Mirtillo and Ergasto. Mirt. "Fair Amaryllis, if by speaking, I
"Offend thee, I will hold my peace, and dye.

Erg. " Mirtillo, Love is a great pain at best;
"But so much more, the more it is suppressed.
Why do you inward burn, and find no tongue?

Mirt. "My fear, and my respect to her, thus long,
"Have silenced me. Alas, too well I know,
"Nor has Love struck me blind, that in my low
"And slender Fortunes, it were idle pride
"To hope a Nymph so shaped, so qualified,
"So raised in Birth, in Spirit, and in Blood,
"Above all these so gentle, and so good,
"Can e're be mine. No; I have took the height
"Of my unhappy Star, and dread my Fate.
But Amaryllis Weds; say, does she not?

Erg. It Is so resolved.


Mirt. Oh my u^happy Lot!
Now Destiny has done its cruellest part,
Despair till now, but hovered round my heart.
Till now, amid'st the greatest of my fear,
Some glimmering hope at distance did appear:
My wishing Love did the kind Flatterer play;
And though 'twas Night, me-thoughts I dreamt of Day.
But now my Horror runs through all my Veins:
Despair fills up my heart, and absolute Tyrant reigns.
Past all recovery she is gone, she is gone.
I see the Prize by a blessed Favorite won;
From my weak arms for ever, ever, torn;
I see the Myrtle Wreath my Rivals brows adorn.
And now Ergasto, e're my heart quite break,
"Though it is too late, I am resolved I Will speak.

Erg. "Woe be to her, should her stern Father hear.
"That to stolen prayers she ever lent an Ear.

Mirt. Alas my Looks and Language shall be far,
Both from offending him, and injuring her.
"I Will only say to her I owe my Death,
"And beg, when I sigh out my latest breath,
"She Would cast her fair Eyes on me, and say, Dye;
"This favorable Boon she cannot deny:
That e're she goes to make another Blessed,
My Sighs may reach her Ear, though not her Breast.
" Silvio, the Rich, the Gallant, and the Fair,
"The Priest, Montanoes only Son and Heir;
"'It Is he (oh envied Youth) whose joy appears
"So ripe for Harvest in his Spring of years.

Erg. "Indeed you have little cause to envy him;
Rather to pity him.

Mirt. To pity him!
Can pity such a happy State befit?

Ergast. "Because he Loves her not.


Mirt. "And has he Wit?
"Has he a heart? Is he not blind? And yet
"When I consider with what full Aspect
"Her Starry Eyes their influence direct
"Into my Breast, she cannot have a Dart
"Left in her Quiver for another heart.
"But why do they a Jem so precious throw,
"To one that knows it not, and scorns it so?

Erg. Because from Silvios Marriage, Heaven of old,
TO Arcadia has deliverance foretold:
You, though a Stranger here, have understood,
That of an offered Virgins guiltless blood,
A Tribute by Dianas dire command
Is yearly paid by this unhappy Land.

Mirt. "But what strange Crime deserved so sharp a Doom?
"How could such monstrous cruelty find room
"In a Celestial mind?

Erg. The cause of all
This storm, was one of Cynthias Favorites fall:
Her best-lov'd Priest, a Youth of Noble blood,
By an inconstant Nymphs fair Eyes subdued;
And by her Vows and broken Oaths betrayed,
In desperation sor this Perjured Maid,
Himself, before her Feet, a bloody Victim laid.
Whose Death Diana did so much incense,
That by a long and violent Pestilence,
A suffering Nation in her fall was crushed:
In Purple dye her killing fury blushed:
Nor could the dying Criminals blood alone,
Wash off her stain, and for her sins atone.

Mirt. But how did you at last the Goddess rage appease?


Erg. Our Cure's almost as ill, as our Disease.
"For going to consult Heavens Will, we from
"The Oracle received this fatal Doom,
" That yearly, we to Nights offended Queen;
" A Maid or Wife should offer, past fi^teen,
" And under twenty; by which means, the rage
"That ^wallow'd thousands, one death should assuage.

Mirt. And was this Barbrous Tribute by her will,
Doomed to be paid for ever?

Erg. "The Oracle
"Being asked again, what end our Woe should have;
"To our demand, this punctual answer gave.
" Your Woe shall end, when two of Race Divine*
" Love shall Combine:
" And for a faithless Nymphs Apostate State,
" A faithful Shepherd supererrogate.
"Now there is left in all Arcadia,
"Of Heavenly stock, no other branch but they.
"Young Silvio, and fair Amarillis, She
"From Pan descended, from Alcides, He;
"And to our grief, till now, there never yet
"Of Heavenly Race, a Male and Female met.
On this a Nations hope depends; the rest
"Is still reserved in Fates own secret breast;
"And with this Marriage, one day will ensue.

Mirt. "And all this poor Mirtillo to undo.
"What a long reach is here? what Armies Band
"Against one heart, half murdered to their hand?
"Is It not enough that cruel Love's my Foe,
"Unless Fate too contrives my overthrow.

Erg. "Alas Mirtillo, grieving does no good;
"Tears quench not Love, but are its Milk and Food.
"*T shall escape me hard, but e're the Sun descend,
"This Cruel One shall hear thee: Courage Friend.

Mirt. That word has shot life through me; do but this,
And to repay you for so vast a Bliss,
When I am Dead, and her fair Hand has given
The killing-wound, I Will send you thanks from Heaven.
Exeunt.
SCENE the Third.
Enter Corisca and Celia. Corisca. Yonder he goes; oh that bewitching Face;
"When I behold Mirtilloes every grace,
"His unaffected Carriage, all his Charms;
What pleasing heat my panting Bosom warms?
But when I think another Chains he wears,
And will be deaf to all my Sighs and Prayers,
That dismal thought my bleeding heart strings tears.
"Shall I the flame of thousand hearts, the wrack
"Of thousand Souls, languish and burn, and lack
"That pity I denied to others? I
Who kill by Cruelty, by fondness dye.

Celia. Talk not of dying, Death's an end of pain
To those that Love but once, and never Love again:
But thanks to Heaven, you have no such danger nigh,
You have that pleasing Charm, Variety;
Let those that starve in Love, complain they dye.

Corisc. Yes Girl, had I no other Love but this,
In Love there would be very little Bliss.
"How extreme poor must that ill House-VVise prove,
"Who in all the World keeps but one only Love.
"What Is Faith?
"What Is Constancy? Tales which the Jealous feign,
"To awe fond Girls; (...) as absurd as vain?
"Faith in a Woman (if at least there be
"Faith in a Woman unreveal'd to me,)
"Is not a Virtue, nor a Heavenly Grace,
"But the sad Penance of a ruind Face,
"That Is pleased with one, 'cause it can please no more.
A thousand fettered Slaves, should all besore
A Beauteous Face fall prostrate, and adore.
"What Is Beauty, tell me,
"If not pursued? where Lovers numerous are,
"It is a sign the person Loved is rare;
A Crea^ure Charming, excellently fair.

Celia. You Beauties then like Majesty in State,
"Keep a large Train. One Officer to wait,
"Another to p^esent, a third to p^ate,
"A fourth for somewhat else.

Corisc. Well Celia, when thy opening Beauty blows,
Grown up to Love, take my advice, and use
"Thy Lovers, like thy Garments, put on one;
"Have many; often shift, and wear out none.
"For daily Conversation breeds distaste;
"Distaste Contempt, and Loathing at the last.
"Then get the start, let not the Servant say,
"He has turned his Mrs, but she him away.
"These are the rules I take; I Have choice, and strive
"To please 'em all; to this, my hand I give,
"And wink on him; the handsom'st I admit
"Into my Bosom; but not one shall get
"Into my Heart; and yet I know not how]
"(Ay me) Mirtillo's crept too near it now.

Celia. For shame, leave sighing Sister, have more Pride*
You that have got so many Loves beside,
Cure this fond Thirst by some more pleasing taste;
In half your plenty, none but Fools would fast.

Corisc. I never sighed, but to deceive before,
Such pains as these, till now, I never bore:
What shall I do?
Leave him, I cant; Court him I must not. Yes:
Love forbids that, and Honor hinders this.
"First then I Will try Allurements, and discover
"The Love to him, but will conceal the Lover.
If after this, he does my flame despise,
Naught but Revenge, shall my hot Rage suffice,
And my Proud Rival Amaryllis Dies.
My Persecu^or here --
Spying Sylvano Enter, she runs away.
Enter Sylvano and Dorco. Sylva. Corisca, stay.
Confusion seize her! how she hasts away?
Why by Heavens Curse and Malice was I Born
To be a Vassal to such Pride and Scorn?
"As Frosts to Plants, to ripend Ears a Storm;
"To Flowers the Mid-day-Sun, to Seed the Worm;
"To Stags the Toils, to Birds the Lime-twiggs, so
"Is Love to man an everlasting Foe.
"And he that called it fire, pierced well into
"Its Treacherous Nature; for if fire you view,
"How bright and beautiful it is. Approacht,
"How warm and comfortable? but when touched,
"Oh how it burns; the Monster-bearing Earth
"Did never Teem such a Prodigious Birth.
"Where e're Love fixes its Imperial Seat,
"Cottage and Palace to its Rage submit.
So absolute is its too large Command,
Nothing can its Tyrannick power withstand.
"So Love, if you behold it in a pair
"Of Starry-eyes, in a bright tress of hair;
"How temptingly it looks; what kindly flames
"It breaths? what Peace, what Pardons it proclaims*
"But if thou do it in thy bosom keep,
"So that it gather strength, and can but creep,
"No Tygress in Hircanian Mountains Nursed,
"No Lybian-Lyoness is half so cursed.
"Nor ^rozen Snake ^osterd with humane breath,
"His Flames are hot as Hell, Bonds strong as Death.

Dor. Why all this storm? leave her, and rage no more.


Sylv. Preach silence to the Winds; I Will never give over.
"Women, perfidious Women; all that is naught,
"In Love, from You is by In^ection caught.
"He of himself is good, meek as the Dove,
"That draws the Chariot of the Queen of Love.
"But you have made him wild --
"You, who your Care, your Pride, and Pleasure place
"In the mere out-fide of a Wanton face.
"Nor is it your business how to pay true Love,
"And ^tudy whether shall more constant prove.
"To bind two ^ls in one, and of one heart,
"To make the other but the Counter-part.
But how to use those arts you should abhor;
"To paint your faded Cheeks, to cover over
"The faults of Time and Nature. How ye make
"Pale Feulemort a pure Vermillion take;
"Fill up the wrinckles; dye black, white; a spot
"With a spot hide, where it is; make it where it is not.
"And all the while such Torment you are in,
"That it is at once a Penance and a Sin.

Dorco. But for Coriscas Crimes, why must you strike
At the whole Sex?

Sylv. Damn 'em, they are all alike.


Dor. But why such railing?


Sylv. Railing do you called!
There Is not that Accusation, nor that Guilt,
As barbarous as Hell could e're invent;
Of which Perfidious Woman's innocent.
"Do their lips open? E're they speak, they lie;
"And if they sigh, they lie most damnably.
"False lights their Eyes are, and false weights their Ears;
"Their Hearts false measures, and false Pearl their Tears.
"So talk, or look, or think, or laugh, or cry;
"Seem, or Seem not; walk, sit, or stand, they lie.

Dor. If Women are such Monsters as you make,
How have they Charms, men's hearts how can they take?

Sylv. Their Snare's so plain, you would wonder we are caught:
But Love is man's misfortune, not his fault.
For to promote their cursed bewitching Arts,
They steal our Reasons first, and then our Hearts.
And the acts of Mad men cannot be called their sin,
And none but Madmen ever take Love in.
Yes, Mad indeed, when we repose our trust
"In those who would dye, rather than be just.
"These are the cursed Arts, these are the ways
"That have made Love so hateful in our days.
"False and ungrateful Nymph. Example take
"By me, unskilful Lovers, how ye make
"An Idol of a Face; and take it for granted,
"There Is no such Devil as a Woman Sainted.
"She thinks her Wit and Beauty without peer,
"And over thy slavish Soul does domineer,
"Like some grear Goddess, counting thou were born
"As a thing Mortal only for her ^corn.
"Takes all that praise as Tribute of her merit,
"Which is the flattery of thy abject spirit.

Dor. Why then so humbly is that Sex adored?
And each kind Look with sighs and tears implored?
"These are the Woman's Arms: Take the best way,
Pursue, and tire, and seize her as your prey.

Sylv. Thou have inspired my so ul, and I Will obey.
Since Tears and Prayers are vain, a bolder course
I Will steer: I am resolved to enjoy by force:
"I must strike fire out of her Breast, by dint
"Of Steel; what Fool used Bellows to a Flint?
" Corisca, thou shall find no more of me
"That bashful Lover: No; I Will let her see
"That Love sometimes (though he appear sta^ blind)
"Can from his Eyes the Handkercher unbind.
And when I once have got her in my Arms,
I Will sport and revel in her Riffled Charms.
Exeunt,
ACT the Second.
Enter Montano and Titiro. Titiro. HOw is it possible my Daughter should
"By Heavens be destined for the general go^d?
"For when I mark the words o'th'Oracle,
"Methinks with those the Signs agree not well.
"If Love must join 'em, and the one does fly,
"How can that be? How can the strings which tie
"The True-Loves-Knot be hatred and disdain?
Did Heaven intend this Marriage, '^would ordain,
Beauty, not Hounds over Sylvios heart should reign.

Mont. "He Is young; and has time yet to ^eel Loves Dart.


Tit. He Love! The Woods have took up all his heart.


Mont. Not so, but Love may still new pleasures bring.


Tit. "But Love's a Blossom that adorns our Spring.
Since want of Love is that this age his Crime,
I have but little hope t'expect from Time.

Mont. "What if this Marriage be not writ in Heaven,
"'It Is made on Earth, their mutual Vows they have given.
"To violate which, were rashly to profane
"The Godhead of great Cynthia, in whose Fane
"The Solemn Oath was taken. Now how prone
"Our Goddess is to anger, and how soon
"By us to be incenst, you are not to learn;
But I declare as far as I discern:
"And a Priests mind rapt up above the sky,
"Can into the eternal Counsels pry:
"This Knot is tied by the hand of Destiny.
"Besides, I in a Dream have something viewd,
"Which my old hopes has more than e're renewed.

Titr. Dreams, what are they? Your hope's too strongly bent;
But say, what did the Airy form present?

Mont. "When swelling Ladon weary of his Yoke,
"The Banks with his Rebellious waters broke:
"So that where Birds but lately built their Nests,
"Usurping Fishes swam; and Men and Beasts
"With Flocks and Woods promiscuously ta'n,
"Th'Impartial Deluge swept into the Main.
"That very night, that very night undone,
"I lost a Child, and then my only Son:
Whilst in his Cradle the poor Infant lay,
"The cruel Torrent ravished him away:
I owe my Death to that unhappy day.

Tit. "And I may say of thy two Sons; the Floods
"Have rav^sht one, the other's lost in the Woods.

Mont. Perhaps kind Heaven in the surviving Brother,
"Will by the one make me amends for the other.
"'It Is always good to hope; now hear me out:
"'T was at the dawning of the Morn, about
"That Mungrel hour, which gotten betwixt Night
"And day, is half an Aethiop, and half White:
When kind Heaven to my waking fancy brought
These l^vely Images of Fate, me thought
"On famed Alpheos* banks I Angling sat
"under a shady Beech; there came up straight
"A grave old Man, down to the middle bare;
"His Chin all dropping, and his grizled hair,
And said, Lo, here is thy Son, and take good heed
Thou kill him not, then dived into the Reed:
Startled, I cried, Propitious Heaven defend:
No sooner did the Reverend shape descend,
"But strait black Clouds obscured the Heav^n around,
"And threatening me with a dire Tempest fround;
"I to my bosom clapped the Babe for fear,
"And cried, shall then one hour both give and bear
"Away my hopes: Straight all the air was turned
"Serene, and Thunder* bolts to ashes burned,
"Fell hissing in the water; with Bows broken,
"And Shafts by thousands; Signs which did betoken
"Extinguished Vengeance; then a shrill Voice broke
"From the riv'd Beech, which in its tongue thus spoke;
" Believe Montano, and thy hopes still nourish,
" Thy fair Arcadia once again shall flourish.

Titi. Can your fond hope from such weak fancies rise?
"Alas, Montano Dreams are Histories
"Of what is past, rather than Prophecies
"Of what is to come; mere sragments of the sight,
"Or thoughts of the past day revived at night.
Man's Doom, and the great Oracles of Heaven
Are never by such feeble voices given.
"In short, how Heaven has destined to dispose
"Of our two Children, neither of us knows.
"But this is clear to both of us; thine flies,
"And against Natures Laws does Love despise.

Mont. "Take courage Titiro, do not debase
"Your thoughts with mortal fears, but nobly place
"Your hopes above: Heaven favors a strong Faith,
"And a faint Prayer never climbs that Arduous Path.
"Our Childrens Pedigree you know's Divine,
"And Heaven that smiles on all, will surely sh^ne
"On its own Progeny. Come Titiro,
"Together to the Temple let us go.
And humbly bow to the Eternal Throne,
Victims and Prayers have power, if Dreams have none.
"And thou high mover of the O^bs, that ridest
"The Starry Region, with thy Wisdom guidest
"Their Course, look down upon our tottering state,
"And reconcile Disdain and Love with Fate?
(Exeunt.
SCENE the Second.
Enter Ama^yllis. Amar. "Riches, what are they, but our freedoms snares.
"What boots it in the Springtime of ones years,
"To have the Attributes of fair and good,
"In mortal Veins to lock Celestial blood?
"If with all these our hearts Cont^ment lose,
And what we most desire, want power to choose?
"Happy that Shepherdess, whom ^ome course stuff
"Obscurely Clothes, yet clean and just enough.
"Rich only in her self, and in the best
"And noblest Ornaments of Nature dressed.
Whose narrow state no foreign Cares distress:
Her Bosom, and her little World at peace.
"Who in sweet Poverty no want does know,
"Nor the Distractions, which from Riches grow.
"Yet whatsoever may suffice the mind,
"In that Estate abundantly does-find.
"One Fountain is her Looking-glass, her Drink,
"And Bath; and if she is pleased, what others think,
"It matters not. She heeds not blazing Stars
"That threaten mighty Ones; Wars or no Wars,
"It is all one to her: Her Battlement
"And Shield is that she is Poor, Poor; but content.
Enter Corisca.
Cor. Beyond my wish I Am favored by my Fate.
Heavens, must I be Mirtillos Advocate.
Oh kind Ergasto, a more pleasing task
Thou could not grant, nor could Corisca ask. aside.
Under the Name of Amaryllis Friend,
I have fit means, and safe, to work my end.

Amar. Corisca!


Coris. My dear Amaryllis here?


Amaryll. Yes kind Corisca, all that is left of her.
I Am to be Married; all that once was mine,
My freedom, and my heart, all that was thine;
My friendship and my smiles, are ours no more;
They are all seized by a commanding Power.

Corisc. Do not with needless fears disturb your peace:
Why must your freedom and our friendship cease?
There Is no such Fetters, no such dangers wait
Upon the sweet and happy Married state.

Amar. Happy and Sweet -- Alas --


Corisc. "Why do you fetch
"That ^igh? Leave sighing to that Wretch.

Amar. "What Wretch?


Corisc. Mirtillo.


Amar. What of him -- Oh that blessed Name.

aside.
Corisc. Only I have saved his Life.


Amar. His Life! How came
His Life in danger?

Cor. By his despair for you.
That hour he first your fatal Contract knew,
The k^lling sound no doubt had mortal proved,
Had not my kindness half his pain removed;
"By promising to break this Match, which though
"I only said to comfort him, I know
The way if need were --

Amar. Dear Corisca, speak;
Can thy kind help this cruel Gordian break?

Corisc. Yes, easily.


Amar. My better Angel, how?


Cor. By Heaven she loves him, and my fears are true. Aside.
To break this Marriage off, if you would please
TO assist me, is a thing I Would do with ease.

Amar. Unkind Corisca, had you in your power
This blessing, and concealed it till this hour?
Well, though you hide your secrets, yet take mine:
Know when I think I must my heart resign,
"And all my Life, be subject to a Boy,
That hates me, and does place his only joy
In Woods, in Beasts, in Dogs, and Hunts-mens cries;
That thought to my wracked soul all Peace denis.
Why was I born of Heavenly race for this?
"Happy that poor and humble Shepherdess,
"Who has not half my weighty Cares to keep
"Her heart awake; who feeds her Master's Sheep
"With the pearld grass, and with her lovely eyes,
"Some honest Swain, that for her Beauty dies.
"Not such as Men or Gods choose to her hand,
"But such as Love did to her choice commend.
"And in some favored shady myrtle Grove,
"Desires, and is desired, and lives all Love.
"This only is true Bliss, which till the breath
"Deserts the body, knows not what is Death.
"Would Heaven had made me such a one.

Coris. Why that
I Will wish; to save you it is not yet too late.

Amar. "Not late! My Faith I have already given
"Both to my Father, and what is worse, to Heaven:
"And break with them I neither will, nor may.
"But if your Industry can find a way
"T'unty this Knot, so that my Honesty,
"My Faith, my Fame, and my Religion be
"Preserved, how blessed, how proud --

Cor. Leave it to me.
Coriscas Glory, and her power, this day,
In all their colors shall their Pride display.
"But when from an ill Husband thou art freed,
"May not an honest Lovers hopes succeed?
Mirtillo you must Love, you shall -- nay mo^e,
Must give him leave to see you, and adore.

Amar. "'swear better he would in peace and silence rest,
"And root so vain a love out of his Breast.

Coris. "Some comfort you shall give him e're he dye.


Am. Half favors do but heighten misery.


Coris. "If they do so, the seeking is his own.


Amar. "And what must I expect, should it be known?


Coris. "How Cowardly thou art.


Amar. "And may I still
"Be Cowardly in any thing that is ill.

Coris. "And can you fail me in this small request.
"Farewell; so may I fail thee in the rest.

Amar. "Oh stay Corisca.


Coris. "If you will promise me
"To hear Mirtillo.

Amar. Well, I Will promise thee
To hear him; but provided it may be
But once.

Coris. But once.


Amaryl. "And that he may not know
"We meet with my consent or knowledge.

Coris. No:
You cannot think I Will be so indiscr^et.
I Will make him think it is by my plot you meet.
Trust to my care; your safety in my hand,
Your faithful Creatures power and Life command.

Amar. Farewell kind Maid.

Exit.
Coris. Believing Fool, farewell;
Yes, trust me, I will serve thee; but as Hell
Serves Sinners; I will lead her fairly on
Till past Redemption lost, she is undone.
She Loves Mirtillo:
And Rivalship enflames me to that height,
That now I love him at that senseless rate,
That for his sake I Would startle at no crime.
Nay, I could e'ne turn Fool, and Marry him.
Enter Sylvano, rushing from behind the Seen, and catches her. "Oh Amaryllis I
am caught, I am caught;
Stay and assist me.

Sylv. No, she hears thee not.
"Thou Mrs. in the art of making Lies,
"That sell'st false looks, false hopes at such a price,
"With honesty stamped on thy haughty brow,
None of thy falsehoods shall deceive me now.

Coris. To me this barbrous Language?


Sylv. Yes to thee.
Now I Will reward thee for thy Treachery,
Thou Cheat, Dissembler, Witch, and Sorceress;
Perjured Corisca.

Corisc. "Yes, I do confess
"I am Corisca; not that happy she,
"Who once was Courted and beloved by thee,
My gentle dear Sylvano.

Sylv. Gentle, dear!
What sweetning words, what a new style is here?
Oh the Conversions that are wrought by fear.
Was this the language, this the humble look,
When Me for the young Thyrsis you forsook?
And from that heart, just sealed to me before,
All your repeated Oaths to Niso swore.

Coris. Who, I ^orsake thee? take back the lest part
From thee of that entire devoted heart,
Which is thy sacred right.

Sylvan. Oh wondrous strange!
No, no; Your constancy can never change!
Since of your Crimes you can forgetsul be,
My Vengeance shall refresh your memory.

Coris. Vengeance! Oh Heavens, on whom?


Sylv. On thee Enchantress, thee fair Infidel;
Thou have not played the Traitors part so well,
As I will do the Lovers. Thanks kind powers,
After so many sighs and tedious hours,
My Life and Fortune's spent to buy your smiles,
Kind Fate at last rewards my weary toyls,
And my false fair one, now I Will triumph in the spoils.
Since so much Hell within your Bosom reigns,
I Will Conjure all the Devils in your Veins.

Corisc. Oh Horror! My soft Peace, how can you fright?
Can you hurt her whom once you called your dear delight?
What Faith in Men can Wretched Virgins find,
If my Sylvano ceases to be kind.

Sylvan. Cease to be kind to thee. By Heaven not I,
I Will be so kind --

Coris. Oh my hard destiny!


Sylv. -- That not thy Father, when in all his heat,
And Youth, he did thy wanton Mother treat,
To raise this Cursed race to damn Mankind,
Was ever half so hot, or half so kind.
He, lazy Nuptial Fool did only move
In the dull humane Path of making Love*;
But I Will turn Ravisher, and sport like Jove.

Coris. "Behold me at thy feet. Oh pardon me,
"If ever I by chance offended thee,
"My Idol; by those God-like looks, these more
"Than humane Knees, which clasping, I adore.
"By thy dear self Sylvano; thy more dear
"Affection which thou once to me did swear:
"By the sweet influence of those Eyes, which thou
"Were wont to call two Stars, two Fountains now.

Sylv. TO extract these Tears, what wonders have I done?
Such soft Dew falls not after every Sun.

Corisc. Dear Sylvan, pity me, and let me go.


Sylv. "Think thou still Siren to deceive me? No.


Corisc. Oh let me go, try me but once, and see
How just, how fai^hful, and how kind I Will be.

Sylv. No, I am grown too wise to credit thee;
"And he that takes thy word, himself ensnares,
"Beneath this humble show, beneath these Prayers.
"Is hid Corisca. I too long delay.
My Pleasure and Revenge calls me away.
Come my fair Martyr.

Corisc. Oh Inhumane stay,
Hear me but one word more.

Sylv. You beg in vain.


Corisc. Have you no pity left? shall I obtain
No Mercy?

Sylv. None, I Will drag you to my Cave,
And no more treat you as my Saint, but Slave.
There, Oh my Vengeance! Oh my pleasure!

Corisc. Hold.
Are you resolved?

Sylv. As firm as Fate, and less to be controlled.
Have you done whining?

Corisc. "Oh thou base, and not
"To be exampled Slave, half Man, half Goat,
"And all a Beast; -- thou Natures Outcast, born
For her Disgrace, and for Corisca's Scorn.
" Corisca Loves thee not! thou think the truth;
"What should she see in such a Charming Youth?

Sylv. Now your true self appears; but do not think
Curses or Prayers shall make Sylvano shrink.

Corisc. Infernal Beast, let go your hold, be gone:
Think not the impious deed's so easily done.
That minute thy Impiety shall dare
But touch me, with my shrieks I Will fill the Air;
And call down all Heavens Thunder on thy head:
Nay, I Will turn Basilisk, and look thee dead.

Sylv. Call Thunder down! as if the Gods would hear
Thy out cries Devil. I so little fear
Heavens Anger for so just, so brave an act,
That in the very height of all the Fact,
I Will with such pride the glorious deed commit,
That I^le my self call Heaven to witness it.

Corisc. Hell and Damnation thy black soul confound,
And everlasting Horror shade me round.

Sylv. But I Am
Too gentle: In this posture I appear
More like a Courtier than a Ravisher.
Fur^'s the garb my I^j'ries should wear:
Beast as thou art, I Will drag thee by the hair.
Lets go her Arms, and twists his hands in her Hair. My Rage cannot commit an
act too foul:
Fright me away? I Am not that easy Fool --
As he drags her away, her Hair comes off; and Sylvano falls; at which time she
runs off. Perdition seize her. Oh she is gone; was e're
Such an Escape, such a defeat as here!
"Was ever man so Fooled! Thou all made up of Wiles,
"Was It not enough thy words, thy looks, thy smiles
Were all deceit; false, treacherously fair,
"But you must likewise falsify your hair.
"The glowing Amber, and the flowing Gold
"Which you, mad Poets, so extol, behold!
"Blush, blush now at your error, and recant
"Your threadbare Theme; instead whereof, go paint
"The arts of a deformed and impious Witch;
"Breaking up Sepulch^es by Night; from which
"She steals the hair, which upon Deaths-head grows,
"To Imp her own; which she so neatly does,
"That she has made you praise, what you should more
"Then dire Megaeras Snaky locks abhor.
Exit.
SCENE the Third.
Enter Gerana and Dorinda. Dor. To follow Sylvio, is that a Crime?
I Would wander over the World to follow him.
Not Savage Deserts with their Beasts of prey,
And all their frightful Rocks should stop my way.

Ger. Come dear Dorinda, do not figh in vain;
Come Love no more, but shake off all this pain.
Should Maids, in wild Young Men, place their delig^t;
Alas, they are Creatures not to please, but fright.

Dor. You were young once, and if you told me true,
You said You Loved, And did they frighten you?

Ger. But when I Loved, 'twas at a Woman's Age.
I stood upon my Guard against their rage.
I was more able too the storm to bear:
But they are Creatures which You ought to sear.
Ravenous as Lions, and more fierce than they:
Whilst Slavish* Women must their Wil^s obey,
And to their furious Appetites give way:
They have desires, to which You cannot bow.

Dor. But you have tried, and you shall tell me how.


Ger. Poor Innocence, you know not what you say:
There Is Debt, in Love, you are too young to pay.
Alas, you are Ignorant --

Dor. Why then I Would learn.


Ger. Alas, your own desires you cannot discern.


Dor. To please my Love, What is it that I want?
Can he ask any thing I cannot grant?
No, I have so much Love, that I believe,
I Have rather more than I know how to give.
Instruct me, for I Would please him if I could.
What are those Debts? -- I know they must be good.
Love is a God, I Have heard our Shepherds say:
And all that Gods command, we should obey.
If I Have more hearts than yet I understand,
Tell me, they shall be all at his command.

Ger. Inquire no farther -- pretty Innocence,
But think of Loving Sylvio seven years hence.

Dor. And must I stay so long, so long a time?


Ger. Your Beauty then will be in all its prime.


Dor. Have I not all my Beauty yet? is it*
For that my Sylvio cannot Love me yet?
My wants in Beauty are this way supplied,
I Have Love enough, what e're I want beside.

Ger. Do but observe the Beauties of the May:
Yours will be once as ripe, and bright as they.
Stay till your worth is better understood.
All these gay flowers were once but in the Bud.

Dor. Must Virgins then grow up as Roses do?
Pray, how is that?

Ger. To Age their Sweets they owe.
Whilst by th'warm Sun, and the kind Spring, they blow.

Dor. If then my want of growth be all my fau't,
Methinks I need not stay seav'n years for that.
Let but my Sylvio Love me: He has such charms*
Methinks I could shoot up in Sylvios Arms.
His charming looks would make me any thing.
So kind a Sun would soon bring on the Spring.
Enter Sylvio and Hunts-men crossing the Stage: Sylvio seeing Dorinda, offers
to go.
Dor. Stay Sylvio, do not fly me.


Ger. Cruel, stay.
Cannot such suppliant Beauty stop your way?

Sylv. My Torment here. aside.
To stay, I want the power.
I Have no time now to fool away an hour.

Ger. Inhumane; is this treat a recompense
For all the groans of dying Innocence?
Thou man, more barbarous than the Scythian Race,
And Savager than the wild Beasts you chase.

Dor. Dearer than Life, and sweeter than the Spring.
My Joy, my Love, my Heart, my every thing.
Oh unkind Nymph, can you so Cruel prove,
To talk so harshly to the Man I Love?
Dear Sylvio -- What have I said --
Methinks I blush, yet why, I do not know.
Something I Have said or done, I should not do.
To say I Love him, there is no sin in that:
To tell the truth, sure cannot be a Fau't.
And yet me-think --
A secret shame into my face does fly,
And says it is men should Court, and Maids deny.

Sylv. What is the cause fair Nymph --


Dor. Fair Nymph! Ah no:
You call me fair, but do not think me so.

Sylv. What idle frenzy can so powerful be,
To make you take such pains to follow me?

Dor. Why do you ask? As if you did not know.
I would be near you whereso're you go:
Do, let me follow you, let me be near.
"I Will hold your Arrows, and your Quiver bear:
And if your precious Life should e're,
By the wild Bore you chase, in danger be,
I Will step between, and he shall first Kill me.
In Sylvio's presence is my sole delight:
On you ^ think all Day, and dream all Night.
And in the Morning, when by restless Cares
I early wake, and go to say my Prayers,
All on a sudden, when I kneeling bow,
And think I speak to Heaven, I Pray to You.
Yet unkind Sylvio from Dorinda flies.
Takes all my Heart, yet gives me none of His.

Sylv. Why do you throw away a heart so ill?
I never yet knew Love, nor ever will.
Or if I did, it is in the Chase, the Groves
And Woods: My Hawks and Hounds have all my Loves.

Dor. In Love with Hawks and Hounds! Those Creatures, Sir, have got
Their Loves already. They Are by Nature taught
To Love amongst themselves. Those humble Creatures too,
Are not deserving to be Loved by You.

Sylv. Well Nymph, I see I wrong you by my stay;
I Will take the Cause then of your Grie^s away.
Adieu.

Dor. Stay but one minute; must we part
So soon? I see the cause of all my smart:
It Is Amaryll is takes up all your heart.

Sylv. Before I go,
That little satisfaction you shall have,
I gave my hand; my heart I never gave.

Dor. Do you not Love her then?


Sylv. By Heavens, not I.


Dor. Does she want Charms?


Sylv. Their Influence I defy.


Dor. But are you sure you do not Love her?


Sylv. Why?


Dor. Do you not think, and wish you know not how,
And Dream of her a Nights, as I of You?

Sylv. I think not of her waking, nor asleep,
My heart does no such worthless Triffles keep.

Dor. You Have eased me of I know not how much pain:
I Am Charmed to hear you ta^k with such disdain.
Malice or Love, or both, what e're it be,
I Am pleased he Loves not her, though he hates me.
The Hunts-men hollow from within.
Sylv. Hark, I am called, my pleasure I delay.
Farewell.

Dor. You shall not go.


Sylv. I must not stay.


Dor. Have you no Love, nor pity, cruel Man?


Sylv. I pity you as much as e're I can.


Dor. Well Sylvio,
If by your Hate I Am Doomed to be undone;
I Am the first slighted Maid that dyed so soon.

Sylv. Well powerful Nymph,
For the unrest, the sighs, and pains, so long
You Have borne, in Charity t'a thing so young,
For once I will be kind.

Dor. Will you be kind?
Kind to Dorinda! Oh my lightened mind? --
And will you Love me? -- I never lived till now. --
Shall I be you^s? -- My Joys too mighty grow.
If the unrest I Have borne your kindness win,
To keep you kind, I Will never sleep again.
And if you*ve Charity, because I Am young,
Be sure I Will never grow old -- but why so long
A silence? why this distance? Did you say
You would be kind, and do not know the way.
Swa^ns, when they are kind, their dearest Nymphs approach,
With all their greedy joys their hands they touch,
And kiss 'em over and over.
Then round their Necks their twining Arms they throw:
Were I a Swain in Love, I should do so.

Sylv. Hold gentle Nymph, and give me leave to speak.
Do not my promis d Charity mistake,
Your softness has my stubborn spirit bowed
So much, that I would Love you if I could.
And this Effeminate Confession, none
Of your whole Sex could win, but you alone.

Dor. And is it thus, you're kind?


Sylv. Love I never can.
Within my Breast that Fever never ran.
You have my Pity; all I can I Will g^ant.
Nor will I say I Love you, when I cant.

Dor. You cannot Love?


Sylv. My kindness is so great,
I will not pay your Love with Counterfeit.
Nay, in compassion to your sighs and tears,
Each rising Sun shall hear my Zealous Prayers:
I Will beg kind Heaven that you may Love no more,
And your Conversion on my knees implore.
Once more farewell.

Dor. Why all this hasty flight?
Stay, and be cruel still, and kill me quite.
Exit. Sylv.
Gerr. E'ne let him go, and to requite this scorn,
May he by Heaven's pursuing Vengeance, torn
By some wild Monster in a Desert dye,
And injured Virgins curse his memory.
The noise comes near; ^ye hence, no longer stay;
What if the Savage Beast should come this way,
And Chafed with Hunting, spill your precious blood?

Dor. Alas, I would forgive him, if he ^nou'd.
Since unkind Sylvio from my Love does fly,
Young though I am, I Am Old enough to dye.
Exeun^. The End of the Second Act.
ACT the Third.
Enter Amaryllis with a Train of Shepherdess, who enter Singing. Song.
WHy does the foolish World mistake,
And Loves dull praises sing so loud?
What idle Subjects must they make,
Who choose a blind and Childish Boy their God?
What dearer Joys our Freedom brings,
Whilst the winged Quire on every bough,
Charmed with our Bliss in Consort sings,
And Night and Day our harmless pleasures view.
Chor.
It Is Shame and the Night Loves folly does cover,
And only the Bat and Schreich-Owl that hover
About the dark Windows of a drowzy dull Lover.
The Song ended, they Dance, which done, they go off singing, and Corisca
enters and stays Amaryllis. Manent only Corisc. and Amar. Cor. "I Must go speak
to him, or he will not stir.
"To her faint-hearted Swain; what do you fear?
Calling to Mirtillo.
Enter Mirtillo. Mirt. I would approach her, but dare move no nigher:
"How near to Impotence is strong desire?

Corisc. Make have, or she is lost.


Amar. "What do I view!


Mirt. "Stay; If this action to thy scorn be due,
"Behold the Weapon, and the Breast.
holding his Dagger to his Breast.
Amar. Thou have
Deserved that Sentence thy rash tongue has past.
What cause, bold man, could thy presumption move
To interrupt my sost Retirements?

Mirt. Love.


Amar. "Love is not rude.


Mirt. Can it be rudeness when I kneel before
That dear Celestial Creature I adore.
Is it a Crime t'approach what we admire.
Do but observe, fair Nymph, how the winged Quire,
Each wandering Bird flies over Woods and Groves,
To mix its Ayr^s with the dear Mate it loves.
And what their Loves and weaker sense has done,
Should dastard Man, the Lord of Reason shun?

Amar. And is this Love? Did Love your soot-steps steer,
Prayers, not surprises would have brought you here.

Mirt. "As a wild Beast, enraged with want of Food,
"Rushes on Travelers from out the Wood.
"So I, that only live on thy fair Eyes,
"Since that loved Food thy Cruelty denis,
"On my fair Prey, a Ravenous Lover seize,
To my long famisht Love, the only ease.
My Passion, and my Fears were long at strife,
And 'twas a stratagem to save a Life.

Amar. "Alas, you persecute me, but in vain.
What is it you can ask, or hope t'obtain?

Mirt. "Once ere I dye, to hear me.


Amar. "Well Sir, that Boon I grant. But this before,
"Say little, quickly part, and come no more.

Mirt. "Then that I love thee more than I do love
"My Life; if thou doubt'st, Cruel, ask this Grove,
"Each st^pid Rock, each Mountain, which so of^,
"I by the voice of my Complaints, made sof^.
"Behold these Flowers that make the Earth so proud,
"Those Stars which nail the Firmament. The crowd
Of Nights, bright Gems attest my high desires;
They Have all been witness of my restless fires.
To the adored bright Beautys of those Eyes,
My soul with all her winged affections flies.
"But since you bid me say but little, I
"Shall say but little, saying that I dye;
"And shall do less in dying, since I see
"How much my death is cove^ed by Thee.
Yet when I Am Dead,
You Will pity what to Live you cannot permit;
"Must those bright Stars which my Loves Torches lit,
"Light too my Funeral Tapers, and fore run
"As once my rising, now my setting Sun?

Amar. What shall I say? I cannot speak.

aside.
Mirt. Fair Saint,
Have you no sense of my too just Complaint?
Have you no Pity? speak! -- what have I done,
This Fate to merit? -- Must I talk alon^ --
Say something Cruel Nymph, --

Amar. What should I say?
You know I must not answer you your way.

Mirt. "Say, dye, at least, if nothing else you will say.


Amar. "That honest pity I may grant, you have.
"Other it is in vain to hope or crave.
"For amorous pity you must never implore
"From her, who has given away all that before.
"But if you love me, and have told me true;
"Love my good Name, my Life and Honor too.
"You seek Impossibles: I am a Ward
"To Heaven; Earth watches me, and my reward,
"If I transgress, is Death. But most of all
"Virtue defends me. Sir, your heart recall:
On barren Rocks, none but the unhappy fall.
"And it is the part of Vi^tue to abstain
"From what we love, if it will prove our bane.

Mirt. "He that no longer can resist, must yield.


Amar. "Where Virtue reigns, all passions quit the field.


Mirt. "Love tryumphs over Virtue.


Amar. "Let that man
"That cannot what he will, will what he can.

Mirt. "Necessity of Loving, has no Law.


Amar. But effects cease when Causes do with draw.
I Will see you then no more.

Mirt. Oh stay; your form's fixed here;
"In vain we fly what we about us bear.
"There is no Cure but that which Death affords.

Amar. "Death! Let me speak then, and be sure these words
"Be as a Charm to you. Although I know,
"When Lovers talk of dying, it does show
"Rather an amorous custom of the tongue,
"Then a r^solve of mind, continuing long.
"Yet if in earnest you should ever take
"So strange a frenzy; know that when you make
"Your self away, you murder my Fame too.
"Live then is you do love me, and adieu.

Mirt. And must I live for ever in despair;
Doomed to a Life that is not worth my care?

Amar. Mirtillo, it is high time you went away,
"You have already made too long a stay:
Be gone, and let your griefs not grow too strong,
"Of hopeless Lovers, there is a numerous throng.
"There is no wound, but carries with it pain;
"And there are others, who of Love complain.

Mirt. How can I leave you?


Amar. Why, Sir, should you stay?
You know my heart's already given away.
You know I Am to be Married Sir, -- yet still --
Oh Heavens! I Would like to have said against my will. aside.
Be gone, be gone --
For should he longer stay aside.
I shall the weakness of my soul betray.

Mirt. Why must I fly so sast from all that is dear?


Amar. Should but the Nymphs return, and find you here,
This place they hold so sacred, that they would tear
You Limb from Limb: "The Thracian Nymphs never tore,
"And Murdered Orpheus so on Hebrus shore.

Mirt. Is that a fear should drive Mirtillo hence?
What if the place be sacred; the offense
Proceeds from Love, and Love is sacred too;
They could not hurt the Slave that dies for you.

Amar. He has staid too long; his presence has such power -- aside.
My Father I expect this very hour:
And if he find you here, I shall pull down
A Nations anger and a Fathers frown.
Sir, for my safety go.

Mirt. That word alone could force
Me hence; "but can I suffer this Divorce,
"And yet not dye; the pangs of death I Am sure
" I feel, and all that parting souls endure.
Exit.
Amar. " Mirtillo, oh Mirtill^, could thou see
"That heart which thou condemn'st of cruelty,
"Soul of my soul, thoud'st find it so much thine,
Thoud'st give me pity, and not ask me mine.
"Oh why, if Love be such a natural
"And powerful passion, is it Capital?
"Law too severe that Nature do offend,
"Nature too frail that do with Law contend.
Why must our bleeding hearts with sorrow break,
Whilst modesty forbids our Sex to speak?
"Oh dear Mirtillo, pardon thy fierce Foe,
"In words and looks, but in her heart not so.
"But if addicted to Revenge thou be?
"What greater Vengeance can thou take on me,
"Then thy own grief? For, if thou be my heart,
"As in despite of Heaven and Earth thou art;
"Thy sighs my Vital spirits are; the flood
"Of tears which follows, is my vital blood.
"And all these pangs, and all these groans of thine,
"Are not thy pangs, are not thy groans, but mine.
Enter Corisca and Celia.
Corisc. Why pangs and gro^ns? what should your peace destroy?
What hinders your desires, or bars your Joy?
Come, you must love Mirtillo: Why so coy?

Amar. What do you mean? You know our breach of Faith
Is punished by the Arcadian Laws with death?

Corisc. And is it that dull Nymph keeps you in awe?
"Which is more ancient, tell me, Love or Law?
Love's a Majestic power;
Came in with Nature, and grew up with Man,
And with the world its Sovereignty began.
Laws were but Innovations crept in since,
Which envying Loves Imperial Excellence,
Like Rebels Circumscribed an Absolute Prince.

Amar. Oh Heavens! I scarce dare guess at what you mean:
But could I thy wild Counsels entertain,
"And for the offense, the Law my Life should take;
"Can Love of Life a Restitution make?

Corisc. "Thou art too nice: If Women all were such,
"And on thy scruples should insist too much:
"Good days adieu.
"Laws are not for the Wise. If to be kind
"Should merit death, love help the cruel mind.
"But if Fools fall into those Snares, it is fit
"They be forbid to steal, that have not wit
"To hide their Theft.

Amar. Hold: this wild subject change.
You starrle me to hear you talk so strange.

Corisc. Why strange!
One minute of our Life's not in our powers,
And who but Fools would lose whole days or hours? *
Celia, convert her with that Song I taught you.

^elia Sings. " Let us use time whilst we may;
" Snatch those joys that have away,
" Earth her Winter* Coat may cast,
" And renew her Bea^ties past;
" But our Winter come, in vain
" We solicit Spring again.
" And when our Furrows Snow shall cover;
" Love may return, but never Lover.
Amar. "Thou say all this only to try me sure:
"Not that thy thoughts are such; but rest secure,
Unless the way to break this Contract be
A plain safe way; from guilt and scandal free:
Your useless Councels you propose in vain;
"I Would dye a thousand Deaths e're I Would my Honor stain.

Corisc. "But Amaryllis, do thou seriously
"Believe thy Sylvio rates his Faith as high,
"As thou do thine?

Amar. Alas, how should I know?
"What Is Faith to him, who is to Love a Foe?

Corisc. "Loves Foe! There Is thy mistake: Oh these coy souls.
"Believe 'em not. The deep stream silent rowls.
"No Theft in Love so subtle and secure,
"As to hide sin by seeming to be pure.
"In short, thy Sylvio Loves, but it is not thee.
"He Loves elsewhere.

Amar. "What Goddess must she be.
"For certainly she is not of mortal frame
"That could the heart of Sylvi^ inflame.
Where are her Altars, what is this Goddess Name?

Corisc. "No Goddess, nor yet Nymph.


Amar. "What was it you said?


Corisc. "Do you know my Lisetta?


Amar. "Who, the Maid
"That tends thy Flocks?

Corisc. "The same: She Is all his joy.


Amar. "A proper choice for one that was so coy.


Corisc. But will you know what Magick's in her Arms,
And what great pains he takes to meet her Charms.
"He feigns to go a Hunting. But i'ch' heat
"Of all the sport, he does by stealth retreat
"From his Companions, and comes all alone
"Into my Garden, by a way unknown.
"Where underneath a Haw-thorne-hedges shade,
"The Gardens sense, the poor expecting Maid
"Hears his hot sighs and amorous prayers; which she
"Comes Laughing afterward, and tells to me.

Amar. It Is well.


Corisc. Now hear my plot, and let my Friendship prove
My' industrious Zeal to Crown your Sacred Love.
"I think you know, that the same Law which does
"Enjoin the Woman to observe her Vows
"To her Contracted, likewise does Enact,
"That if the Woman catch him in the fact
"Of falsehood, all her ties and contracts cease,
And she'has free power to Marry where she please.

Amar. "I know Examples. Egle having found
" Lycotas false, remaind her self unbound.

Corisc. "Now hear me out: My Maid by me set on,
"Has bid her Credulous Lover meet anon
"In yonder Cave with her, whence he remains
"The most contented of all living Swains.
"And waits but th'hour. You shall surprise him there:
"And I too as your Witness, will be near.

Amar. Already I Have a prospect of my Bliss.
"I like it rarely, but the way --

Corisc. "'It Is this.
"In th'middle of the Cave, oth' right hand, lies
"Another lesser Grot. There thou shall hide
"Thy self; and hidden in that place abide
"Till the two Lovers come: I mean to send
" Lisetta first, and after her, her Friend;
"Following aloof my self; and when I have
"Perceived him safely Lodged within the Cave,
I will rush after him, and at my cries
You shall come in, and the false Swain surprise:
"That done, shall take the penalty oth'Law:
"I, and Lisetta then will straight withdraw,
"And to the Priest; and then thou shall untye
"This Fatal Knot.

Amar. "Before his Father?


Corisc. Why?
"What matters that? Think thou Montanoes blood
"Will stand in Balance with his Countries good.

Amar. "Go on then; setting all disputes aside,
"I wink, and follow thee my faithful Guide.

Corisc. "Then linger not, dear Nymph, but enter in.


Amar. Before this mighty enterprise begin,
I Will to the Temple, and the Gods adore:
And by my Prayers from Heaven, success implore.
Exit.
Corisc. "Go, and return then quickly. How I Am pleased!
Of half my Troubles I Am already eased.
"But to go on, there is something must be done
"To Abuse my honest Lover Coridon:
"I Will say I Will meet him in the Cave, and so
"Will make him after Amaryllis go.
"That done, by a back-way I Will thither send
"The Priest of Cynthia, her to Apprehend;
"Guilty she will be found, and by our Laws she dies*
The cause of all Mirtilloes Crueltyes.
Enter Mirtillo. "He Is here -- I Will sound him till she comes: Now rise,
"Rise all my Love into my Tongue, and Eyes.

Mirt. "Hear ye damnd Spirits that in Hell lament,
"Hear a new sort of pain and punishment:
"See in a Turtles look a Tigers mind;
"She crueller than death, 'cause she did find
"One death could not suffice her bloody will;
"And that to live was to be dying still,
"Enjoins me not to make my self away,
"That I may dye a thousand times a day.

Corisc. How fares your Love, Mirtillo, since you came*
From your dear charming Ny mph -- Curse on the Name

asid^. Mirt. "As one who in a violent Fever cast,
"And is forbidden Liquor, longs to taste.
"Which got, he greedily sets to his mouth,
"And th^s he quenches Life, but cannot Drouth.

Corisc. "Love over us, no power can e're receiv^
"But what our slavish selves, Mirtillo, give,
"When by his fond desires man's soul is brought.
"So poorly to be fettered to one thought;
"Love quickly Tyrannizes in his Breast,
"And straight grows up a Master from a Guest.

Mirt. Should not one Thought fill up Mirtilloes heart*
Is her^ a Beauty to deserve but part?

Corisc. "How weak, how ill a bargain foolish Swain,
"You make, to exchange kindness for disdain?

Mirt. "The Cruelty of Beauty does refine
"A Lovers Faith, as fire the golden Mine.
"Where were the Sacred Loyalty of Love,
"If charming Women did not Tyrants prove.

Corisc. "Oh wretched and unhappy those, in whom
"That foolish Idol, Constancy finds room.
"Come rouse, Mirtillo, know your nobler parts.
"Look out, you cannot want a thousand hearts.

Mirt. Though scorned and hated, I had rather fall
Her dying Victim, than command 'em all.

Corisc. Oh horror! how he tortures me. aside.
No doubt
You are possessed with some kind f^attering thought,
That though an outward Scorn she is pleased to show,
Like burning Mountains covered over with Snow,
There Is heat within. Enchanted Dreamer, no.

Mirt. "These are but Trophies of my constant Love,
"By which I Will Triumph over the Gods above;
"Over Men below, my Torments and her Hate;
"Over Fortune and the World, over Death and Fate.

Corisc. "Wonder of Constancy! If this Man knew
"How much he is loved by her, what would he do. aside.
Mirtillo, were you e're in Love before.

Mirt. Her, and her only can my soul adore.


Corisc. Then it should seem your Heart was never laid,
But at the Feet of some disdainful Maid.
"Oh that 't had been thy chance but once to be
"In Love with one that is gentle, courteous, free.
"Try that a little, try it, and thou wilt find
"How sweet it is to meet with one that is kind.
"How pleasant it is to have thy Mrs. twine
"About thy Neck, and her sighs echo thine.
"And after say, my Joy, All that I have,
"All that I am, and thy desires can crave,
"At thy Devotion is. If I am fair;
"For thee I Am fair; for thee I deck this hair.
"This Face, this Bosom, from this Breast of mine,
"I turned out my own heart to harbor thine.

Mirt. Happy's the man that is born under a Star
So fortunate!

Corisc. "Dull Swain; a Nymph as fair
"As the proud'st she that curles and spreads to th'Ayr
"Her Beauteous Tresses, worthy of thy Love,
"As thou of hers: The Honor of this Grove,
"Love of all hearts, by every worthier Swain,
"In vain solicited, adored in vain,
"Does Love thee only, and thee only prize
"More than her Life, and for that Love she dies.

Mirt. If such a Nymph there be, conceal her Name;
To all my other Tortures add not shame.
Let me not know she suffers for my sake,
And blush to think I no return can make.

Corisc. "How* ever try what kindness is, taste both.


Mirt. "Distempered Pallats all sweet things do loath.


Corisc. "Uncharitable Youth, art not thou poor,
"And cant'st thou beat a Beggar from thy door?

Mirt. "What Alms can Beggars give? Alas, I Have Sworn
Allegiance, and a Traitor cannot turn.

Corisc. "Blind Youth, who is it thou art constant to?
"I am unwilling to add Woe to Woe.
But can I see thee Cheated and Betrayed;
Her Honor sold, thy Sighs her pass-time made,
And yet not speak? "No doubt but you suppose,
"This Cruelty from her strict Virtue grows:
Thou art abused; that tiresome Vanity,
Called Innocence, she has long since laid by.

Mirt. And can your profanation swell so high?


Corisc. You Will not believe!


Mirt. Believe thee.


Corisc. Then go on
In wilful Ignorance, and be undone.

Mirt. "Oh Torture! I must dye if this be true.


Corisc. "No, live dull Man, and thy Revenge pursue.
And though I know it will your heart strings tear,
Her falsehood I must speak, and you must hear.
"Then to convince you, see you yonder Cave;
"That is your Mrs. Faith and Honors Grave.
"In short, there often a base-born Shepherd warms
"Thy Virtuous Amaryllis in his Arms.
There she her Bliss, her Life, her Heaven does find:
The Ivy to the Oak's not half so kind.
"Now go and sigh, and whine, and constant prove
"To that kind Nymph that thus rewards thy Love.

Mirt. "Ah me Corisca, do thou tell me true?
"And is it fit I should believe thee too?

Corisc. "Truth is, I did not see it, but thou may,
"And (...), for she her word has past
"To (...) there this very hour. But hide
"Thy self beneath this shady Hedges side,
"And thou shall see her enter into th'Cave,
And after her, her happy amorous Slave.

Mirt. "So quickly must I dye?


Corisc. "See, I have spyed
"Her coming down, already by the side
"Of The Temple. Mark how guiltily she moves;
"Her stealing pace betraying their stolen Loves.
"To mark the sequel, do you here remain,
"And afterward we two will meet again.
Exit.
Mirt. "Since the discovery of the Truth's so near,
"With my Belief I will my Death defer.
Enter Amaryllis.
Amar. "I from the Temple come as light as Air:
How much Heaven listens to a Virgins prayer?
"I kneeled and prayed, and strait I felt, me-thought,
"Another soul into my body sho^.
"Which whispered, fear not, Amaryllis, go
"Securely on. Yes, and I will do so,
"Heaven guiding me. Fair Queen of Love, befriend
"Her, who on thee for succor does depend:
"Thou that as Queen in the third Orb do shine,
"If e're thou selt'st thy Sons flames, pity mine.
An humbler Votaress never kneelt before thy Shrine.
"Securely Enter; oh Mirtillo, oh Goes into the Cave.
" Mirtillo* could thou dream for what I go.

Mirt. "I wake and see what I could wish to have been
"Born without Eyes, that I might not have seen.
"Or rather not to have been born; cursed Fate,
"Why have thou thus prolonged my Life's sad Date?
"To bring me to this killing Spectacle!
" Mirtillo more tormented than in Hell.
Dye then, Mirtillo dye -- How dye, and give
The Traitor leave my Ruin to outlive.
"You that enjoy my spoils, who e're you are,
"Since I must fall, shall my Destruction share.
Back to my Covert then I will repair,
And when the Villain shall approach, he dies*
"But is it not base to kill him by surprise?
"What if her Wrongs I openly should right?
"That would proclaim the cause for which we fight.
"Dye basely then thou base Adulterer,
"That have slain me, and have dishonored her.
"I, but the blood may, if I kill him here,
"The Murder show, and that the Murderer.
"What need I care? Yes, but the Murder know^,
"Betrays the cause, for which the Murder's done.
But her staind blood, has not so quenched my flame;
I Would *kill her Guilt, but would not wound her fame.
"Close then in branches on the Rocks left side,
"Within the mouth oth' Cave, my self I Will hide:
And when I see her impious Minion come,
I Will gi^e the Adulterer and her shame one Tomb.
Enter Sylvano. "And your dear footsteps which I long have traced
"In vain, un-erring path lead me at last
"To where my Love is hid. To You I bow,
"Your Print I follow. Oh Corisca, now
"I do believe thee. Now thou have told me true.
Goes into the Cave.
Sylv. "Does he believe Corisca, and pursue
"Her steps to Eryc^nas Cave? A Beast
"Has Wit enough to apprehend the rest.
Is there a Devil like a Woman damnd
In Lust? Not Hell is half so much inflamed?
Her guilt and shame is but too plain,
"This Strumpet to this Swain her self has sold
Bewitching Lust, but more bewitching Gold.
"And here by the false Light now of this Vault,
"Delivers the bad ware which he has bought;
"Or rather it is Heavens Justice that has sent
"Her hither, to receive her punishment
"From my Revenging hands. The words he said,
"Seemed to imply some promise she had made,
"Which he believed: and by his spying here
"Her print, that she is within the Cave, it is clear.
"Do wisely then, and stop the mouth oth' Cave
"With that great hanging stone, that they may have
"No means of scaping; to the Priest then go,
"And bring by the back way, which few men know,
"His Ministers to take her in the fact;
And by her death, my dearest Vengeance act.
Justice, Revenge, Heaven and my injured Love,
Join all your powers with mine, this Rock to move.
Shuts the Cave with a piece of the Rock. "So now the Fox is trapt, and finely
shut
"Where she had Eathed her self. I'l^ straight go put
"Fire to the hole; where I could wish to find
"The rest of Women to destroy the kind.

Exit. The End of the Third Act.
ACT the fourth.
Scene the first.
Enter Corisca. Corisc. "THis day has Heaven and Earth, Nature and Art,
"Fortune and Fate, Friend and Foe taken my part.
"How much more happily (to make her sin
"Look more like Truth) Fate brought Mirtillo in,
"Then I contrived to have brought Coridon?
And how as luckily was that great stone
Roul'd by Sylvano over the mouth of the Cave?
Who could expect such Service from that Slave?
Enter Sylvano.
Sylv. Corisca here! thou damned perfidious Cheat;
I thought by this I had cured your amorous heat.
How comes it, Devil, that I find thee here?

Corisc. To find me here, where lies the wonder? where,
Did you expect me?

Sylv. To have found thee Fooled,
Snared and betrayed, thy wanton courage cooled;
Led to a Temple, there to have undergone
That punishment my Vengeance had pulled down,
And thy loud Crimes deserved: I thought I should
Have seen
Shame written in thy Forehead, and thy Blood.

Corisc. Audacious Slave!


Sylv. Was not that Stone enough
To hold ye? are not Rocks and Marble proof
Against the Assaults of Lust? How got ye off?
Speak Sorceress!

Corisc. What does the Traitor mean?


Sylv. How got you out of the Cave, that dear dark Scene
Of Villainy, t'escape the Minister
Of Justice, which I sent to seize you there?
Have you broke Prisons, or subverted Laws,
Or baffled Justice; made your impious cause
Like those fair looks which your false colors paint;
Acted a Devil and appea^'d a Saint?
Which of 'em was it? or was it all? say, how?
All this betwitching Woman's power can do.

Corisc. I scorn thy Imputations savage Slave.
'Twas Amaryllis that was found i'th'Cave.
And with Mirtillo caught, th'Adultress dies.
Can thy black soul, with all its Treacheries,
Father on guiltless me thy barbarous Lies.

Sylv. Did he not name your Name in entering in,
And say you had told him true -- Oh I begin
To find the Cheat; some trick to take her head.
Nothing that is truth can from thy tongue proceed.
I Will to the Priest, and clear her of the guilt.
No blood but thine shall by my rage be spilt.
I Will swear thy Treasons, and her death prevent;
And false, or true, I Will prove her Innocent.
offers to go.
Corisc. Sylvano stay, and hear me e're you go.
God's! for a little of the Woman now.
This Villain, if his flight I do not stay, aside.
Will ruin all my Love, and all my Plots betray.
You Have often said you Loved Corisca.

Sylv. True.


Corisc. And she has often said that she loved you.


Sylv. And I, Fool as I was, believed you too.


Corisc. Why was that Faith a Crime? how can you still
See by false lights, and read my thoughts so ill?
How often my seeming falsehood you have pursued,
Even to my death, and sought my guiltless blood?
Nay, when your Jealousy so high could swell;
And your blind fears, you thought, discerned so well,
You see kind Heaven your Error does prevent,
And, cruel Man, you find me Innocent.

Sylv. Because I once have had a false distrust,
Therefore my Jealousy must never be just.

Corisc. Well, if I am still that Monster you suppose,
However, sure some sign of Love it shows;
When I can ^amely hear you treat me thus,
And yet forgive a style so infamous.

Sylv. Oh Siren, can thou Love? how many Rogues,
And Villains, odious Slaves, and hated Dogs,
Have I been cal^'d; and treated like'em too?
Do, call this Love, yes perju^'d Woman, do.

Corisc. To those harsh words, I was by passion d^iven:
Things done in storms, should be in calmes forgiven.
Besides, I have been treated too as ill;
And yet through all your Rage, you Loved me still.

Sylv. And you deserved it; you ca^'t less than prove
A Miracle of Faith, of Truth and Love:
You Have such a wondrous stock: a^k Corydon,
Philander, Strephon, Niso, Clitophon,
Philisides, Geron, Thyrsis, Doreo.
By all those Legions of your Loves you're true.

Corisc. How can your fears such wild Ch^maera's frame?
Can you my harmless Conversation blame?

Sylv. How harmlesly you their kind Visits paid,
Witness the Assignations you have made,
The Presents you ^eceiv'd, the cursed Gold,
For which your Vows were broke, and Honor sold.

Corisc. Can you object the Gifts and Treats they made^
And think those Tributes were with Love repaid?
Our Companies requite the Treats we take,
And our Acceptanc^ pays the Gifts they make.
^ kept'em Company -- was it ill done
To hear all Loves, when I received but one?

Sylv. Oh Cunning!


Corisc. She bestows a worthless heart,
Whose seeble Eyes, had never but one Dart.
It Is a dull prize that is never sought but once*
But thus their weak pretenses I r^nounce:
I Am all Sylvano's sacred and entire.

Sylv. Magic and Witchcraft, I shall take new fire.


Corisc. Alas, I made you Jealous on design,
TO assure your*Love before I made you mine.
Since Marriage is a Bond that ties till death,
Could I have too much trial of your Faith?

Sylv. Death and the Devil! I am snared again.
The ^ame and silly loving Fool's got in.

Corisc. Men best express how Treasures they esteem
By the concern they show in losing 'em.
Your ^age and storms to think me perjured, prove
The violence and ardence of your Love.
And to requi^e the tedious pains you have born^,
Accept in blushes this last just return. Gives him her hand.
To morrow at the Altar seal my heart.

Sylv. Thou will be true, thou must -- by Heavens thou art.

Kisses her hand.
Corisc. In all my Charms there my Dear Love I Will meet,
And lay my soul at kind Sylvano's feet.
But one thing I forget;
Do not defend that naughty Woman's cause,
Let the lewd shameful Wretch suffer the Laws.
They have met there before, a hundred times.
But let her dye vile Creature ^or her Crimes.
I hate that odious sin so much; may all
That practice it, as much unpittyed fall.

Sylv. Forgive me, if I take my self away:
To morrows Bliss permits me not to stay.
I must prepare for our dear Nuptial day.
And the bright Sun when he salutes the sky,
No Persian shall adore so much as I:
But see I find you true.

Corisc. Can you suspect me now?
By my Religion and my Lise I Am true.

Sylv. Pray Heaven this pious resolution last,
For to your Sex that Grace comes not in have.

Corisc. Why this mistrust?


Sylv. You know you never told me truth before.


Corisc. Now you're unkind.


Sylv. Well I Will suspect no more.
I will believe you just; and live in hope
Falsehood in Woman; is a stream may stop.
Grant ye great Gods (that one kind (...) do)
Once in a l^fe a Woman may speak true.
Exit.
Corisc. Poor credulous Fool -- What dangers did I shun?
Had I not used this Cheat, I had been undone.
Had the bold Slave appeared in her defense,
He had crushed my Plots, and proved her Innocence.
But now thanks to my Wit,
His preparations for his faithful Bride,
No doubt has found him work enough beside.
Proud Rival, nothing now thy Fate shall stay:
The gaudy Sacrifice must bleed to day.
Exit.
SCENE the Second.
Enter Montano, Amaryllis bound, with Attendants. Mont. "Base present Age,
which do with thy impure
"Delights, the beauty of the soul obscure,
"Teaching to Nurse a Dropsy in the Veins,
Bridling the look, but give desire the Reins.
"Thus like a Net that spread, and covered lies,
"With leaves and tempting Flowers, thou do disguise
"With coy and holy Guiles a Woman's heart;
"Make Life a Play, and Virtue but a Part.
"They think it not a fault Loves Sweets to steal,
"So from the World they can the Theft conceal.

Amar. "Had I been guilty, then it would have been
"Less grievous to me to have Death pay sin.
But now to dye thus Innocent, in all
"My pride of Youth and For^une thus to fall,
"Is a sad case.

Mont. A sad one it is indeed,
When at one stroke the Arcadian hopes must bleed.
Thou born of Heavenly Race, born to assuage
A Nation's griefs, to appease a Goddess Rage;
"One that for Heavenly Beauty, merited
"Temples and sacred Victims, to be led
"Thy self to The Altar as a Sacrifice.
"Who could behold it without melting Eyes.
Oh wretched fa^l!

Amar. "For all this have not I
"Transgrest the Law, but Innocently dye.
"Must I then dye Montano, must I dye?
"None left to hear, none to defend me left?
"Of all abandoned, of all hope bereft?
"Only of such a mocking pity made
"The wretched object as affords no aid.

Mont. "Be patient Nymph, and give me cause to tell,
"Though thou did ill, yet that thou suffer'st well.
"Look up to Heaven, that gave thee Birth, and be
"Content with what is writ above for thee.

Amar. Oh it is a cruel Sentence, whether given
By Men or Gods, or writ in Earth or Heaven:
But writ in Heaven I am sure it cannot be,
For that does my unsullied Bosom see;
And there my injured Innocence is known,
Stands fair, and shines before The Eternal Throne.
"But what does that avail, if I my Life must pay?

Mirt. "Who fears to dye, dies every hour i'th'day.
"Why hang'st thou back, and draw'st a painful breath?
"Death has no ill in it, but the fear of Death;
"And they that dye when they have heard their Doom,
"Fly from their Death.

Amar. "Perhaps some help may come.


Mont. Good Nymph no more, our duty calls us hence;
I with your stay no longer can dispense.

Amar. "Dear Woods adieu then, my dear Woods adie^,
"Receive these sighs (my last ones) into you,
"Till my cold shade, forced from her seat by dire
"And unjust Seel, to your loved shades retire;
"For sink to Hell it cannot, being Innocent,
"Nor soar to Heaven, laden with discontent.
" Mirtillo, dear Mirtillo, most accursed
"The day I saw, the day I pleased thee first:
Without thy Love, death would less frightful be;
My greatest pain in death, is, losing thee.
Enter Corisca. Is this the Nymph accuses me, dear Friend,
Thy goodness cannot to such crimes descend;
Rescue my Honor, and my Life defend.

Corisc. Dear Amaryllis, your own actions blame;
You l^st my Friend^hip when you lost your Fame.

Am^r. Nay, then my ruin does too plain appear,
I little thought such Treason harbored here.

Corisc. Treason! Heaven knows my heart. -- Treason in me?
No, I Would not wrong my mortal Enemy:
Because I Have spoyld her amorous design,
She would repair her Fame by wounding mine:
But Sir, I am a Witn^ss of her sin,
I saw this Wanton Nymph steal softly in:
A glowing color all her Face o'respread;
It ma^e me blush to see her look so red.
At her approach, behind a Bush I stepped,
And unperceived, my watching station kept:
The eager Youth came after her in have;
His looks less fearful, and his steps more fast,
And blustering, rusht into the Cave, whilst I,
Oh the strange Charms of Curiosity --

Amar. Oh my tired patience! Oh thou barbarous
In humane Nymph, to abuse my Virtue thus;
What Treacheries did ever I design
Against thy blood, that thou should thirst for mine.

Corisc. Abuse thy Virtue! thou have none to wrong;
But not to make th'unpleasing tale too long,
Close to the Rock my listening Ear I l^id,
And th'hollow Cave this gentle sound conveyed;
On the cold ground, as the Ny^ panting lay,
In a faint dying Voice, I heard her say,
What shift does poor Love make? to which the Swain,
With a brisk joy, thus Answered her again:
No shining Monarchs in their Beds of Gold,
And their pr^ud Arms do so much Treasure hold,
Not half my B^ss, nor half thy sweetness taste.

Amar. Oh torture me no more, dear Sir, make have,
Send me to Execution, let me dye;
*It Is worse than death to hear this Blasphemy.
Ex* guarded
Corisc. See with what have she takes her self away;
Her guilt's so terrible, she dares not stay:
Yet there is such winning Beauty in her Face,
That I protest, were I to judge her case,
My tenderhearted Nature is so good,
I should forgive her sin: I Vow I should.
Exit.
Mont. "Fair Golden Age, when Milk was the only Food:
"The Cradle of the Infant* World the Wood,
"Rockt by the Winds; when the untoucht Flook did bea^
"Their dear Young for themselves. None then did fea^
"The Sword or Poison; no black thoughts begun
"T'Eclipse the light of the Eternal Sun:
"Nor wandering pines unto a foreign shore,
"Or War, or Riches (a worse mischief) bore.
"That Idol, Honor, which the Ambitious blinds,
"Was not till now the Tyrant of our minds;
No Lawless wishes then, no Perjuries
Corrupted Love; then the blind God had Eyes.
"Husband and Lover signified one thing;
"True Love, and the delights true Love does bring,
"Was Honor to those sober minds that knew
"No Happiness, but what from Virtue grew;
Dear Heaven that state of Innocence renew.
Exit. Enter Mirtillo.
Mirt. Wretched Mirtill^, to the Temple fly,
And there behold thy Amaryllis dye;
A Martyr to thy groundless Jealousy.
Oh damned Corisca, thou Infernal Hag;
Do, boa^ thy Treasons, and thy Trophies brag;
And as the greatest Curse that I can give,
May thou but dye with half the pains I live.

SCENE the Third.
Enter Dorinda disguised in a Coat of Furs. Dorind. Sylvio, when I appear in my
own shape,
Takes all the care my presence to escape;
And when my sighs I utter, then he speaks
With so much s^n, that my poor heart he breaks;
But thus disguised I may his footsteps trace,
"Securely gaze upon his lovely Face.
"Live in the Sunshine his fair Eyes do cast,
Follow my Love, and near my Heaven be placed.
But what if he should see through my Disguise?
Tho Love, they say, is blind, yet Hate has Eyes.
Wretched Dorinda, every way thour't lost:
Was ever poor unhappy Maid so crossed?
Well, from my Love you too unkindly fly,
The Nymphs will chide you Sylvio when I dye.
I Am the last Conquest too you e're will make:
For none of 'em will Love you for my sake.
Wearied and tired, I grow so faint, I Will try
If I can sleep, in yonder brake I Will lie,
If they can fleep that Love so much as I.
Exit.
Enter Sylvio, with Linco and other Shepherds; a Bores Head being carried
before him in Triumph, the Shepherds Sing. "Oh glorious Youth, true Child of
Hercules,
"That kilst with ease such Monstrous Beasts as these.
Lynco. " Oh glorious Conqueror, by whom lies slain
" The terror of the Arcadian plain:
" This is the famous Trophy, Noble Toil
" Of him whom we our Demi-god must style:
" Extol his great Name Shepherds, and this day
" Keep ever Solemn, ever Holy Day.

The Shepherds Sing. " Oh glorious Youth, true Child of Hercules,
" That Kilst with ease such Monstrous Beasts as these.

Lynco. " Oh glorious Youth, who did despise thy own
" For others safeties.

Sylv. All that I have done,
Was but my duty. "Virtue climbs her Throne
"By these steep Stai^s, and the high Gods have set
"Danger and Toil before her Palace Gate.

The Shepherds Song.
Thanks Conqueror to thee* n^ more shall the Clown
Be scared from the Plough, and the Tillage lay down;
"He shall Sow the plump Seed, and from Earths pregnant Womb,
"Expect the wished fruit when the Season is come*
No more shall the Shepherds be frightened away,
The Nymphs and their Loves in the Forests shall play.
Chor. No more shall the Shepherds, etc.


Lync. "Such peradventure was the famous Bore
" Alcides slew, yet so thy glory's more;
"'It Is thy first labor, but his third.
"But with wild Beasts thy Infant Valor plays,
"To kill worse Monsters in thy riper days.

Sylv. "But stay, I see, unless my eyes mistake
"A greyish thing at Couch in yonder brake;
"Sure some wild Beast, most certainly it is one
More Tryumphs still, my Victories to Crown.
Direct this Arrow by thy power Divine,
And Cynthia, the devoted head is thine.
Sylvio draws an Arrow and shoots; at which Lynco, and some of the other
Shepherds go out.
Sylv. "What have I done, what have my Eyes beheld?*
"In a Beasts skin I have a Shepherd killed:
Sylvio an end to all thy Tryumphs give;
"Throw down thy Weapons and inglorious live.
Enter Lynco and the former Shepherds, leading in Dorinda bleeding as wounded
with an Arrow.
Lync. Lean gently on my Arm.


Dorin. May I not know --


Sylv. D^rinda!


Dorin. To what hand my death I owe?


Lynco. To Sylvio's.


Dorin. Must I Sylvio's Martyr prove?


Sylv. How ill poor Nymph have I repaid thy Love.


Dor. Killed by so dear a hand?


Sylv. How can I gaze
On so much ruin? dare I see that Face
And live? "No, fly thy guilt, fly thy disgrace;
"Yet something holds me, and would make me run
"To her, whom I of all the world did shun.

Dorin. Why do you look so wildly -- do not start
At what you have done; if you have struck my heart?
It was your own, and that can be no ^ault:
"Those hands to wound me, your fair Eyes have taught.

Sylv. Run Linc^, fly, and bring some quick relief;
Bring all your help, Friends, Arts to save her Life;
Fly as you value my Eternal Bliss.
Exit Linco.
Dorin. This Care is wondrous kind, indeed it is.
But now I fear it comes too late.

Sylv. Too late.
Divert ye Gods this bloody Scene of Fate,
And save her Life, or I must ever howl:
Horrors and Hell will haunt my tortured soul*

Dorin. Wipe your dear Eyes, this grief I cannot see.
You are too good to be disturbed for me:
But if you think my death a fault has been,
Let me enjoin the penance for your sin:
When I am dead, dear Sylvio, do but come
Once in a day, and visit my cold Tomb.
And when you see the pretty Garlands hung*
About my Grave, to show I died so young,
And think how the bewailing Nymphs all me^,
With trembling hands the Cypress branches set,
And mixed the flowers their tender Eyes all wet;
When you shall read upon the little Stone,
Here lies Dorinda by her Love und^ne,
And over my dust the weeping Marble see,
Then with a sigh you will remember me.

Sylv. Remember thee; is this weak Tribute all
That I must pay for thy unhappy ^all?

Do^in. And* is not this enough? Will you do more
Then sigh for my poor sake; nay, then you shall weep too,
And mou^n for me, as I have done for you.
Say, will you not?

Sylv. Is that all I can pay?
A Pious Mourner at your Grave I Will stay,
And on your Marble, weep my Life away.
Why could our meeting Souls no sooner join?
Now dear Dorinda, I am entirely ^hine.

Dorind. Then I Will dye pleased, if Death has made you mine.


Sylv. Must so much goodness dye? when thou a^t dead,
And all that is dear on Earth's for ever fled;
Thus over thy Dust I Will hang my drooping Head.

Dorin. But will you wish I were alive again?


Sylv. More then for Heaven.


Dorind. But would you love me then?


Sylv. More than the Saints love Bliss: I Would be all thine:
No Constancy, no Faith, no Love like mine.

Dorind. With Joy before I could my Life resign.
But Death will now but* little welcome find.
Now I Would fain live to hear you speak thus kind.

Enter Lynco and Dameta. Sylv. Oh save her Life, with hers redeem my Fate: to
Da.
Restore her Heaven; but if I pray too late,
If Faith on Earth the Gods above regard,
With Constellations, and with Crowns reward,
No common Coronet's reserved for thee
In Heaven, in Hell no common pains for me.
Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT the fifth.
SCENE, the Temple of Diana. Amaryllis appears bound, with Guards of Shepherds
attending, with a Heads-man and an Axe. Enter to her Mirtillo, who kneels to
her. Amar. MIrtill^ rise; this posture does not fit
My dying state: And though our Sex admit
Such humble Tribute in their Pomp and Pride,
Now I must lay that Vanity aside.

Mirt. If so much Innocence must bleed, and all
sh' unaiding Gods can see such Virtue fall:
Where all my Vows, and all my Prayers are due,
Be not offended if thus low I bow;
You are a part of Heaven, and it is my Duty now.

Amar. Mirtillo, do not chide me when I own,
I grieve in death we two must part so soon.

Mirt. Oh my charmed Ears, dear Excellence go on.


Amar. Had Life been mine, I h^d kept this secret hid;
But Modestys strict Laws sure cannot ^orbid
To own my kindness now. Yet if it be
A fault, my dear Mirtillo, to impart
The tender secrets of a dying heart,
I shall be quickly punished for my sin;
That Tongue that utters it, never speaks agin.
And you will soon see in Scarlet currents flow,
That blood that blushes when I tell you so.

Mirt. What divine Raptures from this sweetness flow.
But after all these blessings must you dye;
Never was happiness wound up so high,
To break so soon.

Amar. Since I have gone thus far,
I cannot but let you all my weakness hear.
By a feigned Plot the false Corisca laid
Into that fatal Cave I was betrayed,
To have found Sylv^o false; and entered in,
By the just forfeit of his Faithless sin,
To break the Fetters I was doomed to wear;
And so recall my Vows to pay 'em here.

Mirt. Now to all this dazeling kindness hear
From me, the barbarous return I made.
I too was to that fatal Cave betrayed.
I saw you enter in, and my blind Jealousy
By false Coris^as Arts was raised so high,
That my Accursed misguided soul had framed
Those black and hideous thoughts, for which it is da^'d.
I went to find a Base-born Shepherd there,
Divinely good, and excellently fair.
Now judge, if in the race of man there be
A Devil such as I, or Saint like thee.

Amar. Mirtillo, 'twas unkind, 'twas much unkind.


Mirt. Is that the harshest name, that you can find?
Why was I made the Monster of Mankind?
Suspect such Innocence, such goodness doubt;
No Infidel but I durst harbor such a thought.
Just Heaven by your winged Lightning let me burn,
And fall a Funeral Taper at her Urn.

Amar. Hold unkind Sir --


Mirt. Let me go on* What Curse too great can be
For that Infernal Slave that Murders thee?

Amar. As I ^orgive you Sir (and may Heaven too)
No sarther this unpleasing style pur^ue.

Mirt. Must I be silent then?


Amar. Yes Sir, you shall.
To our unhappy Stars impute my fall.

Mirt. Oh Miracle of Goodness!


Amar. And if e're
You truly Loved, let your calm looks appear.
This as I Am dying, sure you cannot deny.
It Is worse to bear your horrors than to dye.

Mirt. Divinest of thy Sex, thou art obeyed;
I Will summon all my Courage to my aid.
Enter Corisca. Corisca here?


Corisc. The Priest within, and the chief Ministers
Are feasting Heaven with Sacrifice and Prayers.
The place is sa^e, and I may speak. Her Guards
Keep distance, and I shall not be o're-heard.

Mirt. Dares thy Accursed Face --


Corisc. What dismal Prologue's there? aside.
No Sir, it is my kindness brings me here.
I come to save her Life.

Mirt. Will thou protect her Life, and clear her Fame.


Cor. I will.


Mirt. Then I Will raise Altars to thy Name.


Corisc. When I betrayed you --


Mirt. I forgive the sin.
Name it no more; thou art all white again.
Save but her Life, and in immortal Charms
I Will Live for ever.

Corisc. Hold. Not in her Arms.


Mirt. What do I hear?


Corisc. Unseal your blinded Eyes.
I am that Nymph, who for Mirtillo dies.
And once my Rivals Murder had designed,
But thanks to Heaven I Have changed that bloody mind.
The Guilt's all gone, but yet the Love remains.
Mirtillo, if in pity to my pains,
You can be moved by a sad Virgins Prayer,
To save my Life by killing my Despair:
Your hand to me before this Altar give,
And Amaryllis for that Grace shall live.

Amar. Oh horror! what a killing sound is here?


Corisc. Nor for her safety think you pay so dear.
I rob you Sir of nothing. She can never
Be Yours; the Bars that Destiny has thrown
Betwixt your Loves, have your vain hopes undone.

Amar. By her false Accusations let me dye.
If nothing but your Love my Life can buy,
That mighty sum do not too Prodigally pay;
That hour that takes Mirtilloes heart away,
My Death begins. Then let it gently come;
Let me not sink in Tortures to my Tomb.

Corisc. Oh my wracked heart!


Mirt. Oh my transported soul!
Was ever Love so true?

Corisc. Was ever Fool
So Idle? Yes, embrace thy amorous Prize:
Fill thy fond Arms, and glut thy greedy Eyes:
But know in one half hour thy darling dies.

Mirt. Infernal Fiend.
Forgive me; Angel, was the word I meant. Kneels to Corisca.
Save but her Life, and be my Tutelar Saint.

Enter Montano, Ergasto, Linco, and several Shepherds and Priests in
Procession, singing. SONG.
" Sols Sister, Daughter of great Jupiter,
"That shin'st a second Sun in the first Sphere,
"To the blind World.
"Thou, whose Life-giving and more temperate ray
"Thy Brothers burning fury does allay.
"Ah pity thy Arcadia, and that rage
"Thou do in others in thy self assuage.
Mirt. "Once more your sacred Voices all Unite;
"And once again invoke the Queen of Night.

Second SONG.
Where Is artless Innocence and guiltless Loves,
If they are Banished the Arcadian Groves.
Fair Cynthia, though late,
Pity the Ruins of a World, "Create
"In us true Honor: Virtue's all the State
"Great souls should keep. To these poor Cells return,
"Which were thy Courts, but now thy absence mourn:
"From their dead sleeps awake,
All those Lethargick Infidels,
Who following their corrupted Wills,
"Thee and the glory of the ancient World forsake.
Mirt. To what dire Prodigies does sin give Birth?
"The Goddess sweats cold drops of blood; the Earth
"Is Palsy shook; the sacred Cavern houls
"With such unwonted sounds as tortured souls
"Send out of Graves: Our blasted Victims show
Our Ills too plain, and our Revenge too slow.

Mirt. These Prodigies by angry Heaven are sent
To prove this perjured Beauty Innocent.
Mistake not, Holy Sir;
When Justice strikes, and suffering Criminals dye,
The Gods look smiling, and serene their Sky.
These horrors all from Innocent blood arise:
Heaven's only Clouded when the guiltless dies.

Corisc. How! guiltless? would she were: Then these chaste Groves
Had never been profaned with impious Loves.
Her Insamy had then not been so loud;
Nor had this Funeral pomp drawn all this mourning crowd.

Mirt. Exquisite Fiend!
Oh Sir, believe her not.
This Injured Virgins Honor has no spot.
A purer Saint the undeserving World never graced;
A brighter Star in Heaven was never placed:
The Goddess you adore is not more Chaste.

Mont. Forbear this Blasphemy.


Corisc. No, let him Rave;
It Is all the pleasure that poor Losers have.
No kindness yet.
aside to Mirt.
Mirt. Oh my distracted Soul!


Corisc. Yet yield, and she shall live.

to Mirt.
Mirt. No Traytress.


Corisc. Constant Fool!


Mont. Now Nymph, before the Fatal stroke is given,
If thou would reconcile thy self to Heaven,
Make thy last Prayer.

Amar. Kneeling. Since then my Stars my Martyrdom decree,
My injured Fame, dear Heaven, I leave to Thee.
Clear but my sullyed Name, when I am dead,
And willingly to th'Axe I Will bow my Head.
"My Body to its Native dust I give:
"My Soul to Him, in whom alone I live.

Mirt. If she must dye:
Here my last Vows I Will seal.
Kneels and kisses her hand.
Mont. Rude Swain forbear.
Such profanation is not suffered here.

Mirt. You may more easily Seas from Seas divide:
Our Souls are joined, and make one mixing Tide.

Mont. Force 'em asunder. The Attendants force 'em apart.
It Is no wonder Heaven
Has such dread signs of its displeasure given:
When their own Rites they thus polluted see,
And from such stains not their own Altars free.

Mirt. Is there such Treason in a parting kiss?
For ever torn from all my dearest bliss.

Amar. Mirtillo, this is an unkind Divorce;
But let their cruel Rites have their free course.
Love at this distance, no strict Laws deny:
Thus I Will look blessings on You, and then dye.

Enter Carino and Dameta. Car. Hold, hold, your Fatal Doom!


Mirt. My Father here?


Carin. Yes, and thy Father is thy Murderer.
Thou art Montanoes Son; and if he give
Her Death, in whom thy Life does only live,
It Is his own blood he spills.

Mont. Take heed bold Man.


Car. Sir I speak truth, and fright me if you can.
The Son you lost i'th'deluge, is this Youth;
I found him lodged near our Alpheos mouth
"Undround: His Cradle like a little boat,
"Into the Woods had carried him afloat.
Such care had Heaven --

Mont. Where is Dameta?


Dam. Here.


Mont. "When you came back ('it is since some 20. year)
"From seeking of my Child, which the swollen brook,
"By'ts rapid Inundations from me took:
"Did you not say that you had sought with pain,
"All that Alpheo Baths, and all in vain.
"How comes it then --

Dam. Your pardon Royal Sir,
I went to seek him, and I found him there.
But this good Man had kept him as his Son,
And Fear made me conceal what he had done.
Because the Oracle foretold me there,
" That if the Child then found should e're
" Return, he should be like to dye,
" By his mis-guided Fathers Cruelty.

Mont. "Ah me! it is too clear: This act of mine,
"My Dream and th'Oracle did well Divine.
Why did the Gods protect my drowning Child?
Preserve my blood to have it thus defiled.

Mirt. Great Sir, from whom my Royal Birth I draw,
I claim the favor of the Arcadian Law:
When Criminals are doomed to bleed,
Equals in blood in their Exchange may dye,
And now that Equal to her blood am I.
How can you see such Fetters on those hands?
Make have, unty, unty those impious Bands.
And in her place, by the kind Gods decree,
Your Cynthias juster Victim, offer me.

Corisc. Now all my hopes are ruined --
Foolish Swain! aside.
By my cursed Arts my dear Mirtillo slain!

Amar. Why generous Youth do you pursue this claim?
You Will save me from the Axe to dye with shame.

Mirt. What glory to my Royal Birth I owe,
When to redeem thy Life, my blood may flow.

Corisc. I cannot see him dye.

aside. Enter Sylvano. If you have pity for a Virgins Prayer, kneels.
For your own blood, this dear Youths blooming years,
And your Arcadias hope --

Sylvan. What do I see!
By all the Devils in her Soul, it is she.

Corisc. Alas, I Have been unkind --


Mont. What does she say?


Corisc. To Death with him; take the fond Fool away.
Pray for his Life! my dull mistake forgive.
A Slave so senseless don't deserve to live.

Sylvan. By all that is good, she Loves the smooth-faced Youth.
Sir, I Conjure you by your Love to Truth:
By all your piety, the Gods you fear,
Believe her not; that Monster do not hear.
On her own head let your kind Justice fall;
She has Cheated You, Her, Him; Betrayed you all.
Treason's her business, Poyson's in her Tears;
Perdition in her soul; she never Swears
But she is Perjured; if she speaks, she Lies;
And all the Prayers she makes, are Blasphemies.

Carin. "Thou art the happiest Father, and most dear
"To the immortal Deities; see here
"The long-kept secret of our Fate made clear.
"Tears of delight in such abundance flow,
"From out my heart, I scarce can speak. Our Woe,
" Our Woe shall end when two of race Divine,
" Love shall combine,
"And for a Faithless Nymphs Apostate state,
"A faithful Shepherd Supererrogate,
Of Heavenly race is not this Youth, when thine?
And Amaryllis is of race Divine.
"And what great Sir, but Love has them combined?
Sylvio, by Parents and by Force was joined
"To Amaryllis, and is yet as far
"From Loving her, as Love and Hatred are.

Mont. "In what a mist of Errors, how profound
"A night of Ignorance have I been drowned?
By every C^cumstance it is evident
"The fatal Voice, none but Mirtillo meant.
"For who indeed since slain Amyntas Death
"Expressed such Love as he? such constant Faith?
"Who but Mirtillo for his Mrs. would,
"Since true Amyntas spend his dearest blood?
"This is that work of Supererrogation;
"This is that faithful Shepherds expiation
For the Apostate Lucrin's fact. Now Son,
Complete a Nations joys, and Crown thy own.
Gives him Amaryllis.
Mirt. Then the Immortal Treasure let me seize,
And thus kind Sir, embrace your sacred knees.

Amar. Our Loves thus Crowned, Ergasto fly, and save
My wretched mourning Father from a Grave:
Tell him I live, and all his fears remove.

Mirt. Thy Piety's as Charming as thy Love.


Corisc. Break, break my heart.


Mont. But as the Gods ordein'd
T'unite your hearts, your hearts must be unstained.
Heaven that preserved thy Childhood from the Flood,
By Miracle restored thee to my Blood;
And to oblige Mankind, decreed this tie,
Could do no less than guard her Chastity.
As you dread Tortures, Death, and angry Heaven, to Cor.
Confess her Injuries and be forgiven.
Repent, and say she is Innocent.

Corisc. I do.
I wronged you Sir, but yet I loved you too.
to Mir.
Sylvan. Yes, she has loved him, and all Mankind beside;
The Sex is not enough to please her Pride.

Corisc. Oh how I hate that Face.


Sylvan. I know you do.


Corisc. Dear World farewell, and all delights adieu.


Silvan. Sir, as you ever Faith and Justice prize,
Hear from my tongue that Witches Sorceries.
Their Entrance to the Cave's her Plot, and laid
Only to have her Rivals Life betrayed.
And yet by all the Oaths Art could design,
Or faithless Woman ever break, she is mine.
And mine by all her Conjurations; nay
To morrow was to be our Wedding day:
And all was but a trick to take me hence,
Least I should stay to prove her Innocence.
Never did such a monstrous spurious Race
Of Nature, Heaven, and Natures works disgrace.

Mont. Is all this Truth?


Sylvan. Too true.


Mont. Just Heaven forbid.
False Nymph, did You --

Corisc. I know not what I did;
I Cheated Him, wronged Him, designed Her Fall:
I have my Pardon, and I Own it all.

Mont. Had ever blood been so unjustly spilt.
But though I have forgiven your savage guilt,
I cannot permit your breach of Faith; I must
Not only pardon you, but make you just.

Cor. I am all horror.


Mirt. If this false-Fair ones Crimes you can forgive,
And take an humble penitent Fugitive,
She Is yours.

Corisc. Death and Confusion!


Mont. 'Twas breach of Faith was the provoking guilt,
In all the sufferings Arcadia felt.
But it shall end.

Sylv. You could not please me more.
This Nymph is all the Blessings I implore.
I hate her worse
Then Hell, and of all other hopes bereft, aside,
Marriage is all the dear Revenge that is left.

Corisc. Is this your promised mercy?
Let me meet Wracks, Death, any thing but him.

Mont. Is this your Penitence for your pardoned Crime?


Corisc. To Marry him is all the plagues of Hell:
Adders and Scor^ions.

Sylvan. No, it is wondrous well.
I shall Convert thee, pretty Infidel.

Corisc. Have you no mercy left? no pity Sir?


Sylvan. Have you no Justice le^t? Give me but her --


Corisc. Of all the Savages the World can find,
Let me but shun that Monster of the kind.

Sylv. Of all the happiness of humane Life,
I only beg that Jewel, for a Wife.

Cor. Oh Sir! you Stab me, Kill me --


Mont. When you Swore
You Would Marry him, were Oaths esteemed no more?
Forsaken Piety, where art thou fled?
Be just, as you would save your forfeit Head.

Corisc. I loath thy very sight.


Sylv. And I love thee, my pretty Innocence,
As much as thy Hot blood loves Impotence.

Cor. Why then Inhumane will you Marry me?


Sylvan. To torture every Vein of thy false heart,
Make thy checked pride at my dear Vengeance start.
Thy torments will a secret Joy afford.
I was thy Slave, and now shall be thy Lord.
Nor hope I Will shun thy hated Bed; in spite
I Will Tyrannize all day, and sport all night.
My Head I Will on thy perjured Bosom lay;
Ransack thy spoils, and chase thy sleeps away.

Enter Sylvio and Dorinda, who kneel to Montano. Corisc. Yes, Villain do, and
my Revenge shall be,
I will be kind to all thy Sex, but thee:
I Will make you a worse Monster than you are.
Oh I am Mad --

Sylvan. A very hopeful pair.


Corisc. I Will meet thy loathed embrace in such a frightful shape,
That ev^ry Kiss you force, shall be a Rape.
To Mirt. As I am doubly punished for my Crime,
At once in losing you, and meeting him,
In pity to the Ruins which you make,
Those few stolen minutes from her Arms you take,
Bestow on me. You Will find me strangely good.
I Will banish all the Feavour from my blood;
And love you with desires so pure, so chaste --

Sylvna. Stand off; the Witchcrafts of those Eyes are past:
Dear Mine, I Will lay thy wandering Devils fast.

Corisc. You shall be welcome to my Soul, my Arms.
But i^ the force of her more powerful Charms
Hold you too sure; to make him Jealous, be
So kind, as but to feign and flatter me.
Aid the Revenge of an unhappy Wife,
And make him lead a wretched Husbands Life.

Sylvan. Let him come near thee, Siren, if he can;
Thy Slavery shall have so short a chain,
I Will keep my aching Forehead from that pain.

Corisc. In all the Cheats I used, the tricks I played,
And all the Credulous Fools I have betrayed,
Free from all heinous Crimes I safely slept:
My Virgin Chastity entire I kept.
Did I preserve my Innocence for this?
A Maid! dull Slave, I am too good for thee.
A Curse upon my Idle Honesty.

Sylvan. Can she be honest then at last? If this
Be true, ye Gods, I ask no greater Bliss.

Sylvio. Your Confirmation of our Loves has given
Me all the joys I wish on this side Heaven.

Dorind. But Sylvio see you Love me as you should,
And slight me not for want of Heavenly blood.
But, Sir, if Love to Gods Allied can be,
I am as near of Kin to Heaven as she.

Enter Titiro. Tit. Welcome to Life, and to thy Fathers Arms:
I am all joy: My Youth never felt such Charms.
Here take her, Sir, and may you happy live. to Mirt.
This day has all the longest Life could give.

Dorin. Gerana.


Ger. My dear Joy.


Dorind. The happy Dart
That Sylvio shot, brought me my Sylvio's heart:
Through the dear Wound his Soul came fluttering in:
He Will Love, and Love, and never Hate again.
But you have been unk^nd.

Ger. I?


Dor. Yes, you said
I should not think of Love, Heaven knows how long,
Till seven years hence. But you were in the wrong;
My Sylvio finds no fault that I Am too Young.

Mont. Now my dear Children, share your F^thers heart;
Love has this day played its Triumphant part.
But, Cynthia, all these Blessings spring from Thee;
Faith, Innocence, Truth, Justice, Constancy,
And every Grace that humane Breast inspires,
Is but a spark of the Celestial fires.

Mirt. All other Virtues may be taught a hove;
But ye great Gods look down, and learn to Love.

Exeunt Omnes, FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Who would not Damn a silly Rhiming Fop,
When there is scarce a Fore man of a Shop,
With sense of Animal, and face of Stoic,
But Courts poor Tawdry Sempstress in Heroic;
Will make ye Rhimes on Cakes and Ale; Rehearse
A Holy days Treat, at Islington, in Verse?
Rhiming, which once had got so much your passion,
When it became the Lumber of the Nation,
Like Vests, your seven years Love, grew out of fashion.
Great Subjects, and Grave Poets please no more:
Their high strains now to humble Farce must lower.
So strutting Gallant, in his burly Vest,
And in his loose full-bodyed Tunick dressed;
All on a sudden to Thin gutted Paunch,
A slim French Jerkin, Breeches close to Haunch,
Was grown so changed, you would swear the slender Imp
Was dwindled from a Lobster to a Shrimp.
And as with Habits, so it is with the Stage.
Fashion is all the Beauty of the Age.
An^ yet though (thanks be to our happy Stars)
We'v^ Fools enough, good Comedies are scarce.
And Faith it is very strange, Fops being so plenty,
There Is not one hits your Pictures, right in twenty.
And gad the Reason I have thought upon:
To that Pariety of Fop you run,
Your Features change e're half your Picture's done.
Be but more Constant, Fool but on one way,
And sit but ^ut the finishing a Play,
(...) (...) (...) my honest word I Will pawn,
You may be better p^as'd, and better drawn.

