THE Triumphs of London. Performed on Tuesday, October. 29. 1695. FOR THE
Entertainment of the Right Honorable SR. John Houblon, KNIGHT. LORD MAYOR of the
City of LONDON.

CONTAINING A True Description of the Several Pageants; with the Speeches
Spoken on each PAGEANT.

All Prepared, at the proper Costs and Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF
GROCERS. To which is added, A New Song upon His Majesty' s Return.

By E. S.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by Jer. Wilkins; And are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, at the
Oxford-Arms in VVarwick-Lane, 1695.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir John Houblon, Knight LORD MAYOR OF THE City of London.
MY LORD,
IN this Dedication to the Right Honorable Sr. John Houblon, One of the Lords
of the ADMIRALTY, Governor of the Royal BANK of England, and now the great
Lieutenant Royal of this Metropolitan City; methinks, I am enterd into so
spacious a Field, with such various attracting Prospects before me, as even
divide my Veneration. The Homage is on all Sides so equally Due, that I know
not Where to Kneel first. For Your Lordship by an Accumulation of Glories, has,
perhaps, so far outrun the Common Race of Honor; that in Your Accession to
the CHAIR, as considerable a Triumph as it gives you, instead of being Your
Highest Ascendant of Renown, is only an Addition to Your more ample Pile of
Trophies; whilst You have so far out-stript the Candidates of Dignity before
You, that You bring the Right Honorable to Your Praetorian Seat, not come to
find it there.

Not that this public Address, I now make Your Lordship, is intended for any
Piece, either of Panegyric, or Herauldry, to Illustrate or Blazon the High
Promotions to which Your Lordship has so eminently Arrived: No, my Lord, I have
a fairer Theme, a Speculation above them. For it is not Preferment, Titles, or
State: It Is the Virtue, the Merit, Principle and Integrity, that both mount and
fill the Seats of Power and Trust, are the embodyed Mass; when the others are
but the mere Drapery of HONOR.

It Is in this last Capacity, (not the Pomp and Splendor of Advancement,) but
Your Lordships Double Qualifications of Fidelity and Ability to Execute in
those Exalted Posts, that render You the Subject of an Universal Applause. And
though my present Address is chiefly to Congratulate Your Lordship's
Inauguration into this August Magistracy, in which both the Pride and Gratitude
of the Honorable Company of GROCERS make their profoundest Tenders of Respect
to so Conspicuous a Member and Ornament to their Society: Yet all this is but
an inconsiderable Tribute, compared to what the World has yet to Pay You; For,
Your Lordship has taken Care for a more lasting Triumph; so vast is the
Difference betwixt Glittering for a Day, and Shining for a Life.

I should dwell longer upon this inviting Theme, were I not not sensible that,
to all Your other Accomplishments, Your Lordship has that innate Modesty, that
You rather study to deserve Encomiums than to hear them; which only
Consideration shall check my Pen, and make me the sooner hasten to Subscribe my
self,

MY LORD, Your Lordships Most Obedient and Dutiful Servant E. SETTLE.

To the Worshipful Company of GROCERS.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is now but Three Years since I had this Honor before; and If I am come so
soon again to tender my new Service to my Worthy old Masters, I have only this
to say, That You live in a Warm Sun and a Fruitful Soil; where WORTH and VIRTUE
spring up apace amongst You, when you have so often the Pride of Filling the
CHAIR from a Member of the Honorable COMPANY of GROCERS.

Your Griffons are truly a Bird of Wing, when they Fly so High and Mount so
Fast: But indeed it is less to be wondered that Growing HONOR should Root so
Strong and Flourish so Eminently with You, when the very ROYAL-FOUNTAIN of it,
makes One amongst You; whilst not only the Lord of it, but likewise the
SOVEREIGN of the Chair too, Great WILLIAM himself if a Member of Your SOCIETY:
And though, it is true, so many Crowned Heads before had so often Blessed Your
Happy Roof: Yet let it suffice, that this last Glory consummates Your whole
Renown: And whilst You stand thus highly Graced with that Illustrious and
Adorable Name Enrolled amongst You; As by the Reach of Your Charter the whole
Spicy-Nest was all Your own before, I may now add this Prouder Blazon to Your
Scutcheon, that You have the Phaenix too.

Dic quibuscum sis, and dicam quis es. (Worth is known by the Company it
Keeps.) Was a Celebrated True Adage of Old, which you Gentlemen, have amply
Veryfied: For it is sufficient for the truly Honorable G R O C E R S, to their
Noblest Reputation, to tell the World, that the Darling of Britain, the
Champion of Christendom, and the Pride of Europe, the English LION Herds with
You: And the particular Inclination of the Albion CAESAR in Electing Your
SOCIETY His Favorite Choice, is an ample Demonstration, that His Encouragement
for such an Election, was, that undoubtedly he found those Virtues amongst You,
Nearest His Own; and Worthiest such Royal Favor.

And, Gentlemen, whatever other Conspicuous Merits You challenge, it is enough
that this single Plume in Your Fair Crest, shall Entitule You to no common
Share of Fame; and it is with my Congratulation of This, and all your Other
Happiness, I subscribe my Self,

GENTLEMEN, Your most Devoted Humble Servant E. SETTLE.

The Movements of the Morning.
Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company designed for the Duty
of the Day, meet at Grocers Hall.
1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns Faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budge-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulders, and a White Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colors of the Company in
their Hats, Crimson and White.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
His Majesty's, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Crimson and a White.

8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies
Colors, with others of His Majesty's Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City Marshals each of them Mounted on Horseback, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper, all Embroidered; Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend with Scarfs, and Colors of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colors.

11. The Master of Defense, with the same Scarf and Colors, Eight Persons of
the same Science to attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps employed in carrying the Standards
and Banners.

This Ordered, and accomodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, and ranked all Two by
Two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard-Bearers. In the Head of
them are placed Two Drums, One Fife, and One Gentleman bearing the Companies
Arms.

In the Rear of them, Two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
Deceased Benefactors.

In the Center of them, fall Two Drums.

In the Rear of them Three Drums, One Fife, and Two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing Two Banners, One of His Majesty's, the Other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen-Ushers, followed by the BudgBatchelors.

The next, Two Gentlemen bearing Two Other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foins Batchelors.

In the Rear fall in Two Drums, and a Fife. Then Two Gentlemen One bearing my
Lord MAYOR's, the Other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen-Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division

The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen Two by Two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of Two and Two the whole Body move toward Skinners-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Elect, attended from his own House, joins with the Old
Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all of them, in this Order, March through
King Street down to Three-Grane-Wharfe, there entering into their several
Barges, which are gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship, and
this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the
Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties,
and taken the Oaths to His Majesty, he returns again by Water to
Black-fryers-Stairs, with Drums Beating, Trumpets Sounding, Music Playing, etc.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies Landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap Side, where
his Lordship is Saluted with the First Pageant.

The First Pageant, of FAME.
ON a large Stage are Erected Four Antique Pedestals, upon which are planted
Four Urnes of Gold, from which issue forth Four Trees sprinkled with
Golden-Nutmegs. In the Center is planted a large Camel of Gold, being the Creft
of the Honorable Company; on which rides a beautiful Figure, richly and
properly Dressed, representing Fame; Below, on each fide of the Stage, are placed
Four Figures more, viz. Justice, Mercy, Equity, and Law.

Fame thus Addresses His Lordship.
IF Monarchs in their Sovereign Command,
In no less Post than Heavens Vicegerents stand;
And, in the Second Sphere of Government,
The Magistrate dos the Crown'd-Head Present;
Hayl then, My LORD, to Your Praetorian Seat,
Where both the Caears and Heavens Image meet:
And here 'twixt Justice, Equity, and Law,
So near the Life Your Great Originals draw;
Till Your Augusta's Heart, so all Your Own,
You fix the CHAIR the Copy af the THRONE:
Whilst 'twixt her Ecchoing Praise and Bended Knee,
You make Your Happy Year a Jubilee,
Thus shall You Eternize Your Hononour'd Name,
And never want the loudest Trump of Fame.
The Second Pageant.
The Chariot of VICTORY.
A Large Chariot splendidly Imbellished with all manner of Enrichments of
Silver, as Lions Heads, Large Shields, Noble Festoons, and Embossed Goloss; The
Wheels likewise are Silver. Beneath the Chariot Wheels are Piles of Trophies,
all of Silver, viz, Helmets, Targets, Armory of all sorts, etc. This Chariot is
drawn by Two stately Griffons, the Companys Supporters, on whose Backs are
seated Two Princely Figures, Representing Asia and America; as being those
Parts of the World whence the Spicery and other Grocery are Imported. In this
Chariot fits a Figure Representing Victory, Attended by Six more Figures
Personating Wisdom, Policy, Labor, Industry, Vigor, and Vigilance.

VICTORY Speaks.
WHilst Victory, with all her ecchoing Praise,
Dos the Great WILLIAM's Deathless Honor raise,
Is it the Hero's only Crowned? And grows
The Laurel only for the Warriour's Brows?
No! Peace her Trophies has, as well as War:
Your Lordship with Great Caesar shares thus far;
He in his Martial, You Your Justice Seat;
Whilst He in Foreign Fields in Fame so Great,
His Sword and Shield his Glittering VVreath Secures,
Your Sword and Scales at Home shall Plant You Yours.
This Difference, it is true, Your Toyls attends;
His Foes He Conquers, You shall win his Friends.
Thus both the Prince and Magistrate shall join,
Both Glories Tune One Harmony Divine:
Your Olive-Garland, with his Bays shall Shine.
The Third, the Plantation Pageant.
IN the Center of a very large Stage is Erected a Magnificent Pile, as the
Shrine of St. Anthony, Patron to the Honorable Company; In this Pile, under
Four Arches fits St. Anthony and Three more Attendants, Representing India,
Persia, and Arabia; The whole is Environed with Twelve Pedestals, bearing as
many Large Golden-Urnes, from whence Issue Cinnamon-Trees, Richly Ornamented
with Flowers, Blossoms, Golden-Fruit, etc. Within the Body of this Pageant are
several Persons in Rural Habits, as Negroes, Tauneys, Virginia-Planters, etc.
All exercised in Imitation of their several Employments. The whole Pageants all
Adorned with Flags and Streamers.

St. ANTHONY's Speech.
WHilst Proud St. Anthony, in his Spicy Plains,
The Honorable Grocers Patron Raigns;
It Is here my Aromatic Odours spring;
And my Rich Fruits their fragrant Harvest bring.
But hold! -- From my poor Throne, I must remove,
It Is You're the Lord of all my Balmy Grove:
It Is from Your Smiles alone each kind Perfume,
And all my Oriental Sweets must Bloom.
Sweets did I say! You Have Sweets yet more Refined;
Virtue and every Grace that decks Mankind.
Virtue a Plant of Paradise may boast,
The Original Offspring of the Eden Coast:
Nor let the Famous Bird of the Fair East
Vaunt her Proud Urne of that Rich-Mass possessed;
It Is Virtue only Builds the Spicy Neft.
A SONG.
I.
GRin Malice, burst Envy, cheer Albion, sing Fame.
It Is all a just Tribute to NASSAU's Great Name;
He comes! And, hark, round
The Hosannas resound.
In his Chariot Triumphant the Hero dos move,
Whilst His own Grateful Thunder salutes our dear JOVE.
II.
The Virgins strew Flowrs, and the Matrons they Pray,
The Nymphs on the Plains, and the Shepherds they Play.
The Groves they all Ring,
Whilst the Nightingales Sing
And the Lark to the Skies the sweet Harmony bears,
Till the Gods join in the Chorus and new Tune their Spears.
III.
He comes, yes he comes, but more strong to Return:
His Friends they Rejoice, but His Foes they must Mourn.
His bold Pen of Steel,
Has yet Volumes to fill;
For the brave British LION the Lillies must Win.
He began at the Boyne, and shall end at the Seine.
FINIS.

