Mare Clausum: OR A RANSACK FOR THE DUTCH.

May 23. 1666.

By E. S. Gent.

LICENSED,

May 30. 1666.

LONDON,

Printed by Peter Lillicrap, for John Million, at the Man in the Moon in the
Little Old Baley, 1666.

Mare Clausum: OR A RANSCAK FOR THE DUTCH.
OUR Ancestors being born within the Pale
Of that we call the Golden Age, of all
It was the best, then happened no contest;
No Points of Honor was our interest:
All moved for Peace, Justice her self did Reign,
No trespass then was done; no projects feigned.
But when Astrea fled, then men began
To share the Earth, to parcel out their Land;
And by their sweaty brows they gat their Bread,
Now Masters Rule, and Slaves by them are fed:
An Age of Brass soon follows this, being worse,
Strife now takes place, the Earth becomes a Curse.
Proceeding careless, they themselves did wrong,
For raging malice in their breast did throng;
The Sea not limited was in discourse;
And by our power and excelling force;
We soon became Lords of the Narrow Seas;
And who then dare resist! who dares displease?
Our awful wills, success has made it ours;
Assist our Cause, ye High and Mighty Powers!
What shall such bold resistance as the Dutch
Pretend to what is ours? No, it is to much;
We Will check their Impudence, we will maintain;
Our Fathers glory over this our Main.
Shall clay describe its Fashion or direct?
The Potter what to form, what 'twill effect;
Shall Pedants rule? Shall they now bear the sway,
Commanding what is not theirs, soon to obey?
We were their founders, gave them being by
Our Mighty aid, we caused Posterity
To change from poor distressed, by our Fates,
They Have crowned themselves the High and Mighty States.
Ill weeds they grow a pace, and let alone
Soon take deep root, and overcome the Corn.
The Dutch no sooner thrived, no sooner grew,
But slighted us, as if no duty due
As when their Grotius, forward by their Pride,
Did undertake their Title should reside
On these our Seas; as if their Fleet was come,
To challenge Right being Mare Liberum.
And though by arguing Seldom overcame
His strongest Reasons, they were still the same;
Their courage not abated, till we used
Expelling force to Right us being abused:
This checked them for a time, yet Insolence
Still growing great, was like a mighty fence,
To their ill Natures, brands them yet more base,
Amboyna shews't a horrid bloody case.
And bloody 'twas indeed, when none of all
Our Valiant Troop, but did by Murder fall.
Blood called to Heaven, blood for Revenge did cry,
Amboyna's fact, Amboyna's remedy,
Then expiate your guilt you guilty Souls;
Exterpate blood within you, and control
Your loose desires, lest just revenge come down
From Heaven it self, your minds being most unsound.
Me think^ your impious deeds, most dreadful, strange,
Inhumane Facts, should cause a perfect change
Upon your bloody minds; like one who scapes
From a huge Precipice, whose horror shakes
His trembling limbs, as yet filled full with fears,
Greaten's his past danger; so should your cares,
Lest that revenge should follow close your guilt,
And shed your blood for that which you have spilt.
But it is beyond your powers to argue thus,
You thirst for blood, and naught else can discuss.
The Heavens above have seen your rude contempt,
Murder will houle, 'twill have its punishment.
As when your mighty Fleet weighed Anchor for
A mightier prize, to be sole Conqueror:
Shall Heavens design, and not perform its work?
Shall it decree, and shall not Noble York,
Bravely atchieve what providence declared?
Once he your Conduct, now his Countrey's Guards;
Where Right and Honor sits, his Highness stands
Where Justice is, thence issue his commands;
These were his Guide, these steered his awing Course,
These made him Victor; none withstand his force.
'Twas Honor led the Van, Right broke their Ranks;
Justice like Nilus overflowed their Banks.
Valor destroyed, and Courage drove them home,
Clausum approved, not Mare Liberum.
Your Honor's great, you died by Princes hands,
Your Vessels sunk, you fled by their commands.
Your Opdam's lost, your Fleet was quickly gone;
Your Besom's burnt, your Trump almost undone:
Not yet content, will you again presume?
What must we make an utter final doom
Of seven whole Provinces; O pity! lest
Your corrupt earth be made the fishes feast.
Were Tomyris alive, she would quench your thirst,
She Would give you blood to satisfy your lust.
That men with envy might no more be toiled;
That Neighbor Nations be no more embroiled
In such contests; Alas! their thoughts are far
From that of Peace, they will make another War,
Clausum's a word not easy to digest,
In such crude stomachs, but must be suppressed
By that which helps decoction; Naught but quarle
Will serve their turns; Then may brave Albemarle
Run through their Squadrons, like an Arrow sent
From a stiff Bow to give them punishment.
May all our trust reposed be like to his!
May all our Foes this year be Sacrifice!
May Glory waite's! may Heaven direct the Sea!
May we put on the Trophee of the day!
And like Achilles at our Chariot Wheel
Drag Belgian Beast! such may their Champions feel
Through fear, who knows? but that they are grown wise,
Their Fleet's at home, what will you once surprise
Our Narrow Seas? Or will you dare to meet
Our floating Castles, or our vaster Fleet?
Strive for a Peace, and pay your duty home;
No more lay claim to Mare Liberum.
We will be good, we will be free enough,
Accept a Peace, but you must make a Vow,
And solemnly protest, You Will mend your lives;
But hold, our Faith is weak, your fatal Knives
Bereft our Subjects of their utter breath,
And none escapt, but all were seized by Death.
Nay, did your Powers reach this little Flock,
What one amongst us should escape your shock?
What person left untouched? what Throat unscrapt?
What Female Sex but should be made a Rape?
What cruelty does now your Burgers act,
To our destressed men? their bodies ract.
Considering not that we have Prisners too,
And by our rigor can them soon subdue;
But we are kind, and know not how to use
Your Subjects harsh, too good so to abuse.
It Is freedom you pretend in the narrow Seas;
You claim a Right, to make you fishing days:
You hungry Souls, will you consume our Trade?
What would you not if that you power had?
Why were your Nets not spread? why was your care
Slackn'd to fish the last foregoing year?
Sure Neptunes rage was stirred, you did not pay
His duty due; so he gave Haddocks way
To seize your Corpse; your brawny sides to eat,
To let the remnant know you proved a cheat.
For freedom you have fought, and since declared
You Will fight it out, then come, we are prepared;
What means you Cowards, will you turn your back?
What ails your Spirits, do you courage lack?
Then soon renounce, and right us as before,
Or from the Texel we will increase our store.
Six shall not one resist, one six shall beat,
Our Diamond's true, it is no eounterfeit.
If Tar or Cordage lies within your close,
We Will fetch it Prize, or make you feel our force.
Our souls are generous, and will not become
The scorn of Pedants twice; but hate your Drum;
Rejoice you may, since that prosperity
Attend not virtue always, but do fly
To those who apprehend, Naught else but ends
The unrighteous Mammon is their best of friends;
Fortune being blind, and chance propitious too,
None but Dependants, none but such as you.
(...) any else carved out those favors? then
We had deprived, at least desputed them,
You Hogan Mogans, think, do'nt violate
Nature her self, nor injure humane state.
You wrong, acknowledge, be to us sincere,
Lest you prove Slaves, Vassals, as once you were.
Though height'n'd now; confess it is by our hands;
Lay open all, say, take your just demands;
Then our affection challenge, be assured,
Doubt not our words, be well, by being cured.
FINIS.

