SOME SELECT SONGS As they are Sung in the FAIRY QUEEN.

Set to Music, By Mr. HENRY PURCELL.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for the Author; and are to be Sold by John
Carr, at the Inner Temple Gate near Temple-Barr, by Henry Playford at his Shop
in the Temple, and at the Theater in Dorset-Garden. 1692.

First Song sung in the second Act.
by Mrs. Aliff.
^SIng, sing whilst we trip it, trip, trip it, trip, trip it up -- on the
Green: But no ill Vapors rise or fall, but no ill Vapors rise or fall, no
Nothing, no Nothing of -- fend, no Nothing of -- fend our Fai -- ry Queen; no
Nothing, no Nothing, no Nothing, no Nothing of -- fend our Fai -- ry Queen; no
Nothing, no Nothing, no Nothing, no Nothing of -- fnd our Fai -- ry Queen.

Second Song in the Second Act.
Sung by Mrs. Dyer.
^I am come to lock all fast, Love with -- out me can -- not last: Love like
Counsels of the Wise, must be hid from Vul --;gar Eyes; It Is ho -- ly, it is ho
-- ly, and we must, we must Conceal it; they pro -- fane it, they pro -- fane
it who re -- veal it; they pro -- fane it, they pro -- fane it who re -- veal
it.

Third Song in the 2d. Act.
Sung by Mr. Freemam.
^ONE Charming Night gives more -- De -- lights then a hundred then a hundred,
a hundred luckey days. Night and I im -- proves the taste make the Plea -- sures
lon -- ger last a thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand se -- v'ral
ways.

First Song in the 3d: Act
Sung by Mrs. Dyer:
^IF Loves a sweet Passion, why does it tor -- meant, if a bitter oh tell me
whence comes my con -- tent? Since I suf -- fer with Pleasure why ^should I com
-- plain, or grieve at my Fate when I know it is in vain? yet so pleasing the
Pain is, so soft is the Dart, that at once it both wounds me and tickles my
Heart.

I press her hand gently, look languishing down,
And by Passionate silence I make my Love known;
But Oh! how I Am blessed when so kind she does prove,
By some willing mistake, to discover her Love;
When in striving to hide, she returns all her Flame,
And our Eyes tell each other, what neither dare Name.
Second Song in the 3d. Act,
Sung by Mrs. Buttler.
^WHen I have often heard young Maids complaining, that when Men promise most
they most de -- ceive, then I thought none of them worthy my gaining, and what
they swore I would never be -- lieve, but when so humbly one made his
Addresses, with Looks so soft, and with Language so kind, I thought it Sin to
refuse his Ca -- res -- ses, Nature ore -- came and I soon changed my mind.

Should he employ all his Arts in deceiving,
Stretch his Invention and quite crack his Brain,
I find such Charms, such true Joys in believing,
I Will have the pleasure let him have the pain.
If he proves perjured I shall not be cheated,
He may deceive himself but never me,
It Is what I look for, and shall not be defeated,
For I Am as false and Inconstant as he.
Third Song in the 3d. Act.
Sung by Mr. Freeman.
^A thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand ways we'll find to en --
ter -- tain the hours, A hours, no two shall ere be known, no two shall ere be
known so kind, so kind, so kind, so kind, no two shall ere be known so kind, no
Life so blessed as ours, no Life so blessed as ours, so blessed as ours, so blessed as
ours, as ours, as ours, no Life so blessed, so blessed as ours, so blessed as ours,
so blessed as ours, as ours, as ours, no Life so blessed, so blessed as ours, so
blessed as ours, so blessed as ours.

First Song in the Fourth Act.
Sung by Mrs. Butler.
^THus the e -- ver grateful Spring, Thus the e -- ver grateful Spring does
her yearly Tribute bring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly
Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring; all your sweets be --
fore him lay, all your sweets be -- fore him lay, then round his Al -- tar sing
and play; all, all, all, all, all, all, all your sweets before him lay, then
round his Al -- tar sing and play, then round -- his Al -- tar sing and play:
Thus the ever grateful Spring does her yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her
yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly Tri -- bute bring, does her yearly
Tri -- bute bring.

The second Song in the 4th Act,
sung by Mr. Pate.
^HEre's the Summer sprightly, gay, smi -- ling, wanton, fresh and fair: A --
dorn'd with all the flowr's of May, whose va -- rious sweets per -- fume the
Air, a -- dorn'd with all the flowr's of May, whose va -- rious sweets per --
fume the Air.

Song in the Fifth Act.
Sung by Mrs. Aliff.
^Thus hap -- py and free, thus treat -- ed are we, with Na -- ture's chiefest
De -- lights: We ne -- ver cloy, but re -- new our Joy, and one bliss a -- no
-- there, and one bliss a -- no -- there In -- vites.


