A SERMON Designed for the FUNERAL of Ed. Wiseman Esquire. Late of East-Lockinge in
the County of BERKS.

Who was Buried at Stevinton near Abingdon November the Ninth, 1694.

By WILL. SEVILL, Master of Arts, And Fellow of C. C. C. OXFORD.

Published at the Request of many Gentlemen of BERKS.

Printed for John Wilmot, and John Howell Booksellers in OXFORD, 1694.

TO THE DESERVEDLY HONORED Mrs Mary Wiseman, RELICT of Edm. Wiseman Esquire.
DECEASED.
MADAM,
THOUGH I am conscious to my self, that this Discourse appears in public with
far greater Disadvantages, than many other do; a great part of it having been
hastily wrote in a tumultuous hurry of Thoughts, and some disorder of Passion,
upon the Death of my much Esteemed FRIEND: Yet in honor to His Memory, and in
compliance with the Requests of many of those worthy Gentlemen who attended His
Funeral, and more especially for Your Satisfaction; I have so far prevailed
upon my self, as to dis-regard the Censures that may be passed upon it. If it
should be thought by some, not worthy the Reading of many, whose hands it may
now fall into; I shall leave Those, whom I much respect, to make their Promised
Apology: That the Will of the Dead could not any way be better fulfilled, than
by Publishing that, which by Monsieur De l'Angle was denied to be preached.

A sort of French Civility, which I was, till now, as little Acquainted with,
as I desire to be with their Government, or Religion. So far as I can learn,
'twas never practiced amongst Englishmen; and I am sure in the mildest
Construction that can be made of it, it must be termed a most Unseasonable,
Ungrateful, and Indiscreet piece of Rudeness. Most Unseasonable certainly at
His Funeral, who always Pursued the Things that made for Peace and Love, for
Meekness and Charity, for Hospitality and good Neighborhood: Most Ungrateful
to Him, who whilst he was living, had Obliged the Gentleman by several eminent
Acts of special Favors and Kindnesses: And most Indiscreet, in respect of the
poor French-Protestants, whose calamitous Condition has been, by the
compassionate Care of Their MAJESTY'S, frequently and lately Recommended to the
Charity of the whole Nation. So that, if Monsieur De l'Angle had no Regard to
the Gentlemen of Berks, yet Pity to his own Countrymen might have moved him, at
that time, to abate his Resentment of those words, that an Honorable Member of
Parliament, and some Others upon just Provocation had given him, when he
refused to Comply with their Request, under Pretense that he had not been
treated as a Gentleman; because no particular Messenger had been sent unto him.
In the Dispute I know he told them, That I of All Men should not have his
Pulpit; but for what Reason, he was not bound to satisfy any Man, nor would he
declare. I remember very well, when he stood for his Degrees, I was very
Industrious to Oppose his Letter of Petition, because I thought his Request
very Unreasonable, and Himself Unqualify'd for them. If this were the Reason,
(as Some guessed it to be) and he were sordidly inclined to seek Revenge; He
might have took some other Opportunity for it, which would have rendered him
less Ridiculous and Odious to Mankind, than this his late Behavior has done.
If that were not the Reason, but (as Others rather Conjectured) he were Biased
by a Party to espouse a Quarrel: They may know that it was One of the worst
Hands that was ever employed to Defend their Honorable Cause: and I believe he
Himself will be Convinced, (if he be not already) that he ought to be better
Rewarded, than I have been for more Civil Services. However Many besides my
self have learnt that there are Some, Who, notwithstanding all their Boasts of
Gentility, have little Reputation to Lose, and less Modesty to be Tender of.

I humbly beg Your Pardon, GOOD MADAM, for making mention of this Matter,
which, I fear, does revive and increase Your Sorrow: But it could not be
concealed without manifest Injustice to those Many Worthy Gentlemen, who were
so extremely affronted, whilst they were paying their last Respects to Your
Late Most Affectionate HUSBAND; as well as to My Self, who could not without
Great Indecency, decline the Publication of this Sermon, and the Occasion of
its Coming forth. Such as it is, I most humbly present it to Your Perusal;
beseeching ALMIGHTY GOD, Who comforts those that are cast down, to support You
under this sad Stroke of His Providence, so to Bless You, as to make All things
work together for Your Good, and to fill You with all Joy and Peace in
Believing; till at last You are received into the number of the Blessed, and
made Partaker, with them, of Pleasures for evermore. Which is, and shall be the
constant Prayer of,

MADAM, Your Most Faithful, Most Obliged, and Most Respectful Servant, WILL.
SEVILL.

A Sermon, etc.
REV. Chap. XIV. Ver. XIII. I heard a Voice from Heaven, Saying unto Me, Write;
Blessed are the Dead, that dye in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the
Spirit; that they may Rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them.


WERE we acted by nothing but the mere Impulse of our lapsed Nature, Death, in
its best Representation, would be always thought the King of Terrors: for though
the Embraces of our Mother Earth within her, will certainly free us from all
the Labors of our Life upon her, so as to make the weary in her Bosom to lie
at Rest; yet to Dust thou shall return, in its finest Colors, would still be
looked upon, as an ill-favored, and heavy Curse to us, whose fleshly
Constitutions put us always upon Desires after a longer Continuance here; and
are therefore still apt to be much affrighted when they think, that Corruption
is their Father, Chapter 17. v. 14.
(as Job speaks) and that the Worm is their Mother, and their Sister.

Nay, what is more, though by the Innocence of our Lives, we enjoy the peaceable
Fruit of Righteousness at the last; so as upon our Deathbeds we can say, with
good Hezekiah, Remember, Isa. 38. ver. 3.
O Lord, how I have walked before thee in Truth, and with a perfect Heart, and
have done that which is Good in thy sight; yet when this Summons of Death
comes, Set thy House in order; Ver. 1.
for thou shall Dye and not Live; with him we many times turn toward the Wall,
Ver. 2, 3.
and weep sore; and with good David, Water our Couch with our Tears; Ps. 39.
when we imagine we shall go hence, and be no more seen; and therefore pray to
be spared a little, that we may recover our Strength.

And thus the Apprehensions of our Approaching Departure, being a Subject
always terrible to all Men in their Natural, and for the most part a Sorrowful
one to many, in a Righteous State; As a Voice of old bade the Prophet Isaiah to
cry, All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof, as the Flower of the
Field; thereby to denote the Importance of the thing; that a frequent
Premeditation of it is a part of the greatest Wisdom, and the best means to
conquer the Suggestions of Nature, and to stir us up to the performance of Good
Works, whilst it is called to day: So for the same ends, and more especially to
comfort the Souls of the Righteous; A like Voice to that, was heard in these
latter times from Heaven, to bid St. John, in the words now handled, not to
cry, but to write; Cry not to the Inhabitants of the Earth at present; but
write, Record it to all Ages of the World: and what is thus to be written, or
recorded by virtue of this Charge from on high? Blessed are the Dead that dye
in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit; for they rest from their
Labors, and their Works follow them.

Blessed are the Dead that dye in the Lord. By which Persons so pronounced
Blessed, I know that Qui Christi causa mortis pericula adeunt. Says Grotius
upon the Place, and Translates (...), Qui propter Dominum vel Domini causa
moriuntur. As also Beza, Junius, and Others.
some Interpreters have understood here, in a proper Sense, only Those, that
have Sacrificed their Lives to seal the Truth of their Religion with their
Blood; or, Those that have laid them down for Christ's Namesake, or their
Faith in him: and that, by reason of some preceding part of this Chapter, which
speaks of a Vision, wherein a Third Angel was seen, and heard to say with a
loud Voice, Ver. 9, 10.
If any Man Worship the Beast, and his Image, the same shall drink of the Wine
of the Wrath of God; and afterward, Here is the Patience of the Saints: Ver.
12.
Intimating, as they would have it, that the sole intent of the Spirit, in
these words, was to cheer up the Hearts of the Primitive Professors of
Christianity, so as to make them to bid Defiance to those Persecutions, which
the Rage of the prejudiced World, and the Madness of the Idolatrous Heathen
were then bringing in upon them; and in order to that to tell them, that the
Persons so Dying in the Lord, were those that are now pronounced Blessed.

Yea, Blessed, for ever Blessed, if GOD be true, are such; but that these are
not the only Persons here meant, is evident from the Character given of them,
in the words immediately before my Text; Here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus; which no sooner was proclaimed by
the Angel, but the Voice is directed to St. John, Saying, write, Blessed are
the dead, that dye in the Lord; that is, according to the Connection, those that
dye in the LORD, as having kept the Commandments of GOD, and the Faith of
JESUS: so that, as long as the sense of these words may properly be extended
farther than Martyrs, Sicut in Christo esse dicuntur, que ei vera fide
constanter adhaerent; and in Christo vivere, qui vivunt ad voluntatem Christi;
ita in Domino mori dicuntur, qui in vera fide, and invocatione Domini, per
fidem Christo insiti, ut vera membra corporis ejus moriuntur. Par. Cluv. Gat.
to all true Disciples of our Blessed Savior; who, by whatever Death they
fall, have sincerely endeavored to keep the Commandments of GOD; upon their
Failure been truly penitent; and by a lively Faith, in the Merits and
Satisfaction of our Savior's Sufferings, commended themselves to His Mercy:
They may pertinently, and profitably be discoursed upon, at this Solemnity,
whilst we are paying our last Office to this our late Dearly-beloved, and
much-esteemed BROTHER; Whose sincere and hearty Repentance, Whose constant
Piety, and fervent Devotion, and Whose cheerful Resignation of Himself to GOD's
Disposal (of all which I was a daily Witness) gives me confidence to say, In
every part He fulfilled the Character.

Be pleased then in them to consider these Particulars.

First, A Declaration of the Blessedness, or State of Happiness of All those
that dye in the Lord. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord. Secondly, A
full Assurance or Confirmation of it: Yea, says the Spirit. And lastly, A
Twofold Reason, containing in it the Nature of that their Blessedness, or State
of Happiness: That they may, or rather, So we find (...), translated in our
Liturgy.
for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.
But that my Discourse upon these Heads may be the more Clear, and Regular; I
shall invert their Order, and begin with the last; (viz.) The Twofold Reason,
containing in it the Nature of their Blessedness: And when we have seen, in
some measure, what their State of Happiness is, I shall speak something very
briefly, to the two first, (viz.) The Declaration, and Confirmation of it both
together; that thereby we may be satisfied of the full Assurance we have, that
such shall be their Portion, that dye in the Lord.

And that what shall be delivered, may have such an Impression upon us, as to
move us earnestly to endeavor to be found at the last of their number; I shall
add something as an Application suitable to the present Occasion, and so
conclude.

I begin then with the Nature of that Blessedness, that is said to be the
Portion of those that dye in the Lord; contained in this, that They rest from
their labors, and their works follow them.

Which evidently manifests this unto us, that the Nature of their Happiness
consists, First, Negatively, in a Cessation, or Freedom from all, or their not
being tormented with any worldly labors, and troubles; and, Secondly,
Positively, in the Enjoyment of inconceivably great Rewards, consequent upon
their good Works. And first, Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord,
inasmuch as they happily enjoy a Cessation, or freedom from all their worldly
labors, and troubles: They rest from their labors.


And, indeed, so many are the laborious miseries of this vain world, that by
reason of them, the Thracians of old wept at the Birth of those Children, who
were ready to be brought under their Burden; and celebrated the Funerals of
those, who by Death were freed from them with Musical Entertainments: and we
Christians, according to the Rules of our Church, do nowadays, with hearty
Thanksgivings to our GOD, for that it has pleased Him to deliver them from the
miseries of this sinful world: which is not a less Rational than a Religious
Custom. For how sadly has Sin defaced our Souls, and made our Understandings
become so short-sighted, that we cannot penetrate into the true Nature of many
things: nay, nor scarce get a through Apprehension of some few necessary ones,
without much study; Eccles. 12.12.
which (as the Wiseman speaks) is a weariness of the Flesh! The corruptible
Body presses down the Soul, Wisd. 9.15, 16.
-- and with labor do we find out the things that are before us. How
wretchedly by the same Original sin are our Wills corrupted, that when we seem
to our selves most securely to sland, we are obliged of necessity continually
to labor, lest we fall! forasmuch as we always find (in the Apostle's
Language) a law in our members, Romans 7.2^.
warring against the law of our minds, and bringing us into captivity to the
law of sin. How miserably are our Bodies deprived of their primitive welfare,
and how jarring and unsociable are all their parts! so full are they of inward
aches, and disturbing pains, that we are frequently compelled to labor to
preserve them in a Vital Amity, to keep them and our Souls from a dissolution:
forasmuch as in the midst of life we are in death. And besides all this, How
difficultly does the Earth bring forth her Fruits, and with what labor do
living Men enjoy them! truly with so great pains, that, according to the curse
of GOD upon it, we are forced to Eat our bread in the sweat of our brows. And
how many are our other outward Crosses, our suprizing Losses, and thereby our
great Disappointments! Oftentimes truly so many, that in patience to possess
our Souls, we find a very laborious task. And all these in their innumerable
particulars, are so inseparably annexed to the Life that now is, that Omnia ad
quae gemimus -- tributa vitae sunt -- in longa vita sunt, quomodo in longa via
pulvis, and lutum, and pluvia. Ep. 96.
Seneca an Heathen, as well the Spirit of GOD, has compared our course upon
Earth, to a Journey upon a Road; in which the Traveller may as soon expect not
to meet with rain, nor dirt, nor wind, nor dust; as we in our Life may not to
meet with Labors, nor Crosses, nor Troubles. And if an Heathen could observe
this of himself as a Man, and if in the same sense our sad Experience
oftentimes confirms this to our selves, that We are born to sorrow, as the
sparks fly upward; that is, by a Natural necessity; to how far greater measure
are our Labors augmented, who profess our selves the Soldiers of CHRIST our
Captain, as well as the Servants of Him our Master! who in our Baptismal Vow,
have sworn by the Labors of a continual warfare, manfully to fight against the
assaults of our Lusts, and the Wiles and Temptations of Devils: who, in the
midst of the Commotions of a mad World, are obliged to strive for Peace with
all Men, to bear Persecutions when laid upon us for Righteousness-sake, and the
like.

Whereas now the Dead that dye in the Lord, are not perplexed with any of
these, or the like troublesome tasks; but are freed from all their hardships,
their tiresome journeyings, their tedious warfare, their fretting cares, their
vexatious crosses, their grievous persecutions; and in a word, all other their
worldly afflictions: which is in one Expression now spoken to, They rest from
their labors. Yea, they rest from their labors.

For certainly there is no striving after Knowledge, no Labor under Ignorance
to them, who are made partakers of GODS Wisdom, and Glory in Heaven. No labor
to them of preserving themselves in their state of Holiness, who, like those
Angels that never sinned, are confirmed in their station, and put out of a
possibility of falling. No pains, no aches of Body to them, whose Bodies lie
senceless in the dust, until the Resurrection, and at, and after that time are
transformed into, and remain glorified ones. No difficulty to them of
supporting themselves with provisions, who perpetually are feasting upon the
Bread of Heaven, being actual possessours of ineffable pleasures at Gods right
hand for evermore. No surprising losses, no vexing disappointments to them in
that state, which GOD has made as unalterable as Himelf is, who is the same
yesterday, today, and for ever, and changes not. No labor against temptations
to them, who lie not within the reach of any enemies, and whom neither lusts,
nor Devils can assault. No strivings after peace to them, whose place has
known no wars, nor commotions, since the Devil and his Angels thence were
beaten. And they of necessity must be freed from persecutions; since they have
fought their Good Fight, obtained their Victory by Faith, and are made Members
of a Church eternally triumphant.

And this is the First Part of that Blessedness, The Dead enjoy, who dye in the
Lord they rest from their labors.

But alas! a mere resting from their labors, falls infinitely short of half
their Happiness; as will be clearly manifested, now (...) come to treat of the
Second positive part of their state, which was said to consist in the enjoyment
of inconceivably great Rewards consequent upon their good works; contained in
these words, Their works follow them.

GOD'S gracious Rewards of their good works accompany them: Not that we are to
think, that these their good works were the Meritorious cause of their
enjoyment of them; so as by reason of them we may (with the Romanists) affirm
that they deserved them or in strict justice might have challenged them, as
their due from GOD: but only that they were the necessary means appointed by
GOD, for the obtainment of the Blessing, a^ being those without which they
never would have had their joys. Joys, that no Man upon Earth can pretend to
set forth in their proper colors; forasmuch as whatever pleasures there arise
to our Rational Natures made perfect, from the Vision, and Fruition of that
All-glorious Spirit, who is the incomprehensible Fountain of all perfection,
and happiness; forasmuch as whatever pleasures there arise from the unspeakable
harmony of Celestial Hallelujahs; from the society, and love of holy Angels,
and the Spirits of Just Men made like unto, and as pure as them: and lastly
forasmuch as whatever advantages there arise to these our Corruptible,
dishonorable, weak, and Natural Bodies, by being raised, and glorified in
Incorruption, in Honor, in Power, and Spirituality, are pleasures, and
advantages truly, that the Mind of Man cannot apprehend any so agreeable to the
dignity of our Constitutions; and as touching the excellency of them, what they
are in themselves; the highest strains of Humane Oratory can never represent,
nor our loftiest imaginations mount unto.

But though Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor Heart conceived the things that
God has prepared for those that love him, for those that by keeping his
Commandments, and the Faith of Jesus dye in Him; yet as we can look upon them (
as through a Glass darkly) at present, thus much we know in part, that their
Bodies after the Resurrection will remain as the brightness of the Firmament,
Chapter 12. ver. 3.
(as the Prophet Daniel assures us) and shine as the Stars for ever and ever.
And, as touching their Souls; Before that glorious manifestation of God's
Power, and Promises in raising their corrupted Bodies from the Dust; we are
assured they shall be with Abraham in Comfort, and with Christ in Paradise; and
After, their Minds will be filled with as much Light, and their Wills with as
much Love, as ever they are capable of; their Faith being heightened into an
Eternal Vision of God, and thereby their Hopes and Desires swallowed up in the
fruition of immutable Bliss.

And being assured of this, we need not trouble our selves with those vain
Disputes of some Ages before us, concerning the separate State of Departed
Souls; nor with the Idle Notions of those various Limbus's, whereinto some have
fancied them to have been received: but having these Revelations it is matter
of infinite Importance to us all, to use our utmost Endeavors after Purity,
and Holiness, and a steadfast and lively Faith in Christ our Savior; that
thereby we may be found among those that Dye in the Lord, who by the Voice from
Heaven are declared Blessed from henceforth, or from the Moment of their
Departure. So See (...)
several good Expositors understand those words, and our Church confirms the
Interpretation, when She acknowledges to Almighty God, that with him do live
the Spirits of them that depart hence in the Lord; and with him the Souls of
the Faithful, after they are delivered from the burden of the Flesh, are in
Joy and Felicity.

For which Discovery of these Spiritual Joys, should I now offer to speak the
due Praises of our Christian Religion, I know not when I should end the
Panegyric, or finish the Task; as being those that eminently display its
Excellency above all other Institutions whatever. The Gentiles, by the Light of
Nature, could never reach them: The Jews of Old never had them in their written
Law, unless in Types; See (...)
and the Turks at present expect the quite contrary in their Sensual Paradise.
And indeed, God intended these express Revelations of the Life to come,
together with some Descriptions of the true Nature of its Bliss; for the
Business, and the Glory of the Gospel, by which, and which alone, Life Eternal
in a Blessed Immortality is brought to light: Yea, brought to Light for this
very purpose, that all such as endeavor to Dye in the Lord, might in their
Labors be encouraged with the Hopes of the Enjoyment of so great a recompense
of Reward: For though the intrinsic Beauty of Holiness be very great, and
excellent; yet, through the Degeneracy of Mankind, that proving not a sufficient
Allurement to the Exercise thereof, God in the Scriptures has annexed his
Promises to the Commands he has given; and confirmed those Promises by his
Oath: that by two immutable things (a^ the Author to the Hebrews speaks) in
which it is impossible for God to lie, Chapter 6. ver. 18.
we might have a strong Consolation to lay hold upon the hope that is set
before us. And in like manne^ here, for our Consolation, He not only declares
those Persons Blessed that dye in Him but Emphatically confirms it by his Yea,
i^ his own Name, and by himself; and by greater it could not be done.

Which brings me to speak a word or tw^ to the Declaration and Confirmation of
(...) both together, that thereby I may satisf^ you of the full Assurance we
have, that suc^ a Blessedness, as I have in some measure represented to you,
shall be the Portion of those that Dye in the Lord.

Blessed then are the 'Dead that dye in the Lord, Yea says the Spirit.

Touching the former part whereof, (viz.) the Declaration; The Voice that St.
John heard from Heaven spoke it unto him, Saying, Blessed are the Dead that dye
in the Lord; which words he affirms he heard in a clear and articulate Sound,
and therefore could not mistake it for any other than what it really was; as
One we know to have been that came before to our Blessed Savior, Joh. 12.29.
which some that stood by thought was thunder, and others the speech of an
Angel. And lest this Voice should be capable of any misconstruction as to its
Author, and thereby the Authority of Him who uttered it be any way questioned;
It confirms to the World the Truth of what had been said with a (...): Yea, (or
of a Truth) says the Spirit. (...), The Spirit eminently above All; in himself
an Author essentially Infallible; as being THE SPIRIT whose Knowledge extends
to the true Nature of all things, and therefore not capable of being deceived
Himself about the Matter; and whose Justice and Holiness is not inferior unto,
but equally Infinite with His Knowledge, and his Wisdom; and therefore not
capable of affirming what he knows to be false, and thereby of deceiving any
other. As being THE SPIRIT who by His Omnipotent Power called the whole World
into its Being out of Nothing, and therefore of Ability to dispose of those
Mansions he himself has made. And lastly, as being THE SPIRIT whose Goodness is
equal to, nay, if his Divine Attributes would admit degrees, I should say
greater than Omnipotence it self; since the first Characters of his Glorious
Name are The Lord God, Exodus 34.6, 7.
merciful and gracious, keeping Mercy for Thousands; and therefore as he
delights to manifest himself, by nothing so much as Acts of Beneficence; so
will he more especially make himself known, by fulfilling his Declarations and
Promises, in receiving those that Dye in him into a Rest from their Labors,
and an everlasting Reward of their good Works. And now if in Matters of far
less Evidence, a mere (...), So says the Philosopher, was thought a sufficient
ground for Heathen's Satisfaction; certainly in Matters of so great moment, and
such agreeableness to our Natures, a (...), So says the Spirit, ought to be a
sufficient foundation for a Christian's Faith.

Wherefore instead of suspending our Belief, or doubting of God's Veracity, let
us call to Mind the great Advantages We receive by those Declarations,
Confirmations, and Promises HE has given unto us to strengthen our Hopes, to
comfort us in Affliction, and to encourage us in the Performance of good Works:
and then, so much matter of Praise and Admiration will offer it self unto us,
that we shall think we can never sufficiently bless and adore his Goodness
toward us; for should he have left us to our selves without such Revelations,
though we have natural Desires after Immortality, and Blessedness implanted us,
yet our narrowlimited Knowledge could never have discovered unto us the
Certainty of Heavenly Joys, to be possessed by the Righteous, who are said to
Dye in the Lord. Under our heaviest Pressures, or amidst our greatest Troubles,
we might, and should often have said indeed, Blessed are the dead, for they
rest from their labors: But even in our highest Speculations, or our most
exalted Raptures we could never have known, or said, that Blessed are the dead
that dye in the Lord, for their works follow them, that is, according to the
Context, follow them in the presence of GOD, the Lamb, and the Holy Angels, and
so instead of a clear Assurance of a real Heaven in Spiritual Joys, we might
have been still led on as the Old Heathen World was, with the blind hopes of a
feigned Elysium in Shades and Groves. And therefore as long as we enjoy the
Powers of Thinking by being Living Men, let us not forget this great and
weighty Truth, that the Voice from Heaven for our Comfort and Salvation
declared and confirmed by the Seal of GOD, that so we may not faint in our
Travels, whilst we are laboring to abound in the work of the Lord, to obtain
that Blessedness, that is the sure Reward prepared for those that dye in Him.

In a brief Application then of all. The Persons that dye in the Lord, are all
those that depart this Life, having sincerely endeavored to the end to keep
the Commandments of GOD, upon their failure been truly Penitent, and by a
lively Faith in CHRIST committed themselves to his Mercy. And that there are
incomprehensible Degrees of Blessedness in the Mansions Above, prepared for all
such Persons; I believe no well-disposed Reason of Man can after this remain
unconvinced: and if he has any Faith in JESUS, must, I am sure, be fully
satisfied; since that is the Substance of this Blessedness hoped for in him,
and the evidence of Joyful things to come hereafter, and as yet not seen.

Wherefore having this satisfaction by this Voice from Heaven, Eternal weight
of Glory, Act. 14. ver. 22.
whereinto through much Tribulation we are foretold, we must expect to enter;
and where, the Angel proclaimed, is the patience of the Saints. Saints, who,
though once were sailing in these troubled waters, yet because they made not
Shipwreck of a good Conscience, but by Faith bore themselves up from sinking in
the Waves, are now arrived at their ever-quiet Haven: whose Number, (my Hope,
yea Confidence is) the Soul of this our Deceased Brother has increased; who in
time of his Affliction, yea amidst his greatest Pains, submitted himself to
God's Visitation with a wonderful Calmness, and Serenity of Spirit; much like
unto His, who said, Not my Will, O Father, but thine be done. Who, having
purged his Conscience from dead and sinful Works, to serve the living God, and
thereby being filled with the well-grounded hopes of a blessed Immortality
through Jesus Christ; Faced his approaching Hour with that truly Christian
Fortitude, that he showed himself as Unconcerned at the sense of its usual
Terrors, as the Apostle did when he sang Triumphantly this Epinichion; O Death
where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?

But Secondly, that Dye in the Lord; Let us always remember the great Advantage
they have by their Change, who dye the Death of the Righteous; and thence learn
not overmuch to lament our Loss by their Departure.

GOD, for many wise Reasons, more than the Wisest of us can discern, takes the
Righteous to himself from the Evil that is, and is to come; and it is, or at
least it should be our Prayer, that He would be pleased shortly to accomplish
the Number of his Elect, and hasten his Kingdom: and therefore as well in
submission to the unsearchable Methods of Divine Providence, as in compliance
with other Christian Duties, we should check those Passions that are apt to
exceed the Bounds allowable to natural Affection, whenever they arise to an
high Degree upon the sense of our Loss by the Departure of our Friends. By
Death they are freed from the Labors and Miseries of this World, and if their
last End were like his whose Funeral we are now attending, they are Rejoicing
in the Ease and Pleasures of the Other; and therefore though Lamentation and
Mourning may plead very strongly for themselves upon this Occasion; when GOD
has Deprived a most tenderly Affectionate Wife of an Husband, who never in any
thing Contended with her, unless it were to exceed her in Kindness: When he has
been pleased to take from a Family, a Father rather than a Brother; from the
Neighborhood, a Composer of their Differences, and a Guardian of their Rights;
from the Poor, a Reliever of their Necessities; and from all his Acquaintance,
from the highest to the lowest, an Affable, Courteous and True-hearted Friend;
One, who was always an Enemy to PAGEANTRY,
HYPOCRISY, and PRIDE; and, though abounding with this World's Good, could never
by any One be charged (as the Prince of Tire is by the Prophet) that his Heart
was lifted up because of his Riches: Eze. 28. ver. 5.
Though, I say, the sense of these Losses by so Worthy a Gentleman's Death (which
I should more largely insist upon, were it not my Design to allay your Sorrows)
may very strongly incline us overmuch to Lament and Grieve; yet when in one
Minute we look upon our selves, and his just Character, and Sigh upon the sense
of our Loss; let us, in the Next, consider his happy State, and Comfort our
selves upon the Thoughts of his infinite Gain: for should his Spirit return to
us, he Himself would Advise us not to Weep for him, but t^ Weep for our selves,
who now are in the midst of our labors whilst he rests from them, who now are
working, whilst he is rewarded.

Thirdly, and lastly, dye in the Lord are Blessed with Eternal Joys, that none
can comprehend, but that GREAT GOD that gives them; and those Happy Souls, that
by His Favor do now possess them: notwithstanding the wonderful and
unspeakable Greatness of them, and their Eternity; Shall we ever be so seduced
as by Apostasy from our Faith in CHRIST, and Obedience to His Precepts, to
forfeit our Title to them, either for the hope of Temporal Profits, and
Honors? or the sake of sensual Pleasures? or the Fear of worldly Afflictions?
Alas! all Temporal Advantages, even the greatest of all earthly Felicities, had
they a Sufficiency in themselves to satisfy our Desires; and could we be secure
of their Duration, or Continuance with us; yet at best, can attend us no
farther than this present Life, which is as a vapor, and a Shadow, and passes
away like a tale that is told. When we please our selves most in the Thoughts
of enjoying them; GOD many times is pleased to interpose Himself, and cut us
off: And to say to our Souls, Luke 12.19.
take your ease, eat, drink, and be merry, because, as we think, there is much
goods laid up for many years; is so sandy a foundation to build upon, that our
Lord has faid, THOU FOOL, Ver. 20.
to him that does it; For this night our Souls may be required of us. Let us
therefore, Phil. 3.14.
press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, and set our affections on things above, and not on things on the earth;
Col. 3.2.
always remembering the Wise-man's Words, Prove. 11.4.
that Riches profit not in the day of wrath, but Righteousness delivers from
death. And whatever fair Offers, or Enticing promises of this World's Treasures
be made, or given unto us, upon our compliance with sinful terms; As Moses
refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's Daughter, Heb. 11.24.
because he had a respect unto the recompense of reward; so let us contemn the
like Proposals, for the same reason, choosing rather (as he did) to suffer
affliction with the people of God, Ver. 25.
than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season.

And indeed, as the pleasures of sin are but for a season, or of a short
continuance; so are they base in themselves, and end in bitterness. Be they in
appearance never so specious, yet, (in the Wise-man's Language) they bite like
a serpent, Prove. 23.32.
and sling like an adder; they lead down to the Chambers of Death, and their
way is the way to Hell. Chapter 7.27.
Wherefore let us consider the dignity of our Nature, and the Excellency of our
Religion, and let not brutish Sense lead Us so basely captive; to whom GOD has
given Reason to be our Guide, and of whom He now requires Faith, as our Support
against Temptations, and our Glory in our Conquest of them: And that it may
not, let us (following these Exhortations) mortify our members that are upon
earth, Col. 3.5.
and (as the Apostle himself infers) having these promises, 2 Cor. 7.1.
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the fear of God. For as all our future, and everlasting Happiness
proceeds from the Vision of Him, so are we certain that without Holiness, no
Man shall ever see Him.

And as thus we should be upon our guard, lest either the Hopes of this World's
profits, and honors, or the enticements of its pleasures should so far
prevail, as to seduce us out of those paths that lead to Blessedness; so should
we also, lest the fears of affliction should drive us from them. Wherefore
rather than do any ill Action, let us suffer every ill thing, The Powers, and
the Rage of this World can lay upon us; reckoning, with the Apostle, Romans 8.18.
That the sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed in us. So shall we be prepared for all
conditions of Life, and every thing that can beset us; and thereby approve our
selves as true Sons of our CHURCH as this our Deceased Brother was; Whose Faith
in JESUS, and Whose stedfastness to our Religion I need not tell many Persons
here to have been truly such, as the changes of the World could never alter.

In the close of all; Hold fast (as He did) the profession of your faith
without wavering, Heb. 10.23.
for he is faithful that has promised; and be ye steadfast, 1 Cor. 15.58.
unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know
that your labor will not be in vain in the Lord. For since He, who it is
impossible should act any thing in vain, or be disappointed of His Ends, did
condescend to a most painful, and shameful Death, that all such as dye in the
Lord, might be advanced to an Everlasting Life of Pleasure and Glory, Certainly
when he had overcome the sharpness of that Death, He opened the Kingdom of
Heaven to all Believers. And Now,

To God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One
God, be ascribed all Dominion, Power, and Glory, both now, and for ever. Amen.


