SEVERAL Weighty Quaeries Concerning Heraclitus and the Observator, IN A
DIALOGUE BETWIXT Timothy the Corn-Cutter and Mr. Scruple.
Timothy. MR. Scruple, Mr. Scruple, whither in such have, what is that you have
got under your Arm in that Green Bag there?


Mr. Scruple. Only a few Quaeries, or Cases of Conscience, that have stuck so
in my Throat these three days, I could get nothing down for 'em; and I Will take
my Oath, I believe I have tumbled over all Bishop Hall's Cases, Bishop
Sanderson, Doctor Hammond, besides abundance of Foreign Casuists, and yet not
one of 'em touches upon any one particular Case of mine.


Timothy. Why prithee, what are they? let us see 'um.


Mr. Scruple. Why Sir, first,

(1.) Whether Heraclitus be a Man or a Woman (as one notably suggested the
other day) he rails so much like a Billings-gate scold.

(2.) Whether he be one individual Animal, or that several Clubb to the
production of this Monster, every one spitting his Venom till the Baggs full;
as once upon a time, all the Gods met and Piss't in an Oxes Hide, for the
making that huge Fellow Orion?


Tim. Why, a'y they say, there is Lawyers, Divines, Brewers-Clerks, and the
Devil an all concerned in the spawning of that Pamphlet.


Mr. Scruple. Ah Tim: and thirdly:

(3.) Whether that do not evidently appear from the variety, and incoherency of
the Style, and the Frothiness of it, is not an infallible sign, that it is
wrought off in a Tippling House by these Tankard-bearers of Helicon; as they
say, the reason of so many Monsters in Africa, proceeds from the drougth of the
Country, and the flocking of Beasts of different Kinds to one and the same
Fountain, and their coupling promiscuously?

(4.) Whether these Virtuoso's Write for Bread or Wine?


Tim. Why, to my Knowledge, for all their Noise, the poor Rogues are forced to
keep more Fast-days then the Church enjoins.


Mr. Scruple. (5.) Whether their Raillery and all that be not picked out of
Poor Robin, who got an Estate and left off, and their Politics out of Mr.
Hobbs of the Civil War, and these stitcht together with the Course Thread of T.
B's Brain, and the business is done?

(6.) Whether he of Heraclitus's Gang the other day deserved to be Hanged or
Drowned: who when the Secretary to the Cabal scrupled the putting in a
confounded Lie, cried, Dam it, in with it, it will make the Whiggs stare, and
serve to fill up, at the Woman said, when she Piss't into the sea.

(7.) Whether it were such Geese as these, that saved the Capital.

(8.) Whether Coleman and the Jesuits wan't Fools to these two new Champions,
who have set up Protestant English Colors in a Popish Privateer; and under the
greatest pretense of zeal for the Church of England have made us lose the scent
of the Popish Plot, and instead of that have most wonderfully found out another
of their own making? Heraclitus and Observator.

(9.) Whether Heraclitus's gang be Atheists, Jews, Turks, or Infidels?

(10.) Whether that Elegant Phrase of Greek-speaking, Hickringil T. B. and the
Taylor's Wife did not call an excellent Joak.

(11.) Wether this Club, may not one day, come to make a true lovers knot at
Tyburn.


Tim. But pray proceed to the Observator.


Mr. Scruple, (1.) Whether he had not like to have said his Prayers under the
Gallows.

(2.) Whether the Observator ought not to be kept from Pen, Ink, and Paper, as
Madmen, are from Knives and Sizzars?

(3.) Whether the Observator has not the Throat and Stomach of an Ostrich; he
can swallow and digist such woundy hard lies, and whether any thing can ever
Choack him but a Roap?


Tim. Ha, ha, ha, that is as pretty a Quere, as Jack Ketch put to one to'ther
day, whether he might with a safe Conscience let College Blood this hot
weather, or no?


Mr. Scruple, (4.) Whether the Observator be not a compendium of Law and
Politics.


Tim. Why I Will tell you what, I heard a fellow say, that he had rather hear the
Observater read once, than Baxter Preach 16 times; and another of my
acquaintatce was so far transported with the spirit of Toryism, that he said,
he never desired any more than 3 Books in his Family; the Bible, Whole Duty of
Man, and the Observator: Our Churchwarden never goes to Church without one in
his Pocket, partly as an Antidote against Whiggism, but chiefly to read if the
Ministers should chance to be Dull. Besides, I Have heard, that several Ministers
of State beyond Sea, have them always conveyed to 'em, by which, as by the
Weather-Glass, they know whether it will be Foul or Fair Weather in England.

Why a'my Conscience, they are of as much use to the Nation as the Coco Nut is
to the Indians, or the Palm Tree to the Aegyptains; of the Branches they make
Bedsteds, of the Leaves, Fans: Here you have all Law Points discoursed, your
rattling Metaphors, your Ginger-Bread simileis, your Concise and Flored Fetches,
and Reportees, and as good English Divinity as is to be found in St. Austins,
and for Flashy Wit, I Would turn Towzer loose to any Whelp in Christendom; why, as
I live and breath, it makes a man fit for any company.


Mr. Scruple, But hold, good Tim. a word with you:

(5.) Whether these Vomitings of the Observator, which he is troubled with
twice a Week, do not argue him in a desperate condition?

(6.) Whether Heraclitus and the Observator that Work and Drudge in the Popish
Mines, wont have least of the Oar?

(7.) Whether if Heraclitus and the Observator, should meet Lucian and Hobs, in
the other World, they would not shake hands together?

(8.) Whether that story be true, that the Observator is so intoxicated with
his late present out of Cambridge Shire, that he is going to bind up all his
sheets in Super Royal Paper and present them; and that they are to stand next
to Dr. Heylins History of Presbytery,

(9.) Whether Sed. Col. Camb: by sending the Observator into the World, have
yet fully atoned for Oliver Cromwell who had his education there?

But honest Tim. I am in have, and so are you, Farewell.


LONDON, Printed for Matthew Burdid, 1681.


