The Triumphs of London, For the Inauguration of the Right Honorable Sir
Richard Levett, Knight. LORD MAYOR OF THE City of LONDON. CONTAINING A Description
of the PAGEANTS, together with the Public Speeches, and the whole Solemnity of
the Day. Performed on Monday the 30th Day of October, Anno 1699. All set forth
at the proper Cost and Charge of the Honorable Company of HABERDASHERS.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for A. Baldwin, at the Oxford Arms Inn in Warwick Lane,
MDCXCIX.

To the Right Honorable Sir Richard Levett, Knight. Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
My LORD,
THE City in their Unanimous Choice of their Supreme Magistrate, have put the
Sword and Scales into so tried a Hand, already so famed for the Administration
of Justice, that Your Lordship's Advancement to the Praetorian Chair, is no
more than the Laurel to the Conqueror; all the Heroic Bravery, and every
Meriting Virtue that won those Bays were all his own before.

Never was this Honor more Deserved, or less Coveted than by Your Lordship.
The Popular Torrent of an Universal Esteem and Veneration carried their Darling
Choice to the Chair. Yes, Sir, it was their common Oblation of Gratitude: They
owed it, and they paid it You. In which Honorable Dignity they Crowned Your
Virtues, not Your Ambition. And to complete that truly Excellent, that
Prideless Character, so wholly Your own; all the private Satisfaction Your
Lordship shall receive from that Illustrious Administration, will be Your Glory
of Serving the City, not that of Commanding it.

And indeed that which has attracted Your Lordship so general a Love and
Respect, is, that Moderation that has always governed through the whole Conduct
of Your Life. Your Lordship, with a true Judgment, and right Reason, has ever
esteemed Opinion and Faith to lie only before a Higher Tribunal, and
consequently to be only Answerable there. Under the Guidance therefore of that
Golden Mean, not Byast or Warpt by Favor or Prejudice, an Assent with You
never heightened Your Smiles, nor a Dissent from You ever lessened 'em. No, the
Difference of Persuasion that has so often disturbed whole Families, and even
shaken States, never concerned Your Lordship. No, my Lord, Humanity and Common
Right have ever been adjudged by Your Lordship the only Arbitrators in Humane
Society. And therefore with a Justice without Severity, and a Mercy without
Fondness or Partiality, Your Lordship has ever held the Balance upright and
even to all Mankind. It Is with this Innate and Unchangeable Principle the Chair
finds You, and the World shall leave You. This Due all Tongues have ever paid
You, and my Pen only writes after 'em, being,

My LORD, With all profound Humility, Your Lordship's most obedient Servant, E.
SETTLE.

TO THE Worshipful Company OF HABERDASHERS.
Gentlemen,
Though you have now had a pretty considerable Interval, viz. of near 35 Years,
since the Chair has been filled by an Honorable Member of your o^n Society:
However, your Fair Records keep a Long Roll of Honor among you, when you
number no less than twenty Lord Mayors of your own.

But though, it is true, the Collar of SS, that Honorary Ornament for a Year, has
not so lately shined among you; however it is not so long since you have
received that Honor that will shine Ages, a more Lasting Monument of the
Haberdashers Glory: A Pile of that Illustrious Charity (Charity of all Honor
the Brightest) that we need take but a very short Walk to see as fair a
Structure for another Inscription of a Deo Dante dedit Robert Ask Armig. as
that of Thomas Sutton; whilst a Hoxton Foundation may even bear Head, and write
Sister with a Chartreux one.

But indeed it is not a single Glory of that kind that has thus shined among
you. The Charitable Donation of Eighteen Thousand Pounds from one of your
Members in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth (a pretty round Sum in those early
Days) deserves a very large Page in the Haberdashers Register of Fame. And
really the Doners of Charity are the only Men (to say Truth) that pay their
Debts before they die. They owe all their Riches to the Smiles of Heaven; and
in the Provision for Fed Mouths and Clothed Backs, they pay it all Back to
Heaven again.

For one yet Additional Honor more to your Company, it is a Numerous one. So
large a Body of you seems to say, you have some extraordinary Attractions of
Worth and Honor to invite and draw so General a Conflux to you. And to make it
yet larger still, we must consider you as a very spreading Root, when no less
than the whole Foundation of so Eminent a Society as the Merchant Adventurers
were Originally a Branch of You.

Thus wishing You a daily Accumulation of new Honors to the Rich Portion you
already possess, I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant, E. S.

The Movement of the Morning.
THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in
the Morning at his Lordship's House, viz.

1. The Wardens and Assistants in Gowns faced with Foyns. 2. The Livery in
Gowns with Budge, and their Hoods. 3. The Foyns and Budge Batchelors and Gowns
and Scarlet Hoods. 4. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each a Chain of
Gold about his Shoulders, and a white Staff in his Hand. 5. Thirty other
Gentlemen carrying Banners and Colors. 6. The Serjeant-Trumpet wearing two
Scarfs, one of the Lord Mayors Colors, and the other of the Companies, with 36
more Trumpets, whereof 16 are His Majesty's. 7. His Majesty's Drum-Major,
wearing a Scarf of the Company's Color, with four more of His Majesty's Drums
and Fifes. 8. Seven other Drums and two Fifes with Scarfs. 9. The two City
Marshals riding on Horseback, and six Persons attending with Scarfs and Colors
of the Companies. 10. The Foot Marshal and six Attendants with like Scarfs,
etc. 11. The Master of Defense and his Retinue in like Scarfs, etc. 12. Several
Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, bearing Standards and Banners. 13. Other
Pensioners in Gowns and Caps, carrying each a Javelin in one Hand, and Target
in the other, having the Arms of the Company's Founders and Benefactors.
All these Ranked by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's
Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums
and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with
Standards; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six
Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Batchelors concluding the Second Division. Six
Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bearing the City's, the other the Company's Arms.
Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Batchelors make the Third
Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and
then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City
and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, etc. Four
Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, four Gentlemen and four
Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear.

In this Order they march from Guild Hall, his Lordship being accompanied from
thence by the old Lord Mayor, whence the whole Company move through Cheap Side
to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Livery, and part of the
Gentlemen Ushers, take their Barge for Westminster, whither his Lordship is
attended, with the several Barges of the respective Companies, with Flags,
Streamers, several Pleasure-Boats, with Hautboys, Flutes, Trumpets, and all
manner of Music, etc.

His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer,
returns with the same Attendants and Splendour to Dorset Stairs, where, at his
Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Martial Ornaments
in Buff and Silver Head-pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves
forward toward Cheap Side. In his March, he is first entertained with this
Pageant.

The First PAGEANT, The Triumphs of Honor.
ON a stately Pedestal of the Compositive Order is erected the Lion of England,
Passant Or, being an Honorable Addition to the Arms of the Worshipful
Haberdashers, by the particular Gift of the Crown in Reward of their Great
Services, etc. On this Lion sits a Figure representing TRIUMPH, with the Bannor
of England in his Hand. At the four Angles are erected four flaming Pyramids
filled with the Coats of Arms of all the Worthy Benefactors of the Company
together with the Escutcheons of 20 Lord Mayors, all Members of their Society,
viz. 1. Sir Robert Billisden, Anno. 1434. being in the First Year of Richard
III. 2. Sir Stephen Peacock, Anno 1532. 3. Sir William Foreman, 1538. 4. Sir
George Barns, 1552. 5. Sir William Gerard, 1555. 6. Sir Nicholas Woodhouse,
1579. 7. Sir Thomas Blanke, 1582. 8. Sir George Barns, 1586. 9. Sir George
Bond, 1587. 10. Sir William Rider, 1600. 11. Sir John Gerard, 1601. 12. Sir
Thomas Low, 1604. 13. Sir Francis Jones, 1620. 14. Sir Hugh Hammersley, 1627.
15. Sir George Whitmore, 1631. 16. Sir Nicholas Raynton, 1632. 17. Sir Richard
Fenn, 1637. 18. Sir Thomas Fowk, 1652. 19. Sir John Lawrence, 1664. 20. The
present Lord Mayor. At the Basis of this Pedastal are seated four Figures,
representing Charity, Liberality, Virtue and Honor.

TRIUMPH thus Addresses his Lordship.

The Speech of Triumph. ON my triumphant Golden Lion crowned,
I view my Pyramids and Trophies round.
These Scutcheons most belong to the Great Dead,
Whose shining Glories, Sir, before You led.
Patrons and Benefactors, whose warm Smiles
Founded their own Rich Monumental Piles;
Structures of Charity whose proud Roofs shall raise
To endless Time the Haberdashers Praise.
To all those Worthies in the Front appear,
It Is You, Illustrious Sir, bring up the Rear.

The Second PAGEANT, The Temple of Time.
A Stately Dome erected upon four Columns of the Dorick Order; over the
Etableture of which are planted four Pedastals, supporting the proper Insignia
of TIME. The whole Fabric of Egytian Marble adorned with Gold and Precious
Stones; the immediate Attendants are Truth, the Daughter of Time, with this
Motto, Vincit Veritas, Truth overcomes. 2. Humility with this Motto, In terris
Corpus in Caelo cor, The Body on Earth the Heart in Heaven. 3. Constancy with
this Motto, Metam tangenti Corona, The Crown belongs to him that perseveres to
the End. Four more Figures are placed at the Angles, representing Prudence,
Patience, Temperance and Mercy.

TIME thus Salutes his Lordship.

The Speech of Time. TIme measures out the Globe, Life's fleeting Sands
And the keen Scythe of Fate are in my Hands.
But though so swift my Rapid Minutes drive,
I keep Records that shall to Ages live:
The Memories of the Great, the Good, and Just,
By me enrolled in Fame, by me embalmed their Dust.
If Time is that Historian, I have here
A glorious Theme for my Great Register.
Your fair Memoirs, my Lord, the auspicious Sway
Of your Pretorian Power, and that warm Ray
Your Virtues, Justice, Equity display,
Shall in Times Annals fill the noblest Page;
And one Years Reign find Glory for an Age.

The Third PAGEANT, The Palace of Pleasure.
A Magnificent Fabric supported by four Twisted Columns, and as many
Pillasters of Lapis Lazuri richly adorned with Silver and Gold, the whole
Structure Roof'd with several Intricated Angles, all centring and pointing into
an Octagon Form. The principal Figure in this Pageant is the Goddess FLORA,
whose chief Attendants are Ceres, Vertumna and Pomona. To which are added four
more Attendants, expressing Joy, Harmony, Love and Felicity.

FLORA thus Congratulates his Lordship.

FLORA' s Speech. FLora, a Goddess of that sovereign sway,
I cheer the Spring, I dress the Fields so gay;
The Winged Choristers all sing to me;
All Nature only wears my Livery.
But though my Hand does that vast Scepter bear,
I view that Head which I must Homage here.
Here Albion's Metropolis, the Great
Augusta's Lord, fills his more awful Seat.
My pettier Empire reaches but the Plains,
The Groves and Vales; commands poor Nymphs and Swains.
Those Nymphs, my Lord, must your loud Triumphs greet,
And strew their Flowery Garlands at your Feet.
Augusta, it is to Thee my Swains must bow,
For Thee they plant the Vineyard, guide the Plough:
In Thee the Hopes of all their sweating Toils.
It Is when the City shines the Country smiles.

The Fourth PAGEANT, The Chariot of St. Katharine.
A Stately Chariot all enriched with Embossed Work of Silver, driven upon four
golden Katharine-Wheels. In this Chariot is seated St. KATHARINE, the Original
Patroness of the Honorable Company of HABERDASHERS, the Chariot drawn by two
large Indian Goats, Argent, being the Supporters of the Company; with her are
seated two Figures in a Descent beneath her, representing Faith and Piety. On
these Beasts ride two Persons expressing Victory and Peace sounding two
Trumpets, with a Kettle-Drum; the Charioteer representing Conduct, with four
more Attendants on each side the Chariot. St. Katharine speaks as follows.

St. Katharine' s Speech. ST. Katharine did of old this Claim possess,
Was the Honored Habardashers Patroness.
Though Rome's created Saint, sure I Have not lost
All Title to that Honorable Post.
No; my Original Right to reassume,
Henceforth I Will quit my Abdicated Rome.
No more a Roman, but a Britain now,
I Will to a True Great Faith's Defender bow.
This Homage then to Albion's Caesar due;
I owe a Knee to his Vicegerent too.
Hail then Great Deputy to our NASSAU,
Fill your proud Chair, and give Augusta Law.
As Rome does now for Jubilees prepare
This great Revolving Seventeen Hundredth Year.
Why shall we have our Triumphs less than they?
No, Sir, beneath your warm propitious Ray,
Proud London shall those smiling Joys assume:
She Will keep her Jubilee as well as Rome.

The Fifth PAGEANT, The Factory of Commerce.
ON a very large Stage are planted, almost all round, several Shops, viz.
Milliners, Hosiers, Hatters, Cappers, etc. with Indian Planters and Cutters of
Tobacco, etc. The whole Pageant in some part Arched over, and in other parts
enriched with a Cornish of Gold over the several Shops; in the Rear of the
Pageant is planted a stately Throne richly gilt and adorned, on which, under a
Noble Canopy, sits a Person representing COMMERCE. During the Movement of this
Pageant, several Papers of Tobacco are given among the People. At his
Lordship's Approach, the Person representing Commerce descends from his Throne
to pay his Homage to his Lordship as follows.

The Speech of Commerce. HEre in my Factory of Trade I stand;
Trade that commands the World, You Trade command.
All Heads, all Hands, to dig the Industrious Mine,
The Product of the Earth, Air, Seas, all join,
From Trade's Rich Crop to make whole Nations shine.
Nor shall the Virtues of this Generous Taking up a Hand of Tobacco.
Plant,
In Fame their just Recorded Glories want:
Yes, thou dear Plant, from the vast Indian Coasts,
The Richest Flower the Royal Garden boasts,
Advance thy Worth, and raise thy Head yet higher,
Till even proud London from thy Growth aspire,
To gain by Smoke what once it lost by Fire.

Here his Lordship moves forward to Guild Hall to Dinner, where he receives the
Honor of Entertaining the Lords of the Council, the Judges, and the Chief of
the Nobility; the whole Magnificence of which splendid Entertainment concludes
the Solemnity of the Day.

FINIS.

