THE PROLOGUE TO PASTOR FIDO.
Spoken by Mr. Edward Lambert.
PReface and Prologue, are such modish Toys,
Books ar'nt without this, nor without that Plays.
Welcome, Gallants! and Ladies of the May,
You shall be courted modishly to day,
Because without you, there had been no Play.
As to our Play 's Original; we will first
Do right to famed Guarini's sacred Dust,
It Is learned Author. Nor let it be decry'd,
'Cause All Is Italian, Nothing's Frenchifi'd.
For, Plays (you know) like Clothes submit to Mode,
And that^s but dull, that keeps the common Road.
We care not for that -- for here, Sirs! naught you will have,
But what is Noble, Sage, Wise, Solid, Grave.
Stern CATO a Spectator might be here,
And modest V^rgins may Unmasked appear.
You Have Come^^ in it is most ancient dress,
As when of old* Carted through Villages.
Here Is then no place, for the Sparks and the Blades of the Times,
(Vallueing themselves upon their Garb, their Crimes)
Who scoff at us poor Bumkins: whose defense
Is our Simplicity, our Innocence.
To please such Fopps (for mortally we hate 'um)
We Will never attempt. --
In short, you have here, the Passions rudely dressed
To act their parts, if F^ar balks not the rest.
Here Is coy Love, flattring Hope, cold Desperation,
Enlivening Joys, fawning Dissimulation,
Pleasing Revenge, easy Credulity,
Fondness, Moroseness, Rage, and Cruelty
Charmed into Pity. -- Here ^re Love's Fatigues
It Is Toyls: and Lover's Wi^ Councels, Intrigues.
And if All this will not take, stop here -- for not
(As I Am a Sinner) one word of the Plot.
For, since it is at your choice, to clap or hiss,
Expect the rest: if well, we do in This
Your patience crave; pardon in what is amiss.
The End.
THE EPILOGUE TO PASTOR FIDO.
Spoken by Sir W^lter Ernle Barronet.
GAllants! the Stage is cl^r'd, and I am come,
To hear the Actor's ^^nd or fatal doom.
Poor Wretches! The amused with anxious fears
And fled; jealous they have fo^feited their Ears*
Though to be tried by YOU more than their Peers.
Yet why should They a pa^^ial Trial fear,
Where YOU, fair Ladi^s! influence the Bar?
Where full of Pity, as of ^ate, YOU sit,
There needs no IGNO^AMVS to acquit.
Do like your selves! Ste^m the moroser guise!
Cramp snarling Critics! and control the wise!
These All strike Sail to YOU -- and are All blessed
Who in such Harbor, can securely rest.
You Will say the Play's u^modish because old,
Alas! you will all be so -- good Tales are often ill told.
This seems to be our ^ase. Put (Ladies!) then
Most of you know, such Striplings are not Men
And though your kindness called or Farce or Play.
In Truth it is neither but a rude Essay.
Faith! then be kind! -- I do protest you would need
Accept this first time, the good will for the deed.
This Boon I only beg; grant This and then
We hope to temp^ you hither once ag'en
Mean time, win parting thanks Clown-like we treat ye
And in our Hone-bred Phrase can only say to ye
After an ill Mea (Friends!) much good may't do to ye.
The End.

