THE Triumphs of London, Performed on Thursday, October. 29. 1691. for the
Entertainment of the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS STAMP Knight; Lord Mayor of the
City of LONDON.

Containing a true description of the several Pageants, with the Speeches
spoken on each Pageant.

All set forth at the proper Costs and Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of
DRAPERS.

By E. Settle

LONDON, Printed by Alex. Milbourn, for Abel Roper at the Mitre near
Temple Bar, 1691.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sir THOMAS STAMP Knight; LORD MAYOR of the City of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
Honor ever looks Lovelyest, and shines Brightest, when it is the Recompense
and Meed of Virtue; so great is the Difference between a Present and a Reward?
Your Lordship ascends the Praetorial Chair under the last Qualification. Your
Merits have planted You so fair a Mark for that Dignity You have received, that
it is paid, not given You. And the Unanimous acknowledgements of all good Men
are so sensible of a Desert so conspicuous, that their concurring best Wishes
make you one United Congratulation. And that Your Lordship has so deserved,
your Constant Zeal for the Honor of Your Country, is not the Business of
Yesterday. Your Lordship set out an early Devote in so worthy a Cause. For
Instance, several Years together in those memorable Days, when Intrigue and
Design sat high at the Helm, Your unshaken Honor and Honesty were thought so
dangerous to the then State-Hammerers at the Anvil, that no less then
Court-Power was pleased to rise up and wage against You, witness the several
potent, Oppositions made against you and your long Exclusion from your Rightful
Entrance into Trust. But thanks to Providence, under the present more benign,
and more auspicious Administration, a Reign where Integrity qualifies for
Magistracy, and the Courtier and the Patriot are not names incompatible, your
Lordships Glory of being the Fear of that Age, intitles you to the Darling of
this. And our proud Metropolis receives her saluted PRAEIOR so pleased at your
Inauguration, and with such promising confidence of so upright and unbiast a
Ministry of Equity and Justice from your Lordship that she never entrusted her
Scales and her Sword in a Worthier Hand. In which high post of Honor, I join
but in the Universal Quire, when all Prosperity and Hoppiness to your Lordship
are most heartily wished by, My Lord,

Your most humble and obedient Servant, E. SETTLE.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL COMPANY OF DRAPERS.
Gentlemen,
UNDER this fair Occasion of expressing my Gratitude, perhaps I take a fairer
of gratifying my Pride, when I publish Your Generous Goodness in Accepting of
my poor Talent for the Service of this Honorable City. My best Acknowledgments
to Your Introducing Favor lie no little Duty upon me; and though I dare not
Arrogate any Merit to so much Honor, yet at least I have this Advantage that I
succeed not over-formidable Predecessors; Those Brothers of the Quill whose
Pegasus has not soard so high, that there is much danger of my Flagging behind
'em.

But when I Address to You my Kind and Worthy Patrons, I dare not pretend in so
narrow a Paper to recount the Antiquity and Splendour of the Worshipful Company
of DRAPERS. It is enough to say that the Honor of your Corporation extends as
far as Trade can reach, or Canvas Wings can carry it; and from this little
Island visits only those Nations of the World that there is Sea to Travel to.
And for Your First Original, Drapery is unquestionably so Ancient as to have
the Honor of being the immediate Successor of the Fig Leaves. And though we
are not certain that our great First-Father began it within his Fair Eden, yet
we are assured that Eves Spinstry and Adams Spade set to work together. And as
for any Poetical Harangue to the Drapers Encomium, let it suffice that whilst
there are Verdant Plains and Bleating Flocks, those innocent Panegyrists will
do you more Justice, and speak much better than any weak flourish from the Pen
of

Your most Obliged Humble Servant E. Settle.

The Movements of the Morning.
Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company designed for the Duty
of the Day, meet at Drapers-Hall.
1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulder, and a White-Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colors of the Company in
their Hats, Blew and Yellow.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesty's, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Blew and a Yellow.

8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies
Colors, with others of Their Majesty's Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horseback, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroidered: Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colors of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colors.

11. The Master of Defense with the same Scarf and Colors, Eight Persons of
the same Science to Attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed in carrying of Standards
and Banners.

13. Eighty Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, Yellow Sleeves and Blew Caps, each of
them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is
Painted the Coat Armor of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, ranked all two by two,
beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them
are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall
two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesty's, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen Ushers, followed by the Budg-Batchelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Batchelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, with the principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Guild Hall, where
the Lord Mayor Elect joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all
of them in this Order march through Kingstreet down to Three Crane-Wharf, there
entering into their several Barges which are gloriously adorned with Flags and
Pendants, His Lordship and this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is
conducted to the Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremonial and
Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths to their Majesty's, he returns again by
Water to Blackfriars Stairs, with Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Music
playing, etc.

There his Lordship, and the several Companys landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap Side, where
his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant.

The First Pageant A Chariot, etc.
ON a large Stage are placed two large Lions finely Gilded and Pollished, being
the Supporters to the Drapers Company. On their backs are seated two Negroes in
their Native Habit, bearing in their Hands two large Banners, the one of the
Citys, the other the Drapers Arms; their Bridles, Trappings, and other
Ornaments all of the Companys Color.

In the Rear of the Lions, and adjoining to them, is Erected a Golden Chariot
set with all the richest Embelishments that can be performed by Art.

Supremely elevated and gradually ascending, under a Canopy of Silver tied up,
in a Majestic glory sits a Young and Beautiful Virgin, representing Arachne
the Mistress and Patroness of Arts, Industry, Spinstry, etc. A Peruque of Curld
Bright Flaxen Hair flowing from her Shoulders, a Crown of Stars Around her
head, beset with precious Stones, enrobed in a Bass or Tunick of Purple and
Carnation, bearing in her Right hand the Kings Banner, and in her Left a
Cornucopia to signify that Increase is owing to Industry and Art.

On her right hand (on a Descent beneath) sits Diligence, on her Left hand
Industry.

Diligence Arrayed in a Robe of Lemon Colored Silk, with a mantle of Green
Sarsnet, in short curled hair with a Wreathe of Laurel, a pair of Silver Sheers
in one hand and a Banner of the Citys in the other.

Industry, in a Robe of Crimson Silk Fringed with Silver, a Mantle
Party-colored, Brown Hair, a Garland of Flowers, bearing in one hand a Shield
Vert, a Bee-Hive, and a Swarm, in the other the Lord Mayors Arms.

In the Front of this Chariot are placed three other Figures, richly adorned in
their Proper Habits, Success, Union and Tranquillity, Success beating the Kettle
Drum, and Union and Tranquillity sounding of Trumpets.

Arachne Addressing to my Lord.
HOld, hold my sooty sun burnt Charioteers,
Behold the awful Lord of Power appears:
Bid my Triumphant Driving Chariot stay,
Till to bright HONOR I my Homage pay.
That Powerful Hand must stop my rolling Wheels,
Whilst to such WORTH even my proud Lion Kneels.
My Lions! Yes; at that commanding Word,
They know their Duty and must own their Lord.
If such their Homage, Sir, what must be mine,
I who but only from Your Favor shine?
Though proud Arachne does her self profess,
Of Arts the Mistress, and the Patroness.
Fair Industry and Arts your Handmaids stand;
The improving Age and the Enriching Land,
All spin their Thread from Your Encouraging hand.
My Wheel then and my Loom are all Your own,
And' it is Your Smiles that mount me to my Throne.
Then from that Throne, my Lord, I bend thus low;
And to Acknowledge the vast Debt I owe,
My Founders Fame in my own Loom enrolled,
For that Rich Web I Will spin a Thread of Gold.
The Second Pageant THE Pyramide of Honor.
ON a Large Stage is Artfully and Eminently Erected a Lofty Pyramide, whereon
is placed (and Richly Gilded) all manner of Trophies, as Standarts, Ensigns,
Shields, Helmets, Trumpets, and other Military Habiliments, etc. On the
Pinnacle of the Pyramide Three Imperial Crowns. Beneath this Stately Pyramide,
on each side the Basis, are seated four Persons, representing Albion, Germania,
Hispania and Batavia, intimating the present CONFEDERACY, Arrayed in this
following Manner.

Albion in a Suit of Silver Armor with a Crimson Scarf, on his Head a Large
Peruke tied back in a bag, his brow encircled with a Gold Laurel, in his right
hand a Golden Truncheon, in his left a Banner of England, his Buskins Crimson,
inlayed with Gold.

Holland in an Orange Colored Robe, a Silver Headpiece, a Red Plume of
Feathers, and a Silver Mantle.

Germany in a Purple Robe of Wachet Color Silk, a Silver Headpiece and Scarf.

Spain in a Purple Robe, a Gold Mantle, and Gold Headpiece.

At the 4 Corners of this Stage are placed these four Rivers in Proper Habits,
with their Urnes, Rushes Flags and Reeds, etc. viz. The Boyne, Shannon, Rhine
and Danube, signifying the present Seats or Scenes of War, and the whole
Pageant the Royal Confederacy of Europe, etc.

ALBION's Speech.
WHilst Nassaus Trump shall to endless Ages blow,
Far as the Boyne, or Shannons Waters flow:
Third Edward and Fifth Henry's deathless name,
All centring in One Consummating Fame;
Bear up, fair Albion, thy exalted Pride,
Rise high my Monumental Pyramide.
But whilst my Elevated thoughts I raise,
All tuned to the Great WILLIAMS hallowed Praise;
Whilst my Transported Veneration mounts
To that vast Theme, and the Summed Mass recounts:
It Is just, my Lord, I pay Your Equal due;
You share his Cause, and must his Honor too.
Does the Armed Caesar drive Your Foes before You;
Yes, You, kind Patriot, Plume his Wings for Glory:
Divide between you then your shared Renown,
William that Wears, you that support a Crown.
The Third Pageant, the Theater of Victory.
ON a spacious Stage is Eleborately contrived and Erected a stately
Amphitheatre of the Richest Egyptian Marble, curiously wrought and adorned;
designed and built after the Corinthian order, with Columns and Pilasters in a
Quadrangular Form, wherein are seated in four Arches, bearing each the Prospect
of an Amphitheatre, Neptune and Thetis, Mars and Bellona sumptuously Dressed
after the manner of those Heathen Gods and Goddesses.

Neptune in a Robe of Seagreen, fringed with Gold, a Silver Mantle, on his
head a Coronet of Shells and Coral, his hair and beard Green, in his Right hand
a Silver Trident, in the other a Banner of my Lords, etc.

Thetis in an Aurora Colored Mantua; and Watchet Colored Bases, a Coronet of
shells and Coral, a Golden Mantle, bearing the Citys Bannar.

Mars in a Roman Body of Gold, A Silver headpiece, a Plume of Red Feathers and
Bases, a Silver Scarf, bearing the Kings Banner.

Bellona in a Carnation Robe fringed with Gold, a silver headpiece, a Plume of
Red and Blew Feathers, a silver Scarf.

On the Cupulo a stately Figure of Fame gilt: among the Ornaments of the
several Columes, are intersprinkled these proper Mottos.

Victrix Fortuna.

Triumphans Causa.

Over Neptune

Imperium, Oceano, sed Famam terminet Astris.

Over Mars.

Vltricibus Armis

The Speech of Neptune.
NEptune and Mars (the Spear and Trident joined)
The two great equal Terrors of Mankind,
From all our desolating Vengeance, hurled
Around the Solid and the Floating World,
We come to fill the Triumph of this Day,
And both our Tributary Duties Pay.
TO Augusta's great Commanding PRAETOR, you
D^ead Caesar's Image, Caesar's Vassals bow,
And it is but Just that all those aiding Powers
That wait his Triumph, should attend on yours.
Whilst the great NASSAU treads the Worlds fair Stage,
Fills Fames loud Trump, the Hero of the Age;
Though his Illustrious Hand leads to the field,
The Arming World that fights beneath his Shield;
Battles and Arms his Sovereign Right, it is true,
But Wealth and Riches, those, my Lord, your due,
The Sinews of proud War belong to you:
And whilst He Marches EUROPES Leading Lord,
It Is He but Weilds, it is you that Edge the Sword.
The Fourth Pageant The Wilderness: OR, The Arcadian Plain,
IN the Front of which is placed the Crest of the Worshipful Company of
Drapers, being a Ram Artfully carved and properly Painted, as big as the Life,
planted for Magnificene on a green Mount, or Hill. On whose back is mounted a
Beautiful Boy with Flaxen Hair, crowned with a Garland of Roses, in a Robe of
white Sarsnet, and a Carnation Mantle fringed with Gold, with white Shepherds
shoes and stockings, playing on delightful Music, bearing the Banner of the
Arms of the Corporation of Drapers.

In the Rear is placed a stately Bower composed after the Tuscan order, well
carved and richly gilded and painted, and adorned with all manner of flowers.

Under this Bower on a Green bank sit Sylvanus and Fauna, the Rural Deitys of
the Groves and Flocks etc. to whom the Shepherds and Shepherdesses pay
Devotion, etc.

Sylvanus in a Robe of straw color, Embroider^d with Gold, a sky colored
mantle Fringed with Silver, a Garland of Flowerson his head, white hair and
beard, Carnation silk hose, gold Buskins, a Shepherds Crook, a Linen Scrip,
and Leather bottle, bearing the Citys Banner.

Fauna Attyred in a Purple Robe, Embroider^d with Silver, a Scarlet Mantle
Fringed with Gold, light Flaxen hair, on her head a straw hat adorned with
Flowers, a Sheepcrook, a silver Scrip and Leather Bottle, bearing the Banner of
the Lord Mayors Arms.

In the square of this Plain, planted round with Trees and Bushes, adorned with
Satyrs and other Rural Figures, are Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Wood-Nimphs,
all Gayly Attired, with Bags, Bottles, Sheephooks and Streamers Flying, etc.
with other Persons concerned in the Woollen Trade at Work, as an Old Woman
Spinning of Yarn, some Carding and Picking of Wool, and all at Intervals,
Frolicking, Pipeing, Dancing and Singing, representing the Pastoral and Rural
Innocent Mirth, as a Compliment to the New Lord Mayor, and a Testimony of their
Service to the Drapers Company.

At the Approach of the Lord Mayor this CAROL is Sung.
COme Shepherds and Nimphs a jolly fair Train,
Let Us Frolic and Dance it around the Plain,
Round the Plain,
Round the Plain,
Let Us Frolic and Dance it around the Plain.
We'll drink my Lord's Health, then Laugh and lie down,
And all to the Glory of London Town,
London Town,
London Town,
And all to the Glory of London Town.
The Ceremony ending with this Speech of Sylvanus.
What though the whole Alarmed Globe all round,
Their softer Ayrs in Wars loud Thunder drowned,
The Frighted Swain throws his tuned Reed away:
No sullen Cloud shades Britains halcyon day.
Here Peace does with her Tuneful Measures reign,
And to your Triumph brings this Rural Train.
It Is true, my Lord, when we approach before ye,
We neither boast of Pomp, nor State, nor Glory.
Yet our Course Bowls as hearty Mirth can hold,
As Theirs that drink your Lordships Health in Gold.
Here the Pageantry concluding, the Painters, George Holmes and Richard Hayes,
bid you good Night; the Lord Mayor and the whole Train moving off to Dinner,
which finishes the Solemnity of the Day.

FINIS.

