SEVERAL PROPOSALS OR HUMBLE PROPOSITIONS Delivered in to the Commissioners of
Parliament residing with THE ARMY.

Resolved upon at a general Council of War of the Army under the command of
his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, held at Reading, July 17. 1647.

WITH A Letter to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council concerning the
disposal of the MILITIA of LONDON,

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX and his Council of
War.

Signed by JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sec.

OXFORD, Printed by J. H. and H. H. and published for the satisfaction of the
Kingdom, 1647.

Several PROPOSALS Delivered in to the Commissioners of Parliament residing
with the Army.
THese several ensuing Particulars being considered, debated, and resolved
upon at a general Council of War, (his Excellency being present) we the
Commissioners of the Army were appointed in (the name and behalf of them) to
present the same to your Lordships and the Commissioners, to be tendered with
all speed to the Parliament; which we accordingly offer, and desire your speedy
care therein, that so an Answer (according to the desire and expectation of the
Army) may be speedily returned to these Particulars.

1. That there be an effectual Declaration forthwith published to the whole
Kingdom, against the inviting, and bringing in of any Foreign Forces, under
any pretense whatsoever.

2. That the Army may be paid up equal with the dissertors thereof, according
to the late Votes of Parliament; And that the Army may forthwith be put into a
constant course of pay, that they may not be burdensome and oppressive to the
Country: for the more speedy performance whereof, we desire, that the House of
Peers would be pleased to concur with the desires of the House of Commons
(so often proposed to them) for the reviving of the Committee for the Army;
that so the Assessments and great Sums in arreares both in the City, and
elsewhere, may be by their endeavor collected for the speedy and necessary
supply of the Army: And also, that the Treasurers and the Committee at Weavers
Hall, may be speedily called to an account, in what manner, and by what
warrant, the two hundred and thirty thousand pounds lately entrusted in their
hands, have been in so short* time consumed.

3. That the Militia of the City of London, and the Committee for the same,
may consist of such Persons, and speedily be returned into those hands who
formerly during the worst of times have therein given large testimony of their
fidelity to the Parliament and Kingdom; which besides the real security it
will be to the Parliament and Kingdom, in preventing of dangers, and
preparations toward another war; would conduce so much to the removing of
iealousies, and give such a ground of confidence to the Army, as that we might
the better dispose it to larger Quarters in several parts, for the ease of the
Country.

According to, and in pursuance of the Particulars mentioned under the fifth
Head of the Representation of the Army, we do earnestly desire.

4. That all persons imprisoned in England, or Dominion of Wales, (not for
Delinquency in relation to the late war, but for other pretended
misdemeanors) whose imprisonment is not by the regulated course of Law, but by
Order from either House of Parliament, or of Committees flowing from them; may
be put into a speedy, regular, and epuitable way of trial: or (if the
necessity of settling the general affairs of the Kingdom admit not their
present trial,) that then they may have present liberty upon reasonable
security for their appearance at a certain day to answer what shall be charged
against them in a legal way. And that when they shall be tried, if they
appear wrongfully or unduely imprisoned; they may have reparation according to
their sufferings. In particular we desire this may be done in behalf of
Lievetennant Colonel John Lilburne, M. Musgrave, M. Overton, and others in
their condition imprisoned in and about London.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX. Reading July 19.
1647. John Rushworth, Secretary.

A LETTER sent from his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the Council of
War; to the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
IN the carrying on of the great business of the Kingdom toward a general
and happy setlement; it has been a fixed principle with us to make it our
first endeavor with the Parliament; that all things tending to the engagement
of the Kingdom in a second War might be removed, before we could have a
confidence to expect a good issue upon a Treaty with their Commissioners: which
course of ours, although it might have some appearance of delay, yet by men,
that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope no endeavor will be judged
unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of a new embroylement.

We are now come thus far; that the most material particulars which we have
in preparation to propose for the general settlement of the affairs of the
Kingdom, have been communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners, and we hope
they are satisfied that they contain in them things tending to a general good,
and to lay an hopeful foundation for a common Right and freedom to the People
of this Land in future, and for a lasting peace amongst us.

But before we can securely intend, and without interruption apply our selves
unto the proceeding and dispatch of the Treaty thereupon; we have addressed
some humble desires to the Parliament, which we have delivered into the hands
of their Commissioners.

The paper consists of three particulars, the last whereof (which is the
Militia of the City) you being most imediately concerned, to the end you may
see, we would ask nothing which relates to you, without giving you a just
account thereof, and all possible fatisfaction therein, we have also given a
Copy thereof to your Commissioners to be herewith sent unto you.

We should not desire this or any thing else of that nature, were we not
persuaded that what we desire is seasonable and necessary for yours and the
Kingdoms good and quiet, and we should willingly have been silent (as to this)
but considering the just iealousies which lie against some persons now
authorized in the exercise of that power amongst you, and those attempts which
have been made by some who would have engaged your City to a war, had not
your Lordship and the court of Aldermen and Common Counsel by your wisdom
prevented it, by getting those Votes which were passed by the Militia, made
null; we cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you in
desiring your concurrence with ours to the Parliaments, that the Militia may be
changed into those hands out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity
to the public there has been so long and large experience, as few ages have
paralleld. And if the interest we have so long fought for be still the same.
let it not seem strange, that we desire both of the Parliament and City, that
those may be in places of such a trust who have given the best proof of their
courage and constancy in prosecution of the same.

Having thus far declared our selves withal freedom and clearenesse to you,
as we do not doubt of your good acceptance of our intentions therein, so we
desire your forwardness in a work, so much tending to mutual confidence, and
to prevent the designs of any who would be glad to put obstructions in the way
to an happy conclusion, and envy nothing more then the continuance of a right
understanding between you and us.

Reading July 19. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX. and his Counsel of War. John Rushworth.


