Several LETTERS From the COMMITTEES In several COUNTIES. To the Honorable
William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of COMMONS, Read in both Houses
of PARLIAMENT, June 27. 1642. Wherein (amongst diverse other Passages very
remarkable) is related how the Towns Men of Manchester, put themselves into
Arms, and stood upon their defense against the Lord Strange and his Forces, who
came to seize on the MAGAZINE. With an intercepted Letter from Sir Edward
Fitton, to Sir Thomas Aston at York: Discovering a fowl design of the
Malignant Party. Whereunto is added several Votes of both Houses.

Die Lunae, 27. Junii, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these Votes and four
Letters be forthwith Printed and Published.

Job. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.



London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott, and John Wright. 1642.

To the Honorable WILLIAM LENTHALL Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons,
These present.
HONORABLE SIR,
THe high Sheriff of Lancashire having surprised the Powder and Match at
Preston, as you have received Advertisements by a Letter herewith sent from M.
Rigby, who instantly gave notice thereof to M. Ashton of Middleton, for
prevention of the like in Manchester, where o^ Barrels of Powder, and some few
bundles of Match were lodged in a room of a house belonging to the Lord
Strange, and by him lent for the keeping thereof: M. Ashton forthwith repaired
to Manchester, and then Sir Alexander Ratcliffe, and M. Thomas Prestwich, two
of the Commissioners in the Commission of Array from the King and M Nicholas
Mosley, and Thomas Danson the Undersheriff, endeavored to take away that
Powder and Match, but were prevented by M. Ashton, who, with Sir Thomas
Stanley, and others, Deputy Lievtenants, took it, and removed it into other
places of the Town: and thereupon my Lord Strange, who had upon Monday last
seized and taken away above 30 Barrels of Powder, and a great quantity of Match
from Leverpool, parcel of the Countries Magazine, did, with many armed Forces,
repair to a Town called Bury, near Manchester, but 20 miles distant from his
own house: This appearance of his, struck a great terror and amazement into
the Country, so that instantly, for their safety and defense, the Townsmen of
Manchester put themselves into Arms, and many of the parts Adjacent came
voluntarily in unto them for their assistance: being come together, we and
diverse others of the Deputy-Lievtenants mustered and trained them, and with
them began to execute our instructions for the Militia, and then stood in a
posture of defense, as yet we do: And we and our fellow Deputy-Lievtenants,
though our Forces were for the present much stronger then those of the Lord
Strange, as we doubt not he well understood, did nevertheless, for prevention
of effusion of blood, send unto him upon Thursday last two, and yesterday three
of our selves to treat with him, and to atone the business; the result of
these Treaties was, That his Lordship offered, That if we would return the
Powder and Match into his hands, in the place from whence it was taken, then he
would deposite them into the hands of some of us, and of M. Robert Holt, one of
his own Deputy-Lievtenants by Commission from the King; whereunto we and our
fellow Deputy-Lievtenants could not assent, so that upon those treaties, in
those two days nothing is yet done therein; however, yesterday the Lord
Strange dismissed diverse of his Forces, so that but few men did yesterday
appear about him, which occasioned us and our fellow Deputy-Lievtenants to
suffer many of our Forces which came out of the neighboring Towns, to return
to their own houses; and this morning we have again for the like purpose as
formerly, sent to his Lordship one of our selves, who is not yet returned: and
since whose departure from us, we hear that there are new Proclamations sent
from York, to be published in this County, against us and our proceedings upon
your Instructions; that the King will be suddenly here with us, with great
Forces; but yet we have seen or heard any of these Proclamations. We have this
week discovered a foul design, by a Letter from Sir Edward Fitton of Gawsworth
in Cheshire Baronet, directed to Sir Thomas Aston, and intercepted by us; which
Letter we have here enclosed sent unto you, having no other information
touching the Contents of that Letter but what is therein contained, save only
that Sir Edward Fitton came yesterday very uncivilly amongst us and our fellow
Deputy-Lievtenants, and required the Letter; and he and M. Peter Danyell the
younger have given out great threats against some of us, for taking and
detaining that Letter. Our high Sheriff, and his fellow Commissioners of Array,
will readily, as we conceive, always upon all occasions, endeavor the power
of the County against our proceedings upon your Instructions. These are all
whereof we can for the present advertise you, only in regard we daily expect
and fear great Insurrections of popish Protestant professors, Papists, and
other malignant persons: which to prevent, as also to strengthen us in our
proceedings in the Militia, we should infinitely rejoice in the presence of the
Lord Wharton our Lieutenant, and such other speedy assistance as you should
hold meet for

Your most humble, and faithful Servants, RAPHE ASSHETON. JOHN MOORE. ALEX
RIGBY.

Manchester in Lincolnshire, 25 of June, 1642.
For his truly honored Friend, Sir THOMAS ASTON Baronet, at his lodging. York;
present these. 27. Junii. 1642.
Noble Sir,
I Shall ever acknowledge it as an honor done unto me your poor Kinsman and
servant, as that you did own me, in being so noble and friendly unto me while I
continued at York: As also, the favor you did me, in bringing me to kiss the
hands of him, to whom my life, my fortunes, and all that has dependancie on
me, has been ever, and ever shall be laid at His Majesty's feet, to do him
what service I am able. Sir, this day I have met with my fellow-Commissioners,
concerning the Subsidies now in hand; we have chosen a Collector for the
gathering of them, and appointed the Country, that they should with all
convenient speed pay in the money, which I doubt not but will be within the
compass of a fortnight I moved the Commissioners, that the Collectors should
keep the money in their hands: But I found they were unwilling of it; I did not
press them overmuch to it, in regard that this money is to be paid into the
Lord Major of Yorks hands; as also, Yorkshire, Cumberland, and Westmerland,
with many other Counties. If you look into the Act, it will better satisfy
you. Sir, I conceive, that if His Majesty would be pleased to send to the Lord
Major of York, and the Citizens, that they should not part with the moneys
until they knew his farther pleasure, it might more properly be staid there
then here, until His Majesty be satisfied, that the money go the true way it
was intended. But if His Majesty like not that way, and that I might know the
way how for to stop it here, I would zealously perform it in wh^t lies in my
power. And, I hope His Majesty will send me a Commission for the acting what I
do.

Sir William Brereton will be upon Saturday (as I hear) at Chester, to settle
the Militia of this County for the Parliament if he can; you know what a spirit
he is of, and having a company of Roundheads about him, may much advantage him
about Chester; he is so near unto his Decoy, that he may send out his Ducks
every way to fetch in others: what will be done in contradiction of him, I know
not; for I hear nothing of my Lord Strange's stirring yet, nor of any
Commission that is come from him. (Sir) I may assure you, that the major part
of this Hundred of Manchester, where I live, will stand right. And now I will
trouble you no further; only this I should wish from you, to favor me with
three or four lines by this Bearer, to know what service I may do unto my King:
And that you will be pleased, if there be any News stirring, to impart some of
it unto me, and I shall acknowledge it as an extreme favor done unto me; And
ever remain

Your Kinsman, and most true Servant, EDWARD FYTTON.
If my Lord Rivers be at Court, I beseech you present my most humble service to
him. Gawsworth, 22 June, 1642.
Die Sabbati, 12, Junii, 1641.
Resolved upon the Question.

THat the Clergy of England, Convented in any Convocation or Synod, or
otherwise, have no power to make any Constitutions, Canons, or Articles
whatsoever, in matter of Doctrine or Discipline, or otherwise, to bind the
Clergy or the Laity of this Land, without common consent of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question. Nullo contra Dicente.

THat the several Constitutions and Canons, Ecclesiastical, treated upon by
the Archbishops of Canterbury and York, Presidents of the Convocations for the
respective Provinces of Canterbury, and York, and the rest of the Bishops and
Clergy of these Provinces, and agreed upon with Kings Majesty's License in
their several Synods, begun at London and York, 1640. Do not bind the Clergy,
or Laity of this Land, or either of them.

Resolved upon the Question.

THat these Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical, treated upon by the
Archbishops of Canterbury, and York, Presidents of the Convocations, for the
respective Provinces of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the Bishops and
Clergy of those Provinces, and agreed upon by the Kings Majesty's License in
their several Synods, begun at London and York, in the year 1640. Do maintain
in them many matters contrary to the Kings Prerogative; To the Fundamental
Laws and Liberties of the Realm; To the right of Parliaments; To the propriety
and liberty of the Subjects, and matters tending to Sedition, and of a
dangerous consequence.

Die Lunae, 27. Junii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That these Votes be
forthwith Published and Printed.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.



FINIS.
Honorable Sir;
MAster Shutleworth and my self, being in obedience to the commands of both
Houses in our way to Lancashire, and hearing as we found it true, that by
color of a Letter from the King to Sir John Girlington the high Sheriff of
that County, publik Summons was given through all or most part of the County,
that all the Protestant Subjects therein, should the next day appear at
Preston, to hear read the last Lancashire Petition to the King, and his Answer
thereunto, and his Majesty's 2. last Declarations to that of both Houses of the
19. and that of the 26. of May, we by the way discharged some, with whom
causually met of their appearance, and willed them to do the like to their
neighbors, and from the Constable of Standish, we took a warrant directed to
him alone, for the summoning of all within that Township, which warrnat had
that very day being Sunday, been published in Standish Church, by Master
Chaddock the Parson thereof; and we did that night repair to Preston, whither
the next morning being the 20. of this instant June, the high Sheriff
accompanied with the Lord Strange his eldest son a child, the Lord Mollineux,
son in law to the Lord Strange, and diverse other Gentlemen resorted, and
thither also then came about five thousand persons upon the said Summons, whom
the Sheriff did then draw out to a great Moore adjoining, called Preston
Moore, but before the Sheriff went forth, we, who by the shortness of time*
could conven no other of the Committee, or of the rest of the
Deputy Lieutenants, acquainted the Sheriff, that we with others, as a
Committee of both Houses, wereby them sent down for the preservation of the
peace of the County, and showed him such parts of our instructions as enjoined
his obedience thereunto, and conduced to the present occasion, and we
demanding, he acknowledged that he, upon the said Letter, had caused the people
to be summoned and convened to the purpose aforesaid, and showed us the Letter,
but not the Declarations, we told him we feared the publishing of the
Declarations might tend to the raising of a faction or party against the
Parliament, and we therefore admonished and advised him to forbear the doing,
publishing, or dispersing any thing of that nature, and we further demanding,
he told us that he had a Commission of Array, directed to the Lord Strange, to
himself, to Sir George Midleton, now lately made Baronet at York, Sir
Alexander Radcliffe, Master Tildesley of Mierscough, Master William Farington,
and others, and that when the people were drawn together, he would acquaint
them with that Commission, and that he would also proclaim the Kings
Proclamation, of 27. of May, which as he affirmed, he had already caused to be
proclaimed in many places, we thereupon wished him to forbear it, and
afterward according to our instructions, we tendered unto him, and required him
in the name of the Lords and Commons, to read and publish to the people,
several Books containing the Declaration of the Lords and Commons, concerning
the said Proclamation, and the supposed Statute, d. 7. Edw. 1. as also the
Votes of both Houses, made the 20. of May last, with sundry Articles or Acts of
Parliament, to confirm the same; but he refused to publish them or to receive
them from our hands, and when the people were assembled, he and his under
Sheriff, Master Thomas Danfon; and Robert Male, a Popish Recusant, and others,
did then read unto them the said Letter, Lancashire Petition and answer, the
two last Declarations of the King, and the Sheriff himself showed unto them
the Commission of Array, under the great Seal of England, but before these
passages were ended, the assembly went away, except as we beleve about 6, or
700, persons, in whose presence we called to the Sheriff, and told him that we
were to speak unto him, in the name of the Lord* and Commons assembled in
Parliament, and were to acquaint him with our instructions, concerning his
Commission of Array, and his intermedling with the Militia of the County, but
he refused to stay to hear them, and then according to our instructions, we
did in the name of the Lords and Commons of England, require and command him to
deliver unto us that Co^mssiion of Array, to be by us sent to the Parliament,
or to give us his answer, and thereupon he denied to deliver that Commission,
and Master Tidlesley of Mierscough told us we should receive an answer from
York, we also in the name of the Lords and Commons commanded the Sheriff and
all his fellow Commissioners in that Commission of Array, to forbear the
execution thereof, and all the people to forbear to obey the same, at which
the Sheriff departed, and he and diverse about him cried out, all that are for
the King go with us, crying For the King, for the King, and so about 400.
persons, whereof very many, and as we believe the greater part were Popish
Recusants went with him, and rid up and down the Moor, and cried, For the King,
For the King, but the rest then staying with us, we proceeded and declared unto
them, that we and others were sent down by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, for the preservation of the peace of this County, and that both
Houses and our selves in particular, ever had done and ever would do, all
things tending to the safety honor, and peace of the Kings person, and his
Kingdoms, and nothing to the contrary, and wished them not to divide between
the King and Parliament, but to stand for the King and Parliament, whereupon
with a general acclamation, they prayed for the King and the Parliament, we
then wished all high Constables, and petty Constables, and others then present,
to be attentive, and we read unto them such parts of the instructions as were
applicable to the present passages, and the Militia of the County, concerning
which we told them, that all the Deputy Lieutenants appointed by the
Parliament, were forthwith to meet, and therefore we but being two, would give
no further direction therein till that time, and then they should receive
further advertisements how to behave themselves, and in the mean time we advised
them not to suffer themselves to be drawn into Arms without direction from
the Parliament, and so we dismissed the assembly, Sir George Midleton, and
Master Thomas Tildesley of Meriscough, and Master Thomas Prestwiche, whose
wives are Popish Recusants, and Master William Farington a Justice of peace,
were in our judgments, the most busy and active, and they assisted,
countenanced, and abetted the Sheriff in all the aforesaid passages, and
therein pressed and urged him forward, who of himself was thereunto
sufficiently inclined, and whilst these things were in acting upon the Moore,
Will. Su^pner, servant to Master William Farington, who during his late Deputy
Lieutenancy, had placed in a private house in Preston, about 13. barrells of
Gunpowder, and some quantity of Match, did secretly convey away about 6.
barrells thereof, in Packcloathes upon Packhorses, and the next morning about
6. of the clock and before, we had notice in whose house that Powder and Match
was lodged the Sheriff did convey away out of the Town and Liberties of
Preston, the residue of the said Powder and Match, which being made known to
me, I forthwith repaired to the Sheriff, and showed him the Order of the Lords
and Commons, made the 10. of May last, for the disposing of the Magazines, and
also a deputation from the Lord Wharton, authorizing his Deputy Lieutenants, or
any two or more of them, to dispose of the Magazines of Lancashire, and then
desired him to cause that powder to be returned to Preston, but he answered
that he would not return it, but would keep it and defend it with the power
of the County, and the Sheriff and Sir George Midleton then said, that that
Order should not be obeyed, and I thought it not meet for so small a quantity
of Powder and Match, though indeed a very considerable quantity for the time
and place, to endeavor a return thereof by force, so that it now remains
unknown to me where they (who took it) have disposed it: in the last place I
make bold to present my opinion, that the Malignant party could not by any
passage at the assembly on Preston moore, distinguish that the affections of
any considerable part thereof, inclined unto them, and I verily believe that we
lost not, but gained by that days work, for the safety and peace of the King
and Kingdom, yet concerning the Sheriff, I considering the man, and the
command incident to his place, the great number of Papists, the great store of
Horses for service, now amongst them, the many Popish Protestant Professors and
other Malignant persons, you may peradventure fear, that thereby we shall
receive discouragement, unless your timely and full assistance be extended to
us, and the other here entrusted by you, but however I trust in God, with the
issue and sequel, his Majeststy shall find the loyalty, and you the fidelity,
and industry of

Your humble servant, Alex. Rigby.

Sir,
THe reason why Master Shutleworth subscribed not this Letter, is, for that
before it could be made up, I was by many of my fellow Deputy Lieutenants, upon
the occasions mentioned in their and my Letters, herewith sent suddenly, called
away from Preston to Manchester, whether Master Shutleworth is not yet come,
pardon I pray you the foulness of the Letter, in regard of the shortness of
time, and multiplicity of our occasions.

Manchester in Lancashire, the 24. of June, 1642.
SIR,
IN obedience to the Instructions (which I well endeavor punctually to
observe) I have taken the boldness humbly to present you this Account, that
upon my first access into these pats, I distributed the deputations and
Instructions to the several Deputy Lieutenants therein concerned, and we have
appointed a meeting of all the Deputy Lieutenants and Captains in the County,
upon Monday next: In the mean time it shall be the work of my endeavor, to
dispose and incline the Country to contribute their assistance to the public
service, which I suspect may be the more difficultly obtained, because it is
confidently believed and expected by many (who prepare accordingly) that his
Majesty intends within short time to come into these parts, and to prepare the
Country for his assistance and entertainment, has issued a Commission of
Array to the Lord Strange, wherein (it is credibly affirmed) there is joined in
the Commission the Lord Kilmorrey Cholmondly and Brereton, Sir George Booth,
Sir Richard Wilbraham, Sir Edward Fitton, Sir Thomas Aston, and Our Sheriff,
Master Leigh of Addlington, Master Thomas Cholmondly, Master Thomas Cotton,
Master Whitmore, and others, some whereof have declared and discovered too much
forwardness therein, though I hope one or two of them will be better advised.

Because therefore it is apprehended that at the same time and places they will
attempt to put the Commission in execution when the Ordinance touching the
Militia is likewise to be executed.

Give me leave (I beseech you) to represent this to your consideration, that so
such further directions may be added to the former as may be thought requisite.
For by the former (as may appear unto you by this clause herein closed) it
seems to be intended, that the power and strength of the County is to be
employed for the suppressing of such Assemblies, and for the apprehending and
sending up all such persons as shall after admonition and command to the
contrary persist, which is not to be expected to be ^ffected without force and
violence, which being once entered into, may not be suddenly composed and
allayed, nor perhaps made good, unless we can disposesse them of the Country
powder, which is in the public Magazin in their hands, so as the Country is
much wanting, save only that which is in private hands.

Notwithstanding we will use our best endeavors, within a short time to
possess our selves of the Magazin, and what may be the further pleasure of the
Parliament shall be observed by him, who will always make it a chief work of
his duty to obey their command, And to your self in particular, to approve my
self,

Your most faithful friend and servant Will. Brereton.
Chester 24 June 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THat Sir John Girlington, Sir George Middleton, and Sir Edward Fitton, be
forthwith sent for as delinquents.

Resolved, etc.

That the Lord Strange be required to deliver that part of the Magazin of the
County of Lancaster (seized by his Lordship) into the hands of the Deputy
Lieutenants of that County appointed by the Ordinance for the Militia.

Lunae 27 Iunii 1642.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That these Votes and four
Letters be forthwith Printed and Published.

Jo. Brown Clerr. Paliamentorum.



FINIS.

