THE SINGLE SONGS IN The New OPERA, CALLED, The World in the Moon.

Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell, and Mr. Clark.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Henry Playford at his Shop in the
Temple-Change Fleetstreet, where also may be had a General Catalogue of all the
Musick-Books for this Thirty Years last past down to this present time. 1697.

Price Six Pence.

Some of the Song-Tunes Transposed for the Flute.
^ Come Strephon, Phillis,
^ Then come kind Damon,
^ Divine Astrea hither flew,
Song in the New Opera, called the New World in the Moon,
Sung by Mrs. Cross. Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ COME Strephon, Phillis, come let us troll a Jo -- v'al Hour away; and whilst
the Gol -- den minutes to -- ll, we'll Sing and Dance, Sing and Dance and Play;
and whilst the Golden minutes to -- ll, we'll Sing and Dan -- ce and play;
we'll Sing and Dan -- ce and play.

A Song
Sung by Mrs. Lindsey. Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ THen come kind Da -- mon come a -- way, to Cinthia's power advance; the
Sylvians they shall Pipe and play, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up, and
we'll lead up the Dance; the Sylvians they shall Pipe and play, and we'll lead
up, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up the Dance; the Sylvians they shall
Pipe and play, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up, and we'll lead up the
Dance.

A Song
Sung by Mrs. Cross. Set by Mr. J. Clark.
^ SMile then with a Beam Di -- vine, we'll be Blessed if you but shine; Hap --
py then our pains and toyls, Wit on -- ly lives when Beau -- ty smiles: happy
then our pains and toils, Wit only lives, Wit on -- ly lives when Beau --
ty smiles, Wit on -- ly lives, Wit on -- ly lives when Beau -- ty smiles.

A Song
Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell, Sung by a little Girl.
^ YOung Strephon met me the o -- there day, and Cour -- ted me to toy, to to --
y and play. Young Strephon met me the o -- there day, and Cour -- ted me to to
-- y, to to -- y and play: He talked of twenty prit -- ty things, of Darts and
Flames, of Darts and Flames, and Cu -- pid's Wings; what need he tell me over
and over, I had a thousand Charms and more, my Glass had told me that, my Glass
had told me that be -- fore, my Glass had told me that, my Glass had told me
that before; and than He fell to Sobbing, Sigh -- ing. Wooing, Wooing, Cooing,
Whineing, Cringing, Vowing, Swearing, all, all, all, all, all, all, all but
dying, Vow -- ing, Swear -- ing, all, all, all but dying. I knew what he meant,
I saw't in his Eyes, 'twas all but a pack, all, all but a pack of flat'ring
lies; I knew 'twas all that he said, for Young as I am, young, young as I am, I
am too old, too old to be betrayed; for Young, young, young as I am, young,
young as I am, I am too old, I am too old, too old to be betrayed; Young, young
as I am, young, young as I am, I am too old, I am too old, too old to be
betrayed.

A Song
Set by Mr. J. Clark.
^ DI -- vine A -- strea hither flew to Cynthia's brigh -- ter Throne, she left
the I -- ron World below, to bless the Silver Moon; She left the I -- ron world
be -- -- low to bless the Silver Moon.

A Song
Set by Mr. Daniel Purcell.
^ YOung Strephon he has Wooed me long,
^ and Cour -- ted me with Pipe and Song;
^ but I a sil -- ly, sil -- ly pe -- vish Titt,
^ for want of Sense, for want of Wit,
^ have poo'd and cried,
^ have pish'd and fy'd,
^ and played the Fool, and lost my Time,
^ and al -- most slip't, and al -- most slip't, and al -- most slip't
^ my May -- den prime.
II.
But now I thank my gracious Heaven,
I hope my faults are all forgiven;
I Have struck the Bargain, eased my pain,
And am resolved to take my Swain:
To Poo, and cry,
And Pish, and Fie,
And make a Virgin's coy pretense,
Is all, all, all, is all, all, all, is all, all, all
For want of Sense.
A New Song.
^ LEt those Youths who freedom prize,
^ far from the conquering Syl -- via run:
^ never see her kill -- ling Eyes,
^ or hear her soft enchant -- ing Tongue.
^ For such sure de -- struc -- tion waits,
^ on those darts with which she wounds,
^ no Shepherd e -- ver can escape,
^ but falls if Syl -- via does but frown.
III.
Damon, to his cost has proved,
All resistance is but vain:
Heaven has formed her to be loved,
And made her Queen of all the plain.
IV.
Damon, when he saw her sace,
From her beauty would have fled;
But the Charmer turned her voice,
And with a Song she struck him dead.
Advertisement.
BY Reason Madam Purcell's AIRS and SONATA'S coming out this Trinity Term, the
Press could not complete the Collection of Choice SONGS of Mr. Henry Purcell's;
for which, several Gentlemen have Subscribed; and also a greater Number of
SONGS than was Proposed, will be Added. Therefore all Gentlemen and Ladys, that
intend to Subscribe, are desired to do it before the 25th. of July; and the
Books, without farther delay, will be delivered Michaelmas-Term next.

FINIS.

