LOVE AND REVENGE: A Tragedy. Acted at the DUKE'S THEATER. Written by Elkanah
Settle, Servant to his MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Pope's Head in the New-Exchange in the Strand, 1675.

TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS and most RENOWNED PRINCE WILLIAM, DUKE OF NEWCASTLE,
ONE OF HIS MAJESTY'S most Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the most
Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THat so worthless a Present to so Eminent a Person, is a piece of Arrogance, I
am as Conscious as I am that your Grace has Goodness to Pardon it; for if sins
of Presumption could not be forgiven, the punishment of Offenses would put a
restraint on Virtue, and make Mercy one of the noblest Ornaments of Greatness a
Stranger to it; and at that rate a Patron would be as confined as a Judge, who
at the same time he is a Kings Representative, and presides over Justice, is a
Slave to it; whilst his Sentence is but the voice of Law, and his Favor or
Cruelty, not voluntary, but prescribed. Your Patronage is not so bounded, your
Favors are unlimited, and your Grace can execute a more peculiar Kingly power;
You can give Pardons, and by your Smiles create Merit where you do not find it.
But above that Title of a favourer of Poetry, which single Attribute were
enough to make the Muses your Votaries; the World is sensible of your
Conspicuous Eminence in more adorable Qualities. In a Duke of Newcastle Wit has
found a Pillar, Valor a Pattern, Loyalty a Standart, and England a Patriot: In
which rank of Heroes so placed and so adorned, your Grace has the advantage
over both the ancient Worthyes, and those of the present Age. For when Homer or
Virgil Charactered Greatness, with them the Walls of Cities were built by the
Hands of Gods, their Heroes descended from Deities, and their Divinities
personally Interested in National Quarrels; whilst the almost fabulous
Gallantry they painted, was set off by False Lights, and so their Presidents of
Glory were but things of Noise, and works of Art. But your Grace lives in an
Age where History and Poetry are the Representations of Nature; and he that
describes your Worth, draws your true Self; and Story must render you
Illustrious by Glories that are your Own: And when Fame (which will preserve
your Memory longer then Marble can your Ashes) shall speak of a Newcastle; its
Authority will be undisputable, as its Subject is unimitable. Nor can this Age
(should it join the Noblest Blood, and the most forward Courage in one Person,)
raise your Equal. For Loyalty now under a Flourishing King, is but like Ripe
Fruits in Summer: The kindness of the Season, and the Blessing of the warm Sun
take off their Rarity, and lessen their Price. But you, my Lord, are the truest
and noblest Miracle of Honor, whose Arms, whose Policy, and whose Fortunes
were Vigorously engaged, and as Gloriously signalized under a great, but
drooping Cause; whose Fidelity was ripend by the Influence of a declining Sun.
Thus the faithful Newcastle laid a foundation for Immortality; and to complete
so fair a Structure, Fate conspired with his just and sacred Ambition. For when
Rebellion durst strike at Majesty, and the Quarrel of a threatened King had made
Newcastle an Assertour of his Countries Freedom, Victory waited on his Arms,
and added Gems to his Coronet, when it deserted a Crown; wherever he led in
Person, Conquest attended him, and his Royal Cause had never sunk, had
Newcastle admitted of Rivals; had all its Champions been as great Favorites of
Fortune as He. But Providence, as it had more particularly obliged your Grace
with extraordinary Parts and Ornaments of Nature, so it adjusted the Laurels
which it gave you, to the Merit of the Brow that wore them. Nor did your
Honors spring only from the Trophies of the Field, the Harvest of War: Your
Glory began its Ascension, before it had those steps Conquest and Triumph to
mount upon. His late Majesty of ever blessed Memory out of the Deserving
Nobility of England, singled out your Grace for the Care of a Nations Hopes,
the Tuition of a Prince of Wales: So visible were your Sacred principles of
Honor, that they were thought fit to be precepts for an Heir to a Crown, and
by that powerful inspirer Education, to be imprinted in the Bosom of a growing
Majesty. In which high Trust, your Grace reached that height which Seneca could
not arrive to. He, though in his Learning and Integrity he resembled You, met
not your Success in the stubborn Nero. Providence has justly lengthened out
your happy Life, to see the prosperous Reign of a Great, a Pious, and Gracious
Monarch in your Royal Charge. Thus whilst your Matchless Gallantry has rendered
your Character so great in the Records of Fame, and your Worth an Object for a
Kingdoms Veneration; in the vast numbers of those whom the Admiration of your
Virtues has made your Creatures, I, in presenting you an ill Play, have made
the meanest Offering to your Grace; yet I humbly beg you would not condemn an
Effect that has a Cause so powerful. Every one cannot be deserving in Crowds;
and not to have your Admirers numerous, is as impossible, as it is for your
Grace to bid your Fame spread thus far, and no farther; whilst That knows no
bounds, They must be Infinite; which is the only justification of

Your Graces Most Devoted, most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, Elkanah
Settle.

PROLOGUE.
PLays without Sc^ne, Machin, or Dance, to hi^,
Must make up the defect of show, with Wit.
As sometimes course Girl takes in homely Gown
Whose Beauty, though it is little, is her own,
Before a gaudy Flu^terer of the Town.
So it is with Plays; and though a Gaudy sight,
Song, Dance, and show, more briskly, move delight;
And there the advantage get over plain dressed sense;
Yet Wit and Object have this difference.
As poor raw Girls express in their Loves Arms,
With untaught Kindness, their unpracticed Charms,
Whilst a Town-Mistriss, with a much more gay
And lively air, does the amourous Wanton play,
Yet they in this perfection get the start:
Their Excellence is Nature, hers but Art.
Yet still it is Object* has a power most strong:
Nature it is true delights you, but not long.
It Is fine Plays draw an everlasting throng.
So with plain Girls one Night or two you will sleep:
But a gay Mistress for whole years you will keep.
Yet though you kindness lies another way;
Our modest Author humbly begs he may
Crowd in this Entertainment: for one Night
Divert, though not content your Appetite.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Nigrello in a Man's Habit, but in a white Wig, and her Face
discovered.
LAdies, this Play our Author stole from you,
Here he your Anger, there your Influence drew;
And whilst such Love, and such Revenge he made,
He both your Honor and your Charms surveyed.
From you then let this Play Protection take,
Whilst Beauties judge the Characters they make.
But such a Lover^ a^ you^ ve seen to day,
I fear you rarely meet but in a Play.
Marriage it is true, goes on in the old Road,
But dying* Lovers are quite out of Mode;
Search but the Calendar, and I Am mistaken,
If you find Saints or Martyrs of Loves making.
No, Courtiers now take a quite different way,
As, Madam you're so pretty, and so gay,
G^d take me, I could throw a heart away
On such a Charming Rogue. Come, is it a Match?
Hang studying; there is nothing like dispatch.
I ^ am for Marrying, whilst our Bloods are hot,
You shall have Coach* and Ioynture, and what not.
So if she likes her Man, the Fort is won:
If not, they kiss, and part, and no harm's done.
As for despairing Lovers t'Hang, Stab, Drown,
Or run Mad when their cruel Ladies frown;
There Is no such thing in Nature. So much Rage,
Is none of the Diseases of this Age.
But though your Charms such worthless Captives take,
And through the Ages lightness rarely make
Amongst all your numerous Slaves, one Sacrifice,
Who at the feet of a harsh Mistress dies;
The fault's not in your Beauty, but their Eyes.
Actors Names.
CLot air, Heir of France, and afterward King. Mr. Smith. Lewis his Brother.
Mr. Crosby. Brisack, A^helias Brother. Mr. Norris. Clarmount, the Queens
Favorite, and Marshal of France. Mr. Medbourn. Dumain, Lamot, Chlotildas
Brothers. Mr. John Lee Mr. Gillow. Burbon, Mr. Purseval. Nigrello, a Moor, and
Favorite to the Queen and Chlotair, being Chlotilda in disguise, Mrs. Mary
Lee. Fredigond, the Queen, Mrs. Osborn. Aphelia a Court-Lady. Mrs. Batterton.
Petitioners, Villains, Lords, Guards, Attendants, and Ladies.
Love and Revenge.
ACT the First.
Scene the First.
Enter Dumane and Lamot, Attired as two poor Soldiers. Dum. WE are not safe,
Lamot; this Bawdy Peace
Begets a War within me; our Swords worn
For Ornament, not Use. The Drum and Trumpet
Sing Drunken Carolls, and the Cannon speaks
Health, not Confusion. Helmets turned to Cups,
And our bruised Arms administer discourse
For Tables and for Taverns, where the Soldier
Often finds a Pity, not Relief. I Will tell thee,
We Are walking Images, the signs of Men,
And bear about us nothing but the form
Of Man that is manly.

Lam. We are cold indeed.

Dum. Yes, and the ungrateful time
As coldly does reward us: All our actions,
Attempts of Valor, looked into with eyes
Full of contempt; when, ye great Gods, they know
It is our Gifts they see yet. Oh I Am mad,
The very breath that lends 'em life to scorn us,
Our Blood has paid for.

Lam. Patience good Dumane.

Dum. Lamot, thou know I can be patient:
With what an equal temper did I breath
Under the frozen Climates of the North.
Where in my Arms, the sheets of War, I slept.
My Bed being Feathered with the Down of Heaven,
I have lay'n down a Man, and rose a Snow-ball.
Yet these have been my pastimes, which I'ave bor'n
As Willingly, as I received 'em Nobly.
The Queens black Malice, which does still remain
Unmovable as the decrees of Fate
Armed for our Ruin, does not swell my Gall:
No, not this willing Beggary I wear,
To cloud me from her Malice. By the Gods,
This Bastard-getting Peace unspirits me,
A greater Corrasive to my active soul
Then all past Ills whatever.

Lam. Cool your Rage,
And be as Wise as Valiant; this is no time
To vent your feeble Passions like a Woman:
A Soldiers tongue moves only in his Sword.

Dum. You are an expert Tutour, and I thank you.
Our Wrongs would add a spirit to the Dead;
And make them fight our Quarrels. Who comes here?
Enter Clarmount, attended by Nigrello Brisac, and other Lords bare-headed, who
are followed by a Rabble of Petitioners. The Minion to our Queen. Oh what a
Train
His gaudy Greatness bears? 'Sdeath, were I Jove
But only for this Giant.

Petit. Good your Honor, our Wives and Children.
Good your Honor hear us.

Clarm. Where are our Slaves: Keep off these dregs of men,
Bring round my Chariot to the Postern Gate.

Petit. Good your Honor consider us.

Clarm. These Bell-mouth'd Vassals split my Ears with noise.
Make have before, le^t my great Mrs. wait
My coming.

Petit. Good your Honor

[ Exeunt Clarmount, Lords, and Petitioners. Dum. These are the fruits of Peace
Upstarts, and Flatterers.
Tell me, Lamot, can this same Marchpane man
Think or commit a sin, though never so horrid,
But it is Candid over.
Were I the King; -- but he is wilful blind.
Before the Wanton and hot-blooded Queen
Sold have the License but to be suspected,
I Would lock her up, and house her like a Silkworm.

Lam. Pardon me, Sir, the good old King's unable.

Dum. And therefore must admit an up-start Flatterer,
Now raysd to Honor by her lawless Lust:
Marshal of France; the next step is the Throne.
Oh peasant State, when Owls build Nests
In Cedars tops, the Seats of Eagles.
Were I the King, I Would Execute 'em both.

Lam. Execute 'em! By his best blood he dares not.
The Unchaste Queen is great in Faction,
Followed and Sainted by the Multitude,
Whose judgment she has linkt unto her Purse,
And rather bought a Love then found it.
She has a working Spirit, and active Brain:
Besides her Sons, the Pillars of the State,
Support her like an Atl^s, where She sits,
And like the Heavens, commands our Fates beneath her:
She is the Greater Light, the King a Star,
That only shines but through her Influence.

Dum. Hark!
[A flourish within. The Thunder of the War: How out of tune
This Peace corrupting all things, makes 'em speak.
What means this most adulterate noise?

Lam. This is a Night of Jubilee, and the King
Solemnly Feasts for his Wars good success:
We shall have Masks and Revelling to Night.

Dum. Now the Great Gods confound this pickthank noise.
The Drum and Trumpets too turned Flatterers.
And Mars himself a Bawd to grace their Ryots

Enter Nigrello, who delivers to each of them a Purse of Gold; leaves a Letter
and departs. Lam. What Vision's this? It Is Gold, or sure I dream.

Dum. I cannot tell whether I dream or not too.
But this I Am sure, if I should see that Man
That dares to take this from me, he should find
I was awake. Was It not Nigrello brought it.

Lam. Yes.

Dum. What Paper's that, Lamot.

Lam. If it be Chorus,
To this dumb show I Will read it.
The Letter.
AS you are Soldiers, truly Valiant, I honor you; as poor, I pity you; and
therefore have sent you what will render you as complete Courtiers, as
undaunted Soldiers. Dumane and Lamot, let it suffice, we know you, for our Eye
is every where. Whilst I remember your Worths, I shall forget your Parents
Injuries. Fear nothing: for your hitherto Concealment, I Will get your Pardons;
and whilst I breath, breath your kind Mrs. If you dare trust us, appear at
Court to Night s^ adorned as shall become your Honors and our Friends.

Fredigond.




Dum. We are betrayed, Lamot; what shall we do?

Lam. We Will take the gracious offer of the Queen.
She Is Princely, Vowed our Friend; besides, what ill
Can we expect from her, who might have sent
Her murdering Ministers, and slain us here,
Had She intended foul play? No, She Is Noble.

Dum. Noble -- Grant her so, yet --

Lam. Yet what?

Dum. Her Murdered Brothers memory.

Lam. When He fell
We were too far off for Traitors.

Dum. But not for Torments had we been apprehended.
For in the high displeasure of that Queen
All our Posterity was doomed, some felt the Wheel,
Some Wrackt, some Hanged, others empaled on Stakes;
And had not we been then in Wittenburgh
We had added to the number of the Dead.
And think you still we shall not?

Lam. By my Life
It Is Murder to suspect her: We Will to Court.
Our Lives are all that we can lose, our Fame
Stands fair; no power can reach a Soldiers Name.

[Exeunt. Enter Fredigond and Nigrello. Queen. What Conference did they
maintain with thee?

Nigr. None further then the Language of their Eyes:
They looked on me, as if they meant me thanks,
Which their Amazement robbed me of.

Queen. Spoke they not?

Nig. No, not a word.

Queen. Do you know 'em?

Nigr. No, Royal Madam, they appeared to me
But like the silent postures in the Arras,
Only the form of men with stranger faces.

Queen. Come take 'em in* They are our Enemies,
Which I have Angled with that golden bait.
Their Parents waded in my Brothers blood,
For which I Will be revenged on all their Race.
Did they increase as fast as I could Kill,
I Would ever Kill that they might still increase.
A bloody, and a terrible mistake!
To right the Injuries of their Ravished Sister,
They Murdered Cl^dymer for Clotairs fact:
My Brother Dyed for what my Son did act.
For which thus Fredigond's revenged.
The old Dumane, the Father to this Maid,
With all his Kindred, all his Race, except
Her wicked Brothers, and that Ravished Whore
I have already Sacrificed.
Is not Revenge a Pastime for the Gods?

Nigr. Were but their Ravished Sister, and those Brothers
With 'em, it were a pastime for the Gods.

Queen. We find thee fit, Nigrello, for employment.
I Have always found thee trusty, and I love thee.

Nigr. I ^ay my Life at my great Mrs. feet.
But, Madam, how came this their Sister Ravished?
Now for the greatest Rancour of her Soul.
[Aside. Was She such Ice, or He so ill a Courtier,
That He your Eldest Son, the Heir of France
Could not subdue a Ladys heart, nor steal
A Pleasure but with so much Violence?
'Twas very hard he could not.

Queen. Yes, 'twas hard.
'Twas my ill Fate he could not. For that Lady
I knew he Loved; and I, and my dear Clarmount,
Glad of th 'occasion, instantly used all
Our Arts to make Her His. 'Twas we seduced her
By false pretenses to that fatal place,
Where my hot Sons wild passion forced her Honor.
But for a different end we brought her thither;
For we designed her for an easier prize,
In hopes She would have yielded to his Arms,
That when he had once debaucht her to a Mistress,
He might have been diverted by her Love,
And those more fweet stolen Pleasures, from the thoughts
Of the morose and duller Joys of Marriage,
And the more weighty cares of Heirs to Kingdoms.
And by that means we thought to have softend him
Into so loose a Life, as might have rendered
My Clarmounts passage easier to the Crown.

Nigr. Was ever such a Bawd, or such a Mother?
[Aside. But She it seems more Chaste then Wise, refused
The gracious offer of your Princely Son.

Queen. Refused it? Yes: And (Curse upon the Name)
Her Chastity that scorned his Love, inflamed it;
And drew that Rage from his unruly Passion
That lost her Honor, and my Brothers Life.
Her Enraged Kindred wanting power for open
Revenge, in a dark hour, and silent Walk
Mistook, and Stabbed my Brother for my Son.
But see how my Revenge I have persued.
And what is my Misery, I am still forced
To set new Plots on foot.

Nigr. As how, Royal Madam?

Queen. I Have laid the Platform of great Childricks death.

Nigr. Her Husbands death!

[Aside. Queen. And they two Brothers must be thought his Murdrers.
Our Enemies, and now new Courtiers,
Whom for this end I have reserved for Policy.
First, that they take away the Guilt from Us:
Next, being seized, to study Pains and Deaths,
The Heads of all our Engineers shall sit
T'invent unheard of Torments for the Villains.
I long to see 'em greet their Kindreds Dust.

Nigr. The Plot's most admirable.

Queen. Then I Will commend thee to my Elder Son,
Where thou shall wind into his secret thoughts.
As for the Younger Boy, let me alone.
Did ever Woman less delight in blood,
And shed so much as I must. Oh, Nigrello,
I once was a Kind Wife and Pious Mother.
But now my Husband, and my Sons must dye,
And I must be the Traitor. I can Weep
To give 'em Deaths, and yet I cannot save 'em.
Almighty Love this wondrous Change has made,
A Love that has my hopes of Heaven betrayed:
And yet I cannot resist it. For my Clarmount,
My best-lov'd Clarmounts sake, Husband and Sons
Are Clouds betwixt my Love and Me: and all
The ties of Blood and Nature are too small
To check what Love resolves. When Love bears sway,
All lesser powers, all weaker ties give way.
Enter Clarmount. Sir you are welcome.
Your Visits have been freer, but I grow old,
And you command the Beauties of the Time.

Clarm. What means my Noble Mistress, think you the blood
Runs so degenerate within these Veins,
To stoop to any thing below the Charms
Of this Divinity?

Queen. But oh my dearest Clarmount, we are betrayed,
Our Interview last Night was by the King
Discovered.

Clarm. How discovered!

Queen. Yes; but by
What Arts I cannot learn.

Nigr. Learn! No, it is past your skill. The Plots I lay,
I defy all the Arts of Man or Devil,
To countermine; or what is more subtle
Then Man or Devil; I defy thy power,
The power of Woman damned in Lust, whose Breast
Harbors more Hell then Zealots Fears, or Poets Fables ever framed.
Aside Furies are Tame, and burning Lakes are cool^
To thy Insatiate Lust and monstrous Villainies.

Clarm. How? has he dropped ambiguous words, and what
To Fredig. His Language left imperfect, spoke in Looks?

Queen. Yes Sir, but as he is of a fearful Nature,
And consults safety e're his Rage speaks plain,
So is he of a cruel one, when that rage
Is ripe for action: what he intends
I cannot guess, unless it be our deaths.
Which if he speedily performs not, then
Know he shall never; for this night concludes him.

Nigr. Dye, and to Night!

[Aside. Queen. The Poyson's drank already,
And wants but some few hours for operation.
My Sons I weigh not this. They have Rebelled
And taken spirit to oppose my Will;
For which it is not safe that they should live.
The Kingdoms Heir shall b^ a Child of thine,
And Kings and Queens shall follow in thy Line.
Enter Dumane and Lamot nobly Attired. You're welcome to the Court, take a
Queens word,
Fredigond bids you welcome.

Dum. Your Highness is all Mercy.

Queen. Follow us,
We Will be your Guardian and Protectress.

Clarm. What are ^hese?

Queen. Sheep, Clarmount, Sheep, which I have fatted up
Only for Slaughter. If they look like things
Worthy a humane name, call 'em a pair
Of thinking Animals, (if what I hate
Be worth the thought of Destiny,) by mine
And their own Planets doomed e're they were born,
First to be made my Slaves, and then my Victims.
Mortals, whose pride does like thin Meteors rise;
It shines this minute, and the next it dies.
The Fates and I have in one Vote decreed
That some shall smile to night, and others bleed.

Exeunt all but Nigrello. Nigr. Her Husband Poisoned, and his Life not in
My power to save; and I unfortunately
By her discovered Guilt an acce^^ary
To this outrageous Crime! Forgive me Heaven,
And injured Majesty. My Vengeance calls
For black and tainted blood. But since ill fate
Has martyred Innocence: Since Destiny
Has wrought thy Fall; yet in the worst mischance
There is some good; thy Fatal Blood will add
More weight to her Damnation, and more edge
To my Revenge; which whilst my Arm pursues
My Rage does from thy Ruin higher rise:
I kill more justly: She more guilty dies.
[Exit.
Enter Lewis and Aphelia. Aph. If this should be dissembled, not your Heart;
And having won my souls affection, you
Should on a judgment more retired to State
Fl^ng off affection, and leave Me in Love,
What ill-bred tales the World wo^ld make of me?

Lewis. That Jealousy I Will strangle. Take this Ring,
Be this our mutual pledge of Love. That Diamond
Is your Adorers Emblem; as the Sun
From precious Dew does solid Diamonds make,
So hard that they can no Impression take,
But from the sacred Light from whence they grew:
So shall my Bosom be inspired by You;
Obdurate to all force, assault, surprise,
All but the charms of fair Aphelias Eyes.
Your Beauty only shall my soul invite,
Impenetrable to all power but Light.
But see the King.

Enter passing over the stage; the Old King leading Fredigond attended by
Clotair, Lewis, Brisac, Nigrello, Dumane, Lamot, Lords, Ladys, and Guards.
Clotair viewing Aphelia, deserts the Kings train, and with Nigrello steps upon
the Stage. Clotair. Such Excellence I have not seen, Nigrello.
What envious Parent, or Religious Fool
Has kep^ such Beauty Prisoner to a Chamber,
Or Cloister, that it never shined out till now.
That neither fame, nor her fair eyes have been
My Friends before this hour. What Lady's that?

Nigr. Aph^lia Daughter to a Country Lord,
Whom late preferment from your Fathers bounty,
Due to his Loyalty, has newly brought
To Court, and with him his chief Wealth, his Daughter.

Exeunt Lewis and Aphelia. Clotair. No, he is a poor Possessor of that Treasure:
Beauty is Wealth to a Lover, not a Father:
As Golds no Riches whilst it is in the Mine.
Art sure she is honest?

Nigrell. Snow Sir, is not purer:
She has the fame of a most rigid Virtue.
She has not been long enough in the warm Court
To thaw her frozen Constitution yet.
Morals and Country pie^y stick close still.

Clot. So much the worse; however use thy skill,
Get but that Lady for me.

Nigr. Sir, She doats
Upon your Brother, and though their acquaintance
Has not been long, they have interchang'd their hearts,
And built in minutes what cannot be destroyed
In Ages.

Clotair. How, more Mountains in my way?
I like not that; how-ever though he Love her,
I must enjoy her. We Are by Nature Lords
Of our Desires, why not their Objects too.
Let others Love in their way, I in mine.
Love is the Pulse of souls, and beats most high
In Feavourish tempers, such as burn like mine.

Nigr. Spite of her Chastity, I have a plot
To get her Company for you to Night.
Trust me to serve you Sir.

Clotair. Do It and be happy.
[Exit.
Nigr. I fear it not. For this design, I Am sure to have
His heart and soul. Delight never goes unpaid;
This Service Prince, I Am sure you will requite.
Exit.
ACT the Second.
Enter Nigrello and Aphelia. Aph. BUt why, Sir, would the Prince make this
Night-visit?
He knows my Virtue, knows my Honor is
My Guard; but such a Guard, as he may pass
If he but give the word, when light and day
Give his access an honorable title.
Why this dark minute for an interview;
The Visits which we made, the Sun still knew.
My Love and I have met under his Beams;
But never by Night before, unless in Dreams.
And those so pure, so innocent
As slumbring Vestals would not blush to own;
When wearied, they for a short rest retire
To gain new strength to tend the sacred fire.

Nigr. Yours, And your Princes honor is so firm,
That privacy and Night can add no stains
To Virtues so un^ullied; and the cause
Why he requests this solitary meeting, is,
To tell you France beholds his growing luster
With wondering eyes, and their unmannerd zeal
Designs to match him with the Infanta of Spain;
The hopes of which Alliance, and the fear
Of your too powerful Influence over his heart,
Which some Court-spyes have by their arts discovered,
Have shrunk your Beauties estimate: Your Eyes
Are looked upon as Comets, that design
A Nations hurt, grown fatal where they shine.
Their Malice has with their new Hopes conspired:
They look with hate on what they once admired.

Aph. And is the Prince too joined in this new Change?
Are his looks altered too?

Nigr. No; nor his Heart:
He thinks with scorn on their unwelcome kindness,
And begs this private conference to tell you
How much of Fate in your great Beauty lives,
And what irrevocable dooms it gives.
His Love is moved by Destiny, not Chance;
He Will Marry you, and blast the hopes of France.

Aph. A Love so pure, a bliss so high -- Lead on.
Where such Light shines, all fears and Clouds are gone.

Nigr. Oh admirable Villainy! Revenge
Does feed on Ruin. Ruins are
Its Food and Life; it flourishes as they
Who living on Seacoasts, for Tempests pray.
When against Rocks some wealthy Vessel cracks,
They run to shore, and are made rich by wracks.

Aside Exeunt. Scene the Second:
Enter Clotair, Lewis, Fredigond, Dumane, Lamot, and Guards. Clotair. Horror
and death! My Royal Father Poisoned!

Lew. Oh dismal fatal hour!

Queen. My Childrick dead!

Lam. Have patience Royal Madam.

Queen. Stand off.
Preach Patience to the Sea, when the rude winds
Swell her Ambitious Billows 'bove the Clouds;
And if thou tutour'st them to peace and silence,
I Will be as calm as they.

Clotair. The Treason visible, and not the Traitor!

Queen. Ignorance darkens Hell. Doubt you the Traitors.
I Have brought a pair of Vipers to the Court;
Warmed and relieved them, that their sting might kill us.
Who could be Authors of this deed but they?
It Is his new bosome-Friends have Murdered him.

Clot. Our Guards?
Lay hands upon the Traitors.

Lam. Oh Dumane,
We are betrayed.

Dum. There Is justice in our Cause,
Why not our Swords? I Will dye before I Will yield.

Lam. Than dye by me.
Yield up your Sword, or you shall fall by mine.

The Guards seize'em. Dum. Must we be Prisoners then, and Traitors too?

Lam. No. The first name's enough, a name too haish
For Soldiers,
Did not our King command it; and the last
Too horrid for Mankind, or ought but Devil.
The disobeying of a Kings so heinous
That you deserved your death for your resistance.
His will is, we are Prisoners; but for Traitors,
Poysoners of Kings: Know mighty Prince, and You
Whom Blood and Duty bids our King call Mother,
We Are injured, ba^ely wronged. Madam from you --

Queen. Yes, it is from Me you have received the name
Of Murderers, if you acquit your selves
I shall be still the gracious Queen I was;
Till then expect -- Oh my much injured Lord,
What Vengeance hangs upon the blood of Kings;
But what more heavy burden on my heart?
A load that sinks me. Go, convey'em hence;
Let Them be strictly guarded till to morrow.

Lam. Fetters or Death are things that we can bear.

Dum. It Is not the Wrack that can our courage tame,
Our only Torture is a ^ullied Name.
The Queen well knows --

Queen. Oh, Sir, command 'em hence.
I know too much to have so tame a sense
Of my dear Lords loved blood.

Lam. But Sir --

Queen. Away.
To Prison strait; they kill me if they stay.
Who patiently can brook a Traitors sight,
But they who in a Traitors Crimes delight.

Exeunt Dumane and Lamot forced out by the Guards. Enter Nigrello. Clotair.
Madam, dry up your tears.
Expect to hear that Justice done, that is due
To a Murdered Monar^hs Blood, and Fathers too.
But to Aphelia first; if kind Nigrello
Be but successful in this Nights design,
This Night I Will in her Arms my Passion Crown.
But stay! My Father dyed but now; his Fate calls down
For thoughts of Vengeance, and my tender breast
Should be with dreams of piety possessed:
With thoughts of Blood and Death, of Funeral Beds,
Of Martyred Monarchs, and of Traitors heads;
A Mothers Tears, and walking Fathers Ghost,
Disturbed in the other world, for what in this was lost.
These should I think on; but to night sleep sorrow:
For Love to night, and for Revenge to morrow.
The world has much mistaken been, to say
That walking Spirits love the Night, not Day.
Prisoners as well in Dungeons may delight:
They Are doomed to shades, and therefore pleased with Light:
It is not Ghosts, but Lovers walk by Night.
Exit.
Manent only Queen and Nigrello. Queen. Their Blood thou see must for my
Crimes be spilt:
Mine is the Innocence, and theirs the Guilt.
But hold Nigrello, say the Cloud we raised
Should be transparent, and my Arts that gave
'Em Fetters, have not power to work a Grave.
Suppose they clear themselves. What though the King
Has in a heat of fury built his Faith
Upon my Tears, and has decreed their death:
Yet when he comes to a more calm debate,
His senses may be cleared, and we may find
His Justice, when more Tardy, is less blind.

Nigr. Revenge that moves most slowly, is most wise:
When it has fiercest hands, has weakest eyes.

Queen. But to dispel that fear, be it your care
To Poyson'em before their Trial comes;
Which done, I will give out, and get it sworn
They Poisoned their own selves; and chose that death
To Avoid those fiercer torments that they knew
Were to their guilt a Monarchs Murder due.
Do this, and we are safe: Perform this act,
And think what Debts you from your Queen contract.

Nigr. It shall be done, and done without a pause;
Doubt not my Service in so great a Cause.
Exit Queen. No, Monster-Woman, neither of 'em Bleeds,
My Vengeance aims at more Heroic deeds:
My Rage shall at the Heads of Princes fly;
It Is thou, and thy Adulterate Race shall dye.
Exit.
Enter Lewis and Brisac. Lew. Your Sister not returned yet? This late hour,
And her strange absense makes me all amazement.

Brisac. My Father Sir, is all Distraction for her;
In pious Rage one while he storms at Her,
Another at the Court So far in the Night,
And his Aphelia ^absent, he is undone.
Courts are no Sanctuaries, She no Vestal.
Then prays to Heaven to mend the one, and guard
The other.

Lew. For her Virtue, that I fear not.
I know, (whatever outward force may do,)
Within She has no Traitor. The Suns eye
Views not a fairer outside, nor can Heaven
Inspire a brighter Soul.

Brisac. But Sir, Nigrello
Has just now sent me word, that there is a business
Requires your Company, and mine to Night
In such a private Chamber; for there is something
That Is near my Honor, and your Heart in danger.

Lew. Then it is no idle fear: Show me the place.
Ghosts keep your Beds, you Sentinels of Night,
Goblins and Specters do not walk your round.
A general Lethargy seize on this hour,
Whilst I alone, the Watchman of the Night
Will wake in spite of Fate. Argus thy Eyes
To find Aphelia, and her Injuries.

Exeunt. Enter Aphelia and Nigrello with a Light. Aph. Into what Labyrinth do
you lead me, Sir?
Had you not used his Name, which is to Me
A strength against Terror, and himself so good
Occasion cannot vary, nor the night,
Youth, nor his wild desires; otherwise
A silent sorrow from my Eyes would steal
And tell sad stories for me.

Nigr. You are too tender of your Honor Madam,
Leave your vain fears. The Prince has no desires
But what are just; nor does he own that heat,
Which were you Snow, would thaw a tear from you.

Aph. Is this the place appointed?

Nigr. Yes, I Will call him:
Here is a Book will bear you company
Till my return.
Hither I send the King; not that I mean
To give him time to cool his burning Lust,
For Lewis shall present him in the fact.
And thus I shall indear my self to both.
Lewis enraged, I Am certain will conceive
Such mortal hatred against his Lustful Brother,
For such an outrage offered to his Mistress,
As will prepare his breast for the impressions
I must make there.
My skill must fail me, if I do not set.
Thy Crown upon thy Brothers head. Clotair,
Thy Cankered heart wants Lancing; and thy Brother
Shall by my Art, administer that cure
Which France will thank him for. Thy Mother too
With her Incarnate Devil Clarmount, shall be
The next whom my Revenge shall damn, if Hell
Be but as just as I; for it is their Right:
Hell then be kind, and let us join force to Night.
Exit.
Aph. Poor Ravished Philo^el, thy Lot was ill
To meet that Violence from a Brother.

Enter Clotair in a Cloak. Aphelia sits down and Reads. Clot. She has Sworn
Faith to Lewis, and to woe her
Into my Arms, (suppose 'twere possible,)
It Is not a work of so few hours as I have
To accompish it. The flattery of to morrow
Is a smooth Style for a calm-blooded Lover.
But Seiges will not down with my Complexion:
She has tied her Soul to Lewis, and a Parley
Will scarce get a Surrender of a heart
So fortified; how'ere win her I must:
And the most likely way to do it, is as
The World was Conquered once: He was the Man
That cut that Knot which was too hard t'untye.
I must confess I Have read that Force in Love's
A sin that forfeits Souls: But She Is so fair,
The pleasure cannot be bought too dear.

Aph. I feel my heart burdened with something ominous.
What if Nigrello should play foul, and this
Expected Lover should not be the Prince?
I dare not stand the hazard; guide me Light.

Offers to go. Clot. I must be Resolute. Fair Lady --

Aph. What Man art thou
That hidest thy face from Darkness, and the Night?
What art thou? speak: And wherefore come thou hither?

Clot. I come to find one Beautiful as thou art;
And am a Man willing to please a Woman.

Aph. I understand you not.

Clot. I will instruct you:
And it is so smooth a Lesson, and so easy,
That a good will is all the pains in learning it.
And when once learnt, the Pleasure is so sweet,
The Practice so delightful, that not the
Worst memory in all our Sex could e're
Forget it. Come dear Madam, closer yet;
And let our Souls lodge in our sense.

Aph. Help, help.

Clot. None of your Clamours, Lady.
[Draws his Dagger. If you rise one note higher, you see your Death.

Aph. What Violence is this? Why do you wrack me thus?
My hands are guilty of Crime; do not torment 'em.
My heart and they have joined in Prayers together
For Mankind that is Holy; if in that act
They have not prayed for you, mend and be good,
The fault is none of theirs.

Clot. Come, do not seem
More holy than you are: I know your heart.

Aph. Let your Dagger too, Noble Sir, strike home,
And Sacrifice a Soul to Chastity,
As pure and spotless as her Innocence.

Clot. This is not the best way --
[Undisguises. Know you Me, Madam?

Aph. The Majesty of France.

Clot. Be not afraid.

Aph. I dare not fear; it is Treason to suspect
My King can think an ill, much worse to act it.
I know you're Godlike good, and have but tried
How far weak Woman could be Virtuous.

Clot. Pretty Simplicity, thou art deceived;
Thy Wit as well as Beauty wounds me.
It is thy Virtue moves me, and thy Goodness
Tempts me to acts of Evil: Were thou bad,
Or loose in thy Desires, I then could stand
And only gaze, not ^urfeit on thy Beauty.
But as thou art, there is Witchcraft in thy face:
I must enjoy thee, or not thou thy Life.

Enter Lewis and Brisac to the door. Aph. Your are my King, and may command my
Life;
My Will to sin you cannot. You may force
Unhallowed deeds upon me, spot my fame.
And when you have done this Irrel^gious deed,
What Trophy, or what Triumph will it bring
More then a living scorn upon your Name?
The Ashes in your Urne will suffer for it.
Virgins will sow their Cur^es on your Grave,
Time blot your Princely Parentage, and call
Your very Birth in question. Do not think
This deed will lie concealed; for Kings appear
When great in sin,
Like to Prodigious Comets in the Air,
At which all tongues are mute, all eyes do stare.

Clot. I can endure no longer; I Am all fire.
Madam in vain --

Aph. Hold, Royal Sir --

Clot. No more.
I am resolved, and what I once resolve
Is in the Book of Fate: I must enjoy you,
And though by Force that blessing I extort,
Repine not at the loss of what, though Princes
Cannot restore, they can repay; for this
Stolen pleasure I Will be a Lover, Friend, and King.

Aph. Do not mistake, great Sir,
These are too gentle names for Ravishers.
If you proceed, and this black Crime take wing,
You will be neither Lover, Friend, nor King.

Lew. Hold, hold, my heart. Can I endure -- Unhand me,
Lest I forget my self on thee.

Bris. Good Sir
Remember it is your Brother, and the King.

Lew. Oh that I could forget it, that I could
Shake off my Duty, and renounce my Blood.
That like a Whirlwind, I might rush upon him
And bear him to Destruction.
Sir how can you
Abuse such Innocence? is it not enough
That you have wronged Clotilda, Ravished a Maid,
A Virgin of that Innocence of Life,
Might Saint her here on earth: But you must add
To your first Crime a second Violence,
The Gods must not forgive?

Enter Nigrello. Clot. If you esteem
A Monarchs friendship worth a Subjects care,
Express your Zeal more mannerly; be a Brother,
And aid me in my desires.

Lew. Be a Man,
And shake a Nature off will damn you.

Clot. Traitor Boy,
Thy Fate moves in those words.

Draws. Lew. And is it so?
Then King defend thy Life, for I am swift
As Lightning, or the thought that Executes.

[Draws. Brisac. Hold, hold my Lord, forbear.

Aph. Help, help.

Enter Fredigond, Clarmount, Burbon, and Attendants. Nigr. Lewis over acts the
part that I designed him,
For if he falls I Am lost.

They fight, and Lewis falls. Aph. Oh my unhappy Lord! Oh my swollen heart!

Queen. Oh bloody King. Thy hand has made those wounds,
For which the Vengeance of a Mothers Curse,
Abler in operation then Lightning,
Strike through thy body, every Limb a Death.
A Husband, and a Son, lost in one Night.

Nigr. Damn her false tears; she is glad he is dead.

Aph. Now you have killed him, wherefore do I live.

Clot. Remove that Siren from our wandering Eyes,
And house her in a Dungeon.

[ To Burbon. Aph. A Dungeon Sir -- you and my Stars are kind,
If in that Dungeon I a Grave may find.
How great will Fame proclaim you, if your Breath
Be but propitious, and pronounce my Death?
What different Fates can Majesty decree?
Your Cruelty kills him, your Kindness me.

[Exit. Let out by Burbon. Nigr. Great Sir, I have a boon to beg.

Clot. What is it?

Nigr. The body of the Prince.
I beg the ordering those Funeral Rites
Which his high Birth deserves.

Clot. That care be thine.

Queen. Oh thou Inhumane bloody Tyrant --

Clot. Mother,
Bestow your tears on those whom they can melt,
I am too hard for pity.
And scorn to have my thoughts so ill employed,
To mourn for what my justice has destroyed.
Exit.
Nigr. Dear Lewis,
The Glory I intended thee, the punishment
Of a base Tyrants Crimes chance has prevented.
But what I left
Unpay'd to thee; I Will to thy Ghost make good,
Appease it first with Tears, and then with Blood.

Exit with the Guards who carry off Lewis. Manent only Fredigond, and
Clarmount. Fredig. Now we begin to flourish, this black Night
Is only lighted by our Stars that smile
Upon these actions, and rejoice to see
Thee our dear Favorite so near a Crown.
But tell me Clarmount, how did I act the Mother?

Clar. You wept for certain.

Queen. Yes, as an Actor in a Play would do.

Clarm. And I methinks could write you Subjects too.
I Would teach you Love, whose universal power does rule
Far as the Light; equal in Cell and Court,
Love the Worlds business, and the Stages sport.

Enter Nigrello. Queen. And Sir, to show how apt a Scholar I Will be,
At Night, make me a visit and instruct me.
The Courts disorder for these late mischances,
By kind Nigrelloes help and your Disguise,
Renders your Visits easy and unsuspected.
Then all our Cares, a quiet rest shall take.
All other Passions sleep when Love's awake.

Exeunt Clarmount and Fredigond. Nigr. There you shall sleep your last: I Will to
the King,
And he shall take you in the very act.
And that I may not seem the unkind discoverer
Of his Dishonor, and his Mothers Guilt,
I Will set on fire the Queens Apartment,
That so I may disturb 'em more securely,
And yet the Plot not mine. I Will tell the King,
Unless there is present help, his Mother burns.
Waked by the Alarm
Of such a bold intruder as the Fire,
I Will scorch the sweating Satyr from his den,
Till the rowz'd Monster to escape that Fate,
Shall rush into the Kings very Arms, a toil
That Is strong enough to hold him; if there is Gall
Or Honor in a Tyrants breast to punish
So infamous and public a disgrace
T'extract a Letcher from a Flaming Bed;
A rare Alembick, excellent Chemistry.
All my misfortune is, I must my self
Be an assistant to this amourous meeting;
A kind Procurer to a Royal Strumpet.
But let that pass; for an exployt so rare,
There is no dress, But what Revenge dares wear.
Exit.
The end of the Second Act.
ACT the Third.
After [Fire] cried, Enter Clotair, Nigrello, Lords, and Guards. Nigr. LOok how
it flames, I fear some Treachery:
Beat at her Chamber door, cry it aloud,
And let your voice be Thunder to this Lightning.

Guards. Fire, Fire.

Clot. Mother awake, left you do sleep for ever;
Force open the door.

Guards. Fire, Fire.

Nigr. It Is fortified against strength, you must call louder.

Clot. Madam, awake, awake;
Your sleep was never so like Death as now.

Enter Fr^digond above, in her Night Gown. Queen. What Impudence is this, dares
be so rude?
He had better rowz'd a sleeping Lyoness
Then thus have broke my slumbers. What art thou?

Clot. Look!
The fire will give you light; it is I, your Son.
Fly from that Chamber or you're lost: The Court
Is all on Fire.

Queen. Let it burn.
I Have lost my Credit everlastingly.

[Aside. Enter Clarmount above in a Nightgown behind her. Clarm. What shall we
do in this Necessity?
We shall be taken, and you shamed for ever.
Let us bethink our selves; what shall we do?

To the Queen Queen. I know not what: Curse on this blazing light.
No Art, no Magic, no Devil of our side! --
Kind Fates, I have it -- Clarmount, in my Closet
Lies the Habit that my Husband wore last Night
When he was Poisoned; put on that, and with
Part of the same Disguise you entered in,
Make up the form of the dead King, which sight
With the surprise that I Will put on, shall so
Amaze* him, till you have past by him safely.
Do not appear to me, I did not wrong thee,
To Clar. Seek out the Beds of those that caused thy Death,
And howl to them thy pitiful Complaints.

Clot. Whom do you hold discourse with, with the Air?

Queen. Oh Son,
Such horrid Apparitions
Have I beheld, have quite unwitted me:
Your Fathers Ghost most terribly frightful
Has thrice this dismal Night appeared to me:
In his right hand he bore a shining Cup,
Which to his mouth he raised with looks so gay,
As if he drank a health to some young Bride.
The aerie Potion drank, strait in a sum
He threw the seeming Goblet to the ground,
And with an altered look assumed a paleness
More death like then the frost, his Age and Cares
Made him in Lifetime wear: To Heaven he pointed,
Thrice did he cry, Revenge; and at that word
Sprung through the Roof which now stands bare to Heaven,
Where he did rain down Fire which here you see.

Clot. Behold it comes.

Queen. Oh fear it not my Son.

[Descends. Enter Clarmount disguised in the habit of Childrick, his face
disc^lour'd white. Clot. My Fathers form exactly, who could think
The Devil were so good at Picture-drawing^
Pray Heaven he be not Ceremonious; for
I find my self but ill provided for^
A Complement. If it be Injuries,
Break open Monuments, and disturb the Dead:
I Will ^ee thy rights performed. If thou desire
To be appeased with Blood, Blood thou shall have:
Or if that is not enough, I Will build thee Temples.
Thou shall have Altars, humane Sacrifice^.
Do but depart; thy presence does not please me,
Thou art not Company for Flesh and Blood.

Exit Clarm. Enter Queen below. Queen. How fares our Son?

Clot. Fares Mother, as a Man
Would fare that never saw the Devil before:
He was a Stranger to me, and surpised me.

Nigr. The Villain has outhwitted me.

[Aside. Clot. If Revenge Mane^t only King, Queen, and Nigrel.
Will do the work; Nigrello bring the Prisoners.

Nigr. Dumane Sir, and Lamot?

Clot. Yes, them.

Nigr. Oh Sir,
Your Princely care for your great Mothers danger
Diverted me from interrupting your
More pious thoughts, or else I had informed you
That but just now their Jaylour brought me word
That they have took a draught of Poison (but
How got, he knows not) to escape those tortures,
It is imagined that their guilty Conscience
Expected would attend so damned a Crime:
They have prevented Justice, and are dead.

Clot. Poisoned, and dead!

Nigr. Poisoned, and Damned; for sure Heaven that ordains
The Murderers of Kings such easy Deaths,
Designs the greater torments for their Souls.

Queen. Poisoned! By Poison my great Lord expired.
Is Providence so barren to Decree
Martyr and Murderers one Destiny.
Heaven that fore sees the Falls, and Seals the Tombs
Of Monarchs, had decreed severer Dooms
For Traitors, had it felt my sufferings,
My griefs, my pains, my sense of Murdered Kings.
[Exit.
Clot. His Poysoners Dead, and yet his Ghost disturbed!
Or are there more of the Conspiracy,
Whose Deaths his troubled shade comes to demand?

Nigr. What shade?

Clot. My Fathers Spirit, in his very habit;
Here from my Mothers Chamber it came forth.

Nigr. His habit had it on; his very habit?

Clot. His habit, so I say; the very dress
He wore last night, when the accursed Poison
Impoverisht France to en^ich Heaven.

Nigr. That habit,
As I remeraber, was last night put off
In the Queens Bed chamber^ the King was in
Her Lodging seized with the first pains of that
Qutragious Poison; in the midst of whose
Torm^nting heat, in pious Duty,
T'administer some ease by the help of Air.
His Garments from his Body we tore off.
Stripped from which burden, to my certain knowledge
That habit never stirred from thence till now.
And the Disguise his Ghostly Visage wore,
I Am confident was more Pleasant to the Queen
When It entered thither, though so terrible.
When it departed thence -- Ha, ha, ha,

Clot. Why this ridiculous Mirth.

Nigr. The Devil Sir, came from your Mothers Bed chamber?
She can raise a Spirit.
But such an old, dry, heary Apparition --
It Is well 'twas but a Vision; for I know
So well her Constitution
That it is a younger substance must pleas Her.
But Clarmount, thanks to his Stars under that frozen out side --

Clot. How! What say you?

Nigr. Sir, not to abuse your Patience,
He has had as free access to her, as e're
Your Father had.

Clot. But art thou sure on it?

Nigr. Ha! What a look was there to ask that question!
[Aside. Sir, if I Have wronged your Honor or her Virtue,
May the just Gods --

Clot. No troubling Heaven to witness it.
Tell me, art confident --

Nigr. Of what?

Clot. What have we
Been talking of? Th'intrigue between my Mother
And Clarmount.

Nigr. By your unconcern for her
Dishonor, I suspect you understand me not.

Clot. 'Sdeath, but I do: Where lies the Mystery?
My Mother holds an amorous League with Clarmount,
And the next Night after her Husbands Death,
Admitted him t'her Bed; and then for fear
Of a Discovery, disguised him
In her Dead Husbands habit. Wit, I love thee:
By Heavens 'twas witty.

Nigr. Does it please you Sir?

Clot. Please me? Yes, above expression I would not
Have mist this knowledge for a Kingdoms wealth.
Good kind Informer, tell me, does she practice
These wanton Revels often? Bless my Ears
With the discovery; speak: is it often?

Nigr. Sir, you amaze me to be thus transported:
I thought the news would not have been so welcome.

Clot. Not welcome! Yes, I pardon her, and thank her.
I find the sin of Lust is not so Capital.
My Father but last Night by Poison Dyed,
And I at the same time by Lust inflamed,
Lest the concern due to a Fathers Murder,
To fly into a Mistresses embrace.
I but a Father lost; and by that loss
I gained a Throne: She lost a King and Husband,
And with that loss a Crown: Ye^ Love had power
To make her losses, King and Crown forget,
And the next Night fly to a Lovers Arms.
Why then should I be troubled; when my sin
(If it be one) runs in my Blood: My Mother
Was kind before me; and if
Such pleasant harmless Crimes must needs be punished,
My Parents then
Ought to be sufferers for my Offenses.
Nature's in fault; I act but what I Am born to.

Nigr. Shall Clarm^^^^ live then; shall this Insolent Villain
Profane your Blood, and have his own unspil^?

Clot. I hate the Offender, though I love the Guilt.
She is my Mother, and her Favorites Blood
Must expiate the injuries of Majesty.
He dies for it. Think not
Because I practice it, I can forgive it:
What Nature pardons, Honor punishes.
But say, how fares Aphelia?

Nigr. Wrapped in sorrow,
As her ill fate requires.

Clot. As so much Beauty
Does not deserve. I once was of a Nature
Unmoved by any thing in Womankind
But the Enjoyment. I esteemed 'em Vassals
To our desires, not Sovereigns over 'em.
But why her Beauty, Virtue, or her wrongs
Have al^e^'d me, I know not, but am sensible
Of a strange Change, of which I feel the effects,
But cannot tell the Cause; a shining light
Shoots through me, and my yiedling heart gives way:
Where the Usurping Guest raigns Lord, and I his Slave obey.
[Exit.]
Nigr. So far I Am happy. Clarmounts Doom is Sealed.
I know he has so much Honor, that I doubt not
His profecution of so infamous
And black a guilt; and though his own stains cannot,
His Mothers I am sure will fret his Heart strings.

Enter Lewis disguised. Lew. My kind Preserver, my dear dear Nigrello.

Nigr. Sir, your recovery to life, the health
Of France, the Hopes of Kingdoms, and the pride
Of Europe --

Lew. Hold Nigrello, by my life
That life ^ owe to thee, thou flatter^ ^t me.
Heaven when it gave me breath, ordained me for
My Countries humble Slave ^ and now thou have
Restored that Breath they Creature.

Nigr. Sir, no more.
The action has so well it self rewarded,
That I Am o'repaid with half this Complement.
But Sir, why do you walk abroad so soon,
Your wounds being so fresh, the Air may hurt you.

Lew. Oh fear not that; the cause that brings me hither
Has perfected my cure. I come to ask
My fair Aphelias safety.

Nigr. Sir, be satisfied.
Her Life, her Honor, and her Love are safe.
The king, it is true, Doats on her, even to madness.
After you had fallen, and he had in blind rage
Sent her to Prison, touched with sudden sense
Of his own Gu^lt, her Innocence and Wrongs,
And the bright stamp her Beauty had imprinted,
He Is grown so Passionate and changed a Lover,
As't may be feared, that if no other means
Can conquer her, He'^ Marry her, to enjoy her.

Lew. Marry her!
The voice of Schreichowls over the Graves of Traitors,
Is Music to this Language.

Nigr. Cease your Fears;
Your Image in her Bosom, and my power
Step in between. A crown can neither tempt her,
Nor shall he wrong her. Let my Arts alone
To countermine her Danger, and his Lust.

Lew. Your Friendship kind Nigrello --

Nigr. Call it Justice:
A service due to injured Innocence.
But Sir, as I Am a suffering Ladys Champion,
Be you a bleeding Kingdoms. I Have a story
Will wrack your Ears, and scorch your Royal blood
Into a Feavour. Du^ane and Lam^t,
The Kings suspected Murderers, you know
Were sent to Prison: But your Zealous Brother,
Out of a pious horror even to hear
The story of a Fathers Death repeated,
Gave me Commission privately in Prison
To Poison 'em before their Trial came.

Lew. Good Gods! What do I hear?

Nigr. Then 'twas resolved
To have it published to the World they poisoned
Themselves t'avoyd that certain Execution
It would be thought they expected and deserved.
And thus this Art^fice, he imagined would
Silence all farther dangerous inquiries
Into so great a secret.

Lew. Hell and Devils!
But kind Nigrello, as my preservation
Convinces me you are honest, yet --

Nigr. Yes Sir,
I guess your trouble, you would have me prove
This Imputation; yes, it is just I should,
And though you have found me honest, yet believe
My honesty in such a weighty cause
No farther then your eyes. Then to convince you
That I had the disposal of their Lives,
Instead of Poisoning 'em, I have releast 'em.

Lew. Releast 'em!

Nigr. Yes, and satisfied the King,
(Whose confidence in my dispatch had made him
Apt for the impression) that he thinks 'em dead.
And to confirm you, in few hours you will hear
The train has took, and that the City's loud
With the discourse both of their Guilt and Deaths.

Lew. Thou have a Wit, great as thy Loyalty,
And their deliverance is a proof of both.
This process of a Fathers Death, has rowz'd
My Soul, and showed me Horrors in a shape
Too terrible to enter Loyal hearts,
And not bring thoughts of Vengeance with them. France,
It Is I must disabuse thee.

Nigr. Sir, the Prisoners
Thus Rescued, for my safety walk in Clouds,
And under borrowed Names; they, I intend
Shall visit you, and make the business plain.

Lew. My Resentments
Of my wronged Fathers death a while must pause,
I Will Right a Kings, but first a Mistress's Cause.

Nigr. Sir, I Will contrive to place you where you will hear
What passes the next interview between 'em:
But keep on your disguise, wear your Mask still;
It Is not yet known you live, which if it were,
Your access would be difficult; besides
You Will have the greater trial of her Faith
By the greater hate she expresses to your Murderer,
Which your disclosed Recovery would frustrate.

Lew. Do this, and I am blessed. What scene of Love
Could be more pleasant? Be my self Spectatour
Of my Loves Funeral Rites? Behold the Tears
Aphelia pays my Tomb? What voice more charming,
What nobler Monument? nay, what Bliss more high
Than Love paid to a Lovers Memory?
No Constancy like what Death cannot shake:
What Saint would not this Paradise forsake:
Could he invisibly to Earth return,
To see a faithful Mistress at his Urne?
[Exit.
Nigr. How my designs succ^eed? which that they are just
Heaven by his preservation has confirmed,
In saving of his Life to make him Agent
In my Revenge. The King, though I know he hates him,
Will be extremely glad of his Recovery,
If but to appease his murmuring peoples Anger,
Who he knows are more then Mourners for his Death.
And for the Prince, whose heart, my Services
To him and his Aphelia, have made mine,
His Mistress's Injuries, and Fathers Murder
Which I have artfully made the Kings Guilt,
Will raise a fire within him
Too hot and fierce to smother, or be stopped
Till it break out in a Rebellion. Which
His Interest in the French hearts will animate.
What could I wish for more, then to engage
The fury of a Kingdom in my Rage?
[Exit.
Scene the Second. The Scene a Dungeon.
Aphelia is discovered on a Couch. Enter Clotair. King. Now I am justly punished
for my sins.
That Violence I offered to thy Honor,
Thou on my Breast have acted; Ravished thence
My Freedom and my Heart. All thoughts of rest,
And hopes of Peace are banished from this Seat,
Thy Tyrant-pow'r has seized. Nay Crown and Life
Turn Vassals; at thy feet they prostrate lie;
Yet though their Fall is low, their Object's high.
Though at thy Feet they humble homage pay,
Up to thy Eyes they look, the Heavens to which they pray.
And if she be not all Disdain, all Marble,
I Will shake her pious constancy to Lewis,
Make her admire my Love; if not reward it.

Aph. The King!

[Rises. King. Is this a Lodging for so fair a Guest?
Is this a Shrine for such a Saint? Is this
A Temple fit for such a bright Divinity?
Who waits without there?

Enter Burbon. Burb. Royal Sir, your pleasure?

King. How came this Lady hither?

Burb. By command
From you.

King. Liar and Slave, from Me!
[Strikes him. My Guards there.
Enter Guards. Here kill that Dog, -- but stay -- A death so gentle
Would be an act of Mercy, not of Justice.
Oh impudence unpardonable!
I send so great a Beauty to a Dungeon!
Convey him hence, and let him dye by tortures,
Wrackt limb from limb, let his torn Carcass bleed;
And feel such pains so black a Guilt, and such
A Blasphemy deserves. A Dungeon!

Burb. Hold great Sir, do but remember --

King. Good Gods! The Traitor has the Impudence
To speak. Be gone. Has not thy tongue been guilty
Enough already, but thou still dare breath
After so damned a Lie. A Dungeon! Heavens!

Aph. Let me, Sir, be his Advocate. Thus low --

kneels. King. Aphelia on her knees! That posture Madam,
From such a fair Petitioner's too humble
When paid to Heaven. Commanding Lady rise,
And be obeyed.

Aph. Great Sir, remember 'twas
Your act of Grace that doomed me to this Lodging;
A Lodging fit for an Inhabitant,
So wrapped in Sorrows, and disguised in Tears,
That any nobler roof would mock my Fortune.
The darkness of the place becomes her Griefs
That dwells in it.

King. Were you then brought here by my
Command?

Aph. By your Command, Sir, and the Breath
That gave that kind command, pronounced a Fate
So glorious, that I am bound to honor
My Sentencer; this melancholy place
Agrees both with my wishes and misfortunes.
You in this favor just and generous prove,
So dark a scene befits a mourning Love.

King. If you affirm it Madam, what you say
Is Oracle: 'Twas I that sent you hither.
You came by my command into this Dungeon.
But durst the Slave obey that breath that sent you?
Away with him to the VVrack, and let his tortures
Be doubled. How, obey me Villain! Obedience
To a command so barbarous and so monstrous,
Deserves more than an enraged King can utter,
Or torments act: What if you had been commanded
To Whore your Sister, Stab your Father, Ravish
Your Mother, Curse your God, or Kill your King?
Dog, would you have obeyed and done all this?
Away with him.

Aph. Stay Sir, remember 'twas
His King commanded him; and had the deed
He acted been a Crime, (as this was none,
This was a blessing, and so great a blessing
As on my Knees I would have begged from Heaven;)
Yet sure your hand cannot punish what your tongue
Was Author of.

King. I Author of! why Madam,
It Is therefore that I punish him. I Author!
I do not doubt it in the least.
I was the only cause; I gave the Sentence;
I ordered you this Lodging; and no wonder.
Had I not made attempt to Ravish you?
Had I not Killed my Brother? And do ye think
Less then a Madman could commit such outrage;
A Man all Rage, all Lunacy, all Devil?
But this dull, sottish, ignorant Slave obeyed me.
Obey me! are the looks
And deeds of Kings no better understood?
Be gone. His ignorance forfeits his Life.
What could he have done more to merit death,
Then to think Madmen ought to be obeyed?
To Tortures. --

Aph. Hold! If I have any power --

King. If you have any Power -- Power did you say?
I Would quit my Kingdom, and turn Anchoret
Or Pilgrim, if I thought that Heaven had more.

Aph. You are too kind. That little power I have
Is in my Tears, let those Sir, beg his Life.

King. Is it your pleasure Madam, he should live?

Aph. Yes, and for what you're pleased to call a Crime,
I think he merits a reward, not punishment.

King. You bid him live; live then, and live unpunisht:
Thank Her. But Slave, next let me hear you have ransackt
A Temple, razed a Palace, burnt a City;
And if this Lady pardons you, -- you Live.
Your Pleasure is so absolute, your Power
So uncontrollable, what you forgive
So free from punishment, that your Mercy, Madam,
Would shut up Hell, and make Damnation cease,
Had you but half that Influence over Heaven
You have over Me.

Aph. These shining Titles, Sir,
Believe me, are too gay: But since you're pleased
Thus to adorn me with these borrowed glories,
I will pursue the Character you lend me,
And beg a favor greater than his Life.

King. Fair Excellence, what is it?

Aph. My Death.

King. Your Death!

Aph. Is the Request so wonderful? My Lewis
Is gone before. And do you think that Patience
In Heaven's a greater Virtue than on Earth.
When he was living, he would have been distracted
With half so long an absence from Aphelia.
And do you think Heaven where the Sun and Stars
Have kept one course so many thousand years,
There where the Saints sing one Eternal song,
Where Bliss without decrease has held so long,
Can you think Heaven harbors Inconstancy?
My Lewis, when he took his last farewell,
Left all the world but me behind; he bore
My Image with him to the skies, and there
Expects the sad Original should follow.
He is impa^ient, languishes, desires,
And thinks compared to Love the Sta^s dimne Fires,
Think's he is but half in Heaven; in his blessed seat
Wants Me to make his Paradise complete.
I come, I come. Oh my most gracious King,
By your command let my freed Soul take wing.
He cannot be blessed without me. And as you
Gave him his Death, give him his Glory too.
This Blessing you in Justice ought to grant:
You made the Martyr, and now make the Saint.

King. Madam, is Love so barbarous, that it must
Depend on Cruelty to make it constant?
Does it delight in blood, that it requires
A Mrs. Murder for a Lovers Monument?
No, no; He Will be a Saint a milder way.
Your pity makes him blessed without your Death.
My happy Brother, happy in his Fall,
Who dies deplored by fair Aphelia, was
Your Slave; and Conquerors may their Slaves outlive.
And though one of your Trophies is destroyed,
Those eyes that made that shine as bright as ever,
And can make more; of which see here the greatest.
France at thy feet, tread on his Royalty.
[Kneels. Or if thy Nature knows not to forgive,
(Which to believe were impious,) take this Sword
To Appease the troubled Spirit of thy Love.
I find a speaking pity in thy eyes,
Which thence will drop upon thy gentle tongue,
And cry, Live Clotair, my unhappy Loves
Repenting Murderer live.

Aph. The Penitence
Of Kings, would expiate a Nations sins:
Sure then their own may be forgiven. His blood
Heaven pardon you, for I do.

King. Then I Am pardoned.
There cannot be an act you pass, but Heaven
Will sign to. But dear Madam in this state
Of Innocence, to which your Mercy has
Restored me, let me offer up a heart
To fair Aphelia for a Sacrifice:
I am a full and perfect Convert now.
Both Murderer and Ravisher repents:
My heart grown Virtuous and unspotted, now
Approaches you with Adoration, looks
With piety on what it once profaned.
Accept a Love, a Love so pure, so true,
Nothing but You could raise, nothing but You
Reward.

Aph. Hold Sir, You are my King; but though
Things are exempt from Laws, their Crimes above
Th'examining of Justice from a Jud^:
Yet Kings may guilty stand at Loves Tribunal.
I can condemn you, yet, great Sir, I do not.
But though I do not, and his death I pardon,
Honor, obey, and reverence a King
I can, but Love I cannot. My heart his Right,
His Province I can never make a seat
For any second Lord, much less his Murderer.
They who forgive a Crime may not reward it.

King. Oh my hard fate! Oh more then cruel Woman,
Is this to honor, reverence and obey
A King, to scorn him? or can the requiting
My Love, be the rewa^ding of my Crime?
Oh Cruelty! Concerned so much for Blood
I shed in my wild rage, and moved so little
At Ruins you design, at deaths you give
With a firm look, fixed and resolved to kill.

Enter Lewis and Nigrello to the door. Nigr. Stand here unseen, and you are
safe.

Lew. The Plot
That thou have laid to try her constancy
Is excellent.

Nigr. He Is here; expect the event on it.

Enter Burbon in have. Burbon. Forgive my hasty rudeness, for my Cause
Requires it; Sir, the City's up in Arms,
Your Subjects in Rebellion, and their sury
Seems by Revenge inspired: Revenge they cry.
Their Rage is grounded on your Brothers Death.
And they are resolved as the Incendiary
Of his destruction, to have Aphelia's blood.

Lew. As I could wish.

Burbon. Great Sir, bethink your self.

King. Aphelias blood!
The common Multitude advance their Arms
Against her sacred Head. Oh Hellish outrage!
The Giants when they besieged Heaven, attempted
To Dethrone Jupiter with less impiety.
Her Blood!

Enter in have a second Gentleman. Second Gent. Great Sir, your frighted Guards
o're-pow'rd,
Your Palace they have entered, and resolve
To lay it level with the ground, if what
Their loud and ba^barous rage calls Justice, this
Fair Lady's Life do not appease their fury.

King. Her Life to appease ^em! By that Life they ask,
Her precious Life, the Sacred'st Oath
That I can swear, their Insolence has damned 'em.
Go instantly and tell the Rebels I
Am her Protector, and she shall not dye.

Aph. Hold gracious Sir, revoke that harsh decree.
Tell 'em I am their Martyr, and my Death --

King. Be gone, and say as I command you, have.

Aph. Oh no Sir, say that I Will submit and dye.
Consider but what dangers you will shun;
Think how much blood you will by my Sentence spare,
And can you be so cruel, when the opening
Of one poor Virgins veins, that hates her Life,
And begs her Death, repaires a Kingdoms health.

Lew. Oh my best Angel! Oh my full-blown joys!

[Aside. King. You cruel Woman, how can you request
That which your eyes forbid. Whilst I gaze there,
And feel that Love their Light inspires, I Would see
My Empire set on float, and France lie deeper
In humane gore, then e're the Deluge laid
The sunk Foundations of the drowning World,
E're I Would behold one drop of yours let out.

Aph. Oh you forget your self. What Mariner
Would not throw overboard a worthless Freight
T'avoyd a Shipwreck?

King. But what Fool or Madman
Would throw away his Wealth, his Life, his Soul,
His Heaven to avoid that storm his courage scorns?
Tell the bold Rebels I Am in person here,
And as I know Rebellion shrinks at nothing,
I Will satisfy their rage a nobler way:
That blow their Impious hands dare aim at hers,
I through my Breast will intercept: their King,
Their Victim, sure The Impetuous tide will stop.
Go then, and do as I command.

Aph. No, stay. --
Kings are not safe in raging Crowds; their fury
May Murder you.

King. What then, what if they do?
What can the Man you hate be worth the saying?

Aph. Sir, though I cannot Love, yet my Allegiance
Will never let me see my Sovereign bleed.
The sacred Blood of Kings --

King. The Blood of Kings:
A toy, a trifle; do you understand^
Your power so little to esteem his Life,
You scorn, worthy your care. You wrong your self
To cast a thought on such an abject thing
As a poor hated Lover, though a King.
Dull Sir, be gone --

Aph. No kind Sir, stay. -- Dread Lord,
Rebellion is a thing too terrible
For a soft Virgins ears, especially
When she is the occasion, Great Sir, say
What is it I would not do to save your Life,
And to divert my threatened Countries danger:
I am all Duty when those are at stake,
And all Obedience.

King. And do I command?

Lew. Oh my wrackt Patience! Oh my blasted hopes!
Curse on my Plot: Is this her Constancy?

[Aside. King. Oh my large hopes! How high methinks I rise;
How big methinks I grow. What Empires, nay
What Worlds has this Commission made me Lord of.
Fair Creature, must I then assume that part
The Gods should only act, inspire your will,
And teach you how to obey?

Aph. Your humblest Slave
Submits, her Fate should wait upon your pleasure.

Lew. I am all torture.

King. In my Name, command
Our Marshal, and our other Officers
Of State, to give this Answer to the Rebels.
Aphelia I have made my Queen; and an
Affront don to her Sacred Person, drew
That rage from me that took my Brothers Life.
Yet 'twas no more than what our Laws for his
Offense would have required; however I Am sorry
They Have lost a Favorite, and I a Brother.
Bid 'em lay down their Arms, and with their pardon
Pronounce 'em free from all the Impositions,
Duties and Taxes due to the Crown of France
For three whole years.

Lew. Cursed instrument of Hell.

[Aside. King. Which Act of Grace, say, was their Queens request.
[ Exeunt Burbon, and the other Gentleman. Now to the Temple to confirm my
Bliss.
Madam --

Aph. Sir, I attend you.

King. Then lead on.

Aph. Now in one act
I Will serve my King, my Country, and my Love.
Mistaken Prince, I to the Temple go
Not to be made thy Queen, but Sacrifice.
Forgive me Heaven, for it is a just disguise
Which does from Love, and from Allegiance spring.
It is my Loyalty that Cheats my King.

Aside. Lewis undiscovers, and comes in to them. Lew. I can hold no longer.

King. Lewis alive!

Nigr. The Queen, She faints.

Aph. faints. Lew. Still let her sleep, sleep on:
For if she wakes, she will appear too monstrous
An object for frail eyes to see and keep their senses.
Oh that in Nature there were left an ar^
Could teach me to forget I ever loved
This her great Masterpiece. Oh well built Frame,
Why do thou harbor such unhallowed Guests?
If that our Vows are Registered in Heaven,
Why are they broke on Earth, unkind Aphelia.
Oh I run mad.

King. Rule your disordered Tongue
Lewis, what is past I am content to think
It was our Brother spoke, and not our Subject.

Lew. I had forgot my self, yet well remember
That Gorgon has transformed me into Stone.
And since that time my Language has been harsh,
My words too heavy for my tongue, too Earthly.
I was not Born so Sir: When She was just,
My thoughts and language bore a fairer stamp;
But now she is a Disease, that turns my Blood,
And makes my veins run poison, that each sense
Groans at the alteration.

King. You Have done ill,
And must be taught so: You capitulate
Not with your Equal: She Is your Queen.

Lew. My Queen!

Aph. My Lewis living!

Lew. Yes, he lives to see
You Perjured.

King. Perjured. By the Gods, for such
A Blasphemy, thy forfeit life and soul --
But it is our Wedding Day, and you have our Pardon.
Recovered by your care.

[ To Nigr. Nigr. The wound you gave him proved not mortal; but
I Am sorry that I brought him hither so
Unluckily to interrupt you.

King. No.
You have done well. I Am glad of his Recovery
For my murmuring Kingdoms sake, and for my own
I Am glad to see him here, to envy at
My Bliss, and see his Mrs. share my Crown.
Come my fair Innocence.

Aph. Stay Royal Sir,
[Kneels. And grant your pardon here, it is I that want it.

King. How Madam?

Aph. I have wronged you.

King. Wronged me?

Aph. Yes,
I promised to attend you to the Temple;
But my design of going thither, was
Not to be Clotairs Queen, but Lewis's Martyr.

King. Go on.

Lew. Go on.

Aph. But I Am a Loyal Cous'ner:
I feared the Tumults that demanded mine,
Might in blind Rage assault your sacred Life;
And since no otherwise you would calm their fury,
My kind submission was but a design
To Appease a Kingdom, and preserve a King.
Which when I had performed, their Arms laid down,
And all your danger gone, I was resolved
Before the Priest, the Altar, and that bright
High Presence they attend on, to refuse
A Crown, and beg a death; and with that death
Your Princely pardon that I durst not cancel
Recor'ds in Heaven, my Love, and Vows to Lewis.

Lew. Oh my Blessed Saint.

King. Saint; Devil! Woman-Devil!
Oh I Am distracted; I Am thy own Aphelia;
Thou have inspired me, and I by thy example
Can be as great a fury as thou art.
And to begin that Cruelty thou have taught me
Here.
Calls in his G^ards. Seize her, and convey her, where the light
May be as great a stranger to her Eyes,
As is my Passion to her Soul; that Sun
[To the Capt. of the Guards, who seizes her. Which She once sees again, thou
see no more.
Away.

Lew. Hold barbarous King, can your wild rage
Be so inhumane?

King. Hold: What man art thou
That dare with impious hands seize on that Beauty.
To the Capt. of the Guards Forbear; was ever Violence so profane
To touch a thing so much Divine?

Capt. of the Guards. Great Sir. --

King. Cut off his hold
[He lets her go. Ha! it is the fair Aphelia --
The fair Aphelia? -- No, the false Aphelia;
The falsest of her Sex, the Cruellest
That e're had Eyes to Charm, and Scorn to kill.
Seize her again; I did forget my self:
Her Treachery and Cruelty have banished
All that was Sacred in her: She Is no Saint now;
All her Divinity's expired; she is turned
A Monster, as deformed, as changed, and black
As Angels when they fell. Away with her.

Lew. Hold your rude hands, and take my Life before she goes.

Offers to draw upon the Guards, who disarm him. Aph. Lewis farewell. To Love
and Life farewell.
The worst that I can suffer, is but death;
Which if I do --
Know at that hour, when I my Life resign,
My Blood's his Sacrifice, but my Heart thine.

[Exit Guarded. Lew. Stay bloody Dogs.

King. You Are a rash Fool to struggle, for a Beauty
Must be a Queen or nothing. Twixt extremes
In common things there is a Mean, as Light
And Darkness; there is a Dawn 'twixt Day and Night.
But such bright forms no middle course can have,
She rises to a Throne, or sinks t'a Grave.
Exit.
Lew. I Will follow him, and brave the Tyrants rage.

Nigr. Stay, for her Safety, I Will my Life engage.
Be calm, and you're secure.

Lew. You saved my Life:
And I Will entrust you with defending hers.
Thus far I Am blessed. I Have heard with how much Zeal,
In constancy to Me, She scorned a King;
And when my Hirelings made that false Alarm,
How freely her demanded head she offered,
And chose the Temple for the place to publish
Her scorn of Life and Crowns in Love to Me.
And for my Brothers rage, I Will not be troubled:
Let Love Despair, and all things else conspire;
What though he be a King, no power's so great,
But what force cannot shake, Art may defeat:
As subtle Enemies, high Towers assayl,
They undermine what is too high to scale.

Exeuent. ACT the Fourth.
Scene the First.
Enter Nigrello. Nigr. CUrse on this whining Passion! Th'amourous King
Minds Love so much, that he forgets his Honor.
Aphelias Charms have so possessed his thoughts,
That all things else lie by. I have as good
As called him Bastard, and his Mother Whore:
Yet Clarmount wears his head. All other interests
Neglected lie, where Sovereign Woman reigns.
I scorn so tardy a Revenge, I Will keep
My rage awake, though thine, dull King, can sleep.

Enter Fredigond. Queen. Mischief grows lean, Nigrello, all my plots
Turn head upon themselves.

Nigr. It Is very strange,
Your Bedchamber take fire, ^th'very mi^ute
Of pleasure and security. For certain
Some subtle Devil crosses your designs.

Queen. Subtle! No, I Will swear for him, none oth'subtlest;
For by this light, I out-witt^d him and all
His politics. With what majestic grace
Did the old reverend Goblin stalk away,
Whilst th'amaz'd King, and his stout-hearted train
Turned pale, and looked as ghastly at the sight
As I Have seen Brutus picture look in Tapestry,
Staring on Cesars Ghost. Was not the escape
Of Clarmount, in my Husbands shape most excellent.

Nigr. Yes Madam, it was lucky. But what Guard
Do you design against all future dangers?
What next do you resolve on?

Queen. My dull Ethiope,
I will instruct thy blackness: Learn to know
My Reputation's sickned, and my Fame
Is looked into with narrow eyes at Court.
Therefore it is thus decreed, I will remove
And sequester my self from Company.

Nigr. Good.

Queen. Thou know where Childrick oftentimes retired,
When fits of piety (rest his soul)
Took him ^ith' head.

Nigr. Madam, I know the place.

Queen. There I and Clarmount will securely meet:
The Cave that leads to th'Postern-gate
Will give him entiance at all hours unseen.

Nigr. Madam, your Wit's as glorious as your Love.

Queen. I will away to Night. I cannot brook
My Frantic Sons wild passion for Aphelia:
If (as I fear he will) he Marrys her,
He has undone my hopes on Earth for ever.
Therefore Nigrello, let my Clarmount be
Acquainted with our new designs.

Nigr. What else?

Queen. If by the conduct of thy subtle brain
Thou could remove --

Nigr. Aphelia, or the King,
The Prince, or all: is it not so?

Queen. Thou have a Wit which does engender thoughts
As Regal as our own: when Fate blows fair,
Set out, and prosper. In a brave design,
I wish no better head nor hand then thine.
Farewell. Remember Me.
Exit.
Nigr. You shall be thought on, fear it not; but how?
Should I prevent her Lust this second time,
Before the third she may repent, and so
May save her Soul which my Revenge would damn:
Yet I Will prevent her, and contrive it so
She shant repent, nor shall Hell lose a Subject.
Thou, and thy Tyrant Son shall meet one Fate,
But I Will begin with you -- In Reverence
To Age, thou Beldam as the elder Sinner,
I will take care shall be the elder Devil.

Enter Lewis and Lamot disguised. Lam. Where shall we meet you.

Lew. Here. I Will wait your coming:
Expect me here.

Exit Lamot. Nigrell^, are we safe? Nigr. Safe Sir, and private.

Lew. I am glad I Have found thee:
I Have business to impart.

Nigr. And so have I.

Lew. Mine is of honorable consequence,
And does require thy aid.

Nigr. So does mine yours.

Lew. My fair Aphelia is --

Nigr. Your Brothers Prisoner.
What then: His Wife she never shall be.

Lew. But say
His Lust should seize her Honor, or his Rage
Her Life; Tyrant and Ravisher are names
He has been too well acquainted with already,
Suppose Aphelia meets Clotild as fate.

Nigr. Suppose you dead, and me asleep; whilst you
Are living, and I waking, it is impossible.

Lew. Thy Courage I adore. Lead on Commander,
I Will follow and obey.

Nigr. Then take this path,
And Conquer. First you know he loves her Virtue;
Doats on her to Distraction; not because
She Is only Fair, but Chaste. Her beauteous mind,
And her fair form within makes her his Saint,
His Heaven, and whatever names th'Idolatry
Of Love can give her. Then to take away
That adoration, you must first displace
The Saint, leave the Shri^e empty, and remove
That Virtue, and that Chastity he doates on.

Lew. Bless me; where will this end?

Nigr. She must be Strumpeted.

Lew. Death and destruction, what a word was that?

Nigr. Hold Sir, do not mistake: it is a hard word,
But I Have no time for Eloquence; She must
Appear, not be that Creature. His wild Frenzy
Must have a desperate Cure. He must be told,
And be by Circumstance convinced, She Is Loose,
Dishonest, and Unchaste.

Lew. A strange foundation.

Nigr. But it is a sure one.

Lew. But Nigrello, say,
Where shall we lay the Scene: Unchaste with whom?

Nigr. Sir, if you will trust my choice, let it be Cl^rmount.
He is a Villain, and the imputation
(Suppose your Jealous Brother takes his head for it)
Will do but justice.

Lew. Well: Grant him the Man.

Nigr. You have some of Aphelias Letters by you?

Lew. Yes.

Nigr. What if you forged her hand, and in her name
Wrote Love from her to Clarmount? And to prove it,
Put in some hints of a lost Maidenhead,
Larded with some big words, such as stolen pleasures,
Embraces, or Enjoyment, or what else
You shall think fit.

Lew. Her Lover, and betray her!
Nigrello, for thy friendship, take my thanks:
The Treason I Would embrace* but be the Traitor --

Nigr. But can you yield to see her Ravished, Murdered,
Or what is worse, Married; Married to your Brother?
That Traitor you must be, or one of these
Is certainly her fate.

Lew. Is there no way?

Nigr. None Sir, but this: and if her Safety, or
Your Love be worth your Care, resolve.

Lew. I Will do it.
^Tiwxt Love and Honor, Interest ends the strife,
I Will prostitute her Fame to save her Life.

Nigr. Now you resolve, you shall not; your consent
Shall be enough; the labor shall be mine.
And that the story may not seem a cheat,
Or a design of yours by me to serve her,
I will appear her Friend so little, that
If he designs to punish her Unchastity,
I Will aggravate her Guilt, and spur him on
To Justice; but take care he never shall act it.
I Will raise the Thunder, but divert the blow.

Lew. What debts must I for so much kindness owe?

Nigr. You too must put on the disguise of hate;
Seem satisfied she is false, and slight and scorn her.
All Rivalship between you being once ceast,
At news of the Rebellion set on foot,
He will raise Arms to check it, and no doubt
You being the fittest object in his Kingdom,
As you may manage it, make you their Leader.

Lew. Let me embrace thee; this is a design
Has shot life through me.

Nigr. By this means you may
Convert the Tyrants Sword to his own Ruin*
Instead of your suppressing the Confederates,
Join his own Army to assist their Cause.

Lew. I am satisfied, an am resolved to study
All arts and means for my Revenge. Revenge
Cannot be too fierce moved by so just a cause:
An Injured Mistress, and a Murdered Father.

Nigr. Since your mind's bent on honorable ends,
I have one more will try you.

Lew. Name it then.

Nigr. Your Mother stoops to actions that abhor
The Light, and this Night meets, if not prevented --

Lew. My soul finds out the Man, is it not Clarmount?

Nigr. The same.

Lew. Are Palaces such Scenes of Villainy?
Had not the Court enough of Hell before in it.
Conduct me where I may but seize this Monster,
That his stained blood --

Enter Burbon, Lamot, Dumane, and Brisa^. Nigr. Change your discourse and looks:
Your Friends attend you.

Lew. Gentlemen, you're welcome.
My almost Brother once, I thank you,
To Brisack. And kindly greet this brave Assembly, whose
Great spirits look for stirring Opposites:
But there your expectation will be lost,
For I Will take care your danger shall be small,
And your resistance flender. Sirs, your pardon;
I Have business of Importance with Bris^^
That robs me of your company some minutes,
But I'l^ repair that loss at our next meeting:
But take this in my stead. I Will share your Cause.

Lam. Our Lives and Fortunes Sir, lie at your feet.

Exit Lewis and Brisac. Burbon. Are your men bold and daring; resolute
To run your fate; indifferent Rich, not Poor
That only fight for Bread; such often betray
The sinews of a well-knit plot for gain,
When these fight as well to defend as win

Dum. Mine know nor fear, nor death, souls of that fire
They Will catch a Bullet flying, scale a Wall
Batt'led with Enemies, stand breaches, laugh at
The thunder of the Canon; call it Music,
Fitter a Ladys Chamber than the Field.
When over their heads the Element is Seeld;
Darkend with Darts, they will fight under the shades,
And ask no other Roof to hide their heads in;
They fear not Jove, and had the Giants been
But half so spirited, they had Dethroned him.
Such are the Men I lead.

Burb. Well kind Dumane,
I see they want no Herald that have got
Your Friendship.

Dum. Sir, I speak 'em as I love 'em.

Lam. In good old Childricks reign, before his Queen
Had taught him Revels, and untaught him War,
Before her wanton Lust had sheathed his Sword,
To give her treacherous Poison, power of death;
I knew that they had valor, and a cause
To show it in. Nor has the rust of Peace
Blunted their edge; they are as fierce as ever.

Burb. They Are Soldiers fit to Sack a Kingdom then --

Dum. And share the spoil.

Burb. Were It come to that sport once. --

Lam. Burbon it must, o^ some of us must fall.
The Ulcerous State is ripe, and we must lance i^.

Exeunt. Scene the Second. The Scene a Room of State.
Enter Aph^lia. Aph. I am a Prisoner still. But why so fair
A Prison, and so ki^d an entert^inment,
After he had pronounced so harsh a doom,
I cannot guess the cause, unless it spring
From the Conversion of my cruel King:
If that is the cause, as ye kind powers, I hope it is --

Enter Nigrello. Nigr. Now for my disguise:
This Lodging, and this Entertainme^t's my design:
Aside. The King I have persuaded to this mildness,
As the more easy way to win her heart
Then Cruelty. But on the same foundation
I seem to raise his hopes, I Have built his ruin.

Aph. What read'st thou in the Book of Fate Nigrello?
What is Heavens pleasure?
Quick, make have and crown
My hopes, speak, thou can read
The Language of my Stars, the will of Destiny^
For thou can tell how looks my angry King.

Nigr. Madam, he is now a King indeed, no more
Your Tyrant, witness his strange Reformation
Now Madam he intends to make you happy
In giving, not accepting of your heart.
This milder usage he designs a Prologue
This vanquished passion, and your altered (...)
The Generous, the Good, the Courteous (...)
Has been so much your Friend. --

Aph. Clar^ount, my Friend*

Nigr. Your Influence is so great, that this kind man
Has used such force, spoke such convincing reason,
That the Converted King adores your Faith,
Charmed with your constancy, resolves to cherish it.

Aph. Can I believe my Ears?

Nigr. If you belief
So tardy be, stay till your Eyes confirm it:
And when your generous King gives your fair hand
To Lewis, call your Slave your Oracle.

Aph. What ecstasy do thou inspire? But Clarmou^,
Was he the Kings Converter? his strange power
Both in the Kings and Peoples hearts I Have heard of:
But his strange kindness in my Cause is wondrous.

Nigr. No doubt the Prince may have engaged him in it.
But what'ere motive led him on,
It was a bold and brave attempt
To Oppose the passion of a raging King.

Aph. What Recompense does so much kindness merit?

Nigr. No more then you can pay: Send him your thanks,
And the Debt's cancelled.

Aph. Yes, by thee I Will send'em.
Tell him from me, how high a sense, what value --

Nigr. Madam, my Will exceeds my Power to serve you.
I doubt my little Eloquence so much,
That you would oblige your humble Slave, to trust
Your nobler thoughts to Paper.

Aph. Who waits there?
Enter Attendant. Bring Pen and Paper.

Exit Attendant, and brings in Pen, Ink, and paper, and Aphelia sits down and
writes. Nigr. I have my wish, A Letter does the business.
[Aside. Enter Brisac. Noble B^isac.

Bris. How fares our mourning Sister?

Nigr. Hist: I have wor^t her up ^ to a belief
Of Clarmounts Friendship, and the Kings conversion:
And you are come^th happy minute to
Confirm her in it.

Brif. The King has sent me hither
To Court my Sister for him. But the Laws
Of Friendship and of Nature ought to be
Obeyed before th^unjust commands of Kings.
His Love is Tyranny, an Invasion of
What Vows and Oaths the Seals of Heaven have made
His Brothers right. The serving of my Friend
And Sister then, is a design so just,
That all the Cheats I use, and shapes I take,
Are pardon^d for their glorious cause sake:
Moved by the ties of Friendship and of Blood,
The means are lawful where the end's so good.

Aph. Oh my dear Brother, welcome. Kind Nigrello
Tells me my miseries draw near an end;
The King's no more my Lover, but my Friend.

Bris. If his wild Loves Conversion, is so great,
What Is his Devotion then, that makes the Proselite?
How great is the obliging Clarmounts Friendship?

Aph. How great I think it is, read there, and see.

Bris. Reads the Letter. My Lord,
My Transports of joy have been such, as your favors merited: when I consider
the furious Love of a Tempestuous King, I cannot but reflect on the danger of
your kindness in wrestling with that Love, and the glory of it in subduing it.
Pursue the generous Friendship that has been so well beg^n, and take into the
number of your Admirers the humblest of yor Servants.

Aphelia.




It Is well; his worth too high you cannot raise:
The first reward of all good deeds is praise.

She fits down and Seals the Letter. Nigr. Those lines with some addition of my
own
Shall make all my design secure. I Will drive
The cheat on with such Impudence and courage,
That all his furious rage shall not deter me,
Nor all his arts disprove me.

[Gives him the Letter. Aph. Here Nigrell^.

Nigr. I Will fly to serve you; but before I go,
I ought to tell you that the King intends
To visit you; and though he comes to take
His last farewell to Love, yet you must think
Lovers quit Ladies just as Garrisons
Surrender; in their fall their Pride's so great,
They willingly would have their yiedling look,
As little as it can like a defeat.
The King, no doubt, though in his vanquished passion,
Will make some Love; say some kind amorous things;
And if you will take my Council, let your Answers
Be mild and gentle.

Exit Nigrello. Bris. The advice is good,
And you will oblige your self if you pursue it.
It Is a vain glory that attends a Lover,
Never to say he quits; and when Hope dies,
The Gallantry of Love still lives, is charmed
With kindness but in shadow; takes delight
Even in its being deceived. Love's the only passion
Takes pleasure to be flattered in despair.

Aph. Can a feigned look, or a dissembled smile
Oblige so good, so generous a King.
Such Treachery I scorn; no, he deserves
A nobler usage. His resigning me
To Lewis, has so charmed me, that I cannot
Pay him too much. My Friendship, Kindness; all
The faculties of my Soul (but what my Vows
To Heaven and Lewis do except) are his.
Come glorious Lover, storm an easy Breast,
Take all my heart has liberty to part with.
This brave refigning me, has gained such pow'^,
Lewis had never a Rival till this hour.

Bris. Madam, I see him coming; take no notice
Either of our discourse or his conversion.
It Is more than I dare answer: it anticipates
The Gallantry, and the surprise of great
Designs, to have ^em told e're they are acted.

Enter King. King. What Vulture gripes me here? Ha, what art thou?
If thou be'st so Jealousy, mount and be gone:
Fly to the vulgar bosom, whose cheap thoughts
Despair their own performance; in a King
Thou show'st a Nature retrograde to Honor.
Suppose She Loves, and has vowed constancy
To Lewis, must it follow that her heart
Cannot be moved? It Is but my fears that say so.
I Will boldly on, and tire her till she yield.
Is She not fair? Beauty's a spark of Heaven,
And all that is Heavenly may be moved, it is only
The Infernal powers that are inexorable.
What brow wears our fair Tyrant? Is a Brother
To Bris. More powerful then a King? Does ^he unmoved
Admit thy Mediation in my Cause,
Or am I still that unshaped thing, whose name
Has terror in it. Does still each sound, that breaths
My hated name, strike horror through her veins;
And shake that Seat where my proud Brother raigns.

Bris. I found her not so cruel as I wished her;
The Conquest was so easy, that my pains
In serving you, were less then I desired.

King. The Conquest? How, what say you?

Bris. Sir, the Cloud
That hindered her the prospect of her bliss
Is gone; the power of Majesty and Love
Has the long mist dispel^d: She is restored
To sense and reason.

King. Is Aphelia kind?

Bris. Yes, to her self: She understands the Love
Of Kings; and why she understood no sooner,
She does confess her senses have been more
Dazzled then darkened.

King. My kind Advocate.
Oh that I had a Sister for thy sake,
As Cruel, and if possible, as fair,
That I might pay thee back this kindness.
They Madam, who Divinitys approach,
[To her. Seek out for prosperous hours to breath their Vows in:
Which attribute of Heaven Divine Aphelia
Mercy or Justice is the mighty work
Of this days fate? Have you marked out this hour
For lending ear to your Adorers Prayers,
Or forming Thunder for Offenders crimes.

Aph. If there is any thing Divine or Sacred
Lodged in this Breast, it is Royal Sir, your Creature.
For this poor humble roof, cannot be built
For such a Guest, unless you're pleased to raise it;
And if you would have me Sainted, you of all men
Should have lest cause to ask how I Am inclined:
Who makes the Saint, may well expect it kind.

King. I am transported. If this sudden kindness
Be truth, it is Miracle.

Bris. If it be false,
Punish her Treason on her Brothers heart.
By my Allegiance, and my hopes of Bliss,
She entertains no wish nor thought to abuse you.

King. This Language speaks thee ^air Aphelias Brother:
Thy Breath else could not be so near allied
To hers, to carry so much charm, such Heaven in it.
They Madam, who would mighty Structures raise,
[To her. Search the Foundation first, on which they build.
The highest flight of my Ambition is
To know my power in fair Aphel^as heart.

Enter Nigrello. Aph. Your power in that you shall distrust no more.
It Is all that Loyalty and Gratitude
Can make it; my Prophetic thoughts have told me
You will be kind; and as my Sovereign ought
To have disposal of your Vassals Fates.
And that high Fate you have marked out for me
I doubt not will be welcome, great, and glorious.
And as I Am satisfied 'twill be all these,
Great Sir, to obey you, shall not only be
My duty, but my hopes.

Bris. How prettily
They drive on the mistake.

Nigr. The plot works rarely.

Bris. But stop 'em e're it goes too far.

Nigr. Great Sir,
I Have something for your Ear.

King. Another time.

Nigr. None but this minute will suffice. Your safety
And honor are cocern'd.

King. And what of them?
Be quick, I Am too full of thought to talk.

Nigr. My story is so fiery, that it must
Move slow; for if it should break out too fiercely,
It will do Violence to your Ear, disturb,
If not displease you.

King. But it shall not. I Have but
Just now received the promise of her heart;
And do you think it lies in Fortunes power
To shake my quiet at so blessed an hour:
Out with it, speak the worst thou have to say,
My Joy's too great t'admit of an allay.

Bris. Let us withdraw; perhaps they would be private.

Exeunt Bri^ac and Aphelia. Nigr. But shall I have yor pardon?

King. Yes, dispatch then.

Nigr. Your Mistrerss is not --

King. What?

Nigr. Not Chaste.

King. Not Chaste?
Had thou ten thosand lives, not one of them
Should escape my Justice for so damned a lie.

Nigr. You promised me my pardon.

King. How! thy pardon?
I would not give't my Father; no, not his Ghost:
Should but his shadow from his Grave rise up
To speak but one such word, for the Impiety
I Would burn the Temple where his Ashes sleep,
And raze his Tomb to be revenged on's dust for it.
But now I think on it thou shall live for tortures;
I know there must be greater heads then thine
In this Conspiracy; which I Will wrack from thee:
Then my Revenge I Will take when 'twill be glorious:
Less then a Massacre* would be too mean
A Sacrifice to Aphelias injured Honor.

Nigr. That trouble shall be saved; I doubt not, Sir,
But you will believe me e're l've done.

King. Believe thee Slave! I Would not believe an Angel;
Should a Messenger from Heaven bring me this News,
I would turn Athest to affront him for it.
Nigrello gives him Aphelias Letter. What Is this, a Letter to Clarmount.
[Reads. My Lord,
My transports of joy have been such as your Favors merited. When I consider
the furious Love of a Tempestuou^ King; I cannot but reflect on the danger of
your kindness in wrestling with that Love, and the glory of it in subduing it.
Pursue that generous friendship that has been so well begun, and take into the
number of your Admirers the humblest of your Servants.

Aphelia.




The danger of his kindness in wrestling with my Love, and his glory in
subduing it --
That Friendship which has been so well begun -- then it seems
He Is a more powerful Rival then his King.
Something a loving style; stay, here is a Postcript.
When I am Married, and a Queen, our stolen pleasures will be more difficult,
but shall not be less desired, nor less grateful to yours still

Aphelia. Reads. What pretty sorgery is this?
Betray her Virgin-honour! make stolen meetings!
Aphelia Clarmounts Whore?

Nigr. Oh no Sir:
The World has found a gentler name, his Mrs.
I see Sir you are startled; cease your wonder.
Is she not fair; and in this loving Age
A little Gallantry's a Venial sin.

King. Slave, do you sport with me? confess who forged
This Blasphemy. For'tis no more her writing
Then you are a Saint.

Nigr. It Is hers; I saw her write it,
And when she had done, she gave't me to deliver.
But Curiosity made me so rude
To break it open; which when I had read,
My Loyalty made me present it here
To save your honor from a Sirens charms,
And guard my Prince from a loose Wantons arms.

King. Thou lie; there is not one word on it hers. Has Lewis
Corrupted thy fideliry? I suspect
It is his plot, but I will force the secret
From thy black soul, or tear thy heart strings out.

Nigr. I Am not Subornd: That Letter is Aphelias;
She wrote it, and I Will prove it. I confess
She Is Beautiful; but what though she be fair,
Must that conclude she is honest?

King. Hold thy Athestick tongue: Or speak, and dye.

Nigr. Great Sir --

King. Peace Slave, thou that infect'st all Peace.

Nigr. Why are you thus distempered; let not truth
Make you so wild a Tempest. Were it false,
Or that I sought the ruin of your Peace,
Your Youth, or Honor, then it were a time
To swell to this extravagance of passion:
But being truth --

King. Truth, Dog, avoid my sight:
Fly where the ruder world, ill verst in Kindred,
Promiscuously combines without distinction:
Where every Man is every Woman's Husband.
These are a People that might bear with thee,
And fit for thee to dwell with.

Nigr. Yes Royal Sir, I Am gone; but the only way
For me t'avoyd your sight, must be to dye.
Nothing but death can separate your Slave,
Your loyal faithful Slave, from his loved Lord,
His honored and adored Lord: But if death's
My doom, pray let your humble Vassal beg
[Kneels. An honorable death. Sir, from your hand
Let it in glory come; that death which I
Deserve, when my great Master thinks me false.
But e're you give me honor, right your own
[Rises. Sir, if I do not prove
All I have said, send my black soul to Hell:
Damnation for abusing Majesty
Is a just due, Hers, and your wrongs demand.

King. Leave off your Protestations; can her Fame
Be questioned, or disputed?

Nigr. Not by one,
Who is all passion, but by Reason --

King. Then
Let Reason be the judge: I Will show it her.

Nigr. Do Sir. -- But hold. She Is not so impudent in sin to own
So foul a Paper. If she should disown it
(As, if you show it her, no doubt she will)
You Have but my word for it. Then for better proof,
Let her be sent for, and at her approach,
Do you retire unseen, to over-hear us:
The first thing that I Am certain she will ask me,
Will be about that Letter; the discourse
Between us, will convince you that she sent it,
And make perhaps more large discoveries
Of her false heart then this has power to do.

King. It is impossible; her Character
Gives this black scrowl the lie. She cannot be
That Monster which this Letter represents her.
Were she Unchaste, why then did she refuse
A profferd Crown? I offered Marriage to her;
And Marriage, that is the veil to Unchastity
You see she shunned. Did she not choose her death
Before my Love? Were she in league with Clarmount,
Why would she for my Brothers Love have dyed?
Were all this truth, where is all her Vows to Lewis,
Her scorn of Life, and her desire of Heaven
To meet him there?

Nigr. Where are they? where they should be.
In the smooth tongue and oyley words of subtle
Woman. Where are they! why Sir, cannot you guess?
Is the pretense of Constancy and Honor
Such news in Woman kind? Did not you love her.
And courted by a King, could she do less,
Were she a Devil, then appear an Angel?
She had promised Marriage to your Brother. But
Must you conclude her Chaste for courting Death
To follow him? what a strange, bold request
Was it to beg her Death from him she knew
Loved her too well to grant it her? The favor
She asked, she never expected to obtain.

King. How Is this?

Nigr. And for the conduct of her Love to Lewis,
Examine it, and where is her mighty Faith;
She Would hate you as his Murderer, and Love
Her Murdered Lovers memory; She Would choose
To be his Sacrifice, before your Queen.
'T was a brave Character, and she pursued it:
But search its depth, 'twas Interest, an Artifice
To heighten your esteem of her. How common
Is it to make a Conquest difficult
To raise the value on it. For after all,
She Is not invincible, nor he so powerful,
But she could yield at last. Did she not tell you
That that high fate you had marked out for her,
Would be both welcome, great, and glorious;
And so in loving duty, and kind Loyalty,
Her heart was at her Kings disposal.

King. Hold!
I Will hear no more.

Nigr. But Royal Sir, you must,
Though the bold speaker dies for it. When you have Married her,
She has her ends. For then, what with your Pride
For your hard Conquest, and your high assurance
Both of her Love and Honor, which her great
And pious Character confirms, she is certain
To raise your Passion to so vast a height,
That all she wishes, is her own. What greater
Security for a loose Woman's pleasure
Then the fond kindness of an amourous Husband?
Such liberty and safety waits on Marriage,
That Clarmount then securely --

King. Cease this rudeness;
They who raise Thunder, may not be so bold
To sport with it. Yonder it comes.

Nigr. What Sir?

King. That wondrous thing thou talk of.

Nigr. Retire but for a minute; if I do not
Prove all I Have told you, let my Blood appease
Your Anger, and her Injuries --

The King absco^ds. Enter Aphelia. Aph. Nigrello.

Nigr. The generous, and the worthy Clarmount thanks you

Aph. My Letter you p^esented?

King. Cannot be true
She owns that impious Libell!

Nigr. Yes, and he
Accepted it with so much joy; such ecstasy
No common influence could raise.

Aph. Kind Sir,
I am your Debtor.

King. Yes in justice
She ought to pay her Bawd; his Office merits it.

Aph. He is a generous, and a faithful Friend,
And whilst th'obliged Aphelia has breath
T'express, and power to gratify his favors,
I Will pay my thanks in heaping honors on him.

King. How fond she is. She cannot forbear to praise him.
If her loose tongue can be so Prodigal
To one whom she supposes thinks her honest,
What are her private thoughts. I am distracted.

Aph. This kind, good man --

King. Damnation seize him for it.
It Is but too plain. Since she can be Unchaste;
If such a sacred form can bear such stains,
I cannot wonder at the ancient Romans
That made their Gods Adulterers.
Nigrello What read'st thou in our brow*

Nigr. A fond desire
To be deceived. A flattering kind of hope
That fair Ap^elia may be honest still.

King. A settled resolution my black Genius,
Not to be altered by the brackish Tears
That flow in pregnant eyes of easy Woman.

Aph. Why looks my King so altered? What strange error
Has Fate committed; for if any ill
Attend so good a King, it is Heavens mistake:
It cannot be so unjust as to design it.
What chance has made this change; you look as if
A load hung on your thoughts?

King. Yes, did man kind
Think half so bad of Hell, as I of thee,
There would not be a Sinner in the World.

Aph. Am I so terrible? There was a time
Your language flowed more gently, and Aphelia
Appeared less frightful. Where Is the alteration?
Trust me my Lord, I feel it not. I fear
Some Villainy has your pure thoughts infected.

King. Why did the oversight of Heaven lay out
Such vast expense to Beautify a Face,
And form the Soul of such a different mould?
Crule Aphelia, cruel to thy self,
T'obscure such Excellence, Eclipse such Light:
Is that a Brow fit for eternal Night?
How could a wanton heat, or loose desire,
Lodge in that Breast, till the fair seat took fire:
Whose spreading flames have all your glories crushed,
Ruined your Fame, and laid your Pride in dust?
Why this strange fall -- why this Lethardick passion?
I am too mild for an affronted King;
Thy Treasons are too loud to be discoursed
So tamely. Oh thou infamous base Woman,
What saucy Devil tempted thy hot blood
To prostitute thy Virtue, shame thy Birth,
Betray thy Credulous King, and damn thy Soul?

Aph. I am all horror. Oh my startled senses!
What means my King?

King. To use thee just as coursly
As thou have done thy honor: Take her hence.

Aph. Sir, do but hear me --

King. Convey her hence, and let her talk to morrow;
My ears have been too busy for one day.

Aph. Then I am satisfied; if I have leave
To speak my Innocence before my Death,
I thank kind Heaven, my courage is so high,
Whate're's my doom, I can obey, and dye.

Exit Nigrello leading Aphelia. King. If so much Innocence, and so much Beauty
Can be corrupted; if Aphelia can
Turn Whore, why may not all man kind
Mistrust their Fathers, and suspect their Births?
Their Mothers are less fair, and why more honest.
Who knows, but whilst the Husbands arms embrace
The seeming honest Wife, her wanton fancy
May in a straggling fit, fix on a Satyr,
Or some more lustful favorite; and her issue,
Though it is got lawfully, be conceived a Bastard.
Exit.
Scene the last The Scene a Grotto.
Enter Lewis, Brisac, Soldiers with a Page carrying a dark Lanthorn. Lew. Upon
your Lives, let no man pass that way;
Make that your Post.

Bris. Your Grace shall be obeyed.

Lew. So if the darkness of the place protects him,
If he escapes my hands, he will fall in yours.

Exeunt. The Scene opened; Clarmount and Fredigond are discovered together.
Enter Lewis. Clarm.. Here all our joys are safe; no envious eyes,
No rudeness will this humble Seat surprise.
Nor can ill Fate our secure Loves betray:
No fire can guide a Jealous King this way.

Fred. Oh my dear Clarmount, 'twas unkindly done
To have my pleasures hindered by my Son,
Considering 'twas I that made him King;
'Twas I that set his Fathers soul on wing.

Lew. Ye Gods, what a discovery have I made:
Had she a hand too in my Fathers Murder!

Aside. Fred. And yet Heaven knows how I abhorred the sin;
Yet for thy sake could act it over again:
To kill a Husband, was a crime so horrid,
As startled me to enter in my thoughts,
Till Love presented me objects so gay,
As instantly drew the dark Scene away.

Clarm. We are betrayed.

Lew. Stir Traitor, and thou dyest:
[Holds a Dagger at his Breast. Brisac.

Enter Brisac, Nigrello, and Soldiers. Bris. My Lord.

Lew. That Monster is thy charge.

Clarm. Nigrello in the Plot. Oh credulous Fool!

Lew. Thou glorious Light, that in thy natural Orb
Did comfortably shine upon this Kingdom,
How is thy worth Eclipsed? what a dull darkness
Hangs round about thy Fame? in all this piece
To every limb whereof, I once owed duty:
I know not now where to find out my Mother.

Queen. The Devil and disobedience blinds your eyes.

Lew. Oh that I had no eyes, so you no shame:
Murder your Husband to arrive at Lust,
And then to lay the blame on Innocence:
Blush, blush, thou worse then Woman.

Queen. Ha, ha --

Le^. Hold my heart.
You're impudent in* sin; has your lustful Villain
Made you thus Valiant?

Queen. How dare thou cloth thy speech in such a phrase
To me thy Mother?

Lew. Adultrate Woman, shame of Royalty;
I blush to call thee Mother, yes to think it.
Whilst I reflect upon thy tainted blood,
I doubt the pureness of my own. The spring head
Defiled, who knows but the under stream may be
Corrupted: I am all distraction,
And dare not talk too long on such a subject,
Least wildness conquering my softer sense,
Thrust forth my hand into an act of horror.

Queen. Insolent Boy, will thou turn Parracid^?

Lew. The justice of my cause would well excuse
Me, if I should. Nigrello.

Nigr. Sir, your pleasure*

Lew. Nature forbids me spill my Mothers blood,
And Clarmount is unfit for my Revenge;
For I must study torments for the Villain.
This is the Night that the Confederates
Begin the work: Therefore I give '^m up
To thy Tuition, till I shall return
Victorious, then we'll determine of 'em.

Exeant Lewis and Bri^ac. Queen. Did I for this, ungrateful Traitor, trust
My honor in thy hands*

Clar. Did she for this
Bestow her Princely smiles on thee; prefer thee;
Raise thee to honor, and rewards above --

Nigr. No more; I have no time for words or thoughts
Of any thing but Justice; take 'em hence,
And lodge 'em in that Dungeon which I told you.
Exeunt Fredigond and Clarmount forced out by Guards. All goes as I could wish:
The King's possessed
Aphelia has been Debaucht by Clarmount.
And this Nights work
Strengthens that Faith; for Clarmount being removed,
By his strange and sudden absence, 'twill be thought
He lies concealed, and that concealment seem
The effect of guilt, by which I Will work the King
To a belief he thinks his crime discovered,
And is retired t'avoyd the punishment.
What prospect of Revenge am I arrived to.
Their confidence in my Honesty destroys'em.
What safer policy then seeming just*
The greatest prop of Treachery is Trust.

[Exeunt. ACT the Fifth.
Scene the First.
The Scene a Prison. Clarmount and Fredigond appear bound. Enter Nigrello.
Clarm. ARt thou here?
Persidious Slave, is this the gratitude
Thou pay'st thy Royal Mistress?

Queen. Barbrous Villain,
Thou have outdone even thy own Native soil,
And made thy self a Monster, more deformed
Then e're thy Africa bred.

Nigr. Go on.

Clarm. Oh Impudence!
Hear me ye sacred Powers, in punishment
To such Ingratitude, may you invent
A Plague, for yet your Vengeance never sent
On all the sinners since the Worlds Creation,
One bad enough for him. But if the Gods
Are barren at Invention, let 'em join
All th^^r old Plagues in one; and if that prove
Too light, add my Gall to it to make it weight.

Nigr. You're not so good at Curses, as I am
At pardon^ng 'em: Thus I reward your Rage.

[Unbinds 'em. Clarm. What means this Pageantry? some fair disguise
To palliate thy guilt. Mock us with freedom,
To cut our throats more pleasantly. Is It not
Enough to kill, but you must have the vanity
Of a Surprise in acting it?

Nigr. You wrong me.

Clarm. It Is likely; you're so innocent the least
Spot stains you. First, betray our privacy
And thy Queens Honor, then to have her seized
And dragged by servile hands into a Dungeon,
Loaded with Chains, and all to have the occasion
T'oblige her with the taking of 'em off again.
How thin, and how transparent are thy cheats?

Nigr. Sir, t'undeceive you, know that I am guiltless:
And though I was the man that seized you, sent you
To Prison, used all cruelty and rudeness
I could invent, 'twas all designed to serve you.

Queen. He speaks like Oracles in Mysteries.

Nigr. And like them too speak truth. Your Son betrayed you:
But by what information he surpised you
In so retired a place, I know not; but
Finding you were betrayed, and by the Prince
Beset; I, at the Alarm strait joined
With the Confederates, appeared their Friend.
Pursued the chase more eagerly then they,
And was the first, and fiercest that a^^acqued you.
I first proposed this Dungeon for you Lodging,
And as kind Fate would have it, by that intrest,
My Service to the Prince in his recovery,
Had gained me in his breast, It was thought honest,
And my design embraced. Thus was I made
Your Jaylour, and thus your Deliverer.

Clarm. Can this be truth?

Queen. He cant sure be so great
A Villain as this makes him, if it be false:
We have found him honest; this was not the first time
That he has been the Guardian of our Honor,
In places too, where had he then proved false,
Our Infancy had been more loud, and our
Disgrace more public then by seizing us
In so retired a place as this. Why not
A Villain then? If he intended Treason,
Why mist he such much fairer opportunities
To act it? no, he is; he must be honest.

Clarm. Since your mistrust is gone, mine too must vanish.

Nigr. But Madam, Courtesies that cost us nothing,
Cannot be acts of Gratitude: Fate (I thank it)
To pay my Debts to you, a glorious path has shown,
By saving your Lives I expose my own:
But danger's welcome in so great a cause.

Queen. Nigrello, kind Nigrello, how I love thee.

Nigr. Your pious Son has such strict sense of Honor,
That though perhaps Nature may intercede for You*
For Clarmount, he designs a death in Tortures:
But when he shall have heard I saved his Life,
What danger will my humble weakness run,
By the just anger of so great a Prince;
How easily am I crushed by such a hand:
Yet all this Madam, I dare undertake,
When acted for my Royal Mrs. sake.

Queen. My kind preserver, I want words to thank thee

Nigr. I ask no thanks; all the requital I
Desire, is, that you two would Love for ever.
Under the ^^elt^r of so blessed an Union
I Am certain to be safe; whilst that Tie hold^;
That sacred tie of Love, you'^ cast some thoughts.
On your poor humble Slave, and guard him from
An angry Princes rage: But if that Chain
Be ever broke, my shaken fortune sinks,
And all I am expires and dies, if e're
You cease to Love --

Queen. If what we owe to thee,
Can by our Loves be paid, doubt not your Debtors,
We are too Rich in Love e're to be Bankrupts.

Clarm. When we cease Loving, we must cease to be:
Our Loves are Registered in Heaven; or if
They be not yet, they shall be. Ye dull Destinies,
I Will dictate while you write. Our Love desires
To last as long as Fate, for I am serves
It Is as unchangeable. To those fair Eyes
I Will dedicate my Life, my Soul, my --

Nigrello stamps, and immediately a Company of Villains rush in with drawn
Swords, and massacre the Queen and Clarmount. Nigr. Down, down with them you
Dogs; one minutes Life
May save their souls. So, you have done well,
Lay their bodies where I ordered,
And when I give the sign again, be ready.
Exeunt Villains, carrying out Clarmount and Fredigond. Revenge, oh dear
Revenge. Name me the man
In Story that e're prosecuted Vengeance
So far as I have done. Had I took their lives
When they expected death, they then might have
Prepared for dying, and death would have been all.
But now to raise 'em to the hopes of Life,
Nay, and to work'em up to vow the leading
A profane Life in an unlawful Lust;
And whilst the impious Vow was sealing, then
To stop th'Adultrous breath just in that minute,
As damned their Souls, is a revenge so charming.
But business now grows thick. Here I have lodged
Aphelia, and expect the King. Burn on,
Burn on my best loved Rage. Ye infernal Furies
Be kind, and heighten my weak gall; be but
My Slaves to day, and be my Saints to morrow.

Enter King and a Lord attending him. Lord. The Castle is surrounded, and their
number
Is twenty thousand, and the greatest part
Are Childricks Soldiers, Souls of blood and fire.
A fiercer Troop, and spirits more resolved,
Life never put in action.

King. Let 'em come on,
This Castle will endure
A Fortnights Siege. Before which time's expired,
My Brother with the noblest blood of France,
Whom I have Commissioned to suppress their outrage,
Shall lash these Rebels for their insolence.
Leave us. Nigrello.

Exit Lord. Nigr. Sir.

King. Bring Aphelia in.
Exit Nigrello. Love, thou have had thy flight; now Hate take thine,
Whilst my blind Faith believed her Chaste, my Faith
Made my Devotion; I believed that Heaven
Was lodged in her, and so I kneelt and worshipped.
But now I see I have misplaced my prayers,
And find that Idol-Beauty I adored,
No true Divinity: To expiate
My misled Zeal, I Will put the false light out,
And down in dust, low as the grave, degrade
That painted God my Superstition made.

Enter Nigrello and Aphelia. Aph. Is this my King? why wears your angry brow
So dark a Cloud? I have deserved no frowns:
Yet by the calculation of your looks,
I find I have not long to Live.

Nigr. Yes, Live.
Confess, and turn thy Fate: Tell me what damnd
Infernal Fury tempted thee to quit
Thy Innocence, and leave a stain behind it
So deep, as spreads Contagion over thy Soul.

Aph. How Royal Sir, what means --

King. Hold,
Confess thy Crimes, but make 'em not too horrid;
Say that thy sin was not so black; say that
The lustful Villain offered Marriage to thee,
And by a Treacherous and Perfidious craft,
Gilded the sin, till it looked fair and lovely.
Abused thy tender years and weaker knowledge,
To take a possession of thy Virgin Honor
Before the deeds were sealed that should convey it.
Say he betrayed thee.

Aph. Hold Sir --

King. That too much still.
Say that he gave thee philters, and so poisoned
Thy purer Nature, till the infectious herbs
Had stupefied that sense which was the guard
Of thy untainted Honor, till thy Sovereign
Reason was from its Royal seat deposed,
And so thy Frenzy, not thy Lust undid thee.

Aph. I am all horror.

King. Hold; That shape's too black still;
Say that the Villain did it by surprise.
Found thee alone, or sleeping, and his Dagger
Pointed against thy heart, by force extorted
The fatal prize, whilst fear, not guilt betrayed thee.
Say any thing to make thee seem less monstrous.
Whilst I behold that face I love so well still,
I would not have thee ^aln from all that is good;
I ^ain would think thee Virtuous, if I could.

Aph. Stay Royal Sir, and hear an injured Maid:
I Have felt the Tyranny of Prisons, Chains,
My Sovereigns frowns; and those I Have born with courage.
But t'hear my King accuse me of a Crime,
Of which my thoughts, nor dreams were never guilty.
If I betrayed my Virtue, I must lay
The Scene of Treason in some strange dark place
As Sun never saw: For after such a stain
I could not look Light in the face and live.

King. How impudent is Lust; she never thought,
Not she, nor dreamt an ill. Because some Charity
For her Soul, and some little kindness for her Beauty
Made me so fond, to wish her Crime might be
As little as it could; she at next word
Has Innocence enough to stock a Saint,
And takes the borrowed Name without a blush.

Aph. Mistaken Sir, you are abused. What Monster
Has some malicious Traitor rendered me?

King. Ask your Gallant, your Clarmount.

Aph. You distract me:
Clarmount Sir, what of him?

King. You Would have me tell you:
The sport's so Ravishing, that by this Light,
She Is for the pleasure of the repetition on it.

Aph. Why do you shake my tender sense, and offer
Such Violence to my chaste ears? Indeed
If you could read my Soul, you would not talk
So like a Stranger to it. Whatever malice
Conspires against your quiet and my Life,
By my best hopes of Heaven, Heaven that should guard
The fame of Virtue, and the peace of Kings,
I Am injured, basely wronged, and am so far
From what my King suspects me, that I never spoke
To Clarmount.

King. You're wondrous good at signs then. Sure you rated
Your Honor at low price, to make no words
At parting with it. 'Sdeath, not speak to him^
What numerous Crimes
Attend on Lust? All other sins came singly.
The Murder kills a Man; the Sacrilegious
Plunders a Temple; the Blasphemer Curses
His God; and who makes more on it* But a Woman
That Is Damnd in Lust, commits all sorts of sins.
The Hypocrite she must be; she appears
The thing she is not. Perjury's her study;
For she protests for Chastity. If she Marries
Her antidated Monster in the Bridal Night,
Wrapped in false light, sna^ches at unknown joys,
And cheated with a Conquest that required
Not half the pains he takes sor't, thinks he has gained
An infinite spoil; when Heaven knows, long since
The Mine was ransackt, and the Treasure gone.
And next perhaps, the Issue of her Groom,
Or Page, is made her cousen'd Husbands Heir:
And thus not only her own blood's defiled,
But the base Canker spreads through Families;
And so one minutes sin leaves stains to Ages.
But to unridle this dumb show of Virtue,
Though you were modest, and you durst not speak^,
I Will try if you dare read. Is not that yours?

Shows her the Letter. Aph. Yes Sir; and where is the offense of this?

King. She Is witty with me. Where Is the offense on it says she!

Aph. What Is this I see, what a black line is here.
Reads. Be careful of my Honor, when I am Married and a Queen, our stolen
pleasures will be more difficult, but shall not be less desired, nor less
grateful to yours still

Aphelia.



The greatest favor that you e're can grant me,
Tell me who gave you this.

Nigr. I gave it him.

Aph. I am betrayed. This false Nigrell^ told me
That Clarmount had prevailed with you to quit
All Love to me, and give me to your Brother,
And then persuaded me to write my thanks
To Clarmount, in acknowledgment of such
An eminent favor. I, surprised at such
A sudden bliss, what by my Brother, who
Confirmed his words --

King. Brisac too in the Treason!

Aph. -- And my own passionate desires too apt
To take impression from so fair a stamp,
Which ease believed so wished a story; and
In height of ecstasy, expressed my sense
Of Clarmounts Friendship in that Letter to him:
Which this unkind ill man, to spot my fame,
And shake your peace, has Treacherously corrupted,
And by that last forged line, subverted all
My innocent meaning.

King. Did you write that Postscript?

Nigr. Yes.

King. And abused her Innocence?

Nigr. Aye Sir.

King. Can I believe my Ears.

Nigr. I know no reason
To th'contrary.

King. How Slave,
Art thou in earnest?

Nigr. Why Sir, do I look
As if I jested?

King. Death, Hell, and the Devii!

Nigr. Death, Hell, and Devil; you do well to call'em:
But trouble not your self; they are near enough
To come without a call.

King. I Am all amazement:
But what I want in words, I Will speak in deeds.
Offers to draw, at which Nigrello stamps, and the former villains rush in,
seize, and disarm him. You are too rash: Kings may be Kings in Palaces,
But not in Dungeons. It Is I am Monarch here.
Clotair, it would be Charity to kill you,
For you have outlived your power. This day your Brother
By my Conspiracy, converts that force
You lent him to assist the Rebels cause.
And you shall live to see him crowned. Release him.

The Villains let him go. King. Thou black Infernal Dog. Thank Heaven that gave
thee
A Face of such a dye as cannot blush:
Or rather thank the Devil that lent thee Impudence
To be bejond the use or fear of blushing.

Nigr. But now I think on it better, Life's a burden,
And I will ease you on it. Have at your heart.

Aph. Hold, hold Nigrello, stay, stay, save the King.
Interposing. And I Will forgive thee all thy wrongs to Me.

Nigr. Peace foolish Woman, I that kill one King,
Have raised another; one too, that shall make
Aphelia Queen. But King, before thou dyest
I Will show thee my Experience in Murder.

A Curtain drawn, Clarmount and Fredigond appear dead. King. My Mother dead!
Inhumane Villain, though
I scorn to fear my Death, or ask my Life
Of thee, I Will condescend t'as mean an act
As King was ever guilty of; I Will stoop
To talk to thee, and ask thee what strange cause
Made thee this Traitor.

Nigr. Think upon the wrongs
Of the abused Chlotilda.

King. What Is her wrongs to thee?

Nigr. I Will not capitulate my Injuries.

Within: Long Live Lewis King of France. Nigr. I hear my time is short.

King. My Brother Crowned!
How! can the Slave speak truth!

Nigr. Now for thy blood. --
I cannot strike him: Oh relenting heart!
What Awe hangs on the brow of Majesty.
Faint heart! A Man so long, and now turn Woman
In the last action of my Life. Here, take
This Sword: But I conjure you by the wrongs
That I have heaped upon you, by the loss
Of fair Aphelia,
To guide the point directly at my heart.

Gives him his Sword. King. What means this turn? But I Have no time for
questions.
A Villain and a Traitor dye with thee.

Kills him. Enter Lewis, Brisac, Burbon, Lamot, Dumane, and Attendants. Lewis.
Aphelia, welcome to my Arms. Clotair,
Thou art thy Brothers Prisoner.

King. No Usurper,
This gives me freedom.

falls on his Sword. Lew. Hold your hand.

King. No Rebel,
Your Mercy comes too late after your Treason.
I cannot loose Aphelia, and outlive
That loss. Nigrello, tell me who thou art;
For by thy glorious Villainy, thy Wit,
Thy Courage, and thy Conduct, I am sure
That blackness hides some noble blood. What art?

Nigr. Chlotilda.

Lam. How! my Sister!

All. Chlotilda.

Nigr. Ravished by thee Clotair, betrayed by Clarmoun^
And Fredigond, for which they are no more.
'Twas they seduced me to that fatal place,
Where you my Honor stole; 'twas they that spilt
My Guiltless Parents blood; and in requital
'T was I betrayed them hither, where at once
I took Revenge both on their Lives and Souls.
But when I came to my last stroke of Vengeance,
After I had robbed thee of a Crown and Mrs.
To kill thee King, there, there, my sury stop^^
Thou had injured me, yet I would dye by Thee.
And though I had worn so long a masculine shape
For all my other Scenes of Cruelty,
I put on my own Sex again to dye.

Dum^ Our Sister and our Patroness! This Revenge
Is an Estate to th'Family; 'twill make
The Dumane race immortal.

Nigr. Now I dye.
To Lewis. Grant me this favor for the Crown I gave you,
Though I have justly wrought your Brothers fall,
I must not blast his Fame after his Death:
He was no Murderer till I made him one;
Your Fathers Destiny was your Mothers Crime.
But oh I dye. When elder time shall rip
This story up, be courteous to my Fame;
Call not these Ruins Treason, but Revenge;
A satisfaction due to an Injured Lady.
Call me and honorable Murderer,
And finish there as I do.

Dies King. Art thou gone?
Farewell thy Sexes Champion; thou have acted
A cruel part so high, so well, that it
Commands applause from those it has destroyed.
And Rival Brother, if you dare be just,
Build her a Pyramid for a Monument.
But whilst
I'give her Cruelties pardon, I forget
To ask if for my own. Injured Aphelia,
Forgive a sin greater then what thy Chains
And this black Dungeon brands me with. Forgive
My Impious Faith that durst believe a wanton
And unchaste thought could harbo^r in thy Breast;
A Seat, Divinities would choose to dwell in.
Here I would gaze for ever, but an envyous darkness
Hangs on my Eyes, farewell. Must we part then?
Is King and Lover such a mortal name?
Where Is all my mighty Vows? Where Is all
My passionate Devotion to the fair Aphelia?
Shrunk to a poor faint Sigh, a dying look,
A cold farewell to Love; and then no more.

dies Aph. Farewell great Soul, when in thy glorious flight
Thou have reached thy high Immortal Seat above,
Forget thy harsh and rigid Fate below,
And borrow so much Mercy from that Heaven,
Of which thou make a part, to pardon faults
Unkind Aphelia had not power to shun:
Who to such kindness could so cruel prove,
Wanting a heart to pay so great a Love.

Lew. What strange intrigues has Fate wrought up to day*
Disguised Nigrello, the abused Chlotilda!
And I by false suggestions blindly led,
Have aimd a Sword against a guiltless head:
Deposed a Brother to Revenge a Father.
Thy Rage was just, but mine was too severe.
The sad resentments of my fatal error,
And thy wrongs, spread a darkness over my Soul
That mis-becomes this day.
But Tears are all, we to the dead can pay;
And whilst I view such happiness so near
My griefs at this bright Object disappear.
But injured Prince to appease thy angry doom,
I'lle be a pious Mourner at thy Tomb,
When my great joys, and my Aphelias charms
Will give me time to attend thy Sacred Dust,
And Love afford me leisure to be just.

Exeunt omnes^ FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
THis Play is founded on a Tragedy called the Fatal Contract. And in the two
First Acts, there is much of the Original Copy remaining. But from Page 25th.
it is entirely New to the End, excepting the Last Scene in the 4th. Act, and a
little Scene beween Dumane, Lamot, and Burbon. For in the Fatal Contract, after
the supposed Death of Lewis, in the 2d. Act, Aphelia in the very next Scene
after, at First Word asking, much like the Ephesian Marton, Marries the King
her Lovers Murderer, which quite varied the Intrigue to the End of the Play. I
could make Excuses for putting an ill Head upon Worse Shoulders; Or tell you as
some of our Impertinent Tribe do, that 'twas Written in three Weeks, or a
Months time, if I thought any Reasonable Man, would be more Favorable to the
Defects of the Play for such an Apology. But as I am Sensible, that that Excuse
to a Play, would be much like that of a Builder, that after the fall of a
House, shall tell you, truly he Built slightly, and chose in ill Foundation; I
will not urge that Plea for the Plays Defense; which in the best Interpretation
must render an Author Lazy, if not Dull: In the first of which, he shows
himself Impudent, when he dares be so Disrespectful to an Audience, as to
obtrude such incorrect Stuff upon^em, as he is, or ought to be ashamed of: Or
else proves himself a Blockhead, and makes that Excuse, when really ^e wanted
Abilities, not Leisure to write better.


