

The Empress of MOROCCO.

A TRAGEDY.

WITH Sculptures.

As it is Acted at the Duke's Theater.

Written by Elkanah Settle, Servant to his Majesty.

Prim^s da versibus annos. Petr. Arb.

LONDON,

Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head in the Lower Walk of the New
Exchange in the Strand, 1673.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY, EARL of Norwich, and EARL-Marshal of ENGLAND,
etc.
My Lord,
THe Impudence of Scriblers in this Age, has so corrupted the Original Design
of Dedications, that before I dare tell you, this trifle begs your Lordships
Protection, I ought first to Examine on what grounds I make the Attacque; for
now every thing that e're saw the Stage, how modest soever it has been there,
without daring to show 'its Face above three Days, has yet the Arrogance to
thrust it self into the World in Print with a Great Name before it: Where the
fawning Scribler shall compendiously say, the factions of Critiques, the Ill
time of the Year, and the worse Acting of the Players, has prejudiced his Play,
but he doubts not but his Grace, or his Honor's more impartial Judgment will
find that pardonable which the World has so Maliciously Censured; that is as
much as to say: Sir, You are the only Person at Court whose blind side I dare
venture on, not doubting but your good Nature will excuse what all the World
(except the Author) has justly condemned. Thus they esteem their Plays, as the
Fanatics do their Religion, the better for suffering Persecution; and to
disguise their Shame, and prop their Feeble Writings, they make Dedications
when their Plays are Damned, as the Dutch do Bonefires, when their Navies are
beaten; be their Success never so bad, they still write themselves Conquerors:
And thus a Dedication which was forme^ly a Present to a Person of Quality, is
now made a Libel on him, whilst the Poet either supposes his Patron to be so
great a Sot, to defend that in Print, which he hist off the Stage: Or else
makes himself a greater, in a^king a Favor from him which he never expects to
obtain. However, that which is an abuse to the Patron, is a Complement to the
Bookseller, who whispers the Poet, and tells him, Sir, Your Play had
misfortune, and all that -- but if you would but writ^ a Dedication, or Preface --
The Poet takes the hint, picks out a person of Honor, tell him he has a great
deal of Wit, gives us an account who writ ^ense in the last Age, supposing we
cannot be Ignorant who writes it in This; Disputes the nature of Verse, A^swers
a Cavil or two, Quibles upon the Court, Huffs the Critiques, and the work's
done. It Is not to be imagined how far a Sheet of this goes to make a
Bookseller Rich, and a Poet Famous.

But my Lord, whilst I trouble you with this kind of discourse, I beg you would
not think I design to give Rules to the Press, as some of our Tribe have done
to the Stage; or that I find fault with their Dedications in Complement to my
own: No, that is a trick ^ do not pretend to. Besides your particular Favors,
in the public Honors you have condescended to grant this Play, and the
Author, have heightened my sense of Gratitude beyond my Power of expressing it.
This Play, which for no other Merit* (...) take Sanctuary here, throws it self
at your feet, as your own: the Story of which, I owe to your Hands, and your
honorable Embassy into Africa: And on that score I present it to your
Patronage, as the Jews made their Sacrifices which we read took fire from
Heaven: The Incense was lighted by that Divinity to whom it was offered; nor is
this all I may modestly boast of: For besides it is noble Birth, you g^ve it a
noble Education, when you bred it up amongst Princes, presenting it in a
Court-Theatre, and by persons of such Birth and Honor, that they borrowed no
Greatness from the Characters they acted. Thus has your Lordship showed your
self so great a Friend to the Muses; that as in former ages the Poet made the
Patron: When all that is left of a Maecenas, is, that Horace gave him a Name:
Your influence on the Contrary makes the Poet, and if this Play Live, or have
Success enough to preserve a Name; it is by being your Creature, and enjoying
your Smiles; which is the highest Ambition of

MY LORD, Your Lordships most Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, Elkanah
Settle.

The first Prologue at Court, spoken by the Lady ELIZABETH HOWARD.
I Wish you only did expect to day,
A common Prologue to some usual Play.
For when young Ladies are to speak to Kings,
You look that they should say no Vulgar things*
It Is below us what meaner Actors do:
Either ^'excuse our selves, or rail at You.
Nor come you here as to the Common Pit,
With the lest hope of finding fault with Wit.
Loves gentler Thoughts possess the Men of Sense:
At lest it shall be so, e're they go hence.
Gallants take warning then: 't^s time to fear;
When Youth and Beauties on the Stage appear.
Those Charms elsewhere are pretty dangerous found:
But here we shoot upon a Rising Ground.
No Heart can escape we have a mind to hit,
Unless it is guarded by some Eyes 'ith Pit.
To Hearts engaged our power does not extend:
And therefore* Sir, to you we humbly bend. To the King.
Yet from your Constancy we need not fear:
To all fair Nymphs you keep an open Ear.
No watching Eyes, those soft alluring Wiles,
Can hinder you from giving Gracious Smiles.
Now for the Men: Their praise should next be shown;
But that I think* were better let alone.

Written by the Earl of Mulgrave.
The second Prologue at Court, spoken by the Lady ELIZABETH HOWARD.
WIT has of late took up a Trick t'appear,
Unmannerly, or at the best severe.
And Poets share the Fate by which we fall,
When kindly we attempt to please you all.
It Is hard, your scorn should against such prevail,
Whose ends are to divert you, though they fail.
You Men would think it an ilnatur'd Jest,
Should we laugh at you when you did your best.
Then rail not here, though you see reason for it.
If Wit can find it self no better sport;
Wit is a very foolish thing at Court.
Wit's business is to please, and not to fright,
It Is no Wit to be always in the right:
You Will find it none, who dare be so to night.
Few so ill-bred will venture to a Play,
To spy out Faults in what we Women say.
For us no matter what we speak, but how:
How kindly can we say -- I hate you now.
And for the men, if you will laugh at them, do;
They mind themselves so much, they will never mind you. --
But why do I descend to lose a Prayer
On those small Saints in Wit, the God sits there.
To you (Great Sir) my Message hither tends,
From Youth and Beauty your Allies and Friends.
See my Credentials written in my Face,
They challenge your Protection in this place:
And hither come with such a Force of Charms,
As may give check even to your prosperous Arms:
Millions of Cupids hovering in the Rear,
Like Eagles following fatal Troops, appear.
All waiting for the slaughter, which draws nigh,
Of those bold Gazers, who this Night must dye.
Nor can you 'scape our soft Captivity,
From which old Age alone must set you free.
Then tremble at the fatal Consequence --
Since, it is well known for your own part (Great Prince)
Against us you still have made a weak Defense. --
Be generous, and wise, and take our part;
Remember we have Eyes, and you a Heart.
Else you may find, too late, that we are things
Born to kill Vassals, and to conquer Kings,
But oh! to what vain Conquest I pretend,
Whil^st Love is our Commander, and your Friend.
Our Victory your Empire more assures,
^or Love will ever make the Triumph yours.
Written by the Earl of Rochester.
PROLOGUE At the Play House.
FOr this days Treatment you have pai'd too dear.
Your best beloved diversion is not here,
All you're now like to have is a dull Play.
The Wells have stolen the Vizar Masks away.
Now punk in penitential Drink begins,
To purge the surfeit of her London Sins.
Their Loves have been o're*stockt, and but make stop,
For a new tillage toward another Crop.
It Is seasonable sometimes to forbear:
Alas it is not Harvest all the Year.
Though heated they like tattered Ships keep in,
They stay but to refit, then Lanch again.
Be honest then one Day, and patient sit,
With neither baudy in the Play, nor Pit.
And though thus far you to your loss are come,
What Is yet still worse you must drive Empty home.
Nor when Play's done need the shamefaced Debauch*
Change the guilt Chariot for the hackney Coach.
Then since our sober Andience denies
You furious men of prey all hopes of prize:
To* see the Play should be your only Ends,
We Will then presume you are the Authors Friends.
And though you miss your dear delights, you may
Be to the Poet kind, and Clap the Play:
Your Hands are now employed no other Way.
The Actors Names.
Muly Labas, Son to the Emperor of Morocco. Mr. Harris. Muly Hamet, a Prince
of the Royal Blood, contracted to Mariamne, and General of the Emperors
Forces. Mr. Smith. Crimalhaz, a Courtier and Gallant to the Queen Mother. Mr.
Batterton. Hametalhaz, his Confident and Creature, Governor of a Castle in
Morocco. Mr. Medbourne. Abdelcador, Friend to Muly Hamet. Mr. Crosby. Achmat,
An Eunuch Laula, Empress of Morocco, and Mother to Muly Labas and Mariamne.
Mris. Batterton. Mariamne her Daughter. Mris. Mary Lee. Morena, Daughter to
Taffalet. Mris. Johnson. Villains, Lords, Messengers, Priests, Masquers, and
other Attendants.
THE EMPRESS OF MOROCCO.
The First Act,
Scene the First.


Scene opens, Muly Labas appears bound in Chains, attended by Guards.

Muly L. Condemned to Fetters, and to Scepters born!
It Is in this Garb unhappy Princes mourn.
Yet Fortune to great Courages is kind;
It Is he wants Liberty whose Soul's confined.
My Thoughts out-fly that mighty Conqueror,
Who having one World vanquished, wept for more:
Fettered in Empires, he enlargement craved
To the short Walk of one poor Globe enslaved.
My Soul mounts higher, and Fates Power disdains,
And makes me reign a Monarch in my Chains.
But it is my Father has decreed my fate;
Yet still he shows his Greatness in his hate.
Thy rage, brave Prince, mean Subjects does despise;
None but thy Son shall be thy Sacrifice.
Enter Morena bound. This dazzling Object my weak sight invades:
Such Beauty would make Dungeons lose their shades.

Moren. Remember, Sir, when first you were a Guest
To Taffale^a's Court, and to my Brea^t,
That I, fond Woman* in a (...) shape,
Was a Conspirator in my own Rape,
When in a fatal night, whose darkness did
Both our Escapes, and my faint Blushes hide:
With You I fled my Country, left a Crown,
Heir only ^ow t'^n (...);
And now for refuge to M^rocco come,
We in your Fathers Court receive this doom;
points to her Chains. Our Love from him this Entertainment gains;
We in our Sanct^ary meet our Chains:
Our Fathers too have now proclaimed a War;
By Taffaletta's Arms we are pursued.
Our amorous flights like threatening Comets are,
Which thus draw after them a train of Blood.

Muly L. Why do you thus ^ sad relation make
Of all that you have suffered for my sake,
Unless you my Unworthiness resent,
And of your misplaced kindnesses repent?

Moren. No, I recount the Scenes of our past storms,
To arm your Fancy for more pleasing forms;
I come to tell you that your Father's kind,
And has our mutual Happiness designed.
Of our past Woes I have this relation given,
As Purgatory does make way for Heaven.

Muly L. This does disperse my Fears, checks my Despair:
And has my Father -- Shall we then -- and are
Our Loves and Hopes -- Oh my u^ruly Joy
Which does my Thoughts so in their Birth dest^oy,
That my disordered Words no form can bear!
Speak then what You would say, and I would hear.

Moren. He has pronoun^'d such great and glorious things,
As are fit only for the Breath of Kings:
Our happy Passion he so far approves,
That ere three days expire he will crown our Loves.
Know then, to grant our Souls a stric^r Tie,
He has decreed -- we shall together Dye.

Muly L. How are my visionary Dreams retired,
And my fond Hopes in the Embrace expired?

Mor. That day my Father Taffaletta's Arms
To this proud City give their first Alarms,
His Standard fixed before Moro^co's Walls,
Muly Labas and his Morena falls.
He for my Murder does this reason plead,
He will present my Father with my Head.
That sudden Blow, which he designs for you,
It Is your suspected Treason prompts him to:
And the same Jealousy that made his Breath
Decree your Chains, makes him pronounce your Death.

Muly L. I freely at his feet my Life will throw;
Life is a debt we to our Parents ow.
But die suspected! Can he think so fou^
A Thought as Treason harbors in his Soul,
Which does Morena's sacred Image bear!
No shape of ill can come within her Sphere.
But must Morena fall? when e^re she bleeds,
He no severer a Damnation needs,
That dares pronounce the Sentence of her Death,
Than the Infection that attends that Breath.

Moren. Hold, Sir, and your unmanly fears remove,
And show your Courage equal to your Love:
Let us to Death in solemn Triumph go,
As to the nobler Nuptials of the two:
For when we are dead, and our freed Souls enlarged,
of Natures grosser burdens we are discharged:
Then gentle as a happy Lovers Sigh,
Like wandering Meteors through the Air we will fly;
And in our a^ry Walk, as subtle Guests,
We Will steal into our cruel Fathers Breasts,
There read their Souls, and track each Passions sphere,
See how Revenge moves there, Ambition here:
And in their Orbs view the dark Characters
Of Si^ges, Ruins, Murders, Blood and Wars.
We Will blot out all those hideous Droughts, and wr^te
Pure and wh^te forms; we will with a radiant light
Their Breasts incircle, till their Passions be
Gentle as Nature in its Infancy;
Till softened by our Charms their Furies cease,
And their Revenge dissolves into a Peace.
Thus by our Death appeased, their Quarrel ends:
Whom Living we made Foes, Dead we will make Friends.

Muly L. Oh generous Princess! whose courageous Breath
Can set such glorious Characters on Death:
The ancient World did but too modest prove,
In giving a Divinity to Love.
Love the great Power oth' higher World controuls,
Heaven but creates, but Love re^ines our Souls.

Enter to them Q. Mother weeping. Q. Moth. Oh Son! your Royal Father --


Muly L. -- Hold! your Tears
Confound my hopes. O my presaging fears!
Has he -- it cannot be -- has he decreed --
Morena must not, no, she shall not bleed:
The Skies would blush when that bold deed were done,
And look more red than at a setting Sun.

Q* Moth. It Is not Morena who is doomed to die.


Muly L. Has he decreed I shall her place supply?
If so, thanks my kind Father, thou have done
The only deed that could oblige a Son:
If I to save your Life resign my own to Morena.
I shall more glorious shine than on his Throne.

Q. Moth. That object which your Mothers tears procures
Is your great Fathers sudden fate, not yours.

Muly L. My Father! ha!


Q. Moth. -- is dead. Just as he sat
Pronouncing yours and your Morena's fate;
A sudden Check his hasty Breath controlled,
He startled, trembled, and his Eye* balls rould,
His wandering fears, his unshap'd thoughts supplied
With horrors; then Muly Labas he cried,
Forgive what my mistaken Rage has done,
In peace possess thy Mistress and my Throne:
Then with his dying Breath his Soul retired,
And in a sullen sigh his Life expired.

Muly L. The Emperor dead! and with his dying Breath
Did he Morena to his Son bequeath?
He in this Gift a Father has out-don,
And robs me of the Duty of a Son;
For those just Tears, which Nature ought t'imploy,
To pay my last Debt to his Memory,
The Crowning of my Pass^on disallows;
Grief slightly sits on happy Lovers Brows.

Enter Crimalhaz and Hametalhaz, with Attendants. A Shout within. All Long live
Muly Labas Emperor of Morocco.


Crim. Welcome, brave Prince, to your great Fathers Crown,
Advancing from a Prison to a Throne:
The City does in one full shout concur,
And in one voice proclaim you Emperor:
Yet, Sir, your Freedom must not reach so far,
But this fair Princess Chains you still must wear.
The Sun, Great Sir, must in one circuit view
Your Coronation and your Nuptials too.

Muly L. Enjoy a Throne, and my Morena wedd!
A Joy too great were not my Father dead.
The Force of one the others Power controuls:
Heaven fits our swelling Passions to our Souls.
When some great Fortune to mankind's conveyed
Such Blessings are by Providence allayed.
Thus Nature to the World a Sun creates,
But with cold Winds his pointed Rays rebates.
Exit Muly L. leading Morena.
Q Moth. Besotted in thy Love and Empires Charms,
Sleep, and grow dull in your Morena's Arms.
'Twas not for this I raised thee to a Crown,
Poisoned the Father to enthrone the Son:
Had thou been ripe for Death, we had decreed,
Thou should him in his Fate, not Throne, succeed:
Thy early growth we in thy Chains had crushed,
And mixed thy Ashes with thy Fathers Dust.
But live, fond Boy: to manage our Design,
We first must thy Great General undermine.
They, who by Policy a Crown pursue,
Snatch at one Grasp the Sword and Scepter too.
Then we will with ease depose an Armless King:
Men sport with Serpents when they have lost their Sting.
When our Designs to the full height succeed
I Will place the Crown Imperial on your Head. to Crimalhaz.
Sir, of your Progress a Relation make,
How died the King? how did the Poison take?

Crim. With safety I accomplished your desire;
For Hell and Night did in the deed conspire.
As if He by some secret instinct knew
The fatal Potion had been sent by you:
Up from his Seat he rose, and sighing cried,
O unkind Laula! and then groaned and died.
His Death so much of horror did present,
I cursed my Hand for being the Instrument:
A strange unusual trembling shook my Heart,
As that Mag^cian, whose infernal art,
Raising a Vision, is with Terror seized
At th'Apparition his own Charms have raised.
Have you considered, Madam, what you have done?

Q. M. Poisoned my Husband, Sir, and if there need
Examples to instruct you in the deed,
I Will make my Actions plainer understood,
Coppying his Death on all the Royal Blood.

Crim. The Falls of Kings are heavy, and on You --


Q. M. Hold, Sir, sure you have drunk the Poison too,
That thus your Blood grows cold, and your faint Breast
Is with such dull and stupid Fears possessed.
A States-mans Breast should scorn to feel remorse;
Murder and Treason are but things of course.

Crim. I am a Convert, Madam, for kind Heaven,
Has to mankind immortal Spirits given,
And Courage is their Life: but when that sinks,
And to tame Fears and Coward-faintness shrinks,
We the great Work of that bright Frame destroy,
And show the World, that even our Souls can die.
By your Example I Will great Deeds pursue:
My Thoughts shall not start at what my Hand dares do.

Hamet. Madam, as Agents in this great Design,
Zibdy, Morat and Abdrahamon join;
They the Kings Ears will with such Whispers fill,
As shall the Poison Jealousy instill:
And by such subtilty his Breast infect,
Till he his Generals Loyalty suspect.

Crim. Then to promote Suspicion we will proclaim
His Generals high Courage, Power and Fame;
His Armies Love, and his great Spirit praise:
And to that pitch his heightened Virtues raise,
That their Perfection shall appear their Crime,
As Giants by their Height do Monsters seem.

Q. M. Brave Crimalhaz! thy Breast and mine agree:
Now thou art wo^thy of a Crown and Me.
And by such Arts I Will my Sons Breast invade
Till his fond Duty has his Life betrayed,
Till by my means we have his Army gained,
And have removed the Sword into your Hand:
And then we publ^kly and safely may
Our bloody Ensigns to the World display:
His Power once gone, we will act his Death in state,
And dash his Blood against his Palace Gate.
Great Deeds should in the open day be don,
As Sacrifices offered to the Sun.

Crim. But till these mighty Actions ripened are
We must the borrowed Looks of Friendship wear.

Q. M. To flattering lightning our feign Smiles conform,
Which, backed with Thunder, do but guild a Storm.

Exeunt. Finis Actus primi.
Act the Second,
Scene the First.


The Scene opened, is represented the Prospect of a large River, with a
glorious Fleet of Ships, supposed to be the Navy of Muly Hamet, after the Sound
of Trumpets and the Discharging of Guns.

Enter King, Young Queen, Hametalhaz and Attendants. Hamet. GReat Sir, Your
Royal Fathers General
Prince Muly Hamet's Fleet does homewards sail,
And in a solemn and triumphant Pride
Their Course up the great River Tensift guide,
Whose guided Currents do new Glories take
From the Reflection his bright Streamers make:
The Waves a Masque of Martial Pageants yield,
A flying Army on a floating Field.
Order and Harmony in each appear,
Their lofty Bulks the foaming Billows bear.
In state they move, and on the Waves rebound,
As if they danced to their own Trumpets sound:
By Winds inspired, with lively Grace they roll
As if that Breath and motion lent a Soul.
And with that Soul, they seem taught Duty too,
Their Topsails low^'d, their Heads with Reverence bow*
As if they would their Generals Worth enhance,
From him, by instinct, taught Allegiance.
Whilst the loud Cannons echo to the shore,
Their flaming Breaths salute You Emperor.
From their deep Mouths he does your Glory sing:
With Thunder, and with Lightning, greets his King.
Thus to express his Joys, in a loud Quire
And Consort of winged Messengers of fire
He has his Tribute sent, and Homage given,
As men in Incense send up Vows to Heaven.

Enter Muly Hamet and Abdelcador, Attended, introduced with ^ Flourish of
Triumpets: Muly Hamet kneels to the King. King. Welcome true owner of that Fame
you bring,
A Conqueror is a Guardian to a King.
Conquest and Monarchy consistent are;
It Is Victory secures those Crowns we wear.

Muly Hamet. In all that Sword you lent me has subdued,
I only, Sir, my Duty have pursued:
And acts of Duty merit no applause,
I owe my Laurels to my Royal Cause.
My Actions all are on your Name enrolled,
Since it is from you my Conquering Power I hold.

Hametal. But in Morocco his high Pride may find
His Name less glorious, and his Stars less kind.
aside.
Muly Hamet. Sir, your victorious Arms are doub'ly crowned,
On Sea and Land the same success have found:
When first our greeting Navies did salute,
And in the rage of Flames our Cause dispute:
The Trains of Fire our fatal Guns did make
Did the fierce shape of blazing Comets take:
Our meeting Heat such fury did contract,
That Comets can but threaten what we act.
But when the Day had a spectatour been,
And the whole Progress of this Parley seen,
Led by your Genius, fate their Side forsook,
Some of the^r Ships I sunk, and some I took.
But when the ^nterposing shades of Night
Assisted them in their disordered flight,
I made their Fleet to Conquest light my way,
With burning Ships made Beacons on the Sea.

King. Kind Fate, in giving you so great Success,
Could scarce grant more, nor did You merit less.

Muly H. Their Arms who have at Sea victorious been,
Do but the Outworks of an Empire win.
Then to complete, what on the Sea before
I Would but begun, I landed on their Shore.

Abdelc. Saphee and Salli, Mugadore, Oran,
The famed Arzille, Alcazer, Tituan,
Which the Usurper Gayland's Power possessed,
Those his Sword conquered, and his Fame the rest:
For the less Cities at his Names surprise,
Yielding made Crowds of bloodless Victories.
Your Arms against your Foes so much have done,
They feel the Heat though the fierce Fire be gone.

Muly H. And now --
Hearing whose Force Morocco will invade,
I have b^ought home your Army to your aid.

Y. Q. Valor and Fate such just success allow,
As ^irmly place the Laurel on your Brow,
Whose very Looks so much your Foes surprise,
That You, like Beauty, conquer with your ^ies.
But, Muly Hamet, now your Sword must be
Employed in a more Cruel Victory;
Against Invaders You your Force must lead,
And meet my Father in an Army's Head:
But the rough hand of War more gentle make,
And spare His Blood for His Morena's sake.

Muly H. We only do aspire to this great end,
To make your Father not our Prize, but Friend.

King. Should Fortune Crown our Forces with Success,
Our Arms, though Conquering, shall not make him less.

Enter Mariamne, attended. Muly H. Now I Am a Conqueror, Mariamne's Name alone
Has Tr^umph in it; I from this hour am made
Greater than if I wore those Crowns I won;
My Laurels too without your Beams would fade.

Mariam. If Mariamnes Eyes, Great Sir, can give
Your Laurels Life, she grants them leave to live.

Muly H. Oh my full Joys!


Mariam. I come, as one of the Admiring Crowd,
To welcome Him whose Actions speak so loud.

Muly H. Madam, my Deeds can reach no higher Fame,
Than that your precious Breath gives 'em a Name.

Mar. No doubt but War and the harsh sound of Arms
Has from your Bo^ome chased Loves softer Charms:
Your Thoughts, accustomed now to Martial Toils,
Court only Honor, dressed in savage Spoils.

Muly H. No, Madam, War has taught my Hands to aim
At Glory, to deserve a Lovers Name;
Since my Ambition has your Heart pursued,
I Conquer Crowns to make my Title good:
Whose narrow Thoughts to lesser Objects move;
His Soul wants Room to entertain your Love.

King. Sir, to requi^e you with a Crown would be
Too mean Reward, Crowns you have bestowed on me:
To speak my Thanks and Gratitude more large,
That vaster Debt I owe She shall discharge.
To pay what so much Merit does require,
I do command you love, where I admire.
to Mariamne.
Muly H. Though Mariamne's Love appeared before
The highest Happiness Fate had in store,
Yet when I view it, as an Offering
Made by the Hand of an obliging King,
It takes new Charms, looks brighter, lends new Heat.
No Objects are so Glorious or so Great,
But what may still a Greater Form put on,
As Optic Glasses magnify the Sun.

Enter Crimalhaz, Shouts within. Crim. Your Subjects wait with eager joys to pay
Their Tribute to your Coronation Day.

King. You are arrived a welcome Guest, to share
Those Ceremonies which their Joys prepare; to Muly Hamet.
Your Presence to their solemn Rites will grant
That Ornament which this days Triumphs want:
What more could their impatient Wishes meet,
Then in one day a King and Conqueror greet?
Whilst they behold triumphant on one Throne
The Wearer and Defender of a Crown.
Lead on --

Muly H. Lead on, and all that kneel to you,
Shall bow to me. This Conquest makes it due.
to Mariamne.
Exeunt all but Chrimalhaz. Crim. Dull Soldier, in thy Victories go on,
And live to see me wear the Crowns you won.
Let Cowards to their Fathers Thrones advance,
Be Great and Powerful by Inheritance.
No Laurels by descent my Brow adorn;
But what gains Crowns. I am to Courage born,
Ambition is the rise of Souls, like mine.
Those Wreaths my Birth does want, my Brain shall win.
They in advance to Greatness glorious prove,
Who out of the dull track of Birthright move.
Birthright, the Prop of an unpurchas'd Name,
A weak Alliance to an elder Fame.
No Glory by Descent is never worn;
Men are to Worth and Honor Raised, not Born.
Exit.
The Scene opened.


A State is presented, the King, Queen and Mariamne (...) Muly Hamet,
Abdelcador and Attendants, a Moorish Dance is presented by Moors in several
Habits, who bring in an artificial Palm Tree, about which they dance to several
antic Instruments ^f Music; in the intervals of the Dance, this Song is sung
by a Moorish Priest and two Moorish Women; the Chorus of it being performed by
all the Moors.

1. Stanza.
No Music like that which Loyalty sings,
A Consort of Hearts at the Crowning of Kings:
There Is no such delightful and ravishing Strain,
As the Echoes and Shouts of Long Live and Reign.
Long live and reign, long live and reign,
No Shouts so delightful, as, Long Live and Reign.
Long live and reign, etc. Chorus.
2. Stanza.
No Homage like what from Loyalty springs,
We Will kneel to our Gods, but we will die for our Kings:
We Will pay that Devotion our Lives shall maintain:
No raising of Altars like Long Live and Reign.
Long live and reign, long live and Reign,
No raising of Altars, like Long Live and Reing.
Long live, etc.
After the Dance. King. They have paid theirs, now I my Debts will pay,
Sir, the next Sun shall see your Nuptial day.
We, who would best great Services requite,
Do first our Friendships, then our Bloods unite:
And that your Hands more solemnly may join,
Our Royal Mothers Gift shall second mine.

Y. Queen. Her gentle Breath already, from just Fame,
Has kindly entertained your Glorious Name;
And in that Dress, You, as a Conqu'rour, may
To Her a more than welcome Visit pay.

King. But since the Sorrows of the Mourning Queen,
For our late Father, make Her keep unseen,
Let this conduct you.
Gives him a Ring.
Muly H. I am here more blessed --
Than if I an Imperial Sea^ possessed.
Whilst in your Breast an Empire I obtain, to Mariamne.
Not only Kings, but Gods unenvied reign.
Beauty would almost Infidels create,
Who, beyond Love, can wish a higher state?

Exeunt all but Abdelcador. Abdelc. Oh Charming Sex! --
How vast a Circle does thy Magic take?
The highest Spirits humblest Lovers make.
All that Heroic Greatness, which but now
Made haughty Foes and stubborn Nations bow,
Turns Vassal to a Smile, a Looks disguise:
Who conquer Thousands are one Woman's Prize.
Fate sets Commanding Beauty in their way,
Beauty that has more God-like Power than they:
Love over the Hearts of yielding Heroes sports;
Who Are Conquerours in Camps, are Slaves in Courts.
Exit.
Finis Actus secundi.
Act the Third,
Scene the First.
Enter Muly Hamet, Scene the Palace. Muly H. It Is now our Royal Mothers Breath
must bind
That sacred tie of Love my King has signed,
And Providence has sealed: make Her but kind.
Exit.
Scene a Bedchamber.
The Scene opens, and discovers Crimalhaz and Queen Mother sleeping on a Couch,
a Table standing by, with Crimalhaz's Plume of Feathers, and his Drawn Sword
upon it.

Re-enter Muly Hamet. Muly H. Laula in Crimalhaz his Arms asleep!
Ha! Does she thus for her dead Husband weep?
Oh fond and amorous Queen! has Lust such Charms,
Can make Her fly to an Adulter^rs Arms?
His Sword drawn for his Guard, -- Spies the Sword.
But he shall die. -- No, He shall Wake, and Know
The Justice and the Hand that gives the Blow:
Should I descend to a Revenge so base,
His Death unarmed my Glory would deface:
I will restore the Traitors Sword; for still
I have been taught to conquer those I kill.
Well, as a Witness of his Crime, his Sword
I Will take, which when we meet shall be restored.
Then secretly, but honorably too,
My Hand shall Act what to his Guilt is due.
For, lest I should my Queens Disgrace proclaim,
I Will right her Wrongs, but I Will conceal her Shame.
Exit.
The Scene changes to an Antichamber.
Muly Hamet reenters with the same Sword, and in passing over the Stage is
overtaken by the King. King. Muly Hamet! stay.


Muly H. The King!


King. What have you there?


Muly H. Cursed Chance! what shall I say?

aside.
King. You thus appear
To Have left the Field to gather Laurels here.
Who is the Man that has this Honor gained,
To be subdued by such a Generous Hand?
Tell me.

Muly H. Your Royal Pardon.


King. No, proceed.
If you have kil^'d him, I forgive the Deed;
Who e're against You durst his Sword unsheath
Has justly from your Hand deserved his Death.

Muly H. No, Sir, he lives, and lives unvanquish'd too.


King. How, lives!


Muly H. Oh do not your Demands pursue.
Urge me no more, nor force me to reveal
The only thing my Honor would conceal.

King. How, Muly Hamet, durst you act that thing
You dare not utter to your Friend, and King.

Muly H. My Kings Esteem I by my Silence lose,
And Speaking, I his Mothers Shame expose.
aside.
King. Speak, if you can by Friendship be conjured.
Whose is it?

M^ly H. Sir, it is Crimalhaz his Sword.


King. How Crimalhaz! Are you not newly from
The apartment of my Royal Mother come?
In what defenseless Garb did you surprise
Him there, that you disarmed him with such ease?
We over our Women's Honors set such Eyes,
That the Seraglio all access denies.
Who enters there without my Signet dies.

Muly H. Her Shame too openly will be descried;
His Jealousy will find what I would hide.
aside.
King. A sudden Fancy does my Breast inflame,
Something so strange, as I want words to name:
But She Is my Mother, and I dare not guess --
Yet She Is a Woman, and I can no less
Than start at Horrors which my Honor stain.
Confusion! and was Crimalhaz the Man?

Muly H. Oh! Sir, what has my forced Obedience don?
Against a Mother I Have incensed a Son.
Your Princely Brow let no disorders change,
Let my Hand, Sir, Your disturbed Peace revenge.

King. No, Muly Hamet has a Sword too good
To be defiled with an Adulterers Blood.
He t'an ignobler Fate shall be condemned;
I Will make him infamous, low, and contemned.
Disrobed of all his Titles he shall bleed,
Like a Crowned Victim to an Altar led,
Whose Wreaths and Garlands to the fire are cast,
And then the naked Sacrifice falls last.
That sinking Statesman undergoes the worst
Of Deaths, whose Honors and whose Power dies first.
exit King.
Muly H. This was the only Chance could shake my Fame.
Oh weak Foundations of a Glorious Name!
I from the Field do a Crowned Conqu'rour come,
To turn a base Informer here at home:
Yet nothing is so bright but has some Scars;
Men can throngh Glasses find out Spots in Stars.
Exit.
The Scene changes again to the Queen Mothers Bedchamber, where She and
Crimalhaz appear hand in hand; She in a Morning Dress. Crim. Love acts the part
of tributary Kings:
As they pay homage to their Conqueror;
Our kind Embraces are but Offerings
Of Tribute to triumphant Beauty's Power.

Q. M. Great Spirits Rivals are to Gods, and can,
Were all the World like me, their Heaven unman:
We'd antidate our Bliss, not stay to move,
like Pageant-Saints, to airy Seats above:
We'd here below enjoy our Chiefest Good,
And reap Delights which they never understood.

Crim. Ha! my Sword gone! Madam, we are betrayed.


Q. M. Whose he that dares our Privacy invade?


Crim. Some fatal Eye our interview has seen.


Q. M. Who e're has seen us, knows I am a Queen.
That powerful Word his Silence does demand;
It Is Blasphemy to name, nay understand
What Princes act. --

Crim. Ho! Achmat, Achmat, -- Enter Achmat.
-- What bold Man has been
Admitted to the Apartment of the Queen?

Ach. Prince Muly Hamet.


Q. Moth, Ha! by whose Command?


Achm. The Royal Signet from the Kings own hand
Gave him Admittance.

Q. Moth. But, rude Slave, how durst
You violate what I commanded first?
Know, Traitor, I am Mother to a King:
His Power subordinate from Me does spring.
My Orders therefore should unquestioned stand,
Who gave him Breath, by which he does Command.
What my Commands have mist, this shall make good.
Princes are by their Deeds best understood.

Stabs the Eunuch, who falls and dies. Crim. Fall, and in Death all hopes of
Mercy lose,
Who durst the Secrets of your Queen disclose:
Closets of Princes should be held Divine,
As a Saints presence Consecrates his Shrine:
And Princes Pleasures should Alliance hold
With their great Power, be free and uncontrou'ld.

Q. Moth. Is it not pity now --
That Grave Religion, and dull sober Law
Should the high flights of Sportive Lovers aw?
Whilst for the loss, of what is not worth a Name,
The slight exc^rsions of a wanton flame,
You must your Ruin meet, and I my Shame:
And yet we must not at our Dooms repine;
Because Law and Religion are Divine.
Yes, they are Divine; for they are so over-good,
I Am sure, they never were made by Flesh and Blood.
But since it is past, what does your Courage think?
You will not shake, at what I scorn to shrink.

Crim. No, though I lose that Head which I before
Desig'nd should the Morocco-Crown have wore:
Yet what is the fear of Tortures, Death, Hell? Death,
Like a faint Lust, can only stop the Breath.
Tortures weak Engines that can run us down,
Or skrew us up till we are out of tune.
And Hell, a feeble, puny cramp of Souls:
Such infant Pains may serve to frighten Fools.
Fates, if I Am doomed your Mark, ^'le stand you fair;
Nor will I for your Favors lose a Prayer.

Q. M. A prayer, Devotion and a Statesman! No,
The Pow's above are titular below:
Stars are all Eye, and when great Deeds are done
All their faint Lights are but bare Lookers on.
Now thou art brave, none but a Heart above
The shock of Fortune, could deserve my Love:
But fear no danger, to our aid I Will call
My Arts and Fiends in Hell to stop our Fall.
To this I Will for our safety take recourse:
Through your right Hand this fatal Dagger force:
Then leave the Conduct of the Deed to me;
Fate dares no less than my Protector be.

Here Crimalhaz stabbs himself in his right Arm, which immediately appears
bloody. Crim. It Is don.

Throws away the Dagger.
Enter to them the King and Muly Hamet. King. May Heaven forgive my Eyes, that
they have seen
This Object in a Mother and a Queen.

Q. M. Oh Son! be deaf to what will wound your Ear,
Let this black Day be cancelled from the Year.
But if your Justice must his Faults pursue,
Impose on Me what to his Guilt is due.

Muly H. See how she treats her Shame: Madam, I wish
Your Virtues greater, or your Birth were less.

King. Since you have sullied thus our Royal Blood,
The Grounds and Rise of this past Crime relate, to Crimalhaz.
That, having your Offenses understood,
We, what we cannot recall, may expiate.

Crim. Sir, 'Twas my fate --


Q. M. Hold, Sir, the Story does to me belong,
A Woman's Frailty from a Woman's Tongue.
Whilst pensively I in my Closet sat
My Eyes paid Tribute to my Husbands Fate,
And while those Thoughts my sinking Spirits seized
His Entrance my dejected Courage raised:
Pointing to Muly Hamet. The sudden Object did new Thoughts produce;
My Griefs suspended, lent my Tears a Truce:
For then I otherwise employed my Eyes,
Whilst in His Aspect I read Victories. points to Muly Hamet.
But, Muly Hamet, then your cruel Breast --

Muly H. Speak.


Q. M. Let my Tears and Blushes speak the rest:


Muly H. What does she mean? My laboring Thoughts dispatch.


Q. M. Your Soul and Person Nature did ill match.
Such savage Passions and unruly Heat,
Lodged in Your Breast, hold a too glorious Seat.

Muly H. This mystic Language does my Sense confound.


Q. Moth. Oh, Sir!


King. This riddling History expound.


Q. M. Well, Sir, since you will force my Tongue, I must
Be to my Honor and my Virtue just.
Having a while upon each other gazed,
He at my Silence, I his Eyes amazed:
Then, Muly Hamet, then --

King. What did he do?


Q. M. Attempt to ravish me. His altered Brow
Wore such fierce Looks, as had more proper been
To lead an Army with, than Court a Queen.
And, as a Ravisher, I abhorred him more
In that black form, than I admired before.
But whilst my Virtue a Resistance made
My Shrieks and Cries brought Achmat to my aid:
Whilst the Eunuch stood amazed, his Sword he snatc'd,
And at one Stroke his wondering Soul dispatched.

Muly H. Oh Horror!


Q. M. Then, led by some happy Chance,
Kind Crimalhaz did to my Aid advance.

Crim. But being by my sudden Entrance crossed,
And all the Hopes of his stolen Pleasures lost,
My sight did to his sparkling Eyes inspire
Such Rage, as if his Lust had lent *em Fire:
Though Justice in Her Cause did guide my Hand,
No Sword could his Victorious Arm withstand:
And when his Weapon through my Hand run,
Fearing the Event of what his Rage had done,
He bore away my Sword, a poor Pretense,
To turn his Crime upon my Innocence.

Muly H. False and perfidious Traitor! to Crimalhaz.
Sir, to your Royal Favors add one more, to the King.
And I Will quit all that I received before:
To this Adulterer your Leave afford
To vindicate his Treason by his Sword;
That Justice, by my Hand, may give him Death,
And stifle with his Blood his pe^jur'd Breath.

King. Hold, Sir, if you this rash attempt pursue,
You Will make me think, that what he says is true.
This subtle mystery confounds me more
Than the past horror of the Deed before.

Crim. Alas, Sir, He, who has so savage been,
To dare abuse the Honor of a Queen,
Esteeming all less Crimes but sportive things,
Could not want Words to abuse the Ears of Kings.

Muly H. Bold Villain --


King. Hold, your Passions Rage command;
You in an injured Monarchs presence stand.

Muly H. Can the Eternal Powers such Treachery
Permit? You the great Rulers of the Sky,
Sitting thus patient at so tame a rate,
In Heavens soft ease are grown effeminate.
If such loud Crimes your armless Power outface,
Your pointless Vengeance will your Heaven disgrace.

Q. M. Had you my Breast by Honor sought to win,
Yet Love to a pious Mother, and a Mourning Queen,
Had sounded harsh. But grant that Time and Love
Could from my Bosom my dead Lord remove:
I to your Passion might so just have been,
To 've met your Love, but not in the shape of Sin.

Muly H. Madam, You may say any thing: Your Sex
And Birth the vent of my just Passion checks.
Sir, do but hear --
To the King.
Crim. You may vouchsafe to hear
What You may read more plainly, here, and there.

Points to the dead Eunuch and his wounded Arm. King. I in this Parley too much
time bestow:
Hearing the Cause, I make the Vengeance slow.
Guards -- Yet I Will hear him --

Muly H. My single Word a vain Defense will make,
Where so much Witness, and a Mother speak.
But yet Heaven sees my Innocence; and know
That I am proud this Shame to undergo.
Believe me, her intended Ravisher
Appearing so, I take the Guilt from Her.
Their false Impeachments do this comfort bring,
That I may wear that Cloud would shade a King.

King. His kind soft Words do but confirm the Offense;
Men are nere losers for their Breaths expense:
But still speak kindest when their Falls are near,
Not out of Generosity, but Fear.
It is enough She witnessed his Offense;
Her Virtue scorns to accuse Innocence.
And since her Blood does run within my Veins,
By' instinct I know she all that is base disdains.
But if I want more Proofs to make it out,
His Murder and his Wound removes the doubt.
Muly Hamet, for this Guilt our Prophets Breath
Has in his sacred Laws pronounced your Death.

Q. M. His Death! Surprised.
But hold! The King will then my Cheat descry,
I wish His Death who tamely see him dye. aside.
O cruel Sir, that killing Breath recall: to the King.
Our holy Prophet dares not see him fall,
I Am sure, had he My Eyes. Heaven cannot see
Such Courage bear so harsh a Destiny.
The Powers above would shrink at what he felt:
His Death to Tears their Crystal Orb would melt.
But --
If You must act what Mercy cannot prevent,
Inflict -- inflict some milder Punishment.

King. His Deeds and Service in Morocco's Cause
May mitigate the rigor of our Laws.
His Army then I to your charge commend,
Her Honors Guardian, and our Loyal Friend. to Crimalhaz.
Here bind the Traitor, and convey him strait to the Guards.
To Prison, there to linger out his Fate:
Till his hard Lodging and his slender Food
Allay the Fury of his Lustful Blood.
Guards bind Muly Ham.
Q. M. Think what Impression on my Breast 'twill make,
To ^ee his Hands wear Fetters for my sake. In whisper between Muly Hamet and
Queen Mother.

Muly H. Madam, be serious, tell me how so foul
A Treason gained admission to your Soul.

Q M. My Soul! Dull Man, what has my Soul to do
In such mean Acts as my betraying You?
Murder and Treason --
Without the help of Souls, when I think good,
Such toys I act; as I Am but Flesh and Blood.

Mu. H. Let not too high your Scorn of Justice swell:
Know, Madam on such Crimes there waits a Hell.

Q. M. Hell! No, of that I scorn to be afraid:
I Will ^end such throngs to the infernal shade,
Betray, and kill, and damn to that degree,
I le crowd up Hell, till there is no Room for Me.

King. Here, to the Tower that guarded Prisoner send:
His sa^ther Doom from my Commands attend.

Muly H. I for my former state
My Homage to your Royal Father paid,
And Monarchs may destroy what Monarchs made:
For Subjects Glories are but borrowed things,
Raised by the favorable Smiles of Kings:
And at their Authors Pleasures should retire,
And when their Breath renounces 'em expire.
Should I the Sentence of my Sovereign blame,
I should be gu^tier than They say I am.
But though your Frowns declare my Fet^ers just,
Look to what dangerous Hand your Power you trust.
Monarchs do nothing ill, unless when they
By their own Acts of Grace their Lives betray.
When Favors they too gen'rously afford,
And in a Treacherous Hand misplace their Sword,
Their Bounties in their Ruin are employed:
Kings only by their Virtues are destroyed.

King. Your Counsels weakly do my Ears attract;
You ill ^each Virtue which you cannot act.
Live then, till time this ^ense of Horror brings,
What it is to ravish Queens, and injure Kings.

Exeunt King and Muly Hamet severally; Muly Hamet led out by the Guards. Q. M.
You see the Fates do their Allegiance know.
And to my powerful Breath their Conduct ow.
It Is pity Monar^hs are so scarce --
Such generous, ^asie, kind, good natured things,
That one feigned Tear can rule the Faith of Kings.

Crim. So bravely, Madam, your Design succeeds,
As if the Fates were Vassals to your Deeds.
That Politician who to Empire climbs,
With Virtues Dress should beautify his Crimes.
Our gilded Treason thus like Coral seems;
Which appears Black within its native Streams:
But when Disclosed it sees the open Air;
It changes Color, and looks Fresh and Fair.
Exeunt.
Scene the second, the Scene a Prison.
The Scene opens, Muly Hamet appears bound. Muly H. Disrobed of all at once!
what turns more strange
Can Ages, if an Hour can make such Change?
Enter to him Mariamne, with one Attendant, from whom she takes a Sword, and
exit Attendant. Kind Mariamne!


Mar. Yes, False Man, the same,
Till your bold Lust had forfeited that Name.
The Daughters easy Breast would ill confer
A Kindness on her Mothers Ravisher.

Muly H. Can Mariamne think me guilty too?
More than my Chains have done your Frowns will do:
Mariamne's Eyes outvie her Brothers Power.
I never was miserable till this hour.

Mar. Ungrateful! is your Soul so much defaced?
Have I so ill a too fond Heart misplaced?
My Rival Mother does my Right remove:
And in affront to my rejected Love
Your Scorn to Me you in her Shame make good,
Forcing her Virtue to profane my Blood.
But, perjured Man, though you deserve so ^ll,
Yet you shall find me Mariamne still.
To my past Favors I will add one more.
Thus I your Freedom, and your Sword restore*
Unbinds him, and gives him the Sword. Live, and in safety go, and fly that Fate
Which does the unhappy Muly Hamet wait.

Muly H. My Sword and Liberty restored by You,
To one ungrateful, false and perjured too!
Ah, Madam, if your Mercy can confer
Such Bounty on a condemned Ravisher;
What nobler Favors would your Smiles dispense,
If Mariamne knew my Innocence?

Mar. Sir, you mistake my Favors: I have lent
Your Freedom only as your Banishment:
That being released, you might Morocco fly,
Removed at once both from my Heart and Eye.
For should he stay --
Something like Pity in his cause would plead,
Till my faint Anger were in Triumph led. aside.
Some Rebel Thought my ill-fenc'd Heart would win,
And treacherously once more let him in.
Go, Ravisher, take your offered Liberty:
And to some barbarous, unknown Desert fly,
Where Men have naught but Shape that is humane; there,
Where Virtue looks more ill than Monsters here.
Converse with wild and lustful Savages:
Live, and inhabit any Seat -- but This.
Points to her Breast.
Muly H. Divine, but cruel Princess, to whom Heaven
Has all its Titles but its Knowledge given.
Else, like their Powers, you could not want a Sense
Of Muly Hamets injured Innocence.
Can Murders, Rapes, or any barbarous Deed,
Madam, from your Adorers Thoughts proceed?
No, Hells Commission does not reach so far,
To touch his Heart, which does your Image wear.

Mar. Ah, were this true!


Muly H. Witness the sacred Powers,
If ought of truth be in a Heart that is yours,
Then Crimalhaz is false. Your Mother too,
(If ought that is ill can be allied to you)
Has spoke what Muly Hamet durst not think.
Achmat his Death, and Crimalhaz his Wound,
Not from My Sword, but from Their Dagger sound.
The Eunuchs Blood by their own Hand was spilt;
To work my Ruin, and conceal their Guilt.

Mar. A genle Calm my Anger does assuage,
Creeps cooly over my Heart, and chils my Rage.
Some strange Divine Intelligence is stole
Into my Breast, and whispers to my Soul, aside.
Unkind, Suspicious, Cruel, and Unjust;
That Virtue Love had taught him you may trust.

Muly H. Were I that Savage Ravisher I seem,
I still might father this imputed Crime:
This Prison, and Our private Interview,
Giving me power t'Attempt that force on You.
How dare you then my Out-lawed Virtue trust,
And lend that freedom which would arm that Lust?
But did you know how clear my Soul does shine,
Unclouded, and still pure enough, t'enshrine
Such a Divinity as yours, you would free
Your self from Doubts, as you from Chains did Me.
Your Mothers Eyes cannot your Right remove:
To prove the power of M^riamnes Love,
Madam, my proffered freedom I refuse:
Flying Morocco, I your sight should lose;
And rather than be banished from those Eyes,
I can all thoughts of Liberty despise:
For I in Fetters may your Grace implore,
And make your Pity grant one Visit more.
If not your Love, yet your Compassion may
Once more, at least, guide your kind steps this way.
Gaining your sight, I can my Chains out-brave,
The Brother's prisoner, but the Sister's slave.

Mar. Enough, brave Prince; My Jealousy forgive:
Virtue never dies, where so much Love does live.
Heaven cannot but, like Me, think it unjust,
That so much Virtue should in fetters rust.
But since of injured Innocence Heaven dares
Be a spectator, I Will correct the Star's.
I will redress those Wrongs
Which their ^ame patience lets you suffer. Take
Once more your Freedom for your Princess sake.
^ly these infected Walls, this barbarous Town,
Where Virtue mourns under a Tyrants frown.
Before, my Rage your Freedom did Command:
But now accept it from a gentler Hand.
Kindness and Cruelty one doom decree:
None ever Punish, and Reward like Me.

Muly H. And must I from my Princess presence fly?


Mar. No, stay.


Muly H. Kind Stars!


Mar. Yes, in my Memory.
Absent you shall in my Remembrance reign.
I Will to your Image dedicate this ^hrine.
Points to her Breast.
Enter King, and young Queen. To the Door. Muly H. Madam, your Brother, when he
hears my Swo^d,
And Liberty is by your Hand re^tor'd,
May grow incensed to such a high degree,
To make You share those Frowns which threatened Me.
And are my thoughts so low, to make you run
Those Dangers which I by my flight shall shun?

Mar. Request does with a Mistress power ill suite.
Sir, I Command that freedom you dispute.
And, if his stubborn Faith to a just thought
Of your wronged Innocence cannot be wrought:
If his rash passion natures bonds should quit,
And make him both my Sex, and Birth forget;
Remember that you wear a Sword, and you
As you're my Servant, be my Champion too.

Enter to them King, Young Queen, Q. Mother, Crimalhaz, Hametalhaz and
Attendants. King. His Sword, and freedom by her hand retrived!
Surely my Eyes and Ears are both deceived.
How! Rebel, dare you with things Sacred sport,
Ravish the Mother, and the Daughter Court? to Muly H.
Have You your Birth no better understood, to Mariamne.
Than to be Traitor to your own high Blood?
Since Prisons no restraint over Lust can have,
Why did I not confine him to a Grave?

Muly H. It Is not long since your Bounty did design
Not only This, but The Hand that gave it, mine.

King. When I designed That, I designed She should
Be in a Palace, not a Prison, wooed;
Not circled in a Chain, but in a Crown:
Sir, You mistake a Dungeon for a Throne.

Q. M. Remember, if your Memory can prove
So just, t'unravel your own Scenes of Love.
Unless blessed ^overs, whose desires are Crowned;
Mounting so high, forget their rising ground.
These Prison-walls have Echoed to your Sighs,
Conscious as well of your Amors, as His.
No fetters can Lov's lawless power suppress:
You too have been a Lover in his dress.
Some Pity then should to their Loves be shown,
For their so near resemblance of your own.
She can forgive his Faults, why cannot You?
If Love can Pardon, why not Honor too?

Mar. Knew you his Innocence, you would approve
Both his just Liberty, and my just Love.
But, Sir, you know, I Am Sister to a King:
And in that Name I dare do any thing;
Make where I please my Heart an Offering.
Tortures, nor Chains, shall not my Love rebate:
I Will share his Breast, though I should share his Fate.

King. Sister, your noble Pride has made me kind:
I Will give him that Reward which You designed.
Your Courteous hand his Freedom did restore;
And I Will repeat what you pronounced before:
Be gone, and never see Morocco more.
At the next mornings light, if the Suns Eye
Find you within the City-gates, you Dye.
And the Tenth day you lose your Head, if found
Within the Circuit of my Empires bound.

Muly H. Now I am lost, and all my Hopes dispers't.
This Monsters villainy has done its worst. to Crimalhaz.
Inhumane, to your Conscious Soul recall --

Crim. The Tortures which it feels to see You fall.


Muly H. No, Traitor.


Crim. Traitor, Yes Sir, I should be
Traitor to Reason and Humanity,
Should I not grieve for You.

Muly H. Oh cunning Ignorance!
These Traitors walk like madmen in a Trance:
Seem not to understand the Crimes they Act.
But from what springs, do You your Tears extract!
aside, to Q.M.
Q. M. From springs so deep shall sink Thee down to Hell.
I shed my Tears, as Rain in Egypt falls,
Sent for no common cause, but to foretell aside to him.
Destructions, Ruins, Plagues, and Funerals.
I never draw Tears, but when those Tears draw Blood.

King. My Justice in suspense too long has stood.


Q. M. How, Justice? no, your Cruelty. How can
So harsh a Doom against so Brave a man
Be Justice? View that Brow, that Charming Eye:
See there the Grace and Mien of Majesty.
Can you to Exile then that Man enjoyne,
Whose Soul must, like his Aspect, be Divine*
Oh Son!
Weeps.
King. His Sentence is already past;
And now her Kindness does his Ruin have.
Be gone, and fly to some infected Air,
Where Poisons brood, where men derive their Crimes,
Their Lusts, their Rapes, and Murders, from their Climes:
And all the Venom which their Soils do want,
May the Contagion of your Presence grant.

Muly H. I must obey you, and embrace my Doom
With the same patience Saints do Martyrdom.
Only their Suffering's a Reward receive;
They Die to meet that Happiness I leave:
They Die, that in their deaths they Heaven may find:
But in my Princess, I leave Mine behind.
And my hard Exile does this Horror bring,
I lose the power to serve so good a King:
So Good, that 'twould as great a Bliss confer
To Die for You, as it is to Live for Her.
Since in your Kingdoms limits I Am deni'de
A seat, may your great Empire spread so wide,
Till its vast largeness does Reverse my doom;
And for my Banishment the World wants room.

King. I Will hear no more. But for this Audience know
How much you to my gracious Favor owe.
His Mercy's great, whose Patience is so strong,
To give a Traitor leave to Talk thus long.

Exeunt King, and young Queen. Mar. Farewell for ever. When you're gone, and all
Mariamne ever Loved, or ever shall. --
She sees no more; Yet by despair made just,
Let not our Hearts take leave, though our Eyes must.
Though you through wild and savage Deserts go,
No place so barren, but where Love may grow.

Muly H. When to your ears some gentle breath shall bring
The last Remains of a lost wretched thing,
That lived as long as he could gaze on You;
And shined, till that inspiring Light withdrew.
If Fame vouchsafe words on a wretch so poor;
When you shall hear I was, but am no more;
In my Lost seat let my Remembrance stay:
Give my Name life, though Grief take Mine away.

Exeunt Muly Hamet and Mariamne severally. Crim. Fate and our Wishes meet.


Q. M. His Exile is not all:
Our Treasons are not safe but in his Fall.
He Lives, though he be Banished; and the Great
Are never fully Dark'ned, till they Set:
This Cloud may pass, and He shine out once more;
But from your hand this favor I implore:
Pursue him out of Town, and in disguise to Hametal.
With some dissembling Tale his Ears surprise;
Till your Confederate-Party has gained time
To place an Ambuscade, and Murder him.

Hamet. Conclude it done.


Q. M. And your next step t'a Throne to Crimalhaz.
Must be, dear Sir, the Murder of my Son.

Crim. His Palace --
And the kind City's love's so strong a Guard,
The Attempt within these Walls appears too hard.

Q M. But what that Bars, this Easier way secures:
His Army, and his Treasures Charge, are yours.
To Morrow on the Plain before the Wall,
His Forces you t'a general-muster Call.
Then their Commander You shall in their Head
His Army to the Mountain Atlas lead:
And to secure your Flight, to night by Stealth
Ransack his Treasury, seize all his Wealth.
At first Alarm, this will his Courage damp:
But by such Arts, I his Resolves will sway;
I Will work him from the Town up to the Camp,
And safe into your Hands his Life betray.
But when Your Throne I on His Grave have built,
Remember Love was Author of my Guilt.

Crim. This work, which we so roughly do begin,
Zeal and Religion may perhaps call Sin.
No; the more Barbarous garb our Deeds assume,
We nearer to our First perfection come.
Since Nature first made Man wild, savage, strong,
And his Blood hot, then when the world was Young:
If Infant-times such Rising-valours bore,
Why should not Riper Ages now do more?
But whilst our Souls wax Tame, and Spirits Cold,
We Only show th'unactive World grows Old.

Exeunt Crimalhaz, and Young Queen. Hamet. Muly Hamet Bleeds the next.
To him, who Climbs by Blood, no track seems Hard:
The Sense of Crimes is lost in the Reward:
Aspirers neither Guilt nor Danger Dread:
No path so rough Ambition dares not Tread.
E^it.
Finis Actus Tertii.
Act the Fourth,
Scene the First.
Enter King Attended. King. HOw! Crimalhaz up to the Mountains fled,
And with him the Morocco Forces led.
Oh Rebel!

1. Lord. Sir, he only does pursue
That Treason which you lent him Power to do:
He was your Treasurer, and has made bold
To be too strict a Guardian of your Gold.
All your Crown-Jewels, and your heaps of Wealth,
He in the Night conveyed away by Stealth.
And now --
Encamped on Atlas skirts, he by your Gold
Has Raised new Forces, and Confirmed the Old.
With that he Bribes your Army to his Cause;
And after him new Trains of Rebels draws.

King. Oh Profane Gold, which from infectious Earth,
From Sulfurous and Contagious Mines takes Birth.
It grew from Poisons, and has left behind
Its native Venom to infect Mankind.
Rapes, Murders, Treasons, what has Gold not Don?
If it has ever any Glory won,
Given to Reward a Virtue, or decreed
T'a Pious use, or Charitable deed;
That Sacred Powr's but borrowed, which it bears,
Let from their Royal Images it wears.

Enter Queen Mother. 2. Lord. I am afraid his Thoughts fly High; his Dreams
Have little less than Empires for their Theams:

King. On what Ill subjects I my Favors cast?
Him high in Power, and Honors I have placed.
Kings Bounties act like the Suns Courteous smiles,
Whose rays produce kind Flowers on fruitful Soyles:
But cast on barren Sands, and baser Earth,
Only breed Poisons, and give Monsters Birth.

2. Lord. Let not too far your Fears your Peace molest:
Perhaps you have mis-interpreted his Breast.
You know that Crimalhaz his 'High Command
Was formerly in Muly Hamets hand.
He who forced Favors both from Fate, and Fame;
Made War a Sport, and Conquest but a Game.
And therefore he, perhaps, to Act some Deed
Which Muly Hamets glory may exceed.
Has for his Mistress from the common Rou^
Of the worlds beauties singled Honor out.
And that which makes him his Designs disguise,
He Will make his flight of Honor a surprise.

King. No, he is a Traitor, and he will use my Power
Not to Promote, but to Usurp my Crown.
Power swollen too High destroys, not guards; as showers,
Luxurious grown, what they should Cherish, drown.
Our Swords in Loyal hands may act great Things:
Be both the Glory and Defense of Kings:
But when misplaced, those Arms our Ruins be:
As Mountains bulwarks are at Land, but Rocks at Sea.

Q. M. Can you Rebellion fear, or any thing
Who are my Son, and great Moroccoes King?
If he be False, you cannot resist your Fate:
If True, his aim will be to guard your State.
But grant he would some Traytrous act perform,
Accept my Counsel to divert the Storm.
Up to the Mountains strait, and visit Him.
Your Awful sight may check an ungrown Crime;
Outface his Treason e're his Rise begin:
Men Bashful are in the nonage of a Sin.

King. Madam, your dauntless spirit would breath fire
To breasts as cold as Age. I must admire
Your Courage: but your Innocence mistakes.
Your Goodness in my Cause weak I^dgment makes,
Your Thoughts cannot Reach the flights which Treason takes.

Q. M. You Have hit my Thoughts: Alas, I am too good,
Treason's a Thing I never understood.
But yet I understand what is High and Brave.
He dares not, Sir, abuse that power You gave.
For he who saved my Honor, will guard yours:
That very Argument your Life secures.
Then trust to Fortune, and my Counsel. Go
And visit him; but wear no Jealo^s brow:
It makes men False to be Suspected so.
I Will be your Leader.

King. When She leads the Way,
Though it were Death to go, 'twere worse to Stay.
Madam, I Will go. For Taffaletta's Arms
In few days March will reach Moroccoes Walls.
If Crimalhaz prove False, at his Alarms
Muly Labas by a foreign Conq'rour falls.
Staying, I tamely Perish; if I go,
I face my Ruin, and I Charge my Foe.
It will more like an act of Courage look,
To be by Ruin met, than over-took.
But at my sight perhaps he in my brow
May something read which his High thoughts may bow.
Kings that want Arms, do not want Majesty.
Heaven is still Heaven, though it lays its Thunder by.
Exit with Attendants.
Q. M. Go easy Fool, and Dye, and when you Bleed,
Remember I was Author of the Deed.
T'enlarge Fates black Records, search but My Soul:
There ye Infernal Furies read a scrowl
Of Deeds which you want Courage to Invent;
Of which Hells Legends want a President.

Scene the Second.
The Scene opened, is presented a Prospect of a Clouded Sky, with a Rain bow.
After a shower of Hail, enter from within the Scenes Muly Hamet and Abdelcador.
Abd. Such Storms as These, this Climate never knew:
A Shower of Hail's an Object strange and new
I fear it does Portend some Dire Event,
That waits upon your Fatal Banishment.

Muly H. My Country, Princess, and my King forsook:
Storms to my Miseries like attendants look.
These Tempests Sir, are to my Sufferings due:
When my King Frowns, it is just that Heaven frown too.
But why does my dear Confident intend
In my Misfortunes thus to run my Race?
Must I in my sad Ruin plunge my Friend?
As Drowning men sink those whom they Embrace.

Abd. Do not my friendships right forbid. With You
I Have been a Conq'rour, why not Exile too?
Shall my Esteem grow faint, or my Zeal less,
Because I view you in a Meaner dress,
Your outward Pomp laid by, and Honors razed?
The Saint's not less, although the Shrine's defaced.

Enter Mariamne with a small Attendance. Muly H. Mariamne!


Mar. Yes. And she who led by Love,
Leaves Palaces, and does to Deserts Rove.
Winged by that zeal united Souls do bear
Those Stars that smile on Lovers, brought me here.
I for Your sake my wandering steps engage:
Devotion is the rise of Pilgrimage.

Muly H. Can Love in Hearts such deep impressions make,
That you can for your Wretched Vassals sake
Leave Courts, Pomp, Greatness, and all splended things?

Mar. Sir, it is the same with Lovers, as with Kings,
Thus, if a King should with his Train resort
To a poor Cell, he makes that Cell a Court.
Oh Sir, the most Illustrious Queen on Earth,
Would quit the Pageantry of Crowns and Birth:
And in exchange Mariamnes Exile choose,
Could she but Love as Mariamne does.

Muly H. Oh my kind Princess; King and Court sarewel:
Where painted Honors, and feigned Glories dwell:
Lovers when happy made, have Souls that scorn
Those gilded wreaths which swelling brows Adorn.

Mar. Mariamne has this glory on her side,
That kindness you call Love, I call my Pride.
For of my Constancy --
Any less trial I disdain to make
Then show I scorn an Empire for your sake:
And whosoever does my rash Flight condemn,
The meaness of their Censures I contemn.
None of my Actions can fit Judges be,
But they who have soul enough to Love like Me.
Lovers alone Loves causes can decide,
As Nobles only by their Peers are Tried.

Enter to them Hametalhaz disguised in the Habit of a Priest, with Villains in
the same Dress. Ham. Sir, our great Prophet has pronounced your Fate,
Your Love is doomed to be Unfortunate.

Muly H. No Sir, it is False, thou do belie his Name:
Our Prophet is a Lover as I am.

Ham. Your Mistress too must your Misfortune find.


Muly H. To her our Prophet cannot be unkind*
She is a Princess.

Ham. No Titles his eternal will confute.


Muly H. She is a Woman, and he scorns to do it.
Did not thy Garb protect thee -- Mahomet
To wrong her Sex his greatness would forget.

Ham. No Sex is from ill destiny debarred.


Muly H. She is a Beauty, and that Name's her guard.
Good sates as due should be to Beauty given:
Beauty which decks our Earth, and props his Heaven.
When Heaven to Beauty is propitious,
It pays those Favors it but lends to Us.

Ham. Oh, do not Sir, their Oracles decry,
With patience hear the Language of the Sky.
Heaven when on Earth some Change it does fore-shew,
Does write Above what we must read below.
This Morning, as our Eyes we upward cast,
The desert Regions of the Air lay Wast.
But strait, as if it had some Penance bore,
A mourning Garb of thick black Coulds it wore.
But on the Sudden --
Some aerie Demon changed its form, and now
That which looked black Above looked white below.
The Clouds disheveled from their crusted Locks,
Something like Gems coined out of Crystal Rocks.
The Ground was with this strange bright Issue spread,
As if Heaven in affront to Nature had
Designed some new*found Tillage of its own;
And on the Earth these unknown Seeds had sown.
Of these I reached a Grain, which to my sense
Appeared as cool as Virgin-innocence:
And like that too (which chiefly I admired)
Its ravished* Whiteness with a Touch expired.
At the approach of Heat, this candid Rain
Dissolved to its first Element again.

Muly H. Though showers of Hail Morocco never see,
Dull Priest, what does all this Portend to me?

Ham. It does Portend --


Muly. What?


Ham. That the Fates -- design --


Muly. To tire me with Impertinence like thine.


Here a Company of Villains in Ambush from behind the Scenes discharge their
Guns at MulyHamet, at which Muly Hamet starting and turning, Hamettalhaz from
under his Pries^s habit draws a Sword, and passes at Muly H. which pass is
intercepted by Abdelcader. They engage in a very fierce Fight, which the
Villains, who also draw and assist Hametalhaz, and go off several ways
Fighting; after the discharge of other Guns heard from within, and the Clashing
of Swords, Enter again Muly Hamet, driving in some of the former Villains,
which he Kills. Muly H. Dye Slaves, and may this desert raise a brood
Of unknown Monsters from your venomed Blood.
My Princess gone, Fortune and Justice are
Sure not so Blind, but they of her took Care.

Enter Abdelcader. Abd. Your Princess Sir, is from your Arms divorced,
In her own Chariot to Morocco forced.

Muly H. I Will fetch her back, though --


Abd. Hold! With their fair prize, they have took so quick a flight,
That She is now beyond your reach and sight:
And the chief Leader of those Villains, was
The Old Queens Confident, Hametalhaz.
And all the Story which the Slave did frame,
Was only to gain time to take his aim.
They chose that Garb as what might best prevail,
To gain your Patience, and their Swords Conceal:
But missing of your Blood, your brave Escape
Changed his intended Murder to a Rape.

Muly H. Hell and Damnation, these cursed Traitors seize.
But why against such Barbarous Savages
Do I in vain these useless Curses name;
They are such Brutes, that they want Souls to damn?
No against my self I should my Curses bend,
Coward so ill my Princess to defend.

Abd. Oh Sir, do not profane your Conquering Sword,
Their Numbers were too great to be o're-powr'd.

Muly H. How, Numbers! Abdelcader, you mistake;
No Sir, where Love and Beauty is at stake,
True Lovers of their Swords should make such Use,
As angry Heaven of Threatening Earthquakes does;
To shake whole Kingdoms, make proud Cities fall,
Not to o're-throw one single Criminal.
Had they been Thousands more, and each man there,
More Feirce than Lust, more Valiant than Despair,
I should have Fought till I my Princess freed,
Though I had waded through the Blood I shed.

Abd. Sir, the last words she spoke that reached my Ear,
Were, that she did your passions Rashness fear:
And therefore from me bid you understand,
It Is your kind Mariamnes last Command;
You never should see Morocco more, lest there
You should e^ndanger what she prized too dear.

Muly. H. And am I banished by my Princess too?
Fates ye have done all the ill your Powers could do;
Great Minds the pride of Prodigals have Learned,
At loss of Power or Crowns are unconcerned;
But when they are Misers, it is in Love alone,
Then their Hearts rend to see their Treasure gone.
Condemned never to see Morocco more!
Thus am I doomed to quit all I Adore:
As profane Sinners are from Altars driven,
Banished the Temple to be banished Heaven.
Horror and Tortures now my Jaylours be,
Who paints Damnation needs but Copy me;
For if Mankind the pains of Hell e're knew,
It Is when they lose a Mistress as I do.
Exeun^.
Scene the Third, the Scene a Tent.
Enter Queen Mother and young Queen. Queen. M. No more, dear Madam, Crimalhaz
distrust,
The Emperor has found him kind, and just.
His Entertainments, and his Oaths have proved,
He has not from the paths of Honor moved.
And to appear extravagantly great,
He makes a splendid Mask his this nights Treat.

Y. Queen. I Have been an Actor in such Comic Sport,
When in my Father Taffaletta's Court.
He took delight in the represented Spoils
Of Cyrus, Caesar and Aeneas Toils.

Queen. M. Has Marriage and a Crown so changed your Will,
You could not act your youthful Pastimes still?
Could you your Greatness for one Night persuade
To lay by Majesty for Masquerade?

Y. Queen. I never yet did any thing so ill
I ought to leave, or good that is not still:
I seem inconstant if you think me Proud;
Inconstancy the guilt of the untaught Crowd.
Madam, I dare do any thing, to show
TO a Throne I change of Place, not Passions owe.

Q. Mother. I cannot suspect a goodness so Divine.
Well Madam, since you fancy the Design,
For your Diversion, and your Kings, I Will ask
This Boon, that you would in person grace the Mask.
What Character and Part you shall present,
We will consult of farther in my Tent.
Exeunt.
Enter King and Hametalhas. Scene continues. King. Murdered this Night and
sleeping did you say?


Hamet. Yes, if for your escape Heaven finds no way.


King. My Entertainments since my being here,
All shows of Loyalty and Friendship bear.
But does he in that Garb his guilt Disguise
To take my Life, by such a base Surprise?

Hamet. Goodness may in Men's very Looks be Trackt;
But Traitors rarely look like what they Act:
Nor is this Treason Crimalhaz first Crime:
Your Fathers Blood was sacrificed by Him.

King. By Crimalhaz my Royal Father Killed?


Hamet. That Poison which your Father drank, He filled.


King, Poisoned ^ How was this Murder hid till now,
And by what arts was it disclosed by You?

Enter Queen Mother. Q. M. That were too long to tell: the unhappy Son
This Night too must the Fathers Fortune run.

King. Is there no Policy, nor Art that may
Prevent his Treason?

Q. M. Yes I Have found the Way.
Accept my Council, to preserve my Son,
I Will save your Life, your Empress, and your Throne.

King. But how?


Q. M. To you this Night he does a Mask present,
A smiling Prologue to his black intent.
And the intrigue of this Dramatique sport,
Is Orpheus his descent to Plutoes Court.
To fetch Furidice from the infernal shade;
On this Foundation I Have this Structure laid.
I have in your Name given out --
To shun the trouble of the formal State,
Which does upon your Royal Person wait;
That this nights Pleasure may be freer made
Your Self and Train will be in Masquerade.
Your Death being not designd before you sleep,
Till then you thus will undiscovered keep,
And that your flight may be more safe and free,
Your Self, and your fair Queen shall Masquers be:
You shall act Orpheus, she Furidice.
When by the Masks design by Hells Command,
Furidice is given to Orpheus Hand,
You the last entry shall his Shape assume,
And in dumb show enter in Orpheus Room.
Her then you shall lead out, and in that Shape
Pass through the Guards, and to the Town Escape.

Ham. The Watches Orders are not strict, you may
Without disturbance at all hours find way.

Q. M. And that he may not miss you till you're gone
Beyond his Reach, I, when the Mask is done,
Will keep the Revels up, till you're secured
From his sharp Malice, and his sharper Sword.

King. Bravely contrived.


Q. M. The Maskers, who already are designed
To act those Parts, are Mine: and them I Will bind
To silence: That this safely may be wrought,
She shall to Mine, You to his Tent be brought.
They must be kept asunder for our work.
Aside
Hamet. How many Devils in one Woman lurk!

Aside
King. Madam in vain your Pity bids me Fly,
I am in duty bound to stay and Die;
Knowing how ill your Kindness he will requite,
If he should find you Author of my Flight.

Q. M. Leave that to Providence: but grant he should --
He would not sure attempt a Woman's Blood.
At least when he considers how to was don,
A Mothers Piety to save a Son.

Hamet. I Will lead you where you may all eyes escape,
And privately put on this borrowed shape.

Q. M. But in disguise see not one word you say,
Least speaking you the Emp'rours Voice betray.
Enter Young Queen. Your Empress here? I must instruct her too.


King. I by our Loves conjure you to pursue,
What her kind Counsel orders to be don; to the Y. Queen.
To save your Self, a Husband, and a Crown.
Exit K. and Hametal.
Y. Q. What Task is that so strictly he enjoins?


Q. M. This Night the Traitor Crimalhaz designs
To Ravish You; and when that fact is don,
To kill your Husband and possess his Throne.

Y. Q Oh my Amazement!


Q. M. Being informed what Part
You act, by his accursed Lust enraged,
He with the Masker subt'ly has engaged,
His shape in the last entry to assume,
And seize you in the supposed Orpheus room.
Then will he rudely snatch you from the place,
And basely force You to his foul Embrace.
And at that instant, Your dear Lord shall Bleed
By Murderers appointed for the Deed.
Whilst with the noise of Drums, and Trumpets sound,
Your Outcries, and his Dying Groans are drowned.

Y. Q. Inhumane Monster! such a bloody Fact
No mortal sure can Think, much less dares Act.

Q. M. It Is but too true: But since --
No other force this Treason can withstand;
It is Your Husband, and your Kings command,
When the bold Ravisher seizes You, to take
This brave resolve for your fair Virtues sake;
Where both your Honor, and his life's at stake.
In your Defense t^ act your own Champions part,
With your drawn Dagger stab him to the Heart.

Y. Q. Could Fate --
This Office on no hand but mine confer?
A Queen, a Traitors Executioner.

Q. M. You have no leisure to dispute the deed:
You must resolve with Courage, and with speed.

Y. Q. I Will do it. And though it misbecomes my Hand;
Yet at my Virtues, and my Kings command,
Through all my Veins I feel a manly heat:
And this Heroic act looks brave and Great.
Methinks I hear loud Fame already sing,
She nobly saved her Honor, and her King.

Q. M. Fame in this Deed our Sex will higher prize,
Proving our Arms Victorious, as our Eyes.

Y. Q. Yes Ravisher, meet your intended Prey;
Meet her, but meet your Death too way.
To strike my Dagger home --
Love and Obedience shall that strength supply,
Which Nature does to a female Arm deny.
Exit
Q. M. Let those, whom pious Conscience awes, forbear,
And stop at crimes because they Vengeance fear.
My deeds above their reach, and power aspire:
My Bosom holds more Rage, than all Hell Fire,
Exit
The Mask.


The Scene opened; is presented a Hell, in which Pluto, Proserpine, and other
Women-Spirits appeared seated, attended by Furies; the Stage being filled on
each side with Crimalhaz, Hamet, Q. Mother, and all the Court in Masquerade:
After soft Music Enter Orpheus.

Orpheus Sings. The groans of Ghosts and Sighs of Souls,
Infernal Echoes and the Howles,
Of Tortured Spirits cease:
A gentle Gust
Has all things Hushed;
And Hell in spite of Vengeance is at Peace:
Whilst Ravished by my warbling Strings,
The Vultures moult their Wings;
The Furys from their Heads will s^ake
Each useless Snake;
The Scorpions loose their Stings,
And Hell it self forget their Tyrant Kings.

Pluto Sings. Whence Mortal does thy Courage grow,
To dare to take a Walk so Low?

Orpheus Sings. To Tell thee God, thou art a Ravisher.
No Tears nor Prayer
Your unresisted Will Controules,
Who Commit force on Virtue, Rapes on Souls.

Pluto Sings. Dares a weak Animal of Mortal Race,
Affront a God to his Face;
And of a Crime Impeach a Deity?
Thy Breath has Damned Thee, thou shall Die.
For your God and Honors sakes,
Unloose your twisted crests of snakes:
Into his Breast those swift Tormentors fling,
And his tortured Entrals Sting.

Proserpine Sings. Oh Sir, his fatal Doom recall,
Dispel your furious Anger;
Let not such noble worth your Victim fall:
Be kind both to a Lover and a Stranger.

Attendant Sings. Oh Pardon, Pardon what his height of Love discovers,
Rage is a venial Sin in Lovers.

Proserpine Sings. Then gentle Stranger tell;
What Fortune has befell,
That brings a Lover down to Hell?

Orpheus Sings. I have a Mistress in your Sphere,
Forced from my Arms
By deaths Alarm's:
My Martyred Saint brings me a Pilgrim here,
My fair Eurdice my fair Eurdice.

Proserpine Sings. Unhappy Wanderer which is she? Oh which is she?

Orpheus Sings. If a gentle Ghost you hear,
Complaining to the Winds, and sighing to the Air;
Breathing an unregarded Prayer:
If She in faint and murmuring Whispers Cry,
Orpheus, Orpheus, Oh I Die,
Snatched from Heaven and thee,
Oh that is She.
Oh take me down to Her or send Her back to me.

Pluto Sings. Shall Lovers Idle Prayers disturb my Ear?
Mortal we'v'e serious business here.
Your tiresome Story pleads in vain;
Be gone.

Proserpine Sings. But with thee thy fair Treasure take,
Releast by Love from that Eternal Chain,
Which destined Kings and Conquerours cannot break.

Pluto Sings. No, fond Man, no, who comes within my Power,
From Death and Hell returns no more.

Proserpine Sings. If Hell's str^ct Laws have never alt'red bin,
Let us be kind and now begin.
Revoke her angry Doom,
That when on Earth they come;
To the wondering World he in soft Aires may tell,
Mercy as well as Justice Rules in Hell.

Pluto Sings. Your love does with Success implore:
Conduct Her in, but in such State,
As fits the Court of Fate;
And to his Hand the fairest Guest restore,
That Ever Landed on the Stygian Shore.
Proserpine Exit, and Reenters with the young Queen Dressed for Euridice
Orpheus. For this sig^al Grace to the World I Will declare,
In Heaven Earth and Hell Loves Power is the Same.
No Law there nor here, no God so Severe,
But Love can Repeal, and Beauty can Tame.

Chorus. For This Signal Grace to the World I Will declare.
In Heaven etc.

Here a Dance is performed, by several infernal Spirits, who ascend from under
the Stage; the Dance ended, the King Offers to snatch the Young Queen from the
Company, who instantly draws her Dagger, and stabs him. Y. Q. Take that
Ravisher.

stabs Him.
Q. M. Hold.


King. By my Morenas hand!

undisguising himself.
Y. Q. Muly Labas!

Faints away, and falls into the hands of some Women; who run in to her
Assistance.
Here all the Masquers undisguise, and run in to the Kings assistance. Q. M. My
Son k^l'd by Her hand!


Crim. Call my Physicians. Bid my Guards appear.
The Emperor Stabbed, the Queen his Murderer!

King. Have I for this a too fair Saint admired?
And with a more than common Love inspired,
Raised my bold Thoughts so high t'engross your Charms;
And bounded my Ambition in your Arms?
And mu^t I die as deposed Angels fell;
'Cause they aspired, and loved their Heaven too well?
My death Morena a less pain will be,
Than it is to think I owe my death to Thee.
Have I less kindness from your Hands than Eyes,
For they have given me gentler wounds than these?
Your hand, it is true, has your Adorer Ki'ld.
'T has reached his Heart, but not the Love it held.
Your Image cannot from my Soul retire;
My Lov's Immortal though my Life expire.
Dies.
Here the Young Queen being revived before the last words of the King, turns
and kneels to him. Y. Q. Oh my dear Lord! Stay gentle soul! Oh stay!
Rude Death stand off: his life's too great a Prey!
But Oh he is gone. --
His ravished Soul is mounting to the Skies:
But I Will send mine t'o'^etake it as it flies.
Offers to stab her self, but is detained by Crimalhaz; and the Dagger snatched
from her.
Y. Q. Why does your cruelty my hand debar,
From being a Traitors Executioner?
Good, Gentle, Kind, give me the Dagger back;
For mine -- for His -- For Heaven -- and Justice sake.
Cannot my Tears and Prayers your heart overcome?
If my Request appear too burdensome,
Grant but this one -- that pointed Steel restore,
And I Will not live to ask you any more.

Q. M. Oh cruel Queen, What has your fury done?
That made You lose a Husband, me a Son;
This Realm a King, the World a Virtue, grown
Too fit for Heaven, but not to go so soon.

Y. Q. Mother it does a much less wonder seem,
That I Have killed him, than that you blame the Crime.
Was it not You that armed me to this guilt,
Told me I should a Ravishers blood have split?
No 'twas by your design my Husband fell;
You in this Masque have over-acted Hell.

Q. M. Alas! she Raves. See how her rage begins,
But madness always ushers in great Sins.
This is no News to that which she has don;
She was distracted ere the Masque begun.
Alone I saw her in a posture set,
As if she thought of something High -- and Great --
Strai't with a more than common rage inflamed,
She moved -- star'd -- walked -- stormed -- raged -- cursed -- raved and damned.
With a distorted look she tore her hair --
Unsheathed her Dagger -- and gave Wounds to The Air --
Her face discolored grew to a deep red,
As if her looks presaged that blood she shed.
Then with an infant Rage, more soft, and mild,
She pla^d with madness, leaped* sung, danced, and smiled.
Why did not Heaven this Mystery unfold? --
Her frantic Rage, his Death too plain foretold.
Had I foreknown you did this blow design:
To strike his He^t, you should have pierced through mine.

Y. Q. Think you there is a God, or have a Soul,
That on my score dare such false crimes enroule?
Is It not enough that my dear Lord I flew,
But must be Actor and Designer too?
No, barbarous stepmother, 'twas you alone
Guided that hand, that killed your King, and Son.

Q. M. Observe how idly her wild fancies walk,
But she who acts so ill, as ill may talk.
Who'd think a thing so young, so soft, and Fair,
Could be so kind a Husbands Murderer?
But see when Heaven commands its gifts away,
The Wits and Senses lost, the Soul may stray.

Y. Q. Oh perjured Woman, how can you invent
This feigned disguise to appear innocent?

Q. M. It Is pity Fate such Beauty should misplace,
So stained a Heart, and yet so fair a Face.

Y. Q. Impostor, speak (if Conscience have a Seat,
In Traitors breasts.) was it not You whose Cheat,
And Cunning did my fatal hand engage,
At once to a Murder, and a Sacrilege?
To kill my King, and rob mankind of more
Virtue, than ere dwelt in one Breast before.

Q. M. Divert thy Frenzy Child, some other way.
Oh, my dear Daughter, try if you can Pray.

Y. Q. How she disowns that blood which she has spilt!
Treason with her is but a modest guilt.

Q. M. Our presence will but raise her Passion higher,
T'allay her frantic Rage, let us retire.
But of your Queen see that strict care you keep,
Wait her to her repose, try if she would Sleep.
Sleeping, some Angel may be kind,
And in a Dream t'her thoughts her guilt present,
That when this fit is over she may Repent.

Here the Attendants carry off the King, over whom the Young Queen Weeps. Y. Q.
Heavens since from You the power of Monarchs springs,
Sure you were bound to have had more care of Kings.

Exeunt all but Q. Mother, Crimalhaz and Hametalhaz. Q. M. Now in her Death we
must some way invent,
That of his blood we may seem Innocent.
First let her Face with some deep poisonous Paint,
Discolored to a horrid black be stained.
Then say 'twas as a mark of Vengeance given,
That she was blasted by the hand of Heaven.
And as a public Spectacle exposed,
Let her be in a burning pile enclosed.
And whilst the clouded Air reeks with the smoke,
Hire a magician by his art to invoke
A Train of Devils, who in dreadful forms,
Waited by Earthquakes, Thunder, Winds, and Storms,
Shall rove in the Air, and with loud echoes houle;
As if they watched to seize her flying Soul.
Thus will men think, 'twas only she that framed
This Treason, and that for the deed she is Damned.

Crim. Bring back the Queen -- E're I see Justice don,
I with Morena will converse alone.
Enter Guards leading in the Young Queen. Great Empress stay, and hear my Story
too,
How much I for an injured Queen dare do.

Discourses in whisper with the Queen. Ham. The Emp'rours acting of the
Masquers part,
His Murder, and the management, your Art;
And her feigned madness to our wish succeed.

Q. M. And more than this to have secured the Deed,
Had not Her hand struck home to back her Crime,
The Surgeons I had bribed to poison him.
It Is not the blood of Sons nor Monarchs, shakes
Those resolutions which my Courage takes.
Over Fear and Virtue too, I have this odds:
My W^ll's my King, my Pleasures are my Gods.

Ex^nt Q. M. and Ham. Manent Crimalhaz and Y. Queen, Crim. Since I Am a Monarchs
Heir, may I not own,
An equal Title in his Love as Throne?
If you will accept so mean an Offering,
You shall not want a Lover nor a King.
My kindness shall supply --

Y. Q. Hold Do you mean,
This o^er'd service to an injured Queen?
How Sir? is my dead King so far removed,
That I am past remembrance that I loved?
Admit new Courtships, and with the same Eye,
Behold a murdered Sovereigns Ghost stand by.
I thought your profer'd kindness had been this,
To Have sentenced me to mix my blood with his.
To Have told me I should Die, and dying have
The Happiness of sleeping in His Grave.

Crim. Death is guilts due. Yours is a gentler Doom;
You may enjoy my Throne, but not his Tomb.
I know your Innocence and Virtue. You
This fatal Deed from some false Copy drew.
And I begin to think your Mothers Heart,
Has Poison in it, what-ere her looks impart.
But to revenge a Murdered King* I Will ^ound
This Treason, till the utmost Depth be found:
And to such pains the Authors I Will condemn,
That to the World I Will your lost Fame redeem.

Y. Q. A Kings Revenge so brave an act will be,
That you will at once Oblige both Heaven and Me.
And his blessed Spirit in the Skies must owe,
A Debt, which he has left unpaid below.

Crim. That trifling score one smile from you will quit.
And sure you are so kind to pay his Debt.

Y. Q. My Thanks are granted e're your Suite is heard.


Crim. I must have more than Thanks for a reward.


Y. Q. The Glory of the deed requites the pains.


Crim. But Glory only in your Favor Reigns.


Y. Q. That Breath I cannot, must not understand.


Crim. Love needs but little art to be explained.


Y. Q. Love! stop that barbrous Breath. In a new Love*
I stab his Image, and profane his Dust.

Crim. But not to love your Champion is unjust.


Y. Q. Your Service I accept, your Love take back.


Crim. None hate the giver who the present take.
Why cannot your Heart --

Y. Q. -- Why cannot your Arm revenge
A King, without my Heart paid in exchange?
Know though you basely trade with Loyalty,
My Love my Kings revenge does over-buy.
Go, Mercenary man, I will resign
His Vengeance to the hand of Heaven, not thine.

Crim. Let such harsh words be by tame Lovers borne,
My Passion is too rough to bear your scorn

Y. Q. And must my Heart at such a price be sold?
Thy Seat Usurpt before thy Blood is cold?
This was thy Right, and though thy Death I gave,
Who loved the Martyr will the Relics save.
My Heart by none but thee was ever won.
I Will guard the Trophy, though the Conqu'rour's gone. Aside
But stay -- This Grant is to revenge thy Blood,
And on that score no Offering's too good.
I should scorn Love, Life, Honor, Empires, -- all
To strike their Heads whose Treason wrought thy fall. Can you on no less terms
my King revenge?

Crim. No second Thoughts my Resolution change.
Since all I act is only for your sake,
Love must accept those offers Love does make.

Y. Q. Well Sr, my Heart is won. Your Seige remove,
I conde^cend to any thing -- but Love. Retreating from him.
Resign that Heart that is His --
Heavens, shall I live to act so great a Sin!
To right a Monarch must I damn a Queen?
Be gone! I hate thee now worse than before.
Descend to thee? No, I that Thought abhor.
And though his Blood does loud for Vengeance call;
I know ^ee'd scorn his Queen so low should fall.
Though I have lost a King, I Am not so poor;
The Temple razed, the Ruins I Will adore.

Crim. My Love's too fierce long Seiges to attend:
You Have lost ^ Servant, and your King a Friend.
offers to go.
Y. Q. Stay -- No, be gone I scorn thee -- Yet Sir stay,
Hopes of Revenge so much my passions sway;
That what would I not do for Justice sake.
Where the assault's so strong, here Conqu'rour take --
Gives her hand
Crim. Oh my best hopes --

Kisses her Hand.
Y. Q. My -- friendship -- give my Love! --
My Love my Sovereigns Right I rate above
The Ransom of a world; and if thy hand
Does not perform what his loud wrongs demand;
Thou art his Murderer.

Crim. But when you see that murderer wear his Crown,
You shall too late repent your haughty Frown.
Offers to go.
Y. Q. Hold, ere the pleasures of Revenge I Will want,
Invader, here what e're you ask I Will grant.

Crim. Oh Charming Excellence!


Y. Q. But Sir.
Loving too soon, I shall convince the Faith
Of Men, that I designed my husbands Death.

Crim. It Is true, some marks of sorrow should be worn
To please the World; I*le give you time to mourn.

Y. Q. When you have appeased his Ghost, and the angry Powers
Above; and to his sacred Memory
My last debt's paid, all that I am is yours.

Crim. My Vow's the same. First to Revenge I Will fly,
With Traitors Blood I Will entertain your Eye.
E're you're my Queen, and wear a second Crown,
I Will build a Scaffold first, and then a Throne.
Exit
Y. Q. I Have found the way. Oh my dear Lord, though now
Death does embrace what to my Arms is due;
I Will keep --
My Vow to Him, and Love to Thee Entire.
No second King shall to this Throne aspire. Points to her Breast.
To Thee my last Debts payment shall be this,
I Will die -- and dead all that I am is His.
In thy Revenge when I Have Triumphant stood,
On Traitors necks amid'st a Scene of Blood;
Morena's hand shall wash the stain She wears;
As Condemned men turn Executioners.
To expiate thy blood I Will let out mine,
And triumph in my fall, who mourn for thine.
Then with a gentle gale of dying sighs,
I Will breath my flying Soul into the Skies.
Winged by my Love I will my passage steer,
Nor can I miss my way when You shine there.
Exit.
The Fifth Act.
Enter Crimalhaz attended as King. Crim. THough on the Blood of Kings my Throne
I Have built,
The World my Glory sees, but not my Guilt.
Mysterious Majesty best fits a Throne.
They Virtuous seem whose Vices are unknown.
Men have adored and have made Offerings
To unknown Gods, why not to unknown Kings.
Enter Ham.
Ham. Your Guards are set, your forces on the Walls,
And in the Streets are ranked in fighting forms;
Expecting when the martial Summon calls,
And Taffaletta this proud City storms.
For our last Scouts which newly are come in,
Tell us the assault will in few hours begin.

Crim. I thank him ^or this War he has begun,
The number of my Foes enhance my Crown.
It does a worth on Kings as Beauties set,
To have our Rivals numerous and Great. --
But is the imprisoned Princess, whom your Sword
Ravished from Muly Hamets hand, secured
From the Worlds knowledge --

Ham. Royal Sir I have --
The pride to be her Jailer -- and her Slave.
Aside.
Crim. Muly Hamet and Mariamne are the last
Of the Imperial Race, that have not past
To the other World, to make me room in this.
But though your hand did of his murder miss:
However his exile has restrained his Power:
And her I have concealed within the Tower.
But should she be discovered, and I found
Her Jailer, her restraint would horrid sound,
I am not safe then till I see her Dead,
You therefore shall present me with her Head.

Aside. Ham. Mariamnes Head presented by my Hand!
I Would first strike his that gives me that Command.
For since that Beauteous Prisoner was my charge,
Her charming Image did my Soul enlarge.
At the approach of so Divine a Guest,
I Have shook my late familiars from my Breast;
The thoughts of Mischeifs, Villainy and Blood;
By her fair Eyes inspired I dare be good.
Exit.
Enter Queen Mother. Q. M. Though your De^igns have met so great Success,
Do not forget I was your Patroness;
And she to whom you made this solemn Vow, to Crim.
That I should share that Throne I raised you to.

Crim. The highest Seat in all but Monarchs Breasts
Should be by th'high'st of Passions, Love, Possessed.
But Kings in so sublime a Region Move:
They have Concerns that must take place of Love.
My Subjects call for Vengeance, and I must
To the dead King before my Love be Just.
Then give me leave to prosecute his Death,
First wear the Cypress, then the Myrtle Wreath.

Q. M. Bring in the Queen --
If She delay our Love,
Let out her Blood and those weak Bars Remove.
Enter Guards bringing in the Young Queen. Muly Labas his Queen and Murderer,
To Expiate his Death you are Summoned here.
To prove how much the World by you has lost,
And what Atonement's due to a Monarch's Ghost.

Y. Q. Yes Madam, when great Princes Die, I Would have
Their Majesty kept up beyond the Grave.
Such streams of Blood should for their Murders pay;
Their Ghosts should have a Train as great as they.

Q. M. See Sir she begs her Death as a Reward:
Use Charity, do not her Bliss retard.
to Crimal. aside
Crim. In Common Murders Blood for Blood may pay:
But when a Martyred Monarch dies, we may
His Murderers Condemn; But that is not all:
A Vengeance hangs over Nations where they Fall.

Q. M. No Tedious Introductions to her Death:
Good Sir make haste, more business and less Breath.

Crim. Who wears his Crown can best defend his Cause.
I Will on his Murderer Execute such Laws,
The Rigor of my Justice shall declare,
How high I rate that Majesty I wear --

Q. M. No Prologues to her Death, let it be done;
I could have killed ten Queens while you are judge One.

Crim. Therefore to prosecute his Death --


Q. M. Speak Home.


Crim. I on his Murderer must Pronounce a Doom --


Q. M. No Mercy, be Severe.


Crim. -- As may Express,
I cannot do more, nor can his Blood ask less.
Guards, I on You that Office do Confer,
Obey my Orders, seize This Murderer. Here the Guards seize the Q. M.
Thy poisoned Husband, and thy murdered Son;
This injured Empress, and Moroccoes Throne,
Which thy accursed Hand so often has shook,
Deserves --
A blow more Fierce than Justice ever struck.
Q. M.
Q. M. Inhumane Villain, Monster, Devil --

Struggling in the Guards.
Crim. Silence her Fury, Stop her poisoned Breath;
And check her growing outrage by her Death.
But since to Me you have been so kind to impart,
Some Favors, and a Title in your Heart:
In Gratitude and Honor, you shall have
This Mercy, to walk gently to your Grave.
Bid my Physicians a strong Draught prepare,
And leave her Execution to their Care.

Q. M. Ungrateful Slave!


Crim. Go -- I Will not hear her Plead,
No Arguments shall save a Traitors Head.
All his Revenge demanded, I have done; to the Y. Queen.
Perform your Vow, accept my Love and Throne.

Q. M. Hold Sir -- I ask not Life; such acts of Grace
Your Bounty may on little Sinners pass.
My Sins are but too Capital, -- My Son,
And Poisoned Husband -- What have I not don?
So many Treasons and such bloody Rage,
Would sink an Empire and defame an Age.
No sound but Deaths harsh Name, my Soul could Daunt:
Now all my Sins my frighted Conscience Haunt.
Guilt only thus to guilty Minds appears:
As Sirens do to drowning Mariners:
Seen only by their Eyes whose Deaths are Nigh.
We rarely see our Crimes before we Die.
And now they 're seen, I Am with such Horror struck;
They seem so large, I dare not Upwards look.
Where Is all my Confidence, and Courage driven?
Guilt never grows bashful till it thinks of Heaven.
Though I want Power to ask for Mercy there,
I will look down, and beg my Pardon here. Kneels to the Y. Q.
Fair Innocence, I for your Pardon sue,
TO a condemned Traitor, but a Mother too:
Let her repenting Sighs her Griefs impart;
Who thus -- Offers her Tears -- and thus -- thy Heart.
Stabs the Young Queen. Die Rival -- and Die Traitor -- Runs to stab
Crimalhaz, but being stopped by the Guards stabs her self.
-- Then Die Thou.

Crim. Morena Killed!


Q. M. Yes Sir, and I Would have don the same for You.
But since my Dagger has so feebly don,
Missing thy Breast I Have sent it to my own.
If some kind Devil had but took my part,
I'had pierced thy Bosom, as I Have don thy Heart*
Curse on weak Nature which my Rage unmanned,
A Masculine heart linkt with a Female Hand.
My Stars had been more just had they designed
Me less of Hell, or less of Womankind.

Y. Q. T'express my Gratitude, thus low I Bow: to the Q. M.
Murder was never an act of Grace till now.
Your Courteous Arm retrived mine from a Guilt,
Morenas Hand, Morenas Blood had spilt;
Had not that stroke more kindly been decreed.
You never did act a Mother, till this Deed:
Here -- I perform my Vow -- To Crimalhaz giving him her Hand.
When I Have resigned,
My Soul to Him -- take -- all I leave behind.
Thy death, Dear Saint; revenged, and mine so near,
Such charming objects to my Thoughts appear:
In hopes I shall meet Thee, my Joy's so high,
Methinks I visit Heaven, before I die.
My mourning Soul durst never one thought incline,
To sense of Joy, till it drew nigh to Thine.
Heaven's Blisses are a prize Love only Wins,
Where my Life ends my happiness Begins.
Dies.*
Q. M. Is this your Thanks for all her Love has done!
Who staked her Soul, to raise Thee to a Throne.
Durst you Perfidious Villain, with one Breath,
Pronounce Her Coronation and my Death?
But I Have removed that Rival: Thanks to Me;
Her wandering Soul is mounted to a Cloud,
But you may Court her still -- in Heaven -- if she
Can hear so far, and you can talk so loud.

Crim. Though against Me your Rage had just pretense;
Yet how durst you assault such Innocence?

Q. M. Let single Murders, Common Hands Suffice:
I Scorn to kill less than whole Families.
In all my Race, I nothing find that is ill;
But that I Have Barren been; and wanted still
More Monarchs to dethrone, more Sons to Kill.
My Actions are scarce worth the Memory,
And I am yet too Innocent to Dye.
Had but my Hand performed thy Murder too,
I should meet Death with smiles upon my Brow.
But O^ my Spirit's Faint -- yet I have Breath,
Enough to make a Prayer before my Death.
If there be such a place as yields abodes,
To Souls that scorn the company of Gods:
May I in Hell hell's greatest Torments bear,
Provided it is thy Doom to meet me there.
Dies
Crim. Infection stick upon thy blasted name,
Thou Foil to Monsters and thy Sexes shame. to Q. M.
But here my Heart to Pity does Incline: to Y. Queen.
Till now I smiled at blood, but sigh for Thine.
Virtue farewell, I could bewail thy Fate --
But it is a Cowards Crime to grieve too late.
Fury's the Mourning garb great Spirits wear,
From this day for thy sake no Lives I Will spare.
I will send ^housands to attend thy shade,
Lust made me King, Love has a Tyrant made.
Remove those breathless objects, those dumb shows
Of Majesty; now I Will for deeds prepare:
This morning must*begin and end a War.
Kind Taffalet does for my presence Call,
I am invited to his Funeral.
The little Champion with impatience waits,
To beg a Tomb before Morocco's Gates.
And rather than his ling^ing Fate delay,
I Will with my Army take a walk that way.
His heat of blood, and lust of Crowns shall cease;
Lasht to a Calm and cooled into a Peace.

Enter Hametalhaz in have, a sound of Trumpets heard from within. Ham Your
Army's routed ere the War's begun,
The City taken, and your Empire won.
And this surprising Conquest is not gained,
^y Taffalets but Muly Hamets Hand.

Crim. Muly Hamet from his banishment returned!


Ham. Yes, at the News of the Emperors Death Concerned;
That his great Master was by you betrayed:
He came to Taffalet, and frankly made
A proffer of his Sword: which brave demand*
Was by the generous King thus Entertained.
Welcome brave Friend; Muly Hamet was never taught
To back, but head those Armies where he fought.
That Fame and Glory then which waits on thee,
Shall never be lessened when you Fight for me.
With me, brave Youth, thou shall my Forces lead,
And fight my Equal in my Army's head:
When to your startled squadrons he appears
Taffalets General, who late was theirs.
Their former love renewed, such Changes wrought,
That they forgot the Cause in which they Fought.
A sudden Clamor Ecchoed through the Throng,
Which Muly Hamet, Muly Hamet, Rung.
By their own hands the Gates were straight pulled down,
And he in Triumph marched into the Town.
They paid to him what to their King they owe;
And proudly now aloud proclaim him so.

Crim. Draw up my Forces, Rouse my Guard, I Will try,
Who Is the succesful Rebel, he, or I.
I Will write my Vengeance in whole streams of Blood,
Fortune take your free Choice, be ill or good;
I dare your Worst: --
Yet I deserve to be your Favorite.
Tyrants are kind, to those they cannot Fright.
Exeunt.
Enter Muly Hamet, and Attendants with drawn Swords, after a sound of Trumpets.
Muly H. My Cause subdues more than my Sword, the Town
Does at my Feet their prostrate Arms lay down.
Conquest sounds best, and Glory brightest shines,
Where Loyalty, not Force, the Laurel wins.
Lead to the Palace, through the Guards I Will break,
And to th'Usurper I Will in Thunder speak.
To the infernal Shades I Will send a Ghost,
Stained with more Sins than all their Hell can boast.
His Blood, dear Prince, shall pay for shedding thine.
No Cause so just, no Rage so fierce as mine;
Where Loyalty and Love the fuel bring,
A Ravished Mistress and a Murd'red King.
Exeunt. The Trumpets continue Sounding, and dashing of Swords is heard from
within.
Enter Crimalhaz, Hametalhaz, and Attendants, with drawn Swords, as pursued.
Crim. And Muly Hamet Fighting in their Head.
Ham. Fly quickly, Sir, see where your Guards lie Dead.
The furious Muly Hamet leads 'em on,
Whose Fortune, and whose Sword has Wonders done.
Your Guards hewed down, He by no Force withstood;
Comes now this way to sacrifice your Blood:
He with such Fears your shaking Palace fills,
That with the Horror that he brings he Kills.

Crim. In this long Story, all I can descry,
Is, my Crown's going, and my Death draws nigh.
No, it is no common Thunder strikes me Dead:
I Have a Retreat yet left to save my Head. Trumpets sounding.
I by this Hand my ^inking Throne will stay,
And reign to Morrow, though I fly to day.
Exeunt.
The Scene Changes.
Enter Muly Hamet and Abdelcador Attended. Abdel. Kind Taffalet --
Concerned to owe this Conquest to the Charms
Of your Victorious Presence, not his Arms:
Scorning to wear that which his Arms never Won,
Frankly Surrenders you Morocco's Crown.

Muly H. Well generous Prince, this offered Crown --
With Thanks and Envy shall Accepted be;
I Will be a Monarch to act deeds like Thee.
Here Mariamne appears from the Balcone above. My Princess, the bright Charms
those Eyes convey,
Complete th'imperfect Triumphs of this Day:
It does a larger Happiness afford,
To have a Mistress, than a Crown Restored.
Here at your Feet, kind Providence has thrown
Your banished Lover, and your Ravished Crown.
Your influence, and my Arms so happy proved;
Th'usurpers Scepter's to your Hand removed:
His blood, when he his forfeit Head dares show,
Shall pay what to your Brothers Dust I owe.

Enter to her Crimalhaz into the Balcone. Mar. My Jaylour here. -- --


Crim. Though I am fallen so low:
My fortune lost, I may a Beggar grow.
This Mercy does on generous Spirits wait,
You always pity the Unfortunate --
And on that score I Will beg one modest boon;
I Will only ask you to restore my Crown.

Muly H. Thanks Heaven, the only man whose Head I want.


C^im. Do not thank Heaven, for what It cannot grant.
My Head, fond man, is for thy reach too high;
I from this Castle thy weak arms defy.
Immured within the walls of this strong Tower,
I am so safely Guarded from thy Power;
That I dare tell you, yes and boldly too,
This Head you threaten shall be Crowned by you.

Muly. H. What means this Impudence --


Crim. To end the Strife --
I ask a Crown a Ransom for her Life.
Draws and points his Sword at Mariamnes Breast.
Muly. H. Here I my baffled hopes of Vengeance lose:
To right my King my Mistress I Expose.

Crim. I know your Passion has a tie so great,
That for her sake you will quit The Imperial Seat.
I knew your Virtue is so strong, that if
You swear you will protect my ^hrone and Life,
You Will keep your Vow: Swear then by all those Powers
Which the Religious World fears and Adores,
To quit your Claim to Empire; Swear You Will make
Me Monarch in that Throne which youl'e forsake,
And with your Blood you will guard that Crown you give;
If so, your Mistress shall have leave to Live.
Though you quit Empires, you shall meet these charms
To sleep, and dream of Kingdoms in her Arms.
If not, prepare to see her amourous Breast,
Give entertainment to this Iron Guest.
To this your Answer.

Muly. H. Savage Infidel,
Monster, there is not a hand on this side Hell,
That dares attempt that Deed; there is not one Dart
In Heaven, that would not strike the Murd'rers Heart,
Before his hand should touch her sacred Breast.

Crim. Since you are with such Heavenly Faith possessed,
To think sh'has Champions in the Skies; I Will try,
Who Is the best Executioner, Heaven or I.

Muly. H. Hold Barbr'ous, Cruel, hold your murdering hands,
Think on the Vengeance which that Crime attends:
Think what a fierce Revenge I for her sake,
Will on my Princess bloody Murderer take.

Mar. Hold Muly Hamet, let his Rage go on.
Can You but think of fear when I have none?

Crim. To^tures and Wracks will prove a vain design:
That hand that sheds her Blood shall let out mine.
Speak quickly then, e*re words will come too late:
My Crown restored, you will yet redeem her Fate.

Muly H. My Laurels, Crowns, and Empires are all yours.


Crim. Swear then.


Muly. H. I swear by the Eternal Powers,
For her Lives ransom I this offering make:
Morocco and your Crown I Will give you back.
To my last blood I will your life defend,
In Wars your Champion, and in Peace your friend.

Crim. A silent Grotto, and a shady Grove,
Are far more proper scenes than Thrones for Love.
And though your hand and hers no Scepter bears,
You Lovers may get Kings to be my Heirs.

Mar. I Will bind my Vow by the same powers you swore.
I Will to a Thousand Deaths my Life expose,
Before I will one Inch of Empire lose.
It Is not, bold Slave, my threatened death can make To Crim.
My female fears my Right t'a Throne forsake.
Heir to a Crown, though you so fierce have been,
Mariamne scorns to die less than a Queen.

Crim. So brisk young Champion! Have at thy Heart.


Muly. H. Stay Sir. Oh cruel Mariamne can you part
From Love and Life to rob the world and me?

Mar. No Muly Hamet, a worse stain 'twill be
To have my Crown resigned, than my Blood spilt,
I of the two will choose the lesser guilt.
Fame never shall in Histories express,
Born to be great I yielded to be less.

Muly. H. If you aspire to greatness, that I Will grant:
Your Muly Hamet Empires cannot want,
Whilst he possesses You, and wears a Sword.
And if our Africa does no room afford;
I*le travel then to some remoter Sphere,
Till I find out new Worlds, and Crown you there.

Mariam. It Is Honor and not Crowns that I esteem.
And should I basely yield my Throne to him;
My Name and Story would but poorly sound,
Who raised a Murderer, and a Rebel Crowned.
No, if at worst I by this Traitor Dye;
Adore my Name, and love my Memory.
Yes Mighty Man, perform this Valiant Part, To Crim.
Bravely and boldly pierce a Female Heart:
Let story boast, you this great deed fulfilled;
Your manly hand an unarmed Woman kil*d.

Crim. Since you at scorn and daring are so good,
I Will feel your Pulse, and try your heat of Blood.
Guards fire the Castle.
And while that burns I Will a new shape assume:
I Will Sport and Revel with more pleasing Charms,
Than Nero when he sung to burning Rome.
I Will sing my Funeral Obsequies in these Arms;
I Will Ravish her --
Then throw my self and her into the Fire,
And arm in arm together we will Expire.
Burn, Burn the Tower.

Enter Hametalhaz, in the Belcone with Guards, who seizes Crimalhaz and
disarmes Him. Ham. Before this Tower takes Fire, you will want a Head.


Crim. Hametalhaz stand off; am I betrayed!


Ham. I have no time to answer your demands:
Deliver him to Muly Hamets Hands.
The highest Triumph my weak Arm e're gained,
Is to present this Princess to his Hand.
Crim. is forced down by the Guards.
Muly. H. Her life preserved and he the instrument!
What Miracle of Honor has fate sent?
Sure Heaven acts Wonders! Wonders, no it is none --
What have th'high'r Powers to do but to take care,
Of so much Virtue and a Face so Fair?
Enter Crimalhaz below, led in by Guards. See him Conveyed to Execution
straight:
He as he rose in Blood in Blood shall ^et.

Crim. Since I must die, and die Condemned by you:
Hear Heaven, for I never troubled you till now.
So may my body rot when I am Dead,
Till my rank dust has such Contagions bred:
My Grave may dart forth Plagues, as may strike death
Through the infected Air where thou draw'st breath.
Others may fancy pleasures more divine,
I know not where: this shall in Hell be mine;
To think when dead I yet can Death Convey,
And what my Arm cannot act my Ashes may.
Exit Guarded with Abdelcador.
Enter Hametalhaz Leading Mariamne. Muly. H. My dear and best Life, welcome. By
thy Hand,
My Crown, my Happiness and Heaven regained.
What mystic Blessing does my fate pursue,
To see her Saved and see her Saved by you?

Ham. Oh do not at this mystery admire:
Nothing is strange which Beauty does inspire.
To punish Treason and preserve a Throne,
Are due to Mariamnes Eyes alone.
When to his hand I gave that beauteous prize,
Designed for his ambitions Sacrifice:
When her hard fate, and her bright Charms I saw,
These did my homage, that my pity draw.
Something so kind I to that face did pay,
That to Serve her I could my trust betray.
Had I ^een born a Prince, and, in that name
Like You, Erected Trophys to her fame:
In all things then I had your Rival proved,
And confidently told her that I Loved.
But wanting worth I wanted words, and chose
This way my speechless Passion to disclose.
I would defend what I could never enjoy,
And break all bars that did her Peace destroy.
But I too late resolved a flight so high:
I cut my wings before I thought to fly:
Too quick to wo^k, too weak to prop her Fall.
My Penitence could not my Sins recall,
Till this blessed moment and your influence gave
Her dangers and his insolence a Grave.

Muly. H. Such Honor and such Love! I am Conquered here,
My Deeds and Passions are below thy Sphere.
But as your Worth, your Power shall out-reach mine:
Subjects my Homage pay, but Monarchs thine.
Embraces him,
Ham. Though Heaven by me her threatened life secures,
And saves her blood to be allied to yours.
Despair, not Friendship, yields to that hard task;
I bravely give what I durst never Ask.
Hold Heart while I this Treasure do resign;
And Crown her Bliss with that which ruins mine,
I perish at her feet whom I adore,
The greatest Wracks are nearest to the shore.

Mariam. Such Language may by Chastest ears be heard,
Your Love I must admire, and he reward.
A Nobler Passion Story never writ,
That turned a Traitor to a Proselyte.
Thou best of Converts,

Muly. H. And of Rivals too,
Sir, as a Tribute to your Virtue due,
All Honors Merit in a Court can meet,
And a kind Monarchs Love, lie at your Feet.

Ham. Hold, that great act of Mercy must not pass,
Let not your first days Reign a King disgrace.
Of such high Bo^nty I Am unworthy still:
My good Acts have not yet out-weighed my ill.
No --
To some far Country,
I from those Eyes for ever will remove,
I cannot stand the sight of hopeless Love.
Pilgrims, whose Zeal's more blessed though less Divine,
Go meet their Saints: but I must fly from mine.
Offers to go.
Muly. H. Stay I conjure you; stay you shall, you must:
You Have made me Great; Let me not be unjust.
Speak what Command, what Power, what Crown you will choose.

Ham. Crowns, no, such little Favors I refuse.
None but the place you hold my wish can bound.
But since I have your free offer to be Crowned,
It is accepted: I a King will be,
And of my Reign make this my first Decree,
This Criminals Banishment, and to pursue
My state, a Conqueror and a King like you;
To what er'e place my wandering steps incline,
I Will fancy Empires for I Will think her mine.
Exit Ham.


Here the Scene opens, and Crimalhaz appears cast down on the Gaunches, being
hung on a Wall set with spikes of Iron. Enter again Abdelcador.

Abd. See the reward of Treason; Death's the thing
Distinguishes th'Usurper from the King.
Kings are immortal, and from Life remove,
From their Lower Thrones to wear new Crowns above:
But Heaven for him has scarce that bliss in store:
When an Usurper dies he raigns no more.

Muly. H. My Justice ended; now I Will meet a Crown:
Crowns are the Common Prizes I have won.
Those are Entayld on Courage. No it is You
Can only yield a Bliss that is great and new.
The Charm of Crowns to Love but dull appears:
Rargning's a whole life's toil, the work of Years.
In love a day, an hour, a minut's Bliss,
Is all Flight, Rapture, Flame, and Ecstasies.
Love's livelyer Joys so quick and active move;
An Age in Empire's but an Hour in Love.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
THis Play like Country Girl come up to Town,
Longed t'appear fine, in Jewels, and rich Gown;
And so,
Hoping it is Pride you Courtiers would support,
To please You, lost its Maidenhead at Court.
Pufft with the glittering of your gaudy Charms;
It feared to meet no danger in your Arms.
And though the harshest Censures be its due;
Yet kinder usage it deserves from you.
A generous Gallant though tired and Cloyed,
Should still speak well of what he has enjoyed.
Should you damn this you would your selves reproach,
It Is barbarous to defame what you debauch.
Nay, now you have Cast it off, yet do not Frown:
Though like the refuge of a Miss of the Town,
It is turned Common, Yours for half a Crown.
It Was generous at Court and did for Love,
But does for profit to the Stage remove.
Women and Wit on equal scores begin;
Love and affection first may make 'um Sin,
They trade for Interest when they are once got in.
But for you Sirs, who Censure but not Write;
Who do in Wit, as some in War, delight;
Whose Courages do not much care to Fight:
But though they cannot of Scars nor Conquests vapor*
They can draw sieges and take Towns in Paper.
You 't will be hard to please;
Critiques whose saving and Condemning, still
Is not your Act of Judgment, but your Will.
Who equal Choice in Plays as Faces make,
What you resolve, not what deserves shall take.
Th^s your applause resembles your Amors,
Have we not seen (Oh loves almighty Powers!)
A Wench with tallow- Looks and winter- Face,
Continue one Man's Favorite seven Years space:
Some Ravishing k^ack in the sport and some brisk motion,
Keeps the gilt Coach and the gallants Devotion.
Be to this Toy thus kind, and you will raise
Much better Fancies to write better Plays.
When meaner Faces are used kindly by ye,
What Power have greater Beauties to deny ye.
So your kind Smiles advance the scribbling Trade:
To get good Play's you must Excuse the bad.
FINIS.
ERRATA
FIrst page of the E^istle line 21 read Author. page 2. l. 16. ^. to giv^
(...) Pla^. p. 8. l. 13. r. feighn'd, l. 26* ^ gilded. p 12. l 3^. deleatur
period (.) p. 19. l. 29. r. friend^, p. 21. l. 25. ^. hand had run. p. 34. l.
21. ^* Lent p. 3^. l. 4. r. clouds l. 29. r with, p. 43 r. Euridice p. 45. l.
25. ^. in the way* p. 50. l 6. r. R^quests, p. 58. l. 20* dele* are, p. 60. l.
5. r. her Heart,, p. 62. l. 28. r. Raise my Guard, p. 63. l. 15. r. know.


