THE Triumphs of London. Performed on Monday, October. 30th. 1693. FOR THE
Entertainment of the Right Honorable Sir William Ashurst, Knight, LORD MAYOR
of the City of LONDON. CONTAINING A True Description of the several Pageants;
with the Speeches Spoken on each Pageant. All set forth at the proper Costs and
Charges of the WORSHIPFUL COMPANY of Merchant-Taylors. Together with The
Festival SONGS for His Lordship and the Companies Diversion. By E. S.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by J Orme; And are to be Sold by Benjamin Johnson, near St.
Paul's Churchyard: 1693.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE Sir William Ashurst, Knight, LORD MAYOR of the City of
LONDON.
MY LORD,
IN the present Solemnity of Your Lordship's Inauguration; never was Entry made
to that fair Post of Honor, under more Expectations than from Your Lordship,
nor more Confidence of seeing those Expectations answered. It Is not only the
more unthinking Crowd of Homagers, those cheaper Lips, salute You; but Judgment
and Sense have their Eyes fixed upon You, as fully satisfied that You bring
those ample Qualifications for Our Metropolitan Royal Representative, that
never Chapplet more fitted the Brow that wears it.

And as no little Illustration to the eminent Figure that so much Worth must
make, I may justly say of Your Lordship, That Authority as it never approached
a Fairer, so it never entered under a more Prideless Roof than Your Lordship's.
For never certainly was Power more affable, nor Command more familiar. Your
State and Your Regalia wait You no farther than Your Chair; which more
troublesome formal Attendants of Office are instantly dismissed, and Your more
genuine softer Train, all Your Sweetnesses of Conversation, and the
condescending Graces of Courtesy, Goodness and Humanity are called in as Your
gentler and nearer Menials. And to all these there runs that Bravery of Spirit
through You; a Glory so particularly Your own, that in all the Knees that bend
before You, You give an occasion to Thank wherethey Pray. Your Lordships more
generous Goodness is not worshipped by empty Gazers only, but by a more sensible
Zeal and Devotion. But not to instance the acknowledgments of Duty and
Gratitude, the Addresses and Panegyricks You receive where You have bestowed
Smiles and showered Favors: Those are no more than the payment of Debts that
are owing You; and Greatness and Power every day meet such Homage. No, my Lord,
Your Lordship's Virtue soars a pitch yet higher, a Virtue so attractive, as
creates You Votaries at a much farther distance: For Your Lordship has reached a
Character so universally Grateful, that You are every where honored, even
where you never obliged.

And indeed it is no more than the Common Justice of mankind to pay that Esteem
to so noble and public spirited a Principle as Your Lordship's; Your Lordship,
that think Your self made for the World, as well as the World for You, and
consequently (not like too many rising Favorites of Fortune that look no
higher than home; to be Rich to themselves, and Poor to all mankind besides,)
You make it an equal, if not larger part of Your Ambition to hoard a fair Name
as well as a fair Mass to leave behind You.

But in all Your Personal Accomplishments to furnish out the Magistrate, Your
Lordships innate Gallantry and Honor are in a high measure owing to Your
Generous Extract, and as Generous Education, Derivative from Your Veins, and
sucked in from Your Cradle: Your Lordship that possibly has that extraordinary
Advantage, that Additional Weight in your Scale, a Blazon so rare, or at least
not in every City Coat, as to descend from that fair Original, the Ashursts of
Ashurst, a Family that brought in the Gentility in their Blood, and the Normand
Fleur de Lis's in their Scutcheon, with the First Great William; and have ever
since continued in that unbroken Chain both of Fortune and Reputation, as has
trod as near the Heels of Nobility as any First Rank Gentry in England. And as
one Honorable Derivative more of Your Lordship's, Your Ancestors have been
constant Assertors and Champions of Religion and Virtue, Witness Your
Lordship's Uncle in the Reign of King Charles the First, who then High Sheriff
of Lancashire, had the hardy Christian Courage as to lay a Criminal by the
Heels for the violation of the Sabbath day, though a Transgressor in that kind
and at that time within the Verge of Privilege, under the Umbrage and
Protection of the then newly published Metropolitan Canterbury License and
Authority.

But whilst my weak Oratory, the meanest Trumpet of a Renown so conspicuous, is
only repeating of what all Tongues are already filled with; I beseech You to
believe, That this Epistle is not addressed to the Right Honorable Your
Lordship; but the Right Worthy, Sir William; not any tributary Devoir to the
Greatness You wear for a Year, but the great Soul You wear always. For as Your
Lordship's present Dignity is not presented You as a Gift, but paid You as a
Reward; under that consideration, to level at the true Object of our
Veneration, we must look beyond the Robe You wear, to the Merit that put it on.
For the Foundation of True Honor, is like that of the Pyramide: The Basis is
always larger than the Pinnacle that Crowns it. It Is in that capacity, as both
an Honor to the City, and an Ornament to Your Country, I Congratulate Your
Lordship's Accession to Your Praetorian Chair, and our proud Metropolis's
Happiness in such a Member, and such a Magistrate, being with no little Pride,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted and most Obedient Servant. E. SETTLE.

TO THE HONORABLE COMPANY OF Merchant-Taylors.
Gentlemen,
WHEN I address to You as Merchant-Taylors, that very Name alone, without my
particular Survey of the collected Body of so Honorable a Company, is enough
to take up no little part both of my Speculation and Veneration. For do we
visit the utmost Reach and Extents of Land and Sea: make the very boundless
Ocean a Tributary to the narrower Thames, and bring home the Wealth of the
Universe to our own Doors? Who but the Merchant is that commissioned Purveyour,
and traveling Treasurer! What Is the whole Mass and Wealth of Ransact Nature,
but his rich Hoard! The very Jemms of Crowns and Robes of Kings, Their Ermyn,
and their Purple, their Pearls, and their Rubies, are all but his Richer Cargo.
Do the glittering Palaces of Monarchs in all their Luster and Magnificence so
dazzle our weak Eyes? Their Splendour is no more than the Oar refined from the
Merchants Mint; and their Embroydery but his Drapery; being all first the
Riches of His Wooden Walls, before they are the Ornaments of their Marble Roofs.

What is the Merchant but the Surrounder and Circler of the spacious Globe,
that draws the only Lines of Communication betwixt the Conversing and
Commercing Regions of the Earth. Were it not for the Merchant, we had lived
altogether in an unsociable World: Our very next Neighborhood had been a
downright Terra-Incognita to us; whilst pent up in their own narrower
untraffiking Precincts, whole Kingdoms and Nations had been little less than a
larger sort of Cloisters and Cells. Then the product of our own Glebe only must
have furnished both our Kitchen and our Wardrobe. Nay our very Monarchs
themselves must have been contented to have taken up with a homlier mettald
Crown, possibly such another as the Isle of Mann's Diadem; and their very
Coronation Mantle, (though no Disparagement to our own native Growth, the
Fleece of the Sheep that buys the Jewels of the Crown) instead of the richer
Orient Embroydery, the Silkworms softer Spinstry, and the Ermins whiter Down,
must at highest have reached but to Wool and Lambskins. Thus the Pavilion Royal
is but justly a part of the Merchant-Taylors Scutcheon: For whilst the Imperial
Hero marches to the Field, and sweats in Arms all Day; he sleeps at Night under
Your Umbrage, whilst not only his Tent of War, but his Canopy of Peace is all
Your own.

Thus the Great Columbus in his Discovery of a new World, only opened a new
Door to the Merchants Glory; whilst after their long Addresses and Visits to
their European, Asian, and African three old Mistresses; they had found out a
new fair American Sister to pay their new Court and Devoirs to; and to plume
themselves in the Wealth of the rich Dowr She brought them.

We may justly rank the whole Industry of mankind under these two Classes, That
of the Husbandman, and this of the Merchant. And indeed there is so far an
Alliance and proportion betwixt both their Toyls and Labors, that it is all but
the Work of the Plough: His that turns up the Glebe of the Earth, and Yours
Your Keele that ploughs the Main. And as the Fruits of Bountiful Nature are his
Harvest; So the Riches of it are Yours: Only with this Difference between You,
That the Husbandman is but the Subminister or Underfactor of the Merchant. The
sweat of His Brow gets the Bread: But Your Gold pays that sweat; and indeed
drives both Plough and Ploughman

Amongst the several Pageants of the Day, all suited to the Luster and Renown
of Your Honorable Foundation, the Fair Minerva in both her Capacities, viz.
the Goddess of Arts and Arms, is but the true Emblem and Portrait of Your
Glory. For Arts are all so entirely Your own, that You resemble the Ocean, on
which You Trade. For as into that all the Lesser Rivers flow: So the Toyls and
Industry of the whole Land, from the Spinstry of the Cottage, to the Loom of
the Burgh, and the Woof of the City, all Center in the Merchant. And as the
Wealth and Improvements of Peace are so justly Yours, no less are the Prowess
and Strength of Arms Your own too. For as the Nerves and Sinews of Trade are
the Life and Soul of War; It Is only as the Merchant leads the Battle moves.

And now Gentlemen, having brought You thus far in Your fair Chase of Honor,
here I Will leave You, and heartily wish, so may You all unanimously lead, and
make the Battle so successfully move; That England may live to see her long
Effeminacy shook off: and have yet a Race of the Third Edward and Fifth Henry
Boys, as may still carry Terror to the too powerful neighboring Lillies, and
raise up the Heads of her own Royal Lions.

With this hearty Prayer I subscribe my Self, GENTLEMEN, Your most Faithful
Servant E. Settle.

The Movements of the Morning.
Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company designed for the Duty
of the Day, meet at Merchant-Taylors Hall.

1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Sholder, and a White-Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs and Colors of the Company in their
Hats, Blew and White.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesty's, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Blew and a White.

8. The Drum-Major-general to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the
Companies Colors, with others of Their Majesty's Household Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them, Mounted on Horseback, with rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Imbroider'd: Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs and Colors of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colors.

11. The Master of Defense with the same Scarf and Colors, Eight Persons of
the same Science to Attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed in carrying of Standards
and Banners.

13. Seventy Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, White-Sleeves and Blew Caps, each of
them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is
Painted the Coat Armor of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company. All
these are ushered by Twenty personable Figures in Roman Crimson Habits, and
Silver Head-peices with the Arms of the Honorable Company, the City and the
Lord Mayor, Back and Breast, bearing Lictors Staffs, and Silver Axes.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, ranked all two by two,
beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them
are placed two Drums one Fife, and a Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlmen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall
two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesty's, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen Ushers, followed by the Budg-Batchelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foins Batchelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honorable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts His Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Grocers-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Elect joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue;
whence all of them in this. Order march through Kingstreet down to
Three-Crane-Wharf, there entering into their several Barges which are
gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship and this Gallant
Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the Exchequer-Bar; there
having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths
to their Majesty's, he returns again by Water to Blackfriars Stairs, with
Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Music playing, etc.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him toward Cheapside.

The First Pageant. The LAMB.
UPon a Stage is a stately Pedestal richly ornamented, whereon the Coat of the
Honorable Company, the Silver Lamb is planted. On a Descent beneath on the
four Corners are four Palm Trees; adorned with Crowns, Coronets and Laurels,
being the emblematical Trophies of the Worthy Predecessors, as Members or
Benefactors of the Honorable Company of Merchant-Taylors. On the four square
sides, Quadranglar ways, are planted four Figures, viz. Peace, Humility,
Patience and Mercy, in their proper Attire and Ornaments, these four being the
requisite Attendance of Innocence, emblemiz'd in the Figure of the Lamb; and
the Palm tree being not only a proper Field for the Lamb, but likewise alluding
to Truth and Virtue, which according to the Motto of the Palm (Crescit sub
pondere Virtus) the more it is depressed the higher 'twill rise.

The Second Pageant. The Temple of CONCORD.
A Lofty Structure is erected, supported upon four noble Pillars or Columns
with all the Etableture according to the Compositive order. Over all is a
stately Domo, completely adjusted in circular Figure, whereon is erected a
Magnificent Cupulo, with a Golden Lion placed in Chief, carrying a Banner of
the Kings Arms.

Underneath this Dome sit four Figures richly attired in silken Habits, The
first proper to the Hieroglyphich of Harmony; and the other three Theological
Virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity. These three Divine Virtues being not only the
necessary Attendants of Harmony and Union; but likewise very applicacable to
the Honorable Company for their Foundations of Religion, Learning, and
Charity. These three Virtues bear three Scutcheons on which are inscribed their
proper Mottoes.

At the four Corners of this Fabric sit four more Figures properly habited, as
Temperance, Truth, Zeal, and Constancy with silver Banners displayed, with the
Kings, Cities, and Lord Mayors and Companies Arms, in all Respects suited to
the Glory of the Day.

Harmony thus Addresses to His Lordship.
WHen the proud Towers of Concords Temple rise,
Her Basis stands on Earth, and Head in the Skies;
Heavens darling Blessing, and the Worlds fair Soul;
Concord, the mighty Axis turns the Pole.
Till her fair Head above the Waters bore
'Twas Chaos and Confusion all before.
Concord, by whom Truth raigns, and Empires stand,
States flourish, all by her supporting Hand.
As such the Shrine, and such the Deity,
What must the Founder of her Temple be?
That, Sr's, Your Work: Our Concords Walls You build,
Whilst Our Praetorian Chair thus nobly filled,
Such Massy Worth and Morals so refined,
Such leading Virtue with true Honor joined,
Shall stand those fair Examples for mankind;
Till Our blessed Gates with Love and Union filled,
Fair Concords Brightest Wreath Your Brow shall guild.
Nor the Happy London's only shall You bless,
But Your own Merchant-Taylors Walls no less,
With such United Worth enricht and stored,
'Twixt such a Master there, here such a Lord.
The Third Pageant. The CHARIOT.
UPon a very Large Stage is fixed a Noble Triumphant Chariot, (drawn by two
Golden Camels) richly and curiosly adorned, with all the Glorious Ornaments of
Carved Work as Art can perform, in its gldiing and painting, and all
Illustration enricht with several Delightful Figures, as well Artificial as
Natural lively represented, and properly appertaining to the Solemnity of the
Day. On the most Noble and Greatest Seat of this Structure sits Minerva, the
Goddess in Chief of all the Arts and Sciences, a person of a Majestic Aspect,
attired with long thick bright curld Hair, on her Head a Silver Head-peice,
graced with a high flourishing Plume of Feathers consisting of diverse Falls;
she is attired in Rich Robe of Gold surfled with Silver, and over all a Noble
Scarf of Carnation silk fringed with Gold, with a Crimson Mantle laid with
Ermyn. In one Hand she bears a Bannor of the Companies Arms, in the other a
Shield of the Cities Arms. On a Descent beneath her are placed three Graces,
viz. Vigilance, Diligence, and Labor, being expressed by the Kettle Drums and
Trumpets. In the Front of these, remote from the former, sits a Figure
personating Time, who holds the Reins of these two stately Camels excellently
carved and gilded, and painted in equal proportion to the Life, with Trappings
of Crimson and Silver, and Crimson Bridles, as being the supporters of the
Honorable Company of Merchant-Taylors Arms. This Figure of Time is so ordered
to hold the Reins of this Triumphant Chariot, as intimating the Antiquity of
this Honorable Company, the Records of their Magnificence and Glory, having
lasted so many long Ages past, and whose Chariot shall still drive on till Time
it self shall finish. On the Backs of the two Camels are seated, or mounted two
sweat young Yrinces, a Negro and a Pawny, the one an Asian, and the other an
African, in their Richest Robes, attired in the most Princely Dress of those
Countries, with Coronets on their Heads beset with plumes of variety of diverse
colored Feathers. In their Right Hands they bear two displaid Banners, one the
Cities, the other the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor intimating their Fealty
and Submission to the Heroic Monarch of Great Britain, the sole Sovereign of
the Sea, and so far Lord of the World from Our British Communion and Traffic
in the Richest Asian and African Commerce, etc. And likewise implying their
Ambition to hold an amicable Correspondence with this Renowned City. Moreover,
upon this Stage are placed three Figures representing the Seasons of the Day,
viz. Morning, Noon, and Evening; attired in their proper Habits, with gilded
Banners suitable to 'em all, intimating that Vigilence, Diligence and Labor
are the Duties of every Hour of Life: and at each Corner is four Golden Cypress
Trees. His Lorship is saluted by Minerva in this Speech, etc.

SIr, in Your bright Inauguration Glory,
Amongst the humble Knees that bend before You,
With the just Tribute of her earlyest Vows
Thus low the dutiful Minerva bows:
Arts and Wits Sacred Goddess, with her fair
Triumphant Chariot, waits Your nobler Chair.
Yes Sir, whilst London Europes proudest Town,
And Albion's fairest Head, Your power must own;
Her Wheel, her Loom, her Industry, are all
But Menials, Sir, to Your commanding Call:
Her Arts encouraging Lord is only You;
Nor is Wits Patron less Your Title too:
Both Atributes so well You have deserved;
Wit, I am sure, never kinder Master served.
Then Sir beneath the influence of Your Reign,
I, and my Muses, all Your Duteous Train,
Shall sing Your praises in that cheerful Chorus,
From this blessed Day smile the whole Year before us.
The Fourth Pageant. The SHIP.
AS a farther Testimony of their Zeal and Esteem for his Lordship, they present
my Lord with a Ship, named the William and Mary, a Merchant Adventurer. This
Ship is laden with Cloth, Silk and Stuffs of all sorts, as representing the
Traffic in which His Lordship deals into Foraign Countries. This stately
Vessel bears all her Guns, with Ancients and Pendants, Streamers, Flaggs
Standarts, Tackling, Braces, Bowls, Cables, Anchors, Sayls and Cordages, and
all sort of Rigging appertaining to a Merchant-Man of that Burden, being richly
gilded and painted with all her Waste Clothes.

On board this Ship are a Captain and his Mate, a Bosewain and Mariner, each
man at work, some at the main Tack, others at the main Braces, others the
Bowlings, some climbing up to the Maintop, others siting cross the Yard-Arms.
Others with Quarter Canns drinking the King and Queens Health; the Lord Mayors,
and the Honorable Companies, with Guns fireing, Shouts, Huzahs and
Acclamations, as the Expressions of their Joy for his Lordship's Inauguration,
and their Dutiful salutes to welcome him to the Chair, with Songs and Trumpets
sounding, proper to the Action and the Honor of the Merchant-Taylors.

The Captain with his Crew placing themselves on the Quarter Deck, dressed in
Indian silks, with rich Fur Caps, attired like Seafaring men; the Bosewain
having given his signal by a whistle, and commanded silence, the Sirens being
placed in the Sea leave off their melodious Music, and display their Bannors
whilst the Captain accosts his Lordship.

STrike Saylor, strike, Your Homaging Topsayls lower,
And humbly veil to yond commanding Power,
That awful Power that fills our swelling Sail,
And whose kind Smile lends all our prosperous Gale.
Our duteous Tribute, Sir, is all Your Due;
Our Canvass Wings are only plumed for You:
For You alone our Tritons Trumpets sound;
And our pleased Nereids Dance their watery round.
And if, when Your Great Name of Honor calls,
The rattling Music from our wooden Walls
Does with her loudest Mouths of Thunder roar,
It Is to salute the Lord that rules our Shore.
But what, alas, in the Triumphs of this Day
Can my poor Flags and humble Pinnace Pay,
To You that guide a prouder Helm than Mine;
Glory that does with brighter Streamers shine?
And since our fair Metropolis's Command
Is lodged in such an Honorable Hand,
The safe Augusta shall no Shipwreck fear,
Whilst so much Virtue her great Bark shall stear.
The Fifth Pageant. The ARCADIAN PLAIN.
WIthin this large Plain are Eleven or Twelve Figures, all clothed in their
proper Habits, as Nymphs and Shepherds of Arcadia, with gilded Streamers and
Bannors, being the Ensigns of Honor, of the Worthy Members of the Honorable
Company. Amongst these is Industry a Spinning, and several of the
Shepherdesses,; some Carding and some Cutting of Wool, and all Singing and
Dancing, when the Matron or Mistress of the Family calls from Work, they having
all their Scrips and Wallets, Bottles of Leather, and Baskets with Shepherds
Crooks and Straw Hats and Garlands of Flowers round their Heads, the Pageant
being all ornamented suitable to so rural a place, and enlivened with variety
of Pastoral Music accordingly. In the Front of this pleasant Plain is planted
a gilded Lion, the Plain all strewed with Greens and Flowers, and other
Ornaments befitting the place, and also proper for so Noble an Augmentation
that was given from one of the Kings of England, out of his own Imperial Arms,
in Honor of the Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors, for some very
Illustrious Acts of Chivalry performed by the Famous and Noble Sir John
Hawkwood, once a Member of this Royal Society, whereof has been Eleven Kings,
Twenty two Princes and Dukes, Twenty seven Bishops, Forty seven Earls, Seventy
seven Lords and Barons; besides Ninteen Lord Mayors to this present Year, who
all received the Honor of Knighthood.

In the Rear of this Pageant is seated on a Throne, a Soldier under a Royal
Canopy, as the Arms of the Honorable Company attended on each hand by two
Persons in Parliamentary Robes, who addresses his Speech to his Lordship,
himself representing that Famous and Memorable Hawkwood.

BEhold, before me on these Verdant Plains
'The Crooks, the Fleece, the Wheel, the Nymphs and Swains,
All Homagers to the Merchant-Taylors Name;
Their Rural Reeds the Trumps of Your fair Fame:
And whilst these Sons of Peace in the Front appear
Your Hawkwood, Son of War, brings up the Rear.
Hawkwood who, that bold Martial Champion stood,
Whose once Illustrious Feats in Fields of Blood,
In Your Rich Scutcheon fixed that fair Renown,
A borrowed Lion from the British Crown.
But why do we revive old Hawkwood's Name,
When we have a Younger Nobler Heir of Fame;
Your Lorship whose Renown outvies his poorer Story,
Who dare as much for Truth, as Hawkwood durst for Glory.
A SONG.
I.
TO sing the Renown of the brave Merchant-Taylors
Come blow a fresh Gale, Boys, and Hey jolly Saylors.
For weell merrily troll
All around round the Pole;
Weell cut the Sea through;
And bring home the Wealth of the Indian Peru.
For the World has no Lord but the Merchant alone;
And the whole Phoenix Nest, Boys, is all but Your own.
Then in the Triumphs of the Day,
To the Merchants weell pay
Our heartiest Zeal and Devotion:
Weell sing, and weell laugh,
And the Bowls that we quaff
Shall hold a whole Iittle little Ocean.
II
Weell cut through the Line, Boys; then hey merry Saylors;
From Cancer to Capricorn bold Merchant-Taylors:
It Is for You the North Swain
Drives the Great Charles his Wain:
The Star at the Pole
For You lends the Needle her whole Life and Soul;
Whilst the Sun in the Skies, and the Stars in their Glory
Are all but Your Linkboys to travel before You.
Then, etc.
III.
To the jolly God Cupid do Mortals build Altars;
And sing Loves soft Chorus in sweet Virgin Psalters?
Does the Beauty Divine
In its whole Glory shine?
Though bright as the Morn
It Is the Merchants rich Wardrobes proud Venus adone.
Her downy foft Sweets all but his rich Perfumes;
And our Mistresses shrine but in his borrowed Plumes.
Then, etc.
IV.
In City and Country, both Profit and Pleasu^^
Come all from the Hoard of the Merchants rich Treasure.
Even the poor Country Cloun,
When he comes up to Town,
No sooner he goes
To buy a new Topknot for Peggy and Rose,
But merrily home again home he trips down,
And thanks the kind Merchant for Jo^ns Wedding Gown.
Then, etc.
V.
Do we drink a brisk Health to Great William and Mary
In blushing fair Claret, or smiling Canary?
When the Conduits run Wine,
What Is the Nectar Divine
That cheers up our Souls,
But the Merchants rich Juice, Boys, that Sparks in our Bowls?
And the proud Golden Goblet we drink in's no more
Than a Relick a Relick from the Merchants fair Store.
(...) etc.
The Pageantry concluding, the Lord Mayor and the whole Train move off to
Dinner, which finishes the Solemnity of the Day.

FINIS.

