THE ROYAL Shepherdess.

A TRAGI-COMEDY, ACTED By his Highness the Duke of York's Servants.

Non Quivis videt immodulata Poemata Iudex.
Hor. de art Poet. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the
Blew-Anchor, in the Lower-walk of the New-Exchange, 1669.

(...) I have added little to the Story, only have represented that in Action,
which was expressed by him in long Narrations: For we find (though the French
do often relate the most considerable Actions in their Plays, especially in
their Tragedies) the English will not be content without seeing such Actions
done, and this is one, of those many things, that make our English Plays so
much exceed the French: But this was long ago observed by Horace: Segnius
irritant animos demissa per aurem,
Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta sidelibus.


I have endeavored to carry on these few Humors, which were but begun by him;
and (to satisfy the Concupiscence as Mr. Johnson calls it, of Jigge and Song)
I designed as fit occasions for them as I could, there being in the former Play
but one short Song which is the last but one.

Where it is possible, I have kept the Scenes unbroken, and with as proper a
connection as I could. What I have besides added I need not tell you, being I
fear so much worse that his, that you will easily distinguish it.

I shall say little more of the Play, but that the Rules of Morality and good
Manners are strictly observed in it: (Virtue being exalted, and Vice depressed)
and perhaps it might have been better received had neither been done in it: for
I find, it pleases most to see Vice encouraged by bringing the Characters of
debauched people upon the Stage, and making them pass for fine Gentlemen who
openly profess Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, breaking Windows, beating
Constables, etc. and that is esteemed among us a Gen^ile gayety of Humor,
which is contrary to the Customs and Laws of all civilized Nations. But it is
said, by some, that this pleases the people, and a Poets business is only to
endeavor that: But he that debases himself to think of nothing but pleasing
the Rabble, loses the dignity of a Poet, and becomes as little as a Jugler, or
a Rope-Dancer; who please more then he can do: but the office of a Poet is,
Simul and jucunda, and idonea dicere vitae.


Which (if the Poets of our age would observe it) would render 'em as useful
to a Commonwealth as any profession whatsoever.

But I have too long troubled you with a Discourse of this Play, which (let me
say what I will of it) you will judge of as you please: But if you consider,
aft^r such an Infinite number of Plays, when (Nil intentatum nostri liquere
Poetae.)
How difficult it is to write even an indifferent one^ (as none but those that
cannot write think it easy) Methinks it were but an ordinary piece of Humanity
(...)

Dramatis Personae.
BAsilius, King. Theander Prince. Endymion A worthy Lord of small Fortune.
Pyrrhus A Creature of the Kings. Neander A vain, cowardly, vicious effeminate
Lord. Geron An old Jealous Fop that has married a young Wife. Priest. -- Queen.
-- Cleantha Niece to the King. Evadne Servant to the Queen. Urania One that was
a Shepherdess, and preferred by the Prince to wait on Cleantha. Phronesia A
vain foolish Woman, Wife to Geron. Cleopatra Mother to Urania; concealed by the
name of Parthenia. Messengers, Officers, Shepherds, and Shepherdesses, Nymphs,
and Satyrs, Priests of Mars, etc.
SCENE ARCADIA.

THE ROYAL SHEPHERDESS.
THE FIRST ACT.
Enter Pyrrhus, Endymion, Neander. Pyr. Believed my Lords, they say the Prince
does Wonders.

Nean. They say he kills a world of men indeed;
But 'faith I think the wonder had been greater
If he had made but half so many live.

Endy. Perchance, my Lord, you would have him turn Physician.

Nean. Rather than Butcher, it is the Nobler Trade.

Endy. But they are his Enemies he kills,
Men that offend, and do deserve to die.

Nean. O! then I think you will praise the Hangman next,
You give a definition of his Trade.

Pyrr. If I do not mistake your humor Sir,
You were never taken with this dying,
It is a thing does mar a Courtier much.

Nean. 'Thank Heaven, I am not yet so mad to wish for it;
Let Broken-Merchants, and the busy Rout
That dirt the Streets, when their designs miscarry,
Cry that there is nothing Certain in this World,
I think there is less in that which is to come:
Here I Am sure of something, I Am a Lord,
And live with men: But to be turned a grazing
In the Elizian-Fields (that men do talk of)
Among Philosophers, n'ere could make a Leg.

Endy. Fie, fie, Neander! this is too profane,
And relisheth far more of Beast than Man.
(...) Arcadia shall Command those Provinces,
Who lately thought our long and happy peace
Had softened so our Minds, that now we were
Fit to be Lo^ded over by their Wills:
But strange it is, to see the King so little
Joy'd with the news, that still he bears a Face
More troubled than Sicilian Seas in storms.

Pyrr. It Is for the Love of that poor Shepherdess,
The Prince not Ten months since took from a Cottage
As he was a hunting, and gave the fair
Cleantha for a Present.

Endy. aside Alas! my poor Urania! how does
Thy harder Fortune vindicate my Choice?
Who now dares say Endymion loves to low,
When he loves her that can make Princes die;
No more, no more, we must scorn Cottages
Those are the Rocks from whence our Jewels come.
Gold breeds in barren Hills, the brightest Stars
Shine over the poorer Regions of the North.

Enter King. Pyrr. Here comes the King* Endymion, pray retire,
It is not fit you should be privy to his Thoughts.

Endy. I Will try if I can hear what resolution
The Kings enraged Passion makes him take. He retires.

King. Pyrrhus! how thrives my Love? I have
Entrusted you with all I am, and all I wish for.

Pyrr. Sir, I have already done,
What Language and Rewards have power to do

King. And what return am I to hope for then?

Pyrr. There Is little hope: This Ermin will not be
Persuaded from the whiteness she so Loves.

King. Poor Country Girl, where can she find Words
Or Resolution when you do assault her?

Pyrr. When I first
Mentioned the business to her, all alone,
Poor soul she blushed, as if already she
Had done some harm by hearing of me speak.
Whilst from her pretty Eyes two Fountains run
(So true, so Native) down her fairest Cheeks,
As if she thought her self obliged to weep
That all the World was not as good as she.

Endym. Heaven! how does this Carriage please me!

King. This Modesty of hers inflames me more.
As springs are hottest in the coldest weather.

Pyrr. Her Tears so innocently begged my pity,
That I was straight turned over to her side,
And had forgot the Cause for which I strove*
Till rallying again, I once more gave
A new assault, and urged her to answer:
All her reply was no: then humbly prayed me,
Not to be Cruel to a poor weak Maid,
Who had not any thing, in all the World,
To give her value but her Innocence;
With such Success as this I often have
Assailed her Virtue.

King. Ah Pyrrhus! where will this Tyrant end? shall I
Still be Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar too,
Unto a Passion, I can satisfy,
But never Conquer? What poor things are Kings?
What poorer things are Nations to obey
Him whom a petty Passion does Command?
Heaven! why was man made so ridiculous?

Pyrr. Your Majesty says that of your self,
Which were Impiety in any else,
But once to think.

King. Men but Flatter me.
Oh Fate! why were not Kings made more than men?
Or why will people have us to be more?
Alas! we govern others, but our selves
We cannot rule, like to our Eyes, that see
All other things, but Cannot see themseves.

Pyrr. Sir, do not discompose your self; you may
Soon Queench this mighty Flame, and where your Prayers
Have not prevailed, your Power may Command:
Who in Arcadia dares resist your Will?

^lean. My Lord it is true, Let Us to the Queen --

Exeunt all but Evadne. Enter Neander. Nean. How does this Minute transport my
soul with Joy, to have the blessed privilege to be with fair Evadne?


Evad. I a^ glad it makes some body happy.


Nean. With her who has my Heart. --


Evad. Have I it? pray my Lord take it again.
I would not be troubled with keeping such a Bawble for the World.

Nean She whom great Nature (now grown wanton) made to look upon, and scorn her
other Works.


Evad. My Lord Neander! I see you are resolved not to study to no purpose, you
will have out your Complement, let me say what I please: but I must take
liberty to leave you in the middle of it.


Nean. Nay, Madam, I beseech you be not so unkind.


Evad. Nay now I have put you out of your Complement; I care not if I stay a
little longer.


Nean. Madam! you are Cruel! how do you Kill?


Evad. Kill Neander? No sure then you would not be so near me.


Nean. I never could fear death from so fair a hand as yours.


Evad. I believe indeed, my Lord, you fear death least from the hands of a
Woman, which is the Reason you choose to stay here at Court among the Ladies,
rather than go to War with the Prince.


Nean. Madam! -- You Ladies have a Privilege.


Evad. Yes, my Lord, ^it's sometimes a privilege to speak Truth.


Nean. 'Faith Madam, you may say what you please.


Evad. Pardon me, my Lord, it would please me much better if I could s^y you
were in the War in Thessaly.


Nean. T^u^y Madam, I could give you very good reasons why I went not to the
War with the Prince.


Evad. I believe you can, and so can every body else that knows your Lordship:
The first and Chiefest reason was a certain tenderness you have for the
prese^vation of your Person, some scandalous people stick (...) to call it fear.


Nean. Do not judge so Madam; I can assure you it was for very different
reasons.


Evad. You will give very much satisfaction to the World, if you say what they
are.


Nean. Why then, to tell you the truth, Madam, I am somewhat troubled with
Corns that I cannot without pain wear a riding Boot* and then I am strangely
subject to the Toothache, which makes me very unsit to lie in the Field, which
indeed were the two main Reasons made me refuse the War.


Evad. What pity it is so brave a Mind should be so unluckily hindered from
showing it self.


Nean. I perceive you railly, Madam.


Evad. I see Sir, you are a man of a quick apprehension.


Enter Priest. Priest. How now Daughter? what do you here? my Lord I do not
desire your Lordship should make any address^s to my Daughter, her Fortune is
too humble for your thoughts.


Nean. Your servant, Madam.
[Aside] Pox on this Formal Priest. -- Exit.

Priest. Well now Evadne, my dear Child, thou art
Come forth upon the Worlds great Stage, and it
Must be my care first to advise thee, then
To pray for thee: Yet thou art innocent,
(Oh may thou still be so my Child) yet know not
Ought but the holy practices of cells,
Where virtuous Matrons have instructed thee.

Evad. But now the Scene is changed, the Queens Commands
Have brought me to the Court to wait on he^;
The employment truly noble: and I have
In her the brightest pattern of true virtue
That all the world can boast of.

Priest. But tho^'lt find
Few more besides whose wandr^ng paths are safe:
Those of thy Sex thou't find so strangely vain,
That they think they have washed, and patched, and cutl'd
Themselves even into little Deities:
They do believe that wanton men speak truth,
When to consume those hours, they care not for,

Phro. Ay, Madam, is it not? would you be willing to be used so? Besides,
Madam, no man in the Court offers to speak to me, but he thinks it is Love.


Evad. He thinks you are so handsome, perhaps, that it is impossible for any
man to look upon you without being smitten.


Phro That may be something, as you say, Madam, but I will never put up this
Injury: Marry me to keep me honest, quoth 'a? I Will never endure it, while I have
breath: -- See Madam -- where he comes -- do but observe him.


Enter Geron. Ger. I have brought my self into a sweet condition, like an old
fool as I am, why could not I remember how many I had Cuckolded my self, and to
think I should not be served in the same kind, were to suppose neither
Wickedness, nor Justice in the World.


Phro. Look, Madam upon this Mischievous Countenance.

Geron to himself How could I imagine that any of these sort of Women would
keep themselves honest three minutes, when they feared neither the danger of
taking Savin, nor a great Belly? Heaven! what a Condition am I in! -- now do I
plainly perceive the pain that poor Children endure at the coming of their
Teeth, by the coming of my Horns -- Oh Phronesia! are you there?


Phro. Yes! you old Fumbling Sot I am here. --


Evad. Fare you well. Ex. Evadne.


Ger. O wicked Phronesia! how have you used me? whom have you appointed now to
do me the Courtesy? -- my Lord Pirrhus -- he is of a black Complexion, and
that never fails; -- My Lord Endymion's a Poet forsooth, and prevails with
Sonnets; -- and for my Lord Neander, -- the Priest convinced him the other day,
that Adultery was a very great Sin, and that is reason enough for him to lie at
Rack and Manger; I am sure my head must ache for it.


Ph^o. Let it ache on, you old Fop, you married me to keep me honest, did you?
I Will honest you; I will go instantly and meet 'em all three* Exit.


Ger. But I Will follow you close at the heels, and prevent your recreation! --
If any Man be weary of his life,
Let him at Threescore marry such a Wife.



Exeunt. The End of the First Act.
THE SECOND ACT.
Enter Pyrrhus and Urania. Pyrr. COme fair Urania, think upon the honor
To be a Mistress to a King, sounds it not Well?

Uran. It is an Honor I should not envy her
That sought my ruin! I will never forsake
My Virtue, for a little outward splendour.

Pyrr. Is Love a Vice Urania? why did Nature
Make us all Vicious, when she did immerse
Love in the very beings of all Creatures:
Go search the Universe, and show me there
What but affrighted man is not as free
To satisfy his Love as Thirst or Hunger;
Beasts never dispute the Lawfulness of what is Natural.

Uran. It Is well, my Lord, when you intend
Unlawful Loves to instance not in men
But Beasts -- but let me ever be
Of that affrighted Number tha^ follow virtue.

Pyrr. Come, come, Urania! Love, like men, was free,
E'^e ^^w'r and Laws had taught 'em both the use
Of Chains, and Fetters: Nature never Confined
Her No lest Creature to the Narrow'st Prison,
Nor gave him Inclinations to torment him,
(...) And with a holy Flame, my Sighs and Tears
Have been as pure, as are those Gales and Springs
which in Elysium do refresh the blessed:
And yet thou have not pitty'd him that loves thee,
Even though thou be'st as gentle, and as soft
As morning dew just melting into Air.

Uran. What shall I serve you in my Lord?

Endym. Permit
Me to enjoy the Title of your servant,
And pay my fire with equal flames again.

Vran. My Lord, I were ungrateful if I should not.

Endym. Then be not so, but (to be short) I fear
The Kings approach, and therefore if thou wilt promise
This night to sleep within my arms (being first
Authorized by Hymen's Priest)
I Will free thee from the Kings unlawful Love.

Uran. What Is to be done in this sad Exigence? -- aside.
(To him) My Lord, I will, but satisfy me, how?

Endym. You must appoint the King to meet you there,
In yonder Grotto, and oblige him to
The Language, and the time of Love, soft Whispers,
And the Night; and I Will prepare
So^e other Woman to supply your place;
This will gain time till to morrow, when
I Will own you to the King to be my Wife:
Then the respect to all my Loyal services
Will make him quench his now Unruly Passion.

Uran. Ah, who will be so wicked as to meet him?

Endym. Enough, never fear it.

Uran. Sure it is impossible!
What Woman would consent to such an Act?

Endym. Ten thousand, Madam!

Uran. But they shall not for me,
I Will rather choose a Thousand times to die,
Then own a wretched Life, saved at the rate
Of so much ^nfamy.

Endym. Come, be content,
Chaste Soul; I Will do what you shall well approve;
My dear, I must retire, I fear the King:
Now act thy part, and then confide in me;
Be happy fair Urania, I am blessed
That my employment is to do thee service. Ex. Endymion.

Vran. Ah, dear Endymion! how could I weep
If tears were able but to wash away
The blackness of my Crime? now thou have thought
To lead me from the Labyrinth of my Woes,
The next thing I must think must be to cheat
All thy Innocent expectations, which
(...) to my self,
(...) Soul;
^
^
(...) King.
(...) Showers allay you thus your Beams?
(...) and more are due to my Misfortunes.
(...) this, Pyrrhus told me you had consented.

Vra^. With what Face can I say yes to the King?
Though I but feign consent, and mean to cheat him, -- Aside.
It is Immodest sure -- it cannot fit
A Woman's Mouth.

King. Are you not yet resolved?
What means this doubt? Consent to my desires,
And you shall live adored and feared by all;
The Kingdom shall rejoice at all your smiles,
And tremble at your frowns: But if you do not --

Vran. Is there no other way to save my life?

King. Come, do not trifle thus to tempt my rage.

Uran. Good Sir, be not angry; I will.

King. My dear Urania! now be happy, let us withdraw
This place is much too public for our Love. --

Uran. Let me not lose all Modesty at once,
But let Sin take possession by degrees,
I have some sparks of Virtue yet remaining
Which will require some time to quench.

King. I am impatient of delays, in this

Nean. A death from your fair hand, I would embrace.


Evad. Ay, th^s kind of dying put's a man to no pain, but to be run through the
Lungs, or shot through the Body is mighty inconvenient.


Nean. Ay, 'faith is it. --


Evad. But it is honorable.


Nean. For my part, I cannot possibly find what honor there is in having
Oylet-holes made in a man's body: 'Slife a Man's body is not made to see through,
is it? and yet I know some Duelling Coxcombs so often run through, as if their
bodies were intended Through-fares for Swords. --


Evad. But I hope you have more prudence then to venture that danger.


Nean. If I be run through, may I be pickled up when I am dead like a Sturgeon,
and be served up to the Table of an old (...)surer.


Evad. I will say this in your Commendations, (...) presents it self, I believe
there is not a man in (...) as your self, I mean so swift of Foot.


Nean. Not so, Madam, indifferent, indifferen^ (...)


Evad. But suppose Sir I should stand in need of a ^^^mpion.


Nean. O Madam! your Eyes will revenge your Quarrels.


Evad. Or they must be unrevenged for you!


Nean. Nay, Madam, in a Lady's Cause I can be a Lion.


Evad. When you meet with a Lamb.


Nean. Nay, Madam! I have Courage, but I must confess,
It Is a thing a man may better spare then any of his
Goods and Ghattels.

Evad. Yes, yes, you have Courage, witness the going to The War when you were
commanded!


Nean. It was not want of that; But who the Devil, that had a plentiful
Estate, like me, and might live among these pretty Ladies at the Court, would
go to lie without Sheets, with Stones and Blocks, for Pillows, and be most
honorably Lousy, and damnably n^^^l'd, for a company of ungrateful Fellows,
that live Luxuriously at home, and laugh at the Honorable Affairs abroad? and
when they have done, they value these Mighty men of War, just as a man doe^ a
Credito^ that Duns him for Money lent, which he never intended to pay.


Enter Geron. Evad. What would this old jealous Fop have?


Ger. Nay, now I will not hang my self yet: I Will be revenged on this Lord first
-- My Lord --


Nean. Pox of this Rogue, how I scorn any one that is below me, What say you
Geron?


( Geron aside.) Furies pursue him.

How does your Lordship?


Nean. Very well! how does your Lady?


Ger. It Is he has done it, a Curse on him. Aside.


Nean. Why how now? what do you Conjure? what is the matter?


Ger. I need not Conjure, I know the Father now. To himself.


Nean. Why what do thou mutter man?


Ger. My Lord! why should you ask for my Wife?


Nean. Because I am Civil.


Ger. Because I am a Cuckold. Aside.


Nean. Pox on thee, why do not speak out?


Evad. Your Servant, my Lord, suppose by this time my Lord Endymion has left
the Queen.


Nean. I beseech you let me wait on your Ladyship Exeunt.


Ger. This is the man! it is he; Why should he ask for my Wife? Suppose I have a
Wife, what is that to him, must he needs be asking for her presently? This
Rascal Neander, this Villain that I dare not say any thing to; not because he is
Valiant, for then it would not grieve me, but because he is a Lord, which he
could no more help, then I can that I am a Cuckold: Here Is another Lord too.


Enter Endymion. Endym. O Geron! how is it with you?


Ger. Your Servant, my Lord.


Endym. How does Phronesia?


Ger. Here Is another, what Two Lords to make one Cuckold?


Endym. What, are you mute? has any Misfortune befaln your Wife?


Ger. Too much has befaln me I am sure: 'Sdeath I am Cuckolded and laughed at
too; you do not well my Lord to use me thus.

(...) And her great Titles reckoned up, whilst she,
Does in her Closet, weep she is not less,
Poor Endymion! how little dare thou think
My Thoughts; or I dare say them to thee?

Uran. Should Endymion speak,
You then would hate him for his Confidence,
A Crime of which he never can be guilty.

Clean. Nay, should he speak, in that he would forfeit
The very thing I love him for, that rest
He finds in the Elysium of his thoughts,
And those true satisfactions which he takes
In being all the World unto himself.

Enter (...) Evad. Sir, I beseech you (...),
It would incense my Father (...) against me
If he should see you.

Nean. Madam, never mind
What old Gray people in their Wisdom talk of,
They Would Cross us out of Envy to our youth;
For when the Wine of Love is drawn out of 'em,
They live some years by its Vinegar, spite.

Clean. Poor Lady, how she is pestered with yon gaudy Nothing.

Enter Phronesia, and after Geron. Phro. O Madam! we shall have a Ball to
night, The Queen will entertain his Majesty, and desires your Highness to be
ready.


Clean. I attend her pleasure.


Ger Hell take that Clogg of mine; how overjoyed she is to have an opportunity
to show her self, and lay baits for young Gudgeons?


Nean. Let me Consider how I may look He pulls out of his Pocket a
Looking-glass. amiably in the sight of the Ladies; let me see, a Pa^ch or two
here, and a little more red here -- very well; this Face of mine cannot choose
but charm them!


Ger. Well Minion, there is a Ball; but let me but see you dare to look upon any
man but my self there, and by all the villainies of thy Sex, I Will tear thy flesh
from thy bones, and hang thy Skeleton up in a Physic School. She shrinks from
him.


Clean. How now Geron, what in passion with your Wife?


Ger. O no: and 'please your Highness I cannot be angry with any one I love so
well.


Phro. Ah, Madam! he threatens to tear my flesh from my bones, and't please
your Highness.


Clean. Geron! do you know before whom you do this?


Ger. Certainly, my dear, thou art distracted, how come thou to mistake thy
self so; Madam, I have a great Tenderness for her as I have for my own eyes,
Heaven knows.


Nean. They deserve much alike; his Eyes are Blood-shot, Rhumatick and Blind,
and his Wife Ugly, Insolent and Froward.


Ger. If thou knew'st, my dear Phronesia, how great a value I have for thee,
thou would not thus have injured me.


Clean. So, this is well; but Urania and Evadne let us go wait upon the Queen:
Neander, stay you here.


Ex. Clean. Uran. Evad. Nean. I like not that so well, I love this Evadne most
abominably.


Ger. Prithee! my Dear, harbor not so ill thoughts of thy loving Husband till
death; Geron -- you Strumpet, I Will make you know what it is to use me thus.


Phro. My Lord Neander help, or this old Wizard will murder me; Avaunt Beelzebub.


Nean. Hold Geron!
Here Is a Fellow I may show my Valor on; Aside.
He is old, and Cowardly: Oh, that all Hectors had the
Same discretion in the Choice of their men that I have,
They would not be so often beaten as they are; Now
Will I prove as good a Knight Errant as the best of 'em,
And rescue this distressed Lady.

Ger. Huswife, to morrow will come. --

Phro. My Lord! 'Pray take my part against this wicked old Jealous, Toothless,
Impotent fellow.


Nean. Do you hear Sir! do but dare to think of injuring this Lady,


Qu. Alas! dear Sir! you injure me to think that that same Evening that gives
pain to you; Can give me pleasure.


King. My dear! I am not sick.
I only am a little indisposed,
I Will beg your pardon to retire this night,
But pray stay you, and take no further Care,
Till at your own appartment I see you
To morrow morning.

Qu. Sir! your will is still my Law.

King. Once more good Night -- Ex.

Qu. Poor Prince! now little do thou think
How soon thou art to meet with her thou fly'st,
That wife that still has been so constant!
Oh! how ridiculous
Just Heaven does make the ways of men,
When they forsake the ways of Virtue.
This brave Prince,
(At whose Victorious Armies Greece now trembles)
When he contrives inglorious actions, shall
At the same time, be pitied by his servants,
And a poor Girl shall up-braid him, in
Contriving to preserve him virtuous:
How do men ravel back to Childhood, when
They cease to be thy Children, sacred Virtue!
And need the Care of every little person,
That what they call for may not do 'em harm.

Priest. Not to be subject to temptation is
A privilege only had in the other world,
And yet I hope, Madam, what you design
Will him from his intended Crime defend,
Use you the means, and Heaven will crown the End.

Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
THE THIRD ACT.
Enter King and Pyrrhus. King. GOod morrow, my Lord.

Pyrr. A good day to your Majesty.
A day as pleasant as your night has been.

King. Ah Pyrrhus! I wish it indeed.

Pyrr. I hope your Majesty has been well enough diverted
This night. --

King. Yes, my Lord, though not as you suppose,
I Have been diverted from those wild desires
That made me first injure my self, and then
Unlord my Confident, but I have asked pardon
Of Heaven, and my own Majesty, and now
I beg it too from you, my Loyal Pyrrhus;
Forgive me that I have profaned thy faith,
By such Commands, that thou art bound to ask
Blessed Heaven forgiveness for thy Loyalty.

Pyrr. Your Majesty I hope will give me leave
To wonder at this Change, and understand it,
When you shall please to think me fit for it.

King. I Will tell thee all -- when now the Night
Grew blak enough to hide a sculking action,
I softly stole
To yonder Grotto, through the upper Walks,
And there found my Urania; but I found her,
I found her Pyrrhus, not a Mistress, but
A Goddess rather, which made me to be,
No more her Lover, but her Worshipper:
She only whispered to me as she promised,
Yet never heard I any voice so loud,
And though her Words were gentler far than those
That holy Priests do speak to dying Saints;

Clean. Heaven bless you -- Ex King.
-- when Every thing is green
Must poor Cleantha only wither, and never
Know a Spring? Was I made only high
Like Rhodope, and Haemus, or the Alps,
To dwell with everlasting Winter? to wear Snow,
When every Valley is adorned with Roses?
Well I must die, then I may also be
Happy as other Folks; the Grave looks Wistly,
Like my Fortune, there I shall not see
Poor Villagers more blessed in Love then I,
And there I shall be able to make appear
Cleantha and Endymion Equal are;
Then possibly some of Cleantha's Earth
May prove a little Flower, and look fresher
Then when it was a part of a great Princess.

Enter Urania. Vran. Madam! the Queen expects your Highness.

Clean. I Will wait on her. -- Ex. Cleantha.

Vran. Endymion is returned! what shall I do?
To be at once both Just and Civil too.
If I could satisfy Endymion's Love,
I should unjust to great Theander prove;
That Prince who to so mean a thing as I,
(Bred in a little Cottage) did bestow
His Noble Heart, which is a Present fit
For any Princess fruitful Greece can boast of:
From whom if I could give my Love, I would not.
Why did I give my Promise then last night?
And yet the Generous Endymion
Will sure forgive me when he knows the Cause:
He Is here; Heaven forgive me, what I Am forced to.

Enter Endymion. Endy. Madam! I come upon my Knees to beg your pardon.

Vran. My Lord, it is not well to mock me further,
You have deluded me enough already:
Thus we that are so easy to bestow
Our Love, the greatest Treasure we possess,
Are still neglected by ungrateful men;
But I had thought to have found more truth in you.

Endym. Madam! 'twas my allegiance forced me from you.

Vran. Those men, who dare offer such injuries,
Never want bolduess to excuse their Crimes.

Endym. Had I refused to obey my Kings Command,
You could not think me Worthy of your Love.

Vran. aside He speaks a Truth, I ought, but dare not own,
What a fond Fool was I to be so forward
In trusting a Court Lord, to believe
You e're would marry one of my mean Fortune.

Endym. Dear Urania, I appeal to'th' Gods
Who are honored when they are witnesses to truth.

Vran. Make no more Vows, I am not to be deceived again,
I was too foolish to believe your last: Farewell, my Lord.
Aside. The Powers above forgive me. -- Ex. Vran.

Endym. How much unlike Urania is this Passion?
Who used to be all Calm, and gentle still:
And sure would be so, did not my unlucky
Stars, that never meant me good, incline
Her to this Anger. -- Ex. Neander.

Nean. Your servant, my Lord!

Endym. 'Curse on this vain, Fop. -- Ex. Endym.

Nean. Are you so stout; Farewell. -- Well! I wonder whom the Devil intends I
shall marry with? I have been a servant, as they called; that is, I have Ly'd,
and Sworn, and spent Money upon every Lady about the Court, and still am as far
from having one of them as the very'st Eunuch is; nay more, for they say
Evnuchs have a Trick now a-dayes to please the Ladies Exceedingly: -- I was in
most hopes of Evadne, and love her best: but the old Priest forbids her to see
me, or speak with me; Here she comes! I will force her to hear me -- Enter
Evadne in haste. Dear Apple of my Eye! why this haste? thou have wounded me,
and then thou ^ly'st me.


Evad. There is a sufficient reason for it.


Nean. Must then Neander die?


Cho. of 3. Here our own proper Flocks of Sheep
We may in pleasant safety keep.
Here a perpetual Spring does cloth the Earth,
And makes it fruitful with each seasons birth.
In this fair Climate every day
Is fresh and green as May,
And here no beauty can decay.
Cho. of 3. Thus, thus live we,
As the Elements free
Each day and each night
Is Crowned with delight
Without either Envy or Strife
This is the Jolly Shepherds life.
2.
Free from all Cares in pleasant Shades,
And fragrant Bowres, we spend the day;
(Bowers which no Heat, nor Cold invades;
Which all the year are fresh and gay)
Each does his Loving Mate embrace,
And in soft pleasures melts the Hours away,
So Innocently that no Face,
Of Nymph or Shepherd can a guilt betray:
And having Ease, the Nurse of Poetry,
We sing the stories of our Loves,
As Chaste as Turtle-Doves,
Free from all Fear and Jealousy
From every Envious Eye:
For every Man possesses but his own,
No Shepherd sighs, nor Shepherdess does frown:
No Ambition here is found,
But to be Crowned
Lord or Lady of the May;
And on that solemn day,
For Singing to have praise
Or f^r ind^ting to deserve the Bays,
Thus, thus, live we, etc.
3.
In the Cool Evening, on the Lawns we play,
And merrily pass our time away.
We dance, and run, and pipe, and sing,
And Wrestle in a Ring.
For some gaudy Wreaths of Flowers,
Cropped from the fruitful Fields, and Bowers.
By some pretty Nymps composed,
By their fair hands to be disposed,
To those ambitious Shepherds, who
With Virtuous Emulation strive to do
What may deserve the Garlands, and (obtained)
Are prouder far than Princes that have gained
In fight their Valors prize,
Or ever stubborn Nation's Victories;
Whilst in the adjoining Grove the Nightingale
Does tell her mournful Tale,
And does our Pleasures greet,
With each Note,
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet
From her pret^y jugging, jugging throat.
It does each Breast inspire
With loving heat and with Poetic Fire.
Thus, thus live we, etc.
4.
We live aloof from Destiny,
(That only quarrels with the Great)
And in this Calm Rretreat,
(Content with Nature uncorrupted) we
From splendid miseries of Courts are free;
From pomp, and noise, from pride, and fear,
From Factions, from divisions Clear,
F^ee from brave beggary, smiling strife.
This is indeed a Life:
Clean. O Gods! banish Endymion: desire Evadne to come
To me.

Vran. I will -- Ex. Urania.

Clean. Wretched Cleantha! is thy Love a Crime,
A Crime to him thou love? must it be ruin
To a person, if thou but affect'st him?
Have I some Plague that I must thus destroy,
Whom I embrace? or is my Destiny
G^own Paradoxical, and proves my Love
To be true Hatred? --
O Death! thou art not half so Cruel yet,
In thy destructions of the Prosperous,
As in not killing Wretches that would die.

Enter Endymion. Endym. Urania does not well to treat me thus:
I took no leave of her, but I have told her
The reasons why my Love forbad it me,
Yet she persists in Cruelty.

Clean. He Is here --
His Countenance betokens grief.

Endym. To be thus angry and accuse me of
Slighting a poor deluded Maid
In spite of all my Vows of Love to her --
The Princess still is Gracious to me:
I had best entreat her to persuade my now
Provoked Urania She Is here;
But she is alone, I dare not interrupt her Thoughts.

Clean. Good morrow, my Lord.

Endym. Your pardon, Madam, if unthought of, I
Have rush^d on your Retirement.

Clean. Your Presence will better it.
'Pray what News from Argos?

Endym. Madam, the Repo^t was brought last night to Cortu
Had nothing ^n't of Truth: I found all quiet,
But only for the disturbance which we made
Our selves by our Arrival in the Night.

Clean. I am glad my Lord your danger was no more.

Endym. You oblige me Madam to undergo
Much greater danger for your Highness then
This could have proved.

Clean. My Lord! you have already
Served me beyond what I can recompense.

Endym. Madam! t'has been your Highness's pleasure still
To honor with two great respects the little
Merits of your mean Servant, who is advanced
When numbered in the lowest rank of those
That have been Fortunate to do you service.

Clean. You add still to my debts, my Lord, yet are
No way injurious, since you make me rich
In having such a Noble Creditor:
But pray, my Lord, tell me, (as one concerned
Much in your Fortunes) what is the Cause
Your Lordship has not worn of late that rest
Upon your looks which heretofore appeared.

Endym. Madam, it is for you to wear that rest who are
Placed in that upper Region where there is
No Wind, but a little Bark, in the midst
Of a great Sea, subject to every Wave,
And every gust of Wind, can never pretend
To this blessed 'State.

Clean. My Lord; you have some griefs that are particular.

Endym. For my troubles, Madam,
Alas; their objects would appear so small
To your great Eye, you would think I did affront you
Should I dare say them to you. Could the Lion
In his Midnight-walks hear some poor Worms
Complain for want of little drops of dew,
What pity could that noble Creature have,
Who never wanted small things, for those poor
Ambitions? yet these are their concernments,
And but for want of these they pine and die.

Clean. I hope my Lord what is your Trouble may
Not be augmented by my knowing it,
Else I shall never think ought small that can
(...) Thus to instruct you in Astronomy.

Endym. I am lost in wonder: -- Aside.
Madam, it is not strange,
If I Am proud of what you blush at, but
I am sure your unbounded wit to morrow
Will with much greater reason quite deny it.

Clean. My Lord, you think no woman can be constant
To what she says a day, but your Urania:
But till you have tried, pray have more Charity,
You Will after have more Faith: my Lord Farewell:
The Gods forgive my breach of Modesty -- Aside.

Endym. What have I heard!
Was It not enough to lose my dear Urania,
Unless I also did adore the hand
That snatched her from me, Cleantha Loves Endymion
But Fool it cannot be; never may I know
Her Noble breast harbor a thought so low. -- Exeunt.

The End of the Third Act.
THE FOURTH ACT.
Enter Neander. (...). I Was (at least in my own conceit) in probability of
winning the sweet Evadne; and now, that not only her ugly Father, but the
Queen too should forbid her to see me or speak to me; it is what I cannot, will
not bear: Though Fate it self say, I shall do it, I am resolved that old gray
Priest and his Mistress the Queen, shall be the subjects of my Revenge: and yet
I am not ambitious to show my Valor so far, as to be hanged for it neither -- I
think I have it; If I can do this, 'twill be the sweetest part of my Revenge, to
live, and tread, and spit upon their Graves: I have sent for Geron, a Rogue sit
for my purpose, for he is Covet^us to Extremity, and I have Gold to bribe him,
and which is lucky above my Wishes, the Priest and Queen have chec'kd him
lately, and countenanced his Wife against him, which torments him so, that I
believe he would be glad to be hanged on any terms. -- Here he is.


Enter Geron. Ger. Consume him he is here --


Nean. Dear Geron, let him embrace thee that
Perhaps is thy best Friend.

Ger. Perhaps, with a Curse to him -- Aside.
No, my Lord, you are a Friend to my Wife.

Nean. Geron! give me your hand.

Ger. Would I had your Heart's blood. -- Aside.

Nean. Give me your Hand, Geron.

Ger. My Good Lord! you do me too much honor.

Nean. I beg your pardon heartily that I presumed to
Countenance your ugly, impertinent, ill-natured, vain
Wife against you, you that are so worthy an honest Knight;
It was Ignorance of her, and you made me do it. I protest it was.

Ger. What the Devil does he mean by this? -- Aside.


Nean. Upon my Honor Geron it was; had I not been a stranger to her ill
Qualities.


Ger. I am afraid you know 'em too well. -- Aside.


Nean. I should never have encouraged her in her Insolence to you.


Ger. What does all this tend to? -- Aside.


Nean. For I am well satisfied, a Man, especially an old Man that has had
experience of the vanity of the World, ought to have an absolute Dominion over
his Wife.


Ger. My Lord, this is a Truth! I would you had acknowledged sooner; for my
abominable Wife, instead of being humbled, is ^ncourg'd by the Court.


Nean. I know though too late now, your Wife is froward, Foolish, petulant,
wanton, proud, expensive, disobedient, Ungrateful. --


Ger. It Is too true; but a Plague on him, I am afraid he has

(...) Night resumed his desires, and that Urania has promised it in earnest.


Nean. But Urania will contradict that --


Ger. No; she asked the Princess liberty to leave the Court a day or two for
some private business or other, and is now absent.


Nean. Excellent Geron! but how shall we carry this story?


Ger. My Wife; who shall still be ignorant of the matter.


Nean. Admirably invented: thou shal't have the Talents; besides if thy Wife
should discover thee or me, if she be questioned, we will face her down in it and
she shall hang for it.


Ger. That Argument prevails with me more then the Talents: whether she betrays
us or no, we will do that my Lord.


Nean. With all my heart, Excellent Geron: for the Priest, thou shall go to
him, and subtly persuade him that the Queen has made an appointment to meet
me in the Grotto, and that I to avoid suspicion am to be in Woman's Clothes.


Ger. My Lord, he will never believe it.


Nean. Do thou confirm it by ten thousand Oaths.


Ger. That will be dangerous.


Nean. Not at all: But think on the Talents, and the death of thy Wi^e man:
Thou may persuade the Priest to meet her to prevent it in a Woman's loose
habit, and then bring the King to see them.


Ger. But the Priest will soon undeceive the King.


Nean. No, no, fear not that, the King will be so enraged: it is ten to one he
kills 'em both without Examination; if not, you and I, who will be the first
Accusers will swear 'em both down in it; think upon Revenge and Profit.


Ger. My Lord -- I Will do it about the time of this Even'ng Sacrifice for the
Victory of Theander.


Enter Endymion with a Guard. Ger. What means this?


Nean. O Endymion's banished.
And this Guard is to convey him out of the
Kings Dominions; let him be hanged and
He will. -- let us about our business -- Ex. Geron and Nean.

Endym. May I not see the Princess for
Whom I am banished before I go?

Officer. No, no, along Sir.

1. Sold. Pray Sir, go a little faster.

2. Sold. Prithee, let the Gentleman alone, soft
And ^air goes far, and the Gentleman
Considers he has far to go.

Endym. Farewell than brave Cleantha, may thou never
Once think Endymion suffers for thy sake:
And farewell dear Urania, I will love thee
On those hard Rocks I now must dwell upon.

Officer. What Is this muttering? Along Sir.


2. Sold. Good Gentleman! he is loath to leave the Princess
I warrant him. Enter Cleantha.

1. Sold. Here she comes.

Endym. The Princess! -- Great Princess pardon
My glorious sufferings; forgive me that Kneels.
I ever saw the Light, or lived a Minute:
That you are injured thus by him whose being
Is not worth your meanest thought.

Clean. Ah, my Lord, affront me not:
Rise brave Endymion! It Is my misfortune:
Thou art too low already.

Endym. Fortune made me low to be advanced by a hand
More Worthy than her own. Rises.

Clean. My Noble Lord!
I have undone you! what can I give you now
In recompense of Liberty, and all
The pleasures you must loose
In a sad banishment, for her who only
Can be afflicted at your sufferings.

Endym. Madam, you have Enough to give to pay
So mean a debt, if you will call it one
A thousand times.

Clean. Name it, and take it, dear
Endymion, though it be my life.

Endy. Madam!
Then grant me this request: use every art
To make your Hours as blessed as I shall pray
They may be many; and never let a ^hought
(...) My impatience to be troublesome to others.

King. You grieve for Endymion, when all Arcadia
Rejoices at the Victory of
Theander, which this Evening we shall Celebrate
With Sacrifices, and with other Rites, for whom
We will prepare a public Triumph:
Compose your self, and let not others see
Your shame.

Clean. My Shame they never Aside.
Shall see; Call it ^y Glory, so it is.

Enter Pyrrhus. Pyrr. Sir, the Sacrifice is ready for the
Altar, and the Priests wait your Royal presence
For the Execution.

King. Niece! think on what I Have said, and follow us.

Ex. King and Pyrr. Qu. Come, dear Cleantha, prithee be not sad,
The Prince of Macedon will be fitter for
Your noble Blood which is derived from Kings.

Clean. And some other will b^ fitter for him
Then I, unless he likes a broken heart.
Besides the Prince is Contracted already to
The Queen of Thrace's eldest Daughter.

Qu. She is long since dead.

Clean. Who can tell that, Madam; I am apt to believe
If she had her Kingdom yet the Prince would find
Her out.

Enter Phronesia. Qu. What News with you?

Phro. News that does import your Majesty. -- Whisper.

Enter Geron. Ger. Madam! the Queen and your Highness are expected at the
Temple* this will be a night of Joy.


Clean That brings me naught but sorrow; the name of joy
Is odious to me, since Endymion's gone.

Qu. Art thou sure of this Phronesia?


Phro. Yes, Madam, doubt it not.


Qu. The Gods amend all once more, I Will prevent it:
But first I Will to the Temple; Come Cleantha.

Ger. What have you told the Queen
What I enjoined you?

Phro. I h^ve, and she is resolved to Circumvent him: Come to the Temple,
haste. -- Ex. Phron.


Ger. Thus far it goes well; I have with many Oaths and P^otestations confirmed
the Priest in the belief that Neander in Woman's Clothes is this night to meet
the Queen: it takes admirably -- The Talents are my own, and this wife of mine
is dead already.


The Scene changes to the Temple. After the Sacrifice, there is a Consort of
Martial Music, and two or three of the Salii or Priests of Mars sing as
follows. 1.
ALL Praises to the God of War,
Who in our Battles gives Success,
By whom we now Victorious are,
Who does not only us with Conquests bless,
But it is his Power that gives us Peace.
Arcadia now may safely that enjoy,
Thessalians cannot that destroy:
For brave Theander has our Foes oppressed,
And by his Noble Toyls procured our Rest.
2.
In vain they did their Heedless Force oppose,
Against such Courage, and such Conduct too,
Such as required more strong and numerous Foes*
Fit for his Noble fury to subdue.
Oh how he thundered in the Van,
Godlike he threatened, and did more than man^.
Priest. Heaven bless you Madam. -- to her -- Exit. Queen.
To himself. And make you see your Crime
In it is own horrid shape e're you attempt it,
And yet she bears it with so much assurance
I could believe her Innocent, yet why
Should Geron dare to invoke all the Gods
To testify it; if it be false, what can
Provoke him to this Villainy? If true,
She never will acknowledge it to me
What ere it be; it is worth my venturing
To be undeceived. -- Ex.

The Third Scene.
Enter King, Geron and Pyrrhus. King. Is It possible? my Queen an Adultress?
It cannot be: Be sure Sir, if you accuse her
Falsely, ye shall not only die, but
Linger out a wretched life in Torments.

Ger. Sir! if I lie, let me have what death
The witty'st Cruelty can invent.

Pyrr. I am amazed! the Queen and Priest
In Woman's Clothes? strange Circumstance
To meet in Grotto, this Night? Sure it is
Impossible.

Ger. Sir, I am content to dye fort, if you see not your self all this to Night.


King. In the mean time, you will be content to be secured?


Ger. Sir with all my heart.


King. Guard! take Geron, and secure him till further order.


Enter Guard, and seizes him. Pyrr. Sir! this dreadful news amazes me!


King. Ah Pyrrhus? in this very Grotto
I met Urania, and forgot the Queen,
Though then I thought her faithful.
And as free from any Carnal thoughts
At (...) departed Souls in the other world.

Pyrr. The Gods grant this meeting prove no worse
Than that did.

King. O Heaven! methinks I see 'em already in their Lust, yet sure it cannot
be; if I find this Accusation false, it had been better for this fellow he
never had been born.


Pyrr. Sir, you may yet prevent it.

King. I may for this time, but I will not harbor
That Devil Jealousy within my breast
For all this World can give me: I am resolved
To see the certainty my self; and if
It prove untrue, my Queen shall live with freedom,
As she has ever done, in all my Thoughts,
And her Accuser fall her Sacrifice:
But if she can forget her former Virtue,
I can take as much pleasure to see her blood
Drop from the fatal S^ord, as e're I did
To see it blushing on her Cheek, when first
I thought her modest*
Look! where they come -- Enter Queen and Priest.
Let us withdraw; it may be we shall
Discover something.

Priest. And nothing is more Common
Then this, which is not thought a sin, because
It seems an Impulse of Nature.

King. Hear'st thou Pyrrhus? I am distracted!

Qu. The King.

Priest. All happiness attend your Majesty.

King. I must contain! how do you Madam?

Qu. Always happy whilst your Majesty is so.

King. And what are you discoursing of?

Qu. Nothing! but good with this good person sure.

King. What^s that you talk of which is not Sin
Because an impulse of Nature? --

Qu. What do you mean Sir?

Priest. I know not how we came by Chance to speak
How little wantonness is thought a sin
Because it seems an Impulse of Nature.
Whereas the Virtuous still fix their Eyes
(...) It has been very long, two hours at least: Enter a Lord of the Council.
It Is bad enough for certain: here it comes!
My Lord, you have been long; but I expect
No good; and therefore care not if you had
Been longer.

Lord. Sir, before I can satisfy your Expectations,
I must humbly pray you will be pleased to pardon
The entreating your Answer to a Question
On which all we have done depends.

King. What Is that?

Lord. I may seem too insolent: but the whole Truth
Of all the Examination does depend
Upon It; that is, Whether your Majesty
Did not one night Command a little Lady,
That waits on the Princess, one Urania,
To attend you in that Grotto, where
The Queen and Priest were seized on*

King. I did.

Lord. And she was there?

King. She was.

Lord. Is your Majesty assured it was she, or might it be the Queen?


King. Ha! -- her Whispers were like the Queens: Pyrrhus knows I told him so.


Lord. Be happy then great Prince;
Your Queen is Innocent; your Priest is holy,
And Geron and Neander only are
The Criminals.

King. Are you assured of this?

Lord. Yes Sir; it was the Hellish contrivance of
Geron and Neander brought them both together.

King. Why did not the Queen reveal this?

Lord. She rather would have died then have disclosed
Your S^mmo^^ to Urania, which with your Majesty's
Pa^^on, she is pleased to call your dishonor.

King. My Lord it was; but pray relieve my Wonder
And tell me the whole Story.

Lord. Sir, in this Confession of Geron and Neander, and Phronesia, which we,
(having found them Tripping in some part of the Story) by threatening Tortures,
have extorted from 'em: Your Majesty may fully read the Story of the Innocence
of the Queen and Priest, and of the guilt of these Barbarous Wretches.


King. Blest' Heaven! how are thy ways just like thy Orbs,
Involved within each other: yet still we find
Thy Judgments are like Comets that do blaze,
And fright, but die withal, whilst all thy Mercies
Are like the Stars which ofttimes are obscured,
But still remain the same behind the Clouds.

Pyrr. May all your Doubts and Fears thus terminate*

Lord. Thus are you shaken to be more confirmed.

King. Send for Urania, Pyrrhus! she shall wear
This day the just rewards of Virtue; I
Will visit my brave Queen, who rather chose
To die unjustly as a Criminal
Then I should justly be so termed,
For which I will proclaim my Fault since she
Will have the Glory of concealing it.

Enter Evadne. Evad. The King seems pleased, as he has reason.

King. My Lord! let the Council remove
Into the Hall, where before all the Court
I Will bring my Queen in Triumph there to hear
Her base Accusers sentenced. -- Ex. all but Evadne*

Evad. I was told I should find Cleantha here --
Why did I beg to leave my Cell?
(Where I did never injure any one)
To see this place, and in so little time
To do more mischief than whole Generations
Can parallel? how much
Had it been better I had ever dwelt
In those Retirements, where small Sins seem great*
And great Devotions small, then to be here
Where the blood of Queens and Priests had like
To have been sacrificed to the Malice of
Wicked men? (had not the Gods taken the Cause

Clean. How Is this?

King. What mean thou?

Gent. See Sir, see,
Those Cheeks that lately Beauty wore, now pale
With guilt.

King. Her Crime!

Gent. She is with Child.

Clean. It is impossible; she cannot dissem^^e so much Virtue,
I Will engage my Life she is Innocent.

King. How know you this?

Gent. Sir, being sent in haste by my Lord Pyrrhus,
To bring her to your Majesty, by chance
I learned of one of the Servants of the Princess
Near to what place he thought she was:
I made Enquiry there, at a small house
I was acquainted at; The Woman told me,
She thought she I inquired for was in the house:
And asking of me many Circumstances,
She told me it was surely she: but told me too,
As a great Secret, That she was with Child,
But that she said she was Married;
As did her Mother who this morning left her,
At this I went to Urania, who confes't it,
But would not tell me who her Husband was,
And was very loath to come with me, though
I told her, your Majesty had sent for her.

King. And is this truth Urania?

1. Lord. Speak to the King.

Vran. It Is true.

King. And who is your Husband?

Lord. ^e not: shamed to name your Husband, Madam,
'Twill be your shame if you name none.

Uran. I am not ^sham'd to name him, but afraid --

King. (...) ^s't, speak?

V^an. (...) not disobey, and by my Lord
Am autho^ (...) him, when
(...) qu^stion'd, who is more tender
(...) his own.

1. Lord. Name him!

Vran. It is the Great Theander.

Qu. The Prince!

King. What are you married to the Prince!
Married to Theander? -- Rises in a Fury.

Vran. O pardon me, Great King,
That I refused not to be taken from
A Cottage, to the bosom of a Prince,
On such Conditions as we dared to call
The Gods to Witness.

King. Whether she be his Wife,
Or only dares affirm it, though she were
More to me then my Eyes, she should
Die e're I sleep.

Clean. Upon my Knees I beg,
Great Sir, you will recall this hasty Sentence;
It is the Princes fault, not hers.

King. I will hear
No Intercessions -- by the Honor of a King,
I swear it. -- The Prince in some few hours
Will be in Town; -- if what she says be false,
This news shall be his welcome: but if true,
It Is fit his coming be too late to save her.

Vran. Ah, Great Prince, pity the distressed who has
No friend to plead her Cause; all I affirm
Is truth; Theander is my Witness, see Takes a Let^er ou^ of her bosom.
That Noble Name; this I received from him
Not three days since.

King reads it and gives it to the Queen. King. It Is so; but know Urania!
My Crown would prove too heavy for your offspring,
Fit only for ^ottages; it will behove you to
Prepare ^or death this day within Two hours.

Qu. Sir hold!

Clean. I beseech your Majesty --

King. I charge you on your Loyalty to hold;
I swear again this day within ^wo hours
I Will see her head off* Marshall take her hence,

Nean. Peace, wicked Woman!


Ger. O vile Woman! it is you that have brought me to this! must I be cut in
pieces?


Phro. Truly loving Husband you must, and be given to Dogs too, but they will
have but ill Commons of you; you will be mighty tough; besides you have so many
diseases, that if you were divided into as many pieces as there are hairs in
your Beard, each Morsel would own a several Malady: for my part I would not
advise any Dog that I have a kindness for to taste of you, for fear of
endangering his health.


Ger. O thou abominable filthy Hag, if thou were to be served so first, it
would not trouble me.


Phro. O Sir, you would have drawn me in, but I shall live to tread upon your
Grave! you know it were ill manners for me to be hanged before my Husband! but
how does your Lordship? will you have some Greek-wine to comfort your cold
stomach, you will die with the fear on it else before to morrow morning; but I
beseech you, my Lord, do not forget, if you do live till then, to have a
Nose-gay, and a pair of white Gloves, with clean Linen too, for the Execution!
Men of quality are always very cleanly when they go to be hanged.


Nean. O! what will become of me? I shall never be able to endure it. Oh! you
old cowardly Sot! this comes of your confessing; Rogue.


Ger. This may thank your villainous design, with a Curse to you, I was only
drawn in.


Nean. You deserve to be hanged Rascal, and will be so.


Ger. 'Twill be some comfort to me to have a Lord suffer with me, but 'twould
be more honor to me, if that Lord were a wiser man.


Nean. O! you old Dog! that I could come at you.


Ger. That I could poison you with my breath, but that 'twould put you out of
your pain, which is your immoderate fear.


Enter Priest. Priest. Peace be here!


Phro. You come as seasonably as can be, for the Traitors are at Civil War.


Priest. Away, woman, and interrupt 'em not.


Phro. I will not take my leave on you, for I intend to see my dear Husband
again, at least before you be cut into Messes, Farewell. -- Ex. Phron.


Priest. I am now come to speak to you as dying men.


Nean. Ay, ay, you old Rascal Geron, whom may that thank?


Ger. A villainous Lord that corrupted a poor innocent man as I was: a Curse on
him for drawing me in.


Nean. A Curse upon an old Cowardly Rogue, to let his fear betray us.


Priest. Come, it is not now a season to quarrel with one another, but to make
peace with the Gods: I am come to prepare you for your deaths, and first
Neander I begin with you.


Nean. 'Pray Sir begin with him, he needs it most! he has always been the most
perfidious, impious Wretch.


Ger. I need it most? I scorn to be prepared any more then your self, if you go
to that, with that ugly, pocky Who^e-masters face of your own.


Nean. Sir, it is no matter what he says; he has as much malice to good men, as
Whores have to honest Women


Priest. I must first begin with you my Lord.


Ger. Look there, he knows who has most need on it.


Nean. Peace Wisard, peace! do you say this to me?


Priest. Peace stupid Wretches, I command you: and confess, and repent of your
most horrid Crimes.


Nean. Well Sir, I have done; and I do confess from the bottom of my heart -- O
you old dry, raw-bon'd, wretched, decrepit-Cuckold you, to bring me to this.


Priest. Heaven! what impiety is this?


Ger. Ay Sir! you see his Devotion? O! Villainous wicked man.


Priest. Sir! hold your Tongue! my Lord, it is time now to be sensible of your
sad condition.


Ger. Ay Sir! so it is, if you knew as much as I do of his wickedness, you would
say so.


Nean. Well Sir! I do confess, I Will torment the Rogue Asid^. I have many Sins
to repent of -- First -- I have been naught with that old fellow's Wife.


Evad. If pity poor Urania could do thee good,
Thou have enough on it.

Vran. I do confess I Am married to the Prince;
But he will witness for me 'twas the effect
Of his own Choice: I never presumed
To think i^ till he told me it should be so;
Since when how faithful I have been to him
Witness! Oh! Heaven! and all those Powers that dare
Acquit whom Kings condemn; and though for this
I now must suffer death, I cannot wish
I had not don't, since 'twas the Prince's pleasure,
Whom to contradict, to me were worse then death.

Gent. Alas! I pity her, her Case is too severe.

Vran. And yet I feel
That death is bitter, it is an Enemy
Looks cruelly on those who have no friends:
It Is hard to undergo the greatest Task alone;
But it is my Fate, and Heaven must be obeyed --
-- It Is a long hazard that we run in death,
And a short warn^ng rather does disturb
Then sit us for it; were it not for this,
I could be well content to close these Eyes
That have of late beheld so little pleasure.

Marsh. She draws Tears from my Eyes; I was not wont
To be so soft.

Vran. But I too long
Detain you with Complaints, whose business is
To see me die: Live happy brave Theander,
May all thy Sorrows die with thy Urania,
And all those Joys live with thee which she took
(...) thy ^ontents* -- May thou be happy in
A Princess, great as thy own Merits, bright
As thy own ^yes, and virtuous as
Are all thy Thoughts; and may she honor thee
As ^^uly as thy poor Urania did.

Execu. Are you ready, Madam?

Uran. Who is this?

Gent. Madam, it is your Destiny.

Vran. O, it is he
Sir, you can instruct me what I am to do;
I never yet saw any body die.

Gent. Madam, you must kneel.

Uran. How will he strike?

Gent. With all the mercy that he can.

Execu. When you have ended all you have to say,
Pray kneel with your Face that way, and give
Some sign when I shall strike.

Uran. I will.

Evad. I cannot stay to see it; Farewell, dear Urania. Exit. Evad.

Vran. When I am dead, pray Sirs suffer none
But my Mother to fit me for my Grave;
She will be careful of me, she will pay
Holy devotions for me, and bedew
With pious Tears that face she still has loved:
And may the Gods give comforts in her sorrows,
And all those Stars which have been hard to me
Be merciful to her -- May my misfortune
Work in her only a more true content
In the low Sphere she so securely moves in*

Execu. I think she will never a done prating, they all keep such a coile when
they come to die: Would the King would please to forbid all Speeches upon
Scaffolds.


Vran. Sirs! Farewell, pray present
My humble Service to my Noble Princess,
With thanks for all her Favors, in my life,
And Charity in death -- blessed Gods assist me. -- Kneels.
Pray expect the Sign.

Execu. I shall. --

Enter in haste Parthenia Vrania's Mother Parth. Stay stay the fatal Blow.

King. What Is this?

Par. A miserable Mother come to save her only Child.

King. Executioner do your Office. One of the Gent. lays hold of the
Executioner.
(...) To dawn upon me, and instruct me, those
Are nearer it, who kneel in humble Cells,
Then such as stand on Tiptoe on high Towers.
For now Theander makes Urania more
A Princess, then a Kingdom could, by courting
Her as a Shepherdess, and shows the World,
That more then Chance conduced to her Greatness.

King. Why did you not tell Theander the whole truth?

Par. Sir, he married her at Court, and I knew not of it
Till he we was gone to the War in Thessaly:
For witness of all this, I do invoke
Those Powers, who never testify untruths;
And here produce those small Remains of Greatness
Misfortune yet has left me; See, Sir, here She shows several rich Jewels.
That so famed Jewel which so many Kings
Of Thrace have worn, and with such veneration
Have still preserved on an old Prophecy, that
This should preserve the Thracian Family.

King. Pyrrhus! it is all true! Go tell the Queen and Princess this:
Ex. Pyrr. I need no Testimony but those words,
All Queens might blush to hear from Cottagers,
But is it possible so mean a place
So long should hold great Cleopatra?

Par. Know, great Prince (and know it too
From one who has experimented Greatness)
When I had satisfied my self in my
Endeavors of regaining my lost Rights,
And saw 'em all unprosperous, (as if
Heaven long enough had given one Family
The privilege to govern others)
I was as well content to be the first
Must learn to act with common people,
As he who first was called from them to rule.

King. Great Queen,
The Prophecy is now fulfilled, That Jewel
Will serve to satisfy the World as much
Of all you say, as your own Words have me:
And thus preserves the Thracian Family, -- Embraces Urania.
Dear Daughter! still be happy and forgive
Our ignorance; I cannot love thee better
Then at that very time I did condemn thee,
I could as well have sentenced my two Eyes;
And pardon me, dear Sister, if I first -- Salutes Cleopatra.
Asked pardon where I most did need it.
Call the Queen, and tell Cleantha Urania is alive.

Par. Now, my dear Daughter thou art safe within my Arms.

Vran. Madam, it only did belong to you
Who gave me life, thus to preserve it too. -- Trumpets within.

King. What Is this?

Gent. The Prince is come.

King. What will Theander say to see his dear Urania
Thus attired at his return?

Uran. He Will say you are merciful.

Enter Queen, Cleantha and Pyrrhus. King. Madam, see here great Cleopatra
And call her Sister; take Cleantha!
Her thou have wept for: Pyrrhus has told you all.
Enter Theander. My Son! never more welcome! never The Prince fixes his Eyes on
Urania.
Did more Joy spring from more Sorrow.

Thean. Bless me dread Sir!
What Scene does entertain me? Are your Joys
Expressed by Sacrifice?

King. Theander, take,
Take thy Urania, and wonder not
At any thing but her.

Thean. My Triumphs are more dreadful than my Conquests.

Qu. My Son be happy
In thy best Choice; let not thy wonder make
(...) 'Twill be but gratitude in me to do
Some of their business for them, and reward
So brave a Virtue as Endymion owns,
And make him great for his Cleantha too.

Clean. Is Endymion returned? O happy hour!

Thean. The War in Thessaly has found an happy end,
And there I Have left
Those hands that made that Scepter stoop, who, now,
Want but a Scene to do new wonders in,
And this may prove rebellious Thrace, if you
Sir, think fit I wear that Crown Urania gives me;
In this Conquest, the brave Endymion
Shall be my second; what shall I not expect from
Such virtue and such valor when they meet?

King. I have of late received such mercies, that
I cannot think of any thing which looks
Like Cruelty. Therefore wonder not
All that you ask so soon is granted you,
Cleantha; Take then your Endymion; be
More blessed in him than Greatness e're could make you.

Qu. And now you are doing works of mercy Sir,
I beg for the sake of this glorious day
Which is a day of mercy to us all,
That Geron and Neander may not die
But suffer Banishment for life.

King. What you propose has much of Piety;
I Will not deny't: and now I Have one request
To you my honored Priest, your leave
That Pyrrhus my best Confident may serve
The fair Evadne

Priest. You oblige me Sir to make me see
My poor Evadne is so much your care,
It shall ^e mine; she still shall think that best
Your Majesty is pleased to choose ^or her.

Enter Endymion. Thean. Endymion! why so slowly to thy Joys? Kneels and kisses
Cleantha 's hand.
Re^p here the fruits of Gratitude and Mercy.

Clean. Welcome my Lord.

Qu. My Lord, you are welcome from your Banishment.

King. You Have only now this Ladies leave to ask
For any thing you would have.

Endym. I am happy in your Royal mercy Sir,
And hope in time to be so too in hers.
Madam, I hope your Highness has the Charity
To pardon your poor Servant, who was the
Unwilling occasion of so much injury
To so Noble a Princess.

Clean. You need not fear
Your Sentence when Cleantha is your Judge.

King. Let us all away, and satisfy our selves with what
We have so long travailed with, and let the World
Learn from this story, Those that are virtuous
Cannot be long in Clouds; Innocence concealed is the
Stolen pleasure of the Gods, which never ends
In shame as that of Men does often times, but
Like the Sun breaks forth, when he has
Gratified another World, and to our Eyes appears
More Glorious through his late obscurity.

Priest. The Impious here a while may find some Rest,
But in the End the good are only blessed.

Ex. omnes. FINIS.

