THE MISER: A COMEDY ACTED By His Majesty's Servants, AT THE Theater Royal.
Written by THOMAS SHADWELL.

LONDON, Printed for Hobart Kemp, at the sign of the Ship in the upper Walk of
the New Exchange, 1672.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES Lord Buckhurst, Gentleman of His MAJESTY'S
BEDCHAMBER.
My Lord,
THE Favor which your Lordship was pleased to show to this Play, I value more
than all the loud Applauses of a Theater: Nor can it be less esteemed by any
man that has had the honor of knowing your Lordships Person, or the pleasure
of reading the diversions of your pen. It seems by your obliging kindness to
the Poets, and your great example in writing, as if you were designed by
Heaven, among many other great uses, for the sustaining of declining Poetry.
This consideration, with the boldness which your frequent favors have given
me, pull the trouble of this Dedication upon you. You see, my Lord, the danger
of encouraging any of us, who are too apt without it to use the names of great
men for the defense of our weaknesses and follies; nay, some are so arrogant to
believe their injurious Dedications competent returns for all the Obligations
they receive from the generosity of their Patrons. But I, my Lord, have been
too much obliged by you to think of making any return: all that I can do, is to
beg leave to make an humble acknowledgment of all your favors; and to take
this occasion to publish my self to the World,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Obliged Humble Servant, THOMAS SHADWELL.

READER.
THE Foundation of this Play I took from one of Moliere's called L' Avare; but
that having too few persons, and too little action for an English Theater, I
added to both so much, that I may call more than half of this Play my own: and
I think I may say without vanity, that Moliere's part of it has not suffered in
my hands, nor did I ever know a French Comedy made use of by the worst of our
Poets, that was not bettered by 'em. It Is not barrenness of wit or invention,
that makes us borrow from the French, but laziness; and this was the occasion
of my making use of L' Avare. This Play, as it was wrote in less than a month,
and was the last Play that was Acted at the Kings Theater in Covent Garden,
before the fatal fire there; the great have I made in writing it, that made me
very doubtful of the success of it, which was the reason that at first I did
not own it, but concealed my Name. I have resolved to take my leave of long
Prefaces, and will give you no farther trouble here, for fear you should find
too much afterward.

PROLOGUE
[The Authors Name not being then known.]
OUR Poet never doubts the good success
Of Farce that is in half French, half English dress:
And this was made with little pains and wit,
As any cobling Poet e're wrote yet,
And therefore he is resolved not to submit.
The Fortune of his Fellows he has seen,
Who in dull Farce have so successful been,
That could he write true wit, he is in doubt
Whether you would endure to sit it out.
But though he has no wit, he has some shame,
And stealing from the French conceals his name.
French Plays, in which true wit's as rarely found
As Mines of Silver are in English ground;
A foolish Marquess, or his knavish man,
Or some poor Pudden fool's the best they can. --
But stay, I Have been to bold; methinks I see
The English Monsieurs rise in mutiny,
Crying confound him, does he damn French Plays,
The only Pieces that deserve the Bays:
France that on fashions does strict Laws impose,
The Universal Monarchy for Clothes,
That rules our most important part, our dress,
Should rule our wit, which is a thing much less.
But Messieurs he says, farther to provoke ye,
He would as soon be Author of Tu Quoque,
As any Farce that e're from France was sent,
And all considered it is a complement,
And yet he hopes the advantages they gain,
That he may please ye with small stock of brain:
For our good natured Nation thinks it fit,
To count French Toys, good Wares; French nonsense, wit.
The Actors Names.
Goldingham The Miser. Theodore His Son. Squeeze A Scrivener. Timothy His Son.
Bellamour A Gentleman in disguise, his true name Raines, and servant to Gold.
but a lover of Theodora. Rant and Hazard Two Gamesters of the Town. Robin
Theodore's Servant. Roger James and William Servants to Goldingham. Justice Two
Bullies Constable and Watch Three Counterfeit Baylifs Fiddlers
Women:
Theodora Daughter to Goldingham. Isabella Sister to Bellamour. Cheatly A
Procurer. Lettice Her Daughter a Wench. Joyce A Wench. Bridget The same.
The Miser.
ACT. 1.
SCE. 1.
Enter Rant, Hazard, Theodore. Rant. WHat a devil makes thee in so musty a
humor? Thou art as dull and dump^^^ as a fellow that had been drunk over night
with Ale, and had done no^^^ng but drunk Coffee, talked Politics, and read
Gazettes all this morning.


Haz. Have lost thy money, or thy wench?


Rant. Nay faith Hazard, if he has lost his money, I am sure he has lost his
wench, in spite of the noble virtue of constancy.


Haz. Come Theodore a lucky hand or two at the Groom Porters, will get thee as
good a Mistress as any about the Town.


Rant. No pox on it they are kept so high by foolish elder Brothers, that poor
younger Brothers must despair of 'em.


Haz. No Rant, thou art mistaken, the Elder Brothers are so kind to keep 'em
for the younger, that can not do it for themselves; they are civil to the one
for love, and the other for money.


Rant. I am not of your opinion, there was never so much ready money and so
little love stirring, as at this time.


Haz. Faith then we (that have but shallow purses) must three or four club for
one, she will serve us all, considering how we drink. Come Theodore be not
melancholy, if thou have lost thy Mistress, I Will club with thee for another.


Theo. So Gentlemen, ^his Dialogue run^ off very smartly; you had rehearsed it
before, but I find you have the effects of last nights debauch upon you, and
are hot headed this morning, what else should make you think me melancholy?


Rant. Come faith, thou art.


Theo. I must confess Gentlemen I am not in so brisk a humor as to leap over
Joynt-stooles, or come over a stick for the King, or any of those pretty
frolicks; but I have no trouble, unless you will create me one.


Haz. I am so far from that, that I Will tell thee news that will rejoice the
heart of thee, if thou were as dumpish as a young Spark that is newly denied to
be trusted for a white Periwig.


Theo. Prithee what is that?


Rant. That which I am sure you will bite at.


Haz. There is the most delicate, charming creature, come to lie over against
us in Bow-street! Oh it is a melting Girl, she looks as if she would dissolve
like an Anchovee in Claret.


Rant. She would relish better (when a man has the hot fit upon him) than small
Beer in a Fever.


Haz. Than small Beer a pox on it, she would be more welcome to thee than a
Reprieve would, if thou were just now trolling out Hopkins and Sternhold upon a
Ladder.


Theo. You are mighty witty, and, full of similies; but who the Devil is this
incomparable Lady?


Rant. Pox on it, thou art as testy as an old Lean Judge fasting, upon the
Bench, between eleven and twelve.


Haz. I Will put him into a better humor; with this young Lady, is Mrs* Cheatly,
party per pale Match-maker, and Baud, got acquainted, and has promised to bring
her to a Ball at the Bear at Charing Cross, where you know there is a very
convenient Couch.


Rant. Oh she is a delicate bit for him that can get her, she is fit for one of
us honest Fellows to debauch, and for a dull rich Fellow (born to the drudgery
of Plowing Land and getting Heirs) to Marry.


Theo. But (if you be not too much transported to tell me) Pray who is this
young Lady?


Haz. Why, it is one Isabella that lies over against our Lodgeing at the Blew
Balcone.


Theo. 'Sdeath what said he?


[Aside] Rant. How now, are you nettled? Gad I Will lay my life this Rogue has
been beforehand with us.


Theo. No faith Gentlemen, but this Lady I have seen, and know she has some
qualities very unfit for your Company.


Haz. What are those Man?


Theo. Damned unfashionable qualities, called virtue, and modesty.


Rant. Pish, but if she be not too much seasoned with virtue in this warm age,
she cannot keep long.


Theo. Indeed but she will, in spite of that Villainous Seducer Cheatly, whose
Clutches scarce any young Lady can escape.


Rant. Prithee speak not against thy Mother-in-Law, thou had the debauching
of her Daughter Lettice.


Theo. I the debauching of her; she was debauched from her Mothers Womb, she
has it ex Traduce.


Haz. I Will hold thee ten pound Cheatly brings this Lady to Supper, for all her
virtue, and modesty.


Theo. 'Sdeath Sir, I know she cannot, shall not do it.


Rant. On my Conscience he is in downright abominable love with this Lady.


Theo. Well, because you are a couple of good honest Fellows, that is, as far
as those that use Cater-deuce-azes, and smooth Boxes, and Cheat at Dice, can be.


Haz. Cheat? we do play a little upon advantage I confess, (as many people of
Quality and most Gentlemen that are Gamesters do.)


Theo. Indeed false Boxes, and Dice are an advantage, but to let that pass: I
will prevent your Error, with this Isabella I am unreasonably and desperately
in Love.


Rant. But 'its in an honorable way, I hope, not at all inclining to wedlock.


Theo. Yes faith, I am in Love, even to Matrimony.


Haz. Pox on thee for an unseasonable Fellow, to think of Matrimony in this
age, when an honest Woman is almost ashamed to show her Face, she finds
triumphant Punk so much preferred before her.


Rant. If we, honest Fellows of the Town, go on as we begin, honest Women will
come to be Stoned in the Streets.


Haz. What, thou art turned a public spirited Fellow, I warrant, and wisely
considerest, that people are wanting in England, and that more frequent
Marriage would be a means of Propagation.


Rant. And I believe thou have subtly found out that whoreing, and
Monasteries, are as great causes of their wanting people in Spain, as their
West Indian Colonies.


Theo. None of these politic considerations I assure you; and yet ever since I
saw Isabella I care less for a Whore, than you do for an honest Woman: Yet you
shall find I am not wholly unfit for your Company, I have not given over all
sins at once, for if you will go before and bespeak, Dinner at Shatolins you shall
see how I Will sowce you in Burgundy.


Haz. Well, we will go and hope, by the help of Burgundy, to recover your Senses
again.


Theo. Have a care of loosing your own.


Rant. That we may have no advantage over you, we will each of us drink 2 or 3
Beer-glasses, before you come.


Haz. Adieu.


[Exeunt. Haz. Rant.] [Enter Bellamour.] Theo. How now Bellamour, where is my
Father.


Bell. Sir, he is busy upon a question in Arithmetic, to see how much 15 l.
comes to in seven years, with use upon use.


Theo. What use his fifty in the hundred, that he takes of Herb-women and
Oyster-women? For which they Pawn, their dear Rings, and Wedding Petticoats.


Bell. Sir, he is willing to make the most of his money.


Theo. Has he taken account what Dripping has been sold this week to the
Kitchen-stuff Women? Has he weighed the ends of Candle, and Suet, to change for
Candles of 20 in the pound?


Bell. All this Sir, and he has been higling with a Fellow, above half an hour
this morning, about 5 Coney-Skins he sold him; nay, Good man, he is very
careful, and all for you.


Theo. For me, ^ Sdeath I expect he should live fifty years longer, unless the
Parliament would bring down money to four in the hundred; and faith I thought
the report of that last Sessions, would have done an honest Filius ante Diem
some kindness, but a pox ont he is recovered, but no more of him, prithee send
in my man to me.


Bell. I will Sir Robin.


[Exit Theodore.] [Enter Robin.] Robin. What say you Sir?


Bell. Go in to your Master [Ex. Robin] [Enter Theodora] Here comes the
Mistress of my heart, my dearest Theodora, I see you now this morning, with as
much Joy, as the Persians do the Rising Sun, that gives them all their Comfort.


Theo. For all your complements Bellamour, I find little prospect of comfort
for either of us.


Bell. My dearest Theodora, I have observed much dejection in your Countenance,
ever since the obliging assurances you have given me of your faith; do you
repent of that engagement? then I am miserable.


Theo. No Bellamour, I cannot repent of any thing I do for you; you have too
great a power overme, to suffer such resentments in my mind.


Bell. What then can be the reason, that in the miest of all my Joys, I see
you grieve.


Theo. The thousand difficulties we are to undergo.


Bell. Ah Madam, do but Love enough, and there are none.


Theo. There is an impossibility of getting my Fathers consent, though it would
be so much to my advantage: His covetous Shagrin Humor makes him hate a
Gentleman.


Bell. I have gained so much upon him, that I do not despair of it; But since
I have your consent, I have too much happiness for one man.


Theo. I must confess, my Bellamour, I could justify my Love to you to all the
world, but to my Father; I have to defend me your Person, and your Merit: I can
never repay the obligations I have received from you, that after seven years
Travel, you can be content to stay from your Country, your Friends, and
Kindred, and conceal your self from all the world but me: But above all, to put
your self for my sake, in so base a condition, as to serve my Father, which is
worse than Rowing in Galleys, this Testimony of your Love can never be
forgotten.


Bell. Ah Madam! one kind look from you will overweigh a thousand such small
Services: I must confess, serving your Father is the severest Task I have, to
minister to his wretched Avarice, and endure the curses of all whom his
extortion grieves. Pardon me, dear Theodora, that I take this liberty before
you: This is a Subject, you know I can speak little good of.


Theo. I am too sensible of it, but I am extremely glad to see you gain so much
upon him by your Artifices.


Bell. You see Madam, Love is able to turn a man into all Shapes, nay into the
worst, a Flatterer, to a Covetous man: But by the sordid applauding of what he
does, and observing all his Rules and Maxims, I have gained this point; That
he will hear or believe no man so soon as me.


Theo. But why do you not discover this to my Brother, and procure his
assistance in it?


Bell. Your Father's and Brother's tempers are so opposite, that it is
impossible to accommodate my self to both of 'em, but do you please to manage
our interests with your Brother, he Loves you extremely, and will hear you; I
hear him coming, I Will away.

[Ex. Bellamour]
[Enter Theodore and Robin.] Theo. Robin go stay within till I call you.


Robin. I will Sir.

[Ex. Robin]
Theodore. Dear Theodora I am glad you are here, I have a secret of the
greatest concernment in the world to me, to discover to you.


Theodora. I shall be glad to hear't, and (if I can) to serve you in it; what
have you to say?


Theodore. A thousand things, in one little word, Love.


Theodora. How Brother are you in Love, I Will tell you --


Theodore. Hold Sister, I know as well as you that I depend [Scommatically]
upon a Father, and that the name of Son, carries an inviolable Duty along with
it.


Theodora. But Brother --


Theodore. And that I ought not to engage my heart without the consent of him
who gave me breath.


Theodora. Do you hear --


Theodore. And that Heaven has made our Parents disposers of our wills, and
that they are in a condition to see more and be less deceived than we.


Theodora. Hold a little.


Theodore. And that we ought to trust the Eyes of their wisdom before the
blindness of our own passion.


Theodora. Are you mad --


Theodore. And that the heat of our youth misleads, and betrays us often to
dangerous precipices.


Theodora. Not one of these wise things would I have said to you, but tell me,
are you engaged to her you Love?


Theodore. No, but resolved, in spite of all opposition, and I conjure you,
give me no reasons.


Theodora. Why do you believe I will?


Theodore. You are no Lover, and faith I am damnably afraid of your wisdom.


Theodora. You know not my condition Brother; but pray who is it that has
Charmed you thus?


Theodore. A young Lady that Lies near this place, of so excellent a Beauty, so
delicate a creature, I cannot think of her without an ecstasy.


Theodora. Pray save your oratory, and in short, tell me who she is.


Theodore. Her name is Isabella; but that which is my extremest trouble, I
have discovered under hand, that she is the Daughter of a sickly Widow, and of
a small Fortune: You know the abominable humor of my Father (whose damned
covetousness, if I had not n^w and then a Lucky hand at play, would make me
forget all use of money) so that I have scarce any possibility of giving this
Lady the least proof of my affection; and if I find not some means to do it, I
am lost.


Theodora. It is an inhumane thing of him to put us both to our Shifts, thus,
to get but ordinary Cloths.


Theodore. Prithee Sister, lets Join in our Complaints to him; and if he
opposes us, we will quit our selves of his insupportable Tyranny, and seek our
Fortunes together.


Theodora. I hear him coming, he is enraged at something, pray let us retire and
consult what to say to him, here he comes, step in.


Theodore. Come on.


[Exeunt Theodore and Theodora] [Enter Goldingham and Robin] Gold. Out of my
house you Dog, begone, make no replies, you Rascal, that are a Sworn Thief; the
Gallows groans for you.


Robin. Well, there was never any thing so wicked as this [Aside] damned old
Fellow, and I think, under correction, the Devil's in him.


Gold. What Is that you mutter between your Teeth Sarrah?


Robin. Why do you hunt me up and down thus?


Gold. Out you Hang-Dog, must you ask questions? Out of my Doors, or I Will knock
you down.


Robin. A pox on this damned flea-flint [Aside] Why what have I done to you?


Gold. Dispute no more, begone.


Robin. My Master gave me order to stay here for him.


Gold. Get you gone and wait in the Street, you Rascal, must you stand here
like a Sentinel, and (with your damned watchful Eyes) be a Spy upon my actions,
to devour what I have, (...) to ferret up and down to see what there is to
Steal.


Robin. What a Devil do you think I should steal, unless I should steal you?
[Aside] Besides, He Is as watchful as an Owl, a man that had killed seven men,
Pissing against a wall, would rest more quietly.


Gold. You Dog must I be daily in danger to be Robbed by you?


Robin. You are not a man to be Robbed, all you have is uner Lock and Key;
besides you profess your self to be in great dant.


Gold. [Aside] Oh how I tremble! Least this Rogue should suspect I have money
hidden in my Garden: If he does I am ruined. Though I have but little Sirra^, I
should be loath to loose it by such Rascals as you are. Besides what is Locked
up, is not there a Tin Candlestick, a Pair of Brass Snuffers, a Nutmeg-Grater,
Bellows, and a Darnock Carpet.


Robin. I scorn 'em all.


Gold. Come Sirrah, you are one of the Rogues that reported that I have money
hid.


Robin. How, have you money hid say you?


Gold. No no you Dog, I don't say so, I have no money hid you Villain you.
[Aside] 'Sdeath he distracts me.


Robin. Why what is it to me whether you have or have not.


Gold. What are you arguing? I Will beat your foolish reasons out of your head,
once more, begone.


Robin. Well, I go.


Gold. Stay, have you taken nothing with you?


Robin. You had best search me.


Gold. Show me your hands.


Robin. There.


Gold. The other -- Both together -- Stay have you put nothing here.


[He feels in his Coat Pockets.] Robin. What a Devil should I put there?


Gold. Let me see here.


[All this while Groping Robin.] Robin. Such a man as you deserves to be Robbed.


Gold. What say you?


Robin. I say I think you will grope me all over.


Gold. So I will Sirrah.


Robin. A Plague on all covetousness, and covetous men.


Gold. What Is that?


Robin. I say, a Plague upon all covetousness, and covetous men.


Gold. Of whom do you speak Sirrah?


Robin. Of covetous men.


Gold. What are those covetous men?


Robin. Rogues, Villans, Dogs, Caterpillars, Horse-Leeches, Vipers, Theives,
Robbers, Sons of Whores.


Gold. How now you Rascal.


Robin. Why do you trouble your self Sir, you are none of those; may not I
curse covetous Rogues?


Gold. Sirrah, to whom did you speak thus? tell me.


Robin. I spoke it -- I spoke it -- to that Rogue Dives in the Picture there.


Gold. And I speak to your fools head there, Sirrah take that, do you feel me
Rogue?


Robin. Ay, pox on you, against my will.


[Aside] Gold. Again Sirrah, out of my doors, I say, you insolent Villain.


Robin. A curse on him, he has broken my bones.

[Ex. Robin.]
Gold. Oh the pains, the Jealousies, and fears a man must suffer that has great
sums of money to guard; I cannot find one place safe enough about the house;
Coffers and Trunks Theives can never escape. Let me see this particular.
Imprimis, a thousand Pound, for which I have Pawnes worth two, at above fifty
per Cent. Item in the City five thousand Pound, for which I have ten per Cent,
and the best security in England. [Enter Theodore and Theodora*] Item in
Morgages of Land from young Gay Sparks 6000l. Oh but that dear sum of six
thousand broad pieces in my Garden, that transports me. [He sees his Son and
Daughter.] 'Sdeath that I should read this Note loud, I have betrayed my self,
they have overheard me, and I am ruined; would they were both hanged: Well,
what is the matter with you, have you been long there?


Theo. No Sir, but now come.


Gold. What do ye stand listening?


Theo. Not we, I assure ye.


Gold. Come come ye did: if they overheard me, I shall hang my self --


Theodora. Not we, I assure you Sir.


Gold. I was saying to my self, how happy should I be if I had but six thousand
Pound in the world.


Theo. You need not wish that.


Gold. It Is false, it is false, Oh would to heaven I had! Oh how happy should I
be, I should never complain then, that the times are hard, not I.


Theodora. This is all but Raillerie Sir.


Theodore. You have more than five times as much.


Gold. 'Sdeath, what says he? Oh thou Villain, thou Viper thou, have I bred
thee up to destroy me? are my Children become my greatest enemies?


Theo. Are those your enemies that say you are rich?


Gold. Oh it is the vilest injury you can do me, such discourses as these will
make my throat be cut, Thieves will believe I am all made up of Gold; your
extravagant expenses too, will make 'em think so.


Theo. I know none I am guilty of, unless keeping my self clean be so.


Gold. Oh your Periwigs, your Ribbands, your Laces, you are as much a Spark as
any of those that go fine, keep Whores, and pay no debts, about the Town; and
if the truth were known, you, and your Sister, here, must Rob me to do it.


Theo. He will have good luck that Robs you: [Aside] You know my Sister
ventures some money at Sea, (that was left her by an Aunt,) and (for me) I am
sometimes lucky at play, and I eat and drink, and keep my self handsomely dressed
with it.


Gold. Handsomely, foolishly; to what end are these multitudes of Ribbands, this
Flaxen Mop of Whores Hair, and this Flanders Lace upon the Shirt; I warrant
this Habit cost thirty Pound: now if you do win money, put it to other uses
(you foolish young Knave) 30 l. comes to six and thirty shillings a year,
according to Statutable use; But thou might make twenty Pound a year on it,
if thou had any brains, and (with such use upon use) what would 30 l. come
to in seven years!


Theodora. But Sir, my Brother and I came to talk with you of other business.


Gold. Well, and I have something to say to you, of other business.


Theo. It Is concerning Marriage, Sir.


Gold. And I intended to speak to you, concerning Marriage.


Theodora. Ah Father!


Gold. Ah Father! what is that for? what? what? you would be at it already,
would you? soft and fair young Gentlewoman.


Theo. No Sir, my Sister is afraid that your opinion of Marriage will not
agree with ours.


Gold. Fear not, you shall have no cause of complaint, I shall do well for you
both; and (first of all) have you Theodore, seen one Isabella, that lies near
this place?


Theo. O yes Sir, several times, in her Balcony.


Gold. And you?


Theodora. I have heard of her, Sir.


Gold. Well Son, and how do you find that Lady?


Theo. She Is admirably handsome, I have never seen her equal.


Gold. Her face, ha?


Theo. Beyond what e're a Lover fancied of his Mistress.


Gold. Her shape, is it not well?


Theo. Not only faultless, but excellent to a miracle.


Gold. Her mien, ha --


Theo. Graceful, and admirable.


Gold. Her air, and her manner --


Theo. The most charming in the world; her air so full of modesty and wit, her
carriage so allureing and gentle, I have never seen the like.


Gold. Oh oh, would not this Lady make a pleasant bedfellow?


Theo. It were a happiness beyond all expression, such as 'twere not safe to
think on it.


Gold. But there is one point to be considered, her Portion.


Theo. Oh Sir, that (with so fine a Lady) is not considerable, not to be
mentioned.


Theodora. Besides Sir, I have heard she has a tolerable fortune.


Theo. Never think of that.


Gold. Well, I am glad we agree so well in our opinions of this Lady; for (by
these charming qualities) she has so won upon me, that I am resolved forthwith
to marry her.


Theo. Oh heaven!


Gold. What say you?


[Hastily.] Theo. Are you resolved say you --


Gold. Yes, to marry Isabella.


Theo. Who you? you?


Gold. Yes I, I, I, why, what do you make of me, young Cox-comb?


Theo. 'Sdeath this has struck me to the heart.

[Ex. Theo.]
Gold. Who cares, go get some Aqua-Vitae, I hope this young Prodigal Ass will
hang himself at the news of a young Mother-in-Law -- This Daughter, is that
which I resolve for my self: now for him, I have provided a grave Matron of
about 50, with a great deal of money; and you, I intend to marry to Timothy
Squeeze, the rich Scriveners Son, a very thrifty young man.


Theodora. Heaven, what do I hear!


Gold. He Is a very pretty young man, and knows how to make sixty per Cent of
his money.


Theodora. Sir, if you please, I will not marry.


Gold. Madam, if you please you shall marry.


Theodora. Pray pardon me Sir.


Gold. Pray pardon me Madam.


Theodora. You may command me in any thing, but this.


Gold. I will command you in this, and to night too.


Theodora. To night, that shall not be.


Gold. That shall be.


Theodora. No Sir.


Gold. Yes Sir.


Theodora. I Will kill my self, before I marry him.


Gold. You shall not kill your self, and you shall marry him; but did ever
Father endure such insolence from a Daughter?


Theodora. Was ever Daughter so severely used by a Father?


Gold. All the world will allow of my choice.


Theodora. No man of sense will.


[Enter Bellamour.] Gold. Here comes Bellamour, will you be judged by him.


Theodora. With all my heart.
This is lucky enough.

[Aside] Gold. Look you Bellamour, my Daughter disputes with me, which do you
think has reason, she or I?


Bell. Oh Sir, you without question.


Gold. Do you know what we were talking of?


Bell. No Sir, but you cannot be in the wrong.


Gold. Look you, you are to be Judge, I would marry her to Timothy Squeeze, the
rich Scriveners Son this night; and the baggage despises him.


Bell. And am I to be Judge?


Gold. Ay of this.


Bell. Oh heaven!


Gold. What say you?


Bell. I am of your opinion Sir, in the main, but your Daughter is not wholly
in the wrong.


Gold. Why, why is Mr Timothy's Person, or Fortune, to be rejected? where can
she have a better?


Bell. That Is true Sir, but she may say, it is too rash to resolve to do it so
suddenly; and that she ought to have some time to accommodate her inclinations
to him.


Gold. Time, come I must take occasion by the fore-lock; his Father (that is
very rich, but of mean extraction) will (for the sake of good Alliance) let his
Son marry her without a Portion.


Bell. Nay then, I must say no more, that is a convincing reason, she must
submit to that.


Theodora. What means Bellamour?


[Aside] Gold. I know not what it is to her, I am sure it is the most
confiderable reason in the world to me.


Bell. Without doubt Sir, no man can contradict that, but your Daughter may
answer you, that Marriage is the most solemn thing in the world, and that which
must make her always either happy, or miserable.


Gold. Without Portion! mark that --


Bell. You have reason Sir, that decides all. But Sir, people will tell you,
that the inclination of your Daughter, ought to be a little regarded; and that
forcing affections has often ruined the best of Families.


Gold. What without Portion?


Bell. Nay, there can be no reply to that: it is true, there are a great many
Fathers that prize the satisfaction of their Daughters, and would never
Sacrifice them to interest, but would consult their affections.


Gold. But again I say, without Portion.


Bell. It Is true, without Portion is an answer to every thing; and who can
resist such reason as vours.


Gold. [To himself] Oh heaven I hear the Dog bark, I am so afraid of this
money, I must into the Garden: stay here.

[Ex. Goldingham.]
Theodora. Bellamour you are in the wrong, to talk thus with him.


Bell. If I should oppose him Madam, I should ruin our design, and you will do
better to feign a consent to what he commands.


Theodora. But for this sudden Marriage, to night.


Bell. We Will find means to break it, and make him consent to it.


Theodora. What can you invent?


Bell. Feign some sickness, and desire him to delay't for that.


Theodora. Physicians will find out that deceit.


Bell. Madam, he would scarce be at the charge of one to save his own life,
much less yours.


Theodora. But he has Kindred, that will give him their advice for nothing.


Bell. Madam do you believe in Doctors? do you think they know more than
Nurs-keepers? I warrant you Madam, counterfeit what distemper you please,
they will find reasons enough to tell you from whence it comes.


[Enter Goldingham.] Gold. Heaven be praised, all is well, there was no body.


Bell. Besides Madam, our last recourse shall be to discover our selves, and
our affections, and if you can be constant, as I doubt not -- [Goldingham is
seen by them.] Madam (as I was saying) a Daughter ought not to dispute her
Fathers will, or once think whether she likes the man or no, whom he chooses for
her; especially where that invincible reason, of without Portion, offers its
self.


[Theodora flings from him hastily, and goes out.] Gold. Well said Bellamour.


Bell. Sir, I ask you pardon, that I make so bold with your Daughter.


Gold. I am orejoy'd at it, you have done exceeding well.


Bell. Sir, I will never fail to urge her with arguments, and especially, that
undeniable one, of without Portion.


Gold. It Is very well.


Bell. Oh Sir, there is nothing (in this world) so precious as money, not
Honor, Birth, Education, Wit, Courage, Virtue, Wisdom, Religion, Loyalty --


Gold. Oh there spoke an Oracle! dear Bellamour I could hug thee for this, thou
shall follow, and advise her. But first, give me some little account of this
days business, has Sarah the Orange-Wench redeemed her Thumb-Ring, that I lent
her ten shillings upon last week?


Bell. No Sir.


Gold. It Is forfeited then, it weighs two and twenty. Has the fellow that cries
old Cloths, redeemed the new Velvit Coat (which I believe he Stole) or the
Oyster-Woman her Red Petticoat with Silver Lace on it? or has the Cobbler
redeemed his Pewter that he Pawned for money to buy Soles? or has the Country
Gentlewoman (that lost her money at play) taken out her Watch, for which she is
feign to make excuses to her Husband, and say it is a mending?


Bell. None of these.


Gold. Has the Whetston Whore redeemed her Mantoplicee, and her Silk-dy'd
Petticoat, with Gold and Silver Lace?


Bell. No poor soul, she has had ill trading of late.


Gold. There is a Bauds Silver Aqua-Vitae Bottie, a Midwife's hackny Satin
Mantle, with old fashioned Gold Lace; a Herald Painter's Hears-Cloth, and
Velvit Pall; besides (let me see) an Attorneys Clerk Pawned a Beaver of his
Masters in the Country; there is too, a Porters and a Water-mans Silver Badge,
the Fidler's Violin, the Hackny Trumpeter's Brass Trumpet, the Barber's inlayd
Razor Case, with Silver heads to his Instruments, are any of these redeemed to
day?


Bell. None of 'em Sir.


Gold. They are forfeited, to Hell with them, ab inferis nulla redemptio, this
has been a happy week Bellamour: two young Sparks have forfeited Morgages this
week: they are the sweetest people to deal with, they seldom fail of forfeiting
them, and I never fail to take 'em, but prithee go to my Daughter, and advise
her.


Bell. I will Sir,
Better then you think.

[Aside[ Gold. How happy am I in this servant! well, (if this trade holds) I
shall tumble in money; and next to that.

The greatest pleasure I can have of life,
Is in cold age, to have a warm young wife.

ACT. II.
SCE. II.
Enter Squeeze, Timothy, Roger. Sque. IS Mr. Goldingham at home?


Roger. He is in the Garden (where he always is) I Will tell him you are here.

[Ex. Roger.[
Sque. Come Timothy, Cheer up, has't not thou forgot to put on thy little
Cuffs, to Comb thy head, and get thy hair powdered.


Tim. No no, I have my best Clothes on too, just as I used to go to Church; but
de' hear Sir, I shall be ashamed when Theodora comes, de' see, for (on my
conscience and soul) I shall never learn how to Suitour a woman.


Sque. Take my directions, and I warrant thee.


Tim. How did you go to work to Suitor my Mother?


Sque. Why, I Will tell thee, when I was a young man, (Oh the happy days we lived
in then) I could woe a young Gentlewoman, with as much dexterity, as the
Sprucest Gallant on 'em all.


Tim. I long to hear, before Mrs. Theodora comes.


Sque. Why look you, suppose thou were thy Mother, stand there (and I Will tell
you she was as fine a young Lass, as any Aldermans Daughter, (though she was
but a Button-makers Daughter) and as well bred too; I am sure it cost her
Father ten shillings a month for her learning to Dance, and she played most
violently upon the Cittern too But stand still, thus I begun. [He Salutes, and
Kisses Timothy.] Then forsooth your Servant, said I, wont you please to sit
down? here is a Chair, and please you.


[He sets a Chair for Timothy, and sits down by him.] Tim. I vow this is very
well, de' conceive me?


Sque. Then thus I went on; pray give me leave to kiss your hand.


[He kisses Timothy's hand.] Tim. O Lord Sir!


Sque. I protest and vow, I have a very great affection for you; the very
thoughts of you, has often broke my sleep; and made me fetch many a sigh.


Tim. Ha, ha, ha, very well I vow.


Sque. For you are very handsome (as I am an honest man, and I cannot but love
you, an I were to be hanged for it.


Tim. It Is your goodness more than my desert.


Sque. Good lack, to see the luck on it, she made that very answer, I protest.


Tim. Oh Gemini, why did she?


Sque. Yes, but to go on, said I, I am come to see if you can love such a one
as I am, (and I was then as pretty a young Fellow as any in the City) and if
you can, said I, I shall be very well content to make you my wife.


Tim. Ay but Mrs. Theodora, they say, is most pestilent Coy.


Sque. It Is no matter, be thou bold, and she will not deny thee.


Tim. Ay and I will now you bid me, though I venture my life for it, de'
understand me?


Sque. Do, stand up to her man, and kiss her, she will not deny thee, for thou art
a very pretty Fellow, though I say it; stand up, let me see, turn thee about,
well made too, well thou take just like me, I was just such another when I
was young.


[Enter Goldingham and Bellamour.] Gold. Mr. Squeeze you are welcome.


Sque. Thank you good Sir.


Gold. And you Mr. Timothy.


Tim. Thank you good Sir, (as my Father said before me.)


Sque. This is the young man I bring to your Daughter.


Tim. Ay Sir, I make bold to come a woing to Mrs. Theodora, de' conceive me, if
your worship please.


Gold. With all my heart.


Bell. An excellent choice, an accomplished, Rival have I: I should sooner be
jealous of a Ballad-singer, or a Pick-pocket.


[Aside] Gold. Bellamour, go call my Daughter.


Bell. I will Sir, A curse on him, must she be baited by this Bandog.

[Ex. Bell.]
Gold. While the young people are together, we will drink a Cup; I would send for
a Pint of white Wine, or half a Pint of Sack for you, but the Vintners do play
the Rogues so, and put Horseflesh, dead Dogs, men's bones, Molossus, Lime,
Brimstone, Stumme, Allom, Sloes, and Arsnick into their Wine -- but I Will send
for a Cup of wholesome Ale for you.


[Enter Bellamour and Theodora.] Sque. With all my heart.


Bell. There Is the sweet youth, he has provided for you.


Tim. Now Father stand by me.


Gold. This Daughter, is the pretty young man I told you of.


Theodora. He looks more like a Corn-Cutter than a Lover.


[Aside] Sque. Your servant young Gentlewoman.


[He Salutes her.] Tim. Your servant forsooth, I make bold to Salute you, de'
see: I vow it is the sweetest kiss that ever I had in all my life; you kiss very
well Mrs. Theodora, pray let me have another.


Theodora. Hold Sir, not too fast.


Tim. Why look you Father, did I not tell you how 'twould be?


Sque. You were a little too forward Son.


Gold. Come let us leave the young people, they will do best together.


Sque. Ay I warrant you, they had rather be alone.


Gold. D'y' hear Theodora, be civil to him Bellamour!

[Ex. Goldingham, Squeeze, and Bellamour.]
Tim. So now we are alone Mrs Thea, I call you Thea for shortness, de' see?
will you please to sit down?

I Will try now if I can outdo my Father.


[Aside] Theodora. To wait upon you I will Sir.
What a ridiculous Lover have I?

[Aside] Tim. Come Mrs. Thea, I profess my Legs are very weary, I have been all
this morning dunning for money, at this end of the Town; and I promise you I
mind my business as well as e're a young man in the City that wears a head,,
but (a deus take 'em) they do so fob me off with Protections hereabouts.


Theodora. They do ill, to disappoint so fine a Person.


Tim. Ah forsooth, you are pleased to say so, but come (now I think on it) pray
where is your Maid?


Theodora. Why do you ask?


Tim. If you please to send her to some Tavern, where you have Credit, I Would
make bold to send for a Pint of Sack for you, (there I outdo my Father a whole
half Pint.)


Theodora. Oh admirable breeding.
[Aside] By no means I don't love it, I assure you.

Tim. Then I Will send for a Bottle of white Wine; I have Sugar in my pocket, the
Rogues at Tavern's make us pay three pence a paper for it.


Theodora. A thrifty consideration, but I drink no Wine.


Tim. Nay peuh Mrs Thea, you say this now to save me Charges, de' see; but alas
I care no more for money than I do for the dirt under my foot, d' you
understand me? if I had you at the Pope's Head, I Would give you half a peck of
Oysters, I have as good Credit there as ere an Alderman's Son of 'em all, no
dispraise: but faith I will send for White Wind now, you shall not say me nay.


Theodora. Oh intolerable! I will have none sent for.


[Enter James.] James. Sir, your Father bids me tell you he is sent for to
Chatolins, to some young Blades, whom he is to take up


Tim. It Is very well. Come Mrs Thea, pray be not angry, but let us to our
business.


Theodora. Have you any with me?


Tim. Yes that I have, and very earnest business too, I Will tell you that.


Theodora. What is it?


Tim. Look you Mrs. Thea, pauca verba, the short and the loug on it is, I have
had a very great affection for you, any time these two months, ever since I saw
you at Covengarden Church, de' conceive me?


Theodora. Oh wonderful!


Tim. As I am an honest man, you have stuck as close to my heart (all the
time,) as a Burr (de' understand me) nay I have scarce slept a quiet night, all
that time, for dreaming on you.


Theodora. It Is impossible.


Tim. Nay feck now it is true, whereupon my Father seeing me in this condition,
advised me to come to you for cure, de' hear me?


Theodora. Oh Sir, doubt not but you may command me.


Tim. No forsooth pardon me, I shall entreat you.


Theodora. To do what?


Tim. Feck only to love me a little, that is all.


Theodora. No more but that! how can I choose?


Tim. Ay but will you have me for a husband, de' see? that is the business I
come about: if you will, I shall for my part, be very glad to make you my
Bedfellow, as the saying is.


Theodora. Oh Sir, you deserve one of a greater Beauty and Fortune than I am.


Tim. Pshaw what is matter for that, it is all one as long as my Father bid me
ask you Mrs. Thea, de' conceive me?


Theodora. Sure this Holiday Fool, has never been bred to any thing but
throwing at Cocks, or demolishing evil houses on Shrove-Tuesday; or may be, he
has Rid on a Pageant for a Neptune, or a Sea-god, or perhaps waited at my Lord
Mayor's Table upon a Feast day.


[Aside.] Tim. What say you to the proposition, ha?


[Enter Robin.] Robin. Did you see your Brother Madam?


Theodora. He Is gone out.


Tim. A deus take this Fellow for interrupting us.


Gold. Within. Theodora.


Theodora. Hark, I am called, farewell.

[Ex. Theodora.]
Tim. Nay an I leave you, the King shall know it.

[Ex. Tim.]
[Enter at the other Doors Mrs. Cheatly.] Cheat. Oh dear Robin, art thou here?


Robin. Mrs. Cheatly, what makes you here for heavens sake?


Cheat. That which makes me go every where; I love to be serviceable to the
Nation, in my faculty, I bring people together, and make work for the Parsons,
and the Wid-wifes. But where is Mr. Goldingham.


Robin. What business can you have with him? of all mankind.


Cheat. That which I hope to get by; you know I have no Rents, Industry, and
Intrigue must maintain me; but thou art sure not to lose by it, my dear Robin.


Robin. And you not to get by it here, I assure you.


Cheat. You don't know, there are some things within my power, that may touch
very nearly.


Robin. Why thou may sooner hope to get by thy Trade in a Town three years
besieged, and almost famished.


Cheat. I warrant you, I have a way of tickling of 'em as they do Trouts out of
their senses, but I must work upon him by degrees.


Robin. Why he would not give a shilling to save thy soul, nor eighteen pence
for his own; I have heard him wish that that word Give, were blotted out of the
English Tongue: you will put him into Fits, if you but propound it to him. 'Slife
here he comes, I must be gone I am sure.

[Ex. Robin.]
[Enter Goldingham.] Cheatly. Ah dear Sir, how briskly you look to day, good
lack! If I had not been in your house, I protest I should not have known you.


Gold. I look well, alas, alas!


Cheat. I never saw any creature so changed in my life, sure you drink nothing
but Viper Wine.


Gold. Nay you wheedle.


Cheat. Upon my life, you amaze me, you look so delicately, so fresh, and gay.


Gold. Nay but do I? hah.


Cheat. Sir, you were never so young in your life, I have seen men of five and
twenty in white Periwigs, have less youth about them.


Gold. But (for all that) I am above six and fifty.


Cheat. Six and fifty! alas that is nothing, that is the season of a perfect man,
you are now in the flower of your Age -- it was the time when the Patriarchs
you know began to get Children.


Gold. That Is true, but if I were twenty years younger, 'twould do me no hurt.


Cheat. You jest Sir, you need no youth, I Will lay my life you will live till
you are a hundred years old.


Gold. No no, but do you think so really?


Cheat. Most certainly Sir, you have all the marks of long life; let me see,
hold a little: Oh what a sign of life there is upon your forhead! I am sure
you will have four wives more.


Gold. -- I care not how many wives I have, I love to bury wives much. [Aside.]
But have you such skill in these things?


Cheat. Ay as much as e're an Almanack-maker, or Cunning-man of 'em all; let me
see your hand, Heaven! what a Line of life is here.


Gold. How, let me see.


[He puts on his Spectacles.] Cheat. Do you not see how far that Line goes?


Gold. Yes, but what does that import?


Cheat. A hundred did I say? if you don't live to sixscore, I Will be content to
be hanged, when I am so old my self.


Gold. It Is impossible.


Cheat. You will live to bury all your Children, Grandchildren,
Great-grand-children, and Posterity, to the fifth and sixth Generation.


Gold. The more I bury, the better; what care I for Posterity, I would be my
self the last man of my family.


Cheat. Yes Sir, as you are the first.


Gold. But pray Mrs. Cheatly, how goes our affair?


Cheat. If it did not go extremely well, you would not have me in so good a
humor. Well on my conscience no woman in England has that faculty in
Match-making, that I have: there are no two persons, so opposite, that I cannot
bring together: (if I had lived in that time) I would have been hanged if I had
not Married the Pope to Queen Elizabeth.


Gold. But I would not have had that done, that might have spoiled the
reformation: but tell me? --


Cheat. Why Sir? I acquainted the Mother with your proposition, and brought
Isabella to the window (as you appointed,) where she surveyed your person, your
age, your youth, I mean, your mien and all your motions.


Gold. And how liked she, ha?


Cheat. She likes your person infinitely, and her Mother, and she entertained
the proposal with a great deal of joy; and Isabella says you are the most
Reverend charming old young Gentleman, in all Covengarden.


Gold. It Is her goodness, but in troth that was a little too much: but have you
spoke with her Mother about Portion?


Cheat. Oh she will be a vast Fortune, she will be worth above two thousand Pound
a year to you (besides her Beauty) which if you would, you might make as much
more of, if she would consent.


Gold. And (if I can make so much more of her) I am sure I Will make her consent,
or I Will strangle her. [Aside.] But how will she be worth so much besides?


Cheat. Why first, she has the most thrifty Stomach of any woman in Europe;
she loves nothing but Sallads, Milk, Cheese, Butter, and Apples, nor does she
ever desire sweet meats above Almonds, and Raysins, you need not keep a table
furnished with varieties, or delicacies for her: Wine she drinks none, this
will be worth a thousand Pound a year; then she hates all finery, Lace she
detests out of hatred to the French.


Gold. She does well, it was a Roguish invention, and he that first invented
it, is damned.


Cheat. She hates rich Cabinets, Pictures, rich furnished Clos^ets, and costly
furniture extremely, this (with her own thrift in Habits) will amount to above
six thousand Pounds; then she has a horrible aversion for Gaming, then Plays
she detests.


Gold. This is admirable, I am each minute more in love with her.


Cheat. Then she never gives a farthing to the poor, though she sees 'em
starving.


Gold. How admirably shall we agree, for I hate the poor as much as she can do.


Cheat. Then she abominates Singing-Masters, French-Masters, Dancing-Masters,
Harpsical-Masters, above measure; now to sum up all these things they will
amount to 2450 l. a year, for her life, there is four hundred and fifty Pound
above your sum.


Gold. Mrs. Cheatly, these things are very good, but they are not real goods, I
would have something that I might give an Acquittance for, and say, I say
Received per me Humphrey Goldingham.


Cheat. Are not all these excellent qualities real Goods? and I assure you, you
may receive them when you please.


Gold. These are not Goods and Chattels Mrs. Cheatly; I must touch something.


Cheat. Touch! why, you shall touch her, and touch her all over, and as much as
you please, there is a delicate creature to touch, there is a touch for you.


Gold. Ay, but I must touch money; there is a delicate thing to touch, there is a
touch for you.


Cheat. Money you shall have too, they have a good Estate in the North, which I
have heard them speak of --


Gold. That must be seen: But there is one difficulty more; she is young, and I
fear will not be brought to love an old man.


Cheat. Cods me I had like to have forgot that quality of hers, she has the
most unconquerable aversion, in the world, for all young men; she was to have
been Married the other day, and broke off the match, because she found the man
was not above fifty.


Gold. It cannot be, sure.


Cheat. Upon my word it is true, she says the young men of this age, are nothing
but brisk, airy, conceited, gay, proud, ignorant, foolish, singing, dancing,
Baboones in huge Periwigs, not fit for wives.


Gold. It is impossible.


Cheat. If you did but see her Seals, and the few Pictures she has, not of
Adonis, Paris, Apollo, Narcissus, or any young Figures, but of Saturn, King
Priam, Anchises, Nestor, Methusalem, and some of the old Partiarchs, John of
the times, and old Parre.


Gold. This is incomparable indeed, if I were a young woman I should never
endure young Fellows; for my part I wonder what they can see in them, to love
'em so.


Cheat. Ay I wonder what pleasure they can take in 'em, Oh yur fine old man for
my money, he is the civilest, quietest Bedfellow; worth a thousand of these
young Fops, that are ever upon the spur, like a Citizen on a Journey.


Gold. It Is your goodness: But can thou not bring this Isabella to Supper, to
night, to my house? I am to give Mr. Squeeze, and his Son a Supper; who shall
marry my Daughter immediately, and (if you can bring this Lady) I would kill
two Birds with one stone, as that excellent thrifty Proverb says.


Cheat. Never doubt it Sir, I Will bring her after Dinner to see your Daughter,
and they may take the air in your Coach together, and so come back to Supper.


Gold. Prithee go about it instantly.


Cheat. But Sir --


Gold. Nay prithee Mrs. Cheatly go about it, make no delays, prithee go now --


Cheat. One word more.


Gold. No more for heaven sake, go now.


Cheat. I must speak to you.


Gold. By no means, go just now about it, now, go quickly.


[He thrusts her on toward the door.] Cheat. Well, there is nothing to be done
with this old Fellow now.

[Ex. Cheatly.]
Gold. This Cheatly is a rare woman, but I was plaguily afraid she would have
asked to borrow money of me, after she had done her story. 'Sdeath what do I
hear! the Garden door opens, she is gone in there; I must watch her, and my dear
dear money.

[Exit.]
[Enter Bellamour and Theodora, as Gold. is going out.] Theodora. What, makes
my Father in such have? I believe he is gone into the Garden; where he goes a
hundred times a day: But pray Bellamour, is your man returned, you sent into
the North to enquire of your Father?


Bell. Madam I expect him to night. But my dearest Theodora, since I have your
heart, there is nothing else I have within my eye, or thought! let us not think
of business, but employ this happy minute in talking of love.


Theodora. Here Is my Father, to your advice again.


[Enter Goldingham.] Gold. So all is safe in the Garden.


Bell. Madam you must obey, and marry him to night, your Father will not delay
the making of you happy.


Theodora. To night, is too sudden Bellamour.


Bell. It Is never too soon to obey your Father Madam.


Gold. Admirably well said, dear Bellamour, never was man so happy in a
servant! Come into the next Room Daughter; I warrant you, my man and I will
soon convince you.


Theodora. Let me beg you will defer it Sir.


Gold. I will have it despatch'd to night, come along.


[Exeunt omnes.] [Rant, Hazard, Lettice, and Joyce at Chatolins] Rant. That
Theodore should be such a Villain, to disappoint us.


Hazard. I wonder he should have no more care of his own soul, than to break
his word with honest Fellows.


Lettice. I believe he knows of my being here; and has not the face to see me
(after some inconstancy, I have taken him in lately.)


Joyce. That she should pretend to an interest in him, Mr. Rant! but if every
body that has injoyd her should be constant to her, (as she calls it) she would
have an Army of Lovers.


Rant. God-a-mercy Mrs. Joyce, I Will drink thy health for that; here boy give me
a Glass. [Boy gives a little Glass.] A pox on this thimble, give me such a
Glass as your Nonconforming Parson drinks in, after laboring at a Conventicle;
as big as King John's Cup at Lyn, or John Calvin's at Geneva: That is fit for
nothing but to wear in a man's Bandstring (as your Citizens do Rings.)


Boy. Here Is one will fit you Sir.


Rant. Fill it, and strike it.


Lettice Here Is thy health in a brimmer, Hazard have at thee.


Hazard. I Will do thee reason, dear Rogue, an 'twere a Pulpit full of Burgundy;
I love such honest Fellows, that let drinking and wenching go hand in hand.


Rant. Faith they are such sweet sociable sins, it is pity they should ever
be parted.


Hazard. Come boy, my Glass.


Lettice. But where is the Fiddlers you promised us?


Rant. Here Is Captain Theodore.
[Enter Theodore.] They cannot be far off.

Theodore. How now Gentlemen, what so forward already? Ladies your servant.


Rant. You see Theodore we are not wanting, we provide you good Company; but I
am sorry you came not to Dinner.


Lettice. You see Mr. Theodore what I venture for your company; to undergo the
Scandal of these Gentlemen.


Theodore. No Scandal I hope Mrs. Lettice! for women of your Tribe (like
Fanatics) are above Ordinances.


Joyce. Mr. Theodore, you are very unkind of late, one can never see you: But
you see I can venture to be ruined with my Alderman to see you; but not a word
of this.


Theodore. Fear it not, I am as much afraid of the Scandal as you are.


Hazard. Come Theodore, thou want two or three Beer-Glasses; Is it not
better to drink, and be free with these glorious Harlots, than to crouch to a
foolish simpering Lady that is honest?


Rant. Thou art like a dry-foot-Dog, that (out of a whole Heard of Deer)
singles out one, whose sent he only follows, and tires himself to catch that,
when he might have twenty in the mean time.


Theodore. Gentlemen! the Devil is much obliged to you, you are his great
Champions; and defend Whoreing with as good arguments as any of his
controversial Divines about the Town: But all this will not make me think ill
of an honest woman.


Hazard. I tell you there is not a woman in the world, that is honest at all
times, and upon all occasions.


Theodore. What not thy Mother, or thy Sister?


Hazard. No gad, if they were, I would disown them, they had none of my blood
in 'em.


Rant. Theodore let me advise thee not to speak contemptibly of Sons of Punks,
for (if thou do) Gad thou will raise a world of enemies.


Theodore. I Will assure you, I have a better opinion of the Sex than what ill
company, and your lewd lives, have given you.


Hazard. Ay pox on it, thou art not compos mentis, thou art in love; but here is
a couple of remedies for that Disease; which (if thou do not nip in the bud)
will prove more dangerous than three Claps.


Rant. I hope it is nothing but some fumes of the Spleen, that make him base
company (for the present:) I hope (with these Ladies assistance) and a Bottle
or two of Burgundy, to set them right yet.


Lettice. I am Mr. Theodore's humble servant, he shall want no assistance I can
give him.


Joyce. Nor will I be deficient in any thing to serve him.


Lettice. Alas Madam, he does not ask your service, nor would it do him much
good.


Joyce. Goodlack Mrs. Lettice, you are so exalted by the bounty of Mr. Squeeze
the Scrivener, and twenty or thirty more, that (unknown to him) Club with him.


Lettice. Twenty or thirty, thou insolent creature; did you learn no better
manners of your Alderman?


Rant. Hold Ladies, here are the Fiddlers. [Flourish of Fiddles.] Let them
reconcile your quarrel. Come in youths.


[Enter Fiddles.] [Enter Mrs. Cheatly and Mrs. Betty.] Cheat. Come Gentlemen
you shall not be merry without me, I will participate.


[They all Salute Betty.] Hazard. Who is this thou have brought with thee Mrs.
Cheatly?


Cheat. A pretty young Girl, which I am to marry to an old Prebend; but mum
for that.


Rant. Boy give me a mighty Glass of Burgundy: Theodore here is thy Mistress's
health; Hazard, to you, Fiddlers play a health.


[They Flourish.] Theodore. You are very brisk, but I shall tame you, I warrant
you.


Hazard. Come Ladies, faith you shall not escape, we will warm ye first with Wine,
and then with a Dance; Mrs. Cheatly.


Cheat. I Will pledge you Sir, but with allowance


[They Flourish.] Hazard. With all my heart, take your liberty.


Cheat. Mrs. Joyce, Mr. Theodore's Mistress.


Joyce. With all my heart Madam Cheatly. [They Flourish.] There Is one in this
Room, perhaps is as nearly con cerned in it, as any body.


Lettice. For all that you know Mrs. Joyce, I vow Mr. Theodore, her confidence
makes me ashamed of her.


Theodore. Alas poor modesty, fa la la.


Cheat. If you will have any singing, I Will sing you a little Country Song
shall stir up these Girls more than your Fiddles and Voices can do.


Hazard. Prithee do Cheatly.


Song.
AS I walked in the woods one evening of late,
A Lass was deploring her hapless estate,
She sighed, and she sob'd, Ah wretched she said;
Will no youth come succor a languishing Maid?
Shall I still sigh and cry, and look pale and wan,
And languish for ever for want of a man?
At first when I saw a young man in the place,
My color would fade, and then flush in my face,
My breath would grow short, and I shivered all over;
I thought 'twas an Ague, but Alas it was more,
For e're since I Have sighed, and do what I can,
I find I must languish for want of a man.
When in bed all the night I weep on my Pillow,
To see others happy, while I wear the Willow;
I revenge my self on the innocent sheet,
Where in rage I have oftentimes made my Teeth meet:
But all this will not serve, let me do what I can,
I find I must languish for want of a man.
Now all my fresh color deserted my face,
And let a pale greenness succeed in the place,
I pine and grow faint, and refuse all my meat,
And nothing but Chalk, Lime, or Oatmeal, can eat:
But in my despair I Will die if I can,
And languish no longer for want of a man.
Joyce. Really Madam Cheatly it is a pretty Song.


Cheat. It Is a little too wanton, that is the fault on it.


Rant. Nay, it cannot be too much of that; how do like it Theodore?


Theodore. Pox on it, there is no Wit in it.


Rant. Don't all your greatest Wits make Songs without any Wit at all in 'em,
that take extremely?


Hazard. Come Theodore take out they woman; we will bounce their bodies in a
Dance.


[Enter Robin.] Cheat. Is Robin here? he Dances well, (with his Master's leave)
he shall be my partner.


Theodore. With all my heart, but what news Robin?


Robin. Mr. Squeeze the Scrivener Sir will come to you, and bring the Gentleman
that will lend the money.


Theodore. Squeeze does not know me.


Robin. No Sir, I told him it was a young Gentleman in whom he must be
satisfied, when he knew his name.


Rant. Come Theodore, I bar all business now.


Theodore. Come Gentlemen I Will be as Idle for a while as the best of you,
strike up.


[They Dance.] [After the Dance, Enter Timothy.] Tim. Gentlemen by your leave,
is my Farher here among ye?


Rant. Pox of this Rascal, knock him on the head.


Hazard. Hold Rant, who is your Father?


Tim. Mr. Squeeze the Scrivener, de' understand me? Lord! that Gentleman needed
not have been so angry, my Father is a Livery-man, de' see, I am no such
contemptible person, I promise you.


Hazard. Be civil to him, he has the Countenance of an excellent Buble.


Rant. I warrant thee, I Will make much of him; Sir I hope you will forgive my
ignorance of your person; had I known you, I should not have been so unmannerly.


Tim. Nay, alas I Will be friends with you, for my part with all my heart; but my
Father was sent for to this house, to some Gallants that wanted money: and by
the noise and Ranting you kept here, de' understand me, I thought you had been
the men.


Hazard. We expect him here every minute.


Theodore. Now will you brace of Knaves Cheat this fool.


Hazard. If he scapes us one way or other, I Will forswear Caterdeus-ace, and
smooth Box, as long as I live.


Lettice. Heaven! if Mr. Squeeze finds me here I shall be ruined for ever.


Cheat. Pray lets withdraw into another Room more private.


Theodore. Go all into another Room, and I Will come to you suddenly; I will but
speak one word with my man.


Rant. Come on Ladies: Come Sir we must engage you till your Father comes.


Tim. Sir your servant, I don't care if I spend my Pint with you; and it be a
Quart, I have money enough, de' see?


Hazard. And shall have little enough, de' see, before we leave you.


[Aside.] [Ex. all but Theodore and Robin.] Theodore. Come Robin, is there any
hopes of procuring the three hundred Pound?


Robin. Yes Sir, you may have the money upon some few conditions; and I (seeing
you could not have it upon other terms) told him you must have the money upon
any condition.


Theodore. So I must, but what are they?


Robin. I Will read 'em to you Sir, I have 'em here in writing; first, you must
engage some reversion of Land for security.


Theodore. That Is reasonable.


Robin. Item Mr. Squeeze will have 30 l. for Broakerage, for he but procures it.


Theodore. Oh damned Jew!


Robin. Have patience Sir, you shall hear more: Item the Gentleman that Lends
it, will not in conscience take above 6 in the hundred; but he will have a
Present of 30 l. for a pair of Candlesticks.


Theodore. What cursed exaction's this!


Robin. Item he will have you take the greatest part of it in Goods.


Theodore. A curse on him, what Moor or wild Arab is this?


Robin. Hold Sir, Imprimis a fine new Razor-Case, with Razors, and every thing
suitable; the Case in-layd with Silver, and all the Instruments with Silver
Heads, very fit for your man to learn to shave by.


Theodore. Death and Hell! what is this?


Robin. Item A Bolonia Lute, a Roman-Arch Lute, 2 Gittars, a Cremona Violin, 1
Lyra Viol, 1 Viol de Gambo and a Trump-Marin, very fit for you, if you be a
lover of Music; Item a very neat Chess-Board, and a pair of Tables, very good
to pass away the time with.


Theodore. What abominable Villains are these?


Robin. Item 15 large Pewter Dishes, 2 Dozen of Pewter Plates, two Brass Pots
and a Kettle, very useful for you against you keep house. Item a Furnace of
Brick, with the Cornues, and Recipients, very fit for you, if you be curious in
Distilling. Item 1 Scru'd Pistol, 3 Muskets, 1 Back, Breast, Headpiece and
Gauntlet, and 5 Swords; these things are valued at 160 l.


Theodore. What Inhuman bloody Rogues are these? I should not have above 80 l.
of all this money: Heaven what shall I do! money I must, and will have; though
by all the extremities in the world.


[Enter Squeeze and Goldingham.] Gold. But do you think there is no danger?


Sque. None at all, he says his Father is so well known, that no man will
question him: Besides he is so pressed for money, that he will undergo what ever
you can put upon him.


Gold. That Is very well.


Sque. Besides, he will go to the ensurance Office, and ensure his own life and
his Fathers death, as you know they will ensure any thing.


Gold. That Is well again.


Theodore. 'Sdeath who is here, my Father? I am betrayed by this Rogue.


Sque. Oh Sir, your servant, this is the young Gentleman Mr. Goldingham that
wants the money.


Gold. Oh Heaven, my Son! I am amazed.


Sque. Is it his Son? this is lucky, above my wishes, [Aside.] he will
disinherit him; and my Son will have a Portion then, a large one with his
Daughter.


Theodore. You Rascal, did you betray me? I Will cut your throat you Dog.


[Softly.] Sque. I betray you! heaven forbid it.


Gold. Oh you Villain, is it you that abandon your self to these wicked
extremities?


Theodore. Is it you Sir that are guilty of these abominable extortions?


Gold. Is it you that would ruin your self by your debauchery? and borrow money
upon such conditions?


Theodore. Is it you Sir that seek to enrich your self by the Ruin of people,
in lending money upon such shameful conditions?


Gold. Dare you appear before me after this?


Theodore. Dare you appear before the world after this?


Gold. Have you no shame in you, you debauched Villain! to spend thus
impiously, what I have sweat for; to make away the reversion of your Estate,
upon such dishonorable conditions?


Theodore. Do not you blush to dishonor your Name, and Family, by the most
cruel exaction, and unheard of subtleties, that the most infamous of Usurers,
nay Jews themselves could never invent.


Gold. Are you such a borrower?


Theodore. Are you such a lender?


Gold. Come along Mr. Squeeze, I cannot endure the sight of this Villain any
longer.

[Ex. Goldingham and Squeeze.]
Theodore. So, my affairs are in a very good posture, I am disappointed of
money, and undone with my Father, if I cannot find out a way to bring my self
off.


Robin. Make him believe, that it was for another you inquired for the money;
and knowing that Squeeze dealt with your Father (which I am sure you never
suspected till now) that you intended it for your Father's advantage.


Theodore. We Will think on it, and for Squeeze, I hope my friends in the next
Room will Revenge me to the full upon his Son; I Will into 'em, and set them on'.


Robin. Do Sir, and at misfortunes never repine,
While there are handsome Women and good Wine.

ACT. III.
SCE. III.
Enter Theodore and Bellamour. Theo. SIR, I have at length broke loose by force
from my Company, to wait on you; my Sister has told the honor you have done
her, and me.


Bell. Sir I humbly beg your pardon for not first making my address to you: My
long absence had made me a stranger to all the Town, and by that means to your
Character; had I known you to be a man of that honor I find you, I should not
have gone so indirect a way.


Theodore. Sir I am happy that (any way) this favor can be conferred by a
person of your worth upon my Sister; and so much honor on my self; and
therefore it is my interest, as well as inclination, to desire of you that all
Names may be laid by between us too, but that of Brother.


Bell. It is a Name that since you are pleased to honor me with it, shall not
be forgotten, or ungratefully owned while I live.


Theodore. Dear Brother, let me embrace you.


Bell. Let this eternally bind us, my dearest Brother.


Theodore. I am extremely glad you have prevailed so upon my Fathers opinion,
since it may be of great use, as well to your own affairs, as to mine.


Bell. Do not distinguish our interests, for yours is now become mine.


Theodore. I am extremely obliged to you for your kindness, and I have now
occasion to use you in a business of my own; I know you will excuse my freedom.


Bell. There Is nothing you can ever do to me, can need an excuse; nor is there
any thing you can ask of me, which I can deny.


Theodore. I doubt not but my Father has e're this told you of his anger
against me.


Bell. He has, and I am very sorry for it, but I hope to serve you in this
affair.


Theodore. I can put you in a way to do it, as thus, I Will tell you immediately.


[Enter Cheatly.] Cheatly. Oh Mr. Theodore, your friends are very angry with
you for leaving of 'em; but you Coxcomb young Squeeze is as drunk as a Bully,
and so sweet upon Mrs. Joyce (who is the only woman I have left with them) that
there is no staving him off her: She persuaded him to play with Hazard at
Backgammon, and he has already lost his Edward shillings that he kept for
Shovel-board, and was pulling out broad pieces (that have not seen the Sun
these many years) when I came away.


Theodore. I am heartily glad on it, I am sure the Rogues have no more mercy
than a Bailiff with an execution in his pocket; but prithee what brings you
hither? does my Father go astray toward the flesh?


Cheatly. No no, I come to borrow money of him upon Security; good enough, as
you shall find to your cost.


[Aside.] Theodore. I Will send him to you, come my dear Brother.


Bell. I wait on you.

[Ex. Bellamour and Theodore.]
Cheatly. If I be not revenged of Theodore, for using my Daughter unkindly, I
have lost my cunning; I am sure there can be no Instrument of it so certain, as
a Mother-in-Law.


[Enter Robin.] Robin. -- Dear Mrs. Cheatly! were not you discouraged enough
last time, but you must venture again hither?


Cheatly. I Will never give him over till I prevail upon him.


Robin. It is impossible, you will sooner persuade a professed Jew to Swines flesh
and Images, than him to parting with money.


Cheatly. Distrust not my art.


Robin. I heartily wish it might prevail, though I despair on it, for (to say
truth) Mrs. Cheatly I have need at present for a great deal of love, not
forgetting a little money, from you.


Cheatly. Thou shall want neither, as long as I can help thee; here is something,
come to my house at night, and thou shall have more.


Robin. Thank you dear Mistress, it comes seasonably -- Though loving such a
one as she deserves very well; yet this is the freest Titt that ever had
inclination to mankind.


[Aside] [Enter Goldingham.] Gold. God's Death you Rogue, are you about my house?
begone Rascal.


Robin. Call me Rascal before my Mistress? I could find in my honor to beat
him for an old Sink-cater.


Cheatly. Why do you use Robin so unkindly? he is a pretty ingenious young man.


Gold. Hang him Rascal! But prithee how goes our business on?


Cheatly. As you can wish: she says she sawy ou even now walk under her Window,
and made me the pleasantest description, and is so taken with you! She says you
are of a fit Age and Beard for her, and infinitely admires the Gravity and
Decency of your Habit


Gold. Does she like me, say you?


Cheatly. To admiration: Pray Sir turn you; just that delicate shape, that
convenient height that she described! Pray let me see you walk: just that free
and janty mien, that very easy and unconstrained motion which she described.


Gold. It is strange she should take so much notice of me in so short a time,
hah.


Cheatly. She says you look as if you had no kind of infirmity.


Gold. I have none very great, (thank heaven) I have only a defluction that
troubles me sometimes.


[He Coughs.] Cheatly. Oh you are never the worse for that Rheum; you have an
admirable grace, a good air and mien in Coughing; it becomes no man in Europe
so well as you.


Gold. No no, you jest, you are a wag; but will Isabella come to see my
Daughter?


Cheatly. Yes Sir, I am to go and wait on her hither immediately.


Gold. Dear Mrs. Cheatly you oblige me infinitely.


Cheatly. I oblige her of all things in the world. [He Smiles.] But Sir, I have
an humble Petition to you.


[He Frowns.] Gold. What the Devil says she?


Cheatly. I am just now at the point of being cast in a Suit, for want of a
little money to Fee my Lawyers with; you may if you please easily supply me,
you cannot [He Smiles.] imagine what joy she had when I told her I would wait
on her to your house; you cannot believe what pleasure she will have to see you.


Gold. Me, alas! alas!


Cheatly. Upon my word Sir, this Suit is of that consequence to me, that I
shall be ruined, if I lose it; [He Frowns.] and a little assistance from you
will restore my business again; Oh! if you could but have seen what [He Smiles
again.] transport she was in, when I was speaking of you, what joy shined
through her eyes, when I repeated your excellent qualities to her: in fine, I
have made her very impatient till this Marriage be concluded.


Gold. You have done me the greatest pleasure imaginable, and I owe all the
kindness in the world to you.


Cheatly. Sir since it is so, I beg of you that you will afford me the small
supply which I demand.


[He Frowns again.] Gold. Well, adieu, I Will go see all things prepared for her
reception in time.


Cheatly. I assure you, you could never supply me in so great an exigence.


Gold. Well, I Will see my Coach and Horses put in order, for ye to take the air.


Cheatly. I should not importune you, if I had not the greatest necessity in
the world.


Gold. Let me know what she and you love best, that I may bespeak it to Supper.


Cheatly. I beg of you, do not refuse me; you cannot imagine the pleasure a
little sum of money would do me.


Gold. Well, I must go see that Supper be ready in good time, for fear ye
should be sick, if ye eat too late.


Cheatly. Pray consider my condition --


Gold. I warrant ye you shall have Supper ready early enough, I Will bespeak it
instantly: Farewell.


[He rushes from her, and Exit.] Cheatly. This is the most obdurate, inhuman
old Fellow; that are yet ventured a soul to the Devil for money.


[Enter Robin.] Robin. What, you have succeeded just as I expected.


Cheatly. A curse on him, he was prepared and fortified against all my Attaques


Robin. I tell you, you will sooner persuade Quakers to conform, and wear the
Surplice; or Bauds to become Nuns; than him to part with any money.


Cheatly. I Will bait him once with the sight of this Lady here; and if that does
not mollify him, I can soon bring her over to another that shall bid high
enough for her.


Robin. This Trafficking for Maiden-Heads is an exc^llent Profession; but they
are very dear, for their Rarity.


Cheatly. But I think I must wholly leave of Trading about Marriages, the
Market runs higher at present the other way.


Robin. Faith then, its the wisest course.


Cheatly. I Will consider on it, but come you shall usher me to the Lady I speak
of.


Robin. Allons.


[Exeunt.] Hazard, Rant, Timothy, Joyce, Boy Tim. and Haz. at Tables. Tim. On
my conscience and soul you Cog, de' see? look on the Motto of the Tables, Play
fair and swear not, de' hear me?


[Drunk.] Haz. On my honor Sir.


Tim. A Devil take your honor for me, de' see? that is all your word at this
end of the Town; de' conceive me? but for all that, one cannot trust a man of
ye: Here it goes Size-ace, Hazard hold out.


Tim. Did ever man see the like! on my conscience and soul you deal with the
Devil, de' mark me? Mrs. Joyce, let me have but one kiss, de' conceive me, and
I shall win the Game fack.


Joyce. Nay fie Mr. Timothy.


Tim. Nay never offer to resist, de' see? for would I might never stir if I have not it, if I set upon it; Come Come.


[They struggle, he kisses her.] Joyce. You are but a rude person, let me tell
you that.


Tim. I told you I Would have it, I faith; now Sir I am for you.


Rant. Prithee Joyce be not so coy to this young Fool, he may be of great
advantage to us all, and especially to thee.


Joyce. I hope he might use more Courtship to a person of my quality, there is
some difference sure.


Rant. Prithee let there be none, I am sure you will not repent it. Mr.
Timothy, here is the Ladies health in a brimmer.


Tim. I Will pledge you an't were a Peck (six and three) for would I might never
go home alive if she be not one of the Prettiest Gentlewomen I ever saw in my
life (Sink-Duce) Come drink it off.


Rant. It Is off, and there is a brimmer for you.


Tim. Where are the Fiddles? I Will vow and swear I will not drink without
Fiddles.


Rant. They are drinking in the next Room, Boy, call 'em in.


Haz. Twelve, there is, a Back-Gammon, the Gold is my own.


[Ex. Boy.] Tim. A duce take it, I have lost all, as I am an honest man, on my
conscience you have made a League; I make no more of Mr. Selware's Journey-man
next Door to us, I give him one in five.


Rant. If you want any money, you shall have what you will of me; but drink
the health first.


Tim. Come on, Musicianers, strike up, Hey: Here forsooth, here is your health;
and would I might never go out of this place, if I would not drink it sooner
than my Sisters, or my Mothers, if she were alive: Ha ha, [He drinks, they
Flourish.] this is the Prettiest way of drinking I vow; it incourages us, as
Drums and Trumpets do, when we let off our Guns at a Muster. Come Hey, what
care I for losses, my Father has money enough, de' see? Mrs. Joyce, with your
Cozens leave, I make bold to love you with all my heart.


Joyce. I am obliged to you really, but I know not how to return it.


Tim. O your love! I warrant you, you know well enough if you would; well to
morrow we show at Hide-Park, and (if I know your Lodging) I Will give you a Gun
as I come back, and steal a Bottle of Sack, and the Tip of a Neats-Tongue, and
bring you, I tell you that.


Rant. Nay prithee Hazard give an honest account, don't sink for shame.


Haz. Upon my honor; he lost no more, what do take me for a Cheat?


Tim. Come Gentlemen you don't drink, give me a Glass, here is my Mistriss's
health; I make bold to call you so, de' see?


Joyce. O your servant.


Tim. Come Gentlemen, an't I pure Company now? strike up Musicianers, Hey; Gad
you think we Citizens are [He drinks.] Good for nothing, de' conceive me? but
there is a knot of us, of about sixteen or eighteen, if we get together, can be
as merry, as the best of you; we can i faith, and sing, a Boat, a Boat, or
herer's a health to his Majesty, with a fa la la la lero; and Roar gallantly
Mrs. Joyce.


Joyce. Methinks you are as Pretty a Spark as any about the Town.


Tim. I think so fack, I Will scorn any of 'em should outdo me if I set upon it.
Hey!


[He Leaps and falls down.] Joyce. What, have you hurt your self?


Tim. 'Pshaw, not at all, fa la la lero, come [He Sings.] Mrs. Joyce, we will
have a Song faik now; Violin men, (I dare not call 'em Fiddlers, for fear they
should be angry) sing us a Catch; Oh I have seen one of these Act the Country
man, and Simkin in the Chest rarely; and you may talk of your Plays, but give
me such Pretty harmless Drolls for my money.


Rant. Well, you are a merry man.


Tim. I Will be as merry as the best, hang losses, Hey, Hey, strike up, fa la la
la la lero.


Haz. Let me embrace you, dear Mr. Timothy; well he is admirable company Mrs.
Joyce.


Tim. Oh! am I so? Sing a Catch you Rogues, or I Will break your heads; give me a
Glass; here Adversary, here is to you.


Rant. A pox on him, he will be too drunk.


[They Sing.] A Catch in four parts.
Come lay by your cares, and hang up your sorrow,
Drink on, he is a Sot, that er'e thinks on to morrow;
Good store of good Claret supplies every thing,
And the man that is drunk, is as great as a King.
Let none at misfortunes, or losses repine,
But take a full Dose of the juice of the Vine;
Diseases and troubles are never to be found,
But in the damned place, where the Glass goes not round.
Tim. An admirable Song Mrs. Joyce, thank you honest friends: I have heard
these men sing gallantly before my Lord Mayor; Diseases and Troubles are never,
etc.


[He Sings out of Tune.] Rant. Come will you take Revenge on Hazard, here is
twenty Pound if you will.


Tim. Hang revenge fack, he is a very honest Gentlemen; besides I have in my Fob
20. l. in broad Gold, I did not tell you of.


Rant. Is not that good news Hazard?


Tim. Come Mrs. Joyce lets sing and be merry a bitt; Diseases and Troubles,
etc. Hey. [He falls down dead drunk.] Mrs. Joyce come to Bed: Come I say
quickly, I am in have, come away.


Haz. So now you have done well, this Rogue has 20. l. about him; and you have
made him so drunk, he cannot lose it to us.


Rant. Lets carry him into another Room to sleep, and pick his Pocket; gad it is
all one.


Haz. No pox, our way is a little more honorable.


Joyce. I have had excellent company of you to day Gentlemen.


Rant. I know thou have goodness enough to pardon it; but if my design
succeeds, you shall have cause to thank me; I will watch this Fellow, as Bacon
did his Brazen Head; and (if I do not marry him to thee) I Will be bound never to
Cheat the Son of a Citizen again.


Joyce. Flatter not your self, it is impossible.


Haz. Never doubt him, you know not his Art; but whilst he watches him, I Will
wait on you to my Lodging; whither he shall bring Timothy as soon as he wakes.


Joyce. Come on, your servant Mr. Rant.

[Ex. Joyce and Hazard.]
Rant. Your servant sweet Mrs. Joyce. Mr. Timothy wake a little.


Tim. I Will not wake for my Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and all the Common
Council, de' see?


Rant. Here waiter, help to carry him into the next Room.


[Exeunt.] [Goldingham, Theodore, and Theodora.] Gold. But it is really, as
Bellamour tells me, that you would procure the money for another?


Theodore. Upon my word Sir, the young Gentleman will give you a meeting to
morrow morning.


Gold. It Is somewhat better, but why did you keep such scurvy Prodigal company?


Theodore. I did it only to draw him in, and get money of him.


Gold. That Is very well. Now Son I have something else to say to you; the Lady
which I intend for your Mother-in-Law, will be here instantly; and I charge you
betray not the least dislike of any thing in your Countenance, but use her with
all the respect imaginable.


Theodore. I cannot promise you to be glad of the coming of a Mother-in-Law; but
I am sure I will not mislike her you have Chosen.


Gold. Nor you Daughter


Theodora. I have never given you occasion to suspect so ill a thing of me.


Theodore. 'Sdeath! what Instrument of the Devil has he made use of, to seduce
Isabella hither?


Gold. Leave me now, and send in all my servants. [Ex. Theodore and Theodora.]
[Enter Oldwoman, Roger, James, Will.] Here, where are you all, mind all your
Charges. Oldwoman first, to you it belongs to make every thing clean; but do
you here, do not Rub my Movables too hard, to wear them out; if you do, I
shall stop your Wages.


James. Hey, what is to do now?


Gold. You Roger take all the Bottles and Glasses, and rince them; and take
Charge of 'em, if there be one lost or broke, I Will bate it out of your Wages,
Sirrah.


James. That I am sure of.


Gold. Then do you William fill the drink; but, never but when they are dry,
and let 'em call sor't twice, or thrice, pretend to be a little thick of
Hearing; here are a company of Roguish Lackey's about the Town, that are always
offering the Glass, and provoking people to drink, and kill themselves, I will
have no such Rogues about me.


William. I warrant you Sir, I Will look to the Drink.


Gold. Then look you have your best Cloathe's on when the people come.


Roger. I have my best, and all I have on, but they are so horribly greasy
before, that they are fit for nothing but to give to a Soapboyler, or
Kitchin-stuff-woman.


William. And mine are so full of holes behind, as if I had a Volley of
Musket-Bullets in my Posteriors.


Gold. You foolish Knaves, cannot you Sirrah take your Hat, and hold it before
you to hide the Grease? And do you Sirrah turn your Face always to the people,
to hide those holes behind; and when you are sent for any thing, go backward,
thus you Rascal. Now to you James.


[Ex. Oldwoman Roger and William.] James. Would you speak to me as your Cook,
or Coachman? for you know I serve in both Offices.


Gold. As my Cook.


James. Good Sir hold a little.


[He puts off his Coach-mans Cloak, and appears like a Cook.] Gold. What a
Devil is this Ceremony for? you Rascal.


James. Good Sir have a little patience: Now speak, I am ready.


[Enter Bellamour.] Gold. Oh Bellamour come and assist me; James, I am to give
a Supper to night.


James. The most miraculous thing I ever heard of!


Gold. Can you make us good Cheer?


James. Yes, if you will let me have a great deal of money.


Gold. Money! you Rascal you, have ye nothing to say but money; nothing in your
mouth but money, money, money?


Bell. I never heard so impertinent an answer, every fool can do that; but you
must make a good entertainment with a little money.


James. Good Mr. Steward, I would you would teach me that secret.


Gold. Peace Sirrah, and tell me what we must have.


James. There Is your Fac-totum, let him till you.


Gold. Answer me, or I Will break your head.


James. Hold Sir, I will, how many will there be?


Gold. Ten in all, but provide enough but for eight.


James. Why you must have, first, two great Soupes made of Veal, Ducks,
Chickens, Coxcombs, Sweet-Breads, Mushromes, Palates, Forced-meat,
Artichoak-bottoms. --


Gold. 'Sdeath you Rogue, you would Feast all the Town.


James. Then Fricasees, Ragousts, a huge Dish (with all sorts of Fowls) as
Duck, Teal --


Gold. Hold your Tongue you Rogue, you would undo me.


James. Then Plover, Dotril --


Gold. Hold you Rogue.


[He stops Iame's mouth with his hand.] James. Snipes, Ruffs, Woodcocks.


Gold. Hold you Dog, he puts me into a cold sweat.


James. Partridges, Gnats, Godwits.


Gold. Will the Rogue never have done?


James. Pheasants, Heath-Pouts, Black-Cocks, Quails, Rails, Larks, etc.


Bell. What do you intend to cramm all the Town? my Master does not invite
people, to Murder 'em with eating.


James. But he would not starve 'em sure.


Bell. People should eat to live, not live to eat; as the Proverb says.


Gold. O dear Bellamour, let me Embrace thee for that word, he was a great man
that said that; I will have that Sentence Engraven in Great Letters over my
Hall Chimney.


Bell. Never trouble him Sir, I Will take care of the Supper.


James. Pray do Sir, with a little money, we shall see what 'twill be.


Gold. But now for my Coach.


[He puts on his Coach-man's Cloak.] James. Hold good Sir, good Sir hold a
little: Now Sir, what were you saying of your Coach?


Gold. Let it be cleaned, and the Horses Harnessed.


James. Horses Sir, why they are in that poor Condition, that a man must
stretch devillishly to call 'em Horses; they are but the Shadows or Ghosts of
Horses.


Gold. Can they be sick and do nothing?


James. Yes Sir, you make 'em keep such severe Lents, they eat no more than
Chamelions; I look every day when they should depart this life: For my part, it
grieves my heart, for I have a tender love and respect for my Horses; and
indeed a man should not be so hard hearted, or unnatural, not to pity his
Neighbor in distress.


Gold. The Journey will not be far.


James. I have not the Courage to put 'em in; how can they draw the Coach, that
cannot draw their Legs after them.


Bell. Sir, I Will engage one to drive 'em.


James. I had rather they should die under any bodies hands than mine; but you
have a mighty necessary man here to your Superintendent.


Gold. Peace you unmannerly Rascal.


Bell. I Will about these things instantly.


Gold. Do good Bellamour.


James. Sir, I cannot endure these Flatterers, and Pickthanks, I speak my mind
plainly; and it made me mad to hear him say things to your Face, of you, that
none of all mankind besides will say.


Gold. Why, what does the world say of me?


James. Pardon me Sir, you will be angry if I tell you.


Gold. On the contrary, it will please me infinitely to see that plain dealing
in you, let the world say what they will.


James. Truly I must deal plainly with one I love, and (next to my Horses) you
are the person in the world, that I have the greatest respect for.


Gold. Come speak.


James. Why Sir, in plain honest sincerity of heart, I tell you in short, no
man gives one good word of you; one says you never fail to pick Quarrels with
your Servants at Quarter day, that you may turn 'em away without their Wages,
that you have been taken Robbing of your own Horses of their Provender: That
(when you go by water to your house at Putney) you take a Sculler, and make him
bate half his Fair, for your helping him to Row; in short, you would Rob, Pick,
Pockets, Murder, betray your Country, and do any Villainy in the world for
money; your Name is never used without Cursing, and calling you Villain,
Wretch, Knave, common Barreter, Oppressor, Horse-Leech.


Gold. You are a Rogue, a Son of a Whore, a Dog, a Rascal.


[He beats him with his Cane.] James. I was afraid this would be the end on it,
a pox on plain dealing for me; did you not command me to tell you?


Gold. I Will teach you how to speak Rogue another time.

[Ex. Goldingham.]
James. Well, I see it is not safe for any man to be honest in this Age.


Bell. How now Mr. James, your plain dealing is rewarded very ill.


James. 'Sdeath do you make sport at my beating? Laugh at your own, when you
have one.


Bell. Nay prithee be not passionate.


James. He entreats me, I Will huff a little and try [Aside.] if he fears me: Do
you know Sir that I cannot endure to be laughed at? and that I will make you
laugh in another fashion.


[He presses upon Bellamour.] Bell. Nay softly James, if you please.


James. No Sir, it does not please me.


[Iames presses still upon Bellamour.] Bell. Nay good James.


James. You are a very impertinent Fellow.


Bell. Have patience a little.


James. I will have none; if I take a Cudgel, I will so Chastise you.


Bell. How Rascal a Cudgel, did you say a Cudgel?


[Iames Retreats.] James. No no no Sir, alas I have no occasion for one, not I.


Bell. Do you think I am to be beaten Sirrah?


James. Alas Sir not I, I have better thoughts of you.


Bell. Are you not a Son of a Whore?


James. Yes Sir, any thing in the world, what you please, I am a Son of a Whore
Sir, a Son of a damned Whore.


Bell. Do you know me Rascal?


[Bellamour pursues James, who retires round about the Stage.] James. O Lord
Sir, I honor you abundantly.


Bell. Did you say you would Cudgel me?


James. I was in jesting, I did but Droll upon my honor.


Bell. And I shall beat you in jesting.


James. Hold, hold, for heaven's sake.


Bell. Remember Sirrah, against another time, you are a very scurvy Railleur.

[Ex. Bellamour.]
James. A pox on all sincerity, and plain dealing for me, I have had a couple
of good substantial beatings; but if I be not revenged on this domineering
Fellow, I will give Dogs leave to piss upon me.


[Enter Isabella and Cheatly.] Cheatly. Do you know whether your Master be
within?


James. A pox on it, I know but too well.


Cheatly. Pray tell him, we are here.


[Ex. James.] Isabella. But (that I am bound to obey my Mother) you should
never have made me run my self into the danger of seeing this old man, for
(though his Daughter, whom I come to wait on, I hear is an excellent person,
yet) I strangely apprehend the trouble of seeing him.


Cheatly. Consult your Interest Madam, he is very rich, and very old, and will
leave you a great deal of money, that may qualify you to marry any young
Gentleman you please, hereafter.


Isabella. But I have a natural antipathy to old men, as some have to Cats.


Cheatly. This old man will not have the Impudence to trouble your Ladyship
above a year, after you are Married to him.


Isabella. I shall never wait for that time, to make my self happy; one year of
such punishment would outweigh all the pleasure, I could have all my life
after.


Cheatly. I find the young Brisk Gentlemen you spoke of yesterday is still in
your head.


Isabella. He is I confess, and in my heart too, and I think nothing will e're
get him out; he keep's such a stir there, he will never let me rest a minute.


Cheatly. Do you know who it is Madam?


Isabella. No, but I have often seen him walking by my Lodging, and perpetually
looking up at the Balcony, either upon me when I was there, or watching for my
coming thither; and by his look, and air, I guess all is not well with him
neither; I hope he is in the same condition with my self.


[Enter Goldingham.] Cheatly. Here comes the old Gentleman.


Isabella. What Spectacle's that?


Gold. God save you Lady, I am obliged to you for the honor you do my poor
house, which (if you can love an old man,) know Lady I am above six and fifty,
and it shall be yours: What a devil Mrs. Cheatly! she answers nothing, nor
shows any kind of pleasure at the sight of me.


Cheatly. O Sir! she is surprised extremely; besides, Maids endeavor what they
can to hide their affections; she is so full of joy, she cannot speak to you.


Gold. That Is something indeed.


Isabella. What a prodigious, ridiculous old Fellow is this?


Gold. What says my fair one?


Cheatly. That you are a most admirable person.


Gold. Fair Lady, you do me too much honor.


Isabella. What an abominable, odious old Fellow's this!


Gold. I am infinitely obliged Madam, for your good opinion of me: Here Is my
Daughter Madam.


[Enter Theodora.] Isabella. Madam, I have too long delayed waiting on you, but
I hope you will pardon it.


Theodora. Madam, you do what I ought to have done; 'Twas on my part, to have
prevented you.


[Enter Theodore.] Gold. Here Is my Son comes to kiss your hand.


Isabella. Oh Mrs. Cheatly! what accident's this? This is the young Gentleman I
spoke of.


Cheatly. This is wonderful.


Gold. I see you are a little amazed to see me have such lusty Children, but I
will soon be rid of them both.


Theodore. Madam, this is an adventure which I did not expect; nor was I ever
in my life so surprised, as when my Father told me his design.


Isabella. Sir, I am not less surprised then you, I assure you, I was not at
all prepared for what I see now.


Theodore. It Is true, Madam, my Father cannot in the world make so fair a
Choice, and I am infinitely happy to see you here; but you are the person in
the world, I would not have my Mother-in-Law; that would break my heart: Madam,
I know you have apprehension enough to take what I say in the right sense, and
not be offended at it.


Gold. You coxcomb, what an impertinent, silly complement is this! you must be
making confessions, must you?


Isabella. Sir, we are so much upon even terms, that you are the man in the
world, whom I would not have my Son-in-Law; and (if I were not brought here by
an absolute power,) I should have given you no shadow of suspicion.


Gold. She is in the right, your complement deserves no better return; I know
you would anger her: I beg you Madam to forgive my Son's impertinence, he is a
young Sot, that does not understand himself.


Isabella. What he said, was so far from offending me, that it pleased me
extremely to hear him so frankly declare his opinion, and (if he had spoke in
any other manner) I should have esteemed him less.


Gold. You have a great deal of goodness to forgive his faults; in time he will
be wiser, and change his opinion.


Theodore. Sir, I can never be capable of changing, and Madam, I beg of you to
believe me.


Gold. 'Sdeath what extravagance is this?


Theodora. Brother, you will provoke him too much.


[Softly.] Theodore. 'Sdeath Sir, would you have me lie?


Gold. Again, I say change the discourse, you Sot.


Theodore. Well Sir, since you command me to speak in another fashion, give me
leave Madam to put my self in my Fathers place; and now Madam, I protest to you
I never yet saw so charming a creature: This is the happiest minute of my life,
indeed my life began but from the time I saw you; the Name of your husband, is
an honor, which I would prefer to the Titles of all the Princes upon Earth;
and there is nothing which I would not dare to do, for so glorious a conquest.


Gold. Softly, hold a little.


Theodore. It Is a complement I make for you to this Lady.


Gold. I have a Tongue to express my self, I need no advocate.


Isabella. I am not so dull of apprehension not to know for whom that
complement was intended, and am glad to find it.


[Aside.] Cheatly. Sir, if you please let us take the air, I hear your Coach at
the door.


Gold. Oh is it? but I am sorry you will make such have, I have not time to
prepare you a Collation before you go.


Theodore. Sir, I foresaw that, and provided beforehand upon your account, a
great Dish of China Oranges, Cittrons, all sorts of Sweetmeats, Limonades,
Sherbets, and all sorts of Wines.


Golding. Softly, but in anger. Villain, who gave you commission to do this.


Theodore. Pardon me Sir, if there be not enough, I know this Lady has goodness
enough to excuse it; besides I can soon have more.


Gold. Is the Sot mad?


Theodore. Madam did you ever see a finer Stone, than that Diamond upon my
Father's finger?


Isabella. It sparkles delicately.


Theodore. With your leave Sir.
[He takes it off his Fathers finger, and gives it Isabella.] Madam be pleased
to look on it nearer.

Gold. What means the Rascal.


[Aside.] Isabella. It is a delicate clear Stone indeed.


[She is going to give it Goldingham, Theodore puts himself between her and his
Father.] Theodore. No Madam, no returning of it, it is in too fair hands
already, it is a Present, my Father makes to you Madam.


Gold. Who I?


Theodore. Is it not true, that you would have this Lady keep the Ring?


Gold. What do you mean you Villain, are you mad?


[Softly] Theodore. Madam, he desires you, by me, that you would please to
accept of it.


Gold. The fear, she will take it, distracts me.


Isabella. Pardon me Sir, I use not to receive Presents.


Theodore. Madam, I am sure my Father will never receive it.


Gold. Oh this lying Rascal! you are mistaken.


Theodore. Look you Madam, your Refusal has made him stark distracted.


Gold. O this damned Villain!


Theodore. Do you not see how he frets, and fumes? for heaven's sake Madam
receive it.


Isabella. Well Sir, (rather than offend you Father,) I will keep it.


Gold. 'Sdeath I am undone, but there is no remedy. Madam, I thank you for the
favor you do me. But would they were all hanged, and I had my Ring again.


[Aside.] [Enter Will.] Will. Sir, there is one to speak with you.


Gold. I am engaged, I cannot come.


Will. He has brought you money.


Gold. Oh has he, I ask your Pardon Madam: Remember to go backward Will.


[Ex. Goldinghant and Will.] Theodora. You have infinitely provoked my Father,
and yet I could not but be pleased with it.


Theodore. I had a violent temptation upon me, that I could not resist Madan;
will you do us the honor to take part of this Collation.


Isabella. Your humble servant Sir.


Theodora. Come Madam.


[To Cheatly.] Cheatly. I attend your Ladyship.


ACT. IV.
SCE. IV.
Enter Theodore, Theodora, Isabella, Cheatly. Theo. MAdam, you are one of the
most hard hearted Ladies that ever triumphed over man.


Isabella. And you the most violent Lover, that ever attaqued a woman; but this
storm of love, is too great to last.


Cheatly. Never blame this violence, it is the best quality a Lover can have, to
my knowledge.


[Softly to Isabella.] Theodora. Madam, my Brother has made me his confident in
this affair, and I can answer for his truth; do not think me partial, for I
assure you, I will value your interest equal with his, or with my own.


Isabella. You extremely oblige me with your kindness; and your friendship will
be able to sweeten all misfortunes that can happen to me.


Cheatly. You Lovers had need have something to sweeten, for ye are an unlucky
fort of people.


Theodore. Love, when inclinations meet, is the only condition to be enjoyed.
Love! there is no life without it; we do but sleep, and dream we live, when we
are not in love; and pray Madam will you be pleased to wake out of this dream,
and think a little of one that loves you so, that his life or death depends
upon your breath.


Isabella. You let me take no breath Sir.


Theodore. A good Soldier, when he has made a breach, assaults it presently;
and never gives time to repair, and fortify.


Isa^ella. But extemporary love, is most commonly as Hypocritical, as
extemporary prayer: But if not dissembled, it is seldom constant.


Theodore. Let me beg to know your resolutions, must I live or die?


Cheatly. Come Madam, be merciful, and reprieve the Gentleman, that may be
otherwise so far given over as to hang himself for your Ladyships love.


Theodora. Let me beg you will please to encourage my Brothers affection, which
I am sure is true, and honorable.


Isabella. Madam, think your self in my place, and imagine whether I have not
given too much encouragement for the first time; and whether it becomes my
honor to give more.


Theodore. Pox of this canting word Honor, it never did good yet, it is often
the occasion of Killing men, and prevents the getting of 'em. [Aside.] [To
Isabella] Madam, there is no honor but in love, the rest is but a shadow of
honor; which the Authors of Romances have perplexed with intricacies, more than
the Schoolmen have Divinity.


Isabella. You give me no time to think of love.


Theodore. I that have so little time, ought to make what use I can of this; if
my Father perceives this, he will with all the malice that can be, seek to
prevent me.


Isabella. But Sir, I have a Mother (whom yet I never disobeyed,) that has
engaged her self to your Father; and though I confess, I can never think of
marrying him, yet I must think of no other, without her consent.


Theodore. This is you that made that engagement, I thank you, a Plague of all
Matchmakers; but I must make [Aside.] use of her yet, and not undeceive
Isabella in the Character of her.


Cheatly. Sir, I did not know you had a passion here, but I will make you
amends: if I can marry her to Theodore [Aside] he is liberal, and will reward me
well; but his Father is the most hidebound Fellow -- he has the Villainy of
fifty Jews, and, which is more, of ten London Brokers in him.


Theodore. Madam, let me have but some assurance, not to to have your
unkindness, and all other oppositions in the world are trifles.


Cheatly. Come Mrs. Isabella, hold off no longer; in short, you told me you
loved this Gentleman violently, and wished he were captivated with you; you did
not wish it, that you might use him ill; therefore, since it is your
inclination, dissemble no longer: Here Is the Gentleman, take him by the hand,
he is your own ipso facto, he is a proper Gentleman, make much of him; here he
is for you, and there is the short and the long on it. Now Mr. Theodore I think I
have made you amends.


Theodore. Can I believe so great a happiness, I am so transported Madam, you
must expect no sense from me.


Isabella. Sir, since she has betrayed my weakness, which she for her Sex sake
ought to have concealed, and I ought in modesty not to have told you, pardon my
easiness, and think me not guilty of levity, if you do, you will be very unjust
to censure one that esteems you so well.


Theodore. I should as soon censure heaven for granting my prayers; I have not
words enough to tell you how welcome this minute is to me.


Theodora. Now I hope you will do me the honor to let me call you Sister.


Isabella. I shall be proud to be called so by you, but I cannot be so till my
Mother consents.


Theodore. Shall I have your leave Madam, to use all the means I can to procure
her consent?


Isabella. I freely give you leave to do and say what ever you can to obtain
it; but I believe you will find it hard to break off her engagement with your
Father.


Cheatly. Now comes my part, to set my brains on work, I Will show you the
mastery of my Art, and make your Father break off first.


Theodore. It is impossible he should be such a wretch as as willingly to quit
so great a Prize.


Cheatly. I warrant you, trust me, there is one of my acquaintance who I will
persuade him is worth 500. l. more than this Lady; and though Madam he loves
you very much, yet he loves a little money much more: This friend of mine is
but a Tailors Daughter, but I will make her Act a Countess with some odd Title;
and she can behave her self as proudly and statelily, as the best of 'em, I
will make him believe that she has a very great mind to marry him for his care
and thrift, etc. This may make him release my Lady of her engagement.


Theodore. I think you have reason.


Cheatly. Reason ay, I think so; if I have not, who should have it? alas I have
done things that shall be nameless, that no woman of intrigue but my self has
been capable of, though I say it; and if I do not bring this about, I will
never pretend to an intrigue again.


Theodore. You will infinitely oblige me.


[Enter Isabella's Footboy.] Footboy. Madam, my Lady your Mother desires your
company instantly.


Isabella. I wait on her. Madam, if possible I will wait on you at Supper.


Theodora. I hope your affairs will permit you to do us that honor.


Theodore. Let me have the honor to wait upon you to your Mother; and be
pleased to make me so happy as to assist me in persuading her to break off the
Engagement with my Father.


Isabella. A man of your deserts needs no advocate with me, I am sure. Madam,
your humble servant: your servant Mrs. Cheatly.

[Exeunt Theodore, Isabella, and Footboy.]
Cheatly. Now Madam I have something to impart to your Ladyship's privacy.


Theodora. To me, what is it?


Cheatly. Your Ladyship is very young, and mighty Pretty, really I have never
seen so charming an eye, so delicate an air in any Face, so excellent, such
pleasant motion, and so bewitching a way --


Theodora. Pray Madam don't raily me at this rate --


Cheatly. I protest Madam I speak my opinion. Now Madam there is an
acquaintance of mine is extremely taken with your Ladyship; he is one of the
hansomest and most accomplished Sparks in Town: He has fifteen hundred Pound a
year, and his love is honorable too; now if your Ladyship will be pleased to
walk in Gray's Inn walks with me, I will design it so that you shall see him,
and he shall never know on it.


Theodora, I ask your pardon, I have no thoughts of putting my self off to
Sale; but when I have, that Mart is too scandalous.


Cheatly. In the Mulbery-Garden, then Madam, he shall never know of it; I vow
the poor Gentleman is ready to die for your Ladyship.


Theodora. You must excuse me.


Cheatly. In Covengarden Church, will you see him? I Will order it so with him
that keeps the Gallery, that you shall both set together there.


Theodora. I assure you, I carry no such thoughts about me to Church.


[Enter Robin.] Robin. Mrs. Cheatly, your Daughter has urgent business with
you, and desires you to come home immediately; I find Mr. Squeeze is there
privately.


Cheatly. I thank you dear Robin. Madam, I hope to convince you next time I see
you; in the interim I kiss your Ladyships hand.


Theodora. Your servant. [Ex. Cheatly and Robin.] [To her self.] This woman I
fear is a little scandalously given, I will not trust her.


[Enter Bellamour.] Bell. Oh Madam I have been seeking you at the Park, and the
Mulbery-Garden; and thought it an Age till I saw you.


Theodora. What Is the matter? you look as if you had some ill news for me.


Bell. I am sorry I must tell you, that which we must speedily provide against.
Your Father has prepared an entertainment, and will have a Hackney Parson
ready, that will venture all his Perferment, and go against the Canonical Hour,
to marry you this night to that Rascal Timothy: and in spite of all my
persuasion, your Father is resolved on it.


Theodora. How sudden are these resolutions? I shall not need to counterfeit
sickness, I shall have enough when I see him.


Bell. Be pleased suddenly to make use of that Artifice; and if that prevent
not, I hope you will give me leave to own my person, and my love.


Theodora. What disease must I make choice of now?


Bell. Here Is one comes to help you to one.


[Enter Timothy very drunk.] Tim. sings. Diseases and troubles are never to be
found,
But in the damned place where the Glass goes not round.

Bell. This is lucky, above my wishes; he is very drunk, and that will
certainly defeat your Fathers intention; this night, if you dare trust your
self with him, I Will bring your Father to see him in this condition.

[Ex. Bellamour.]
Theodora. Pray do, it will do very well.


Tim. Oh dear Mistress, have I found you! let me Salute you, de' see?


Theodora. Hold Sir.


Tim. Nay prithee Mrs. Thea don't be so coy, look what I have brought you here;
here is a Bottle of Campaigne, I think they call it, and almost a whole
Neats-Tongue, and a power of Sweetmeats, for you dear Mrs. Thea, there they
are.


Theodora. This Fellow has that advantage by nature, that not drunkenness, nor
any condition can make him worse.


[Aside.] Tim. Well Mrs. Thea, I have been with the finest Ladies, and the
merriest Gentlemen; we did rant, and roar, and sing, and tear, Hey, Diseases
and Troubles are, etc. Faith I am as drunk as a Drum, or as the driven Snow, or
as David's Sow, as the saying is, de' see? Hey, fa la la la, prithee dear Mrs.
Thea let me kiss thee now, nay prithee do, nay shaw poise on it.


Theodora. Be not so passionate good Sir.


[She thrusts him almost down.] Tim. Nay peuh, I cannot abide this, you might
have given one a fall now, would I might never stir; but it is no matter for
that, I Will drink six go-downs upon reputation in Campaigne to your health, de'
see? I can be merry when I set on it: in faith here is your health upon my knees,
de' understand me? Oh if I had but Fiddles to play a health now!


[He drinks upon his knees.] [Enter Goldingham and Bellamour.] Bell. Do you see
Sir how abominably drunk he is?


Gold. He is a little in Beer, he is; he is disguised, that is the truth on it.


Tim. There Mrs. Thea I have done it, faith you shall pledge me by word of
mouth; de' see, nay fack I am sound, you may drink after me, de' conceive me?


Bell. You see Sir he is too drunk to be married to night.


Gold. Come come, he is the fitter for it, for being drunk, if he be sober, he
may repent him, and ask a Portion: stay here, I will fetch a Parson immediately.

[Ex. Goldingham.]
Bell. This is worse and worse, Madam did you hear him?


Theodora. Yes to my grief, I must into my Chamber, and be very sick.


[She offers to go.] Tim. Nay, if you stir I am a Rogue, a very Rogue, de' see?
we will be very merry, Diseases and Troubles, etc.


Bell. Who taught you this insolence? unhand her.


Tim. Why you saucy Fellow you, what is to do with you? Ha, you are so purdy.


[Exeunt Bellamour and Theodora.] [Enter Rant, and Will, Goldingham 's man.]
Will. Where Is Mr. Timothy Squeeze?


Rant. 'Slife, what makes this Rascal here? if I do not carry him off, I lose
the hopefullest Bubble in Christendom.


Tim. Where Is Mrs. Thea, Mrs. Thea?


Rant. Mr. Timothy come along with me, Mrs. Joyce is impatient till she see's
you.


[Enter Bellamour.] Tim. I Will not stir till I see Mrs. Thea, where is Mrs. Thea?
Hey, Hey.


Bell. She says you are a drunken Rascal, and she will have you kicked out.


Tim. Does she so? would I might never stir if I do not do her errand to her
Father.


Rant. Come away and leave her: Mrs. Joyce is a person of Quality, and Fortune,
and will use you with more civility.


Tim. I know she is a fine person, and I Will wait on her, but I am resolved to
stay till Mr. Goldingham comes, that I may tell him of this Gilflirt his
Daughter.


Rant. Nay then, I must to my last shift; Bailiffs come in.


[Softly.] [Enter three counterfeit Bailiffs.] Bailiff. I Arrest you, at the
Suit of Humphrey Nit a Barber.


Tim. Sirrah, you lie like a Rogue, I owe him not a farthing.


Bailiff. No Sir, but you did vi et armis break, or cause to be broken a very
large Window, where he used to expose his Flaxen Periwigs.


Rant. Is that all? I Will Bail him for that --


Tim. Will you? nay then I Will break 'em again, I Will break Windows with e're a
Gentleman that wears a head.


Bailiff. Come come and talk of these things in another place.


Tim. Ay with all my heart, Diseases and Troubles, etc. What a pox care I, come.

[Exeunt all but Bellamour.]
Bell. This is a lucky Fellow that came in to our rescue.


[Enter Theodore.] Theodore. Dear brother, I am glad I have found you, I have a
design, and upon my Father too, in which I am confident you will join.


Bell. -- You may be sure to command me in any thing.


Theodore. I know some may blame me, but love excuses all.


Bell. Love, like the Crown, takes away all Attainders.


Theodore. My design is to work so upon my Fathers covetousness, as to draw him
into a Plot against the Government; and he is you know, a mighty well wisher to
the damned good old Cause, yet.


Bell. This will be dangerous tampering with; how can you draw him into one,
without being guilty your self?


Theodore. It shall be but a seeming Plot, you may be sure; I would not engage
my self in a real one; it is only a design to invert the order of nature for a
while, and keep my Father in awe.


Bell. How can you contrive it?


Theodore. I have several great Chests almost full of Lumber, but covered on
the top with a great many fine Arms, here he comes, I have not time to tell you
the rest; but pray second me, in what I shall say to him.


[Enter Goldingham.] Bell. I Will not examine your design, but serve you.


Gold. Have you the confidence to appear before me, after your giving my Ring
away, and sending for those mountains of Sweetmeats, and that Ocean of Wine
and Limonades?


Theodore. I humbly beg your pardon; but I thought I had done well, since you
commanded me to show all the respect imaginable to my intended Mother-in-Law.


Gold. Respect with a pox, de' call it?


Theodore. I beseech you be not angry, I Will get your Ring again for you, and
put you in a way to get forty Guinnes this night, but I must be very private in
it.


Gold. How! can you do that? then I will forgive all your extravagance; but how
is it? speak, you may trust Bellamour.


Theodore. Sir, there is one that was my Shcool-fellow, that I am very well
acquainted with, that is called a Phanatick according to the flesh, he (after
he had made me take an Oath of Secrecy, told me of a design his Brethren had,
who (out of pure Zeal against Surplice and Common Prayer Book) were resolved
upon an insurrection, and to sieze in one night upon Whitehal, and the
Exchequer.


Gold. What say you?


Theodore. They have accordingly provided Arms and Ammunition, which they
dispose of in packs of goods; to their secret friends, and well wishers, for
which they reward them liberally.


Gold. What can this come to?


[Aside.] Theodore. He remembering that (when we were Boys together) I had shown
him a secret Vault in the Garden, that is known but to few, propounded to me
the concealing six Chests of Armor there, and promised forty Guinnes, and an
Oath of Secrecy; this Sir you may choose, whether you will accept of or no, but
I thought I was obliged in duty to tell you, knowing you take all occasions
whatsoever for the getting of money.


Gold. I got a good part of my Estate by Rebellion (as many other Estates were
raised) but I would be loath to lose it by Rebellion again.


[Aside.] Theodore. There is no danger, we will all take Oaths of Secrecy.


Bell. Ready money Sir is not to be despised, it is a precious thing.


Gold. There spoke an Angel.


Bell. Besides Sir, if the Chest should be discovered, (which will be almost
impossible) some of your Swcarers in Ordinary shall testify you took 'em in
Pawn.


Gold. The money is sweet, but the attempt is [Aside.] dangerous; hold to
Theodore. Now Sir, I am glad you have put me in a way to be revenged of you for
all your Villainies; I will immediately acquaint the King with your Treason, and
you shall be hanged.


Bell. For heaven's sake, betray not your own Son.


Gold. My Loyalty is dearer to me than Son and Daughter, and all the Relations
in the world; I will hang him, I Will to the King immediately.


Theodore. I am at your disposal Sir, but be pleased to remember I did this for
your advantage, and out of love and duty to you.


Gold. No Sir, I will hang you, never speak on it; farewell, shall I betray my
Country?


Theodore. Hold Sir, for Heaven's sake conceal it, I will return the twenty
Guinnes he gave in earnest; here they are, I will go and give 'em him
immediately.


Gold. Did he give you twenty Guinnes, hum?


Theodore. Yes Sir, and promised twenty more at the delivery of the Chests.


Gold. Forty Guinnes is a most delicious Sum, where are they? let me see them.


Theodore. Here they are Sir, but I beseech you be not angry; I will carry them
immediately.


Gold. Hold, it may be there is no necessity of that -- I would hang this Rogue;
but forty Guinnes, dear forty Guinnes.


[Aside.] Bell. He comes on a pace.


[To Theodore.] Theodore. Sir, I will by no means offend you with the sight of
'em, I am gone.


Gold. Stay I say, and let me see them.


Theodore. I am afraid it will provoke you to talk any more of this business*
do not be offended, I will return them instantly.


Gold. 'Sdeath Sir, I will see them.


[He lays hold on Theodore.] Theodore. There they are Sir.


Bell. Oh Sir, how I could hug that Gold.


Gold. Ay Bellamour, does it not look beautifully? they talk of the beauty of
women; but give me the beauty of Gold, Oh dear, dear, sweet Gold.

[Kisses the Gold.]
Theodore. Shall I return 'em Sir?


Gold. No Sir, you shall not: Oh dear, dear Guinnes, are we all secret?


[He kisses them again.] Bellamour. Theodore. We are.


Gold. Swear never to reveal this.


Bellamour. Theodore. We do Swear.


Gold. Well Son, your importunity at last has overcome me, when shall these
Arms be delivered?


Theodore. This night at ten a Clock.


Gold. Do you Bellamonr see it done, and take his Oath of Secrecy. But I had
forgot, where is Mr. Timothy? the Parson is ready in the Parlour.


Bell. He was Arrested here by Bailiffs, for breaking Windows when he was
drunk, who have hurried him I know not whither.


Gold. 'Sdeath how unlucky is this! send immediately to all the Bailiffs
hereabouts, to find him out; go Bellamour.


Theodore. Pox on it, I might have saved money, he would have consented to have
betrayed his Country for half the Sum; and so will any covetous man, that can
do it safely.


[Exeunt Theodore and Bellamour.] [Enter at another door Cheatly.] Cheatly.
Sir, I am very glad I have taken you alone; I have a secret to impart to you.


Gold. 'Sdeath she is come to borrow money of me.


[Aside.] Cheatly. Though it may be to no purpose, I think it my duty to
acquaint you, that I have since I parted with you discovered a Countess that is
not above thirty, that is extremely in love with you for your person, besides
your care and thrift, which she says to me, would be very useful to her in the
mannagement and improving of her Fortune, she has five hundred Pounds more than
Isabella.


Gold. What you are merry, Mrs. Cheatly?


Cheatly. Nay Sir, if you distrust me, there is no hurt done; I did not think
you would embrace the offer; but I thought my self bound to discharge my trust,
for the truth is, she engaged me (though something unwilling) to use my care in
this business.


Gold. Why, sure thou art not in earnest?


Cheatly. If ever you were (when you said your prayers) I am.


Gold. There must be something in this, [To himself.] this is strange Mrs
Cheatly.


Cheatly. You may choose whether you will believe me or no, for my part I don't
desire you should change; for I think if there be any difference, Mrs. Isabella
is something more desirable.


Gold. Good faith, but if this be true, she is not more desirable, fifty Pounds
is a noble Sum, and more than any woman's person is worth: for my part fifty
Pounds with me would turn the balance, were there never so much difference in
their persons. But who is this?


Cheatly. You must not know, till you see her.


Gold. Can all this be true thou tell me?


Cheatly. If I make it not good, I Will forfeit my life; but I Will take my leave
now, I have done my errand; but truly Sir, I think you ought not in honor to
quit Isabella.


Gold. In good faith but I ought, I take it; Honor! quoth she; lose five
hundred Pounds in honor! what a pox care I for their persons in comparison
with money?


Cheatly. I am a little in have, but I beseech you let not Mrs. Isabella know
of this, she will be distracted.


Gold. Hold a little, it was unlucky we did not know of this before you brought
Isabella acquainted with my Daughter, I shall be troubled with her: but can
thou oblige me to contrive an interview between the Countess and me?


Cheatly. Ay and a Marriage too, if I would; but really I think you are too far
engaged to Isabella.


Gold. Engaged, I am not engaged, I will have nothing to do with her; I will
forbid her my house.


[Enter a Footboy.] Footboy. Is Mrs. Theodora here?


Gold. What would you have with her?


Footboy. Mrs. Isabella presents her service to her, and says she cannot
possibly wait on her at Supper.


Gold. It Is very well, it is no matter whether she does or no, go get thee about
thy business Lad; go go. This is very lucky: Mrs. Cheatly you will Sup here.


[Ex. Footboy.] Cheatly. Sir, I must go home first. Your Servant. This will be
joyful news for the two Lovers.


[To her self.] [Enter William.] Will. Sir here is a Porter come from Mr.
Squeeze, who says he is engaged upon extraordinary business, and cannot Sup
here to night.


Gold. The Devil take thee for thy news.


[Enter Roger.] Roger. Mr. Timothy was at the Rose Sir, under an Arrest, but
was Bailed by Mr. Rant and Mr. Hazard; and is gone along with them we know not
whither.


Gold. All my designs are crossed this night, here is my Supper lost, and I have
not given one this dozen years before, but I Will make these Rogues fast this
month for it; begone Rogues, and call my Son: Oh here he is. [Ex. William and
Roger.] [Enter Theodore.] Son I have something to say to you of concernment,
pray (now we are alone) speak freely, how do you like this Isabella? (setting
aside the name of a Mother-in-Law.)


Theodore. I like her, what does he mean?


[Aside.] Gold. Yes, her Air! her Shape! her Beauty! her Wit.


Theodore. Faith Sir (to speak the truth) she is not what she appeared to me,
she has no Air or Spirit in her Face, her Shape's very indifferent, her Motion
awkward, and her Wit little or none, but I like her well enough for a
Mother-in-Law.


Gold. You talked at another rate to her to day.


Theodore. I only made some few complements to her in your name, I meant not
one of 'em* I assure you.


Gold. Do you think you could have no kind of inclination for such a kind of
woman?


Theodore. No not I Sir, if there were none but such women, I should be out of
danger of Gun Shot.


Gold. I am sorry to find this, because it breaks a resolution I had made: I
had reflected with my self upon Isabella's youth and my age; which are so
disproportionable, that I have made choice of another, a Countess too of about
thirty years old, that is worth five hundred Pounds more than she.


Theodore. How has Cheatly wheadled him already! I Will try him further: Sure Sir
you cannot be in earnest.


Gold. By Heaven I am, and (but for this aversion I find in you) I would have
Married Isabella to you.


Theodore. To me Sir?


Gold. Yes, to you.


Theodore. It Is a thing I must confe^s I have no inclination in the world to;
but I will obey your commands in any thing.


Gold. No no, mistake me not, I Will not force your inclination.


Theodore. Sir, I am easily inclined to any thing you please to impose upon me.


Gold. No Sir, I will impose nothing; those Marriages can never be happy where
affections do not meet.


Theodore. I Will sacrifice my affection to interest, and your commands.


Gold. No no, if you had loved her, you should have Married her in my stead;
but (since you have such an aversion,) I Will follow my first design, and marry
her my self.


Theodore. Then Sir I must speak freely to you, I love her infinitely, and
designed to ask your consent at the same time you declared your intention to
marry her your self, and you might easily have perceived how that declaration
surprised me.


Gold. It Is very well, and did you ever reveal your love to her?


Theodore. I have Sir, and she received it very kindly; and her Mother too, if
you will quit her of her engagement, will freely dispose of her to me.


Gold. And has the Daughter consented to this, say you?


Theodore. She has Sir, and I am extremely happy that you are pleased to give
your consent; nothing else could be wanting to complete my happiness.


Gold. I will give you my consent to hang your self, but not to marry her, I
assure you.


Theodore. How Is this?


Gold. 'Slife I had been finely served, to have been bob'd of my Mistress, for
a story of a Countess of I know not what, this was a fine conspiracy.


[Aside.] Theod. Sir, You are very mystical, pray let me understand you.


Gold. I speak plainly: Do not dare once to think of loving this Lady: Have you
the impudence to pretend to one whom I reserve for my self?


Theod. This makes me mad. Sir, Since you provoke me thus, I do pretend to
her, and will never quit those pretensions but with my life.


Gold. Impudent villain! to speak thus to your Father.


Theodor. In other things I respect you as my Father, but love knows no body.


Gold. I will make you know me, or I Will cut your throat.


Theodore. A lover, and afraid of threats?


Gold. And shall I that am a love endure this insolence?


Theod. I will not make use of my plot yet, things are not ripe.


Gold. Out of my doors you Rascal.


Theodor. Fare you well Sir,

[Exit Theodore.]
Gold. This design was well escaped; but'le watch your waters I warrant you.

[Exit Gold.]
[Squeeze, Lettice, and Cheatly.] Squeeze. My dear, I doubt not thy constancy,
so pretty a creature cannot be false to one that loves her as I do.


Lettice. Indeed I can think of no body but you; the thoughts of you are the
last that leave me at night, and the first that salute me in the morning.


Cheat: I am sure I am sufficiently troubled with her, she talks and thinks of
nothing but you; if I ask her a question about business, she answers me
something about you, and is so out of humor when you are absent.

I hear some body knock.
[Knocking at the door.] Exit Cheat.
Squeeze. Alas poor thing! my dear pretty Lettice!


Lettice. My dear Mr. Squeeze, I can find no satisfaction but in thy
conversation, it is so charming and pleasant.


[She strokes his cheeks] Squeeze. Thou art the rarest woman upon earth. Let me
kiss thy hand upon my knees; [He kneels.] I know thou love me, and art true
to me, for which I Will reward thee to the full: There Is never a one of 'em all
shall keep his Mistress better than I do; go to the Goldsmiths, and choose a
hundred pounds worth of Plate, I Will send money for it by an unknown hand.


Lettice. Alas how can I deserve it? I can return nothing but my thanks, nor
can I desire any thing from you but your constancy. [Aside] upon these terms.


Squeeze. I will be as constant to thee, as the Sun and Moon are to their
courses.


Lettice. But I shall have you get a young Wife, and forget me.


Squeeze. If I should marry, my Dear, it should be for money, that I might
spare the more for thee: besides what married man Loves not his Mistress better
than if he were single? a Wife is but a foil to a Mistress.


Lettice. It Is true, this is the fashionable opinion, but you would be of
another mind I fear.


Squeeze. Prithee believe me if I had a Wife, thou should have power to
turn her out of doors at thy pleasure, thou should ride in myglass Coach
when she took a hackney; thou should have my purse, my heart, and every
thing: are Wives to be compared to Mistresses, that would be a fine age in
faith.


Lettice. This is extreme kind, you are a good Man: I could never endure that
a Wife should share affection with me, especially from thee my Dear.


[She strokes him on the head] Squeez. Nay, prithee my dear, do not stroke my
head, it is bald, but it is not with age, for I am not above eight and thirty,
but the hair came off with a sickness.


Lettice: It Is no matter, I like it, I hate them that wear much hair upon
their heads, it is greazy, and smells ill; but this is so sweet, and clean, and
pretty, I could kiss it now.


[Enter Cheatly. Cheatly. Oh Daughter, here has been the young Knight you know
of; he was so importunate to see you, I thought I should never have got rid of
him.


Squeeze. What Is that, pray let me know?


Lettice. Nothing Sir,


Squeeze. Prithee my Dear tell me.


Lettice. Pray Sir do not ask, it signifies nothing.


Squeeze. I shall take it unkindly if you do not tell me.


Lettice. Nay there is nothing I can keep from you: the truth is, my Taylour
came to Dun me, but the Rascal shall stay I warrant him.


Squeeze. How much is the debt?


Cheatly. Twenty pounds.


Squeeze. As I am an honest man, but he shall not stay, here is the money, give
it him immediately.


[Enter a servant of Cheatly's.] Servant. Sir Ieffery Smelsmock is coming up to
see Mistress Lettice; she was denied below, but he would not be answered.


Cheatly. Oh heaven, we are undone, if I stop him not.


[Ex. Cheatly and Servant.] Squeeze. What Is the matter, is it another Dun?
prithee have comfort I Will send thee 50 l. to morrow morning to discharge all
little driblets.


Lettice. I could not expect this from you.


[Enter Cheatly.] Cheatly to Lettice softly. I have got rid of Sir Ieffery much
ado. Well this Mercer's saucy fellow, here is a stir for a little money indeed.


Lettice. Hang him rascal, he shall not have it these six Months for his
insolence, and I Will have him kicked besides.


Servant. within. Sir, I tell you she is not within.


Bully. Hold your tongue you insolent rascal! I Will break open [within] the
door. Where Is Lettice, where is your Ladyship? let me in, or by Heaven I Will
break the door.


Lettice. For heavens sake Sir get into the Closset till I get rid of this
roaring fellow, I know not who it is.


Squeez. Ay with all my heart, where is it? I tremble every joint of me.


Bully. What Madam, your Ladyship Bully bounces and breaks open the Door, and
enters. is grown coy and deny your self: What you do this for an old Rascal,
they say that keeps you; If I can learn his name, or catch him here once, I Will
cut off his ears, and his nose, both his arms, and both his legs, I will
mangle the old dog so.


Squeeze. Oh defend me heaven from this roaring Bully, he puts me in a cold
sweat.


Lettice. Let me beg of you to go into another Room, and I Will satisfy you.


Bully. Come on, now you are civil.


[Exit Bully and Lettice.] Cheatly. Would this Bully were hanged, he will ruin my
daughter. Come Mr. Squeeze, all is clear, come out.


Squeeze. Is he gone, he has put me in a dreadful fright; this was a Dragon of
a Bully*


Cheatly. You see Sir what she suffers for your sake, because she will not
yield to the temptations of men.


Squeeze. Ay poor heart, but whither is she gone? Pray heaven she be true to me.


[Aside.] Cheat. She must give him fair words till she gets him out, and then
she will wait on you.


Squeeze. Oh me, where is she, she stays long, pray heaven all be well.


Cheatly. What is this Girl doing?


[To her selfe] Squeeze. Gad forgive me, will she never come, what is the
matter? I am afraid the Bully is not gone.


Cheatly. Why Lettice, will you never come?


Squeeze. I hope in Gad she is honest, but I do not like this.


[Enter Lettice.] Cheatly. Oh fie upon you, you have been naughtwith this
Bully, look how you are Ruffled.


Lettice. Mum, not a word, I have sent him away much ado, I Will have him clapped
by the heels if he comes to affront me again like an insolent fellow as he is.


Squeeze. Heaven, what noise is that there? A noise without of singing and
roaring and Fiddlers. there are more roaring Bullies abroad. Let us retire
quickly to bed, and bolt the door upon our selves, my dear Lettice; quickly
Mistress Cheatly bar the doors of the house.

[Exeunt Cheatly, Lettice, and Squeeze.]
Rant, Hazard, Tym: with a sword, two Servants and Fiddlers playing, they
singing and roaring, Drunk, breaking windows. Tym: Hey let us break windows in
abundance.


Haz: Ah brave Timothy, thou art as gallant a Bully as a man shall see in a
summers day.


Tym: Here Is the Constable, don't you use to beat him always when you see him?


Hazard. Yes, and will now.


Constab: Stand in the Kings name.


Tym: I can stand in never a Kings name in Christendom but we will beat you in
the Kings name very exceedingly.


Constab: Knock *em down, fall on Fellows of the watch.


Rant: Have at you Rogues that disturb the Kings Peace, and will not let
honest fellows give serenades, and break windows in quiet, have at ye.


[They fight, the Constable and Watchmen are driven up into a corner. Tym. Hey,
have we conquered you ye Rogues? lay down your arms.


Rant. Lay down your weapons, or we will cut your throats.


Constab: Well sir, it is done.


[They lay down their Halberts.] Hazard. Do you mutiny ye Rogues, against Bully
Rocks, your Commanders?


Rant. Are you offended at the noise of fiddles? strike up, and sound an alarm
in the ears of 'em.


Hazard. Come Rogues here are just eight They play with their fiddles at their
ears. of you; either dance to these fiddles, or we will slice you into steakes.


Constab: Ha ha, come fellows of the watch, we will please them for once, they
are very merry Gentlemen I fack,


Rant. It Is very well done, there is a crown to drink for you: I, like Julius
Caesar, am generous to foes over come.


Hazard. Here Is another for you to make ye as drunk as we are.


Tim. And I Will be outdone by no man, there is a broad piece for you, now I have
beaten you.


Rant: He Is plaguey liberal of our Money. Stay watch and be our guard.


Constab. We thank ye Gentlemen, and will live and die with ye.


Hazard. Strike up here, faith we will see Lettice before we have done: Cheatly
open the door.


[They play. Cheatly within. We are all abed: what Ruffians are those?


Tim. Bounce at the door, break the windows, hey.


[They bounce at the doors. Squeeze at a window in, his cap, and undressed.
Squeez. Heart! if I be discovered in this condition I am ruined for ever, my
credit in the City will be quite lost: Heaven they have almost broke the door,
I must venture to escape at this window. [He leaps down.] Death I have broke my
bones; oh, oh.


Constable. How now, what noise is that?


Rant. Some body leaped out of a window: lets see what old Rogue's this.


Tim: Ay, what old Rogues this, ha?


Squeeze. I was frightened out of my Lodging by these Roaring Blades, and I
thought to have escaped out of a window.


Constable. Speak to me, I represent the King's person, who are you? what make
you here?


Tim. Hang him, take him away to the Round house.


Squeeze. My Son here drunk with Bullies! then all my shame comes together.


Constable. What Is here, he has been in bed with a woman, and for have has
mistaken a red silk stocking of hers for his own.


Hazard. It Is true, away with him an old whoring Rogue.


Tim. Ay away with him, an old Rogue, in bed with a whore! away with him, away
with him.


Constable. We must secure the woman to.


Rant. We Will secure her, carry him away.


Squeeze. What a dreadful mistake was this, I am for ever undone, I am for
ever ruined, what shall I do?


Ex. Constable and Watch with Squeeze. Hazard. If you will Rant, let us first
give Isabella a serenade, and then come hither again. It will be time too, to
bring our buble to Mistress Joyce again.


Rant. Come along Fiddles, strike up.


Haz. Rank your selves here, strike up, and put out the lights that we may not
be discovered.


[They go off, and come in at another door.] [Enter Theodore and Robin.] Rant.
Fair Isabella, sweet Isabella! look out and shine upon your servants.


Theodore. How now, what Rascals are these: Robin fall on.


Hazard. Are you so brisk?


They fight, and Theodore is driven back, Bell. This must be Theodore and his
man that are engaged, I parted from 'em but just now.


Enter Bellamour and Ioynes with Theodore, and they beat the other off the
Stage. Tim. Fly, shift for your selves, the day is lost.


Theodore. Who Is this that is so kind to draw his sword for us? my dear
Brother, is it you? a thousand thanks to you.


Bell. No words, but lets pursue the Rogues.


ACT. V.
SCE. I.
Enter [Theodore, Bellamour.] Theo. I Wonder who those Fellows were we
rancounter'd last night.


Bell. Very active nimble youths, they ran like Irish Footmen.


Theodore. If we had caught 'em, we would have paid 'em for scouring under
that Window: But now I can think of nothing else but love. Revenge has given
place to that. Yesternight I got a promise from my Mistress, and am within this
hour to meet her, and marry her privately in the City; this day will make me
richer than the Indies can.


Bell. I congratulate your good Fortune, but cannot envy any man, since I am
happy in my Theodora's love.


[Enter Roger with a Letter.] Roger. Here Is a Letter Mr. Bellamour came by the
Post for you.


Bell. For me!


[He reads it, and seems astonished.] Theodore. What is it that disturbes you?


Bell. News that nothing could make tolerable to me, but that it puts me into
a condition of serving my Theodora better then I could before.


Theodore. How Is that?


Bell. My Father has been dead these nine months, and died without a Will; my
younger Brother is at present possessed of the Estate, and has inhumanly put my
Mother and Sister out of the house, who live privately in this Town, somewhere
about Covengarden. This account I have received from my man, who is hasting up
to Town to me.


Theodore. In good faith such news would break a man's heart; but pray bear it
with a manly fortitude; if my Father should knock off, I could have no other
remedy.


Bell. I have now no time to railly with you, I Will to my dear Theodora, and
hope to get her into so good a humor, that we shall not be long after you in
Marriage: adieu.

[Ex. Bellamour.]
Theodore. What ever you are in that, I am sure you are before hand with me in
the death of a Father. How now Bullies, are you up so early? sure you have lain
rough, or have not slept to night.


[Enter Rant and Hazard.] Rant. How now Lover that are, and Whore-Master that
was, you are full of your bobs.


Hazard. What I warrant you, you are got up early to Write a fashionable
Sonnet, without sense, upon the Divine Isabella.


Rant. How many Stars, Moons, Suns, Alabasters, Roses, Pearls, and Rubies, have
you made use of for similies?


Hazard. Come prithee communicate, let us see the labor of thy Muse.


Theodore. As I live, drunk still: but Gentlemen I hate the name of a Muse, as
I do that of a Baud; were I a Poet I would invoke Creswell or Gifford before
any Muse in Christendom.


Hazard. Faith thou art in the right, for they tw^ can supply our necessities
better than all the nine Muses.


Rant. But this is not our business, here is a young Gentleman at the door
called Mr. Timothy Squeeze, that comes to wait on you.


Theodore. Hang him Rascal, keep him to your selves, he is fitter for your
purpose; have you fleeced him soundly?


Hazard. Very sufficiently I assure you, but he is come upon a pleasant
occasion; he says he has done you, and your Family such an injury.


Theodore. Pox on him, I will forgive him any but the trouble of his company.


Rant. Thou shall see him, and when he tells thee his condition, thou will find
we have Revenged thee to the full; I Will fetch him in.

[Ex. Rant.]
Theodore. How have you used the Rogue? you have won all his money.


Hazard. That Is not all, but I Will not forstall you, you shall be surprised into
your pleasure; he begged of us to make him friends with you for fear you should
kill him, he fears not your Father.


[Enter Rant and Timothy.] Tim. Are you sure he will do me no hurt?


Rant. I am, speak to him.


Tim. Sir, your Servant.


Theodore. Sir, Yours.


Tim. I beg your pardon from the bottom of my heart, for an injury I have done
you, and your Family.


Theodore. What Is that?


Tim. Pray Sir be not in passion, and I Will tell you, you know Sir I should have
have been your Brother-in-Law Sir; and lastnight it seems I was overtaken in
Campaigne, and as these Gentlemen tell me (for I vow I remember not a word
on it) I married one Mrs. Joyce, Mr. Hazards Cousin Sir: But your Sister sent me
word she would have me kicked out of the house Sir lastnight, or I should not
have done it on my cnoscience Sir; I find I did it in passion really.


Theodore. Oh brave Bullies, now you have Revenged me sufficiently.


Tim. Now Sir, I hope in God you will please to forgive me since I married in
drink; and I vow to God Sir, as I am an honest man, I meant no more hurt in it
Sir, than I do at this present; for I waked this morning Sir, and found my self
in Bed with the said Mrs. Joyce, de' understand me, (and I vow she is a pure
Bedfellow that is the truth on it) but at first I was frighted, and wondr'd what
a dickens was the matter, when these Gentlemen came up with a Cawdle to me, and
faced me down I was married Sir, and at last showed me the Ring, the License,
and the Parsons Certificate Sir.


Theodore. No more Sir, I forgive you freely Sir.


Tim. Sir I am beholding to you; but if there be an offense you must blame
those Gentlemen; for I protest and vow I intended to marry Mrs. Thea, or would
I might never stir out of this place alive. But I tell you in private, if I had
not married the aforesaid Mrs. Joyce, I believe they would have forced me to
it: for my part Sir, I don't like 'em; for between you and I, they won above
forty Pound on me. But to give the Devil his due, the Gentlewoman is a Pretty
Gentlewoman, and they say has a good Portion.


Theodore To Hazard and Rant. This relation pleases me, but pray take away your
Fool, for I have business of great concernment.


Rant. This was all we had to say to you. Fare you well.


Hazard. Tim come along, dear soul.


Tim. Ay come Cousin [ To Theodore.] Sir your Servant to command.


[Exeunt all but Theodore.] [Enter Robin.] Robin. Sir, I have a Present for
you, but let us begone Sir, and take it in another place; pray follow me, I am
weary with carrying it.


Theodore. What means the fellow?


Robin. Here is a Chest of money of your Fathers that was hid in the Garden.


Theodore. Of my Fathers! how came thou by it?


Robin. Not very honestly Sir, but this is no place to ask questions in, now I
am Revenged on him for calling me theif; follow me Sir.


Theodore. This is a lucky supply.

[Exeunt Robin and Theodore.]
Enter at another door William, Cheatly, and Bridget, with a Page. Cheatly. Is
Madam Theodora within?


Will. She is gone out with Mr. Bellamour.


Cheatly. Is not your Master within?


Will. We expect him every minute Madam.

[Ex. Will.]
Cheatly. Now Mrs. Bridget, can you represent a Stately Countess.


Bridget. Never fear me; Page hold up my Train Sirrah, I can bear my head as
high as any Lady in Christendom.


Cheatly. Remember when any body Salutes you, to turn your Cheek to him, as
great Ladies use; that is very convenient too, for concealing a tainted breath.


Bridget. Mine is not so, but I Will not forget it.


Cheatly. But thou have so used to offer thy mouth, that thou will forget it.


[Enter Gold.] Gold. Oh Sir, your Servant, the Countess of Puddle Dock is come
to see Mrs. Theodora.


Gold. [Aside.] Countess of Puddle-Dock! I never heard of that Title, it may be
it is some Scotch or Irish Title.


To Bridget. Madam I kiss your Honor's hand: where is my Daughter that she
comes not to wait on her Honor.


Cheatly. Not within. This is the Countess I spoke of


[Softly.] Gold. Let me see; if this be a Countess, and has such a Fortune, no
more then of Isabella; but I must into the Garden to my dear Gold. Madam I Will
wait on your Honor presently.

[Ex. Goldingham.]
Cheatly. Is not this an amiable old Gentleman?


Bridget. As bad as he is, I am not so nice, but I could make shift with him.


Golding within.] Murder, murder, Oh Thieves, theives.


Cheat. What Is the meaning of this, is the man mad.


Enter Goldingham. Golding. Thieves, thieves, murder, murder, death, devils,
damnation, Hell and furies, thieves, thieves, I am undone, undone, they have
cut my throat, they have murdered me, they have stole my money, where is it?
what is become on it? where are the Thieves? where have they hid themselves?
whither shall I go to find'em? what shall I do? shall I run? shall I stay? are
they here? are they there? where are they?


Cheatly. What is it transports you thus?


Golding. Oh are you here, give me my money, [He tugs and hales Cheatly.]
where is my Gold, confess, or I Will rack you, where is my dear Gold, my poor
Gold, give it me, conceal it no longer.


Cheatly. Help, help, will you murder me?


Bridge. Are you Mad, it is Mrs. Cheatly.


Golding. Another, is there more of your number, I will hang ye all, where is
my money, Money, Money?


James. What Is the Matter Sir,


[Enter James, Roger, Will.] Cheatly. Come Countess, it is time to shift for our
selves.


Golding. falls on 'em with his Caine. Oh you thieves, my Gold, my Gold, give
me my Gold, I Will hang ye, I Will drown ye, I Will murder ye all; oh my Gold, must I
lose thee?


James. He raves help to hold him.


[He breaks from them, they run away. Golding. I have lost my money, my life,
my blood, my entrals, my heart, my vitalls, I dye, I am dead, I am buried, will
no body save my life, and help me to it, oh I am mad, what say you, will you,
hum; alas I am mad, there is no body: Oh my money, my soul, Justice, Justice, I
will hang all the Town, if Isabella has a hand in it I will hang her, I will
beg the help of Constables, Beadles, Churchwardens, Baylies, Sergeants,
Justices, Aldermen, Judge, Gibbet, Gallows, and Hangmen: I will hang my son
and daughter if they be guilty: and if I find not my Money I will hang my self.


James. My master Sir is Mad, be pleased to command him in his Majesty's name
to keep his worships wits.


Golding. Oh neighbor Justice, you are come in season, I am robbed undone, make
me a Mittimus.


Justice. For whom neighbor Goldingham.


Gold. For all Covengarden, I will hang every body, oh my Gold.


Justice. You Will spoil all, if you be thus outrageous, we must examine such
things privately, or you will never have notice of your Money.


Golding. Oh my money, I cannot contain my self, but if you will assist me,
I Will endeavor.


James. Ha, is my Master Robbed? now I may be fully revenged of our dominus
factotum for my beating, and other things. [To Gold.] I am mistaken, or I can
give you some light into this business.


Golding. Speak what can you say, if you do not discover it, I will hang you.


James. I do certainly believe that Mr Bellamour has it.


Golding. What he that appeared so true, and faithful to me?


James. The same Sir, I believe it is he that has robbed you.


Golding. Pray Sir make his Mittimus, I Will hang him if there were no more of
the race of all mankind.


Justice. But why do you believe it Sir!


James. Why do I believe it Sir?


Just. Yes.


James. Why, why, why, because I do believe it.


Justice. But I must have some proofs.


Gold. Did you see him dig where my money was hidden?


James. Oh yes Sir, why should I say so else? Where did you lay your money?


Gold. In the Garden.


James. Ay there I saw him digging: What was your money in?


Gold. In a Chest.


James. Why there is the business, now I saw him have a Chest, and the very same
Chest you mean.


Justice. What manner of Chest is it?


James. What manner of one: 'Sdeath I shall be snap'd!


[Aside. Justice. How is it made?


James. Why it is made -- it is made very like a kind of a Chest, extraordinary
like a Chest.


Justice. But how?


James. Why it is a great Chest.


Gold. Mine is a little one. Oh my Gold!


James. Ay so was this in it self, but for what it contained it was a great
one, and was so heavy that I am sure it made him puff and blow to carry it.


Gold. It must be the same, mine is very heavy.


Justice. Hold a little pray, what Color is it of?


James. Of what Color.


Justice. Yes.


James. Why it is of a color, a certain Color, I know not what a deus they
call it, but really it is very pretty Color, for a chest, that is the truth
on it.


James. Was it not a red?


Gold. No, no, mine is a green one.


James. Lord, you are so hasty, a reddish green I was going to say.


Gold. The same Sir; pray make his mittimus, and let him be hanged.


[Enter Bellamour.] James. Here he comes, let him not discover this of me;
perhaps he will confess it.


Gold. Come you Villain, come near and confess your wickedness, your
abominable action.


Bell. What do you mean Sir?


Gold. Oh horrid traitor, do you not blush?


Bell. Has he heard any thing of his daughter and me; for what should I blush
Sir?


Gold. Oh impudence, as if he knew not what I meant; but all your villainy is
discovered: oh wretch, to come into my house to betray me, and abuse my
goodness with so infamous an action!


Bell. Sir, since you have discovered me, I Will make no more excuses.


[Aside.] James. That I should guess so right when I swear at a venture: I told
you Sir, he would confess.


[To the Justice.] Justice. He has confessed in part, but we must have more
yet*


Bell. It was my design to tell you of this, but I stayed for a happier
opportunity, and I beseech you be not angry' till I give my reasons.


Golding. Oh abominable insolence, he would be giving me reasons for his
infamous theft, like an impudent Thief.


Bell. These Titles are none of mine, and you will find, if you examine it, that
my crime is pardonable.


Golding. Oh devil, pardonable, to take away my soul, my life, my blood!


Bell. I am in a condition to do your blood no wrong, and to make full
reparation for this pretended injury.


Golding. Oh you overjoy me, will you make restitution.


Bell. Your honor shall be fully satisfied.


Golding. Pox on my honor, I don't talk of my honor. But what could incite
you to such action?


Bell. Love.


Golding. A pox on your love, admirable love indeed, love of my broad pieces.


Bell. No sir, it is not your Gold that I care for, let me but enjoy what I
have already, and I care for nothing in the world beside.


Gold. Oh intolerable insolence, he justifies his theft, and would keep what
he has stolen. He distracts me, Sir you shall be hanged, drawn and quartered,
before you shall keep the least part of it.


Just. No Sir, you must not keep what you have got, by your favor.


Bell. With your favor Sir, but I must; we have mutually engaged our faiths,
and are now married, and nothing but death shall part us.


Golding. Engaged his faith, and married to my Chest: [aside.] it is enough,
make his Mittimus, that he may be hanged, and so be divorced from it.


Just. Here is some mystery: where is this Treasure you have taken?


Bell. Here in the house.


Just. Have you not broke it up?


Bell. Broke her up; better words Sir, or I shall forget my respect to you; I
assure you she is too honest.


Golding. How my Chest of money too honest.


[aside.] Bell. Her fair eyes have inspired in me a more refined passion.


Golding. The Fair eyes of my chest.


[aside.] Bell. I see Sir it is in vain to conceal the truth any longer. It Is
not a quarter of an Hour since your daughter, and I were married in
Covengarden; and without a Portion.


Gold. Oh devil, is that affront added to my loss?


Bell. Without portion, consider that Sir.


Gold. Make his Mitt^mus, you shall be hanged you Villain, send him to the
Gatehouse quickly.


Bell. How be hanged! I assure you, though I stole your daughter, 'twas with
her own consent.


Just. But you have confessed a more capital theft; or if you had not, it is sworn
against you, and I must send you to the Gaol.


[Enter Theodora.] Theodora. Oh Heaven! what do I hear? S^r, ^^veou had any
affection for me, hear me now; this Gentleman is a man of Quality and Fortune.


Gold. A curse on him, he has raised his Fortune on my ruins, and for his
Quality 'twill bring him to the Gallows.


Theodora. For Heaven's sake Sir use no extremity on him, I consented to all he
did; if there be a fault committed against you, I am equally guilty, and will
suffer with him.


Gold. Heaven! my own Daughter guilty of such an action, she shall be hanged,
send her to the Gaol immediately; no less then six thousand broad pieces at a
time.


Th^odora. Sir, I underotand you not.


Gold. Oh cunning Baggage! look you Mr. Justice, she understands me not; I Will
have her hanged, my own Daughter Rob me.


Theodora. Rob you! I am amazed.


Bell. Sure Sir, you are not compos mentis.


Justice. I am sorry to find ye guilty of so great a Felony, I must send ye
both to the Goal without Bail or Mainprize.


[Enter Theodore.] Theodore. Brother, I heard you were in this condition, and
came to rescue you.


Gold. Oh Villian! are you come to heighten my affliction with the sight of you?


Theodore. Sir, I come about a little business that concerns you.


Gold. Business with me? you insolent Rebel, what can that be.


Theodore. Sir, the money is right.


Gold. What money you impertinent Ass?


Theodore. The broad pieces that were in the Garden, they are just six
thousand; and I Will give you an acquittance under my hand for them.


Gold. O Devil, had you them?


Theodore. They were received by my order, to my own proper use and behoo^e; I
say Received per me Theodore.


Golding. strikes at Theodore. O Barbarous insolence, I will cut your throat.


Justice. Nay, good Neighbor keep the peace.


Gold. I cannot keep the peace, I will not keep the peace* let the peace keep
its self; it is impossible to keep the peace.


Justice. By your leave Sir, you must keep the peace, and not be Judge in your
own case.


Gold. Send him to Gaol then presently.


Justice. Be patient, and I will.


Theodore. Why would you have the Conscience to hang your Son?


Gold. Give me my Gold, and I Will spare your life.


Theodore. No Sir, your Gold is in sure hands, it is held in Mortmain.


Gold. Then I will hang you Rogue, make his Mittimus.


Theodore. You may please to remember, that there is a College Lease of 4
hundred Pounds a year, that you hold only by my life; you will lose that (if
you hang me) besides your broad pieces, of which you shall never have one by
Heaven.


Gold. Nay then, I cannot be in a worse condition than I am; make have Sir with
his Mittimus.


Justice. It Is a making.


Theodore. Hold Sir, you must not make it, I did not St^al the Gold; I did but
Sieze upon it for the Kings use.


Gold. By Heaven, I owe the King not a farthing, I paid the last assessment, it
went to my heart I am sure; and yet, to say truth, the Assessors have stretched
their consciences against the King all over England, God bless them: Have you
the impudence to say I owe the King money?


Theodore. Assist me Brother. [To Bellamour.] [To Gold.] Do you think Sir the
King will let you commit [Softly.] Treason for nothing?


Gold. Treason.


Theodore. There are Arms and Ammunition in the Vault Sir, if you be pleased to
remember.


Bell. Have a care what you do Sir, Treason will fall heavy upon a rich man;
you will be an excellent morsel for a Courtier.


Gold. Have ye the impudence to speak of a Plot ye drew me into, ye brace of
Traitors and Villains?


Theodore. Sir I know nothing of a Plot, not I, but my Brother and I can swear
we saw Arms and Ammunition put in a Vault; and we know from whom they were
Received, and the consideration too. We shall find friends Sir.


Bell. Sir Release the Gold, and make no more ado; if it should be found out
that we know of the Plot, we should be pardoned, for bringing in so rich and
Capital an offender; but you would find no more mercy, than ever you showed to
one that forfeited a Morgage.


Gold. A curse on these Villains, I am caught in my own snare; they are in the
right, I shall be sure to be hanged, but if I were sure they were to be hanged
with me, it were no matter: But Son, are you in earnest? will you not give me
some of my Gold again?


Theodore. Not one piece by heaven, and pray Sir believe I deal fairly with
you, that I ask no more; you know, I have not had a shilling of you these dozen
years, it is time now to gather my Arrears.


Gold. What will become of me? I must either lose my money or my life, I know
not which is best; I think I must go hang my self, for fear of being hanged.


Justice. What shall I send him to Goal?


Gold. No, let it alone, I must forgive the Rogue for this time.


Theodore. And do you release me of the money, before all these witnesses?


Gold. Yes yes, but you cursed Villain I will be revenged on you, I Will marry
Isabella, get Children and disinherit you of all the rest of my Estate.


Theodore. Now since you have Releast me, look in your Chests in the Vault, and
you will find nothing but Lumber.


Gold. And was it no Plot you drew me into?


Theodore. No by heaven, I but pretended it, and your hard usage forced me to
these extreamities.


Gold. Oh unheard of Villain, I will go marry Isabella instantly, and I hope
you will hang your self.


Theodore. Stay Sir, I have one thing more to ask of you. This Lady and I are
Married; and beg your pardon, and your blessing.


[Enter Isabella.] Isabella. Sir I beg your blessing and your pardon: Heaven
would have it thus, and I could not help it.


Gold. 'Sdeath and Hell! Married! you two Married!


Theodore. It Is now too late to perplex your self.


Gold. Oh Treacherous wretches! Oh this Engine of the Devil, Cheatly with her
damned Countess of Puddle-Dock.


Theodore. Will you give us your blessing Sir? we kneel for it.


[They kneel.] Gold. Yes, I will give you my blessing.


Isabella. I shall receive it joyfully.


Gold. May all the curses e're attended Marriage fall on you.


Isabella. Oh impious wish.


Theodore. We are obliged to you Sir.


Gold. May invincible impotence possess you, raging Lust her, and tormenting
jealousy both of ye.


Justice. For shame Neighbor be not so wicked.


Gold. May the perpetual spirit of contention wait on ye, may ye never in your
lives agree in one thing; may the name of quiet never be heard betwixt ye; and
to complete all, may ye never be assunder: and so Farewell.

[Ex. Gold.]
Justice. I Will after him, and try if I can mollify him.


Theodora. Dear Sister, I am infinitely happy in my relation to you.


Bellamour To himself.] It must be so. Oh heaven! it is my Sister (though I
have not seen her these nine years) yet she has so much of her former
Countenance remaining, that I am sure it is she.


Theodore. Dear Isabella, here is a worthy. Gentleman you must call Brother.


Bell. I have a nearer Title to her than what you can give me, she is my own
Sister Isabella.


Theodore. This is wonderful.


Isabella. Indeed I had an Elder Brother beyond Sea, but we (having not seen
him in nine years, nor heard from him these fifteen months) concluded him dead.


Bell. (To his great grief) my younger Brother will find it otherwise.


Isabella. But is it possible! are you my Brother? indeed you have some
resemblance of my Father, when he was living.


Bell. If you be Sir William Raines his Daughter of the North (as I am sure you
are) I am your Brother; but thou were too young when I left England; to have
any impressions left of me now.


Isabella. My dear Brother, I am convinced, this is a happy hour, this will
revive my dear Mother, who has kept her Chamber ever since my Fathers death.


Theodore. My dear Brother, now you are doubly so, but friendship yet shall be
the stricter tie.


Theodora. This is a wonderful and happy union of our Families.


Bell. To show you more clearly I am your Brother, (though my Father died
without a Will) I know it was his intention to give you five thousand Pounds,
which upon my honor you shall have.


Theodore. This is generosity in the highest point; but I was rich in the
possession of my Isabella, beyond the thoughts of Dowry; but if I live to have
my Fathers Estate, faith I Will be even with you.


Isabella. This noble offer confirms me, you are my Brother; but why did you so
long conceal your self?


Bell. That my dear Theodora can best tell you. But let us have to see my
afflicted Mother.


[Enter Constable and Watch, with Squeeze.] Consta^le. They say the Justices
Worship is here Gentlemen.


Theodore. The Constable with Squeeze! pray lets stay a moment after our
Comedy, that ends so pleasantly, in hopes to see a Farse.


Squeeze. Heaven! what confusion am I in, and besides my bones are all loose
with the fall last night.


Theodore. What Is the matter Mr Constable?


Constable. Why Sir, this old Gentleman (not having the fear of God before his
eyes) by the malice and instigation of the Devil, did yesternight vi and armis,
contrary to the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity;
commit carnal copulation with one Mris Lettice.


Bell. The Style of an Indictment.


Theodore. How now Mr. Squeeze, is the snare fallen upon you? can you help a
man to three or four hundred Pound at fifty in the hundred, with good security?


Squeeze. You are very merry Sir, it is well if you have cause. Oh! Mrs. Cheatly
what shall I do? my reputation is ruined, I am undone for ever.


[Enter Mrs. Cheatly.] Cheatly. Oh Sir, there is more affliction for you yet,
your Son lost fifty Pound last night, and Married a wench, one Mrs. Joyce, that
was kept by Alderman Do-Little.


Squeeze. Oh Heaven! all my misfortunes come together; this added to the other,
will distract me.


Theodore. This is for your damned Brokeage and Use.


Cheatly. Could you not have bribed the Constable?


Squeeze. He durst not let me go for fear of the Bullies? what shall I do; what
shall I do?


Cheatly. I would be loath to put you to inconvenience, but if you would own my
Daughter for your wife, it would soon preserve or at least repair your credit.


Squeeze. She says true.


[Aside.] Cheatly. And if you would really make her your wife, you would be
fully revenged on your Son for his rash Marriage.


Squeeze. Ha, that is true again directly.


[Aside.] Cheatly. If you do it not, the poor Girl will be ruined for ever in
her reputation; which you know is her support at present.


Squeeze. She is in the right, there is no way to save my reputation but this;
if my disgrace should be published, no Godly Citizen will trust me; old men in
this Town had as good marry their wenches, for they stand 'em in more money,
and they keep 'em as long as if they were their wives.


[Enter Hazard and Lettice.] Hazard. Mr. Squeeze. here is your Lady, pray
restore her Red Stocking, and take your own Black one; Oh Theodore, thou art
gone the way of all flesh, I hear thou't Married.


Theodore. I am Sir, for all your instructions to the contrary.


Hazard. Then thou art a lost man; yet faith it is as Pretty a Girl for a
fortnights, use or so, as a man could wish.


Bell. I find this Bully has the common place wit of all the young Fops in this
Town; in Railing against Marriage.


Hazard. Now art thou, Theodore, for a year condemned to eat and drink, go to
Plays, to Church, and lie with thy own wife most unreasonable; But it is but
having a little patience, and we shall have you amongst us again, as honest a
sinner as the best of us.


[Enter Rant, Timothy, and Joyce.] Tim. O Lord, here is my Father, I am so
afraid of him.


Rant. Bear up to him, you say you have two hundred Pound a year left by an
Aunt, which he cannot touch.


Tim. Ay, I have so.


Rant. Stand up and own your wife to him; then besides 'twill vex the heart of
Theodora to see how you have bob'd her.


Tim. Ay, I think so, (do you understand me?) I hope 'twill break her heart,
de' see?


Rant. Sir, here is your Son and his Lady, come to ask your blessing.


Squeeze. Oh you infinite Rascal!


Tim. Rascal Sir, I am the Son of a Scrivener, and they say I take mightily
like my Father too.


Squeeze. Oh Villain! marry a Whore, out of my sight.


Tim. A Whore Sir, I vow to God I scorn your words, do you mark me, she is as
Pretty a civil young Lady, and I am sure I had her Maidenhead, had I not my
dear?


Joyce. Yes indeed my dear, the best I had for you.


[Aside.] Squeeze. Oh infamous Villain! marry a Strumpet?


Joyce. Sir, I Would have you kicked if you were not my Father-in-Law.


Hazard. Dare to speak one ill word more of my Cousin, and I Will cut your
Throat, old Sot.


Squeeze. I am horrible afraid of this Hector; but I will be Revenged of the
Rogue my Son.


Joyce. Now Madam Lettice I hope you will own me to be equal at least with your
Ladyship, Mr. Tim. has made me an honest woman; there is more that you are.


Rant. Farewell Theodore, thou art no more a man of this world; Marriage alters
some men, and makes them forget their friends, as much as Perferment does


Hazard. But I hope he has more grace.


Theodore. No more of your senseless Railing against Marriage, it is dull and
common.


[Enter Justice.] Justice. There is no mollifying of your Father, he is run out
in a rage; he has shut himself in his Closset, and will not be spoke to;
Constable what makes you here?


Constable. Sir we have brought an old Gentleman here before you, upon
suspicion of Fornication, an please your Worship.


Justice. Whom, Mr. Squeeze! can a man of your years be guilty of Fornication?


Constable. Sir, we took him leaping out of a Window half undressed, and for
haste he had puton a Red Silk-stocking of the Gentlewomans from whom he rose:


Justice. Is this true?


Squeeze. It Is true, I was in bed with this Gentlewoman, but she is my wife; and
I hope that is no offense.


Justice. Your wife.


Squeeze. Yes, and before all this company I a vow her to be so.


Tim. O fie for shame Sir, marry a Strumpet


Squeeze. Peace you insolent Rascal.


Theodore. Lettice, I wish thee joy of thy old Rascal.


Lettice. I thank you Mr. Theodore. Now Mrs. Joyce I hope you think not your
self my equal: Down on your knees huswife and ask me blessing.


Joyce. I scorn your words, I shall never endure to call you Mother-in-Law
while I live.


Cheatly. Madam Isabella, I wish you much joy with this Gentleman, and he is
young enough, and handsome enough to give you good store on it.


Theodore. Mrs. Cheatly, to show my gratitude to you, I have a hundred pieces
ready for you; and Robin, you I will make my particular care.


Robin. Sir, to show you that I have taken some care of you, I have provided
Fiddles for you.


Theodore. Let 'em enter, we will borrow my Fathers house for a Dance; for
perhaps we shall never come in it again.


[Enter Fiddles.] Robin. What say you Mrs. Cheatly, shall you and I marry, or
continue to love on as we did?


Cheatly. I am very indifferent Robin, take thy own choice.


Robin. Why then as you were.


Cheatly. Content.


Bell. Strike up.


[They Dance.] Theodore. Now we have done, I must confess I have transgressed
in my duty to my Father, which I could not help; unless I would have neglected
a greater, which I ought to your Beauty my dear Isabella, and my Love; and I
hope

My passion will a just excuse be thought:
What is urged on by love, can be no fault.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
WHen Sieges now by Poets are prepared,
And Love and War against Nations is declared;
When Africa and Asia are not spared,
By some who in Rhyme will all the World o'rerun,
Who in their Conquests will no Country shun,
Not scaping the Mogul, nor Prester John,
No American Prince is in his Throne secure,
Not Totty Potty Moy himself is sure:
But may the fury of their Rhyme endure,
Nay in time each Prince in Guinny will be sought,
And under these Poetic Fetters brought;
And we shall see how the black Rogues loved and fought.
When such great things are for the Stage designed,
We fear this trifle will no favor find.
But as a fop that is dressed in Masquerade,
Will any place with impudence invade,
And little rambling Punks dare be so rude,
Among the best of Ladies to intrude:
So Poets sure, though ill, may be allowed
Among the best in Masquerade to crowd.
Our Poet who wrote this Incognito,
Does boldly claim this privilege as his due;
He presses in, and will not be kept out,
Though he deserves to stand amongst the rout,
Those fifteen hundred Poets who have writ,
And never could have one Play acted yet.
But now he is in, pray use him civilly,
Let him, what e're* he says, unquestioned be,
According to the Laws of Masquerade,
Those sacred Laws by dancing Nations made,
Which the young Gallants sure will never invade.
If ye resolve that yee'l be angry now,
Ye vent your spleen upon an unknown Foe;
Or if he be not, yet yee'l make him so:
But if a kindness to him ye intend,
And though 't deserves it not, the Play commend:
Each man for ought he knows is kind to's friend.
FINIS.

