BURY-FAIR. A COMEDY, As it is ACTED by His Majesty's Servants.

Written By THO. SHADWELL, Servant to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1689.

TO CHARLES EARL of DORSET and MIDDLESEX, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Household, Lord Lieutenant of Sussex, and one of the most Honorable Privy
Council.
MY LORD,
I Who have been so long and so continually obliged by your Lordship, have ever
fresh Occasions of acknowledging your Favor and Bounty to me, and cannot be
silent of the late great Honor you have done me, in making me the King's
Servant; but must publish my Gratitude for that, and all the rest of the great
Obligations I have received. Your Lordship not only makes use of your own
Power, but of that which the King has entrusted you with, to do good to
Mankind, which you ever delighted in. And as I am apt to believe, that no Man
had ever a great Office conferred upon him with more Favor from his Prince, so
I am well assured no Man ever received one with a more general liking of the
People than your Lordship. Nothing but the Service of so Great and Gracious a
King, who so miraculously redeemed us, and since makes all our Interests his
own, could recompense you for the happy Retirement you might enjoy, and wherein
you so much delight.

This Play, my Lord, I humbly submit to your Lordships Judgment. I can write
nothing worthy of your Acceptance; but I hope your Lordship will give some
Indulgence to this, since it was Written during eight Months painful Sickness,
wherein all the several Days in which I was able to Write any part of a Scene,
amounted not to one Month, except some few which were employed in indispensable
Business. This is indeed no Excuse in any one who does not Write for
Necessities of Life.

The Play has met with a Kind Reception from all for ought I hear, but some of
the late Loyal Poets, above whose Censure I esteem my self; and from some who
are still so fond of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-resistance, that
they think it a Profanation to bring the very words into a Comedy.

These are so weak to mistake that for a Point of Divinity, which is indeed a
Point of Law; and some of the most vigorous Maintainers of that Doctrine, have
seen their Error, and not only left off professing it, but have wisely and
justly Contradicted it in their Practice, b^ assisting toward our late
wonderful Deliverance. And sure there is no need of any great measure of
understanding to find out, that, when the Compact on which Government is
founded is broken, and those very Laws destroyed, which were made to secure the
People in their Estates, Liberty and Religion, the Law of Nature must take
place, which not only permits, but obliges Mankind to Self-defence.

I never could Recant in the worst of Times, when my Ruin was designed, and my
Life was sought, and for rear Ten years I was kept from the exercise of that
Profession which had afforded me a competent Subsistence, and surely I shall
not now do it, when there is a Liberty of speaking Common Sense, which though not
long since forbidden, is now grown Current.

I humbly beg your Lordship's Pardon for the trouble of this Epistle, who am,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obliged Humble Servant, Tho. Shadwell.

Drammatis Personae.
Lord Bellamy, Mr. Better^on. Mr. Wildish, Mr. Mountf^rt. Mr. Oldwit, Mr.
Underhill. Sir Humph. Noddy, Mr. Noukes. Mr. Trim, Mr. Bowman* La Roch, Mr.
Leigh. Valet to Mr. Wildish, Mr. Bohen. Charles, Page to my Lord Bellamy, Mrs.
Butler. Lady Fantast, Wife to Mr. Oldwit, Mrs. Cory. Mrs. Fantast, Daughter to
my Lady Fantast by a Former Husband, Mrs. Boutell. Mrs. Gertrude, Oldwit's
Daughter by a former Wife, Mrs. Mountfort. Luce, Mrs. Fantast's Woman. Four
Ladies. Butler. Nicolas, Servant to La Roch. Page to La Roch. Milliner,
Perfumer, Hosier, Goldsmith, Indian-Gown Man, two Iack-Puddings.
Gingerbread-Woman; Fruit Women, Country Fellows and Wenches, Constable and his
Guard, Servants and Footmen.
SCENE St. EDMVNDS-BVRY.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Mountfort. TO what hard Laws you Comic Writers bind,
Who must at every turn new humor find;
Though the great Masters of the former Age,
Had all the choice of humor for the Stage:
And they that plenteous Harvest reaped so clean,
Their Successors can little else but glean.
Frolic, and Cockwood yet were good and new,
And the Plain-dealer, and Sir Foplin you
Have seen, and justly have applauded too.
Our Author some new humor did produce,
But look not for an unexhausted Cruse.
The task each day grows harder than before;
For as good Poets have brought forth great store,
So Fellows of no Genius, with much Toil,
Still Sweat for humor, which they always spoil:
And by their hints good Comic Pens prevent,
As Whelps stanch Hounds, by foyling of the scent.
^hese wretched Poetitos, who got praise
For writing most confounded Loyal Plays,
With viler, courser Jests than at Bear-Garden,
And silly Grubstreet Songs worse than Tom Farthing.
If any Noble Patriot did excel
His own, and Country's Rights defending well,
^hese yelping Currs were straight loo'd on to bark,
(...) the deserving Man to set a mark.
(...) abject, fawning Parasites and Knaves,
^ince they were such, would have all others Slaves,
It Was precious Loyalty that was thought fit
(...) atone for want of Honesty and Wit.
No wonder Common Sense was all cried down,
And Noise and Nonsense swagger'd through the Town*
Our Author then oppressed, would have you know it,
Was Silenced for a Nonconformist Poet:
In those hard times he bore the utmost test,
And now he Swears he is Loyal as the best.
Now Sirs, since Common Sense has won the day,
Be kind to this, as to his last years Play.
His Friends stood firmly to him when distressed;
He hopes the number is not now decreased:
He found esteem from those he valued most,
Proud of his Friends, he of his Foes could boast.
To all you. Bury Sparks, he bid me say
That every Part is Fiction in his Play;
Particular Reflections there are none,
Our Poet knows not one in all your Town.
If any has so very little Wit
To think a Fop's dress can his Person fit,
Even let him take it, and make much of it.
BURY-FAIR.
ACT. I.
SCENE I.
Wildish and his Valet dressing him. Val. NOW I hope, Sir, you will acknowledge
you see a sweet Town, clean, and finely Situated, in a delicate Air; here I
was Born, here I Sucked my first Breath.


Wild. Thus every Coxcomb is big with the praise of the Country and Place of
his Nativity.


Val. All the World says as much of St. Edmand's Bury.


Wild. There is indeed some Truth in this; but it is not thou, but the Town, is
in the right: for thou would have recommended the Air of the worst Town in
the Hundreds of Essex, had thou Sucked thy first breath in it, as thou
say. But one thing I can tell of thy Town, That it can produce a Blockhead.


Val. You may say what you please of me, Sir, but there are so many fine
Gentlemen and Ladies, so Gallant, and so well bred, we call it little London;
and it out-does St. James's Square, and all the Squares, in Dressing and
Breeding; nay, even the Court it self, under the Rose.


Wild. I doubt not, but they are given to outdo, as all Imitators are.


Val. Well, you London Wits, will never give any Man, nor any thing, a good
Word.


Wild. You impudent Rascal! Wit, say you! What, do you call me Names? I had as
leive be called a Pick-pocket, as a Wit. A Wit is always a Merry, Idle, Waggish
Fellow, of no Understanding: Parts indeed he has, but ^he had better be without
'em: Your solid Fop is a better Man; he will be Diligent and Fawning, always in
the way, and with his Blockhead do his business at last; but your Wit will
either neglect all Opportunities for Pleasure, or if he brings his business
into a hopeful way, he will laugh at, or draw his Wit upon some great Man or
other, and spoil all.


Val. Would I were a Wit for all that. But to give you an Example of the Wit
and Breeding of our Town; there is the Lady Fantast, and her Daughter.


Wild. The most perpetual, impertinent, prattling, conceited, affected Jades,
that ever plagued Mankind.


Val. Mercy on me! Impertinent! Why, they are the Flower of Bury. Is not the
young Lady a Beauty too?


Wild. I must confess, God has given her one good Face; but by her most
insupportable Affectation, she screws it into twenty bad ones. She has
naturally a good Complexion, becoming good Features; and she, by Art, makes her
Face look like a new White Wall with a Red Lettice.


Val. I hope, you will grant Mr. Oldwit is a fine Facetious, Witty, Old
Gentleman, my Lady Fantast's Husband.


Wild. Almost as arrant an Ass, as thou art. He is a paltry Old-fashioned Wit,
and Punner of the last Age; that pretends to have been one of Ben John* son's
Sons, and to have seen Plays at the Blackfryers.


Val. You Will be Stoned in the Streets, Sir, if you talk thus in Bury. I
warrant, you will not allow Sir Humphrey Noddy to be a Wit, and a fine
Gentleman.


Wild. A Blunt, Noisy, Laughing, Roaring, Drinking Fellow; as troublesome as a
Monky, and as Witless as a Jackdaw. He is, at best, but a Wag.


Val. Well, Sir, say what you please, he is a fine Gentleman, and will make a
Man burst a Vein to keep him Company; he has Wit at will, that is certain.


Wild. If the Rogue had no more Money at will, he would dye in a Ditch.


Val. Will no body at Bury please you? What think you of Mr. Trim? he is
accounted the finest Gentleman in all Bury, for Breeding and Civility, and the
like.


Wild. Now you have hit on it: He is a most Complete, and finished Fop: Nature
has not been negligent, nor Art been Idle, in his Composition. He is very Wise,
Reserved, full of Forms, and empty of Substance; all Ceremony, and no Sense:
more troublesomly ill-bred with his Formality, than a High-shoo'd Peasant with
his Roughness. Sir Noddy and he are two excellent Fops in Consort!


Val. Fops! Mercy upon me! You will be accounted a Madman, if you talk thus at
Bury.


Wild. Yes, among Fools.


Val. Why, they are those that carry all the Town before 'em.


Wild. No doubt on it, I never knew a Town yet, wherein the Fops do not carry
all before 'em: They are a numerous, Impudent, and Noisy Party; while the Wise
and Ingenious are Few, Modest and Reserved. There are Men of Wit, Honor, and
Breeding; and Women of great Wit, Beauty, and Ingenuity, and Well-bred too, in
this Town, which is really a sweet Town; but these pretend to nothing: Your
pretenders never have any thing in 'em.


Enter Mr. Trim. Val. Hold, Sir, here is Mr. Trim.


Trim. Sweet Mr. Wildish! I am your most humble Servant; and cannot but
congratulate those auspicious Stars that brought you hither, to render this
Town, and your Friends in it, happy by your presence.


Trim stands jetting out his Bum, and bowing all the while. Wild. You do me
Honor, Sir.


Trim. Coming abroad to participate of the freshness of the Morning, among our
Bury Gallants; the thrice fortunate rencounter with one of your Train, put me
in mind of paying that Tribute of my Service which I long have wished to pay:
But my wishes have often been frustrated, for want of that happy opportunity of
kissing your hands, which I now enjoy.


Wild. Your great Civilities are surprising; really your Generosity is as much
beyond my expectation, as it is above my Merit. What an Engine is this Fop.


aside. Trim. It is impossible that we of Bury, who I may say with modesty
enough, have no small Fame for Breeding and Civility, can ever be so obnoxious
to that Stupidity, or neglect of either, as not to value the great Honor done
to us, and the cohonestation of us, by your arrival at Bury at this time of the
Fair: Which will add to the wonted gayety and Splendor of the Place and Season.


Wild. You astonish me, with your most admirable Address, and Complaisance: and
I think there lives not, among the race of Mankind, a person more skilful in
all Decencies of Behavior, compleatness of Expression, Gestures of Body,
Modulations of Voice, and all those Arts of Modish Gallantry, which might
render a man the Mirror of Courts, and the Wonder and Example of all other
places. aside. A pox on this Fool in a Frame!


Val. Rarely done on both sides! Oh how their Tongues are hung!


Wild. Be pleased to sit.


Trim. Oh Lord, Sir, while you are on your Feet! Sure I can never live to be
blotted with that odious Soloecism in Manners. Nay, Sir, I beseech you.


They sit down; but Trim strives to sit down last. Wildish makes signs to put
his Hat on, and takes his own up. Trim strives again who shall put on his Hat
last. Wild. Sir, you will catch cold.


Trim. I had rather catch any thing, than the Infamy of ill Breeding.


Wild. Well, Sir, how stand Affairs at Bury?


Trim. Singularly well, Sir; the amenity of our Situation, together with the
equal Temperature of the Climate, produces in us that serenity of Mind, that
Bury seems to be the Habitation of the Graces and the Muses.


Wild. Bury indeed seems to be the Scene of Beauty, Wit and Breeding.


Trim. It Is a great Honor to us, to hear this pronounced by a Person, who is
no less Eminent in Wit, than celebrated for Humanity, and Decency of Deportment.


Wild. A Pox on this Puppy! Two such more, would drive me out of Bury, before I
see my Mistress, the Creature of the World I am most passionately in Love with.


Trim. You, that make so noble a Figure among the nimble and quick Spirits of
the Age, and are such a Top Wit, that all England rings out your Fame!


Wild. Pr'y thee, Mr. Trim, what e're you do, don't call me a Wit; it is good
for nothing in this Age, but to undo a Man: I shall be hunted for a Wild Beast.
But pray, what Lady rides Admiral here at Bury?


Trim. O Lord! who should, but Madam Fantast, the sweet Lady Fantast's
Daughter? a Paragon of Beauty, and a Mirror of Wit and Breeding! at once the
Envy and Wonder of the Sex and Age! She bears the Flag of Wit and Breeding on
the main Topsail of her Beauty. (A pretty Trope! Aside)


Wild. How does Mr. Oldwit's young Daughter? I saw her in London last
Easter-Term: She is the prettiest Charming Creature my Eyes ever beheld!


Trim. She is indeed a pretty Bud of Beauty: and if she Blossoms under the
Sunshine of my Lady Fantast's Favor, and her Daughters Example, she will
flourish; otherwise not.


Wild. Very concise and dogmatical. Aside. You are a great Servant of Mrs.
Fantast's. To him.


Trim. I, I am her humble Admirer, her Adorer: I call her Dorinda, and she
honors me with the name of Eugenius. I visit her daily.


Wild. Nicknames and Visits! then there is somewhat more between you, in faith
Mr. Trim.


Trim. Upon my Honor, nothing but a certain creeping correspondence; a
Conversation that savours somewhat of Gallantry, mixed now and then with Ombre,
Crimp, Comet, or Uncertain; and sometimes we read an Author, or so.


Wild. Or so! Hark in your Ear.


Trim. Sir, I am astonished to think I shoud be obnoxious to that Infelicity to
be so mistaken: and I must tell you, Sir, I scorn your words.


Wild. I did not think it had been a Dishonor to a man to lie with a pretty
woman.


Trim. I would not for the whole World: Nor ever did. Mistake me not, unless I
were Married.


Wild. What a Devil do we all run after 'em, and keep 'em company for, and
Dance, and play the Fool, but in ordine ad?


Trim. I visit all the Ladies for their Conversation, for the excellence of
their Conversation.


Wild. Conversation! That is so frivolous, it were not to be born, but for
something else that shall be nameless: and I Will tell you one thing, Mr. Trim,
That any Woman you keep company with, who does not think you have a mind to lie
with her, will never forgive you, to my knowledge.


Trim. Their Conversation does infinitely transcend men's, I assure you: I have
studied the Sex.


Wild. I Will tell you one thing more: That you must never be alone with a Woman,
but you must offer, or she knows you care not for her: Five to one but she
grants: But if she does not care for you, but denies, she is certain by that you
care for her, and will esteem you the better ever after.


Trim. Oh uncharitable Sentence!


Wild. Come, you and I Will sup together, and be merry; and two or three Bottles
will make you freer, and more open-hearted.


Trim. I never Sup: We of the better Rank never Sup, at Bury.


Wild. How? not Sup!


Trim. No.


Enter Mr. Oldwit, and Sir Humphrey Noddy, stealing in. Wild. Nor drink a
Bottle?


Trim. Never between Meals: We do indeed divert our selves with some
Milk-Pottage in the Evening; that is all.


Sir Hum. Now, now this Rogue's my Rival: I shall Tease him, ere I have done
with him.


He plucks the Chair from under Trim; and gives him a Devilish fall: Oldwit and
he laugh immoderately. Oldw. Sir Humphrey, forbear; I pray forbear: You Will be
the death of me.


Wild. How now? what, will not this Fool cut the other Fool over the Pate?
Shall I have no Sport with 'em?


Old. I shall break a Vein, if I keep you company, you arch Wag you. Mr.
Wildish, I am come to kiss your hands: you are welcome to Bury-Fair.


Wild. Sir, I am your most humble Servant: you honor me with this Visit.


Sir Hum. Dear Ned, let me kiss thee! Ah, Ned, that night I saw thee at
Newmarket!


Wild. Which was the first night I ever saw the Puppy.


Sir Hum. I shall never forget it. Ah, 'twas the merriest Night! aside.


Wild. Ay, 'twas so: we talked of nothing but Cocks, Dogs, and Horses.


Sir Hum. Not a word. 'Twas the bravest Night! But I was too hard for, and out
vapour'd all the Jockeys and Cockers; and after that I hunted over a bottle.
Here Jowler; hey Venus! and we roared so till four in the Morning; that, Gad
take me, between you and me, I was deaf on both Ears for three weeks after; I
have scarce recovered one Ear yet. I would give Fifty pound for such another
night.


Trim. Sir, I must tell you, your Deportment is very undecent, and savours much
of ill Breeding: And I would desire you would please to explain your self, in
this particular.


Sir Hum. Puh! Waggery, mere Waggery. Dear Jack, kiss me: Honest Jack, I love
to be familiar with my Friends. Jack, Jack, dear Jack! nowns Jack!


Trim. Jack, Jack, Jack! Familiar! I must tell you, Sir, I cannot brook the
Roughness of your Demeanor; the consequences whereof may produce those
effects, as may not be agreeable to those decencies required in Conversation.
But I shall at present take my leave, and visit Ladies, Sir, I kiss your hands.


Wild. Sir, your most humble Servant.


Trim. Mr. Oldwit, I am your most faithful Servant.


Old. Your Servant, sweet Mr. Trim. Well, Sir Humphrey Noddy, go thy ways; thou
art the Archest Wit and Wag! I must forswear thy Company: thou wilt kill me else.


Sir Hum. Hanged, a pox on it, what is this World worth, without wit, and
waggery, and Mirth? I love to be merry.


Wild. Plague on him; his Mirth is the melancholiest thing in the world. aside.


Sir Hum. You saw, Mr. Wildish, how I run down Fellows at Newmarket, with my
Jests and my Tricks: They took me for a Put; but I outroar'd 'em all, in faith,
and could have put them all in a Mouse-hole.


Wild. How does my Lord, your dear Friend, and Patron?


Sir Hum. Oh, Sir, his Lordship is in good Health. He is no body without we
poor Man: he loves Wit, and good Company; I Will tell you, I Will tell you --


Old. Now we shall hear some Wit and Waggery!


Sir Hum. 'T'other day we were a Hunting, and at a cold Scent; one of his
Gentlemen being alighted, stood by a Plash of Water: I sneaked behind, and
pushed him, I vow to Gad, up to the Knees.


Old wit is big with Laughter, then roars out. Old. Good, Good: Ha, ha, ha.


Sir. Hum. Ha, ha, ha. But, if you had seen his Lordship laugh: the Water
trickled down his Honors Cheeks: then one Jeremy stood staring; I called him
loudly and suddenly, and held my Fingers thus: he turned suddenly, and hit his
Nose such a Bump, that all the Blood gushed out. Ha, ha, ha.


Old. Look you there: Ha, ha* ha. Well, well.


Sir Hum. But if you had seen his Honor Chuckle and Laugh, till he was black
in the Face! I twirl'd another Fellows Hat over a little River, that was not
Navigable; and he was forced to go a Mile about to fetch it: I thought my Lord
would have killed himself! He desired me at last to forbear; he was not able to
endure it.


Wild. My Lord is a very merry Man.


Sir Hum. Ay, Gad take me, as any's upon the face of the Earth. But, how goes
Wit at London?


Old. You are the chief Genius, the high Wit of the Age.


Wild. Prithee, Mr. Oldwit, lay not that to my charge; you had as good accuse
me of Felony.


Old. Never talk of that, your Pen has betrayed you; and we look upon you here,
to be the choicest Wit of the Times.


Sir Hum. And, in faith, we can show you Wit at Bury too.


Wild. What, a Devil, you wont make a Wit of me, in spite of my Teeth, will
you?


Old. No, Nature has made you a Wit. Why do you take it ill? I think it the
greatest Honor can be done to a Man. I my self, simple as I stand here, was a
Wit in the last Age: I was created Ben Iohnson's Son, in the Apollo. I knew
Fletcher, my Friend Fletcher, and his Maid Joan: Well, I shall never forget
him, I have Supped with him, at his House, on the Bankside: He loved a fat Loyn
of Pork of all things in the World: and Joan, his Maid, had her Beerglass of
Sack; and we all kissed her, in faith, and were as merry as passed.


VVild. This was enough to make any Man a Wit.


Old. Puh! this was nothing: I was a Critic at Blackfriers; but at Cambridge,
none so great as I, with Jack Cleaveland: But Tom Randol and I were Hand and
Glove: Tom was a brave Fellow; the most Natural Poet!


Sir Hum. They were brave Fellows, but you Wits now a days, out-top them all.


VVild. Zounds, I will have nothing to do with Wit, I tell you!


Old. Pshaw, pshaw! but I was telling you, you have seen many pretty things,
that were written in those Times, that were mine. For Example: One Mr. Murial,
a Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, had a Horse dyed; I writ this upon it. Now Cruel Mors
Has ta'n the Horse
Of Mr. Murial:
Ye Scholars all,
Of Pembroke-Hall,
Come to his Burial.
Ha! hum! hum! Nay, I was good at Epitaphs, both of Man and Beast.


Sir Hum. Ha, ha, ha; admirable good, in faith, Mr. Oldwit!


VVild. Why, this was Wit all over! You were an errant Wit!


Old. And that Translation too was mine.

Mittiur in disco mihi Piscis ab Archiepisco
Po, non ponatur quia potus non mihi datur.
I sent a Fish, Sir Hum. sneaks behind, and pins him and VVild. together.
In a great Dish,
To the Archbish.
Hop was not there,
Because he gave me no Beer.
Was not that Lucky? Ha? humh? anon?


Wild. Most incomparable:


Old. I was such a Rakehell, I would needs be a Wit, My Friends soon perceived
I could not be a Divine; so they sent me to the Inns of Court, and there,
in faith, I peppered the Court with Libels and Lampoons: my Wit was so bitter, I
escaped the Pillory very narrowly, between you and I. But then, for good
Language, and strong Lines, none out did me.


Wild. Why, thou were a most Plaguey Wit indeed!


Old. Ay, Faith: and the Poets were so in awe of me! You must know, I was a
devilish biting Fellow: Why, we had a couple of your Poets here: Sir Humphrey,
and I made nothing of 'em, in faith.


Sir Hum. Gad take me, they were but silly Fellows: and yet, they say, they
were Cock Poets.


Wild. That may very well be: we have Poets, as pretty Fops as any about Town;
and are fitter for Subjects of Comedies, than Authors of any thing.


Enter Oldwit's Man. Serve. Sir, my Lord Bellamy is come to Town: and my Lady
bid me tell you, she has invited him to Dinner.


Old. Ha! my Lord come to Bury! Gad forgive me, what is the matter? ha?


VVild. What Is this? what, are we linked together?


Old. Oh, you wag, you wag; this is Sir Humphrey! Ha, ha, ha. You Will never give
over.


Sir Hum. No, faith; not I.


Old. Go home: I Will follow you. Exit Servant.

Mr. Wildish, pray Honor my House at Dinner.


VVild. I will, my Lord Bellamy's my great Friend.


Old. You shall have Sir Humphrey too; in faith, we will be merry, and turn the
House out of the VVindow.


Sir Hum. And I will Roar, Roar most exceedingly.


Old. Your humble Servant.


Sir Hum. Your Servant, Sir, we shall see you?


Exit Hum. and Old. VVild. I will wait on you. Here, Roger my Gloves,
Handkerchief, and my Sword. My dear Bellamy in Town! This is a happiness I
dreamed not of: I thought he had been retired from the World, and would not
come to so public a place. You Puppy, these are your Wits, and fine
Gentlemen, I have been Plagued with! A curse on 'em! What must I undergo, for
the sake of my Love!


Val. I took 'em, Sir, and so do most here, for fine Gentlemen; but I wonder
Mr. Oldwit is so merry after his Disaster: And yet Sir Humphrey would make a
Man burst.


VVild. What Disaster?


Val. Why, Sir, his eldest Daughter, a great Fortune by her Mother, (his first
Wife; for he has had three) about four Months since, fled, the night before he
was to have Married her to a fine Bury Gentleman.


VVild. I heard so; but she has sent a Letter, to let him know, that she will
not be forced to Marry: And for that end, she will not appear till the day
after she is at Age to dispose of her self; and that then she will; and is in
the mean time safe, beyond his enquiry.


Val. The young Daughter is a great Fortune by her Mother, who was an Heiress.


Wild. He has had a lucky hand at Heiresses: but I must find out my dear
Bellamy.


Exeunt. Scene, Lord Bellamy 's Lodging, Bellamy, and Page. Bell. My Kinswoman,
who recommended thee, Charles, to my Service, told me, thou were a Young
Gentleman of the North, whom she knew and was of Kin too, and that thou had
left thy Guardian for harsh usage: And she engaged me to conceal and protect
thee.


Charles. I can assure your Lordship, I have done nothing that can make you
blush to own me.


Bell. I believe thee, my Kinswoman made me give my word to inquire no farther;
and I have kept it.


Cha. You have, my good Lord.


Bell. I see thy Education has been good, and find thou art a virtuous Boy, and
so ready in thy Service; thy diligence has almost out flown my thoughts; yet
it has kept pace with my desires: and every thing thou do, thou seem to do
with pleasure.


Char. I should be wicked else, having so excellent a Lord and Master.


Bell. I use thee not as other Noblemen their Pages, who let Gentlemen's Sons
ride at the Tails of their Coaches, crowded with rascally Footmen: it is a
French mode; they used formerly to give 'em the same Education with their Sons,
which made their Fortunes; and 'twas a Preferment then, for a Gentleman's
younger Son: Now, they are bred to Box and Dice, and Cheat with the Footmen;
after they are out of Livery, perhaps they turn to the Recreation of the
Highway; or the top of their Fortune is to take up in some Troop, and there is
an end of 'em.


Cha. I must confess, your usage of me has been so Noble, that all the Service
of my Life, can never make return.


Bell. Thou art too grateful. Thou Charm'st me too with thy pretty Voice: I Will
breed thee up to be my Friend. But, prithee, what is the reason that thou, who
have been ready to fly at my Command, have seemed to be uneasy, and unwilling,
to come to Bury?


Cha. It Is the public time of the Fair, when Men of ^ll Countries flock
hither; and, as I told your Lordship, I was afraid of being discovered, and
that my Guardian would find me out, and seize me: and, Heaven knows, I had
rather Dye, than leave so good a Lord.


Bell. Kindest of Youths, I love thee so, I will not part with thee, let who
will discover thee.


Char. My kind, good Lord, let me kiss your hands.


Bell. Besides, thou needst not be seen in the Fair; only I am to Dine at Mr.
Oldwit's to day.


Cha. At Mr. Oldwit's! what do I hear? aside.


Bell. Thou art my little Friend; I come to make love to his Daughter: She
knows me not; but I have seen her, and am extremely taken with her: the old man
and I am agreed. I must entertain her with some Music: I know thou wilt lend me
thy Voice.


Cha. Oh Heaven and Earth! what killing words are these! Ah me! aside.


Bell. Why do thou sigh?


Cha. If your Lordship Marries, as no Lady sure can resist you, I shall be cast
off.


Bell. Prithee think not so, dear Boy; thou art too secure of my kindness for
that.


Cha. I never shall please your Lady. Besides, the Ladies never can endure their
Lords favorite Servants.


Bell. I give thee my Hand, I Will never part with thee, till thou quittest me.


Chapter I Will quit my Life when I do that. Oh fatal hour, wherein I saw those Eyes!
How many years of Misery are like to hang upon it! aside.


Enter Wildish. Bell. Ned, my dear Ned, welcome to my Arms! This is a happy
Surprise.


Wild. My dear Bellamy! my dear Peer! I could not embrace a Mistress with more
Ardour! I thought you had been so retired, I had lost you.


Bell. That was your fault: I have as pleasant a House and Seat, as most in
England, that is thine as much as mine, Ned.


Wild. But it is in the Country; a pretty Habitation for Birds and Cattle: but
Man is a herded Animal, and made for Towns and Cities.


Bell. So many Pens of Wild Beasts upon two Legs, undermining, lying in wait,
preying upon, informing against, and hanging one another: A Crowd of Fools,
Knaves, Whores, and Hypocrites.


Wild. Hey, my Renegado Countryman: thou had once the Respect due to good
Wine, fine Women, Music, Wit and Sense, and true Pleasure.


Bell. For good Wine; I coud never be Drunk, but I did some mad thing or other,
which made me ashamed to show my Face. For Women; those that were worth the
having, were hard to come by, and harder to put off; besides, the immorality of
the matter, gave me anxiety of Mind; I saw Men of Wit, when they came to
understanding, gave it over: and, when a thing must be done, it is best to do it
quickly.


Wild. Thou may as well say, since we must dye, let us hang our selves now:
No, that is time enough, when we are weary of living. At our years, leave Women
and Conve^sation!


Bell. He that Debauches private Women, is a Knave, and injures others: And he
that uses public ones, is a Fool, and hurts himself. And for Conversation,
'twas all run into Parties and Politics, and become Dull and Dangerous: The
Living were such Knaves, I was resolved to Converse with the Dead, in my Study.


Wild. But, in this late Scene of Action, the Knaves are pretty well laid open:
and, for all those Parties, we could meet with choice Company, truly honest,
and with whom good Wit and Sense was stirring, and would pass for current.


Bell. Wit and Sense may pass in a Room with honest Fellows, but Noise, and
Nonsense, always carry it in the World.


Wild. Pox on this dull Wisdom at our Age! it is as unseasonable as Snow in the
Dogdays. Can thou think, my dear Peer, that thy Philosophy can tame the
Vigor of my Appetites?


Bell. I will no more suffer my Appetites to Master me, than Fire and Water*
they are good Ministers, while they can be kept under.


VVild. I Would not give a Farthing for an Appetite that can be Curbed: My Stoic,
I Would have my Appetites high mettled, and run away with me.


Bell. And I must always think a Man a Slave, till he has Conquered himself:
for my part, I had almost as leive be in subjection to another Appetites, as
to my own.


VVild. This is Spleen, Wind in the Hypocondriacks pent: Why, thou will
Prophecy at least.


Bell. Come, dear Ned, we'll debate this matter at more leisure: Time will make
you of my mind: for I observe, all men of Wit Reclaim; and only Coxcombs
persevere to the end of Debauchery. But prithee, what makes thee hereabouts?
I Will lay my Life, there is some Wench or other in the way.


VVild. May be, that may be somewhat; but at present I come to ease my self
from the Swearing, Lying, Roaring, Vaporing, Cozening Noise and Tumult of
New Market: But I thought thou had renounced all Crowds, and should as soon
have expected a Hermit here.


Bell. A little time may satisfy you I have reason.


VVild. Ha! Bell. what pretty Boy is this? ha!


Bell. He is a Gentleman's Son, he serves me at present. I Will tell the more
enter nous: But, in the mean time, he and my little Consort shall entertain you.


Ex. Charles. VVild. This is somewhat.


Bell. I will not live like an ordinary Hunting, Hawking Puppy; I Will have my
City Pleasures in the Country: of which good Music being one; I Will spare some
Rogues, some Dogs, and Horses, to have that good.


Enter Charles, with Instruments. VVild. I have been visited this Morning, by
three most confounded Fops, that ever Plagued me yet; and they talked of
nothing, but the Wit and Breeding of Bury: Trim, Sir Humphrey Noddy, and Mr.
Oldwit.


Bell. There are those things in Bury, but as it is in Religion; least among
those who talk of them most, men are always proudest of their foibles, and
keep their Strength's concealed: If a fellow has but a difficulty of Speaking,
or Stutters, his Tongue will never lie still.


Wild. A fellow that has one Leg shorter than another, will never stand still;
but Hop, hop, hop, round, round, round.


Bell. Observe any Fellow that has a stinking Breath, as if a Voice were not
intended to be heard but smelt, will speak in your very Nose: and turn round as
often as you will, he turns with you, and your Nostrils must have it. Come
begin.


SONG. VVild. It Is very pretty; and delicately Sung.


Bell. Now I have got thee in the Country, I Will carry thee to my House, and
make a Convert of thee.


Enter La Roch a French Peruke-maker, with his Man. VVild. Hey! La Roch, what
makes you here?


La Roch. Serviteur, Monsieur; my Lor, vot Serviteur: I see your Laquais below,
dat make me come up to kiss your hands.


Bell. How now, Monsieur Cutbeard? what makes you at Bury-Fair?


La To. Dis is de place dat is Fameux for de pretty Garl wid de cheveux blond,
de farie hair: my Man and I come for buy de vite lock, indeed to get de
Monee to make de Pot Boil, my Lor.


VVild. A thought comes into my Head: It shall be so. I will have some
Diversion, while I am here.


La To. Dat be de last Peruke I send your Lorship? Begar, is fine Air, Curle
delicate morbleu: You talk of de Chedreux, he is no bodee to me; dear is no
man can Travaille vid me; Monsieur VVildish has got my Peruke on his Head:
let me see, here is de Hair, de Curle de bouckle, ver good, ver good. If dat
Fool Chedreux make de Peruke like me, I will be Hanga.


Wild. Hold, good Monsieur Snip-snap, I have another Employment for you: Were
you ever here before?


La To. No.


Wild. That Is well. I must have you be a French Count. I remember we had a
Count de Brion at London, passed upon the choicest Sparks, and best Bred Men
and Ladies: I will have this Fellow pass upon the Fops of Bury, and amuse the
wiser sort.


Bell. You will never be without some mad Frolic, or other: But this,
certainly must be very pleasant.


VVild. Of all female Creatures, my aversion is to the Lady Fantast, and her
Affected, Conceited, Disdainful Daughter: I will have this fellow personate a
French Count, and make Love to the Daughter.


La To. Ha, ha, ha, de French Count! dat be ver well: ha, ha! Make de Love!
begar, I come for make de Monee. Love! Morbleu, de French Count spend de
Monee, de French Peruke-maker make de French Count, he loosee de Monee.


VVild. You shall lose no Money, you Puppy, my Man is acquainted with all this
Country, and shall help your Man to buy the Wenches Hair, the pretty'st Wenches
in England; and if you be a French Count, you shall have the Wenches too; all
the Town will run after you: you will be courted by every body, feasted, and
invited to Balls, and all Meetings; but the Lady Fantast, and her Daughter,
will be mad after you.


La To. Ha, ha, ha; de French Count, ver well indeed, ha, ha: I make de French
Count: begar, Monsieur, I have de Count of my Familee, I am a Gentilman of
France. Indeed my Parens did condiscent to let me make de Peruke, for I
delighted in it.


VVild. Go you Rogue, you shall do this, I am resolved on it, or I Will cut your
Throat. You shall have Clothes and Ornaments of me, here are wholesale men;
three or four Suits for Footmen will do, and we'll help you to the men too.
I Will bear all the Charges; I Will do it, if it cost me a Hundred pound.


Bell. Are you in earnest?


VVild. Ay, by Heaven, it shall be. You shall be called Monsieur le Count de
Cheveux; you shall be entertained like a Prince: the Women will lie with you,
as if the Devil were in them.


La To. Hah! dat be ver good indeed! I was not bred to make Peruke, it vas for
my diversion I did itte: I spent my time among de Gens de Quality in de Academy.


VVild. Yes, to Shave them, thou true Picture of a French Scoundrel. aside.


La To. Dear I did appen to kille de Count for my Honneur.


VVild. Then there is a Count missing: you shall supply his place.


La To. I flay, dey seize on my Land and my Chatteaux; and begar, it vas ver
well for me dat I did delight in make de Peruke ven I vas young indeed.


VVild. This good Breeding of yours will qualify you excellently! Why, you will
be Adored by the Ladies: But, of all, I charge you to Court Mrs. Fantast;
commend her Wit and Breeding.


Bell. Suppose she falls in love with him in earnest!


VVild. I Would give a hundred pound to see that. Well, Monsieur le Count, let us
to my Lodging, and fit you for this Enterprise.


La To. Hold, hold: if dey find me out, vil dey not wippe de French Count?
Begar, I no love to be wippe.


VVild. Upon my Honor, I Will protect you.


La To. Vel, vel; no more to be said: I am Monsieur le Count de Cheveux.
Serviteur Monsieur my Lor, vot tres humble Serviteur.

Fala ha la. Sings.


VVild. Come, my Lord, your humble Servant, we are to meet at Dinner: I must
about this business, my Heart is set upon it; 'twill make an Admirable Farce.


Bell Get thee gone, Ned, thou art a mad Fellow: I Will go and take a little Air.


La To. Allons Monsieur: Fa la la la la.
If my wise Conduct you please to rely on,
I Will make as good a Count, as Count de Brion.

Exeunt. ACT. II.
SCENE I.
Mrs. Gertrude. Gert. WEll, I am weary of the Life I lead here; never poor
Creature was so Teased, as I am still, with my Stepmother, and her Daughter,
the Old Cucko and the Young, that tire me continually with the same Notes of
Wit and Breeding: And having themselves nothing but Folly and Affectation, are
always reproaching me for want of both.


Enter Luce. Luce. Madam, my Lady Madam Fantast, having attired her self in her
morning Habiliments, is Ambitious of the Honor of your Ladyship's company, to
Survey the Fair.


Gert. Here Is a foul Copy of one of 'em: I see, this Folly is Contagious. Tell
her, I Will wait on her.


Luce. She will suddenly arrive at this Place, where she desires the Interview
may be betwixt you*


Gert. I will haste for my Hoods and Gloves, and the rest of my Movables; and
be here instantly.


Exit Gert. Luce. A fine young Lady this, if she had but half the Wit and
Breeding of my Lady.

Enter Lady Fantast, and her Daughter Mrs. Fantast. Madam, Mrs. Gatty will kiss
your Ladyship's hands here incontinently.


L. Fan. Come, my sweet Daughter, consider what I have said. Thou art in thy
maturity of blooming Age; I have bred thee to the very Achme and Perfection of
Bury Breeding, which is inferior to none in this our Island; Dancing, Singing,
Ghittar, French Master: And I Will say that for thee, my Jewel, thou have
Sacrificed all thy Endeavors to attain thy Education; which, corroborated: by
thy Acuteness of Parts, have rendered thee exactly accomplished, and together
with the excellence of thy Beauty, justly admired by the Amorous Males, and
envied by the malicious Females.


Mrs. Fan. To all that, which the World calls Wit and Breeding, I have always
had a natural tendency, a penchen, derived, as the Learned say, Ex traduce,
from your Ladyship: Besides the great Prevalence of your Ladyship's most
shining Example, has perpetually Stimulated me, to the Sacrificing all my
Endeavors toward the attaining of those inestimable Jewels; than which,
nothing in the Universe can be so much a mon gre, as the French say. And for
Beauty, Madam, the Stock I am enriched with, comes by emanation from your
Ladyship; who ha^ been long held a Paragon of Perfection: most Charmant most
Tuant.


L. Fan. Ah, my dear Child: I! Alas, alas! Time has been, and yet I am not
quite gone; but thou have those Attractions, which I bewail the want of:
Poetry, Latin, and the French Tongue.


Mrs. Fan. I must confess, I have ever had a Tendress for the Muses, and have a
due reverence for Helicon, and Parnassus, and the Graces: But Heroic Numbers
upon Love and Honor, are most Ravissant, most Suprenant; and a Tragedy is so
Touchant! I dye at a Tragedy; I Will swear I do.


L. Fan. I must confess, my dear, thy Wit has more of Notoriety, than thy
Beauty; since the pretty various Diversions of thy Pen, have transmitted thy
Fame of Wit, beyond the narrow limits of an Island. But it is now high time to
manifest thy Judgment, in the disposal of thy Person; and thou have rejected a
Multitude of Lovers.


Mrs. Fan. I am so much indebted to Nature and Education, that I am resolved
not unequally to dispose of that Person, which (without vanity I may say)
Nature by its genuine Bounty, and Art by its friendly Additions, have rendered
not disagreeable, or void of Attraits: But all want of Wit and Breeding, does
affect me with that unconquerable Chagrin, that, eh Good, I cannot suffer such
Fellows.


L. Fan. Mine own dear Daughter, to a hair! And I must confess, we are troubled
enough with it in Mr. Oldwit, his Daughter, and his Companions: Had not my
Jointure been somewhat entangled, I had never had him. But Mr. Trim is as fine
a Gentleman, as the Sun in all his Circuit sees.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, my Eugenius! he is a finished piece of Humanity; but has not the
Estate I would have.


L. Fan. Sir, Humphrey Noddy,


Mrs. Fan. Has a very good Estate, but wants the Noble Accomplishments of my
Eugenius, whom I intend to preserve for my Platonic Servant. Enter Mrs.
Gertrude. Sweet Madam Gatty, I have some Minutes impatiently expected your
arrival, that I might do my self the great Honor to kiss your Hands, and enjoy
the favor of your Company into the Fair; which I see, out of my Window, begins
to fill apace.


Gert. I got ready as soon as e're I could, and am now come to wait on you.


L. Fan. Oh, fie, Daughter! will you never attain, by mine, and my dear
Daughters Examples, to a more Polite way of Expression, and a Nicer form of
Breeding? Fie, fie, I come to wait on you! You should have said; I assure you,
Madam, the honor is all on my side, and I cannot be ambitious of a greater,
than the enjoyment of the sweet Society of so excellent a Person. This is
Breeding.


Mrs. Fan. Ah, this had been a Propos: Observe my Lady.


Gert. Breeding! why, this had been a Flam, a mere Flam.


Mrs. Fan. Eh, Mondieu! this had been delicate et bien tournee. Call generous
Complements, Flams.


L. Fan. Thus you had s^own true breeding.


Gert. Breeding! I know no breeding necessary, but Discretion to distinguish
Company and Occasions, and Common Sense, to entertain Persons according to
their Rank, besides making a Courtesy not aukwardly, and walking with one's
Toes out*


Mrs. Fan. Eh Good, eh Good.


L. Fan. Let me tell you, you are a pert young Thing: you are a Curious Judge
indeed, of the Art of refined Conversation.


Gert. Art! Conversation ought to be free, easy, and natural.


Mrs. Fan. Eh Good, eh Good: Sweet Madam, despise not Art. Can there be any
Conversation well dressed, as I may say, without French in the first place, to
Lard it?


Gert. Some Fops indeed think so, that use it in every Sentence.


L. Fan. Nothing is so Confident as Ignorance.


Mrs. Fan. Ars non habet Inimicum praeter Ignorantem.


L. Fan. Look you there: I have bred my Daughter a Linguist.


Gert. A Lady may look after the affairs of a Family, the demeanor of her
Servants, take care of her Nursery, take all her Accounts every Week, obey her
Husband, and discharge all the Offices of a good Wife with her Native Tongue;
and this is all I desire to arrive at; and this is to be of some use in a
Generation, while your Fantastic Lady with all those Trappings and Ornaments
you speak of, is good for no more than a Dancing Mare, to be led about and
shown.


Mrs. Fan. Eh, mon Dieu! pray forbear, sweet Madam, forbear; I am not able to
hear this Blasphemy against true breeding.


Gert. It must needs be pretty French one learns of an Irishman at Bury. I
believe it is a kind of bastard French.


L. Fan. Good Mrs. Gatty, you are very Confident.


Enter Oldwit, and hearkens unseen. Mrs. Fan. Whatever you do, never speak
against Art.


Gert. Art stiffens, and spoils Conversation, as Painting does Faces: if you
hear never so many florid Coxcombs, they speak all alike; and see never so many
painted Women, they look all alike.


Mrs. Fan. Eh, mon dieu! Quel fascheux; Ex quovis ligno, etc. Mercury's Statue
is not made of every Wood.


L. Fan. Look you, I know your secret cogitations: Because you are so ill bred
as to look like a Tallow thing, and will not improve your Complexion by Art,
you obliquely reflect upon me and my Daughter, for our melioration of Nature.


Gert. Come, come, Madam, if you be ready without a Complement, to go to the
Fair, I am ready to go with you; but, by my troth, if you look for Complements,
you must get them somewhere else. Come, I Will lead you.


Exit Gertrude. Mrs. Fan. Ill breeding, au dernier point! Oh, my Chagrin. I
kiss your Ladyships hands.


Exit Mrs. Fantast. L. Fan. Oh, Mr. Oldwit, would you had been here, you would
have heard a fine deal of ill breeding from your Daughter Gatty.


Old. I was here at part of your discourse, and I heard nothing but good Sense
from her.


L. Fan. Nay, she is like you.


Old. Gad take me, I am glad she is not like you.


L. Fan. I know your ill breeding; but it is a shame you have not better
cultivated your Daughter as I have mine.


Old. Cultivate! A Pox on your affected stuff; should I have made her an
affected Ass, to be laughed at, as you and your Daughter are?


L. Fan. Prodigy of Ignorance! my Daughter and I laughed at! Whom even the
Court, when we are there, perpetually Gaze at and Admire; and all the Beauties
and Gallants here make their Court to!


Old. A great many Flutterers do flock about you indeed, as small Birds would
about a Cast of Owls, to wonder at you.


L. Fan. This is most Stupendous.


Old. A Pox on this perpetual Noise about Wit and Breeding! You made my
Daughter by my first Wife run away, with Teazing her, and persuading me to be
such an Ass to press her to Marry one of your formal Fops, against her will,
and now you are plaguing this poor Girl, to make her runaway too, but I have
agreed upon Articles with one that will soon rid you of her.


L. Fan. Most Exorbitant, and Amazing! 'Twere well, if beholding us could do
any good upon her.


Old. No doubt it will; as the sight of the Drunken Slaves did upon the Spartan
Children. There Is Wit, and Reading, for her.


aside. L. Fan. Were not we well fortified by Art and Nature, we might be
obnoxious to the taint of your and her most unsavory Rusticity. While all the
Beau Mond, as my Daughter says, are with us, in the Drawing Room, you have none
but Ill-bred, Witless Drunkards with you, in your Smoaking-room. What
punishment do I deserve, for making Alliance with so much Ill-breeding.


Old. What Plagues have I met with, in marrying an Affected Old Lady; who, with
her Daughter, take themselves to be Wits! Their Tongues never lie still: At
Dinner, they must have the whole discourse; at dinner the Common Crier, were he
there, could not be heard; no, not another Woman. There Is my Friend Iuvenal,
for you: Wit and Breeding.


L. Fan. My Daughter and I no Wit, and you have it! this is most Astonishing!
Ha, ha, ha. If ever you had Wit, it is obliterated, antiquated, and buried in
the Grave of Oblivion.


Old. No Wit! Ounds, now you provoke me. Shall I, who was Jack Fletcher's
Friend, Ben Iohnson's Son, and afterward an Intimate Crony of Jack Cleaveland,
and Tom Randal, have kept Company with Wits, and been accounted a Wit these
Fifty Years, live to be Deposed by you?


L. Fan. Ha, ha, ha.


Old. Ha, ha, ha. I, that was a Judge at Blackfriers, writ before Fletcher's
Works and Cartwright's, taught even Tailor and the best of them to speak. I
cannot go to London yet, but the Wits get me amongst them, and the Players
will get me to Rehearsal to teach them, even the best of them: and you to say I
have no Wit, I say, you have not, nor ever had, any Beauty.


L. Fan. Nay, now Mr. Oldwit, I can bear no longer. Shall I, that in my Youth
Charmed all the Gallants of that time, even to Fascination; and in my
Widowhood, but five years since, was Adored by Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and captivated several of their Hearts, be thus Calumniated! Know, I have more
Beauty than you can make use of.


Old. Indeed, toward you, I am somewhat frigid; but some in the World know I
have a Colt's Tooth.


L. Fan. I should serve you right, to have others find out my Colt's Tooth too,
though thou can not.


Old. Thy Tooth! the Devil of one thou have, but what came out of Bowlane:
Three remaining Stumps there are, that look like three broken Pillars in a
ruined Cloister. And there is Wit for you now, and a Clinch to boot.


L. Fan. Poor Railing Buffoon! there Wit! Well, there are some of another mind,
concerning my Beauty.


Old. Pr'ythee take thy course with them: Whoever commits Adultery with thee,
it must be merely the Act of the Devil; there is nothing of the Flesh in it.
What a Pox, you and your Daughter are notorious, for out-painting all the
Christian Iezebels in England.


L. Fan. It Is false, rude Fellow: we only use a Wash, and lay on a little Red.


Old. No more does a Wall: but you, for your part, are fain to fill up the
Chinks in your rivell'd Skin, as House-painters do the Cracks in Wainscot, with
Putty. Pox on it, you would by Art appear a Beauty, and are by Nature a mere
Mummy. There Is Wit for you again. Gad, I Will pepper you with Wit.


L. Fan. Did I not despise thee for thy want of Wit and Breeding, these
barbarous Contumelies would exhaust Tears from my Eyes.


Old. If thou should cry, it would make streaks down thy Face; as the Tears
of the Tankard do upon my fat Hosts Belly-pieces. There Is Wit again for you.


L. Fan. Farewell Brute.


Exit Lady Fantast. Old. Fare thee well. He that would have the Devil more
Damned, let him get him to Marry a She Wit. Now, for the Fair. Here; who waits?
Enter a Servant. Bid the Cook get Dinner within two Hours, at farthest.


Scene the Fair, with a great many Shops and Shows, and all sorts of People
walking up and down. Mrs. Fantast, and Gertrude, Masked. Gert. It Is pleasant to
observe the mixture of People here*


Mrs. Fan. Ah, how pleasant 'twoud be, if none but the Beau monde made their
promenade here! but I hate the Canaille.


Millener. What do you lack, Ladies? fine Mazarine Hoods, Fontanges, Girdles,
Sable Tippets, choice of fine Gloves and Ribbands.


Hosier. Stockins, Silk Stockins; choice of Silk Stockins: very fine Silk
Stockins.


Perfumer. All sorts of Essences, Perfumes, Pulvilio's, Sweet-bags, Perfumed
Boxes for your Hoods and Gloves, all sorts of sweets for your Linen, Portugal
sweets to burn in your Chamber. What do you lack? What do you buy?


Gert. I have no such contempt for the common People: they come near Nature,
and have no Art or Affectation; and there are a thousand Fops made by Art, for
one Fool by Nature.


Mrs. Fan. Oh fie! Odi profanum vulgus, etc.


Indian Gown-man. Fine morning Gowns, very rich Indian stuffs; choice of fine
Atlasses; fine morning Gowns.


Goldsmith. Will you please to Raffle for a Tea-pot, a pair of Candlesticks, a
couple of Sconces.


Enter Mr. Trim. Trim. Not all the Clouds assembled in the Firmament, can hide,
or can eclipse so muffle the Sun, but we poor Mortals know it shines, and feel
the warm effects. Why should Dorinda think to blunt her pointed Glories, or
conceal the Radiant Luster of her conquering Beams?


Mrs. Fantast. I see, to the quick-sighted Eugenius, nothing is obscure. Nor
coud Eugenius in the Dark be hid: that golden Tongue, and that sweet Eloquence
would soon reveal him; as the Proscribed Senator was by his Perfumes betrayed.


Trim. How does the bright Dorinda make me blush, when she commends my
Eloquence; and in that very Act so much exceeds me!


Mrs. Fantast. Fine! very fine! bien turn! that thought's very recherchee.
Observe, Madam: this is a true Witty and well-bred Gentleman.


Gert. Now really, Madam, between you and me, this man appears to me a most
extraordinary Shallow Coxcomb, as one can possibly see in a Summer's day.


Mrs. Fantast. Eh Good, eh Good! poor Soul, I pity thee: but, assurement, nothing
can be more engaging than the Wit and Breeding of Eugenius.


Trim. I see, there is no contending with Dorinda: she will have the Ascendant
over poor Eugenius; his small Pinnace must strike Sail to her Admiral. Wit.


Gerit. These Fops are very happy: for if an Archangel should tell 'em they
were Fops, they would not believe it,


Trim. Let me present to the fair Dorinda's hands a little offspring of my
Brain* the Tribute of my Morning Service.


Mrs. Fantast. I was just going to present Eugenius with the Issue of my
teeming Muse, who was delivered this morning of a Pastoral: I must needs say,
she had a good time, for she had an easy Labor; Aurora Musis amica. But pray
let me read yours first.


Enter Luce. Luce. Oh, Madam, does your Ladyship hear the News?


Mrs. Fantast. What News; Luce?


Luce. Oh, Madam, such news, as perhaps may not be ungrateful to your Ladyships
Ears. There is now, even now arrived a Noble French Count; the finest Person my
eyes yet ever beheld: I saw him, heard him speak; he speaks English. He has the
prettiest Charming way! no Lady sure can e're resist him.


Trim. Who can this be?


Mrs. Fantast. Ha! a French Count? Oh Lord! I am afraid I am not in Order
enough: he will certainly make addresses to me; how is my dress.


She lets fall Trim 's Paper; he stoops to take it up, and offers it her; she
neglects it. Luce. Very French, and very exact.


Mrs. Fan. The report of me has certainly brought him hither. Heaven a French
Count, say you! Now we shall see Breeding in Perfection: and I am glad I shall
have the opportunity of appearing before so great a Judge.


Gert. How do you know but this French Count may be an errant Coxcomb?


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Madam, Madam, I beseech you betray not your ill Breeding. A
French Count a Coxcomb! Mon dieu.


Trim. It is not, my Dorinda --


Mrs. Fan. When shall our Eyes be blessed with the sight? when, think thou,
will he make this place happy?


Luce. My Eyes saluted him first upon the Change: his Landlord, who was with
him, told me what he was; from thence I followed him to Cook-row, and so
through the Fair to the Bowling-green* His Air, his Mien, and his Deportment
charmed me so, I coud not leave him: there I saw him ride the Flying Horse,
with his Equipage, which much delighted him.


Mrs. Fan. Shall we go to the Bowling-green? My expectation is on Tiptoes, till
I behold him.


Luce. That Is a rare saying! I Will remember that. My expectation is on Tiptoes!
Madam, he is gone from thence, and said he would be in the Fair presently.


Enter Sir Humphry Noddy. Trim. This sudden indifference toward me seems
abrupt and temerarious!


The Shopkeepers cry all their Goods again, one after another; and then all
together. 1 Woman. Fine mellow Pears; fine Burgamy Pears; fine Norwich Pears.


2 Wom. Fine Ginger-bread: very good Ginger-bread.


Sir Hum. Yonder Is my Mistress; I know her, for all her Mask: I Will present her
with a Fairing.


Sir Hum. buys some Ginger-bread. Enter several Gentlewomen; two Country
Wenches, and two Country Fellows, and People of all sorts, and walk about the
Fair. Sir Hum. Madam, it is not a Mask can conceal you from a Lover; whether I
see you or no, my Heart will leap up to my Teeth when ever you come in
presence; as a dead Body will bleed at the arrival of the Murderer. Is not
that well said, Mr. Trim?


Gives Trim a devilish kick on the Shint. Trim. 'Sdeath, my Shins!


Mrs. Fan. Men's Hearts seldom come so near their Mouths.


Sir Hum. Madam, let me present you with your first Fairing, a Heart.


Gert. Of Ginger-bread.


Sir Hum. Ay faith, pretty Lady.


Gert. Is it a true Image of your own? Did you sit for it?


Sir Hum. Ha, ha, ha; a very good Jest! Udsbud, there is a pair of Gloves of the
same mettle, to stop your pretty Mouth. And, Mr. Trim, here is a Wise Cap,
befitting your Gravity, and the Solidity of your Parts, for you.


Trim. Sir, there is an old Adge, that says, Familiarity breeds Contempt: I am
past those Juvenile Joques.


Sir Hum. Alas, poor old Gentleman! Come, Madam, walk, and let us see the
diversions of the Fair: I warrant you, I Will make you merry.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, this Count! Did you see the Count?


Sir Hum. No; but I hear there is a flaming French Beau come to Town: Will your
Lordship Raffle a bout or two?


Gert. The activity of this Monky is as ridiculous as the Gravity of that
Paboon. Enter Wildish, and walks. Oh Heaven, Wildish here! Down, down my Heart:
Thou foolish Heart; why do thou flutter so? I see he is thus far a Man of
Honor: If all he says, in his Letters, were as true! And yet I know not
whether I should wish it.


Enter Lady Fantast. Mrs. Fan. Oh, Madam, here is the rarest News! Have you
heard of the French Count?


L. Fan. Ay, my Dear; and therefore am come to bless my Eyes. His Fame is
diffused throughout the Town: they say, he is the finest Gentleman that ever
came to Bury!


Wild. Good! It takes as I could wish.


Wildish plucks Gertrude by the Sleeve. Gert. How now, Sir, who are you?


Wild. One who has lost a Heart, and apprehends you for it.


Gert. You are somewhat free of Carriage.


Wild. Think not, my pretty Mad-cap, that a piece of Velvet can conceal you:
Your Eyes strike at every one you level at, like Lightning through a Cloud.


Gert. Very pretty! Shall I oblige Mr. Trim with this fine expression? he will
give you any Money for it.


Trim. Sir, --


Wild. Now is this Fop setting out his Bum for a smart bout at Complement.


Trim. It is so great an Honor to our Town --


Wild. Sir, your most humble Servant.


Wildish turns quick upon his Toe, and leaves Trim bowing. Trim. Is this his
Breeding? Indeed, when I left him, he led me not to the door of his Lodging.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, mon Dieu! here is that London Wit, that is a Laugher, and
Scoffer! I hear he has made a Lampoon upon Bury. I hate the Fellow.


L. Fan. He a Wit! Mr. Trim or Sir Humphrey, would make nothing of him.


Wild. Look you, my dear Mad-cap, I must love you, and will love you; say what
you can, do what you can, I will always haunt you while I am alive, and never
leave you when I am dead.


Gert. Nay hold, good Mr. Hothead, I doubt not but our Lives will differ so,
that we shall part when we are dead, Sir, whatever we do living: And a sure way
to part while we are alive, would be to Marry, which Heaven forbid; then it
would certainly follow to some purpose.


Wild. The Steel shall sooner willingly desert the Loadstone, than I my pretty
Miss.


Gert. You are not sure in Earnest


Wild. By Heaven, and all the Powers --


Gert. I mind Vows in Love, no more than Oaths in Anger. That I were sure once
that you were in love with me.


Wild. There is nothing to prove it to you, which I will not undertake.


Gert. Your Hand upon it.


Wild. My Heart upon it; which here I present you.


Gert. Now have I one to Domineer over. Tremble; for I will make thee such an
Example, as shall be a Terror to thy Sex, and revenge all the Insolences
committed upon mine.


Wild. I am prepared for all thy Tyranny, good Semiramis.


Gert. I will make thee fetch and carry, and come at my foot, like a Spaniel.


Wild. And I will persevere so, I Will make thee relent, tho thou were a Devil.


Sir Hum. Come, Gentlemen and Ladies, come down Guinea's apiece, and Raffle for
a Tea-pot: Come, Jack Trim, Jack; Mr. Wildish, Ladies.


Trim. Jack! Jack! ill Bred. For Complaisance and Breeding sake, I Will do it.
Enter Lord Bellamy. The Lord Bellamy! My Lord, I can assure your Lordship,
there is not a Person among the race of Mankind --


Bell. Sir, I am your humble Servant. My dear Ned! I see, here is all the good
Company.


Wild. My dear Lord, I am glad you are come: here is the best Company in Bury.


Bell. It Is a delicate Morning: I have been sucking in the sweetest Air in
England.


Sir Hum. My noble Lord, your most humble Servant. It Is indeed very fine
Weather; it used to be Bury-foul, instead of Bury-fair. Is not that a pretty
Clinch, Jack?


He gives him a rap on the Back. Trim. Sir, let me tell you, there is a Spanish
Proverb, which says, Whego de manos, whego de Villanos.


Sir Hum. Do you call me Villain in Spanish? I shall reckon with you for that.


Bell. I Will put in for a Rafflle with these Ladies. Come, Madam, will you
Raffle for a Heart?


Gert. No, my Lord: that is usually a light, hollow thing, and not Sterling
neither; I am for massy Plate, that will endure the touch.


Bell. Mine will endure the strictest touch. If your Beauty be equal to your
Shape and Wit, you Conquer all you look on.


Enter Charles. Cha. What do I see! that is my Sister! He is already fixed upon
my Ruin, my Death. Sister, I never till now could wish thy Beauty less. If not
discovered, I am at least undone.


Bell. Come, Charles, thou shall Raffle too: Here Is a Guinea for him.


Enter Oldwit. Old. My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant.


Bell. Sir, I kiss your Hands.


Old. What a Pox, is this Puss my Wife here? I Will lay my Life she hears of the
French Count: I was in hopes she would have been sullen, and we might have had
the House to our selves. Come, come, off with your foolish Masks: My Lord, this
is my Wife.


L. Fan. And this is my Daughter.


Bell. salutes her. Bell. I dare swear she is. Aside.


Old. Mr. Wildish! VVild. salutes L. Fan. and Mrs. Fan.
This, my Lord, is my Daughter.

Bell. Madam, your Father has commanded me to do my self the honor of the
World I am most ambitious of.


Gert. You are resolved, my Lord, your Ambition shall be no danger to the
Government.


Bell. I own no Government, but yours: Others, but rule the Body; you, the Mind.


Cha. How can I hear my own sad Funeral Peal?


Old. Mr. Wildish, my Daughter.


Wild. So, Madam, you have my Heart; it is flown, I could not hold it: look to
it, and make much on it, and see that it comes to no Damage; I shall require it
whole, and safe.


Gert. It Is a light one, and always ready to whistle off at any Game; and as
ready to be lured back again: but, if I have it, I Will use it so, it shall be
glad to be gone.


Wild. That Beauty cannot harbor so much Cruelty. Oh, that this Kiss would
last to Eternity!


Gert. Raptures are no more signs of Love, than Huffing is of Courage.


Old. Oh, you Arch Wag you! are you there? Sir Hum. steals to Old. as he leans
upon his Cane, strikes it away, and flings him almost upon his Nose. ha, ha, ha.


Sir Hum. Yes, that I am. Ha, ha, ha. Come, down with your Guinea. Now we have
enough for a Tea-Pot, and a pair of Sconces.


Bell. She Is delicately handsome as an Angel! what think thou, my Boy?


Cha. With Submission, my good Lord, I think she is mortal; I am not surpised
with her Beauty. Look narrowly; does she not look like a Shrew?


Bell. No; she is all sweetness in perfection!


Cha. I wish you find her not so: Fame whispers They throw the Dice in Order.
somewhat of that kind.


Enter the French Count, with his Equipage: The Shopkeepers all cry their
Things. The Count stares about him, munching of Pears. L. Fan. Daughter,
Daughter; yonder comes the French Count! It must be he.


Mrs. Fan. Mon Dieu, it is he! Nay, if Quality or Breeding scapes my Eye, I
have lost my Cunning. What an Air? what a Mien is there?


Count. Nicholas.


Nic. Monsieur?


Count. Take de notice of dose two Garle, vatch them, dey have de very fine Air.


Mrs. Fan. His Person is Charmant, Tuant his Air, victorious his Mien: Mon
pauvre Coeur!


Wild. I could not wish better success.


Gert. A most Charmant, Tuant Mien, in eating Burgamies: he out-craunches a
Schoolboy on a Holy Day. I Will lay my life, he is an errant Coxcomb.


Count. Page, set my Cravat-string. Ver well, ver well.


L. Fan. He is an incomparable Person!


Bell. Thy Farce is like to take admirably: the Rogue looks very stately, and
Fantastical!


Wild. No Gudgeons ever took their Baits more greedily.


Count. Monsieur, Serviter tres humble. Have you forgotte me?


Wild. Monsieur le Count de Cheveux!


Count. De same* I had de Honeur to wait upon you vid my Regiment of Gen d'
Arms, on de right Attaque at Luxemburgh. Oh, my Lor Bellamy, I am surprise ver
much! you did Charge my Regiment at de Battle of Monts. I will say no more of
dat; but, Begar, you did make us turn de Back; vich de Regiment never did
before, nor since; But is all one for dat, Serviteur tres humble.


Bell. The Rogue Acts it admirably!


Wild. You are welcome into England.


Count. I come to see de fine Lady, de grand Beautee English; which, Begar, is
beyond all de Varle: yes indeed.


Bell. You have learnt the Language?


Count. I speak a littel. I did keep de Company vid de English Officeers; de
ver brave Gentleman indeed, to learn de Langage; for I did resolve to come di^
plas, for see de Beautee and de Wit of England.


Trim. Perhaps, your most auspicious Stars could not have guided your wandering
course to a more proper Region of the Earth, than this little City of Bury, for
the full Satisfaction of both these Curiosities you are pleased to mention: nor
is in all the Regions of Earth you have Surveyed, a Person more devoted to your
Service, than your most humble Servant John Trim.


Count. Monsieur Iean Trim, you do me de grand Honeur; Begar, me am your humble
Serviteur. Jerny bleau, dis fellow be one great Fool indeed. aside.


Wild. That is the Lady and Daughter I told you of: this is the Lady's Husband.


Count. Is ver well: let me alone for dat.


Mrs. Fan. A most admirable Person of a Man! his Eyes brillant, and fierre! my
Heart is gone: he may say, as Caesar did, Veni, vidi, vici.


L. Fan. My Eyes never beheld a Parallel.


Mrs. Fan. Eh Good! how the French Nobless outshines our's! methinks, they look
like Tailors to 'em.


Sir Hum. Monsieur, your most humble Servant: welcome to Bury as I may say.


Old. My Lord Count, you are heartily welcome to Bury: and I beg the honor of
your Company at Dinner, at my House.


Count. Monsieurs, me kis^e your hands: me did tinke to invite de Shief
Majistrat, I don know vat you call him, Oh, is Alderman, to take de Collation
vid me; butte me can no refuse de faveur.


Mrs. Fan. I am transported with Joy!


L. Fan. Daughter, speak to him in French; he seems already Captivated with
your Looks.


Count. You are appy in de Conversation of de very fine Ladee; butte to let
you know my Skill, my Cunning, me vil gage a hundred Pistol, dat dat fine
Ladee, and her ver pretty Sister, are de French Ladee.


Old. Ounds, this Count will make my damned affected Toad so proud, the Devil
would not live with her. French, and Sister, with a Pox!


L. Fan. We have often bewailed the not having had the honor to be born French.


Count. Pardon me; is impossible.


Mrs. Fan. Monfoy, je parle vray: we are mere English assurement.


Count. Mon foy, je parle vray! vat is dat Gibberish? Oh, let me see; de
Fader is de Lawyere, an she learn of him at de Temple: is de Law French. I am
amaze! French Look, French Air, French mien, French movement of de Bodee!
Morbleau. Monsieur, I will gage 4, 500 Pistol, dat dese two Sister vere bred in
France, yes. Test bleau, I can no be deceive.


Mrs. Fan. Iee vous en pry, do not; we never had the blessing to be in France;
you do us too much honor. Alas, we are forced to be content with plain English
Breeding: you will bring all my blood into a blush. I had indeed a penchen
always to French.


Cou. Penchen! vat is dat? Oh, is Law French. You put de very great Confusion
upon me: I tought it was impossible to find dat Mien, Air, Wit, an Breeding,
out of France.


Old. French! why, my Lord Count, this is my Wife, this is her Daughter.


Cou. Daughtere! dis young Ladee have de Daughtere! Begar, you make my Head
turn round, an mine Hair stand up: is impossible. Pardon me.


L. Fan. My dear sweet Lord Count, you pose me now with your grand Civilities:
She is my Daughter; I was Married indeed exceeding young.


Cou. Pegar, Madam, den you be de pretty Modere, she de pretty Daughtere, in de
whole Varle. Oh mine Art, mine Art! dose Eyes, dat Air, ave kille me! I
brought de Art out of France, and I ave lost it in dis plas: is gone, Madam;
an Morbleau, you see now de French Count vidout a Heart.


Trim. With what frigidity she looks on me! and with what warm Transport she
seems to pierce the Frenchman through! Varium and mutabile semper foemina.


Re-enter Bellamy, Wildish, and Gertrude. Wild. What would you give for such a
Servant?


Gert. Just as much as I would for you: I had not so much as pitched upon a
Country yet for my choice; but methinks France should be the last. I like not
these Apish Counts; they are mere Kickshaws.


Bell. You judge right, Madam, of this Count at least.


Gert. Indeed, he seems to me a very choice Coxcomb.


Cou. Oh, Madam, you have de fine Hair, de very fine Hair! dose tresses
Conquer de Lovere; Cupid make his Net of dat Hair, to catch de Art: de coleur
delicat, better den my Peruke is great deal: Begar, if I had dat Hair, I would
make two tree Peruke of dat.


Wild. Pox on you, you Rascal. You are no Barber, Sir; yoe are a Count.


Cou. Have de Patiance: dat is, me could make de Peruke two tree; butte I voud
make de Locket, de Bracelet, an de pretty Love knack.


They all cry their Wares. Enter several Jack Puddings, and give Papers. 1 Pud.
A very good Monster! a very pretty delicate Monster: the like never seen in
England! The Monster is just now beginning.


2 Pud. Pimper le Pimp, the High German Juggler! pray walk in, and take your
places; it is the last time of Showing this morning.


Cou. Vat is Pimp? Vat, does he let a de Whore at de Fair?


1 Pud. A most delicious dainty monster, the most delightful monster, the
prettiest monster ever was seen! The most admirable! The most incomparable
monster!


Cou. Ha, ha, ha. Begar, I like dis Iean Pudding very well; I will talk vid
him, Begar: he make me Laugh dis morning, he almost kille me.


Wild. You Rogue, remember you are a Count, and no Barber, Puppy.


Mrs. Fan. You see his Wit and Judgment! he finds out good Breeding immediately!


Gert. Yes, he has found Wit in a Jack Pudding.


Cou. Morbleau, Madam, I have see de Marionette de Iean Pudding in France* dat
have de great deal of Esprits, and of de Wit: de very pretty man, and de very
good Company; yes indeed.


Mrs. Fan. No doubt, Sir, Assurement ouy. Look you, Mrs. Gatty.


Cou. Begar, dat be very merry Gentilman; Sir Humphrey finds a Country Peasant
leaning upon his Staff; he strikes it away, and he falls backward. Another
Peasant knocks Sir Hum. down: he rises, and Draws. Several of the Mobile join
with the Peasant: the Gentlemen Draw, and Rescue him. The Ladies shriek, and
run away. he have de great deal of Wit, assurement ouy. Test bleau, de
Insolence of Peasant English!


Wild. Death, let us in, and Rescue him.


Bell. Sir Humphrey, you have suffered for your Wit I see.


Old. Only a Head broken, that is all: the inside of your Head will often
endanger the outside, Sir Humphrey.


Sir Hum. Pish, this is nothing. Pox on it, an accident; a mere Accident Gad
take me, I Will have my Jest, let what will come on it.


Cou. Insolent Peasan! Begar, me vill kille two tree tousand Peasant. Strike de
Gentilman! Sire morbleau, me vill help you to kille de damn Peasant.


Old. Come, come to my House: my Daughters Woman shall lay you on a Plaster.


Cou. I voud be glad to put my Cutto into de Body of de Peasant, dey have
fright de Lady.


Bell. But, Monsieur le Count, our Peasants have Quarter-staves; and if
Gentlemen go to run 'em through, they will knock 'em down: and we commend 'em
for it.


Cou. De Peasant! begar, de Peasant be de Slave, de Dog, morbleu.


Bell. Our Peasants wear Shoes and Stockins, and lie warm; and have good Meat
and Drink in their Houses.


Wild. Your King is a King of Dogs then: but how much greater is ours, who is a
King of Men, and Free Men! Ours Governs the willing, he the unwilling.


Cou. Your King great as our King! Jerny, your King can do noting, dear is de
Law, de Parliament, I don know vat begar: my King can send for my Head wen he
pleas; yes indeed, hum.


Old. My Lord Count, it is almost Dinner time.


Wild. The Rogue talks, as if he were of the Blood Royal.


Bell. Yes, like the next Successor.


Cou. Yes, Begar, he can send for my Head: and dat be very good for him.


Wild. But my King cannot send for my Head when he please.


Cou. Morbleu, dat be very good for you: yes indeed. Exeunt.


ACT. III.
SCENE I.
Oldwit, Lord Bellamy, VVildish, Sir Humphrey, Count, Trim. Old. COme my Lord
Count, my Lord Bellamy, and Gentlemen, may good Digestion wait on Appetite, and
Health on both; as Mackbeth says: Ah, I love those old Wits.


Wild. You are a Wit in your Heart.


Old. Ay, faith, so I am; and I love to be merry at Meals. Ah, Wit is as
necessary as good Wine at Table.


Sir Hum. Ay, faith, so it is: I summon up all my Wit at Dinner.


Old. My Lords, and Gentlemen, we'll into my Smoaking-room, and sport about a
Brimmer; and Wit shall fly about like Hail-shot. Oh, the Wit that I have heard
in that Room!


Bell. We will wait on you soon; but I have promised the Ladies an
Entertainment, with a little Concert of Music by my own Servants, who are
ready now: and I desire you will call the Ladies, Sir.


Old. If your Lordship please: but, faith, we had better be a Toping.


Sir Hum. Did you ever hear the Thetford Music?


Bell. Not I, Sir.


Sir Hum. 'Sbud, they are the best Music in England: there is the best Shawm
and Bandore, and a Fellow that Acts Tom of Bet'lem to a Miracle! and they ^ing
Charon, Oh gentle Charon, and Come my Daphne, better than Singleton and Clayton
did.


Wild. Her^'s the pleasure of Country Conversation, Bellamy: Had not a man
better be condemned to the Galleys, than endure it?


Bell. I am of your Opinion, Ned; and for that Reason, never have such Company
at my House: If I have, it is but for once; for Country Gentlemen, unless you
repay their Visit, are too proud to see you twice: and I never Visit any, but
such as I like very well.


Sir Hum. Dumfounds the Count with a smart rap on the Shoulders. Cou. Morbleu,
vat is dat? Monsieur Wildish, did you hi^e me?


Wild. Not I, Monsieur.


Sir Hum. raps him again. Cou. Nor you, my Lore?


Bell. Not I, Monsieur le Count.


Coun. Ventre bleu, is dear again! Sire, vat you mean by dat, to strike me
between de Head and de Shouldere?


Trim. My Lord, if your Honor had given your self the leisure circumspectly to
have made Inquisition into any part of the History of my Life and Breeding, or
into the sedate Composure and Serenity of Mind, you might easily have Collected
that I am a Person that either never exercised my self in such Juvenile and
Jocular Diversions; or, at least, have totally abandoned them.


Cou. Begar, dis be de very great Fop, Test bleu, I no understanda him. Again?
is de Diable. Ah, may foy, is dat merry Gentilman. Sir Hum. raps him again. Ha,
ha, is very good Jest indeed; but, Begar, you hitte me too hard indeed.


Sir Hum. Nothing, nothing at all, my Lord Count, among Friends: I cannot
forbear my Jest, in faith; let us Kiss, and be better acquainted.


Cou. Vid all mine Art. (Kiss.) Ha! who Shave your Face? let me see: he leave
two, tree, four great Stumpe, dat prick my Countenance. Oh sie! dese Barbiers
English can do no ting: If I would take de (Snaps his fingers) Trade, Begar, I
voud starve them all. Snaps his fingers again.


Wild. Sirrah, Rogue, remember you are a Count still.


Cou. Is all one: I sometime take delight to Shave de Nobless of France, for my
plaisir.


Enter Charles with the Music. Enter Oldwit, and Lady, Mrs. Fantast, and
Gertrude, Women and Chamber-maids. Old. Now, my Lord, let the Music strike up;
here are the Women: I long to be at Brimmers.


Sir Hum. Now for ^ fit of Mirth.


Bell. Come Charles, begin. They Sing an Italian Song of two parts. You must
excuse it; it is Country Music, Madam.


Gert. It Is admirable! the Court has no better.


L. Fan. You must be putting in, with your ill Breeding! If any Traveller*
should affirm that Italy afforded better, I should humbly demand his Pardon.


Mrs. Fan. I am swallowed up in Admiration! je suis astonne! I am only in
doubt, whether the Harmonious Composition, or the elegant Performance, be most
Charmant.


Cou. Dat is admirable bien dict, Madam!


Old. I had a Daughter that sung -- But, no more of her.


Char. What do I hear? I Will haste away: Farewell.


Exit Charles. Gert. I never heard a Voice and Manner so like my poor Sister's.
I thought he had some resemblance of her, but that he is of another Complexion:
But he was so Bashful, he would not show his Face.


Sir Hum. My Lord, can they sing Lilly Burlero? or have they e're a merry Song?


Bell. My Servants are no Fiddlers.


Old. Come, come, my Lords and Gentlemen, into my Smoking Room: Women, go pack
into the Drawing Room, and play at Toe Gleek, or Ombre; go.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Madam, get the French Count with us, or I am Ruined. Oh, he is
the finest Personage, and most agreeable!


L. Fan. Good Mr. Oldwit, you will betray your ill Breeding: Entertain one of
the French Nobless with Smoking and Sotting! he shall with us. You show your
Wit, and not a word of French among you!


Old. 'Sdeath, my Wit! dare you profane my Wit? Thou old, ill-bred, silly
Creature, I Will teach thee better Breeding, and make thee submit to thy Lord and
Master.


Cou Sir* I beg your pardon; I am for de Ladee: I no Drink, I no Smoke. Come,
Madam, vee vill play at de petites jeux, or some ting or oder. Begar, de smoke
spoil my orangery and Pulvilio.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, I love de Petites jeux extremement.


Trim. I am also for the Ladies; to whom I have ever Sacrificed all my devoir:
Madam, I kiss your hands.


Mrs Fan. Pish! But as I was saying, Monsieur --


Trim Ha! must I be Sacrificed to that Kickshaw of a Frenchman? It shall not be
long e're he receive a Chartel from me.


Sir Hum Mr. Oldwit is so importunate, that I cannot leave him yet, in faith;
But I Will steal away, and pay my Duty to you.


Mrs. Fan. No, no, Sir Humphrey, no matter: the Count is an Accomplished
Gentleman. Monsieur, you were speaking --


Sir Hum. Say you so, Ud'sbud? the Count my Rival! I will take an occasion to
kick that damned Count most exceedingly.


Old. Daughter, meet me half an hour hence, without fail, in the great Dining
Room above.


Gert. I will, Sir.


Wild. Pray let it be within a quarter of an hour, for most important Reasons I
will give you there.


Old. I have contrived an opportunity for your Lordship to be private with your
Mistress, my Lord.


Bell. You infinitely oblige me, Sir.


Old. Come, now let us all into my Smoaking-room. Go, Womankind, pack away to
your Cards, and your Tea.


Ex. Count and Ladies. Trim. Mr. Oldwit, I humbly take my leave, to withdraw
with the Ladies.


Old No, faith, shall you not. Sir Humphrey, take him you by one Arm, and I Will
take him by the other.


Trim. Gentlemen, Gentlemen, commit not a Rape upon me, I beseech you: I drink
not between Meals. Did you know how averse I am -- Sir, Sir, I would not be
Intoxicated for the Universe: Sir, Sir.


Old. Come, my Lord, and Mr. Wildish.


Trim talks all the while they bale him. Bell. and Wild. We wait on you.


Bell. What are we Condemned to?


Exeunt. Re-enter Lord Bellamy, Wildish, Sir Humphrey, and Trim. Old. Here,
where is this damned Butler? bring the Monteith, and Bottles. Well, Mr.
VVildish, you are one of the top London Wits.


VVild. Not guilty, upon my Honor.


Old. No matter for that. But did you ever hear more Wit fly about a Dinner at
London? Such Broadsides and such Merriment, my Lord?


Wild. Yes, indeed, a great deal of Wit did fly about the Room.


Sir Hum. Sir, your humble Servant. When my Lady asked me for a piece of
Rabbet, you remember I told her it was a Rawbit, for 'twas not roasted; ha, ha,
ha.


Trim. That was a good jest indeed.


Sir Humphrey. She asked me, if I would have any Custard? I told her, I was not
such a Fool to refuse it.


Old. And, when she asked me, Will you have any Woodcock, Husband, I answered
No: I will have some Goose, Wife. She thought to have put the Woodcock upon me;
and I put the Goose upon her, in faith.


Sir Hum. Ha, ha: Very good! excellent!


The Count and he Laugh. Trim. These Gentlemen, Mr Wildish, are Witty, I must
confess they want not Salt, and are indeed very Jocose; but I would gladly hear
something from your self, and my Lords Honor, that savours more of Solidity,
than what they hitherto have produced.


Wild. Are you always thus Witty, Sir Humphrey?


Sir. Hum. Oh, ay. The Judges, when they come the Circuit, certainly send for
me: they love my Company.


Bell. Do Judges love this way of Wit?


Sir Hum. Ever while you live; and your Sergeants, and Doctors of Divinity: the
last time I Dined in such company, I told a Story of a Doctor of Divinity,
whose Wife used to entertain him with three Dishes every day; Bitter, Pout, and
Tart. There was such a Laughing, they Roared out again: The Ladies Tyhee'd
under their Napkins; I am the Son of a Whore, if the Tyhee did not take a
reverend old Gentlewoman as she was a Drinking, and she squirted out the Beer
out of her Nose, as an Indian does Tobacco. Ha, ha, ha.


Old. Pr'ythee, dear Sir Humphrey, forbear; I am not able to bear it: I have
laughed my self sore. Mr. Trim, what ails you? you are melancholy.


Trim. I must confess, Sir Humphrey is a man of neat concise parts, and
exceeding Jocular; but my way is to affect, being more grave and solid.


Old. Grave and solid! Come, come, you want a Bottle. Why, Sirrah, Butler,
come quickly. You shall have a whisking Bumper.


Trim. Sir, I protest against Bumpers: I would not drink a Bumper for the
Universe.


Enter Butler, placing Glasses and Bottles. Old. Rascal, make haste, you lazy
Elephant* and, do you hear, bring me my Horn I use to Drench the Restive Drinkers
with. I Will make you take your Dose.


Trim. That men should cloud the Faculties of their noble Souls, and put their
minds, as 'twere, into a Mist!


VVild. VVy, you can make a Joque, Sir Humphrey upon any thing.


Sir Hum. I seldom fail, thank God.


VVild. Let Us hear now, upon the VVainscot.


Sir Hum. Pshaw waw! it is weak Wainscot.


Bell. How so? it is good Danish Oak.


Sir Hum. Ha, ha, ha; you know, the weakest goes to the Wall: the VVainscot
goes to the Wall; Ergo, weak VVainscot. Ha, ha.


Old. Ha, ha, ha: passing good!


Sir Hum. I am ready again: Reprieving VVainscot.


VVild. How so? the Devil cannot find that out.


Sir Hum. Ha, ha, ha: why, Wainscot saves many a Hanging:


Old. Ha, ha: admirable! for, if I had not. VVainscoted my Rooms, I must have
had Hangings. He Will kill me some time or other.


Bell. Upon the Window.


Sir Hum. Why it is a damned mutinous Window; for it is full of Quarrels: You
shall never take me at a Why not.


VVild. Upon the Looking-glass.


Sir Hum. Why, it is an Ill-natured Looking-glass.


VVild. How so?


Sir Hum. Because it makes Reflections; ha, ha.


VVild. Upon the day.


Sir Hum. Upon the day. Hah, hum; why, it is a scabby day.


VVild. A scabby day?


Sir Hum. Ay, because the Sun's broken out.


Old. For the love of Heaven, dear Friend, not so fast: I cannot suffer it.
Come, Sirrah, a Bumper.


Enter Footman. Foot. Sir, there are four Gentlemen come to wait on you.


Old. Who? Butler, remove the things into my Parlour: this Room's Whisper. too
little. Come, Gentlemen; I beseech you secure the Prisoner.


They lay hold on him. Trim. Sir, you have Company enough, I beseech you, Sir:
Sir, I disclaim Drink between Meals.


Exeunt. Enter Gertrude. Gert. VVildish is not here yet; I am come somewhat
before my time, to fly from the horrible Impertinence in the Drawing Room. I Will
lay my life, this French Count is some idle Scoundrel, and an Impostor.


Enter Wildish. VVild. Madam, your most humble Servant: you have not stayed
long, I hope.


Gert. Not at all for you, I assure you, Sir: my Father appointed me --


VVild. Not this quarters hour yet, by my Watch.


Gert. It wants nothing by mine: but you Sparks have such vanity, that you are
ready to turn every thing to your own advantage. Can you believe I come to meet
you here?


VVild. Is it not fitter for your Youth and Beauty, to meet an honest young
Fellow, who is in Love with you to Madness, than an Old Fellow with musty
Sayings, old Proverbs, and wise Counsel?


Gert. Don't abuse my Father behind his back. He wise! No wiser than your self:
He is a Bury Wit, as you are a London one.


Wild. I a Wit, Madam? You are resolved to use your Sovereign Power over me;
and I Will show you my Passive Obedience. Do you Swagger like a Tyrant? you shall
find I can bear like a Slave.


Gert. Yes, you can act a Slave for a time, in hopes of making me one ever
after.


Wild. Ah, Madam, those eyes were made to Conquer, and preserve their
Conquests: where e're they come, they will Govern always.


Gert. For all that, if I were Married to you, which Heaven avert, you would,
within three months, be apt to think my Maids eyes, though a Doudy, more
Victorious.


Wild. It is impossible: I could as soon prefer a farthing Candle to the Sun.


Gert. Nay, I shall never try.


Wild. I am resolved I Will never leave you: I will wait upon your Person, or
watch about your House continually.


Gert. But I Will command you from me; I Will try my Dominion.


Wild. In what ever I can, I will obey you: but you may as well command your
Shadow from you, in the Sunshine.


Gert. I Will call in aid, to remove you farther.


Wild. Not Bombs, or Cannons, can do that. While you are awake, I Will never be
from you; and when you sleep, I Will watch, and sigh, and sing my Plaints about
your House.


Gert. Sure you dare not be thus bold!


Wild. By Heaven, I cannot help it: and look to it; for this in Bury (as all
little Towns are full of Tatling and Censure) will bring Scandal to you, at
least, if it does not produce Love in you.


Gert. For Love, I am sure it shall not: and for Scandal, I Will remove.


Wild. Where ever you go, you have fast hold on my Heart Strings, and will tug
me along with you.


Gert. If I have, I Will tug you, I Will warrant you, till I crack them. These are
Flams: I Will to London; there I shall be lost to you, like a Hare in a Hare
Warren, and you shall yelp no more after me.


Wild. You are so fair, so bright, above all others, that I shall follow you by
your Track of Light, and never miss you.


Gert Are there any Lovers thus Impudent, to think to procure Love by troubling
one.


Wild. Is it Impudence, to own your Power, and my Weakness? In short, Madam, I
am resolved to haunt you worse than any Beau, and pelt you with Billets doux
some Fifteen times a day.


Gert. What, like one of those odious Creatures, will you Dress at me? and tie
Cravats at me? and strut like a Turky-cock, and prune your self?


VVild. Even so; and stare, and goggle at you; and never have my Eyes off you,
while I Side-box you in the Playhouse.


Gert. What, where the Beaux draw up three Ranks deep every day?


VVild. Yes.


Gert. Well, and I Will never cast my Eyes upon you for a whole Play together.


VVild. That will be over acted; and cunning Intriguers will Censure you from
that.


Gert. Very fine! But I assure you, if you join with the Beaux, you shall never
be looked upon by me: for there is not upon Earth a more odious sight, than
those Boxes full of ugly Beaux. I observe, the Beaux now are the ugliest
Hatchet-fac'd Fellows about Town.


VVild. Fellows of five and fifty, with grizly Beards, set up for Beaux: and
among these will I herd, when you are at a Play, that I may Ogle you, Fair.


Gert. Then will I leave the Play.


VVild. So will I.


Gert. And to the Park.


Wild. So will I: where I will Side-glass you, turn when you turn, --


Gert. Then will I leave the Park.


Wild. So will I, and follow you to the Mall.


Gert. You will not dare sure?


Wild. Yes I will: and strut up to you, with a Slur and a Coupee; sing a silly
new Song or two softly in your Ear, and put on an Air of Gayety, as if I had
succceeded.


Gert. I Will soon shake you off, and go to the Drawing Room.


Wild. No sooner there, but I am with you: and it is as good a Scene of Ogling,
as any.


Gert. Sure, I shall cast you off when I go to Church.


Wild. The Beaux are the most constant Churchmen: you shall see Troops of 'em
pork'd up in Galleries, setting their Cravats. There you shall be sure to find
me: and I will stare you out of your Prayers. In short, my dear, sweet, pretty
Madcap, I am resolved never to give thee over, while I have breath.


Gert. This is most amazing! Art not thou a very Impudent Fellow, to talk thus?
Do you call this making Love? why, this is making War; worse than Blockades and
Sieges, which they write of in Gazettes.


Wild. It is a gentle Siege; but I will never raise it. I may fall dead before
your Fort.


Gert. And that you shall, before you take it.
What a dissembling Jade am I now Aside.

Wild. Then will I haunt you at noon, at dead of night --

Gert. You will come a faithful Humble Be, and Hum, and Buz; as the Rehearsal
says. A noise of one coming up stairs. Here comes some body! I Will not have the
scandal upon me, of being taken alone with you.


Exit. Enter Lord Bellamy. Wild. Oh, my Lord, I have had the Advantage of you,
in stealing from you confounded Company before you.


Bell. You have so; but there is great enquiry made after you.


Wild. We were bad enough with our Punning Fools; but that new Detachment of
Drunkards and Visitants, made 'em completely the most confounded Company I ever
was condemned to. Here are the fruits of the Country! Prithee, my Dear Peer,
fling off this melancholy thought of Retirement, and let us enjoy thee again in
London: let me not lose my dearest Friend, for a Fit of the Spleen, or two.


Bell. Dear Ned, if any thing could tempt me to that noisie Town, thou, and
some choice Friends, whose Conversation I extremely value, might do it: but I
am weary of it, and dote upon my quiet Retirement.


Wild. Man is not self-sufficient: he was made a Sociable Animal, and must have
Conversation.


Bell. And that, by a Man of a good Estate, as you and I have, may be had in
the Country.


Wild. Merry Meetings may be had; but not so frequently, as your Sessions: and
when you think you have a choice Company, in rushes some loud obstreperous
Hunter, Hawker, or Jocky, good for nothing else, and Roars about Dogs, Kites,
and Horses,; and spoils that Meeting. To keep open House, and entertain the
neighboring Coxcombs is worse than being Host of an Inn: and to meet Company
elsewhere, is to be poisoned with damned Wine.


Bell. I take care to meet none but good Company; and wherever we meet, we
take a course to have as good Wine from London, as any there: and at my own
House, I will entertain none but good Company.


Wild. Then the Country Gentlemen, who are most of 'em ill Company, will hate
you, and you will have no Interest.


Bell. He that esteems himself by another man's opinion, is an Ass. My Tenants I
make much of.


Wild. But what can be the diversion of a Country Life? A man must bewak'd at
three in a Morning, by the cracked Voices of Huntsmen, with damned Bugle Horns,
and the confounded yelps of Curs: and for want of Friendship with Men, divert
themselves with their Enmity to Beasts; and hunt as if the Devil were in 'em,
till at dark night they are scarce able to dismount their Horses.


Bell. They are Fops, Ned, that make a business of Sport. I hunt with my
Harriers half a dozen heats in a Morning, for Health and an Appetite: and, at
Dinner time, let 'em be in never such full cry, I knock off.


Wild. There is some Reason in that; but your true Country Squire lives in
Boots all the Winter, never talks or thinks of any thing but Sports, as he
calls 'em: and if an ill Day comes, saunters about his House, lolls upon
Couches; sighs and groans, as if he were a Prisoner in the Fleet; and the best
thing he can find to do, is to Smoke, and Drink, and play at Back-gammon, with
the Parson.


Bell. These are of the strictest Order of Hunters, such as keep Journals of
every Days hunting, and write long Letters of Foxchases from one end of England
to the other. Tho these are Fops, Ned, a Reasonable man may enjoy himself very
well in the Country.


Wild. How so?


Bell. I have a noble House, an Air pure, and uncorrupted.


VVild. Which are to be had in St. James's- Square and Hide-park.


Bell. I view my stately Fields and Meads, laden with Corn and Grass; my Herds
of Kine, and Flocks of Sheep; my Breed of Horses; my Delicate Gardens full of
all sorts of Fruits and Herbs; my River full of Fish, with Ponds, and a Decoy
for Water Fowl, and plenty of Game of all kinds in my Fields and Woods; my
Parks for Venison; my Cellar well furnished with all variety of excellent
Drinks: and all my own, Ned.


VVild. All these things have we at London. The product of the best Cornfields
at Queen-Hithe; Hay, Straw, and Cattle, at Smithfield; with Horses too. Where
is such a Garden in Europe, as the Stocks-Market? Where such a River as the
Thames? Such Ponds and Decoys, as in Leaden-Hall-Market, for your Fish and
Fowl? Such Game as at the Poulterers? And instead of Parks, every Cook's Shop
for Venison, without Hunting, and venturing Neck or Arms for it. And for
Cellars, from Temple Bar to Aldgate; and all that I have use of, my own too,
since I have Money.


Bell. But I have pleasure in reading the Georgies, and contemplating the Works
of Nature.


VVild. I contemplate the chief Works of Nature: fine Women; and the Juice of
the Grape, well concocted by the Sun.


Bell. Your fine Women, are a Company of proud, vain, Fops and Jilts,
abominably Daubed and Painted; and I had rather kiss a Blackamoor, with a
Natural Complexion, than any such: And, besides, many of them are so unsound,
that making Love is become as dangerous as making War; and the Wounds and Scars
are dishonorable to boot. Then, for your Wine, it is attended with such
Surfeits, Qualms, Head-akes, late Hours, Quarrels and Uproars, that every Scene
of Drunkenness is a very Bedlam.


Wild. Poor Bellamy! thou were never happy, since thou left'st off those Noble
Maxims, Beati non numerant horas, measure not your time by Hour-glasses, but by
Wine-glasses. Oh, the sweet of a Brimmer at Midnight! The Night was made for
Beasts to sleep in, and for Man to Watch in.


Bell. And if I have no other misfortune but the Head-ake, and Puking in the
morning, to hear of this Friend breaking a Collar Bone with a fall, that having
his Scull cracked by the Watch, another run through the Lungs by drunken
Bullies; and all this to Treasure up Diseases, if you shall arrive to a
miserable Age.


Wild. Who would not be sick ten Days for one good Night, with Men of Wit and
Sense?


Bell. There Is no true Pleasure but in Health.


VVild. What should a Man do with Health in damned Country Company, which a
man ought either to be a very good Philosopher, or none at all, to endure?


Bell. What good does Wit and Sense do you? do what you can, the Fops will be
at the top of Pleasures; and the Knaves will be at the head of all Business in
spite of you; and will bear down the World, that a man who has Wit can be good
for nothing.


VVild. That makes the business of the World so foolishly done.


Enter Gertrude, and Oldwit's Footman. Gert. My Father is not here.


Foot. He commanded me to bid you meet him in this Room.


She offers to retire. VVild. VVhither goes my pretty Tyrant? Though your Father
be not here, here is (I am sure) one humble Servant of yours.


Bell. That I am sure of, Madam, who is tesolv'd to lay himself at your Feet,
there humbly to receive his Doom.


VVild. What the Devil does he say? Is my best Friend my Rival? I hope, Madam,
you are not in doubt, who that Servant is I spoke of?


Bell. What Is this? Are we Rivals? This is the greatest misfortune that could
have happened! Hold! perhaps it may be only his usual Gallantry to all young
Women. Would you could see the Wounds you make in Hearts; then, Madam, mine
would expect your pity.


Gert. This is a very pretty Scene; runs smoothly off the Tongue, and is very
well Acted: Can you do it over again?


Enter Oldwit. Old. Oh, Mr. VVildish! I have been searching, and sending for
you, all over the House. What? turned Flincher! Faith, I must have you down
with me.


VVild. Here Is my Lord's a Flincher too.


Old. I wink at that: I can give you some Reason for that, as we go* Daughter,
you know what I have said to yeu-of this Noble man: I could not find out in all
the Nation, such a Match. Do you mind me?


Gert. Yes, Sir -- But, by your good favor, I Will find out for my self, for all
that. aside.


VVild. It Is evident! What damned misfortune could have fallen out like this?


Old. Come, faith, Mr. Wildish, you shall not escape so: Brimmers fly about
handsomely* and we are a rare Company.


Wild. I must not discover my Love to this Old Fellow yet; I will knock him
down, with two or three in a Hand.


Exit with Oldwit. Gert. How I hate this kind of Fooling! A Woman never makes
so silly a Figure, as when she is to look demurely, and stand to be made Love
to. aside.


Bell. Madam, the several Letters I have addressed to your Ladyship's hands,
and my good Orator your Father, though you never saw me, have let you know who I
am; and then you will guess what I have to say.


Gert. It Is true, my Lord, I do guess, and therefore your Lordship need not
trouble your self to say it; for all Discourse, about that affair, runs to the
same Tune.


Bell. I never loved before; nor can I believe that any Man loves like me.


Gert. It Is all alike. Madam, your Beauties! your excellent Accomplishments!
your extraordinary Merits! Divine, etc. The luster of your Eyes! and the rest.
The honor to kiss your fair hands! etc. All this we have in Romances, and Love
and Honor Plays. Trust me, my Lord, it is tedious.


Bell. Could I incline your gentle Heart to Love, then no Discourse of it would
seem so.


Gert. I cannot tell that; but as things stand now, indeed it makes me smile, to
think of a grave Mother, or, for want of her, a wise Father, putting a Daughter
into a Room, like a Hare out of a Basket, and letting him loose; that is, to
act the Part of a Lover before Marriage, and never think of it afterward. Then
is she either to frown, be peevish, or sullen, and make no answers, or very
scurvy ones; or else to blush, hold down her Head, tell the Sticks, and play
with her Fan, and say, I have no thoughts of Marriage, I am too young, it is
time enough.


Bell. But, Madam, a Lady of your Wit and Sense, knows it is the great end that
Woman is designed for; and it is in vain for you to speak against Love; for
every look, and every word of yours, inflames me more.


Gert. There Is a word now, Inflames, and Chains, and Fetters! I warrant you;
One would think a man were a Martyr, or a Slave at Algiers at least. What
conversation might Men and Women have, did not this foolish Love interpose!


Bell. It Is impossible for a Man to forbear thinking, or talking of Love, in
the presence of so Beautiful, so excellent a Lady.


Gert. I could expect no less* Beautiful! Excellent! etc. How sillily one
looks, who must stand to hear her self Complemented! My Lord, you are a Man of
Honor, and I will speak plainly to you: I am resolved against Love, therefore
pray deal frankly with me: Disappoint the Old Gentleman, and let us not have one
word of it betwixt us. My happiness or ruin depends upon your Breath. I am too
young and giddy, to fix upon so solemn a business; and the pleasure I find in
being free, cannot be bought at any rate.


Bell. Your Father, Madam, I hope may be a prevailing Advocate.


Gert. Hope is a very thin Diet, fit for Love in a Fever; but, to tell you
true, I am apt to believe there is no such thing as love: but, if there be, I
can assure you, you have gone the wrong way; for my Father is no Outwork of
mine: you may take him, but you are never the nearer me. I am a free Heiress of
England, where Arbitrrry Power is at an end, and I am resolved to choose for my
self. How happily am I relieved! Enter Count, and Mrs. Fantast. Look you, my
Lord, here are a pair of Turtles! The French Count has gotten an absolute
Conquest. Let Us retire, and hear the Love betwixt them: they will divert us upon
that subject, better than we can our selves. They retire and listen.


Bell. I must obey.


Mrs. Fan. Now Monsieur le Count, we are free: we were embarrass'd with Company
below, that we could not enjoy our selves; and some so ill bred, that, eh Good,
they caused such a Chagrin in me!


Cou. I am very appy in de occasion of kiss your And, in secret; indeed de
Bury Ladies be ver fine, ver prettee, and do me de great honeur;; butte, Madam,
your Luster does outshine them, as the great Sun does de leetel Star dat
twinkel, twinkel, in the Sky, Madam.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Monsieur, the ebat of your Wit will make any thing appear well:
I must confess, I never have met such brillant Conversation, as from your most
agreeable person.


Cou. See be de Victorious Ladee; butte, begar, see speak de dam French for
all dat. Aside.


Mrs. Fan. En verity, you have Charmed them all; but, mon foy, I hate the
Impertinence of a numerous Assemblee.


Cou. Oh, Madam, dear is no plaisir in de Varle, as de retirement vid so bright
a Nymp: and, Madam, I must tell dat, now you have steal me out of de
Companee, you cannot but perceive me, dat I have de ver great and signal
Passion for your Ladyship; and I have but de few littel opportunitee to say,
dat, if you take no Compassion upon me, you break mine Art; and I must kille
my self vid de French Bayonett, if you make de scorn of me.


Mrs. Fan. I am not so ill bred to scorn one of the Nobless.


Gert. Pray forbear, my Lord, they will come to the point presently: would you
have us play the Fool thus?


Cou. If you have no scorn, de Indifferance is fatal, and vill kille me too.


Mrs. Fan. Sincerement, Monsieur, a Lady cannot have indifference for a Person
so bien fait, and whose Conversation is Ravissant.


Gert. She comes on handsomely.


Cou. Ah, Madam! I kiss your sweet And, for dis great honeur: butte, Madam, if
my Ambition might aspire at your Love, I will be more appy ten Tousand time,
den de great Monarch, Madam.


Mrs. Fan. You know very well what the Poet says: Res est Solliciti plena
timoris amor.



Cou. Ver well, Madam, you be de most profound Ladee, and de great Scholar.
Morbleu, she vill find me out! Begar, I can no read. aside.


Mrs. Fan. No, no assuremant, pretty well read in the Classic Authors. Or so.
Monsieur Scudery says very well: L'amour est une grande chose.


Cou. He be ver pretty Poet too. Begar, she will puzzle me. aside.


Mrs. Fan. Poet! Monsieur, he writ Romances.


Cou. Ah, Madam, in France we call de Romance, de Poeste:


Bell. Oh, Rogue! that is well come off.


Mrs. Fan. And, as Monsieur Balzac says, Songez unpeu.


Cou. Dat Balzac write de very good Romance.


Mrs. Fan. Indeed, I never heard that.


Cou. Je vous assure. A pox on her reading! [Aside.] But, Madam, let de Poet,
de Philosoph, say vat dey vill, begar I am so much in Love vid your Person, dat
if you vill no be in Love vid my Person, begar, I must kille my self in two
tree day.


Mrs. Fan. Take time, Sir, I beseech you; we must consider on this affair.


Cou. Madame, I have no time to consider; de grand Monarch, my Maitre, want me
for a Lieutenan General, to make de War again Holland and Flandre, to burna de
House, and to kille de Man, Voman, and Shilde, as de great Monarch does, for
his Glory. And I will speak one proud Vord for my self; he has not one
Officier in his Armee dat burn, make de Ravage, and kille de Man, Voman and
Shilde, better den my self; no indeed.


Mrs. Fan. Eh, mon Dieu! that is Sanglant cruelle.


Cou. Pardon me, Madam, is de Discipline of War to put de Village and de
House in flame, and vid de Pistolet to shoot de Voman paph in de Ear vid big
Bellees, and de oder vid de Shilde in dear Arm paph paph, ver dum, ver dum,
paph, paph, and to put de Pike an alf Pike into de littel Suck Shilde, and
dey sprawl, sprawl, vid deir Arm and deir Leg, and make de ver pretty Shight;
and take de littel Boy and de Garle, so high, so high, so high, and stick,
and stick de Rapier into de Bodee. Madam.


Mrs. Fan. This is very Bloody.


Cou. Oh, no, Madam; dey be de Enemee: de great Hero always burn and kille de
Man, Voman, and Shilde, for deir Glory.


Mrs. Fan. If you Heroes be so cruel, it is enough to fright a Lady.


Cou. Ah, Madam, it is de Enemee: butte to de Maitress, de Heroes be jentle as
de Lamb.


Gert: This Rascal must be an Impostor: I scarce believe he is a French man;
though I have seen many a French Coxcomb, yet I never saw a French Clown before.


Bell. I will assure you, he is so: it is Ned Wildish his Frolic; and it is fit
you know it, before the business go too far. I Will tell you more.


Gert. Oh, the farther the better: I love mischief heartily.


Mrs. Fan. If I should agree to your Honorable Proposal, I must lose you
presently.


Cou. Ah, Madam, it is for mine Honeur, you fall go to my chatteau, my great
House; for I have several, vid de great Royaltee.


Enter Lady Fantast, with several Ladies more. L. Fan. These Ladies have
entertained your, and my Lord Count's absence, with some regret and Chagrin,
suitable to the occasion.


1 La. Ah, Madam, did you design to ingross my Lord Count?


2 La. That was foul play, indeed, Madam. Well, he is a fine Person!


Lord Bellamy, and Gertrude appear. Mrs. Fan. Quelle me Impertinance! Why would
you bring them, Madam? I shall be a great Woman; he is Captivated to the last
degree, he has ten thousand Pistols a year, and great Houses and Castles.


Gert. In the Air. aside.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Fie; how her pitiful English Lord looks, in presence of my
French Count.


1 La. Pray, my Lord, do my Husband the Honor to Dine with him tomorrow.


2 La. If your Lordship be not engaged, be pleased to honor my House at a
Collation this Night.


3 La. My Lord, your Lordship shall do my Husdand a great Honor, to take a
Repast with him.


4 La. My Lord Count --


Mrs. Fan. They are all Amoreuse of him: his Eye is Cupid's Quiver, and his
Beams the Darts.


Enter Wildish. Wild. So, here is a very fair Assembly!


Mrs. Fan. He Is engagee to Night, Ladies.


Cou. Ladee all, you do me de very great honeur: I vish I could divide my self;
but I am engagee to wait upon this Lady, and her pretty Modere. I find, she
lovee me, by dat Lie she makee for me. aside.


Gert. I like your Frolic admirably, for all it is yours.


Wild. So well acquainted, to tell secrets, already!


Bell. They are very familiar: ha! it is most apparent!


Cou. Serviteur, my Lor: Serviteur, Monsieur Wildish. De Ladee ^ake mush of de
French Count: ma foy, you will see presentlee.


Enter Trim. Trim. I am not a little afflicted, that I have been constrained to
borrow my self so long, from your Ladyship's most --


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Fie! you smell of Tobacco to a great degree.


Cou. Ah, Madam! take my Peruke, and smelle de Pulvilio: here, Madam.


He plucks his Peruke off, and gives it; she smells to it. Mrs. Fan. Mon Dieu!
Obligeant! Here is Breeding, to divest himself of his chiefest Ornament, to
gratify my sense! it is very sine!


1 La. It Is admirable, I swear!


2 La. Delicate, I vow!


The four Ladies smell it. 3 and 4 La. Very fine!


Cou. Is de ver fine Hair, Ladee: I have a great deal of de best in England or
France, in my Shop.


Gert. How? in your Shop! Do you keep Shop, Monsieur? How do you sell it?


Cou. Morbleu, vat is dis? Begar, I will bite my Tongue. Shop! Shop! I no
understand English, Shop! Vat you call de place de Jentilman put his Peruke?
Oh, his Cabinet, his Closet.


Mrs. Fan. Now you see, Madam Gertrude; would you have him understand English
like one of us? Je vous remercy; there is your Peruke again.


Trim. Sir, be pleased to read that Chartel, and give me such an Answer.


Enter Sir Humphrey Noddy. Sir Hum. Gentlemen and Ladies, I kiss all your hands.


Cou. Pox take de Note: Ventre bleu, I can no read; but I believe is a
Shallenge.


Sir Hum. Madam, Udsbud, we have drunk your Health in Bumpers Supernaculum.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, fie! stand off.


Cou. Hold: de Ladee no love de smell de Tobac.


Sir Hum. Are you there, in faith? I hate the sight of a French Dog, and I will
pluck him by the Nose.


Cou. If I draw, dey will part me. [aside.] Morbleu, mine Honeur! mine Honeur.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Insolence! save the Count, save the Count. Bell and Wild. part
them. The Ladies shriek, and run to the corner of the Stage. Oldwit staggers
amongst them drunk. The Women run out shrieking; with them, Ex. Trim, Sir Hum.
Bellamy.

Oldwit Sings. There were three Men came out of the West,
To make Saltpeter strong, etc.
Where are my Drunkards? where are my Drunkards? You flinchers, you sober Sots!
Where is my Iezebel, my Cockatrice, my Clogdogdo, as honest Tom Otter says? A
senceless Jade, with her Wit, and her Breeding: She steals away my Drunkards.
Old Spouse, Mummy; thou that wrap'st thy self every Night in Sear-cloths!


The Servants come in, and hold him. Cou. Consider I did kille de Count, and
have de Blood upon me. Vel, Monsieur, you vill take de care o de business;
Morbleu, Pox take de Note, me can no read, me can no Fight: vat me can do vid
de Shallange? aside.


Wild. You have done rarely! let me alone; I Will protect you: but let us fly the
fury of this Drunkard.


Ex. with the Count. Old. Where is my Goad? my damned for better for worse? She
has stolen my Drunkards and my Wits from me. Where are my Drunkards? Rogues,
let me go to my Drunkards, and my Wits, you Rogues.

There were three Men came out of the West,
To make Salt Petre strong;
To turn it into Gunpowder
For to Charge the King's Cannon.

The Servants hale him out. ACT. IV.
SCENE I.
VVildish, Trim. Wild. I Am the Count's Friend, but he will not engage me: he
says, he always Kills, for he never gives Quarter; and he will not be the
occasion of my leaving my Country. He must into France, he is a great Officer;
he has laid Horses, and will be ready to escape.


Trim. Is he so inveterate an Enemy?


VVild. Yes, and Fences like a Provost: he throws in his Passes quick as
Lightning, and hits what Button he pleases.


Trim. Then, if I reap the Honor of the Field, my Laurel will be greater. At
the East end of the biggest Church, you say, a quarter of an hour hence: I will
not fail. I kiss your Hands, Sir. How ever the unfortunate arrival of this
Count, who has prodigiously insinuated himself into my Mistresses affections,
may have ruffled and disordered the wonted serenity of my Temper; yet in all
occasions that may occur, I assure you, Sir, you shall ever find me Rational
and Civil. Your humble Servant: the Time fleets quick away, and Honor calls.


Exit. VVild. This formal Coxcomb, I find, is stout; and the Count will find
some trouble in him: but 'twill advance the Farce, to have the Ladies, who are
stark mad after him, see or hear he is soundly Cudgelled. Enter Sir Humphry. Sir
Humphry, if you make not haste, the Count will be before you: he will wait alone,
at the East end of the great Church.


Sir Hum. A Pox on him; does he Fence so devilishly, and never give Quarter?
Bloody Rogue! But, what care I, I make no more account of this Count, than of a
Jackanapes.


VVild. Never without a Conceit!


Sir Hum. Take me without a Jest? But I Will be gone, and make the French Count
dance a Minouet. Your Servant.


Exit. Enter Valet. Wild. This fellow may be a Coward, by his Vapouring.
Have you found the Count?

Val. Yes, Sir* very melancholy at your Lodging, where he has told me the
secrets of his Heart: he bewailed this unlucky Quarrel, which he apprehends so
much, that, were he not sure, as he says, of the Love of Mrs. Fantast, he would
leave his Countship, and run from Bury immediately. But he is now coming hither.


Wild. Well; go about yous business, and say nothing yet.


Exit Valet. Enter Count. Count. Vell, Monsieur, vat is become of dis business
vid Monsieur Iean Trim?


Wild. I told him, I was your Friend, and I have appointed him a place to meet
you in.


Cou. Begar, I will no meet.


Wild. I have passed my Honor, you shall be there.


Cou. Morbleu, I will no be dear: Jerny, I will tell you de secret. Dis fine
Ladee Maitres Fantast is in Love vid me: Ventre bleu, I will no fight; if I do,
I am de very great Fool indeed, to lose de great Fortune; for if dis dam Rogue
run me trough de Bodee, me lose de Maitress.


Wild. How, you Rogue? Lose her! you shall never have her: as great an aversion
as I have to her, the Frolic shall not go so far.


Cou. Ma foy, you be mistake: de Frolic shall go more far; yes indeed. Aside. I will no kille de Rogue, or be hanga for de Rascal.


Wild. Don't trouble your self: I have given him that Character of you, that he
trembles at you; he will never dare come. But we must be there, for our Honors
sake.


Cou. Is de Coward indeed? Aside. Eh Morbleu, Monsieur, me fear no person dat
vear de Head; but in dis case is no Prudance.


Wild. I have met Sir Humphry, and I have Challenged him to Fight with you, for
the tweak he gave you by the Nose: and told him, I would be your Second.


Cou. Jerny, vat is dis? Begar, I will no kille two: I will no meet dat dam
Rogue, ma foy.


Wild. I have appointed him; you must be there: I believe he is a Poultron; but
you will be Cudgelled by all the Men, and scorned by all the Women, if you take
the Tweak by the Nose. Come along with me, I Will tell you more.


Cou. Is better to take de Cudgel upon de Shouldere two tree four time, den to
have de Rapier trough de Bodee one time: yes, a great deal better.


Wild. Allons: here is Company coming.


Exit Wild. and Count. Enter Charles. Cha. There goes the Rival to my Lord: Oh,
may he prosper in his suit, and cure my Lord of his short Fevor! I am sure, he
can never be so mean, to love one who shall love another. But here he comes.


Enter Lord Bellamy. Bell. Not all the ill Fortune I have ever met, can equal
this; that he, whom I have loved so long, so true a Friend, so much a Man of
Honor, should be my Rival! I cannot blame him for it neither; he has broken no
Trust: and any Man, that looks upon her, must be subdued, as I am. But my hope
is yet, she is unapt to Love. Oh, Charles, did thou see Ned Wildish this
Evening?


Cha. Yes, my Lord: even now, he went into the Abby-ya^d.


Bell. But, what says my Mistress to the Present, and the Letter, which I sent?


Cha. She was not at home. Here is your Golden Box, full of Jewels: It is the
finest Present I ever saw made to a Lady. My Lord, I beseech your Lordship, let
one of your Gentlemen carry 'em.


Bell. Is my service then become irksom to you?


Cha. Oh, no, my Lord; pray frown not: I Will plunge into the Deep, I Will run into
the Fire, to do you service. Pray be not angry.


Bell. I cannot tell what it is should move thee to it; but thou art still
averse to the proceeding of my Love.


Cha. I love you more than ever Servant loved a Lord: and it is my fear for you.
My Cousin in Northampton shire is of Kin to her, your Lordship knows; and I
once heard her say, she had too great a Spirit for a Wife.


Bell. She has all the Beauty and Wit, of her whole Sex in her; and none of all
their Vanities. Did thou not Observe?


Cha. I did, my Lord, that which your Lordship did not.


Bell. Ha! what was that?


Cha. My Lord, I fear I shall offend.


Bell. Yes, if you tell me not.


Cha. Did you not perceive she made a difference in her looks, and entertained
not every man with equal sweetness?


Bell. He stings me to the Heart! [Aside.] Explain your meaning.


Cha. I may mistake; but yet, methinks, there is one Gentleman, whom she
beholds with greater favor, than what seems indifferent.


Bell. It is her gayety of Temper: you are too Jealous.


Cha. It is for you, my Lord: pray pardon me. Alas! what Interest can I have,
but yours? I should be loath to be Officious.


Bell. What means the Youth? sure, young as he is, he is in Love with her; and
Love will nourish even the highest Ambition: for why should he be so concerned?
Where is the Letter, which I ordered you to give my Mistress with the Present?


Cha. It is here, my Lord. [Gives him a Note.] Sure, this will convince him.


Bell. Ha! what do I see? It Is Wildish's hand! To the fair hands of -- How came
you by this Note?


Cha. My Lord, the Note? Ha! 'Twas my mistake. I did, at the beginning of my
Discourse, intend to show it to your Lordship; but found you would be too much
moved. It dropped from Mrs. Gertrude, after Dinner, and I took it up.


Bell. Why did you not restore it?


Cha. I, knowing the Hand, thought I might do your Lordship service in showing
it to you. Will you not read it?


Bell. Did you?


Cha. Oh yes, my Lord, knowing your Lordship was so highly concerned; and found
it so familiar --


Bell. It was Impertinent.


Cha. My Lord!


Bell. It was not honest.


Cha. My Lord, my noble Lord, pray pardon my misguided Zeal for you: impute it
to my Youth, my small Experience, my mistake of Honor; Forgive me, or my Knees
shall grow to the Earth.


Bell. Rise, and learn better: to open others Letters is mean, and
dishonorable.


Cha. How glad am I to have Instruction from you! You are a Man of strictest
Honor! How shall I expiate my Fault, and gain your Pardon?


Bell. I pardon you, and will impute it to your want of Knowledge: and to make
atonement for it, you shall return it to her, and make her what excuse you
can: Go instantly, and find her, and give me the Present, with my Letter


Exit. Cha. Into how sad, and how perplexed a case, has my too headstrong
Passion brought me, which every day increases, while my hopes grow less? What
prospect have I now, or glimps of Comfort? She, in a little time, must love as
I do. What shall I say to her? She will discover me: She said, she never saw
one yet so like her Sister, but for the color of my Hair; I overheard her:
What shall I do? Hold: If this Jealousy should make him fight with Wildish, I
am lost! I Will follow him; for, sure, I shall be Valiant in his Cause. Oh,
wicked rashness!


Exit. Wildish and Count, in the Abby-yard. Wild. It Is a fine Moonlight night:
these Fellows are Poultrons, and dare not come.


Count. It Is de grand pity dat de Coward should be suffer to live indeed, me
vould hang de Coward. Begar, is time to go.


Wild. We must stay a little: if they come, I Will run Sir Humphry through the
Lungs, while you whip the other through.


Cou. Jerny, vat, stay for de Coward? Begar, I scorn to stay for de Coward: ver
well indeed, de man of Courage stay for de Coward! is no Raison for dat.


VVild. I see two coming toward us; they are them two.


Enter Bellamy and Charles. Cou. Pox take him, he does Love de Tilt: Ma foy, is
all one for dat; begar, I will no meet them: dey have affronte me, to make me
vait so long time; and I will put de affront upon them, an leave them now dey
be come.


Walks hastily away. Wild. Monsieur le Count, come back: What, will you leave
me to two?


Cou. Hum, hum, hum; me vill no come back.


Wildish overtakes him, and lays hold on him. Bell. Mr. Wildish.


Wild. My Lord.


Cou. O, begar is my Lor; de Coward vill no come.


Bell. I have somewhat to say to you, which concerns me nearly.


VVild. My Lord, I lately have perceived something of you, that lies heavy at
my heart.


Bell. I never yet met with misfortune which could equal this.


VVild. I know too well your meaning. I never yet had any Cross, which I with
ease could not have born before.


Bell. We have been Friends.


VVild. Long Friends, and true.


Bell. I think so.


VVild. How, my Lord, do you but think so?


Bell. I never, till this day, had the least doubt. What pleasant Conversation,
what Endearments, what mutual Kindnesses, have passed betwixt us.


VVild And are you weary of my Friendship, that you resolve to break with me,
by doubting it? How have I loved you present? with what regret have I sustained
your absence? how often have we ventured our Lives for one another's Honor?
And am I changed, my Lord?


Bell. Oh yes, Friend, we are both Changed: I have a Mistress now, so Charming,
it is impossible that I should Live without her.


Wild. I have a Mistress too; so much above her Sex, so Fair, so Witty, so
Engaging, that I must Enjoy her, or I perish!


Bell. How? Enjoy her! Take heed, Friend.


Wild. I mean all Honor to her.


Bell. Would you possess the Mistress of your Friend?


Wild. Would you possess the Mistress of your Friend?


Bell. How, Sir? do you Echo me?


Wild. The Case, my Lord, is so. Once, there was nothing in the World so dear
to me, as you; but, since I knew my Mistress, I would quit all that is precious
in the World, e're I would lose her.


Bell. What do I hear! Sir, have you then possession of her?


Wild. A Sanguine man is never out of hope: I have her in Imagination now
methinks.


Bell. Methinks, you go too fast, Sir; you know my Temper: Sir, how long do you
think that I can bear a Rival?


Wild. I can consider nothing but her, and her, and only her.


Bell. You slight me, Sir.


Wild. I hope I have more manners*


Cha. Oh, how I tremble! They will Fight, and I am lost for ever!


Cou. Dey seem in de Passion. If dey two be mad, as to make de Duel, dey vill
take me for de Second, against dat littel Jentilman, de Page; and I have seen
de Page in France Fence like de Diable: he vill put his Rapier in my Bodee;
me vill steal away. Steals out.


Bell. I am agreed upon Articles with her Father, who is her Guardian.


Wild. And I am endeavoring to agree upon Articles with her: which is a
shorter way.


Bell. But it is not so fair a way.


Wild. How, not so fair?


Bell. No: nor can any man enjoy her, while I live.


Wild. 'Sdeath! what do you say? Defend your self.


Bell. I am always ready to do that.


They fight. Charles runs out. Wildish drops his Sword; then strives to run in
to Bell. who offers him his. Cha. Help! help! murder, murder! help, help!


Bell. Hold, Sir; hold: you want a Sword; pray make use of mine.


Wild. You are generous, my Lord; my Life's yours, and so it was before, and
whatsoever I could call mine was so; except my Mistress.


Bell. Let us be still such Friends: there is not a man on Earth I value equal
with you.


Enter Charles. Cha. They are embracing! blessed Heaven! I hope my Lord's not
hurt:


Bell. What remains then, but we proceed like men of Reason; each take his way
to gain the Divine Creature's Love? And, since one must be for ever miserable,
let her be Arbitress of our two Fates.


VVild. You still possess the same Honor which you ever had; I am now your
most unhappy, but most faithful Friend.


They embrace. Enter the Count. Cou. Is de Fight done? Oh, dey embrace, is no
dangere.


VVild. You most impudent Cowardly Dog! if you had not run away, you might have
parted us, and not have suffered Friends to Fight.


Kicks him. Count. Hold, hold: is ver well, you kick de French Count! Begar,
you show de Breeding: Kick de Count! you take me for de Barbier; ver fine, yes
indeed.


VVild. Sirrah, you shall be Count no longer: this Frolic shall not turn to
earnest.


Cou. I will be gone, an get de Ladee, for all dat. Adieu: Jerny, me vill no
stay to be kick.


Wild. My Lord, I must take off this Rogue, my Honor may be questioned: for,
tho I hate the Affected Creature, I would not have this go on to a Marriage, or
a Contract. I Will follow him.


Bell. You have reason: by what I overheard, 'twill come to one of them* if
you prevent 'em not. Exit Wildish.

Come Charles, come along with me: this Evening all the Company will be in the
Fair, and there I must meet my Mistress.


Cha. What deadly sound is this! On every side I am lost!


Exeunt. Trim in the Churchyard; and Sir Humphry standing close under a Pillar
of the Church. Trim. I could not have imagined, that this French Count should
be so devoid of Breeding, and the Decencies which become all Gentlemen, as to
make me wait so long, upon so important an occasion.


Sir. Hum. This damned French Count will stay here for ever, I think: A Pox on
him, for a Blood-thirsty Rascal! But I will outstay him, and face him down,
that I waited here for him; and there may be hopes it may be taken up. Gad take
me, he is a Murdrous Rogue, and I will not Fight! I durst have sworn he had been
a Coward.


Trim. Will he never appear?


Enter La. Fantast, Mrs. Fantast, two Men Servants. Mrs. Fan. Oh, Madam, I am
ruined, if my dear Count should Fight! my Passion is extreme, as his for me.


L. Fan. I cannot blame thee, Daughter: he is the most Charming Person, that
ever my eyes beheld!


M. Fan.* Oh, Madam, should he fall, I never can survive him! He las, mon
pauvre Ceur!


L. Fan. Sir Humphrey was seen come into the Churchyard.


Trim. Here is Company: I must retire.


Sir Hum. Ounds, the Rogue will find me out! he comes upon me!


He stands up close: Trim comes upon him. Trim. Ha! who is this?


Sir. Hum. Oh pox is it he? Jack, Jack, little Jack, nown Jack, my Lad!


Trim. Jack! Jack! Jack! Sir, you are too familiar, and by your Apish
Gesticulations have endeavored to expose my Person on all occasions; for
which, now we are opportunely met; I will Chastise you, as becomes a Gentleman.


Sir. Hum. Why Jack! nown Jack! what, art thou mad? Pr'y thee kiss me.


Trim. I will salute you in another manner.


Strikes him with his Sword. Sir Hum. Why Jack, Jack, prithee leave fooling.


Trim. Draw: or I will Sacrifice you to my just Revenge, this very individual
Moment. Have at you.


Sir Hum. Hold, hold! this Rogue will kill me.


He draws. Trim pushes at him, and his Sword falls: Sir Humphrey takes it up.
Mrs. Fan. Oh Heaven! there they are Fighting! Run, run, and save the Count! Oh,
save the --


She runs, and L. Fan. after her. L. Fan. Oh, save the Count! save the Count!


Sir Hum. Take your Life; I give you your Life: and learn how you provoke me
another time.


Mrs. Fan. Pish! are these two here?


Sir Hum. Take notice I give him his Life.


Mrs. Fan. Is this all? Madam, let us go.


L. Fan. Come on.


Exeunt hastily. Trim. Sir, you have good Fortune only, but no Valor, to boast
of.


Sir Hum Sir, I have disarmed you, and there is an end on it.


Trim. You will return my Rapier, as becomes a Gentleman?


Sir Hum. Gad take me, not I, till you come in the Fair: for ought I know, a
Whim may take you to fight again.


Trim. Sure, I have a greater share of Honor, and a greater stock of Breeding,
than to commit such an Error against him whom Fortune has presented with that
advantage.


Sir Hum. Uds bud, I Will not trust you: follow me. But I am resolved to Cudgel
this damnable Count, for a Coward.


Trim. And I likewise: and surely Cudgels will render him obnoxious to the Hate
and Scorn of Madam Fantast.


Sir Hum. I Will lay him on. Come, follow me.


Exit. Trim. That Persons should frequent Bury, and suck in no more Breeding,
is I must confess Prodigious!


Exit. Scene, the Fair. They Cry their several Wares. Enter Wildish: to him,
the Count. Wild. Where is this damned Count? Oh, here. Do you hear, Sirrah? I
am told, you have succeeded so far with this Fantastic foolish Creature, that
she will Marry you.


Count. Den, begar, I have make de French Count ver vel.


Wild. If you make any farther application, I will cut your Throat. But, in the
first place, I will un-Count you, and cut off your Train, Sir.


Count. Vel, vel, vat you please: ma foy, she Love me ver vel. Sall I make de
Fornication vid her? begar, I will no Marry upon my Honeur.


Wild. I had rather you should do that, than Marry her; but I will have no more
Love to her: and then carry on your Countship as much as you will; you may have
your choice of others. But be sure to use the Cowards scurvily.


Count. I warrant you, I will beat them.


Wild. Then Cudgelling will ensue. Aside.


Count. Jerny, he cut my Troat! Begar, me make de great Laugh at dat: he no
dare behanga; me vil have de Ladee for all dis; me know de Law.


Enter four Ladies. 1 Lady. Oh, Monsieur le Count, Serviteur!


2 Lady. Monsieur, your humble Servant.


3 Lady. Monsieur, I am yours, I assure you.


4 Lady. Oh, my Lord, we thought the Fair had lost you.


Count. Madams, me kiss all your Hand: me would be two tree four Count for
your saka; begar, me vil make two tree four Cuckold, and Marry de Ladee too.


He walks forward, with two on each hand. Enter Gertrude. Wild. Oh, my most
cruel Mistress!


Gert. Oh, my most ungracious Servant; can I come no where, but you must cross
me with your unlucky Countenance?


VVild. You can come no where, but I will endeavor to Bless my self with the
sight of yours, or I must die.


Ger. Oh, that it were in my Power to make a Lover hang himself! then I would
Triumph for the rest of my poor deluded Sex. They talk of being Martyrs, and
Dying, and Dying, and such stuff; but would I could see one of 'em Die once:
that would be worth the seeing.


VVild. My pretty Charming Tyrant, sure you are not so bloody minded!


Ger. Well, I am of opinion, that a Lady is no more to be accounted a Beauty,
till she has killed her Man; than the Bullies think one a fine Gentleman, till
he has killed his.


VVild. I must beg leave to be a little more serious with you.


Ger. Never; why, you will come to the Point then, which I can never endure: Love
in Jest, is but just Tolerable; but serious Love is duller than a Rhyming Play.


VVild. My case is now more desperate than I thought: I have discovered, that
my greatest Friend, a man of Worth and Honor, is my Rival.


Ger. Never the more the desperate for that; 'twas full as desperate before:
but, ^f you be a true Friend to him, give over troubling me.


VVild. How! have you then made choice of him?


Ger. Of neither: but, if I can be once rid of you, he is somewhat modester,
and I doubt not but to shake him off. Here he comes.


Enter Lord Bellamy. VVild. These free-spirited Ladies are hard to be subdued:
a Man may get Ten modest, meek, and shamefaced Ladies, e're he can conquer one
of these; they have not the Heart to deny.


Ger. My Lord, I beseech your Lordship, no Love in the Fair.


Bell. How hard is my Condition; who have so Cruel a Mistress, and so deserving
a Rival! and, which is most unfortunate, my greatest Friend too!


VVild. In the first part of my Character, you do me too much Honor: but in
the later, you are Just.


Ger. So; here is a fine Subject for a Love and Honor Poet! But you are in no
danger of him; for I am resolved to keep my self free, and incline to none*
Methinks it is Air I tread! how light I am without a yoke!


Enter Oldwit. Old. Oh, my little Gatty! Ha, my Lord! here is Flesh and Blood
for you! will she not make a rare Bedfellow?


Ger. By, Sir, what do you mean? Farewell.


She walks out. Old. You must both Sup with me, my Lord, and you, Sir. I have
had Company with me; and we have had such a Discourse about Wit: they, of the
New Wit; and I of the Old Wit, and my own things I writ in the last Age.


VVild. Well, and you run 'em down, I make no doubt.


Enter Lady Fantast, and Mrs. Fantast. La. Fan. Servant, Ladies.


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Monsieur Le Count, I am o'rejoy'd, to see you safe!


Count. Safe, Madam! Begar, Trim and Sir Noddy be de two great Coward indeed,
and me beata them like two Dogua; yes, fait.


Mrs. Fan. If your pretended passion have Reality, follow me to our House: you
are in danger for my sake, and I will stick to you with my Life and Fortune;
come instantly, there are Spies upon us. Madam, come away.


La. Fan. I come, dear Child.


Exit La. Fan. and Mrs. Fan. Coun. Poor Rogua! she love me extrememant! Begar,
Monsieur Vildish is an Ass, an me vil have de Ladee for all him. Aside.


Old. What? a French Barber and Peruke-maker, and no Count! Hang him, he would
not Drink, I thought there was no good in him.


Wild. I am to beg a Thousand Pardons of you: 'twas my Frolic, but it is gone
too far; for, if you don't prevent it, he may marry Mrs. Fantast.


Old. Nay, faith, it is no great matter if he does: would he could marry the
Mother too; for, under the Rose, never man was so plagued with a couple of
Impertinent, Fantastic Jades, as I with them: And to complete the Affliction,
they must pretend to Wit before me, and will allow me to have none!


Wild. That indeed is most unsufferable.


The Count is very busy talking with the four Ladies. On Trim 's Entrance, he
makes up to him. Old. Ay, is it not?


Enter Trim. Wild. Now is your time, Count, to put an affront upon that Coward.


Count. Let me alone for dat. Begar, I am amaze, dat de Coward dare show his
Face any where: Begar, I will pluck you by de Nose, because you ^o dare me a
me.


Trim. And I will make that return which becomes a man of Honor to do in like
cases.


He Cudgels him. The Ladies shriek, and run away. Count. Jerny, vat is dis? vat
you do? You Cane de Count! Begar, you show de Breeding. Hold, ^old: vat you do?
Monsieur Vildish, my Lor, stand by me.


He draws, and Trim lays him on: He runs away, and meets Sir Humphry on the
other side of the Stage, who cudgels him too. He runs backward and forward, and
is Cudgelled on both sides. The Constable with a Guard Enters, and knocks Trim
and Sir Humphry down, and the Count escapes. Sir Hum. Are you there, you Coward?


Coun. Eh, Morbleu! vat is dis?


Bell. Now it works.


Oldw. Passing good, in faith! Come, let us to my House.


Ex. Wild. Old. and Bell. Constable. Come, Gentlemen, you shall go before the
Alderman: he will teach you to make a Disturbaace in the Fair.


Trim. Sweet Mr. Constable: Sir, Sir; Mr. Constable, Mr. Constable!


Constable. Away with 'em, I say.


They hale 'em out. Exeunt. ACT. V.
SCENE I.
Oldwit, and Mrs. Gertrude. Old. I Shall have nothing but Uproars and Quarrels
in my Family: Trim and Sir Humphry have quarreled with the Count, about Madam
Fantast, with a Pox to her; and even now my Lord Bellamy and Mr. Wildish have
fought about you, as the Page said, and I heard it.


Gert. How? Fought about me!


Old. So I say, I shall have my foolish Family the whole Discourse of this
Tittle-Tattle Town. Look you, Daughter, I knew not of Mr. Wildish's Love to
you; they have both very good Estates: but Mr. Wildish is a Wit, a great Wit,
in faith. I leave you to your Choice.


Gert. I thank you, Sir: then I choose neither of 'em, nor any other.


Old. Thou art so wild, and such a skittish Filly, you must be Tamed and
Married. Come, come* determine your choice suddenly, which they have past their
Honors shall determine them, or Battle and Murder may ensue about you.


Gert. I am not so vain, to believe that.


Old. Be not so foolish to believe otherwise. Look you, they are coming in, and
you are to sit upon Life and Death: be an upright Judge, and do not delay
Justice; I must have an end of this Suit presently. Farewell.


Exit: Gert. A very grave Judge shall I be, without doubt! But I think the
Petticoat may vye for Wisdom and Sincerity, with the Long Robe, before our late
Restoration.


Enter Charles. Char. Madam, this Letter, which fell from your Ladyship
accidentally, came into my Lords hands; and he commanded me to deliver it to
you, unread, and unopen'd, tho he knew the Hand.


Exit. Gert. How? my Note fallen into his hands! How unlucky was this! Ha,
gone! How strangely this Youth resembles my Sister Philadelphia! This is
handsomely done of my Lord, and like a Man of Honor.


Enter Lord Bellamy, and Wildish: Charles steals in after them. Wild. Madam,
behold a pair of Rivals, hand in hand, and Friends.


Bell. Who come to prostrate themselves at your Feet, and must from your fair
Mouth expect their Doom.


Char. Oh, she will choose my Lord, and I must perish! Aside.


Wild. To whom ever you shall give leave to continue your Servant, the other
will quietly Retire, and suffer his hard Fate with all the Patience that he
can: But if I am Rejected, I shall be for ever miserable.


Bell. And to me, Heaven knows, not all the World besides, can recompense the
loss of you.


Char. Ah me! Aside.


Gert. Are you resolved to be in Earnest, and would you make me so? I have not
yet determined to marry any one.


Wild. Must we then both sue on, and try by constant Service to obtain your
Heart?


Gert. No, no: you will oblige me more, if you will both desist. I have that
Joy in Freedom, that I cannot think of parting with it yet.


Bell. You are born to Command, and always must be Free.


Wild. I love so, Madam, I must be your Slave for ever.


Gert. Yes, if you Love, so long I may keep you at my Command: but this same
Whoreson Marriage kills all Love, and makes best Friends fall out.


Bell. Nothing can ever make my Love decrease.


Gert. Yes, if I love again: as Fire takes out Fire.


Wild. Not all your Cruelty can Tame my Love: which, if it be so Raging now,
what would your Kindness make it?


Gert. Oh, Marriage is a Sovereign Julep; and Thirst grows less apace by
Drinking.


Bell. Not where it is a Distemper, a Violent Fever; as all Love is, sure.


Gert. Too violent to last.


Wild. Madam, in short, if you do not determine which of us shall have leave to
sue, implicitly you give it both of us.


Gert. Is that your Logic, Sir? No: in the first place, I never will give you
leave to make the least Address to me more.


Char. Oh, I am lost!


Swoons, and falls down upon a Chair. Bell. What Is the matter?


Gert. Your Page is in a swoon: Help, help! Open his Breast. Oh Heaven! this is
a Woman!


Bell. and Wild. A Woman!


Gert. She comes to herself.


Char. Oh, Madam, I am your Sister: for Heavens sake, conceal me!


In whisper. Gert. Run up privately into my Chamber quickly. I am amazed! This
is Prodigious!


Bell. A Woman! Madam, I was never so surpised.


Gert. No doubt, you are surpised; and so was she: I believe she is run out of
doors in haste enough.


Bell. Accursed misfortune! I am undone for ever! I Will hasten and have a full
account of all this matter.


Exit hastily. Gert. Aside. I hope, he knew her not. My Sister! This is an
admirable Lover! Let my wise Father keep him to himself, I have done with him.


Wild. Will you be pleased then to begin with me? I am the truest Lover of my
Sex.


Gert. If you are, I Will keep you so: for, should I think of Marrying you, I
give up my Dominion. No, no: I will Domineer seven years first.


Wild. 'Sdeath Madam, seven years! What, do you take me for a Patriarch; serve
seven years? They might stay, who begun at Fourscore to get Sons and Daughters:
but I have but a short time to live.


Gert. I am sure, if I should Marry you, I should have but a short time to
Reign.


Wild. Consider, Madam.


Gert. I have considered: Farewell.


Exeunt. Count, Mrs. Fantast. Mrs. Fan. How glad I am, to see you safe! Your
Life is beset, for my sake; and I am bound in Honor to protect it.


Count. Madam, you have de great share of Honeur, and de great share of de
Beautee; but for de Rival, I will beat and kille them all.


Mrs. Fan. They are a greater number, Monsieur, than you imagine.


Count. Begar, all dat look upon you are de Rival; butte dey dat make de Love,
I will make de Example: I had kille two of them just now, but de Fair all rise
upon me, and make me make de Retreat.


Mrs. Fan. Heaven grant you be not blessee, Monsieur.


Count. Me have no Wound, Madam, but vat you give me trough de Art: de Dangere
of de Rival, Morbleu, me despise; me vill run them trough de Bodee dus, in
Quart, Second, Tierce; hah, hah, hah. He thrusts with his drawn Sword. Butte
you can no save my Life, if you no Love my Person, and Marry vid my Person.


Mrs. Fan. Oh je suis rouge, you make me blush: I fear, you have decouvre more
of my Tendress, than I would have had you.


Count. Madamma, if you will make me your Husband, you stop all de insolance
of de Rival, and make me appy beyond de Varle: else, me vill be bound in Honeur
to kille two tree Rival every day, every day, Madam, and dat vill be Bloody
varke; butte is all one for dat, if you no Marry vid me, me am desperate.


M. Fan. Tho, I must confess, I never met such Charms in any Person; yet I
should be censured for being too precipitous, in agreeing so soon to your
Honorable Proposals.


Count. Vee vill go into France, beyond de Censure, to de great Chatteau of
min, as big as Amptong Coor, vid de great Canaille, de great Park, and de grand
Royalty, vid two tree grand Chatteau beside: butte it must be sudden; for de
grand Monarque expecte me.


Enter Lady Fantast. L. Fan. Come, Daughter, I have been acquainted before with
my Lord Count's Honorable Passion toward you; and he is a Person of undoubted
Excellence: you have full Ten Thousand pounds; and I shall think your Fortune
and your Person well bestowed, upon a noble Gentleman of such grand Merit.


Count. Oh, fair Madamma, you do me de great Honeur: me no care for (...), it
is de Person; dis hope make me all on Flame. Madam, get de Parson, de
Minister, to dispatche de business presantlee.


L. Fan. Sir, it is Night: it is not de Canonical hour.


Count. Is all one: de good Roman Catolique Priest vill do it presantlee.


M. Fan. No, by no means; not till to morrow, Madam.


Count. Break de Gold, and make de Contract den now: dat vill break de Art of
all de Rival, and make them sneake, like de pitiful Roga, Begar.


L. Fan. Let it be so, Daughter: if by any accident you should lose the Count,
we were undone.


M. Fan. Ouy sans doubt, I should be most miserable.


Enter Luce, and Page to the Count. L. Fan. Oh, Luce, you are come in season.


Luce. My Lord Count, your Page is here to speak with you.


Count. Let him come in. Hey, Page. Let all be witness of de Contract: me vill
be no Fourb, no Frippon. Upon de Knee me Swear to Marry dis Ladee Madam
Fantast, to morrow in de morning.


He kneels. L. Fan. Daughter, you must Promise: Come, never be ashamed of so
transcendent a Choice.


M. Fan. I am Obedient: I swear to marry this Noble Person Mounsieur le Count
de Cheveux, to morrow morning.


She kneels: Count. Ah, Madamma, now break de Gold, de Broad Piece: so, is
done; and now, rise up ma cher Countess:


M. Fan. Eh, mon Chere Count!


L. Fan. Millions of Joys fall on you both. I weep for Joy.


Nich. Master, they have got the Report now all over the Town, that you are a
Barber, and Peruke-maker; your Equipage is revolted: Mr. Wildish's Men talk it
every where, and my Lord Bellamy's Men; and it is in every Body's mouth.


Count. Begar, dey be de Rogua, de Scoundrella: but begone from dis House, and
be seen no more here; and say, you can no find me.


Exit Page. M. Fan. Somebody's coming up; a Rival, I believe; A noise of some
coming up Stairs. Pray, go into my Closet


Count. Where, where is de Closet? Begar, I vou'd kille de Rival before your
Face, but is not Decent, Madam.


M. Fan. Madam, I beseech you entertain 'em, while I retire with Mon cher Count.


They retire into the Closet, where they peep out to listen. Enter Trim. Trim.
Madam, I kiss your Ladyships fair hands.


L. Fan. Your Servant, sweet Mr. Trim.


Trim. Could I think to have lived to have seen this inauspitious Day, who had
so long admired the Beauty, and adored the Mind of my Divine Dorinda? That I,
having devoted not only my Heart, but all the Actions of my Life to her
Service, should be thus Sacrificed to a Frenchman!


L. Fan. It Is a most fatal Mistake: she bears a most profound Respect toward
the worthy Mr. Trim.


Trim. At his first approach, her sad indifference appeared in the Bud, which
since has sprouted up to complete Scorn; And all for this Frenchman, this false
Count, this Impostor!


L. Fan. How? False Count!


Count. Let me go: Begar, I will run him trough de Bodee.


M. Fan. You shall not* stir.


Trim. Yes; he is a false Count, and a true Barber and Peruke*maker.


Count. Jerny, dam Rogue, make de great Lie of me! Let me go, Madamma; me
vill kille de Rogue, for dis affront.


M. Fan. I will not part with you out of my Arms.


L. Fan. Sir, be not so temerarious: he is one of the Nobless, and his Nature's
vindicative in Honor's Cause.


Trim. Hang him, Snip-snap Rogue, I contemn him; I Challenged him: he is a
Coward, and durst not answer my Chartel to meet me; for which, I exercised him
plentifully with this numerical Cane.


Count. O de dam Lie Rogue! Begar, me must kille him, for mine Honeur. Morbleu,
Madamma, me did beata dis Rascal, like de Spaniel Dogue, indeed.


M. Fan. Let him Lie on: I Will revenge it.


L. Fan. You must pardon me, Sir, if I give not Credit to what you say: I am
assured, he is as brave a Gentleman as e're drew Sword, and a great Commander.


Trim. I do averr, That he is a Barber in Pickadilly.


L. Fan. Ha, ha, ha: that is a Jest! My Daughter and I mistake in Breeding and
Quality!


Enter Sir Humphrey. Sir Hum. Oh, Madam, I am come to vent my just Resentments,
for the Slight your Daughter has put upon me for this damned Rascally Count,
whom I tweak'd by the Nose last Night. I Challenged him: he dared not meet;
but, by Cross-biting, made Jack here, little Jack and me meet, and fall out;
and you saw me give him his Life,


Trim. If you hold your own at any rate, boast not once more: if you persist,
you will awaken my Fury till it may destroy you.


Sir Hum. Prithee, Jack, hold thy peace: thou art the peevishest Fellow! But
after all, this Count of yours is a Rogue, a Cheat; he is a Barber in Pickadilly.


L. Fan. Ha, ha, ha: as if my Daughter and I could take a Barber for a Count!
Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Hum. Udsbud, this Fellow's a Barber: I can prove it upon him.


Count. Oh, Madamma, me beg upon de Knee dat you vill let me but kille dese
two, and me vill kille no more, upon mine Honeur. De Devil can no make de Lie
so.


Sir Hum. Nay, Gad take me, I don't much care; I have a good Estate, and I
shall have Women enough Court me, where I need not apprehend a French Count,
made of a Barber and a Peruke-maker; a damned Coward too, that durst not meet
me; but I Cudgel'd him so in the Fair, Jack, hah! that he will not be very
Active awhile.


Count. Ah, Madam, dey provoke me beyond de Pa^iance.


Mrs. Fan. Go in, I say; and let me alone with them. She locks him in. I have
overheard you; and wonder much you dare Calumniate a Person of such Breeding,
Quality, and Honor, as the Count! Your Lives were not worth a Farthing, if he
heard you. Is this like Gentlemen?


Sir Hum. Honor! hang him, Scoundrel: Gad take me, I Cudgel'd him, till my Arm
aches; a damned Cowardly Barber and Peruke-maker.


Trim. And I chastis'd him in like manner most exorbitantly.


M. Fan. You are insolent, thus to Traduce a Person of his Worth!


L. Fan. Call you this Breeding; to Challenge and abuse a Person of Quality in
my House, for his Gallantry to my Daughter?


M. Fan. How dare you commit the Insolence, to Challenge a Person whom I
favor? and then to blacken his unspotted Fame? when I know you dare not meet
him, and he cudgel'd you.


Trim. Admired Dorinda, the Faculties of whose noble Soul did use to shine more
bright, than to be led into so gross an Error as to mistake a Barber for a
Count --


M. Fan. Ha, ha, ha: My Lady and I mistake Breeding and Quality, and take a
Barber for a Nobleman! Mondieu, this is Malice, mere Envy of my Favors.


L. Fan. If my Daughter and I can mistake in such material Points, who can be
Judges?


Sir Hum. Nay, for my part, Madam, if you must love a Cudgel'd Barber, and take
him for a valiant Count; make much of him, I shall desist: there are more
Ladies, Heaven be thanked.


Trim. Yes, Sir, there are more Ladies: but, if any man affirms, that my fair
Dorinda has an Equal; I thus fling down my Glove, and do demand the Combat for
her Honor. This is a nice point of Honor I have hit. Aside.


Sir Hum. Why, Jack, Jack, nown Jack; what, art thou Mad? Jack, Jack!


Trim. Prithee Jack me no Iacks; but speak with Honor of my Mistress, or Draw.


L. Fan. What, more Quarrels in my House!


Sir Hum. Prithee, Jack: why, I gave thee thy Life, Man. What, a Devil, if you
be so peevish* Fare you well. Ladies, your humble Servant: and a Pox of all
Cowardly French Peruke-makers, I say.


M. Fan. Quell insolance! I will not hear his Honor lessened so.


Trim. It Is an undoubted Verity, most inevitably true, that he is a Barber,
Madam.


M. Fan. It Is false. It Is the basest malice to blacken men in absence: he is a
Person, in whom all Charms are met.


Trim. He Charms! Alas, Dorinda, whither do you stray?


M. Fan. Begone: avoid my Presence.


Trim. Can my Dorinda. --


M. Fan. I say, begone.


Trim. Will you not hear?


M. Fan. No.


Trim. I obey: I say no more at present.


Exit. M. Fan. Monsieur, my dear Count come forth.


Count. Ah, Madam ma Chere, mine Honeur! de Barbier! de Peruke-man! Morbleu, vy
do dey no call me de Tinkre, de Jugler, vat dey vill? If you please let me
kille dese two Rogua, you vill oblige me ver mush indeed, my dear Countess.


M. Fan. Would you kill me, by bringing your self into that Danger? No; Let the
happy Lovers, Love and Revel: -- Hi sunt de pace triumphi,
Bella gerent alios.



L: Fan. Here Is some coming: keep my Lord Count in your Lodging, till Three in
the morning, I will have a Coach ready to carry you to be Married.


Count. I beseech you, let me but kill one Rogua.


M. Fan. In, into the Closet.


Count. But one, Madam. Call de Count, de Barbier! Jerny bleu, vat is dis?


Enter Oldwit. Old. Where is my most Wise and Subtle Spouse, with her Witty
well Bred Daughter?


L. Fan. What have you to do with Wit, or Breeding?


Old. Such counterfeit Breeding and false Wit, as you, old doting Fop, with the
most Affected and Fantastic Thing your Daughter do possess, I utterly renounce.


L. Fan. What says the Antiquated Wit, with his Shreds of old Poets?


Mrs. Fan. Helas! you be de very fine Judge indeed! Ha, ha, ha.


Old. Judge; ha, ha, ha! Have a care of losing your English, before you have
gotten another Language. But, do you hear? In earnest, do you two think that
you two have either Wit, or Breeding?


Mrs. Fan. Think! we know we have: and that you want both, is too evident by
your Question.


L. Fan. Yes, thou old Lumber full of Frippery, we have: while, Heaven knows,
you have neither.


Old. Ounds; what, I no Wit?


L. Fan. No.


Mrs. Fan. No.


Old. No, no! why, thou piece of Clock-work, thou have no Teeth; no Hair, no
Eyebrows, no Complexion, but what cost thee Money: and, but for Iron Bodice,
art as crooked as a Bugle Horn; and I have made an Epigram upon thee.

She Is bent, like a Nine-pence; and had been quite broken,
Had not Nature intended the Devil a Token:
Sure, Heaven in its Indignation has made her,
And in her Mam's crooked Paunch Neck and Heels laid her.
There Is Wit, old Sybil, for thee.


L. Fan. That Wit, you silly old Fumbler! You are an Opprobrium to the name of
Wit, thou ill-bred old Sot.


Mrs. Fan. You a Wit! Eh Good! The very Spirit of Grubstreet Reigns in you.


Old. Thou young Iezebel, with nothing natural about thee! thou look as if
thou were painted by some lewd Painter for the Sign of Folly, with such turning
up of Eyes, and screwing of Faces, with Convulsions in your Mouth: She makes
wry Mouths, and chews every word,
Like an old Sow, that simpereth with a new T --
You understand me. There Is Wit for you both now, you Brace of Flirts. I no
Wit. quoth they!


Mrs. Fan. If Rudeness, Railing, and Ill Breeding, may pass for Wit, you are
plentifully endu'd; but I despise it.


L. Fan. An old Soaker, with a white Head, a red Face, a Brain clouded with
Fumes, and empty of Wit, full of Whims and Maggots.


Old. Come, come, you brace of Fopdoodles, where is your French Barber you are
both so fond of; and you are to Marry, Mrs. Wit? A pox on him: if he could
Marry you both, with all my Heart.


L. Fan. What, have you gotten that silly story too? Ha, ha.


Mrs. Fan. This is raised by some London Wit, some Laugher: They call it
Shamming.


L. Fan. and Mrs. Fan. A Barber! Ha, ha, ha.


Mrs Fan. Can we be deceived in Quality and Breeding?


L. Fan. Not know a Mechanic, a Barber, from a noble Count! very likely.


Both Laugh. Old. mocking them. Ha, ha, ha! You most abominable brace of
Conceited, Affected Fools! What a Pox, my House will become Ridiculous, the
Scorn and Laughter of the whole Country: Here are Twenty People in Town, can
prove he is a Barber.


L. Fan. Go, Doatard, go: A Barber! Ha, ha, ha!


M. Fan. O filly! a Barber! Ha, ha, ha. Mondieu.


Old. Ounds, you make me Mad, you most incorrigible pair of Fools. Well, for
once, I Will take more care of you, than you of your self: I Will have this Rogue
Barber, if he be above ground, and make an Example of him.


Exit. Enter Wildish. Old. Here Is one can tell you who your Count is.


Wild. Why, he is my Peruke-maker, and he is a Barber: I put him upon this
Frolic, thinking to make Sport in the time of the Fair; but never thought it
would have come to Earnest.


L. Fan. Ha, ha, ha: this is finely carried on indeed!


M. Fan. Envy, Malice! Believe a London Wit! a Jeerer! a Scoffer! a Shammer!
ha, ha, ha.


Old. Ounds, I Will have no more Fooling about this Business: Produce this
Barber; he came into my House, has not gone out since, and you must have hid
him.


M. Fan. I hide a man in my Apartment! I defy you, insolent.


Old. I Will see; is he not behind the Bed? or in it? Hah, I cannot find him. He
must be somewhere in these Rooms.


L. Fan. What can provoke you to abuse my Daughter thus?


M. Fan. Must I, who have been Admired (I may say Adored) for Virtue, have my
Reputation questioned thus by you?


Old. Are you angry to be kept from marrying a Barber?


L. Fan. How dare you Domineer in my House thus?


Old. Stand by, Old Fool. Who is in this Closet? let me see. Breaks it open.
Oh, Sheep-biter, are you here?


L. Fan. Oh Heaven, the Count here!


M. Fan. Mon dieu! how came you here?


Old. Come, Mr. Barber, instead of Monsieur Le Count.


Cou. Vat you mean? Begar, I will have de satisfaction: and, vere it not for de
Reverence to de Ladee, Begar, me vou'd cut all your Troat, Morbleu.


Wild. Why, Sirrah, Rascal, are you not my Barber and Peruke-maker? Did I not
set you up for a Count? Is not that my Suit of Cloths?


Count. Do not provoke me to run you trough de Bodee: me am amaze! Ventre
bleu, Madam, dey be all stark mad; dey Dream, and dey talk in deir Sleep:
Jerny, me can no tell vat dey mean. Do dey Treat de French Count in England
dus? Oh Brutal!


Wild. If you dare persist in rhis business, I will cut your Throat infallibly.


Count. Let me alone: Begar, you no dare be Hanga.


M. Fan. Nay, then it is time to speak. Good Mr. Impudence, what have you to say
to my Husband?


Old. and Wild. Your Husband!


L. Fan. Yes, Sir, her Husband: So he is.


Count. Yes, vat you say to dis Ladee's Husban? Ha! Morbleu!


Old. Oh thou damnable betrayer of thy Daughter! I warrant you, I Will have a
Trick for him, and have him in the Pillory: you shall see your Husband peep
through Wood, I warrant you. Come, Sir, let us go.


Exit Wild. and Old. M. Fan. He is gone with some wicked Design, or other: Let
us fly.


Count. Me vill do vat you pleas, but Monseur le Count did never fly before.


L. Fan. Come, haste and escape, while he is gone out.


Exeunt. Enter Mrs. Gertrude, and her Sister Philadelphia; and Lord Bellamy.
Phil. Had not my Sister, against my will, surpised me with the sight of you; I
never had seen your Eyes again, but had found out some melancholy hole, and died
for shame.


Bell. I had been then completely miserable. She Is excellently Fair!


Phil. With what Confusion must I look on you! I never shall behold you, but
with a Face covered with blushes.


Bell. The infinite Honor you have done me, o'rewhelms me with such shame;
that, being conscious how little I deserve, I cannot bear it: But, Madam, I
will never rise from hence, till you have pardoned me for every Command I had
the Impudence to lay upon you.


Phil. There is no color for a Pardon: I owe you all the Thanks I am capable
of expressing; and I can forgive all the World, but my self. I beseech your
Lordship, impute the rashness of my Conduct to my Madness ^ that Madness which
my Father drove me to, who would have forced me to marry a Fop I hated: You I
had seen in public places often. What moved me to run to you, I know not; pray
think the best.


Gert. Come, Sister, Comfort your self; such things have been done: the
knowledge of this is in a narrow compass; you differ from your self so in this
habit, you cannot be known to have worn the other.


Bell. It is so much to my Advantage, that I will enquire no farther of the
Cause; but such it is, that makes me owe my Life, and all I have to you: which
I shall prostrate at your Feet:


Phil. My Kinswoman, my Lady Loveland, had never assisted me in my rash design;
but that, (Distracted) I know not how, she thought I would have killed my self,
had she not answered my desires.


Bell. A Thousand Blessings on her.


Phil. My Lord, I beseech you, do me the right to believe, That I intended to
have died e're you should have discovered me: for so, Heaven knows, I did.


Bell. That was unkindly designed, to lock up my chief Happiness.


Gert. Here are some coming; pray retire quickly. Bell. and Phil. retire. This
is a happy turn! The House is in some Uproar, whate're's the matter.


Enter Lady Fantast, Mrs. Fantast, and four Ladies. L. Fan. It Is true; this
damned Count is a Barber! The Barber in Cook-row knows him, and has seen him
often at London.


Mrs. Fan. I am undone for ever! Lost! Wretched! Miserable! Oh me! I will hide
my Head within some Hole, and never be seen again.


Gert. How? what, this man of Quality and Breeding, a Barber!


L. Fan. What Is that to you, Minx?


Gert. Could you mistake in Quality, and Breeding!


Mrs. Fan. Oh, Impertinante!


1 La. What, married to a Barber!


Gert. How? Married!


2 La. What pity '^is?


Enter Count. Mrs. Fan. Oh, I shall burst! He is not my Husband: I only said
so, for fear my Father-in-law and Wildish should have Murdered him in their
Rage.


Count. Vat, you Renounce me? Begar, me vill make you know, dat me am your
Husband.


Mrs. Fan. Avaunt, thou Impudent Fellow.


Gert. I could burst my Spleen at this; but I have more serious business.


Exit. Enter Oldwit. Count. Is all one, Morbleu, if you no let me have your
Person, me vill have your Monee, Testebleu.


Old. Say you so, Sirrah? I have confined you from flying, and have Officers
now to wait on you: and I will have your Ears, and have you whipped.


Count. Is all one for dat: me vill loose de two Ear, and be wippe two, tree,
four time, for Ten Tousan pound; and, begar, me vill have de Portion, do vat
you vill.


Old. Enter: here, take him away to Jayl.


Officers Enter, and hale the Count away. 3 Lady. It Is no great matter: she was
a Proud, Fantastic Creature.


4 Lady. Nay, for my part, I am glad on it.


Enter Trim, and Sir Humphrey. 1 Lady. How sneakingly he looks! He is but a
pitiful Fellow!


2 Lady. He looks like a Barber, methinks: Lord, that I should not discover it
before!


3 Lady. I think, I was bewitched, for my part.


4 Lady. That I should ever take him to be a Count!


Trim. Madam, as in Duty bound, I wish you happy in your Choice.


Sir Hum. Madam, much Joy to you, and your Count Barber: Ha, ha, ha.


M. Fan. I Will run away, and never see the Face of Man again.


Exit. L. Fan. Mr. Oldwit, farewell; Let me have my Coach, I Will never see Bury,
or you, after this Hour.


Old. Who waits there? Bring the Coach and six Horses to the Door; and, Grooms,
be ready instantly.


L. Fan. Farewell for ever.


Old. We'll Kiss at parting, faith. They kiss: she goes out in haste. Heaven be
praised, for this great Deliverance; no more shall I be plagued with with their
damned Wit and Breeding!


Enter Wildish. Wild. What, on your Knees?


Old. Ay, faith: and never had more Reason in my life.


Gert. Pray, Sir, down on your Knees once more.


Enter Mrs. Gertrude, Conducting Philadelphia, and Lord Bellamy in. Old. Say
thou so, my Girl?


Gert. Do you know this Face?


Old. My Daughter! Oh Heaven! Ten Thousand Welcoms! as many Blessings on thy
Head! Rise, dear Child, where have thou been? when did thou come? which way?
I am o'rjoy'd!


Gert. Ask no Questions; it is no time to ask Questions: here she is.


Old. Can thou forgive me, Child? I Will never endeavor more to force thy
Inclinations: Thou art free.


Phil. It Is I must ask your Pardon, Sir.


Old. Oh, name it not.


Bell. Now, Sir, can you part with what you love so dearly? If so, I beg her on
my Knees?


Old. How Is this? I am amazed! astonished! my Head turns round! How came this
about?


Bell. By Love and Fate, that Govern every thing. I loved this Daughter, while
she was lost to you and me: and, if she will accept of me, I have all I wish on
Earth.


Old. Have I my Senses, my Lord?


Gert. Again asking Questions! Come, come, do the Duty of a Father, and bestow
your Daughter, when she has, like a free Woman, chosen for her self.


Old. My Head turns round! but come, Daughter: are you willing, Phil.?


Phil. Yes; here I will Obey.


Gives her hand. Old. All Joy be with you. I am not my self!


Wild. Joy to my Friend. This is a happy Turn!


Bell. I was Passionate to Marry the other Sister, because I loved her; but I
think it more reasonable to Marry this, because she loves me:


Old. Call all my Servants, lay down all my Meat to the Fire, set all my
Hogsheads abroach: Call in the Fiddlers; let us Revel for a Month at least.


Enter Servants. Wild. Hold, hold, Sir, a little. Madam, Madam.


Pulls Gert. by the Sleeve. Gert. Have you any thing to say to me?


Wild. Can you find in your Heart to dispose of your Sister to my Friend, and
not of your Self to me?


Gert. Time enough to think on that, after I have tamed you, and brought you up
to hand: you are too Wild for me, a great deal.


Old. Come, Daughter, let me persuade you: Let it be a general Night of Joy.


Gert. I think I had as good: he is the most Importunate Lover, I shall never
be quiet for him. Well, I will Dissemble no longer: here is my Hand.


Wild. And here is my Heart: which you shall ever Reign in, while I live.


Gert. No Raptures. And know, for all my vapouring, I can obey, as well as ever
a meek, simpering Milksop on 'em all; and have ever held Non resistance a
Doctrine fit for all Wives, tho for nobody else.


Old. Call in the Fiddlers: I am Transported! I am all Air! Sirrah, go you, and
set the Bells a going in both Churches: Call in all my Neighbors, I Will have
him hanged that is Sober to Night: let every Room in my House Roar, that it may
keep the whole Town awake. Here are the Fiddles: fall to Dancing presently;
lose no time.

Let all this Night be spent in Mirth, and Wine. Dance.
Let Us lose no part of it in beastly Sleep.
This is the happy'st Day of all my Life;
I Have found my Daughter, and have lost my Wife.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Mountfort. I Was our Authors Advocate last year,
And then ye very gentle did appear.
To him ye now should more Indulgence show,
Eight months he has been sick, and well we know
How very little a sick man can do.
But could he Write with never so much Wit,
He must despair of seeing a full Pit:
Most of our constant Friends have left the Town,
Bravely to serve their King and Country gone.
Our unfrequented Theater must mourn,
Till the Brave Youths Triumphantly return.
Soft Men of Peace enough are left at home,
Daily to cram our House, if they would but come:
They eagerly elsewhere in throngs resort,
Crowding for Places in the well filled Court.
Here one who has been fifty years a Knave,
Strives for a Place, with one foot in the Grave.
Another there, who did what e're he could
Against the Sovereign Author of our good.
Some who rode Westward at least ten miles down,
Some made Blue Coats at him, and staid in Town.
All these would have preferment, as if they
Had to this Glorious Change prepared the way:
Thus there are more admirers to each place,
Than e're a Celebrated Beauty has.
And they who cannot that advancement gain,
They think their mighty Merits ought to attain,
Steal to some Grumbling Club, and there complain.
Pox on it, things go not well, I Will change my side,
I thought they would for my great Worth provide.
Pray have less Vanity, and learn more Wit,
Come here, we have Places for you all most fit
Within our empty Boxes and our Pit.
But you who use to hiss, pray keep away,
And try to Write before you damn a Play;
'Twill then so hard a task to you appear,
You will not have the Heart to be severe.
Books Newly Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Congratulatory Poem on His Highness the Prince of Orange's coming into
England. By Tho. Shadwell. A Congratulatory Poem to the Most Illustrious Queen
Mary, upon Her Arrival into England. By Tho. Shadwell. The Squire of Alsatia. A
Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho. Shadwell. The True
Widow. A Comedy Acted by their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho. Shadwell.
The Forced Marriage, or, The Jealous Bridegroom; As it is Acted by His
Majesty's Servants. Written by A. Behn. The Female Prelate: Being a History of
the Life, and Death of Pope Joan, A Tragedy; As it is Acted at the Theater
Royal. The Wanton Friar, or, The Irish Amor: A Novel in Twelves. The History
of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa; Written in French by the
Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored five Years under those Severities, with
an Account of his Deliverance; Translated into English, Quarto. Price 1 s.
FINIS.

