The Humorists, A COMEDY.

ACTED

By his ROYAL HIGHNESSES

SERVANTS.

Written by THO. SHADWELL Of the Middle Temple.

-- Quis iniquae
Tam patiens urbis tam ferreus ut teneat se.
LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1671.

To the most Illustrious Princess MARGARET DUCHESS OF NEWCASTLE.
May it please your Grace,

THe favorable Reception my Impertinents found from your Excellent Lord, and
my Noble Patron, and the great mercy your Grace has for all offenders of this
kind, have made me presume humbly to lay this Comedy at your feet: for none can
better than your Grace, protect this mangled, persecuted Play from the fury of
its Enemies and Detractors, who by your admirable Endowments of Nature and Art,
have made all Mankind your Friends and Admirers. You have not been content
only to surmount all your own Sex in the excellent Qualities of a Lady and a
Wife, but you must overcome all ours in wit and understanding. All our Sex have
reason to envy you, and your own to be proud of you, which by you have obtained
an absolute Victory over us. It were a vain thing in me to endeavor to commend
those excellent Pieces that have fallen from your Graces Pen, since all the
World does. And this is not intended for a Panegyric, but a Dedication, which
I humbly desire your Grace to pardon.

The Play was intended a Satyr against Vice and Folly, and to whom is it more
properly to be presented than to your Grace? who are, above all your Sex, so
eminent in Wit and Virtue. I have been more obliged by my Lord Duke than by any
man, and to whom can I show my gratitude better than to your Grace, that are so
excellent a part of him? But Madam, this (...) of mine is a very unsuitable
return to be made for his favors and the Noble Present of all your excellent
Books. But I hope your Grace will forgive me, when you consider, that the
Interest of all Poets is to fly for protection to Welbecke; which will never
fail to be their Sanctuary, so long as there you are pleased so nobly to
patronize Poesy, and so happily practice it. That will still be the only
place where they will find encouragement that do well, and pardon that do ill;
and of the latter of these no man has more need than

Madam, Your Graces Most humble and obedient Servant

THO. SHADWELL.

Preface.
THis Play (besides the Errors in the writing of it) came upon the Stage with
all the disadvantages imaginable: First, I was forced, after I had finished it,
to blot out the main design of it; finding, that, contrary to my intention, it
had given offense. The second disadvantage was, that notwithstanding I had (to
the great prejudice of the Play) given satisfaction to all the exceptions made
against it, it met with the clamorous opposition of a numerous party, bandied
against it, and resolved, as much as they could to damn it right or wrong,
before they had heard or seen a word on it. The last, and not the least, was,
that the Actors (though since they have done me some right) at first were
extremely imperfect in the Action of it. The least of these had been enough to
have spoiled a very good Comedy, much more such a one as mine. The last (viz.)
imperfect Action, had like to have destroy d She would if she could, which I
think (and I have the Authority of some of the best Judges in England for it) is
the best Comedy that has been written since the Restoration of the Stage: And
even that, for the imperfect representation of it at first, received such
prejudice, that, had it not been for the favor of the Court, in all
probability it had never got up again; and it suffers for it, in a great
measure, to this very day. This of mine, after all these blows, had fallen
beyond redemption, had it not been revived, after the second day, by her
kindness (which I can never enough acknowledge) who, for four days together,
beautified it with the most excellent Dancings that ever has been seen upon the
Stage. This drew my enemies, as well as friends, till it was something better
acted, understood, and liked, than at first: By this means the poor Play's life
was prolonged, and, I hope, will live in spite of Malice; if not upon the
Stage, at least in Print.

Yet do not think I will defend all the faults of it: Before it was altered, I
could better have answered for it: yet, as it is, I hope it will not wholly
displease you in the reading. I should not say so much for it, if I did not
find so much undeserved malice against it.

My design was in it, to reprehend some of the Vices and Follies of the Age,
which I take to be the most proper, and most useful way of writing Comedy. If I
do not perform this well enough, let not my endeavors be blamed.

Here I must take leave to dissent from those, who seem to insi* nuate that the
ultimate end of a Poet is to delight, without correction or instruction:
Methinks a Poet should never acknowledge this, for it makes him of as little
use to Mankind as a Fiddler, or Dancing Master, who delights the fancy only,
without improving the Judgment.

Horace, the best Judge of Poetry, found other business sor a Poet

Pectus praeceptis format amicis;
Asperitatis and Invidiae, corrector, and Irae,
Recte facta refert, orientia tempora notis
Instru^t Exemplis:
I Confess a Poet ought to do all that he can, decently to please, that so he
may instruct. To adorn his Images of Virtue so delightfully to affect people
with a secret veneration of it in others, and an emulation to practice it in
themselves: And to render their Figures of Vice and Folly so ugly and
detestable, to make people hate and despise them, not only in others, but (if
it be possible) in their dear selves. And in this latter I think Comedy more
useful than Tragedy; because the Vices and Follies in Courts (as they are too
tender to be touched) so they concern but a few; whereas the Cheats, Villainies,
and troublesome Follies, in the common conversation of the World, are of
concernment t^ all the Body of Mankind.

And a Poet can no more justly be censured for ill nature, in detesting such
Knaveries, and troublesome impertinencies, as are an imposition on all good
men, and a disturbance of Socie^ies in general, than the most vigilant of our
Judges can be thought so, for detesting Robbers and High-way*men; who are
hanged, not for the sake of the money they take (for of what value can that be
to the life of a man) but for interrupting common communication, and disturbing
Society in general. For the sake of good men ill should be punished; and it is
ill nature to the first, not to punish the last. A man cannot truly love a good
man, that does not hate a bad one; nor a Wiseman, that does not hate a Fool;
this love and hatred are correlatives, and the one necessarily implies the
other. I must confess it were ill nature, and below a man, to fall upon the
natural imperfections of men, as of Lunaticks, Idiots, or men born monstrous*
But these can never be made the proper subject of a Satyr, but the affected
vanities, and artificial fopperies of men, which (sometimes even contrary to
their natures) they take pains to acquire, are the proper subject of a Satyr.

And for the reformation of Fopps and Knaves, I think Comedy most useful,
because to render Vices and Fopperies very ridiculous, is much a greater
punishment than Tragedy can (...) upon 'em. There we do but subject 'em to
hatred, or at worst to death; here we make them live to be despised and laughed
at, which certainly makes more impression upon men, than even death can do.

Again, I confess a Poet ought to endeavor to please, and by this way of
writing may please, as well as by any way whatsoever, (if he writes it well)
when he does Simul and Iucunda and idonea dicere vitae.

Men of Wit and Honor, and the best Judges (and such as cannot be touched by
Satyr) are extremely delighted with it; and for the rest Odi profanum vulgus
and Arceo.

The rabble of little people, are more pleased with Jack Puddings being soundly
kicked, or having a Custard handsomely thrown in his face, than with all the
wit in Plays: and th^higher sort of Rabble (as there may be a rabble of very
fine people in this illiterate age) are more pleased with the extravagant and
unnatural actions, the trifles, and fripperies of a Play, or the trappings and
ornaments of Nonsense, than with all the wit in the world.

This is one reason why we put our Fopps into extravagant, and unnatural
habits; it being a cheap way of conforming to the understanding of those brisk,
gay Sparks, that judge of Wit or Folly by the Habit; that being indeed the
only measure they can take in judging of Mankind, who are Critics in nothing
but a Dress.

Extraordinary pleasure was taken of old, in the Habits of the Actors, without
reference to sense, which Horace observes, and reprehends in his Epistle to
Augustus

Garganum mugire putes nemus, aut Mare Tuscum,
Tanto cum strepitu ludi spectantur, and Arts,
Divitiaeque peregrinae, quibus oblitus actor,
Cum stetit in scena, concurrit dextera Laevae,
Dixit adhuc aliquid! nil sane, quid placet ergo?
But for a Poet to think (without wit or good humor, under such a Habit) to
please men of sense, is a presumption inexcusable. If I be g^ilty of this, it
is an error of my understanding, not of my will. But I challenge the most
clamorous and violent of my Enemies (who would have the Town believe that every
thing I write, is too nea^ly reflecting upon persons) to accuse me, with truth,
of representing the real actions, or using the peculiar, affected phrases, or
manner of speech of any one particular Man, or Woman living.

I cannot indeed create a new Lauguage, but the Fantastic Phrases, used in
any Play of mine, are not appropriate to any one Fop, but applicable to many.

Good men, and men of sense, can never be represented but to their advantage,
nor can the Characters of Fools Knaves, Whores, or Cowards (who are the people
I deal most with in Comedies) concern any that are not eminently so: Nor will
any apply to themselves what I write in this kind, that have but the wit, or
honesty, to think tolerably well of themselves.

But it has been objected, that good men, and men of sense enough, may have
blind-sides, that are liable to reprehension, and that such men should be
represented upon a Stage, is intolerable.

It Is true, excellent men may have errors, but they are not known by them, but
by their excellencies: their prudence overcomes all gross follies, or conceals
the less vanities, that are unavoidable Concomitants of humane nature; or if
some little errors do escape 'em. and are known, they are the least part of
those men, and they are not distinguished in the world by them, but by their
perfections; so that (if such blind-sides, or errors be reresented) they do not
reflect upon them, but upon such on whom these are p^edominant; and that
receive such a Biass from 'em, that it turns 'em wholly from the ways of
Wisdom or Morality.

And, even this representation, does not reflect upon any particular man, but
upon very many of the same kind: For if a man should bring such a humor upon
the Stage (if there be such a humor in the world) as only belongs to one, or
two persons, it would not be understood by the Audience, but would be thought
(for the singularity of it) wholly unnatural, and would be no jest to them
neither.

But I have had the fortune to have had a general humor (in a Play of mine)
applied to three, or four men (whose persons I never saw, or humors ever heard
of) till the Play was acted.

As long as men wrest the Writings of Poets to their own corrupted sense, and
with their Clamors prevail too, you must never look for a good Comedy of Humor,
for a humor (being the representation of some extravagance of Mankind) cannot
but in some thing resemble some man, or other, or it is mons^rous, and
unnatural.

After this restraint upon Poets, there is little scope left, unless we
retrieve the exploded Barbarismes of Fool, Devil, Giant, or Monster, or
translate French Farces, which, with all the wit of the English, added to them,
can scarce be made tolerable.

Mr. Johnson, I believe, was very unjustly taxed for personating particular
men, but it will ever be the fate of them, that write the humors of the Town,
especially in a foolish, and vicious Age. Pardon me ( Reader) that I name him
in the same page with my self; who pretend to nothing more, than to join with
all men of sense and learning in admiration of him; which, I think, I do not
out of a true understanding of him; and for this I cannot but value my self.
Yet, by extolling his way of writing, I would not insinuate to you that I can
practice it; though I would if I could, a thousand times sooner than any man's.

And here I must make a little digression, and take liberty to dissent from my
particular friend, for whom I have a very great respect, and whose Writings I
extremely admire; and though I will not say his is the best way of writing,
yet, I am sure, his manner of writing it is much the best that ever was. And I
may say of him, as was said of a Celebrated Poet, Cui unquam Poetarum magis
proprium fuit ^ubito aestro incalescere? Quis, ubi incaluit, fortius, and
falicius debacchatur. His Verse is smoother and deeper, his thoughts more quick
and surprising, his raptures more mettled and higher; and he has more of that
in his writing, which Plato calls (...), than any other Heroic Poet. And those
who shall go about to imitate him, will be found to flutter, and make a noise,
but never rise. Yet (after all this) I cannot think it impudence in him, or any
man to endeavor to imitate Mr. Johnson, whom he confesses to have fewer
failings than all the English Poets, which impli^s he was the most perfect, and
best Poet; and why should not we endeavor to imitate him? because we cannot
arrive to h^s excellence? It Is true we cannot, but this is no more an argument,
than for a Soldier (who considers with himself he cannot be so great a one as
Julius C^sar) to run from his Colors, and be none; or to speak of a less
thing, why should any man study Mathematics after Archimedes, etc. This
Principle would be an obstruction to the progress of all learning and knowledge
in the world. Men of all Professions ought certainly to follow the best in
theirs, and let not their endeavors be blamed, if they go as far as they can
in the right way, though they be unsuccessful, and attain not their ends. If
Mr. Johnson be the most raultless Poet, I am so far from thinking it impudence
to endeavor to imitate him, that it would rather (in my opinion) seem
impudence in me not to do it.

I cannot be of their opinion who think he wanted wit, I am sure, if he did, he
was so far from being the most faultless, that he was the most faulty Poet of
his time, but, it may be answered, that his Writings were correct, though he
wanted fire; but I think flat and dull things are as incorrect, and show as
little Judgment in the Author, nay less than sprightly and mettled Nonsense
does. But I think he had more true wit than any of his Contemporaries; that
other men had sometimes things that seemed more fiery than his, was because
they were placed with so many ^ordid and mean things about them, that they made
a greater show.

Inter quae varbum (...), si forte, decorum,
Si versus paulo concinnor, unus, and alter,
Injuste totum ducit, venditque Poema.
Nor can I think, to the writing of his humors (which were not only the
follies, but vices and subtleties of men) that wi^ was not required, but
judgment; where, by the way, they speak as if judgment were a less thing than
wit. But certainly it was meant otherwise by nature, who subjected wit to the
government of judgment, which is the noblest faculty of the mind. Fancy
rough-draws, but judgment smooths and finishes; nay judgment does in deed
comprehend wit, for no man can have that who has not wit. In fancy mad men
equal, if not excel all others, and one may as well say that one of those mad
men is as good a man as a temperate wiseman, as that one of the very fancyful
Plays (admired most by Women) can be so good a Play as one of Johnson's
correct, and well-governed Comedies.

The reason given by some, why Johnson needed not wit in writing humor, is,
because humor is the effect of observation, and observation the effect of
judgment; but observation is as much necessary in all other Plays, as in
Comedies of humor: For first, even in the highest Tragedies, where the Scene
lies in Courts, the Poet must have observed the Customs of Courts, and the
manner of conversing there, or he will commit many indecencies, and make his
Persons too rough and ill-bred for a Court.

Besides Characters in Plays being representations of the Virtues or Vices,
Passions or Affections of Mankind, since there are no more new Virtues, or
Vices; Passions, or Affections, the Idea's of these can no other way be
received into the imagination of a Poet, but either from the Conversation or
Writings of Men. After a Poet has formed a Character, (as fuppose of an
Ambitious Man) his design is certainly to write it naturally, and he has no
other ^ule to guide him in this, but to compare him with other men of that kind,
that either he has heard of, or conversed with in the world, or read of in
Books (and even this reading of Books is conversing with men) nay more,
(besides judging of his Character) the Poet can fancy nothing of it, but what
must spring from the Observation he has made of Men, or Books.

If this argument (that the enemies of humor use) be meant in this sense, that
a Poet, in the writing of a Fools Character, needs but have a man sit to him,
and have his words and actions taken; in this case there is no need of wit. But
it is most certain, that if we should do so, no one fool (though the best about
the Town) could appear pleasantly upon the Stage, he would be there too dull a
Fool, and must be helped out with a great deal of wit in the Author. I scruple
not to call it so, first, because ^is not your downright Fool that is a fit
Character for a Play, but like Sir John Dawe and Sir Amorous la Fool, your
witty, brisk, aie^y Fopps, that are Entreprennants. Besides, wit in the Writer,
(I think, without any Authority for it) may be said to be the invention of
remote and pleasant thoughts of what kind soever; and there is as much occasion
for such imaginations in the writing of a Curious Coxcomb's part, as in writing
the greatest Hero's; and that which may be folly in the Speaker, may be so
remote and pleasant, to require a great deal of wit in the Writer. The most
Excellent Johnson put wit into the mouths of the meanest of his people, and
which, is infinitely difficult, made it proper for 'em. And I once heard a
Person, of the greatest Wit and Judgment of the Age, say, that Bartholomew
Fair (which consists most of lo^ persons) is one of the Wittiest Plays in the
World. If there be no wit required in the rendering Folly ridiculous, or Vice
odious, we must accuse Juvenal the best Satyrist, and wittiest Man of all the
Latin Writers, for want of it.

I should not say so much of Mr. Johnson (whose Merit sufficiently justifies
him to all Men of Sense) but that I think my self a little obliged to vindicate
the Opinion I publicly declared, in my Epilogue to this Play; which I did upon
mature consideration, and with a full satisfaction in my Judgment, and not out
of a bare affected vanity of being thought his Admirer.

I have only one word more, to trouble you with, concerning this Trifle of my
own, which is, that, as it is at present, it is wholly my own, without
borrowing a tittle from any man; which I confess is too bold an attempt for so
young a Writer; for (let it seem what it will) a Comedy of humor (that is not
borrowed) is the hardest thing to write well; and a way of writing, of which a
man can never be certain.

Creditur, ex medi^ quia res accessit, habere
Sudoris minimum, sed habet comoedia tanto
Plus oneris, quanto veniae minus.
That which (besides judging truly of Mankind) makes Comedy more difficult, is
that the faults are naked and bare to most people, but the wit of it
understood, or valued, but by few. Wonder not then if a man of ten times my
parts, miscarries in the Attempt.

I shall say no more of this of mine, but that the Humors are new (how well
chosen I leave to you to judge) and all the words and actions of the Persons in
the Play, are always suitable to the Characters I have given of them; and, in
all the Play, I have gone according to that definition of humor, which I have
given you in my Epilogue, in these words:

A Humor is the Biasse of the Mind,
By which, with violence, it is one way inclined.
It makes our actions lean on one side still,
And, in all Changes, that way b^nds the Will.
Vale.

Prologue
Written by a Gentleman of Quality.
SInce you are all resolved to be severe,
To laugh and rail at every thing you hear,
I know not why a Prologue should forbear:
First we declare against the wary Wit,
Who having had the luck of one good hit
Dares not appear again before the Pit.
Some have done well; yet to remove all doubt,
Men must fight more than once to be thought st^t:
Others are too much in a scribbling vein,
As if they had a looseness in the brain:
These catch at every little slight occasion,
As our Gay empty Sparks at each new Fashion:
Perpetually they fumble for the Bays,
With Poems, Songs, Lampoons, and long dull Plays.
A man would wonder what the Devil they meant,
(Like ill-nos'd Currs that only foil the scent)
To mangle Plots, and they will as boldly do it;
As our Sir Martin undertakes the Lute.
Now for the Women --
The little Fools into extremes are got,
Either they are stone cold or scalding hot.
Some peevish and ill-bred, are kind to none;
Others stark mad, in love with all the Town.
The famous Eater had his Worm to feed,
These Rampants have a hungry Worm indeed.
And as his ravenous stomach made him get
Tripes, Livers, and the coursest sort of Meat,
Our craving Damsels, rather than stand out,
With any raw-bone Coxcombs run about;
Making no difference of Size or Age,
From the Grim Hector to the beardless Page.
Learn little ones, for shame learn to be wise,
And not so very rank, nor yet so nice.
Who buryes all his Wealth, and never lends,
Is more a Wretch than he that wildly spends.
And she who is so coy to fancy no man,
Is yet a viler thing than she that is common.
If you will own your selves concerned you may,
And for a Saucy Prologue damn the Play.
Dramatis Personae.
(...). ONe that is in Pox, in Debt, and all the Misfortunes that can be, and
in the midst of all, in love with most Women, and thinks most Women in love
with him. ybob. A Fantastic Coxcomb, that makes it his business to speak ^ine
things and wit as he thinks; and always takes notice, or makes others take
notice of any thing he thinls well said. Brisk. A Brisk ayery fantastic,
singing, dancing Coxcomb, that sets up for a well-bred Man and a Man of honor,
but mistakes in every thing, and values himself only upon the vanity and
foppery of Gentlemen. Raymund A Gentleman of wit and honor, in love with
Theodosia. Sir Richard Loveyouth. Husband to the Lady Loveyouth, supposed dead.
Sneake. A young Parson, Fellow of a College, Chaplain to the Lady Loveyouth,
one that speaks nothing but Fustian with Greek and Latin, in love with
Bridget. Pullin. A French Surgeon, originally a Barber. Lady Loveyouth. A vain
amorous Lady, mad for a Husband, jealous of Theodosia, in love with Raymund.
Theodosia. A witty ayery young Lady, of a great fortune, committed to the
government of Lady Loveyouth her Aunt, persecuted with the love of Crazy,
Brisk, and Drybob, whom she mimicks and abuses, in love with Raymund. Bridget.
Woman to the Lady Loveyouth. Mrs. Errant. One that sells old Gowns, Petticoats,
Laces, French Fans and Toys, and Jessumine Gloves, and a running Bawd. Striker.
A Habberdasher's Wife, a vain fantastic Strumpet, very sond and jealous of
Crazy. Friske. A vain Wench of the Town, debauched and kept by Brisk.
Servants, Attendants, Fiddlers, Bailiffs.
SCENE LONDON, in the Year 1670.

Duration of the Scene 24 hours.

THE HUMORISTS.
ACT the First.
Enter Crazy in ^ Nightgown and Cap. Crazy. OH this Surgeon! this damned
Surgeon, will this Villainous Quack never come to me? Oh this Plaster on my
Neck! It gnaws more than Aquafortis: this abominable Rascal has mistaken sure,
and given me the same Caustic he applied to my Shins, when they were opened
last.


Enter Mrs. Errant. Errant. Good morrow sweet Mr. Crazy.


Craz. Good morrow Mrs. Errant.


Errant. How does the pain in your Head?


Craz. Oh I am on the Rack! No Primitive Christian under Dioclesian ever
suffered so much as I do under this Rascal: This Villain, that like a Hangman
destroys Mankind, and has the Law for it. Oh abominable Quacks! that devour more
than all the Diseases would do, were they let alone, which they pretend to cure.


Errant. Ay, but Sir, yours is a French Surgeon, and who so fit to cure the
French Disease as a French-Surgeon?


Crazy. Yes, as one poison expels another; but if this Rogue should cure me, he
can cure me of nothing but what he has given me himself: 'twas nothing, when I
put my self into his hands; he has brought it to what it is, and I think I must
deal with him as they do that are bitten with a Viper, crush the Rogues Head
and apply it to the part, for if I do not kill him, he will be the death of me.


Errant. It may be Sir, he favors the Disease for Countrey's sake.


Craz. A Curse on these French Cheats, they begin to be as rife amongst us, as
their Country Disease, and do almost as much mischief too: No Corner, without
French Tailors, Weavers, Milliners, Strong-Water-Men, Perfumers, and Surgeons:
but must I be such a fantastic Sot as to be cheated by them? Could not I make
use of my own Contrymen, that are famous all over the World for cheating one
another?


Errant. I am heartily sorry Sir, for you could not have been ill in so
unseasonable a time.


Craz. Oh! why Mrs. Errant, what is the matter?


Errant. Do you think he could not mend you, and patch you up to hold together
a little for the present?


Craz. Why Mrs. Erran^? Oh death! what is this I feel?


Errant. I was with Mrs. Striker the Habberdashers Wife, this morning, to sell
some of my little French Toys, as Fans, Points, that had been worn a little,
and Jessamine Gloves; but chiefly a Maid of Honors Old Gown, that fitted her
to a hair; and a delicate white Mantou: and a pair of the neatest little Shoes
that had been worn two or three days by a Countess, that bewitched the very
heart of her.


Craz. Well! and how does my dear Striker? Does she not desire to see me poor
heart.... Oh what a twinge was that?


Errant. She does most impatiently wait the good hour, that she may steal from
her Husband and give you a meeting at the WhiteHart at Hammersmith.


Craz. Alas! dear soul! I know she loves me entirely. Oh my Shinne! it is there
now: sweet Mrs. Errant sit down, and do me the favor to chafe it a little.

[She sits and rubs his Shins, he makes sour faces.
Enter Raymund. Raym. Ha, ha, ha! this is pleasant, 'faith; this Itinerant
Habberdasher of small Wares, is a Ranger of the Game, a very BawdErrant...
chafing of his Shins too! ha, ha, ha.... but how could I think any of that
Profession could be otherwise, procuring lies so in their way, they cannot
avoid it.


Craz. She is a most delicate person, I love her infinitely, and I believe she
has no unkindness for me.


Raym. Ah brave Crazy! do st thou hold up thy humor still? Art thou still in
love with all Women?


Craz. 'Faith Raymund I cannot but have an affection, nay a veneration for the
whole Sex yet.


Raym. I Will swear all Women ought to believe thou love 'em, for thou have
suffered more for them than all Knight Errants in Romances ever did. I Will say
that for thee, and thou have as much Passive-Valour as to Pill and Bolus, as
any man in Christendom.


Errant. It shows him to be a person of much generosity and honor.


Craz. Perhaps there is not a truer Lover of the Sex than my self among
Mankind..... Oh my Shoulders!


Raym. Thou have reason, witness that twinge else: well certainly so much Love
and Pox never met together in one Man since the Creation. Nor 'faith do I know
which is the more tolerable Disease of the two.


Craz. Prithee Raymund no more of this Raillery.


Errant. Do not scandalize Mr. Crazy so; the Venom of his Disease is all gone,
this is but a Rheum, a mere Rheum.


Raym. Why thou Villain Crazy, will thou never leave wheadling Women thus*


Craz. Prethe^ leave off; I tell thee it is no more.


Raym. Why what impudence is this? If thou go on in this, thou art not fit
to go loose, I will have a Red Cross set upon thy Door: why don't I know thou
have taken Bushels of Pills and Bolus's enough to purge all the Corporations in
the Kings Dominions.


Craz. You make good use of your time, to get drunk so soon in a Morning.


Raym. Have thou not raised the price of Sarsaperilla, and Guiacum all over the
Town.. the Drugsters are very ungrateful Fellows, if they do not give thee a
Pension for the good thou have done to their Trade.


Craz. Mind him not Mrs. Errant, he is lewdly drunk...


Errant. I protest Sir he is the least in my thoughts.


Raym. Why thou Sot thou, do thou talk of Love, and say thou have no Pox; why
I will not give Six Months purchase for an Estate during the term of thy
Natural Nose! I shall l^ve to see thee snuffle worse than a Scotch-Bag-Pipe
that has got a flaw in the Bellows.


Craz. Let him alone, let him alone! this is a way he has with him.


Errant. He Is a very uncivil man, let me tell you that.


Raym. Why have thou not for these seven years observed thy seasons like the
Swallow or the Cuckoe; with them thou stir'st abroad in the Summer, and with
them retir'st in the Winter; why thou art a kind of Vegetable, that peep^st out
thy head at the coming of the Spring, and Shrink'st it in again at the approach
of the Winter; while we that drink Burgundy, like Bay-trees, are green and
flourish all the year.


Craz. Why, have thou the confidence to compare Wine to Beauty?


Errant. Ay, I thought what a proper man you were.


Craz. Wine, that makes you swelled like Trumpetters with pimpl'd Faces; and
Eyes staring like Pigs half roasted, prominent Bellies, perished Lungs, tainted
Breaths, parched Livers, decayed Nerves, perpetual Fevers, Dropfies, Gowts,
Palseys, and a Complication of more Diseases than you drink Healths.


Raym. With what ease can I return upon thee; Women, that bring you to sore
Eyes, weakened Hamms, S^iatica's, falling Noses, and Rheums, Crazy.


Errant. Now out upon you for a base man, to revile Women thus.


Raym. But then Wine, the Bond of humane Society, that makes us free as
absolute Princes, rich without covetousness, merry, valiant, witty, generous,
and wise without allay; that inspires us far above the level of humane
thoughts, and affords us diviner Raptures than the deities of old did to their
prophets in their Ecstasies.


Craz. But then Beauty, Heaven's brightest Image, the thing which all the World
desires and fights for; the Spur to Honor and all glorious Actions, without
which no Dominion would have been prized or Hero ever heard of; the most
gentle, sweet, delicate, soft thing --


Errant. O dear Mr. Crazy! Go thy ways, thou art a sweet man.

[ She claps Crazy on the Shoulders.
Craz. O Death! what have you done? You have murdered me; oh you have struck me
just upon a Callous Node, do you think I have a body of Iron?


Errant. Sir I beg your pardon, I had quite forgot it, this Rheum is very
violent.


Craz. Oh, oh.


Raym. The most sweet, delicate, gentle soft thing, go on Crazy.


Craz. The most delicate, sweet, gentle, soft -- Oh Devil what do I endure?


Enter Pullin the French Surgeon. Pullin. G^d morr, good morre.


Craz. Oh, oh!


Pull. It Is ver vel, come to our Business, ve vil proceed to de operation.


Craz. Oh my Neck and Shoulders.


Pull. Yes, yes, I vas ver vel assure of dat; it vil put you to de pain
^ndeed; but if dear be such tinge in England for draw, den I am no Syrigin
indeed.


Craz. Oh you damned eternal Son of a Whore Quack!


Pull. Cacque morbleu! Vat is Cacque? I know ver vel vat is Son for a Whore,
but vat is Cacque vertu-bleu I can no tell.


Raym. It Is a certain Rascal, that cheats a man both of his money and health.


Craz. Just such a Rascal as you are.


Pull. Begar, you are mistake, Cacque is no French vard; it is for the Damned
Sy^igin-English. Mais vat is de matre vid you?


Raym. Damned English Surgeon! Why you impudent Villain, did not you when you
came first into England, ride upon a Milch Ass, and did not you maintain your
self by selling her Milk to people in Consumptions, till you set up for an
abominable Barber, but for the damned roughness of your hand and the filthy
noisomness of your breath, could get no Customers; and then were fai^ to set up
with six penyworth of Diaculum and a Collection of rot^n Pippins, and pretended
only to the Cure of Broken Heads; and had you any other Customers for a year
together than the Cudgel Players of Moor-Fields, or now and then a Drawer that
was wounded with a Quart Pot.


Pull. I am amaze, vat is de business?


Errant. Sir, I must make bold to take my leave.


Craz. Your Servant sweet Mrs. Errant, present my service to Theodosia, and let
her know I have a passion for her, you understand me.


Errant. Fear it not Sir --

[Ex. Errant.]
Pull. Ver vel, you make de jest of me.


Raym. Was not the next thing you arrived at, the inestimable secret of
Brimstone and Butter for the Cure of the Itch, and had you any one Receipt more?


Pull. It Is ver vel indeed Mr. Crazy! I am come to be abuse.


Craz. Why, have you the impudence to deny this: Good Mounseur Pullin, do not I
remember when you first set up for the Cure of this Disease you pretend to,
with only two pound of Turpentine and a little China, a few Hermodactyles, a
pound or two of Sarsaperilla, and Guiacum; two Glyster-bags and one Syringe:
Could all thy wealth arrive at more Materials than these?


Raym. I must confess, since, you have learned some little experience, by
marrying an unsound English Strumpet, that was peppered by some of your
Ambassadors Footmen; she, by the many Courses she has gone through, has taught
you something.


Pull. Tete bleu, dat I should be dus affronte.


Raym. If you had been good for any thing, there were Diseases enough in your
own Country, to maintain you, without coming to us, with a Pox to you.


Pull. O Jernie, vat is dis? I have cure ten tousand Gentlemen of de Clappe in
Paris, and to be abuse! --


Craz. Am not I obliged to you then, that you would not cure one in England?
for Raymund, now there is not a Woman here, I confess to you, he has not wholly
cured me; but on my conscience I can do a Woman no hurt.


Pull. I am assure dat all de Operators for de Clapp in England can no do so
much as I do to cure you.


Raym. Why have thou not been longer in curing him than a Chancery Suit is
depending?


Craz. Did not I put my self into your hands when it was first a Ghonorhea
virulenta? Did not you by your damned French Tricks, your Styptick-Injections,
and your Turpentine Clysters, suffer me to be Chorde, to come to Caruncles, to
the Phymasii, Caries, Pubii, Bubones, Herniae.


Raym. Nay, have you not driven his Enemy out of the open Field, where he might
have been easily conquered, into his Strong Holds and Garrisons.


Pull. Ver vel, ver vel.


Craz. Is there any one Symptom which I have not had.. oh - - have I not had
your Carbuncula, Achrocordones, Mermecii, Thymi, all sorts of Ulcers
superficial and profound, Callous, Cancerous, Fistulous.


Raym. Hey-brave Crazy! thou have terms enough to set up two reasonable
Mountebanks.


Craz. Have I not had your Pustul^, Crustatae, and Sine Crustis Ver^cae,
Cristae, Tophi, Ossis, Caries, Chyronya, Telephia, Phagadenia, Disepulotica.


Raym. What art thou going to raise the Devil with these hard words?


Pull. Vel! and have I no cure all dese? Have I no given you de sweat, not in
a damned English Tub or Hot-house, but I have taught you to sweat in de Cradle,
and vid Spirit of Vine in de Paper Lanthorn, ala Francois, and taught you de
use of de Baine d'Alexandre.


Craz. And has all this done any thing but driven him to his Winter Quarters,
where he domineers as much as ever; Oh I have him here.


Raym. You have given him so many Bolus's in Leaf Gold, that the loathsomness
of 'em, has made his Stomach turn at a Twenty Shillings Piece, and that is the
reason he never carries any in his Pocket.


Craz. Do you hear that Rascal? I have been cheated enough by you; but I Will
bilk your Cribbidge for you.


Pull. But assure de Law will give de remede.


Craz. And that thou m^yest be cursed sufficiently for this, may thou be as
long in Law as I have been in Physic.


Raym. Prithee curse him to purpose, may he be choked with Bolus's, drowned in
Dyet-drink, or smothered in a Privy-house, that he may die by that Excrement by
which he lived.


Pull. Diable, no curse me, give de Madiction to the Dam Whore.


Craz. O Impudence! I protest to you Raymund she is as pretty a civil young
Lady, and between you and I, a Person of Honor?


Raym. She was a very Pocky Person of Honor.


Craz. And on my Conscience and Soul loved me as passionately as any young Lady
in England.


Raym. Besides, if she were a Whore, her Calling is to give it, and yours to
cure it, Sirrah.

[To Pullin.]
Craz. Shall I suffer so excellent, so virtuous a Person, to be traduced by
your fowl Mouth, you Rascal: Get you gone, you Dog. --

Kicks him.
Pull. O vat is dis? Elp, Elp.... vel, vel, dear is the Law for do me Justice
-- -- --

Ex. Pullin.
Enter Footman. Footm. Sir, here is a Lady alighted out of a Coach, and coming
up hither.


Craz. 'Slife a Lady! give me my Hat and Peruke, quick, quick, prithee Raymund
help me quickly, that I may appear well before her.


Raym. If thou can appear no better than thou art, she will not like thee very
well.


Craz. So, so! you say I am not in favor with the Ladies.


Enter Mrs. Striker. Strik. Your humble servant sweet Mr. Crazy, I have just
broke loose from my husband, and come to kiss your hands. Oh cry you mercy, you
have a Stranger with you; I protest if I had known it, I would not have been so
bold.


Raym. Though I be a stranger Madam, I am ready to be as well acquainted with
you as you please.


Craz. Dear Madam Striker stay a little, this is a Friend of mine, you may
trust him You see Raymund, alas, I am no body with the Ladies, not I. This is a
Person of honor.


Raym. No doubt on it.


Strik. Sir, I beseech you misconstrue not my innocent intentions, I heard Mr.
Crazy was not well, or I should not have seen him.


Craz. If I were not, I should be obliged to my distemper, were it the Gout,
and be very loath to part with it, to be deprived of the honor of seeing you;
but I am very well.


Friske. Your servant, sweet Mr. Crazy, I heard you were not well.

Enter Mrs. Friske
Raym. Another! they flock about this Fellow as Ravens do about a sick man for
the reversion of Carrion.


Strik. How came she here tro? I do not like this Mr. Crazy.


Frisk. Your servant Madam Striker.


Strik. Your servant Madam Friske.

[ Raym. takes Striker aside.
Craz. Really, Madam Friske, this is such a favor as will make me eternally
indebted to you -- but I am so well, as I intended to come and kiss your hands.


Frisk. But how came she here I wonder?


Raym. Pray Madam, do me the favor to tell me who she is?


Strik. Sir, I Will inform you present^y. Truly Mr. Crazy, this is not civil, to
be so familiar with such a one as she is in my presence; I thought for my part
that I had been enough for any one person.


Friske. Mr. Crazy, one word with you; I wonder for my part Madam Fli^ts should
have no more breeding than to interrupt us.


Strik. Why I Will tell you Sir, what she is, she is a person of mean descent; I
think her Father was at first a Journey-man Tailor or some such thing: She was
debaucht by one Mr. Brisk an Inns ofC^urt-Gentleman, and I am sure 'twas well
f^r her, she was so; for before that she went in Paragon and Pattens: for my
part I would not be known to be in her company for more than I Will speak of.


Raym. This is pleasant.


Strik. Pray Mr. Crazy favor me with one word; Lord, Madam Friske, cannot you
let one speak a word with ones Friend?


Frisk. Your friend, alas poor soul, sure I may pretend to as much interest in
him as you can.


Strik. How Is this? you pretend!


Craz. No Ray^und, I have no share in the Ladies favors not I! Do you see how
jealous the poor things are of me, poor Hearts! Oh my Shoulders! they are both
Persons of Quality -- But Madam Striker, pray mistrust not my affection.


Raym. Pray Madam, let me beg the favor to know who she is?


Frisk. She! why she is a pitiful Habberdasher's Wife, her Husband's a poor
sneaking Cuckold; she has a very ill reputation, for my part I don't care for
being seen in her Company, that is the truth on it.


Raym. That Is very well.


Frisk. She used to appear in a scurvy Fleetstreet Dress, but now she comes
into the Pit at the Playhouse, and makes brisk Reparties to young Sparks.


Strik. What to have such a scandalous Woman as she come to your Chamber* truly
if it were not here, I should have soon left her company. One may have one
Friend I confess, or so; but to have two or three club for one, I scorn her.


Raym. I see there are Punctilio's of Honor among Whores as well as Bullies.


Frisk. But pray Mr. Crazy, come hither; you do not tell me how you like my new
Petticoat here?


Strik. Lord, Madam Friske, why how should he like it, it is but an ordinary
^light thing; for my part I do not like it at all.


Frisk. No matter what you say, as long as one does.


Raym. Who Is that one, Crazy?

[Jogs him.]
Craz. 'Slife you hurt my Arm; but that one is I man, that thou should not
find it.


Strik. But pray Mr. Crazy how do you like this Point about my Neck?


Craz. It Is a very pretty Ornament, but you give an Ornament to that.


Frisk. That (...) is a foolish Counterfeit Point.


Strik. I come, come; I come by my things honestly.


Frisk. Ay, and I as honestly as you too; but pray how do you like this Ruby
upon my Finger?


Craz. It Is very glorious indeed.


Strik. Is not this a very pretty Locket?


Frisk. Let me see what is a Clock? it is just Eleven --


Strik. It Is a quarter past by mine.


Frisk. Yours! Ay I think so; yours is a scurvy Silver Watch, and does not go
right.


Strik. Good lack a day, a Silver Watch! why it should go with any Gold Watch
in Town for 20 l.


Frisk. Yes, yes; it is very like a Silver Watch can go as well as a Gold one?
ha, ha, ha --


Raym. Hey! they use him as if they were bidding for him by Candles ends.


Strik. Alas poor silly Creature!


Raym. But, Madam Friske, from whence come all these fine things?


Frisk. Ha, ha, there is a way that we have Sir.


Strik. But Mr. Crazy, I must of necessity leave you; my husband will ^e come
home: but I Will see you again.


Craz. I am sorry you must make me unhappy so soon, but have you a Coach?


Strik. Yes, I have a Hackney waiting below.


Frisk. O fie! a Hackney! I hate 'em all they are so uneasy: I have a Coach
with a Coronet waits for me.


Strik. Ay, ay, there is some could borrow Lords Coaches too, if they would do
as others do, Madam Friske, let me tell you that.


Frisk. I don't know, Madam Striker, but I believe they would if they could.


Strik. Well, well, I like a Hackney; but it is no matter, Mr. Crazy, your
servant --

[Ex.
Frisk. I must be gone Sir too.


Craz. Will you eclipse me so soon?


Frisk. Indeed I beg your pardon for eclipsing of you, but I cannot help it at
present; your servant --

[Ex.
Craz. Have you such Ladies as these come to vifit you?


Raym. No Sir, I keep no such ill Company.


Craz. Company! why they are Persons of Honor.


Raym. Yes, yes, I know Habberdashers Wives and Tailors Daughters are Persons
of Honor; fare you well, fare you well, and keep your Persons of Honor to
your self.


Craz. But do ye hear Sir?


Raym. No Sir, no; no wheadles upon me, I am to dine at Chatolins with some
Persons of Honor -- Adieu.

[Ex.
Craz. 'Sdeath! how unlucky is this, he should discover it, Boy.

[Enter Boy.]
Boy. Sir.


Craz. Come in and dress me: Oh my head and shoulders --

[Exit.
The Second ACT.
Enter Raymund and Footman. Raym. I wonder my Lady Loveyouths Woman appears not
yet; this was the time appointed! if'twere an assignation for her self, she
would be more punctual: Waiting Women have always the Grace to keep touch for
that. Sir, Go tell Mrs. Bridget I am here.


^ootm. I will Sir --

[Ex.
Raym. I am very uneasy, till I hear an Account from her of my Letter to
Theodosia, Excellent Theodosia, I have sought many opportunities to make my
passion known to her; and upon her receiving it, depends my life or death.

[Enter Bridget and Footman. Oh Mrs. Bridget your servant --

Come! you are my little Genius from whom I expect nothing but good; what is my
doom?


Bridge. Why Sir, she read your Letter, and whether ^he would not trust me,
being a Servant to her Aunt, or what it was, I know not; but methought your
Letter did not seem so agreeable as I expected.


Raym. He Is a faint Soldier that gives off for one repulse, if she were as
hard to be taken as Candia, I Will not raise the Siege: but you are my dear
Confident, do me the honor to receive this little earnest of my Gratitude: I
must confess it is too small a Present, and yet enough to make a Waiting Woman
betray her Country, were it in her power.

[Aside.
Bridget. Really Sir, you make me blush.


Raym. No more, no more; but dear Mrs. Bridget, can you tell me why your Lady
so narrowly watches me, that I could never yet have opportunity to speak to her
Niece?


Bridge. Well! there is nothing I can keep from you; the truth is, my Lady loves
you most passionately, and desires no such Rivals as her Niece, I warrant you.


Raym. Prithee don't rally with me, but tell me --


Bridge. You are strangely dull, if you perceive it not your self; does she not
admit those that have less fortunes, as Mr. Drybob and Mr. Brisk to make love
to her, and yet bars you of that liberty: Can this be any thing but her love to
you?


Raym. It is impossible.


Bridge. Well, it shall all out; the truth on it is, she can neither think nor
talk of any thing but Mr. Raymund in her very sleep; she embraces me when I lie
with her, and calls me Mr Raymund; I remember once she did it so eagerly, I
protest I was afraid of a Rape.


Raym. If this be true she tells me, I must disguise my love to her Niece, or I
shall be sure to lose her.


Bridge. My Lady, Sir you know, has a great Estate, besides her Jointu^e, and
has the disposal of Theodosia absolutely given her by her B^others Will.


Raym. What u lucky Devil designed this to cross me.


Bridge. If you please to consider, 'twould be no ill bargain for you; I should
be very glad of the honor to serve you in it.


Raym. But I have heard she is not yet assured of the death of her husband,
indeed I have been told he parted from her about three years since upon some
discontent, and never since was heard of.


Bridge. Yes Sir, my Lady heard of him from Venice, from whence about two years
since, he went to the War at Candia, and we having never hea^d from him fince,
conclude him dead.


Raym. It Is very probable, she is employed by her Lady, I must not trust her.
It must be so, I see there is no way to come to the Niece, but by the Aunt --
Wonder not that I am am surpised at th^s News, since it is a happiness too
great for my belief.

[Aside.
Bridge. Do you think it a happiness?


Raym. So great, that I am doubly paid for the loss of Theodosia, in gaining so
excellent a Lady as my Lady Loveyouth; and I Will assure you there I should have
made my first address, but that I heard she had made a Vow of Widdowhood.


Bridge. And did you believe that Vow Sir?


Raym. No I warrant you. I would as soon credit a Knight of the Post, as a
protesting Widow. Dear Mrs. Bridget let me entrust you with my love to your
Lady, since it concerns me so nearly.

[Aside.
Bridge. Sir, I shall be very glad of this occasion, and can the more easily
promise you my assistance in it; since Mr. Sneake, whom I have no small power
over, can persuade my Lady to any thing.


Raym. Is It he that speaks nothing but Greek or Latin, or English Fustian?
He Is Fellow of a College, if I mistake not.


Bridge. The same Sir.


Raym. Indeed I have heard he is a Well-wisher to you. But he is out of Town --


Bridge. He will be in Town this Afternoon, I had an Epistle from him, which
tells me so, which perhaps is one of the pleasant'st you ever read.


Raym. What Is this?

A Letter. Perdurant and inconcussed Mistress, It Is not only my Solamen, but
the Celsitude of my felicity, that the transpiration of our Chaste Flames of
Sympathetick Amity, are mutually continuate; whose perpetuity no Snake hair'd
destiny nor Furies-Furiband nor the ghastly Ghosts of Central Nigritude, with
all their damned infernal Powers, can ever evert, renode, or dissolve -- Why
this is conjuring.


Bridge. O Lord Sir, yonder comes Mr. Drybob; walk off I beseech you, I must not
be seen with you. --

Ex. Raym. [Enter Mr. Drybob with a little French Dog under his arm.
Dryb. Well, I know some Sots, that are still presenting their Mistrisses rich
Rings and Lockets, till they spend more than their Portions in the wooing o^
them; but let 'em match me for a Present. He e's a pretty French Dog shall
charm the Heart of Theodosia This is as new a Present it may be as can be
thought on, besides, really it is very pretty and fantastic.


Bridge. What has this Fopp got under his Arm?


Dryb. Besides, this Dog I stole from my Mother, who loved him as well as if
she had whelp'd him her self; and I can say so many fine ingenious pretty
things upon him too, besides a Song that I have made of him that shall bewitch
her certainly.


Bridge. How n^w Mr. Drybob, what are you designing some Reformation in the
Government, you are so studious?


Dryb. Oh Mrs. Bridget your Servant! my little Factor in Love! ha! I think that
was no ill expression of mine; but what News of the Cargo of my Love, which I
entrusted you with? Will it turn to account? I think by the way, that thought
of mine was well enough? Oh what think thou?


Bridge. O admirably well said!


Dryb. Nay, it may be I do say as many fine things in a year, as ever a wit of
'em all; but let that alone.


Bridge. I think so, you are the Chief of all the Wits.


Dryb. I! no alas, not I; I know they will have me one amongst them, do what I
can: but deuce take me, if I care much for the Name on it. Indeed I do value my
self upon Reperty a little that is the truth on it, and not to lie to you, I must
confess I am very happy in that; but alas! who can help it.


Bridge. But what have you got under your Arm Sir?


Dryb. A pretty little French Dog, which I intend to sacrifice to my Mistress;
Sacrifice! observe that word -- hum, ha.


Bridge. What Sir, shall he die for your Mistress?


Dryb. I thank you for that, ha! never a Dog in Christendom shall have the
honor to die for my Mistress, I intend to do that my self, if there be
occasion for it.


Bridge. How then Sir?


Dryb. I intend to present him to her delicate Ala^laster hands, as an
Hieroglyphick of my affection; Hierogliphick? ha, ha, well, I am amazed to
think how these thoughts come into my head. I am, as to matter of Jests, as my
F iend Ovid was in Verses, Quicquid conabor dicere -- now as I hope to live,
this came into my head before I was aware on it.


Bridge. Good lack! it is wonderful.


Dryb. Nay, faith, it is strange, as thou say, but would I might never stir out
of this place, if it was not ex tempore, I protest and vow, as I am an honest
man it was.


Bridge. It is impossible.


Dryb. Nay, prithee, dear Mrs. Bridget, believe now, deuce take me, if it was
not; but faith I think Hieroglyphick was very pretty and Catachrestical. -- hum.


Bridge. Sir, If you please, I Will sacrifice this Dog to my Lady Theodosia. --


Dryb. No, I beg your pardon, I will my self make an Oblation of him to her, as
I do of this little Tribute of a Purse to you.


Bridge. Your humble Servant Sir.

If this Trade holds, I shall get as much by Bribery as ever a Magistrate in the
Nation can --


Dryb. But pray how does Theodosia receive or entertain my Love? no, no, my
Flame, my Flame? ay Flame: that is well enough expressed too, hah.


Bridge. Very well Sir; and yet I must tell you, you have a very dangerous
Rival, one Mr. Crazy.


Dryb. He, pshaw! a pox on him, he has no wit; a damned dull fellow, he cannot
break a jest in an hour: but may I have the liberty to go and caress my
Mistress.


Bridge. No Sir, at present she is not visible.


Dryb. Visible! ha, ha, ha, very prettily said upon my life and soul; well I
see thou art happy in thy thoughts sometimes as well as I am.

[Bell rings.
Bridge. Hold Sir, I hear my Ladies Bell! I am called, adieu.


Dryb. Adieu -- my dear Love Factor, as I said before.

Enter Crazy. Here comes Crazy, ha, ha, he is my Rival, pox on him; I fear him
not; no, no, Th^odosia has judgment to distinguish between a dull fellow and a
man of parts. Hold, I must conceal my Dog.


Craz. I am your Servant Mr. Drybob.


Dryb. O Sir, your humble -- but whither are you marching with so galliard and
facetious a Countenance, as if you intended this day to storm Ladies hearts --
hah.


Craz. Ha, ha! faith to tell thee the truth, I am going to visit a Lady a
Person of Honor.


Dryb. By what Name or Title dignified or distinguished?


Craz. Well, honest Drybob, thou art my loving Friend; I Will bring thee to her:
She is upon my honor, the most delicate bewit^hing Person; and I think I may
say without vanity, has some affection for me.


Dryb. He little thinks I am his Rival. Pox on me, if he be not one of the
dullest fellows. I could find in my heart to write against him, and I Will be
hanged, if in a Months time I did not write his Head off.


Craz. On my soul and conscience she is one of the most ingenious and judicious
Ladies -- and in good earnest I don't use to be mistaken in these things. I
could tell you many symptoms of her affection.


Dryb. Symptoms of affection; to give the Devil his due, that is not amiss; but
I Would be hanged if I did not break his heart with Reperties in half an hour for
all this; poor Sot.


Craz. As Sir, I Will tell you some.


Enter Bailiffs and arrest Crazy. Bayl. Mr. Crazy I arrest you.


Craz. Arrest me! at whose Suit? Hold, hold, hands off. Oh you hurt my Callous
Node.


Bayl. Do not tell us of this and that, I arrest you at the Suit of Mounsieur
Pullin, the French Surgeon. Come away.


Dryb. Let me go. -- --

[ Craz. lays hold on Drybob.
Craz. Prithee, dear Drybob, bail me.


Dryb. Hold Crazy, do not name me, I was bound with a wit for a sum of money,
and it is come to an Execution, as most of their debts do; and there is a
Warrant out against me -- I dare not stay -- --

[Breaks loose.
Craz. Oh I am undone, beyond redemption.


Dryb. So, so, Crazy is caught as sure as a Rat in a Trap.


Craz. O my Shoulders! I am murdered --

[They tug and have him.
Enter Mrs. Errant. Errant. Help, help, here, will you kill Mr. Crazy?
Help, help.

Bayl. Out you Strumpet, what do you come to make a rescue?

[Kick her.
Erran. Murder, murder! help, help.


Craz. Good, honest, worthy, loving, pretty, dear, good-natured Gentlemen, stay
but a moment.


Bayl. No Sir, no; come along. --


Craz. Nay, dear hearts, dear souls, I have no money, but here is a Ring, I had
at the Funeral of my Uncle, take that to let me have the honor to speak with
that Lady.


Bayl. Nay, I Will be glad for my part to do any Civility I can for a Gentleman.


Errant. What Is the matter, Sir, are you arrested? I Will fetch you bayl.


Craz. No it is no matter for that; but dear Mrs. Errant thou art my life and
soul, prithee tell me, how do thou find Theodosia inclined, do thou think
she loves me.


Errant. Without question she has some kindness for you, she confessed to me you
were one of the wittiest persons.


Craz. No alas, not so neither.


Errant And one of the handsomest Gentlemen she ever saw.


Craz. Nay, fie, fie, that was a little too much 'faith, she is a very Judicious
Woman.


Errant. But you have a dangerous Rival one Mr. Drybob.


Craz. He alas! alas!


Bayl. Come Sir, we can stay no longer.


Craz. Hold but a little, but one minute.

[Enter Raymund.
Raym. How now Crazy? are they hurrying thee to base durance, and contagious
prison?


Craz. Yes Raymund, at the Suit of Pullin the French Surgeon.


Raym. Stay ye Dogs.


Bayl. Who are you? What would you rescue our prisoner from us? then have at
you.


Raym. How now Rascals?

[They fight.
Errant. Hey brave Mr. Crazy, hey brave Mr. Raymund: So Sir, now you are at
liberty, I Will take my leave; I Am in haste to go to Mrs. Striker the
Habberdashers Wife.


Craz. And will thou remember me dear Mrs. Errant?


Errant. Ay, ay, I warrant you.


Craz. Your most obliged Servant --

[Ex. Errant.
Raym. Come on Crazy, thou behav'st thy self bravely.


Craz. O S^r, I should have fought better, but for some damned Pustles upon my
Arm, and some Acrochordones upon my right Shoulder; but really Mr. Raymund this
is such a deliverance, that nothing can show my gratitude, but to bring you to
see a Person of Honor hard by.


Raym. What a Habberdashers Wife and a Journeyman Tailors Daughter --


Craz* Nay prithee Raymund, no fooling; I Will tell thee who it is, it is
Theodosia; I hope she is a Person of Honor Sir.


Raym. Are you acquainted with her?


Craz. Acquainted! yes, yes, I shall not say much, but it may be -- but I am a
fool for speaking -- yet thou art my friend, she commends me extremely, and
says I am the wittiest Gentleman and the finest person, and if I may with
modesty tell thee, I have some assurances of her kindness.


Raym. Death, if I did not know the vanity of this Rascal, this would strangely
move me.


Craz. But why do I talk, you will not believe I am in favor with the Ladies,
but I Will bring you to her and convince you.


Raym. Come on Sir, I Will go with you --

[Exeunt.
Enter Lady Loveyouth and Theodofia. La. Lovey. Come, come, Gentlewoman, deny
it not to me; I perceive your inclinations well enough: but pray let me advise
you not to set your thoughts upon Mr. Raymund.


Theo. What Is your reason, Madam?


La. Lovey. My reason, Minx! Come, come, there is something in it that is not fit
to tell you.


Theo. I understand the mystery well enough, but I will set my heart upon him
in spite of her ravenous Ladyship, that would make him her prey.


La. Lovey. Besides, he is a wild young Gentleman.


Theo. And you would have the taming of him.

[Aside.
La. Lovey. I believe he will dispose of himself in another place too I Will assure
you -- This insolent Girl would come in competition with me forsooth. Do not I
allow you three Suitors, that is enough for any reasonable Woman one would think*


Theo. And three such too! Madam!


La. Lovey. Such, I Will assure you Mr. Crazy, Mr. Brisk, and Mr. Drybob, are
three as agreeable persons and as pretty Sparks perhaps.


Theo. And as well matched as any three Baboons in Europe, why, Madam, I would
as soon marry a Drill as any one of them. The little Gentleman a Horseback,
that leads the Bears to persecution, is a Prince to any of them.


La. Lovey. Ay, ay, I know her drift, she would rob me of Mr. Raymund, but if I
have any prevailing Charms remaining in these Eyes of mine, she shall not.


Theo. They Husbands, why a Nunnery were more tolerable, to be mewed up with
none but musty old Women, or your melancholy young Eaters of Chalk. I had
rather be kept waking at a Conventicle than hear the name of them.


La. Lovey. You are a foolish Girl! I protest they are pretty Gallants and
Wits of the Town.


Theo. Gallants and Wits! Buffoons and Jack-puddens; rather condemn me to a
little City-Shop-Keeper, with whom I may never have new Gown and Handkercher,
but half a year behind the Fashion; where I may be bred to rail against the
Ladies of the Court, among my public She Neighbors, and to mince and simper
at an Up-sitting or a Christning.


La. Lovey. Ay, ay, go on, go on.


Theo. To live all the Week in a melancholy Back-room, and on Sunday go to
Church with my Husband in a broad Hat, strutting before me, and the Foreman of
the Shop having me in one hand, and a huge Boss'd Bible, as big as I am, in the
other.


La. Lovey. Good Mrs. Dis-dain make much of them, for I Will assure you, you are
like to have no other; I Will look to you for Mr. Raymund I promise you.


Theo. No other! why I had rather marry a Country Justice, that lives in a
Hall-place, two mile from a Town; that's too covetous to keep a Coach, and too
jealous to suffer me to come to London: that makes me rise by five a clock in
the morning to look to my Dairy, and to receive Geese and Capons as Bribes to
his Worship for Justice.


La. Lovey. How your Tongue runs?


Theo. Or when I have a Holyday, to have the liberty to walk two mile to fill
my Belly with Stewed Prunes or Rashers of Bacon at a poor Neighbours-house.


La. Lovey. Good Mrs. Nimble Chopps they are fit for your betters.


Theo. Yes, for your Ladyship, why don't you choose one of them.


La. Lovey. So I would, Mrs. Malepert, had I not vowed to live a Widow.


Th^o. A Widow, that keeps a Vow against Marriage, were a more monstrous
Creature than the Fish taken at Greenwich.


Enter Bridget. La. Lovey. How now Sauce Box? Oh Bridget where have thou been?


Bridge. Oh Madam, I have News for your Ladyship, that I hope w^ll not be
unpleasant.


La. Lov^y. For me? What is it?


Bridge. From Mr. Raymund, Madam.


Th^o. How Is th^s?


La. Lovey. From Mr. Raymund, alas, what can that be?


Bridge. Madam, I Will tell it in your Ladyships Ear.


La. Lovey. Nay, nay, pray speak it out -- well he ^s an excellent person --

[Aside.
Bridge Madam, he told me, he had an extraordinary passion for your Ladyship.


Theo. What says she?

[Aside.
La. Lov^y. For me! O my dear Raymund, I am sure I have for thee -- What did
you say Bridget, I did not mind it?


Bridge. That Mr. Raymund had a very great passion for your Ladish^p, and I am
sure he loves your Ladyship most violently.


Theo. Can I endure to hear this?


La. Lovey. Me, fie, fie, why sure he did not tell thee so?
I am transported at this happy News --
[Aside.
Bridge. I Will assure your Ladyship he did, and but that I would not take money
to betray your Ladysh^ps affections, offered me good round Fees, to be his
Advocate.


Theo. Perfidious Man!


La. Lovey. I told you Gentlewoman he had disposed himself in another place.


Theo. But Madam, you a^e resolved to live a Widow.


La. Lov^y. I know not, I am as unwilling to marry as any body; but you know
where Marriages are made, alas, there is no resisting of our Fate. How I am
o'rjoy'd that I shall get him from this confident Girl! who would be my Rival.


Enter Crazy and Raymund. Theo. Here he comes, that I could breath infection on
him.


La. Love. Good lack! he is here, and I am not half in order. Bridget you have
dressed me so carelessly to day.


Craz. Ladies your most humble Servant, I make bold to introduce a F^iend of
mine.


Raym. Prithee peace, I can introduce my self.


La. Love. He is very welcome upon his own account.


Raym. Madam, you infinitely oblige me.


Craz. Dear Madam, I kiss your fa^r hands.


Theo. Dear Sir, it is very civilly done of you.


Craz. Alas Madam! but I make bold to present this worthy Friend of mine.


Raym. Poxo' this Coxcomb --

[Aside. Madam, I hope you will do me the honor to receive my duty from my
self -- ha! what means this scorn?

[Turns away from him.
La. Love. I knew 'twould vex her to see him make his applications to me.


Craz. P^ethee Raymund do'nt be troubled at her a version, you know I told you
before I was the only person in her affection; Faith I was afraid she would use
you thus.


Raym. Curse on this Fool, I will find some means to put a Ticket I have into
her hand, that will try her farther.


La. Love. Sir, My Niece is a foolish ill-bred Girl, that knows not how to
value a Gentleman; but I hope you will be so just to me, to bell eve you are to
me most welcome.


Raym. If you knew how much I desir^d to be so to you, of all your ^ex, I fear
I should be less.


La. Love. No Sir, I should not be so uncivil.


Raym. 'Slife! she comes on faster than I have occasion for her. Madam, I
beseech you, Let the violence of my passion excuse me, when I presume to tell
you that I have so long suffered by your Charming (...), tha^ I can no longer
keep my passion in; it is now too headstrong for me.


La. Love. Oh, he is a rare person --

[Aside.
Theo. This is an affl^ction which nothing can su^pa's but the love of this
Coxcomb.


Craz. Well! it is most evident, she has a pass^on for me, but who can help it.


Raym. Kill not a young Gentleman at first dash Madam it is too inhumane.


La. Love. Sir, I hope you intend nothing but honorable.


Raym. Injure me not to suspect my honor.


La Love. No Sir, by no means. Indeed I heard something of this from my Maid.


Raym. But I am now come to present my heart with my own hands.


La. Love. Sir, If you please, let us retire a little and discourse of this
business.


Craz. Madam! I humbly demand your pardon, I perceive your aversion to Raymund
does disturb you a li^le, had I known it, I would not have brought him; and yet
faith he is a very honest Fellow.


Theo* Do not believe so ill of me, to think any thing can give me a
disturbance while you are present.


Craz. Ah Madam, I kiss your fair hands; you are so obliging, really I know not
how to deserve it.


Theo. This conceited Ass can never know when he is abused.


Enter Drybob. Dryb. Ladies! Your most obedient humble Footstool, I take the
liberty to pay my devoir here.


La. Love. You are welcome, sweet Mr. Drybob.


Dryb. Dear sweet Lady, your Vassal couchant. Raymund, servant Raymund. How now
Crazy?


Craz. How I despise this Fool?


La. Love. But Sir, what were you saying, these G^ntlemen in^errupted us.


Theo. I will conceal my resentment, if Raymund should perceive it, 'twould
make him more insolent.


Dryb. Madam, You see I am a bold man, that dare venture to come within
Eye-shot of you. It may be Crazy that was not ill said. But Madam, I would
adventure any danger to a^chieve a Kiss of your fair hand. Mind that Crazy.


Theod. Sir, you have conferred a favor on me, that I cannot be worthy of, tho
I should sacrifice all my endeavors to merit it.


Craz. This Coxcomb does not find that she abuses him.


Dryb. Dear Spark of Beauty, your are very pleasurable; but I swear Madam by
the Tip of your Ear, that I love*you most immaculately, there again Crazy --

[Kicks his Shins.
Craz. Death, this Rogue has murdered me! Oh my Shins, a Pox of his fine
Sayings.


Dryb. And as Hieroglyphick of that affection, I present you with his little
French Dog to be Servant to your little Bitch.


Craz. What an Employment has he found out to be Pimp to a Bitch.

[ Theo. gives the Dog to Bridget, who carries him away.
Theo. Really Sir, it is a Dog of a very elegant composure.


Dryb. Admirably well said, I protest and vow, Madam, is it not, Crazy. I know
'twould take her strangely; but what does this dull Sot hope for, that does not
say two good things in a day. But I beseech you, Madam, how does your little
Domestic Animal your Bitch. Mark that Crazy.

[Kicks him.
Craz. 'Slife cannot a man stand in quiet for this Rascal, if he be so damnable
witty I Will draw upon him.


Theo. Really Sir, the poor Creature, by reason of a great Defluxion of Rheum,
has sore Eyes and keeps her Chamber.


Dryb. This Lady has an admirable wit, pox on me Madam, if I am not extremely
afflicted for the indisposition of her body.


Enter Bridget. Bridge. Madam, here is one from Mrs. Errant --


La. Love. Sir, I ^ake my leave of you at present, but shall wait on you
immediately.

[Ex. La. Love.
Raym. Your humble Servant, this is a happy opportunity. Madam, I beg the
honor of you to hear me one word.


Theo. No Sir, I have heard too much already.


Raym. Hah! this anger of hers is no ill sig^.


Craz. Prithee Raymund, for my sake, don't trouble thy self for this; Alas, I
told thee this before. That Coxcomb may be allowed to be abused.


Dryb. Raymund, thou see this Lady is most abstemiously squeamish, and yet
that damned dull Fellow Crazy does most per^inaciously caress her* Poor Sot, I
pity him*


Enter La. Loveyouth and Bridget. La. Love. Sir, Iam now returned, if you
please to the point.


Raym. Pox of all impatient Widows.


Dryb. Let me see, I forgot something I was to say of this Dog that was worth
Diamonds.


Craz. Madam* This is a very Impertinent Fellow, but I could wish we were
alone, that we might enjoy our selves.


Theo. That were too great a happiness for me.


Craz. No Madam, you deserve a great deal more.


Dryb. Oh I have it.


Craz. Now is this Villain going to break a jest, and I dare not stand near him.


Dryb. Madam, I must confess the Dog was not born in France, but of French
parents upon my honor, and is of as ancient a Family, and has as good blood
running in his veins (no dispraise) as ere a Dog in France. But Raymund I Will
show the Song I made of this Present, that may be is well enough.


Raym. Most excellent.


Dryb. Ay is it not brisk, I am ashamed to give it to my Mistress, prithee do
thou.


Raym. With all my heart. Madam, Mr. Drybob desires to present this to you.

[Changes it, and puts a Ticket into her hands.
Theo. ^ He might have don't himself. Ha! what is this?

[She views it, She reads, MAdam, The love I make to your Aunt, is only acted
by me, finding I can never come to an opportunity of revealing my passion to
you, till by pretending love to her I have removed all jealo^sies; you see at
present she watches me so narrowly, that I can find no occasion to tell you how
much I honor you, who am entirely yours

Raymund.

Forgive my unjust suspicion, this is a happy turn.


Dryb. Come, Madam, I see it pleases you; if you please, Madam, pronounce it
with an audible voice, that this little Audience may communicate.


La. Love. Ay, do so Niece. I have seen very pretty things of Mr. Drybobs; or
if you will I Will read it, give it me.


Theo. Heaven! what shall I do?


Raym. Madam, I fear you are not used to the hand, give me leave --

[Changes it for the Song.
Theo. But I hope Mr. Drybob will be pleased to give it breath, and utter it
harmoniously.


Dryb. My mellodious Pipes are a little obstructed, but to serve you, I will
chant it forth incontinently, hem, hem, but Madam, I want a Theorbo to pitch my
voice.


La. Love. Will not a Gittar serve?


Dryb. It will in some measure supply the defect.


La. Love. Bridget go fetch one --

[Ex. and brings a Gittar.
Dryb. Now Raymund observe. Crazy listen carefully, Methinks it should break
this Fools heart to see how kindly I am used. -- Hem, hem.

Sings. I hope it is your pleasure
To accept of this Dog for a Treasure,
From him that loves you beyond all measure
Which may mystically show
What to your Ey^s I owe.
That of your affection I have put on the Cl^g,
And am your most humble Servant and Dog.
With a Bow, Wow, Wow, etc.
Ha, how do you like that Chorus, faith I think it is very new.


Raym. It Is so, and in my judgment has as much sense as mo^ Chorus's.


Dryb. Is it not very brisk and facetious, hah?


Craz. It is so, but in good truth I did not take you for a Dog before.


Dryb. Now for a Reparty to knock down this Coxcomb, with hum -- Death it will
not do. Pox on it, I used to be more present to my se^f.


Craz. Madam, I beseech you let us retire from this impertinent Ass.


Theo. Yes, with a more impertinent one.


Dryb. Now I have it, ha, ha, ha, though I am a Dog, I am not the Son of a
Bitch Crazy, ha, ha, ha.


Craz. Why Sir, who is?

[Bussles up to him.
Dryb. Nay Sir, I say nothing, Mum is the Italian tu quoque word.


Craz. But Sir, let me tell you, if you be a Dog, and not the Son of a Bitch,
you are not lawfully begotten.


Dryb. Ha, ha, pox on me, if it be notwell said; prithee let me kiss thee for
that. O my Conscience my Company makes thee witty.


La. Love. Sir, since I find you are so honorable, if you please we'll
withdraw.


Raym. 'Sdeath I have plunged my self over head and ears before I was aware
on it --

[Ex. Raym. La. Loveyouth.
Theo. My Termagant Aunt has no mercy on her Lover.


Craz. Sir, notwithstanding your mirth, I hope you are ready to gi^e me
satisfaction for the affront.


Dryb. This dull infipid Fellow takes a witty reparty for an affront, but I Will
bear up to him. Sir, if you talk of satisfaction, the world knows I am ready to
a^tend any man's motion in that way.


Theo. Gentlemen, I must retire a while.


Craz. I hope I shall have the honor to wait on you.


Dryb. Madam I Will wait on you.


Theo. How shall I rid my self of these Fopps?


Craz. You wait on her?


Dryb. Yes Sir I, for all you Sir. Lord, Sir, you are so hasty.


Craz. Do not be impertinent, to intrude upon a Ladies privacy.


Dryb. Peace Coxcomb, peace. Come, Madam, I Will wait on you, I vow this Fop
makes me very merry.


Craz. Prithee stand by and learn more manners.


Dryb. A^as, Madam, mind him not.


Theo. Farewell Gentlemen --

[Ex.
Craz. Keep back I say.


Dryb. Keep you back then, if you go to that. --

[Exeunt.
The Third ACT.
Enter Crazy* and Drybob with their Swords drawn. Craz. COme, come, have you
made your Will?


Dryb. Yes, yes, don't you trouble your self for that, I have it always ready
upon these occasions.


Craz. If you have not, your Estate by being unsettled, may come* to be divided
among the Lawyers, after I have killed you.


Dryb* Sweet. Mr. Crazy, don't think to f^ght me, for I am a Rhinoceros, if I
care any more for you than I do for a Feather of a Shuttlecock.


Craz. This will not fright the Rogue. --

[Aside. Under favor I will run you through the Lungs immediately.


Dryb. He shall not out-huffe me --

[As^de. Look you Sir, I am no man to be frighted, though you look as big as a
Dutch Trumpeter; and I think that is well enough said too.


Craz. I am no Gentleman, if I do not stick you to the ground the first Pass.


Dryb. I am the Son of a Corn-Cutter if I do not rip up your Puddens instantly.
Death this Rogue looks like a very Bussy d' Ambois.


Craz. Come on Sir, have at you -- yet if you will resign Theodosia, I care
not, if I be contented with a Leg or an Arm; not that I believe you have an
interest; but for form sake.


Dryb. Resign my Mistress! ha, ha, if I should, do you think she would marry a
Fellow with a face that looks like a squeezed Turnip; and I think there is a
Satirical Bob upon you.


Craz. I must try some other way.


Dryb. Why you look already as sowrely as the Picture of a Stabbed Lucrece. I
shall break the Rogues heart with these Bobs.

[ Craz. beats Dryb. Sword out of his hand, before he is aware on it.
Craz. Now Sir, pray quickly.


Dryb. Hold, hold, I cannot pray very well, but I can run as well as most men
in the Nation, which will serve my turn better at this time --

[Runs.
Craz. Are you so nimble, I shall overtake you; 'Slife this Rogue has run his
heats at New Market I think --

[ Dryb. runs round the Stage and Crazy after him --
Dryb. This is a lucky opportunity:

[ Craz. lets fall one of the Swords. Enter Mrs. Friske passing slowly over the
Stage -- [ Dryb. takes it up and fights.
Craz. Hold, hold, I say; I Will spare your life two minutes, till I wait upon
you, Lady.


Dryb. You spare my life! I scorn your words; but I will in mercy let you take
your leave of her; since it is the last time you shall ever see her.


Frisk. Ah -- what is here, a Sword drawn --

[Skrieks.
Craz. Be not afraid, Madam Frisk, I am fighting with a simple fellow here for
your honor.


Frisk. For my honor? I was going to Mr. Brisk's Lodging, I Will call him to
help you.


Craz. By no means. Dear Madam Friske let me kiss but this fair hand, and that
will inspire me to kill twenty such Rascals in an Afternoon. -- But where shall
I have the honor to wait upon you by and by?


Frisk. Put up your Sword then, I will be at my Lodging within a quarter of an
hour, and I shall have never a friend with me.


Dryb. What will you never have done there?


Craz. Madam, I will but run this Fellow through the Body a little, and I Will not
fail to wait on you.


Dryb. If I fall on now I shall come off with honor, for she will be sure to
call some body to part us.

[Runs at Crazy.
Frisk. Help, help, Mr. Brisk. Oh help, help Mr. Brisk.


Craz. Stand your ground you Coxcomb, do you think I am bound to fight you by
the mile.

[Fight, and Craz. drives Dryb. back.
Enter Mr. Brisk and Friske. Brisk. Where are they?


Frisk. There, I dare not stay to look on them --

[Exit.
Brisk. Hold, hold! What a pox ails you? Hold, hold, you Wits can never agree
among your selves; you are not so strong a Party, that you should need to
destroy one another: you are fighting here as fiercely as Guy of Warwick and
Colbrand the Dane.


Dryb. Faith Jack Brisk that is a pretty thought of thine, ha, ha.


Brisk. Put up, for shame, put up, and be Pilades and Orestes, what was your
quarrel? I am afraid you do not understand these nice points of honor. Let me
hear, how was it?


Craz. He had the insolence obliquely to give me the Name of Son of a Bitch.


Dryb. I protest and vow he gave me the ignominious appellation of a Dog, like
a damned Cynick Philosopher.


Brisk. Why look you, here is your mistake already: Why I was called Son of a
Whore at Chatolins last night, and what do you think I did?


Craz. According to the Laws of honor I make no question.


Dryb. P'shaw, you understand those things no more than a Costermonger.


Brisk. Pish, you are out, you are out! Lord. Lord, To see the fault of men's
Education. I Will tell you -- when he called me Son of a Whore, I even took him
up roundly, and told him flat and plain I scorned his words. Now by this means
I put this Rogue out of his Road; the Sot knew not what to reply, I took such a
new way of affronting him.


Craz. This fellow is no better than a Coxcomb.


Dryb. I am the Son of a Squi^rel, if this was not mighty pretty and exoti^k.


Brisk. Ay, was it not, I knew I should vex the heart of him with this affront,
and upon my honor it incensed him so devillishly, that ha, ha, ha -- he gave
me three as good sufficient substantial kicks as a man would wish to see in a
Summers day, ha, ha, ha.


Dryb. But what did thou reply to the kicks, Jack, ha?


Brisk. Why faith when he kicked me, I told him very smartly, I scorned such
ill-bred Sots from my heart, and that I thought him as much below me as the
fellow that cries Tinder-Boxes and MouseTrapps; and then sung a Corant of
Berkenshawes in D'sol, re, fa, la, la, la.


Dryb. By Gayland Ben. Buker, and Taffaletta, most judiciously managed.


Brisk. At this he was amazed, and said I was a Stoic, but I sung on, fa la,
la, la, which by the way is an excellent Corant, thou shall hear't, fa la, la.


Dryb. In good faith it is a very merry and luscious Corant.


Brisk. But come, my dear friends, embrace, embrace.


Craz. Sir, under favor, I do no more care for him, than I do for one of your
Operators for Teeth.


Dryb. Nor I for you, any more than for one of those obstreperous wide-mouthed
Rogues that cry Spratts, which I think by the way is another guess thought than
yours, ha, ha.


Brisk. Come, upon my honor you shall embrace* and I will bring you to my
Mistress, and we'll have Fiddles and dance too.


Craz. Nay, if there be a Lady in the Case I submit.


Dryb. And what care I, no body shall be too hard for me in kindnes^.


Craz. Your Servant, Mr. Drybob.


Dryb. Your humble Servant Mr. Crazy.


Brisk. So come, let us go to my Mistress, fa la, la, la.


Craz. This was a lucky ^' ancounter --

[Exeunt.
Enter Bridget and Sneake. Bridge. Good Mr. Sneake, you will overset me with
Learning, you smell so strong of the Un^versity.


Sneak. Truly Mrs. Bridget, by the interposition of an Opacous distance between
those Luminaries your Eyes and my self, I have suffered a Deliquium, viz. an
Eclipse.


Bridge. You have not, I deny your Major.


Sneak. I could delucidate this by way of illustration, but I confess Metaphors
are not argumentive; but your Eyes I say are like the Birds in the Hyrcinian
Groves, which by the refulgency of their Wings did guide the wandering Traveller,
and enlighten the most Opacous tenebrosity.


Bridge. So much for this time, yonder comes a st^anger, we will retire.


Sneak. I am your Servant in any thing within the Sphere of my Activity


Enter Sir Richard Loveyouth in disguise. Bridge. Who Is this --

[Ex.
Sneak. You shall have conference with her, I will cause her to approach
incontinently.


Sir Rich. What Coxcomb have we got here? well this disguise and my long
absence will secure me from my Wives knowledge, I am resolved to try her
farther. It Is possible that impertinence, that vanity and frowardness, that
made me leave her, by this time may have forsaken her -- Here she comes. I Will
observe her.

Enter La. Loveyouth. Madam, Are you my Lady Loveyouth.


La. Lovey. I am, would you have any thing with me?


Sir Rich. I am the unhappy Messenger of ill new^ to your Ladyship.


La. Lovey. Ill news? What can that be?


Sir Rich. Your Husband, Sir Richard Loveyouth.


La. Love. My Husband! What of him? I hope he is not living yet.


Sir Rich. Madam, He is dead.


La. Lov. Dead! and how died he?


Sir Rich. He was killed in Candia in that fatal Sally made by the French upon
the Turks.


La. Lov. Art thou sure of it?


Sir Ric. This is very fine.

[Aside. Madam, I brought off his body, having then the honor to be his
Servant, and to confirm what I say, behold this Ring of his.


La. Lov. It is so; but I will not afflict my self farther, we must all die;
the grief that was due to his memory, I believing him dead, have paid alteady.


Sir Rich. A very short lived grief I thank her for it. Ha! I have a way to make
discoveries of her, that may be cause of a Divorce, which Heaven send me.
Madam, the death of my Master has put me out of employment, and if your
Ladyship has any vacant place, I beg to serve you. I will do it faithfully.


La. Lov. You speak very seasonably; for my GentlemanUsher died last week for
love of my Shoemakers Daughter, you shall succeed him.


Sir. Rich. A worthy Employment --

[Aside. Madam, I humbly thank you.


La. Lov. Much good may it do you, and as a beginning of your service, pray go
into the next room, and desire Mr. Raymund, a handsome worthy Gentleman, that
waits there, to come to me.


Sir Rich. I will Madam -- A very good beginning --

[Aside.
Enter Raymund and Sir Richard. La. Lov. Now Mr. Raymund I am assured of my
Husbands death.


Raym. How Madam?


La. Lov. This honest fellow, whom I have entertained into my service, saw him
dead. Pray tell him you Sir.


Sir Rich. O Devil! what is this? --

[Aside. It Is too true Sir.


La. Lov. And now Sir] I take the liberty to tell you I can no longer be
refractory to your honorable desires.


Enter Bridget with a Letter. Bridge. Sir, Here Is a Letter for you left by a
Porter; who said it required no answer and is gone.


Raym. For me, what can it be?


La. Lov. Where Is my Niece?


Bridge. In her Chamber, Madam.


La. Lov. If she offers to intrude upon Mr. Raymund and my self; tell her we
are busy.


Bridge. I will Madam.


La. Lov. And do you hear?


Raym. Shall I believe my Senses?

Reads. I Cannot but be sensible of the honor you do me in your Professions of
kindness to me, and since this Paper cannot blush, I presume to tell you what
nothing but the restraint I suffer could force me to; which is, that your
person and your passion are esteemed by

You may trust this Bearer.

Theodosia.

Ah my dear Theodosia.


Enter Theodosia. La. Lov. How now Minx? What makes you sawcily intrude upon
Mr. Raym^nd and me?


Theo, A certain curiosity of doing things that are forbidden me.


La. Lov. It Is very well; but pray gape not after him. You may if you please
call him Uncle: In the mean time get you in*


Raym. Curse on her impertinent Jealousy.

Madam, I have too short a time to tell you how I am transported at your Letter.


Theo. Pray take care, we are spied; talk with Bridget, I am assured of her
faith to me.


La. Lov. Good lack! Niece, you might have spoken loud, Mr. Raymund would have
trusted me; but pray get you to your Chamber.


Theo. Well Aunt I shall be quit with you --

[Ex.
La. Lov. Hark vou Robin.

[Whispers Sir Rich.
Raym. Mrs. Bridget, since Theodosia has entrusted you, you must not refuse to
bring me privately into her Chamber this Night.


Bridge. I shall be glad to serve you, but my Lady will discover it.


Raym. Let me alone to manage that; I Will dispose of her that she shall never
know of it.


La. Lov. Mr. Raymund I beg your pardon; but if you please at present we will
withdraw.


Raym. I Will wait on your Ladyship.


Enter Crazy, Brisk, and Drybob. Brisk. Ah Madam! your Ladyships humble Servant.


La. Lov. Gentlemen your Servant.


Brisk. Where is your Niece?


La. Lov I Will send her to you --

[Ex. La. Lov. Raym. and B^idget.
Brisk. Now, you shall see my Mistress.


Dryb. This is a very good jest i faith, Crazy; his Mistress.


Craz. That men should understand themselves no better?


Brisk. Fa, la, la, la, that is an excellent Corant; really I must confess Grabu
is a very pretty hopeful man, but Berkenshaw is a rare fellow, give him his
due, fa la, la, for he can teach men to compose, that are deaf, dumb, and blind.

[Walks about co^bing his Peruke.
Dryb. This is a good, pretty, apish, docible fellow; really he might have made
a very pretty Barber Surgeon, if he had been put out in time: but it arrides me
extremely, to th^nk how he will be bob'd?


Craz. Yes, yes, he will be bob'd; that men should be so mi^.


Dryb. Ay, on my Conscience and (...) the Palate of (...) Judgment is down; and
by the way how do like that Metaphor or rather Catachresis?


Craz. Oh admirably.


Brisk. Drybob.


Craz. While these Coxcombs are in discourse, I Will privately go in and see my
Mistress --

[Ex. Craz.
Brisk. Here Is a Perriwig, no Flax in the world can be whiter; how delicately
it appears by this Colored Hanging, and let me advise you ever while you live,
if you have a fair Peruke, get by a Green or some Dark colou^'d Hanging or
Curtain, if there be one in the Room. Oh it sets it off admirably.


Dryb. A very Metaphysical Notion.


Brisk. And be sure if your Eyebrows be not black, to black 'em soundly; ah
your Black Eye-brow is your fashionable Eyebrow. I hate Rogues that wear
Eyebrows that are out of Fashion.


Dryb. By the soul of Gresham a most Phylosophical Invention.


Brisk. Thou Wilt scarce believe it, but upon my honor, two Ladies fell in love
with me one day at the Kings Playhouse, and are in a desperate condition at
this very time, for this Perywig.


Dryb. But why are you so cruel?


Brisk. Alas! if I should mind every Lady that falls in love with me, I should
have a fine time on it indeed.


Dryb. Stultorum omnia plena! I am the spurious issue of a Fishmonger, if a
more conceited Puppy ever presented himself to my Eyes.


Brisk. I had three several Suits in one year won me three very ingenious,
quick-spirited, and very pretty merry conceited Ladies as any are within the
Walls of Europe. You must know I do value my self upon my Clothes and the
judicious wearing of 'em.


Dryb. N^y certainly you are a most complete and polite Gentleman in the
opinion of at least two besides your self.


Brisk. No, no, but I Will tell thee an honest fellow of my acquaintance, by
imitating one of my Sui^s, got himself a (...) of 3000 l. a yea^ Penny Rent.


Enter Crazy and Theodo^a. Craz. Pray Madam, let me advise you, don't run your
self into trouble with these Puppies, but let us enjoy our selves in private.


Theo. Sir, I must obey my Aunt, it is not for want of Inclination to your sweet
Society, I assure you.


Brisk. Ah, my Queen Regent, I salute the hem of your Garment.


Theo. I cannot without a blush, allow the humility of the address.


Dryb. Thou shall see Crazy how she will abuse him, for I am the Son of a
Bum-Bayly if she has not the most exuberant and luxurious expressions that ever
entered the concave of this Ear.


Craz. This Fool Drybob has no more understanding than a Gander.


Brisk. By the Coat of our Family, which is an Ass Rampant, a very ancient and
honorable one, I am ready to venture my life under the Banner of your Beauty;
and honor you so, that I would, oh it is incomparable, it is incomprehenfible.
--


Theo. By my Grandfather's Spur-leather, which was in those days worn by very
honorable Persons, you oblige me so immoderately: That oh -- it is admirable,
it is inexpressible!


Craz. How I blush for this fellow!


Brisk. Come, Madam, let us be frolic, Galliard, and extraordinary brisk, fa,
la, la, la.


Theo. Sir, I cannot behold the lines of that face, but I am provoked to mirth,
fa, la, la, la.


Brisk. Look you there Drybob and Crazy, look ye --


Craz. Madam, I am so interrupted by these fellows, that I have not time to
tell you that I feed a Flame within, which so torments me.


Dryb. Pox on it that is stole out of a Play.


Craz. What then, that is lawful; it is a shifting age for wit, and every body
lies upon the Catch.


Brisk. O Madam, where were you, that I missed you last Night, at the Park?


Theo. Did you shine there last Night?


Brisk. Madam, I did; for after I had pranc^d before your Window upon my
Roan-Nag, in honor to my Love, --

Did you see me Madam?


Theo. O Sir, my Eyes met you in your Career, by the same token you had a
Muskatoon and Pistols.


Brisk. I had so Madam, and my man carried a skrew'd Gun, that I bought at
Brussels; for I always love to do those things en Cavalier; but thus equipped,
I went to take the Air in the Park, and immediately all the Ladies and Persons
of Quality left the Tour and came about me, and were most incomparably pleased
with the fashion; so that I am resolved next time to go with Back, Breast, and
Headpiece.

[Florish.
Theo. Most accutely imagined.


Brisk. But hark you Madam, yonder are my Fiddles: I bespoke 'em, and pray let
me have the honor to dance with you; it may be you will like my manner well
enough.


Dryb. But we want Women.


Craz. I Will supply that, Madam, immediately.


Brisk. Prithee do, and make haste Crazy.


Craz. Now will I be revenged upon Brisk, and bring his own Strumpet hither.
--

[Ex Crazy.
Enter Lady Loveyouth and Raymund. Raym. You must not deny me this Evening some
private Conference with you.


La. Lov. But how shall I keep it from the knowledge of my Niece.


Raym. I Will tell you, Madam, If you please to walk in the Garden, I Will come in
at the Backdoor and wait on you there, where we will confer about our mutual
happiness.


La. Lov. I will not fail --


Brisk. My honorable Aunt that shall be, I adore your Shoestrings.


La. Lou. O Lord Sir, your Servant. Come on Mr. Raymund, let us hear you break a
jest, and put these two Wits o^t of Countenance.


Theo. Methinks Mr. Drybob is a notable man.


Brisk. Ay, Madam, as far as Inns of Court breeding; but alas, we are above
those things.


Raym. Are you above Inns of Court breeding?


Brisk. Yes, that I am S^r, what is that to you?


Raym. Why it is not six Months since you used to keep Company with none but
Clerks, and call for your Threepence in Beef at Hercules Pillars or the Harrow
in Chancery Lane; where the whole Company used to fall out about the divi^ing
of Three-halfpence: when every Night you used to drink Ale and put Law Cases as
long as you could see.


Brisk. You are merry Sir.


Dryb. And where you used --


Raym. Nor is it five Months since I saw you st^ut most Majestically in the
Hall and inveagle a thi^d man at Sixpenny In and ^n, and by the help of a dozen
men, chastiz one poor Topper or Palme^; where I have seen you most
magnanimously assist at the (...) of a Bawd, or the washing and trimming of a
Baily.


(...). Where I have seen you? --


(...). Is this your breeding?


Dryb. A pox on it a man cannot speak for you.


Brisk. But Sir, I Would have you know I was as well esteemed there (...) man that
ever eat Loins of Mutton dry-rosted yet, and danced as well at the Revels too.


Dryb. I have seen you there, how you --


Brisk. And let me tell you that at Christmas, when we were to have had a
Prince, I was as fair for preferment as any man there.


Dryb. Yes, and I can tell you --


Brisk. But the Government, by reason of some civil dissentions, fell that
Christmas to a Commonwealth; but alas I am above these things.


Dryb. Above 'em! -- I Will tell you --


Raym. Why this to me?


Dryb. Pox of these uncivil fellows, they will not let a man break a jest among
'em; and Madam, I am the Son of a Baboon, if stoppage of Wit be not as great a
pain to me as stoppage of Urine.


Raym. Have not I seen you within these three Months lolling out of Mundens
with a Glass of Windy-Bottle-Ale in one hand and a Pipe of Mundungu^ in the
other; and out of a brisk gay humor, drinking to Passengers in the Street.


Brisk. It Is well Sir, I hope you will give me satisfaction for these affronts?


Raym. Yes, as much as you dare ask.


Brisk. Then blood will ensue.


Enter Crazy and Friske. Craz. Madam, here is one Lady.


Brisk. Death this Rogue has undone me! ^riske here! Theodosia will for ever
disown me --


Raym. What Is the matter Brisk? are you Planet struck. Crazy, I could hug
thee for this.


La. Lov. We need your assistance in a Dance, Madam.


Frisk. Your Servant sweet Madam; Lord, Mr. Brisk, you need not be so strange.


Brisk. Ah Cousin your Servant.


Theo. Is she your Cousin Sir?


Frisk. Mr. Brisk is none of my Cousin, I assure your Ladyship; is my Servant,
nay perhaps there is a little nearer relation betwixt us.


Theo. How Is this Sir?


Brisk. 'Slife, this She Devil will ruin me! Alas, Madam, she is merry, she
drolls; but come le^s dance and put these things out of our heads. Come in Mi^m
and Crotchet and fegue your Violins away, fa, la, la, la.


Enter Mrs. Striker. Craz. O Heaven! who is here, I am undone.

[He goes to thr^st her away.
Brisk. This is a Revenge beyond my expectation, stand by Crazy; whither do you
put the Lady? Come in Mrs. Striker; here is a Mistress of Crazy's will serve to
make up the number of Dancers, Madam.


Craz. Prithee begone, if thou lov st me.


Striker. Come Mr. Crazy, this will not pass upon me. Your Ladysh ps most obedient
Servant --

[To Theod.
Raym. Bea^ up Crazy, you know she is a Person of Honor.


Craz. Come Fiddles strike up, p ay Madam, let us dance.


Brisk. Now Sir, I hope you are ready to give me sati^faction.

[They Dance.
R^ym. I am Sir.


Brisk. Fo low me then Ladies, I have ^n inexorable business calls me away at
p^esent -- Serv^nt, you^ Se vant.


Raym L^dies, I Will w^t on you again instantly; Mrs. Bridget prithee forget not
what I said to you, we shall have (...) sport.

[Ex. R^ym.
Bridge. I warrant you I Would do it Sir.


La. L v. Now he is gone, I Will retire; Ladies and Gentlemen you Se v nt --

[Ex
Frisk. O me, Madam, why does not your Ladyship frequent the Mulberry Garden,
oftener: I vow we had the pleasant'^ D vertisement there last night.

[ Cr^z. wh^spers B dget.
Strik. Ay, I was there, Madam Frisk, and the Garden was very full; M^dam, of
Gentlemen and Ladies that made love together till Twelve a lock at Night, the
prett^ly'st: I vow 'twould do ones heart good to see them.


Theo. Why that is a time for Cats to make love in, not Men and Women.


Frisk Well Madam, there was a Lord, that shall be nameless, would needs come
and proff^ his service to me.


Strik. I know who that was; a^as, he will do that to any body, Madam Friske.


Frisk. Lord, you are so troubled, I warrant you, Madam Striker.


D y^. to Bridge. But are thou sure thy Mistress loves me?


B^idg. Why ^he cannot rest for you.


Dryb. But she is so pestered with these Fools Brisk and Crazy, that I can have
no-time to ca ress her.


B^idg. I Will tell you a way to get privately, into her Chamber this Night.


Fr^sk But M^dam, this Lord took me by the hand and kiss d it, and told me it
was as sweet as Roses and as soft as Jelly of Quinces.


Theo. Or he might have said as sweet as Frankincence or as soft as the Pappe
of an Apple.


Strik. Alas, Madam, that is nothing; I assure your Ladyship, he has said the
same thing to me twenty times.


Frisk. For my part, Madam Striker, I do not think you know him.


Strik. Lord, Madam Friske, you are always detracting from one, I am sure I
saw him last Night, and he told me, Madam, he honored the ground I trod upon,
and made me abundance of the rarest (...), and ^ said a number of the pretty'st
things to him; if I could remember, I Would tell 'em your Ladyship, you should be
judge of them, Madam.


Dryb. Dear Mrs. Bridget accept of this little Present, I Will not fail to do it
-- Ladies I have an exorbitant affair causes me at present to bestow my absence
upon you, but I Will besure not to fail you --

[Ex.
Theo. What means this foolish fellow?


Bridge. Pray Mr. Crazy let me beg a word with you.

[Whisper.
Frisk. I Will tell you, Madam, now she talks thus, there was another Person of
Quality came to me, and told me I was a pretty Nymph, and he was a Satyr, and
invited me to drink a Bottle of Rhenish and Sugar, and I protest and vow he
would not drink one drop, t^ll I had dipped my Finger in the Glass.


Theo. It seems he loved to drink with a Tossed --


Strik. Pish! that is nothing, I assure you a Person of Quality, that treated
me, would not drink a drop of Wine, till I had washed my hands in the Glass,
now she talks of that, (...).


Theo. What ridiculous vain Wenches are these?


Frisk. Pish! mind her not Madam, but I vow, now she puts me in mind on it, a
Gentlem^n the other day played the Wagg with me, and would needs ^ull my Shoe off
my Foot and drink it full of Wine; upon my word he did now.


Craz. to Bridge. Faith, as thou say, I believe she loves me; but why would
she not tel^ me this her self?


Bridge. She had no opportunity, but she charged me to desire you to come in at
her Window this Night as I tell you.


Craz. And upon my honor I Will do it, were as high as Paul's. Ladies, my
occasions invite me hence, and I shall be glad to wait on you.


Strik. Madam, I humbly covet the honor of your further acquaintance.


Frisk. I hope your Ladyship will not deny me that honor.


Frisk and Strik. Your humble Servant, Madam.


Theo. Your humble Servant, Ladies.


Craz. Madam, I Will not fail you upon my honor. --

[Ex.
Theo. What means this fellow? Bridget, what trick have you put upon these two
Coxcombs, that they both tell me they will not fail me.


Bridge. Madam, Mr. Raymund designs this Night privately to wait on you, and
that he may not be interrupted, has appointed my Lady to wait for him in the
Garden; and I to get rid of this brace of Widgeons, have appointed each of 'em
to get in at your Window by Ladders privately this Night.


Theo. How then shall I see Raymund in my Chamber without discovery?


Bridge. Madam, I have appointed them to come to a wrong Window, but were it the
right Window, they being to come both at one time, would disappoint one another.


Theo. That Is not unpleasant, we may have good sport. It Is possible they may be
taken by the Watch, and apprehendded for House-breakers; but come along with
me. --

[Ex. Ambo.
The Fourth ACT.
Enter Raymund and Brisk in a Tavern. Raym. COme out Sir, and fight, if you
have a maw to t: I am ready, I thought you would have brought me into the
Field, and you bring me into a Tavern.


Brisk. Nay prithee dear Rogue, le'ts stay a little and debate the business
over a Bottle of Wine first: Look you, here is to you.


Raym. Must I stay, till by the strength of Terse Claret, you have whet your
self into courage?


Brisk. But look you, dear Raymund, the Case is this --


Raym. No more words, I am ready.


Brisk. Now I think on it better, we must adjourn the Combat, for it is grown
dark and we cannot see to kill one another.


Raym. Come I warrant you we can see one another Bodies, and that is enough.


Brisk. Ay, but I have sworn never to fight, but when I can see to parrie.


Raym. I Will take away that objection; here are Candles in the Room, and I Will
bolt the Door, that no Drawer shall come to part us.


Brisk. Fie Raymund, is that like men of honor, fight in a Tavern? why it is
like the Bullies man.


Raym. None of your foolish punctilio's here, draw.


Brisk. Well, ha, ha, ha, I have considered on it, and Gad thou art a very
honest fellow, I have that affection for thee, that the Devil take me if I
fight with thee.


Raym. Why did you call me out then?


Brisk. Come, pox on it, put up; I must confess I have rashly embarked my self
in a most prejudicial affair, but thou art a man of honor, and I will not
fight with thee.


Raym. Are you not a Coward?


Brisk. Ha, ha, honest Raymund, thou art a very merry fellow, I Will give thee
leave to say what thou will.


Raym. I need not ask the question.


Brisk. Well faith, I will not fight with thee, say what thou will, but upon my
honor I Will give thee this Diamond Ring and my Roan Nag, if thou wilt oblige me
in one thing.


Raym. In what can that be?


Brisk. You know my Mistress will-think I ought in honor to fight; and if you
will do me the favor to make her believe you fought with me, I Will tell her you
disarmed me, and by this means I shall save honor, and you will get it; and
for ever oblige me.


Raym. Faith I had best take 'em for sport sake, though I retu^n 'em again. --

[Aside.
Brisk. Prithee, dear Rvymund do; I Will do as much for thee upon my honor.


Raym. Would you have a Gentleman lie for you?


Bri^k. Why I ll lie for you again man, when you will; what do you (...) of that?


Raym. Not I Sir.


Brisk. Let me see, I have thought upon a way to save that; (...) ou, we^ll
fight a l^ttle in jest; and I Will let you disarm me. (...), (...) take the Ring,
and do it; and I Will send for my Roan Nag (...).


Raym. (...) ^ir, to oblig^ you I will, Draw then. --


Brisk. Hon st (...), I am thy dear Servant. --


Raym Come on, come, have at you --


Brisk. H^ld hold m^n -- hold --


Raym What Is the matter?


(...). How shall I be sure you will not fight in earnest?


Raym. I g^ve my word for it.


(...). (...) Gad now I think on it, I will not trust you, if you (...) me your
Bond; I don't know how the Devil may tempt you: Besides, who knows, but your
foot may slip, and you may ^un me through the Body.


Raym. What an immoderate Coward is this?


Brik. Faith, thou had as good tell her so without this Expe^.*


Raym. But there must appear some signs of fighting, or she will not believe it.


Brisk. Why I Will tear my Band and my Shirt, and run my self through the Coat.


Raym. But there must be some sign of blood.


Brisk. Pox on it, how shall we contrive that?


Raym. Why take your Sword, and run your self through the Arm.


Brisk. Thank you for that in faith, I have known men have died of that.


Raym. Fie, Fie! it is nothing; I Will do it my self then.


Brisk. Hold, hold, 'Slife you may prick an Artery and bleed to death, and then
I shall be hanged for that.


Raym. That Is well thought on! O incomparable Coward!


Brisk. 'Twill do as well if my Shirt be bloody at the hand, an^ I Will venture
to prick my fingar for that; and to run through my Coat.


Raym. Well, as you will; but do it as you go along.


Brisk. Dear Raymund kiss me, you have obliged me so, that I am a Son of a
Scavenger, if I die without issue, I Will make you my Heir: but if you love me,
not a word of all this.


Raym. I warrant you. Drawer to pay.


Brisk Prithee, by no means, G^d I Will treat thee dear Rogue; it is all mine.
Come on, dear Raymund, let us ^o --

[Exeunt.
Enter Crazy with a L^dder. Craz. This is the W^ndow Mrs (...) ^ppointed to get
in at, so now (...) my Climbing. --

[^ets ^ow the Ladder. How I shall l^ugh at my two too (...) Riv ^s Brisk n^
(...) ^oor (...), that they could not find all this (...) how ^heodosia abuses
them.

Enter Drybob with a Lad^er.
Dryb. This is the Window, my expectation is on Tiptoes, as I may so say, but
let me fix my portable pair of Stairs.

[Sets it upon Crazy.
Craz. Heaven! what will become of me? This is some Vi^lain coming to commit
Burglary.


Dryb. Pox ta e me, if I know what is the matter; it cannot be the (...) that
yields thus.


Craz. Slife if it should be a Thief, he will cut my Throat, least I should
discover him; what shall I do?


Dryb. Well, let what will come on it, though I precipitate my fate, I will
storm this i chanted Castle.


Craz. Who ever he be, I am sure I Will not suffer him to come up; if he be a
mortal man, I Will try if he has a Neck to spare, for I am resolved to break one
for him --

[Turns the Ladder.
Dryb. 'S^fe! what is this, am I to be turned off and executed for Love felony
before my time? what can this mean? I have got no hurt yet: it may be 'twas the
corner of the Balcony I set my Ladder against: I Will make one experiment more:
so now, it is fast.

[Goes up a little.
Craz. Theodosia, Theodosia, open your Window.


Dryb. The Ladder stands very fast now, I will once more enterprise this
honorable action, though Beelzebub himself stood in my way -- Theodosia open
your Window, it is I my Dear.


Craz. Death, what will become of me, this must be the Devil, a Man would have
broke his Neck.

O Heaven! yonder is a Light coming toward us. I shall be ruined if I don't
shift for my self.


Dryb If I be discovered by yon Ignis fatuus or Lanthorn, I shall be undone for
ever, I must try to make an escape.


Enter Raymund and Brisk, Boy with a Light and Fiddles; and beat them as they
come down the Ladder. Brisk. Come on my dear Friend, strike up my Men of Noise;
How now! what is hete? Thieves with Ladders at my Mistrisfes Window, I Will mall
'em.


Raym. How now Villains -- Bridget has done this admirably.

[They beat them off.
Brisk. 'Slife Raymund, if I had not come, I might have lost my Mistress out of
this Window; for on my Conscience these Rogues came with a felonious intention:
but come let us in and give 'em an account of it: and Fiddles make way for us.


Raym. Come on: But how shall I get ^id of this Fool, I must think of some way.


Enter Bridget with a Candle. Bridge. O Gentlemen! what is the cause of this
uproar?


Brisk. Oh, Mrs. Bridget, I have made bold to beat a couple of Rascals; that
were going to commit Felony, without the benefit of the Clergy; but I Will go and
wait upon my Mistress

[Ex.
Raym. Oh, Mrs. Bridget, 'twas Crazy and Drybob, our Pl^t is spoiled; I shall
be diverted by them from seeing my Mistress.


Bridge. No, no, let me alone, I Will dispose of 'em another way.


Raym. Adieu --

[Ex. Raym.
Enter Crazy from behind the Door. Craz. Oh I am beaten, bruised, and lamed so,
that I had rather have been twice flux'd than have endured it; my bones are as
loose as the Skeletons in the Physic School: Oh my Head and Shoulders! Mrs.
Bridget I kiss your hands, and rest your humble Servant Crazy.


Bridge. Sir, I find you are defeated by some ill accident or other, but I Will
put you in another way to be secure. The Lady Theodosia is in that passion for
you, that I fear she will discover her self.


Craz Poor heart! I know she loves me; but I hope she will be so discreet as to
conceal her passion; but here was another with a Ladder climbing up to the
Window, or I had got in.


Bridge. Another! that is impossible; but least you should be suspected, take
away your Ladder, and set it against the Garden Wall, and I will appoint your
Mistress to receive you there; if you will venture to come over to her; and
there shall be a Parson ready to join you in the Banqueting House: make haste,
least you be surpised, and come to us instantly.


Craz. Dear Mrs. Bridget take this, I fly, I fly. --

[Ex. with a Ladder.
Enter Drybob. Dryb. O Mrs. Bridget! Are you there? I have been beaten more
severely than ever Turk was by Tamberlain; which by the way is no ill
comparison, hah?


Bridge. I have heard so; but take up your Ladder and be gone, and lay it down
on the backside of the house and come to us presently, and I will design an
easier assignation for you; haste, lest you be discovered.


Dryb. Dear Mrs. Bridget take this Ring, I Will be with you instantly.

[Ex. with the Ladder*
Bridge. Go your ways you brace of Baboons, and be still the subject of all
Farces --

[Ex. Bridget.
Enter Raymund, Brisk, La. Loveyouth, Theodosia, Bridget. La. Lov. Is it
possible! Thieves coming in at my Window! Heaven! how I tremble!


Bridge. Truly Madam, they were as sufficiently beaten as your Ladyship can wish.


Theo. That Is some revenge for the trouble their impertinence has given me, but
I am afraid these Coxcombs will hinder Mr. Raymunds Visit.


Bridge. Fear not that, Madam.


Raym. Be not apprehensive Madam, for the Rascals are too well satisfied for
their pains to attempt any more.


Enter Crazy, and after Drybob. Craz. Ladies and Gentlemen, your humble Servant.


Dryb. Dear friends, your Slave; I am in one word the Enemy to all your Foes.


Brisk. Oh are you here! I Will tell you as I was coming in to give my Mistress a
Serenade, a couple of Felonious Rascals were with two Ladders climbing in at a
Window of the House; but I think I have so bruised the Dogs, they will scarce be
fit for climbing this Week again.


Craz. A plague on it, I feel it in my bones, but I must dissemble it.


Dryb. Pox on them, the Rogues^ laid on as if they had been threshing for
Twelve Pence a day.


Craz. But is it possible?


Brisk. Yes, I assure you as this Blade does testify.


Dryb. Why, what impudent Rogues were these Crazy?


Craz. 'Death, that I must be forced to call my self so. -- If I had been there
I would have mall'd the Villains.

[Aside.
Dryb. For my part I don't wish I had been there, for my extraordinary passion
would have made me had the blood of the Rogues; that is certain. -- O pox of
their heavy hands.


Raym. He has been fighting, Madam, that is the truth on it; pray take notice
on it.


Brisk. I wonder, Raymund, no body takes notice of my torn Band, my bloody
Sleeve, and my Coat being run through, I think they are all blind.


La. Lov. Good lack, Mr. Brisk, you are bloody and your Band's torn.


Brisk. Ha! bloody say you?


Raym. Pray hold up the humor, Madam.


Theo. I protest, Sir, you fright me, what dangers have you run your self into?


Brisk. Alas, Madam, this is nothing, a trifle, a trifle.


Bridge. Your Coat's run through, you have been fighting.


Brisk. My Coat run through! where, where? ha, ha, it is so.


Dryb. A pox on him this damned Bully Heildibrand was fleshed, and would needs
show his Valor upon my Shoulders.


La. Lov. Are you wounded Sir?


Brisk. 'Pshaw Madam, this, alas, alas, I beseech you take no notice of this;
'pshaw, a slight thing, a toy, fa, la, la, la.


Bridge. Shall I go for a Surgeon?


Brisk. No, I thank you, he would discover the trick on it; no, no, by no means;
alas, you make so much on it: I am used to these things; 'pshaw, this is
nothing: Pray call in the Fiddles, come, come; let us be very merry, fa, la,
la, la.


Theo. Sweet Mr. Brisk do me the favor to tell me the occasion of this?


Brisk. Nothing, nothing, Madam, alas, alas, --


La. Lov. Assure your self I Will not fail to wait for you in the Garden.


Raym. I hope your Ladyship doubts not me.


Brisk. Faith Madam, if you will needs have it, I made bold to call Mr. Raymund
to an account for some words that passed before you; and upon my honor, Madam,
he is a very gallant fellow.*


Raym. Nay, I beseech you Mr. Brisk.


Brisk. Nay, Gad it shall all out, he fought like Thunder and Lightning, and I
must confess it was my fortune to be disarmed, Madam; but I hope I lost no
honor, since 'twas by so brave a fellow, whom for his generosity I embrace.
Dear Friend, you have obliged me for ever. Come Fiddles strike up, I have
provided a very honest fellow to dance.

[A ^ig is danced.
Raym. Madam, I Will not fail to wait on you, your humble Servant. --

[Ex.
Dryb. Madam, I hope you will be punctual.


Theo. Trust me Sir.


Dryb. Adieu to all. --

[Ex.
Craz. Madam, I Will instantly go and prepare to wait on you, you will not fail.


Theo. I shall not be so injurious to my self.


Craz. I humbly kiss your hands. Madam, your Ladyships most obedient Servant.
--

[Ex.
La. Lov. Good night, sweet Mr. Crazy; Mr. Brisk, I pray be pleased to favor me
with your absence.


Theo. 'Pray do, and get a Surgeon to dress you, and to morrow I shall be ready
to receive a Visit.


Brisk. Ladies your Servant, Servant, Ladies, fa la, la, la. --

[Exit Brisk.
La. Lov. P^ay Gentlewoman go up into your Chamber.


Theo. Madam, I Will obey. --


La. Lov. Be sure you do. --

[Ex. La. Lov. and Bridge.
Theo. Go thy ways, my dear Aunt, and meditate on what thou wilt never enjoy -- If
my Uncle, after all this report of his being killed, should appear again, when
she has, as she thinks, made sure of another Husband, it would be no ill Farce.


Enter Raymund. Raym. Now, now, my Incomparable Theodosia, I am blessed with the
opportunity I have so long sought for to cast my self at your feet, and to tell
you, that it belongs to you to make my life for ever happy or miserable.


Theo. You may with justice enough accuse me of levity, in so suddenly granting
it; but I hope you have so much honor, to impute my easiness somewhat to the
slavery I suffer, though I have no disesteem of you.


Raym. Madam, It is so much to my advantage, that I shall never enquire the
Cause, only let me beg of you, since our fortune is like to allow us so few of
those opportunities, that we may make what use we can of this.


Theo. I have so ab^olute a confidence in your honor, that I yield to you
conduct in this affair, and defire nothing more than to be redeem d from the
foolish Tyrany of my Aunt.


Enter Bridget. Bridge. I have left my Lady in the Garden, most impatiently
expecting you Mr. Raymund. But pray Madam, if you love me, retire into your
Chamber, lest any of the Servants should unluckily see you, and inform your
Aunt.


Theo. '^ is no ill advice.


Raym. But how have you disposed of Drybob and Crazy.


Bridge. O they are safe enough, Sir.

[Exeunt.
Enter La. Loveyouth in the Garden. La. Lov. Sure the passion he has for me,
will not suffer him to stay long, the Story of Thieves at my Window, has put me
into such a fright, that nothing but Love could engage me to walk here alone.


Enter Crazy looking over the Wall. Craz. The Coast is clear on this side, if
my Mistress be but in the Garden, I am safe -- My Dear.


La. Lov. Here I am.


Craz. Now I come, were as high as (...) Steeple! Death I have broke both my
Shins: I am murdered* Oh I see these leaps are not for men that have flux'd
thrice.


La. Lov. How Mr. Raymund* Have you hurt your self?


Craz. Did you expect Raymund here? I am not he.


Enter Drybob looking over the Wall. Dryb. Now for my leap of honor.

[Noise crying Thieves.
La. Lov. Oh Heaven! Thieves, thieves, help, help.


Craz. Death what do I here?


Dryb. Thieves! I shall be apprehended for a House-breaker.


Craz. Where shall I hide my self? I would not be discovered for the World.


Dryb. I am astonished like the Head of a Gorgon; what shall I do to abscond a
little, I shall be apprehended for a Thief else.


Craz. It Is very dark, where shall I hide my self?


Dryb. What Devilish mistake is this? Pox of this damned post, I am sure I had
like to get a most Diabolical fall with running against it.

[They run against one another.
Craz. Death what was that I run against, what an unfortunate fellow am I, to
be thus disappointed, just as I thought to have been sure of my Mistress? but
my comfort is, I know she loves me.


Dryb. What a Devilish Catastrophe is this? --

[Groping lites upon his hand.
Craz. O horrid! sure this House is haunted, which way can I escape?


Dryb. If this be the Devil that touched me, I don't like his (...) Tricks to
fright a man thus; would he would be as civil as the Wiltshire Devil was: and
beat a Drum, to give a man notice where he is, that I might avoid him, unless
he were better company.


Craz. What Is here? her amazement has made her leave open the Door of the
House, I Will in there, there is more safety yet than here --

[Goes in.
Dryb Ha, I saw one enter at that Door, I Will follow and apprehend him; and his
attachment will secure me. --

[Ex.
Enter Crazy. Craz. What Door is this? I Will even hide my self here till this
(...) be over.

Enter Drybob. Noise within. Lights here, follow, follow.
Dryb. If I could but conceal my self till they are past, I might easily
insinuate my self into Theodosia's Chamber. What Is here? This I believe leads
into the Cellar, I will descend and lie in Ambush there. --

[Ex:
Enter Servants with Torches, Spits, and Fireforks, Mr. Sneake and Sir Richard.
1. Serve. Come, now we have mustered up our forces, let us into the Garden.


Sir Rich. Ay, come let us see who this Devil is my Lady speaks of; we shall
find more than one I believe.


2. Serve. I believe we shall find them to be Thieves.


1. Serve. If it be the Devil, Mr. Parson, we'll turn you loose to him, you take
pay to fight against him; we are but Volunteers.


Sneak. If he dares approach, I will conquer him syllogistically in Mood and
figure, and conjure him down with

Barbara Celarent Darii, Ferioque Darapti.
Cesare, Camestres, etc.

2. Serve. Hold, hold, 'slife this is the way to raise him:


1. Serve. I think your best way is to take the great Bible in the Hall, and
fling at his head; that will knock him down certainly.


Sir Rich. Come, let us in quickly, if they be Thieves, they will escape else. --


1. Serve. The Cellar Door is open, if there be any body there, we'll lock it
and secure 'em --

[Ex.
Enter Bridget* with a Candle. Bridge. How unlucky is this! this has marred all
our design; my Lady has found Mr. Raymund and her Niece, we are undone (...)
yond redemption.


Enter La. Loveyouth, Raymund, and Theodosia. La. Lov. False and ungrateful
man, did I for this, so soon bestow upon you my too credulous heart, so early
to betray me; O unheard of Villainy.


Raym. Madam, pray hear me.


La. Lov. No, thou vile treacherous man, I will hear no more, Have thou the
impu^ence to excuse it! O heaven! I am lost for ever. But for you, you most
abominable Creature, to undermine me thus: Take leave of liberty, hence
forwards your Chamber shall be your Prison, till I have disposed of you to
another Person, I assure you.


Theo. Then Madam, you force me to declare my self sooner than my Modesty would
give me leave; this Gentleman is mine while I have breath; nothing but death
shall part us.


Raym. And Madam, that minute that I am false to you, may all the plagues that
ever afflicted yet mankind fall on me.


La. Lov. In what a miserable condition am I? but Mr. Raymund I cannot believe
this, sure this is some interlude.


Raym. Madam, it is a truth I Will die for, though Madam, I am obliged to beg
your Ladyships pardon for making you a property.


La. Lov. O impudence! Come Mistress into your Chamber quickly, I Will be your
Keeper.


Raym. Madam, we will be prisoners together.


La. Lov. Out of my Doors, you Villain, or I will have those that shall
chastise your insolence with death.


Raym. Madam, I haven t so mean a soul, to be frighted from protecting my
Mistress.


Theo. Sir, Let me entreat you to leave me, and assure your self we will not
long be separated.


Raym. But Madam, 'twill be dangerous to leave you to her ^ury.


Theo. Sir, Let me beg you will not dispute it further, but be gone; if you
should make more noise in this business, it might call my honor in question.


Raym. Madam, I must obey, and I have a way to free you instantly, it is this.


La. Lov. Away, no more discourses. --

[Ex. La. Loveyouth and Theodosia.
Raym. Well, a de^perate disease must have a desperate Cure; Mrs. Bridget I
have a way this moment to secure my Mistress.


Bridge. O Sir, I am in that fright for you.


La. Lov. within. Bridget come up quickly.


Bridge. O Sir, I am called I must away.


Raym. I have not time to tell you; but desire Theodosia, whatever happens not
to be frighted, I Will about it instantly.


Enter Servants, Sir Richard, Sneak. -- 1. Serve. My Lady was frighted with
nothing.


2. Serve. If any body had been there, the Walls are so high on the inside, they
could not have 'scap'd.


1. Serve. Ha, here is one, seize him.


Raym. Seize me, you Rascals; have at you.

[They fight, and Raym. beats 'em off.
Sneak. Nay, now you are in Combat, I Will leave you --

[Exit.
2. Serve. This a Thief, I am sure he fights like a Devil.


Sir Rich. It Is Mr. Raymund, did you not know him.


1. Serve. A pox on him, was it he? but let^s to my Lady, and give her an
account. --

[Ex^nt.
Enter Crazy and Drybob in the Cellar. Craz. I hear a bustling here about the
Cellar that frights me horribly! This is a most unfortunate ^ght.


Dryb. O that I were out of this Hellish Place! if ever I had to do with Love
and Honor more, would I were an Eunuch in the Turks Seraglio. -- Oh Heaven,
who is that there?


Craz. It Is a man by his asking that Question, and may be one of the House.


Dryb. Who are you in the Name of Wonder? O how I dissolve!


Craz. I am the Devil.


Dryb. The Devil! oh he is come to fetch me away for my whoring and my drinking.


Craz. Mortal, thou art my due.


Dryb. That may be, but he is a damned impatient Devil to dun before his day.


Craz. Come into my Arms.


Within. Fire, fire, fire.


Craz. O Heaven, what shall we do?


Dryb. 'Slife fire! Oh Heaven! how shall we get out?


Craz groping. Which is the way out? The Door's locked, what shall I do?
They Will not mind us if we call; we shall be burnt.


Dryb. What are you a Devil, and afraid of your own Element? Methinks a Devil
out of the Fire should be like a Fish out of the Water.


Within. Fire, fire, fire.


Both. Help, help here, fire, murder, help.


Enter Servants above. 1. Serve. What noise was that below?


Both. Help, help.


2. Serve. Oh ho, have we caught you? They are the Thieves.


^. Serve. That Is well, stay there; you Dogs, if the House be burnt, I Will assure
you, you shall burn with it.


Craz. O help, help, it is Crazy.


Dryb. Crazy! a Curse on you for frighting me; help, it is I Drybob.


(...). We'll see if we can get out at the Window. Well this is a judgment upon
me for acting the Devil. --

[Exeunt.
Enter Servants running up and down. (...) Serve. More hands, water quickly, and
we shall quench it instantly.


2. Serve. It Is strang^ h^w the Coach-House should be (...). --

[Exeunt.
Enter Raymund and Theodosia. Theo. This was an excellent Stratagem, Sir, and
with (...) or no danger.


Raym. Come Madam, while your Aunt is seeing the fire quenched on the
backside, let us escape at the fore-door. --

[Exeunt.
Enter La. Loveyouth, Bridget, Sir Richard, Sneak, and Servants. La. Lov. So,
Heaven be thanked, all danger's past; How could this fire happen? This has been
a night of wonder.


Sneak. I will dilucidate it to you, you saw a Spirit in the Garden, Madam?


La. Lov. I did, I think, to my great astonishment; I have not yet recovered
the ^right.


Sneak. Look you, Madam, These Philosophers av^, that ^ll Spirits are
transported through the Air in their several and res^ctive Vehicles; now this
was infernal, and had a Bituminous Vehicle, which by a violent Motion against
the Coach-House, as it were by Collision, did generate this ^lame, which had
(...) ^o have caused this Conflagration.


Sir Rich. A pox of this F^stian Rascal.


Bridge. Come Madam, it must be some Thieves design to rifle your house.


1. Serve. We have some of the Thieves safe in the Cellar, they shall-suffer for
it.


La. Lov. In the Cellar, fetch 'em up quickly; by them we may discover
something. Go see where my Niece is Bridget.

[Ex. Bridget.
2. Serve. Come along you Rascals.


Enter Servants haling Crazy and Drybob. 1. Serve. Come out you Sons of Bitches.


La. Lov. Who are these Mr. Crazy and Mr. Drybob? this is as strange as all the
rest.


Craz. Madam, I kiss your fair hands.


Dryb. Pish, that is a vile old phrase. I am an humble Servant of your Footmans.


La. Lov. Sure this is enchantment! How came you two in the Cellar?


Enter Bridget. Dryb. Madam, I will most expeditiously inform you.


La. Lov. How now, where is my Niece?


Bridge. Madam, She Is gone! fled away! I have been in every Room of the House
and cannot find her.


Sir Rich. Gone! What can this mean?


La. Lov. Gone! I am undone! Ruined for ever! What shall I do?


Sir Rich. She undone! Oh invincible impudence!


Dryb. What imports this transport of yours, Madam?


La. Lov. You and I and all of us are abused! betrayed! this false Wretch, this
base Villain Raymund, has stolen away my Niece.


Sir Rich. I see Raymund is a man of honor. This pleases me.


Craz. Madam, Do not fear that, to my knowledge there is a person in the world,
she is more than half engaged to. No, no, she cares not for Raymund, take that
from me.


L. Lov. Flatter not your self, it is true, it is true.


Dryb. Raymund! I Will assure you Madam, she used to simper more ^vourably upon
me than upon any man, and gad if the truth were known, she thinks me all the
Nine Worthies, compared to him.


La. Lov. Come Gentlemen, Let Us in and hear the Story, while I send for a
Warrant to search for my Niece; I Will have her dead or alive. --

[Exeunt Omnes.
The Fifth ACT.
Enter La. Loveyouth, Bridget, and Sir Richard. La. Lov. NO News of either
Raymund or Theodosia?


S^r Rich. All possible search has been made after 'em both last night and this
morning, and they are neither to be found.


La. Lov. How am I confounded with this disaster; yet I have it in my head to
be revenged on 'em both.


Sir Rich. Your Ladyship was too credulous to trust him so soon.


La. Lov. And Robin, he is a dirty person thus to desert me; but I Will be quit
with him, and that Jig-em-bob my Niece.


Bridge. How Madam?


La. Lov. Why, I will immediately settle my Estate, to which she is Heir, for
want of lawful Issue of my Body, on my Cousin Richard, and to plague Raymund I
will marry another; for I am resolved to play at a small game rather than stand
out.


Sir Rich. Oh unparalled impudence! I Will try her further: Madam, What think
you of Mr. Crazy, he is no unfit man for a Husband?


La. Lov. Why really I believe he is a good natured Person and a Child of
Honor, the softness and gentleness of his Amorous Nature is admirable; but do
you think he will have any sprinklings of affection for me.


Sir Rich. 'Sdeath! what do I hear?


Bridge. Sprinklings, Madam? He will have a whole Flood of Love for you.


La. Lov. Why truly, he is a pretty hopeful man, and I have no aversion to, but
r^her a concern for him; you shall see, Bridget, I am a Woman easy to command
my passions; but in the mean time send for a Scrivener, and bid him bring a
Blank Conveyance with him: for though I do resolve to make Mr. Crazy my
Husband, yet I will dispose of my Estate, as prudent Widows are wont to do.


Sir Rich. 'Slife! now it is time to appear! I shall be finely used else by this
Villainous Woman. I Will into the Town and prepare for it.


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam, Mr. Crazy is coming to wait on you*


La. Lov. Tell him I am retired. Bridget, I Will leave thee to sound him as to
point of this Concern. --

[Ex.
Bridge. This is pleasant, I Will observe him.


Enter Crazy* stumbles and falls. Craz. Murder, murder. O Heaven! what shall I
do? I have hurt my self just upon the Shin-bone, that was exfoliated: I have
spoiled my Arm: I fell just upon that part of my Arm, where is a (...) Node
upon the (...).


Bridge. What Is the matter Sir?


Craz. I have hurt my self a little with the fall; besides I am i^ a little
disorder for the loss of Theodosia; sure some base fellow has forced her hence;
for I am sure she loved me most extremely. 'Sdeath I have spilt my Bottle of
Diet-drink in my Pocket, and spoiled all my Almonds and Raisins.


Bridge. Flatter not your self, Mr. Crazy; she loves you not.


Craz. Prithee do not put this upon me; ha, ha, ha. I am sure no man had those
favorable smiles from her that I received. Oh! that twinge.


Bridge. Come, the truth is, Sir, she is fled away with Mr. Raymund.


Craz. Lord, Mrs. Bridget! all this will not do; as if I did not know when a Woman
loves me?


Bridge. You may please to slight it; but to my knowledge she is married to Mr.
Raymund.


Craz. Is it true?


Bridge. Too true for you. --


Craz. I am ruined beyond redemption, I am ^or ever disappointed both of Love
and Money.


Bridge. There is another person in the world that is worth your Love, and has a
Fortune equal to Theodosia.


Craz. Dear Soul, thou do 'st eternally oblige me! but prithee who is it? Oh,
oh, prithee tell me.


Bridge. My Lady Loveyouth.


Craz. Ha, ha, ha, well really she is a fine person, and I am extremely
deceived, if she has not a violent and most predominant passion for me.


Bridge. Sir, You are not deceived.


Craz. I think not -- I would forgive a Woman that can deceive me in that
point. -- But where is she?


Bridge. In her Chamber, where I am sure you would be no unwelcome person.


Craz. This is very lucky, by this means I shall be fully revenged for the most
perfidious Apostasy of Theodosia, and with this ample fortune patch up my own
ruinous condition.


Bridge. No more, Sir, but go to my Lady while she is in this humor.


Craz. I am happy beyond expression i^ your Friendship; alas, I know this poor
thing loves me dearly; and gad she shall be no loser by it: I will go
immediately and kiss my Ladies hand; but in the mean time receive this little
piece of my gratitude.


Bridge. Your humble Servant, Sir.


Craz. Sweet, dear Rogue, I kiss thy pretty hand. --

[Ex.
Enter Drybob. Dryb. How now?
Is the stray Lady returned home?

Bridge. No Sir, there is no news of her?


Dryb. I am the unlawful Off spring of a Jugler, if ever man of honor
encountered such a Crocodile; and yet let me not live, if she had not the most
pretty harmonious strain of wit with her that evet tempted a judicious Ear.


Bridge. But she is false -- she is false.


Dryb. Really I begin to conjecture it, yet she has so many predominant
perfections with her, which I did adore; that I can scarce invite this into my
belief: Invite it -- 'faith that is well enough too.


Bridge. It Is too true.


Dryb. Well she is gone, adieu to her; yet really she had the prettiest Figures
and the choicest Phrases in her ordinary Conferences: there are not better in
Pharamond, or Cleopatra.


Bridge. I am glad to see you so indifferent.


Dryb. Not so indifferent: Gad I admire the sharpness of her Ingenuity -- But
I Will tell thee the truth I have sent my man to a little Rosicrucian or
Star-gazer; to enquire of my ^tar how she comes thus to start from her Sphere:
Start from her Sphere, that is well now; that is well.


Bridge. And when will he return?


Dryb. I expect him at every pulse o^ (...) Watch; (...) by the way is not that
pretily said -- (...) But I (...) I shall recover her, and yet if I lose her, I
am (...) I have not as many Mistrisses as I can turn my self too* Faith I have
abundance of Ladies that would think themselves happy to enjoy me: but I cannot
be in all places at once: yet in good faith I wish my self an Ubiquitary for
their Love, as I am an honest man.


Within. Bridget.


Bridge. I am called, adieu Sir. --

[Ex. Bridget.
Enter Mr. Brisk. Brisk. How now! What Is the News? Has Raymund stole away
Theodosia -- ha.


Dryb. Ay pox on him, he, or some damned Robber as bad as he, that I fear by
this time have committed Burglary upon her Bo^y.


Brisk. And shall I be thus cheated of my Mistress?


Dryb. Your Mistress -- ha, ha, ha, you speak as freely of her as if you were
acquainted ever since the Deluge with her.


Brisk. Why, had you any pretense to her?


Dryb. Yes Sir, that I had, and perhaps no man rece^v'd larger testimonies of
her innate affection.


Brisk. Oh impudence! why sure you don't pretend to be a man fit for Ladies
Conversation! What Charms have you to attract 'em? Ha, ha, ha, you --


Dryb. What Charms quoth he? Is any man in Europe more notorious among Ladies,
or valued for his pregnant parts, than Drybob? My manner of speaking, if it
were nothing else, is enough to intoxicate Ladies affections. No Orator in
Christendom adorns his Language with those Flowers that I do, or is enriched
with more plentif^l Discourse.


^risk. Ad autre Monsieur ad autr^.


Dryb. Never tell me Sir, The Ladies of the Town are so exorbitantly pleased
with my manner of speaking, that I have been often set upon a Table to speak ex
tempore to a whole Room full, and have ravished 'em all for half an hour
together; and this I have got by University Learning and Traveling.


Brisk. Fiddle, faddle on your Traveling and University.


Dryb. Ha, ha, ha, I protest you make me smile.


Brisk. You talk of Ladies, I am a man that still flourish in the Spring of all
the Fashions, and in such variety that upon my honor it is not a fortnight
since the publishing of my last new Suit.


Dryb. Publishing! Pox of this Rogue! how came he to lite upon that pretty
expression. --

[Aside.
Brisk. You visit Ladies! Gad I spend more money in a year to keep my self
sweet, than thy revenue comes to.


Dryb. I am the Son of a Lancashire Witch, if thou art not an errant stinking
Fellow then; but what do such people signify but to maintain Fools, Whores,
Mercers, Barbers, and Fiddlers.


Brisk. Look you Sir, I care not a farthing for your fr^mps; what can you do? I
can sing or walk a Corant with any man in Europe, fa, la, la, la.


Dryb. As I hope ever to live to eat Woodcocks, this is a most stupendous
Baboon. Pshaw, what do you talk of this? Can you break a Jest or make a Reperte
to render your self acceptable to Persons? That ought to be the business of all
Gentlemen, to take all opportunities of showing their parts and complying with
Company.


Brisk. Break Jests! Pshaw, no man in Europe better; but I have other ways to
catch Ladies. Look you no man appears better upon a Bench in the Playhouse,
when I stand up to expose my person between the Acts; I take out my Comb, and
with a ^onne mien comb my Perriwig to the tune the Fiddles play: thus, look
you, fa, la, la, la.


Dryb. 'Pshaw, I bear my self at another rate; I sit in judgment upon Plays
with my Hat thus; with a brow wrinckl'd like a withered Pear-mayne; which Gad
is a very pretty thought, take notice of that: but by this posture am I become
more dreadful to the Poets and Players then, -- What, let me see, pox on it,
hum. This is the first time I ever wanted a smile in my life.


Enter La. Loveyouth and* Crazy -- Craz. Madam, I am transported with your
favors.


La. Lov. Why in earnest, Sir, I take you for a Person of Genetosity, and I
cannot but comply with your honorable affections.


Craz. Madam, I humbly kiss your foot, I will immediately go and prepare for
the perfection of my happiness.


La. Lov. Why truly Sir, it is something too sudden and temerarious, but you
h^e so absolute an Ascendant over me, that I cannot signify any thing as to
point of Repulse.


Craz. I make bold to take my leave for some few moments.


Enter Raymund in disguise and Bridget. La. Lov. Have you brought a Deed with
you?


Raym. Yes Madam, such a one as will fit you to a hair.


La. Lov. Let us in and read it. --

[Ex. La. Lov. and Raym.
Brisk. Pox on it Mrs. Bridget, thou know well enough what is become of
Theodosia, prithee tell me.


Bridge. Well, to you I must confess I do, since she gave me commission to do
it; and Sir, the report of Mr. Raymund's stealing her is false: she still
preserves her love to you, you are the man (...) resolves to live and die with.


Brisk. Dear Rogue bring me to her; ^aith I was amazed to think she should
leave me, and betray her self to Raymund, a fellow that never wore a noble and
polite Garnitu^e or a white (...); one that has not a Bit of Interest at (...),
or ever eat a good Fricacy, Sup, or Rogust, in his life; but prithee bring me
to her.


Bridge. Go immediately to your Lodging, you shall hear from me.


Brisk. Adieu, Servant Drybob.


Dryb. Pray will you oblige my understanding, to reveal to it this Mystery.


Bridge. It Is all for you, in short Theodosia has employed me to tell you, that
to avoid the importunity of Crazy and Brisk, she fled away, but for you she
has still the same honor and esteem which you deserve.


Dryb. In good faith this thought was no stranger to my imagination.


Bridge. I have sent him away, that he might not pry into our actions. Hark, my
Lady is coming; go i^stantly and walk in the Piaza, I will send to you suddenly.


Dryb. I will, I will --

[Ex. Dryb.
Bridge. I have a plot in this mischievous head of mine, if it takes, shall
prove no ill farce.


Enter La. Loveyouth and Raymund. La. Lov. What are the Gentlemen gone? Pray
call a Servant or two to be witnesses of this Deed of Gift of all my Estate to
my Cousin Richard after my decease.


Bridge. Yes, Madam. --

[Ex.
Raym. Remember Mrs. Bridget.


La. Lov. Now I shall fit Theodosia for a punishment for all her ^illany, by
this Deed, shall I not?


Raym. Yes, Madam, -- better than you imagine.


Enter Servant and Bridget. La. Lov. Oh are you come, Come, are you ready?


Raym. I will put on the Wax, Madam, here is a Deed will match it, and ready
filled up to my purpose; I have changed it without discovery. -- Come Madam.

[She sets her hand to it.
LaLov. I declare this as my Act and Deed. Come witness it. So, -- here Bridget
take my Key and lock it up.


Bridge. Yes, it shall be kept safe, -- from you I assure you. --

[Aside.
La. Lov. There Is for your pains; does that content you?

[Ex.
Raym. Yes, Madam, I am contented. --

[Ex. La. Lov. Or all the world can never make me so, to have obtained my
Theodosia, is a happiness so great, that I could think of nothing beyond that;
nor should I have done this, had it not been for her: for I in her have all I
ever would aim at.


Bridget returns. Bridge. There Sir, there is the Deed.


Raym. Dear Mrs. Bridget, you have obliged me beyond a Recompense.


Bridge. Now you are married to her and have the Writing, pray let the Lady
Theodosia come hither instantly, I have more Irons in the Fire, and need her
assistance.


Raym. It Is well, I ll not fail to tell her --

[Ex. Raym.
Enter Sneake. Sneak. Now, dear Madam Bridget, Let our Flames incorporate, and
by the Mysterious Union of a Conjugal Knot, beyond the Gordian, too strong for
the Macedonian Steel to rescind.


Bridge. Shall I never learn to understand you, pray help me to a Clavis.


Sneak. The meaning of it is I would make you my Spouse.


Bridge. What? would you lose your Fellowship?


Sneak. I would to that, as they say -- Nuncium remittere; for I am presented
to a Benefice worth six on it.


Bridge. You have reason, I shall deny you nothing that is reasonable, upon
condition you will do one thing for me.


Sneak. It Is very well, I shall not deny it.

Post varios Casus post tot discrimin^ rerum.
Tendimus in Latium --

Bridge. You must first marry Mr. Brisk and Mr. Drybob as I shall direct you,
but the Ladies will not be known, therefore you must marry 'em in Vizor Masks.


Sneak. I will, since you command, make no haesitation or dilatory scruple.


Bridge. Pray be gone, I see one coming I must speak with; well, this Plot if it
takes, will produce no unpleasant effects. Oh Madam!

[Ex. Sneake. Enter Theodosia. I am heartily glad your Plot succeeded so well.


Theo. Dear Bridget I owe a great deal of it to thee.


Bridge. I am happy that I could serve you; but now I have a design of my own,
in which I beg your Ladyships assistance.


Theo. You may be assured of that, what is it?


Bridge. I have persuaded each of the Coxcombs Brisk and Drybob, that you fled
to reserve your self for him; and each has so good an op^nion of himself, that
I found it no hard matter.


Theo. What can this produce to your advantage?


Bridge. Madam, (...) tell you.


Enter Striker and Friske. -- Frisk. Good lack, Madam Striker, who thought to
have seen you here*


Strik. Why, Madam Friske? I ho^e I may be as welcome here as you can.


Frisk. I do not know that neither.


Strik. Madam, your Ladyships most obedient Servant.


Theo. Madam, your Ladyships most affectionate Servant.


Frisk. Madam, your Ladyships most obliged Servant.


Theo. Madam, your Ladyships most faithful and devoted Servant.


Strik. Madam, I have weighty occasion invites me to kiss your Ladyships hands
this Forenoon.


Frisk. And I one of no less consequence, I assure your Ladyship.


Theo. I hope your Ladyships will do me the honor to pronounce both your
occasions.


Strik. Madam, Mine is.


Frisk. Madam, Mine is.


Strik. I wonder you have no more breeding than to interrupt one.


Frisk. Marry come up Mrs. Habberdas^er! Do you think my Breeding inferior to
yours? I am sure I was bred at a very pretty dancing School hard by, and you
talk of that.


Strik. Good Mrs. Gigg-em-bob! your breeding, ha, ha, I am sure my husband
married me from Hackney School, where there was a number of Substantial
Citizens Daughters; your Breeding --


Frisk. Good Mrs. Gill-flirts we live in a fine age, if a little Paltry
Citizens Wife shall compare her self with a Person of my Quality, i^aith.


Strik. Thy Quality Mrs. Kick-up --


Theo. Nay* pray Ladies! Pray keep the peace. Come, have but a little pat^ence,
and I will give Audience to both; but no more contention, I am in haste Mrs.
Striker.


Strik. Madam, I have done; and my business is this: I protest I am almost
ashamed to tell you, but it must out: Mr. Crazy has long since engaged his
heart to me and I mine to him, and therefore I think, Madam, your Ladyship
ought not to encou rage the falsehood of any Ladies Servant, to listen to any
proffers of affection from him.


Theo. Why, you are married! Your Servant.


Strik. Ay, ay, by that time your Ladyship has been married a year or two,
you will soon find the necessity of a Gallant as well as I; besides my husband's
in a Consumption, heaven be praised, he cannot live long.


Theo. Madam, upon my word I will not rob you of your Jewel, I freely resign
him to you.


Frisk. What! will you never have done? Madam, Does your Ladysh^p know that Mr.
Brisk is my Servant.


Theo. Yes, yes, and know (and know what you would have) and I have found out a
way to get you married to this Servant too, or to another as good.


Frisk. I humbly thank your Ladyship; indeed I had rather have another, for
besides variety in the Case, I shall be then at once provided with a Husband
and a Gallant.


Theo. Pray take this Key, and go up two pair of Stairs to a Chamber on your
left hand and stay there till further order. I warrant you, I Will please you;
but at present you must leave me: Be gone.


Strik. Madam, I humbly take my leave of your Ladyship, your Servant. --


Frisk. Your Servant Madam, I am gone. --

[To Theo.
Theo. Your Ladysh^ps humble Servant, I Will to my Chamber Bridget, and I Will
warrant thee to effect thy design.


Strik. Why sure you have not the confidence to take place of me, have you Mrs.
Whirliwigg.


Frisk. P^ethee Pusse be quiet, I know what I do.


Strik. Avoid you Sttumpet, I am the Mother of Children.


Frisk. Then stay there thou grave Ma^ron. --

[Ex.
Strik. She has got it, well I was never so affronted in my life, I could tear
her heart out: I Will be revenged if I live --

[Ex. Striker.
Theo. Stay, here! I Will send for the brace of Oa^s.


Bridge. I will, Madam --


Enter Crazy, Parson, and Footman* Craz. Sweet Mrs. Bridget I am thy most
obliged Servant, I have ^ound out Mr. Sneake and brought him here along with
me, to complete my happiness in joining me to your Lady, and upon my honor the
whole remainder of my life and love shall be at thy service.


Bridge. I am glad it was in my power to oblige my Lady in so fine a Person.


Craz. Not ^o neither, yet I will be bold to say she will not be altogether
unhappy in a Husband. Boy, I had forgot, go home, and bring me a Bottle of my
Dyet-Drink, or I shall eat no Dinner to day. Come Si^ --

[Ex. Craz. and Sneak.
Enter Raymund. Raym. Where Is my dear Thodosia?


Bridge. She Will instantly be here; now Sir I have time to wish you all happiness.


Raym. I thank you, but it is a superfluous wish, I have it all already; nothing
is yet behind but to make peace with my Lady Loveyouth, whom I really have used
ill; and to reward your kindness, in ea^nest of which, you must receive this
small present.


Bridge. Sir, I am already too well rewarded, the honor of serving you carries
that along with it.


Raym. You are too kind; but what possibilities is there of reconciling me to
your Lady.


Bridge. She is now pretty well appeased, and has made choice of another for a
Husband.


Enter Theodosia. Raym. Who Is that?

My dearest Theodosia, I am so happy in thy love, that it is beyond the power of
Fortune to oblige me more; I can now look down on those I once have envied, and
scorn all pleasures in the world but thee.


Theo. I can sooner distrust my self than your honor, and cannot but be very
easy to believe what I like so well; though my own want of merit would
persuade me to the contrary.


Raym. I find the wisest have still less knowledge of themselves than of
others, or you would value more what all men do; your Beauty, Wit, and Virtue,
are so admirable, that Nature could have added nothing to you; nor is there one
Charm in all the rest of your Sex, that can one moment divide my thoughts from
you.


Theo. I have so great a belief in your constancy and truth, your words can
never confirm me more; therefore let us leave this, and think of some atonement
to my Aunt: for my part I know none better than helping her to another for a
Husband if we can: for she longs more for one, than a Son and Heir of one and
twenty does for the death of his Father.


Bridge. Madam, She does not want that, for she and Mr. Crazy have resolved, he
to be revenged of you, and she to be revenged of Mr. Raymund, to couple in the
Bonds of Wedlock.


Theo. It Is pity to forbid the Banes.


Raym. To Crazy! what has she a mind to practice Physic and Surgery.


Enter Drybob and Brisk. Theo. O! yonder comes Drybob and Brisk.

Pray Mr. Raymund avoid the room, and enter not till I give you your cue --

[Ex. Raymund.
Brisk. I am come, Madam, according to appointment, and understand your
resolutions are to live and die with Jack Brisk.


Theo. I will no longer conceal my affections! I am so ill used by my Aunt,
that if you think fit, I will immediately consent to be your Wife; Mr. Sneake
shall do it for us.


Brisk. How am I exalted! Dear Madam, let it be instantly.


Theo. But I must hide my face, or he will discover me to my Aunt, and we may be
prevented for this time.


Brisk. 'Slife, I have thought (...), you shall put on a Vizor Mask.


Dryb. What! will you engross the Ladies Ear?


Theo. Pray go and expect me suddenly.


Brisk. Farewell Drybob, ha, ha, ha! poor sneaking fellow.

[Ex.
Theo. Mr. Drybob I will not blush to own my affection to you.


Dryb. I hope, Madam, you need not.


Enter Sir Richard. Theo. Yonder comes one I must speak with, pray go with
Bridget; I have entrusted her with the rest: I will be with you suddenly.


Dryb. Come, my Dear Bridget, I fly as quick as thought.

Ex. Drybob and Bridget.
Sir Rich. Madam I beseech you where'^ my Lady*


Theo. Oh she is married to Grazy since I saw you* she has made quick dispatch I
assure you.


Sir Rich. 'S Death and Hell married! Is this truth, Madam?


Theo. Ay Sir, but what is the Cause that makes you so concerned at it?


Sir Rich. Have I not reason? Do you know this face?

[Pulls off
Theo. O Heaven! my Uncle Sir Rich. Loveyouth.

[his (...):
Sir Rich. Cease your wonder Niece, you see the Story of my death was feigned.


Theo. My dear Uncle! I am infinitely happy to see you once more in this place.
This was a happy change.


Sir Rich. Niece I rejoice no less to see thee; thou art improved in beauty
since I saw thee: but this abominable Woman I for ever banish from my thoughts.


Theo. But pray Sir, what made you keep your disguise so long after your return?


Sir Rich. I ll tell you Niece, but hold I hear some coming hither; I Will
withdraw and acquaint you with it.


Theo. Come Sir, and I Will bring you to one that will be glad to see you -- --

[Exeunt.
Enter Crazy, La. Loveyouth, (...) two Servants. Craz. Now, my dear Lady, I am
happy beyond my wishes*


La. Lov. Sir, I beseech you be not the worse opinionated of me, for your easy
Conquest; for I have long had an inclination for you.

Enter Sneak, Drybob and Friske, Brisk and Bridget. ( Friske and Bridget
masked.) How now? whom have we here?


Brisk. Madam! your Servant, ha, ha, ha, you little think where Theodofia is?


La. Lov. Name her not, vile Creature, to run away with Raym^nd.


Dryb. No, no, she did not run away with him. With Raymund quoth she? no, no.


Brisk. What does this Fool mean? ha, ha, ha.


La. Lov. Not married to Raymund! how unlucky is this? that I should fool my
self into marrying this fellow; I might yet have captivated Mr. Raymund.


Sneak. Gentlemen, are you both satisfied with your marriage?


Dryb. Ay, ay.


Brisk. Ay, ay. Come, my dear Theodosia, u^ask your self, and keep 'em no
longer in suspense.


Bridge. Sir, I obey you. --

[She unmasks.
Brisk. *SDeath and Hell! Who Is this? Bridget!


All. Bridget -- ha, ha, ha.


Sneak. O tempora! O mores! Would you serve me thus? I shall not live to endure
it, I shall suddenly expire, and (...).


Dryb. Now Brisk, thou have married the Chambermaid* I Will prefer thee; I told
thee the Mistress was for my tu^: Prithee my dear unmask, ha! Who Is this?


Frisk. Even as you see Sir --

[ Friske unmaskes*
Dryb. Death, Fire brands, Devils Damnation,! What Is this!


Brisk. My old Mistress! Prithee Drybob be patient* thou will have a Son and
Heir of mine shortly; and prithee for my sake take care and see him well
educated.


Craz. How now Gentlemen, are you bob'd?


Enter Raymund and Theodosia. Raym. Madam, We are come to beg your approbation
of ou^ M^iage* I humbly beg your pardon for the irr^gular means I used: Pray
Madam turn not from us, but give us your consent; since it is now too late to
prevent it.


La. Lov. Avoid my presence thou impudent fellow, I Will have thee kicked.


Enter Mrs. Striker and whispers Mrs. Bridget. Craz. Poor fellows, methinks you
look as scurvily as if you were mounting the Pillo^y with Papers on your backs.


Strik. Married say you? Ah false man! have you used me thus? Did I for this
yield up my honor to you, and you promised me to marry me after the death of
my Husband; who is in a deep Consumption! Ah villainous man! I will have thee
kicked and beaten.


Raym. Drybob, Tell him his Wife has made over all her Estate.


Dryb. Yet this condition of mine is as good as marrying a Widow that has made
over her Estate, as you have done.


Craz. Is this true, Madam?


La. Lov. I must confess I did it to defeat my ungracious Niece of her
inheritance.


Dryb. Give you joy good Mr. Crazy.


Brisk. Give you joy good Mr. Crazy.


Raym. Madam, your Ladyship is mistaken, it is a Deed of Gift of all your
Estate, after your decease, to Theodosia: I have it here.


Theo. Madam, I thank your Ladyship: I shall study to deserve it.


La Lov. Am I thus cozened and abused?


Craz. It Is I am cozen^d and abused.


Strik. Go thy ways thou vile man, thou art served right for thy falsehood to me.


Craz. I Will be revenged of her. -- --

[Aside. I must tell you, Madam, you are not less disappointed than I am; for I
must ingeniously confess I am very much visited with the Pox


Dryb. Pox on him for a Rascal; visited is a very pretty word there in faith.


La. Lov. O Heaven! I am undone for ever; this is a most unspeakable
disappointment to a Lady! O miserable unfortunate Woman that I am.


Enter Sir Richard. Sir Rich. What Is the matter Madam?


La. Lov. Oh I have just now cast my self upon that diseased impotent fellow,
that walking Hospital Crazy.


Sir Rich. Now, Madam, do you wish your other Husband alive in Candia?


La. Lov. No, not so neither; but would I were as fair rid of this Husband, as
I was of him.


Sir Rich. So! I am beholding to her!

[Aside. I have a way to rid you of this Husband.


La. Lov. If you have, you shall command my person and my purse.


Sir Rich. And you shall know that I Will command 'em both.

[Discovers himself.
Omn. Sir Richard Loveyouth alive!


La. Lov. O Heaven! I am ruined for ever* there is now no dissembling! all my
misfortunes are completed now.


Craz. I am glad you are come to take your Wife again.


Sir Rich. Fond Woman, thy foolishness and vanity, and thy impertinent
contentions with me, caused my three years absence; and shall make me still
continue a stranger to your Conversation: yet you shall never want what ever
befits your Quality: upon the rest of all the Company let no Cloud appear to
day.


Brisk. You are a happy man Crazy.


Dryb. You have had ill luck with honest Women, Crazy, you had e'n as good
stick to Whores.


Craz. I have had worse luck with them I am sure, yet this is better than
marrying a Chambermaid, or Wench big with Child, Gentlemen.


Sir Rich. Sir, I am a stranger to your repute, and think my self much honored
in the relation I have to you.


Raym. Sir, The honor is wholly on my side.


Sir Rich. Come Gentlemen, I am informed of all your Stories, and it is wisdom
in you to be content, with what you cannot redress.


Sir Rich. I shall never have Children, I therefore here declare my Niece my
Heir.


Theo. Sir, I can return nothing but my thanks.


Sir Rich. This day, Sir, I dedicate to my fair Niece and you.


Raym. You do me too much honor.


Sir Rich. Come Gentlemen and Ladies, Let Us b^ merry; we'll have Music, we'll
begin this days jollity with a Dance.


Craz. Sweet Madam Striker, receive me into your favor; for upon my honor,
tho I married her, I intended to reserve the whole stock of my affection for
thee.


Strik. Get thee gone, thou wicked fellow, I will have ^one of thee; thou have
declared thou have the Disease: Get thee gone, I tell thee I will have thee
kicked.


Sir Rich. Come Gentlemen, join in a Dance.

[Dance. So, it is well.

All happ ness to both, and may you be,
From discontents of Marriage ever free,
May a^l your life be one continue^ peace,
And may your Loves each day and hour increase. --
[Ex. Omnes.
Epilogue.
THe Mighty Prince of Poets, learned BEN,
Who alone dived into the Minds of Men:
Saw all their wanderings, all their follies knew,
And all their vain fantastic passions drew.
In Images so lively and so true;
That there each Humorist himself might view.
Yet only lashed the Errors of the Times,
And never exposed the Persons, but the Crimes:
And never cared for private frowns, when he
Did but chastise public iniquity.
He feared no Pimp, no Pick-pocket, or Drab;
He feared no Bravo, nor no Ruffian's Stab.
'Twas he alone true Humors understood,
And with great Wit and Judgment made them good.
A Humor is the Byas of the Mind,
By which with violence it is one way inclined:
It makes our Actions lean on one side still,
And in all Changes that way bends the will.
This --
He only knew and represented right.
Thus none but Mighty Johnson ever could write.
Expect not then, since that most flourishing Age,
Of BEN. to see true Humor on the Stage.
All that have since been writ, if they be scanned,
Are but faint Copies from that Master's hand.
Our Poet now, amongst those petty things,
Alas, his too weak trifling humors brings.
As much beneath the worst in Johnson's Plays,
As his great Merit is above our praise.
For could he imitate that great Author right,
He would with ease all Poets else out-write.
But to out-go all other men, would be
O Noble BEN! less than to follow thee.
Gallants you see how hard it is to write,
Forgive all faults the Poet made to night:
Since if he finn'd, *it was meant for your delight.
Pray let this find --
As good success, though it be very bad,
As any damned successful Play ever had.
Yet if you hiss, he knows not where the harm is,
He Will not defend his Nonsense Vi and Armis.
But this poor Play has been so torn before,
That all your Cruelty cannot wound it more.
FINIS.

