ODE ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE KING's BIRTH.

BY THO. SHADWELL, Poet Laureat, and Historiographer-Royal.

Steriles Transmissimus annos
Haec AEvi prima Dies,
LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Sign of the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1690.

ODE ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE KING's BIRTH.
WElcome, thrice welcome, this Auspicious Morn,
On which the Great Nassau was Born,
Sprung from a Mighty Race which was designed
For the Deliv'rers of Mankind.
Illustrious Heroes, whose prevailing Fates
Raised the Distressed, to High and Mighty States;
And did by that possess more true Renown,
Then their Adolphus gained by the Imperial Crown.
They cooled the Rage, humbled the Pride of Spain,
But since the Insolence of France no less,
Had brought the States into Distress,
But that a precious Scion did remain
From that Great Root, which did the shock sustain,
And made them High and Mighty once again.
This Prince for us, was Born to make us free
From the most abject Slavery.
Thou have restored our Laws their force again;
We still shall Conquer on the Land by thee;
By thee shall Triumph on the Main.
But thee a Fate much more sublime attends,
Europe for Freedom on thy Sword depends;
And thy Victorious Arms shall tumble down
The Savage Monster from the Gallick Throne:
To this Important Day, we all shall owe,
Oh Glorious Birth, from which such blessed effects shall flow.
On this glad Day let every Voice,
And Instrument, Proclaim our Ioys, Genera Chorus of Voices and Instruments.

And let all Europe join in the Triumphant noise.
Io Triumph let us Sing,
Io Triumph let us Sing,
And let the sound through all the spacious Welkin Ring.
From thy fresh Laurels shall the Olive spring,
Thy Victories shall bring us Peace,
And under Thee, our most Indulgent King,
Shall Industry and Arts increase;
Quiet we shall possess, but not Inglorious Ease.
Then shall each fertile Mead, and grateful Field,
Amply reward our Care and Toil;
The Herds and Flocks a vast increase shall yield,
Which raging War shall never spoil,
Free from Invading sorce, and from Intestine broil.
And though our Plenteous Isle shall need no more,
Than what its Soil for Natives does provide,
Yet added to its mighty store,
Whatever any Foreign Coast,
Of Plenty, or of Wealth can boast,
Shall on our Happy Shores flow in beside,
From the superfluous Bounty of each Tide.
No Avarice or Ambition in the Great,
Shall under thee thy Godlike Power pervert,
Rewards nor Threats corrupt thy Judgment Seat;
Nor Trusts be gained but by desert,
While thy Great Self thy Wisdom shall exert.
Then shall the Vile Ungrateful Murmuring Band,
Whom our great Moses has set free
From Egypts Bondage, and Idolatry,
Glad to submit to his Command;
For Shame their guilty Heads hang down,
Owning the best of Kings that ever filled the Throne.
Thus the Prophetic Muses say,
And all the Wise and Good will pray,
That they long, long, may Celebrate this Day.
Soon Haughty France shall bow, and Coz'ning Rome,
And Britain Mistress of the World become;
And from thy Wise, thy Godlike Sway,
Kings learn to Reign, and Subjects to Obey.
On this Blessed Day let every Voice,
And, etc.
FINIS.
Books Newly Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Co^ Poem on His. Highness the Prince of Orange's coming into England: By
Tho. Shadwell.

A Co^^^^datory Poem to the Most Illustrious Queen Mary, upon her Arrival into
ENGLAND: By Tho. Shadwell.

The Squire of Alsatia. A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by
Tho. Shadwell.

The True W(...). A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

Bury Fair. A Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by Tho.
Shadwell.

The Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom; As it is Acted by His (...).
Written by A. Behn.

(...) Fortune ^unters, or, Two Fools well met. A Comedy, Acted by Their
Maj^^^^^^ (...). Written by James Carlisle.

The Female Prelate: Being a History of the Life and Death of Pope Joan. A
Tragedy, as it i^ Acted at the Theater Royal.

Mr. Anthony, a Comedy, Acted by Their Majesty's Servants. Written by the Earl
of Orrery.

The Wanton Friar, or, the Irish Amor: A Novel, in Twelves.

The Wanton Friar, or, the Irish Amor: A Novel, in Twelves, the 2d Part.

The Governor of Cyprus, or; the Loves of Virotto and Dorothea. A Novel in
Twelves.

The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa. Written in French
by the Ingenious Monsieur ^ellon, who labored five years under those
Severities, with an Account of his Deliverance. Translated into English.
Quarto, Price 1s.

Some Observations concerning the Regulating of Elections for Parliament, found
among the (...) o^ Shef(...)'s Papers after his Death, and now recommended to
the Consideration of this Present Parliament. In Quarto, price 3 d.

(...)Jacobi, or, the H^^^ory of the Reign of King James II* from his first
coming to the Crown to his Desertion.

FINIS.

