THE Lancashire-Witches, AND Tegue o Divelly THE Irish-PRIEST: A COMEDY Acted
at the DUKE's Theater.

Written by THO. SHADWELL.

-- Nihilo quae sunt metuenda magis quam
Quae p^eri in ten^bris pavitant, finguntque futura:
LONDON: Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple-Barr.
MDCLXXXII.

TO THE READER.
FOps and Knaves are the fittest Characters for Comaedy* and this Town was wont
to abound with variety of Vanities and Knaveries till this unhappy division.
But all run now into Politics, and you must needs, if you touch upon any
humor of this time, offend one of the Parties. The Bo^nds being then so
narrow, I saw there was no scope for the writing of an entire Comaedy, (wherein
the Poet must have a relish of the present time) and therefore I resolved to
make as good an entertainment as I could, without tying my self up to the
strict rules of a Comaedy; which was the reason of my i^troducing of Witches.
Yet I will be bold to affirm, that Young Hartfort, Sir Timothy, Smerk, and
Tegue O Divelly are true Comical Characters, and have something new in 'em. And
how any of these (the Scene being laid in Lancashire) could offend any Party
here* but that of Papists, I could not imagine, till I heard that great
opposition was designed against the Play (a month before it was acted) by a
Party who (being ashamed to say it was for the sake of the Irish Priest)
pretended that I had written a Saty^ upon the Church of England, and several
professed Papists railed at it violently, before they had seen it, alleging that
for a reason, such dear Friends they are to our Church. And (notwithstanding
all was put out that could any way be ^rested to an offense against the Church)
yet they came with the greatest malice in the world to hiss it, and many that
called themselves Protestants, ^oyn'd with them in that noble enterprise.

How strict a scrutiny was made upon the Play you may easily see, for I have in
my own vindication Printed it just as I first writ it; and all that was
exp^^ged is Printed in the Italick Letter. All the difference is, that I have
now ordained Smerk, who before was a young Student in Divinity, expecting
Orders and to be Chaplain to Sir Edward. The Master of the Revels (who I must
confess used me civilly enough) Licensed it at first with little alteration:
But there come such an Alarm to him, and a Report that it was full of dangerous
refl^cti^^s, that upon a Review, he expunged all that you see differently
Printed, except about a dozen li^es which he struck out at the first reading.

But, for all this, they came resolved to hiss at it right or wrong, and had
gotten mercenary Fellows, who were such Fools they did not know when ^o hiss,
and this was evident to all the Audience. It was wonderful to see men of great
Quality and Gentlemen in so mean a Combination. But to my great satisfaction
they came off as meanly as I could wish. I had, so numerous an assembly of the
best sort of men, who stood so generously in my defense, for the three first
days, that they qu^sh'd all the v^in attempts of my Enemies, the
inconsiderable* Party of ^issers yielded, and the Play lived in spite of them.

Had it been never so bad, I had valued the honor of having so many, and such
Friends, as eminently appeared for me* above that of excelling the most
admirable Johnson, if it were possible to be done by me.

Now, for reflecting upon the Chuch of England, you will find, by many
expressions in the Play, that I intended nothing less. And I am well assured
that no Learned, or Wise Divine of the Church, will believe me guilty of it. I
profess to have a true value and respect for them.

But they who say that the representation of such a Fool and Knave as Smerk
(who is declared to be an infamous Fellow, not of the Church, but crept into it
for a Livelihood, exposed for his Folly and Knavery, and expelled the Family)
should concern, or reflect upon the Church of England, do sufficiently abuse
it. A fo^lish Lord, or Knight is daily represented: nor are there any so silly
to believe it an abuse to their Order. Should Thompson, or Mason, or any
Impudent Hotheaded Tan^ivy Fool be exposed; I am confident that the Sober and
the Wise Divines of the Church will be so far from thinking themselves
concerned in it, that they detest them as much as I do.

Nor should any of the Irish Nation think themselves concerned, but Kelly (one
of the Murderers of Sir Edmond-Bury Godfrey) which I make to be his feigned
Name, and Tegue O Divelly his true one. For Whores and Priests have several
names still.

Some of the worsted Party of the Hissers were so malicious to make People
believe (because I had laid the Scene in Lancashire) that I had reflected
personally on some in that, and in an adjoining County. Which no man, that will
give himself leave to think can believe. And I do here solemnly declare the
contrary, and that it was never once in my thoughts to do so.

But the Clamours of a Party (who can support themselves by nothing but
falsehood) rose so high, as to report that I had written Sedition and Treason,
had reflected upon His Majesty, and that the Scope of the Play was against the
Government of England. Which are Villainies I abhor* and some of the Reporters I
believe would not stic^ at. But I am well assured they did not believe
themselves, only (out of malice to me) thought if they could bring the report
to Windsor (which they did) by that means to cause the silencing the Play,
without farther examination: But they who had the Power, were too just for
that, and let it live.

For these reasons I am forced, in my own vindication, to Print the whole Play
just as I writ it (without adding, or deminishing) as all the Actors who
rehers'd it so a fortnight together, before it was reviewed, may testify.

For the Magical part, I had no hopes of equalling Shakespeare in fancy, who
created his Witchcraft for the most part out of his own imagination (in which
faculty no man ever excelled him) and therefore I resolved to take mine from
Authority. And to that end, there is not one action in the Play, nay scarce a
word concerning it, but is borrowed from some ancient, or Modern Witchmonger.
Which you will find in the notes, wherein I have presented you a great part of
the Doctrine of Witchcraft, believe it who will. For my part, I am (as it is
said of Surly in the Alchymist, somewhat costive of belief. The evidences I
have represented are natural, viz slight, and frivolous, such as poor old Women
were wont to be hang^d upon.

For the act^^^s, if I had not represented them as those of real Witches, but
had showed the ignorance, fear, melancholy, malice, confederacy, and imposture
that contribute to the belief of Witchcraft, the people had wanted diversion,
and their had been another clamor against it, it would have been called
Atheistical, By a prevailing party who take it ill that the power of the Devil
should be lessened, and attribute more miracles to a silly old Woman, then ever
they did to the greatest of Prophets, and by this means the Play might have
been Silenced.

I have b^t one thing more to observe which is, that Witchcraft, being a
Religion to the Devil, (for so it is) their charms upon several occasions being
so many offices of the Witches Liturgy to him,) and attended with as many
ceremonies as even the Popish Religion is, it is remarkable that the Church of
the Devil (if I may catachrestically call it so) has continued almost the
same, from their first writers on this subject to the last. From Theocritus his
Pharmaceutria, to Sadducismus Triumphatus: and to the shame of Divines, the
Church of Christ has been in perpetual alteration. But had there been as little
to be gotten in one as in the other, it is probable there would have been as few
changes.

I have troubled you too long, speak of the Play as you find it.

ERRATA.
IN the Notes upon the 1st Act, for fabicatorum r. fabricatorum. In the Notes
upon the 2d Act* r. solent ad conven^^m, after Daemonem expunge the Colon,
after her cum horridum, r. etc. for Ecrates r. Eucrates. for Matu praeceptus,
Matri praereptus. for furgentio r. turgentia, instead of veto quod nomine, r.
vero. for devocat, r. devorat. for cansat, cantat line penult. alta hic salta
illic. The rest of the faults in the Printing, the connection and the sense will
make you mend.

BOOKS of Poetry and Plays Printed for John Starkey.
THE Works of Sir William Davenant Knight. containing, 1. Gondibert. 2. Madagascar.
3. Siege of Rhodes both parts. 4. Playhouse to be let. 5. Unfortunate Lovers.
6. The Wits. 7. Love and Honor. 8. Law against Lovers. 9. Man's the Master.
10. Platonic Lovers. 11. Albovine King of Lumbardy. 12. Just Italian. 13.
Cruel Brother. 14. News from Plymouth. 15. Distresses. 16. Siege. 17. Fair
Favorite. With several other Poems never before Printed; all published out of
the Authors Original Copies, and Printed together in Folio.

Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy, by John Wilson, in 4 to.

Heraclius Emperor of the East, a Tragedy, by Lodowick Carlel Esquire in 4 to.

The Shepherds Paradise, a Pastoral, by Water Montague, Esquire in 8 to.

Aminta, the Famous Italian Pastoral, Translated into English, in 8 to.

Paradise Regained, a Poem in four Books, to which is added Sampso^ Agonistes,
the Author John Milton, in 8 to.

PROLOGUE.
OUR Poet once resolved to quit the stage,
But seeing what slight Plays still please the Age
He is drawn in: And thinks to pass with ease,
He cannot write so ill ^s some that please.
Our Author says he has no need to fear,
(...)
The common Eyes all paintings please ^like,
(...)
Instruction is an honest Poets aim,
And not a large or wide, but a goo^ (...)*
But he has found long since this would not do,
And therefore thought to have deserted you:
But Poets and Young Girls by no mishaps
Are warned, those damming fright not, nor these (...)*
Their former I^tch will spite of all persuade,
And both will fall again to their old trade:
Our Poet says that some resolve in spite
To damn, th^' good, what ever he shall write.
He fears not such as right or wrong oppose,
He swears, in sense, his friends out weigh such fo^s.
He cares not much whether he sink or (...),
He will not suffer, but we shall for him.
We then (...)
Your charity for this Crippled piece we pray
We are only losers if you damn the play
DRAMMATIS PERSONAE.
Sir Edward Hartf^rt. A worthy Hospitable true English Gentleman, of good
understanding, and honest Principles. Young Harf^rt his Son. A Clownish,
sordid, Country Fool, that loves nothing but drinking Ale, and Country Sports.
Sir Ieffery Shacklehead. A simple Justice, pretending to great Skill in
Witches, and a great Persecuter of them. Sir Timothy Shacklehead. Sir Ieffery's
Son, a very pert, confident, simple Fellow, bred at Oxford, and the Inns of
Court. Tom. Shacklehead. Sir Ieffery's poor Younger Brother, an humble
Companion, and led: drinker in the Country. Smerk. Chaplain to Sir Edward,
Foolish, Knavish, Popish, Arrogant, Insolent; yet for his Interest, Slavish.
Tegue O Divelly. The Irish-Priest, an equal mixture of Fool and Knave.
Bellfort. Doubty. Two Yorkshire Gentlemen of good Estates, well bred, and of
good Sense. La. Shacklehead. Wife to Sir Ieffery, a notable discreet Lady,
something inclined to Wantonness. Theodosia. Daughter to Sir Ieffery, and Lady.
Women of good Humor, Wit, and Beauty. Isabella. Daughter to Sir Edward
Hartfort. Susan. Housekeeper to Sir Edward. Clod. A Country Fellow, a retainer
to Sir Edwards Family. Thomas o Georges. Another Country Fellow.
Witches.
Constable. The Devil Mother Demdike. Mother Dickenson. Mother Hargrave. Mal.
Spencer. Madge, and several other Old Woman that Searches them* Servants,
Dancers Musicians, Messenger, etc.
The Scene in Lancashire, near Pendle-Hills. THE Lancashire Witches AND TEGVE O
DIVELLY THE Irish PRIEST.
ACT. I.
Enter Sir Edward Harfort and Smerk. Smerk. SIR, give me leave, as by my duty
bound,
To let you know (though I am lately come
Into your Family) I have observed
(For all your real courtesy, and seeming mirth
Among your Friends that visit you) a fixed
And constant melancholy does possess you, Sir,
When you are alone, and you seem not to relish
The happiness your ample fortune, and
The great esteem your worth has ever gained
From all good men might give you, I am bound
To inquire the Cause, and offer my Advice.

Sir Edw. Pray search no further, I, for once, can pardon
The rashness of your curiosity.
I did not take you for my Councellor.

Smerk. You now, Sir, are become one of my Flock:
And I am bound in Conscience to Advise,
And search into the troubles of your spirit,
To find the secrets that disturb your mind.

Sir Edw. I do not wonder that a Parson should
Be foolish and pragmatical; but know,
I will advise and teach your Master of Artship
(That made you lord it over Boys and Fr^shmen)
To add to your small Logic and Divinity
Two main Ingredi^nts, Sir, Sense and Good-manners,

Smerk. Consider, Sir, the Dignity of my Func^ion.

Sir Edw. Your Father is my Tailor, you are my Servant.
And d^ you think a Cassock and a Girdle
Can (...) you so much, as to enable
You (who before were but a Coxcomb, Sir,)
To t^ach me? Know, I only took you for
A me^hanick ^^vine, to read Church Prayers
Twice every day, and once a week to Teach
My Servants Honesty and Obedience.
You may (...) to a silly Flock,
And leadem where you please, but ne^re must hope
To govern men of sense and knowledge.

Smerk. My Office bids me say this is profane,
And little less than Athiestical.

Sir Edw. You're insolent, you're one of the senceless,
H^theaded Fools, that injure all your Tribe;
Learn of the wise, the moderate and good,
Our Church abounds with such examples for you.
I (...) the name of Atheist, you^re ill-manner^d.
But who ere touches one of you hot-spur Parsons,
You brand him home, and right, or wrong, no matter.

Smerk. My Orders give me Authority to speak.

Sir Edw. Your Orders separate, and set you apart
To Minister, That is to serve in Churches,
And not to domine^r in Families.

Smerk. A power Legantine I have from Heaven.

Sir Edw. Show your Credentials. Come good petulant
Mr. (...)-L^gick, pack up your for Books
And ^ld Black threadbare Clothes to morrow-morning,
And have my House; get you a Wall-ey^d Mare,
Will carry double, for your Spouse and you;
When some ^ast Chambermaid shall smile upon you,
Charmed with a Vic^aridge of forty pound
A year, the greatest you can (...).

Smerk. Good Sir! I have offended, and am sorry.
I (...) will once c^mmit this fault again,
Now I am acquainted with your Worships mind*

Sir Edw. So, now you are not bound in Conscience then.
The indiscretion of such paultry fellows
Are scandals to the Church and Cause they Preach for.
What fatal mi^chiefs have domestic Priests
Brought on the best of Families in England!
Where their dull Patrons give them line enough,
First with the Women they insinuate,
(Whose fear and folly makes them slaves t'you,)
And give them ill opinions of their Husbands.
Often ye divide them if the women rule not.
But, if they govern, then your reign is sure.
Then y' have the secrets of the Family,
Dispose oth' Children, place and then displace,
Whom, and when you think fit.

Smerk. Good, Noble Sir! I humbly shall desist.

Sir Edw. The Husband must not drink a Glass, but when
You shall, of your good grace, think fit for him.
None shall be welcome but whom you approve:
And all this favor is, perhaps, requited
With the infusing of ill principles into the Sons,
And stealing, or corrupting of the Daughters.
Sometimes upon a weak and bigot Patron you
Obtain so much to be Executor:
And, if he dies, marry his Widow, and
Claim then the cheating of his Orphans too.

Smerk. Sweet Sir forbear, I am fully sensible.

Sir Edw. With furious zeal you press for Discipline,
With fire and blood maintain your great Diana.
Foam at the mouth when a Dissenter's named,
(With fiery eyes, wherein we flaming see
A persecuting spirit) you roar at
Those whom the wisest of your function strive
To win by gentleness and easy ways.
You dam em if they do not love a Surplice.

Smerk. Had I the power, I Would make them wear pitched Surplices,
And light them till they flamed about their Ears
I would --

Sir Edw. Such Firebrands as you but hurt the Cause.
The learned and the wisest of your Tribe
Strive by good life and meekness to overcome them.
We serve a Prince renowned for Grace and Mercy,
Abhorring ways of Blood and Cruelty;
Whose Glory will, for this, last to all Ages.
Him Heaven preserve long quiet in his Throne.
I will have no such violent Sons of Thunder,
I will have moderation in my House.

Smerk. Forgive my zeal, and, if your Worship please,
I will submit to all your wise Instructions.

Sir Edw. Then (on your good behavior) I receive you,
Search not the secrets of my House or me.
Vain was our Reformation, if we still
Suffer auricular Confession here,
By which the Popish Clergy rule the world.
No business in my Family shall concern you;
Preach nothing but good life and honesty.

Smerk. I will not.

Sir Edw. No controversial Sermons will I hear:
No meddling with Government; you are ignorant
(...) Laws and Customs of cur Realm, and should be so.
The other world should be your care, not this.
A Plowman is as fit to be a Pilot,
As a good Clergyman to be a Statesman, Sir,
Besides, the People are not apt to love you,
Because your sloth is supported by their labors.
And you do hurt to any Cause you would
Advance.

Smerk. I humbly bow, Sir, to your Wisdom.

Sir Edw. A meek and humble modest Teacher be;
For pitteous tri^les you Divines fall out.
If you must Quarrel, Quarrel who shall be
Most honest men; leave me, and then consider
Of what I have said.

Smerk. I will do any thing,
Rather than lose your Worships grace and favor.

Sir Edw. Begone.

Ex. Smerk* Enter Isabella. Isabella. Sir, why do you walk alone, and
Melancholy?
I have observed you droop much on the sudden.

Sir Edw. Dear Isabella, the most solid joy
And comfort of my fading life! thou truest Image
Of thy dead Mother! who excell^d her Sex:
Fair, and not proud on it; witty, and not vain;
Not grave, but Wise; Chaste, and yet kind and free;
Devout, not sower; Religious, not precise:
In her no foolish affectation was
Which makes us na^seate all good qualities.
She was all meekness and humility;
The tenderest Mother, and the softest Wife.

Isab. My Dearest and most Honored Father,
(Had you not been the best of Parents living)
I could not have outlived that Mothers loss:
Loss of her tender care, and great example.

Sir Edw. Yet learn, my Child, never to grieve for that
Which cannot be recalled; those whom I love
With tenderness I will embrace, when living,
And when they are dead strive to forget 'em soon.

Isab. What is it can afflict you now, dear Father?

Sir Edw. You Are wise, to thee I can declare my grief;
Thy Brother has been still my tender care,
Out of my duty, rather than affection,
Whom I could never bend by education
To any generous purpose, who delights
In Dogs and Horses, Peasants, Ale and Sloth.

Isab. He may have Children will be wiser, Sir.
And you are young enough yet to expect
Many years comfort in your Grandchildren.

Sir Edw. To that end, I would match the unhewn Clown
To the fair Daughter of Sir Ieffery Shaklehead,
Who has all the perfections can be wished
In wom^n-kind, and might restore the breed:
But he neglects her to enjoy his Clowns,
His foolish sports, and is averse to Marriage.
I would not have my name perish in him.

Isab. aside. I am sure she will never help to the continuance.

Sir Edw. But thou art good, my Child, obedient,
And though Sir Timothy, Sir Ieffery's Son,
Has not the great accomplishments I wish him,
His temper yet is flexible and kind,
And will be apt to yield to thy discretion.
His person not ungratious, his Estate
Large, and lies altogether about his House,
Which (for its situation and its building)
With noble Gardens, Fountains, and a River
Running quite through his Park and Garden,
Exceeds most in the North: Thou know my Child
How this cross match will strengthen and advance
My Family -- He is coming hither from
His sport, He has given his Horse to his man, and now*
Is walking toward us; I Will go and find
My Lady and her Daughter.
Ex. Sir Edward.
Isab. Oh hard fate!
That I must disobey so good a Father:
I to no punishment can be condemned
Like to the Marriage with this foolish Knight.
But by ill usage of him, I will make him,
I^ possible, hate me as I hate him.

Enter Sir Timothy Shaklehead. Sir Tim. Oh my Fair Cousen, I spi^d ye, and
that made me give my man my Horse to come to you.


Isab. Me? have you any business with me?


Sir Tim. Business! yes Faith, I think I have, you know it well enough, but we
have had no sport this afternoon, and therefore I made have to come to you.


Is^b. Such as you should have no sport made to you, you should make it for
others.


Sir Tim. Ay, its no matter for that; but Cousen, would you believe it, we were
all (...), Mother Demdike and all her Imps were abroad, I think, but you are
the pr^tty (...) that enchants my heart. This must n^^ds please her.


Aside. Isab. Well said, Academy of Compliments, you are well read I see.


Sir Tim. Ods Bud, who would have thought she had read that!


Isab. Nay, for Learning and good breeding let Tim alone.


Sir Tim. Tim! I might be Sir Timothy in your mouth though one would think.


Isab. I am sorry the King bestowed Honor so cheaply.


Sir Tim. Nay, not so cheap neither; for though my Lady Mother had a dear
Friend at Court, yet I was fain to give one a Hundred pounds, besides my Fees,
I am sure of that: Tim, hum go too --


I^ab. Was there ever so fulsom a Fool*


Sir Tim. Besides, I gave Thirty Guinnies for the Sword I was Knighted with to
one of his Nobles, for the King di^ not draw his own Sword upon me.


Isab. Do you abuse the Nobility? would a Nobleman sell you a Sword?


Sir Tim. Yes that they will, s^ll that or any thing else at Court. I am sure
he was a great Courtier he talked so prettily to the Kings Dogs, and was so
familiar with them, and they were very kind to (...), and he had great interest
in them: He had all their names as quick, and (...) know who, and discours^d
with them, I protest and vow, as if they had (...) Christians.


Isab. Oh thou art a pretty F^llow; hey for little Tim of Lancashire.


Sir Tim. You might give one on^s title one would think, I say again,
especially one that loves you too.


Isab. Yes, I will give you your Title.


Sir Tim. Thank you dear Co^z^n.


He offers to kiss her hand, she gives him a box on the ear. Isab. Take that,
and your proper Title, Fool.


Sir Tim. Fool! I (...) you, I s^orn your words, it is a burning shame you
should be (...), that it is: Little think my ^ady Mother how I am used.


I^^b. Once for all, as a Kinsman I w^ll b^ civil to you; but if you dare make
love (...), I Will make thee such an example, thou shall be a terror to all
foolish Knights.


Sir Tim. ^oolish! ha, ha, ha, that is a pretty jest; why have NOT I been at Oxford
and the (...) of Court? I have spent my time well indeed if I be a Fool still:
But I am not such a Fool to give you over for all this.


Isab. Do thou hear? thou most incorrigible lump, never to be lickt into
form; thou Coxcomb incarnate; thou fresh, insipid, witless, mannerless Knight,
who wearest a Knighthood worse than a Haberdasher of Small wares would; It
serves but to make thy folly more eminent.


Sir Tim. Well, well, forsooth, somebody shall know this.


Isab. Every one that knows thee knows it. Do thou think, because thy foolish
Mother has Cocker^d thee with morning Cawdles and afternoons Luncheons, thou
art fit to make Love? I Will use thee like a Dog if thou dare but speak once
more of Love, or name the world before me.


Sir Tim. Mum, mum, no more to be said, I shall be heard some-where. Will your
Father maintain you in these things, ha Gentlewoman?


Isab. Tell if thou durst, I Will make thee tremble. Heart, if you bent gone now
presently, I Will beat you.


Ex. Sir Tim. Enter Theodosia. Isab. My Dear, art thou come! I have been just
now tormented by thy foolish Brothers awkward Courtship, forgive me that I make
so bold with him.


Theo. Prithee do, my Dear, I shall be as free with thine, though he is not so
great a Plague, for he is bashful, very indifferent, and for ought I perceive,
to my great comfort, no Lover at all: But mine is pert, foolish, confident, and
on my Conscience in love to boot.


Isab. Well, we are resolved never to Marry where we are designed, that^s
certain. For my part I am a free English woman, and will stand up for* my
Liberty, and Property of Choice.


Theo. And Faith, Girl, I Will be a mutineer on thy side; I hate the imposition of
a Husband, it is as bad as Pop^ry.


Isab. We will be Husband and Wife to one another, dear Theodosia.


Theo. But there are a brace of Sparks we saw at the Spaw, I am apt to believe
would forbid the Banes if they were here.


Isab. Bellfort and D^ubt^ they write us word they will be here suddenly, but I
have little hopes; for my Father is so resolved in whatever he proposes, I must
despair of his consent for Bellfort, though he is too reasonable to force me to
Marry any one* besides he is engaged, in honor, to your Father.


Theo. Nay, if thou think of subjection still, or I either, we are in a
desperate case: No, mutiny, mutiny, I say.


Isab. And no money, no money will our Fathers say.


Theo. If our Lovers will not take us upon those Terms they are not worthy of
us. If they will, farewell Daddy, say I.


Isab. If so, I will be as hearty a Rebel, and as brisk as thou art for thy
life; But can thou think they are such Romancy Knights to take Ladies with
nothing? I am scarce so vain though I am a woman.


Theo. I would not live without vanity for the Earth; if every one could see
their own faults 'twould be a sad World.


^^ab. Thou say right, sure the world would be almost depopulated, most men
^ould hang themselves.


The^. Ay, and women too: Is there any creature so happy as your affected Lady?
or (...) Coxcomb?


I^ab. I must confess they have a happy error, that serves their turn better
than truth; but away with Philosophy, and let us walk on and consider of the
more weighty matters of our Love.


(...). Come along my Dear.


Ex* Isabella and Theodocia. Enter Sir Timothy. Sir Tim. What a pox is the
matter? She has pissed upon a Nettle to day, or else the Witch^s have b^witched
her. Hah, now I talk of Witches, I am plag^eily afraid, and all alone: No here is
Nun^^e Tomas.


Enter Tho. Shaklehead. T^^ Sha. How now Cousen?


Sir Tim. Cousen? plain Cousen? You might have more manners Uncle, S flesh, and
one gives you an Inch, you will take an Ell. I see Familiarity breeds Contempt.


T^m Sha. Well, Sir Timothy, then, Byr Lady I thought no harm; But I am your
(...) that.


Sir Tim. Yes, my Father's younger Brother. What a Murrain do we keep you for,
but to have an eye over our Dogs and Hawks, to drink Ale with the Tennants
(when they come with R^nt or ^resents) in Black Jacks, at the upper end of a
Brown Sho^^^-board ^able in the Hal^? to sit at lower end oth' board at meals,
rise make ^our (...), and take away your Plate at second Course? And you to be
thus familiar!


T^m Sha. Pray forgive me good Cousen: Sir Timothy, I mean.


Sir Tim. V^ry well, you will be fa^cy again Uncle. Uds lud, Why was I Knighted
but to have my Title given me? My Father, and Lady Mother can give it me, and
s^^h a Fellow as you, a mere younger Brother to forget it.


T^m Sha. Nay, nay, hand ye yeou mun tat in good part, I did but forget a bit,
good Sir Timo^hy.


Sir Tim. My Mother would (...) a fine taking about it, and she knew it.


T^m Sha. Nay, pray now do not (...) my ^ady, by the Mass who will be even (...)
wood an who hears o^t. But look a, look a, here come the Caursers, the Har^
(...) played the D^^l with us to (...), we (...) bewitched.


Sir Tim. Ay, so we have, to have the Hare vanish in open Field before all our
fa^^^, and our eyes never (...) from her.


T^m Sha. Ay, and then an awd wife (they caw'n her Mother Demdike) to start
(...) very spot o grawnt where we losten puss!


Enter Sir Ieffery Shaklehead, Sir Edward Harf^urt, young Harfourt, Chaplain,
Clod, and other Servants. Sir Edw. These are Prodigies you tell, they cannot
be; your senses are deceived.


Sir Ieff. My senses deceived! that is well, Is there a Justice in Lancashire
has so much skill in Witches as I have? Nay, I Will speak a proud word, you shall
turn me loose against any Witch-finder in Europe; I Would make an Ass of Hopkins if
he were alive.


Young Har. Nay, I Will swear it is true, a Pox on that awd Carrion Mother
Demdike, she has marr^d all our sports, and almost killed Two Brace of
Greyhounds worth a Thousand pound.


Sir Edw. Dreams, mere Dreams of Witches, old women's fables, the Devil's not
such a Fool as you would make him.


Sir Ieff. Dreams! mercy upon me! are you so profane to deny Witches?


Smerk. Heaven defend! will you deny the existence of Witches? It Is very
Atheistical.


Sir Edw. Incorrigible ignorance! it is such as you are Atheistical, that would
equal the Devils power with that of Heaven its self. I see such simple Parsons
cannot endure to hear the Devil dishonored.


Sir Ieff. No Witches? why I have hanged above Fourscore. Read Bodin, Remigius,
Delrio, Nider, Instit^r, Sprenger, Godelman, and More, and Malleus Maleficarum,
a great Author, that Writes sweetly about Witches, very sweetly.


Sir Edw. Malleus Maleficarum a Writer, he has read nothing but the titles I
see.


Sir Ieff. Oh I a great man, Malleus was a great man; Read Cousen, read the
Antidote against Atheism: Well, I Will make work among your Witches.


Young Har. Ay good Sir Ieffery do, Uds Lud they will grow so bold one shan^ go a
Caursing, Hunting or Hawking for 'em one of these days; and then all the joy of
ones life's gone.


Sir Edw. Why are those all the joys of Life?


Young Har. Ay Godsflesh are they, I Would not give a Farthing to live with out
'em, what is a Gentleman but his Sports.


Tho. Sha. Nay, byr Lady, I mun have a saup of Ale now and then, besides sports.


Sir Ieff. Why here is my Son, Sir Timothy, saw the Hare vanish, and the Witch
appear.


Sir Tim. That I did upon my Honor Sir Ieffery.


Enter Clod. Clod. So ho, here is the Hare again.


Young Har. He Boys, loo on the Dogs, more sport, more sport.


Sir Edw. It Is almost dark, let us home: go to your Mistress, Fool.


Young Har. Time enough for that, Sir, I must have this Course first, halloo.


They all go out as to Coursing. Mother Demdike rises ^ut of the ground as they
re-enter. Sir Ieff. Now, Sir Edward, do you see, the Hare is vanished, and here
is the Hag.


Sir Edw. Yes, I see it is almost dark, the Hare is run from your tired Dogs,
and here is a poor old Woman gathering of sticks.


Smerk. Avaunt thou filthy Hag, I defy thee and all thy works.


^lod. This is wheint indeed Sir, you are a Schollard, pray defend me.


Sir Ieff. Now you shall see how the Witches fear me.


Sir Edw. The old women ha^^ reason to fear you, you have hanged so many of 'em.


Sir Ieff. Now Tom Shaklehead, and you Clod, lay hold of the Witch quickly; now
you shall see my skill, we will search her, I warrant she has biggs or ^eats a
handful long about her parts that shall be nam^less; then we^l have her wa^c^ed
e^ght and forty hours, and pricked with Needles, to keep her from sleeping, and
make her (...), Gad ^hee'l confess any thing in the world then; and if nor,
after all, wee^l tie her Thumbs and great Toes together and (...) her into your
great Pond. Let me alone with her, I warrant ye, come, come, come, where are
you?


Sir Edw. So I must have a poor old woman murdered in my House.


Mother Demdike knocks down Tom Shakle* head and Clod and vanishes. Tom. Sha.
Clod. Oh the Witch, the Devil.


Sir Ieff. How now, what is the matter?


Tom Sha. Why by'r Lady, the De^ls in the matter, the old Hag has knocked us both
dawn, and is vanished under grawnt I think.


Sir Edw. Your fear has knocked you down, and the old woman has escaped.


Sir Ieff. No, no, she has done't; a Witch has a mighty strength: Six men are
not strong enough for a Witch of Fourscore.


Sir Edw. Come prethy, Sir Ieffery, let us home and drive these fables out of
her heads, its dark.


Sir Ieff. Nay, I know how to deal with her, I^le send my Warrant, and a
Constable with that is strong enough to beat six Witches, ay, six the ablest
Witches on 'em all^you'd wonder at it, but faith it is true.


Exeunt omnes. Mother Demdike reenters. Demd. Ha, ha, ha, how I have fooled
these fellows, let 'em go home and prate about it, this night we will revel in
Sir Edward's Celler, and laugh at the Justice. But to the business of the Night.

She sings. Come, Sisters, come, why do you stay?
Our business will not brook delay,
This is a solemn description of a fit time for Witches to be at work.
The Owl is flown from the hollow Oak.
From Lakes and Bogs the Toads do croak.
The Foxes bark, the Screetch-Owl screams:
Wolves howl, Bats fly, and the faint beams
O^ Glowworms light grows bright a-pace;
The Stars are fled, the Moon hides her face.
The Spindle or Wheel is used in the^s conjurations. M^rtial makes it used for
troubling the Moon, lib. 9. Ep. 3. Quae nunc Thessalico (...) did ^cere^rhom
(...) lib. 2. Ep. 67. Cum secta Cho^co Luna Vapulat rhombo, Lucan who of all
the Poets writes with the ^ost admirable height about Witchcraft in his sixth
Book, makes the Wheel or Spindle to be used in ^^^ve matters, Traxerunt torti
Magica v^rtigine sili, as does, Ovid lib. 1. Eleg. 8. Se^ ^ene quid grames
(...) licia, etc. And so Propertius, lib. 3. Staminea rhombi d^citu^ ^rota. And
lib. 2. D^ficiunt Magico torti sub c^rmine rhombi.
The Spindle now is turning round:
The groaning of Mandrakes is a tradition of old women, and that the groan
kill^. See the Notes in the Third Act, it has been always thought of great use
in Magic.
Mandrakes are groaning under ground.
For choosing Ditches for their Magic rights, Ovid Metam. lib. 7. (...) procul
egesta scrobibus ^ellure du^k^^ (...) facit. For scraping holes with their
(...) lib. 1. Satyr 8. concerning Ca^^^lia, and Sag^na scalpere terram (...)
And it is used by our modern Witche^, as you shall find in Malle^s
Malle^^^arum, Bodin, Remigius, Delrio, etc. Il. lib. 3. (...) M^gicarum, Sect.
4. de s^gitarii (...) is et imaginum fabica^orum Malefic^s tells man, st^^ies
of their using
^'th' hole in the Ditch, (our Nails have made)
Images, he says, H^^d mul^^^ a sagittarii^ (...) imagines quas vel ac^bus
p^e^ngunt^vel ig^e liq ^^nt vel confringunt, etc. See (...) B^e^h, the H^sto^y
of King Duff, lib. 3. rer^m Scotica^^m Corn. Tacit. Ann. 2d de (...) pisonis et
morte (...), say^, rep^rieba^tur (...) humanorun c^rporum reliquiae carmina et
devotiones (...) Quae movere ceroas ima^ines, Ovid, Amor. 7. Eleg. 6. Sagave
punicea de fixit nomina cera.
Now all our Images are laid,
Of Wax and Wool, which we must Ovid ibid, et medium te^^es in jecur urget
acus (...). Ep. before quoted, following that Verse, Et mis^rum tenues in jecur
urget acus. See Bodin. Daemonoman. lib. 2. Cap. 8. a great deal of stuff to
this purpose. One in my memory had this kind of Witchcraft sworn against her at
the Old-Bayley, before Steel, Recorder of London,
prick,
With Needles urging to the quick*
Hor. lib. 1. Satyr 8. de Canidia and Sagan^^ pullam dveillere mordicus agnam
caeperunt, Ovid metam. 7 cultrosque in guttur velleris atri conjucit et patulas
perfundit sanguine fosses.
Into the hole I^le pour a flood
Of Black Lambs blood, to make all good.
The Lamb with Nails and Teeth wee^l tear.
Come where is the Sacrifice? appear.

Enter Mother Dickenson, Hargrave, Mal, Spencer, and several other Witches with
a Black Lamb. Witches. ^Tis here.

Demd. Why are you all so tardy grown?
Must I the work perform alone?

Dicken, All Witches, ancient and modern, are said to have one pre^iding at
their conventions which they honor with a title. Apuleius mentions the Regina
sagarum and Delrio, Disqu. Mag. lib. 2. quest. 9. and this is found in all late
examinations of Witches.
Be patient Dame, we will all obey.

Them. Come then to work, anon we will play.
To yonder Hall
Our Lord Weel call,
Sing, dance and eat,
Play many a feat,
And fright the Justice and the Squire,
And plunge the Cattle into the Mire.
But now to work
They tear the Black Lamb in pieces and pour the Blood into the hole. Deber is
said to be the Demon of the night, that flies about and does mischief, and
principally in Tempests, Pet. de Loyer de spectris in English, page 14. And
Bodin, lib. 2. cap. 4. says, Deber is the Demon of the night, and Chel^b of
the day.
Deber, Deber, do not Stay,
Upon the Waves go sport and play*
And see the ship be Cast away.
Come let us now our parts perform,
And Scrape a hole, and raise a Storm.

Dicken. For their rights in their imaginary raising of Storm^. see Bod. lib.
2. cap. 8. Remig^^s D^^molat, lib. 1. cap. 25. and cap. 29. also Delrio, lib.
2. Quest. 1. enumerates a great many odd rites (different from the following.)
For troubling the Air, and bringing darkness, Thunder, Rain, Hail, etc. see
Nider in his Formicarium, cap. 4. O laus de gentibus sep^e n^rionlibus, lib. 3.
sub titu^o de magis et Maleficis Finnorum, also Mall^us Maleficarum. Wierus de
praest, Daem. lib. 3. cap. 16. describes at large the way of raising a Storm.
Speaking of the illusions of the Devil toward Witches, he says, (...) ^as
instruit ut quandoque silices post tergum occidentem versus pro^iciant
aliquando ut araenam aquae torrentis in aerem projiciant plerumque scopas in
aquam in tingant coelumque versus spargant vel fossula facta et lotio iufuso
vel aqua digitum (others say, digitum vel baculum) comoveant subinde in olla
porcorum pilos (or as others say, Setas porcinas) bulliant no^^unquam trabes
vel ligna in ripa transverse collocant, See Scott. p. 60. he adds the use of
rotten Sage.
Here is some Sea Sand I have Gotten,
Which thus into the Air I Throw.

Harg. Here Is sage, that under ground was rotten,
Which thus a-round me I bestow.

Spencer. Sticks on the Bank across are laid.

Harg. The hole by our nails is almost made.
Hogs Bristles boil within the Pot.

Demd. The Hollow flint Stone I have Got,
Which I over my Shoulder throw,
Into the west, to make winds blow.
Now water here, and urine put,
And with your Sti^ks stir it about.
Now dip your brooms, and toss them high,
To bring the Rain down from the Sky.
Not yet a Storm? Lucan, lib. 6. Miratur Erictho has satis licuisse moras
(...) verberat immotum vivo serpente cadaver, I use live Serpents here upon
another occasion.
Come let us wound
The Air with every dreadful sound, For these confused noises Lucan in the same
Book, Tun^ vox Letheis cunctis polleutior herbis excantare Deos (...) murmura
brimum dissona et humanae multum discordia lingu^e latratus habet illa canum
gemitus* L^porum quad trepidus bubo quod strix nocturna queruntur quod strident
vlulantque ferae quod sibilat anguis etc. To^ rerum vox una fuit: See the
latter part of the Notes in the second Act, about the raising ot Tempests; if
you be so curious you may find something in all Authors that treat of Witches,
and many of 'em mention one Ericus ^ing of Swee^en, who, as they believe, could
do it by magic, as does Delrio, R^^igi^^, and Lud^^igus, (...) Daemonomagiae,
Qu^stio 6. Silvest. Prierias de ord. prae licatorum de strigimagis, Discourses
of the power of Witches in raising Storms: and G^accius compendium maleficarum,
(...), Bartholom^us Sp^^eus and many more.

And with live vipers beat the ground.

They beat the ground with Vipers, they bark, ho^l, hiss, cry like
Screetch-Owles, hollow like Owls, and make many confused noises: The Storm
begins. Song of three parts.
NOw the winds roar*
And the Skies Pour
Down all their Store.
It Thunders and Lightens. And now the Nights black,
Hark how the Clouds crack.
Hark how the Clouds crack.
It Thunders and Lightens. A hollow din the Woods now make,
The Valleys tremble, Mountains Shake,
And all the living Creatures quake.
It Thunders and Lightens. It keeps awake the Sleepy fowl,
The Sailors Swear, the high Seas roll,
And all the frighted Dogs do howl.
It Thunders and Lightens. Demdike speaks. Now to our tasks let us all be gone,
Our Master we shall meet anon,
Between the hours of twelve and one.

They all set up a laugh* Enter Clod with a Candle and Lanthorn. Clown. Whaw,
what a Storm is this! I think Mother Demdike and all her Dee'ls are abroad to
neeght, it is so dark too

I canno see my hont. One of the Witches flies away with the Candle and
Lanthorn, Mother Demdike sets him upon the top of a Tree, and they all fly away
Laughing.
Oh the Dee'l, the Dee'l,

help! help! this is Mother
Demdike, help, S-lesh,
what m^n I do? I canno
get dawn, 'swawnds Ayst
be clemd an I stay here aw neeght.

Enter Bellfort and Doubty. Bell. Was there ever such a Storm raised on a
sudden, the Sky being clear, and no appearance on it before?


Doubt. But the worst part of our misfortune is to be out of our way in a
strange Country, the night so dark that Owls and Bats are wildred.


Bell. There is is no help, Cover the Saddles, and stand with the Horses under
that Tree, while we stand close and shelter our selves here; the Tempest is so
violent it cannot last.


Doubt. Now Philosophy help us to a little patience, Heaven be praised we are
not at Sea yet.


Bell. These troubles we Knight Errants must endure when we march in search of
Ladies.


Doubt. Would we were in as good Lodging as our Dogs have which we sent before
to Whalley. I fear too (after all this device of yours) our pretending to hunt
here will never take.


Bell. Why So?


Doubt. Will any body think that a man in his right wits should choose this
Hilly Country to hunt in?


Bell. O* yes, there are Huntsmen that think there is no sport without venturing
Necks or Collet-bones; besides, there is no other way to hope to see our
Mistresses: by this means we shall troll out my Mistresses Brother, who loves,
and understands nothing but Country sports. By that we may get acquaintance
with Sir Edward Harfourt, who is reported to be a wise, honest, hospitable,
true English man. And that will bring us into Sir Ieffery Shaklehead's family,
Whally being in the midway betwixt them.


Doubt. I am resolved to see my Mistress, what ere comes on^t, and know my
doom. Your Yorkshire Spaw was a fatal place to me, I lost a heart there, Heaven
knows when I shall find it again.


Bell. Those interviews have spoiled me for a man of this World, I can no more
throw of my loose corns of Love upon a Tennants Daughter in the Country, or
think of Cuckolding a Keeping Fool in the City; I am grown as pitiful a (...)
Loving animal as any Romance can furnish us with.


Doubt. That we should escape in all the Tour of France and Italy, where the
(...) has power to ripen Love, and catch this distemper in the North! but my
Theodosia in humor, wit and beauty has no equal.


Bell. Besides, my Isabella!


Doubt. To you your Isabella's equal.


Bell. We are pretty fellows to talk of Love, we shall be wet to the Skin;
yond^r are lights in many Rooms, it must be a great House, let us make toward
it.


Doubt. It is so dark, and among these Hills and Enclosures it is impossible.
Will no lucky fellow, of this place, come by and guide us? We are out of all
Roads.


Cl^d. Oh! Oh! what mun Ay do? Ay am well neegh parisht: I mun try to get dawn.
He falls. Help, help, Murder, Murder.


Bell. What a Devil ^s here a fellow fallen from the top of a Tree?


Doubt. Sdeath ^s tais a night to climb in? what does this mean?


Clod. Oh! Oh!


Bell. Here, who art thou? What Is the matter?


Clod. Oh the Dee^l; avaunt, I defy thee and all thy warks.


Doubt. Is he drunk or mad? give me thy hand, I Will help thee.


Clod. Begone, Witches I defy ye, help! help.


Bell. What do thou talk of? we are no Witches nor Devils, but travelers
that have lost our way, and will reward thee well if thou will guide us into it.


Clod. An yeow been a mon Ay'st talk wy ye a bir, yeow mun tack a care o your
^^lls, the (...) haunted with Buggarts, and Witches, one of 'em took my Condle
and I a^thorn out of my hont, and ^^ew along wy it; and an other Set me o top o
the tree, where I feel dawn naw, Av ha well neegh brocken my theegh.


Doubt. The fellows mad, I neither understand his words, nor his Sense, prithee
^ow far is it to Whalley?


Cl^d. Why yeow are quite b^said the road mon, yeow Shoulden a gone dawn (...)
^onk by Thomas o Georges, and then even at yate, and turned dawn the Lone, and
(...) the Steepo of the reeght ^ont.


Bell. Prithee don't tell us what we should have done, but how far it is to
Whalisl^y.


Clod. Why marry four mail and a bit.


Doubt. We Will give thee an Angel and show us the way thither.


Clod. Marry that's Whaint I conno see my hont, haw con Ay show yeou to Whalley
to neeght.


Bell. Can thou show us to any house where we may have Shelter and Lodging to
night? we are Gentlemen and strangers, and will pay you well for it.


Clod. Ay byr Lady con I, the best ludging and d^^^t too in aw Loncashire,
Yonder at the ^ough where yeow seen the leeghts there.


D^ubt. Whose house is that?


Clod. Why what a pox, w^ere ^an yeow lived? why yeow are Strongers indeed!
why, it is Sir Yedard Harfourts, he (...) to all Gentry, yeou^ st be welcome to
him by day and by neeg^t (...) Lord of aw here abauts.


Bell. My Mistresses Father, Lu^k if it be thy will, have at my Isabella, Can
thou guide us thither?


Clod. Ay, Ay, there is a pawer of Company there naw, S^^ Ieffery Shaklehead,
and the Knight his Son, and Daughter.


Doubt. Lucky above my wishes, o my Dear Theodosia, how my heart leaps at her!
(...) guide us thither, we will pay thee well.


Clod. Come on, I am e^n breed aut o my senses, I was never so freeghtend sin I
was born, give me your hont.


Bell. No here are our men and Horses, we will get up, and you shall lead the
foremost: Now Stars be kind.


Ex. Omnes, ACT. II.
Enter Isabella and Smerk. Isab. HOW this insolence provokes me!
aside. You are not sure in earnest!

to him. Smerk. Can any one behold those radiant eyes
And not have sentiments of Love like mine?

Isab. This fellow has read Romances as well as Scholmen*

Smerk. Those eyes to which mine are the Burning-glasses
That to my heart convey the fire of Love.

Isab. What a ^ustian Fool's this! Is this language
For a Divine?

Smerk. Are not Divines made of those Elements
Which make up other men: Divines may be
In love I hope.

Isab. And may they make love to the Daughter without
The consent of the Father?

Smerk. Undoubtedly, as Casuists must determine.

Isab. Will not common sense, without a Casuist, tell
Us when we do wrong, if so, the Law we are
Bound to is not plan enough.

Smerk. Submit to the judgment of Divines (sweet Lady)
Marriage is not an Ordinance made by Parents,
B^t from above derived* and it is for that I sue.

Isab. Is it not fit I should obey my Father?

Smerk. O no, sweet Lady, ^^ve it not to him,
Your Father has not reverence enough
For the Church and Churchmen,
Besides, I Will tell you,
He is Atheistically inclined: pardon my boldness*
For he believes no Witches: But, Madam, if my
Poor person and my parts may seem gracious to you,
You lawfully may choose me to make happy.

Isab. Your person needs must please; ^Tis amiable.

Smerk. Ah sweet Madam!

Isab. Your parts beyond exception, ^eat, spruce, florid,
And very ^^verting.

Smerk. No, no, dear Madam.

Isab. Who can behold your face without pleasure? or
Consider your parts without Reverence?

Smerk. O Lord, I swear you pose me with your great civilities: I profess you
do.


Isab. It Is impossible you should keep long from being Dignified.


Smerk. It Is that I m^inly aim at next the enjoyment
Of so fine a Lady.

Isab. May I ^latter my self to think you are in earnest?

Smerk. You may most excellent Lady.

Isab. And so am I.

She gives him a box on the Ear. Smerk. Sweet Madam, I receive you as a
blessing on my knees.

Isab. Thou most insolent of Pedants, thou silly formal Thing with a stiff
plain band, a little parsonical Grogram and a Girdle thou art so proud of, in
which thou would do well to hang thy self; some have vouchsafed to use it to
that purpose: Thou that never were but a Curate, -- a Iourney-man Divine, as
thy Father was a Iourney-man Tailor, before he could set up for himself, to
have the impudence to pretend love to me!


Smerk. My function yet, I say, deserves more reverence.


Isab. Does it make you not an Ass, or not a Tailors Son?


Smerk. It equals me with the best of Gentry.


Isab. How Arrogance! Can any power give honor but the Kings? This is Popery,
I^e have you trounc'd. Could it once enter into thy vain pate, that I could be
contented with the pitiful equipage of a Parsons Wife? Bless me^ to be carried
home to an antique building, with narrow windows, and huge Iron-bars, like an
old Iail in some Country Borough, wickedly abused too with delapidations. To
lie in Darneux Curtains, and a Beds-Tester, carved with Idolatrous Images, out
of two load of old Timber: or to have for a Friend or a Lying in, one better,
one of worsted Chamblet, and to be dressed and undrest by my Cookmaid, who is my
Woman and my Chambermaid, and serves me and the Hogs.


Smerk. I intend none of these. I assure you my House shall be --


Isab. I know what it will be: your Parlour hung with Green printed stuff, of
the new fashion, with guilt Leather in panes, a fingers breadth at least, sruft
up with a great many stinking Russia Leather Chairs, and an odious Carpet of
the same: Then Shelves on one side of your Chimney for a pair of Tables, A
Chess-board, your frame of Wax Candle and Tobacco-pipes.


Smerk. No, no, no, Madam.


Isab. On the other side, Shelves for huge Folices, by which you would be
counted a great read man; vast large volumes of expositions upon a short Creed;
some Twenty folio's upon the Ten Commandments; Lauds, Heylins, Andrews, and Tom
Fullers works, with perhaps a piece of Austin, to show you understand a little
Latin; and this is your Ecclesiastical furniture, very fit for a Gentlewoman's
eating room is it not?


Smerk. I understand the mode, Madam, and contemn such vulgar Ornaments.


Isab. And in this Parlour to eat Five Tithe-Piggs in a week, brought in by my
Woman-Chambermaid, Wash-maid, Cook-maid, etc. And if it be not a working day,
waited on by your Groom, Ploughman, Carter, Butler, Tithe-gatherer all in one,
with Horse-naild Shoes; his head new kemb^d and slick'd, with a starc'd-Band
and no Cuffs.


Smerk. My merits will provide you better, please to bear me.


Isab. Yes, I know your merits. Then to quible with you, for my desert, your
Backside of half an Acre, with some Sixteen Trees of Marygold and
Sweeting-Apples, Horse-Plums, and Warden-pares, hem^d in with panes of antique
crumbling Clay; where I should have six Hives of Bees, and you a Mare and Feal,
going with a Peacock and Hen.


Smerk. All these I much despise would you hea^.


Isab. Hear, yes, how I should have nothing to entertain my Visitors with, but
stewed Prunes and H^nycombs, and flying Ale bottled with Lymen-pill, without
all sight of Wine. And should I march abroad to visit, ^would be behind my
Can^nical Husband, perhaps upon a pied ^^ld Mare big with Foal, holding both
hands upon his Girdle, and when at place appointed I arrive, for want of Groom,
off slips my nimble Husband first, then helps me down. And now, Fo^l, I have
painted thee, and what thou art to trust to, in thy colors.


Smerk. I beseech you, Madam, moderate your passions: Hear my propositions.


Isab. No, Impudence, my Father shall hear 'em.


Smerk. I beseech you, Madam, for Heavens sake, that will undo me. I shall
desist, I shall desist.

Ex. Isabella. Enter Susan the Chambermaid. Good lack how a man may be mistaken!
I durst ha sworn, by her courtesy and frequent smiles, she had been in love
with me.

Susan. Sweet Sir, what is befallen you? has my Lady angered you? If she can,
her heart is not like mine.


Smerk. Nothing, Mrs. Susan, nothing, but to be thus dispis'd.


To himself. Susan. Dear Sir, can I serve you in any thing? I am bound. I never
have been so elevated by any man; methinks I never should have enough of your
powerful Mi^istry sweet Sir.


Smerk. Pish: If she tells her Father I am ruined.


To himself. Susan. Dear man, now, come drive away this sadness.
Come, give me thy hand; let us sit down and be merry.

Smerk. How! my hand! go too.
This creature is in Love with me: But shall my prodigious natural parts, and
no less amazing acquisitions in Metaphysics and Schooled Divinity be cast upon
a Chambermaid? Farewell, I must not be too familiar.

Exit.
Susan. So scornful! Cruel creature, I will soften thee yet. Have I for thee
set days and nights cross-Legg'd and sighed before thou came hither? And
fasted on St. Agnes night for thee? And since thy coming have tied three
coulour'd True Loves Knots, quill'd thy Cuffs and startch^d thy Band my self,
and never failed thee of thy morning Ca^dle or Jelly Broth? have I already put
my Hair and Nails in Powder in thy Drink, and put a live Fish in a part about
me till it died, and then gave it thee to eat in thy Drink, and all for this?
Well, I will mollify thee. And Mother Demdike shall help me to morrow: I^le to
her, and discourse her about it. If I have breath, I cannot live without him.


Enter Sir Edward Harfort and his Son. Sir Edw. Susan, Go tell my Cousin
Theodosia, I would speak with her.


Susan. I will Sir.

Exit.
Yo. Har. Pshaw, now must I be troubled with making Love; a deuce take it for
me: I had rather be a Coursing an twere time o^th day.


Sir Edw. Now Son, for your own good and my satisfaction, I would have you
(since her Father and I am agreed) to settle this business, and marry with
Theodosia with all the speed that can be.


Yo. Har. What haste Sir? For my part I care not for Marriage, not I. I love my
Neighbors, a Cup of Ale, and my sports, I care for naught else.


Sir Edw. (But that thy Mother was too virtuous for my suspicion) I should
think that by thy ^ordid mind thou were a Stranger to my Blood; and, if you be
not ruled by me, assure your self I Will make you a stranger to my Estate.


Yo. Har. What does he mean now? hah, to disinherit me?


Sir Edw. No, part of its entail^d; and if you will not marry where I direct
you, your Sister will obey me, and may bring me one to inherit it. Consider
that.

Enter Theodosia. Here comes your Mistress, beautiful and good as any of her
Sex. Sweet Cousin be pleased to stay one moment with my Son: I^le wait on you
again.

Exit.
Theo. Your Servant Sir. How shall I be entertained by this Dolt! How much
rather had he be with Country Justices and Farmers, in a low Thatched House,
with a smooth Black Pot of Ale in his hand, or with his Kites, Dogs and Cattle?


Yo. Har. What a Devil shall I say to her now? I had as leive knock my head
against the wall as make Love. Will you please to sit down Cousin?


Theo. Ay Cousin. And fall fast a-sleep if I can.


Aside. Yo. Har. 'Twas a great Storm, and rose very suddenly to night Cousin.


Theo. Very true.


Yo. Har. Pox, I don't know what to say to her.
Aside. It Is almost over though now.

To her. Theo. '^is so.


Yo. Har. It Is so, What a Devil shall I say more? Would I were at six go downs
upon reputation, in Ale, with honest Tom Shaklehead.

Aside. What do you think it is a Clock Madam?

To her. Theo. Six minutes past eight by mine.


Yo. Har. Mine goes faster, Is yours Aspenwolds?


Theo. No Tompions.


Yo. Har. It Is a very pretty one! Pish, I can go no farther, not I.


Theo. It Is Bedtime.


Yo. Har. Ay so it is, and I am main sleepy byr Lady,
Coursing had gotten me a woundy Stomach,
And I eat like a Swine Faith and Troth.

Theo. But it got you nothing to your Stomach.


Yo. Har. You have heard the story, we cours'd a Witch all day instead of a
Hair; Mother Demdike.


Theo. It Is well you did not catch her, she would have been very tough meat.


Yo. Har. Ha, ha, ha, well I ^ow that^s very well. I hope Sir Ieffery will hang
the Wit^h; I am sure she has tired my Dogs and me so, that I am so sleepy I can
scarce hold up my head by^r Lady.


Theo. I am tired too: This dullness is almost as tedious as his making of Love
would be.


Yo. Har. If 'twould hold up now, we should have fine weather for Hawking to
morrow, and then have at the Powts.


Theo. Your Hawks would not fly at Mother Demdike too.


Yo. Har. Nay, marry I cannot tell: But would you would go a Hawking, you
should ride upon a Pad of mine, should carry you with a Bumper in your hand,
and not spill a drop.


Theo. I am for no Field sports I thank you Sir.


Yo. Har. Now cannot I speak a word more.


They paws. Theo. Now methinks we are mere man and Wife already, without
marrying for the matter. Hah, he is a-sleep, and snores like the Base-pipe of an
Organ: Though I like his indifference better than I should his Love; yet I have
no patience to bear sleeping in my face; that is a little too much.


Yo. Har. Oh Lord, what is that! Oh Mother Demdike! Oh, oh, the Witch, the Witch!


Theo. He talks in his sleep, I believe, even as well, as when he is awake.


Yo. Har. Murder, murder, oh help, the Witch; oh the Witch, oh, oh, Mother
Demdike!


Theo. He talks and dreams of the Witch: I Will try a trick with him.


She pulls the chair from under him. Et exit. Yo. Har. Oh help, help, the
Witch, the Witch, ay there she vanished: I saw her, oh she flew up the Chimney.
I Will go to Sir Ieffery, and take my Oath presently. Oh I am fore frightened.

Enter Isabella. Oh the Witch, the Witch, Mother Demdike.
Exit yo* Har.
Isab. What ails the Fool, is he mad?
Here Is a Coil with Witches.

Enter Sir Jeffery, Lady Shacklehead and Sir Timothy. Sir Tim. Oh Madam, are
you there? I have done your errant.


L. Sha. Your Servant Cousin.


Isab. Your Ladyships humble Servent.


L. Sha. Look you Cousin, Lady me no Ladies, unless you be civiller to Sir
Timothy.


Sir Tim. Look you there.


Sir Ieff. I suppose you are not ignorant who we are.


La. Sha. Nay, prithee, Sir Ieffery, hold; Let me alone.


Sir Ieff. Nay, go on my Dear, thou shall have it; well, thou art as notable a
woman as any is within Fifty miles of thy head, I^le say that for thee.


La. Sha. Pray Cousin conceive me, breeding is a fine thing; but you have
always lived in the Country* I have, for my part, been often at London, lodged
in Covent Garden ay, and been in the drawing Room too. Poor creature, she does
not know what that is.


Sir. Ieff. Pray mind my Chicken, she is the best bred Woman in the Country.


L. Sha. Pray spare me Sir Ieffery, here is Sir Timothy, I have bred him with
great care and charges at Oxford and the Inns of Court.


Sir Tim. Ay, and I have been in the Drawing Room too.


L. Sha. I have gotten him Knighted too, for mine and Sir Iefferies services,
which we have performed in governing the Country about us so well.


Isab. What does your Ladyship drive at?


Sir Tim. Ay, you know well enough: Now you look as if Butter would not melt in
your mouth.


La. Sha. Besides, let me tell you, Sir Timothy's person's as charming as
another; his shape and height perfect, his Face, though I say it, exceeding
good, his Eyes vigorous and sparkling his Nose and Chin resembling our Family;
in short, Nature has not been negligent in his Composition.


Sir Ieff. Well, thou art the best spoken Woman in England, I Will say that for
thee.


Isab. I confess all this Madam.


Sir Tim. Oh, do you so.


La. Sha. Pray give me leave, not one Knight in the Land dresses better, or
wears better fancied Garniture, or better P^riwigs.


Sir Tim. My Triming's my own fancy; and the best Wigg-maker in England, one in
Crooked-lane works for me.


La. Sha. Hold Sir Timothy, I say these things premised, it is not ^it to use
my Son uncivilly: I am loath to complain to your Father, consider and be wise.
I know we are politickly coy, that is decent; I, my self, was so to Sir Ieffery.


Sir Ieff. Ay by'r Lady was she. Well, I thought I should never have won thee*
Thou were a parlous Girl.


La. Sha. But I was never uncivil.


Isab. I know not what you mean! I uncivil to my dear Cousin! what mak^s thee
think so? I assure your Ladyship I value him as he deserves. What Cousin art
angry for a jest? I think no man like him for my part.


Sir Ieff. Why, look you Sir Timothy.


La. Sha. Nay Sir Timothy, you are to blame, jesting shows ones kindness, go
too.


Sir Tim. I swear and vow I thought you had been in earnest Cousin. I am your
humble Servant.


La. Sha. Well, we will leave you together.


Sir Ieff. Come on Boy, stand up to her, Gad I bore up briskly to thy Mother
before I won her. Ah, when I was young, I would have -- Well, no more to be
^^id.


La. Sha. Come, come away, you will have your saying!


Exit. Lady and Sir Ieff^ry. Sir Tim. Well, but have you so good an opinion of
me as you declar^d? hum --


Isab. The very same I assure you.


Sir Tim. Ah my dear pretty Rogue! Then I^le marry you presently, and make you
a La^y.


Isab. Let me see, are they out of hearing?


Sir Tim. Come f^th, let us kiss upon that business, here is a Parson in the
House; nay, feth, feth, I must kiss thee, my dear little Rogue.


Isab. Stand off Baboon, nay, a Baboon of good parts Exceeds thee; Thou Magg^t,
Insect, worse then any nasty thing the Sun is Father to.


Sir Tim. What do you begin to call names again? but this is in Jest too
prithee, ^et me Kiss thee, pray dear, feth do.


Isab. In ^est! Heaven is my witness there is not a living thing upon Two Legs I
would not choose before Thee.


Sir Tim. Holloo, Where Is Sir Ieffery and my Lady?


Isab. They are out of thy hearing Oaph. 'Slife how dare thou be so Impudent
to love me with that face, that can provoke nothing but laughter at best in any
one? Why thou ha^t the Rickets in thy fa^^: There^s no proportion, every
feature by it self is abominable; and put togeth^r I^tollerable. Thou have the
very Lines and air of a Piggs face, Baptista Porta would have drawn thee so.


Sir Tim. Hah, What do you say? my face! I Will not change with e're a man in
Lancashire. Face! talk of my face, Hah.


Isab. Thou art uglier than any Witch in Lancashire, and if thou were in Woman's
Clothes, thy own Father would apprehend thee for one: Thy Face, I never saw so
deformed a thing on the head of an old Lyra violl. It might fright Birds from a
Cherry garden: But what else it is good for, I know not.


Sir Tim. 'Sbud, now you provoke me, I must tell you, I think my self as
hansome for a Man, as you are for a woman.


Isab. Oh, foh, out upon that filthy visage, My maid with her Sizars in two
minutes shall Cut me a Better in brown paper. There is not a Creature upon
Earth but i^ a Beauty to thee; besides, thou have a hollw Tooth would Cure the
Mother beyond ^r^a setida or burnt Feathers.


Enter Theodosia. Sir Tim. Well, well, You Will sing another note when I have
acquainted your Father, you will.


Isab. Thou li^^t, I will not* If I were condemnd to Death, I would not take a
pardon (...) marry thee. Set thy Fools heart at rest then, and make no more
nauseous Love to m^. Thy Face to one fasting would give a vomit beyond Crocus.


Sir Tim. You are a proud, peevish, Mi^x, and that is the best of you. Let me
tell you that, hum. I can have your betters every day I rise.


Theo. How now! What says the fool?


Sir Tim. Uds Ludlikins, huswife, If you provoke me I Will take you of the Pate.


Isab. Thou odious, Loathsome Coxcomb, out of my sight, or I Will tear thy Eyes
ou^.


Sir. Tim. Coxcomb! ha, ha, ha, ah thou are a good one. Well I say no more.


Isab. Da, da, pretty thing!


Enter Sir Edward, Bellfort and Doubty. Sir Edw. Gentlemen, the storm has
obliged me that drove you under my Roof, I knew your Fathers well, we were in
Italy together, and all of us came home with our English Religion, and our
English Principles. During your stay here (which for my own sake I hope will
not be short) command my House: let not your Dogs and Servants lie at Whalley;
but be pleased to know this House is yours, and you will do me honor in
commanding it.


Bell. This generosity makes good the Character that all men give of you.


Doubt. A Character that England rings with, and all men of never so differing
opinions agree in.


Sir Edw. Gentlemen, you do me too much honor; I would endeavor to imitate
the life of our English Gentry before we were corrupted with the base manners
of the Fren^h.


Bell. If all had had that Noble resolution, long since we had curbed the
greatness of that Monarch.


Isab. What are these Apparitions, Doubty and Bellfort!


Theo. They are they indeed. Hay, what ails my heart to beat so fast?


Isab. Methinks mine is a little too busy here.


Sir Edw. Gentlemen, here is my Daughter and her Kinswoman, I think you saw 'em
last Summer at Scarbrough.


Bell. We did Sir.


They salute 'em. Doubt. We little thought to have the honor of seeing so fine
Ladies this night.


Enter Servant, and whispers to Sir Edward. Bell. We could not expect this
happiness, till next Season at the Waters.


Sir Edw. What story is this? My Son almost frighted out of his wits with a
Witch! Gentlemen, I beg your pardon for a moment.


Ex. Sir Edward and Servant. Both. Your humble Servant.


Isab. Nothing could be more unexpected than seeing you here!


Theo. Pray Gentlemen, How did you come?


Doubt. Traveling for Whalley, where I told you, Madam, in my Letters, I would
suddenly be, we lost our way by the darkness of the night, and wander^d till
we came near this House, whither an honest Co^ntry fellow brought us for
shelter from this dreadful Tempest.


Bell. And your Father is pleased to admit a brace of stray-fellows with the
greatest civility in the world: But, Madam, coming safe to shore, after a
Shipwreck, could not bring such joy to me, as I find in seeing you.


To Isab. Doubt. The Sun, to a man left a Winter at Greenland, could not be so
ravishing a sight, as you dear Madam are to me.


To Theo. Theo. This is Knight Errantry indeed.


Isab. Methinks they talk Romance too. But it is too late if they be in earnest;
for the Dames are disposed of.


Bell. Doubt. How, Married!


Isab. Not executed but condemned!


Theo. Beyond all hopes of mercy.


Doubt. Death, Madam, you struck me to the heart: I felt your Words here.


Bell. My heart was just at my mouth, if you had not stopped it with this Cordial
'thad slown. I may live now in hope of a reprieve for you.


Isab. Our Fathers will never consent to that.


Theo. Mine will not I am sure. I have a Mother, to boot, more obstinate than
he.


Doubt. If they be so merciless, self-preservation, the great Law of Nature
will justify your escape.


Bell. We Knight Errants, as you call us* will rescue you I^ warrant you.


Isab. But if we leave our fools, our Fathers will leave us.


B^ll. If you lose your Father, Madam, you shall find one that will value you
in^initely more, and love you more tenderly.


Doubt. And you, Madam, shall meet with one, whose person and whose fortune
shall be always at your command.


Theo. We grow a little too serious about this matter.


Isab. It Is from Matrimony we would fly! oh it is a dreadful thing.


Bell. This heresy can never be defended by you: a man must be blind that
inclines to that opinion before you.


Enter Sir Edward, Smerk, Servants. Sir Edw. Gentlemen, I ask your pardon, be
pleased to walk into the next Room, and take a small Collation to refresh your
selves.


Bell. Your Humble Servant.


Sir Edw. This Country Fellow that led you hither, tells me a Tale of Witches,
and here is and uproar in my Family, and they say this place is haunted with
them; I hope you have no faith in those things.


Doubt. When I hear a very strange story, I always think it is more likely he
should lie that tells it me, than that should be true.


Sir Edw. It Is a good rule for our belief.


Exeunt. Smerk. My blood rises at them, These are damned Hobbists and Atheists,
I Would have 'em burn^ in Smithfield.


Isab. Well, these Gentlemen may perhaps go to their Servants and Horses at
Whall^y to morrow, where they must stay some time before we see 'em again.


Theod. We are ruined then: For this Marriage will be so pressed upon us, now
the Writings are sealed, and Clothes bought, we shall have no way to delay it,
but downright breaking with our Fathers.


Isab. I am resolv^d to consult with the Gentlemen this night whatever comes
on it.


Theo. How can thou possibly bring it about my Dear?


Isab. I warrant thee, a Woman's wit will naturally work about these matters.
Come my Dear.


Ex. omnes. The Scoen Sir Edward's Celler. Enter all the Witches, and the Devil
in the form of a Buck-Goat after. Burchard Decret. amongst his questions about
Confession, where this is found, Fecisti quod quaedam mulieres facere solent
Tollunt Piscem vivum and mittunt eum in puerperium suum and tam diu eum ibi
teneant douec mortuus fuerit and decocto pisce vel assato maritis suis ad
comedendum tradunt ideo faciunt hoc ut (...) in amorem earum exardescant: si
fecisti duos aunos per Legitimas ferias peniteas. For the Knots, Virg. Eclog.
8. Necte tribus nodi^ ternos Amarilli colores, nectae Amarilli modo, and
Veneris, dic vincula necto.
Demd. Lo here our little They call that Devil that calls them to their
Sabbaths or Feasts, Little Martin, or little Master, Delrio Disquis, Mag,
quest. 16. lib. 2. and Bodin Doemonoman, lib. 2. cap. 4. have the same relation
out of Paul^^s Grillandus, H^ is said to call them with a human voice, but to
appear in the shape of a Buck-Goat; ^vocabatur voce quadam velut humana ab ipso
daemo^e qu^m non vocant doemonem sed magisterulum (...) M^rtinett^m Hunc five
Martinellum. And a little after, Et statim hircus ille ascendebat per aerem,
etc. Almost all Authors that speak of Witches Sabaths, say, that he is called
Martine^^us or Magisterulus* and that he appears in form of a Buck-Goat: about
their Sabath. See Nichola^^ Remigiu, lib. 1. cap. 14. Philippo Ludwig. Elich.
Daemonomagi^, Quest. 10. Sol^ut ad conventum delatae Lemi^^ D^emonem: Synagogae
praesidem and rectorem in solio considentem immutatum in Hircum horridum:
Guaccius compendium Maloficarum, Lib. 1. cap. 13. Ibi Demon est conventus
praeses in solio sedet forma terrifica ut plurinum Hiroi, etc.
Master's come.
Let each of us Kissing the Devils Buttucks is a part of the homage they pay
the Devil, as (...) says Doctor Edlin did, a Sorbon Doctor, who was burned for
a Witch. Scot also quotes our Danaeus, whom (...) never read, for kissing the
Devils Buttocks. About kissing the Devils Buttocks, see farther, Guaccius in
the forequoted Chapter, Ad signum homagii eum (sc. daemonem) in podice
osculan^ur (...) Eli^h quest 10* Deinde quod homagii est indicum (honor sit
Aurbus) ab ijs in gerenda sunt oscula Daemouis po^ici.
salute his Bum.
All kiss ^he Devils Arse. See our provisions ready here,
To which no The Devil will have no Salt in his Meat, Lud^^igus Elich. Quest.
7. p. 113. A^ also Guacc^u, cap. 13. The Devil loves no Salt in his Meat, says
Bodin, Daem. lib. 3. cap. 5. because it is an emblem of (...) and used by Gods
command in Sacrifices, and quotes Levit. 1. for that, which is a notable reason.
Salt must ere come near.

Table rises. M. Spen. Who draws the Wine?

Demd. Our Lucian in his Dialogue of (...), or the Lovers of lies ((...)
Witchmongers are) makes one of his Sages Ecrotes tell how he learned of
Pa^crates an Egiptian Magitian that traveled with him, to make a St^ff run of
Errands and bring things to him, and that he in the absence of the Magitian
commanded a Staff to fetch him Water, and not having learned the art of
conjuring it down again, it brought Water so often that he feared it would have
drowned the Room; he cut (...) in two pieces, and then both those pieces
fetched Water till the Egiptian came and conjured 'em down*
Brooms shall do it.
Go thou.

Dicken. And thou.

Harg. And thou.

Mal. Spen. And thou.

Their Brooms all m^rch off and ferch Bottle^. Devil. They are always at their
mee^ings examined by the Devil, or the Dame, what service they have done.
Remigius Daemonolat. lib. 1. cap. 22. Quem admodum solent Heri in Villicis
procuratoribus, etc. Ita Demon in suis comitiis quod tempus examinandis
cujusque rebus and actionibus ipse constituit, etc. Speaking of Witches.
What have ye done for my delight?
Relate the service of the night.

Demd. To a Mothers Bed I softly crept,
And while the unchristen'd Brat yet slept,
See Malleus Male^icarum, Tom. 2. of Witches being transformed into Cats and
^ac^ing the breath and blood of Children.
I suct the breath and Ovid Fast. lib. 6. say^ of Striges, which modern
Witchmonger^ call Witches, No^te volant puerosque petunt nutricis egentes and
vi^iant cunis corpora rapta sui^ ((...) di^^untur lactentia viscera ros^tis and
plenum poto sanguine guttur habent Wier^s, lib. ultim^ de lam^^s, (...). 6^
relates from one (...) a Judg^ in Boltingen, a place in the Country of B^rn,
the con^^ssion of a Witch thus, Infant^bue baptizatis vel nondum baptizatis
insidiamur, and^. hos in cunabulis vel ad (...) pulchro clam suffuramur and in
olla decoquimus de solidiore materia (...) facimus (...) actibus and
transvectionibus commodum de liquidiore vero humore utrem implemus ex quo
quicunque biberit: See the Notes in the third Act.
blood of that,
And stole another flesh and fat,
Which I will boil before it stink;
The thick for Ointment, then for Drink
I^le keep --
Remigius, lib. 2. Daemonolat. cap. 3. Haec and nostrae aeta^is (...) hominibus
moris est facere praesertim si cujus supplicio affecti cadaver Exemplo datum
est, and in crucem sublatum nam non solum inde sortilegijs suis materiam
muteriam mutuantur sed and abipsis carnificinae instrumentis rest vinculis
palo ferramentis siquidem iis velgi etiam opinione in^sse ad incantationes
mag^cas. vim quandam and potestatem. The French Gamesters are superstitious in
this, and think that the noose of the Rope, that went about the Neck of one
that was hanged will make them win. And here old women will prescribe a piece
of the Gallows for a cure for an ague. That the ancients were superstitious in
these thing, see Lucan, lib. 6. La^ueum nod^sque nocentes ore suo rupit,
pend^ntia corpor a carpsit abrasitque cruces percusaque viscera nimbis v^list
and incoctas admisso sole medullas, insertum (...), nigramque per artus
stillantis tabi saniem virusque coactum sustulit and morsus nervo retinente
pependi^. For the use of dead bodies in Witchcraft see Apuleius, De aureo
(...), lib. 3. speaking of (...) Priusque apparatu solito instruxit feralem
officinam. Among other things, Sepultorum cadaverum expositis mul^is
admodum^^membris hic nares illic digiti, illic carnosi clavi pendentium, alibi
trucidatorum (...)
From a Murdrer that hung in Chains
I bit dryd Sinews and shrunk Veins.
Marrow and Entrails I have Brought,
A piece ot'h' Gibbet too I got,
And of the Rope the fatal Knot.
I sunk a Ship, and in my flight
I kicked a Steeple down to Night.

Devil. Well done my Dame, Ho, ho, ho, ho.

Dick. Lucan makes his Witch inhabit such places, Desertaque busta incolit and
(...) ob^inet umbris. Agrippa de occulta Philosophia, lib. 1. cap. 48. Saturno
correspondent (...) fetida tenebrosa s^bterranea religiosa funesta ut
coemiteria busta and hominibus deserta habitacula and vetustate caduca loca
obscura and horrenda and solitaria a^tra, cavernae, pu^ei, etc. And in his
third Book, cap. 42. Aptissima loca plurim^m experientia visionum nocturnalium
incur^ionum and consimilium phantasinatum ut c^miteria and in quibus fieri
solent executiones criminalis judicij, etc.
To Gibbets I flew and dismal Caves,
To Charnel houses and to Graves.
Lucan, lib. 6. Ast. Vbi servantur saxis, quibus intiums humor d^citur, and
tra^ta durescunt^a medu^^e cor^ ora tunc omne^ avide des^^vit in artus
immersitque meanus oculis, gaudetque gelatos aeffodisse orbs.
Bones I got, and flesh enough
From dead men's Eyes the glewy^Stuff,
Their Eye Balls with my nails scoop'd out
And pieces of their Limbs I Have brought --
Nider in his Formicarlum mentions one that killed Seven Children in the
Mothers Womb, by Witchcraft: This, he says, was done by laying ^ Lizard under
the Th^eshold, and that will cause abortion in every Female in the Horse: Vide
Form ^ar. cap. 3. Remigius says abo^t the Cocks-crowing, that nothing is so
hateful to the Witches when they are at their Charms, as the Cock-crowing; as
one Latoma a Witch, among other things confessed; and several other Authors
mention, it as very hateful to the Witches.
A Brat ith Mothers Womb I slew.
The Fathers neck I Twisted too.
Doggs-barkt, Cocks-Crowed, away I flew.

Devil. A good Servant, Ho, ho, ho.

Harg. ^or. Epod. 5. amongst Canidias materials reckons, Ossa ab ore rapta
jejunae Canis. And Lucan* ^ib. 6. of Erictho. Et quodcunque jacet nuda tellure
cadaver ante feras vulucresque sedet; nec carper^ membra vult ferro manibusque
suis morsusque luporum expectat siccis raptura a faucibus artu^.
Flesh from a Raven in a Ditch
I snatched, and more from a ravenous Bitch.
See Apuleius before cited,
Among Tombs I searched for flesh and bore,
^ Ovid per tumulos errat sparsis distincta Capillis. See the Notes of the
third Act.
With hair about my ears alone.
For the parts of the Body, the Wen and the blood of slain men, See Apul^ius
before quoted.
Fingers, Noses, and a Wen.
And the blood of murdered men,
Lucan, lib. 6. Huc quicquid foetu genuit natura sinistro miscetur: Non spuma
canum quib^s unda timori est viscera non Lyncis non durae nodus Hyaenae defuit.
A mad Dogs Foam, and a Wolves Hairs,
A Serpents Bowels, Adders Ears,
I put in my Pou^ch; and coming back
The Bells in a Steeple I did crack.
I sent the murren into Hogs,
And drove the Kine into the Bogs.

Devil. It Is well, it is well. Ho, ho, ho, ho.

M. Spen. For Philtres, See Iuvenal. Sat. 6. Hic Magicos afbert cantus hic
Thessala vendit Philtra.
To make up Love Cups I have sought,
A Wolfs Tail, Hair, and Yard, I Have got
The Green Frogs Bones, whose flesh was tain
From thence by Ants; then a Cats Brain,
The Bunch of flesh from a black Foles head,
Just as his Dam was brought to Bed,
Before she li^kt it; and I have some
Of that which falls from a Mares Womb
When she is in Lust; and as I came home
I put a woman into ^its
And ^righted a Parson out of his wits.

Devil. All Is well. Ho, ho, ho, ho.

(...) Song.
1.
WHat joy like ours can mortals find?
We can command the Sea and Wind:
All Elements our Charms obey,
And all good things become our prey;
The daintiest Meat, and lustiest Wine,
We for our Sabaths still design.
Amongst all the great Princes the sun shall ere see.
None can be so great, or so happy as we.
2.
We Sail in Egg-shells on rough Seas,
And se^ strange (...) when we please*
Or on our Be^soms we can fly,
And nimbly mounting to the Sky,
We leave the swiftest Birds behind,
And when we please outstrip the Wind:
Then we feast and we revel after long ^light,
Or with a Loved Incubus sport all the night.
3.
When we are on Wing, we sport and play,
Mankind, like Emmets, we survey;
With Lightening blast with Thunder Kill.
Cause barrennesss where e're we will.
Of full revenge we have the power;
And Heaven it self can have no more.
Here Is a health to our Master the Prince of the Flies,
Who commands from Center all up to the Skies.
All. For this following potion, take the Words of Wierus de praestig. Daem,
lib. 3. cap. 37. Inter amatoria ad haec venena connumerant^^, in extrema lupi
cauda pilus, ejusque virga, remora pis^iculus, selis cerebrum and Lacertae
stellio cui, stincus nomen est item ^s de rana ^^ridi in formicarum acervo
exesa: See Pliny, lib. 8. cap. 22.
Harr, This Hyppomanes Pliny in Not. Hist. And Aristotle de Not. (...)
mentions, and all the old Poets, Virg, Aeneid, 4. Quaeritur, and (...) equi de
front (...) and matu praeceptusamor. See this discribed in Wierus, lib. 3.
cap. 37. Ovid, lib. 2. De art Amandi datque quod a teueri front revellit
equi. Lucan, lib. 6. Nec noxia tantum pocula proficiunt, au^ quum furgentio
succo frontis amaturae subducunt pignora faetae.
harr, Virg. 3. Georg. Hinc demum hyppomanes ve^o quod nomine dicunt Pastores,
Lentum distillat ab inguine virus. Tibul^^, lib. 1. El^g. 4. Hippamanes cupidae
stillat ab inguine Equae, Ovid, lib. 1. Eleg. 8. Upon a Bawd, Seu been quid
gramen quid torto concita rhomb^ Licia quid valeat virus amantis equae propert,
lib. 4. (in quandam Laenam Consuluit strigas nostro de sanguine and in me
hippomanes faetae semina legit aeque. In Wier^ it is thus described, Caruncula
ba^d parum famora, caricae magnitudine specie orbiculata, Latiuscula, color
nigro, quae in front nascentis pulli equini apparet, quam edito statim partu
matter lambendo, abstergendoque dev^eat and si praeripiatur animum a faetu
peni^us aversum habet nee eum ad ubera admit^t. That they make these confused
noises, see Nandaeus, Hist, Mag. and Pet. de Loyer de Spectris. And that these
shouts and these words and are used by them, see Scott. p. 42. and Bodin, lib.
2. cap. 4. This is to be found in Remigius, and Delrio, and M. Phi. Lud^^igus
Elich o^t of them says, quest. 10. Tota turba (...).
Harr, harr, harr, hoo, hoo, hoo, sabath, sabath, sabath, Devil, Devil, Devil,
dance here, dance there, play here, play there, harr, harr, harr, hoo, hoo,
hoo. --


They all sink and vanish. Act Ends.
ACT. III.
Enter Sir Edward Harfort, Bellfort and Doubty. Doubt. YOu have extremely
delighted us this morning, by your House, Gardens, your Accommodation, and your
way of Living, you put me in mind of the renowned Sidneys Admirable description
of Kalandar.


Sir Edw. Sir you Complement me too much.


Bell. Methinks you represent to us the Golden days of Queen Elizabeth, such
sure were our Gentry then; now they are grown Servile Apes to Foreign
customs, they leave off Hospitality, for which we were famous all over Europe,
and turn Servants to Board-wages.


Sir Edw. For my part, I love to have my Servants part of my Family, the other
were to hire day Laborers to wait on me, I had rather my Friends, Kindred,
Tennants and Servants should live well out of me, than Coach-makers, Tailors,
Embroiderers, and Lacemen should: To be pointed at in the Streets, and have
Fools stare at my Equipage, is a vanity I have always scorned.


Doubt. You speak like one descended from those Noble Ancestors that made
France tremble, and all the rest of Europe Honor 'em.


Sir Edw. I reverence the Memory of 'em: But our New-fashion'd Gentry love the
French too well to fight against 'em; they are bred abroad without knowing any
thing of our Constitution, and come home tainted with Foppery, slavish
Principles, and Popish Religion.


Bell. They bring home Arts of Building from hot Countries to serve for our
cold one; and F^^gality from those places where they have little Meat and small
Stomachs, to suffice us who have great plenty and lusty Appetites.


Doubt. They build Houses with Halls in 'em, not so big as former Porches;
Beggars were better entertained by their Ancestors, than their Tennants by them.


Sir Edw. For my part, I think 'twas never good days, but when great Tables
were kept in large Halls; the Buttery-hatch always open, Black Jacks, and a
good smell of Meat and March-beer, with Dogs-turds, and Mary-bones as Ornaments
in the Hall: These were signs of good House keeping, I hate to see Italian fine
Buildings with no Meat or Drink in 'em*


Bell. I like not their little Plates, methinks there is Virtue in an English
Sur-loyn.


Doubt. Our Sparks bring nothing but Foreign Vices and Follies home; it is
rediculous to be bred in one Country to learn to live in another.


Sir Edw. While we lived thus (to borrow a Coxcombly word) we made a better
Figure in the World.


Bell. You have a mind that suits your Fortune, and can make your own happiness.


Sir Edw. The greatest is the Enjoyment of my Friends, and such Worthy
^e^tlemen ^s your Selves, and when I cannot have enough of that; I have a
Library, good Hors^s and good Music.


Doubt. Princes may envy such an English Gentleman.


Sir Edw. You are too kind, I am a true English man, I love the Princes Rights
and P^ples liberties, and will defend 'em both with the last penny in my purse,
and the last drop ^n my veins, and dare defy the witless Plots of Papists.


Bell. Spoken like a Noble Patriot.


Sir Edw. Pardon me, you talk like Englishmen, and you have warmed me; I hope
to see the Prince and People flourish yet; old as I am, inspite of Jesuits, I
am sure our Constitution is the Noblest in the World.


Doub^. Would there were enough such English Gentlemen.


Bell. Twere to be wished; but our Gentry are so much poisoned with Foreign
V^nities, that methinks the Genius of England seems sunk into the Yeoma^^y.


Sir Edw. We have indeed too many rotten Members* You speak like Gentlemen,
Worthy of such Noble Fathers, as you both had; but Gentlemen I spoke of Music,
I see two of my Artists, come into the Garden, they shall entertain you with a
Song this Morning.


Bell. Sir you oblige us every way.
An Italian Song. Finely composed, and excellently performed.

Doubt. I see Sir you are well served in every thing.


Enter Isabella and Theodosia. Sir Edw. My sweet Cousin good Morrow to thee, I
hope to call thee shortly by another Name, my dear Child, Heaven's bless thee*


Isab. Kneels. Bell. Ladies your most humble Servant; you are early up to take
the pleasure of the Morning in these Gardens.


Doubt. It Is a Paradise you are in; every object within this place is ravishing.


Theo. This place affords variety of Pleasures; nothing here is wanting.


Bell. Where such fine Ladies are.


Enter Servant with Tegue O Devilly an Irish-Priest. Serve. A Gentleman, To
speak with you.


Sir Edw. With me! Daughter pray show those Gentlemen the Statues, Grottoes and
the Waterworks, I^le wait on you immediately.


Bell. This is an opportunity beyond our hopes.


Ex. ^ell. Doubt. Isab. Theo. Sir Edw. Would you speak with me?


Priest. Arrah, and please ty Oorship, I am come here to displaash to maake a
(...) unto thee, dest dou not know me Joy?


Sir Edw. Oh! You live at Mr. Redletters my Catholic Neighbors.


Priest. Ah by my Shoul, I.


Sir Edw. How came you to venture hither? you are a Popish-Priest.


Priest. Ay, but it is no matter for all daat ^oy: by my Shoul, but I will taak
de Oades, and I think I will be excused, but hark (...) you a while, by my
trott I shall be a Pa^pist too for all daat, indeed, yes.


Sir Edw. Excellent Principles.


Priest. I do come for de nonest to see dee, and yet I do not come on purpose
gra: But it is no matter, I will talk vid you about daat, I do come upon
occaasion and Mr. Redletter did shend me unto de^.


Sir Edw. For What?


Priest. What will I say unto dee now, but Mr. Redletter did shend me, and yet
I did come of my self too for all daat upon occaasion, daat I did hear,
concerning of dee, dat die House and de Plaash is all overrun with Witches and
Spirits, do you see now?


Sir Edw. I had best let this Fool stay to laugh at him, he may be out of the
damned Plot, if any Priest was? Sure they would never trust this Fool.


Aside. Priest. What shaall you shay unto me upon all dis, I will exorcize doze
Vitches, and I will plague dose Devils now by my Shoul, vid Holy Water, and vid
Relics, and I will ^reet 'em out of his Plaash, God shaave the King.


Sir Edw. I have forgot your Name.


Priest. They do put the Name of Kelly upon me, Joy, but by my fait I am called
by my own right Name, Tegue O Devilly.


Sir Edw. Tegue O Devilly?


Priest. Yes, a very oold Naam in Eereland by my Shalvaation, well gra, I have
brought upon my Cloke-bagg shome Holy Water, and I will put it upon the Devils
and de Vitches Faashes, and I will make you shome more Holy Water, and you will
vaash all de Rooms vid it and be --


Sir Edw. Well, Father Tegue O Devilly, You're welcome; but how ^are you venture
publicly in these times?


Priest. Why, I have great consideraation upon die Prudence; for if dou woudst
betray me, now phare will be de soleedity of dat Joy.


Sir Edw. I speak not for my self, but others.


Priest. The Devil ^aak me now, I do think, I will suffer for my Religion, I am
afraid I will be slain at lasht at the plaash they call Saint Ty-burn, but I
do not caare by my Shalvaation; for if I will be hanged, I will be a Saint
presently, and all my Country shall pray unto Saint Tegue, besides, shome great
people will be naamless too, I tell you I shay noe more, but I will be prayed
unto Joy.


Sir Edw. Prayed too! Very well.


Priest. Yes by my Shoule will I, and I will have Relics maade of me too.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir Ieffery Shacklehead and my Lady have some business
with you, and desire your company within.


Sir Edw. Come Father Tegue, come along with me, do you hear, find the
Gentlemen that are walking with my Daughter and her Cousen, and tell 'em I will
wait on 'em presently.


Ex. Sir Edw. and Priest. Serve. I will. They are here, Gentlemen, my Master is
called away upon business (...) begs your excuse, and will wait on you
presently.

Ex. Serve.
Bell. Heaven gives us yet a longer Opportunity, and certainly intends we
should make use of it; I have my own Parson that comes to hunt with me at
Whally, Madam, an excellent School Divine, that will end all differences
betwixt us.


Isab. He is like to begin 'em betwixt us* the Name of a Parson is a dreadful
Name upon these occasions, he I bring us into a Condition we can never get out
of but by Death.


B^ll. If the absolute command of me and my Fortune can please you, you shall
never desire to get out of it.


Doubt. I should at more distance and with more reverence approach you, Madam,
did not the shortness of the time, and the great danger of losing you, force me
to be free; Throw not away this precious time, a Minute now is Inestimable.


Theo. Yet I must consider on that Minute on which the happiness or Misery of
all my Life may depend.


Isab. How can ^ imagine that you who have rambled up and down the Southern
World, should at last ^ix on a Horne-bred Mistress in the North? how can you be
in earnest?


Bell. Consult your Understanding and your Looking-Glass, one will tell you how
Witty, Wise, and Good you are, the other, how Beautiful, how Sweet, how
Charming.


Isab. Men before they are Married turn the great end of their Perspective; but
the little end after it.


Bell. They are Men of ill Eyes, and worse Understanding; but for your
Perfections there needs no Perspective.


Theo. If I were inclined to Marriage, methinks we are not well enough
acquainted yet to think of that.


Doubt. To my Reputation I suppose you are no Stranger, nor to my Estate, which
li^s all in the next County; and for my Love, I will convince you of it, by
settling what ever you please, or all that Estate upon you before I expect any
Favor from you.


Theo. You are so Generous beyond my Deserts, that I know not how to Credit you.


Doubt. Your Modesty is too Great, and your Faith too Little.


Enter Sir Tymothy. Sir Tim. Death, Who are these whith my Mistress and my
Sister? Oh! they are the silly Fellows that we saw at the Spaw, that came
hither last night, do you know Sir, that this is my Mistress Sir?


Bell. I know Sir that no man is worthy of that Honor.


Sir Tim. Ye^ Sir, I will make you know that I am Sir, and She has the Honor
to be my Mi^tress.


Bell. Very well Sir.


Sir Tim. Very well Sir, No it is very ill Sir, that you should have the
boldness to take my Mistress by the Hand Sir, and if you do Sir, I must tell*
you Sir -- What do you Smile Sir?


Bell. A man may do what he will with his own Face. I may Smile Sir --


Sir Tim. If you do Sir, I will fight Sir, I tell you that Sir. hah,


Isab. Sir Timothy, you are a Bloody-minded man.


Sir Tim. It Is for my Honor, my Honor, he is plaguely afraid; look you Sir,
if you Smile Sir, at me Sir, I will Kick Sir, that is more Sir.


Bell. If you do, you will be the fifteenth man I have run through the Body Sir.


Sir Tim. Hah! What does he say, through the Body, oh.


Theo. Yonder Is my Brother, we must not be so particular, lets join.


Sir Tim. How, the Body Sir?


Bell. Yes Sir, and my custom is (if it be a great affront, I kill them, for) I
rip out their Hearts, dry 'em to Powder, and make Snuff on 'em.


Sir Tim. Oh Lord! Snuff!


Bell. I have a box full in my pocket Sir, will you please to take some.


Sir Tim. No Sir, I thank you Sir: Snuff quoth a, I will have nothing to do
with such a cruel man, I say no more Sir.


Doubt. Your Servant Sir --


Sir Tim. Your Servant Sir: does he take such Snuff too?


Bell. The same -- do you hear Sir, if you value your own life, which I will
save for the Families sakes, not a word of this to any man.


Sir Tim. No Sir, Not I Sir? Your humble servant.


Enter Sir Edward. Sir Edw. I ask your pardon Gentlemen, I was stayed by what,
if you please to walk in, will divert you well enough.


Doubt. We will wait on you Sir.


Sir Edw. Daughter, Sir Ieffery and my Ladys have made complaints of you for
abusing Sir Timothy; let me hear no more on it, we have resolved the Marriage
shall be to Morrow, it will become you to be upon a little better Terms to day.


Sir Tim. Do you here that Gentlewoman --


Sir Edw. Gentlemen, I have sent to Whally for all your Servants, and Horses,
and Dogs, you Must do me the honor to Make some stay with me.


Bell. We cannot enough acknowledge your great Civility.


Sir Edw. No Complements, I obliege my self; Sir Ieffery Shacklehead and I have
just now agreed, that to morrow shall be the Day of Marriage between our Sons
and Daughters.


Theo. Very short warning.


Sir Edw. He I not delay it longer.


Theo. I Will in and see what the reason of this sudden resolution.


Bell. Sir we wait on you.


Sir Edw. Stay you there a while with Sir Timothy.


Ex. all but Sir Tim. and Isab. Sir Tim. Dear Cousin, prithee be kinder to me,
I protest and vow, as I am a Christian, I love the better then both my Eyes,
for all this.


Isab. Why how now Dogs face, have thou the Impudence to make love again, with
that hideous Countenance? that very insipid silly Physnomy of thine? with that
most piteous mein? why thou lookst like an Operat^r for Teeth.


Sir Tim. This is all sham, I wont believe it; I can see my self in the great
glass, and to my mind no man looks more like a Gentleman than my self.


Isab. A Gentleman! with that silly wadling shuffling gate? thou have not mien
good enough for a chief Constable, every change of thy Countenance, and every
motion of thy Body proclaims thee an Ass.


Sir Tim. Ay, Ay, come Madam, I shall please you better when I am Married, with
a (...) that I have; I tell ye.


Isab. Out of my sight, thou make me sick to see thee.


Sir Tim. I shall be more Familiar with you to Morrow-night, oh my dear rogue
-- well I say no more, faith I shall, well, no more to be said.


Isab. Be gone thou Basilisk, here, I vow if thou were the only man on Earth,
the Kind should cease rather than I would Marry thee.


Sir Tim. You Will be in a better humor to Morrow-night, though you are such a
(...) now.


Isab. This place, where some Materials are to mend the Wall, will furnish me
with some Ammunition: be gone I say.


Sir Tim. I shant do^t, I know when I am in good Company, come prithee Cousin,
do not let us Fool any longer, to Morrow we shall be one flesh -- de ye see:


Isab. I had rather be inoculated into a Tree, than be made one Flesh with
thee; can that Westph^lia hide of thine ever become one Flesh with me? when, I
can become one Ass with thee it may, you shall never change my mind.


Sir Tim. Well, well, I shall have your Body to Morrow-night, and I warrant you
your mind shall soon follow it.


Isab. Be gone, thou infinite Coxcomb, I Will set thee farther.


She throws Stones at him. Sir Tim. What, what, what a pox! hold, what a Devil,
are you mad? Flesh, heart, hold, what a plague, uds bud, I could find in my
heart to turn again.


Isab. Do ^ilthy Face, do if thou dare.


Sir Tim. Oh help, murder, murder.

Ex. Sir Timothy.
Isab. I have no patience with this Fool, no Racks, or Tortures shall force me
to marry him.

Ex. Isab.
Enter Young Harford and Theodosia. Theo. I am very indifferent about this
Matrimony, and for ought I see, you are so too.


Yo. Har. I must confess you are as fine a Gentlewoman as ever I saw, and I am
not worthy of you; but my Father says he will disinherit me, if I will not
marry you to Morrow; therefore I desire you would please to think on it.


Theo. I will think on it.


Yo Har. You shall command all my Estate, and do what you will; for my part, I
r^solve all my Life, to give up my self wholly to my Sports, and my Horses, and
my Dogs, and to drink now and then a cup of Ale with my Neighbors, I hate Wine.


Theo. You will do very well.


Yo. Har. He says we must be Married to Morrow at Ten, I can be going a Hawking
by six and come home time enough, I would be loath to neglect my Hawking at
Pow^s in the height of the Season.


Theo. By no means, you would do very ill if you should.


Yo. Har. Ay so I should, but shall I tell my Father that you will have me to
Morrow? you know the Writings are Sealed, and Wedding-Cloaths bought of all
sides.


Theo. Well, I shall do as becomes me.


Yo. Har. Well, Cousin there is no more to be said betwixt you and I then, Pa^ce
Verba, a word to the Wise, I say, is enough, so I rest your humble Servant to
command; ^e tell my Father what you say presently, your Servant to, tell you
truly I had never so much mind to be Married as now; for I have been so
woundedly frightened with Witches, that I am afraid to lie alone, dee see;
well, I am glad this business is over: a pox upon all m^king of Love for me.

Ex. Yo. Har.
Theo. I thought I saw my Cousin in yo^ Walk, it is time for us to consult what
to do, my Father and Mother are resolved upon to Morrow for the fatal day.

Ex. Theo.
Enter Smerk, and Priest, and Mrs. Susan. Priest. By my shoule, Joy, I thank
you for my Fast-break, for it does give refreshment unto me, and Consolaation
too gra.


Smerk. Thank you Mistress Susan, my Caudle was admirable; I am much
strengthened by these good Creatures.


Sus. Yours was admirable -- if Mother Demdike has any Skill, I shall find the
opperati^^ before night, and I will be revenged for his scorn to me.


Aside. Priest. Though thou dosht know me, yet thou dosht shay thou will tell
nothing concerning of me.


Smerk. No, for my part though I differ in some things, yet I honor the Church
of Rome as a true Church.


Priest. By my Shalvaation ye did all come out of us indeed, and I have
expectaation daa^ you will come in again, and I think I will live to she it;
perhaps I will tell you now, you had your Ordination too with us.


Smerk. For my part, I think the Papists are honest, loyal men, and the Jesuits
dyed innocent.


Priest. Phaat dou dosht not believe de Plot de Devil taak me.


Smerk. No, no, no Papist Plot, but a Presbyterian one.


Priest. Aboo, boo, boo, By my Shalvaation I will embraash die Fathers Child,
and I will put a great kish upon die cheek, now for dat, ay dear ish a damnd
Presbyterian Plot to put out de Paapists, and de Priests, and de good Men, and
if I would have my mind, de Devil taak me I would she 'em all broyle and fry
in de (...) they call Smithfi^ld, (...).


Smerk. I would have S^^plices crammed down their Throats, or would have 'em
hanged in (...).


Priest. (...).


Enter (...) and Doubty. (...) (...) with these Priests, see they are come from
their Breakfast, and (...)


Priest. (...) not believe de Paapist P^ot my Joy.


(...) (...) Presbyterian Plot I do: I would be a Turk before I would be a (...)


(...) (...) I will give Satisf^ction unto dee, and ^aak dee of my Church, we
have (...) of die Church, and dou art almost as good a Friend as he in de West,
I have (...) take it did begin vid a T.


Doubt. How now! Do not you believe a P^pish Plot?


Smerk. No, but a (...) I do.


Bell. This is great Impudence, after the King has affirmed it in so many
Pr^clamations, and three Parliaments have (...) it, Nemine (...).


Smerk. Parliaments, tell me of Parliaments, with my Bible in my hand, ^le
dispute with the whole (...) of Commons; Sir, I hate Parliaments, n^ne but
Phanaticks, Hobbists, and Athiests, believe the (...).


Priest. By my (...), dou d^sh't maak me weep indeed, by my Shoul, Joy, dou
wilt be a good Cath^lick, if I will instruct dee, I will weep on dee indeed.


Bell. Why the true and wise Church of England-men believes it, and are a great
Rock against the Church of Rome.


Doubt. And Preach and Write learnedly against it; but such Fellows as you are
scandals to the Church, a Company of Tantivy Fools.


Bell. All the Eminent men of the Church of England believe the Plot, and
detest it with horror, and abominate the Religion that contrived it.


Smerk. Not all the Eminent men, for I am of another opinion.


Doubt. By my shoul, by my Shoud, Joy, dey are our Enemies, and I would have no
fait put upon de^^, but dis is my dear Friend.


Doubt. This is a Rascal concealed in the Church, and is none of it; sure his
Patron know^ him not.


Bell. No certainly!


Smerk. You are Hobbists and Athiests.


Priest. It is noe ma^ter for all daat Joy, what dey do shay unto dee for by
Chreest, and by Saint Paatrick dey be Heretic Dogs, by my Shalvaation dou
dosht maake me weep upon de again; by de Lady Mary, I think I will be after
reconciling deet o de Catholic Church indeed.


Enter Sir Ieffery, Lady, Sir Edw. and Isab. and Theodosia. Sir Ieff. Your
Servant Gentlemen.


La. Sha. Your most humble Servant.


Bell. Doubt. Your most humble Servant.


Sir Edw. Is not my Irish man a pleasant fellow?


D^ubt. A great Father of the Church.


Bell. And perhaps may come to be hanged for it.


Sir Edw. Sir (...) to take some informations about Witches, perhaps that may
divert you not ill, It Is against my opinion, but I give him way.


La. Sha. I hope you are pleased to pardon my incivillity, in rushing unawares
into your Chamber last night; but I know you are so much a Gentleman, so
well-bred* and so a^^^mplis^t, I know you do --


Doubt. ^adam.


La. Sha. And for that reason I will make you my Confident in a business, that
perhaps, I do not know, but I think it may not be t^ your disadvantage, I will
communicate it to you in ^^ivate. N^w, Sir Ieffery and I are to take some
Examinations. I assist him very (...) business, or he could never do it.


He sits down and La Sha^. Sir Ieff. Call in these Fellows, (...) hear what
they will say about these Witches; come on, Did you serve my Warrant on Mother
Demdike?


They call the Constable in and a Country fellow. Constable. Sir, I went to her
House (and please your Worship) and looked in at her Window, and she was feeding
three great Toads, and they daunc'd and leapt about her, and she suckled a
great black Cat well nigh as big as a Spaniel; I went into the House, and she
vanished, and there was nothing but the Cat in the middle, who spit and star'd
at me, and I was frighted away.


Sir Ieff. An arch Witch I warrant her.


Constable. I went out at the back-dore, and by the Threshold sat a great Hare, I
struck at it, and it run away, and ever since I have had a great pain in my
back, and cannot make Water, saving your presence.


Sir Edw. A fit of the Gravel.


Priest. No, by my shoule, she is a great Witch, and I will cure you upon ^aat.


Sir Ieff. No: I tell you, Sir Edward, I am sure she is a Witch, and between
you and I, last night, when I would have been kind to my Wife, she bewit^ht me,
I found it so.


Sir Edw. Those things will happen about ^ive and fifty.


Priest. I will tell you now, Joy, I will cure you too. This Receipt is in
Scott. he ha^ collected out of Inq^isitors and Witch-mongers.
Taak one of de Tooths of a dead man, and be, and burn it, and taak dee smoke
into both your Noses, as you taak Snush, and anoint your self vid dee Gaal of a
Crow, taak Quicksilver, as dey do call it, and put upon a Quill, and plaash it
under de shoft Pillow you do shit upon, den maake shome waater through de Ring
of a Wedding, by St. Patrick, and I will shay shome Ave Maaries for dee, and
dou wilt be ^ound again: gra.


Sir. Ieff. Who is this pretends to skill in Witchcraft?


Sir Edw. A very lea^^ed man in these matters, that comes hither on purpose.


Sir Ieff. I shall be gla^ of your better acquaintance.


Priest. I will be very vel pleash'd to b after being acquainted vid dee Joy.


La. Sha. Have you any more to say? Fellow speak to me.


Constable. Why, an't please your Worship forsooth, Mother Demdike said she would
be reveng^d on me for not giving her some Butturmilk; and the next night coming
from Rachdale, I saw a great Black Hog, and my Horse threw me, and I lost a Hog
that night, he died, that was as well when he went to bed, as ever he was since
he was born.


La. Sha. It Is enough, a plain, a manifest Witch, make a Warrant for her.


Sir Ieff. Ay, do.


La. Sha. Take some of the Thatch of her House, and burn it at your House, and
you shall see she will come straight.


Sir Ieff. Or to morrow about dawn, piss in a Pot, and cover it with your
right, neither Stocking, and the Witch will be tormented in her Bladder, and
come to you roaring before night.


These two Remedies are in Scott. Doubt. A most profound Science.


Bell. And poor old Ignorant wretches must be hanged for this.


Constable. A Cow of mine is bewitched too, and runs about the Close as if she were
mad; and that, I believe, Mother Hargrave bewitched, because I denied her some
(...). -- good.


Sir Ieff. (...) into the Warrant too: It Is enough, a little thing will serve
for evidence against ^ Witch.


Sir Edw. A very little one.


Priest. This is likewise to be found ^n Scott. Abundance of this kind is to be
seen in Flag^llum Diabol. in the second Tom. of Mall. Maleficarum.
Put a pair of Breeches or Irish Trowsers upon your Cows head, Fellow, upon a
Friday Morning, and wid a great Stick maak beat upon her, till she do depart
out of de Close, and she vill repair unto de Witches door, and she vill knock
upon it vid her Horns indeed.


Constable. Thank you good Sir.


Sir Ieff. Sir, I see you are a Learned man in this business, and I honor you.


Priest. Your Servant Sir, I will put shome holy waater into your Cows mout,
and I will maak Cure upon her for all daat indeed.


La. Sha. Come, has any one else any thing to inform?


Constable. Yes an^t please your Worship, here is a Neighbor, Thomas o Georges.


Tho. o G. Why, an't please your Worships, I was at Mal. Spencers^ House where
he wons (...) Lone, and whoo had a meeghty great Cat, a black one by'r Lady,
and whoo kissed and who clipped Cat, and ay set me d^wn a bit (meet a bit) and
believe Cat went under her Coats, Quo ay what don yeo do with that fow Cat?
why, says Whoo, who soukes me. Soukes tee! Marry that is whaint quo ay, by'r
Lady what ^an Cat do besides? Why, says whoo, whoost carry me to Rachdale
believe. Whaw, quo ay, that is pr^tty! Why, says whoo, ye^st ha one an yeow win
to carry yeow; by'r lady, quo ay, with aw my heart, and thank ow too, marry
'twill save my Tit a power of labor; so whoo cawd a Cat to me, a huge Cat, and
we ridden both to Rachdale strieght along.


B^^l. Well said, this was home; I love a Fellow that will go through stitch.


Sir Ieff. This is a Witch, indeed, put her name in.


Priest. This is n^w thing by my Shoule, I will tell you now it is naw thing
for all d^at, a Vi^h, if she be a good Vitch, will ride upon a Graashopper, I
tell you, very well, and yet a Graashopper is but a weak beast neither; you do
maak wonder upon dis^ but by my Shoule it is naw thing.


Sir Ieff. Where did you take Cat, say you, together?


Tho. o. Geor. Why, we took Cat^ith^ Lone meet a mile off.


Sir Ieff. So you rid eight mile upon Cats: are there any more informations?


Constable. No more an^t please your Worship, but when I have once taken 'em,
enough will come in.


La. Sha. Go then about taking 'em, and bring 'em before Sir Ieffery, and my
self, Ple warrant you we will order 'em.


Priest. I will tell you now Fellow, taak de shoe of a Horse, and nail it upon
your Threshold, de plaash dou dosht go into die door upon.


Sir Ieff. And put a Clove of Garlic into the Roof of thy Horse.


La. Sha. Femel is very good in your House against Spirits and Witches, and
Alicium, and the Herb Mullein, and Long-wort, and Moly too is very good.


Priest. This is to be found in Del^io, and Remig. and Fr. Silvester.
Burn shome Brimstone, and maak a sweet fume of de Gall of a Black Dog, Joy,
and besmeare die Pots, and die Walls, and be, and Cross die Self, and I will
touch dee vid Relics, and dee to gra.


Constable. Thank you good Sir.


Tho. o Geor. Thank a.


Sir Edw. Is not this an excellent Art?


Bell. It Is so extravagant, that a man would think they were all in Dreams that
ever writ of it.


Doubt. I see no manner of Evidences against these poor Creatures.


Bell. I could laugh at the^e Fools sufficiently, but that all the while our
Mistresses are in danger.


Doubt. Our time is very short, prithee let us consider what is to be done.


Isab. Well, my Dear, I must open my heart to thee; I am so much in Love with
this Bellfort, that I shall dye if I lose him.


Theo. Poor Isabella, dying is something an inconvenient business; and yet I
should live very uncomfortable without my Spark.


Isab. Our time's very short, therefore preethee let us play the fool no longer,
but come to the point when we meet 'em.


Theo. Agreed: But when shall we meet 'em?


Isab. I warrant thee before Midnight.


Sir Edw. Come, let us take one turn in the Garden, and by that time my Dinner
will be ready.


Bell. Madam, For Heaven's sake consider on what a short time my Happiness or
Ruin depends.


Isab. Have a care, Sir Ieffery and his Lady will be Jealous.


Bell. This is a good sign.


To himself. Theo. Not a word, we shall be suspected, at night we will design a
cenferrence.


Enter Mal Spencer and Clod. M. Spen. Why so unkind Cl^d? You frown and wonnot
kiss me.


(...). No marry, ^^e be none of thy Imp, I wott.


M. Spen. What do^t thou mean my Love? prithee kiss me.


(...). Stand off by'r Lady an I li^t kibbo once, (...) raddle thy bones: (...)
that, thou art a fow Witch.


M. Spen. (...) Witch^ a poor Innocent young Lass, that is whaint, I am not awd
(...) for that Mon.


(...). And I believe my ^yne, by the Mass I saw you in Sir Yedards Cellar last
neeght with your (...), thou art a rank Witch, uds flesh I Will not come nere
thee.


M. Sp^n. Did you see me? Why, if I be a Witch, I am the better Fortune for
you, (...) of the best and be rich.


(...). (...) marry ^le fare none with thee, I Will not be hanged, nor go to the
Deel (...) mass, but I will hang thee on I con by'r Lady.


M. Spen. Say you so Rogue, I Will plague you for that.


She goes out. Cl^d. What is whoo gone? ^Tis for no good marry, I ha escaped a
fine waife, a fow (...) by'r Lady, I^le hang the Whean and there be no more
Witches in Loncashire. (...) what is tiss?


Mal. Enters with a Bridle, and puts it on ere he is aware. Mal. S. For these
kind of transformations, you will see Authority at the latter end of these
Notes.
Horse, Horse, be thou to me,
And carry me where I shall flee.

She gets upon him, and flies away. Enter Demdike, Dickenson, Hargrave, etc.
with their Imps, and Madg, who is to be the new Witch. Demd For Witches
delighting in such solitary places, see Agrippa and Lucan quoted in the second
Act.
Within this Shatt^r^d Abbey Walls,
This Pit or^ grown with Brakes and Briers,
Is fit for our dark Works, and here
Our Mast^r dear, will soon appear,
And make th^e Mother Madge a Witch,
(...) be Happy, long-lived, Rich,
Thou wi^^ be Pow^rful and Wise,
And be revenged of thy Enemies.

Madg. It Is that I Would have, I thank you Dame,

Demd. Having Imps is to be found in all Authors that treat of Witches. Having
of Biggs or Tea^s, I find no where but in our English Authors, and in late
Examinations.
H^r^ take this Imp, and let him suck,
H^l do what e're thou bidst him, call
Him (...),

Madg. Come hither Puck-Hairy.


En. an Imp in shape of a black shock, comes to her. Demd. Where is thy
Contract written in Blood?


Madg. It Is here.


Demd. So t'^ firm and good.
Where^s my Mamilion^ come my Rogue,
And take thy Dinner.

Dicken. Where^^ my Puggy?
Come to me and take thy Duggy.

Harg. Come my Rouney, where art thou?


Enter Mal. Spencer, Leading Clod in a Bridle. Mal. Come Sirrah, I have switcht
you well
She ties him up, and joins with the other Witches. I Will tie you up now to the
Rack.
Well met Sisters, where^s my Pucklin?
Come away my pretty Sucklin.

Clod. Waunds and Flesh, what con Ay do naw, I am turned into a Horse, a Capo,
a mere Titt; Flesh Ayst never be a Mon again, I marle I con speak, I conno pray,
I wot a pox of the Deel Mun, Ay live of Oats, and Beans, and Hay aw my life,
instead of Beef and Pudding: uds Flesh I neigh too,

He neighs. Oh who has switcht and spurd me plaguely, I am raw all over me,
whoo has ridden a wounded way about too.


Demd. Ointment for Flying here I have,
For this Ointment see Wier. de pr^^^gus D^m. ultimo libro de Lamiis, he has
the Receipt at large, Puerorum pinguedinem decoquendo ex aqua capiunt
inspissando quod ex elixatione ultimum novissimumque subsidet, inde condunt
continuoque inserviunt usu^: cum hac immiscent Eleoselinum aconitum frondes
popules and fuliginem vel aliter
Of Childrens Fat stolen from the Grave.
sium, acorum vulgar pentaphyllon vespertilion^^ sanguinem solanum somniferum,
etc. This Ointment is in Carda^ de su^tiltate, Cap. de Mirabilibus and in
Paracelsus de magna and occulta Philosophia, in Delrio Disquis. Mag. Quest. 16.
p. 130. There are under that Question several Stories under Oaths and
Confessions, of the Witches night-meetings and flying. See Bodin for the
Ointment, lib. 2. Damon. cap. 4. And Scot. p. 182.
The juice of Smallage, and Nightshade,
Of Poplar Leaves, and Aconite made
With these.
The Aromattic Reed I boil,
With Water-parsnip, and Cinquesoil;
With store of Soot, and add to that,
The reeking Blood of many a Bat.

Dick. See the renowned Johnson in the last Scene of the second Act of his sad
Sheepherd.
From the Seas (...) owse a Weed,
I fetch^d to open Locks at need.
^or. Satyr 8. Vidi equidem nigra succinctam vadere palla Canidiam pedibus
nudis passoque Capillo: and the Verse before, Ossa legant herbasque nocentes.
Ovid. Ep. of Hyps^pile. Per tumulos errat sparsis distincta Capillis. Scnec. de
Medea, v. 756. Vinculo solocus Comam secreta nudo nemora lustravi pede. Ovid
Metam. 7. Egreditur tectis vestes induta recinctas nuda pedes nudos humoris
infusa capillos.
With Coats ^uckt up, and with my Hair,
All flowing lo^sly in the Air,
With naked Feet I went among
The use of Herbs in Witchcraft, all Authors both Ancient and Modern take
notice of, that treat of Witches. Virg. H^s herb^^ atque haec (...) mihi lecta
veneno. Ovid Metam. 7. Protinus horrendis infamia pabula succ^^ conterit and
tri^^s Hecateia Carmina miscet. Virg. 3. Georg. Miscueruntque herbas and non
innoxia verba: Propert. Quippe and collinas ad fossam moverit herbas. Virg. 4.
Aeneid. Falcibus ad Lunae Lumen qu^runtur (...) pubentes herbae nigri cum lacte
Veneni,
The poysnous Plants, there Adders cicuta solanum hyoscyamus Ophiogl^sson,
Martagon, Daronicum, Aconitum, are mentioned by Paracelsus, Porta and Agrippa,
as especial ingredients in Magic.
Tongue,
With A^omt^ and Martagon,
Henbane, Hemlock, Moon-wort too,
Hor. Ep. 5. In Ca^idian: Iubet sepulchris caprificos er^tas Iubet capressus
funebres.
Wild Fig Tree, that over Tombs does grow,
The deadly Nightshade, Cypress, Yew,
And Libbards Bane, and venomous Dew,
I gathered for my Charms. Harg. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 13. Writing of
the Mandrake, says, Caveant effossuri contrarium ventum and tribus circulis
ante gladio circumscribunt postea fodiunt ad occasllm spectantes.
And I
Dug up a Mandrake which did cry,
Three Circles I made, and the Wind was good,
And looking to the West I stood.

M. Spen. Hor. Ep. 5. Et uncta turp^^ (...) sanguine plumamque Nocturnae
strigis For the Bones of Frogs, they are used in Love C^p^, see Notes in the
second Act.
The Bones of Frogs I got, and the Blood,
With Screetch-Owls Eggs, and Feathers too.
For the Owl^-eyes, Bats-blood and wings, see Corn. Agrippa d^ occulta
Philosophia. lib. 1. cap. 15. and cap. 25. The Toad is said to be of great use
in Magic see Pliny, Not. Hist. lib. 32. cap. 5. A Cats Brain is an ingredient
in Love-Cups; see the Notes on the second Act.
Here Is a Wall-Toad, and Wings of Bats, The Contract signed with Blood, Bodin
lib. 2. cap. 4. and most Authors speaks of; but Guaccius in his Compend.
Malefie. sets it down at large, of which these are heads: 1. Abn^gant fidei and
Creatori, etc. 2. Diabolu^ illos tingit Lavacro novi baptismatis. 3. Negato
nomine novum illis inditur. 4. C^git abnegare patrinis and matrinis, etc. 5.
Lamiae diabolo dant frustum aliquod vestimenti. 6. Prestant Demoni juramentum
super circulo in terram sculpto. 7. Petunt a Daem^ne de^eri de libro vitae and
scribi in libro mortis. 8. Pollicentur sacrificia and quaedam striges
promittunt se singulis mensibus vel quindenis unum infantulum strigando, i. e.
exsugendo occissur^; this is to be found also in Bart. Spine^s, Quest de
st^igibus, 2. cap. 9. Quotannis aliquid magistellis vel Daemonibus pendere
tenentur. See also Remigius, lib. 1. 11. cap. 10. Corporis alicui parti
characterem solet imponere: signum non est semper idem forma, aliquando est
simile ^eporis vestigio, aliquando b^fonis pedi, aliquando araneae vel catello
vel gliri. Concerning this mark, see Bodin, lib. 2. cap. 4. Ludwig. Elich. p.
58. quest. 4. Nic. Remigius. lib. 1. c. 5. page 58. I put this down at large,
because some were so ignorant to condemn this contract, as if it were my
profane invention, and so ^illy, that they would have the Devil and Witches
speak piously.

The Eyes of Owls, and Brains of Cats.

The Devil appears in Humane Shape with four Attendants Demd. Peace, here is our
Master him Salute,
And kiss the Toe of his Cloven Foot,
They kiss the Devils Foot. Now our new Sister we present,
The Contract too, sign it with Blood.

Madge signs it with her Blood. Dev. First, Heaven you must renounce.

Madg. I do.

Dev. Your Baptism, thus I wash out too.
The new Name Maudlin you must take,
And all your Gossips must forsake,
And I these new ones for you make.

Demd. A piece of your Garment now present.

Madg. Here, take it Master, I Am content.

Gives it him. Demd. Within this Circle I make here,
Truth to our Master you must swear.

Madg. I do.

Dev. You must each month some murdered Children pay,
Besides your yearly tribute at your day.

Madg. I will.

Dev. Some Secret part I with my mark must sign.
A lasting token, that you are wholly mine.

Madg. Oh!

The Devil takes her hands between his. Demd. Now do your Homage.

Dev. Curse Heaven, Plague Mankind, go forth and be a Witch.

The Music sounds in the Air. Song.
Chor. of 3 parts. WElcome, welcome, happy be,
In this blessed Society.
1.
Men and Beasts are in thy Power,
Thou can Save, and can Devour,
Thou can Bless, and Curse the Earth,
And cause Plenty, or a Dearth.
Chor. Welcome, etc.
2.
Over Natures Powers thou can prevail,
Raise Winds, bring Snow, or Rain, or Hail;
Without their Causes, and can make
The steady Course of Nature shake.
Chor. Welcome, etc.
3.
Thou can mount upon the Clouds,
And skim over the ruggid Floods;
Thou can dive to the Sands below,
And through the sollid earth can go.
Chor. Welcome, etc.
4.
Thou Wilt open Looks, or through a Chink
Shall creep for daintiest Meat and Drink.
Thou may sleep on tops of Trees,
And lie in Flowers like Humble Bees.
Chor. Welcome, etc.
5.
Revenge, revenge, the sweetest part
Of all thou have by thy black Art.
O^ Heaven thou never shall f^x thy mind,
For here it is Heaven to plague mankind.
They Dance with fantastic unusual postures Devil. Lucan, lib. 6. Cessavere
vice^ (...) dilataque long haesit nocte dies: legi non paruit Ether. Sen.
Med. pariterque mundus, lege confusa Aetheres and solemn and astra vidie and
vetitum mare tetigistis u^sae^temporum flexi vices.
At your command all Natures course shall cease,
And all the Elements make war or peace:
The Sky no more shall its known Laws obey,
Night shall retreat whilst you prolong the day.
Ovid. Ep. Hypsip. Illa reluctantem cursu diducere lunam nititur and tenebris
abdere solis equos metam 7. de Medea and te luna traho. Pet. Arbiter makes a
Witch, boasting her power, among many other things, say, Lunae descendit imago
c^rminibus deducta men, the whole description is very elegant. Hor. E^od. 5.
Quae ^idera excantata v^ce Thessala Lunamque coelo deripti. Id. Ep. 18. in fine
Epodos deripere lunam voci^^^possum meis. Tibul. li^. (...). Eleg. 2. Hanc ego
de coelo ducentem sydera vidi. Propert. Audax canta^e l^ges impouere Lunae.
Thy Charms shall make the Moon and Stars come down,
And in thick darkness, hide the Sun at Noon.
Ovid. Metam. 7. Nubilaque induco ventos abigoque vocoque.
Winds thou shall raise, and straight their rage control.
Lucan. lib. 6. T^rpuit and praeceps audito ca^mine mandus: Axibus and rapidis
impulsos Jupiter urgen^ miratur non ire polos. Nunc omnia complent imbribus,
and calido producunt nubila Phaebo and tonat ignaro coelum Jove.
The Orbs upon their Axes shall not roll;
Hearing thy mighty Charms, the troubled Sky
Shall crack with Thunder, Heaven not knowing why.
(...) ibid. ventis cessantibus aequor in^umuit; rursus vetitum sentire
procellas conticuit turbante noto: Sen. Medea. son^ere fluctus tumuit (...)
mare tacente vento. Id. Herc. Oct. concussi fretum cessante vento turbidum
explicu^ mare.
Without one puff the Waves shall foam and rage,
Then though all Winds together should engage,
The silent Sea shall not the Tempest feel.
Virg. Aeneid. lib. 4. mugire videbis sub ped^bus terram and descendere
^iontibus orn^s. Metam. 7. Iubeoque tremescere montes and mugire solum. Lucan
lib. 6. has a bolder expression, Terra quoque immoti concussit ponderis axem,
and medium vergens nisu titubavit in orbem.
Valleys shall roar, and trembling Mountains reel.
Metam. 7. Vivaque saxa sua convulsaque robora terra and (...) Ovid. Ep.
Hypsip. Illa loco sylvas vivaque saxa movet. Sen. H^rc. Oct. habnere motum saxa.
At thy command Woods from their seats shall rove,
Stones from their Quarries, and fixed Oaks remove.
Metam. 7. Cum vol^^ ripis i^sis mirantibus amnes in fontes rediere suos,
conc^ssaque fistto stantia concu^io, Virg. Aeneid. 4. Sistere aqu^n (...) and
flimina vertere retro* Tibull, following the Verse beforecited, Fluminis h^c
rapids carmins vertit iter, Sen* Med. violenta phanis vertit in fo^tem vada,
and Ister in tot or a divisus truces compeseit (...) omnibus rip^^ piger.
Vast standing lakes shall flow, and, at thy will,
The most impetuous Torrents shall stand still:
Swift Rivers shall (while wondering Banks admire)
Back to their Springs, with violent have, retire.
Ovid. Amor. 3. Eleg. 6. Carmine laera Ceres sterilom (...) in herba^^ Virg.
Eclog. 8. Speaking of Maeris Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes.
Thy Charms shall blast full Fruits, and ripened Ears.
Aeneid. 4. Haec se carminibus promittit solvere ments quas velit, ast aliis
d^^ras immittere curas.
Ease anxious minds, and th^n afflict with cares.
(...) lib. 6. Carmine T^e^salidum dura in praecordia fluxit non fati^ adductus
amor.
Give Love, where Nature cannot, by thy skill,
And any living creature save or kill:
Hor. Epod. 18. Possum ^rematos excit^^ mortuos desiderique temperare poculum.
The raising of Ghosts, and transforming themselves and others, all Witchmongers
both ancient and modern affirm. Virg. Aeneid. the place before quoted,
Necturn^^que ci^t m^nes. Id Eclog. 8. H^s herbas atque haec Ponto mihi lecta
v^naena ipsa dedit. M^eris nascuntur, pluri^n^ Ponto, His ego saepe lupam fieri
and se condere sylvis Maerim saepe animas exire sepulchris vidi, etc.
Propertius before cited, Audax, etc. and sua nocturno (...) terga lupo. You may
see Lucan make^ Erictho raise a Ghost, Seneca's untrix in He^c. O^teus: And
T^resias in Oedipus do the same, all Witchmongers are full of it. In Bodin
Demon. lib. 2. cap. 6. There is a great deal of stuff about Transformations;
he says, Witches transform themselves into Wolves, and others into Asses; and I
think those are they that believe im 'em: He is very angry with Physicians that
call ^ycanthropia disease; he says, diverse Witches at Vernon turned themselves
into Cats, and tells a story of three Witches at A^gentine that turned
themselves into Cats, and beat and wounded a Faggot-maker. This also Petr. de
Lover de spectris mentions in English Translation, p. 128. He says there, that
in his time a Hermit of Do^e was turned into a Wo^^ and was going to devour a
little Child, if he had not been surprif^d and discovered; and a Merchant o^
Cyprus was turned into as Ass; indeed, he says, the Devil does not change the
body, but only abuse and delude the fancy; and quotes Thomas Aquinas in 2
(...). distinct. 8. Aug. lib 18. de Civit. Dei, says, he himself knew the
Father of one (...) who was changed into Mule, and did carry upon hi^^ back Bag
and Baggage for Soldiers; but he says this was an illusion of the Devil, and
that the Father of (...) was not really changed into a Mule, but the eyes of
the beholders were enchanted. Bodin (...) in the shape of a Wolf, killed a
Child of Twelve years old, eat up her Arms and Legs, (...) And Peter Burgis,
and Michael Werdon, having turned (...) of people: Such impossible Stories does
this helluo (...) him, swallow himself, and disgorge to us. He says, the matter
of Transformation^ (...) Seventh, and by him were all judged possible. Wierus
ultimo libro (...) quoque refertur quod se in Lupos (...) I should have
mentioned the transformations of Lucian and Apuleius, which Bodin (...) the
Seventh made Canonical: I could cite many more Authorities for this, and for
most of (...) in the fore-written Speech; but I shall ^ire the Reader and my
self: I have not endeavored (...) the Poets so much as to take thoughts from
them. For the manner of their Music, see (...) quest. 10. p. 13. and Remigius
Daemonolat, lib. 1. cap. 19. Miris modis illic (...) etc. strepant sous
inconditis absurdis ac discrepantibus canit hic Demon (...) aliquod quod forte
humi repertum buccam seu tibiam (...) lib. 2. cap. 4. who says they Dance with
Brooms. And Remigius, lib. 1. (...) 18. Omnia fiunt ritu (...) and ab omni
hominum consuetudine alienum, dorsis invicem (...)
Raise Ghosts, transform your self and whom you will.

Enter Tom. Shacklehead, with a Gun on his shoulder. Demd. Who Is here? who is
here?

Tom. Sha. Waunds what^s here? The Witches By'r Lady,
I Will shoot amongst 'em: have at ye.
They all vanish, and Clod Neigh^ Hey, Dive-dappers, Dive-dappers:
What a Devils here! Clod tied by a Bridle and Neighing! What a Pox ail'st thou?
Constable a tell?

Tom. Shac. takes off the Bridle. Cl^d. Uds flesh, I am a Mon again naw!
Why, I was a Horse, a mere Tit, I had lost aw
My speech, and coul'd do naught but neigh;
Flesh I am a Mon again.

Tom. Sha. What a dickens is the fellee wood?

Clod. Ise ta the Bridle with me, fly from the Dee'l, and the Witches, and I Will
tell you
aw at the Alehouse.

Tom. Sha. What a murrain ails the Hobbell?
I mun follow, and see what is the matter.

Act Ends.
ACT. IV.
Sir Edward, Sir Ieffery, La. Shaklehead, Sir Timothy and Isabella. Sir Ie^^. I
Am sorry I am forced to complain of my Cousin.


La. Sha. Sorry, marry so am not I; I am sorry she is so pert and ill-bred,
truly Sir Edward it is unsufferable for my Son, a man of his Quality and Title,
Born of such a Family, and so Educated, to be so abused, to have Stones thrown
at him li^e a Dog.


Sir Ieff. We must even break off the Match, Sir Edward.


Sir Edw. Sir, I am as^^med of it, I blush and grieve to hear it; Daughter, I
never thought to see this day.


(...). Sir, I am so amazed I know not what to say, I abuse my Cousin! Sure he
is b^witched.


Sir Tim. I think I am, to Love you after it, I am sure my Arm's black and
blew, that it is.


(...). He ^ested with me, as I thought, and would have ruffled me, and kissed
me, and I run from him, and in foolish play, I quoited a little Stone or two at
him.


Sir Tim. And why did you call me Filthy-face, and ugly Fellow, h^h,
Gentlewoman?


La. Sha He ugly! Nay, then I have no Eyes, though I say it, that should not
say it, (...) his Fellow --


Isab. Nor I neither: 'twas a jest, a jest, he told me he was handsomer for a
Man, than I for a Woman.


Sir Ieff. Why, look you there, you Blockhead, you Clown, you Puppy, why do you
trouble us with this impertinent lie?


La. Sha. Good words, Sir Ieffery, 'twas not so much amiss; hah, I Will tell you
that.


Sir Edw. Sure this is some mistake, you told me you were willing to marry.


Isab. I did not think I should be put to acknowledge it before this Company:
But Heaven knows, I am not more willing to live; the time is now so short, I
may confess it.


Sir Edw. You would not use him, you intend to marry, ill.


Isab. I Love him I am to marry more than Light or Liberty. I have thus long
dissembled it through Modesty; but, now I am provoked, I beseech you Sir, think
not that I Would dishonor you so.


Sir Edw. Look you, you have made her weep; I never found her false or
disobedient.


Sir Tim. Nay, good dear Cousin, don't cry, you will make me cry too; I cannot
forbear, I ask your pardon with all my heart, I vow I do, I was to blame, I
must confess.


La. Sha. Go too, Sir Timothy, I never could believe one of your parts would
play the Fool so.


Sir Edw. And you will marry to morrow.


Isab. I never wished for any thing so much, you make me blush to say this.


La. Sha. Sweet Cousin forgive me, and Sir Ieffery, and Sir Timothy.


Isab. Can I be angry at any thing* when I am to be married to morrow? And I am
sure I will be, to him I love more than I hate this Fool.


[Aside] Sir Ieff. I could find in my heart to break your head, Sir Timothy,
you are a Puppy.


Sir Edw. Come lets leave 'em together, to understand one another better.


Sir Ieff. Cousin, Daughter I should say, I beg your pardon, your Servant.


La. Sha. Servant, Sweet Daughter.


Ex. Sir Edw. Sir Jeff. and Lady. Sir Tim. Dear Cousin be in good humor, I
could wish my self well beaten for mistaking one that loves me so, I would I
might never stir, if I did not think you had been in earnest: well, but I vow
and swear I am mightily beholden to you, that you think me so fine a person,
and love me so dearly; Oh how happy am I that I shall have thee to morrow in
these Arms! by these ten bones, I love you more than all the Ladies in London
put them together. Prithee Speak to me, O that Smile Kills me, oh I will ^o Hug
thee and Kiss thee, and Love thee to morrow night -- I Would give forty pound to
morrow night were to night, I hope we shall have twins before the year comes
about*


Isab. Do you so Puppy?


She gives him a box on the Ear, and pulls him by the Ears. Sir Tim. Help,
Help, Murder, Murder.


Isab. Help, Help, Murder, Murder.


Sir Tim. What a Devils to do now? hah, she Counterfeits a Sound.


Enter Theod^sia at one Door, and Sir Ieffery, and Lady a^ the other. Theo. How
now, my Dear, what is the matter?


Sir Ieff. What Is the Matter?


Sir Tim. I feel the matter, She gave me a Cuff, and lug'd me by the Ears, and
I think she is in a Sound.


I^ab. Oh the Witch! the Witch came just now into the Room, and struck Sir
Timothy, and Lug'd him, and beat me down.


Sir Tim. Oh Lord, a Witch! Ay, 'twas a two legged Witch.


Isab. And, as soon as she had done, she run out of that Door.


Theo. It Is very true, I met her and was frighted, and left her muttering in
the next (...).


Sir Tim. Oh Impudence!


Sir Ieff. You Puppy, you Coxcomb, will you never leave these lies, is the
fellow bewitched?


He cudgels Sir Tim. La. Sha. Go Fool, I am ashamed of you.


Sir Ieff. Let^s see if we can take this Witch.


La. Sha. Quickly, before she flies away.


Ex. Sir Jeff. and Lady. Sir Tim. Well, I have done, I Will never tell tale more.


Isab. Begone, Fool, go.


Sir Tim. Well, I will ^ndure this, but I am resolved to marry her to morrow
and be revenged on her; if she serves me so then, I will tickle her Toby for
her, faith I will.

Ex. Sir Tim.
Isab. Well, I Will be gone, and get out of the way of 'em.


Theo. Come on.


Enter Young Harfort Drunk. Yo. Harf. Madam! Cozen hold a little, I desire a
word with you.


Theo. I must stay.


Isab. Adieu then.


Yo. Harf. I am drunken well (...), and now I am not so hala (since we must
marry to morrow) I pray you n^w let us be a little better acquainted to neeght,
He make bold to Salute you in a Civil way.


Theo. The Fool's drunk.


Yo. Harf. By the Mass she kisses rarely, uds lud she has a Breath as sweet as
a Cow, I have been a Hawking, and have brought you home a power of Powts in my
bag here; we have had the rarest sport, we had been at it still, but that it is
neeght.


Theo. You have been at some other sport I see.


Yo. Harf. What, because I am merry? nay, and I list, I can be as merry as the
best on ^em all.

An onny mon Smait my Sweet hear^,
Ayst Smait him again an I con,
Flesh what care for a brokken Yead,
For onest a mon's a mon.

Theo. I see you can be merry indeed.


Yo. Har. Ay that I can, Fa, la, la, fa, la.

He Sings Roger a Coverly. I was at it helter Skelter in excellent Ale, with
Londoners that went a Hawking, brave Roysters, honest fellows that did not
believe the Plot.


Theo. Why don't you believe the Plot?


Yo. Har. No, the Chaplain has told me all; there is no Popish Plot, but there is
a Presbyterian one, he says, none but Phanaticks believe it.


Theo. An Excellent Chaplain to make love to his Patrons Daughter, and Corrupt
the Son.

Aside. Why all the Eminent men of our Church believe it; this fellow is none
of the Church, but crept into it for a livelihood, and as soon as they find him
they will turn him out of it.


Yo. Har. Nay, Cousin I should not have told it, he Charged me to say nothing
of it; but you and I a^e all one, you are to be bone of my bone to morrow: And
I will Salute you once more upon that do you see.


Theo. Hold, Hold, not so fast it is not come to that yet.


Yo. Har. 'Twill come to that and more to morrow, fa, la, la, but I Will out at
four a Hawking, though for all that, do you understand me?


Theo. Her'es Doubty, I must get rid of this fool.

Enter Doubty. Cousin, I hear your Father coming; if he sees you in this
Condition he will be very Angry.


Yo. Har. Thank you Kindly, no more to be said, I Will go and Sleep a little, I
see she loves me, fa, la, la, la.

Ex. Yo. Harfort.
Doubty. Dear Madam, this is a happy (...) thrown upon me unexpectedly, and I
must use it: To morrow is the faral day to ruin me.


Theo. It shall not ruin me: the Inquisition should not force me to a Marriage
with this fool.


Doubty. This is a step to my Comfort; but when your Father shall to morrow
hear your refusal, you know not what his passion may produce; restraint of
Liberty is the least.


Theo. He shall not restrain my Liberty of Choice.


Doubt. Put your self into those hands that may defend you from his Power: the
hands of him, who loves you more than the most Pious value Heaven, than Misers
Gold, than Clergy men love Power, than Lawyers strife, than Jesuits Blood and
Treachery.


Theo. If I could find such a man.


Doubt. Then look no farther Madam, I am he; speak but one word, and make me
the happiest man on Earth.


Theo. It comes a little to quick upon me; are you sure you are the man you
speak of?


Doubt. By Heaven; and by your Self I am, or may I be the scorn of all Mankind;
and the most Miserable too, without you.


Theo. Then you shall be the man.


Doubt. Heaven; on my Knees I must receive this Blessing; there is not another I
would ask, my Joy's too big for me.


Theo. No Raptures for Heavens sake, here comes my Mother, adieu.


Enter Lady Shaklehead. Doubt. I must Compose my self.


La. Sha. Sir your most humble Servant.


Doubt. Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


La. Sha. It is not fit I should lose this opportunity, to tell you that (which
perhaps may not be unacceptable to a person of your Complexion) who is so much
a Gentleman, that I Will swear I have not seen your equal.


Doubt. Dear Madam, you confound me with your Praises.


La. Sha. I vow it is true; indeed I have strugled with my self before I thought
fit to reveal this: but the consideration of your great accomplishments, do
indeed, as it were, ravish, or extort it from me, as I may so say.


Doubt. I beseech you Madam.


La. Sha. There is a Friend of mine, a Lady (whom the world has acknowledged to
be well bread, and of Parts too, that I must say, and almost confess) not in
the Bud indeed, but in the Flower of her Age, whom time has not yet invaded
with his injuries; in fine, envy cannot say that she is less than a full ripe
Beauty.


Doubt. That this Creature should bring forth such a Daughter.


Aside. La. Sha. Fair of Complexion, Tall, Straight, and shaped much above the
ordinary; in short, this Lady (whom many have Languished, and Sighed in vain
for) does of her self, so much admire your Person, and your Parts, that she
extremely desires to contract a Friendship with you, entire to all intents and
purposes.


Doubt. It Is impossible she should be in earnest, Madam, but were she, I cannot
Marry ever.


La. Sha. Why she is Married already, Lord how dull he is! she is the best
Friend I have, Married to an old man, far above her sprightly years.


Doubt. What a Mother-in-Law am I like to have!


Aside. La. Sha. Can you not Guess who this is all this while?


Doubt. Too well.
To himself. Not I truly Madam.

To her. La. Sha. Ha, ha, ha, no! that is strange, ha, ha, ha.


Doubt. I cannot possibly.


La. Sha. Ha, ha, ha. I Will swear! ha, ha, ha.


Doubt. No, I^le swear.


La. Sha. It Is very much, you are an ill guesser, I Will vow, ha, ha, ha! Oh
Lord, not yet?


Doubt. Not yet, nor ever can.


La. Sha. Here Is Company, retire.


Enter Smerk and Tegue O Divelly. Smerk. I am all on fire, what is it that
Inspires me! I thought her ugly once, but this morning thought (...) in love
already! Sure I was blind, she is a beauty (...) a minutes absence is death to
me.


Priest. Phaat Joy, dou art in Meditaation and Consideraation upon something?
if it be a Scruple upon thy Conscience, I believe I will maak it out unto dee.


Smerk. No Sir, I am only ruminating a while; I am inflamed with her affection,
O Susan! Susan! Ah me! Ah me!


Priest. Phaat do dou not mind me? nor put die thought upon me? I do desire to
know of die Faathers Child, what he does differ from de Caatholick Church in, by
my fait it is a braave Church, and a gaallant Church (de Devil taake me) I will tell you now, phare is dear such a one? vill you speak unto me now Joy,
hoh?


Smerk. It Is a fine Church, a Church of Splender, and riches, and power, but
there are some things in it --


Priest. Shome things! Phaat dosht dou taalk of shome things? By my shoule I will not see a better Church in a Shommers day, indeed, dan de Caatholick
Church. I tell you there is braave dignities, and promotions too; what vill I
shay unto you? by St. Phaatrick, but I do believe I will be a Cardinal before I will have death. Dey have had not one Eerish Cardinal a great while indeed.


Smerk. What power is this that urges me so fast, oh Love! Love!


Priest. Phaat dosht dou shay, dosht dou love promotions and dignities? den I
predee now be a Caatholick. What vill I say unto you more? but I will tell you,
You do shay dat de Caatholicks may be shaved, and de Caatholicks do shay, dat
you vill be after being damned, and phare is de solidity now of daat, daat dou
vill not turn a good Caatholick?


Smerk. I cannot believe there is a Purgatory.


Priest. No! Phy I will tell you what I will shay unto you, I have sheen many
Shoules of Purgatory dat did appear unto me; And by my trot, I do know a Shoule
when I do she it, and de Shoules did speak unto me, and did deshire of me dat
I vould pray them out of that plaashe: And dear Paarents, and Friends did give
me shome money, and I did pray 'em out. Widout money indeed, we cannot pray them
out, no fait.


Smerk. That may not be so hard; but for Transubstantiation, I can never
believe it.


Priest Phaat dosht not believe de Cooncel of Trent Joy? dou vilt be damned
indeed, and de Devil take me, if dou dosht not believe it. I will tell you
phaat vill I say to you, a Cooncel is infalible; and I tell you, de Cardinals
are infalible too, upon occaasion, and dey are damned Heretic Dogs, by my
shoulvaation, dat do not believe every oord dey vill speak indeed.


Smerk. I feel a flame within me, oh Love, Love, wether will thou carry me?


Priest. Art thou in love Joy? by my shoule dou dosht Comitt fornicaation, I will tell you it is a venial Sin, and I will after be absolveing you for it:
but if dou dosh Comitt Marrage, it is mortal, and dou vilt be damned and be
fait and trot. I predee now vill dou fornicate and not Marry: for my shaake now
vilt dou fornicate.


Smerk. Sure I am bewitched.


Priest. Bewitched in love, Aboo! boo! I Will tell you now, you must taake de
Woman's Vide Scot. Discovery etc.
Shoe dat dou dosht Love sho, and dou must maak a Jaakes of it, dat is to shay,
dou must lay a Sirreverence, and be in it, and it will maake cure upon dee.


Smerk. Oh the Witch! the Witch! Mal. Spencer, I am struck in my Bowels, take
her away, there, oh! I have a Thousand Needles in me, take her away, Mal.
Spencer.


Priest. Phaare is she, Mal. Spencer. Exercize te Conjure te in Nomine, etc.


He mutters and Crosses himself. Smerk. Oh, I have a Million of Needles
Pricking my Bowels.


Priest. I will, set up a hubub for dee, help! help! who is dear? help, Aboo,
boo, boo.


Enter Sir, Ieffery, and Lady, and Susan. Smerk. Oh Needles! Needles! Take away
Mal. Spencer, take her away.


Sir, Ieff. He is bewitched, some Witch has gotten his Image, and is tormenting
it.


Priest. Hold him, and I will taak some course vid him, he is possessed, or
obess'd, I will touch him vid some Relics.


Susan. Oh, good Sir, help him, what shall I do for him?


La. Sha. Get some Lead melted (and holding over his body) power it into a
Poringer full of Water, and if there appear any image upon the Lead, then he is
bewitched.


This experiment is to be found in Mal. Mallific. Priest. Peash, I shay, here
is shome of St. Phaatricks own Whisker, and some of the Snuff he did use to
taak, dat did hang upon his Beard; here is a Tooth of St. Winifred, indeed,
here is a Corn from de Toe of St. Ignatius, and here is de paring of his Nails
too.


He rubs him with these Relics. Smerk. Oh worse, worse, take her away.


Priest. By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, I will try some more, here is
St. Caaterine de Virgins Wedding-Ring, here is one of St. Bridge^s Nipples of
her Tuggs, by my shoule, here is some of de sweat of St. Francis, and here is a
piece of St. Laurence's Gridiron, dese vill make Cure upon any shickness, if it
be not ones lasht shickness.


Susan. What will become of me, I have poisoned him, I shall lose my Lover, and
be hanged into the bargain.


Smerk. Oh! I dye, I dye, oh, oh.


Priest. By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, a very aable Devil, I will run
and ^etch shome Holy-vater.

Ex. Priest.
Susan. Look up, dear Sir, speak to me, ah woes me, Mr. Smerk, Mr. Smerk.


Sir Ieff. This Irishman is a Gallant man about Witches, he out does me.


La. Sha. But I do not know what to think of his Popish way, his Words, his
Charms, and Holy Water, and Relics, methinks he is guilty of Witchcrast too,
and you should send him to Goal for it.


Smerk. Oh! oh!


Enter Priest with a Bottle of Holy Water. Priest. Now, I varrant you Joy, I will do de Devil's business for him, now I have dis Holy-Vater. The Bottle
flies out of his hand. Phaat is de matter now? phare is dis Devil dat does taak
my Holy-Vater from me? He is afraid of it; I she my bottle, but I do not she
de Devil does taake it. I will Catch it from him.


The Bottle, as he reaches at it, flies from him. Sir Ieff. This is wonderful!


La. Sha. Most amazing!


Priest. Conjure te malum (...), Conjure te pessir^^ in (...), read mihi me^^
((...) Latime) Bottle, phaat vill I do? It is gone


It ^lyes quite away. La. Sha. It Is strange: You se he does not fear holy water.


Priest. I tell you phaat is de matter, by my Shoule he vill touch de Bottle,
because daat is not Consecrate; but, by my fait, he will not meddle vid de
Vater. I will ferch shome, I have in a Baashon.


He runs out and fetches a Basin of Water. Susan. He lies as if he were a Sleep.


Smerk. Oh! I begin to have some ease.


Priest. I did never meet vid a Devil dat did Cosht so much Laabour before.

He throws Water in Smerks Fact. Exercis^ te Demonens fuge, fuge, Exerciso te,
per Melchefideck, per Bethlehem Gabor, per omne quod Exit in um seu Graecum
sive Latinum.


Smerk. I am much better now, and the Witch is gone.


Susan. Good Sir retire to your Chamber, I will fetch some Cordials.


Smerk. Sweet beautiful Creature! How I am Enamored with thee! Thy beauty
dazles like the Sun in his Meridian.


Sir Ieff. Beauty, Enamourd! Why he seems distracted still; lead him to his
Chamber, and let him rest.


Priest. Now Joy, dosht dou she, I have maade a Miracle by my shoule. Phen
vill I she one of your Church maake a Miracle, hoh? by my Shoulevaation dey
cannot maake Miracles out of de Caatolick Church, I tell you now, hoh.

Mother Demdike enters invisible to them and boxes the Priest. Phaat is de
matter now, ah? by my shoule shomething does cuff upon my faash, an be,
Exercise te in ^omine, nomine, by my shoule Saatan, I will pelt dee vid
Holy-Vater indeed; he is Angry dat I did make a Miracle.


Mother Demdike gets behind him, and Kicks and Beats him. La. Sha. What is
this, I hear the blows, and see nothing.


Sir Ieff. So do I, I am frighted and amazed; lets fly.


Ex. Sir Jeff. and La. Priest. Oh, oh, vat is dis for Joy, oh, all my
Holy-Vater is gone, I must fly.


He mutters and Crosses himself, and the Wuch beats him out. Enter Bellfort and
Isabella. Bell. All this day have I watched for this opertunity, let me improve
it now. Consider, Madam, my Extreme Love to you, and your own harred to that
Fool, for whom you are designed to morrow.


Isab. My consent is to be had first.


Bell. Your Fathers resentment of your refusal, may put you out of all
possibillity of making me happy, or providing for your own Content.


Isab. To Marry one against his Consent is a Crime heel never forgive.


Bell. Though his Engagement to Sir Ieffery would make him Refuse his Consent
beforehand: He is too reasonable a man to be troubled afterward, at your
Marrying to a better Estate, and to one that loves more than he can tell you: I
have not words for it.


Isab. Though I must Confess you may deserve much better, would you not Imagine
I were very forward to receive you upon so short an Acquaintance.


Bell. Would I had a Casement in my Breast. Make me not, by your delay, the
miserablest wretch on Earth. (Which I shall ever be without you) think quickly
Madam, you have not time to Consider long, I lay my self at your Feet, to be
for ever made happy or miserable by you.


Isab. How shall I be sure you will not deceive me? These hasty vows, like Angry
words, Seldom shoes the Heart.


Bell. By all the Powers of Heaven and Earth.


Isab. Hold, Swear not, I had better take a man of honor at his Word.


Bell. And may Heaven throw its Curses on me when I break it; my Chaplin's in
the House, and passes for my valet de Chamber. Will you for ever make me Happy
Madam?


Isab. I Will trust your honor; and I Will make my self so; I throw my self upon
you, use me nobly: now it is out.


Bell. Use ye, as I would use my Soul; my Honor, my Heart, my Life, my
Liberty, and all I have is yours. There Is not a man in all the World, that I
can envy now, or wish to be.


Isab. Take care, we shall be spyed: The short time I have to resolve in, will,
I hope, make you have a better Opinion of my modesty, than otherwise you would
have occasion for.


Bell. Dearest! Sweetest of Creatures! my Joy distracts me, I cannot speak to
you.


Isab. For Heavens sake leave me, if you raise a Jealously in the House I am
ruined, we'll meet soon.


Bell. Adieu my Life! my Soul! I am all obedience.

Exit. Bellfort.
Enter Theodosia. Isab. Oh my Dear, I am happy, all is out that pained me so; my
Lover knows I love him.


Theo. I have Confessed to my Ghostly Father too, and my Conscience is at ease.


Isab. Mine received the news with more Joy, than he Could put in Words.


Enter Sir Ieffery, Lady, and Sir Timothy. Theo. And mine in rapture; I am the
happiest Woman Living.


Isab. I Will not yield to you at all in that.


Theo. There Is no cause, I would not submit to you in, but this my Dear.


Isab. I will hold out in this cause while I have breath, I am happier in my
Choice than all the World can make me.


Theo. Mine is the Hansomest, Wittiest, most accomplished Gentleman --


Isab. Mine is the beautifullest, sweetest, well-shap'd, well-bred, wittiest
Gentleman --


Sir Tim. That must be I, whom she means, for all my Quarrels with her.


La. Sha. Peace, we shall hear more.


Theo. Little think our Fathers how happy we shall be to morrow.


Sir Ieff. What Is that? Listen.


Isab. (If no unlucky Accident should hinder us) we shall be far happier than
they can Imagine.


Theo. How we have Cheated them all this while!


Isab. 'Slife they are behind us, stir not. We have hidden our love from them
all this while.


La. Sha. Have you so? but we shall find it now.


aside Isab. Your Brother Little thinks I Love him so; For I have been Cross
and coy to him on purpose. I shall be the happiest Woman in him, I am to have,
that ever was.


Theo. I could wish your Brother loved me as well as mine does you. For never
Woman loved the man she was to Marry as I do him, I am to have to morrow.


Sir Ieff. That Is my best Daughter, thou were ever a good Child, nay blush no^,
all is out, we heard ye both.


Sir Tim. Ay, all is out, my pretty Dear dissembler: well, I protest and vow, I
am mightily obliged to you for your great love to me, and good opinion of me.


La. Sha. I hope to morrow will be a happy day for both our families.
Enter Sir Edward, Bellfort and Doubty, and Musicians. Oh Sir Edward, is not
that strange I told you, I should not have believed it if I had not seen it.


Sir Edw. And pray give me the same liberty: But now we will have some music,
that is good against enchantment, Sing me the Song I Commanded you, and then
we will have a dance before we go to bed.


Song Enter Priest. Priest. Hoh, it is a pretty Shong, but I will shing a brave
Cronan now, dat is better I tell you.


He Sings. Sir Edw. It Is very fine but sing me one Song more in three parts, to
sweeten our Ears, for all that. They gave and streyn, but cannot sing, but make
an ugly noise.
Why what is the matter? you gape and make faces, and do not sing, what is the
matter, are you mad?


Priest. Do you play, play I say, Oh they are bewitched, I will shay no more.


Sir Edw. Play I say.


Music. I cannot, my Arms are on the sudden stiff as marble, I cannot move them.


They hold up their bows, but cannot play. Exit. Priest. Sir. Edw. Sure this is
roguery, and Confederacy.


Priest. Conjuro te conjuro in nonime, etc.


The Priest. come in with Holy Water and slings it upon them So long till they
run out roaring* Sir Edw. Hold, hold, prithee don't duck us all we are not all
bewitched.


Priest. I tell you it ish good for you an be, and vill defend you upon
occasion.


Sir Ieff. Now you see, Sir, with your own Eyes; cannot you give us a Receipt
to make Holy Water?


Priest. A Resheit, aboo, boo, boo; by my Shoule he is a Fool. I have ma^^e
two Hogsheads gra: and I will have you vash all de Rooms vid it, and de Devil
vill not come upon de plaash by my Shalvaation.


Bell. It Is a little odd; but however, I shall not fly from my Belief, that
every thing is done by Natural Causes, because I cannot presently assign those
Causes.


Sir Edw. You are in the right, we know not the powers of matter.


Doubt. When any thing unwonted happens, and we not see the cause, we call it
unnatural and miraculous.


Priest. By my Shoule you do talk like Heretick-Dogs, and Aathiests.


Sir Edw. Let us enquire farther about these Musicians.


Priest. I will maake shome Miracles, and I think I will be after reconcileing
them indeed, oh dou damned vitch. Ex. all but Priest. Now I do she dee I will
beat upon dee vid my Beads Mother Dick* rises up, and boxes him, be strikes her
with Beads, and see him with her Staff, and beats him out. and Crucifix, oh,
oh, she is a damned Protestant Heretic Vitch, daat is de reason she vill not
fly, oh, oh, oh.

Ex. Priest.
Enter Tom Shaklehead, and Clod, in the Field. Tho. Sha. Byr Lady it is meeghty
strong Ale, Ay am well neegh drunken, and my Nephew will be stark wood, his
Hawks want their Pidgeon saw this neeght.


Clod. Why what wouden yeow be a Angee? Flesh, Ay ha getten de Bridle byr
Lady, Ayst ma some body carry me, and be my Titt too.


Tom. You Are a strange Fillee (Horse I should say) why did thou think thou
wast a Titt when the Bridle was on thee.


Clod. Ay marry, I know weel I am sure, I wott I was a Titt, a mere Titt.


Tom. Listen, there is a noise of women in the Air, it comes toward us.


Clod. Ay by th'Mass, it is Witches.

Witches above. Here this way, no that way, make haste, follow the Dame, we
shall be too late, it is time enough; away, away, away.


Tom. Wawnds and Flesh it is a flock of Witches byr Lady, they come reeght ore
head, Is It let fly at 'em, hah, be the mass I ha mamed one, here is one has a
wing brocken at least.


He shoots, M. Spencer shrieks, and falls down. Clod. M. Spencer by the mass.


M. Spen. O Rogues! I Will be revenged on you, Dogs, Villains, you have broken my
Arm.


Clod. I was made a Horse, a Titt by thee, by the mass Is It be revenged o'thee.

He puts the Bridle upon her. Horse, Horse, be thou to me.
And carry me where e're I flee.

He flies away nyon her. Tom. O'ds Flesh, what is this? I connot believe my
Senses; I mun walk home alone, but I Will charge my Piece again byr Lady, and the
Haggs come again Is It have the other Shoot at 'em.

Ex. Tom. Shack.
The Scene returns to Sir Edwards House. Enter Bellfort and Doubty. Bell. My
Dear Friend, I am so transported with excess of Joy, it is become a pain, I
cannot bear it.


Doubt. Dear Bellfort! I am in the same Case, but (if the hope transports us
so) what will Enjoyment do?


Bell. My Blood is chill, and shivers when I think on it.


Doubt. One night with my Mistress would outweigh an Age of Slavery to come.


Bell. Rather than be without a nights Enjoyment of mine, I would be hanged
next morning: I am Impatient till they appear.


Doubt. They are Women of Honor, and will keep their Words; your Parson's
ready, and three or four of our Servants for Witnesses.


Bell. He is so, 'twill be dispatched in half a quarter of an hour, all are
retired to bed.


Enter Lady Shacklehead. Doubt. Go in, yonder is my Lady-Mother-in-Law coming, I
must contrive a way to secure her: in, in.


Bell. I go.


Doubt. Death, that this old Fellow should be asleep already! she comes now to
discover, what I know too well already.


La. Sha. He is there I Will swear, a punctual Gentleman, and a person of much
honor; Sir, I am come according to your appointment; Sir Ieffery is fast.


Doubt. It Is before I expected, Madam, I thought to have left Bellfort asleep,
who is a Jealous man, and believes there is an Intrigue betwixt your Ladyship
and me.


La. Sha. I vow: ha, ha, ha, me! no, no; ha, ha, ha.


Doubt. Retire for a short time, and when I have secured him, I Will wait on you;
but let it be in the dark.


La. Sha. You speak like a Discreet and Worthy Person, remember this Room,
there is no body lies in it; I will stay there in the dark for you.


Ex. Lady. Doubt. Your most humble Servant. Well, I will go to the Ladies
Chamber as if I ^istook it for mine, and let them know this is the time.


Enter Tegue O Divelly. Priest. Dear is shometimes de pretty Wenches, do walk
here in de dark at night, and by my Shoulvaation if I do catch one, I will be
after enjoying her Body: and fait and trot I have a great need too, it is a
venial Sin, and I do not care.


Doubt. Death, who is here? stay Ladies, here is the damned Priest in the way.


Enter Doubty with a Candle. Isab. Go you, we will follow by and by in the dark.


The Ladies retire, Doubty goes to his Chamber. Enter Lady Shacklehead. La.
Sha. I hear one trampling, he is come already, sure Bellfort is asleep; who is
there?


Priest. By my Shoul it is a Woman's speech, it is I; where are you? by my fait I will maak a Child upon her Body.


La. Sha. Mr. Doubty.


Priest. Ay, let me put a sweet Kish upon die hand Joy, and now I will Shalute
die Mout, and I will embraash die Body too indeed.


La. Sha. S'life, I am mistaken, this is the Irish Priest; his understanding is
sure to betray him.


Priest. I predee now Joy be not nishe, I will maak shome good sport vid dee
indeed.

La. pulls her hand away, and flies. Hoo now, phaare is die hand now? oh,
Enter Mother Dickenson and puts her hand into the Priests. Here it is by my
Shoule.
I will use dee braavely upon occaasion, I will tell you, predee kish me upon
my Faash now, it is a braave kish indeed.

The Witch kisses him. By my Shoul don art very hansome, I do know it, dough I
cannot she dee. I predee now retire vid me, aboo, aboo, by my Shoule dis is a
Gaalant occaasion, come Joy.


Ex. Priest and Witch. Enter Lady. La. Sha. What Is the meaning of this? he
talked to some Woman, and kissed her too, and is retired into the Chamber I was
in.


Enter Isab. and Theo. Isab. Every thing is quiet, I hear no noise.


Theo. Nor I, this is the happy time.


La. Sha. This must be he; who is there?


Theo. S'life! this is my Mothers voice, retire softly.


Isab. Oh Misfortune! What makes her here? we are undone if she discovers us.


La. Sha. Whose there I say? will you not answer? what can this mean? it is not
a Wench I hope for Doubty, and then I care not.

Isab. and Theo. retire. Enter Priest and Witch. I am impatient till he comes;
ha, whom have we here? I am sure this is not he, he does not come that way.


Priest. By my shoul Joy, dou art a Gaalant piece of Flesh, a braave Bedfellow,
phoo art dou?


Dick. One that loves you dearly.


Priest. Phaat vill I do to she die faash I wonder? Oh, here is a light
approaching unto us.


La. Sha. Who Is this with a light? I must fly.

Ex. La. Sha.
Enter Susn with a Candle. Priest. Now I will she die faash.


Susan. O, Sir, are you there? I am going to Mr. Smirk with this Candle poor
man.


Priest. O phaat have I done? Oh! de Vich! de Vich!


The Witch sinks, she lets fall the Candle and Candle, and runs away shrieking.
Susan. Oh! the Witch! the Witch!


Priest. By my Shoule I have had communicaation and Copulaation too vid a
Succubus; Oh! phaat vill I do! phaat vill I do! by my fait and trot, I did
tought she had been a braave and gaallant Lady, and be, oh! oh!

Ex. Priest.
Enter Lady Shacklehead. La. Sha. What shriek was that? hah! here is nobody,
sure all is clear now!


Enter Isabella, Theodosia. Isab. I heard a shriek, this is the time to
venture, they are frighted out of the Gallery, and all is clear now.


Theo. Let Us venture; we shall have people stirring very early this morning to
prepare for the Wedding else.


La. Sha. Ha! who is that?
Isab. and Theo. creep softly into Bel^forts and Doubty's Chamber. I am
terribly afraid: Heaven!
what is this! the Chamber door opened, and I saw a woman
(...) in, I am enraged, I Will distrub 'em.
Isabella, The dosia, Bellfort, Doubty disguised, Parson and Servants in the
Chamber.


Isab. You see we are women of words, and women of courage too, that dare
venture upon this dreadful business.


Bell. Welcome, more welcome than all the Treasures of the Sea and Land.


Doubt. More welcome than a Thousand Angels.


Theo. Death! we are undone, one knocks.


La. Shack, knocks. Bell. Curse on 'em; keep the door fast.


La. Sha. Gentlemen open the door for Heavens sake, quickly.


Isab. Open it, we are ruined else; we will into the Bed, you know what you have
to do.


They cover themselves. Enter La. Shacklehead. La. Sha. Gentlemen, the House is
alarmed with Witches, and I saw two come into this Chamber, and come to give
you notice.


Bell. Here are none but whom you see.


Doubt. They come invisibly then; for we had our eyes on the door.


La. Sha. Are they not about the Bed somewhere? Let Us search.


Bell. There are no Witches there, I can assure you.


La. Sha. Look a little, I warrant you.


Sir Jeffery knocks without. Sir Ieff. Open the door quickly, quickly, the
Witches are there.


La. Sha. Oh! my Husband, I am ruined if he sees me here.


Doubt. Put out the Candles, He enters, and stumbles upon the Servant. lie down
before the door.


Sir Ieff. Oh! Oh! I have broken my knees; this is the Witches doing: I have
loast my Wife too: lights, lights there.


La. Sha. I Will not stay here.


She creeps out softly. Isab. Here Is no staying for us.


Theo. Quickly, go by the Wall.


They steal on. Sir Ieff. For Heavens sake let us into the Gallery and call for
lights.


Bell. A Curse upon this Fellow and all ill luck.


Doubt. Hell take him, the Ladies are gone too.


ACT. V.
Enter Bellfort and Doubty. Bell. WHat unfortunate disapointments have we met
with!


Doubt. All ill luck has conspired against us this night.


Bell. We have been near being discovered, which would have ruined us.


Doubt. And we have but this night to do our business in; if we dispatch not
this affair now, all will come out to morrow.


Bell. I tremble to think on it; sure the surprise the Ladies were in before,
has frighted 'em from attempting again.


Doubt. I rather think that they have met with people, in the Gallery, that
have prevented 'em.


Bell. Now I reflect, I am apt to think so too; for they seem to be very hearty
in this matter. Once more go to their Chamber.


Doubt. Go you in then to ours.


Bell. goes in. Enter Lady Shacklehead. La. Sha. Hold, Mr. Doubty.


Doubt. A Curse on all damned luck, is she here?


Aside. Sweet Madam, is it you! I have been watching, for Bellfort's sleeping
ever since.

La. Sha. I venture hard, since Sir Ieffery missed me out of Bed, I had much
a-do to ^asten an excuse upon him.


Doubt. I am so afraid of Bellforts coming, Madam, he was here but even now:
The hazard of your honor puts me in an Agony.


La. Sha. O dear Sir, put out the Candle, and he can never discover any thing;
besides, we will retire into you Room.


Doubt. Death, what shall I do now.


She puts out the Candle. La. Sha. And since it is dark, and you cannot see my
Blushes, I must tell you, you are a very ill guesser; for I my self was the
person I discrib'd.


Doubt. Oh Madam! you raille me, I will never believe it while I live; it is
impossible.


La. Sha. I Will swear it is true: Let us withdraw into that Room, or we shall be
discovered.

Oh Heaven, I am undone, my Husband with a light run into your Chamber.


Doubt. It Is a happy deliverance.

Aside. Ex. Doubty.
La. Sha. I Will counterfeit walking in my sleep.


Enter Sir Jeffery with a Light. Sir Ieff. Where is this Wife of mine? She told
me she fell asleep in the Closet, at her Prayers, when I mist her before; and I
found her there at my coming back to my Chamber: But now she is not there I am
sure. Ha! here she is. Ha, what is she blind! she takes no notice of me! how
gingerly she treads!


La. Sha. Oh! stand off -- who is that would kill my dear Sir Ieffery? stand off
I say.


Sir Ieff. Oh Lord, kill me! where! ha! here is nobody.


La. Sha. Oh! the Witch, the Witch, oh she pulls the clothes off me. Hold me,
dear Sir Ieffery, hold me.


Sir Ieff. On my Conscience and Soul she walks in her sleep.


La. Sha. Oh, all the Clothes are off, cover me, oh I am so cold!


Sir Ieff. Good lack a day, it is so! my Dear, my Lady.


La. Sha. Hah, hah.


She opens her eyes and shri^ks. Sir Ieff. Wake I say, wake.


La. Sha. Ah.


Sir Ieff. It Is I my dear.


La. Sha. Oh Heaven! Sir Ieffery, where am I?


Sir Ieff. Here in the Gallery.


La. Sha. Oh! how came I here?


Sir Ieff. Why, thou did walk in thy sleep; good lack a day, I never saw the
like.


La. Sha. In my sleep say you! oh Heaven! I have caught my death. Let Us to Bed,
and tell me the story there.


Sir Ieff. Come on. Ha, ha, ha, this is such a jest! walk in your sleep!
godsniggs, I shall so laugh at this in the morning.


La. Sha. This is a happy come off.


Aside Enter Isabella and Theodosia. Isab. If we do not get into this Chamber
suddenly, we are undone: They are up in the Offices already.


Theo. Never have adventures been so often disapointed, in so short a time.


Isab. There Is no body in the Gallery now, we may go.


Theo. Have then, and let us fly thither.


Isab. Theo. Ah, what is this?


Just as they are entering, Chaplain and Susan enter with a Candle. Susan. Oh!
the Witches, the Witches.


Smerk. Oh mercy upon us, where is this Candle?

So let me tell you, 'Twas no Witch; they were the two young Ladies, that
frighted my dear beauteous Love so; and I Will acquaint their Parents with it
I Will assure you.


Susan. This is strange, what could they have to do at this time of the night!


Smerk. I know not. But I well know what I have to do. I am inflamed beyond all
measure, with thy heavenly beauty.


Susan. Alas, my beauty is but moderate; yet none of the worst, I must needs
say.


Smerk. It Is blasphemy to say so; your eyes are bright like two Twin-Stars;
your Face is an Ocean of beauty; and your Nose a Rock arising from it, on which
my heart did split; Nothing but Ruby and Pearl is about thee; I must blazon
thee by Jewels, thy beauty is of a Noble rank.


Susan. Good lack, what fine language is this! well, it is a rare thing to be a
Scholar.


Smerk. It Is a miracle I should not think her hansome before this day; she is
an Angel! Isabella is a Dowdy to her. You have an unexhausted mine of beauty.
Dear Mrs. Susan cast thy Smiles upon me, and let me labor in thy Quarry: Love
makes me Eloquent and Allegorical.


Susan. Sweet Sir, you oblige me very much by your fine Language; but I vow I
understand it not: yet methinks it goes very prettily.


Smerk. I will unfold my hear unto thee; let me approach thy lip, Oh fragrant!
fragrant! Arabia felix is upon this lip.


Susan. Ha! upon my lip, what is that? I have nothing, I have no pimple, nor any
thing upon my lip, not I.


Smerk. Sweet Innocence -- I will be plain; I am inflamed within, and would
enjoy thy lovely Body in sweet dalliance.


Susan. How Sir! do you pretend to be a Divine, and would commit this sin!
know, I will preserve my Honor and my Conscience.


Smerk. Conscience? why so you shall, as long as our minds are united. The
Casuists will tell you, it is a Marriage in foro (...)* and besides, the Church
of Rome allows Fornication: And truly it is much practiced in our (...) too.
Let us retire, come, come.


Susan. Stand off, I defy you: your Casuists are Knaves, and you are a Papist,
you are a foul voluptuous Sw^n^, and I will never smile on you more. Farewell.


Smerk. Hold, hold, Dear, ^^autious Creature, I am at thy mercy: Must I marry
then? speak. Prithee spare me that, and I Will do any thing.


Susan. Stand off, I scorn thy Love; thou art a pitious Fellow.


Smerk. Dear Mrs. Susan hear me; let us but do the thing, and then I Will marry
thee.


Susan. I Will see thee hanged e're I Will trust thee, or e're a Whoremaster of you
all. No, I have been served that trick too often already, I thank you.


Aside. Smerk. Must I then Marry?


Enter Isabella and Theodosia disguised, with Vizors like Witches. Isab.
Yonder Is the Chaplin and Susan;
But this disguise will fright 'em.

Theo. Let Us on, we must venture.

Susan. Oh! the Witches, the Witches.

Smerk. Oh! fly, fly.

Ex. Susan and Chaplin. Enter Bellfort and Doubty. Bell. What shriek was that?

Doubt. We have been several times alarmed with these Noises.

Bell. Here Is nothing but madness and confusion in this Family.

Isab. Heaven! who are these whispering?

Doubt. Who Is this I have hold on, heaven grant it be not my Lady?

Theo. It Is I, it is Theodosia.

Doubt. It Is lucky -- where is your fair Companion?

Theo. Here.

Doubt. And here is my Friend --

Bell. A thousand Blessings on you.

Priest. Phoo are dese?

Enter Priest with a Candle. Bell. Heaven what is this, the damned Priest? These
disguises will serve our turn yet: oh, Sir we are haunted with Witches here,
run in quickly for some Holy Water.


Priest. I will, I will, let me alone.

Ex. Priest.
Bell. Now in, in quickly.


Ex. Bell. Doubt. Isab. and Theo. Enter Priest with Holy Water. Priest. Phaar
is dese Vitches? phaar are dey? hah, dey are Wanisht for fear of me, I will
put dish down in dis plaash for my defense; what vill I do now? I have maade
Fornication vid dis Vitch or Succubus indeed; when I do go home, I will be
after being absolved for it, and den I will be as Innocent as de child unborne
by my Shoule. I have hanged my self all round vid relics indeed, and de
Sprights and de Vitches cannot hurt me fait and trot. --


Enter Mother Dickenson. M. Dick. My Dear, I come to visit thee again.


Priest. Phaat is here, de Vitch again does come to haunt me, Benidi^^^e, out
upon dee dou damned Vitch, vat dosht dou come upon me for? I defy dee, a
plaague taak dee indeed.


M. Dick. I am no Witch, I am a poor Innocent woman, and a Tenant of Sir
Edwards, and one that loves you dearly.


Priest. Dou plaagy Vitch, let me come unto my holy vater, and I will pay dee
off indeed; hoh, by my shoulvaation it is all flown away -- oh dou damnd Vitch,
I will hang dee indeed.


M. Dick. Pretdee be kinder, my Dear, and kiss me.


Priest. Out, out, kiss dee -- a plaague taake dee Joy* stand off upon me, by
my shoulvaation, I will kiss de dogs Arse shaving die presence, before I will be
after kishing dee.


M. Dick. Be not so unkind to thy own Dear. Thou did promise me Marriage,
thou know, and I come to claim thee for my Husband.


Priest. Aboo, boo, boo, Marriage, Vat vill I Marry vid a Vitch, by my shoule
-- Conjuro ^e, fuge, fuge.


M. Dick. Do not think to put me off with your Latin; for do you hear Sir, you
promised me Marriage, and I will have you.


Priest. Oh phaat vill I do? Vat vill I do?


M. Dick. This Morning I will Marry you, I Will stay no longer, you are mine.


Priest By my shoule Joy I will tell you, I am a Romish Priest, and I cannot
Maarry. What would you have now?


M. Dick. You shall turn Protestant then, for I will have you.


Priest. By St. Paatrick phaat does she say? Oh damned Protestant Vitch. I will
speak shivilly, Madam, I will tell dee now, if dou vill repair unto dine own
House, by my shoulwaation I will come unto dee to morrow, and I will give dee
satisfaaction indeed. Aside, As soon as she does get home, fait and trot I will
bring de Constable, and hang her indeed.


M. Dick. I Will not be put off, I Will have you now.


She lays hold on him. Priest. By my Shoul I will not go, I will hang dee for a
Vitch; and now I do apprehend dee upon daat. Help, help.

Enter Tom. Sha. and Clod. I have taaken a Vitch ineeed: Help, help.


M. Dick. I am your Wife.


Priest. Help, help, I have taaken a Vitch.


Tom. Sha. Ha! what is here? one of the Witches by th'Mess.


Priest. Ay, by my Shoule Joy, I have taaken her.


Tom. Sha. Nay, byr Lady, whoo has taken yeow by yeowr leave.


Clod. We han taken a Witch too; lay hawd on her.


M. Dick. Deber, Deber, little Martin, little
Martin, where art thou little
Master? where art thou little Master?

Priest. Do dou mutter? By my shoule I will hang dee Joy; a plaague taak dee
indeed.


M. Dick. Thou art a Popish Priest, and I will hang thee.


Priest. I am Innocent as the Child unborn, I will taak de Oades, and be --


M. Dick. Marmot, Mamilion, Rouncy, Puckling, little Master, have you left me
all?


Clod. We han got another Witch, who is strongly gaurded and Watched in the stabo.


Tom. Sha. Come let us hale her thither: We could not get into the hawse till
naw, we came whoame so late at night.


Priest. Come let us taake de Vitch away: I will hang dee Joy -- a plaague
taake dee fait.


M. Dick. Am I o'retaken then -- I am Innocent, I am Innocent.


Tom. Sha. Let us carry her thither, come along.


Priest. Pull her away -- we will be after hanging of you Fait and Trot.

Ex.
Enter Sir Timothy, and Servant, with a Candle. Sir Tim. I could not rest to
night for the Joy of being Married to day: It Is a pretty Rogue -- she is
somewhat Cross -- but I warrant her she will love me, when she has tried me
once.


Serve. Why would you rise so soon? It Is not day yet.


Sir Tim. It Is no matter, I cannot sleep man, I am to be Married Sirrah.


Serve. Ay, and therefore you should have slept now, that you might watch the
better at night: For 'twill be uncivil to sleep much upon your Wedding Night.


Sir Tim. Uncivil, ay that it will -- very uncivil: I wont sleep a wink. call
my new Brother-in-Law: Oh here he is, he cannot sleep neither.


Enter Harfo^^ and his Man with a Candle. Yo. Har. Set down the Candle; and go
bid the Groom get the Horses ready, I must away to the Powts.


Sir Tim. Oh Brother, good morrow to you; what a Devil's this -- what booted!
are you taking a Journey upon your wedding day?


Yo. Har. No, but I will not lose my Hawking this Morning; I will come back
time enough to be Married Brother.


Sir Tim. Well, breeding's a fine thing -- this is a strange ill-bred Fellow!
what Hawk upon your Wedding day! I have other game to fly at -- Oh how I long
for night -- why my Sister will think you care not for her.


Yo. Har. aside, No more -- I don't very much ^ a pox on Marrying, I love a
Hawk, and a Dog, and a Horse, better than all the Women in the World. [To him.
Why I can Hawk and Marry too: She shall see I love her: For I will leave off
Hawking before Ten a Clock.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, I cannot come at the Horses, for the People have
taken a brace of Witches, and they are in the stable under a strong guard, that
will let no body come at 'em.


Yo. Har. Uds flesh, I shall have my Horses bewitched, and lose 500 Pounds
worth of Horse Flesh.


Sir Tim. No, no, they can do no hurt -- when they are taken the Devil leaves
'em -- Let Us go see 'em --


Yo. Har. What shall we do?


Their men taking up the Candles, (...) Spirits fly away with 'em. Sir Tim. Let
us stand up close against the Wall.


Yo. Har. Listen, here are the Witches, what will become of us?


Enter Isabella, Theodosia, Bellfort and Doubty. Bell. A Thousand blessings
light on thee my Dear Pretty Witch.


Sir Tim. O Lord! there is the Devil too Courting of a Witch.


Doubt. This is the first Night I ever lived, thou Dearest, Sweetest Creature.


Yo. Har. Oh! sweet quoth a, that is more than I can say of my self at this time.


Isab. We will go and be decently prepared for the Wedding that is Expected:


Theo. Not a word of discovery till the last; creep by the Wall. Ha -- who is
here!


Isab. Where?


Yo. Har. Oh good Devil don't hurt us, we are your humble servants.


Bell. In* in quickly --


Ex. Bellfort and Doubty. Sir Tim. Lights, Lights, Help, Help, Murder, Murder,
Oh good Devil don't hurt me; I am a Whoremaster.


Yo. Har. And I am a Drunkard; Help, Help, Murder.


Ex. Ladies. Enter Tom. Shacklehead with a Candle, and T^gue O. Devilly. Tom.
Sha. What Is the Matter?


Thunder softly here. Priest. Phaat is de matter Joy?


Sir Tim. O Nuncle! here have been Devils and Witches: They have flown away
with our Candles, and put us in fear of our lives.


Thunder and Lighten. Tom. Sha. Here Is a great Storm Arising -- what can be the
matter! the Haggs are at Warck by'r Lady, and they come to me by'th' mass, I ha
getten my brawd Sward: Ay^^ mow 'em down, ged faith will I.


Priest. Be not afraid, I will taake a Caare, and I will conjure down this
Tempest fait an be.


Thunders. Tom. Sha. Flesh that Thunder Clap shook the haw^e, Candle burns blew
too.


Sir Tim. Death, it goes out, what will become of us?


Tom. Sha. An the Witches come, by'r Lady Ayst mow 'em down with my brawd Sward
I warrant of -- I have shot one Witch ^lying to Neeght already.


Enter M. Hargrave, M. Madge, and two Witches more; they mew and spit like
Cats, and fly at 'em, and scratch 'em. Yo. Har. What Is this! we are set upon by
Cats.


Sir Tim. They are Witches in the shape of Cats, what shall we do?


Priest. Phaat will I do? Cat, Cat, Cat, Oh, oh.
Conjuro vos ^^gite, fugite. Cacodaem^nes, Cats, Cats.

They Scrat^h all their Faces till the Blood runs about 'em. He cuts at them.
Tom. Sha. Have at ye all, I ha Mauld some of 'em by'th' mass, they are fled,
but I am plagneily scratcht.


The Witches screek and run away. Priest. Dey ware afraid of my Charms, and
de sign of de Cross did maake them fly -- but d^y have s^ratcht a great deal
upon my faash for all daat.


Yo. Har. Mine is all of a gore blood.


Sir Tim. And mine too -- that th^s^ damned Witches should disfigure my
Countenance upon my Wedding day.


Yo. Har. O Lord, what a Tempest's this?


Thunder* Enter Sir Jeffery with a Light. Sir Ieff. Heaven! What a Storm is
this! The Witches and all their Imps are at work. Who are these? hah! -- your
Faces are all bloody.


Sir Tim. We have been frighted out of our Wits; we have been assaulted by
Witches in the shape of Cats, and they have scratcht us most ruefully.


Priest. But I did fright them away, by my Shoule.


Sir Ieff. Why you are as much mauld as any one, nay, they are at work -- I
never remember such Thunder and Lightning; bid 'em ring out all the Bells at
the Church.


Priest. I will Wier: praest. Daem. lib. 1. p. 43. and 44. shows, that it is
the opinion of Papists, that Baptized Bells will drive away Tempests, see also
Guacc. compend. malisiearum. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Baptize all your Bells for you Joy, and then they vill stop the Tempest
indeed, and not before; I tell you, oh, Baptized Bells are braave things fait.


Tom. Sha. Flesh, Christen Bells!


Sir Tim. Yes, I believe the great Bell at Oxford was Christened Tom.


Yo. Har. And that at Lincoln has a Christen name too.


Priest. I tell de Joy, I will carry de hosht and shome relics abroad, and we
vill get a black Chicken and maak one of de Vitches throw it into de Air, and
it vill maak stop upon de Tempest.


Sir Ieff. Why, all the Authors say, Nider in formicario cites this from a
Judge, who had it from the confession of a Witch. cap. 4.
sacrificing a black Chicken so, will raise a Tempest.


Tho. Sha. What Is here a haund! uds Flesh, you see I have cut off a haund of
one of the Haggs.


Sir Ieff. Let Us see, this is a lucky evidence; keep it and see what Witch it
will fit, and it is enough to hang her.


Priest. The Storm begins to stay; I did shay shome Aves, and part of de Gospd
of St. John, and in fine, fugiat Tempestas, and it does go away upon it indeed.


Tho. Sha. We may trace her by her Blood.


Sir Tim. But hark you, What Is the reason my Hawks wanted their Pigeons: uds
bud I shall remember you for it; you think to live like a Lubber here and do
nothing.


Tom. Sha. Peace, I was drunken, peace good Sir Timothy, Ayst do no more so.


Sir Ieff. Methinks all on a sudden the Storm is laid.


Enter Servant. Serve. Sir, the Constable and the rest of us have taken the
whole flock of Witches: but they fell upon us like Cats first; but we have
beaten 'em into Witches, and now we have 'em fast.


Sir Ieff. So now, their Power's gone when they are taken, let us go see 'em.


Yo. Har. I Will wash my face and away a Hawking, now the Storm's over, it is
broad day.


Sir Tim. I will call up Sir Edward; Music, and wake the two Brides with a
Serenade this morning.


Ex. Omnia. Enter Sir Edward and his man with a Light. Sir Edw. It has been a
dreadful Storm, and strangely laid of the sudden, this is a joyful day to me: I
am now in hopes to strengthen and preserve my Family -- my poor Daughter has
the worst on it, but she is discreet; and will mould Sir Timothy to what she
pleases: he is good nature, ^, and he loves her, and his Estate's beyond
Exception. -- Go call my Son to me, bid him rise, it is day, put out the Candle
now. Ex. Servant. This Son, I out of Duty must provide for; for there is a Duty
from a Father to make what he begets as happy as he can; and yet this Fool
makes me unhappy as he can: but that I call Philosophy to my aid, I could not
bear him.

Enter Young Harfort and Servant. How now, your Face scrach't! what were you
drunk last night, and have been at Cuffs?


Yo. Har. No, Sir Timothy, I, and Tegue O Devilly, and Tom. Shaklehead were
assaulted by Witches in the Shapes of Cats; and Tom. Shaklehead has cut off one
of the Cats hands; and all the Witches are taken, and are in the Stable under a
strong Guard.


Sir Edw. What foolish wild story is this? you have been drunk in Ale, that
makes such foggy Dreams.


Yo. Har. Sbud Sir, the story is true, you will find it so.


Sir Edw. How now! what makes you booted upon your Wedding Day?


Yo. Har. Why, I am going a Hawking this morning, and I Will come home time
enough to be married.


Sir Edw. Thou most incorrigible Ass, whom no precept or example can teach
common sense to, that would have made thee full of Joy at thy approaching
happiness; it would have filld thy mind, there could have been no room for any
other object; to have a good Estate settled upon thee, and to be married to a
woman of that Beauty, and that Wit and Wisdom, I have not known her equal,
would have transported any one but such a clod of Earth as thou art: thou art
an excrement broken from me, not my Son.


Yo. Har. Why Sir, I am transported; but cannot one be transported with Hawking
too? I love it as I love my life, would you have a Gentleman neglect his sports?


Sir Edw. None but the vilest men will make their sports their business; their
books, their friends, their kindred and their country should concern 'em: such
drones serve not the ends of their Creation, and should be lopt of from the
rest of men.


Yo. Har. A man had better dye than leave his sport; tell me of books, I think
there is nothing in 'em for my part; and for Music I had as live set in the
stocks, as hear your fine songs; I love a Bagpipe well enough, but there is no
Music like a ^^eep Mouthed Hound.


Sir Edw. Thou most excessive blockhead, thou art enough to imbitter all my
sweets; thou art a Wen belonging to me, and I shall do well to cut thee off:
but do you hear Fool, go and dress your self, and wait upon your Bride, or by
Heaven I will disinherit you. This is the Critical day, on which your happiness
or misery depends; Think on that.

Ex. Sir Edward.
Yo. Har. Was ever so devilish a Father to make one neglect one's sport,
because he is no sports-man himself; A Pox on Marrying, could not I Hawk and
Marry too? well I am resolved I Will steal out after I am Married.


Enter Sir Timothy and Music. Sir Tim. Come on: Place your selves just by her
Chamber and play -- and sing that Song I love so well.


Song. My Dear, my sweet, and most delicious Bride
Awake, and see thine own Dear waiting at thy Door;
Surely she cannot sleep for thinking of me, poor Rogue.
Isabela above. Who Is this disturbs my rest! is it thou? I thought 'twas some
Impertinent Coxcomb or other; do thou hear, carry away that scurvy Face from
me as soon as possibly thou can.


Sir Tim. Well, you have a pleasant way with you, you will never leave your pretty
humors, I see that.


Isab. Ha! Thou have been scratching with Wenches, was not thy face ugly
enough, but thou must disfigure it more than Nature has done? one would have
thought that had don't enough.


Sir Tim. Faith thou art a pretty wag, Thou It never leave thy Roguery;
Wenches, why 'twas done by Witches, who in the shape of Cats, had like to have
killed us: your Brother, my Uncle, and the Irish man are all as bad as I.


Isab. Prithee begone, and mend thy Face, I cannot bear it.


Sir Tim. Ay, ay, it is no matter, I Will come into thy Chamber, I must be
famil^ar with you --


Isab. And I will be very free with you; you are a Nauseous Fool and you shall
never come into my Chamber. ^S life, would your begin you Reign before you are
Married? no, I Will dominere now -- begone.

Ex. Isabela.
Sir Tim. Nay, faith I Will not leave you so, you little Cross Rogue you; open
the door there, let me in, let me in I say.


Theodosia comes out in a Weitches habit and a Viz^r. Theo. Who Is that? Thou
art my love, come into my arms.


Sir Tim. Oh the Witch! the Witch! help,


He runs out, Theodosia retires. Enter Sir Ieffery, Lady, Tegue O Devilly, Tom.
Shacklehead, Clod, and Sir Iefferies Clerk. Sir Ieff. So, Now thou art come, my
Dear, I Will dispatch the Witches, they are all taken and Guarded in the stable:
Clod, bid 'em bring em all hither.


La. Sha. That Is well, are they caught? let 'em come before us, we will order
'em.


Sir Ieff. I would do nothing without thee my Dear.


Priest. Here Lady Taake some M^ll. Malif. I^stitor Springer, Part 3. Quest 15.
A caution to the Judges, Secum deferant sal exercizatum in Dominica die
palmarum and herbas benedictas, He enim res insimul cum cera benedicta in
voluta and in collo deporta^a, etc. miram habent efficatiam, etc. [ I have made
my Irish man translate the Latin false on purpose.
Conjured shall and put upon dee and palm, and shome Holy-Wax daat I did bring
for dish occaasion, and de Witches will not hurt die Laadyship.


La. Sha. Thank you Sir.


Priest. I did give die Husband shome before Joy, but I will speak a word unto
you all, let every one For spitting in their Bosoms, see Tibullus, Eleg. 2. Ter
Cano ter dictis desp^e carminibus.] And in Eleg. 1. Despuit in molles and sibi
quisque sinus. This Theocritik mentions, (...), and several other Authors,
particularly Theophrastus libro de characterismis, speaking of superstitious
persons: (...), for they thought they that were mad, or bad the
Falling Sickness, were possessed with Devils.
spit three times upon deir Boshomes, and Cross d^mselves, it is braave upon
dis occaasion.


Sir Ieff. It shall be done.


They all do it. Priest. Daat is very well now.

Let no Vitch Mal. Mallif. part 3. quest. 15. Non permittant se ab ea tangi
corporaliter. Id. (...). Et si comode fieri potest ipsa a tergo deorsu^^
vertendo adiudices and assessores introducatur.
touch no part about you, and let 'em come vid deir Arshes before deir Faashes,
phen dey come to Confession or Examinaation. We have eye-biting Witches in
Eerland* that kill vid deir Countenance.


Sir Ieff. This is a very Learned and Wise man.


La. Sha. He is a great man indeed, we are nothing to him.


Priest. You vill she now, now I will speak unto them, here dey come; I shay
bring their Arshes before deir Faashes.


They enter with the Witches. Tom. Sha. Bring 'em backward, thus.


Sir Ieff. You Clod, and you Tom. Shacklehead have sworn sufficiently against
the Witch Spencer, and so has that Country Fellow.


M. Spen. I am an Innocent Woman, and they have broken my arm with a shot,
Rogues, Villains, Murderers.


Priest. Dey are angry, daat is a certain sign of a Vitch; and dey cannot cry,
Boain and several Authors mention this; but Mal. Malef. particularly Part 3.
Quest. 15. p. 557. Hoc enim pro certissimo signo, etc. quod etiamsi ad
Lacrimandum conjurationibus hortetur aliqua and compellatur (and the
Inquisitors have an Office for this, as you will see in the Flagellum daemonum
per Fr. Ieron, Menguem. in the 2. Tome of Mal. Malef.) sed si Malefica existit
Lachrymas emittere non potest, dabit quidem flebiles and ex sputo genas and
oculos linire etc. Having of Biggs and Teats all modern Witchmongers in England
affirm. The cutting off the hand is an old story.
daat is anoder shine; l^ok to 'em dey do not put spittle upon deir Faashes to
maake belief daat dey do weep: Yet Bodin dosh shay, daat a Vitch can cry three
drops vid her right Eye, I tell you.


Sir Ieff. Have you searched 'em all as I bid you Woman?


Woman. Yes an't please your Worship, and they have all great Biggs and Teates
in many parts, except Mother Madge, and hers are but small ones.


La. Sha. It is enough, make their Mittimus, and send 'em all to Goal.


Witches. I am Innocent, I am Innocent,
Save my life, I am no Witch,
I am Innocent, save my life.

Priest. Ven dey do shay dey are Innocent, and deshire to shave deir lives,
it is a shertain shigne of a Vitch fait and trot.


Woman. Besides, this Woman Margaret Demdike by name, threatened to be revenged
on me, and my Cow has been sucked dry ever since, and my Child has had fits.


M. Demd. She lies, she lies, I am Innocent.


Tom. Sha. This is she that had a hand cut off, it fits her to a hair.


Sir Ieff. It Is enough: It Is enough.


M. Harg. Must I be hanged for having my hand cut off? I am Innocent, I am
Innocent.


Constak. Did not you say to my Wife you would be revenged on me? and has not
she be^n struck with pain in her rump-bone ever since? and did not my Sow cast
her farrow last Night?


Harg. You should send your Brother to Goal for cutting my hand off.


Tom. Sha. What for cutting a Cats hand off? you were a Cat when I cut it off.


Tho. O. Georges. An't please your Worship this Woman, Gamer Dickinson, Who
threped: and threped, and aw to becaw'd me last Neeght in the Lone, and who said
he would be revenged on me; and this Morning at four a Clock Butter would not
come, nor the Ale warck a bit, who has bewicht it.


Sir Ieff. I have heard enough, send 'em all to the Goal.


La. Sha. You must never give a Witch any Milk, Butter, Cheese, or any thing
that comes from the Cows.


Priest. Now dou damned Vitch, I will be after sheeing dee hanged indeed, I did
taake her by my shoule --


Dick. I am a poor Innocent Woman, I am abused, and I am his wife an't please
your worship: He had knowledge of me in a Room in the Gallery, and did promise
me Marriage.


Sir Ieff. Hah! what is this?


Priest. By my Shalvaation I am innocent as de Child unborn, I speak it before
Heaven, I did never make fornicaation in my life. Aside. Vid my Nostrills: dear
is a mental reservaation, I am too subtle for them, indeed gra. To them. It is
malice upon me.


La. Sha. There is something in this story, but I dare not speak of it.


Sir Ieff. I do believe you Mr. O Devilly.


Dicken. Besides, he is a Popish Priest.


Priest. Aboo, boo, boo, a Priest, I will taake de Oades Fait and trot; I did
never taake. Holy Orders since I was bore. Aside. In Iamaica. Dear is anoder
Mental reservaation too; and it is Lawful.


Constab. Indeed Sir, I have been told he is a Popish Priest, and has been at
Rome.


Priest. I speak it in de presence of all de Saints, daat I never did see Rome
in all my life, Vid de eyes of a Lion, Aside. Dear was anoder by my shoule.


Sir Ieff. Take away the Witches, there is their Mittimus, carry 'em all to
Lancaster. Witches. I am Innocent, I am Innocent.


Constab. Come on you Hags, now your Master the Devil has left you.


Ex. Constable. and Witches. Sir Ieff. Sir you must excuse me, I must give you the
Oaths upon this Information.


Priest. And by my shoule Joy, I will taak them and twenty or thirty more Oades
if dou dosht please indeed, I will take 'em all to serve dee, Fait and Trot.


Sir Ieff. Come into the Hall, there is the Statute Book.


La. Sha. I will go in and see if the Brides be Ready.


Enter Sir Edward, Bellfort and Doubty. Sir Edw. Gentlemen, This day I am to do
the great Duty of a Father in providing for the Settlement of my Children; this
day we will dedicate to Mirth, I hope you will partake with me in my Joy.


Bell. I should have had a greater share in any Joy that could affect so worthy
a man, had not your Daughter been the only Person, I ever saw, whom I could
have fixed my love upon; but I am unhappy that I had not the honor to know you
till it was to late.


Sir Edw. This had been a great honor to me, and my Daughter, and I am sorry I
did not know it sooner, and assure you it is some trouble upon me.


Doubt. How like a Gentleman he takes it, but I have an Ass, Nay two, to deal
with.


Enter Lady Shacklehead, and Isabella, and Theodosia. La. Sha. Good morrow
Brother, our brace of Brides are ready, where are the lusty Bridegrooms?


Sir Edw. Heaven grant this may prove a happy day.


La. Sha. Mr. Doubty, was ever such an unlucky Night as we have had.


Doubt. It Is happy to me who was assured of the love of one, I love much more
than all the Joys on Earth.


La. Sha. Now you make me blush, I swear it is a little too much.


Bell. Ladies, I wish you much joy of this day.


Doubt. Much happiness to you.


Enter Sir Ieffery, and Tegue O Devilly. Sir Ieff. Brother, good morrow to you;
This is a happy day, our families will soon be one: I have sent all the Witches
to the Goal.


Sir Edw. Had you Evidence enough?


Sir Ieff. Ay, too much; this Gentleman was accused for being a Papist and a
Priest, and I have given him the Oaths, and my Certificate, and on my
Conscience he is a very good Protestant.


Priest. It is no matter, I did taak de Oades, and I am a very good Protestant
upon occasion, Fait.


Sir Edw. Say you so? between you and I, how many Sacraments are there?


Priest, How many? by my shoule dear are sheven; how many would would dear be
^ink you Hob? ^y my shoule I have a dispensaation, indeed I am t^o (...) for
'em fait I am.


Aside. Sir Edw. So here are the Bridegrooms.


Enter Sir Timothy, and Yo. Harfort, Servant. Sir Tim. Oh my Dear pretty Bride,
let me kiss thy hand, how joyful am I, that I shall have my Dear within these
arms! ah! now the little Rogue can smile upon me.


Yo. Har. Cousin good morrow to you, I am glad to see you, how do you do this
Morning?


Theo. Never better.


Yo. Har. God be thanked, I am very glad on it.


Sir Edw. Is not the Parson come yet?


Serve. Yes Sir, he is very busy at his Breakfast in the buttery: And as soon as
he has finished his Pipe and his Tankard -- he will wait on you: he has Married
one Cupple already, The Chaplin and Mrs. Susan.


Sir Edw. How!


Serve. It Is true.


Sir Edw. I am sorry for it, that Chaplin is a Rascal -- I have found him out,
and will turn him away --


Enter another Servant. Serve. Sir, here are some of your Tennants and Country
men come to be merry with you, and have brought their Piper and desire to
dance before you.


Enter several Tennants, and Ccuntry Fellows. Tennants. We are come to wish
your Worship, my Young Master and Lady Joy of this happy day.


Sir Edw. You are kindly welcome Neighbors, this is happiness indeed, to see my
Friends, and all my loving Neighbors thus about me.


All. Heavens bless your good Worship.


Sir Edw. These honest men are the strength and sinnews of our Country; such
men as these are uncorrupted, and while they stand to us we fear no Papists,
nor French invasion; this day we will be merry together.


Clod. Ayst make bold to Dance for joy.


Sir Edw. Prithee do -- Clod Dances. Go bid the Parson come in, we will
dispatch this business here before you all.


Isab. Hold, there needs no Parson.


Sir Edw. What say you?


Sir Ieff. How!


Isab. We are Married already, and desire your blessing.


Sir Edw. It is impossible.


Bell. Doubt. Isab. and Theo. kneel. La. Sha. Heaven! what is this I see?


Sir Ieff. Theives! Robbers! Murderers of my honor, I Will hang that Fellow.


Sir Edw. What pageantry is this? explain your self.


Sir Tim. What a Devil do they mean now!


Bell. The truth is Sir, we are Married; we found you Fathers were too far
engaged to break off: I (...) forced us to this way, and nothing else can be a
fit excuse.


Smerk. We have designed this ever since last Summer, and any other but a
private way, had certainly prevented it. Let excess of love excuse our fault,
Sir Ieffery, I will exceed what s^tlement was made upon your Daughter.


Bell. An! I will, Sir, do the same Right to yours.


Sir Ieff. Flesh and Heart -- I Will Murder her.


(...) Hold Sir, she is mine now; I beseech you moderate your passion.


La. Sha. Oh vile Creature; I Will tear her Eyes out.


(...) Forbear good Madam: What cannot be redrest must be past by --


La. Sha. Thou worst of Theives, thou know I can never pass it by.


Sir Ieff. Sir Edward, you may do what you will, but I Will go in and meditat^
revenge.


La. Sha. And I --


Ex. Sir Ieffery and Lady. Sir Tim. Hold, hold me, I am bloody minded, and
shall commit Murder else; my honor, my honor, I must kill him, hold me fast,
or I shall kill him.


Yo. Har. For my part Cousin, I wish you Joy, for I am resolved to hunt and
hawk, and course as long as I live --


Sir Tim. Cruel Woman, I did not think you would have served me so; I shall ^un
mad, and hang my self an^ walk.


Priest. Now phaar is de soleedity of all dish -- phy all ish paasht* and what
vil you say now? You must taak shome Consolaation unto you -- Dou must
Fornicaate vid die Moders Maid sharvants; and daat is all one by my shoule.


Sir Edw. Hold, Gentlemen, who Married you?


Bell. This Gentleman, who is under his gray Coat, my Parson.


Sir Edw. It Is something unhospitable.


Bell. I hope Sir, you will not have cause to repent it; had there been any other
way for me to have escaped perpetual misery, I had not taken this.


Sir Edw. But you Sir have most Iniurd me.


Doubt. I beg a thousand pardons, Though I must have perished if I had not done it.


Theo. It is no injury Sir, I never could have loved your Son; we must have
been unhappy.


Isab. And I had been miserable with Sir Timothy.


Yo. Har. To say truth, I did not much care for her neither, I had rather not
marry.


Sir Edw. Eternal Blockhead! I will have other means to preserve my Name:
Gentlemen, your are men of ample Fortunes and worthy Families -- Sir I wish you
happiness with my Daughter, take her.


Bell. You have given me more than my own Father did, then life and fortune.


Isab. You are the best of Fathers and of men.


Sir Edw. I will endeavor to appease Sir Ieffery and my Lady.


Doubt. Your are Generous beyond expression Sir.


Enter Chaplin and Susan. Chaplin. Sir, I hope your Worship will pardon me, I
am Married to Mrs. Susan.


Sir Edw. You are a Villain, that has made love to my Daughter, and corrupted
my Son.


Chap. Have they told all, I am ruined? good Sir, continue me your Chaplin, and
I will Do and Preach whatever you command me.


Sir Edw. I Will not have a Divine with so flexible a Conscience, there shall be
no such Vipers in my Family; I will take care you never shall have Orders. But
she has served me well, and I will give her a Farm of 40. l. per annum to Plow:
Go Sir, it was an Office you were born to.


Priest. Did I not bid de Fornicaate? and dou did Marry Joy; if dou had not
maade Marriage, I vould have maade dee a Catholic, and preferred dee to Saint
Omers, Dey should have bred dee for one of deir Witnesses fait.


Enter a Messenger. Mess. I must beg your pardon Sir, I have a warrant against
this Kelly, Alias Tegue O Devilly -- he is accused for being in the Plot.


Sir Edw. My house is no refuge for Traitors Sir.


Priest. Aboo, boo, boo! by my shalvaation dear is no Plot, and I will not go
vid you. Dou art a damned Fanaatick, if dou dosht shay dear is a Plot. Dou art
a Presbiterian Dog.


Mess. No striving, come a long with me.


Priest. Phaat vil I do: I am Innocent as de Child dat is to be Born; and if
they vill^hang me, I will be a shaint indeed. My hanging Speech was made for
me, long a go by de Jesuits, and I have it ready, and I will live and die by it,
by my shoule.


Mess. Gentlemen, I charge you in the Kings Name assist me.


Sir Edw. Come Gentlemen, I wish you both the happiness you deserve.
How shallow is our foresight and our prudence!
Be never so wise, design what e're we will
There is a Fate that overrules us still.

FINIS
EPILOGUE, By Mrs. BARRY and TEGUE.
Mrs. Barry. A Skilful Mistress uses wondrous Art,
To keep a pevish crazy Lovers Heart,
His awkard Limbs forgetful of Delights,
Must be urged on by Tricks and Painful Nights:
Which the poor Creature is content to bear,
Fine Manteau's and new Petticoats to wear.
And Sirs, your sickly Appetites to raise,
Yhe starving Players try a thousand ways.
Tou had a Spanish Friar of Intrigue,
And now we have presented you a Tegue;
Which with much cost from Ireland we have got,
If he be dull, even hang him for the Plot.

Tegue. Now have a care, for by my Shoul shalwaation.
Dish vill offend a Party in de Naation.

Mrs. Barry. They that are angry must be very Beasts,
For all Religions laugh at foolish Priests.

Tegue. By Creesh, I swear, de Poet has undone me,
Some simple Tory vill maake beat upon me.

Mrs. Barry. Good Protestants, I hope you will not see,
A Martyr made of our poor Tony Leigh.
Our Popes and Friars on one side offend,
And yet alas the City's not our Friend:
The City neither like us nor our Wit.
They say their Wives learn ogling in the Pit. A foolish word amongthe Canters
for glancing.

They Are from the Boxes taught to make advances,
To answer stolen Sighs and naughty Glances.
We Virtuous Ladies some new way must seek,
For all conspire our playing Trade to break.
If the bold Poet freely shows his Vein,
In every place the snarling ^ops complain,
Of your gross follies if you will not hear,
With inoffensive Nonsense you must bear.
You, like the Husband, never shall receive,
Half the delight the sportful Wife can give.
A Poet dares not whip this foolish Age,
You cannot bear the Physic of the Stage.

The End.

