THE LIBERTINE: A TRAGEDY. Acted by His ROYAL HIGHNESS's Servants. Written by
THO. SHADWELL.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor, in the Lower
Walk of the New Exchange. 1676.

Robert Harley of Bramton Castle in the County of Hereford Esqr.



To the most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM, DUKE, MARQUIS, and EARL OF NEWCASTLE,
etc.
May it please your Grace,
THe Favors have been so many and so great, which your Grace's unwearied
Bounty has conferred upon me, that I cannot omit this opportunity of telling the
World, how much I have been obliged, and by whom. My Gratitude will not suffer
me to smother the favo^urs in silence; nor the Pride they have raised me to,
let me conceal, the Name of so Excellent a Patron. The honor of being favored
by the great Newcastle, is equal with any real Merit, I am sure infinitely
above mine. Yet the encouragement I receive from your Grace, is the certain way
to make the World believe I have some desert, or to create in me the most
favorable thoughts of my self. My Name may thus, when otherwise it would
perish, live in after Ages, under the protection of your Grace's, which, is
famous abroad, and will be Eternized in this Nation, for your Wit beyond all
Poets; Judgment and Prudence, before all Statesmen; Courage and Conduct, above
all Generals; Constancy and Loyalty, beyond all Subjects; Virtue and
Temperance, above all Philosophers; for skill in Weapons, and Horsemanship, and
all other Arts befitting your Quality, excelling all Noblemen: And lastly, for
those eminent Services in defense of your King and Country, with an Interest
and Power much exceeding all, and with Loyalty equalling any Nobleman. And
indeed, the first was so great, that it might justly have made the greatest
Prince afraid of it, had it not been so strongly secured by the latter.

All these Heroic Qualities I admired, and worshipped at a distance, before I
had the Honor to wait upon your Grace at your House. For so vast was your
Bounty to me, as to find me out in my obscurity, and oblige me several years,
before you saw me at Welbeck; where (when I arrived) I found a Respect so
extremely above the meanness of my Condition, that I still received it with
blushes; having had nothing to recommend me, (but the Birth and Education,
without the Fortune of a Gentleman) besides some Writings of mine, which your
Grace was pleased to like. Then was soon added to my former Worship and
Admiration, (...) (...), and infinite Gratitude, and a Pride of being (...) by
one, in whom I observed a Majesty equ^l with greatest Princes, yet A^ability
exceeding ordinary Gentlemen. A Greatness, that none ever approached without
Awe, or parted from without Satisfaction.

Then (by the great honor I had to be daily admitted into your, Grace's
public and private Conversation) I observed that admirable Experience and
Judgment surmounting all the Old, and that vigorousness of Wit, and Smartness
of Expression, exceeding all the Young, I ever knew; and not only in sharp and
apt Replies, the most excellent way of pursuing a Discourse; but (which is much
more difficult) by giving easy and unforced o^casions, the most admirable way
of beginning one; and all this adapted to men of all Circumstances and
Conditions. Your Grace being able to discourse with every man in his own way,
which, as it shows you to be a most accurate Observer of all men's tempers, so
it shows your Excellency in all their Arts. But when I had the favor daily to
be admitted to your Grace's more retired Conversation, when I alone enjoyed the
honor, I must declare, I never spent my hours with that pleasure, or
improvement; nor shall I ever enough acknowledge that, and the rest of the
Honors done me by your Grace, as much above my Condition as my Merit.

And now, my Lord, after all this, imagine not I intend this small Present of a
Play (though favored here by those I most wish it should be) as any return;
for all the Services of my life cannot make a sufficient one. I only lay hold
on this occasion, to publish to the World your great Favors, and the grateful
Acknowledgments of,

My most Noble Lord, Your Grace's Most obliged, humble, and obedient Servant,
THO. SHADWELL.

PREFACE.
THe story from which I took the hint of this Play, is famous all over Spain,
Italy, and France: It was first put into a Spanish Play (as I have been told)
the Spaniards having a Tradition (which they believe) of such a vicious
Spaniard, as is represented in this Play. From them the Italian Comedians took
it, and from them the French took it, and four several French Plays were made
upon the Story.

The Character of the Libertine, and consequently those of his Friends, are
borrowed; but all the Plot, till the latter end of the Fourth Act, is new: And
all the rest is very much varied from any thing which has been done upon the
Subject.

I hope the Readers will excuse the Irregularities of the Play, when they
consider, that the Extravagance of the Subject forced me to it: And I had
rather try new ways to please, than to write on in the same Road, as too many
do. I hope that the severest Reader will not be offended at the representation
of those Vices, on which they will see a dreadful punishment inflicted. And I
have been told by a worthy Gentleman, that many years agon (when first a Play,
was made upon this Story in Italy) he has seen it acted there by the name of
Atheisto Fulminato, in Churches, on Sundays, as a part of Devotion; and some,
not of the least Judgment and Piety here, have thought it rather an useful
Moral, than an encouragement to vice.

I h^ve no reason to complain of the ^uccess of this Play, since it pleased
those, whom, of all the world, I would please most. Nor was the Town unkind to
it, for which reason I must applaud my good Fortune, to have pleased with so
little pains: there being no Act in it, which cost me above five days writing;
and the last two, (the Playhouse having great occasion for a Play) were both
written in four days, as several can testify. And this I dare declare,
notwithstanding the soul, course, and ill-manner'd censure passed upon them,
(who write Plays in three, four, or sive weeks time) by a rough hobling Rhimer,
in his Postscript to another Man's Play, which he spoiled, and called, Love and
Revenge; I having before publicly owned the writing two Plays in so short a
time. He ought not to have measured any Man's Abilities, who writes for the
Stage wi^h his own; for some may write that in three weeks, which he cannot in
three years. But he is angry, that any man should write sense so easily, when
he finds it so laborious a thing to write, even Fustian, that he is believed to
have been three years drudging upon the Conquest of China* But he ought not to
be called a Poet, who cannot write ten times a better in three weeks.

I cannot here pass by his saucy Epistle to this Conquest, which (instead of
expressions of just respect, due to the Bi^th and Merit of his Patron) is
stuffed with railing against others. And first, he begins with the vanity of
his Tribe. What Tribe that really is, it is not hard to ghess; but all the
Poets will bear me witness it is not theirs, who are sufficiently satisfied,
that he is no more a Poet than Servant to his Majesty, as he presumes to write
himself; which I wonder he will do, since Protections are taken off: I know not
what Place he is Sworn into in Extraordinary, but I am sure there is no such
thing as Poet in Extraordinary.

But I wonder (after all his railing) he will call these Poets his Brethren; if
they were, methinks he might have more natural affection than to abuse his
Brethren: but he might have spared that Title, for we can find no manner of
Relation betwixt him and them; for they are all Gentlemen, that will not own
him, or keep him company: and that, perhaps, is the cause which makes him so
angry with them, to tax them, in his ill-manner'd Epistle, with Impudence,
which he (having a particular affection for his own vice) calls by the name of
Frailty. Impudence indeed is a very pretty Frailty.

But (what ever the Poets are guilty of) I wish he had as much of Poetry in
him, as he has of that Frailty, for the good of the Duke's Theater; they might
then have hopes of gaining as much by his good Sense, as as they have lost by
his Fustian.

Thus much I thought sit to say in vindication of the Poets, though, I think,
he has not Authority enough (with men of sense) to fix any cal^mny upon the
Tribe, as he calls it. For which reason I shall never trouble my self to take
notice of him herea^ter, since all men of Wit will think, that he can do the
Poets no greater injury, than pretending to be one. Nor had I said so much in
answer to his course railing, but to reprehend his Arrogance, and lead him to a
little better knowledge of himself; nor does his base Language in his
Postscript deserve a better Return.

PROLOGUE.
OUr Author sent me hither for a Scout,
To spy what bloody Critics were come out;
Those Piccaroons in Wit, wh'infest this Road,
And snap both Friend and Foe that come abroad.
This savage Party crueller appears,
Than in the Channel Ostend Privateers.
You in this Road, or sink or plunder all,
Remorsle^s as a Storm on us you fall:
But as a Merchant, when by storms distressed,
Flings out his bulkey Goods to save the rest,
Hoping a Calm may come, he keeps the best.
In this black Tempest which o'r us impends,
Near Rocks and Quick sands, and no Ports of Friends,
Our Poet gives this over to your rage,
The most irregular Play upon the Stage,
As wild and as extravagant as the Age.
Now, angry men, to all your splenes give vent;
When all your fury has on this been spent,
Elsewhere you with much worse shall be content.
The Poet has no hopes you will be appeased,
Who come on purpose but to be displeased.
Such corrupt Judges should excepted be,
Who can condemn before they hear or see.
Never were such bloody Critics yet in fashion;
You damn by absolute Predestination.
But why so many to run one man down?
It were a mighty triumph when you have done.
Our scarcity of Plays you should not (...),
When by foul (...) (...) d^siroy the Game.
Let him but have fair play, and he may then
Write himself into favor once again.
If after this your anger you will reveal,
To Caesar he must make his just appeal;
There Mercy and Judgment equally do m^et,
To pardon Faults, and to encourage Wit.
The Persons represented.
Don John. THe Libertine; a rash fearless Man, guilty of all Vice. Don Antonio.
His two Friends. Don Lopez. His two Friends. Don Octavio. Brother to Maria.
Jacomo. Don John's Man. Leonora. Don John's Mistress, abused by him, yet follows
him for Love. Maria, Her Maid, abused by Don John, and following him for
Revenge. Don Francisco. Father to Clara and Flavia. Clara. His Daughters.
Flavia. His Daughters. Six Women. All Wives to Don John. Hermit. Two Gentlemen.
Intended for Husbands to Clara and Flavia. Ghosts. Shepherds and Shepherdesses.
Old Woman. Officer and Soldiers. Singers, Servants, Attendants.
THE LIBERTINE.
ACT I.
Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo, Don John's Valet. D. Joh. T

Hus far without a bound we have enjoyed
Our prosperous pleasures, which dull Fools call
[Sins;
Laughed at old feeble Judges, and weak Laws;
And at the fond fantastic thing, called Conscience,
Which serves for nothing but to make men Cowards;
An idle fear of future misery;
And is yet worse than all that we can fear.

D. Lop. Conscience made up of dark and horrid thoughts,
Raised from the fumes of a distempered Spleen.

D. Anto. A senseless fear, would make us contradict
The only certain Guide, Infallible Nature;
And at the call of Melancholy Fools,
(Who style all actions which they like not, Sins)
To silence all our Natural appetites.

D. John. Yet those conscientious Fools, that would persuade us
To I know not what, which they call Piety,
Have in reserve private delicious sins,
Great as the happy Libertine enjoys,
With which, in corners, wantonly they roll.

D. Lop. Don John, thou art our Oracle; thou have
Dispelled the fumes which once clowded our brains.

D. A^to. By thee, we have got loose from Education,
And the dull slavery of Pupillage,
Recovered all the liberty of Nature,
Ou^ own strong Reason now can go alone,
Wi^out the feeble props of splenatick Fools,
Who contradict our common Mother, Nature.

D. Joh. Nature gave us our Senses, which we please:
Nor do^ our Reason War against our Sense.
(...) Natur^s order Sense should guide our Reason,
(...) to the mind all objects Sense conveys.
(...) ^ools for shaddows lose substantial pleasures,
^or idle ^ales abandon ^rue d^light,
And solid joys of day, for empty dreams at night.
Away, thou foolish thing, thou chollick of the mind,
Thou Worm by ill-digesting stom^chs bred:
In spite of thee, well surfeit in delights,
And never think ought can be ill that is pleasant.

Jacom. A most excellent Sermon, and no doubt, Gentlemen, you have edisi'd much
by it.


D. Joh. Away! thou formal phlegmatic Coxcomb, thou
Have neither courage nor yet wit enough
To sin thus. Thou art my dull conscientious Pimp.
And when I am wanton with my Whore within,
Thou, with thy Beads and Pray'r-book, keep'st the door.

Jacom. Sir, I find your Worship is no more afraid to be damned, than other
fashionable Gentlemen of the Age: but, methinks, Halters and Axes should
terrisie you. With reverence to your Worships, I Have seen civiller men hanged,
and men of as pretty parts too. There Is scarce a City in Spain but is too hot
for you, you have committed such outrages wheresoe'r you come.


D. Lop. Come, for diversion, pray let us hear your Fool preach a little.


Jaco. For my part, I cannot but be troubled, that I shall lose my honor by
you, Sir; for people will be apt to say, Like Master, like Man.


D. Joh. Your honor, Rascal, a Sow-gelder may better pretend to it.


Jacom. But I have another scruple, Sir.


D. Joh. What Is that?


Jacom. I fear I shall be hanged in your company.


D. Joh. That Is an honor you will never have courage to deserve.


Jacom. It is an honor I am not ambitious of.


D. Lop. Why does the Fool talk of hanging? we scorn all Laws.


Jacom. It seems so* or you would not have cut your Elder Brother's throat. Don
Lopez.


D. Lop. Why, you Coxcomb, he kept a good Estate from me* and I could not Whore
and Revel fufficiently without it.


D. Anto. Look you, Jacomo, had he not reason?


Jacom. Yes, Antonio, so had you to get both your Sisters with Child; 'twas
very civil, I take it.


D. Anto. Yes, you Fool, they were lusty young handsome Wenches, and pleased my
appetite. Besides, I saved the Honor of the Family by it* for if I had not,
some body else would.


Jacom. O horrid villainy!
But you are both Saints to my hopeful Master*
I Will turu him loose to Beelzebub himself,
He shall outdo him at his own Weapons.

D. Joh. I, you Rascal.


Jacom. Oh no, Sir, you are as innocent. To cause your good old Father to be
killed was nothing.


D. Joh. It was something, and a good thing too, Sir: his whole design was to
debar me of my pleasures: he kept his purse from me, and could not be content
with that, but still would preach his senseless Morals to me, his old dull
foolish stuff against my pleasure. I caused him to be sent I know not whether.
But he believed he was to go to Heaven; I care not where he is, since I am rid
of him.


Jacom. Cutting his throat was a very good return for his begetting of you.


D. Joh. That was before he was aware on it, 'twas for his own sake, he never
thought of me in the business.


Jacom. Heaven bless us!


D. Joh. You Dog, I shall beat out your brains, if you dar^ be so impudent as
to pray in my company.


Jacom. ^ood Sir, I have done, I have done --


D. Lop. Prithee let the insipid Fool go on.


D. Ant. Let Us hear the Coxcomb number up your crimes,
The patterns we intend to imitate.

^acom. Sir, let me lay your horrid crimes before you:
The unhappy minute may perhaps arrive,
When the sense of 'em may make you penitent.

D. Anto. 'Twere better thou were hanged.


D. Lop. Repent! Cowards and Fools do that.


D. Joh. Your valiant well-bred Gentlemen never repent:
But what should I repent of?

Jacom. After the murder of your Father, the brave Don Pedro, ^overnour of
Sevil, for whom the Town are still in grief, was, in his own house, barb'rously
killed by you.


D. Joh. Barbarously, you lie, you Rascal, 'twas finely done; I run him through
the Lungs as handsomely, and killed him as decently, and as like a Gentleman as
could be. The jealous Coxcomb deserved death, he kept his Sister from me; her
eyes would have killed me if I had not enjoyed her, which I could not do
without killing him: Besides, I was alone, and killed him hand to fist.


Jacom. I never knew you go to Church but to take Sanctuary for a Murder, or to
rob Churches of their Plate.


D. Joh. Heaven needs not be served in Plate, but I had use on it.


Jacom. How often have you scaled the Walls of Monasteries? Two Nuns, I know,
you ravished, and a third you dangerously wounded for her violent resistance.


D. Joh. The perverse Jades were uncivil, and deserved such usage.


Jacom. Some thirty Murders, Rapes innumerable, frequent Sacrilege, Parricide;
in short, not one in all the Catalogue of Sins have escaped you.


D. Joh. My business is my pleasure, that end I will always compass, without
scrupling the means; there is no right or wrong, but what conduces to, or
hinders pleasure. But, you tedious insipid Rascal, if I hear more of your
Morality, I will Carbonado you.


D. Anto. We live the life of Sense, which no fantastic thing, called Reason,
shall control.


D. Lop. My reason tells me, I must please my Sense.


D. Joh. My appetites are all I Am sure I have from Heaven, since they are
Natural, and them I always will obey.


Jacom. I doubt it not, Sir, therefore I desire to shake hands and part.


D. Joh. Do You hear, Dog, talk once more of parting, and I will saw your
Windpipe. I could find in my heart to cut your Rascal's Nose off, and save the
Pox a labor: I Will do it, Sir, have at you.


Jacom. Good Sir, be not so transported; I will live, Sir* and will serve you
in any thing; I Will fetch a Wench, or any thing in the world Sir. O how I
tremble at this Tyrant's rage.

[aside.
D. Anto. Come, it is night, we lose time to our adventures.


D. Lop. I have bespoke Music for our Serenading.


D. Joh. Let Us on, and live the noble life of Sense.
To all the powers of Love and mighty Lust,
In spite of formal Fops I will be just.
What ways soe'r conduce to my delight,
My Sense instructs me, I must think 'em right.
On, on, my Soul, and make no stop in pleasure,
They Are dull insipid Fools that live by measure.
[Exeunt all but Jacomo.
Jacom. What will become of me? if I should leave him, he is so revengeful, he
would travel o'r all Spain to find me out, and cut my throat. I cannot live
long with him neither: I shall be hanged, or knocked of the head, or share some
dreadful Fate or other with him. It Is just between him and me, as between the
Devil and the Witch, Who repents her bargain, and would be free from future
ills, but for the fear of present durst not venture.

Enter Leonora. Here comes Leonora, one of those multitudes of Ladies, he has
sworn, li'd to, and betrayed.


Leon. Jacomo, where is Don John? I could not live to endure a longer absence
from him. I have sighed and wept my self away I (...) but ^ve no lif^ le^ in
me. His coldness and his absence (...) gi^en me fearful and killing (...).
Where is my Dear?


(...). Your Dear, Madam! he is yours no more.


(...). Heaven! what do I hear? Speak, is he dead?


^com. To you he is.


L^on. Ah me, has he forgot his Vows and Oaths?
Ha^ ^e no Conscience, Faith, or Honor left?

(...). Le^, Madam, he never had any.


(...). It is impossible, you speak this out of malice sure.


(...). There Is no man knows him better than I do. I have a greater respect for
you, than for any he has betrayed, and will undeceive you: he is the most
perfidious Wretch alive.


Leon. Has he forgot the Sacred Contract, which was made privately betwixt us,
and confirmed before the altar, during the time of holy Mass?


Jacom. All times and places are alike to him.


Leon. Oh how assiduous was he in his passion! how many thousand vows and sighs
he breathed! what tears he wept, seeming to suffer all the cruel pangs which
Lovers ever endured! how eloquent were all his words and actions!


Jacom. His person and his parts are excellent, but his base vices are beyond
all measure: why would you believe him?


Leon. My own love bribed me to believe him: I saw the man I loved more than
the world. Often on his knees, with his eyes up to Heaven, kissing my hand with
such an amorous heat, and with such ardor, breathing fervent vows of loyal
Love, and venting sad complaints of extreme sufferings. I poor easy Soul,
flattering my (...) to think he meant as I did, lost all my Sexes faculty,
Di^embling; and in a month must I be thus betrayed?


Jaco^. Poor Lady! I cannot but have bowels for you; your sad Narration makes
me weep in sadness: but you are better (...) than others. I never knew him
constant a fortnight before.


^eon. Then, then he promised he would marry me.


^acom. If he were to live here one month longer, he would marry half the
Town, ugly and handsome, old and young: nothing that is Female comes amiss to
him --


Leon. Does he not fear a thunde^ bolt from Heaven.


Jacom. No, nor a D^vil from ^ll. He owns no Deity but his voluptuous appetite,
whose satisfaction he will compass by Murders, Rapes, Treasons, or ought else.
But pray let me ask you one civil question, Did you not give him earnest of
your Body, Madam.


Leon. Mock not my misery.

Oh! that confounds me. Ah! I thought him true, and loved him so, I could deny
him nothing.


Jacom. Why, there it is; I fear you have, or else he would have married you: he
has married six within this month, and promised fifteen more, all whom he has
enjoyed, and left, and is this night gone on some new adventure, some Rape or
Murder, some such petty thing.


Leon. Oh Monster of impiety!
Oh false Don John! wonder of cruelty!
[She swounds.
Jacom. What a pox does she swound at the news! Alas! poor Soul, she has moved
me now to pity, as she did to love. Ha! the place is private -- If I should
make use of a Natural Receipt to refresh her, and bring her to life again,
'twould be a great pleasure to me, and no trouble to her. Hum! it is very
private, and I dare sin in private. A deuce take her, she revives, and prevents
me.


Leon. Where is the cruel Tyrant! inhumane Monster! but I will strive to
fortify my self. But Oh my misfortune! Oh my misery! Under what strange
Enchantments am I bound? Could he be yet a thousand times more impious, I could
not choose but love his person still.


Jacom. Be not so passionate; if you could be (...), and love your self, I Would
put you in a way to ease your gri^f now, and all your cares hereafter.


Leon. If you can now ease an afflicted Woman, who ^lse must shortly rid her
self of life, employ your charity; 'twas never placed yet on a Wretchneeded it
more than I.


Jacom. If Loyalty in a Lover be a Jewel! say no more, I can tell you where you
may have it --


Leon. Speak not of truth in man, it is impossible.


Jacom. Pardon me, I speak on my own knowledge.


Leon. Is your Master true then? and have you happily deceived me? Speak.


Jacom. As true as all the power of Hell can make him.


^eon. If he be false, let all the world be so.


Jacom. There Is another-guess man than he, Madam.


Leon. Another! who can that be?
No, no, there is no truth found in the Sex.
[Aside.
Jacom. He is a civil virtuous and discreet sober person.


Leon. Can there be such a man? what does he mean?


Jacom. There is, Madam, a man of goodly presence too --
Something inclining to be fat, of a round plump face, with quick and sparkling
eyes, and mouth of cheerful overture --
His nose, which is the only fault, is somewhat short, but that is no matter;
his hair and eyebrows black, and so forth.

Leon. How! he may perhaps be bribed by some other man, and what he said of his
Master may be false.


Jacom. How she surveys me! Fa-la-la

[Sings, and struts about.
Leon. Who is this you speak of?


Jacom. A man, who, envy must confess, has excellent parts, but those are
gifts, gifts -- mere gifts -- thanks be to Heaven for them.


Leon. But shall I never know his name?


Jacom. He Is one, whom many Ladies have honored with their affection; but no
more of that. They have met disdain, and so forth. But he will be content to
marry you. Fa-la-la-la

[Sings.
Leon. Again I ask you who he is?


Jacom. Lord, how inapprehensive she is? Can you not guess?


Leon. No.


Jacom. Your humble Servant, Madam.


Leon. Yours, Sir.


Jacom. It is my self in person; and upon my honor, I will be true and
constant to you.


Leon. Insolent Varlet! am I fallen so low to be thy scorn?


Jacom. Scorn! as I am a Christian Soul, I am in earnest.


Leon. Audacious Villain! Impudence it self!


^acom. Ah, Madam* your Servant, your true Lover must endure a thousand such
bobs from his M^stris; I can bear, Madam, I can.


Leon. Because thy Master has betrayed me, am I become so infamous?


Jacom. It Is something hard, Madam, to preserve a good reputation in his
company; I can scarce do it my self.


Leon. Am I so miserable to descend to his man?


Jacom. Descend, say you: Ha, ha, ha!


Leon. Now I perceive all is false which you have said of him. Farewell, you
base ing^ateful Fellow.


Jacom. Hold, Madam, come in the morning and I will place you in the next room,
where you shall over-hear our discourse. You Will soon discover the mistake, and
find who it is that loves you. Retire, Madam, I hear some body coming.

[Exeunt Jacomo, Leonora.
Enter Don John in the Street. D. Joh. Let me see, here lives a Lady: I have
seen Don Octavio haunting about this house, and making private signs to her. I
never saw her face, but am resolved to enjoy her, because he likes her;
besides, she is another Woman.

Ent^r Antonio. Antonio, welcome to our place of randezvous. Well, what game!
what adventure!

Enter Lopez. Come, dear Lopez.


Anto. I have had a rare adventure.


Lop. What, dear Antonio?


Ant. I saw at a Vill^ not far off, a grave mighty bearded Fool, drinking
Lemonado with his Mistress; I mislik'd his face, plucked him by the Whiskers,
pulled all one side of his Beard off, fought with him, run him through the
thigh, carried away his Mistress, served her in her kind, and then let her go.


D. Joh. Gallantly performed, like a brave Soldier in an Enemies Country:
When they will not pay Contribution, you fight for Forage.


D. Lop. Pox on it, I have been damnably unfortunate; I have neither beat man,
nor lain with Woman to night, but fallen in love most furiously: I dogged my new
Mistress to her Lodging; she is Don B^rnardo's Sister, and shall be my Punk.


D. Joh. I could meet with no willing Dame, but was fain to commit a Rape to
pass away the time.


D. Anto. Oh! a Rape is the joy of my heart; I love a Rape, upon my Clavis,
exceedingly.


D. Joh. But mine, my Lads, was such a Rape, it ought to be Registered; a noble
and heroic Rape.


D. Lop. Ah! dear Don John!


D. Anto. How was it?


D. Joh. 'Twas in a Church, Boys.


D. Anto. Ah! Gallant Leader!


D. Lop. Renowned Don John!


D. Anto. Come, let us retire, you have done enough for once.


D. Joh. Not yet, Antonio, I have an Intrigue here.

Enter Fiddlers. Here are my Fiddlers. Rank your selves close under this Window,
and sing the Song I prepared.


SONG.
THou joy of all hearts, and delight of all eyes,
Nature's chief Treasure, and Beauty's chief Prize,
Look down, you will discover,
Here Is a faithful young vigorous Lover;
With a heart full as true,
As ever languish'd for you;
Here Is a faithful young vigorous Lover.
The Heart that was once a Monarch in's breast,
Is now your poor Captive, and can have no rest;
'Twill never give over,
But about your sweet bosom will hover.
Dear Miss, let it in,
By Heaven it is no sin;
Here Is a faithful young vigorous vigorous Lover.
D. Joh. Now Fiddlers, be gone.


[Window opens, Maria looks out, and flings a Paper down. Mar. Retire, my Dear
Octavia; read that Note. Adieu.

[Exit Mar.
D. Joh. Good, she takes me for Octavio. I warrant you, Boys, I shall succeed
in this adventure. Now my false Light assist me.

[Reads by a dark Lantern. Reads. Go from this Window, within eight minutes you
shall be admitted to the Garden door. You know the Sign.

Ha! the Sign, Gad she lies, I know not the Sign.


D. Anto. What will you do? you know not the Sign. Let Us away, and be contented
this night.


D. Joh. My friends, if you love me, retire. I Will venture, though Thunderbolts
should fall upon my head.


D. Lop. Are you mad? as soon as she discovers the deceit, she will raise the
house upon you, and you will be murdered.


D. Joh. She Will not raise the house for her own sake, but rather grant me all I
ask to keep her counsel.


D. Anto. It Is very dangerous: be care^al of your self.


D. Joh. The more danger, the more delight: I hate the common road of pleasure.
What! can I fear at such a time as this! The cowardly Deer are valiant in their
Rutting time. I say, Be gone --


D. Anto. We'll not dispute your commands. Good luck to you.


[Exeunt Antonio, Lopez. D. Joh. How shall I know this devilish* Sign?

Enter Octavio with Fiddlers, and stands under Maria's window. Ha! whom have we
hear? some Serenading Coxcomb. Now shall we have some damned Song or other, a
Cloris, or a Phillis at least.


SONG.
Cloris. ^hen you disperse your influence,
Your dazzling Beams are quick and clear,
You so surprise and wound the sense,
So bright a Miracle y'appear.
Admiring Mort^ls you asto^ish so,
No other Deity they know,
But think that all Divinity's be low --
One charming look from your illustrious Face,
Were able to subdue Mankind,
So sweet, so powerful a Grace
Makes all men Lovers but the blind:
Nor can they freedom by resistance gain,
For each embraces the soft Chain,
And never struggles with the pleasant pain.

Octa. Be gone! be gone! the Window opens.


D. Joh. 'Sdeath! this is Octavio. I must dispatch him, or he will spoil all; but
I would fain hear the Sign first.


Mar. What strange mistake is this? Sure he did not receive* my Note, and then
I am ruined.


Octa. She expects the Sign. Where Is my Whistle? O here.

[Whistles.
D. Joh. I have found it, that must be the Sign --


Mar. I dare not speak aloud, go to the Garden door.

[ Don John rushes upon Octavio, and snatches the Whistle out of his hand.
Octa. 'Sdeath, what Ruffian's this?


D. Joh. One that will be sure to cut your throat.


Octa. Make not a promise to your self of what you cannot perfo^m.

[Fight.
D. Joh. I warrant you. Have at you.


M^r. O Heaven! Octavio's fighting. Oh my heart!


Octa. Oh! I am slain --

[Falls.
D. Joh. I knew I should b^ as good as my word. I think you have it, Sir -- Ha!
(...) he is dying -- Now for the Lady -- I Will draw him further off, that his
groans may not disturb our pleasure -- Stay -- by your leave, Sir, I Will change
Hat and Cloak with you, it may help me in my design.


Octav. O barbarous Villain!

[Dies.
Mar. They have done fighting, and I hear no noise. Oh unfortunate Woman! my
dear Octavio's killed --


Flora. Perhaps, Madam, he has killed the other. I Will down to the Garden door;
if he be well, he will come ^hither, as well to satisfy his appointment, as to
take refuge. Your Brother's safe, he may come in securely --

[Ex. to the door.
Mar. Haste! haste! Fly! fly! Oh Octavio. I Will follow her.

[She follows.
D. Joh. Now for the Garden door. This Whistle will do me excellent service.
Now good luck --

[Goes to the door and whistles.
Flo. Octavio?


D. Joh. The same.


Flo. Heaven be praised, my Lady thought you had been killed.


D. Joh. I am unhurt: let us quickly to her.


Flo. Oh! he will be overjoyed to see you alive.


D. Joh. I Will make her more overjoyed before I have done with ^er. This is a
rare adventure!


Enter Maria at the d^or. Flo. Here Is your Jewel, Madam, speak softly.


Mar. O my dear Octavio! have I got you within these arms?


D. Joh. Ay, my Dear, unpierc'd by any thing but by your eyes.


Mar. Those will do you no hurt. But are you sure you are not wounded?


D. Joh. I am. Let me embrace my pretty Dear; and yet she may be a Blackamore
for ought I know --


M^r. We'll reti^e to my Chamber. Flora, go out, and prepare us a Collation.


D. Jon. O admirable adventure! Come, my Delight.

[Exeunt.
Enter Don Lopez, Antonio, Jacomo. Jac. Where Is my pious Master?


D. Ant. We left him hereabouts. I wonder what he has done in his adventure: I
believe he has had ^ome busle.


D. Lop. I thought I heard fighting hereabout.


Jac. Gad forgive me! fighting! where! where!


D. Ant. O thou incorrigible Coward!


D. Lop. See, here is some of his handy-wor^* here is a man killed*


Jac. Another murder. Heaven, what wi^ become of me? ^ shall be hanged, yet
dare not ^un away ^om him.


Enter an Officer with a Guard, going the Ro^nd. Officer. Stand! who are there?


D. Lop. We do stand, Rascal, we never use to run.


Jac. Now shall I be taken and hanged for my Master's murder.

[Offers to run.
D. Ant. Stand, you Dog! offer once more to run, and I Will put Bilbow in your
guts.


J^c. Gad forgive me! what will become of me?


Officer. What Is here? a man murdered? yield, you are my prisoners.


Jac. With all my heart! but as I hope to be saved, we did not kill him, Sir


Offic. These must be the murderers, disarm 'em.


D. Ant. How now, Rascal! disarm us!


D. Lop. We are not used to part with our Swords.


Jac. I care not a farthing for my Sword, it is at your service.


D. Ant. Do you hear, Rascal; keep it, and fight, or I Will swear the murder
against you.


D. Lop. Offer to flinch, and I Will run you through.


Offic. Take their Swords, or knock 'em down.

[ They fight. Jacomo offers to run, some of the Guards stop him.
Jac. A pox on it, I had as good fight and die, as be taken and be hanged.

[Guards are beaten off.
D. Lop. Are you gone, you Dogs? I have pinck'd some of you.


Jac. Ah Rogues! Villains! I have met with you.


D. Ant. O brave Jacomo! you fought like an imprisoned Rat: The Rogue had
concealed Courage, and did not know it.


Jac. O Cowards! Rascals! a man can get no honor by fighting with such
Poletroons! but for all that, I will prudently withdraw, this place will
suddenly be too hot for us.


D. Lop. Once in your life you ar^ in the right, Jacomo.


Jac. O good Sir, there is as much to be ascribed to Conduct, as to Courage, I
assure you.

[Exeunt.
Enter Don John and Maria in her Chamber. Mar. Speak softly, my Dear; should my
Brother hear us, we are ruined.


D. J^h. Though I can scarce contain my joy, I will. O she is a rare Creature in
the dark, pray Heaven she be so in the light.


Enter Flora with a Candle; as soon as they discover Don John, they shre^ke
out. Mar. O Heaven! I am ruined and betrayed.


Flo. He has Octavio's clothes on.


Mar. O he has murdered him. My Brother shall revenge it.


D. Joh. I will cut his throat if he offers it.


Mar. Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves!


Flo. Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves!


D. Joh. I will stop your shrill wind-pipes.


(...) Ma^ia's Brother, with his Sword drawn. Br^th. 'Sdeath! a man in my
Sister's Chamber! Have at you, Villain.


D. ^oh. Come on, Villain.

[ Don John kills the Brother.
Flo Murder! Murder!


M^r. O Villain, thou have killed my Brother, and dishonored me.

Ent^r five or si^ Servants, with drawn Swords. O your Master's murdered!


D. Joh. So many of you; it is no matter: your Hero's in Plays beat five times
as many. Have at you, Rogues.

[ Maria runs away shri^king, and Don John beats the Servants off, and stops
Flora. Now give me the Key of the Garden, or I Will murder thee.


^lo. Murder! Murder! There, take it --

[She runs away.
D. Joh. So, thus far it is well; this was a brave adventure. Amongst all the
Joys which in the world are sought, None are so great as those by dangers
bought.

[Exit.
ACT II.
Jacomo solus. J^c. WHat will this lewd Master of mine do? this Town of Se^il
will not much care for his company after his last (...) Atchievments: He must
now either fly, or hang for it. Ha! methinks my blood grows chill at the naming
of that d^eadful word, Hang What will become of me? I dare not leave him, and
yet I fear that I shall perish with him. He Is certainly the sirst that ever set
up a Religion to the Devil.


Enter Leonora. Leon. I come to claim your promise; is Don John within?


Jacom. No, Madam, but I expect him every minute. You see, Madam, what honor I
have for you, for I venture my ears to do this.


Leon. You oblige me extremely; so great is the present pain of doubt, that we
desire to lose it: though in exchange of certainty, that must afflict us more.


Jac. I hear him coming, withdraw quickly.

[She withdraws.
Enter Don John. D. Joh. How now, Sir, what wise thoughts have you in your
Noddle?


Jac. Why, Sir, I was considering how well I could endure to be hanged.


D. Joh. And why so, Buffle?


Jac. Why you will force me to wait upon you in all your fortunes, and you are
making what haste you can to the Gallows --


D. Joh. Again at your reproofs. You insipid Rascal; I shall cut your ears off,
Dog --


Jac. Good Sir, I have done; yet I cannot but admire, since you are resolved to
go to the Devil, that you cannot be content with the common way of traveling,
but must ride post to him.


D. Joh. Leave off your idle tales, found out by Priests to keep the Rabble in
awe.


Jac. Oh horrid wickedness! If I may be bold to ask, what noble exploits did
your Chivalry perform last night?


D. Joh. Why, Sir, I committed a Rape upon my Father's Monument.


Jac. Oh horror!


D. Joh. Do you start, you Villain? Hah!


Jac. I, Sir, who I, Sir? not I, Sir.


D. Joh. D'hear, Rascal, let me not see a frown upon your face; if I do, I will
cut your throat, you Rogue.


Jac. No, Sir, no, Sir, I warrant you; I am in a very good humor, I assure you
-- Heaven deliver me!


D. Joh. Now listen and learn. I killed a Lady's Lover, and supplied his place,
by stratagem enjoyed her: In came her foolish Brother and surpised me, but
perished by mv hand; and I doub^ not but I maul d three or four of his Servants.

[ Jacomo starts.
Jac. Oh horrid fact!

[Aside.
D. Joh. Again, Villain, are you frowning?


(...). No, Sir, no, Sir; don't think so ill of me, Sir. Heaven send me from
this wicked Wretch! What will become of us, Sir? we shall be apprehended.


D. Joh. Can you fear your Rascally Carcass, when I venture mine? I observe
always, those that have the most despicable persons, are most careful to
preserve 'em.


Jac. Sir, I beg your pardon; but I have an odd humor, makes me something
unsit for your Worship's service.


D. Joh. What Is that, Sir?


Jac. It Is a very odd one, I am almost ashamed to tell it to you.


D. Joh. Out with it, Fool --


Jac. Why Sir, I cannot tell what is the reason, but I have a most
unconquerable antipathy to Hemp. I could never endure a Bell-rope. Hanging is a
kind of death I cannot abide, I am not able to endure it.


D. Joh. I have taken care to avoid that; my friends are gone to hire a Vessel,
and we'll to Sea together to seek a refuge, and a new Scene of pleasure.


Jac. All three, Sir?


D. Joh. Yes, Sir. --


Jac. Three as civil dis^reet sober persons, as a man would wish to drink with.


Enter Leonora. Leon. I can hold no longer!


D. Joh. 'Sdeath, you Dog, how came she here?


Jac. I don't know, Sir, she stole in --


Leon. What Witchcraft do I suffer under? that when I abhor his vices, I still
love his person. Ah, Don John! have I deserved that you should fly me? are all
your Oaths and Vows forgotten by you?


D. Joh. No, no; in these cases I always remember my Oaths, and never forget to
break them.


Leon. Oh impiety!

Did I, for this, yield up my Honor to you? after you had sighed and
languish'd many months, and showed all signs of a sincere affection, I trusted
in your truth and constancy, without the Bond of Marriage, yielded up a
Virgin's Treasure, all my Innocence, believed your solemn Contract, when you
invoked all the Powers above to testify your Vows.


D. Joh. They think much of us, why don't they witness 'em for you -- Pish,
it is nothing but a way of speaking, which young amorous Fellows have gotten --


Leon. Did you not love me then? What injury had I ever done you, that you
should feign affection to betray me?


D. Joh. Yes 'faith, I did love you, and showed you as frequent and as hearty
signs of it as I could; and i'gad you are an ungrateful Woman if you say the
contrary.


Leon. O heaven! Did you, and do not now? What crime have I committed, that
could make you break your Vows and Oaths, and banish all your passion? Ah! with
what tenderness have I received your feigned affection, and never thought I
lived but in your presence; my love was too fervent to be counterf^it --


D. Joh. That I know not, for since your Sex are such dissemblers, they can
hold out against, and seem to hate the men they love; why may they not seem to
love the men they hate?


Leon. O cruel man! could I dissemble? had I a thousand lives, I ventured all
each time I saw your face; nay, were I now discovered, I should instantly be
sacrifi^'d to my raging Brother's fury; and can I dissemble?


D. Joh. I do not know whether you do or no; you see I don't, I am something
free with you.


Leon. And do you not love me then?


D. Joh. Faith, Madam, I loved you as long as I could for the heart and blood
of me, and there is an end of it; what a Devil would you have more?


(...). O cruel man! how miserable have you made me!


D. Joh. Miserable! use variety as I do, and you will not be (...). Ah! there is
nothing so sweet to frail humane flesh (...) variety.


Leon. ^nhumane Creature! what have I been guilty of, that ^hou should thus
remove thy (...) from me?


D. Joh. Guilty, no: but I have had enough of you, and I have done what I can
for you, and there is no more to be said.


Leon. Tigers would have more pity than thou have.


D. Joh. Unreasonable Woman! would you have a man love (...) ^njoyment? I think
the Devil's in you --


Leon. Do you upbraid me with the rash effects of Love, which you caused in me?
and do you hate me for what you ought to love me for? were you not many months
with Vows and Oaths betraying me to that weakness? Ungrateful Monster!


D. Joh. Why the Devil did you not yield before? you Women always rook in Love;
you will never play upon the square with us..


Leon. False man! I yielded but too soon. Unfortunate Woman!


D. Joh. Your dissembling Arts and jilting tricks, taught you by your Mothers,
and the phlegmatic coldness of your constitutions, make you so long in
yielding; that we love out almost all our love before you begin, and yet you
would have our love last as long as yours. I got the start of you a long way,
and have reason to reach the Goal before you.


Leon. Did you not swear you would for ever love me?


D. Joh. Why there it is; why did you put me to the trouble to swear it? If you
Women would be honest, and follow the Dictates of Sense and Nature, we should
agree about the business presently, and never be forsworn for the matter.


Leon. Are Oaths so slighted by you? perfidious man!


D. Joh. Oaths! Snares to catch conceited Women with; I would have sworn all
the Oaths under the Sun; why I would have committed Treason for you, and yet I
knew I should be weary of you --


Leon. I thought such love as mine might have deserved your constancy, false
and ungrateful man!


D. Joh. Thus your own vanity, not we betray you. Each woman thinks, though men
are false to others, that she is so fine a person, none can be so to her. You
should not take our words of course in earnest.


Leon. Thus Devils do in Hell, who cruelly upbraid whom they have tempted
thither.


D. Joh. In short, my constitution will not let me love you longe^: and what
ever some (...) pretend, all mankind obey their constitutions, and cannot do
otherwise --


Leon. Heaven, sure, will punish this vile treachery.


D. Joh. Do you then leave it to Heaven, and trouble your self no farther about
it.


Leon. Ye Sacred Powers, who take care of injured innocence, assist me.


Enter Jacomo. Jac. Sir, Sir! stand upon your guard.


D. Joh. How now! what is the matter?


Jac. Here Is a whole Batalion of courageous Women come to charge you.


Enter Six Women. D. Joh. Keep '^m out, you Villain.


Jac. I cannot, they overrun me.


D. Joh. What an inundation of Strumpets is here?


Leon. O Heaven! I can stay no longer to be a witness of his falsehood --

[Exit Leonora.
1. Wom. My Dear, I desire a word in private with you.


D. Joh. 'Faith, my Dear, I am something busy, but I love thee dearly.

[Aside. A pox on thee!
2. Wom. Don John, a word: it is time now we should declare our marriage; it is
now above three weeks.


D. Joh. Ay, we will do it suddenly --


3. Wom. Prithee, Honey, what business can these idle Women have* send them
packing, that we may confer about our (...).


4. Wom. Lord! how am I amazed at the confidence of some Women! who are these
that will not let one converse with one's own Husband? By your leave, Ladies.


(...). Now it works! tease him, Ladies, worry him soundly --


5. Wom. Nay, by your leave, good Madam; if you go to that.

[Pulls Don John from the other.
6. Wom. Ladies, by all your leaves; sure none of you will have the considence
to pretend an interest in this Gentleman --


D. Joh. I shall be torn in pieces: Jacomo, stand by me.


1. Lad. Lord, Madam, what is your meaning? none ought to claim a right to
another Woman's Husband, let me tell you that.


2. Lad. You are in the right, Madam. Therefore prithee, Dear, let us withdraw,
and leave them; I do not like their compan^.


D. Joh. Ay, presently, my Dear. What an excellent thing is a Woman before
enjoyment, and how insipid after it!


4. Wom. Come, prithee, put these Women out of doubt, and let them know our
Marriage.


D. Joh. Tomorrow we'll declare and celebrate our Nuptials.


6. Wom. Ladies, the short and the long on it is, you are very uncivil to press
upon this Gentleman. Come, Love, even tell 'em the truth of the story --


4. Wom. Uncivil, Madam, pardon me; one cannot be so in sp^aking to one's own.


3. Wom. That Is true; she little thinks who that is.


6. Wom. To their own! Ha, ha, ha, that is true -- Come, Honey, keep 'em no
longer in ignorance.


4. Wom. Come, Ladies, I will undeceive you all; think no further of this
Gentleman, I say, think no further of him --


1. Wom. What can this mean?


D. Joh. Hold, for Heaven's sake; you know not what you do.


4. Wom. Yes, yes, I do; it shall all out: I Will send 'em away with Fleas in
their Ears. Poor silly Creatures!


D. Joh. Now will Civil Wars arise --


4. Wom. Trouble your selves no longer about Don John, he is mine -- he is
mine, Ladies --


All. Yours! --


D. Joh. ^ox on it, I must set a good face upon the business; I see murder will
out --


6 Wom. Yours! that is pleasant; he is mine --


5. Wom. I have been too long patient; he is my Husband.


1. Wom. Yours, how can that be? I am sure I am his Wife.


3. Wom. Are you not (...), Ladies, to claim my Husband?


2. Wom. Are you all mad? I am sure I am married to him.


All. You!


D. Joh. Look you, Ladies, a Man's but a Man; here is my Body, take it among you
as far as 'twill go. The Devil cannot please you all --


Jac. Pray, Ladies, will you dispatch; for there are a matter of fifteen more
that are ready to put in their claims, and must be heard in their order --


D. Joh. How now, Rogne? this is your fault, Sir.


Jac. My fault, Sir, no; the Ladies shall see I am no Traitor. Look you, Ladies
--


D. Joh. Peace, Villain, or I will cut your throat. Well, Ladies, know then, I
am married to one in this company; and to morrow morning, if you will repair to
this place, I will declare my Marriage, which now, for some secret Reasons, I
am obliged to conceal -- Now will each Strumpet think it is her I mean.


1. Wom. That Is well enough.


4. Wom. I knew he would own me at last.


3. Wom. Now they will soon see their errors.

5. Now we'll conceal it no longer, Dearest.


D. Joh. No, no, I warrant you --


6. Wom. Lord how blank these Ladies will look.


2. Wom. Poor Ladies --


Jac. Ladies, pray let me ask a question, which of you is really married to him?


Omn. I, I, I --


D. Joh. 'Sdeath, you Son of a Baboon. Come, Pox on it, why should ^ dally any
longer! why should I conc^al my good actions! in one word, I am married to
every one of you, and have above fourscore more; nor will I ever give over,
till I have as many Wives and Concubines as the Grand Seignior.


Jac. A very modest civil person truly --


4. Wom. O horrid Villain!


6. Wom. Perfidious Monster!


Enter Don Lopez and Antonio. D. Ant. How now, Don John; Hah! you are a
ravenous Bird of prey indeed; do you fly at no less than a whole Covee of
Whores at once? you scorn a single Strumpet for your Quarry.


Ant. What, in tears too! Fie, Don John; thou art the most ungentle Knight
alive: use your Ladies civilly for shame.


D. Joh. Ay, before the Victory, I grant you; but after it, they should wear
Chains, and follow the Conqueror's Chariot.


D. Lop. Alas, poor Harlots!


D. Joh. Peace, peace, good words; these are certain Animals called Wives, and
all of 'em are my Wives: Do you call a man of Honor's Wives, Harlots? out,
on it.


1. Wom. Per^idious Monster!


Ant. Excellent!


D. Joh. Come on, you are come very opportunely, to help to celebrate my
several and respective Weddings. Come, my Dears; 'faith we will have a Ballad
at our Weddings. Where are my Fiddlers?


6. Wom. O salvage Beast!


4. Wom. Inhumane Villain! revenge shall follow.


D. Joh. Pox on revenge. Call in my Ministrils.

Enter Fiddlers. Come, sing my Epithalamium.


SONG.
SInce Liberty, Nature for all has designed,
Apox on the Fool who to one is con^in'd.
All Creatures besides,
When they please change their Brides.
All Females they get when they can,
Whilst they nothing but Nature obey,
How happy, how happy are they?
But the silly fond Animal, Man,
Makes Laws against himself, which his Appetites sway;
Poor Fools, how unhappy are they?
Chor. Since Liberty, Nature for all has designed,
Apox on the Fool who to one is confined.

At the first going down, a Woman is good,
But when ever she comes up, I Will never chew the Cud,
But out she shall go,
And I Will serve 'em all so.
When with one my stomach is cloyed,
Another shall soon be enjoyed.
Then how h^ppy, how happy are we?
Let the Coxcomb, when weary, drudge on,
And foolishly stay when he would fain ^e gone.
Poor Fool! how unhappy is ^e?
Chor. At the first going down, etc.


Let the Rabble obey, I Will live like a Man,
Who, by Nature, is free to enjoy a^l he can:
Wise Nature does teach
More truth than Fools preach;
They bindus, but she gives us ease.
I Will revel and love where I please.
She, she is my infallible Guide.
But were the blessed freedom d^ni'd
Of variety in the things we love best,
Dull Man were the slavishest Beast.
Chor. Let the Rabble obey, etc.


D. Joh. Come, how do you like this? let us be merry, my Brides.


4. Wom. O monstrous Traitor! do you mock our misery?


D. Joh. Good Spouse, be not passionate -- faith we'll have a Dance. Strike up
--

[Dance.
D. ^op. Be comforted, good Ladies; you have Companions in ^our misfortunes --


D. Ant. He has been married in all the Cities of Spain; what a breed of Don
John's shall we have?


D. Joh. Come, Sweethearts; you must be civil to these Gentlemen; they are my
Friends, and men of Honor*


6. Wom. Men of Honor! they are Devils if they be your* Friends.


D. Joh. I hate unreasonable, unconscionable fellows, who when they are weary
of their Wives, will still keep 'em from other men. Gentlemen, ye shall command
mine.


4. Wom. Think thou I will outlive this affront?


D. Joh. I Will trust you for that, there is never a Lu^rece now adays, the Sex has
learnt more wit since. Let me see, Antonia, thou shall have for thy present
use, let me see, my sixth Wife -- *faith she is a pretty buxom Wench, and
deserves hearty usage from thee.


6. Wom. Traitor! I Will be revenged on all thy treachery.


Ant. A mettel'd Girl, I like her well: she will endure a Rape gallantly. I love
resistance, it endears the pleasure.


D. Joh. And, Lopez, thou shall have, let me see, ay, my fourth Spous^, she is a
brave Virago; and Gad if I had not been something familiar with her already, I
would venture my life for her.


4. Wom. Vile Wretch! think thou I will outlive this affront? Impious
Villain! though thou have no sense of Virtue or Honor left, thou shall find I
have.


D. Joh. Virtue and Honor! There Is nothing good or ill, but as it seems to
each man's natural appetite, if they will consent freely. You must ravish
friends: that is all I know, you must ravish.


1. Wom. Unheard of Villainy! Fly from this Hellish place.


Ant. Ladies, you shall fly, but we must ravish first.


D. Lop. Yes, I assure you we must ravish --


4. Wom. No, Monster, I Will pr^vent you.

[Stabs her self.
D. Ant. 'Sdeath, she is as good as her word.
The first time I ever knew a Woman so.

D. Lop. Pox on it, she has prevented me; she is dead.


D. Joh. Say you so? well, go thy ways, thou were a Girl of pretty parts,
that is the truth on it; but I never thought this had been in thee.


2. Wom. These, sure, are Devils in the shape of men.


D. Joh. Now see my providence, if I had been married to none but her, I had
been a Widdower.


1. Wom. O horror! horror! fly! fly!


6. Wom. No, I Will be revenged first on this barbarous Wretch.


D. Joh. Why look you, here is a Wench of mettle for you; go ravish quickly --


6. Wom. Let Us fly, and call for help, some in the street may help us *

[They all run off, crying, Help, murder, murder!
D. Ant. Let 'em go, they are confined, they cannot get out.


D. Joh. It shall never be said that a Woman went out of this house Reinfecta;
but after that, 'twill be time for us to fly.


D. Lop. We have hired a Vessel, the Master is a brave Rogue of my
acquaintance; he has been a Bandit.


D. Ant. A brave honest wicked Fellow as heart can wish, I have ravished,
robbed, and murdered with him.


D. Joh. That Is well. Hey, where are my Rogues? Hey!

Enter Servant and Jacomo. Here, Sir, do you send my Goods on Board.


Ant. My Man will direct you.

[Exit Servant.
D. Joh. Come, Sir, do you remove this Body to another Room --


Jac. O horrid fact! what, another Murder! what shall I do?


D. Joh. Leave your complaints, you Dog; I Will send you after her.


Jac. Oh! I shall be hanged, I shall be hanged.


D. Joh. Take her up, Rascal; or I Will cut your throat.


Jac. I will, Sir. Oh mercy upon me! I shall be hanged --


D. Joh. Now, Sir, do you run into the stre^ts, and force in the next Woman
you meet, or I Will cut your Windpipe; and let nobody out --


Jac. What hellish fact will he now commit?


D. Joh. Take her up, you Hen-hearted compassionate Rascal.


Jac. Heaven! what will become of me? Oh! Oh --

[Carries her off.
D. Joh. Now, Gentlemen, you shall see I Will be civil to you, you shall not
ravish alone: indeed I am loath to meddle with mine old acquaintance, but if my
Man can meet with a Woman I have not lain withal, I Will keep you company; let
her be old or young, ugly or handsome, no matter.


D. Lop. 'Faith I will eversay, you are a well bred man.


D. Ant. A very civil person, a man of Honor.


Enter Servant, ^orcing in an ugly old Woman, who cries out. D. Joh. This
unlucky Rogue has made but a scurvy choice, but I Will keep my word. Come, Bawd,
you must be ravished, Bawd.


Old. Wom. O murder! murder! help! help! I was never ravished in my life.


D. Joh. That I dare swear; but to show I am a very vigorous man, I Will begin
with you. But, you Rascal, Jaccall, I Will make you Cater better next time.


Serve. Indeed, Sir, this was the first I met.


D. Joh. Come on, Beldam, thy face shall not protect thee.


Old Wom. Oh my Honor! my Honor! help, help, my Honor!


D. Joh. Come to our business.


Enter Jac^mo. Jac. O Sir* (...)! shift for your self; we shall all be hanged:
(...) house is (...). Oh what shall we do?


D. Joh. Away, Coward: were the King of Spain's Army beleagu'ring us, it should
not divert me from this Exploit.


D. Ant. Nor me.


D. Lop. Nor me: let us on.


D. Joh. Keep the doors fast, Sir. Come on.


Jac. Oh what will become of me! Oh Heaven! mercy on me! Oh! Oh!

[Exeunt.
In Man's habit, Enter Maria, and her Maid Flora. Mar. Thus I have abandoned
all my Fortune, and laid by
My Sex. Revenge for thee. Assist me now,
You Instruments of Blood, for my dear Brothers,
And for my much more dear Octavio's sake.
Where are my B^avo's? --

Flo. They have beset the Villains House,
And he shall never come out alive. --

Mar. O let 'em show no more remorse,
Than hungry Lions o'r their prey will.
How miserable am I made by that
Inhumane Monster! No savage Beast,
Wild Deserts ever brought forth, provoked
By all its hunger, and its natural rage,
Could yet have been so cruel.
Oh my Octavio! whether art thou fled,
From the most loving and most wretched
Creature of her Sex? What Ages of delight
Each hour with thee brought forth!
How much, when I had thee, was all the world
Unenvi'd by me! Nay, I piti'd all my Sex,
That could have nothing worth their care,
Since all the treasure of Mankind was mine.
Methought I could look down on Queens, when he
Was with me: but now, compared to me,
How happy is the Wretched, whose sinews
Crack upon the merciless Engine
Of his torture? I live with greater torments then he di^.

Flo. Leave your complaints. Tears are no Sacri^ice for blood.


Mar. Now my just grief to just revenge give place.
I am ashamed of these soft Tears, till I Have
Revenged thy horrid Murder. Oh that I could
Make the Villain linger out an Age in
Torments! But I will revel in his blood: Oh
I could suck the last drop that warms the
Monster's heart, that might inspire me with
Such cruelty, as vile Man, with all his horrid
Arts of power, is yet a stranger to;
Then I might root out all his cursed Race.

Flo. I Will follow all your Fortunes, my dear Lady;
Had (...) thousand lives, in this cause I Would
Venture one by one to my last stake.

Mar. Thou art my dear and faithful Creature;
Let not thy Fortunes thus be wracked with mine.
Be gone, and leave thy most unhappy Mistress;
One that has miseries enough to sink the Sex.

Flo. I will not leave you, till death takes me from you.


Mar. O that I had been some poor lost Mountain Girl,
Nursed up by Goats, or suckl'd by wild Beasts,
Exposed to all the rage of heats and killing colds.
I never could have been aband on'd to such fury.
More savage cruelty reigns in Cities,
Than ever yet in Deserts among the
Most venomous Serpents, and remorsless
Ravenous Beasts, could once be found.
So much has barbarous Art debauched
Man's innocent Nature.

Flo. Lay by your tears, till your revenge be finished;
Then, then you may have leisure to complain.

Mar. I will: it is blood I now must spill, or
Lose my own in the attempt. But if I can
Have the fortune, with my own hand, to reach
The Dogs vile heart: I then shall die
Cont^nted, and in the other World I Will
(...) him so, Devils shall learn of me to
^lse the Damned.

Flo. Let Us to our Sacred Instruments of revenge.


Mar. Come on: so just a cause would turn the
Vilest Ru^ian to a Saint.
[Exeunt.
[Bravo's watch at Don John's house. Maria and Flora re-enter. Mar. Come,
friends, let once a Woman preach courage
To you, inspired by my just rage this Arm
Shall teach you wonders. I Will show you now
What Love with just Revenge can do.

1. Brav. We are so practiced in the trade of death,
We need no teaching.

Mar. There Is Gold good store; if you dispatch the Dog,
I Will give you yet much more; if not,
If all the wealth I have can buy your lives,
I Will have 'em in stead of his.

1. Brav. For half the Sum, I Would kill a Bishop at the Altar.

[They reti^e.
Enter Don John, Don Antonio, Don Lopez, Jacomo. D. Joh. Now we have finished
our design; let us make a Salley, and raise the Siege.


D. Ant. Jacomo, do you lead the Van.


D. Lop. Lead on, Jacomo, or we are sure to lose you; you are not good at
bringing up the Rear.


Jac. Nay, good Gentlemen, I know my self better than to take place of Men of
Quality, especially upon this occasion.


D. Joh. Sir, go on: I Will prick him forward. Remember, if you do not fight, I
am behind you.


Jac. Oh Heaven! Oh Jacomo! what will become of thy dear person? Is this your
Courage to put me forward, to what you dare not meet your selves?


D. Joh. No words, Rogue, on, on, I ^ay --


Jac. O I shall be murdered! murdered! Oh! Oh! --


D. Joh. On, on, you Dog.


Jac. Inhumane Master! It must be so! Heaven have mercy on my better part.


Enter Maria. Mar. Fall on, fall on, that is the Villain! Have at you, Dog*


D. Joh. Courage, Jacomo.

[They fight, and are driven off, but Maria and Flora remain.
Jac. Oh! Oh!


Mar. Oh cowardly Villains! the Traitor will escape their hands. Oh Dogs! more
feeble than the feeblest of our Sex Let Us after him, and try our strength.

Enter Don John. He is returned -- fall on.


D. Joh. Ha! must I encounter Boys?


Flo. Oh I am slain --


[Kills Flora. Mar. At thy heart, base Villain.

[ Don John disarms Maria.
D. Joh. There, take your Sword; I Will not nip Roguery in the bud; thou may
live to be as wicked as my self.


Mar. Poor Flora! But, Dog, I Will be revenged on thee yet ere I die.

[Exit.
Enter Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. Jac. What! no thanks! no reward!


D. Joh. What Is the matter, Sir?


Jac. What, no acknowledgment? you are but an ungrateful man, let me tell you
that, to treat a man of my prowess thus.


D. Joh. What has your valor done?


Jac. Nothing, nothing; saved your life only, that is all: but men of valor
are nothing now adays. It Is an ungrateful Age. I fought like a Hero


D. Ant. Called a Stag at Bay.


D. Lop. You can fight, when there is no way of escape, without it.


Jac. Oh! what is here! another murder! fly, fly; we shall be hanged.


D. Joh. Come on! let us now to Sea to try our fortunes.


Jac. Ay, make haste; I Have laid Horses, and will shift by Land. Farewell, Sir;
a good Voyage -- --


D. Joh. I will murder you, if you refuse to go to Sea --


Jac. O, good Sir, consider, do but consider; I am so Sea-sick always: that
wicked Element does not agree with me.


D. Joh. Dare you dispute! go on, I say.


Jac. O, good Sir, think, think a little; the merciless Waves will never
consider a man of parts: besides, Sir, I can swim no more than I can fly.


D. Joh. I Will leave you dead upon the place, if you refuse.


Jac. O Sir, on my knees I beg you will let me stay. I am the last of all my
Family; my Race will fail, if I should fail.


D. Joh. Damn your Race *


D. Ant. Do not we venture with you?


Jac. You have nothing but your lives to venture, but I have a whole Family to
save; I think upon Posterity. Besides, Gentlemen, I can look for no safety in
such wicked company.


D. Joh. I Will kill the Villain. His fear will else betray us.


Jac. O hold! hold! for Heavens sake hold *

[Ghost of Don John's Father rises.
Ghost. Hold! hold!


Jac. Ay, hold, hold. Oh Heaven! your Father's Ghost; a Ghost! a Ghost! Oh! Oh!

[Falls down and roars.
D. Joh. 'Sdeath! what is here? my Father alive!


Ghost. No, no; inhumaue Murderer, I am dead.


D. Joh. That Is well; I was afraid the old Gentleman had come for his Estate
again; if you would have that, it is too late; it is spent --


Ghost. Monster! ^ehold these wounds.


D. Joh. I do; they were well meant, and well performed, I see.


D. Ant. This is strange! how I am amazed!


D. Lop. Unheard of Wonder! --


Ghost. Repent, repent of all thy villainies;
My clamorous blood to Heaven for vengeance cries.
Heaven will pour out his judgments on you all;
Hell gapes for you, for you each Fiend does call,
And hourly waits your unrepenting fall.
You with eternal horrors they will torment,
Except of all your crimes you suddenly repent.
[Ghost sinks.
Jac. Oh! Oh! Heaven deliver me from these Monsters.


D. Joh. Farewell, thou art a foolish Ghost; Repent, quoth he! what could this
mean? our senses are all in a mi^t sure.


D. Ant. They are not, 'twas a Ghost.


D. Lop. I never believed those foolish Tales before.


D. Joh. Come, it is no matter; let it be what it will, it must be natural --


D. Ant. And Nature is unalterable in us too.


D. Joh. It Is true, the nature of a Ghost cannot change ours.


D. Lop. It was a silly Ghost, and I Will no sooner take his word than a Whores.


D. Joh. Thou art in the right. Come, Fool, Fool, rise; the Ghost is gone.


Jac. Oh! I die, I die; pray let me die in quiet.


D. Ant. Oh! if he be dying* take him up; we'll give him burial in the Sea.
Come on.


Jac. Hold, hold, Gentlemen; bury me not till I am dead, I beseech you --


D. Joh. If you be not, Sir, I Will run you through.


Jac. Hold, hold, Sir, I Will go, I Will go --


D. Lop. Let Us on.


D. Ant. Let Us on.


D. Joh. Should all the Bugbears Cowards feign appear, I would urge on without
one thought of fear.


D. Ant. And I.


D. Lop. And I. --

[Exeunt omnes.
ACT III.
Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo, Captain of the Ship, Master
and Sailors. M^st. MErcy upon us! what sudden dreadful storm is this? we are
all lost; we shall split upon the Rocks. Loof, loof --


Jac. Oh! Oh! Mercy! Oh I was afraid of this! See what your wickedness has
brought me to? Mercy! mercy!


D. Joh. Takeaway thy Cowardly face, it offends me, Rascal.


Capt. Such dreadful claps of Thunder I never yet remembered.


D. Joh. Let the Clouds roar on, and vomit all their Sulphur out, they never
shall fright me. --


D. Ant. These are the Squibs and Crackers of the Sky.


D. Lop. Fire on, fire on; we are unmoved.


Capt. The Heavens are all on sire; these unheard of Prodigies amaze me.


D. Joh. Can you, that have stood so many Cannons, be frighted at the farting
and the b^lching of a Clowd?


Mast. Bless me, Captain! six of our Foremast men are even now struck dead with
Lightning.


Sail. O that clap has rent our Masts in sunder.


Jac. O we are lost! You can swim, Sir; pray save me, Sir, for my own and
Family's sake. --


D. Joh. Toss these cowardly Rogues overboard. Captain, Courage! let the
Heavens do their worst, it is but drowning at laft.


Jac. But -- in the name of Heaven, but drowning, quoth he; your drowning will
prepare you for burning, though Oh, Oh, Oh --


Sail. Captain, Captain, the Ship's on ^ire in the Forecastle --


Capt. All hands to work upon the Forecastle. Heaven! how it blazes already! --

[Exit C^ptain.
Jac. Oh! Oh! we burn, we drown, we sink, Oh! we peri^h, we are lost, we are
lost. Oh, Oh, Oh --


Mast. O horrid Apparitions! Devils stand and guard the fire, and will not
suffer us to quench it. We are lost.


Enter Captain. Capt. In all the dangers I have been, such horrors I never
knew; I am quite unmann'd.


D. Lop. A man and fear: it is but dying at last.


D* Joh. I never yet could know what that foolish thing Fear is.


Capt. Help, help, the fire increases. What horrid sights are these? where ever
I turn me, fearful Spirits appear.

[Exeunt Captain and Sailers.
D. Joh. Let Us into the Boat, and with our Swords ke^p out all others.


D. Ant. While they are busy 'bout the sire we may 'scape.


D. Lop. If we get from hence, we certainly shall perish on the Rocks --


D. Joh. I warrant you --


Jac. O good Gentlemen, let us shift for our selves, and let the rest burn, or
drown, and be damned and they will.


D. Joh. No, you have been often leaving me: now shall be the time we'll part.
Farewell.


Jac. Oh! I Will stand by you while I live. Oh the Devil, the Devil! What horrors
do I feel? Oh I am killed, I am dead!

[A Thunderclap strikes Don John and Jacomo down.
D. Joh. 'Sdeath! why this to me? you paltry foolish bugbear Thunder, am I the
mark of your senseless rage?


D. Lop. Nothing but accident. Let Us leap into the Boat.


D. Ant. The Sailors all make toward us; they will in and sink it.


D. Joh. Sir, if you come on, you run upon my Sword.


Jac. O cruel Tyrant! I burn, I drown, I sink! Oh I die, I am lost.


Capt. All shift aboard; we perish, we are lost.


Mast. All lost, all lost.

[A great shreik, they all leap overboard.
Enter an old Hermit. Her. This forty years I Have lived in this neighboring
Cave, and srom these dreadful Cliffs which are always beaten by the foami^g
Surges of the Sea; beheld the Ocean in its wildestrage, and never yet saw a
storm so dreadful: such horrid flashes of lightning, and such claps of thunder,
never were in my remembrance. Yon Ship is all on fire, and the poor miserable
Wretches must all perish. The dreadful object melts my heart, and brings a
flood of tears into my eyes: It is prodigious, for on the sudden, all the
Heavens are clear again, and the enraged Sea is become more pati^nt.


Enter Don Francisco. D. Fran. Oh Father, have you not been frighted at this
prodigious storm, and at yon dreadful spectacle?


Herm. No man that has an apprehension, but would have been moved wi^h horror.


D. Franc. '^was the most violent Tempest I ever saw. Hold, yonder are some
coming in a small Ves^l, and must necessarily split upon the Rock; I Will go and
help to succor 'em.


Herm. He^e are some this way, just come in a small Boat:
Go you to those, and these I will assist --

D. Fran. I Will haste to their relief --

[Exit Don Fran.
Herm. Hah! these are come safe to Land, three men, goodly men they seem to be;
I am bound in charity to serve them: they come toward me.


Enter Don John, Don Antonio, and Don Lopez. D. Joh* Much ado we are safe, but
my Man's lost; pox on him, I shall miss the Fool, it was a necessary Blockhead.


D. Ant. But you have lost your Goods, which were more necessary.


D. Lop. Our Jewels and Money we have all about us.


D. Joh. It makes m^ laugh to think, how the Fools we left behind were puzzled
which death to choose, burning or drowning --


D. Ant. But how shall we dispose of our selves, we are plaguey wet and cold.
Hah! what old Fool is that?


D. Lop. It is an Hermit, a fellow of mighty Beard and Sanctity.


D. Joh. I know not what Sanctity he may have, but he has Beard enough to make
an Owl's Nest, or stuff a Saddle with.


Herm. Gentlemen, I see you are shipwrack'd, and in distress; and my Function
obliges me in charity to succor you in what I may.


D. Ant. Alas! what can thou help us to? do thou know of ever a house near
hand, where we may be furnished with some necessaries?


Herm. On the other side of this vast Rock, there is a fertile and a pleasant
Valley, where one Don Francisco, a rich and hospitable man, has a sweet
Dwelling; he will entertain you nobly: He Is gone to assist some shipwrack'd
persons, and will be here presently. In the mean time, what my poor Cave can
afford, you shall be welcome to.


D. ^op. What can that afford? you oblige your self to fasting and abstinence *


Herm. I have studi'd Physic for the relief of needy people, and I have some
Cordials which will refresh you; I Will bring one to you --

[Exit Hermit.
D. Joh. A good civ^l old Hipocrite: but this is a pleasant kind of Religion,
that obliges 'em to nastiness and want of meat. I Will have none on it. --


D. Ant. No, nor of any other, to my knowledge.


Enter Hermit with a Cordial. Herm. Gentlemen, pray taste of this Vial, it will
comfort your cold stomachs.


D. Joh. Ha! it is excellent 'faith. Let it go round.


Herm. Heav*n bless it to you.


D. Lop. Ha! it wa^ms.


D. Ant. Thank thee, thou art a very honest old fellow in faith.


D. Joh. I see thou art very civil; but you must suppl^ us with one necessary
more; a very neces^ary thing, and very refreshing.


Herm. What Is that, Sir?


D. Joh. It is a Whore, a fine young buxom Whore.


D. Ant. A Whore, Old man, a Whore.


D. Lop. A Whore, Old man, a Whore.


Herm. Bless me, are you Men or Devils? --


D. Joh. Men, men, and men of lust and vigor. Prithee, old Sot, leave thy
prating, and help me to a Strumpet, a fine salacious Strump^t; I know you
Zealots have enough of 'em. Women love your godly Whore-masters.


Herm. O Monsters of impiety! are you so lately escaped the wrath of Heaven,
thus to provoke it?


D. Ant. How! by following the Dictates of Nature, who can do otherwise?


D. Lop. All our actions are necessitated, none command their own wills.


Herm. Oh horrid blasphemy! would you lay your dreadful and unheard of Vices
upon Heaven? No, ill men, that has given you free will to good.


D. Joh. I find thou retir'st here, and never readst or think.
Can that blind faculty the Will be free,
When it depends upon the Understanding?
Which argues first before the Will can choose;
And the last Dictate of the Judgment sways
The Will, as in a Balance, the last Weight
Put in the Scale, lifts up the other end,
And with the same Necessity.

Herm. But foolish men and sinners act against
Their Understandings, which inform 'em better.

D. Ant. None willingly do any thing against the last
Dictates of their Judgments, whatsoever men do,
Their present opinions lead 'em to.

D. Lop. As fools that are afraid of sin, are by the thought
Of present pleasure, or some other reason,
Neces^arily biased to pursue
The opinion they are of at that moment.

Herm. The Understanding yet is free, and might persuade 'em better.


D. Joh. The Understanding never can be free;
For what we und^stand, spite of our selves we do:
All objects are ready formed and placed
To our hands; and these the Senses to the Mind convey,
And as those rep^esent them, this must judge:
How can the Will be free, when the Understanding,
On which the Will depends, cannot be so.

Herm. Lay by your devilish Philosophy, and change the dangerous and
destructive course of your lewd lives.


D. Ant. Change our natures? Go bid a Blackamore be white, we follow our
Constitutions, which we did not give our selves.


D. Lop. What we are, we are by Nature, our reason tells us we must follow that.


D. Joh. Our Constitutions tell us one thing, and yours another; and which must
we obey? If we be bad, it is Nature's fault that made us so.


Herm. Farewell. I dare no longer hear your impious discourse. Such hardened
Wretches I never heard of yet.

[Exit Hermit.
D. Ant. Farewell, old Fool.


D. Joh. Thus Sots condemn what they can never answer.

Enter Don Francisco. This I believe is Francisco, whom he spoke of; if he has
but a handsome Wife, or Daughters, we are happy.


D. Lop. Sir, we are shipwrack'd men, and if you can direct us to a place,
where we may be furnished with some necessaries, you will oblige us --


D. Franc. Gentlemen, I have a House hard by, you shall be welcome to it: I
even now endeavored to succor a Youth and beauteous Woman, who, with two
Sailors, in a Boat, were driven toward these Rocks, but were forced back
again, and, I fear, are lost by this time. I desire nothing more, than to
assist men in extremes, and am o'rjoy'd at the opportunity of serving you.


D. Joh. We thank you.


D. Fran. You shall command my House as long as you please: I see you are
Cavaliers, and hope you will bear with some inconvenience. I have two young,
and, though I say it, handsome Daughters, who are, to morrow morning to be
married; the Solemnity will bring much company together, which, I fear, may
incommode my house and you --


D. Ant. You pose us with this kindness.


D. Joh. What ever pleases you, cannot be inconvenient to us.


D. Lop. On the contrary, we shall be glad to assist you at the Ceremony, and
help to make up the joyful Chorus.


D. Fran. You shall command my house and me; I Will show you the way to it*


D. Joh. Your humble Servant. We'll follow you.

[Exit Don Francisco. This is an admirable adventure.
He has Daughters, Boys, and to be married too:
If they have been so foolish, to preserve those
Toys, they call Maidenheads; their senseless
Husbands shall not be troubled with them:
I Will ease them of those. Pox, what should those dull
Drudging Animals, called Husbands, do with such Treasures:
No, they are for honest Whore-masters, Boys.

D. Ant. Well said, Don; we will not be wanting in our endeavors to succeed
you.


D. Lop. To you alone we must give place. Allons.

[Exeunt.
Enter Hermit, Maria in Man's habit, and Leonora. Herm. Heaven be praised, you
are safely now on Land.


Mar. We thank you, reverend Father, for your assistance.


Leon. We never shall forget the obligation.


Herm. I am happy to be so good an Instrument.


Leon. We followed a Vessel, which we saw fired with Lightning, and we fear
that none of 'em escaped.


Mar. I hope the Villain I pursue has escaped. I would not be revenged by
Heaven, but my own hand; or, if not by that, by the Hangman's.


Leon. Did any come to ^and? for I most nearly am concerned or one; the grief
for whom, if he belost, will soon, I fear, destroy me.


Herm. Here were three of that company came safe to Land; but such impious
Wretches, as did not deserve to escape, and such as no virtuous person can be
concerned for, sure; I was stiff with fear and horror when I heard 'em talk.


Mar. Three, say you?


Leon. By this sad description it must be Don John, and his two wicked
Associates; I am ashamed to confess the tenderness I have for him. Why should I
love that Wretch? Oh my too violent passion hurries me I know not whether! into
what fearful dangerous Labyrinths of misery will it conduct me?


Mar. Were they Gentlemen?


Herm. By their outsides they seemed so, but their in-sides declared them
Devils.


Mar. Heaven! it must be the Villain and his barbarous
Companions. They are reserved ^or my revenge:
Assist me, Heaven, in that just cause.
Oh, Villain, Villain! inhumane Villain!
Each minute is, methinks, a tedious Age,
Till I have dipped my hands in thy hearts blood.

Herm. You seem o'r-joy'd at the news of their safe arrival: Can any have a
kindness for such dissolute abandoned Atheists?


Mar. No; it is revenge that I pursue against the basest of all Villains.


Herm. Have a care; Revenge is Heavens, and must not be usurped by Mortals.


Mar. Mine is revenge for Rapes and cruel murders, and those Heaven leaves to
Earth to punish.


Herm. They are horrid crimes, but Magistrates must punish them.


Leon. What do I hear? were he the basest of all men, my love is so headstrong
and so wild within me, I must endeavor to preserve him, or destroy my self: to
what deplorable condition am I fallen? what Chains are these that hold me? Oh
that I could break them! and yet I would not if I could; Oh my heart!


Herm. They are gone to one Don Francisco's house, that Road will bring you to
it; it is on the other side of this Rock, in a pleasant Valley. I have not
stirred these forty years from these small bounds, or I would give him notice
what Devils he harbors in his house. You will do well to do it.


Jac. (within) Help, help, murder! I am drowned, I am dead; Help, help!


Herm. Hah! what voice is that? I must assist him --


Mar. Father, farewell. Come, Madam, will you go to this house? Now, Monster,
for my revenge.


Leon. I will; but for different ends we go;
It Is Love conducts me, but Revenge brings you.
[Exeunt Maria, Leonora.
Jac. Oh help, help! I sink, I sink!


Herm. Poor man, sure he is almost drowned.


Jac. No, not yet; I have only drunk something too much of a scurvy unpleasant
Liquor.


Herm. Reach me your hand --

[Pulls him out.
Jac. Ay, and my heart too; Oh! Oh!

Sir, a thousand thanks to you: I vow to Gad, you are a very civil person, and,
as I am an honest man, have done me the greatest kindness in the world, next to
the piece of the Mast which I floated upon, which I must ever love and honor;
I am sorry it swam away, I would have preserved it, and hung it up in the Sent
of our ancient Family.


Herm. Thank Heaven for your deliverance, and leave such vain thoughts.


Jac. I do with all my heart; but I am not settled enough to say my prayers yet:
pray, Father, do you for me; it is nothing with you, you are used to it, it is
your Trade.


Herm. Away, vain man; you speak as if you had drunk too deeply of another
Liquor than Seawater.


Jac. No, I have not, but I would fain: Where may a man light of a good Glass
of Wine? I would gladly have an Antidot^ to my Poison. Methinks, Pah! these
Fishes have but a scurvy time; I am sure they have very ill drinking.


Herm. Farewell, and learn more devotion and thankfulness to Heaven --

[Exit Hermit.
Jac. Ha! it is uncivilly done to leave a man in a strange Country. But these
Hermits have no breeding. Poor Jacomo, Dear Jacomo, how I love thy person, how
glad am I to see thee safe? for I swear, I think thou art as honest a fellow as
ever I met with. Well, farewell, thou wicked Element; if ever I trust thee again
-- Well, Haddocks, I desie you, you shall have none of me, no, not a Collop;
no, no, I will be eaten by Worms, as all my Ancestors have been. If Heaven will
but preserve me from the Monsters of the Land, my Master and his two Companions
(who, I hope, are drowned) I Will preserve my self from those of the Sea. Let me
see, here is a path -- this must lead to some house. I Will go, for I am plaguey
sick with this Salt Water. P^h --

[Exit Jacomo.
Enter Clara and Flavia, with her two Maids. Clar. Oh, Flavia, this will be our
last happy night, to morrow is our Execution day; we must marry.


Flav. Ay, Clara, we are ^ondemn'd without reprieve. It Is better to live as we
have done, kept from all men, than for each to be confined to one, whom yet we
never saw, and a thousand to one shall never like.


Clar. Out on it, a Spanish Wife has a worse life than a cooped Chicken.


Flav. A singing Bird in a Cage is a Princely creature, compared to that poor
Animal, called a Wife, here.


Clar. Birds are made tame by being cag'd, but Women grow wild by confinement,
and that, I fear, my Husband will find to his cost.


Flav. None live pleasantly here, but those who should be miserable, Strumpets:
They can choose their Mates, but we must be like Slaves condemned to the
Galleys; we have not liberty to sell our Selves, or venture one throw for our
freedom.


Clar. O that we were in England! there, they say, a Lady may choose a Footman,
and run away with him, if she likes him, and no dishonor to the Family.


Flav. That Is because the Families are so very Honorable, that nothing can
touch them: there Wives run and ramble whither and with whom they please, and
defy all censure.


Clar. Ay, and a jealous Husband is a more monstrou^ Cr^ture there, than a
Wittall here, and would be more pointed at: They say, if a man be jealous
there, the women will all join and pull him to pieces.


Fl^v. Oh happy Country! we never tou^h money, there the Wives can spend their
Husbands Estates for 'em. Oh b^ess'd Country!


Clar. Ay, there, they say, the Husbands are the prettiest civil easy good
natured indi^erent persons in the whole world; they never mind what their Wives
do, not they.


Flav. Nay, they say, they love those men best tha^ are kindest to their Wives.
Good men! poor hearts. And here, if an honest Gentleman offers a Wife a
civility by the By, our bloody butcherly Husbands are cutting of throats
presently --


Clar. Oh that we had those frank civil Englishmen, instead of our grave dull
surly Spanish Blockheads, whose greatest honor lies, in preserving their
Beards and Foreheads inviolable.


Flav. In England, if a Husband and Wife like not one another, they draw two
several ways, and make no bones on it, while the Husband treats his Mistress
openly in his Glass-Coach; the Wife, for decency's sake, puts on her Vizar, and
whips away in a Hackney with a Gallant, and no harm done.


Clar. Though, of late, it is as unfashionable for a Husband to love his Wife
there, as it is here, yet it is fashionable for her to love some body else, and
that is something.


Flav. Nay, they say, Gentlemen will keep company with a Cuckold there, as soon
as another man, and never wonder at him.


Clar. Oh happy Country! there a Woman may choose for her self, and none will
into the Trap of Ma^imony, unless she likes the Bait; but here we are tumbled
headlong and blindfold into it.


Flav. We are used as they use Hawks, never unhooded, or whistled off, till
they are just upon the Quarry.


Clar. And it is for others, not our selves, we fly too.


Flav. No more, this does but put us in mind of our misery.


Clar. It does so: but prithee let us be merry one night, to morrow is our last.
Farewell all happiness.


Flav. O that this happy day would last our lives-time. But prithee, my Dear,
let us have thy Song, and divert our s^lves as well as we can in the mean time.


Clar. It Is a little too wanton.


Flav. Pr^thee let us be a little wanton this evening, to morrow we must take
our leaves on it.


Clar. Come on then; our Maids shall join in the Chorus: Here they are.


SONG.
WOman who is by Nature wild,
Dull be^rded men incloses;
Of N^ture's freedom we are beg^il'd
By Laws which man impo^es:
Who still himself continues sree,
Yet we poor Slaves must fettered be.
Chor. A s^ame on the Curse
Of, For better sor worse;
It Is a vile imposition on Nature:
For Women should change,
And have freedom to range,
Like to every other wild Creature.
So gay a thing was never designed.
To be restrained from roving;
Heaven meant so changeable a mind
Should have its change in loving.
By cunning we could make men smart,
But they by strength o'rcome our Art.

Chor. A shame on the Curse
Of, For, etc.
How happy is the ^illage Maid,
Whom only Love can f^tter;
By foolish Honor never betrayed,
She serves a Power much greater:
That lawful Prince the wisest rules,
Th* Usurper Honor rules but Fools.

Chor. A shame on the Curse
Of, For, etc.
Let us resume our ancient right,
Make man at distance wonder;
Though he victorious be in sight,
In love we'll keep him under.
W^ and Ambition hence be hurled,
Let Love and Beauty rule the World.

Chor. A shame on the Curse
Of, For better, etc.

Flav. Oh, dear Clara, that this were true! But now let us home, our Father will
miss us.


Clar. No, he is walked abroad with the three Shipwrack'd Gentlemen.


Flav. They Are proper handsome Gentlemen; but the chief, whom they call Don
John, exceeds the rest.


Clar. I never saw a finer person; pray Heaven either of our Husbands prove as
good.


Flav. Do not name 'em. Let the Maids go home, and if my Father be there, let
him know we are here.

[Exit Maids.
Clar. In the mean time, if he be thereabouts, do you go down that Walk, and
I Will go this way, and perhaps one of us shall light on him.


Flav. Agreed.

[Exit ambo.
Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio. D. Joh. Where have you left the Old
man, Don Francisco?


D. Lop. He Is very busy at home, seeing all things prepared for his Daughters
Weddings to moriow.


D. Joh. His Daughters are gone this way: if you have any friendship for me, go
and watch the Old man; and if he offers to come toward us, divert him, that I
may have freedom to attack his Daughters.


D. Ant. You may be sure of us, that have served you with our lives; besides,
the justice of this cause will make us serve you. Adieu.

[Exeunt Don Lop. Don. Ant.
D. Joh. Now for my Virgins. A^sist me, Love. Fools, you shall have no
Maiden-heads to morrow-night. Husbands have Maiden-heads! no, no -- poor
sneaking Fools.


Enter Jacomo. Jac. I have lost my way, I think I shall never find this house:
But I shall never think my self out of my way, unless I meet my impious Master;
Heaven grant he be drowned.


D. Joh. How now, Rascal, are you alive?


Jac. Oh Heaven! he is here. Why was this lewd Creature saved? I am in a wo^se
condition than ever; now I have escaped drowning, he brings hanging fresh into
my memory.


D. Joh. What mute, Sir?


Jac. Sir, I am no more your Servant, you parted with me, I thank you, Sir, I
am beholding to you: Farewell, good Sir, I am my own man now --


D. Joh. No: though you are a Rogue, you are a necessary Rogue, and I Will not
part with you.


Jac. I must be gone, I dare not venture further with you.


D. Joh. Sir, do you know me, and dare you say this to me? have at your Guts,
I will rip you from the Navel to the Chin.


Jac. O good Sir, hold, hold. He has got me in his clutches, I shall never get
loose -- Oh! Oh! --


D. Joh. Come, Dog, follow me close, stinking Rascal.


Jac. I am too well pickled in the Salt Water to stink, I thank you, I shall
keep a great while. But you were a very generous man, to leave a Gentleman,
your Friend, in danger, as you did me. I have reason to follow you: but if I
serve you not in your kind, then am I a sows'd Sturgeon.


D. Joh. Follow me, Sir; I see a Lady.


Jac. Are you so fierce already?


Enter Clara, singing, A shame on the Curse, etc. Clar. Ha! this is the
Stranger;
What makes him here?

D. Joh. A delicate Creature. Ha! this is the Lady. How happy am I to meet you
here --


Clar. What mean you, Sir?


D. Joh. I was undone enough before, with seeing your Picture in the Gallery;
but I see you have more Excellencies than Beauty, your Voice needed not have
conspired with that to ruin me.


Clar. Have you seen my Picture?


D. Joh. And loved it above all things I ever saw, but the Original. I am lost
beyond redemption, unless you can pity me.


Jac. (aside) He has been lost a hundred times, but he always sinds himself
again -- and me too; a pox on him.


D. Joh. When Love had taken too fast hold on me, ever to let me go, I too late
found you were to morrow to be married.


Clar. Yes, I am condemned to one I never saw, and you are come to railly me
and my misfortunes.


Jac. Ah, Madam, say not so, my Master is always in earnest.


D. Joh. So much I am in earnest now, that if you have no way to break this
marriage off, and pity me, I soon shall repent I ever came to Land; I shall
suffer a worse wrack upon the Shore, here I shall linger out my life in the
worst of pains, despairing Love; there, I should have perished quickly --


Jac. Ah poor man! he is in a desperate condition, I pity him with all my heart
--


D. Joh. Peace, Rascal. Madam, this is the only opportunity I am like to have;
Give me leave to improve it.


Clar. Sure, Sir, you cannot be in earnest.


D. Joh. If all the Oaths under the Sun can convince you, Madam, I swear --


Jac. O Sir, Sir, have a care of swearing, for fear you should, once in your
life, be forsworn --


D. Joh. Peace, Dog, or I shall slit your Windpipe.


Jac. Nay, I know if he be forsworn, it is the first time, that is certain.


Clar. But, Sir, if you be in earnest, and I had an inclination, It Is impossible
to bring it about, my Father has disposed of me.


D. Joh. Dispose of your self, I Will do well enough with him, and my Fortune and
Quality are too great for him, for whom you are intended, to dispute with me.


Clar. If this be true, would you win a Woman at first sight?


D. Joh. Madam, this is like to be the first and last; to morrow is the fatal
day that will undo me.


Jac. Courage, Don, matters go well.


Clar. Nay, I had rather have a Peasant of my own choosing, than an Emperor of
another's. He is a handsome Gentleman, and seems to be of quality: Oh that he
could rid me of my intended slavery.

[Aside. Sir, talk not of impossible things; for could I wish this, my Father's
Honor will not suffer him to dispense wtih his promise.


D. Joh. I Will carry you beyond his power, and your intended Husband's too.


Clar. It cannot be; but I must leave you, I dare not be seen with you --


D. Joh. Remember the short time you have to think on this: will you let me
perish without relief? if you will have pity on a wretched man, I have a Priest
in my company, I Will marry you, and we'll find means to fly early in the
morning, before the house are stirring.


Clar. I confess I am to be condemned to a Slavery, that nothing can be worse;
yet this were a rash attempt.


D. Joh. If you will not consent to my just desires, I am resolved to kill my
self, and fall a Sacrifice to your disdain. Speak, speak my doom --

[H^lds his Sword to his breast.
Clar. Hold, hold --


Jac. Ay, hold, hold: poor foolish Woman, she should not need to bid him hold.


Clar. I Will find a means this night to speak with you alone; but I fear this is
but for your diversion.


Jac. Yes, it is for diversion indeed; the common diversion of all the world.


D. Joh. By all that is great and good, my intentions are honorable.


Clar. Farewell, Sir, I dare not stay longer.


D. Joh. Will you keep your word, Madam?


Jac. You Will keep yours, no doubt --


Clar. I will, any thing rather than marry one I cannot love, as I can no man
of another's choosing.


D. Joh. Remember, Madam, I perish if you do not; I have only one thing to
say, Keep this Secret from your Sister, till we have effected it; I Will give you
sufficient reason for what I say.

[Exit Clar. Victoria, Victoria; I have her fast, she is my own.


Jac. You are a hopeful man, you may come to good in time.


Enter Flavia. D. Joh. Here is the other Sister; have at her.


Jac. Why, Sir, Sir; have you no conscience? Will not one at once serve your
turn?


D. Joh. Stand by, Fool. Let me see, you are the Lady.


Flav. What say you, Sir?


D. Joh. You have lately taken up a stray heart of mine, I hope you do not
intend to detain it, without giving me your own in exchange.


Flav. I a heart of yours? since when, good Sir? you were but this day
shipwrack'd on this Coast, and never saw my face before*


D. Joh. I saw your Picture, and I saw your motion, both so charming, I could
not resist them; but now I have a nearer view, I see plainly I am lost.


Flav. A goodly handsome man! but what can this mean?


D. Joh. Such killing Beauties I never saw before; my heart is irrevocably gone.


Flav. Whether is it gone, Sir? I assure you I have no su^ thing about me, that
I know of.


D. Joh. Ah, Madam, if you would give me leave to search you, I should find it
in some little corner about you, that shall be nameless.


Flav. It cannot be about me, I have none but my own (...) that I must part
with to morrow to I know not whom.


D. Joh. If the most violent love that man ever knew can ever deserve that
treasure, it is mine; if you give that away, you lose the truest Lover that ever
languish'd yet.


Jac. What can be the end of this? Sure Blood* must follow this dishonor of
the Family* and I unfortunate, shall have my throat cut for company.


Flav. Do you know where you are?


D. Joh. Yes, Madam, in Spain, where opportunities are very (...), and those
that are wise make use of 'em as soon as they have 'em.


Flav. You have a mind* to divert your self; but I must leave you, I am
disposed to be more serious.


D. Joh. Madam, I swear by all --


Jac. Hold, hold; will you be forsworn again?


D. Joh. Peace, Villain, I shall cut that tongue out.


Flav. Farewell, I cannot stay.

[Exit Flavia.
D. Joh. I Will not leave her; I Will thaw her, if she were Ice, before I have done
with her.


Jac. There is no end of this lewdness. Well, I must be killed or hanged once
for all, and there is an end on it.

[Exeunt.
Enter Maria and Leonora. Leon. I am faint with what I suffered at Sea, and
with my wandering since; let us repose a little, we shall not find this house to
night.


Mar. I never shall rest till I have found Don Francisco's house; but I Will sit
down a while.


Leon. I hope he will not find it, till I have found means to give Don John
warning of his cruel intentions: I would save his life, who, I fear, would not
do that for me. But in the miserable ^ase that I am in, if he d^ies his love,
death would be the welcom'st thing on earth to me.


Mar. Oh my Octavio* how does the loss of thee perplex me with despair! the
honor of Mankind is gone with thee. Why do I whine? grief shall no longer
usurp the place of my revenge. How could I gnaw the Monster's heart, Villain!
I Will be with you. When I have revenged my dear Octavio's loss, I then shall d^
contented.


Enter Don Lopez and Don Antonio. D. Lop. The Old man's safe; I long to know Don
John's success.


D. Ant. He Is engaged upon a noble cause: if he succeeds, 'twill be a victory
worth the owning.


D. Lop. Hah! whom have we here? a young man well habited, with a Lady too;
they seem to be strangers.


D. Ant. A mischief comes into my head, that is worth the doing.


D. Lop. What Is that, dear Antonio?


D. Ant. We are in a strange Country, and may want money: I would rob that
young Fellow. We have not robbed a good while; methinks it is a new wickedness
to me.


D. Lop. Thou art in the right. I hate to commit the same dull sin over and
over again, as if I were married to it: variety makes all things pleasant.


D. Ant. But there is one thing we'll never omit. When we have robbed the Man,
we'll ravish the Woman.


D. Lop. Agreed; let us to it, man. Come on, young Gentleman, we must see what
riches you have about you.


Mar. O Villains! Thieves! Thieves! these are the inhumane Companions of that
blou^y Monster.


Leon. Have pity on poor miserable Strangers.


D. Ant. Peace; we'll use you kindly, very kindly.


D. Lop. Do you carry that young Gentleman, bind him to a Tree, and bring the
money, while I wait upon the Lady.


D. Ant. Will you play me no foul play in the mean time then? For we must cast
Lots about the business you wot of.


D. Lop. No, upon my honor.


Mar. Honor, you Villain?


D. Ant. Come, young Gentleman, I Will tame you.


Mar. Help! help --

[Exit Don Ant. having Maria.
Leon. Have you no humanity in you? Take our money, but leave us liberty; be
not so barb'rously cruel.


D. Ant. Come, I have made haste with him; now let us draw ^uts who enjoys the
Lady first.


Leon. O heaven assist me! what do I hear? help! help!


Enter four or five Country Fellows, coming from work. 1. Count. Fell. What,
two men a robbing of a Lady! Be gone, and let her alone, or we have sower
Cudgels shall wasler your bones, I tell you that.


D. Ant. How now, Rogues?

[Fight ofs the Stage.
Leon. Thanks to Heaven. I fly! I fly! where shall I hide my self? --

[Exit.
Enter Don John and Jacomo. D. Joh. I shall conquer'em both. Now, Sir, what
think you?


Jac. Why I think you manage your business as discreetly, and take as much
pains to have your throat cut, as any man in Spain.


D. Joh. Your fear o'r-rules your sense, mine is a life Monarchs might envy. --


Jac. It Is like to be a very short one at this rate.


D. Joh. Away, Fool, it is dark, I must be gone; I shall scarce find the way
home --


Enter Leonora. Leon. Heaven guard me from these wicked Wretches. Help! help!
they are here.


D. Joh. How now, Madam? what* afraid of a Man!


Leon. Don John, no, not of you; you are the man in the world I would have met.


D. Joh. Leonora, you are the woman i'th'world I would have avoided. 'Sdeath!
she will spoil my new designs; but I have a trick for her. What miracle brought
you hither?


Leon. Love, that works the greatest miracles, made me follow you; and the same
Storm drove me on this shore, on which you were thrown, and thus far I Have
wandered till I have found you.


D. Joh. This is the most unreasonable unsatiable loving Lady* that ever was
abused by man; she has a kind of Spaniel love, the worse you use her, the more
loving she is. Pox on her, I mu^ be rid of her.


Leon. I am very faint and weary, yet I was resolv*d not to rest till I had
found you.


D. Joh. Your unweari'd love has o'rcome and convinced me, there is not such a
Woman breathing.


Leon. This is a Sovereign Medicine for all my sorrows, I now, methinks, am
happier than ever: but I am faint and ill.


D. Joh. Here, Madam, I have an excellent Cordial, 'twill refresh you; and I Will
conduct you where you shall never be unhappy more.


Leon. From that dear hand it is welcome --
To your health.
[Drinks.
D. Joh. And to your own destruction; you have drunk your last.


Leon. What means my Love?


D. Joh. You Have drunk the subtlest poison that Art ever yet invented.


Jac. O murder! murder! what have you done?


D. Joh. Peace, Villain, leave your unseasonable pity -- You cannot live two
minutes.


Leon. O ungrateful Tyrant! thou have murdered the only Creature living that
could love thee. Heaven will revenge it, though to me it is kindness. Here all
my sorrows shall for ever cease.


D. Joh. Why would you persecute me with your love?


Leon. I could not help it. I came to preserve you, and am destroyed for it.


Jac. Oh horrid fact!


D. Joh. To preserve me! I wear my safety by my side.


Leon. Oh I faint! Guard your self. There Is a young
Gentleman pursues your life. Have a Care --
I came to tell you this, and thus I am rewarded.
Heaven pardon you. Farewell. I can no more.
[Dies.
Jac. This object sure will strike your heart! Tigers would melt at this. Oh
the Earth will open and swallow you up, and me for company. There Is no end of
your murders --


D. Joh. This is the first time I ever knew compassion.
Poor Fool, I pity her, but it is too late --
Farewell all senseless thoughts of a remorse,
I would remove what ever would stop my course.
[Exeunt.
ACT IV.
Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. D. Joh. THis nights success
exceeded all my hopes. I had admittance to their several Chambers, and I have
been contracted to both the Sisters, and this day resolve to marry 'em, and at
several time^ enjoy them; and, in my opinion, I shall have a brace of as pretty
Wives, as any man in Spain.


D. Ant. Brave Don John, you are Master of your Art, not a Woman in Spain can
stand before you.


D. Lop. We can but envy you, and at a distance imitate; But both their Maids
shall to pot, I assure you.


Jac. How far will the Devil hurry you?


D. Joh. It Is not the Devil, it is the Flesh, Fool.


Jac. Here will be fine cutting of throats. Poor Jacomo, must thou be cut off
in the flower of thy Age?


Enter Don Francisco. D. Fran. Gentlemen, your Servant; I hope you rested well
this night.


D. Lop. We thank you, Sir; never better.


D. Ant. We never shall requite this o^ligation.


Jac. I warrant you my Master will; he is a very grateful civil person indeed.


D. Joh. The favor is too great to be suddenly requited; but I shall study to
deserve it.


Jac. Good man, you will deserve it.


Enter two Bridegrooms. D. Fran. Gentlemen, you are come, you are early.


1. Brideg. This joyful occasion made us think it late.


2. Brideg. The expectation of so great a blessing as we this day hope to
enjoy, would let us have but little rest last night.


1. Brideg. And the fruition will afford us less to night.


D. Joh. Poor Fools! you shall be bob'd. How it tickles my Spleen to think on it.


D. Fran. These are to be my Sons in Law.


D. Joh. And my Cuckolds beforehand.


D. Fran. Pray know 'em, Gentlemen; they are men of Honor.


D. Joh. I shall be glad to serve them;

But first I Will serve their Ladies.

[As^de.
D. Fran. Come, Gentlemen, I Will now conduct you to my Daughters; and beg your
pardon for a moment, I Will wait on you again.

[Exit Don Fran. and Bridegrooms.
D. Ant. These Fools will spoil your design.


D. Joh. No, poor Sots; I have persuaded the Ladies to feign sickness, and put
off their marriage till to morrow morning, to gain time; in the mean while I
have 'em safe, Boys.


D. Lop. But will not the Sisters betray you to one another?


D. Joh. No, I have wheedled each into a jealousy of the other, and each
believes, that if the other knows it, she, in honor, will reveal it to the
Father.


Jac. Sir, if you be so very weary of your life, why don't you make use of a
convenient Beam? it is the easier way; so you may die without the filthy pother
you keep about it.


D. Joh. Away, Coward; it is a sign I am not weary of my life, that I make so
much use on it.


Jac. Oh Jacomo! thou art lost; it is pity a Fellow of thy neat spruce parts
should be destroyed.


Enter Don ^ancisco. D. Fran. Come, Gentlemen, will you not refresh your selves
with some cool Wines this morning?


D. Lop. We thank you, Sir, we have already.


Enter a Servant Serve. Sir, here is a young Gentleman, a Stranger, desires to
speak with you.


D. (...). Admit him.

Enter Maria in (...) habit. Your humble Servant.


Mar. Sir, when I ve told you what I come for, I doubt not but I shall deserve
your thanks. I come to do you service.


D. Fran. You have'em, Sir, alread^ --


Mar. You have lodg^d within your house some shipwrack'd men, who are greater
Villains than the Earth ever bore; I come to give you warning of 'em, and to beg
your power to revenge such horrid actions, as heart could never yet conceive,
or tongue could utter. Ha! they are these -- Revenge, revenge cruel, unnatural
Rapes and Murders. They are Devils in the shapes of men.


D. Fran. What say you, Sir?


Jac. Now the snare is fallen upon me; methinks I feel cold Steel already in my
body. Too well I know that face.


D. Joh. I know that face. Now, Impudence, assist me. What mad young man is
that?


D. Fran. These, by their habits and their meens, are Gentlemen, and seem to be
men of Honor.


Mar. By these two, last night, I was robbed, and bound to a Tree, and there
have been all night, and but this morning was relieved by Peasants -- I had a
Lady with me, whom they said they would ravish, and t^ morning I saw her dead;
they must have murdered her.


D. Fran. Heaven! what do I hear?


Jac. Oh! I am noos'd already, I feel the knot, methinks, under my left ear.


D. Ant. The youth raves; we never saw his face, we never stirred from the
bounds of this house since we came hither.


D. Lop. 'Sdeath, let me kill the Villain; shall he thus affront men of our
quality and honor?


D. Fran. Hold, consider I am a Magistrate.


D. Joh. The Youth was robbed, and with the fright has lost his wits. Poor
Fool! let him be bound in's bed.


D. Fran. Do not persist in this, but have a care: These injuries to men of
Honor shall not go unpunished.


Mar. Whither shall injured Innocence fly for succor, if you so soon can be
corrupted? Monster, I Will revenge my self; have at thy heart.


D. Fran. What means the Youth? put up your Sword.


D. Ant. We told you, Sir, he was mad.


Mar. Oh impudent Villains! I ask your pardon, Sir: My griefs and injuries
tr^nsport me so, I scarce can utter them. That Villain is Don John, who basely
murdered the Governor of Sevil in his house, and then dishonored his fair
Sister.


D. Joh. Death and Hell! this injury is beyond all sufferance.


D. Joh. Hold, Sir, think in whose house you are.


Jac. O Lord! what will this come to? Ah Jacomo! thy line of life is short.


Mar. This is the Villain, who killed the Lover of Antonio's Sister, deflow'rd
her, and murdered her Brother in his own house.


D. Joh. I Will have no longer ^ience.


D. Ant. Such a Villain should have his throat cut, though in a Church.


D. Lop. No man of honor will protect those, who offer such injuries.


D. Joh. Have at you, Villain.


D. Fran. Nay then; Within there: Ho! I will protect him, or perish with him.


Enter two Bridegrooms. 1. Brideg. What Is the matter?


D. Joh. This rashness will spoil my design upon the Daughters; if I had
perfected that, I would have owned all this for half a Duccatoon --

[To Ant. Lop. I ask your pardon for my ill manners; I was provoked too far:
indeed the accusations are so extravagant and odd, I rather should have laughed
at 'em. Let the young Fool have a vein opened, he is stark staring mad.


D. Ant. A foolish Impostor. We never saw Sevil till last night.


Mar. Oh Impudence!


Jac. No, not we; we never were there till yesterday. Pray, Sir, lay that young
Fellow by the heels, for lying on us, men of Honor.


D. Fran. What is the matter, Friend, you tremble so?


D. Lop. 'Sdeath, the Dog's fear will betray us.


Jac. I tremble, Sir? no, no, Sir: I tremble -- Though it would make any one
tremble to hear one lie, as that young Gentleman does. Have you no conscience
in you?


Mar. Heaven can witness for me, I speak not false. Octavio, my dear Octavio,
being dearest to me of all the world, I would in Sevil have revenged his
murder; but the Villain there escaped me: I followed him to Sea, and in the
same Storm in which their Ship perished, I was thrown on shore. Oh my Octavio!
if this foul unnatural murder be not revenged, there is no Justice left among
mankind. His Ghost, and all the rest whom he has barbarously murdered, will
interrupt your quiet; they will haunt you in your sleep. Revenge, revenge!


2. Bride. This is wonderful.


D. Fran. There must be something in this; his passion cannot be counterfeited,
nor your man's fear.


Jac. My fear? I scorn your words; I fear nothing under the Sun. I fear? Ha,
ha, ha --


D. Joh. Will you believe this one false Villain against three, who are
Gentlemen, and men of honor?


Jac. Nay, against four, who are Gentlemen, and men of honor?


Mar. O Villain, that I had my Sword imbrued in thy hearts blood. Oh my dear
Octavio! Do Justice, Sir, or Heaven will punish you.


Enter Clara. D. Fran. Gentlemen, he is too earnest, in his grief and anger, to
be what you would have him, an Impostor. My house has been your Sanctuary, and
I am obliged in honor not to act as a Magistrate, but your Host, no violence
shall here be offered to you; but you must instantly leave this house, and if
you would have safety, find it somewhere else. Be gone.


D. Joh. This is very well.


Mar. Oh! will you let 'em go unpunished?
Whither shall I ^lie for vengeance?

D. Fran. Pray leave this place immediately.


Jac. Ah, good Sir, let us be gone -- Sir, your most humble Servant.


Clar. Oh, Sir, consider what you do; do not banish Don John from hence.


1. Brideg. Ha! what means she?


D. Fran. What say you?


Clar. Oh, Sir, he is my Husband, we were last night contracted.


D. Fran. Oh Heaven! what do I hear?


1. Brideg. I am dishonored, abused. Villain, thou die^t.


D. Joh. Villain, you lie; I will cut your throat first.


D. Fran. Hey, where are my people here.


Enter Servants and Flavia. Flav. Oh, Sir, hold; if you banish Don John, I am
lost for ever.


D. Fran. Oh Devil! what do I hear?


Flav. He is my Husband, Sir, we were last night contracted.


Clar. Your Husband! Heaven! what is this?


2. Brideg. Hell and Damnation!


D. Fran. Oh! I have lost my senses.


Mar. Oh Monster! now am I to be believed?


Jac. Oh spare my life! I am innocent as I hope to live and breath.


D. Joh. Dog, you shall fight for your life, if you have it.


D. Franc. First, I Will revenge my self on these.


D. Joh. Hold, hold, they are both my Wives, and I will have them.

[Runs at his Daughters, they run out.
D. Franc. Oh Devil! fall on --


Mar. Fall on, I will assist you.

[They fight, Maria and Don Francisco are killed, the two Bridegrooms are hurt,
Jacomo runs away.
D. Joh. Now we have done their business.
Ah, cowardly Rogue! are not you a Son of a Whore?

Jac. Ay, Sir, what you please: A man had better be a living
Son of a Whore, than a dead Hero, by your favor.

D. Joh. I could find in my heart to kill the Rascal; his fear, some time or
other, will undo us.


Jac. Hold, Sir; I went, Sir, to provide for your escape. Let Us take Horses out
of the Stable, and fly; abundance of C^pany are coming, expecting the Wedding,
and we are i^parably lost if we take not this time. I think my fear will now
preserve you.


D. Ant. I think he counsels well. Let Us fly to a new place of pleasure.


D. Joh. But I shall leave my business undone with the two Women.


D. Lop. It Is now scarce feizible. Let Us sly; you will light on others as
handsome, where we come next.


D. Joh. Well, dispose of me as you please; and yet it troubl^s me.


Jac. Haste, haste, or we shall be apprehended.

[Exeunt. Enter Clara and F^avia.
Flav. O that I ever lived to see this day!
This fatal day! 'Twas our vile disobedience
Caused our poor Father's death, which Heaven
Will revenge on us. So lewd a Villain
As Don John was never heard of yet.

Cl^r. That we should be so credulous! Oh dreadful
Accident! Dear Father, what Expiation can
We make? our crime's too foul for
Tears to wash away, and all our liv^s will
B^ too short, to spend in penitence for this
Our levity and disobedience. He was the
Best of Fathers, and of Men.

Flav. What will become of us, poor miserable Maids,
Lost in our Fortunes and our Reputations?
Our intended Husbands, if they recover of their
Wounds, will murder us; and it is but Justice:
Our li^es too now cannot be worth the keeping.
(...) Devils in the shapes of men are fled.

Cl^r. Let us not waste our time in fruitless grief;
Let us employ some to pursue the murderers.
And for our selves, let us to the next Monastery,
And there spend all our weary life in penitence.

Fl^v. Let Us fly to our last Sanctuary in this world,
And try, by a R^ligious life, to expiate this Crime:
There is no safety, or no hope but there.
Let Us go, and bid a long farewell to all the
World; a thing too vain, and little worth our care.

Cl^r. Agreed; farewell to all the vanity on Earth,
Where wretched Mortals, tossed 'twixt hope and fear,
Must of all fixed and solid joy despair.
[Exeunt.
The Scene is a delightful Grove.
En^er two Shepherds and two Nimphs. 1. Shep. Come Nimphs and Shepherds, haste
away
To t^appy Sports within these shady Groves,
In pleasant lives time slides away apace,
But with the wretched seems to creep too slow.

1. Nymph. Our happy leisure we employ in joys,
As innocent as they are pleasant. We,
Strangers to strife, and to tumultuous noise,
To baneful envy, and to wretched cares,
In rural pleasures spend our happy days,
And our soft nights in calm and quiet sleeps.

2. Shep. No rude Ambition interrupts our rest,
Nor base and guilty thoughts how to be great.

2. Nymph. In humble Cottages we have such contents,
As uncorrupted Nature does afford,
Which the great, that surfeit under gilded Roofs,
And wanton in Down Beds, can never know.

1. Shep. Nature is here not yet debauched by Art,
It Is as it was in Saturn's happy days:
Minds are not here by Luxury invaded;
A homely Plenty, with sharp Appetite,
Does lightsome health, and vigorous strength impart.

1. Nymph. A chast-cold Spring does here refresh our thirst,
Which by no feavourish surfeit is increased;
Our food is such as Nature meant for Men,
Ere with the Vicious, Eating was an Art.

2. Nymph. In noisie Cities riot is persu'd,
And lewd luxurious living softens men,
Effeminates Fools in Body and in Mind,
Weakens their Appetites, and decays their Nerves.

2. Shep. With ^ilthy steams from their excess of Mea^,
And clowdy vapors raised from dang^rous Wine;
Their heads are never clear or free to think,
They waste their lives in a continual mist.

1. Shep. Some subtle and ill men choose Temperance,
Not as a Virtue, but a Bawd to Vice,
And vigilantly wait to ruin those,
Whom Luxury and Ease have lulled asleep.

2. Shep. Yes, in the clamorous Courts of tedious Law,
Where what is meant for a relief's a gievance;
Or in Kings Palaces, where Cunning strives,
Not ^o advance King's Interests, but its own.

1. Nymph. There they in a continual hurry live,
And seldom can, for all their subtle Arts,
Lay their foundations sure; but some
Are undermined, others blown down by storms.

2. Nymph. Their subtilty is but a common Road
Of flattering great men, and oppressing little,
Smiling on all they meet, and loving none.

1. Shep. In populous Cities, life is all a storm;
But we enjoy a sweet perpetual calm:
Here our own Flocks we keep, and here
I and my Phillis can embrace unenvi'd.

2. Shep. And I and Caelia without jealousy.
But hark, the Pipes begin; now for our sports.
[A Symphony of Rustic Music* NImphs and Shepherds come away,
In these Groves let us sport and play;
Where each day is a Holy Day,
Sacred to Ease and happy Love.
To Dancing, Music, Poetry:
Your Flocks may n^w securely rov^.
Whilst you express your jollity.
Enter Shepherds and Shepherdesses, singing in Chor^* We come, we come, no joy
like this.
Now let us sing, rejoice, and kiss.
The Great can never know such bliss

1. As this.


2. As this.


3. As this.


All. As this.

The Great can never know such bliss


1. All the Inhabitants o'th'Wood,
Now celebrate the Spring,
That gives fresh vigor to the blood
Of every living thing.

Chor. The Birds have been singing and billing before us,
And all the sweet Choristers join in the Chorus.

2. The Nightingales with ^ging throats,
Warble out their pre^ Notes,
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet:
And thus our Loves and Pleasures greet.

Chor. Then let our Pipes sound, let us d^nce, let us sing,
Till the murmuring Groves with loud Eccho's shall ring.
[Dance begin^
4. How happy are we,
From all jealousy free;
No dangers or cares can annoy us:
We toy and we kiss,
And Love's our chief bliss;
A pleasure that never can cloy us.

Chor. Our days we consume in unenvi'd delights,
And in love and soft rest our happy long nights.

4. Each Nymph does impart
Her love without Art,
To her Swain, who thinks that his chief Treasure.
No envy is feared,
No sighs are ever heard,
But those which are caused by our pleasure.

Chor. When we feel the blessed Raptures of innocent Love,
No joys exceed ours but the pleasures above.

General Chorus. In these delightful fragrant Groves,
Let Us celebrate our happy Loves.
Let Us pipe, and dance, and laugh, and sing;
Thus every happy living thing,
Revels in the cheerful Spring.
[Dance continues.
Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo. D. Joh. So, thus far we are
fafe, we have almost killed our Horses with riding cross out of all Roads.


Jac. Nay, you have had as little mercy on them, as if they had been Men or
Women: But ^et we are not safe, let us fly farther.


D. Joh. The house I lighted at was mine during my life, which I sold to that
fellow; he, since he holds by that tenure, will carefully conceal us.


Jac. *It Is a Tenure I will not give him two months purchase for.


D. Joh. Besides, our Swords are used to conquest.


D. Ant. At worst, there is a Church hard by; we'll put it to its proper use,
take refuge in it.


D. Lop. Look here, here are Shepherds, and young pretty Wenches; shall we be
idle, Don?


D. Ant. By no means; it is a long time, methinks, since we were vicious.


D. Joh. We'll serve 'em as the Romans did the Sabines, we'll rob 'em of their
Women; only we'll return the Punks again, when we have used them.


J^c. For Heavens sake hold.


D. Joh. Sir, no more; do as we do, ravish, Rascal, or, by my Sword, I Will cut
thee into so many pieces, it shall pose an Arithmetician to sum up the
frac^ions of thy body.


Jac. I ravish! Oh, good Sir! my courage lies not that way; alas, I, I am
almost famished, I have not eat to day.


D. Joh. Sir, by Heaven do as I bid thee, or thou shall never eat again.
Shall I keep a Rascal for a Cipher?


Jac. Oh! what will become of me? I must do it.


D. J^h. Come on, Rogue, fall on.


D. Ant. Which a^e you for?


D. Joh. It Is all one, I am not in Love but in Lust, and to such a one a
Belly-full's a Belly-full, and there is an end on it.


1. Shepherdess. What means this violence?


2. Shepherdess. Oh! Heaven protect us.


Jac. Well, I must have one too; if I be hanged, I had as good be hanged for
something.

[Every one runs off with a Woman.
D. Lop. Rogues, come not on; we'll be in your guts.


All Shepherdess. Help, help.

[They cry out.
1. Shep. What Devils are these?

[Exeunt. [Three or four Shepherds return with Ja^omo.
1. Shep. Here Is one Rogue. Have we caught you, Sir? we'll cool your courage.


Jac. Am I taken prisoner? I shall be kept as an honorable Hostage, at least
--


2. Shep. Where are the^e Villains, these Ravishers?


Jac. Why you need not keep such a stir, ^entlemen, you will have all your
Women again, and no harm done. Let me go, I Will fetch 'em to you.


1. Shep. No, you libidinous Swine; we'll revenge the Rapes on you.


Jac. Good kind civil people pass this by: It Is true, my Master's a very
Tarquin; but I never attempted to ravish before.


2. Shep. I Will secure you from ever doing of it again. Where'^ your Knife?


Jac. Heaven! what do you mean? Oh spare me! I am unprepared; let me be confessed.


1. Shep. We will not kill you, we'll but geld you: Are you so ho^, Sir?


Jac. Oh bloody Villains! have a care, it is not a season for that, the Sign's
in Scorpio.


2. Shep. Down with him --


Jac. O help, help! murder, murder! Have a care what you do, I am the last of
all my Race -- Will you destroy a whole Sto^k, and take away my Representers of
my Family? --


1. Shep. There shall be no more of the Breed of you -- *


Jac. I am of an ancient Family; will you cut off all hopes of a Son and Heir?
Help! help! Master, Don John? Oh! Oh! Oh!


Enter Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio. D. Joh. How now, Rogues? do you abuse
my Man?


Jac. O Sir, this is the first good thing you ever did: if you had not come
just in the Nick, I had lost my Manhood.


D. Ant. It Is no matter for the use you make on it.


D. Lop. But come, let us now to Supper.


Jac. Come on, I am almost starved.

[Exeunt.
Shepherds return. 1. Shep. Let Us not complain, but Dog the Rogues, and when we
have Housed 'em, we will to the next Magistrate, and beg his power to apprehend
'em.

[Exeunt.
The Scene changes to a Church, with the Statue of Don Pedro on Horseback in
it. D. Joh. Let Us in, and see this Church.


Jac. Is this a time to see Churches? But let me see whose Statue's this? Oh
Heaven! this is Don Pedro's, whom you murdered at Sevil.


D. Joh. Say you so? Read the Inscription.


Jac. Here lies Don Pedro, Governor of Sevil, barbarously murdered by that
impious Villain, Don John, against whom his innocent blood cries still for
vengeance.


D. Joh. Let it cry on. Art thou there in faith? *Yes, I killed thee, and would
do it again upon the same occasion. Jacomo -- invite him to Supper.


Jac What, a Statue! invite a Statue to Supper? Ha, ha -- can Marble eat?


D. Joh. I say, Rascal, tell him I would have him Sup with me.


Jac. Ha, ha, ha! who the Devil put this * whimsey into your head? Ha, ha, ha!
invite a Statue to Supper?


D. Joh. I shall spoil your mirth, Sirr^; I will have it done.


Jac. Why, it is impossible; would you have me such a Coxcomb, invite Ma^ble to
eat? Ha, ha, ha.

[He goes several times toward the Statue, and returns laughing. Good Mr.
Statue, if it shall please your Worship, my Master desires you to make
Collation with him presently --

[The Statue nods his head, Jacomo falls down and roars. Oh I am dead! Oh, Oh,
Oh.


D. Joh. The Statue nods its head; it is odd --


D. Ant. It Is wonderful.


D. Lop. ^ am amazed.


Jac. Oh I cannot stir! Help, help.


D. Joh. Well, Governor, come, take part of a Collation with me, it is by this
time ready; make haste, it is I invite you.

[Statue nods again. Say you so? come on, let us set all things in order quickly.


Jac. Oh fly, fly.


D. Ant. This is prodigious.

[Exeunt Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio, Jacomo.
The Scene is a Dining Room, a Table spread, Servants setting on Meat and Wine.
D. Joh. Come, our meat is ready, let us sit. Pox on this foolish Statue, it
puzles me to know the reason on it. Sir, I Will give you leave to sit.


D. Ant. Let Us eat, never think on it.


Jac. Ay, come, let us eat; I am too hungry now to think on the fright --

[ Jacomo eats greedily.
D. Joh. This is excellent Meat. How the Rogue eats. You Will choke your self.


Jac. I warrant you, look to yourself.


D. Ant. Why, Jacomo, is the Devil in you?


Jac. No, no; if he be, it is a hungry Devil.


D. Lop. Will you not drink?


Jac. I Will lay a good foundation first.


D. Joh. The Rascal eats like a Canibal.


Jac. Ay, it is no matter for that.


D. Joh. Some Wine, Sir.


Jac. There, Sir, take it; I am in haste.


D. Ant. 'Sdeath, the Fool will be strangled.


Jac. The Fool knows what he does.


D. Joh. Here Is to Don Pedro's Ghost, he should have been welcome.


Jac. O name him not.


D. Lop. The Rascal is afraid of you after death.


Jac. Oh! Oh! some Wine, give me some Wine.

[Almost (...).
D. Ant. Take it.


Jac. So, now it is down.


D. Ant. Are you not satisfied yet?


Jac. Peace, peace; I have but just begun.

[One knocks hard at the d^or. Who Is there? come in, I am very busy.


D. Joh. Rise, and do your duty.


Jac. But one morsel more, I come. [Knocks again.
What a pox, are you mad?
[Opens the door. Enter Ghost. Oh! the Devil, the Devil.


D. Joh. Hah! it is the Ghost, let us rise and receive him.


D. Ant. I am amazed.


D. Lop. Not frighted are you?


D. Ant. I scorn the thoughts of fear.

[They salute the Ghost.
D. Joh. Come, Governor, you are welcome, sit there; if we had thought you
would have come, we would have staid for you. But come on, Sir, give me some
Wine.

[The Ghost sits.
Jac. Oh! I am dead; what shall I do? I dare not come near you.


D, Joh. Come, Rascal, or I Will cut your throat.

[Fills Wine, his hand trembles.
Jac. I come, I come. Oh! Oh!


D. Joh. Why do you tremble, Rascal? hold it steadily --


Jac. Oh! I cannot.

[ Jacomo snatches meat from the Table, and runs aside.
D. Joh. Here, Governor, your health. Friends, put it about. Here Is excellent
meat; taste of this Ragoust. If you had had a body of flesh, I would have given
you cher entire -- but the Women care not for Marble. Come, I Will help you.
Come, eat and let old quarrels be forgotten.


Ghosh. I come not here to take repast with you;
Heaven has permitted me to animate
This Marble body and I come to warn
You of that vengeance is in store for you,
If you amend not your pernicious lives.

Jac. Oh Heaven!


D. Ant. What, are you ^ome to preach to us?


D. Lop. Keep your Harangues for Fools that will believe 'em.


D. Joh. We are too much confirmed. Pox of this dry discourse, give me some
Wine. Come, here is to your Mistress; you had one when you were living: not
forgetting your sweet Sister* Sir, more Wine.


Jac. Ay, Sir -- Good Sir, do not provoke the Ghost; his Marble fists may fly
about your ears, and knock your brains out.


D. Joh. Peace, Fool.


Ghost. Trem^le, you impious Wretches, and repent; Behold, the powers of Hell
wait for you --

[Devils rise.
Jac. Oh! I will steal from hence. Oh the Devil!


D. Joh. Sir, stir not; by Heaven I Will use thee worse than Devils can do.
Come near, Coward.


Jac. O I dare not stir; what will become of me?


D. Joh. Come, Sir, eat.


Jac. O, Sir, my appetite is satisfied.


D. Joh. Drink, Dog, the Ghost's health: Rogue, do it, or I Will run my Sword down
your throat.


Jac. Oh! Oh! Here, Mr. Statue, your health.


D. Joh. Now, Rascal, sing to entertain him.


Jac. Sing, quoth he! Oh! I have lost my voice; I cannot be merry in such
company. Sing --


D. Ant. Who are these with ugly shapes?


D. Lop. Their manner of appearing is something strange.


Ghost. They Are Devils, that wait for such hard impious Men. They Are Heavens
Instruments of eternal vengeance.


D. Joh. Are they some of your Retinue? Devils, say you? I am sorry I have no
Burnt Brandey to treat'em with, that is Drink fit for Devils -- Hah! they vanish.

[They sink.
Ghost. Cannot the fear of Hell's eternal tortures,
Change the horrid course of your abandoned lives?
Think on those Fires, those everlasting Fires,
That shall without consuming burn you ever.

D. Joh. Dreams, dreams, too slight to lose my pleasure for.
In spite of all you say I will go on,
Till I have surfeited on all delights.
Youth is a Fruit that can but once be gathered,
And I Will enjoy it to the full.

D. Ant. Let Us push it on; Nature chalks out the way that we should follow.


D. Lop. It Is her fault, if we do what we should not. Let Us on, here is a
Brimmer to our Leader's health.


Jac. Wha^ hellish Fiends are these?


D. Joh. Let me tell you, it is something ill bred to rail at your Host, that
treats you civilly. You have not yet forgot your quarrel to me.


Ghost. It Is for your good; by me Heaven warns you of its wrath, and gives you
a longer time for your repentance. I invite you this night to a repast of mine.


D. Joh. Where?


Ghost. At my Tomb.


D. Ant. What time?


Ghost. At dead of night.


D. Joh. We'll come.


Ghost. Fail not.


D. Lop. I warrant you.


Ghost. Farewell, and think upon your lost condition.


D. Joh. Farewell, Governor; I Will see what Treat you will give us.


D. Ant. And I.


D. Lop. And I.


Jac. That will not I. Pox on him, I have had enough of his company, I shall
not recover it this week. If I eat with such an Host, I Will be hanged.


D. Joh. If you do not, by Heaven you shall be hanged.


Jac. Whither will your lewdness carry me? I do not care for having a Ghost for
my Landlord. Will not these Miracles do good upon you?


D. Joh. There Is nothing happens but by Natural Causes,
Which in unusual things Fools cannot find,
And then they style 'em Miracles. But no Accident
Can alter me from what I am by Nature.
Were there --
Legions of Ghosts and Devils in my way,
One moment in my course of pleasure I Would not stay.
[Ex^unt omnes
ACT V.
Enter Jacomo, with Back, Breast, and Headpiece. Jac. WEll, this damned Master
of mine will not part with me; and we must fight five or six times a day, one
day with another, that is certain: Therefore thou art wise, honest Jacomo, to
arm thy self, I take it. Sa, sa, sa -- Methinks I am very valiant on the
sudden. Sa, sa, sa. Hah! there I have you. Paph -- Have at you. Hah -- there I
have you through: that was a fine thrust in tierce. Hah -- Death! what noise is
that?


Enter Don John. D. Joh. How now, Sir, what are you doing?


Jac. Nothing, but practicing to run people through the bodies, that is all; for
I know some body's throat must be cut before midnight.


D. Joh. In Armor too! why, that cannot help you, you are such a cowardly
Fool; fear will betray you faster within, than that can defend you without --


Jac. I fear no body breathing, I; nothing can terrify me but the Devilish
Ghost. Ha! who is that coming? Oh Heaven!

[Leaps back.
D. Joh. Is this your courage? you are preparing for flight before an Enemy
appears.


Jac. No, no, Sir, not I; I only leapt back to put my self upon my guard --
Fa, la, la --


Enter Don Lopez and Don Antonio. D. Joh. Whom have we here?


Jac. Oh where! where! who are they?


D. Joh. Oh my Friends! where have you been?


D. Ant. We went to view the stately Nunnery hard by, and have been chatting
with the poor sanctified Fools, till it is dark; we have been chaffering for
Nuns-flesh.


D. Lop. There I made such a discovery, if you do not assist me, I am ruined
for ever. Don Bernardo's Sister, whom I fell in love with in Sevil, is this day
placed there for probation; and if you cannot advise me to some way or other of
getting her out, for some present occasion I have for her, I am a lost man,
that is certain.


D. Ant. The business is difficult, and we resolve to manage it in council.


Jac. Now will they bring me into some wicked occasion or other of showing my
prowess: a pox on 'em.


D. Joh. Have you so long followed my fortunes, to boggle at difficulty upon so
honorable an occasion; besides, here is no difficulty.


D. Lop. No? the Walls are so high, and the Nunnery so strongly fortified,
'twill be impossible to do it by force; we must find some stratagem.


D. Joh. The stratagem is soon found out --


D. Ant. As how, Don John?


D. Joh. Why, I will set fire on the Nunnery; fire the Hive, and the Drones
must out, or be burnt within: then may you, with ease, under pretense of
succor, take whom you will.


D. Lop. It Is a gallant design.


D. Ant. I long to be about it. Well, Don, thou art the bravest Fellow
breathing.


Jac. Gentlemen, pray what became of that brave Fellow, that fired the Temple
at Ephesus? was he not hanged, Gentlemen, hum --


D. Ant. We are his Rivals, Fool; and who would not suffer for so brave an
action?


D. Joh. He Is a Scoundrel and a Poultroon, that would not have his Death for
his Fame.


D. Lop. That he is, a damned Son of a Whore, and not fit to drink with.


Jac. It Is a rare thing to be a Martyr for the Devil; But what good will infamy
do you, when you are dead? when Honor is nothing but a vapor to you, while
you are living. For my part I Would not be hanged to be Alexander the Great.


D. Ant. What a phlegmatic dull Rascal is that, who has no Ambition in him.


Jac. Ambition! what, to be hanged? besides, what is the intrinsic value of
Honor when a man is under ground? Let '^m but call me honest Jacomo, as I am,
while I live, and let 'em call m^, when I am dead, Don John if they will.


D. Joh. Villain, dare you profane my name?


Jac. Hold, Sir, think what you do; you cannot ^urt me, my Arms are
Pistol-proof.


Enter a Servant. Serve. I come to give you notice of an approaching danger: You
must fly; an Officer with some Shepherds have found you were at our house, and
are come to apprehend you, for some outrage you have committed; I came to give
you notice, knowing our Family has a great respect for you.


D. Joh. Yes, I know your Family has a great respect for me, for I have lain
with every one in it, but thee and thy Master.


Jac. Why look you now, I thought what 'twou'd come to: Fly, Sir, fly; the
darkness of the night will help us. Come, I Will lead the way.


D. Joh. Stay, Sir, you shall have one occasion more of showing your valor.


D. Ant. Did ever any Knight Errant fly, that was so well appointed?


D. Lop. No; you shall stay, and get Honor, Jacomo.


Jac. Pox of Honor, I am content with the Stock I have already.


D. Joh. You are easily satisfied. But now let us fire the Nunnery.


D. Ant. Come on.


D. Lop. I long to be at it.


Jac. O Jacomo! thy life is not worth a Piece of Eight. It Is in vain to
dissuade 'em, Sir; I will never trouble you with another request, if you will be
graciously pleased to leave me out of this adventure.


D. Joh. Well, you have your desire.


Jac. A thousand thanks; and when I see you again, I will be humbly content
with a Halter.


D. Joh But, do you hear, Fool? stand Sentinel here; and if any thing happens
extraordinary, give us notice of it.


Jac. O, good Sir! what do you mean? that is as bad as going with you.


D. Joh. Let me find you here when I come again, or you are a dead man --

[Exeunt Don John, Don Lopez, Don Antonio.
Jac. I am sure I am a dead man, if you find me here: But would my Armor were
off now, that I might run the lighter. Night assist me. Heaven! what noise is
that? to be left alone in the dark, and fear Ghosts and Devils, is very
horrible. But Oh* who are these?


Enter Officer, Guards, and Shepherds. 1. Shep. We are thus far right; the
Ravishers went this way.


2. Shep. For Heavens sake take 'em dead or alive; such desperate Villains never
were seen.


Jac. So; if I be caught, I shall be hanged; if not, I shall be killed. It Is
very fine. The^e are the Shepherds. I Will hide my self.

[He stands up close against the Wall.
1. Shep. If we catch the Rogues, we will broil 'em alive; no death can be
painful enough for such Wretches.


Jac. O bloody minded men --


2. Shep. O impious vile Wretches! that we had you in our clutches! Open your
Dark Lantern, and let us search for 'em.


Jac. What will become of me? my Armor will not do now.


1. Shep. Thus far we hunted them upon a good scent: but now we are at a fault.


Jac. Let me see; I have one trick left, I have a Disguise will fright the
Devil.


2. Shep. They must be hereabouts.


Jac. I Will in amongst them, and certainly this will (...) (...).


1. Shep. Oh Heaven! what horrid Object's this?


Jac. The Devil.


2. Shep. Oh fly, ^ly! the Devil, the Devil! fly --

[Exeunt Shepherds (...).
Jac. Farewell, good Gentlemen. This is the first ti^ my face ever did me good.
But I Will not stay I take it; Yet wh^her shall I fly? Oh! what noise is that? I
am in the dark, in a strange place too; what will follow? There lie. Oh! my
A^ms. Hah! Who Is there? Let me go this way -- Oh ^he Ghost! the Ghost! Gad
forgive me, 'twas nothing but my fear --

[A noise within, Fir^, ^ire, the Nunnery's on ^re. Oh vile Wretches! they have
done the deed. There is no ^lying; now the place will be full of people, and
wicked Lights, that will discover me, if I fly.


Within. Fire, fire, fire; the Nunnery's on fire; help, help --

[Several people cross the Stage, crying Fire.
Jac. What shall I do? there is no way but one, I Will go with the Crowd. Fire!
Fire -- Murder! help! help! fire! fire --

[More people cross the Stage, he runs with them. Enter Don John, Don Antonio,
Don Lopez, four Nuns.
D. Joh. Fear not, Ladies, we'll protect you.


1. Nun. Our Sex and Habits will protect us.


D. Lop. Not enough, we will protect you better.


1. Nun. Pray leave us, we must not consort with men.


D. Ant. What would you run into the ^ire to avoid Mankind? you are zealous
Ladies indeed.


D. Joh. Come, Ladies, walk with us; we'll put you in a place of safety.


1. Nun. We'll go no further, we are safe enough; be gone, and help to quench
the fire.


D. Joh. We have another fi^e to quench; come along with us.


D. Lop. Ay, come, you must go.


D. An^. Come ^long, we know what is good for you; you must go with us.


1. Nun. ^ven! what violence is this? what impious men are these? H^lp! help!

[All^ry Help.
Enter Flavia and Clara, Probationers. Flav. Here are the bloody Villains, the
causes of our misery.


Clar. Inhumane Butchers! now we'll have your lives.


D. Joh. Hah! here are a brace of my Wives. If you have a mind to this Fool,
take her betwixt you; for my part, I Will have my own. Come, Wives, along with
me; we must consummate, my Spouses, we must consummate.


Clar. What Monsters are these?


All Nuns. Help! help!


D. Ant. 'Sdeath! these foolish Women are their own Enemies.


D. Lop. Here are so many people, if they cry out more, they will interrupt us in
our brave design.


D. Joh. I warrant you; when they cry out, let us out-noise 'em. Come, Women,
you must go along with us.


1. Nun. Heaven! what shall we do? Help! help!


D. Joh. Help! help! Fire! fire! fire!


D. Lop. Help! help!


D. Ant. Help! help!

[They hale the Women by the hands, who still cry out, and they with them.
Enter several people, crying out Fire, Jacomo in the rear. Jac. Fire! fire!
fire! Help! help!
'Sdeath! here is my Master,

D. Joh. Sir, come along with me, I have use of you.


Jac. I am caught.


D. Joh. Here, Sir, take one of my Wives, and force her after me. Do you
refuse, Villain?


Enter Shepherds, with Off^cer and Guards. Nuns. Help! help! good people ^elp!
rescue us from these Villains.


1. Shep. Who are you, committing viol^nce on Women?


2. Shep. Heavens! they are the Villains we seek for.


Jac. Where is my Armor now? Oh my Armor.


Officer. Fall on.

[They fight, Women fly, Jacomo falls down as killed, two Shepherds and the
Officer are killed.
D. Joh. Say you so, Rogues?


D. Lop. So, the Field's our own.


D. Joh. But a pox on it, we have bought a Vic^ory too dear, we have lost the
Women.


D. Ant. We'll find 'em again. But poor Jacomo's killed.


Jac. That Is a lie.

[A^ide.
D. Lop. 'Faith, let us carry off our dead.


D. Joh. Agreed; we'll bury him in the Church, while the Ghost treats us, we'll
^reat the Worms with the body of a Rascal.


Jac. Not yet a while.

[Aside.
D. Lop. Come, let us take away the Fool.


Jac. No, the Fool can take up himself. 'Sdeath! you resolve not to let me
alone dead or alive --

Here are more Murders. Oh!


D. Lop. Oh counterf^iting Rascal! are you alive?

[The Clock strikes Twelve.
D. Ant. The Clock strikes Twelve.


D. Joh. 'Slife, our times come, we must to the Tomb: I would not break my word
with the Ghost for a thousand Doubloons --


Jac. Nor I keep it for ten times the Money.


D. Joh. But you shall keep your word, Sir.


Jac. Sir, I am resolved to fast to night, it is a Vigil: Besides, I care not
for eating in such base company.


Within. Follow, follow, follow --


D. Lop. D'hear that noise? the remaining Rogues have ^ais'd the Mob^le, and
are coming upon us.


Jac. Oh! l^t's f^ie -- f^ie -- what will become of me?


D. Ant. Let Us to the Church, and give the Rogues the Go-by.


D. Joh. Come on, since it is my time, and I have promised the Governor, I Will
go -- You had best stay, Sir, and be taken.


Jac. No: now I must go to the Church whether I will or no. Away, away, fly!

Enter two Shepherds, with a great Rabble. Here they went; follow, follow --

[Exeunt om^es.
The Scene the Church, the Statue of Don Pedro on Horseback; on each side of
the Church, Don John's Ghost, Maria's, Don Francisco's, Leonora's, Flora's,
Maria's Brothers, and others, with Torches in their hands.
Enter Don John, Don Antonio, Don Lopez, Jacomo. Jac. Good Sir, let us go no
farther; look what horrid Attendants are here. This wicked Ghost has no good
meaning in him.


D. Joh. He resolves to treat us in State; I think he has robbed all the Graves
hereabouts of their Dead, to wait upon us.


D. Ant. I see no Entertainment prepared.


D. Lop. He has had the manners to light off his Horse, and entertain us.


D. Joh. He would not sure be so ill bred, to make us wait on him on foot.


Jac. Pox on his breeding, I shall die with fear; I had as good have been taken
and hanged. What horror seizes me!


D. Joh. Well, Governor, you see we are as good as ou^ words.


D. Ant. Where Is your Collation?


D. Lop. Bid some of your Attendants give us some Wine.

[Ghost descends.
Stat. Have you not yet thought on your lost condition?
Here are the Ghosts of some whom you have murdered,
That cry for vengeance on you --

Fathers Ghost. Repent, repent of all your horrid crimes: Monsters, repent, or
Hell will swallow you.


D. Joh. That Is my Old man's voice. D'hear, Old Gentleman, you talk idly.


J^. I do repent, O spare me. I do repent of all my sins, but especially of
following this wicked Wretch.

[Kn^e's.
D. Ant. Away, Fool

[ Ant. kicks him.
D. Fran. Ghost. My blood cries out upon thee, barbarous Wretch.


D. Joh. That Is my Host Francisco, 'faith thou were a good honest Blockhead,
that is the truth on it --


Flora's Ghost. Thou shall not escape vengeance for all thy crimes.


D. Joh. What Fool's that, I am not acquainted with her.


^eon. Ghost. In time lay hold on mercy, and repent.


D. Joh. That was Leonora, a good natured silly Wench, something too loving,
that was all her fault.


Mar. Villain, this is the last moment of thy life,
And thou in flames eternally shall howl.

D. Joh. Thou li'st. This is the young hotheaded Fool we killed at
Francisco's. Pox on him, he disappointed me in my design upon the Daughters.
Would thou were alive again, that I might kill thee once more.


D. Lop. No more of this old foolish stuff; give us some Wine to begin with.


D. Ant. Ay, give us some Wine, Governor.


D. Joh. What, do you think to treat us thus? I offered you a better
entertainment. Prithee trouble us no more, but bid some of your Attendants give
us some Wine; I Will drink to you and all the good Company.


Stat. Give 'em the Liquor they have most delighted in.

[Two of the Ghosts go out, and bring four Glasses full of blood, then give 'em
to D. John, D. Ant. D. Lop.
D. Lop. This is something.


D. Joh. This is civil.


D. Lop. I hope a good desert will follow.

[Ghost offers a Glass to Jacomo, who runs round D. John, D. Ant. D. Lop.
roaring.
Jac. Are you stark distracted? will you drink of that ^iquor? Oh! Oh! what
do you mean? Good sweet Ghost forbear your civility; Oh I am not dry, I thank
you --


D. Joh. Give it me. Here, take it, Sir.


Jac. By no means, Sir, I never drink between meals. Oh Sir --


D. Joh. Take it, Rascal.


Jac. Oh Heavens!


D. Joh. Now, Governor, your Health; it is the reddest drink I ever saw.


D. Lop. Hah! pah! it is blood.


D. Ant. Pah! it is --


Jac. Oh! I Will have none of it.

[They throw the Glasses down.
D. Joh. 'Sdeath, do you mean to affront us?


Stat. It Is fit for such bloodthirsty Wretches.


D. Joh. Do you upbraid me with my killing of you; I did it, and would do it
again: I Would fight with all your Family one by one; and cut off root and branch
to enjoy your Sister. But will you treat us yet no otherwise?


Stat. Yes, I will, ye impious Wretches.

[A Flourish.
D. Lop. What Is here? Music to treat us with?


D. Ant. There is some pleasure in this.


Song of Devils.
1. Dev. PRepare, prepare, new Guests draw near,
And on the brink of Hell appear.

2. Dev. Kindle fresh flames of Sulphur th^re.
Assemble all ye Fiends,
Wait for the dreadful ends
Of impious men; who far excel
All the Inhabitants of H^ll.

Chor. of Devils. -- Let 'em come, let 'em come,
To an eternal dreadful doom,
Let 'em come, let 'em come.

3. Dev. In mi^iefs they have all the damned outdone;
Here they shall weep, and shall unpiti'd groan,
Here they shall howl, and make eternal mo^n.

1. Dev. By B^oud and Lust they have deserved so well,
That they shall feel the hottest flames of Hell.

2. Dev. In vain they shall here their past mischiess bewail,
In exquisite torments that never shall fail.

3. Dev. Eternal darkness they shall find,
And them eternal Chains shall bind
To infinite pain of sense and mind.

Chorus of all. -- Let 'em come, let 'em come,
To an eternal dreadful doom
Let 'em come, let 'em come.

Stat. Will you not relent, and feel remorse?


D. Joh. Could thou bestow another heart on me, I might; but with this heart
I have, I cannot.


D. Lop. These things are prodigious.


D. Ant. I have a kind of grudging to relent, but something holds me back.


D. Lop. If we could, it is now too late; I will not.


D. Ant. We defy thee.


Stat. Perish, ye impious Wretches, go and find
The punishments laid up in store for you.
[It Thunders, Don Lopez and Don Antonio are swallowed up. Behold their
dreadful Fates, and know, that thy last moment's come.


D. Joh. Think not to fright me, foolish Ghost; I ll break your Marble body in
pieces, and pull down your Horse.


Jac. If fear has left me my strength, I Will steal away.

[Exit.
D. Joh. These things I see with wonder, but no fear.
Were all the Elements to be confounded,
And shu^l'd all into their former Chaos;
Were Seas of Sulphur flaming round about me,
And all Mankind roaring within those fires,
I could not fear or feel the least remorse.
To the last instant I would dare thy power.
Here I stand firm* and all thy threats contemn;
Thy Murderer stands here, now do thy worst.
[It Thunders and Lightens, Devils descend and sink with Don John, who is
covered with a Clowd of fire as he sinks.
Stat. Thus perish all,
Those men, who by their words and actions dare,
Against the will and power of Heaven declare.
[Scene shuts.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Jacomo. THrough all the Perils of the Play I Have run,
But know not how your fury I may shun;
I Am in new dangers now to be undone --
I had but one sierce Master there,
But I have many cruel Tyrants here.
Who do most bloudily my life pursue;
Who takes my Livelihood, may take that too.
Against little Players you great factions raise,
Make Solemn Leagues and Cov'nants against Plays.
We, who by no Allies assisted are,
Against the Great Confederates must make War.
You need not strive our Province to o'r-run,
By our own stratagems we are undone.
We Have laid out all our Pains, nay Wealth for you,
And yet, hard-hearted men, all will not do.
It Is not your Judgments sway for you can be
Pleased with damned Plays (as heart can wish to see)
'Ounds, we do what we can, what would you more?
Why do you come, and rant, and damn, and roar?
'Sdeath, what a Devil would you have us do?
Each take a Prison, and there humbly sue,
Angling sor single Money with a Shoo.
What, will you be Don John's? have you no remorse?
Farewell then, bloody men, and take your course.
Yet stay --
If you will be civil, we will treat of Peace,
And the Articles of the Treaty shall be these.
First, to the men of Wit we all submit;
The rest shall swagger too within the Pit,
And may roar out their little or no Wit.
But do not swear so loud to fright the City,
Who neither care for wicked men, nor witty;
They start at ills they do not like to do,
But shall in Shops be wickeder than you.
Next, you will no more be troubled with M^chines.
Item, you shall appe^r behind our Scenes,
And there make love with the sweet chink of Guinnies,
The unresisted Eloquence of Ninnies.
Some of our Wom^ shall be kind to you,
And promise free ingress and egress too.
But if the Faces which we have wo'n't do,
We will find out some of Sixteen for you.
We will be civil when naught else will win ye;
We will new bait our Trap, and that will bring ye.
Come, faith let all old breaches now be healed,
And the said Articles shall be Signed and Sealed.
FINIS.

