THE Sullen Lovers: OR, THE IMPERTINENTS.

A Comedy Acted by his Highness the Duke of YORKES Servants.

Written by THO. SHADWELL.

Number satis est dixisse, Ego ^ira (...),
Occ^pet extremum scabies, mihi t^rp^ (...) est,
Et quod n^n didici san^ nescire fateri.
Hor. de Art. Poet. In the SAVOY, Printed for Henry Herringman at the Sign of
the Anchor in the Lower-Walk of the New (...). 1668.

TO The thri^e Noble, High and (...) Prince WILLIAM, Duke, Marquess, and Earl
of N^^castle, Earl of (...) Man^field, Ba^on of (...), of ^gle, of Bertram,
B^thall, and Hepple, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber, One of His
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, His Majesty's Lieutenant of the County and Town of N^ttingham, and
Justice in Air, Trent N^^th, etc.
May it please your Grace,
HAd I no particular Obligations to ^rg^ me, yet my own Inclinations would
prompt me not only to dedicate this to you, but my self to your Graces
service: Since you have so much obliged your Country both by your Courage, and
your Wit, that all men w^o pret^^^ either to Sword, or Pen, ought to shelter
themselves under your Graces Protection: Those Excellencies, as well* as the
great Obligations I have had the honor to receive from your Grace, are the
occasion of this Dedication: And I doubt not, but that Generosity wherewith
your Grace has always su^cour'd the afflicte^, will make you willing (by
suffering me to use the honor of your name) to rescue this from the bloody
hands of the Critics, who will not dare to use it roughly, when they see your
Graces name in the beginning, that being a stamp sufficient to render it true
Coin, though it be adulterate. That authority that makes you able, and that
great Goodness that makes you willing to protect all your servants, may give
you frequent troubles of this nature, but I hope your Grace will be pleased to
pardon them when they come from

London, S^pt. 1, 1668. My Lord, Your Graces Most obliged humble servant, Tho.
Shadwell.

PREFACE.
Reader,
THe success, of this Play, as it was much more then it deserved, so was much
more than I expected: Especially in this very Critical age, when every man
pretends to be a Judge, and some, that never read Three Plays in their lives,
and never understood one, are as positive in their Judgment of Plays, as if
they were all Iohnsons. But had I been used with all the severity imaginable, I
should patiently have submitted to my Fate; not like the rejected Authors of
our time, who when their* Plays are damned, will strut, and huff it out, and
laugh at the Ignorance of the Age: Or like some other of our Modern (...) that
declare they are resolved to justify their Plays with their Swords (though
perhaps their Courage is as little as their Wi^^ such as peep through their
loop-holes in the Theater, to see who looks grum upon their Plays: and if they
spy a Gentle Squi^e making Faces, he poor soul must be Hectored till he likes
'em, while the more stubborn Bully-Rock damm's, and is safe: (...) in (...)
^hoice of (...) had (...) p^etend they cannot (...) will (...), and look big
upon the success of ^n ill ^lay (...) full of Songs and Dances, (which have
that constraint upon 'em too, that they seldom seem to come in willi^gly;)
When in such Plays the Composer and the Dancing Master are the best Poets, and
yet the unmerciful Scribler would rob the^ of all the Honor.

I am so far from valuing my self (as (...)) upon this Play, that perhaps no
man is a (...) of it then my self; yet if any thing (...) made me proud of it,
It would have (...) Favor and Countenance it received from His Majesty and
their Royal Highnesses.

But I could not persuade my self that they were so favorable to the Play for
the Merit of it, but ou^ of a Princely Generosi^y, to encourage a
young^beginner, that did what he could to please them, and that otherwise might
have been ba^^k'd for ever: It Is to this I owe the su^cess of the Play, and am
as far from pre^u^ption of my own merits in it, as one ought to be who receives
an Alms.

The first hint I received was from the report of a Play of Moli^res of three
Acts, called Les Fasch^^x* upon which I wrote a great part of this before I
read that; And after it came to my hands, I found so little for my use (having
before upon that hint designed the (...) I have made use of but two sho^^ (...)
( Viz*) the first Scene in the Second Act betwee^ S^^^ford and Rog^r, and
Molier's story of Piquette, which I have translated into Back-gamm^n, both of
them so varied you would not know them. But I f^eel^ confess my Theft, and am
ashamed on'^, though I have the example of some that never yet wrote Play
without steali^g most of it; And (like Men that lie so long* till they believe
themselves) at length, by continual* Thie^ing, reckon their stolen goods their
own too* which is so ignoble a thing, that I cannot but believe that he that
makes a common practice of stealing other men's Wit, would, if he could, with
the same safety steal any thing else.

I have in this Play, as near as I could, observed the three Unities, of Time,
Place, and Action; The time of the Drama does not exceed six hours, the place
is in a very narrow Compass, and the Main-Action of the Play, upon which all
the rest depend, is the Sullen-Love betwixt Stanford and Emilia, which kind of
love is only proper to their Characters: I have here, as often as I could
naturally, kept the Scenes unbroken, which (though it be not so much practiced,
or so well understood, by the English) yet among the French-Poets is accounted
a great Beauty; but after these frivolous excuses the want of design in the
Play has been objected against me; which fault (though I may endeavor a little
to extenuate) I dare not absolutely deny: I conceive, with all submission to
better Judgments, that no man ought to expect such Intrigues in the little
actions of Comedy, as are required in Plays of a higher Nature: but in Plays
of Humor, where there are so many Characters as there are in this, there is
yet less design to be expected: for, if after I had formed three or four
forward prating Fopps in the Play, I had made it full of Plott, and Business;
at the latter end, where the turns ought to be many, and suddenly following
one another, I must have let fall the humor, which I thought would be
pleasanter then Intrigues could have been without it; and it would have been
easier to me to have made a Plott then to hold up the Humor.

Another Objection, that has been made by some, is, that there is the same
thing over and over: which I do not apprehend, unless they blame the unity of
the action, yet Horace de Art Po^tica, says, Sit quod vis, simplex duntaxat,
and unum. Or whether it be the carrying on of the humors to the last, which
the same Author directs me to do. Si quid inexpertum Scenae committis, and
audes
Pers^nam formare novam, Ser^et^^ ad Imu^^
Qualis ab incepto processerit, and sibi constet.


I have endeav^^r'd to represent variety of Humour^ (most of the persons of the
Play differing in their Characters from one another) which was the practice of
Ben Johnson, whom I think all Drammatick Poets ought to imit^te, though none
are like to come near; he being the only person that appears to me to have
made perfect Representations of Humane Life: most other Authors that I ever
read, either have wild Romantic Tales, wherein they strein Love and Honor to
that Ridiculous height, that it becomes Burlesque: or in their lower Comoedies
content themselves with one or two Humors at most, and those not near so
perfect Characters as the admirable Johnson always made, who never wrote
Comedy without seven or eight considerable Humors. I never saw one except that
of Falstaff that was in my judgment comparable to any of Iohnson's
considerable Humors: You will pardon this digression when I tell you he is the
man, of all the World, I most passionately admire for his Excellency in
Drammatick- Poetry.

Though I have known some of late so Insolent to say, that Been Johnson wrote
his best Plays without Wit; imagining, that all the Wit in Plays consisted in
bringing two persons upon the Stage to break Jests, and to bob one another,
which they call Repartie, not considering that there is ^ore wit and invention
required in the finding o^t good Hu^or, and Mat^^r (...) repar^ies. For, (...)
of a Humor, ^ Man is confined not to (...) from the Character, and obliged to
say nothing b^t what is proper to it: but in the Plays which have been (...)
of late, ^here is no such thing as perfect Character, bu^ the two chief persons
are most commonly a Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, Ruffian for a Lover, and an
impudent ill-bred tonirig for a Mistress, and the^e are the fine people of the
Play; and there is that Latitude in this, that almost any thing is proper for
them to say; but their chief Subject is bawdy, and profaness, which they call
brisk writing, when the most dissolute of Men, that relish those things well
enough in private, are chok'd at ^'m in public: and, methinks, if there were
nothing but the ill Manne^s of it, it should make Poets avoid that Indecent way
of Writing.

But, perhaps you may think me as impertinent as any one I represent; that,
having so many faults of my own, should take the liberty to Judge of others, to
impeach my fellow Criminalls: I must confess it is very ungenerous to accuse
those that modestly confess the^r own Errors; but positive men, that Justify
all their faults, are Common Enemies, that no man ought to spare, prejudicial
to all Societies they live in, destructive to all Communication, always
indeavo^ring Magisterially to impose upon our understandings, against the
Freedom of Mankind: These ought no more to be (...) amongst us, then wild
beasts: for no corrections that ca^ be lai^ upon them are of power to reform
them; and certainly it was a positive Fool that Solomon spoke of, when he said,
bray him in a Mortar, and yet he will retain his folly.

But I have troubled you too long with this Discourse, and am to ask your
pardon for it, and the many faults you will find in the Play; and beg you will
believe, that whatever I have said of it, was intended not in Justification,
but Excuse of it: Look upon it, as it really was, wrote in haste, by a Young
Writer, and you will easily pardon it; especially when you know that the best
of our Drammatick Writers have wrote very ill Plays at first, nay some of them
have wrote several before they could get one to be Acted; and their best Plays
were made wi^^ great expense of labor and time. Nor can you expect a very
Correct Play, under a Years pains at the least, from the Wittiest Man of the
Nation; It is so difficult a thing to write well in this kind. Men of quality,
that write for their pleasure, will not trouble themselves with exactness in
their Plays; and those, that write for profit, would find too little
encouragement for so much pains as a correct Play would require.

Vale. Tho: Sha^vell

Prologue.
HOw popular are Poets now a days?
Who can more Men at their first summons rais^,
Then many a wealthy homebred Gentleman,
By all his interest in his Country can.
They raise their friends, but in one day arise
Against one poor Poet, all these Enemies:
F^r so he has observed you always are,
And against all that write maintain a War.
What shall he give you composition now?
Alas, he knows not what you will allow.
He has no cautionary-Song, nor Dance,
That might the Treaty of his Peace advance.
No kind Romantic Lovers in his Play,
To sigh and whine out passion, su^^ as may
Charm Waitingwomen with Heroic Chime,
And still resolve to live and die in Rhyme;
Such as your E^res with Love, and Honor feast,
And play at Crambo for three hours at least:
That Fight, and woo in Verse in the same breath,
And make Similitudes, and Love in Death:
-- But if you love a fool, he bid me say,
He has great choice to show you in his Play;
(To do^ you service) I am one to day.
Well Gallants, it is his first, Faith, let it go,
Just as old Gamesters by young Bubbles do:
This first and smaller Stake let him but win,
And for a greater Sum you will draw him in,
Or use our Poet, as you would a Hare,
Which when she is hunted down, for Sport you spare.
At length take up, and, damn no more for shame,
For if you only at the Qu^rrey aim,
This Critic poaching, will destroy your Game.
DRAMMATIS PERSONAE.
Stanford, -- A Morose Melan^holy Man, tormented beyond Measure with the
Impertinence of People, and resolved to leave the World to be quit of them.
Lovel, -- An Ayery young Gentleman, frie^^ to St^^ford, one that is pleased
with, an^ ^aughs (...) the Impertinents, and that which is the others torment,
is his recreation. Sir Posi^ive At-all, A foolish Knight, that pretends to
understand every thing in the world, and will suffer no man to understand any
thing in his Company; so foolishly Positive, that he will never be convinced of
an Error, though never so gross -- Ninny, -- A conceited Poet, always
troubling men with impertinent Discourses of Poetry, and the repetition of his
own Verses; in all his Discourse he uses such affected Words, that it is as bad
as the Canting of a Gypsy. Woodcock -- A Familiar loving Coxcombe, that
embraces and kisses all men: so used to his Familiar endearing expressions,
that he cannot forb^ar* them in the midst of his A^ger. Huffe, -- An impudent
Cowardly Hector that torments St^^ford with coming to borrow Money, and (...)
beaten by him. Roger, -- Stanfords Man. Father, -- To Emilia and Carolina*
Country Gent, -- A Grave ill-bred Coxcombe, that never speaks without a
Proverb. Tim. Scribble, -- Jacob Dash, -- Two Justices Clerks. Emilia, -- Of
the same Humor with Stanford. Carolina, -- Of the same Humor with Lovel. Lady
Vain, -- A Whore, that takes upon her the name of a Lady, very talkative and
impertinently affected in her Language, always pretending to Virtue and
Honor. Luce, -- Emilia 's Maid. Bridget, -- Lady Veins Maid. Serjean^, with a
File of Musketeers, VVaiters, Fiddlers, etc.
The place of the SCENE LONDON. The Time, In the Month of March, 1667/8. THE
Sullen Lovers: OR, THE IMPERTINENTS.
ACT. I.
Enter Stanford and Roger his Man. Stanf. IN what Unlucky Minute was I born,
To be tormented thus where e're I go?
What an Impertinent age is this we live in
When all the World is grown so troublesome,
That I should envy him that spends his days
In some remote* and unfrequented Place,
With none but Bears and Wolves for his Companions,
And never see's the folly of Mankind.

Rog. Good Sir be patient, let it not disturb you,

Stanford. Patient --
Thou may as well teach patience to a man
That has a fit oth' Colic or the Stone,

Lov. What in a fit again Stanford? now art
e^ter Lovel. Thou as moody as a Poet after his Play is Damned.

Stanf. Oh Lovel,
Exit Roger. I am tormented so beyond my patience
I am resolved to quit the World, and find
Some Uninhabited place far from Converse,
Where I may live as free as Nature made me.

Lov. Why this is down right Madness,
Prithee send for a Surgeon and open a Vein,
Try what that will do; for thou will be as
Ripe for Bedlum else as a Fanatic.

Stanf. What would you have me do?
Where e're I turn me I am baited still
By some importunate Foole's that use me Worse,
Then Boys do Cocks upon Shrove-Tuesday;
This makes my life so tedious and unpleasant,
That rather then endure it longer I Will find out
Some place in the West Indies, where I may
See a Man no oftener then a Blazing-Star.

Lov. Why thou will come to be bound in thy Bed Stanford:
'Thank Heaven I find nothing makes me Weary of
My life, thou art scandalous; Why do thou abuse
This Age so? me thinks, it is as pretty an Honest
Drinking-VVhoring Age as a man would wish to
Live in.

Stanf. Sure, Lovel, thou were born without a Gaul,
Or bear thy anger like a Useless thing,
That can endure to live among such Fools,
As we are every Day Condemned to see.

Lov. Where Is the trouble?

Stanf. Sure thou art Insensible, or thou would not ask me,
I am more restless then the Man that has
A Raging Feavor on him; and like him,
I change my place, thinking to ease my self; But find
That which should lessen does increase my pain.

Lov. As how Sir?

Stanf. C^uld any man have borne but yesterdayes impertinence?

Lov* What was that, for I have not seen you since.

Stanf. In the morning,
Coming abroad to find you out, (the only Friend
With whom I can enjoy my self) comes in a brisk
Gay Coxcomb of the Town -- O Lord, Sir, (says he)
I am glad I Have taken you within, I came on purpose
To tell you the news, do you hear it? then might I
Reasonably expect to hear of some great Intrigue or
Other; At the least that the Kings of France and Spain
Were agreed -- Then after he had bid me guess
Four or five times, with a great deal of amazement
Says he: Jack-Scatterbrain comes in with ten Guinny's
Last night into the Groom-porters, and
Carried away 200, and then Teased me
Half an Hour, to tell me all his Throws.

Lov. Now, should I have been pleased with this.

Stanf. You make me Mad to hear you say so.

Lov. If you are Weary of one Company, why don't
You try another? and vary your Companions as often
As your Young-Gallants do their Mistresses, or
The VVell-bred-Ladies their Servants.

Stanf. Where e're I go I meet the same affliction: If I go
Into the City, there I find a Company of Fellows
Selling of their Souls for Twopence in the Shilling
Profit.

Lovell. You are too Satyricall. --

Stanf. Besides, I find the very fools I avoid at this
End of the Town, come thither, some to take
Up Money at Ten in the hundred, what with
Interest and Brokage, as they call it; others to take
Up Commodities upon Tick, which they sell at half
Value for ready Money, and these Inhumane Raskals
In The very midst of all their business will fix upon
Me, and I am more Barbarously used by them, then a
New-Poet by a Knot of Critticks.

Lov. So Sir! go on with your Relation.

Stanf. The other day, being tired almo^^ to death with the
Impertinence of Fopps that importuned me;
For Variety, I ventured into a Coffee-house;
There I found a Company of formal Starch'd-Fellows
Talking Gravely, VVisely, and nothing to the purpose;
And with undaunted Impudence discoursing of the
Right of Empires; the Mannagement of Peace and War;
And the great Intrigues of Councils; when of my
Conscience you would have sooner took them for
Tooth-Drawers then Privy-Counsellors.

Lov. But why don't you make this
Pleasant to your self, and Laugh at them as I do?

Stanf. 'Faith Sir, I cannot find the Jest on it.

Lov. Yet methinks however this should not make me
Uneasy to my self.

Stanf. Sure, Lovell, you have patience more then ever Stoic had; This damned
Impertinence makes me resolved to fly my Country; I can never find one hours
refreshment in a Year: If I go to the Theater, where all People hope to please
themselves;either I find an Insupportable Play; or If a good one, ill acted; or
which is worse, so many troublesome Wits buzzing about my Ears, that I am
driven from thence too.


Lov. If this torments you so, then change the Scene, and
Go to Court, where Conversation is refined.

Stan. Why so I do; but there I find a company of gaudy nothings.
That feign would be Courtiers; that think they are
Hardly dealt withal not to have Employment too:
Besides, when after all my persecutions, I think
To ease my self at night by sleep, as last night
About eleven or twelve of Clock; at a solemn
Funeral the Bells set out: That Men should be
Such Owls to keep five thousand
People awake, with Ringing a Peale to him that does not hear it.

Lov. But it is Generously done, especially since in my
Conscience they expect no thanks for their Labor,
Neither from their Dead Friend, nor any one else.

Stanf. A Curse upon them, this was no sooner past, but
About two in the Morning comes the Bell-man,
And in a dismal Tone repeats Worse Rhymes
Then a Cast Poet of the Nursery can make; after
Him, come those Rogues that wake People with their
Barbarous tunes, and upon their Toting
Instruments make a more Hellish-Noise then they
Do at a Playhouse, When they flourish for the
Entrance of Witches.

Lov. All this disturbs not me: but if you are troubled
With this Noise, Why don't you live in the Country,
There you may be free.

Stanf. Free! Yes to be drunk with March-Beer, and Wine, worse then ever was
served in at Pye-corner at the eating of Pigs; and hear no other Discourse, but
of Horses, Dogs, and Hawks.


Lov. I would not be of your uneasy disposition for
The World: but granting all this: Cannot the
Women of the Town please you? methinks
The pretty Devils have Charms enough to keep me
In the World still without the Danger of being
Felo-de-se.

Stanf. Women! O! name them not: They are impertinence
It self, I can scarce endure the sight of them.

Lov. Why thou art stark-mad; 'faith for my part I
Never met with any of the Sex that was kind and
Pretty, but I could bear with her Impertinence.

Stanf. It cannot be.

Lov. No! would thoud'st try me: And bring
Me to a New Woman that is handsome; if I
Boggl'd at her Impertinence, may I never have
Other to help me at my Necessity, then an Oyster
Wife, or one that cries Ends of Gold and Silver:
Methinks Beauty and Impertinence do well enough
Together.

Stanf. Sure you railly with me all this while, you cannot
Be so stupid to think I have not reason in my
Opinion, but nothing I have ever told you yet
Has equaled the persecution of this Day.

Lov. I know whom that concerns -- prithee let me
Hear't, that I may laugh a little at those
Monkeys; The Variety of their folly always
Affords new mat^^^*

Stanf. That it does, to my sad experience; This morning, just as I was coming
to look for you, Sir Positive At-all, that Fool; that will let no Man
understand any thing in his Company, Arrests me with his Impertinence; says,
he, with a great deal of Gravity, perhaps I am the Man of the World that have
found out two Plays, that betwixt you and I have a great deal of Wit in them;
Those are, the Silent Woman, and the Scornful Lady -- And if I understand any
thing in the World, there is Wit enough, in both those, to make one good Play,
if I had the management of them: for you must know, this is a thing I have
thought upon and considered.


Lov. This is the pleasant'st thing I ever heard.

Stanf. May you have enough on it then if you think so:
But this was not all, for notwithstanding I
Granted his Opinion, he forced me to stay an
Hour to hear his Impertinent Reasons for it;
But no sooner, by some happy Accident or
Other, had I got rid of him, but in comes
That familiar Loving Puppy Woodcock, that admires
Fools for Wits, and Torments me with a damned
Coranto, as he calls it, upon his Violin, which he used
So Barbarously, I was ready to take it for a
Bag-pipe.

Lov. This would have made me broke my Spleen with
Laughter.

Stanf. I must be stung with a Tarrantula, before I could laugh at it: but here
my persecution did not end; For after I had got loose from the other two, whom
should I see as I came along, but that infinite Coxcomb Poet- Ninny: who by
force of Arms hales me into his Lodging, and Reads me there a Confounded Scene
in Heroic Verse: so that, what with Sir Positive's Orations, Woodcocks
squeaking Fiddle, and Poet Ninny's Heroic Fustian, I have a greater VVind-mill
in my brain then a New-Polititian with his head full of Reformation, but as
Fate would have it, in came a Dunn and out got I; and for fear of further
Interruption, came back to my Lodging.


Enter Roger. Roger. O Sir! here is Poet Ninny --

Enter Ninny. Stan. I have but named the Devil, and see I have raised him.

Ninn. Mr. Lovel, Your humble Servant.

Lov. Sweet Mr. Ninny, I am yours.

Ninn. But dear Mr. Stanford, I am infinitely troubled
That that unmannerly Raskal should come and disturb
Us just now: but you know, Sir, we cannot help the
Impertinence of foolish Idle Fellows.

Stanf. No, no! you have convinced me sufficiently of that.
aside. How the Devil could he follow me? I think the
Lovel and Ninny whisper. Raskal has as good a Nose as a Blood-Ho^nd.

Ninn. I have a Copy of heroick-Verses will fit him
I warrant you.

Lov. Read them to him, he is a great Judge I can assure you.

Ninn. Sir, I am happy to meet with one that is so great
A Judge of Poetry as you are, for it is a miserable
Thing for an Author to expose his things to empty
Giddy-fellowes: and let me tell you, between you and
I, there are seven thousand Fools to seven Wise Men.

Lovel. That so great a Truth should be spoken by one
That I Will swear is none of the seven.

Stanf. Now do you judge Lovel:
enter Wo^dco^k 'Slife, another Teazer here! Woodcock?

Wood. Dear Ninny, Ah dear Lovel: Ah my dear Iack-Stanford, I am the happiest
Man in thy Friendship of any Kisses them all. Man's upon Earth: Dear Jack, I
have the greatest value for thee in the World; 'prethee Kiss me again dear Heart.


Stanf. Now Lovel, Have I reason or not?

Lov. That you have to Laugh; This is my recreation.

Stanf. Well! if I do not leave the World within these three days; May I be
eternally baited by Sir Positive, Ninny, and Woodcock, which is a Curse worse
then the worst of my Enemies Wishes.


Wood. Hey! Art thou resolved to give over the World too
Dear Heart; There Is a Lady that came to Town
Yesterday that is of the same mind; she told me
So, but I hope she will not, for the truth on it is
Jack, I am in Love with her.

Ninny. Are you so? but I hope I shall catch her from you for all that.


aside. Wood. She says she is so troubled with Impertinent People, which
between you and I Jack, are so numerous in this Town, that a Man cannot live in
quiet for them, that she is resolved to leave the World to be quit of them.


Ninn. Yes, Faith she told me so last night as I was reading
A Scene of my Play to her.

Stan. No doubt she had reason.

VVood. It Is your Acquaintance Ned Lovel, Carolina's Sister,
Emilia.

Lovel. Now Stanford I Will oblige you, and bring you
Acquainted with this Lady; Certainly her humor
Will please you.

Stan. My Friend torment me too! Have I not impertinent
Acquaintance enough already; but you must endeavor
To trouble me with more.

VVood. Well! that is an Excellent Copy of
Verses of thine: Dear Ninny. Come on Jack,
Thou shall hear them.

Stan. Hell and Damnation!

Offers to go out. Ninn. Hold, hold; You shall hear
Your sad indifference (Look you Sir, it is upon a
Lady, that is indifferent in her Carriage towered me)
Your sad indifference -- (I am confident this
Will please you, here are many thoughts I was happy in,
And the Choice of Words not unpleasant, which you
Know is the greatest matter of all) -- Your sad indifference
So wounds -- (Look you, you shall find as much
Soul and Force, and Spirit, and Flame in this, as ever you
Saw in your Life.

VVood. Come Jack hear't, it is a most admirable piece.

Stanf. Now, Lovel, What think you.
Lovel Laughs. Gentlemen, I have Extraordinary business,
I must leave you.

VVood. No, no, hold! Faith thou shall stay and hear
His Verses, they are as good as ever were read;
Come Ninny --

Stan. O Devil! What have I deserved to have this
Inflicted upon me.

Ninn. Reads. Your sad indifference so wound^ my fair
At once, I hope, and do at once despair.
How do you like that, ha? --
You do at once both hate and kindness show;
And are at once both Kind and Cruel two.

Wood. O! Very fine! Is It not Ned?

Lov. O! Extreme fine.

Stan. What the Devil makes you commend these sottish
Verses, that are nothing but a Iingling of Words?
Let Us go.

Ninn. Reads Again. Hold! hold! hold, hear the rest; hem --
At once my hopes you nourish, and destroy
My only grief, and yet my only Joy.
Mark that?

Stan. O Devil!

Ninn. Reads. Virtue and Vice at once in you do shine;
Your Inclinations are, and are not mine.

Wood. O Admirable! Did ever hear any thing so
Fine in thy life Dear Heart?

'Stan. Ninny Reads again. O how these Curs bait me?
At once a storm and calm I do espy,
And do at once a smile and frown descry.
At once you kindle and put out my flame:
I cold, as Ice, as hot as Charcoal am.
Mark that Mr. Stanford, I was very happy in that
Thought, as I hope to breath.

Wood. Upon my Word, Jack, that is a great flight of his.

Rog. Sir, methinks there is as pretty a Soul in it, as a Man shall see in a
Summers Day.


Stan. What am I condemned to?

Lov. Why do you torment your self thus, methinks nothing can be pleasanter.


Stan. Gentlemen, detain me not, I Will stay no longer.

Ninn. Dear Mr. Stanford, I have just done, if you have any respect in the World
for me, stay and hear the end on it.


Wood. Nay, 'Faith Jack thou shall stay.

Stanf. What Is this I endure?

Ninny Reads. My Fate at once is gentle and severe,
You will not show your hate, nor Love decl^re:
Such safety and such dangers in your eye,
That I resolve at once to live and die.
There Is, Body and Soul, in that Couplet.

Lov. Hey; riddle me riddle me this, but this is the
Fashionable way of writing.

Ninn. What say you, Sir? Are they not well? You are a great
Judge.

Stan. Pray Sir let me go, I am no Judge at all, let me go,
I will not stay.
Sir Posi^ive, here! I had rather
Enter Sir Positive. Go against an Insurrection of 'Prentices, then
Encounter him.

Sir Posit. Ah Dear Jack! Have I found thee? I would not but have seen you for
twenty pound: I have made this morning a glorious Corrant, an immortal Corrant,
a Corrant with a Soul in it; I Will defy all Eur^pe to make such another: You may
talk of your Baptists, your Locks, and your Banisters; let me see them Mend
this: Why here is at least 25 Notes Compass, Fa la, la, etc. You shall hear.


Wood. Come, Sir Positive, lets hear't.

Sir Posit. With all my heart: Fa, la, la.

Stanf. Oh Heaven! Sir Positive, though I love Music,
Yet at present I must tell you,
I am out of Tune.

Ninn. Out of Tune, Ha, ha, ha, -- Now have you said the
Best thing in the World, and do not know it.

Stan. Sir Positive, I must take my leave of you, I must not lose my Business
for a little Music.


Sir Posit. Hold, now you talk of Music! --

Stan. 'Slife, Sir, I talk of my Business.

Sir Posit. But for Music, if any Man in England gives you a better account to
that then I do, I will give all mankind leave to spit upon me: You must know
it is a thing I have thought upon and considered, and made it my business from
my Cradle; besides, I am so naturally a Musician, that Gamut, A re, Bem^, were
the first words I could learn to speak: Do you like Baptist's way of Composing?


Lov. No doubt, Sir, he is a great Master.

VVood. As ever was born, take that from me.

Sir Posit. Upon my Word, Stanford, I will make all my Tunes like his -- You
shall hear his Vein in this Corra^^ now.


Stan. One trouble upon the neck of another -- When
I shall be delivered from these Fools?

Sir Posit. Do but ask Ninny ther^?

Ninn. Yes doubtless, Sir Positive has a great Soul of Music in him; he has
great power In Corranto's and Jiggs, and composes all the Music to my Plays
he has great power.


Wood. As any man that ever was born, Dear Heart.

Sir Posit. Come, you shall hear't --

Stan. Sir, I beg your pardon; I Will hear it some other time.

Sir Posit. Pish, pish, Upon my Hononr thou shall stay,
And hear it now.

Lov. Come, Dear Sir Positive, Make us happy.

Sir Posit. Observe! here is Flame in this Corrant -- Fa, la, la.
There Is a delicate Note in B, Fa Bemi in Alt,
And observe now how it falls down to C. Sol. Fa. Ut.
Fa, la, la -- There Is Mastery for you.

Stan. I do not like that part of your Corrant.

Sir Posit* It is a prodigious thing, thou should ever be in my Company, and
understand Music no better; thou have found fault with the best part of the
Corrant, ask Woodcock else?


VVood. By the Lord Harry, there is a great deal of
Glory in that part of the Corrant.

Fa, la, etc. Sir Posit. Observe here how cunningly it falls out of the Key,
And now at last it ends quite out of the Key.

Stan. Well, well! it is an Excellent Corrant; What the Devil
Will you have more? -- Fare you well.

Sir Posit. No, no; Stay but one Minute and you shall hear it
All together. Ninny, Do you beat Time --

VVood. Well thought on, do, and I Will Dance
To It Dear Hearts.

Stan. Now, Lovel, What think you, this Torture's worse then any the Dutch
invented at Amboyna.


Sir Positive sings, Ninny beats, False Time and Woodcock Dances to it. Sir
Posit. Here Is a Corrant for you, ha! Sta^ford,
What think of this?

Woo^. Think quoth a', I think I danced it as well
As any Man in England, Bully-Rock.

Lov. Certainly, Sir Positive, he Dances very finely.

Sir Posit. As any man that ever was born upon two Legs*
I defy any Man in the World that out-does him;
For betwixt you and I, I taught him every step he has.

Rog. Upon my Word, Woodcock, you have as much power
In Dancing, as any Man in England.

Wood. Dear Heart let me Kiss thee; Gad thou art a great
Judge -- Here, drink my Health.

Rog. Ah! Dear Flattery, How convenient a sin art thou?

aside. Ninn. Come, Mr. Woodcock, you shall go to the reading of my Play.


Wood. Ay! Come on, Bully-Rock --

Ex. Nin. and Wood. Lov. Come, I Will take pity on you, Stanford, and go before,
and prepare some place or other, where we may enjoy our selves, and you be
free. I Will take your Man along with me, and send him back again in haste for
you; by that means you may get loose. --


Stan. For Heavens sake make have, you will oblige me for ever.
Exit Lovel and Roger. Sir Positive! I am sorry I must leave you now;
I must go speak with a Gentleman that came
From Flanders last night.

Sir Posit. Flanders! If any Man gives you that account of Flanders that I do,
I Will suffer Death; You must know I have thought of their Affairs, I have
^onsider'd the thing thoroughly, never speak on it more, name it no more, let it
not enter into your Thoughts; it is a lost Nation, absolutely undone, lost for
ever, take that from me: and yet were I with Castle Rodrigo but one quarter of
an hour, I Would put him in a way to save all yet.


Stan. This is beyond all sufferance. -- Sir Positive, I am
So much in haste, that none but your self should
Have staid me of all Mankind.

Sir Posit. Mankind! Do thou know what thou say now? Do thou talk of
Mankind? I am confident thou never so much as thought of Mankind in thy
life: I Will tell thee, I will give Dogs leave to piss upon me, if any man
understands Mankind better then my self, now you talk of that. I have
considered all Mankind, I have thought upon nothing else but Mankind this
Month; and I find you may be a Poet, a Musician, a Painter, a Divine, a
Mathematician, a S^ates-man; but betwixt you and I, let me tell you, we are all
Mortal.


Stanf. Well, they may talk of the Pox, want of Money, and a Scoulding Wife,
but they are Heaven to my afflictions.


Enter Bridget. Bridge. Sir Positive, my Lady Vain desires you would come And
look upon her Picture that is come this Morning from Master Lilly's.


Sir Pos. Why there it is now Stanford, that people should have no more
Judgment, she had as good have thrown her Money into the Dirt; it is true, I
could have made him have made a good picture on it, if I had drawn the Lines for
him, but I was not thought worthy, and now you talk of Painting, either I am
the greatest Fopp in Nature, or if I do not understand that, I understand
nothing in the World: why I will paint with Lilly, and draw in little with
Cooper for 5000 l*


Stanf. O! intolerable Impertinence! I am afraid he will not go now his
Mistress sends for him.


Sir Pos. Dear Stanford! I must beg thy Excuse --

Stanf. A Curse on him, that is easily granted.

aside. Sir Pos. Come Mistress Bridget I Will go along with you. -- Dear Stanford
take it not unkindly, for I would not leave thee but upon this occasion.


Stanf. A thousand Thanks to the occasion.

aside. Sir Pos. But you know a man must not disoblige his Mistress Jack?


Stanf. Oh no, by no means.

Sir Pos. Adien. --

Ex. Sir Pos. and Bridget* Stanf. So! this Trouble is over.
O Fate! how little care you took of me,
By these Misfortunes I too plainly see.
Ex.
ACT. II.
Enter Carolina, Lovell. Carol. I Long to bring 'em together, they will be well
Matched; but we must stay awhile, for she has been so teased this morning, she
has locked her self up in her Chamber.


Lov. Stanford was ready to fall out with me, when I named a new acquaintance
to him, and will not be persuaded there is such a Creature as a Woman:

That is not Impertinent.

Car. Emilia is as Cautious as he can be, and would be ready To swound at the
sight of a new face, for she will not believe but all mank^nd are Coxcombs: for
Heavens sake Lovell let us surprise them into one another Company, we shall
have admirable sport.


Lov. We Will do it; but Madam, why should we mind their business that have enough
of our own: what if you and I should play the fools once in our Lives, and
enter into the bonds of Wedlock together.


Car. Fie, fie, it is such a Constant condition of life, that a Woman had as good
be professed in a Nunnery, for she can no sooner get out of one then the other.


Lov. But with your pardon, Madam, this is somewhat The pleasanter Condition of
the Two.


Car. That Is according as they use both Conditions, but
Pray Master Lovell bring not this villainous Matrimony
Into dispute any more, lest that may make us desire
It, I have known some men by maintaining a
Heresy in Jest become of that opinion in good Ea^nest.
But do you know that my Lady Vain was here this Morning?

Lov. No Madam; but what of that?

C^r. She told me that of you will make your Ears tingle.

Lov. Of me, Madam, what was it?

Car. She says you are the most inconstant man, the most perfidious Wretch
that e're had breath, and bid me fly you as I would infection.


Lov. What the Devil did she mean by that?

Car. Come, let me know what is betwixt you, or I Will
Rack you but I Will know it.

Lov. This Jealousy makes me believe you love me.
That she should be prating her self,
aside. How many Women would be thought honest, if
They could hold their own Tongues.

Car. I am like to have a fine servant of you: but a Lady would have a fine
time on it that were to marry you, to stake all the treasures of her Youth and
Virginity, which have been preserved with so much Care, and Heaven knows some
trouble too against nothing.


Lov. Faith Madam, I have even as much as I had before, but if you will be kind,
I Will take that Care off your hands, and soon rid you of that trouble.


Car. No, no, go to my Lady Vain, give her your Heart poor Lady she wants it
too but for me, I can keep my affliction to my self.


Lov. Dear Carolina! name her no more, if you do, I will get drunk immediately.
And then I shall have Courage enough to fall aboard her.


Car. Lord! what a loss shall I have: Heaven send me patience, or I shall never
outlive it, to loose so proper a Gentleman, but why should I think to rob her
of her due, no, no, now I think on it to her again, go, go.


Lov. For Heavens sake Carolina do not Tyrannize thus, why I had rather be kept
waking at an ill Play then endure her Company.


Car. Thus are we poor Women despised when we give away our Hearts to
ungrateful men, but Heaven will punish you.


Lov. Dear Carolina, let us leave fooling, and be in downright Earnest.


Car. I hope, Sir, your Intentions are honorable.

Lov. Madam, why should you once doubt it?
My Love to you is as pure as the flame that burns upon an Altar:
You are too unjust if you suspect my honor.

Car. Now will you leave fooling; on my Conscience
He is in Earnest.

Lov. As much as the severest Anchorite can be at his Devotions.


Car. O! are you so, 'its a hard Case, but pray you, Sir, leave off, I had
rather hear a silenced Parson preach sedition then you talk seriously of Love,
would you could see how it becomes you; why you look more Comically then an old
fashioned fellow singing of Robin Hood or Chevy Chase.

My Love to you's as pure as the flame that burns upon a^ Altar! how scurvily
it sounds.


Lov. You are the Cruellest Tyrant alive: Let us be serious a little, I have
rallied my self into a passion will ruin my else.


Car. Come, in what posture must I stand to hear you talk formally.


Lov. On my Conscience it is easier to fix quicksilver than your humor, Madam,
but if you would enter into Wedlock I can assure you that will bring you to
gravity.


Car. Let me but once more hear you name Marriage, and I protest I Will send for
my Lady Vain to you. I tell you again I will not marry. I love your
Conversation, and your humor of all things in the World.

But for Marriage it is good for nothing, but to make Friends fall out.


Lov. Nay, faith if you be at that I can do you the same Civility without the
Ceremony, as you say it is a kind of formal Thing.


Car. No! I shall take Example by my Lady Vain, poor Lady, she little thought
to be unkindly used, I warrant you.


Lov. Again that name.

Car. Besides, if we were Married you might say; faith Carolina is a pretty
Woman, and has humor good enough, but a pox on it she is my wife; no, no, I Will
have none of that.


Lov. Do you still distrust my Honor, it is unkindly done, but --


Car. Hold, hold, her door opens, step you in there, and you may hear how she
entertains the motion.


Enter Emilia with a Book in her hand. Emil. The Wisdom of this Charles the
fifth was
Wonderful;
Who 'midst of all his Triumphs and his Greatness,
When he had done what glory had obliged him to,
Seeing the Vanity of Mankind did quit
The pleasures that attend a Monarchs state;
Nay more, the most bewitching thing called power,
And left the World to live an humble life,
Free from the Importunity of Fools, was it not
VVisely done Sister?

Car. Yes, no doubt on it, as wisely done to go to a Monastery to shun fools, as
to keep Company with Us^rers and Brokers to avoid Knaves.


Emil. Thou art a Foolish Girl, I am tormented
With The Impertinence of both Sexes so,
I am resolved I Will not stay one Week out of a Nunnery.

Car. OF my Conscience thou art stark out of thy Wits with r^ading of Burton's
Melancholy; To a Nunnery to avoid Impertinence? where can thou think to meet
with more then there?


Emil. Now you are too Censorious.

Car. You should like me the better.
But you must needs find relief there? Do you
Think any Women that have sense, or Warmth
Of blood, as we have, would go into a Nunnery?

Emil. If I should meet with Fops there too,
I should be irreparably lost: Oh Heaven! what
Shall I do to ease my self? rather then
Endure the persecution of those fools that haunt
Us here. I will go where neither Man nor Woman
ever came.

Lov. O Rare! Stanford, here is just thy Counterpart ( Within. To a hair.


Car. Since thou art resolved to sequester thy self from Company, I Will buy thee
a Cage and hang thee up by the Parrot over the way, and thou shall converse
with none but him: I hope he is not Impertinent too?


Emil. Must you torment me too? fie Sister.
What would you have me do? my Patience
Is not great enough to endure longer, to see
The folly of this age; Do you judge, after I had been
Suffi^iently worried by the Lady Vain this Morning,
Whom I was forced to get rid of, by Telling her, her
Lover my Cozen Positive was at her lodging, which
You know is as far as the Pall Mall.

Car. That Vertuosa as she calls her self, is the pleasantest Creature I ever
saw: but prithee Sister, let me hear none of your fantastic Stories, methinks
you are as Impertinent as any body.


Emil. It distracts me to see this folly in things that are intended for
reasonable Creatures.


Lov. O Stanford! If this Lady does not match thee the devils in it.


within. Car. These Fools you talk of afford me so much recreation,
That I do not know how I should laugh without them.

Emil. Thou have no sense, they make me weary of the World!
Heaven! what shall I do?

Car. I tell you: Stanford hea^ing of your humor, and Admiring it has a great
desire to see you, before you resolve to leave the world, try how he will
please you.


Emil. What a ridiculous thing it is of you to wish me to new Acquaintance,
when I am leaving the old? I am sure He Is Impertinent, for all mankind I have
met are ^o


Car. Hist Lovell!

Lov. Your humble Servant Lady's --.

com^s out. Emil. Is this he? then farewell.

Lov. Madam! pray stay, and give me the honor of one word with you.


Emil. I knew what he was: my Lady Vain here?

Enter Lady Vain and Bridget. La. Vain. Master Lovell! your most humble
servant.

Lov. Your Ladyships humble servant* how I hate the sight of her in presence of
my Mistress.


Car. Lovell! for shame be civil to your Mistress: L^^'s hear you make Love a
little.


La. Vain. Madam upon my Reputation there was no such thing, Sir Positive was
never there, sure some Dirty fellow or other brought a false Message on purpose
to rob me of the pleasure of your Ladyships sweet Company: would he were hanged
for his pains, he passion he has put me in, has put me out of Breath.


to Emilin. Lov. Lord! how soon she is put in and put out!

La. Vain. But, Madam, as soon as ever I found he was not there I made all
possible haste to wait upon you again, for fear your Ladyship should resent my
too abrubt departure.


Emil. O Heavens! take pity of my afflictions, Madam --

La. Vain. But the truth on it is I designed to spend this day with you, since I
can be no where so well satisfied as with your Ladyships Converse, a person who
is Mistress of so much virtue and honor, which are Treasures I value above the
World.


Emil. Why, Madam --

La. Vain. For the truth is so few Ladies have either, that they are things to
be valued for their rarity.


Emil. Oh Impertinence! whither will this Eternal tongue of hers carry her.


Lov. This is very pleasant for her to name Virtue and Honor In my Company.


aside. Emil. Madam! for Heavens sake --

La. Vain. For the truth on it is, Madam, a Lady without Virtue and Honor is
altogether as detestable as a Gentleman without Wit or Courage.


Emil. Madam! I am sorry I cannot wait on you longer,
I am engaged to dine abroad.

La. Vain. Where is it Madam, for I am resolved to go along with you.


Emil. Why, Madam, you do not know the persons.

La. Vain. That Is all one for that, let me alone to make my Apology.


Emill. This is beyond all suff'rance.

Car^. I hope she will not leave her off so.

Lovel. No: if she does, I am mistaken.

La Vain. Come, Madam; Lets go.

Emili. But Madam, I must call at the Exchange first,
To buy some trifles there.

La. Vain. O Madam! I Will bring you to my Milliner, that
Calls himself the Italian Milliner, or the Little
Exchange; he is better provided then any one
In the Exchange.

Emili. I am on the sudden taken ill, and must retire.

La. Vain. Madam, do you think, I that am a Virtuosa understand no better, then
to leave you now you are not well; What Is your Distemper? no Woman in England
was more serviceable among her Neighbors then I with my Flos Unguentorum,
Paracelsian and Green-salve.


Lov. And your Album Graecum I warrant you*

La. Vain. That Album Graecum was a Salve of my Invention:
But a propos, perhaps it may be a fit of the Mother,
If it be, we must burn some Bl^w-Inckle, and Partridge
Feathers under your Nose; or she must smell to Asra foetida,
And have some Cold Water with a little Flower to drink:
Ay, ay, 'twill be so; pray Mr. Lovel come and help to hold her.

^^ili^. No, no, Madam; there is no such thing I Will assure you:
I must beg leave to go to my Chamber.

La. Vain. Come, Madam, I Will conduct you, and be as careful of you
As if you were my Sister a thousand times.

Emilia. Madam! with your pardon, I desire to be alone, and
Try to rest.

La. Vain. Alone! by no means in the World, Madam, it may
Be very dangerous; I would not for all the World
Madam, you should be alone; suppose you should
Fall into a Fit alone, I can speak it by Experience;
It Is Dangerous for a Lady to fall into a Fit without
An Able Body by her. Come, Madam, I Will conduct you in.

^milia. How shall I get rid of her*

Ex La. Vain and Emilia. Lovel. Let Us in and see when the Fury of this Dol
Common will be at an End.


Carol. Come, come, we shall have the pleasure of seeing my
Sister Worried almost to Death

Exit Lovel and Carolina. Enter Stanford. Stan. I wonder my Man returns not
yet.
I thought to have found Mr. Lovel here, but
Here Is one will do my business.

Enter Huffe. Huffe. Oh Mr. Stanford! Have I found you?

Stanf. Oh Heaven's! Will my punishment never end?

Huffe. I am the most unfortunate Man that ever was born.

Stanf. Why do you trouble me with this? Am I the
Cause on it?

Huffe. No! but I Will tell you, upon my Reputation, I have been Nick't out of
twenty pound Just now at Spiering's, and lost seven to four, for my last Stake.


Stan. What the Devill's this to me? let me go.

Huffe. But, Sir, I Will tell you a thing that very nearly concerns you.


Stanf. Some other time; 'Slife do not disturb me now.

Huff. For Heaven's sake hear me, you will repent it else.

Stanf. Make haste then, keep me in pain no longer.

Huffe. Why, I have found out the finest plump fresh Gi^le, newly come out of
the Country.


Stanf. Hell and Damnation! Why do you trouble me with such trifles.


Huffe. Trifles, Does he call 'em? Well! I see this will not do:
Aside. But, Sir, I Will tell you somewhat concerns you more*
Nearly; Sir, it concerns your Honor.

Stan. My Honor! Why, who dares call it in question?

Huffe. Not so, Sir; but, Do you love Generosity and Honor?

Stanf. Why do you ask the question?

Huffe. Why then I Will put you in a way to do a very Generous* And Honorable
thing.


Stanf. What do you mean by this Impertinence?

Huffe. If you will relieve an Honest Gentleman in distress,
Lend me two Pieces, you shall have them again within
Four and twenty hours, or may I perish.

Stan. 'Pox on you for an Owl: There, take em; I would
I could get rid of all my Impertinents at as cheap
A rate.

Huffe. I give you a thousand thanks.

Stan. 'Slife! trouble me no more, be gone!

Huffe. Sir, It were a very ungrateful thing not to
Acknowledge the favor.

Stanf. Away, away, and let your gratitude alone,

Huffe. D'hear, Mr. Stanford! upon mine honor I Will
Huff offers to go out, and returns Return them tomorrow night without fail.

Stan. Curse on you for a Rascal
Ex. Huffe. So, here is one trouble over!
Well! What Is the News?

Enter Roger. Rog. Do you earnestly desire to know, Sir?

Stan. Must I have Impertinence in my own Family too?

Roger. O! I am so out of breath, I am not able to speak one word; but if I had
never so much breath, I could tell you nothing but what you would be glad to hear:
If I had the wind of an Irish Footman, nay, of a Nonconforming Parson -- or.


Stan. Or, with a Pox to you, one Similitude more, and I Will
Break that Fools head of yours.

Roger. Well, Sir, since you are in haste, I Will be brief as a Fiddler, after
he is paid for scraping, for I love to be so in Cases of this Importance, for I
have heard --


Stan. Out you Dog, a Sentence after your Similitude;
You are as impertinent as a Country Witness.

Roger. I have done, Sir, and now I Will tell you in one Word:
Hold Sir! here is a Spider in your Perriwigg.

Stanf. Death, you Rascal! I Will ram it down your Throat.

Roger. Be patient, Sir: Seneca advises to moderate our passions.

Stanf. Hang ye' Rascal! Seneca is an Ass in your mouth.
Tell me quickly, Or --

Roger. Why, Sir, you are so impatient you will not hear me?

Stanf. 'Faith but I will speak.

Roger. Not to boast of my diligence, which, though I say it, is as much --


Stanf. You Dog tell me quickly, or I Will cut your Ears off.


Roger. Why Mr. Lovel, would have you come to him; What would you have?


Stanf. If I were not in haste, Sirrah; I Would teach you to know your Man, and
who you may put your Tricks on, you impudent Raskal.


As Stanford is going out, enter Woodcock. Rog. Death! That I should find
impertinence in others, and not see it in my self.


Wood. Dear Jack, thy humble Servant: How do do? My Footman told me, he saw
thy Man come in here, which made me believe I should find thee here; and I had
not power to stay from thee, my Dear Bully-Rock, for I can enjoy my self no
where so well as in thy Company: Let me kiss thee Dear Heart; 'Gad I had rather
kiss thee then any Woman.


Stan. This is beyond all Example: Oh horrid! his kindness is a greater
persecution then the Injuries of others.


Wood. I Will tell thee, Dear Heart, I love thee with all my heart: thou art a
man of Sense, Dear Rogue, I am infinitely happy in thy Friendship; for I meet
with so many impertinent silly Fellows every day, that a man cannot live in
quite for them: Dear Heart. For between you and I, this Town is more pestered
with idle Fellows, that thrust themselves into Company, then the Country is
with Attorny's; Is it not Jack?


Exit Roger. Stan. Yes! I have too much reason to believe you, a Curse on you.
--


Aside. Wood. Ay, Did not I tell you so, Jack! ha? but this is not my business*
Dear Rascal kiss me, I have a secret to impart to thee, but if it take the
least Air, I am undone: I have a project in my head shall raise me 20000 l. I
know you will promise secresy, dear heart.


Stan. Don't trouble me with it.

Wood. No, it concerns thee Man: why, thou shall go halfes with me, Dear Heart.


Stan. For Heaven's sake, Sir, don't trust it with me, I have a f^culty of
telling all I know: I cannot help it.


Wood. Oh! Dear Bully-Rock, that Wheedle will not pass. Don't I know thou art a
Man of Honor; and besides, so reserved, that thou will scarce tell a secret to
thy Friend.


Stan. Sir, I am unhappy in your good opinion, this is beyond all suff'rance.


Wood. No, Faith, Dear Jack, thou deserve it; but my project is this, do you
see.


Stanf. Well! I am so tormented with Impertinent Fellows, that I see there is
no remedy.


Wood. As I hope to Live, Jack, I am of thy Opinion: the 'truth on it is, it is
intolerable, for a man can never be free from these Fools in this Town; I
like thy resolution so well, that I am a Son of a Whore if I don't go along
with thee! Ah how we shall enjoy our selves when we are both together, how we
shall despise the rest of the World: Dear Heart.


Enter Roger. Roger. O, Mr. Woodcock! Poet Ninny is gone to the Rose Tavern,
and bid me tell you, he has extraordinary business with you, and begs you would
make all possible have to him.


wood. O Dear Rascal, kiss me! thou art the honestest Fellow in the World: Dear
Jack, I must beg thy pardon for a few minutes, but I hope thou wilt not take it
ill; why it is about business Dear Heart, you know we must not neglect that.


Stan. O no Sir, by no means.

Wood. Nay, Dear Rogue, be not angry, prithee kiss me; as I hope to live, I Will
return immediately; Dear Jack, thy humble Servant --

Exit Woodcock.
Stan. This is a lucky Accident.

Roger. Sir, I was fain to sin a little for you, and get rid of him by this lie.


Stan. Well! this shall excuse all your former Errors, 'Ile away, for fear some
other fools should find me out.


Exeunt. Enter Emilia, La. Vain (following her up and down) after them,
Carolina, Lovel. Carol. Does she not Tease her bravely Lovel?

Lov. Admirably! Oh that Stanford were here! if it were for nothing but to see a
fellow-sufferer.


La. Vain. Then Madam, will your Ladyship be pleased to let me wait on you to a
Play, there are two admirable Plays at both Houses; and let me tell you,
Madam, Sir Positive, that understands those things as well as any man in
England, says, I am a great Judge.


Emili. Madam, I beseech you ask me no more questions; I tell you, I had as
live stand among the rabble, to see a Jack-pudding eat a Custard, as trouble
my self to see a Play.


La! Vain. O Fie Madam! a young Lady and hate Plays; why I Will tell you, Madam,
at one House there is a huge Two handed Devil, and as brave a Fat Friar as one
would wish to see in a Summers-Day; and a delicate Machin, as they call it,
where one sits and sings as fine a Song: And then at the other house there is a
rare Play, with a Jigg in it, would do your heart good to see it; but if there
were nothing else in it, you might have your four Shillings out in Thunder and
Lightning; and let me tell you, it is as well worth it as one Penny's worth
another.


Emil. What have I done?


Stanf. Am I trapan'd into Women's Company?


Offers to go out, Lov. lays hold of him. Lov. Hold, hold, hold, Madam, here is
Mr. Stanford desires to kiss your hands.


Emili. I am in that disorder that never Woman was.

La. Vain. O Mr. Lovel! she is falling into a fit of an Epilepsy: help all to
hold her, lend me a Knife to cut her Lace.


Stan. This is worse then all the rest.

Lovel to La. Vain. Let me speak with you in the next Room in private.

La. Vain. Sir, your most obedient servant: I shall be glad of any occasion to
retire with one, for whom I have so great an affection.


Lov. to Carolina. For Heaven's sake follow me, or I shall be in an ill
condition.


Caro. I find you are an Errant Hippocrite, but I Will take you at your word for
once.


Ex. Lov. La. Vain. and Carolina* Emili. I am the greatest object of pity that
was ever seen: I am never free from these Importunate Fools.


Stanford and Emilia walk up and down, and take little notice of one another.
Stan. I am not less afflicted, and have as much need of pity too.


Emil. I find no possibility of relief, but by leaving the World that is so
full of folly.


Stan. Who would live in an age, when Fools are Reverenced, and Impudence
Esteemed.


Emil. To see a Fellow but the other day content with humble Linsey Woolsey,
now have variety of Ve^ts, Perriwiggs and Laced Linen.


Stan. One, that but the other day, could eat but one meal a day, and that at a
three-penny Ordinar^; now struts in State, and talks of nothing but Shattellins
and Lefronds.


Emil. In so corrupt an Age, when all mankind flatter the greatest, and oppress
the least; when to be just is to be out of fashion, and to betray a friend is
lawful Cunning.


Stanf. This is pleasant for her to speak against these Aside. things, as if
she were not as bad as any one: Who would live in such a treacherous Age, to
see this Gentleman that Courts the the other Gentleman's Wife, meet him and
embrace him; and swear he loves him above the World: and he poor fool dotes
extremely upon him that does the Injury.


Emil. Now has this Fellow a design to have me think aside. him Wise: but
wisdom and honesty are fooled out of Countenance.


Stan. Now the illiterate fool despises Learning


Emil. Nay, among the learned themselves, we find many that are great Scholars
by Art, are most abominable Fools by Nature.


Stan. This shall not persuade me to believe she is not Impertinent.


aside. Emil. Now the qualifications of a fine Gentleman are to Eat A-la-mode,
drink Champaigne, Dance Jiggs, and play at Tennis.


Stanf. To love Dogs, Horses, Hawks, Dice and Wenches, scorn Wit, break
Windows, beat a Constable, ly with his Sempstress, and undo his Tailor, it
distracts me to think on it.


Emil. Now does he desire to be taken for a discreet fellow, but this will not
do.


Aside. Stan. What relief can I expect in this age* when men take as much
pains to make themselves fools, as others have done to get wisdom.


Emil. Nay folly is become as natural to all mankind as lust.


Stan. What shall I do? Whither shall I turn me to avoid these Fools.


Lov. Now let us slip them

Caro. We shall have a very fair Course.

Enter La. Vain, Ninny, Lovel^ and Carolina. Emi. O Heaven's! Are they here?

Stan. What will become of me?

Ninny to Emilia. O Madam, I Will tell you, Stanford pray hear once.
It Is such a thing as never was in the World.

La. Vain. Ay, pray Sir hear him, he is as pretty a Wit as any man in this Town,
except Sir Positive I assure you.


Stan. What are we condemned to?

Emil. To a worse condition then Gally-slaves.

Ninny. I was with my Bookseller, Madam, with that Heroic Poem, which I
presented to your Ladyship, as an earnest of the honor I have for you; But by
the way, he is an ignorant ungrateful Fellow, for betwixt you and I he has got
some hundreds of pounds by some Plays and Poems of mine which he has Printed.
And let me tell you, some under the Names of Beaumont, and Fletcher, and Ben.
Johnson too: but what do you think, Madam I asked the Son of a Who^e for this
Poem?


Emil. O Insufferable!

Ninn. What think you Stanford?

^ayes hold of him Stan. Let me go; I have no Judgment in these things.

Ninn. But I Will you; There are not above 10, or 12000 Lines in all the Poem:
and as I hope to be saved, I asked him but twelve pence a line one line with
another.


La. Vain. And really, Sir, that is as reasonable as he can possibly afford them,
take that from me?


Sta^. O Devil! this is worse then a Sheerness Ague: that will give a Man some
respit between the Fits.


Ninn. By my Soul, Madam, if he had been my Brother I would not have abated him
one penny; for you must know, there are many hundreds of Lines, that in their
Intrinsic value, are worth ten shillings a Line between Father and Son; and
the greatest part of them are worth five shillings a line: but before George
very few or none but are worth three shillings a line to the veriest Jew in
Christendom; they have that salt, thought, imagination, power, spirit, soul,
and flame in them -- ha!


Emil. What does this concern me?


Ninn. No, but I Will tell you, Stanford, prithee hear, as I hope for mercy this
Impudent Rogue told me, he would not give me two shillings for the whole Poem;
an ignorant Puppy, a fellow of all the World I designed to make, for he might
have sold these Books for three shillings apiece, and I would have helped off
with 10000 of them, to ten thousand of my particular intimate Friends; besides,
every one that had but heard of my name, which are almost all the Kings
Subjects, would have bought some; so that I should not have got above six or
seven hundred pound, and in a fortnights time have made this fellow an
Alderman: That such ignorant Rascals should be Judges of Wit or Sense.


La. Vain. Well Sir, we shall never have good World unless the State Reformes
these abuses.


Ninn. It Is very true, Madam, for this is a thing is of Consequence to the
whole Nation, Stanford.


Stan. What the Devil would you have? Am I the cause of this?


(...). No! Heaven forbid I should say so: but Madam, I had forgot another
Advantage he had had by this.


Emil. Heaven defend me! this puts me beyond all patience.


Ninn. I Will tell you, Stanford, prithee mind me a little.


Stan. Oh now I am undone, ruined for ever, Sir Positive's here.


Emili. O intolerable!


enter Sir Positive. Sir Pos. to La. Vain I heard your Ladyship was here and
came to kiss your hand.
Oh Stanford, art thou here? well, how do Cousin?
I am glad I have found you all together, I came to
Present my Lady Vain with a music I have made
Which his that Invention in it, I say no more but
I have been this Month of making it,
And you must know music is a thing I value my
Self upon, it is a thing I have thought on, and considered,
And made my business from my Cradle.

Lov. Come Madam, now they are settled in their business, let us
Leave them.

Car. With all my heart.

Sir Pos. Come! you shall see it.

Emil. Cozen! Pray let it be another time.

Sir Pos. Nay, nay, never talk of that, you shall see it now,
And let me tell you I have as much power of Invention
In music as any man in England: Come in,

Stanf. O Heaven, when shall we be delivered from these fools?


Enter Fiddlers and play a ridiculous piece of music. Sir Pos How do you like
it Stanford, is it not well! what say you Cousin, ha?


La. Va. Indeed Sir Positive, it is very agreeable.

Sir Pos. Upon my honor this honest fellow played it with a great deal of
glory, he is a most incomparable Bower, he has the most luscious, the most
luxurious bow-hand of any man in Europe, take that from me, and let me tell
you, if any man gives you a better account of the Intrigue of the Violin, then
I do, I am a^ Owl, a Puppy, a Coxcomb, a Logger-head, or what you will.


Emil. Sure there is Magic in this? never to be free?


Sir Pos. Magic? why do you understand Magic?


Emil. No, no, no, not I Cozen* O intolerable!


Sir Pos. I do; if you please talk of something else, leave that to me, why I
will discover lost Spoons and Linen, resolve all horary questions, nay raise a
Devil with Doctor Faustus himself, if he were alive.


Ninny to my Lady Vain. Woodcock a Poet? a pimp is he not?


Sir Pos. Whose that speaks of pimping there: well! though I say it no man
pretends to less then I do; but I cannot pass this by without manifest Injury
to my self.


Stanf. This Puppy rather then not be in at all will declare himself a pimp.


Lady Vain. But Sir, are you such a manner of man?


Sir Pos. Why Madam? did you never hear of me for this?


Lady Vain. No Sir! if I had --


Sir Pos. If I had -- ha, ha, ha -- why Madam, where have you lived all this
while.


La. Vain. O ^y upon him, Madam, I shall lose my reputation if I be seen in his
Company.


Sir Pos. Well! the pimps in this Town are a Company of empty idle fellows,
they have no design in 'em.


La. Vain. Sir, I am sorry you are such a kind of Man, but --


Sir Pos. Sorry! well! if I would bend my self to it I would starve all these
Pimps, they should not eat bread, but I am not thought fit.


La. Va. Sure you railly all this while.


Sir Pos. Railly! ha, ha, ha. Why there is not a Lady of Pleasure from
Blackwall to Tuttle-Fields that I am not intimately acquainted with, nay that I
do not know the state of her Body from her first Entering into the Calling.


La. Vain. O Madam! I am undone, ruined for ever by being in his Company.


Sir Pos. Besides for debauching of Women, Madam, I am the greatest son of a
Whore in the World if any one comes near me.


La. Vain. Out upon you, if you be such a man I will have nothing to do with
you, see me no more, I must look to my Honor, my Reputation is dearer to me
then all the World. I would not have a blemish in my Honor for all the riches
of the Earth, this makes me so covetous of your Ladyships Company, a person of
so much Virtue and Honor, but for Sir Positive I defye him; forbear my
presence, you will undo my Honor for ever.


Sir Pos. Oh what have I done?


Emil. O horrid Impertinence!


offers to go out. Sir Pos. Nay, nay, Dear Cozen stay, and see us friends
first, Madam, I beg a thousand pardons: It Is true, I said no man in England
understood pimping better then my self, but I meant the speculative not the
practical part of pimping.


La. Va. O that is something, I assure you, if you had not brought your self off
well with your Speculation, I would never have suffered you to have Practiced
upon me, for no Woman in England values her Honor more then I do.


Enter Bridget. Bridge. Oh Madam, we must go to the Setting Dog and Partridge to
supper to night, Master Whiskin came to invite us, there will be the Blades,
and we shall have a Ball.


La. Vain. Will there be none but our own Company?


Bridge. No Madam.


La. Va. Well! I am resolved not to fail if I can by any means get rid of Sir
Positive, for I love meat and drink and fidles, and such merry Gentlemen with
all my heart.


Enter Woodcock. Wood. Your servant Dear Hearts; Madam, Emilia I kiss your
hand: Dear Jack.


Emilia. Nay, now it is time to shift for our selves.


Wood. My Dear Bully-Rock can I serve thee in any thing?


Stanf. Nay, then fare you well. --


Emil. and Stanf. run out at several doors, the Impertinents divided follow
'em. ACT. III.
Enter Stanford, Emilia, Sir Positive, Lady Vain, Woodcock and Ninny. Sir Pos.
NAy then Cozen, I am an Ass, an Idiot, a Blockhead and a Rascal, if I don't
understand Drammatique Poetry of all things in the World; why this is the only
thing I am esteemed for in England.


Emil. I can hold no longer. aside. This Rudeness of yours amazeth me; It Is
beyond all Example, must we be perpetually persecuted by you and your Crew. For
Heavens sake leave me.


Sir Pos. Ha, ha, ha: Coz, thou railliest well; It Is true, Woodcock and Ninny
will be a little troublesome sometimes; but 'ifaith they are very Honest
fellows 'Give them their due.


Emil. Oh abominable! Worse and worse.


Stanf. to Ninny and Wood. Gentlemen! what Obligation have we to endure your
folly any longer, must we be forced to leave the World for such importunate
fools as you are?


Ninny. What a Devil ails he? he is mad; who does he mean by this?


Wood. Nay faith I don't know, I am sure he does not mean me, Dear Heart.


Ninny. Nor me neither; Take that from me.


Wood. Jack if thou will leave the World, I Will go along with thee as I told
thee, Dear Heart; but who is it troubles thee now Bully-Rock?


Stanf. All of ye; ye are a pack of the most insupportable fools That e're had
breath, I had rather be at a Bear-Garden Then be in your Company.


Ninn. Ha, ha, ha: This is very pleasant in faith: Call the greatest Wits and
Authors of the Nation fools, Ha, ha, ha. That Is good in faith.


Wood. Nay, perhaps the greatest men of the Age: you are a great Judge indeed,
etc.


Lady Vain. Nay Sir Positive even leave her (don't be troublesome) since she
desires you: Come Madam, I Will wait upon you, whither you please: we will enjoy
our selves in private.


Emil. This is worst of all; Do you think I can suffer the Noise of your Tongue
forever with patience?


La. Vain. Of My Conscience Sir Positive she is distracted.


Sir Pos. Yes Madam, if I be a judge she is, and I defy any one to deceive me
in this.


La. Vain. It must be so, for she has a vast deal of wit, and great wits you
know have always a Mixture of Madness.


Sir Pos. Well Madam! I found that by my self, for I was about three years ago
as mad as ever man was; I 'scap'd Bedlam very narrowly, it is not above a
twelve-moneth since my brains were settled again: But come, Madam, I Will wait on
your Ladyship, for she does not deserve the honor of such Company.


La. Vain. What shall I do? to get rid of him, I shall miss my assignation, if
I do not.


Sir Pos. Come, Madam --
Fare you well! since you are no better Company --

Ex. Sir Pos. and La. Vain. Ninn. So, so, now we shall be a little at rest: for
let me tell you Madam, though Sir Positive be a rare man, yet my Lady Vain is
a little too talkative, and there can be no greater Trouble to one of sense
then that.


Emil. You are the most impertinent of all Mankind.


Ninn. Oh Madam! you are pleased to say so --


Emil. You are a most abominable fool, and the worst Poet in Christendom: I had
rather read the History of Tom Thumb then the best of your Poems.


Ninn. Oh Madam! you are pleasant, but this will not pass,


Emil. Such ridiculous insipid Rhimes are you Author of, That I am confident
you are that incorrigible scribbler that furnishes the Bell-man of this Ward.


Ninn. Ha, ha, ha, etc. Madam: as I hope to breath you droll very well, this is
the pretty'st humor in the World.


Enter Lovell and Carolina. Stanf. O Heaven! what will become of me?


Car. Is not this extremely pleasant?


Lov. There was never any thing equal to it.


Emil. Your Verses are such as School-boyes ought to be whipped for.


Ninn. This will not stir me; Madam, I know you are not in Earnest.


Emil. And your Plays are below the Dignity of a Mountebanks stage. Salvator
Winter would have refused them.


Ninn. Nay, Madam, never talk of that, I Will show you a Play I have about me:
Come, Madam, we will read it, here is the most glorious conceits, the most
powerful touches, in a word, it is a Play that shall Read and Act with any Play
that ever was born, I mean, conce^ved.


Wood. Come on Jack!


Stanf. Ah! Dear Lovell! use some means for my delivery, or I am ruined for
ever: for if I should go they would not leave me, they are so barbarously cruel
in their persecutions.


Wood. Nay, never speak of that Madam, before George you will bring your
Judgment in question if you condemn Ninny's Plays Dear Heart.


Emil. Away you Coxcomb, you are ten times a more Ridiculous' Squire then he is
a Poet.


Wood. Ha, ha, ha. By the Lord Harry this is a strange humor of hers as ever I
saw in my life: Well Madam you will have your frolic, but come Ninny, we will
even take our leaves.


Ninn. Ay, ay, come, your humble servants.


Wood. Your servant, Dear Hearts, this is the pleasant'st humor in the World.


Ninn. Ay, is it not? ha, ha, ha --


Ex. Ninn. and Woodcock laughing. Stanf. O Friend, I have been more inhumanely
used then ever Bawd was by the fury of the 'Prent^ces.


Lov. Still I say laugh at 'em as I do.


Car. Let Us leave 'em Lovell, for they are in such humors, they are only fit
for one another Company.


Lov. With all my heart, Madam --


Ex. Lovell and Car^lina* Emil. Well! I will leave the World immediately.


Stanf. Which way do you intend to go?


Emil. Why do you ask?


Stanf. That I may be sure to take another way.


Emil. Nothing could so soon persuade me to tell you as that.


Stanf. What are they gone? they have locked the door too!


Emil. I wonder what they leave us alone for.


Stanf. Heaven knows, unless it be to be troublesome to one another as they
have been to us.


They walk up and down and take little notice of one another. Emil. I am sure I
have most reason to fear it.


Stanf. You most reason? when did you see a man so foolish as a Woman?


Emil. When I see you.


Stanf. No, no, none of our sex will dispute folly with yours.


Emil. That Is hard, I find nothing but Owls among the best of you; your young
men are all positive, forward, conceited Coxcombs, and your old men all formal
nothings, that would have their sullen gravi^y mistaken for wisdom.


Stanf. This is not altogether so much Impertinence as I expected from one of
your sex, but let me tell you, I have too often suffered by Women, not to fear
the best of 'em, there being nothing to be found in most of the sex, but
vanity, pride, envy and hypocrisy, uncertainty and giddiness of humor, the
furious desires of the young make 'em fit to be seduced by the flesh, as the
envy and malice of the old prepare 'em to be led away by the Devil.


Emil. I must confess I don't perceive yet that you are altogether so
ridiculous as the rest of Mankind, but let me tell you, I have Reason to fear
you will be so, perhaps your impertinence is an Ag^e that ha^nts you by fits.


Stanf. That disease in the best of Women is quotidi^n, and if you be not
infected, you must be the most Extraordinary Woman in the World.


Emil. I would give Money to see a man that is not so as the Rabble do, to see
a Monster since all men I have ever seen are most intolerable Fops, would it
not distract one to see Gentlemen of 5000 l. a year write Plays, and as Poets
venture their Reputations against a sum of Money, they venture theirs against
Nothing, others learn Ten years to play of the Fiddle and to Paint, and at last
an Ordinary Fiddler or Sign-Painter that makes it his business shall outdo 'em
all.


Stanf. This looks like sense, I find she does understand something.


aside. Emil. Others after twenty or thirty years study in Philosophy arrive no
further then at the Weighing of Carps, the Invention of a travailling Wheel, or
the poisoning a Cat with the oil of Tobacco, these are your Wits and
Vertuoso's.


Stanf. I must confess this is not so ill as I expected from you; but it does
not less distract me to see a young Lady fall in Love with a vain empty fellow
not worth a Groat, perhaps for dancing of a Jigge, or singing of a Stanza of
fashionable Nonsense, another on the contrary so insatiably covetous, for
money, to marry old age, infirmity, and diseases, and the same bait that
persuades 'em to Matrimony shall entice 'em into Adultery.


Emil. This is not so foppish as I believed, yet though this be a great Truth,
it is a very impertinent thing of you to tell me what I know already.


Stanf. How the D^vil should I know that, I am sure not many of your sex are
guilty of so much discretion as to discern these things.


Emil. I am sure you have not much that cannot distinguish between those that
have and have not.


Stanf. I must confess I am a little surpised to find a Woman have so little
vanity, I could never endure the Society of any of the sex better then yours.


Emil. To be plain with you, you are not so troublesome ^ ^op as I have seen.


Stanf. What the Devil makes me think this Woman not impertinent? and yet I
cannot help it, what an Owl am I?


aside. Emil. I have been so cruelly tormented, and without intermission too,
that this seems some Refreshment to me.


Stanf. Why should I be caught thus, but I Will keep my folly to my self* --
aside. I can bear this with a little more patience; but if you To her. should
grow much Impertinent, I should venture to break open the Door for my Liberty,
I can assure you.


Emil. Pray Heaven you don't give me the first occasion [to him. Well I know
not what is the matter, but I like this man strangely; but, What a Fool am I?


Stan. How like a Woodcock am I ins^ar'd; a [To himself, to him* Curse on Lovel
for leaving me alone with her.


Emil. What do they intend to keep us prisoners forever.


Stan. I care not how long; [Aside. I think they intend to deal with us as they
do with [To her. Juries, shut us up till we agree of our Verdict.


Emil. That would be longer then the Seige of Tr^y (...).


Stan. This is not half so bad though as our late persecutions, That Is one
Comfort.


Emil. It fares with me like one upon a R^ck, that is a little loossen'd from
his pains; it is pleasure to him when he compares his torments, though those he
has left may be intolerable too.


Stanf. In this we agree, though in nothing else.


Emil. I would to Heaven we did in all things; I am [Aside. tormented with my
self, that am forced by the Ridiculous Custom of Women to dissemble, and that
way endure my own foppery -- Ah dear Stanford.


[Aside. Stanf. How now! she smiled, and suddenly checked the Liberty she took.


[Aside. Emil. O Heaven! I fear he has discovered something.


[Aside. Stan. There must be something in it, I like her very well, but am
resolved not to disclose it what e're comes on it; for, that will make her vain,
though she be not already.


[aside. Emili. Why don't you break open the door, Sir,


Stan. I don't find much reason for it yet.


Emili. I could find in my heart to give you enough.


Stan. Nay, I doubt not but it is in your Nature. What can the meaning of this
be? Is there nothing but Riddle in Woman?


aside. Roger. Hold, hold, Mr. Huffe: my Master charged me of all men living to
keep you out of his sight.


Enter Huffe and ^nlocks the door, and Roger after him, and lays hold on him.
Huffe. Prithee stand by you saucy Coxcomb.


Roger. Nay, Sir, be not so boisterous; upon my word you pass no further.


Huffe. Prithee (dear Roger) do'nt put this upon me.


Roger. My Master says it costs him two pieces a time to be rid of you.


Huffe. Prithee let me go, and you shall go my halfes.


Roger. Are you in earnest?


Huffe. Yes upon my Honor.


Roger. Nay then speed ye, but be sure you sink nothing.

[ exit Roger.
Huffe. I warrant you.


Stan. Is he here! hold, hold, hold, here is your two pieces, don't trouble me
now.


Huffe. Your humble Servant, I Will return them again to morrow without fail:
Ha! Do they come so easily; there are more from whence these came: O Sir, I Will
tell you, I have had the severest fortune that ever man had.


Stan. Away, away.


Huffe. For Heaven's sake hear, it is the most prodigious thing you ever heard.


Emil. What will this World come to?


Huffe. I was playing at Back-Gammon for my Dinner, which I won; and from
thence we came to five up for half a piece; of the first set I had three for
love and lost it* of the second I Gammon'd him, and threw Doublets at last,
which you know made fou^, and lost that too; of the third I won never a Game.


Stanf. O Devil! Is this the Miraculous thing you would tell me, Farewell.


Huffe. Hold, hold, Sir! you don't hear the end on it.


Stan. Nor do I desire it, Sir.


Huffe. I Will tell you, Sir, of the fourth set I was four to two, and for the
last game my Tables were filled up, and I had born my thr^e odd men, so that
you know I had two upon every point.


Emili. O insufferable! though I feel enough my self, yet I cannot but pity
Stanford.


[to her self. Stan. O Damned Impertinence! Sir, I tell you, I don't understand
Back-Gamon.


Huffe. Not understand Back-Gamon: Sir, that you may understand well what I
say, I Will tell you what Back-Gamon is.


Emili. This is worse then the other: sure Stanford has some Charm about him,
that I can suffer this rather then leave him.


[to her self. Stan. I desire none of your Instructions.


Huffe. Well: then as I was a saying, I had just two upon every point, and he
had two Men to enter; and as the Devil would have it, my next throw was
Size-Ace; he entered one of his Men a Size; then Mr. Stanford, to see the
Damned luck on it, I threw Size-Sinke next, and the very next throw he entered
upon a Sink, and having his Game very backward, won the Game, and afterward he
Set so, that I lost every penny.


Stanford. This will distract me; What the Devill's this to me?


Huffe. No: but did you ever hear the like in your life?


Stan. This puts me beyond all patience.


Huffe. But this was not all; for just in the Nick came she that Nursed my
three last Children that were born without Wedlock, and threatened to turn them
upon my hands if I did not pay her. -- 'Faith Mr. Stanford three Pieces more
will do my business; upon my Honor I Will pay you to morrow: Come will you
Communicate?


Stan. Yes that, that is fitter for you --


Huffe. What is that Dear Heart?


Stanf. It Is that Sir* --


[kicks him. Huffe. That Sir, I don't understand you; if you go to that Sir:
There Is a business indeed. What do you mean by this? What would you make a
quarrel, Sir? You Will never leave th^se tricks: I have told you of them often
enough. What the Devil do you mean by that?


Stan. Let this expound my meaning. --


Kick^ him again: Huffe. 'Slife, Sir, I don't understand you: and ye talk of
these things, and these businesses, Sir, I Would have you know, I scorn to be
kicked as much as any man breathing, Sir; and you be that Sport, your Servant,
your Servant, Sir.


Enter Roger at the Door. Roger. Come Mr. Huffe, Divide.


Huffe. Divide! There Is one for you, for two of them was all I got.


Gives Roger a Kick. Roger. This you might have kept to your self if you had
pleased, but, Do You think I Will be served thus?


Huffe. Let me go.


Rog. I Will not leave you so. --


Exit Roger and Huffe. Emil. Why do'nt you go? the Doors open now, Sir.


Stan. I am afraid I shall light into worse Company.


Emili. O Sir, that is impossible!


Stan. How vain this is of you; now would you give me a fair occasion to
flatter you, but I can assure you, you shall miss of your design.


Emil. Well, this is an extraordinary man; I love the [Aside. very sight of
him: I wonder, Sir, you will be so foppish to [To him. imagine I love to be
flattered; I hate flatterers worse then our new Poets


Stan. What an Owl am I to like this Woman! sure I am bewitched.


Emil. Aside. Well, Sir, Farewell: and yet I would not leave him.


She offers to go out. Stan. You Would e'n as good stay, Madam, while you are well:
you may perhaps if you go, encounter some of your Persecutors.


Emil. I Would rather stay here then venture that; my trouble is not here so
insupportable.


Stan. She must be a rare Woman! [Aside. Nor perhaps is not like to be, unless
it comes from your [To her. self* But I think there is less vanity in you then
in most women I have seen.


Emil. This is a most excellent person.


[Aside. Stan. Dear Emilia. [Aside. O Heaven! Is he here?


Enter Sir Positive. Sir Posit. Jack; Hark ye.


Stan. For Heaven's sake! I have business.


Sir Posit. It Is all one for that, Sir; Why I Will tell you.


Stan. Another time; I beseech you don't interrupt me now.


Sir Posit. 'Faith but I must interrupt you.


Emilia. What can be the matter he listens to him.


[Aside. Stan. 'Slife, Why should you put this upon me now.


Sir Posit. If you refuse me, I Will blast your Reputation.


Stan. What shall I do? though this be a Coxcombly-Knight, yet the Puppies
stout; are you so cunning in [To him. persecuting me, to put a thing upon me I
cannot refuse: well Sir, remember this.


Emil. What can this mean?


[Aside. Stan. Come, Sir, I Will follow you, but a Curse upon you for finding me
out: Madam, as soon as I have dispatched this business, it is possible I may see
you again.


Emili. But it is not, I Will assure you; I Will never see the Face of one, that has
so little sense to be seduced by such an Idiot as that is.


Stanf. How ridiculous is this of you, to Judge of a thing before you know the
Bottom on it.


Sir Posit. Come, Stanford, 'prethee come away


[Exeunt. Emil. Have I found you? this Fellows as bad as any, and without doubt
did but Counterfeit his humor, to insinuate himself into my good opinion. What
lucky Accident is this has undeceived me? I felt a passion growing in me might
else have proved dangerous -- Luce --


[ enter Luce. Luce. Madam.


Emil. Fetch my Hoods and Scarfes, I Will take a walk in the Fields.


[ exit Luce. Carol. How Sister! What have you lost your Gallant:


Enter Lovell and Caroli^^ Emil. O Sister, I thank you for locking me up with
that Fellow; well, the time may come when I may be quit with you.


[exit. Carol. I wonder how the Door came open; I believe there has been hard
bickering betwixt them: but, I find my Sister is Conqueror, and your Friend is
fled for the same.


Lov. Fare well he, let us mind our selves. Come, 'Faith Madam, Why should you
and I hover so long about this Matrimony; Like a Cast of Faulcons about a Hern
that dare not stoop.


Ca^ol. O Sir, the Quarry does not Countervaile the Danger.


Lov. I Will warrant you, Madam; but let us railly no longer, there is a Parson at
Knights-bridge that yoakes all stray People together, we'll to him, he will
dispatch us presently, and send us away as lovingly as any two Fools that ever
yet were condemned to Marriage.


Caro. I should be inclinable enough to cast my self upon you; but I am afraid
you are gone so far with my Lady Vain, you can never come off with Honor:
Besides, I am sure, what e're you say, you cannot so soon forget your kindness
to her; and if after we are yoked, as you call it, you should draw that way, I
should draw another; and then our Yoke would go near to Throttle us.


Lovel. Faith some would think it much the easier if 'twere wide enough to draw
both ways: But Madam, Will you never be serious with me?


Carol. I know you cannot love me, she is your delight.


Lov. Yes, yes, I delight in her as I do in the Tooch-Ache; I love her
immoderately, as an English Tailor loves a French Tailor that is set up the next
door to him.


Carol. Sir, to keep you no longer in suspense, I am resolved never to Marry
without my Fathers Consent.


Lov. Madam, I Will not despair of obtaining that.


Carol. He has Vowed never to Marry me till he has disposed of my Elder Sister.


Lov. Will you assure me to make me happy when that is done?


Carol. I think I may safely promise any thing against that time; for, as long
as my Sister has these Mellanchollick-Humors, she is far enough from that danger.


Lov. I Will warrant you I Will make a Match yet between Stanford and her.


Carol. That Is impossible, unless you can alter their Natures* for though
neither finds Impertinence in themselves, they I find it in one another:
besides, their very Principles are against all Society.


Lov. Well, Madam, I have a way to make them stark mad in love with one another;
or at least fetch them out of their Sullenness: We will perpetually bait them
with our Fools, and by that we shall either plague them out of their humor, or
at least make their fellow-sufferings be a means to endeare them one to another.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Positive, Standford, and two Clerks. Sir Posit. Now will I
firke my two Clerks.


2 Clerk. But, Sir, before we engage, I would satisfy my Conscience whether
the Cause be just or no?


Stan. Hang the Cause, we come to fight.


Sir Posit. Why, I Will tell you the Cause, Sir.


Stan. By no means, Sir Positive, we come to fight here, not to tell stories.


Sir Posit. We Will fight too; but by your leave I Will tell the Cause first, and
you were my Father.


Stan. Hold, Sir, think upon your Honor, this is no place for Words; Let your
Sword speak your Mind.


Sir Posit. Sir, by your Pardon, I am resolved to satisfy them; no man in
England knows how to manage these things better then my self, take that from me.


Stan. O horrid Impertinence, I fear these Fools Tongues more then I can their
Swords.


Sir Posit. Sir, no man in E^gland would put up this aff^ont; Why look you,
Sir, for him to sit in the Eighteen Pence Gallery, pray mark me, and rail at my
Play alowd the first day, and did all that lay in his power to damn it: And let
me tell you, Sir, if in any Drammatick Poem there has been such breaks, such
Characters, such Figures, such Images, such Heroic Patterns, such Heights,
such Flights, such Intrigues, such Surprises, such Fire, Salt, and Flame, then
I am no Judge: I understand nothing in this World.


Stanf. What a Cause his Valor has found out; and how he Cants too; What an
Owl was I to come along with him; Sir Positive dispatch. Come, come, Gentlemen.


Sir Pos. Hold a little --


2 Clerk. Why look you Mr. Timothy, this is a very honest and in enious
Gentleman for ought I see.


1 Clerk. It Is true, I sat in the Eighteen Pence Gallery, but I was so far
from Railling against your Play, that I cried it up as high as I could.


Sir Posit. How high did you cry it up?


1 Clark. Why as high as the upper Gallery, I am sure of that.


Stanf. O Cowardly Currs! Will they never fight: Y'e ly, y'e did Rail at his
Play.


1 Clerk. Sir, I Will hold you twenty pound I don't lie; Sir, Were you there? Did
you hear me? This is the strangest thing in the Wo^ld.


Stanf. Will nothing make these Rogues fight? You are both Rascally Cowards.


2 Clerk. It Is strange you should say so, you are very uncharitable; Do you
know either of us?


Stan. Oh insufferable! What Sons of Whores has he picked up, and what an
occasion too?


Sir Posit. Why do you say, you did not Rail; Did not I sit just under you in
the Pit?


2 Clerk. Lord! Who would expect to see a Poet in the Pit at his own Play?


Sir Posit. Did not you say, Fie upon it, that shall not pass!


Stan. Gentlemen! either Fight quickly. --


Sir Posit. Hold hold, let him speak; What can you say? Do Gentlemen Write to
oblige the World, and do such as you traduce them -- ha --


1 Clerk. Sir, I Will tell you, you had made a Lady in your Play so unkind to her
Lover (who methought was a very honest well-meaning-Gentleman) to command him
to hang himself; Said I then that shall not pass, thinking indeed the Gentleman
would not have done it, but he indeed did it, then said I fie upon it that he
should be so much over-taken.


Sir Posit. Overtaken! that is good 'ifaith, why you had as good call the
Gentleman fool: and it is the best Character in all my Play. De'think I Will put
that up.


1 Clerk. Not I Sir as I hope to live; I would not call the Gentleman Fool for
all the World, but it is strange a man must pay eighteen pence, and must not
speak a word for it.


Sir Pos. Not when Gentlemen write; take that from me.


2 Clerk. No, I would they would let it alone then.


aside. Sir Pos. But Stanford it would make an Author mad to see the
Invincible Ignorance of this age, now for him to hang himself at the Command of
his Mistress there is the surprise, and I Will be content to hang my self, if ever
that was shown upon a stage before, besides 'twas an Heroic Cato-like Action,
and there is great Love and Honor to be shown in a man's hanging himself for his
Mistress, take that from me.


Stanf. O horrid! this Magisterial Coxcomb will defend any thing.


Sir Pos. What do you think Stanford, you are a great Judge?


Stanf. I think a Halter is not so honorable as a Poniard, and therefore not
so fit to express Love and Honor with.


Sir Pos. Ha, h^, ha To see your mistake now that is the only thing in the Play
I took pains for, I could have made it otherwise with ease, but I will give you
seventeen reasons why a Halter's better then a Poniard. First, I Will show you
the posture of hanging, look, do you mind me, it is the posture of a Pensive
dejected Lover with his hands before him, and his head aside thus.


Stanf. I would you had a Halter you would demonstrate it more clearly.


Sir Pos. 'Faith, and w^^ld I had, I Would show it you to the life -- but secondly
--


Stanf. Hold Sir -- I am convinced, to our fighting business again; but they
have given you full satisfaction,

Let Us away --


Sir Posit. No, no, hold a little.


Stanf. A Curse on him! did I leave Emilia for this?


Sir Pos. Sir, if you will see your hand to this Certificate (...) satisfied,
otherwise you must take what follows.


1 Clerk. Sir! with all my heart, I Will do any thing to serve you.


Sir Pos. I had this ready on purpose, for I was resolved if we had fought, and
I had disarmed him, I Would have made him do it before I Would have given him his
l^fe, how do you write your self?


1 Clerk. Timothy Scribble a Justice of Peace his Clerk.


Sir Posit. Here read it, and set your hand to it.


1 Clerk reads I do acknowledge and firmly believe that the play of Sir
Positive Att-all Knight, called the Lady in the Lobster, notwithstanding it was
damned by the Malice of the Age, shall not only read, but it shall Act with
any of Ben. Iohnsons and B^aumont's and Fletcher's Plays.


Sir Pos. Hold, hold! I Will have Shakespeares in, 'slife I had like to have
forgot that.


1 Clerk reads With all my heart.
I do likewise hereby at^est that he is no Purloiner of other men's Works, the
general fame and opinion notwithstanding, and that he is a Poet, Mathematician,
Divine, Statesman, Lawyer, Physician, Geographer, Musician, and indeed a Unus
in Omnibus through all Arts and Sciences, and hereunto I have set my hand the
day of


1 Clerk* With all my heart.


Sir Pos. Come Sir, do you Witness it.


2 Clerk. Ay Sir.


he sets his hand. Sir Pos. In presence of Jacob Dash.


1 Clerk. Look you Sir I write an indifferent good hand, if you have any
occasion to command me, inquire at the Stationers at F^rnivals Inn. --


Stanf. Why you Impudent Rascals! how dare you; offers to come into the Field?
must I be diver^^^ thus long by kick 'em. you?


Sir Pos. Hold Sta^ford! I cannot in honor suffer that now they are my
Friends, and after this satisfaction I am bound in honor to defend 'em to the
last drop of blood.


Stanf. O intolerable!


1 Clerk. Sir! I pray be not angry! we did not come into the (...) to fight,
but Ma^^er Dash and I came to play a match at Trap-ball for a Dish of Steakes
at Gloster-hall, and here you found us.


Sir Pos. Have you the Confidence to talk of Trap-ball before me, nay, now you
are my Enemies again: hark you Stanford I Will play with 'em both for 5 cool. why
I was so eminent at it when I was a Schoolboy, that I was called Trap Positive
all over the School.


Stanf. Then farewell good Sir Positive Trap.


Sir Pos. Dear Stanford stay but one quarter of an hour, and you shall see how
I Will dishonor 'em both at Trap-ball -- They talk of Trap-ball, ha, ha, ha.


Stanf. Slife what will become of me: out of the field you inconsiderable
Rascals. Must I be diverted thus by you --


They run out. Exeunt omnes. Enter Emilia and her Maid at one Door, Ninny and
Woodcock at the other. Emil. I thought we might have been free here: and here are
these Puppy's.


Wood. Let Us aboard of 'em, who e're they are, fa, la, la, how now Dear Hearts?
by the L. Harry its pity you should walk without a Couple of Servants, here is a
Couple of Bully-Rocks will serve your turn, as well as Two of Buckram, Dear
Hearts.


Emil. O Heaven! --


aside. L^ce. Gentlemen this is very rude! we shall have them come shall thank
you for it.


Ninn. As I hope to breath Ladies you look the pretty'st in Vizard Masks of any
Ladies in England.


Wood. And now you talk of Masks, I Will show you an admirable Song upon a Vizard
Mask, Dear Hearts, of Poet Ninny's making.


Emil. Oh abominable Impudence!


Wood. But I must beg your pardon that I cannot sing it, for I am hoarse
already with singing it to the Maids of Honor.


Luce. You sing it to the Maids of Honor?


Wood. But if I had a Violin here, no man in England can express any thing more
lusciously upon that then my self, ask Ninny else.


Ninn. Yes Ladies! he has great power upon the Violin, he has the best double
Relish in Gam-ut of any man in England, but for the little finger on the left
hand no man in Europe outdoes him.


Wood. You may believe him, Dear Hearts, for he is a great Judge of Music, and
as pretty a Poet as ever writ Couplet.


Emil. O horrid! what is this? there is no way to escape, but to discover our
selves.


they pull off their masks. Ninn. Emilia! what shall I do? I am undone, she will
never own me again.


Emil. Farewell you Baboons, and learn better manners.


Wood. 'Slife she will take me for a Whore-master, I am nipt in the very blossom
of my hopes.


Ninn. For Heavens sake, pardon me Madam.


Emil. Let me go.


Wood. No Madam, we will wait on your Ladyship home.


Emil. This is worse and worse.


Enter Huffe. Huff. Heart! if I put up this, I Will give him leave to use me
worse then a Bayley that arrests in the Inns of Court.


Wood. Why! what is the matter?


Huff. 'Slife kick a man of honor as I am, I Will pistol him pissing against a
Wall.


Luce. Ay then or never to my knowledge.


Wood. What Is the business Dear Heart, hah?


Huff. Sir, I Will tell you.


Emil. This is a lucky Occasion.


Ex. Emil. Luce. Ninn. Are you gone, I Will follow you.

Ex. Ninn.
Huff. I had occasion for four or five Pieces to make up a Sum with, and went
to borrow it of him, and he like an uncivil fellow as he was --


Wood. What did he?


Huff. Why I did but turn my back, and he like an ill-bred sot, gives me a kick
or two of the breech, I Will cut his throat if I should meet him in a Church.


Wood. This will be an ill business; I am sorry for my Friend Jack Stanford. --
for Master Huffes honor aside, is disturbed and I fear he will revenge it
bloodily, for he understands Punctilio's to a hair, but I Will endeavor to
prevent it however.


Huff. If he be above ground I Will cutt's throat for it, I Will teach him to use a
man of honor thus, if he had pleased he might have dealt with me at another
rate, as I hope to live I had a fighting Sword by my side near six foot long at
that very time, and he to kick a man, P'shaw He does not understand his
business, but I shall find him presently.

Ex. Huff.
Enter Ninny. Ninn. Pox on it Woo^cock she would not let me go with her.


Wood. Prithee, Dear Heart, see if thou can find I^ck Stanford in the Fields,
while I go and ^eel if I can find him in the Town.


Ninn. What Is the matter?


Ninn. It Is a business concerns his life, Dear He^^t, ask no questions, but if
you find him, bring him to the Sun.

Exit*
Ninn. What can this be?


But I Will go see if I can find him out,
So to be sure of what I 'me now in doubt*
Fin. Act. tertii.
Act. IV.
Enter Lady Vain and Carolina. La. Va. COme Madam, I am not so blind, but I
have discovered something.


Car. What have you discovered Madam?


La. Va. Let me tell you, Madam, it is not for your honor to give meetings
privately to Master Lovell.


Car. Why Madam, if I should, are you concerned in it?


La. Vain. Yes, Madam, first in my good Wishes to your Ladyship, I would not
have the World blame your Conduct, not that you should have the least blemish
in your honor, but that your Fame and Virtue should continue unspotted and
undefiled as your Ladyships Beauty is.


Car. Fear not, Madam, I Will warrant you I Will secure my honor without your
Instructions.


Enter Lovell softly, and comes just behind them. La. Vain. But, Madam, let me
tell you again, no Woman has really that right in Master Lovell that I have: but
he is false Wretch Madam, he has no Religion in him, if he had any Conscience,
or had used to have heard Sermons, he would never have been so wicked and
per^idious to a poor Innocent Woman as I am.


Lov. This is very fine in faith --


to himself. La. Vain. Madam, he protested all the honorable kindness in the
World to me, and has received Favors from me, I shall not mention at this
time, and now he has raised the siege from before me, and laid it to your
Ladyship.


Car. I cannot imagine what you mean by this?


La. Va. And Madam to confess my Weakness to you, I must needs say, I love him
of all men in the World.


Car. Well, Madam, since you do, I Will resign my Interest in the Gentleman you
speak of, here he is.


La. Va. Oh Heaven! am I betrayed? well, Madam, I shall acquaint your father
with your Amor.


Lov. Hold, Madam, if you do perhaps I may whisper something in Sir Positive's
ear.


La. Vain. Sir! you will not be so ungenerous to boast of a Ladies kindness: if
he should say the least thing in the World after my unhansome leaving of him
just now, it would incense him past reconciliation, what a confusion am I in?


Ex. La. Vain. Lov. Is not this very pleasant Madam?


Car. I wonder, Sir, after what has now past you have the confidence to look me
in the face.


Lov. I like this raillery very well, Madam.


Car. I can assure you, you shall have no reason to think I railly with you.


Lov. Certainly you cannot be in Earnest.


Car. Upon my word you shall find I am, I will have nothing to do with any man
that is engaged already.


Lov. You amaze me, Madam.


Car. 'Ile never see you more --


Enter Stanford. Stanf. O friend! I Am glad I Have found you.


Lov. I shall have no opportunity to appease my Mistress* if I do not get rid
of him, but I have a trick for him.


aside. Stanf. Would this woman were away, that I might acquaint you with the
greatest concernment I ever had.


Lov. Step into that Chamber quickly, and I Will get rid of her, and come to you.
--


Stanf. With all my heart --

Exit Stanford.
Lov. Certainly, Madam, you cannot know this Woman so little as to give her
Credit? I Will tell you what she is.


Car. I am very glad I know you so well: do you think I Will be put off with a
Remnant of your Love?


Enter Roger. Roger. O! Master Lovell! is my Master here? I have lost him these
two hours.


Lov. Ay, ay, but Madam, for Heavens sake hear me!


Car. Trouble me no more.


Exit Carolina, Lovell follows her. Rog. Where is this Master of mine: I have
been seeking him these two hours, and cannot light of him.


Enter Huffe. Huff. Oh Roger! where is your Master?


Roger. O Sir! you shall excuse me for that.


Huff. Prithee dear Rogue tell me, 'twill be better for thee.


Rog. No, no, that will not do, you were not so just to me last time.


Huff. Upon my honor I was: Why should thou distrust thy friend?


Rog. Come Sir, don't think to Wheedle me at this rate!


Huff. I am a son of a Whore if I was not just to you: but prithee bring me to
him once more: I am sure to get money of him, and may I perish if I do not give
you your share to a farthing.


Rog. Well! I Will trust you once more: go, and stay for me in the Hall, and I Will
come to you when I have found my Master, who is somewhere in this house.


Huff. Well! I Will wait for you --

Exit.
Rog. My comfort is, if he gets money I may have my share, if not he ventures a
kicking again, and I venture nothing.


Enter Stanford and Emilia. Rog. Oh Sir! I have been seeking you these two
hours, and here is Master Lovell in the house.


Stanf. You Rascal, must you trouble me too? --


offers to strike him. Emil. He does not trouble you more then you do me.


Stanf. Now are you like a young hound that runs away with a ^alse scent.


Emili. For Heaven's sake leave me.


Stanf. Nay! This is like a Woman, to condemn a man unheard.


Emili. Must I be for ever pestered with Impertinent people?


Stanf. If you were not so your self, you would not think me so; but she that
has the Yellow Jaundies thinks every thing yellow which she sees.


Emili. Is it possible you can have the impudence to endeavor to justify your
folly.


Stan. Not that I care much for satisfying you, but to vindicate myself from
the unjust aspersion: know it was my honor obliged 'me to go along with that
Fool.


Emili. Out of my sight; Are you one of those Fopps that talk of honor?


Stan. Is that a thing so despicable with you? he asked me to be his second,
which I could not in honor refuse.


Emil. Granting that barbarous custom of Duells; Can any thing be so
ridiculous, as to venture your life for another man's quarrel, right or wrong?


Stan. I like this Woman more and more, like a sott as I am* sure there is
VVitch-craft in it. --


aside. Emil. But to do the greatest Act of Friendship in the World for the
greatest Owl in Nature.


Enter Huffe. Huffe. Oh Mr* Stanford, I have a business to impart to you.


Stan. O insufferable! Have you the Impudence to trouble me again.


Emi. I know not what is the matter, but I cannot but have some inclination to
this fellow yet.


aside. Huffe. I am going into the City, where I shall have the rarest Bubble
that ever man had; he was set me by a Renegado-Linnen-Draper, that failed last
year in his Credit, and has now no other trade but to start the Game, whilst
we pursue the Chase. This is one of these fellows that draw in the Youth of
the City into our Decoy, and perpetually walk up and down seeking for Prey.


Stan. Be gone! and leave me.


Huffe. But you know a man must have a little Gold to show, to bait the Rogues
withal.


Stan. Out, you unseasonable Rascal, I Will send you hence.


-- Draws. Huffe. Nay, it is not that Sir can fright me, but that I would not
disturb the Lady, I Would make you know.


Stan. You impudent Villain, I Will send you further.


Follows Huffe, and runs away huffing. Huffe. Nay, Sir, your humble Servant and
you go to that, Sir; I care as little for a Sword, Sir, as any man upon Earth:
I fear your Sword? Who dares say it? your Servant, your Servant. --


(Ex. Huffe Emil. This is not altogether so foolish as fighting in Sir
Positive's Quarrel.


Stanf. Sir Positives quarrel! 'twas in effect my own; for I was sure to meet
with some impertinent Fellow or other for my Enemy, and was glad of this
opportunity to vent my indignation upon one of those many that have tormented
me; I had rather fight with them all, then converse with them.


Emil. But you may choose whether you will do either.


Stanf. Yes, as much as choose whether I Will breathe or no.


Emili. But how could you be sure to meet with such an one.


Stanf. What Question is that? Is it not above 5000 to one odds?


Emil. aside. I am glad he has brought himself well off, for I must like him,
do what I can, he must be a man of sense* I must confess, the business is not
altogether so ill as I imagined.


To him. Stanf. Now Madam, who is impertinent, you or I?


Emil. You are to say the same thing twice to me.


Stan. Well! this is a rare Woman: what a quick apprehension she has. I love
her strangely, the more Coxcombe I, that I should be drawn in of all men living.


aside Enter Woodcock. VVood. O Dear heart, have I met with thee; I have been
seeking thee all the Town over.


Stanf. Heart, What Is this? I was going in great haste just as you came, adieu.


Wood. Ah dear Jack, I have not so little honor as to leave thee in this
condition.


Stanf. Good Sir! What condition? I am not Drunk, am I?


Wood. No, Ga'd, would it were no worse, Dear heart.


Stanf. It cannot be worse, do not trouble me.


Wood. No, I Will tell thee Jack; Huffe threatens Embraces and kisses him. thee
to cut thy Throat where ever he meets thee; and I came my Dear Bully-Rock to
offer thee the Service of my sword and arm.


Stanf. For Heaven's sake put not this upon me; Do you think he that would be
kicked without resistance, dares do any thing?


Wood. But look you, Dear Heart, Lord this is the strangest thing in the World,
you had Ladies with you, and you know it had been an uncivil thing to have
turned again then Jack: but now he is resolved to have satisfaction, he told me
so; And if I can see as far into a Millstone as another, he is no Bully Sandy.


Stanf. Trouble me no more: be gone --


Wood. Ay, ay, thou do this now to try whether I have so little honor as to
quit thee, but it will not pass, my dear Rascal; kiss me, I Will live and dye with
thee.


Stanf. Sir, let me tell you, this is very rude: and upon my word I have no
quarrel unless you will force one upon me.


Emil. Still do I like this man better and better. --


Aside. Wood. Nay, then I smell a Rat -- Farewell Jack -- Servant, Dear Hearts.

Ex. Woodcock.
Enter Lovel, Carolina, Roger. Carol. But, are you sure my Lady Vain is such a
one.


Lov. Yes, that I am, my little peevish Jealous Mistress.


Carol. Yes, yes, I have reason to be jealous of such a Treasure as you are:
But pray, to satisfy a little scruple I have, see her no more.


Stanf. We had best change the Scene, I think, what if you should walk out a
little.


Emili. I care not much if I do.


Stanf. I could find in my heart to go along with you.


Emili. Yes, and leave me again for your Honor forsooth.


Stanf. How Devillishly impertinent is this for you to harp upon one string
still.


Lovel. Let Us pursue our design.


Enter sir Positive. Carol. Agreed: and to our wish here comes my Cousin
Positive.


Sir Posit. Oh! Have I found you: I Will tell you the pleasant'st thing in the
World.


Stan. Sir, I am just now going to a Lawyer of the Temple to ask his Council.


Sir Posit. P'shaw, p'shaw; save thy Money, what need'st thou do that, I Will
do it for you; why I have more Law, then ever Cook upon Littleton had; you must
know, I am so eminent at that, that the greatest Lawyers in England come to me
for advice in matters of difficulty: Come, state your Case, let us hear't, Come.
-- Hold, hold Cozen, Whither Emilia offers to go out. are you going.


Emili. Let me go, I am going in haste to bespeak a Seal.


Sir Posit. A Seal; Why do thou know what thou do now? To go about that
without my advice: Well, I have given Symons and all of them such Lessons, as I
have made them stand in admiration of my Judgment: Do you know that I Will cut a
Seal with any man in England for a thousand Pound.


Roger. I have my Lesson, I Will warrant you I Will do it.

exit.
Emili. O Heaven!
I must go now to bespeak it; I am to send it immediately to my Sister at the
English Nunnery in Bruges.


Sir Posit. Bruges! ah dear Bruges; now you talk of Bruges, I am writing this
night to Castle Rodrigo, you must know I have thought of their Affairs, and
considered them thoroughly; and just this very Afternoon I have found out such
a way for them to preserve Flanders from the French, I defy all Mankind for
such an Invention; and I think I offer him very fair, if he will let me divide
the Government with him, I Will do it; otherwise if Flanders be lost, it is none of
my fault.


Lov. What is your Design Sir Positive?


Stanf. That thou shoud'st be so very foppish to ask questions?


Sir Posit. I Will tell you, I will this year; pray mark me, I will bring 100000
Men into the Field, do you see.


Carol. But, Where will you have these Men, Cozen?


Sir Posit. Have them P'shaw, p'shaw, let me alone for that; I tell thee
Stanford, I will bring 100000 men into the Field, 60000 in one Complete body,
and 40000 for a flying Army, with which I will enter into the very Body of all
France.


Stan. O Devil! I had rather Flanders should be lost, then hear any more on it.


Sir Posit. But this would signify nothing, unless it were done by one that
understands the conduct of an Army, which if I do not, let the World Judge: but
to satisfy you, I Will tell you what I Will do, pray mark me, I will take
threescore thousand Spanish Soldiers, and fight with 60000 French, and cut them
off every M^n: pray observe one, this is demonstration; then will I take those
very numericall Individual Frenchmen I spoke of.


Stanf. What, after you have cut them off every man.


Sir Posit. Pish; What do talk Man? What Is matter whether it be before or
after, that is not to the point? P'shaw, prithee don't thee trouble thy self for
that, I Will do it man; I will take those very 60000 French and fight with a
Spanish Army of 100000, and by my extraordina^y Conduct destroy them all, this
is demonstration, nothing can be plainer then this; by this you may guess
whether I may not be a considerable Man to that N^tion or no. -- Nay, more then
that, I Will undertake if I were in Candia, the Grand Vizier would sooner expose
himself to the fury of the Ianizaries, then besiege the Town while I were in it.


Emil. I cannot tell whether I am more tormented with Sir Positive, or pleased
with Stanford, he is an extraordinary man.


Aside Sir Posit. But as I was saying, Cozen Emilia; I will have 100000 men in
the Field, and I will man the Garrisons to the full: besides pray observe, I
will have an infinite store of Provision every where, and pay all my Soldiers
to a penny duly.


Carol. But where is the Money to do this Cozen?


Emil. What shall I do? Whether shall I turn me?


Stan. Ah Dear Emilia!


Sir Posit. Where Is the Money, that is good one 'Faith! -- Prithee dear Cozen
do thou mind thy Guittar; thou do not understand these things.


Stan. I am sure I understand you to be the greatest Coxcomb in Nature.


Sir Posit. Then I will make you me a League Offensive and Defensive with the
King of England, the Emperor and Princes of Germany, the King's of Sweden and
Denmark, the Kings of Portugal and Poland, Prester John, and the Great Cham,
the States of Holland, the Grand Duke of Muscovy, the Great Turk, with two or
three Christian Princes more, that shall be nameless; and if with that Army,
Provision and Alliance, I do not do the business, I am no Judge, I understand
nothing in the World.


Enter Roger. Roger. O Sir Positive! my Lady Vain would speak with you at your
Lodging immediately.


Sir Posit. Cods my life-kins, Stanford, I am heartily sorry I must leave you.


Stan. So am not I.


Sir Posit. I beg your pardon a thousand times. I vow^t Gad I would not leave
you but upon this occasion.


Emil. How glad am I of the occasion!


Sir Posit. going, returns in haste. Well! I hope you will be so kind to believe,
that nothing but my Duty to my Mistress should have made me part with you thus
rudely.


Stanf. O yes! we do believe it.


Sir Posit. But hark you Cozen, and Stanford, you must promise me not to take
it ill, as I hope to breathe I mean no incivility in the World.


Emil. Oh no, no, by no means.


Sir Posit. Your Servant. --

Exit Sir Positive.
Carol. Come, Lovel, let us follow him, and either prepare him, or find out some
others for a fresh encounter.


Lov. Allon's, but be sure, Roger, you forget not what I said to you. --


(Ex. Lov. Carolina. Rog. I will not, Sir.


Stanf. How Courteously he excused himself, for not tormenting us more.


Emil. This is the first good turn my Lady Vain e're did me.


Rog. No, Madam, this was my ingenuity; I never saw my Lady Vain, not do I know
where she is.


Sir Positive Returns. Sir Posit. Cozen and Mr. Stanford, I have considered
on it, and I vow to Gad I am so afraid you will take it ill, that rather then
disoblige you, I Will put it off.


Stan. O no Sir, by no means; 'twould be the rudest thing in the World to
disobey your Mistress.


Sir Posit. Nay, 'Faith I see thou art angry now, 'prethee don't trouble thy
self, I Will stay with thee.


Stanf. Hell and Damnation! this is beyond all sufferance.


Emil. Let me advise you by all means to go to your Mistress.


Sir Posit. Well! if you will not take it ill, I Will go; adieu.

Exit Sir Posit.
Enter Woodcock, Sergeant, and Musqueteeres. Wood. That Is he, seize him.


Serje. Sir, by your leave, you must go to the Captain of the Guard.


Stan. O! into^lerable! What Is the matter now?


Serjaent. I do not know, but I guess it is upon a quarrel betwixt you and one
Lieu^enant Huffe.


Stanf. Was ever any thing so unfortunate as this? Cannot you defer't an hour?


Serje. I am commanded by my Officer and dare not disobey.


Stanf. How loath am I to leave this Woman; there is something extraordinary in
this -- Madam; I am willing enough to stay with you, but you see I am forced
away: -- stay you here Roger. --


Exit with Sergeant and Musketeers. Emil. What an unlucky accident is this?
but my misfortunes never fail me. --

Exit.
Wood. So, he is safe, and I have done what I in honor ought to do; and now
honest Roger, my dear Bully-Rock, I Will stay with thee, prithee kiss me, thou
art the honestest Fellow in the World.


Roger. Sir, I am glad I can Repay your Commendations; I have the best news
for y'e that ever you heard in your life.


Wood. Me! What is it Dear Heart?


Rog. Why, I Will tell you, the Lady Emilia is in love with you.


Wood. In love with me, fie, fie, Pox on it what a VVheadling Rogue art thou now?
Why should thou put this upon thy Friend now?


Roger. Sir, this suspicion of yours is very injurious: Let me tell you, that I
am sure I have not deserved it from you Sir.


Wood. Nay, I must confess, I have always found thee an honest Fellow, Dear
Heart; but a Pox on it, she cannot love me: P'shaw, me? What, what can she see
in me to love me for? no, no.


Roger. Sir! upon my life, it is true.


VVood. Ha, ha, Dear Rascal, kiss me, the truth on it is, I have thought some
such thing a pretty while, but how the Devil come thou to find it out, on my
Conscience thou art a Witch.


Rog. O Sir! I am great with her Maid Luce, and she told me her Lady fell in
love with you for singing, she says you have the sweetest Voice, and the
delicatest Method in singing of any man in England.


Wood. As Gad shall sa'me, she is a very ingenious Woman; Dear Dog, Honest
Rascal here, here is for thy News, I Will go in and give her a song immediately
--

Exit.
Rog. How greedily he swallows the bait: but 'these selfconceited Idiots can
never know when they are wheadl'd.


Enter Lovell and Ninny. Ninn. P'shaw, p'shaw, ad'au'tre, ad'au'tre, I cannot
abide you should put your tricks upon me.


Lov. Come, Ninny, leave Fooling, you know I scorn it, I have always dealt
faithful with you.


Ninn. aside. I must confess he has always commended my Poems, that is the truth
on it: But I am afraid this is impossible, don't Wheedle your friend.


Lov. I shall be angry Sir, if you distrust me longer.
You may neglect this opportunity of raising your self,
Do, but perhaps you may never have such another.

Nin. Nay* but dear Sir, speak! are you in Earnest?


Lov. Do you intend to affront me, you had as good give me the lie.


Nin. No, dear Sir, I beg your pardon for that, I believe you, But how came you
to know it?


Lov. Her Sister Carolina told me so, and that she fell in love with you for
reading a Copy of your own Verses: she says you read Heroic Verse with the
best Grace of any man in England.


Ninn. Before George she is in the right of that, but Sir --


Lov. 'Slife ask no more questions, but to her and strike while the Irons hot:
have you done you business Roger?


Rog. Most dexterously Sir.


Lov. Let Us away --


Ex. Lov. and Roger. Ninn. Love me? I am o'rejoy'd, I am sure I have loved her
a great while.


Enter Emilia, Woodcock following her singing. Wood. Fa, la, la, la, etc.


Emil. Heaven! this will distract me, what a vile noise he makes worse then the
Creaking of a Barn door, or a Coach wheel ungreas'd.


Wood. This is damned unlucky that he should be here to hinder my design.


aside. Ninn. What a pox makes him here, but I Will on in my business Madam, I Will
speak you a Copy of Verses of my own that have a great deal of mettle and soul,
and flame in'em.


Emil. But I will not hear'em, Sir.


Wood. Alas poor fool he hopes to please her, but it will not do, ha, ha, ha.


aside. Ninn. What the devil can she mean by this, sure she cannot be in
Earnest: No, I have found it; Ay, ay, it must be so, she would not have me
speak before him, because she would not have him take notice of her passion,
but what care I --


aside he offers to rehearse. Wood. Prithee Ninny don't trouble the Lady with
your Verses.


Ninn. Well, well! Cannot you let one alone --


Wood. Fa, la, la, la, etc.


Emil. What horrid Noise is this you make in my Ears? shall I never be free?


Ninn. Alas! poor Coxcomb he hopes to please her with his Voice: No, no, he may
spare his pains -- I am the man.


aside. Wood. What a pox ails she? She Is damnably out of humor what e'res the
matter, I am sure Roger would not deceive me of all men? what an ass am I, that
I should not find it, she is afraid my singing will encourage him to trouble
her; or else she would not have him perceive her kindness --


aside. Emil. Sure all the world conspires against me this day?


Wood. Fa, la, la, la, etc.


Wood. sings all the while Ninny repeats. Ninn. reads My Love to that
prodigious height does rise,

It Is worthy of my heart and of your Eyes:
First of my heart, which being subdued by you,
Must for that Reason be both strong and true;
Then of your Eyes, which Conquerours must subdue:
And make 'em be both slaves and freemen too;
Your Eyes which do both dazzle, and delight,
And are at once the Joy, and grief of sight.
Love that is worthy of your face and fame
May be a glory, but can be no shame:
My heart by being overcome does stronger prove,
Strength makes us yield unto your Eyes and Love.
In this my heart is strong, because it is weak,
This, though I hold my peace, my Love will speak,
Silence can do more then e're speech did do,
For humble silence does do more then woo;
Under the Rose, which being the sweetest flower
Shows silence in us has then speech more power.

Ninn. Why, what a damned Noise does he make; pox take me Madam, if one can be
heard for him* Cannot you let one alone with one's Verses trow.


Wood. Poor fellow! alas! he little thinks why I sing now?


aside. Ninn. If he thought how pleasant my rehearsing were to her, sure he
would not be so rude, but Mum for that.


aside. Enter Luce. Luce. O Madam! your fathers come to Town, and has brought a
Country Gentleman to come a woing to you: he sent his man before hand to know
if you were within, and one of the servants unluckily informed him before I
could see him: he says he is the most downright plodding Gentleman the
Country can afford.


Emil. What will become of me? is there no mercy in store for me?


Wood. Is he coming -- nay then -- hem -- They both take hold of Emilia, and
hold her by force, and sing and repeat as fast again as they did before. -- hem.


Ninn. I Will make haste before he comes to hinder me.


Emil. For Heavens sake let me go.


Wood. Ninn. Sing Repeat


together. Emil. Oh, hold, hold, hold. I faint if you give not over.


Wood. What a Devil does she mean by this, I am sure she loves me; but perhaps
rather then endure the trouble of his Noise, she is willing to dispense with the
pleasure of my Voice.


aside Ninn. A poise take this Woodcock that he should anger this Lady, as I
hope to live he is a very impertinent fellow, for though she was troubled at
him, I perceived she was transported with me.


Emil. It must be so, I must do ill that good may come on it: This
Countrey-fellow will be the worst plague of all, since he has my fathers
Authority to back him, I must be forced to subdue my own Nature, and flatter
these Coxcombs to get rid of him, for they are so impudent they will drive him
from hence --


Enter Stanford, and overhears. VVood. Madam, let me ask you in private, how
did you like my song, speak boldly Madam, Ninny does not hear, Dear Heart?


Emil. I must needs like it, Sir, or betray my own Judgment.


VVood. Ah, Dear Roger! thou art a made man for ever. I am the man --


aside. Stanf. What Is this I hear?


to himself. Ninn. How did you like my Verses, Madam?


Emil. So well Sir, that I hope you will let me hear 'em often. What am I
reduced to?


Stanf. Oh Devil what is this?


Ninn. How happy shall I be? the truth is I did perceive you were troubled at
VVoodcocks senseless Song, how we would enjoy our selves if he were gone?


Stanf. Is it possible I should be deceived so much?


Wood. I Will tell thee Dear Heart, if thou be troubled at Ninny's Rimes,
upon my honor I Will beat the Rogue.


Enter Father and Country Gentleman. Fath. This is she, Sir.


Con. Genesis Your servant, Madam.


Stanf. 'Death she is a very Gossip, and Converses with all sort of fools, not
only with patience, but with pleasure too, how civilly she entertains them?
That I should be such an Owl to think there could be a woman not impertinent, I
have not patience to look upon her longer. --


Ex. Wood. It will not do Ninny, her father little thinks she is engaged Dear
Heart.


Ninn. No, no, her father little thinks she is engaged, aside. nor you neither,
to whom -- ha, ha, ha, it makes me laugh to think how this Country Gentleman
will be bod'd Woodcock.


Wood. He may go down Ninny like an Ass as he came, she will send him down with a
flea in's ear take that from me.


Ninn. What a poise! he does not know she loves me! does he?


aside. Wood. Poor fool! I pity him: ha, ha, ha.


Ninn. So do I, alack, alack.


Cou. Gent. Madam, I am but just now come to Town, you see my Boots are dirty
still, but I make bold as the saying is.


Emil. More bold then welcome, I assure you Sir.


Cou. Gent. Thank you good sweet Madam; this is the most obliging Gentlewoman
that ever was --


aside. Fath. By this he shows the Impatience of his Love (Daughter.)


Wood. Madam, I am a son of a Whore, if I have not the best song upon that
subject, that ever you heard in your life.


Ninn. Before George Madam, I Will repeat you Copy of Verses of my own ten times
better then his song.


Wood. You are an impudent Coxcomb to say so, Dear Heart, And ye lie, and I am
satisfied.


Ninn. Do I so, Madam, do but you judge.


Fath. What can this mean? they are both mad.


sing and repeat together -- Ninn. repeats I am so impatient for to go to
my Dear,
That I run headlong without
wit or fear.

Ninn. What an impertinent fellow are you,
Woodcock cannot you let one alone.
Repeats So great the power of our love is now,
We cannot persuade it reason for to allow.
Strange Miracle of Cytherea's force,
For to transform a man into a horse.

Wood. sings. My love is Cruel grown,
For to leave me all alone,
Thus for to sigh, and moan.
Ah woe is me!
Peace, Coxcomb, peace.
spoke But I Will strive for to find
My love, though she is unkind,
So for to ease my mind.
Oh woe is me!
Hey ho, hey ho, my love,
Who is so Cruel as Jenny to me.

They offer to sing and repeat again. Fath. Hold, hold, are you both mad, is the
Devil in you, if he be, I shall have them will conjure him out of you. Come out
you Coxcombs, or I^le drive you out. --


Ex. Father, Ninny and Woodcock. Cou. Gent. These Gentlemen are as mad as
March-Hares, Madam, as the saying is, but to our business, I had not the power
as I was a saying, to keep from you longer, Lady, not so much as a pissing
while, do you see! for Cat will to kind as the saying is.


Luce. Oh, Sir, you complement, you are an absolute Country Courtier.


Cou. Gent. Who I, alas not I, in sober sadness, we that live in the Country
are right down do you see, we call a spade a spade, as the saying is for our part.


Luce. You do well Sir, for hypocrisy is an abominable vice.


Cou. Gent It Is indeed to be a Pharisy, and carry two faces in a hood, as the
saying is.


Emil. Now I wish my to'ther two fools would come back and drive away this.


Luce. I perceive you are very good at Proverbs, Sir don't you use to play at
that sport with the Country Gentlewomen.


Con. Genesis O yes, I am old dog at that, I am too hard for 'em all at it, do you
see. to Emilia. But Madam now we talk of the Country, how do you think you can
like a Country life?


Emil. O rarely! I cannot choose, to fill ones belly with Curds and Cream, and
stewd Prunes, to eat Honeycomb, and Rashers of Bacon at poor neighbors
houses, and Rise by five a clock in the Morning to look to my dayry.


Co. Gent. O rare how we shall cotton together, as the saying is, I love a good
huswife with all my heart, but Madam, I have a cast of Hawks, and five couples
of Spaniels too, oh Madam, if you saw my beloved Bitch Venus, you would be in
love with her, she is the best at a Retrieve of any Bitch in England do you see.


Emil. Is he here? this is Heaven to me to see him after my late afflictions.


aside. Enter Stanford and Roger. Gent. To the Cou. Sir I have some business
will engage me half an hour, pray will you avoid my sight in the mean time.


Cou. Gent. I will forsooth, I Will go see my horses fed the while.


Emil. This is a modester fool then the others I am troubled with, but if my
father had been here I should not so easily have got rid of him -- What are you
come again?


to Stanf. Stanf. Ay, ay, too soon I am sure.


Emil. Are you not very foppish that you did not stay longer then?


Stanf. This accusation becomes you well indeed.


Emil. Why not Sir?


Stanf. Alas, you are not impertinent, no, no, not you!


Emil. I am sure you are: what can this mean?


Stanf. You were never pleased with Woodcocks damned voice yet, not Ninny's
ridiculous Poetry, not you?


Emil. Not more, than your self.


Stanf. No, no, you were not pleased with them you did not praise 'em, nor
entertain the other Two Fools with kindness, no not you?


Emil. What a ridiculous thing 'twas of you not to tell me this in one word.

Oh Heaven! are they here!


Stanf. How soon you can counterfeit the humor.


Enter Sir Positive and Lady Vain. Sir Pos. You see, I am as good as my word
Stanford.


La. Va. You See, Madam, how ready I am to wait on your Ladyship.


Emil. Ay, to my cost I thank you.


Stanf. She thinks I am so easily bit as to take this for a satisfaction, but I
am too old to be deceived again.


aside. Enter Lovell and Carolina. Lov. Now Madam to our business, if we don't
put'em out of this humor, it is strange.


Car. However let us use our lawful Endeavors toward it.


Enter Woodcock and Ninny. Wood. and Ninn. Sing Repeat.


together. Wood. 'Slife Sir, I Will teach you to trouble this Lady with your
pitiful ^imes.


Ninn. You teach me, nay, if you provoke me before Company you shall find me a
Lion. --


they draw. Wood. Have at y'e, Dear Heart.


Sir Pos. Hold Woodcock! why should you disparage Poet Ninny, He Is a man of
admirable parts, and as cunning a fellow between you and I Stanford, I believe
he is a Jesuit, but I am sure he is a jansenist.


Wood. He a Jesuit, that understands neither Greek nor Latin.


Sir Posit. Now he talks of that, Stanford, I Will tell thee what a Master I am
of those Languages; I have found out in the Progress of my Study, I must
confess with some diligence, four and twenty Greek and Latin words for Black
Puddens and Sausages.


Wood. Think to huff me? I could show you a matter of 200 wounds I got when I
was a Volunteer aboard the Cambridge, Dear Heart, would make you swound to look
upon 'em.


Sir Posit. Cambridge, well that Cambridge is a good ship, and do you know,
Stanford, that I understand a Ship better then any thing in the World.


Stanf. Do you speak, Madam, you are pleased with this --


-- To Emil. Emil. Methinks you are as troublesome as he.


Sir Posit. You may talk of your Petts and your Deanes, ^le build a Ship with
any of them for 10000. pound.


Emil. What will become of me, for if I should go, they would follow me.


Lovel. This is extremely well Painted. --


Shows a picture to Carolina. Sir. Posit. Painted? Why? Do you understand
Painting?


Lovel. Not I Sir.


Sir Posit. I do; if you please leave that to me: It Is true, Michael Angelo,
Titian, Raphael, Tintaret, and Iulio Romano, and Paulo Veronese were very
pretty hopeful Men; but I would you saw a Piece of mine, I showed you my
Magdalen, Emilia, and I protest I drew that in half an hour.


Emil. O! What shall I do to get rid of all these Tormentors.


Stanf. I cannot but like this Woman, yet what ere's the matter; and yet I am
sure she is impertinent.


aside Sir Posit. Let me see. H. H. -- Oh Dear! Hans Holbin, here are
Strokes, here is Mastery; well, no man in England shall deceive me in Hans
Holbins hand, take that from me.


La. Vain. to Emilia. OF my Conscience, Madam, this Gentleman understands every
thing in the World.


Carol. In good earnest, L^vel, that is very pleasant Han's Holbin; why it is a
new Sign for my Landlord, finished but yesterday, that cost him a Noble the
Painting, done by a Fellow that Paints Posts, and Railes, one Humphrey Hobson,
and he calls him Hans-Holbin.


Rog. Indeed Mr. Woodcock, fifty miles in a day was well run.


Wo^d. 'I faith was it Dear Heart.


Sir Posit. Run; why, Why will you pretend to running in my Company; you run,
why I have run sixty miles in a day by a Ladies Coach, that I fell in Love
withal in the streets, just as she was going out of Town, Stanford; and yet I
vow to thee I was not breathed at all that time.


Lovel. to Carol. There Is Knight Errantry for you, Madam, let any of your
Romances match me that now.


VVood. to La. Vain. It Is true, Madam, Sir Positive and Poet Ninny are
excellent men, and brave Bully-Rocks; But they must grant, that neither of them
understand Mathematics but my self.


Sir Posit. Mathematics; why, Whose that talks of Mathematics, let them
alone, let them alone: Now you shall see Stanford.


VVood. Why, 'twas I Dear Heart.


Sir Posit. I dear heart, quoth 'a; I don't think you understand the principles
on it; 'o my Conscience you are scarce come so far yet as the squaring of the
Circle, or finding out the Longitude Mathematics: Why this is the only thing
I value my self upon in the World Cozen Emilia.


Emil. Heaven! deliver me.


Stan. Curse on them all. -- Well, there must be something more in this Woman
then I imagine.


Ninny to Emilia. No man in England plays better upon the Cittern then I do,
ask George my Barbor else, Madam, he is a great Judge.


Sir Posit. Cittern, Cittern! Who named a Cittern there? Who was it* Who was it?


Ninn. Now am I afraid to speak to him, he does so snub one: ^Twas I and
please you Sir Positive


Sir Posit. You talk of a Cittern before me? when I invented the Instrument.


Lov. VVo^dcock. -- Stand up to him in Mathematics; To him.


VVood. Say you so, well then, By the Lord Harry, Sir Positive, I do understand
Mathematics better then you; and I lie over against the Rose-Taverne in
Coven-Garden, Deart Heart.


Sir Posit. I will justify with my Sword that you understand nothing at all
on it -- Draw.


VVood. Nay, hold, hold, I have done Bully-Rock, if you be so angry; but it is a
hard case you will not give a man leave to understand a little Mathematics in
your Company, Dear Heart.


Sir Posit. Pox on it, I have told thee often enough of this, thou will still be
putting thy self forward to things thou do not understand.


Emil. This Impudence is beyond all example, and there is no possibility of
getting from them.


Carol. I Will tell you one thing, Cozen, you cannot understand.


Sir Posit. I Will be hanged then.


Carol. You cannot Cheat at Dice.


Sir Posit. Ha, ha; Why you don't know me sure, you never heard of me.


Lov. Metaphysics.


Sir Posit. Faith, well thought on, Lovel, prithee put me in mind of that
presently, if I don't give you that account of Metaphisicks shall make you
stare again, cut my throat: But, as I hope to live, Stanford, it is a strange
thing Carolina should be so near a Kin to me and not know me! False Dice, I
have spent my time very well indeed, if any man out-does me in that; for your
Goades, your High Fullams, and Low Fullams, your Cater Deuse Ace, and your Size
Cater-Deuse, your sink Trey Ace, your Bar Cater-Trey, your Barr-Sink-Deuse,
your Barr-Sise-Ace, and all that, when I have studied them these sixteen years
-- Cozen Emilia, you know this, don't you?


Emil. Oh horrid! What will become of me?


Stanf. Sure I was mistaken, for this must be a Woman of sense, I love her
extremely, I would I did not.


Sir Posit. But what was that, Lovel, I desired you to put me in mind of?


Lov. Ledger, De-Maine.


Sir Posit. Good, there it is now; I had thought I had kept that quality to my
self of all things in the World: sure the Devil must help thee, Lovel, How
coud'st thou come to know that I understood Leger-de-maine else? why, I Will
perform all Tricks of Leger-de maine with any man in England, let him be what
he will; For the Cups and Balls, Iack-in-a-Pulpit, St. Andrewes-Cross.


Carol. Undoubtedly, Lovel, Cardinal Mazarine was a great Statesman.


Sir Posit. Statesman do you say? Cardinal Mazarine a Statesman? well, I will
say nothing of my self for that; no, I am no Statesman: But, you may please to
remember, who was bob'd at Ostend, ha, ha, What say you Stanford?


Emil. O Heaven! Can you contrive no way of escaping?


Stanf. Let Us e'ne try what we can do, for we had better be with one another
then with these Fools.


Sir Posit. Betwixt you and I, was the man that managed all that business
against him.


La. Vain. Good lack a day, Madam, this Gentleman has a bottomless
understanding.


Ninn. He Is a very rare man, and has great power and imagination.


Wood. As any man in Europe, dear heart.


Sir Posit. This very thing has made me so famous all over Europe, that I may
be at this instant Chief Minister of State in Russia, but the truth on it is,
Stanford, I expect that nearer home.


Rog. Jacob Halls a most admirable Rope-Dancer, Mr. Woodcock.


Sir Posit. Honest Roger! How the Devil coud'st thou find me out in that, Jacob
Hall has told thee, has he not? I thought he would have kept that to himself;
but I taught him, nay, I taught the Turk himself.


Lov. Hey, from a Statesman to a Rope-Dancer, What a leap was there?


Carol. My Maid is excellent at Pastry.


Sir. Posit. Ha, why there it is* now upon my Honor I understand this ten times
better then any thing I have spoke off yet, Pastery, why, the Devil take me if
I would not be content never to eat pie but of my own making as long as I
live; I Will tell you, when I was but four years old, I had so rich a fancy, and
made such extraordinary dirt pies, that the most eminent Cooks in all London,
would come and observe me, to steal from me.


La. Vain. I beseech you, Madam Emilia, take notice of Sir Positive, he is a
Prodigy of understanding.


Sir Posit. Ah Madam, it is your pleasure to say so; but 'twas this made me
skilful in the art of Building, which is the only Art I am proud of in the
World; I^le tell you, Stanford, I have seventeen Modells of the City of London
of my own making (...) the worst of them makes London an other-guess London then
(...) like to be; but no man in England has those Modells of Houses that I have.


Stan. This affliction is beyond all example; why the Devil do thou provoke
him to this?


Lovel. Were it not a ridiculous thing of me not to please my self?


Stan. That Is true; but, What will become of us in the mean time?


Emil. Heaven knows this door's locked, and there is no escaping at the other.


Sir. Posit. I Will tell you, Madam, the other day a damned old Rat eat me up a
Dining-roome and Withdrawing-Chamber worth Fifty pound.


Carol. A Rat eat up a Dining-Roome and Withdrawing-Room, How could that be?


Emil. O fie, Sister, it is no matter how; why, Will you ask him?


Sir Posit. Why, I make all my Modells of Houses in Paste; I vow to Gad I am
ashamed to tell you how much it costs me in a year in Milk, Meal, Eggs and
Butter.


La. Vain. Dear Sir Positive, I think you understand more the^ ever Solamon did.


Sir Posit. No, no, Madam, alas not I, I understand little, but I Will tell you,
Madam, what was said of me the other day, by some great persons that shall be
nameless.


La. Vain. What was that, Sir?


Sir Posit. That I was a man of the most universal knowledge of any man in
England; but without comparison the best Poet in Europe.


Carol. -- Now Lovel to your poast.


Lov. Navigation.


Sir Pos. Navigation do you talk of?


Carol. Geography.


Sir Pos. Geography do you talk of?


Lov. Astronomy.


Sir Pos. Astronomy do you talk of?


Carol. Palmestry.


Lov. Physic.


Car. Divinity.


Lov. Surgery.


Car. Arithmetic.


Lov. Logic.


Car. Cookery.


Lov. Magic.


Lovel and Ca^olina speak so fast one after another, that Sir Positive turns
himself first to one, then to another, and has not time to speak to them. Sir
Posit. Hold, hold, hold, hold!

Navigation, Geography, Astronomy, Palmestry, Physic, Divinity, Surgery,
Arithmetic, Logic, Cookery and Magic: I Will speak to every one of these in
their order; if I don't understand them every one in perfection, nay, if I don't
Fence, Dance, Ride, Sing, Fight a Duel, speak French, Command an Army, play on
the Violin, Bag-pipe, Organ, Harp, Hoboy, Sackbut, and double Curtal, speak
Spanish, Italian, Greek, Hebrew, Dutch, Welsh and Irish, Dance a Jigg, throw
the Bar, Swear, Drink, Swagger, Whore, Quarrel, Cuffe, break Windows, manage
Affairs of State, Hunt, Hawke, Shoot, Angle, play at Catt, Stoolball,
Scotch-hopp and Trap-ball, Preach, Dispute, make Speeches. -- Coughs. Prithee
get me a glass of small beer, Roger.


Stanf. Hell and Fu^ies.


Emil. Oh, oh, --


They run. Sir Posit. Nay, hold, I have not told you half, if I don't do all
these, and fifty times mo^e, I am the greatest Owl, Pimp, Monkey,
Jack-a-napes, Baboon, Rascal, O^fe, Ignoramus, Loggerhead, ^ur-dog, Block-head,
Buffoone, Jack-pudden, Tony, or what you will; spit upon me, kick me, cuff me,
lugg me by the ears, pull me by the Nose, tread upon me, and despise me more
then the World now values me. --


Ex. omnes, and he goes out talking as fast as he can. ACT. V.
Enter Emilia, Stanford, and Lovel. Stanf. IF you be my Friend, as you profess
to be, you will not deny me this.


Lov. I am your Friend, and would not have you perplex your self with what you
see there is no end of; Can this frowardness relieve you?


Stan. Good sir, none of your Grave advice, I am resolved to relieve my self,
by abandoning all conversation.


Lov. How can you brook Emilia's company?


Stanf. Pish! she is not altogether so troublesome: ask me no more Questions.


Lov. Hah! Does he like her? Thus far my Design thrives: Well! I Will keep them
from you a while: but the Hounds are so eager, they will never endure pole-hunting
Long. --

exit.
Stanf. You hear, Madam, we are not like to be long free from these inhumane
persecutors.


Emil. Why will you call them so? you know I am pleased with them: They are my
Recreation as you were pleased to say.


Stan. No, no; you have convinced me of the Contrary: but, How can you blame me
for so easy a Mistake?


Emili. You are a very fit Man to despise impertinent people: you are!


Stan. 'Till be very wisely done to stand muttering here, till the Fools in
the next Room-break-in upon you.


Emili. Perhaps as wisely done, as to trust my self with you, as you have
behaved your self.


Stanf. If you have no more sense then to stay longer: I shall be assured of
what I was but jealous of before.


Emili. What would your wisdom have me do now?


Stan. The VVorst of them would not have asked such a Question: who but you
would be in doubt, or would not fly as a Thief does from a Hue and Cry.


Emili. There Is no hope of escaping.


Stan. Now will you in despair of avoiding them, stay here, and keep them
company.


Emil. 'Twere vain presumption to hope for Liberty by Miracle; they will no
more lose us, then an Attorney will a young Squire that is newly waded into Law;
who will be sure never to leave him till he has brought him out of his depth.


Stanf. By this rule you should not resist a Man that comes to Ravish you,
because he is like to be too strong for you; but if you did not use the means,
your honesty would be no more admired is that, then your Wisdom in this.


Emil. Aside. This is a most admirable person. -- Where should I go?


to him Stanf. I would run into a fire to be quitt of them.


Emil. Well! I am content to go along with you, not for your sake, but my own.


Stanf. Perhaps my inclinations are not much ^^like yours.


Lov. O Stanford, I can no longer keep them from you, it is as easy to stop a
Springtide.


Enter Lovel. Carol. Sir Pos. Nin. Wood. La. Va. Stanf. Now, Whose fault was
this? a Curse upon your delaying, now it is too late to fly.


Sir Posit. Do talk of flying, Jack; I Will teach thee to do that with the
greatest ease in the World: it is true, I heard of a Coxcomb that broke his neck
with the Experiment, but if I had been by him, I would have taught him to have
flown with the best Goss-Hawke in the World.


Stanf. O! Impudence!


Sir Posit. And for my own part for one flight or so, for I will not strain my
self for any man's pleasure; I do it but for my Recreation: I am not mercenary. I
will fly at a Herne with the ^est Jer-Faulcon that ever flew; that is fair.


La. Vain. O very Fair! as can be, by all means Sir learn of him he will do it.


Sir Pos. Do It Madam, I think so: I tell you all Elements are alike to me, I
could live in any one of 'em as well as the Earth: It Is nothing but a sordid
Earthy Nature in us makes us love the Earth better then any other Element.


Enter Roger. Emil. I see it is in vain to torment our selves without
endeavoring our Liberty.


Stanf. That Is cunningly found out.


Rog. Sir, if you can find a way to be rid of Sir Positive, and my Lady Vain,
I Will tell you how to quit your selves of the other.


Emil. We may set 'em one upon another, and by that we may either get rid or
(at least) be a little revenged of 'em.


Stanf. That may make some amends for your last neglect.


Car. Now they are settled in their business, I Will leave 'em and go to my
Tyrewoman in Coven-Garden, who has some Excellent new Patterns of Lace for me,
will you please to Squire me along.


Lov. I hope you have no design upon me: are your Intentions honorable?


Emilia whispers to Woodcock. Car. Yes indeed are they, I intend no rape upon
you.


Lov. Nor any other unlawful way of love.


Car. Leave fooling, and let us away -- Ex. Lov. Car.


Sir Posit. to Lady Vain. P'shaw! I could live in the water so well: that of my
Conscience I am Amphibious, I could catch fi^^ as well as any Cormorant or
Otter, ^^y I can live so long under-water, that (but that I have greater
designs on foot here) I would go into the West Indies to dive for Sponges and
Corals, and if in one year I were not the richest man that ever went thither I
would be hanged Jack Stanford when I swom over again.


Stanf. 'Sdeath I would you were under water one half hour in the mean time.


Sir Posit. Faith I would I were Jack, thou would admire to see what pleasure
I take in lying under Water an hour or two, especially if the Water be warm!


Stanf. Yes, yes, and you can eat fire too? cannot ye?


Sir Posit. P'shaw! you admire a man that eats fire among you, one that has a
depraved palate, and is not able to taste an Ash from an Oak-Coal, which I can
distinguish as well as I can a pickled Herring from a Muscle.


Ninn. Eat fire it is Impossible?


Sir Posit. You are a Fopp, I pity your ignorance, eat fire? Why I Will eat Fire
and Brimstone with the Devil himself man, what do talk of that?


Wood. to Emilia. I warrant you, Dear Heart, I Will do it, and yet I am plaguelly
afraid of Sir Positive.


Emil. What am I forced to? Master Ninny, you have often professed some kindness
to me.


Ninn. And Madam may I never make Couplet again if I don't love you better then
I do Music or Poetry.


Emil. And understand me as little --
aside. I shall soon make trial of you.

to him. Nin. And before George if I do not serve you! --


Emil. Then be sure the next thing Sir Positive pretends to: Contradict him in,
and be as Positive as he is, and by this perhaps, you may deserve my kindness.


Ninn. But suppose, Madam, he should draw upon me, and do me a Mischief.


Emil. Master Stanford and his man will bail you from that.


Ninn. In confidence of this I shall be glad to serve you.


La. Vain. I wonder, dear Sir, a man of your incomparable Ability's should want
preferment.


Sir Pos. Modesty! modesty! we that are modest men get nothing in this age.


Lady Vain. Perhaps the World does not know of these things!


Sir Pos. Not know! why I was never in Company with any man in my life; but I
told him all.


Wood. And no man ever believed you, Dear Heart.


Sir Pos. As I hope to breath, Jack this fellow's mad.


Wood. Never tell me, Dear Heart, I know you understand nothing of all you have
pretended to in comparison of me, Dear Heart.


Sir. Pos. Is not this very pleasant, Madam, ha, ha.


Ninn. Nay, nay, never laugh for the matter, and think to bear up against all
the World, do you think I don't think my self a better Poet then you.


VVood. And I a better Musician;


Sir Posit. You Impudent Baboons!


Ninn. Let him alone, let him alone Woodcock.


Wood. Ay, ay, alas I laugh at him: ha, ha, ha.


Enter Bridget. Bridge. Madam, the party has stayed for you a good while at the
setting Dog and Partridge.


La. Va. Come, while they dispute, let us go --


Ex. La. Va. Bridge. Emilia offers to go out. Ninn. Nay, Madam, if you don't
stay to prevent Mischief, I have done: for I find I begin to grow furious, and
dare not trust my own temper.


Sir Pos. Have you the Impudence to say you are a better Poet, and you a better
Musician than I am?


Ninn. Ay, ay, and not only so, but a better Divine, Astrologer,
Mathematician, Geographer, Seaman --


VVood. A better Physician, Lawyer, Statesman, Almanack-maker.


Ninn. Ay, and what shall break your heart, a better Trap-ball-player too, take
notice of that --


Wood. In one word, I understand every thing that is or is not to be understood
better then you do: take that from me.


Ninn. And let me tell you, Sir Positive, it is a very confident thing in you to
pretend to understand any thing as well as I do.


Sir Pos. O Impudence!


Wood. You understand! how should you come by understanding. Where had you you^
Knowledge, Dear Heart? P'shaw.


Sir Pos. What will this age come to?


Ninn. You Insolence makes me blush, as I hope to breath, for such an empty
fellow to talk of wit or sense; p'shaw, prithee hold thy Tongue.


Sir Pos. I am amazed!


Wood. I tell thee, dear Soul, I love thee so well, I would not have thee
pretend to these things thou do not understand.


Ninn. Especially before such men as we that do understand.


Sir Pos. I can hold no longer, ye eternal Dogs, ye Currs, ye Ignorant Whelps:
I Will sacrifice ye, let me go: if there be no more sons of Whores in England,
I Will murder 'em.


Stanf. Bear up to him, I Will prevent all Injuries.


Ninn. Nay then Sir; never fret and fume for the matter: look you Sir, pray
what can you do better then I?


Wood. Or I either: let us hear't, Dear Heart.


Sir Pos. Hear it you Rascals, I Will rout an Army with my single valor: I Will
burn a whole fleet at three Leagues distance; I Will make ship^ go all over the
world without sails: I Will plow up rocks steep as the Alps in dust, and lave
the Tyrrhene Waters into Clouds (as my friend Cateline says.)


Ninn. P'shaw! you! I Will pluck bright honor from the pale faced Moon (as my
friend Hot-spur says) what do you talk of that?


Emil. Certainly, he is distracted! this is some revenge.


Sir Pos. This single head of mine shall be the balance of Christendom: and by
the strength of this I Will undermine all Common wealths, destroy all Monarchies,
and write Heroic Plays: ye dogs let me see either of you do that.


Stanf. This is raving madness.


Ninn. Would I were well ^id of him, I tremble every joint of me.


Sir Posit. With this right hand I Will pluck up Kingdoms by the roots,
depopulate whole Nations, burn Cities, murder Mat^ons, and ravish sucking
Infants, your Currs can you do this?


Rog. But Sir in the midst of your fury my Lady Vain is gone away with a
Gentleman.


Sir Pos. Ah dear Roger which way did she go? show me quickly I Will bring her
back and she shall see me take satisfaction of these Rascals. --


Ex. Sir* Pos. and Rog. Wood. I Am glad you are gone, Sir, my heart was at my
mouth, did I not do the business rarely, my pretty Rogue? How can thou reward
me for this? hah?


Emil. Unfortunate Woman! what am I reduced to? if you will go immediately to
Oxford Kates, and stay for me in the great Room there, I will not fail to come
to you in a little time. And let you know how sensible I am of this favor; go,
go instantly and make no words on it.


Wood. I fly, Madam, O dear Roger: I have caught her, O Rogue! I Will provide a
parson immediately: dear son of Whore let me kiss thee. --

Ex.
Stanf. I shall have a better opinion of her Wit then ever I had, if she gets
rid of this brace of Iack-Puddens.


Ninn. Ay Madam, you see what danger I have undergone: I am only unhappy I
have lost no blood in the service: for as a Noble Author says, -- It would
have been to me both loss and gain. But shall I hope for any favor from you.


Emil. Let not Stanford perceive any thing; go and stay for me at Oxford Kates
in the great Room, and there we may freely speak our Minds.


Ninn. And will you not fail to come?


Emil. No, no, but what ever happens remove not till I come to you: away, away,
we are observed.


Ninn. O admirable Fortune! sure I was born with a Caul on my Head, and Wrapped
in my Mothers Smock, the Ladies do so love me.

Ex.
Emil. I would these Two fools were obliged to stay there till I came to 'em.


Stanf. Now I hope you will take Warning, and stay here no longer, where they
may find you out, unless you take pleasure in 'em.


Emil. Where can I find a place of safe retreat?


Rog. I have a sister lives in Coven-garden a Tyre-woman, where at this time of
night you may be private: if you please command the house.


Enter Sir Positive. Emil. Make haste then! O Heaven is he returned?


Sir Pos. Pox on it I cannot find my Mistress; where are these Rogues?


Stanf. My Lady Vain is returned, and Ninny and Woodcock are with her in the
next room.


Sir Pos. Say you so? I Will in and first make the Puppy's recant their errors,
and then murder 'em in presence of my Mistress.


Stanf. So! you are fast.


locks the door. Ex. Emil. Come away, away!


Ex. Stanf. Emil. Rog. Sir Pos. within. Stanford open the door, are you mad?
hey Stanford! Cozen Emilia! open the door.


Enter Lady Vain and Bridget. La. Vain. What is the house empty? -- 'Twas an
unlucky thing That the Gentlemen should go before we came.


Bridge. That may thank Sir Positive; would he were far enough for me for
keeping your Ladyship so long.


Sir Pos. Stanford: Emilia! open the door! there! help, help! help.


La. Va. That Is his voice! what can be the matter? the Key is in the door, I Will
in and see --


She unlocks the door Enter Sir Positive. Sir Pos. O Madam! your humble
servant! If I don't murder Stanford may I never have any share in your
Ladyships favor.


La. Va Did he lock you in?


Sir Pos. Yes, Madam, for which with this blade that is inured to slaughter,
will I slice him into Attoms.


La. Va. No sweet Sir Positive restrain your passion, such a fellow (...) he
deserves to be tossed in a blanket.


Sir Pos. No, no, never talk of that Madam! Such a Revenge is below me, but I
have a Pen that will bite and I Will do it vigorously. And yet the Rogue has done
me a kindness: for if he had not locked me up, I had missed of your Ladyship.


La. Va. Sir, upon my honor, I intended not to have stayed from you!


Sir Pos. But Madam, the loss of you has put me into that fright that I desire
to make sure of you.


La. Va. As how, good Sir?


Sir. Posit. To marry you this Night!


La. Va. That Is short Wa^ning.


Sir Pos. But Madam, I have had your promise these three days And that is long
enough to expect performance.


Bridge. Madam! even take him at his Word.


La. Va. But how shall I answer that to my friend in the Country?


Bridge. Never trouble your self for that Madam, it is fashionable to have a
servant as well as a husband, and besides the pleasure of a Gallant, there will
be another, which is no small one to some women, of deceiving your husband.


La. Va. Thou art in the right Wench: besides the failing of this assignation
has set me so a Gogg I would very unwillingly lie alone to night.


Sir. Pos. Come Madam, I see you are consulting: I Will send for a Parson shall
soon finish the debate.


La. Va. Well Sir! Your Intentions are so honorable, I submit to you.


Sir Pos. O intolerable happiness: Let Us dispatch it immediately in this house.


La. Va. No Sir! I Will carry you to a more private place.


Sir Pos. Come Madam, I Will wait on you. --


Exeunt. Enter Lovell, Carolina. Car. Now I have dispatched this important
business of womankind, which is making themselves fine, we may return


Lov. To the place from whence we came, and from thence to the place of
Execution; if you please: I Will have a Levi^e ready.


Car. No Sir, I know you are too true a Son of the Church to venture that after
the Canonical hour.


Lov. I am not so formal to observe a Method in any thing besides Marriage,
being at best unseasonable, can never be less then now.


Car. To speak gravely; let us first take the advice of our pillows: since
sleep being a great settler of the brain may be an Enemy to Marriage, for one
would think that few in their right Wits would undertake so unseasonable an
action: as you call it.


Lov. Must people then be tamed into Marriage? as they man Hawks with watching.


Enter Stanford, Emilia, Roger. Car. What Is here? my Sister with Stanford?


Emil. How unlucky is this, my Sister and an idle fellow with her.


Stanf. Never trouble your self if your Sister be not a Fopp: He Is none I Will
assure you.


Emil. You are a very Competent Judge indeed.


Car. How now Sister can you with all your gravity steal away by night with a
Gentleman?


Lov. Come Stanford: there is Love betwixt you for nothing else can make men and
women so shame faced as to seek out private places.


Car. Come Sister if it be so: never mince the matter, it is the way of all
flesh.


Lov. And we are so far onward on that way that if you don't make haste you
will scarce overtake us.


Car. Come confess Emilia what brought you hither?


Emil. I came to fly from Impertinence, and I have found it here.


Car. That will not bring you off Sister: for if you did not like this
Gentleman very well, you would fly from him as soon as any man.


Stanf. For my part I only came to defend her from Assaults at this time of
night.


Lov. If you had not an Extraordinary value for her you would not play the
Knight Errant to my Knowledge; Is not this dissimulation of yours very
ridiculous.


Stanf. I must needs confess I never saw any Woman I disliked less.


Carol. And, What say you Sister of this Gentleman?


Emil. To give the Devil his due, I have met with less affliction from him then
from other men.


Carol. Nay, then in good earnest it must be a match.


Emil. That Is wisely proposed of you to me, that am immediately leaving the
World.


Stan. to Emil. Pox on her! how she pleases me. -- Aside. Why, Who intends to
stay behind?


Carol. If you neglect this opportunity, Sister, you will never be so well matched
again.


Stanf. 'Twill not be so pleasant to go alone as you imagine.


Carol. No, no, take hands and march along I say.


Emil. That would be much to the advantage of my honor.


Lov. I Will send for one shall satisfy that scruple, Madam.


Emil. The remedy is almost as bad as the Disease.


Stanf. Perhaps if you consider, it 'twill be your VVisest^ course.


Emil. No doubt I should have an admirable Companion of you, as you think.


Carol. I find you have so great a passion for the Country Gentleman my Father
has provided for you, you will never be persuaded to be false to him.


Emil. He will be the greatest plague of all: What shall I do to be rid of him?


Carol. There is but one way Sister; E'ne dispose of your self to that honest
Gentleman to have and to hold.


Stan. 'Twill be very discreetly done, not to qu^t your self of this Country
Fellow, and the rest of your Fools, now it is in your power.


Lov. 'Faith, Madam, be persuaded and join hands.


Stanf. The truth is, I think we cannot do better then to leave the World
together: 'twill be very uncomfortable wandering in deserts for you alone.


Emil. If I should be so mad as to Join hands with you, 'twould not be so much
an Argument of Kindness to you, as Love to my self; since at best I am forced
to choose the least of two great Evils, either to be quite alone, or to have ill
Company.


Lov. This will end in Marriage I see.


Emil. O no! I dare not think of that, if he should grow troublesome, then
'twou'd be out of my power to cast him off.


Stanf. Why there is no necessity we should be such Puppies as the rest of Men
and Wives are, if we fall out, to live together, and quarrel on.


Emil. The Conditions of Wedlock are the same to all.


Stanf. Whatsoever the Public Conditions are, our private ones shall be, if
either grows a Fopp, the other shall have liberty to part.


Emil. I must confess that is reasonable.


Lov. Away Roger, and fetch a Canonical Gentleman.


Rog. I will Sir.


Lov. Faith, Madam, you have taken great pains, Was It for your self or me you
did it?


Carol. You have a very civil opinion of your self I see.


Enter Roger. Rog. O Sir! yonder is Sir Positive and my Lady Vain just alighted
at the Door, with the man you sent for.


Emil. O undone! ruined for ever!


Stanf. Slife you Rascal, did not you tell me I might be private here?


Roger. Pray Sir do not fret, but make your escape out at the back door.


Stanf. Away, away! quickly for Heavens ^ake!


Lov. Come, Madam! let us follow them. --


Exit omnes. Enter Ninny and Woodcock. Ninn. Will you never leave ones room a
little; I tell you I am busy.


Wood. So am I, and it is my room dear heart, let me tell you that.


Ninn. Before George, Woodcock, it is very Impertinent to trouble one thus.


Wood. So it is, Ninny, I wonder you will do it; for my part, a man that had the
least Soul of Poetry in him, would scorn to do this.


Ninn. What! Do you say I have not a Soul of Poetry in me? I don't love to
commend my self Woodcock; but, now I am forced to it: I must tell you, I have
six times as much power in me, as you have.


Wood. You lie dear heart!


Ninn. Why, you lie then, to tell me that I lie, so you do.


Wood. You are a Son of a Whore, dear heart, to tell me I lie.


Ninn. You are a Son of a Whore as well as my self, to tell me so, and you go
to that.


Wood. I, I, you may say your pleasure; but have a care Bully-Rock, for if you
give me the least affront, I Will break your Pate, take that from me.


Ninn. I Will take it from no man: if you do; I Will bre^k yours again man, for all
you are so brief: 'Slife, one shall not speak to you one of these days, you are
grown so purdy.


Wood. Well! well! Dear Heart!


Ninn. Well well too! and you go to that: if you be so fierce: But, I Would feign
know what occasion there is for you and I to quarrel now?


Wood. Ay, what indeed dear heart; Therefore, prithee Dear Soul Kiss me, Dear
Rogue, if thou love me, go out of my Room.


Ninn. No, good sweet Woodcock now, go thee, I Will do as much for thee another
time, as I hope to Live.


Wood. Dear Cut I love thee; but prithee excuse me, I have a Mistress to meet
in this very Room; Therefore dear pretty Ninzy leave me.


Ninn. Cods my Life kins to see the luck on it: may I never versify again if I am
not here upon the same occasion: I Will give thee five Guynny's if thou wilt leave
me: I shall spare them well enough when I have got her.


aside. Wood. I Would have you know, Ninny, I scorn your Guinny's, alas, poor
Fool, he little thinks I shall be in a better Condition to spare fifty then he
can five: Why then, in short, let me tell you I am to be mar^y'd within this
half hour, in this very Room, dear heart.


Ninn. This is prodigious! may I never have Play take again if I am not to be
married here within this half hour, and to a very great Fortune too.


Wood. So is mine, Bully-Rock!


Ninn. Dear Woodcock, let us reconcile this business here; I have two Dice, he
that throws most stays: then am I sure to be too hard for him that way, for I
can nap a Six a-yard.


aside. Wood. No, not I: by the Lord Harry, I Will not trust a business of that
Concernment to Fortune.


Ninn. Nay, then Sir, I will keep my Room, I was first in it.


Wood. By that rule you should go first out.


Ninn. It Is not you can turn me out.


Wood. Say you so: I Will try that!


Draw, and fight at distance. Ninn. At your own peril!


VVood. Cannot you stand a little? Why do you go back so dear heart?


Ninn. Let me alone, I know what I do in going back, I have the Law on my side,
and if I kill you, it will be found se defendendo.


VVood. Ay, ay, Have you murderous Intentions dear heart? If you do kill me, I
will declare upon my Deathbed, That you had Malice in your heart, dear heart.


Ninn. Who I? as I hope to be saved I scorn your Words: I Malice; do your
worst: I am better known then so: I am not so outrageous: pray hear me a Word:
You know we Authors and Ingenious Men have a great many Enemies.


VVood. We have so.


Ninn. At this rate we may kill one another: and a Pox on them they would be glad
on it; and for my part I would not dye to please any of them.


VVood. Nor I neither; therefore prithee leave me my Room, to prevent danger.


Ninn. I am not so base: but, if you will, let us lay down these dangerous
Engines of Blood, and Contend a safer way, by the way of Cuffe and Kick.


VVood. Ay, ay, with all my heart; what a Pox care I: come, come, you shall see
I dare do any thing, since you are resolved to try me.


Enter two Servants, and part them, and Ex. Enter Stanford, Lovel, Carol,
Emilia, Roger. Stanf. Here we are in as much danger as ever: Could any thing be
so foppish as returning to the place from whence we fled.


Emil. It Is a sweet time of night to go upon the Ramble.


Carol. We are safe enough from any body but my Father; and we cannot be
troubled with him long: it is his hour of going to Bed.


Emil. How shall we dispose of the Country Fellow, if he should return.


Rog. Let me alone; I Will find a Trick for him: I lived in the same Town with
him, and know him to be a downright credulous man, that will swallow any thing.


Enter Father and Countryman. Stanf. Now see what you have brought your self to?


Fath. Come Daughter, What think you of my choice of a Husband, He Is extreme
rich; and, Is he not a very accomplished Gentleman, hah?


Emil. There Is a Fellow indeed, why he has not Soul enough for a Cock-Chicken.


Fath. You are a foolish froward Girl thus to despise your happiness; I Will
tell you, either resolve to Marry him to morrow morning --


Lov. Hark you Sir! if you will take my advice, be not so hasty: you know
young Ladies are always Coy, and out of their little knowledge of the World,
are apt to refuse that which may prove their greatest happiness.


Fath. What would you have me do with one that is so obstinate?


Carol. If you please, take some milder way: let us withdraw, and we will all
help to persuade her: you know it is not proper to be done before him.


Fath. I Will be ^ul'd in this: but if persuasions will not do, force shall.


Carol. Be sure you seem pliant to his Commands, it may advance our design.


Fath. Sir, we will wait on you again presently.


Ex. all but Country G. and Roger. Coun. Genesis Your Servant Sir! -- honest Roger
in s^ber sadness I am glad to see you well; I had almost forgot you.


Rog. And, How does your sweet Sister Madam Dorothy?


Coun. Gent. O brave and lusty, as sound as a Roach, as they say.


Rog. I heard your Worship was Knighted.


Count. Gent. No* not I Roger: I am not ambitious of that: As that excellent
Proverb says; Honor will buy no Beife.


Roger. Now we are alone, Sir, I am obliged to tell you; I am sorry to* see
one, whom I so much honored, so ill used.


Count. Gent. Pish! its no matter man! I care not for Knighthood one pin of my
slieve, as the saying is.


Rog. Sir, I mean something concerns your Worship nearer.


Count. Gent. Nearer! What can that be?


Rog. I must beg your Pardon for that; I may be ruined for my ^^deavours to
serve you.


Count. What, Would any of your Town-Gallants bob me of my Mistress?


Rog. That were too good news for you to be true?


Count. Gent. Thank you for nothing: Is this the honor you have for me, to
wish me the loss of a Mistress worth 10000. l. do you see; udds nigs that is a
good one indeed.


Rog. 10000. l. Ha, ha, ha; would she had it for her own sake and yours too?


Count. Gent. Faith are you there with your Bears? nay then I have brought my
Hoggs to a fair Market.


Rog. If she had had one of those thousands my Master would have Married her
long e're this; Sir, I have always honored you, and could not in Conscience
but tell you this, and now it is in your power to ruin me.


Count. Gent. Nay, I Will be as silent as a Dormous, but is it possible? --


Rog. Nay, do not believe me if you please; but I have discharged my duty: and,
if you Marry her, the Inconvenience will be yours, not mine: Besides, if she
had that Fortune you speak of, which she has as much as I have; What good would
it do you in the end? She Will ner be persuaded to live in the Country, you must
keep her in Town, with her Coach and six Horses, Pages and Lacquies: and she
must visit the Plays, the Park, and the Mulberry-Garden.


Count. Gent. O Lamen-table! this were the way to get a pair of Horns bigger
then the Staggs head in My-Hall has: but, if I were Married to her, I^d get her
into the Country as sure as a Gun.


Rog. If you should, you would have every week this Earl, that Lord; this Knight,
and that Gentleman of her kindred come to take the fresh Air; and to Hunt and
Hawke with you in time of year.


Count. Gent. Why they would eat me out of House and Home, as the saying is.


Rog. They would despise your Beife and Mutton: you must keep a Couple of
French-Cookes; and eat nothing but Potages, Fricasces, and Ragusts, your
Champinions, Coxcombes and Pallats, your Andoilles, your Langue de porcean,
your Bisks and your Olio's.


Count. Gent. What are all these, several sorts of Sweetmeats.


Rog. O no Sir! these must be your constant food, and every Dish will cost you
a Piece; and, Will this be done with a small Portion of a Thousand Pound.


Count. Gent. I should soon bring a Noble to Nine-pence then as they say.


Rog. Then you must have your Quails, Ruffs, Gnatts, Godwitts, Plover,
Dotrills, Wheat-Eare, Cock of the Wood, and a hundred sorts of Fowls: besides,
they would scorn your Ale and Sider, and March-Beer: you must have your Sellar
full of Champaign, Chablee, Burgundy, and Remedy Wines; But Mum Sir, if you
love me.


Enter Father, Stanf. Emil. Carol. Lov. Fath. Come, Sir, I have brought my
Daughter to be obedient to my Commands, and I would have you prepare to be
Married to morrow morning,


Count. Gent. I shall fail you do you see.


Fath. What is it you say?


Count. Gent. I shall not be so civil, as the saying is.


Fath. This is madness.


Count. Gent. No Sir, no; There Is no catching old Birds with Chafe,
Fare-you-well.


Fath. D'hear Sir!


Count. Gent. No, Sir, fare ye well -- I am no Bubble, as they say.

Exit.
Fath. I am amazed! I Will after him; and inquire into the business, I must not
lose this Son-in-Law.

Exit.
Lovel. The Rogue has done it dexterously.


Enter Roger. Rog. Come Sir, here is a Parson in the next Room, dispatch, while
the old Gentleman's out of the House.


They are going out. Enter Woodcock. Stan. 'Slife, Wo^dcock's here! I Will cut
his Throat.


Emil. Pray none of your Hectoring here, to Alarm the House.


Wood. How now, Dear Heart! Why did not you come to me as you promised.


Emil. For Heavens sake go up into the Room two pair of Stairs, and I Will steal
from hence, and give you an Account: make haste.


Lov. Come let us in before we be interrupted again.


Ex. Wood. Enter Ninny. Ninn. Hi'st Madam; before George 'twas unkindly done,
not to remember your assignation just now.


Emil. You Will spoil all: I could not get loose; run into the garden there is a
back door: I Will come to you immediately, make haste, we are observed.


Ninn. O ho! this is something.


Stanf. This woman has a soul. --


Ex. omnes. Enter Huffe drunk. Huff. I have pursued him into this house, that
has abused me so basely behind my back, and by this Whiniard, and by the spirit
of Gunpowder: I Will sacrifice him to my fury: Come out you son of a Whore.


Enter Stanford, and the rest after him, Stanford presses upon Huffe, and he
falls. Stanf. That this Puppy should provoke me to draw upon him, that is so
drunk he cannot stand.


Huff. That Is a mistake, not so drunk yet, but if I had stood soberly to it, I
should have been run through the Lungs before this.


to himself. Enter Sir Positive and Lady Vain. Emil. Is there no end of our
affliction?


Sir Posit. Dear Cozen and Jack Stanford, give me Joy, I am married to a Lady
that is the greatest Pattern of Wit: and the greatest Example of Virtue that
this age has produced, and for her face look upon it, took upon it I say! she is
a beauty take that from me, what say you Stanford?


flourish within. Stanf. Yes, yes, she is cursedly hansome.


La. Va. If my glass does not flatter me: you are not deceived in your
Judgment, dear Sir.


Sir Posit. Here I have brought Fiddles to rejoice with you Jack and Cousin,
since I know you love mirth as well as I do.


Enter Woodcock. Wood. I had waited for thee my dear Miss if this unexpected
Music had not brought me hither.


Enter Ninny. Ninn. How now? what Fiddles are these?


Sir Pos. You dogs are you here? now Madam you shall see how I Will chastise
these fellows that would be Wits.


Wood. Hold dear Rogue! why should thou be angry? upon my honor I did but
droll with thee, for by the Lord Harry I take thee to be one of the pillars of
the Nation Dear Heart?


Sir Pos. OF do you so?


Ninn. Dear Sir Positive, I beg your pardon a thousand times, For my part I
believe there never was a man of that prodigious understanding that you have.


Sir Pos. Do you so? I knew it was impossible they should be in Earnest, but do
you hear? have a Care of being Positive another time, a man would think you
might learn more Modesty of me.


Wood. Come Dear Heart, art thou here: prithee kiss me, and let us be friends
for all our late Cuffing: what need we care for a douce or two of the Chops
Bully Rock.


Ninn. Nay for my part I value it as little as you do, and you go to that.


Enter Father and Country Gentleman Fath. What Ryots this in my house? at this
time of night?


Sir Pos. Riot! do you understand what a Riot is in Law: I Will tell you: for no
man in this Nation has committed more then I have.


Fath. Tell me not of Law Sir? what mean these Fiddles I say at this time of
night?


Sir Pos. Uncle they are mine: I am married to this Lady, and resolve to be
merry in your house before we go to Bed.


Fath. Is that it? give you Joy, your Cousin Emilia and this Gentleman will not
be long after ye.


Stanf. Sir, you are mistaken, your daughter has disposed her self in another
place.


Wood. How the devil did he know that Ninny?


Nin. He little thinks where she has bestowed her self, ha, ha, ha.


Wood. No, no, nor thee neither, dear Rogue, ha, ha, ha.


Ninn. Well! honest Woodcock, I think I may trust thee, thou art my Friend; I
am the man she has made choice of, and thou shall be my Bride man.


Wood. Ha, ha, ha, poor whelp! how he will find himself bobb'd immediately:
that this Coxcomb should not find all this while that I am the man.


[aside. Fath. It cannot be what without my Knowledge or Consent?


Wood. Ay, ay, she is disposed on; Dear Heart.


Ninn. Ay, Ay, she is disposed on.


Fath. To whom?


Stanf. To me.


Wood. To me.


Ninn. To me.


Fath. How now to all three?


Car. Sir, she has taken Master Stanford, and I Master Lovell as sure as a
Parson can make us.


Fath. What do I hear?


Car. Sir, I beseech you be not offended, their Births and Fortunes are not
unequal to ours, and if they were, 'twere too late for it to be redrest.


Fath. Is this true?


Emil. Yes Sir, perhaps too true.


to Stanford. Wood. Am I fooled after all this? well I say no more, Dear Hearts.


Ninn. Well let the Nation sink or swim an'it will for me: henceforward instead
of Heroic Verse, hereafter I will show all my power, and soul and flame, and
mettle in Lampoon, I durst have sworn she had loved me.


Fath. Well! Heaven bless you together since you have don't.


Co. Genesis So Sir, I see my Cakes dough, as they say; but I hope you will pay the
Charges of my Journey do you see.


Sir Pos. Well Cozins I am glad of your good Fortunes, and for my own part, if
I understand any thing in the world I am happy in this Lady.


La. Vain. Sir! you are pleased to Complement.


Enter Luce. Luce. Sir Positive here is a Letter was left for you, it comes out
of the Country.


Sir Posit. reads SIr Positive I am informed, but know not how to believe it,
that you intend to marry one that calls her self my Lady Vain: The respect* I
have for your family urges me to tell you she is a Counterfeit Lady, and is at
present my Mistress, by whom I have had one child, and I believe she is half
gone of another, all the Fortune she has is what I allow her.

I have seen enough, how am I perplexed? read Lovell.

Fath. Come Master Woodcock! and Master Ninny notwithstanding you are
displeased let us have your Company a little longer.


Wood. Nay for my part, Dear Heart, I do not care what becomes of me?


Ninn. Nor I neither as little as any man.


Lov. Don't betray your self to the Company.


to Sir Positive. Sir Pos. Well! this is the first thing in the World that I
have met with which I did not understand: but I am resolved, I Will not
acknowledge that: Master Lovell I knew well enough what I did when I married
her, He Is a wise man that marry's a harlot, he is on the surest side, who butan
Ass would marry at uncertainty.


Lov. What will not a Positive Coxcomb defend?


Car. Since we are all agreed: in stead of a grand Dance according to the
laudable Custom of Weddings, I have found out a little Comical Gentleman to
entertain you with.


Enter a boy in the habit of Pugenello, and traverses the Stage, takes his
Chair, and sits down, then Dances a Iigg. Emil. No Wedding day was ever so
troublesome as this has been to me.


Stanf. Make haste and quit the Trouble.
Now to some distant desert let us repair:
And there put off all ^ur unhappy Care,
There certainly that freedom we must find,
Which is denied to us among Mankind.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
Epilogue.
Physicians tell us, that in every age
Some one particular Disease does rage,
The Scurvy once, and what you call the Gout,
But Heaven be praised their Reign is almost out;
Yet a worse malady then both is bred,
For Poetry now reigns in their stead:
The Itch of writing Plays, the more's the pity,
At once has seized the Town, the Court, and City.
Amongst the rest the Poet of this day*
By mere infection has produced a Play.
Once his hot fit was strong when he was bold
To write, but while you judge he is in the Cold,
Yet pray consider, few of you but may
Be given up so far to write a Play:
If not for his, for your own sakes be kind,
And give that mercy which you hope to find.
THE END.

