THE VIRTUOSO. A COMEDY, Acted at the Duke's Theater. Written by THOMAS
SHADWELL.

Licensed,

May 31. 1676. ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk
of the New Exchange, 1676.

To the Most Illustrious Prince WILLIAM, Duke of NEWCASTLE, etc.
May it please your Grace,
SO long as your Grace persists in Obliging, I must go on in Acknowledging; nor
can I let any opportunity pass of telling the World how much I am favored by
you; or any occasion slip of assuring your Grace, that all the actions of my
life shall be dedicated to your service; who by your Noble Patronage, your
Generosity and Kindness, and your continual Bounty, have made me wholly your
Creature: nor can I forbear to declare, that I am more obliged to your Grace,
than to all Mankind. And my misfortune is, I can make no other return, but a
declaration of my grateful Resentments.

When I showed your Grace some part of this Comedy, at Welbeck, being all that
I had then written of it, you were pleased to express your great liking of it,
which was a sufficient encouragment for me to proceed in it: And when I had
finished it, to lay it humbly at your feet; what ever I write, I will submit to
your Grace, who are the greatest Master of Wit, the most exact Observer of
Mankind, and the most accurate Judge of Humor, that ever I knew. And were I
not assured of the Greatness of your favor, I should be afraid of the
excellency of your judgment.

I have endeavored in this Play at Humor, Wit, and Satyr, which are the three
things (however I may have fallen short in my attempt) which your Grace has
often told me, are the life of a Comedy. Four of the Humors are entirely new;
and (without vanity) I may say. I n^'r produced a Comedy that had not some
natural Humor in it not represented before, nor I hope ever shall. Nor do I
count those Humors which a great many do, that is to say, such as consist in
using one or two By-words; or in having a fantastic, extravagant Dress, as
many pretended Humors have; nor in the aff^ctation of some French words, which
several Plays (...) shown us. I say nothing of impossible, unnatural Farce
Fools, which some intend for Comical who think it the easiest thing in the
world to write a Comedy, and yet will sooner grow rich upon their ill Pl^ys
(...) write a good one: Nor is downright silly folly a Humor, as some take it
to be for it is a (...) natural Imperfection; and they might as (...) call it a
humor of Blindness in a blind man, or L^meness in a lame one: Or as a
celebrated French (...) has the humor of one who speaks very fa^t, and of
another who speaks very slow: But Natural imperfections are not fit Subjects
for Comedy, since they are not to be laughed at, but pitied. But the Artificial
folly of those, who are not Coxcombs by Nature, but with great Art and Industry
make themselves so, is a proper object of Comedy, as I have discoursed at large
in the Preface to the Humorists, written five years since: Those slight
circumstantial things mentioned before are not enough to make a good Comical
Humor: which ought to be such an affectation, as misguides men in Knowledge,
Art, or Science, or that causes defection in Manners, and Morality, or perverts
their minds in the main Actions of their lives. And this kind of Humor I think
I have not improperly described in the Epilogue to the Humorist.

But your Grace understands Humor too w^ll not to know this, and much more
than I can say of it. All I have now to do, is, humbly to Dedicate this ^lay to
your Grace, which has succeeded beyond my expectation, and the Humors of which
have been approved by Men of the best Sense and Learning. Nor do I hear of any
professed Enemies to the Play, but some Women and some Men of Feminine
understandings, who like slight Plays only, that represent a little tattle
sort of Conversation like their own; but true Humor is not liked or understood
by them, and therefore even my attempt toward it is condemned by them. But the
same people, to my great comfort, damn all Mr. Johnson's Plays, who was (...)
the best Drammatick Poet that ever was, or, I believe, ever will be; and I had
rather be Author of one Scene in his best Comedies, than of any Play this Age
has produced. That there are a great many faults in the conduct of this Play, I
am not ignorant. But I (having no Pension but from the Theater, which is either
unwilling, or unable, to reward a Man sufficiently, for so much pains as
correct Comedies require) cannot allot my whole time to the writing of Plays,
but am forced to mind some other business of Advantage. (Had I as much Money,
and as much time for it) I might perhaps write as Correct a Comedy as any of my
Contemporaries. But I hope your Grace will accept of this with all its
imperfections; which since the Royal Family have received favorably, I have all
my aim, if it be approved by your Grace, who are next to them, in the greatest
esteem and observance of,

My Lord Your Graces most obliged humble Servant, THOMAS SHADWEL.
London, June 26. 1676.
Prologue.
YOu come with such an eager appetite
To a late Play, which gave so great delight;
Our Poet fears, that by so rich a Treat,
Your Palates are become too delicate.
Yet ^ince you have had Rhyme for a relishing Bit,
To give a better taste to Comic Wit.
But this requires expense of time and pains,
Too great, alas, for Poets slender gains.
For Wit, like China, should long buried lie,
Before it ripens to good Comedy;
A thing we never have seen since Johnson's days,
And but a few of his were perfect Plays.
Now Drudges of the Stage must often appear,
They must be bound to scribble twice a year.
Thus the thin threadbare Vicar still must toil,
While the fat lazy Doctor bears the spoil.
In the last Comedy some Wits were shown;
In this are Fools that much infest the Town.
Plenty of Fops, grievances of the Age,
Whose nauseous Figures never were on a Stage.
He cannot say they will please you, but they are new;
And he hopes you will say, he has drawn *em true.
He Is sure in Wit he cannot excel the rest,
He Would but be thought to write a Fool the best.
Such Fools as haunt and trouble Men of Wit,
And spite of them will for their Pictures sit.
Yet no one Coxcomb in this Play is shown;
No one Man's humor makes a part alone,
But scattered follies gathered into one.
He says, if with new Fops he can but please;
He Will twice a year produce as new as these.
Drammatis Personae.
Sir Nicholas Gi^crack. The Virtuoso. Sir Formal Tri^e. The Orator, a florid
Coxcomb. Snarl. An old pettish Fellow, a great Admirer of the last Age, and a
Declaimer against the Vices of this, and privately very vicious himself. Sir
Samuel Hearty. A brisk, amorous, adventurous, unfortunate Coxcomb; one that by
the help of humorous nonsensical By-words, takes himself to to be a Wit.
Longvil. In love with Miranda. Gentlemen of wit and sense. Bruce. In love with
Clarinda. Gentlemen of wit and sense. Swiming Master. Hazard. Lady Gimcrack.
Wife to the Virtuoso. Clarinda. In love with Longvil. Niece to the Virtuoso.
Miranda. In love with Bruce. Niece to the Virtuoso. Flirt. The Virtuoso's
Whore. Figgup. Snarl's Whore. Betty. Clarindas Chambermaid. Bridget. Lady
Gimcracks Maid. Porter to Sir Nicholas. Ribband-Weavers, Sick and Lame People,
Porters, Servants, Masqueraders.
Scene LONDON.

THE VIRTUOSO.
ACT I.
Bruce in his Gown, reading. Bruce. THou great Lucreti^s! Thou profound Oracle
of Wi^ and Sense! thou art no Trifling-Landskip-Poet, no Fantastic Heroic
Dreamer, with empty Descriptions of Impossibilities, and mighty sounding
Nothings. Thou reconcil'st Philosophy with Verse, and do, almost alone,
demonstrate that Poetry and Good Sense may go together.

Reads. Omnis enim per se Divum Natura (...) ^st,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota a n^stris Rebus, sejunctaque long,
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.

Enter Longvil. Longv. Bruce, Good Morrow; what great Author ar^ thou* chewing
the Cud upon? I looked to have found you with* your* Head-ake, and your
Morning-Qualms.


Bruce. We should not live always hotheaded; we should give our selves leave
sometimes to think.


Long. Lucretius! Divine Lucretius: But my Noble Epicurean* what an
Unfashionable Fellow* art thou, that in this Age art given to understand Latin?


Bruce. It Is true, Longvil, I am a bold Fellow to pretend to it, when it is
accounted Pedantry for a Gentleman to spell, and where the Race of Gentlemen is
more degenerated than that of Horses.


Longv. It must needs be so: for Gentlemen care not upon what strain they g^t
their So^, nor how they (...) 'em, when they have got 'em: the best of 'em now
have a kind of Education like Pages; and you shall (...) (...) a Young Fellow
of this Age that does not look like one of those overgrown Animals newly
manum^tted from ^unk-Breeches.


Bruce. Some are first Instructed by Ignorant-young-housholdPedan^s, who dare
not whip the Dunces, their Pupils, for fear of their Lady-Mothers* then before
they can Conster and Pearce, they are sent into France, with sordid illiterate
Creatures, called Dry'd-Nurses, or Gov^rnors; Engines of as little use as
Pacing-Saddies, and as unfit to Govern 'em as the Posthorses they ride to
Paris on: From whence they return with a little smattering of that Mighty,
Universal Language, without being ever able to write ^rue English.


Longv. O but then they will v^lue 'em for speaking good French.


Bruce. Perhaps good French may be spoken with little sense; but good English
cannot.


Lo^gv. Thou art in the right: but then there are a sort of hopeful Youths that
do not ^ravel; and they are either such as keep Company with their Sisters, and
visit their Kindred, and are a great comfort to their Mothers, and a scorn to
all others; or they are sparks that early break loose from D^scipline, and at
Sixteen ^or sooth set up for Men of the Town.


Bruce. Such as come Drunk and Screaming into a Playhouse, and stand upon the
Benches, and toss their full Periwigs and empty Heads, and with their shrill
unbroken Pipes, cry, Dam-me, this is a Damned Play; Prithee let us to a Whore,
Jack. Then says another with great Gallantry, pulling out his Box of Pills,
Damme. Tom, I am not in a condition; here is my Turpentine for my Third Clap:
when you would ^hink he was not old enough to be able to get one.


Longv. Heaven be praised, these Youths, like untimely Fruit, are like to be
rotten before they are ripe!


Bruce. These are sure the only Animals that live without thinking: A Sensible
Plant has more imagination than most of 'em.


Longv. Gad, if they go on as they begin, the Gentlemen of the next Age will
scarce have Learning enough to claim the benefit of the Clergy f^r
Manslaughter.


Bruce. The highest pitch our Youth do generally arrive at* is to have a ^orm,
a fashion of Wit, a Rotine of spe^king, which they get by i^itation; and
generally they imitate the extravagancies of witty Men drunk, which they very
discreetly practice ^ober; but in so clumsie and awkard a way, that methinks it
should make witty men out of love with their Vices; as Prentices wearing
Pantaloons, would make Gentlemen lay by the Habit.


Longv. These are sad Truths: but I am not such a fop to disquiet my self one
minute for a thousand of 'em.


Bruce. You have Reason, say what we can, the Beastly Restive World will go its
way; and there is not so foolish a Creature as ^ Reformer.


Longv. Thank Heaven, I am not such a publick-spirited fop, to lose one moment
of my private pleasure for all that can happen without me.


Bruce. Thou art a Philosopher: and now thou talk of private pleasure, what
think thou of our Adventure with Clarinda and Miranda, the Vertuoso's, Sir
Nicholas Gimcrak's Neeces? See the danger of going to Church, Longvil: I
advised thee against it; 'twas a ^ine Curiosity, and has cost us dear.


Longv. Did ever I think we two should be caught any way in a Church?


Bruce. It Is a little strange that we, that have run together into all the
Vices of Men, of Wit and Gentlemen, should at last together fall into the Vice
of Fools and Country-Squires, Love.


Longv. We that have wondered at all other amorous Coxcombs must now laugh at
one another. I am amazed at thy passion for Clarinda.


Bru^e. And I no less at thine for Miranda. There Is Witchcraft in it, to love
where there is such apparent difficulty: for ^irtuoso is as jealous as an
Italian Uncle; his jealousy, helped by the vigilance and malice of that
impertinent Strumpet his Wife, keeps 'em from all manner of address. Letters
they have received from us, and we can have no answer; what the Devil's left
for us to do in this case?


Longv. Fall down and worship me! I have found out the Noblest Tool to work
with, and the most excellent Coxcomb that Nature ever began, or Art e're
finished.


Bruce. Thou reviv'st my dying hope. Who is it?


Longv. A Rascal that is Vertuoso's Admirer, Flatterer, and great Confident,
the only Man he will trust his Neeces with, who has discovered to me that he has
a passion for your Clarinda.


Bruce. Curse on him: But a Rival's a very improper Instrument.


Longv. But this is a Rival so conceited of his own parts, that he can never be
jealous of another. He is indeed a very choice Spirit; the greatest Master of
Tropes and Figures: The most Cicero^ian Coxcomb: the noblest Orator breathing;
he never speaks without Flowers of Rhetoric; In short, he is very much
abounding in words, and very much defective in sense, Sir Formal Trifle.


Bruce. He Is an Original indeed, the most Florid Knight alive; I have some
little knowledge of him.


Longv. I have persuaded him, that you and I are the greatest Philosophers, and
the greatest Admirers of the Virtuoso and his Works that can be: This has
already produced that good effect, that Sir Formal has this morning been with
me from his noble Friend Sir Nicholas, to invite me to come to his House to see
a Cock-Lobster dissected, and afterward to Dine with him; and will be here
with the same Message to you.


Bruce. How I applaud thy Wit! but why would not thou communicate thy design
beforehand?


Longv. I was resolved to surprise thee with it if it took, and to conceal it
if it did not,


Enter Bruce's Footman. Foot. Sir Samuel Hearty has sent you word, he will
come and give you a visit.


Bruce. There Is an Ass, an Original of another kind; one that thinks that all
Mirth consists in noise, tumult, and violent laughter: At once, the merriest
and the dullest Rogue alive -- One that affects a great many nonsensical
by-words, which he takes to be Wit, and uses upon all occasions.


Longv. But the best part of his Character is behind; he is the most amorous
Coxcomb, the most designing and adventurous Knight alive; a great Masquerader,
and has forty several disguises to make love in; and has been the most unlucky
Fellow breathing, in that and all other adventures. He has never made Love
where he was not refused, nor waged War where he was not beaten. Here he is.


Enter Sir Samuel. Sir Sam. Tom. Bruce. Good morrow to thee. Dear Jack Longvil,
how do do? 'Faith I wished you with me last night; we were a knot of merry
Rogues of thirteen or fourteen of us got together, sung, and tore, and roared,
and ranted 'igad all weathers, and drunk and laughed Dagger out o'sheath, I vow
to gad: We were upon the high Ropes, in faith. Hey poop -- troll -- come aloft
Boys -- ha-ha-ha. Ah Rogues, that you had been with us, 'ifaith. Ha-ha-ha.


Bruce. (...) and would we had.


Sir Sam. 'Igad Boys: we'd have paid you off. We swing'd it away 'ifaith: We
were so merry, of my Conscience, you might have heard us half a mile.


Long. What a Divine hearing was that?


Sir Sam. 'Faith I was pure company, I was never on a better pin in my life.
There was one of the Company would needs pretend to be a Wit forsooth; but
'ifaith Boys I run him down so, the Devil take me, he had not a word to throw
at a Dog about business. When ever he was impertinent, I took him up with my
old repartee; Peace, said I, Tace is Latin for a Candle; and when ever he
began again, Tace is Latin for a Candle again said I. Thus I run him down with
a Hey poop! Whoo! ha-haha! he had not a word, not one word, I vow to gad.
Ha-ha-ha!


Longv. (to Bruce.) As this Fellow thinks all mirth consists in noise, so he
thinks all Wit is in running a Man down, as he calls it; not considering that
impudence does that better.


Sir Sam. 'Faith I was very frolic; and there came a fellow abruptly into our
company. I whipped him up to. Hey! slap, dash! gave him a kick in the arse to
drink, and made Pilgarlike go ten times faster down stairs than he came up,
in faith, Boys


Bruce. But this may cost you a Challenge, Sir Samuel.


Sir Sam. Challenge! igad if he does challenge me, I Will run him through the
Lungs about that business. He shall not only blow out a Candle with his wound,
but the Sun shall shine through him. Pox! he is a raw fellow, he does not know
what it is to have a Towel drawn through his Body.


Longv. This Fellow's brains, like some bottle-beer, fly all intofroth.


Bruce. So brisk and dull a Rogue I never saw.


Sir Sam. Come, 'faith we are choice Lads, and should make much of one another.
I have indeed to night an Intrigo with a Lady, and I am to venture in a
disguise. I give a Masquerade you know, and, I hope will be there. But to
morrow night, 'faith I Will be very drunk about business. Ha Boys! ha! ha!


Enter Bruce's Footmen. Foot. Sir, one Sir Formal Trifle bids me tell you, he is
come to pay his Devoir to you; he charged me to use that expression, I know not
what he means by it.


Bruce. 'Twas very quaintly expressed: desire him to come up.


Sir Sam. Oh I have often seen him at Sir Nicholas Gimcrack's house, the
Virtuoso; 'faith of a grave fellow, he is a very ingenious Rogue, and i'gad he
has a fine way with him --


Longv. I never knew any man that had a way with him (as they call it) that was
not a Coxcomb.


Sir Sam. He has a notable Vein of Oratory, a brave Delivery; and when he is in
the humor, i'gad he will speak finely, finely very finely. --


Enter Sir Formal Trifle. Sir Form. Gentlemen, I humbly kiss all your hands in
general, but, Sir, yours in a more particular manner.

[To Bruce.
Bruce. Sir Formal, your most humble Servant; you do me a great deal of honor
in this visit.


Sir Form. Sir, I never could admit a thought within the slender Sphere of my
imagination, that could once suggest to me the not meeting with a good
reception, from a person that is so strictly obliged by, and so nicely
practiced in the severer rules and stricter methods of honor, as you are.


Bruce. Sir, you oblige me with your fair Char^cter.


Sir Form. Upon my sincerity, I wholly eschew all Oratory, and Compliments,
with persons of your worth and generosity. And though I must confess upon due
occasions, I am extremely delighted with those pretty spruce expressions,
wherewith Wit and Eloquence use to tric^ up humane thoughts, and with the gaudy
dress that smoother Pens so finely cloth them in, yet I never used the least
tincture of Rhetoric with my Friend, which I hope you will do me the Honor to
let me call you -- I think I am florid --

[Aside.
Sir Sam. I told you in faith he would speak notably; he has a Silver Tongue.


Longv. Oyes! a Golden one! What would such Coxcombs do, if there were not
greater to admire them? This Sir Formal is called a well-spoken man, with a pox
to him -- *


Bruce. Sir, I shall think my self honored with the Title of your Servant.


Sir Form. It is so much to my advantage, that I do assure you, Sir Formal
Trifle shall never give Mr Bruce any occasion to believe, that he shall omit
any opportunity of avowing himself to all the World, to be the most humble and
obedient of his Servants. Sweet Mr. Longvil, having already this morning paid
my devoir to you, I shall at present only tell you that, which I hope is no
news to you; to wit, that I am your most humble Servant. There I think I was
concise and florid.


Longv. You do me too much honor.


Bruce. Is (...) so great a Rascal upon earth as an Orator, that would slur and
top upon our understandings, and impose his false conceits for true reasoning,
and his florid words for good sense?


Longv! Your ^ully, with his false Dice and Box, is an honester man.


Sir Form. (To Sir Sam.) Truly Sir, I am afflicted at the late falling out
between Sir Nicholas and your noble self, which has deprived me of so
frequently enjoying the honor of kissing your fair hands there.


Sir Sam. O Lord, Sir, your Servant, your Servant: 'faith I am very sorry for it
too. But I shall be glad to wait upon you, and drink his health in a glass of
Burgundy, and be very merry about bus^ness: He Is a fine person 'ifaith, though
he does not care much for Wit*


Sir Form. And now Mr Bruce after these little digressions which my particular
esteem of every person in this presence has engaged me to, I am to inform you,
that my nob^e Friend Sir Nicholas Gim^rack does by me invite you, with your
Friend, being Philosophers, and consequently his Admirers, to come to his house
this fore-noon, to see the dissection of a little Animal^, commonly called a
Chichester Cock-Lo^ster; and afterward to take a dish of meat, and discourse
of the noble Operation, and to sport an Author over a Glass of Wine.


Sir Sam Ha! this will prove for my design.


Longv. Give me your Orator for dispatch. What a flourish the Rogue has made to
invite us to dinner.


Bruce. Sir, I will not do my self the injure to fail two fuch Ingenious and
Learned men as Sir Nicholas and your self*


Si^ (...). Alas, Sir, (...) I am but his shadow, his humble Admirer; but I
will undertake for him* Fame has not promised more of him to your expectation,
than he will perform to your understanding. Trust me, he is the finest
speculative Gentleman in the whole World, and in his Cogitations the most
serene Animal alive: Not a Creature so little, but affords him great
Curiosities: He is the most admirable person in the Meletetiques, viz. in
Refl^ctions and Meditations, in the whole World. Not a Creature so inanimate,
to which he does not give a Tongue; he makes the whole World Vocal; he makes
Flowers, nay, Weeds, speak eloquently, and, by a noble kind of Prosopopeia,
instruct Mankind.

And, Sir, though I ignore not what the envy of Detractors have expressed of
him, yet, in short, I opine him to be the most curious and inquisitive
Philosopher breathing; and I will let him know you intend to wait on him;
within two hours he will show. It Is his time of Operation.


Bruce. We will not fail. What an Employment has this Fool under him? he is the
Chorus to his Puppet-show.


Longv. I would rather be Trumpeter to a Monster, and call in the Rabble to see
a Calf with six legs, than show such a Blockhead.


Sir Sam. 'Pray, Sir, commend me heartily to Sir Nicholas, and tell him, Faith
and Troth I am sorry my Wit should offend him; and I shall henceforth endeavor
to be as dull as I can to merit his esteem. I confess I was a little too aerie
and brisk about that bus*ness: but 'faith I am his most humble Servant, and
have a Sword and Arm at his service, and 'gad will draw it against any man
breathing, in defense of his Person and Philosophy; and so let him know from
Sir Samuel.


Sir Form. I shall perform your commands, and doubt not but to do you service
in it. Gentlemen again, I kiss your hands.


[Exit. Longv. Sir Samuel, how came your Wit to offend the Virtuoso?


Sir Sam. 'Faith I was very well there; but you know I am an aerie brisk merry
Fellow, and facetious: and his grave Philosophical humor, did not agree with
mine. Besides, h does not value Wit at all, he will not be pleased with you, I
assure you.


Bruce. Why so?


Sir Sam. Why, he did not like me at all; he is an enemy to Wit, as all
Vertuoso's are.


Bruce. Sure if he had liked Wit, he would have liked you.


Sir Sam. That I think without vanity, but you must know, I pretended to
Miranda.


Longv. Pox on him, what says he?


Sir Sam. And not to boast, I found my love would have had a good reception;
but her malicious Sister, Clarind^, discovered my Intriguo, and Sir Nicholas
forbad me his house upon that business.


Bruce. What exception had he against you?


Sir Sam. Why faith he would not dispose of his Niece to a Wit, he said.


Longv. A Wit! 'faith he might as well have called thee a Dromedary.


Sir Sam. Peace, I say; Tace is Latin for a Candle, Ha-ha-ha. You know I can
run you down. In short, he said* I was a Wit, a flashy Wit. But if you have any
kindness in the World for me, you might help me in this Intriguo.


Bruce. How so?


Sir Sam. Now you are invited, let me wait on you in a Livery for one of your
Footmen. I have forty several Periwigs for these Intriguo's and bus'nesses:
'gad if you will whip* slapdash -- I Will bring this business about as round as a
Hoop.


Bruce. Prithee, Longvil* let him go, that we may make sport with him, and
abuse the Rogue damnably.


Longv. 'Sdeath! what, bring him to my Mistress!


Bruce. Can thou be jealous of so silly a Rascal?


Longv. It Is ill trusting the fantastic appetites of Women; they are subject
to the Green Sickness of the mind, as well as that of the body: One makes them
love Fools and Block-heads, as the other does Dirt and Char-coal.


Bruce. She Is a Woman of Wit; besides, let him wear your Livery, and by your
prerogative you may kick your Rival all this day, if he should be saucy, which
he will certainly be.


Longv. That consideration prevails with me.


Sir Sam. What say you, Boys? is it not an admirable Intriguo? -- Hah! --


Longv. Sir Samuel, there is some difficulty: but, to serve you, we can refuse
nothing. You shall do me the honor to wear a Livery of mine; I have new ones
come home this morning my man will give you one.


Sir Sam. If I do not my bus'nes^, Jack* I am the Son of a Tinder-box.


Longv. Well! Pray Mr. Tinder-box, go about it quickly.


Sir Sam. Gad I Will do it instantly, in the twinkling of a Bedstaff. Ha-ha-ha.


Bruce. In the twinkling of what?


Sir Sam. Hey! pull away, Rogues; in the twinkling of a Bed-staff! a witty way
I have of expressing my self. I Will away.


[Exit. Longv. Was there ever so senseless a Fop? words are no more to him than
breaking wind, they only give him vent; they serve not with him to express
thoughts, for he does not think.


Bruce. A Wit! a flashy Wit! a flashy Wit! What a dull Villain is this
Virtuoso; But prithee take all occasions to kick this flashy Wit much; he will
give thee enough.


Longv. Pox on him* he has read Seneca: he ca^es not for kicking; he never
escaped kicking in any disguise he ever put on.


Bruce. Nor in any of his own habits neither. But I Will in and dress me.

[Ex^unt.
Enter Mirand^ and Clarinda in the Gard^n. Miran. Were ever Women so confined
in England by a foolish Uncle? worse than an Italian. But that I should be
loath to speak ill of the dead, I should think my Father was not Compos mentis
when he made his Will, to bequeath us to the government of a Virtuoso only,
because his first Wife was our Aunt.


Clarin. A Sot, that has spent 2000 l. iu Microscopes, to find out the Nature
of Eels in Vinegar, Mites in a Cheese, and the Blu^ of Plums, which he has
subtly found out to be living Creatures.


Miran. One who has broken his brains about the nature of Magots* who has
stud^'d these twenty years to (...) out the several sorts of Spiders, and never
cares for un^standing Mankind.


Clar. Shall we never get free from his jealousy, and the malice of ^is
impertinent Wife?


Mir. Though he be jealous of us, yet h^'s as tame a civil London Husband to
his Wife, as she can wish -- who certainly Cuckolds him abundantly.


Clar* She hate^ us in her heart, because she thinks we see too much. To be
confined, and to such impertinence too, puts me beyond all patience.


Mir. *Twill make Dogs ^urst to be tied up, and sure 'twill provoke freeborn
Women more?


Clar. We should have as good company in ^ Go a; for none but Quacks and Fools
come hither; and one of the worst of 'em is my foolish florid Coxcombe, Sir
Formal.


Mir. He has banished my Coxcomb, Sir Samuel; a brisk airy Fool, that there is
some diversion in. He had as many tricks as a well educated Spaniel, would
fetch and carry, and come over a stick for the King: He had some tricks of a
Man too, and may pass Muster among the young gay fellows of this Town; and
could sing all the new Tunes and Songs at the Play Houses.


Clar. And we are troubled with an old Fellow here in the House, his Uncle
Snarl, a great Declaimer against the Vices of the Age, a clownish blunt
Satirical Fellow; a hater of all young people, and new Fashions.


Mir. But he is such a froward testy old fellow, he should be Wormed like a mad
Dog.


Clar. We try his patience sometimes; but I am pleased to hear him abuse the
Virtuoso his Nephew, who bears all in hope of his Estate. Snarle is a Fellow
spares no body, always speaks what he thinks, and does what he pleases. But
yet* Miranda, there is a worse misfortune than all this, that we two should, in
a Church, when we should ha'been thinking of something else, fall in love with
two men of Wit and Pleasure, who are two much Men of the Town to think of
Marriage, we being too little Women of the Town to think of any other Love.


Mir. We have Fortunes good enough to lure them to Matrimony, if that were all;
but the worst part of the story is, he whom I love is in love with yo^, and
your Man makes add^esses to me, as their Letters tell us: And even these Men we
cannot see, but at Church, or at a Playhouse, when we are guarded by our
malicious watchful Aunt.


Clar. If we could but see these Men privately, there yet might be some hopes;
we might each of us use our Lover s^urvily, and him we love we might charm with
kindness; for they are men that have known the pomps and vanities of this
wicked World, too much to love a face only.


Mir. If we could bring this about, I would stand out at nothing that might
procure our freedom; the mischief is, if we rebel, Virtuoso will allow us
nothing out of our Fortunes till we come of age.


Clar. Then we must even live upon the credit of a Reversion, as so^e young
fellows do that wish their Fathers hanged: I warrant thee we'll find credit.


Mir. And lose our Reputations: we have much ado to keep 'em as we are.


Clar. Let what will come on it, I am resolved to break out: he shall sooner
stop a Tide than my Inclinations.


Mir. Oh if your Knight Errants and we agree upon the point, they will soon
deliver us distressed Damsels from our Enchanted Castle.


Enter Snarl and his Man. Snarl. It Is a fine morning: fetch me a Pipe of
Tobacco and a Match into the Garden.

[Exit Man.
Clar. Here Is old Snarl, he has called for his Tobacco too: he smoaks all day
like a Kitchen-chimney.


Mir. Prithee let us teaze him a little, it is the greatest pleasure we have.
Morrow Uncle --


Sn^rl. How now you Baggages! what do you abro^d thus early? you used to be
stewing a bed till eleven a clock, like paltry lazy Cockatrices, that are good
for nothing, by the Mass: You Will make excellent Wives, Cuckold your Husbands
immoderately: You mind nothing but prinking your selves up. A wholesome good
housewifely Country Wench is worth a thousand of you, in sadness.


Mir. You have a course stomach, and to such a one a Surloin of Beef were
better than a dish of Wheat ears.


Snarle. A man must have ^ lusty stomach that has a mind to any of*the
Town-Ladies; they have so many tricks to disguise themselves, washing,
painting, patching, and their damned ugly new-fashion'd dresses, that a Man
knows not what to make on 'em, by the Mass: Besides, I have not heard, that
their Reputations are famous all over the World.


Cla^. You are an old fashioned Fellow, Uncle* and think no Dress handsome, but
that which Ladies wore at the Coronation of the last King.


Mir. And think no Ladies honest, but your old formal Creatures, that were in
fashion in the year 1640* and censure all Ladies that have freedom in their
carriage.


Snarl. Freedom with a pox! ay, it is freedom indeed: But the last Age was an
Age of innocence, you young Sluts you; now a company of Jillflirts, flanting
vain Cockatrices, take more pains to lose Reputation, than those did to
preserve it. I am afraid the next Age will have very few that are lawfully
begotten in it, by the Mass. Besides, the young Fellows are like all to be
effeminate Coxcombs, and the young Women Strumpets, in sadness, all Strumpets
by the Mass.


Clar. You are a fine old Sa^yr indeed; 'twere well if you decri'd Vices for
any other reason but that you are past them.


Snarl. You pert Baggages, you think you are very handsome now, I warrant you.
What a devil's this pound of hair upon your paltry frowses for? what a Pox are
those Patches for? what are your faces sore? I Would not kiss a Lady of this Age,
by the Mass, I Would rather kiss my horse.


Mir. Heaven, for the gener^l good of our Sex, keep you still in that mind.


Snarl. Some Ladies with scabs and pimples on their faces invented patches, and
those that have none must follow: Just as our young Fellows imitate the French;
their Summer fashion of going op^-breasted came to us at Micha^lmas, and we
wore it all Winter; and their Winter-fashion of buttoning close their
strait-long-wasted Coats, that made them look like Monkies, came not to us ^ill
A^arch, and our Coxcombes wore it all Summer. Nay, I Will say that for your
comfort, the young fashionable Fellows of ^he Town have as little Wit as you
have.


Clar. You had a better opinion of our Sex sure in your youth, were you never
in love?


Mir. O yes, with himself always*


Snarl. Never with any such as you, I thank Heaven, I was never such an Ass;
I Would not be such a Puppy for the World, in sadness.


Cla^. Pish: you are an old insignificant Fellow, Nuncle, such as you should be
destroyed, like Drones that have lost their (...) and afford no Honey.


Snarl. Marry come up, you young Slut, are you so liquorish after the Honey of
Man? in sadness this is fine.


Mir. You have no pleasure but drinking, and smoking, and riding with your
Gambadoes on your little pacing Tit, to take a Pipe, and drink a cup of Ale at
Hamstead or Highgate.


Snarl. Prithee, you prating Slut, do not trouble me with your impertinence.
What pleasure can a Man have in this coxcombly, scandalous Age; in sadness, I
am almost ashamed to live i^'t, by the Mass.


Clar. Then die in it, as soon as you can, if you do not like it*


Mir. Met^inks, though all pleasures have left you, you may go to see Plays.


Snarl. I am not such a Coxcomb, I thank God: I have seen 'em at Bla^k-Fryers;
pox, they act like Poppets now in sadness, I, that have seen Joseph Tailor, and
Lowen, and Swanstead: Oh a brave roaring Fellow! would make the house shake
again. Besides, I can never endure to see Plays since Women came on the Stage,
Boys are better by half.


Enter Snarl's Man. Clar. But here are a great many new Plays.


Snarl. New ones! yes, either damned insipid dull Farces, confounded toothless
Satyrs, or plaguey Rhiming Plays, with s^urvy Hero's, worse than the Knight of
the Sun, or Amadis de Ga^l; by the Mass. Pish, why should I talk with such
foolish Girls. Here, Sir, give me my Pipe of Tobacco, with the Match. So --

[He smoaks. Go now, and fetch me a lusty Tankerd of Ale, with Nutmeg and Sugar
in it --


Mir. Prithee do thee fling away his Cane, and I Will break his Pipe, which will
almost break his heart --


Clar. Agreed. Fie Nuncle, is this your breeding, to take nasty Tobacco, and
stink much before Ladies?


Mir. A way with it.


Clarinda Flings away his Cane, Miranda breaks his Pipe. Snarl. 'Sdeath! you
saucy Jades, what is this? I Will thrum you; 'twas well you flung away my Cane,
you young Sluts; in sadness I Would ha'made Bamboo fly about your Jackets else, by
the Mass. Ha! it is not broken all to pieces.

[He is stooping for his Pipe, one flings away his Hat and Periwig, the other
thrusts him down. 'Ounds! you young Jades, I Will maul you, you Strumpets, you
damned Cocka^rices: I Will disinherit my Nephew, if he does not turn you out of
doors, you Crocadills.


Clar. That Is it we'd have, we will weary you both of your lives till you bring it
about.


Sna^l. You young Jades, you Strumpets.


[^it Snarl, looking ^or his Hat and P^riwig. Mir. Let Us away, he*ll beat us.


Enter Sir Formal. Sir Form. Ladies, whither so gay, and in such have? Is Sir
Nicholas here?


Mir. No no, Clarinda, come away.

[He lays hold on Clar.
Sir Form. Let me first violently ravish a k^ss from your fair hands; I had
this morning, ere I went out, tender*d you my service of this day; had I not
opin'd, I should too early have disturbed your Beauty: but, Madam, you ignore
not, that those venturous Blossoms, whose overhasty obedience to the early
Spring, does anticipate the proper Season, do often suffer from ^he injuries of
severer weather, unless protected by the happy patronage of some more benign
shelter.


Clar. Farewell, I am in have --

[Exit Clarin.
Sir Form. Her departure savors somewhat of abruptness --


Enter Snarl. Snarl. Strumpets, Jades!


Sir Form. Sweet Mr. Snarl, had my eyes sooner encountered you, I had more
early paid you the Tribute of my respect, which I opine to be so much your due,
that though I ignore not that you are happy in having many Admirers, yet --


Snarl. 'Ounds, if I be not revenged on those Cockatrices.


Sir Form. Yet I say, none of 'em is endu'd with a more zealous heart to do you
service, than your most humble Servant Sir* Formal Triste.


Snarl Pox! What do you trouble me with your foolish Rhetoric?


Sir Form. What is it so disorders the Operative Faculties of your noble Soul?
But I beseech you argue yo^ me not of Or^tory; though I confess it to be a
great virtue to be florid: nor is there in the whole World so generous and
Prince-like a Quality as Oratory --


Snarl. Prince-like, Pimp-like in sadness! I never knew a^ Orator that was not
a Rascal, by the Mass: Orators are foolish flashy Coxcombs, of no sense or
judgment, turned with every wind; they are never of the same opinion half an
hour together, nor ever speak of the opinion they are of. Pox o'your Tropes and
Flowers.


Sir Form. Sir, upon my honor you mistake me still. I assure you I am a person
--


Snarl. Whom I hope to see hanged --


Sir Form. O Sir, you are in a merry humor: but, in good earnest, there is not
a person in the whole World that is a greater admi^er of your politer parts
than my self.


Snarl. Pshhaw! pox of admi^ers; pish! what care I whether you be or no.
Prithee, pish! you are very troublesome, in sadness.


Sir Form. Well Sir, you will have your pretty humors, you are disposed to be
merry.


Snar^. Merry! Oh your Jack-pudding! merry quo^h a! ^ounds you lie --


Sir Form. Sir, I have often entreated you to avo^d passion, it drowns your
parts, and obstructs the faculties of your mind, while a serene Soul, like that
which I wear about me, operates clearly, notwithstanding the oppression of
Clay, and the clog of my sordid humane Body.


Snarl. In sadness! would you were hanged, that your serene Soul might be free
from your sordid humane Body; it is a very sordid one, by the Mass.


Sir Form. O Sir, I will retire, and take away all occasions of your uttering
things that r^ vera, are more injurious to your self, than reflecting on me. I
take my leave, Sir.

[Exit.
Sn^l. You do well in so doing, by the Mass. It Is a fine life I live here: I am
tormented with a couple of young ramping Sluts; and then there is my Nephew's
Wife, the most impertinent foolish Creature breathing. Then my Nephew is such a
Co^comb, he has studi'd ^hese twenty years about the nat^e of Lice, Spiders,
and Insects; and has been as long compiling a Book of Geography for the World
in the Moon Did he not give me my Board for nothing, in hopes of my Estate, I Would
not stay here -- But above all Villaim, and tedious insipid Blockheads, this
Sir Formal is the greatest; he is the most intolerable plague I have: I could
--

With any Fools but Orators dispense,
Who love words so, they never care for sense.

ACT II.
Enter Longvil, Bruce, and Sir Samuel; (Sir Samuel in the habit of Longvil's
Footman.) Bruce. WE are here to our wishes; and neither the Virtuoso, nor his
Master of his Ceremonies within: If we could but meet with the Ladies now --


Sir Sam. Ay, if the Ladies were but here -- you should see how I would show my
parts. Whip-slap-dash. I Would come up roundly with A^iranda, faith Boy^ -- ha --


Longv. A pox of this fellow, he will be intolerable: I see there is no tempering
with that Edge tool called a Fool --


Sir Sam. I am disguised Cap a pe to all intents and purposes, and if any Man
manages an Intriguo better than I, I will never hope for a Masquerade more, or
expect to Dance my self again into any Lady's affection, and about that
business. Come aloft, Sir Samuel, I say --


Bruce. But sweet Sir Samuel, if you discover your self, you will be turned out
of the house, and we for company.


Sir Sam. Let me alone; pox, if I should be discove^'d, Ill bring you off as
round as a hoop, in the twinkling of an Oystershell. But gad I cannot conceal
my self from my Mistress; my Love and Wit will break out now and then a little
about the edges, or I shall burst, faith and troth.


Longv. ^onder come the Ladies -- Good Sam. keep your Distance.


Sir Sam. My distance! why the Ladies are by themselves; I Will present you to
'em, I Will introduce you. Come along, pull away, Boys. Now, my choice Lad^. Hey
poop, come alo^t, Boy -- ^ah --


Longv. Do you hear, Sir Samuel, act the Footman a little better, or by Heaven
I Will turn you out-of my Livery.


Sir Sam. What a pox, you are upon the High Ropes now. Prithee, Longvil, hold
thy peace, with a whip-stich, your nose in my breech, I know what I have to do
mun -- Do you think to make a fool of Pil-garlick?


Longv. By Heaven, Pil-garlick, I Will cut your throat, if you advance beyond
your post -- Stand Centry there.


Bruce. If you do not, Sam. you will find your Master very choleric, honest Sam.


Sir Sam. Choleric! what a pox care I; how shall I show my parts about this
business? if I should stand here. Pshaw, Prithe^ hold thy peace --


Enter Clarinda and Miranda. Longv. Sir, stand there, and mind your waiting
-- Damme stand still --


Sir Sam. What a pox does he mean now? Of My Conscience and Soul he has been a
drinking hard this morning, and is halfSeas over already.


Longv. Ladies your humble Servant.


Bruce. How long have we pray^d to Heaven for this opportunity of kissing your
hands!


Clar. I see then you can be devout upon some occasions.


Longv. We showed our devotion sufficiently the first time we saw you; 'tw^s in
a Church Ladies --


Mir. Lo^! that it should be ou^ (...) (...) ^ee you in a place so little used
by you.


Clar. I warr^nt they came hither as they do (...) a Playhouse, bolting out of
some eating-house, having (...) else to do in an idle afternoon.


Mir. It Is a wonder they do not come as the Spark^ do to a Playhouse too, full
of Champagn, venting very much noise, and very little wit --


L^ngv. What ever your intentions a^e, I am sure it is a very wicke^ thing for
you to go to Church.


Mir. How so, Sir?


Bruce. Why to seduce zealous young men, as we might have b^n, but for you.


Clar. Your zeal will never do you hurt I warrant you.


Longv. You for your part committed Sacrilege, and robbed Heaven of all my
thoughts.


Mir. That Is strange, for I assure you, none of mine ever strayed toward you.


Longv. I am glad to find you can be so very zealous: They that can be so very
violent in that higher sort of zeal, will often be so in a lower -- I am glad
to see my Mistress violent in any passion; it is ten to one Love will have its
turn then.


Bruce. You could not but observe my great zeal to you, Madam; had I soared
never so high, you would have lured me down again.


Clar. Alas, Sir, you never soar so high, but any lure will bring you down
with a swoop, I warrant you.


Mir. You are he that have pestered me with your Billets Doux: your fine little
fashionable Notes ti'd with filk.


Longv. Yes, I have presented several Bills of Love upon you, and you would
never make good payment of any of 'em.


Mir. Would you have one answer a Bill of Love at sight? that is only for
substantial Traders: young Beginners dare not venture, they ought to be
cautious.


Longv. Not, when they know him to be a responsable Merchant they have to deal
with?


Mir. Such, who keep a correspondence with too many Factories, venture too
much, and are in danger of breaking.


Clar. My Sister's in the right: It Is more danger trusting Love with such, than
Money with Go^dsmiths; especially considering most Men are apt to break in
Women's debts. I have received several honorable Summons from you, if I would
have accepted the Challenges.


Bruce. I only provoked you fairly into the open Field; and 'gad, I wonder you
had not honor enough to answer me.


Clar. You would have drawn me into some wicked ambush or other, Matrimony or
worse, I warrant you --


Sir Sam. What a pox do these Fellows mean? I shall stand here till one of them
has whipped away my Mistress about business, with a Hixius Doxius, with the force
of Repartee, and this, and that, and every thing in the world.

[Offers to go to Clar.
Longv. Why Sir, Rascal!


Sir Sam. Ay, it is no matter for that Madam --


[Pulls Mir. by the sleeve. Longv. You impudent Dog.

[ Longv. kicks him.
Sir Sam. Psha! psha! I care not a farthing for this. This is nothing, I am
hardened; I have been killed and beaten to all inten^s and purposes an hundred
times, about intrigues and businesses* Madam, Madam, don't you know me?


Mir. What impudent saw^y footman's this?


Bruce. Poor silly Rogue, he must be beaten into good manners.


Sir Sam. Ha-ha-ha, that is good in faith! Poor silly Rogue! that is well.
Ha-ha-ha. But all these kicks, and these businesses, and all that, we Men of
Intrigue must bear. Prithee, Longvil, do not play the Fool; but let me discover
my self --


Longv Sir, be gone, or I Will beat you most infinitely --

Madam, let us not trifle away those few happy minutes Fortune lends us Lovers.
We know your streights, and how few opportunities we are like to have; and
therefore let me tell you in short, I am most desperately in love with you.


Sir Sam. O Traitor! what says he? I must discover my self quickly about this
business, or whip slap -- I shall be bob'd of my Mistress in the twinkling of a
Bed-staff.


Mir. It Is true, our opportunities are like to be rare; but I Will improve this
so well, we shall need no more -- Good Sir, let it not transport you too much:
for I do assure you, I am extremely and desperately out of love with you, and
shall be so as long as I live.


Longv. Say you so, Madam? and are you absolutely and violently resolved upon
this?


Mir. I am.


Longv. Faith, Madam, I am glad to hear on it. I never knew a Woman absolutely
resolve upon any thing, but she did the contrary.


Bruce. I hope you'^ not take example by your hard-hearted Sister, to nip so
hopeful a Love in the Bud; but nourish it, and in time 'twill bring forth fruit
worth the gathering.


Clar. It shall produce none for me, it is a dangerous surfeiting fruit, and I Will
have none on it.


Sir Sam. I Will sing a Song that I used to entertain 'em with, and that will
discover me. I shall be even with these impudent Fellow^.

Sings -- She tript like a Baron Do, etc.

Longv. 'Sdeath! what does this Rascal mean?


Bruce. Pox on him; he sings worse than an old Woman a spinning.


Clar. How Is this? I have heard that charming voice: it is very like a Coxcomb's
that used to come hither, one Sir Samuel Hearty.


Sir Sam. Peace, Envy, Peace, Coxcomb; she never was so much in the wrong in
her life: she was always malicious against me, because I could not love her,
poor Fool -- Coxcomb, whip-stich, your Nose in my Breech. -- Pish.


Bruce. Hang him, let him discover himself.


Mir. It Is he sure -- What project's this? he was ever a great Designer.


Sir Sam. I can hold no longer. Madam, you have lost your senses?


Longv. 'Sdeath! this Rascal puts me beyond all patience. Impudent Villain --

[Kick hi^.
Sir Sam. Ay, ay, it is no matter for that; it is no matter for that: I can bear
any thing for my Mistress. Don't you know me yet?


Clar. It Is he: I Will make as if I did not know him, and we'll have excellent
sport with him.


Mir. Hold Sir; by your favor I am resolved to speak with him, and know the
meaning of this.


Longv. Sir.


Sir Sam. Psha! prithee hold thy tongue, Tace is Latin for a Candle, I say
again. I knew I should screw her up to the tune of Love -- Now do you know your
faithful Servant Sir Samuel?


Mir. I do; but have a care, if my Sister discovers you, you are undone.


Sir Sam. I warrant you I Will be as secret as a Cockle.


Mir. I am sorry you have been so exceedingly beaten and kicked, Sir --


Sir Sam. Psha! psha! it is nothing, nothing. Come, come -- it is well it is no
worse -- Come, if any man in England outdoes me in passive-valor about
Intrigues, I am the son of a Tinder box --


Mir. Have a care, she suspects something --


Sir Sam. Ay, let me alone --


Clar. What saucy impudent Footman's this? Correct his insolence, and send him
hence, I like not his face --


Mir. The truth is, the Rascal is saucy; but he will learn better manners.


Sir Sam. Good! how the Rogues Love makes her dissemble! Ah cunning Toad!


Longv. 'Sdeath you Dog! I Will learn you better manners; get you gone.

[Kicks him.
Sir Sam. Pox on you, you over-act a Master, and kick too hard about business
--


Longv. Do you hear* you nonsensical Owl, be gone out of the Garden, or by
Heaven I Will run my Sword in your guts --


Bruce. Hold, Longvil, do not kill me; 'twill be something uncivil --


Sir Sam. Uncivil! what a pox do you talk? Uncivil! why 'twill be murder mun.
Uncivil quoth a -- Well, I must be gone with a cup of Content, to the tune of a
damned beating, or so -- This is a fine nimble piece of business, that a Man
cannot make love to his own Mistress. But I Will come upon him with a Quare
impedit, and a good lusty cup of Revenge to boot --


[Exit Sir Samuel. Clar. We have discovered your Fool. Do you want a Fool, that
you must bring such a one as Sir Samuel along with you?


Mir. Perhaps they thought themselves not able to divert us, and brought him to
assist them --


Longv. Faith Ladies, if you make trial of us, if we be not able to divert you,
you shall find us very willing.


Bruce. I am sure if we do not divert you from your cruel resolutions, we are
the most undone men that ever sighed, and looked pale for Ladies, yet --


Clar. I do not doubt but some Ladies, such as they are, may have made you look
pale and wan.


Mir. But a civil Woman could never yet come near your hearts, or alter your
faces.


Longv. The greatest Generals do not escape always unwounded; you have done my
business, Madam.


Bruce. I have held out a long time against the Artillery of Ladies eyes; but a
random shot has mauled me at last.


Clar. That cannot be; you were the greatest Mutineers against civil Women that
could be.


Mir. Always showing your parts against Matrimony, and defending the tawdry
ill-bred fluttering Wenches of the Town.


Longv. That may be, Madam; but we are taken off.


Bruce. Ay, Madam; we are taken off.


Clar. There Is no trusting you; for though you seem to be taken off, as you
call it, yet you will stick fast to your good old Cause.


Mir. A Man often parts with his honesty, but never with his opinion for a
Bribe --


Enter L. Gimcrack and Sir Samuel. L. Gim. Mr. Bruce and Mr. Longvil in the
Garden with my Nieces, say you! young Sluts! do they snap at all the Game that
comes hither? what are they discoursing of?


Sir Sam. Why to the Tune of Love, Madam; what should young Gentlemen and
Ladies talk of else?


L. Gim. O impudent Gill-flirts! cannot one young Gentleman escape 'em? Are they
making Love to my Nieces, say you?


Sir Sam. Yes, that they are, Madam, with a helter-skelter, whip-dash, as round
as a hoop, what should they do else? I Will retire --

[Exit.
L. Gim. That Is Mr. Bruce, a fine strait well-bred Gentleman, of a pleasing
form, with a charming air in his face. The other, Mr. Longvil, who has a
pleasing sweetness in his countenance, an agreeable straitness, and a grareful
composure and strength in his Limbs. I am distracted in my choice on whom to
fix my affection. Let me see, which shall I like best? Mr. Bruce is a fine
person really, and so is Mr. Longvil: and so is Mr. Bruce I vow, and so is Mr.
Longvil, I swear. In short, I like 'em both best, and these fluttering Sluts
shall have none of 'em.


Clar. Prithee, Sister, let us change our Men, and then we shall be troubled
with no love from 'em --


Mir. Agreed. But if we be, it is shifting of our torment, and that is some
ease. But hold, we are undone: here is my Aunt.


L. Gim. Gentlemen, your Servant. So, Nieces, you are soon acquainted with
young Gentlemen, I see, It will in modesty befit you to retire.


Longv. We heard Sir Nicholas was at home, and took the liberty of a turn in
the Garden.


Bruce. Where by accident we found these Ladies, who have done us the honor to
entertain some discourse with us --


L. Gi^. They are always ready to show their little or no breeding; you must
pardon them they are raw Girls --


Clar. Thank Heaven; we have not ^ad the age and experience of your Ladi^hip.


Mir. We will leave your Reverend Ladyship, to show your great wisdom and
breeding.


L: Gim. How now, you pert Sluts -- --

[Exeunt Clar. and Mir. Gentlemen, you are not to take notice what these idle
Girls say concerning my age: for I protest, Gentlemen, I exceed not Twenty two,
upon my Honor I do not.


Longv. That Is well; I remember her a Woman Twenty years ago.


Bruce. It Is true.

[Aside. It Is ^mpossible your Ladyship should be more.


Longv. You are in the very blossom of your age.


L. Gim. O Lord, S^rs! now, I swear, you do me too much honor. Yet had I not
had some cares in the World, and the truth on it is, been ma^ri'd somewhat
against my will, I might have looked much better. But it is no matter for that,
I Am disposed of --


Bruce. This is to let us know she does not care for her Husband.


Longv. She means to trust one or both of us.


L. Gim. Yet I confess, Sir Nicholas is a fine solitary Philosophical person.
But my nature more affects the vigorous gaity and jollity of Youth, than the
fruitless speculations of Age.


Longv. Those fitter for your youth and blood. But may we not have the honor we
were promised of seeing Sir Nicholas?


L. Gim. The truth on it is, he is within, but upon some private business: but
nothing shall be reserved from such accomplished persons as you are. The truth
on it is, he is learning to swim.


Longv. Is there any Water hereabouts, Madam?


L. Gim. He does not learn to swim in the Water, Sir.


Bruce. Not in the Water, Madam! how then?


L. Gim. In his Laboratory, aspacious Room, where all his Instruments and fine
Knacks are.


Longv. How is this possible?


L. Gim Why he has a Swiming-Master comes to him.


Bruce. A Swiming-Master! this is beyond all president -- He is ^he most
curious Coxcomb breathing --

[Aside.
L. Gim. He has a Frog in a Bowl of Water, t^'d with a pack-thred by the loins;
which pack-thred Sir Nichol^s holds in his teeth, lying upon his belly on a
Table; and as the Frog strike^, he strikes; and his swiming-Master stands by,
to tell him when he does well or ill.


Longv. This is the rarest Fop that ever was heard of.


Bruce. Few Virtuoso's can arrive to this pitch, Madam. This is the most
curious invention I ever heard of.


L. Gim. Alas! he has many such He is a rare Mechanic Philosopher. The
College indeed refused him, they envied him.


Longv. Were it no^ possible to have the favor of seeing this Experiment?


L. Gim. I cannot deny any thing to such persons. I Will introduce you.

[Exeunt.
SCENE opens, and discovers Sir Nicholas learning to swim upon a Table, Sir
Formal and the Swiming-Master standing by. Sir Form. In earnest this is very
fine: I doubt not, Sir, but in a short space of time, you will arrive at that
curiosity in this watery Science, that not a Frog breathing will exceed you.
Though I confess it is the most curious of all amphibious Animals (in the Art,
shall I say, or rather nature of Swiming.)


Swim. M^st. Ah! well struck, Sir Nicholas; that was admirable, that was as
well swom as any Man in England can. Observe the Frog, Draw up your Arms a
little nearer, and then thrust 'em out strongly -- Gather up your Legs a little
more -- So, very well -- -- Incomparable --


Enter Bruce, Longvil, and L. Gimcra^k. Bruce. Let Us not interrupt them, Madam,
yet but observe a little this great Curiosity.


Longv. It Is a noble Invention.


L. Gim. It Is a thing the College never thought on.


Sir Nich. Let me rest a little to respire. So it is wonderful, my noble
Friend, to observe the agility of this pretty Animal, which, notwithstanding I
impede its motion, by the detention of this Filum or Thread within my teeth,
which makes a ligature about its loins, and though by many sudden stops I cause
the Animal sometimes to sink or immerge, yet with indefatigable activity it
rises and keeps almost its whole body upon the superficies or surface of this
humid Element --


Sir Form. True, Noble Sir; no^ do I doubt but your Genius will make Art equal,
if not excced Nature; nor will this or any other Frog upon the face of the
Earth out-swim you --


Sir Nich. Nay, I doubt not, Sir, in a very little time to become amphibious; a
man, by Art, may appropriate any Element to himself. You know a great many
Virtuoso's that can fly; but I am so much advanced in the Art of Flying, that I
can already out fly that ponderous Animal called a Bustard; nor should any
Greyhound in England catch me in the calmest day, before I get upon wing: Nay,
I doubt not, but in a little time to improve the Art so far, 'twill be as
common to buy a pair of Wings to fly to the World in the Moon, as to buy a pair
of Wax Boots to ride into Sussex with.


Sir Form. Nay doubtless, Sir, if you proceed in those swift gradations you
have hitherto prosper'd in, there will be no difficulty in the noble
enterprise, which is devoutly to be effligated by all ingenious persons since
the intelligence with that Lunary World would be of infinite advantage to us,
in the improvement of our Politics.


Sir Nich. Right: for the Moon being Domina humidiorum, to wit, the Governess
of moist Bodies, has, no doubt, the superior Government of all Islands; and its
influence is the cause so many of us are Dilirious and Lunatic in this. But
having sufficiently refrigerated my lungs by way of respiration, I will return
to my swiming --


Swim. Mast. Admirably well struck! rarely swum! he shall swim with any man in
Europe.


Sir Form. Hold, Sir Nicholas; here are those Noble Gentlemen and Philosophers,
whom I invited to kiss your hands; and I am not a little proud of the honor, of
being the grateful and happy Instrument of the necessitude and familiar
communication which is like to intervene between such excellent Virtuoso's.


Bruce. We are, Sir Nicholas's, and your most humble Servants.


Longv. We shall think our selves much honored with the knowledge of so
celebrated a Virtuoso.


Sir Nich. You are right welcome into my poor Laboratory; and if in ought I can
serve you in the way of Science my nature is diffusive, and I shall be glad of
communicating with such eminent Virtuoso's as I am let to know you are.


Longv. We pretend to nothing more than to be your humbl admirers.


Sir (...). All the ingenions World are proud of Sir Nicholas, for his
Physico-mecha^ical Excellencie^.


Sir Nich. I confess I have some felicity that way; but were I as praecelling
in Physico-Mechanical Investigations, as you in Tropical Rhetorical Flourishes,
I would yield to none.


Longv. How the As^es claw one another?


Bruce. We are both your admirers. But of all quaint Inventions, none ever came
near this of Swiming.


Sir Form. Truly I opine it to be a most compendious method, that in ^
fortnig^ts prosecution has advanced him to be the best Swimer (...) Europe.
Nay, if it were possible to swim with any Fish of his Inches.


Longv. Have you ever tried in the Water, Sir?


Sir Nic. No, Sir; but I swim most exquisitely on Land.


Bruce. Do you intend to practice in the Water, Sir?


Sir Nic. Never, Sir; I hate the Water, I never come upon the Water, Sir.


Longv. Then there will be no use of Swiming.


Sir Nic. I content my se^f with the Speculative part of Swiming, I care not
for the Practick. I seldom bring any thing to use, it is not my way. Knowledge
is my ultimate end.


Bruce. You have reason, Sir; Knowledge is like Virtue, its own reward.


Sir Form. To study for use is base and mercenary, below the serene and quiet
temper of a sedate Philosopher,


Sir Ni^h. You have hit it right, Sir. I never studi'd any thing for use but
Physic, which I administer to poor people: you shall see my method.


Longv. Sir, I beseech you, what new curiosities have you found out in Physic?


Sir Nic. Why I have found out the use of Respiration, or Breathing, which is a
motion of the Thorax and the Lungs, whereby the Air is impelled by the Nose*
Mouth* and Windpipe into the Lungs, and thence expelled farther to elaborate
the Blood, b^ refrigerating it, and separating its fuliginous steams.


Bruce. What a secret the Rogue has found out?


Sir Nic. I have found too, that an Animal may be preserved without
respiration, when the wind-pipe's cut in two, by ^ollicular impulsion of Air;
to wit, by blowing wind with a pair of bellows into the Lungs.


Longv. I have heard of a Creature preserved by blowing wind in the Breech, Sir.


Sir Nic. That Is frequent. Besides, though I confess, I did not invent it, I have
performed admirable effects by tra^sfusion of Blood; to wit, by putting the
Blood of one Animal into another.


Sir Form. Upon m^ integrity he has advanced transfusion to the Achme of
perfection, and has the Ascendent over all the Virtu^si in point of that
Operation. I saw him do the most admi^able effects in the World upon two
Animals; the one a Domestic Animal* commonly called a Mangy Spaniel; and a
less Fame^lick Crea^ure, commonly called a Sound Bull-Dog. Be pleased, S^r to
(...) it.


Sir Nic. (...) I made, Sir, both the Animals to b^ Emittent and Recipie^ (...)
^he same time, after I had made Ligatures as hard I (...), f^r ^ear of
s^rangling the Animals, to render the (...) (...), I opened the ^arotid
Arteries, and Jugular (...) (...) at one time, and so caused them to change
Blood (...) (...) another.


Sir (...). Indeed that which ensued upon the Operation was miraculous; for the
mangy Spaniel became sound, and the sound Bull-dog mangy.


Sir N^c. Not only so, Gentlemen, but the Spaniel became a Bull-dog, and the
Bull-dog a Spani^l.


Sir Form. Which considering the civil and ingenuous temper and education of
the Spaniel, with the rough and untaught savageness and ill-breeding of the
Bull-dog, may not undeservedly challenge the name of a Wonder.


B^ce. It Is an Experiment you will deserve a Statue for.


Enter Clarinda, Miranda, and Sir Samuel. Clar. Sir, I must beg your pardon for
my intrusion: but I have found out such a practice upon my Sister, as will
nearly concern you to prevent it.


S^r Sam. What does she mean now?


Sir Nic. Against Miranda, say you?


Clar. This Footman has brought a Letter, and has been tempting her from that
vile Man Sir Samuel Hearty. There it is.


Mir. It Is no matter for her persecution. Be confident of me, you can endure
any thing --


Sir Sam. Ay, any thing, the most substantial be^ting under the Sun. I have had
a pretty parcel of kicks already about this business: but as long as I find
love, I care not for ^icking.


Longv. A pox o 'this Rascal, he will undo us --


Sir Nic. This is a Villain indeed, to tempt my Niece from that Knight; why he
is a Spark, a Gallant, a Wit of the Town; the greatest debaucher of Youth, and
corrupter of Ladies in England.


Sir Sam. The Rogue has hit me to a Cows thumb, he is as cunning a Fellow as any
within forty shillings of his head.

[Aside.
Sir Form. The Man indeed has spruce, polite, Mercurial, and pretty concise
parts; but he is a little too volatile and flashy; he would make a fine person
if he were but solid.


Sir Sam. Good! solid! would he so? That Is as dull a Fellow as a man wou^d wish
to lay his leg over.


Longv. I confess he is my Footman, but shall be no longer so; let him be
soundly pumped and tossed in a Blanket.


Sir Nic. Truly it is an injury beyond all sufferance, and with your leave,
I Will have him so exercised. Call in my people.


Sir Sam. Hold, hold, Sir! what do you mean? Sir Samuel desired me to deliver
this Note; and he is a person I am much beholding to, that is all I know of the
matter, only that he is a fine Gentleman, and a w^tty facetious person as any
wears a head.


Longv. Here! where are my Servants!

Enter Serv^nts. Sir! strip that Rascal's Coat over his ears.


Sir Sam. Hold, hold, Longvil! what are you mad? I shall catch cold in the
twinkling of a Bedstaff, man.


Sir Nic. Do you hear, let him be taken, and first pumpt soundly, and then
^oss'd in a blanket.


Longv. Impudent Rascal! away with him.


Mir. Pump him soundly impudent Fellow.


Sir Sam. Ah, my pretty little dissembling Rogue.

[Aside.
Sir Nic. See it done to purpose, and then turn him out a doors.


Sir Sam. What a Devil shall I do? but she loves me still. Come -- it is well
it is no worse -- my intrigue goes on rarely --

[They hale him out.
Cl^r. Let Us see the execu^ion.


Mir. Come on let us see how generously he suffers.


[Exit Clar. and Mir. Sir Nic. But now to return to my transfusion.


Longv. That was a rare Experiment of transfusing the blood of a Sheep into a
Madman.


Sir Nic. Short of many of mine. I assure you I have transfused into a humane
Vein 64 ounces Haver du pois weight, from one Sheep. The emittent Sheep died
under the Operation, but the recipient Madman is still alive; he suffered some
disorder at first. The Sheep's blood being Heterogeneous, but in a short time
it became Homogeneous with his own.


Sir Form. Ha! Gentlemen, was not this incomparable? but tyou shall hear more.


Enter Snarl. Sir Nic. The Patient from being Mania^l, or raging mad, became
wholly Ovine or Sheepish; he bleated perpetually, and chewed the Cud: he had
Wool growing on him in great quantities, and a Northamptonshire Sheep's Tail
did soon emerge or arise from his Anus or humane Fundament.


Snarl. In sadness Nephew, I am ashamed of you, you will never leave Lying and
Quacking with your Transfusions and Fools tricks. I believe if the blood of an
Ass were transfused into a Virtuoso, you would not know the emittent Ass from
the Recipient Philosopher, by the Mass.


Sir Nic. O Uncle! you will have your way; he is a merry Gentleman.


Snarl. Pox! merry! prithee leave prating and lying; I am not merry, I am angry
with such Coxcombs as you are.


Sir Form. Well, Sir, you are very pleasant, and will have your facetious
pretty humors.


Snarl. You are the Z^ny to this Mountebank.


Sir Nic. Pray, Uncle, interrupt us not. ^o convince you Gentlemen, of the
truth of what I say, here is a Letter from the Patient, who calls himself the
meanest of my Flock, and sent me some of his own Wool. I shall shortly have a
Flock of 'em; I Will make all my Clothes of 'em, it is finer than Beaver. Here was
one to thank me for the Cure by Sheeps blood just now --


Snarl. O yes! he did not speak, but bleated his thanks to you. In sadness you
deserve to be hanged* You killed four or five that I know with your transfusion
--


Sir Nic. Sir, alas! those men suffered not under the Operation, but they were
Cacochymious, and had depraved Viscera, that is to say, their Bowels were
gangrened.


Snarl. Pish! I do not know what you mean by your damned Cacochymious canting;
but they died in sadness. Prithee make have with your canting and lying, and
let us go to dinner, or you shall quack by your self -- --


Longv. A pleasant blunt old Fellow --


Bruce. He Is in the wrong in abusing Transfusion: for excellent Experiments may
be made in changing one Creature into the nature of another.


Longv. Nay, it may be improved to that height, to alter the flesh of Creatures
that we eat, as much as grafting and inoculating does Fruits --


Sir Nic. It Is very true, I do it, I use it to that end.


Snarl. Pox! let me see you invent any thing so useful as a Mousetrap, and I Will
believe some of your Lies. Prithee! did not a fellow cheat thee with Eggs,
which he pretended were laid with hairs in them, and you gave him ten shillings
apiece for the Eggs; till I discovered they were put in at a hole, made by a
very fine Needle.


Sir Form. Well Mr. Snarl, you have the prettiest way of drolling. Gentlemen,
pray let me recommend him to you, he is a fine facetious witty person indeed.


Snarl. You recommend me! Prithee, damned Orator, hold thy tongue. In sadness
you are a foolish flashy Fellow --


Bruce. We shall be glad of the honor to know you.


Snarl. I desire no acquaintance with any young Man of this Age, no^ I.


Longv. Why so, Sir?


Snarl. Why then are vicious illiterate foolish Fellows, good for nothing but
to roar and make a noise in a Playhouse. To be very brisk with pert Whores in
Vizards, who, though never so ill-bred, are most commonly too hard for them at
their own weapon, Repartee -- And when Whores are not there, they play
Monkey-tricks with one another, while all sober men laugh at them.


Bruce. They are even with them, for they laugh at all sober men again.


Longv. No Man's happy but by comparison. It Is the great comfort of all the
World to despise and laugh at one another.


Snarl. But these are such unthinking Animals, and so weary of themselves, they
can never be alone; always complaining of short life, yet never know what to do
with the time they have.


Bruce. This snarling Fellow's sometimes in the right.


Snarl. Their top of their Educa^ion is to sma^er French: for in Fr^nce they
have been to learn French V^ces to spend English Estates with; with an insipid
gaity, which is to be slight and bright, very pert and very dull.


Sir Ni^h. S^r I beseech you to be civiller to my Friends.


Snarl. I am transported with passio n against the young Fellows of the Age.


Longv. Old Fools always envy young Fools.


Snarl, ^hey are all forward and positive in things they understand not; they
laugh at any Gentleman that has Art or Science, and make it the property of a
well bred Gentleman, to be good for nothing, but to make a Figure in the
Drawingroom, set his Periwig in the Glass, smile, whisper, and make legs and
foolish faces for an hour or two, without one word of sense in s^dness.


Bruce. The snarling Rogue's very tart upon the Youngsters.


Longv. When the pleasures of Wine and Women, the jo^s of Youth leaves us, Envy
and Malice the lusts of Age, succed 'em --


Snarl. Besides, they are all such Whoring fellows, in sadness ^ am ashamed of
'em. The last Age was an Age of Modesty --


Bruce. I believe there was the same Wenching then: only they dissembled it.
They added Hypocrasie to Fornication, and so made two Sins of what we make but
one.


Longv. After all his virtue, this old Fellow keeps a Whore. I*ll tell you m^re
on it.


Sir Ni^. I hope you will pardon the rough nature of my Uncle, who sp^res no
body. Now if you please, Gentlemen, we'll retire. I am sorry I cannot perform
the dissection of the Lobster, which I promised. My Fi^h-monger that serves me
for that Operation, has failed me: but I Will assure you it is the most curious
of all Testaceous or Crustace^us Animals whasoever.


Sir (...). But we will read an Author, and sport about a little Gr^k and
Latin before Dinn^r. The one is a noble ref^ction of the Mind, as the other is
of the Body.


Lon^v. We wait on you.


Sir Ni^. After Dinner we will have a Lecture concerning the Nature of Insects,
and will survey my Microscopes, (...), (...), (...), Pn^umatick Engin^s,
St^ntrophonical Tub^s, and the like --


B^uce. We ^re infinitely obliged to you, Sir. But all this does not edify
with our Mistresses, Longvil.


Longv. We must find a way to get rid of ^hese insipid Fools. I have a way to
get rid of the Lady.


Sir Form. G^ntlemen, we most humbly attend your motions.


Bruce. We wait on you.

[Ex^unt omnes.
ACT. III.
Ent^r Longvil and Miranda. Longv. DEar Madam! tender the life and welfare of a
poor humble Lover.


Mir. What a fashionable Gentleman of this Ag^, and a Lover! it is impos^ible!
They are all Keepers, and (...) tawdry things from the Ex^hange or the
Play-^ouse, and make the poor Creatures run mad with the ex^remity of the
alt^ration; as a young Heir, being kept short, does at the death of his Father.


Longv. I was never one of those Madam: nothing but age and impotence can
reduce me to that condition. I had (...) kill my own Game, than send to a
Poulterers. Besides, I never eat Tame things, when wild of the same kind are in
season. I hate your coopt cramb'd Lady; I love 'em as they go about, as I do
your Barn-door Fowl.


Mir. It Is more natural indeed.


Longv. But had I been never so wicked, you have made such an absolute whining
Convert of me, that forgetting all shame and reproach from the Wits and
Debauchees of the Town, I can be a Martyr for Matrimony.


Mir. Lord! that you should not take warning! ^ave not several of your married
Friends, like those upon the Ladder, bidden all good people take warning by
them.


Longv. For all that, neither Lovers nor Malefactors can take it; one will make
experiment of Marriage, and the other of Ha^ging at their own sad costs. Neither
of the Executions will e er be left off.


Mir. They are both so terrible to Women, it is hard to know which to choose.


Longv. If you Ladies were willing, we Men are apt to be civil upon easier
terms.


Mir. No; those terms are harder than the other.


Longv. You are so nimble, a Man knows not which way to catch you.


Mir. Once for all I assure you, I will never be caught any way by you.


Longv. Do not provoke Love thus, lest he should revenge his cause, and make
you dote upon some nauseous Coxcomb, whom all the Town scorns.


Mir. Let Love do what it will, I neither dare nor will talk on it any longer.


Longv. You are afraid of talking of Love, as some are of reading in a
Coujuring-book, for fear it should raise the Devil.


Mir. What ever you can say, will as soon raise one as the other in me. But I
must take leave of you and your Similies. My Uncle will want you.


Longv. Will you not in charity afford me one interview more this afternoon?


Mir. Provided I hear not one word of Love, and my Uncle and Aunt be secure; I
shall be in the Walk on the East Side of the Garden an hour hence. But, by your
leave, I shall meet another there --

[Aside. [Exit Mir.
Longv. A thousand thanks for the honor. Yonder come Bruce and Clarinda; I Will
retire --

[Exit Longv.
Enter Bruce and Clarinda. Bruce. I have taken more pains to single you out,
than ever Wood-man did for a Deer.


Clar. If the Wood-man were no better a Marks-man, the Deer would be safe for
all his singling. Besides, I am not so tame to stand a shot yet, I thank you --


Br^ce. Lovers are quick Aimers, and can shoot flying.


Clar. Not, if they fly so fast as I shall from you.


Bruce. Come, I see this way will not do: I Will try another with you. Ah, Madam!
change your cruel intentions, or I shall become the most desolate Lover, that
ever yet, with arms across, sighed to a murmuring Grove, or to a purling Stream
complained. Savage! I Will wander up and down the Woods, and carve my passion on
the Barks of T^ees, and vent my grief to winds, that as they fly shall sigh and
pity me*


Clar. How now! what foolish Fustian's this? you talk like an Heroic Poet.


Bruce. Since the common downright way of speaking sense wou^d not please you,
I had a mind to try what the Romantic way of wining Love could do.


Clar. No more of this, I had rather hear the tatling of Gossips at an
Upsitting, or Christning, nay, a Phanatick Sermon, or, which is worse than all,
a dull Rhiming Play, with nothing in it but lewd Hero's huffi^g against the Gods.


Bruce. Why, I Will try any sort of Love to please you, Madam; I*ll show you that
of a gay Coxcombe; with his full plumes, strutting and rustling about his
Mistress, like a Turky-cock, baiting her with brisk aerie motion, and
fashionable nonsense, thinking to carry her by dint of Periwig and Garniture,
or by chan^ing some pretty foolish sonnet of Phillis or Coeli^; or at best,
treating her with nothing but ends of Plays, or second-hand Jests, which he
runs on tick with witty men for, and is never able to pay them again.


Clar. No, there are too many of these fine Sparks you talk of, who perhaps may
be very clinquant, slight and bright, and make a very pretty show at first; but
the Tincel-Gentleman do so tarnish in the wearing, there is no enduring them.


Bruce. But I am of good metal, Madam, and so true, that I shall abide any
Touchstone, even that of Marriage.


Clar. But it is an ill-bargai^, where I must buy my Metal first, and touch it
afterward.


Bruce. You shall touch it first, Madam, and if you do not like it, I Will take
it again and no harm done.


Clar. No: I Will take care there shall be no harm done* Pray divert this
unseasonable Discourse of Love, for I will never hear on it more. Farewell, I
see my Lady Gimcrack in the Garden.


Bruce. Let me but beg to have one Treaty more with you this afternoon: if I
convince you not of the error of your hard heart, I must submit and be
miserable.


Clar. If you love to hear the same thing again, I will declare it to you an
hour hence in the green Walk on the other side the Wilderness -- Farewell --
But, by your leave, you shall find another in my place --

[Exit Clar.
Enter Lad^ Gimcrack at another door. Bruce. Your Ladiship's humble Servant. I
have been taking the fresh air in the Garden, Madam.


L. Gim. I am come with the same intention, and am happy in the company of a
person, who is so much a Gentleman.


Bruc^. Your Ladyship does me too much honor.


L. Gim. By no means, Sir, your accomplishments command respect from all
Ladies. I doubt not but you have been happy in many Ladies affections --


Bruce. What will th^s come to? --

[Aside.
L. Gim. But Women will be frail, while there are such persons in the world,
that is most certain.


Bruce. Your Ladiship's in a merry humor, to rally a poor young Gentleman thus.


L. Gim. Far be it from me, I swear; your perfections are so prevalent, that
were I not in honor engaged unto Sir Nicholas (and Honor has the greatest
Ascendent in the World upon me) I assure you I would not ^enture my self alone
with such a person: But Honor's a great matter, a great thing, I Will vow and
swear.


Bruce. You Ladies will abuse your humble Servants; we are born to suffer.


L. Gim. Lord, Sir, that you should take me to be in jest! I swear I am in
earnest, and were I not sure of my Honor, that never fai^'d me in a doubtful
occasion, I would not give you this opportunity of tempting my frailty; not but
that my virtuous inclinations are equal with any Ladies: but there is a
prodigious Witchcraft in opportunity. But honor does much, yet oppo^tunity is
a great thing, I swear a great thing.


Bruce. Ay, Madam, if we use it when it offers it self.


L. Gim. How Sir! never hope for it! never think on it! I would not for all the
World I protest. Let not such ^houghts of me enter into your head. My honor
will protect me. I make use of an opportunity -- I am none of those I assure
you.


Bruce. 'Sdeath! how apprehensive she is? I shall forget the Speculative part
of Love with Clarinda, and fall to the practick with her. But I shall never hold
out that long journey, without this or some other bait by the way.


L. Gim. Yet, as I was saying, opportunity's a bewitching thing* Le^ all Ladies
beware of opportunity, I say,: for alas, if we were not innocent and virtuous
now* what use might we make of this opportunity now?


Bruce. She Is so damnably affected, and silly, 'twou'd pall any one's appetite
but mine. Folly and affection are as nauseous as deformity.

[Aside.
L. Gim. Should we now retire into that cool Grotto for refreshment, the
censorious world might think it strange; but honor will preserve me. Honou^'s
a rare thing, I swear, I defy temptation.


Bruce. You Will not give a man leave to trouble you with much. I have not
observed that Grotto; shall I wait on you to survey it.


L. Gim. Ay Sir, with all my heart to survey that; but if you have any wicked
intentions, I Will swear you will move me prodigiously. I^ your intentions be
dishonorable, you will provoke me strangely.


Bruce. Try me, Madam.


L. Gim. Hold! hold! have a care what you do. I will not try if you be not sure
of your Honor. I Will not ven^re, I protest.


Bruce. What ever you are of mine, you are sure of your own.


L. Gim. Right, that will defend me. Now tempt what you will though we go in,
nay, though we shut the door too: I fear nothing; it is all one to me as long as
I have my Honor about me. Come.


Bruce. Yonder comes Longvil, Madam.


L. Gim. For Heaven's sake remove from me, or he will suspect my Honor.


Bruce. So, this accident has p^eserv'd me honest. I am as constant a Lover as
any man in England, when I have no oppo^unity to be otherwise --

[Exi^ Bruce.
Enter Longvil. L. Gim* Fa-la-la-la* O me Sir (...) swear* you frighted me* I
protest my heart was at my mouth. Alas! I shall nor recover the disorder a
good while.


Longv. What'^ the matter, Mad^?


L. Gi^. You brought a G^tlemen that'^ (...) ^o fresh into my mind, one (...)
wa^ the ^st Object o^ my (...) and Affections, no^ (...) (...) se^ you (...).
(...) I th^ught it had been his Ghost, upon my word.


Longv. I am happy in resembling any one you could love, Madam


L. Gim. I have long forgotten my passion for him; but the sight of you did
stir in me a strange Je ne scai quoi toward you; and but that I am another's
now -- otherwise -- But I say too much.


Longv. (aside.) I have been too much acquainted with her character to doubt
her meaning. Madam, you honor me so much, I cannot acknowledge it enough by my
words, my hearty actions shall speak my thanks.


L. Gim. Actions! Oh Heaven! what actions? I hope you mean honorably. I swear
you brought all the blood of my body into my face. Actions, said you! I hope
you are a person of honor, my Honor's dearer to me than the whole Word. I
would not violate my Reputation for the whole Earth.


Longv* Let us retire, Madam. If I do not show my self a Man of Honor, may
your Ladyship renounce me.


L. Gim. Retire! Heaven forbid! Are we not private enough? W^ll, you put me
more and more in mind of my first Love, I swear you do.


Longv. By your leave, Miranda, I can hold no longer. Though I am as true as
Steel, any handsome Woman will strike fire on me. Let us repose a while in the
Grotto, Madam.


L. Gim. O Heaven, Sir! do not tempt me. What, give my self an opportunity!
Consider my Honor, Sir; I am another's*


Longv. And shall be so still; Madam, whatsoever use I shall make of your
Ladyship, I shall return you again, and never alter the property. Dear Madam,
retire.


L. Gim. O Lord, Sir! what do you mean? you fright me so, I protest my heart is
at my mouth. I am no such person. Dear Sir, mistake me not, misconstrue not my
freedom; I would not for the World -- Well, I swear you are to blame now,
mever (...) you are -- But it is your first fault, I can forgive you.


Longv. I am sorry I have offended. But let us retire into the Grotto, and I Will
make as many acknowledgments as I can.


L. Gim. Well, Sir, since you are a little more civil, I am con^ for discourse
sake, for I love discourse mightily --


Longv* W^l, I (...) a (...)* Dear Miranda, forgive me this once. Come, dear
Madam.


L. Gim. I Will follow. But do you hear, Sir, if you be the least uncivil, upon my
honor I Will cry out. Remember, Sir, I give you warning. Do not think on it, I
swear and vow I will; do not, I say, do not.


Longv. No, no, I warrant y^u; I Will trust you for that. How fearful she is I
should not think on it?

[Aside.
Enter Sir Formal. Sir Form. Sweet Mr. Longvil, Sir Nicholas Gi^crack desires
your noble presence: ^e being now ready to impart those secrets about Insects,
which I d^re be bold to say, no Virtuoso, Domestic or Foreign, has explored
but himself.


Longv. I wait on you.


Sir Form. I humbly kiss your Ladiship's fair hands.


[Exit Longvil and Sir Formal. L. Gim. Shame on this unlucky Fellow: I have
discovered the cross love between my Nieces and these Gentlemen, and will make
work wi^h it.


Enter Maid to Lady Gimcrack. Maid. Madam, here is a Letter for your Ladyship;
the Messenger would deliver it to none but me.


L. Gim. Ha! it is from my dear Hazard.

Reads. Madam, I am extremely impa^ient to see your Ladyship at (...) old place
of assignation, as well for a great ^eal of Love, as for a little Business.


L. Gim. Well, I will go, though it cost me money. I know that is his little
business. I know not why we Ladies should not keep as well as Men sometimes.
But I shall neglect ^y important affair with these two fine sweet persons. But
that is uncertain, this is su^e.

[Exit.
Enter Snarl and Mrs. Figgup. Snarl. How happy am I in thy Love! here I can
find re^eat, when tired with all the Rogues and Fools in Town.


Fig. Ay, Dearest! come to thine own Miss; she loves thee, Buddy, poor Buddy.
Coachee, coachee.


Snarl. O my poor Rogue. But when did thou see thy Friend* Mrs. Flirt, my
Nephew Gimcrack's Mistress?


Fig. O shame on her! out upon her! O name her not.


Snarl. Why, what is the matter, Bird?


Fig. O filthy Creature, I cannot abide her* she is (...) she is naught.


Snarl. Why, what is the matter, Figg? what has she done to thee?


Fig. Done! I Will never forgive her while ^ ha'breath. Do not speak of her,
she is a base Creature; name her not, I ha'done with her.


Snarl. Has she affronted thee, poor Rogue? I Will have her mauled. Filthy
Creature.


Fig. Ay, birds-nyes, she is a Queen. But do not thee trouble thy self with her;
it is no matter.


Snarl. I will know what she has done to thee. In sadness, if you do not tell
me, I will not love thee, Pigs-nie.


Fig. Well, I will, but will not you laugh at me then?


Snarl. No, by the Mass, not I.


Fig Nay, but thou will, Bird.


Snarl. In sadness I will not.


Fig. Why would you think it? I wish I might never stir out of this place, if the
lewd Carrion had not the impudence to tell me, that Sir Nicholas Gim^rack was a
handsomer Man than thou art. No, I Will never forgive her while I ha've breath.


Snarl. Poor Rogue! thou art a dear Creature in sadness.


Fig. Impudent Flirts! but I swear our Sex grows so vicious and infamous, I am
ashamed of 'em, they have no modesty in 'em.


Snarl. In sadness it is a very wicked Age; men make no conscience o'their ways,
by the Mass. In the last Age we were modest and virtuous, we spent our time in
making visits, and playing at Cards with the Ladies, so civil so virtuous, and
wellbred.


Fig. For my part, I blush at the impudent Creatures of the Town, that is the
truth on it.


Snarl. So do I, in sadness. To see Villains wrong their sweet Wives, and,
while they keep them short, let little dowdy Strumpets spend their Estates for
'em, by the Mass my heart bleeds, to see so great a decay of Conjugal affection
in the Nation.


Fig. Out upon 'em, filthy Wenches; I wonder they dare show their hardened
faces. They are so bold, it is a burning shame they should be suffered I vow.


Snarl. Nay, the young Coxcombs are worse; nothing but swearing, drinking,
whoring, tearing, ranting, and roaring. In sadness I should be weary of the
world for the vices of it, but that thou comfort'st me sometimes, Buddy.


Fig. Prithee, dear Numps, talk no more of 'em; I spit at 'em; but I love n'own
Buddy Mun. Predee kiss me.


Snarl. Ah poor Budd, poor Rogue! we are civil now; what harm's in this?


Fig. None, none. Poor Dear, kiss again, Mun.


Snarl. Ah poor thing. In sadness thou shall have this Purse; nay, by the Mass
thou shall.


Fig. Na^ p^sh! I cannot abide the money, not I* I love thee, thou art a civil,
discreet, sober person of the last Age.


Snarl. Ah poor little Rogue! in sadness I'ill bite thee by the lip, in faith I
will. Thou have incenc'st me strangely, thou ha^t fired my blood, I can bear it
no longer, in faith I cannot. Where are the instruments of our pleasure? Nay,
prithee do not frown, by the Mass thou shall do it now.


Fig. I wonder that should please you so much, that pleases me so little?


Snarl. I was so used to it at Westminster-School, I could never leave it o^t
since.


Fig. Well: look under the Carpet then if I must.


Snarl. Very well, my dear Rogue. But do hear, thou art too gentle. Do not
spare thy pains. I love C^stigation mightily -- So, here is good provision.


[Pulls the Carpet, t^ree or f^ur great Rods fall down. Within. Ho there
within! open the door. 'Sdeath I Will break it open. What Rascal have you got
with you? I Will maul him.


Fig. O Heaven! this Rascal will undo me. What shall I do? It Is my Brother.


Snarl. In sadness I shall be ruined.


Fig. Run, run, if ^ou love me, into the Wood-^ole quickly. I Will get rid of
him. For Heaven's sake take the Birch along with you


Snarl. Ah Hectoring Rascal! we had none of this in the last Age. Rogues! Dogs!
A man cannot be in private with a Sister, but he must be disturbed by
th'impertinent Brother, in sadness.


Fig. In! in! I Will out to him --

[Ex^unt.
Sir Nicholas, Sir For^al* Bruce, Longvil:

Sir Form. I do assur^ you, Gentlemen, no man upon the (...) of the earth is so
well seen in the Nature of Ants, Flies, Humble-Bees, Ear-wigs, Millepedes,
Hogs-Lice, Maggots, Mites in a Cheese, Todpoles, Worms, Neufts, Spiders, and
all the noble products of the Sun, by equivocal Generation.


Sir Nic. Indeed, I have found more curious Phoenomina in these minute Animals,
than in those of vas^er magnitude.


Longv. I take the Ant to be a most curious Animal.


Sir Nic. More curious than all Oviperous or Egg-laying Creatures in the whole
World. There are three sorts, Black, Darkbrown, and Fillamot.


Longv. Right, Sir.


Sir Nic. The Black will pinch the Dark-brown with his forceps, till it kills
it upon the place; the like will the Dark-brown do by the Fillamot -- I have
dissected their Eggs upon the object plate of a Microscope, and find that each
has within it an included Ant, which has adhering to its Anus or Fundament, a
small black speck, which becomes a Vermicle, like a Mite, which I have watched
whole days and nights; and Sir Formal has watched 'em thirty hours together.


Longv. A very pretty employment.


Sir Form. And a long time we could find no motion, but that of Flexion and
Extension: but ^t last it becomes an Ant, Gentlemen.


Bruce. What does it concern a Man to know the nature of an Ant?


Longv. O it concerns a Virtuoso mightily: so it be Knowledge, it is no matter
of what.


Bruce. Sir, I take 'em to be the most politic of all Insects.


Sir Form. You have hit it, Gentlemen* they have the best Government in the
World: What do you opine it to be?


Longv. O! a Commonwealth most certainly.


Sir Nich. Worthy Sir, I see you are a great Observer; it is a Republic
resembling that of the States General.


Bruce. Undoubtedly! and the Dutch are just such industrious and busy Animals.


Sir Form. Right. But now I beseech you be pleased to communicate some of your
quainter Observations to these Philosophers, about those subtle and insidious
Animals called Spiders.


Sir Ni^. I think I have found out more Phoenomena's or Appearance^ of Nature
in Spiders, than any Man breathing: Would you think it? there are in E^gland
si^ and thirty several sorts of Spiders; there is your Hound, Greyhound,
Lurch^r, Spaniel Spider.


Longv. But, above all, your Tumbler-Spider is most admirable.


Sir Nic. O Sir, I am no Stranger to it: it catches ^lies as T^mblers do Conies.


Bruce. Good! how these Fools will meet a lie halfway.


Longv. Great Liars are always civil in that point; as there is no lie too
great for their t^lling, so there is no^e too great for their believing.


Sir Nic. The Fabric or Structure of this Insect, with its Texture, is most
admirable.


Sir Form. Nor is its Sagacity, or Address, less to be wondered at, as I have
had the honor to observe under my noble Friend; as soon as it has spied its
Prey, as suppose upon a Table, it will crawl underneath till it arrive to the
An^ipodes of the Fl^, which it discovers by sometimes peeping up; and if the
capricious Fly happens not to remove it self by crural motion, or the vibration
of its wings, it makes a fatal leap upon the heedless prey, of which, when it
has satisfied its appetite, it carries the remainder to its Cell, or Hermitage.


Sir Nic. It will teach its young ones to hunt, and discipline 'em severely
when they commit faults; and when an old one misses its Prey, it will retire,
and keep its Chamber for grief, shame and anguish, ten hours together.


Sir Form. Upon my integrity it is true, for I have several times, by Sir
Nicholas's command watched the Animal, upon thi^ or the like miscarriages.


Sir Nic. But, Sir, there is not in the World a more docible Creature, I have
kept several of 'em tame.


Bruce. That Is curious indeed* I never heard of a tame Spider before.


Sir Nic. One above all the rest, I had called him Nick, and h^ knew his name
so well, he would follow me all over the house* I fed him indeed with fair
Flesh-flies. He was the best natured, best conditioned Spider, that ever I met
with. You ^ew Nick very well, ^ir Formal, h^ was of the Spanie^ breed, Si^ --


Sir Form. Knew him! I knew Nick intimately well*


Longv. These Fools are beyond all that Art or Nature ever produced.


Bruce. These are the admirable Secrets they find out --


Longv. Have you observed that delicate Spider called Tarantula?


Sir Nic. Now you have hit me, now you come home to me; why I traveled all
over Italy, and had no other affair in the world, but to study the secrets of
that harmonious Insect.


Bruce Did you not observe the Wisdom, Policies, and Customs of that ingenious
people?


Sir Nic. Oh by no means! It Is below a Virtuoso, to trouble himself with Men
and Manners. I study Insects; and I have observed the Tarantula, does
infinitely delight in Music, which is the reason of its poison being drawn out
by it. There Is your Phenomenon of Sympathy!


Longv. Does a Tarantula delight so in Music?


Sir Nich. Oh extravagantly. There are three sorts, Black, Gray and Red, that
delight in three several sorts and modes of Music.


Bruce. That was a curious Inquisition; how did you make it?


Sir Nic. Why I put them upon three s^veral Chips in water, then caused a
Musician to play, first a grave Pa^in, or Almain, at which the black Tarantula
only moved; it danced to it with a kind of grave mo^ion, much like the
Benchers at the Revels.


Enter Servant. S^rv. Sir, The Gentleman that is going for Lapland, Russi^, and
those parts, is come for your Letters and Queries which you are to send thither.


Sir Nic. I Will wait on him. I keep a constant correspondence with all the
Virtuoso's in the Nor^h and North-East parts. Ther^ are rare Phaenomena's in
those Countries. I am beholding to Finland, Lapland, and Russia, for a great
part of my Philosophy. I send my Queries thither. Come, Sir Formal, will you
help ^o dispatch him?


Sir Form. I am proud to serve you.


Sir Nic. Be pleased to take a turn in the Garden. When we have dispatched, we
will impart more of our Microscopical (...).


(...). Your humble Servant -- This is a happy deliverance.


[Ex^unt Sir Form. and Sir Nic. Lo^gv. I have removed the Lady by writing to
Hazard, to send for her, and keep her an hour or two.


Bruce. And I have sent my man to find out Sir Nicholas his Strumpet, as soon
as he has found her, she will send for him.


Longv. For all his Virtue and Philosophy. This grave Fool will be in the
fashion too. Now if we can get rid of this wordy Fool Sir Formal, we have the
Ladies to our selves. In the mean time, let us to our several and respective
assignations.


[Ex^unt. Enter Miranda in the Garden. Mir. What shall I say to this Bruce? Oh
unjust Custom! that has made Women but passive in Love, as if Nature had
intended us for Ciphers only, to make up the number of the Creation.


Enter Bruce. Bruce. Yonder Is my Clarinda: Now Love inspire me, I am infinitely
transported with this honor you do me.


Mir. If I have done you any honor, pray make your best on it.


Bruce. Is it you, Madam? this honor was unexpected.


Mir. Why whom did you expect? O I see you are not so much transported as you
thought you were.


Bruce. The honor of your Ladyships company I did not expect.


Mir. Nor much care for, I see.


Bruce. 'Twere Blasphemy if I should say so. 'Twas your Sister I expected.


Mir. My Sister! so, I am not fit for your company it seems.


Bruce. If I would tell you how I prize the honor, I should invade the
interest of my Friend.


Mir. Your Friend! if you had no more interest in him, than I am resolved he
shall ever have in me: he would be the worst Friend you have.


Bruce. He Is a Man of Honor, and of Wealth: and if any man could deser^e you,
he might.


Mir. The World is not so barren, but I have found a fitter man: but, Sir,
'twas not my Sister; ^twas my Lady Gimcrack you hoped to meet here. You are a
Man of Honor. The Grotto is a fine Scene of Love. The Lady not very unwilling,
'twas well you were interrupted, Sir.


Bruce. 'Sdeath! how came she to know that? but I must bear it out; I cannot
ghess your meaning: but I see you love your Sister well, to be jealous of her.


Mir. No, I assure you, I have no reason to be jealous for her: for to my
knowledge, she has irrecoverably disposed of her heart in another place.


Bruce. What Is that? What says she? She Is certainly jealous for her self then.
^here must be something in this.


Mir. In what confusion am I? ^his can never end well* What! I see you are
troubled that I have told you a Secret of my Sisters, and discovered one of
yours. Come, walk and consider on it.


Bruce. I am surprised so, I know not what to do in this exigence --

[Exeunt.
Enter Longvil and Clarinda. Clar. You stare about like a Hare-finder: what is
the matter?


Longv. Faith* Madam, I expected to have met your Sister here.


Clar. Say you so? the truth on it is, she desired me to take the trouble off
her (...).


Longv. I am sorry, Madam, she thinks it so.


Clar. You see, Sir, I am content to suffer for her sake.


Longv. You have a mind to try me for your Sister, Madam.


Clar. No: I assure you, Sir, she is resolved never to make trial of you her
self, nor by another.


Longv. What can the meaning of this be?


Clar. Come, Sir, I will be a little plainer with you; She has disposed of her
heart to another, without power of revocation.


Longv. Why would she not meet me* to tell me so her self?


Clar. She thought me fitter for it: besides, perhaps this has given her an
opportunity to see one she likes better.


Longv. I see, Madam, she has not the same kindness for you, to send yo^ to one
she likes so ill.


Clar. You do not know^, but she may have taken as great a trouble off my
hands, and kept me from one I like as ill, as she does you.


Longv. There Is nothing but Riddle in Woman, they deceive as much with the
Vizards of their mind, as they do with those o^ the^r faces --


Clar. I discover Sir* Formal. We must be private no longer.


[As they are going out. Enter Bruce and Miranda. Longv. So Bruce, you are a
happy man, I fee.


Bruce. You are a pleasant one, I see* you and I must come to a cleari^g of
this business.


Longv. Ladies, we ha^ (...) to impart to you, but shall be hindered by ^his
Coxcomb, Sir For^al


Clar. We must have some consultations too with you. Sister, we'll catch him in
a Trap --


Mir. Here Is a Trap-door of a Vault, where my Uncle keeps h^s bottles of Air,
which he weighs, of which you^ll hear more anon. We'll snap him in that, and
then we shall have the plac^ to our selves.


Enter Sir Formal. Clar. Let me alone, I Will catch him.


Sir Form. Gentlemen and Ladies, some affairs have engaged my noble Friend, Sir
Nicholas to borrow himself of you a while; and he has commanded me ^o pawn my
person till he shall redeem it with his own --


Mir. Very quaintly expressed. We were just desiring you^ company.


Clar. And we were admiring this Talent of yours, your excellent manner of
speaking; and I Have engaged to give you a Subject to show your parts upon to
these Gentlemen.


Sir Form. What ever is within the Sphere of my activity, you must command. I
must confess, I have some felicity in speaking.


Mir. Dear Sis^er, give him a subject; you shall hear what Oracles hang on his
lips. It Is all one what subject he speaks upon, great or little.


Sir Form. That it is, Madam; we Orators speak alike upon all Subjects -- My
speeches are all so subtly designed, that whatever I speak in praise of any
thing, with very little alteration, will serve in praise of the contrary.


Clar. Let it be upon seeing a Mouse enclosed in a Trap.


Sir Form. It Is all one to me, I am ready to speak upon all occasions.


Clar. Stand there, Sir, while we place our selves on each side.


Sir Form. I kiss your hand, Madam. Now I am inspired with Eloquenc^ Hem! hem!
Being one day, most noble Audit^rs, musing in my Study upon the too fleeting
condition of poor humane kind, I observed, not far from the Scene of my
Meditation, an excellent Machine, called a Mouse-trap (which my Man had placed
there) which had included in it a solitary Mouse, which pensive Prisoner, in
^ain bewayling its o^n (...)* and the precipit^tion of it^ ^oo (...) (...)*
(...) (...) ^or liber^y against the too stubborn opposition of solid Wood, and
more obdurate Wire: at last, the pretty Mal^factor having tired, alas, its too
feeble limbs, till they became languid in fruitless e^deavors for its
excarceration. The pr^tty Felon, since it could not break Prison, and its
offense being beyond the benefit of the Clergy, could hope for no ^ail, at last
sat still pensively lamenting the severi^y of its Fate, and the narrowness of
its, alas! too withering durance: after I had contemplated a while upon the no
little curio^ty of the Engine, and the subtilty of its Inventor; I began to
reflect upon the i^ticement which so fatally betrayed the uncautious animal to
its sudden ruin, and found it to be the too, alas! specious bait of
CheshireC^eese, which seems to be a great delicate to the pallat of this
Animal, who in seeking to preserve its life, O misfortune, took the certain
means to death; and searching for its livelihood, had sadly encountered its own
destruction. Even so --


Clar. Now let the Trap go --


Sir Form. Even so, I say.


Clar. Even so, I say, I have caught the Orator --

[He sink^.
Sir ^orm. Help! help! murder!

[Below.
Longv* Let the florid Fool lie there.


Mir. I warrant him.


Bru^e. He uses as many Tropes and Flourishes about a Mousetrap, as he would in
praise of Alexander.


Enter Sir Samuel in Woman's habit. Sir Sam. This is the subt'lest disguise to
make love in that ever was invented; this has served me upon many intrigues.
Well, she shall see, for all the sufferings of this day, to the Tun^ of
Kicking, Beating, Pumping, and Tossing in a Blanket, and all that* that nothing
shall hinder me in my Love. Shall Sir Samuel be frighted from an Intrigue? No!


Longv. Whom have we he^e.


Sir Sam. Ladies, I was commanded by my Lady Pleasant to wait on you with
choice of good things, which she ^old me, you would buy.


Mir. What Is the meaning of this?


Clar. Since she came from my Lady, we must see what she would sell.


Sir S^. I have choice of good Gloves, Amber, Orangery, Genoa, Roman,
Frangipand, Neroly, Tuberose, Jessimine, and Marshal; all manner of Tires for
the Head, Locks, Tours, Frowzes, and so forth; all manner of Washes,
Almond-water, and Mercury-water for the Complexion; the best Peter and Spanish
Paper that ever came over; the best Poma^ums of Europe, but one rare, one made
of a Lamb's Caul and May dew -- Also all manner of Confections of Mercury and
Hog^bones, to preserve present, and to restore lost Beauty. If any out-does me
in these businesses, or have better Goods than I, I am the Son of a Tinde^-box.
O Devil! what did I say? I shall bet^ay my self --


Mir. How Is thi^, the Son of a Tinder-box?


Sir Sam. Pish! I mean the D^ughter of a Tinder-box.


Bruc^. This is the Rascal Sir Samuel in disguise.


Sir Sam. In the first place try a pair of Gloves, Madam, don't you know me?


Mir. How should I know you?


Sir Sam. Le^ me tell you, Sir Samuel's as true a Lover, as e'^ wo^e a head.


Clar. What Is the meaning of ^his private discourse?


Sir Sam. Pox on her envy; she is always for a Cup of Mischief. I Will put this
Note into a Glove, and that will do my business. Slap-dash -- as flat as a
Flounder. I have no private business -- Be pleased to try on this Glove, Madam.
Do not you know me yet? -- I am Sir Samuel.


Mir. What Is ^his? a Note within it.


Sir Sam. Keep it to your self.


Clar. What Note's that? from Sir Samuel Hearty? Oh Heaven! this is a Bawd.


Longv. A downright Bawd, and Bawd to that Rascal.


Bruce. 'Sdeath! pull the Bawd in pieces.


Mir. Lay hold on the Bawd, we'll have her Carted. Sei^e her till Sir Nicholas
comes in; we'll have her sent to Bridewel, and soundly whipped there, and then
Carted.


Sir Sam. So! this is a fine merry way of proceeding. I'have made ^imble wo^k
on it. Let me go, I am a^ honest Woman, and l^bour in my vocation. Let me go, or
as I am an honest man I Will sue you about this business.


Longv. How Is this? a Man* nay then I Will try a good kicking, upon you.


Sir Sam. Hold! hold! What do you mean to beat a Woman? will you make me
miscarry? I am with child, and for ought I ^now, you have kill*d that within me,


Bruce* You said, a^ you were an honest man.


Sir Sam. O Dunce that I am! That Is a way I have of expressing my self. Bu^
I Will make you know I am a Woman.


Mir. It is my Fool Sir Samuel; prithee Clarinda, let us put him to Sir Formal,
and secure him till my Uncle comes; it will make excellent sport.


Clar. Do you set him upon the Trap, it will do rarely.


Mir. One word with you. Come this way, Sir Sa^uel. I cannot tell you how much
I am afflicted for your sufferings.


Sir Sam. Sha! it is no ma^er. Come it is well it is no worse.


Mir. Now Clarinda --

[Sir Sam. sinks.
Sir Sam. O murder, murder! Who Is here? the Devil?


Clar. So, now we have the Garden to our selves. Let Us walk, and consult about
our affairs --

[Exeunt.
ACT. IV.
Sir Formal and Sir Samuel in the Va^lt. Sir Form. I Can no longer contain my
self. This Lady, joined with darkness and opportunity, the Midwife of Vice, as
we may so say, has so inflamed me, that I must farther attempt ^er chastity: I
am confident she must be handsome, and no mean person, by her silken Garments.
M^dam, as I was saying, since we are unwittingly enclosed in dark^ess, which
yet cannot be so, since enlightened by the Rays of your Beauty.


Sir Sam. For all your Oratory about this business, I cannot see my hand, it is
so dark.


Sir Form. Ah, Madam! the bright enlightner of the day, by which all Creatures
see, is yet it self deprived of vision.


Sir S^m. ^ox of this damned Rhetoric! what will become of me! I must either
discover my self, which I would ^ot for the world, or be sent to Bridewel, and
be whipped with a Certiorari; and yet methinks I h^ve no need on'^, for I have
been very plentifully kicked and beaten about this business to day already --


Sir Form. Let me be ^eveng'd on this fair* Enemy, the prettiest, (...), and
^ving hand I ever had the honor ^o imprint my kisses on; she has inflamed me
mightily: I Will try her this way. Do me the honor to accept of this Purse, and
the contents thereof.


Sir Sam. I Will take the Rogues P^rse, what ever come on it.


Sir Form. Sweet Lady, let us make our condition as happy as in us lies.


Sir Sam. Nay, good Sir! O Lord, Sir, what d^'e mean? fie, Sir.


Sir Form. Let me approach the honor of your lip, far sweeter than the ^hoenix
Nest, and all the spicy Treasures of Arabia.


Sir S^m. It Is your goodness, Sir; but pray forbear --


Sir Form. Nay strive not, upon my sincerity I will.


Sir Sam. Nay, good Sir, be not uncivil, I am no such person. Nay pish! I never
saw the like; you are the strange^t man. Well, take it then. I vow you make me
blush If I were not in apparent danger of being whipped damnably, a^ mis^ing my
masquerade, I could be merry with ^his Fool.


Sir Form. The sweets of Hybla dwell upon thy lips! Not all the fragrant bosom
of the Spring affords such ravishing perfumes.


Sir Sam. O Lord, Sir! you are pleased to complement! Ah, lying Rogue, my
brea^h smells of Tobacco.


Sir Form. Our time may be but short, pardon the unbecoming roughness which my
passion prompts me to. Come, my dear Cloris.


Sir Sam. Lord, what a pretty name is that! I was never called Cloris before.


Sir Form. Come, my dear Nymph, let us be more familiar: the solitary darkness
of the place invites us to Love's silent pleasures. Now, dearest Cloris, let us
taste those sweets --


Sir Sam. Nay pish! fie! Lord! what do you mean? what would you be at? Keep
off. I protest I Will call out. Nay pish! never stir I will.


Sir Form. Thou have provoked my gentle spirit so, it is become furious, and it
is decreed I must enjoy thy lovely body --


Sir Sam. Out upon you! my body, I de^e you* I am an honest woman. I sco^n your
words. I will call-out for some b^dy to pro^ect my honor.


Sir Form. Your Honor (...) suffer; none can see us* and: who will declare it?


Sir Sam. Out upon you! get you gone, you Swine. I will not s^ffer in my honor,
I am virtuous. Help! help! a Rape! a Rape! help! help.


Sir Form. Be not obstreperous, none can hear you. You have provoked me
contrary to my gentle temper, even to a Rape, Come, I will, I must, in faith I
must.


Sir Sam. 'Sdeath! the Rogue begins to pry into the difference of Sexes, and
will discover mine -- I must try my strength with him. Out lustful Tarquin! you
libidinous Goat, have at you.


Sir Sam. beats Sir Form. kicks him and flings him down. Sir Form. Help! help!
murder! murder!


Sir Sam. Be not obstreperous, none can hear you.


Sir Form. Upon my verity I think this be an Amazon! Well, I can bear this; but
--


Sir Sam. Do you again attempt my Honor? I Will maul you, you las^vious Villain.


Sir Form. Hold! hold! I beseech you; I humbly rest contented, I acquiesce.


Sir Sam. Get you from me, lustful Swine -- Be gone --


Sir Form. I go, Madam: But I know not whether this Vault does terminate here,
or whether it does issue farther.


[They retire: SCENE, a Bedchamber.
Enter Snarl and Mrs. Figgup. Snarl. Come, now we are safe in this hold, none
will interrupt us in our great design. Ah pox o'these wicked Hectors, vicious
impudent Rogues! a Man cannot retire with a Lady for his private satisfaction,
but these ranting Rogues must roar and interrupt us; it is a very impudent
vicious Age in sadness.


Fig. But my Dear, if any body else should have a Key to this Room (as I know
they have) thongh I dare not tell him, it is a common Scene of Love matters.


Snarl. Fear not, the Land-lady tells me, no body has a Key but my self. I h^ve
agreed to give her a Gui^ney a week for these private occasions. In sadness
it is a fine place: Here a man may bring a Lady, and even none of the house
observe it. There is not such a convenience in all the Pall Mall for these
occasions, though some there are, much given to such diversions. How glad am I
to have thee here, poor Pigsn^e --


Fig. Ah Lord! there is some body at the door --


Snarl. In sadness there is. ^here's one with a Key too. In into the Wood-hole
quickly, or we shall be discovered -- quick, quick --


Enter Hazard and Lady Gi^crack. Haz. Come, my Dear Lady, now we are safe from
interption; how happy am I in your favors?


L. Gim. Ah! so you say; but if ever I hear of your inconst^cy, you shall be no
longer happy, as you call it: I cannot suffer a Riv^l.


H^z. Nothing shall ever divert me from the happiness I enjoy in you; nor am I
less impatient of a Rival than you are. I am so covetous of you, that the
thought of your Husband keeps me still inquiet.


L. Gim. Fear not a Husband. Husbands are such phlegmatic indifferent Rivals,
they never can hurt the Gallants; they poor easy Souls, do every thing as if
they did it not.


Haz. They do but court and keep a pother,
To make one Gamesome for another.

L. Gim. You are in the right.


Haz. Nay, I think a Husband is very insipid foolish Animal. and is growing out
of fashion.


L. Gim. We shall begin to lay 'em by. Husbands will be left off, as Gentlemen
Ushe^s are: indeed they are more unnecessary Instruments, than those formal
spindle-sh^nkt finical Fools, with Nose-gays and white Gloves were.


Haz. Those, though they could do no service themselves, would make way for
them that could; but a Husband is a Clog, a Dog in a Manger, a Miser, that
hords up Gold from others, and will not make use on it himself --


L. Gim. Nay, a thousand times worse; a Miser would keep to himself what he
loves, and a Husband what he does not care for. Out on him. A Husband's an
Insect, a Drone, a Dormouse --


Haz. A foolish Matrimonial Lump --


L. Gim. A Cuckoo in Winter --


Haz. An Opiat for Love --


L. Gim. A Body without a Soul --


Haz, A Chip in Porredge. --


L. Gim. A White of an Egg --


Haz. All Phlegm, and no Choler --


L. Gim. A Drudge --


Haz. An ^xcuse --


L. Gim. A necessary thing --


Haz. A Cloak at a pinch --


L. Gim. A pitiful Utensil --


Haz. Good for nothing, but to cover shame, pay Debts, and own Children for his
Wife.


L. Gim. In short, a Husband is a Husband, and there is an end of him; but a
Lover is --


Haz. Not to be expressed but in action. I Will show you what a Lover is with a
vengeance, Madam. Come on. 'Sdeath! there is a Key in the doot.


L. Gim. What shall we do?


Haz. Run into the Wood-hole quickly; I Will bear the brunt, and I may perhaps
make a discovery into the bargain --


[She goes in. Enter Sir Nicholas and Mrs. Flirt. Sir Nic. Come, Dearest, the
Land-lady is not at home, or we would have a Collation here.


Flir^. O Heaven! who is this, Hazard?


Haz. 'Sdeath, Sir! How dare you invade my room?


L. Gim. Oh! who is here? the Devil, the Devil --

Enter Lady Gimcrack. Oh Heaven! who is this? my Husband with a Whore!


Sir Nic. Death and Hell! my Wife with a Hectorly Fellow here! Oh my disgrace.


L. Gim. Oh vile false Man! thy falsehood I have long suspected; now this happy
opportunity has discovered all.


Sir Nic. What means her impudence?


L. Gim. Was I not sufficient for thee, vile Man, but thou must thus betray me?
I cannot look on thee with patience. I shall faint! I shall faint! Oh! Oh!


Haz. Help, help the Lady.


Sir Nic. Hang the Lady. Oh Womankind! what artifice is this? I was informed
by this Lady I should find you here; I wonder not at your disorder upon this
unexpected surprise. O vile treacherous Woman!


L. Gim. Take him from my sight, I shall die else. Have I been always your
obedient, virtuous Wife, and am I thus requited? Heaven sent this honorable
Gentleman to assist me in the discovery, who on purpose got a Key to this Room,
it seems the filthy Scene of all thy lust and baseness. Be gone -- thou
infamous Wretch, I am not able to support the sight of thee --


Sir Nic. Lewd Woman! thou abstract of impudence and falsehood! tremble at my
revenge. Have I at length found out your base lascivious haunt.


L. Gim. O insufferable! do you add to all your barbarous injuries this of
aspersing my innocence?


Flirt. (to Haz.) False man? did I for this give my affection jto thee? and
can thou think I Will bear this unrevenged?


Haz. (aside) 'Sdeath! this Wench will undo me with my Lady.


L. Gim. What do I hear? is he false too? then my misfortunes are complete.
Base vile ungrateful Fellow; is this your constancy and gratitude to me?

[To Haz.*
Haz. Madam, this is a Lady of a great Estate, whom I should have married; and
this accident, I fear, has ruined all my Fortune.


Sir Nic. (to Flirt.) Has my kindness deserved th^s? is this your Gallant too?
Oh this Villain has made me doubly a Cuckold.


Flirt. (to Sir Nic. Do not mistake me; this Fellow took me for a great
Fortune, and should have marri*d me.

Are you consulting for my ruin?

[To them.
L. Gim. (to Haz.) This is a flam, I Will not believe it* This S^rumpet has
doubly betrayed me. Lewd Creature, first I Will take revenge on thee.


Flirt. (to L. Gim.) I thought I should at last find out the cause of my
misfortune.

(To Haz.) You are like to make a good Husband, that can make so ill a Lover.


Haz. After I have heard all your accusation, which is false, let me ^ell you,
I have been informed of your frequent coming hither with Sir Nicholas, and was
resolved at once to be revenged of him and you, by bringing my Lady hither to
discover both.


Flirt. O insolence! I never saw the place before.


Sir Nic. ^ am too well satisfied of he^ falsehood, and though ^t be something
below a Philosopher to draw a Sword, yet to punish her I will.


Haz. Hold, Sir, first you must try with me.


Sir Nic. What are you, her Stallion, and her Bravo too?


L. Gim. Was ever Woman yet so miserable, to be betrayed, by one whom she has
loved so much better than her life? she would have laid it down to have done
him any kindness: and yet to perfect all his cruelty, he blots my reputation.
And since the only* ^reasure of my life is gone, p^ay ^ake that too. Do not
resist him; let him pierce this breast, that never bore any Image but his own.
Come on then, cruel man.


Sir Nic. Wha^ can this mean?


Flirt. (to Sir Nic.) For Heavens sake do not betray me to him; if I be no^
cleared in this I am und^ne.


Haz. Now hear me Sir: This Lady, on my honor, Sir, is free from all blemish,
I believe even in thought. But I being informed you use to come with that Lady
to this House, of ill reputation, in anger to you both betrayed you to my Lady:
I dogged her Mess^nger from her ^odging to you, and immediately gave notice to
my Lady; and in all have we came --


Sir Nic. Indeed I have been acquainted with this Lady, being a Vir^uosa, upon
Philosophical matters, but never saw her here, till we now came for this
discovery. She informed me, she saw you two come hither, and my Wife being gone
out before me, and alone, gave me more suspicion.


Fliat. I having seen you privately talking with my Lady in the Mall, susp^cted
you; and to revenge my self on her and you, I sen^ for him, and we have dogged
you hither.


Sir Nic. But why was she hidden to avoid my sight, if she came for a discovery?


Haz. She thought to have discovered more by being unseen, and over-hearing
your discourse.


L. Gim. Now see, injurious man, how you have wronged me.


Sir Nic. (^o himself) Though I hope I have deceived her with a lie, yet what
she says looks like truth.

(To her) It must be so. Come, no more; I will believe you true, and so am I.


Flirt. Though this sham passes upon him, I know too well you are guilty, good
Mr. Hazard, and I hate you for it.


Haz. Prithee hold thy peace, I am kept by her, as I know ou are by him -- I am
kept, I --


Sir Nic. Heaven knows I am true.


L. Gim. And Heaven can witness for my innocence.


Haz. I am glad that all things are thus happily cleared.


Sir Nic. But what was it frighted you within, my Dear?


L. Gim. There is some body in the Wood-hole.


Haz. Now all is over, I Will see who it is. Come out here. What Is here? a Woman
--

[Pulls out Fig.
L. Gim. A shame on her; how sneakingly she looks? This is some Strumpet I
warrant you. Oh! Foh! how I hate such Cattle! Heaven grant she did not hear me
and Hazard.


Haz. Here Is a Man too. Come out of your hole. Mr. Snarl is it you?

[Pulls him out by the heels.
Sir Nic. Is this the fruit of your virtue, and declaiming against the vice of
the Age?


L. Gim. Heaven! if he overheard me, I am ruined eternally. I Will try him. We
met all here upon a mistake, which is now happily rectified. But it is too
apparent, Uncle, you came for wickedness and abomination.


Fig. I scorn your words, Madam, I am civil and virtuous.


Snarl. Ay in sadness are we; our intentions were honorable. I meet this Lady
upon a virtuous account, by the Mass. I love and honor her in a civil way, and
scorn your filthy lascivious Beasts of this Age.


Sir Nic. Remember, Sir, I have you on the hip; no more will I endure your
frumps and taunts about my Philosophy, and the noble exercise of my parts.


Snarl. Nephew, let me tell you, you are an Ass in sadness, and Iwill make you
know this Lady is virtuous, yes, as virtuous as your Ladyship; and I will
defend her honor with my Sword by the Mass; and he that dares be so
presumptous to contradict it, let him draw.

[he draws.
Sir Nic. Gad forgive me, what means he?


Haz. No, none are so much concerned at it -- But what are these Rods which I
drew out with you? what do they mean?


Snarl. O Devil -- I shall be betrayed. Ha! Rods! what a pox know I what they
are? I believe the Mistress of the House is a School-Mistris.


Haz. Yes, she keeps a very virtuous School, for the disciplining of hopeful
towardly old Gentlemen.


^ig. Now my honor's clear. Let Us go, Sir. Besides, h^res that base Creature
Flirt; I cannot abide the sight of her, since she discommended thee, my Dear.


Snarl. Come, Madam -- In sadness this is very fine. Two civil persons cannot
meet privately in an affectionate way, but such as you must censure them. But I
will make you know this Lady is honorable; I will, in sadness, and so fare you
well.


[Ex. Snarl and Fig. Sir Ni^. Come, my Dear, now let us go home: do not grieve
at my unhappy jealousy, since my belief of thy dear Truth is more confirmed by
it -- Come, my Dear --

[Exeunt.
Enter Longvil, Bruce, Miranda, and Clarinda. Mir. Come, to divert this insipid
talk of Love, a ^heme so threadbare, no man can speak new sense upon it: My
Maid shall sing you a new Song she learnt the other day.


Clar. You must expect much Wit in it: for Poets are grown such good Husbands,
they will lay out none upon a Song.


Mir. All we must look for, is smooth Verse, and a good Tune.


Clar. And how a good Tune, and tinckling Rhyme attones for nonsense, the
Songsters and Heroicks of the time may sufficiently convince you.


Mir. They make nonsense go down as glib without t^sting, as a seditious Lie is
swallowed in a City Coffee house, or Commonwealth Club, without examination.


Clar. But now let us hear it --


SONG.
HOw wretched is the Slave ^o Love,
Who can no real pleasures prove;
For still th^y're mixed wi^h pain^:
When not obtained, restless is the desire.
Enjoyment puts out all the fire,
And shows the Love was vain.
I^ wanders to another soon,
Wanes and En^reases like the Mo^n,
And like her never rest^:
(...) Tides of Pleasure now, and then of Tear^;
Makes Ebbs and Flow^ of Joys and Cares.
(...) ^overs wav^ring breasts.
^ut (...) of Love I will be free,
And tri^mph in the liberty:
I without him enjoy.
(...)* worst of Prisons I Will my Body bind,
Rather than Ch^in my free-bor^ mind.
For such a foolish Toy.
Longv. It Is very well, Madam.


Bruce. But to us ^here is no Music like Love, or Harmony like the consent of
Lover's hearts.


Mir. But as Music is improved by practice, Love decay^ by it, and therefore I
scarce da^e talk on'^.


Clar. Let what harmony soever be between Lovers at first, in a short time it
^urns to scurvy jangling; and therefore can you blame u^ if we divert so
dangerous a thing any way --


Longv. I confess it may come to discord, but it is ^s i^ Music* if it be made
good, it makes the following concord ^etter.


Bruce. If they pla^ upon one another, till they are out of Tune, they must
needs jangle.


Longv. In that case they must lay by, and tune again, and then ^rike up afresh.


Mir. That Simile, will never hold; for when Love grows once out of Tune, they
may scew and keep a coil* but 'twill ^ever stand in Tune ^gain.


Clrr. It Is most certain: when Love comes once ^o bend, it breaks presently.


Bruce. But perhaps it may be set again like a broken Limb, and be the stronge^
for it.


Mir. No: when Love breaks, it is into so many splinter^, it is never to be set
again.


Enter Maid to Miranda. Maid. Shift for your selves, Sir Nichol^ and my (...)
^re both ^eturn'd home again.


Clar. O mischievo^ ill for^ne.


Mir. U^lucky accident.


Clar. I mu^t look after Sir Formal.

[Ex^nt Ladi^.
Longv. Their ca^riage, si^ce their cross appoin^ment in the Garden, has too
evidently decl^r'd their i^tentions. We have mistaken, I see, if we de^gn to
(...), we must change Mistr^es.


Bruce. It Is too evident, we have pl^c'd our Loves wrong, They are handsome,
rich, and honest, three qualities that seldom meet in Women.


Longv. It Is true, and since '^will be necessary, after all our Rambles, to fix
our unsettled lives, to be grave, formal, very wise, and serve our Country, and
propagate our species; Let us think on it here.


Bruce. Let us walk and consult about this weighty affair.


Exeunt Bruce and Longv. Enter Sir Nicholas, Lady Gimcrack, Clarinda, Miranda.
Sir Nich. A Woman with a Letter, a Tire-Woman too! are they all Bawds? Their
very Art of washing and adorning Women i^ implicit Bawding, but this is
downright explicit Bawdery.


Mir. Good Sir, let her be made an Example to all vile Women.


Clar. We have secured her in the Vault here.


Sir Nic^ You have done well, she shall be brought to condign punishment.


Mir. But we can tell you yet a stranger thing; Sir Formal is privately shut up
with this lewd Woman, and has been this hour.


Clar. It Is very true; what his intentions are, I know not, but *it is a very
scandalous thing.


Sir Nic. O Monstrum horrendum! Is my Friend, that seeming virtuous man, fallen
into the snare?


L. Gim. O Virtue, whither art thou fled? my House is dishono^red, abused! I am
ready to faint when I hear of lewdness. My Dear, do not endure it; I shall
never endure my House again; let it with all speed, and let us remove.


Sir Nic. Prithee, Dear; be pacified.


L. Gim. Oh I cannot be pacified: my b^ood rises when I hear of lewd whoring
Fellows; I would have 'em all hanged.


Mir. Excellent Hypocrite!


Sir Nic. Well, Heaven be praised, I am the happiest Man in a Wife. I will
rebuke him: but for the Baw^, I Will have a Warrant from the next Justice; I will
have her Whipped and Carted. Come, bring 'em out here.

[Serva^ts bring in Sir F^rmal and Sir Sam^el* Truly Sir Formal, I am much
ashamed, to find a (...) in such a posture with a lewd woman.


Sir Form. Why, Sir, upon my sincerity.


L. Gim. Out upon you, have you the face to speak in your own defense, or in
defense of this odious Vice? Out on it! you think to bring all off with your
Eloquence; but I Will not hear it: You have defil^d my house, and committed
lewdness within the walls.


Sir Form. Why, Ladies, you know --


Mir. What, you are angry we have discovered you.


Cl^r. Would you have had us keep your pernicious counsel? had that been
becoming our virtue?


Sir Form. Why, Sir Nicholas, I profess --


L. Gim. I cannot suffer it. '^is fit such Hypocrites should be punished. Is
this your Virtue? your sereneness of mind? and are all your Flowers of
Rhetoric come to this?


Sir Nic. I know not what to say in your excuse, to retire with such a lewd
Creature. I did not think you could have fallen into so shameful a scandal. I am
sorry, fince 'twill be a reproach to all Virtuoso's.


Sir Form. By my Integrity.


L. Gim. You are a man of integrity, to meet privately with a filthy Creature,
a Bawd! an ugly Bawd too!


Sir Sam. I scorn your words; neither a Bawd, nor ugly, neither by your leave
-- Ugly, and Bawd, quoth she?


Sir Form. Can I not be heard? shall Oratory have no place?


L. Gim. You think to bewitch us with your Oratory, but it is too apparent; you
have dishonored my house.


Sir Form. Here are some Phae^omena's of scandal, but I will dissolve all in a
punctum of time.


Both speak together. L. Gim. I will never endure you, you shall solve none of
your Phaenomena's here more.


Sir Form. It Is true, I confess I was found here (privately with this Woman,
but no less true --


Sir Nic. Pray let me hea^ him speak --


Sir Form. My Oratory was never sl^ghted before; when did I open my mouth in
vain before? I confess --


Mir. Why look you, Sir, he confesses it; what would you have?


Clar. Will you not believe us, he has been privately with her this hour?


Sir Nic. I say, Peace; I will hear him.


Sir Form. I confess to you all --


Mir. Do You see ^gain? ^e confesses to us all --


Enter Snarl Sir Form. Now my shame comes upon me.


Snar^. What! is my florid Fool caught with a Whore? an ugly Whore? does your
noble Soul operate clearly without the clog of your sor did humane Body now?
you are a fine formal Hypocrite, in sadness; by the Mass it is a fine world we
live in.


Sir Nic. I am confident my Friend is innocent.


Sir Sam. He innocent? hang him, he would have ravished ^e, if I had not been
stronger than he, and beaten him soundly: my Honor h^d suffered upon that
business --


Sir Form. O Tempo^a! O Mores! but I doubt not but I shall shine clearer after
this Eclipse; I will bear these wrongs with a ^erene temper of mind.


Sn^rl. Hang you! never trust your Orator, in sadness they will all lie like
Dogs: by the Mass I would go fifty miles to see an Orator hanged. Orators are
Rogues, the very grievances of the Nation, always putting in an Oar, and
prating and disturbing the business of the Nation, with their foolish Tropes,
and care not which way matters go so they may show their parts.


Sir Nic. I do believe you, Sir Formal. You young Sluts; will you never leave?


^ir. Will you not take the Woman's word?


Sir Nic. What a Bawd's word! she suffer in her honor one that brought a
Letter to you --


Sir Sam. A Bawd! I scorn your words; I brought a Letter from a Gentleman that
makes honorable Love, and would marry her.


Snarl. A Match-maker! that is worst of all.


Sir Nic. Your Marriage*Bawd, your Canonical-Bawd is worst of all; they betray
people for their lives-time. Here, carry her, and lock her up in the
green-room; I Will maul your Bawdship.


Sir Sam. Oh Heaven! I shall be whipped, nay, which is ten times worse, I shall
disappoint the Town, and have no Masquerade to ^ight. But I Will bayl my self
with Money, if it be possible --


^ir. Courage! my Sist^ ^ought this upon you but I Will re^eem all.


Sir Sam. Nay, if I succeed in my love, I care not if I be beaten, kicked, and
whipped, as if Heaven and Earth would come together.


L. Gim. Come, I Will see her locked up safe my self; filthy Creature!


[Exit L. Gim. Clar. Not a word more of this business. I could not forbear the
trick; but you will find me more favourabl^*


Sir Form. I shall be content to suffer any thing for your swee^ sake. --

[Exit Clar. and Mir.
Enter Longvil and Bruce. Snarl. If you had come sooner, you might ha'taken
this Orator, this flashy Fellow, with a Whore, in sadness, a foul deformed
S^rumpet --


Sir Form. Upon my ho^our, Gentlemen, I am wronged; but he was taken with a
Lady, and Rods too, in German-stree^, about an hour since.


Longv. What, this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age?


Bruce. One that so justly repro^ches the Vices of this? I^ cannot be.


Snarl. Oh Dog! Rogue! Nephew, I Will be revenged. No, it cannot be, it is not.
The Orator's a Son of a Whore, and my Nephew a foolish Rascally Philosopher,
one good for nothing but an empty noise of florid words, without sense, in
^adness. And the other good for nothing but useless Experiments upon Flies*
Maggots, Eels in Vinegar, and the Blue upon Plumbs, which he finds to be living
Creatures: but all the world will find him an Ass, and so I leave him and all
of ye, with a pox t'yee. But in sadness, Orator, I will beat thee migh^ily. I
with a Whore? I scorn your words by the Mass.


Exit Snarl. Sir Nic. I know he is in a rage, but it is true; Sir Formal, we'll
no more endure his taunt^. But now he talks of Eels, I Will show you millions in
a Sawcer of Vinegar; they resemble other Eels, save in their motion, which in
others is side-ways, but in them upwards and downwards, thus, and very slow.


Longv. We have heard of these, Sir, often.


Sir Nic. Another difference is, these have sharp stings in their ^ails. By the
way, the sharpest Vinegar is most full of 'em.


Bruce. Then certainly the sharpness, or biting of Vinegar, pro^eeds from those
stings, striking upon the Tongue.


Sir Nic. I see you are a most admirable ob^erver: it must needs be so. So,
this is a rare Phenomenon solved by the by.

(aside.) I have often conclud^d that before -- The whole Air is full of living
Creatures, a thousand times less visible than those living Creature^, mistaken
for Motes in the Sun; I know most of 'em d^stinctly by my Glasses.


Sir Form. ^lk of use. These are the Mysteries of Natures Closet.


Bruce. This foolish Virtuoso does not consider, that one Brick-layer is worth
forty Philosophers.


Sir Nic. Then for the Blue upon Plumbs, it is nothing but many living
Creatures. I have observed upon a Wall-plum (with my most exquisite Glass^s,
which cost me several thousands of pounds) at first beginning to turn blue, it
comes first to Fluidi^y, then to Orbiculation, then Fixation, so to
Angulization, th^n Christallization, from thence to G^rmination or Ebullition,
then Vegetation, then Plantan^nimation, perfect Animation, Sensation, Local
Motion, and the like --


Enter Servant to Sir Nicholas. Serve. Sir, there are a great number of sick men
waiting in the Hall for your Worship, and desire to be dispatched.


[Exit. Sir Nic. Now, Gentlemen you shall see my method of practice. Sir
Formal, will ^ou go and rank 'em?


Sir Form I obey in my wonted Office. G^ntlemen, I humbly ki^s your hands.

[Exit Sir Formal.
Sir Nic. He ranks the (...) people in their ^everal Classes, Forms, or Orders
of Di^eases. To save trouble, you shall s^e all.


Serv^nt returns. Serve Sir, the Constable is come with a Warrant to carry the
Bawd away.


S^r Nic. Come, we will deliver the Bawd into their Clu^ches, and when I have
admi^istred to my sick, we'll take the air* By ^he way, Gentlemen, what
Country air do you like best?


Bru^c. ^hy we cannot travel far for it this evening.


Sir Nic. Tr^vel! I thought I should have you. Why I never travel, I take it in
a close chamber.


Longv. Why you can take but one kind of nasty smoaky air in a Chamber.


Sir Nic. Th^re's your Mistake. Choose your Air, you shall have it in my
Chamber; N^wmarket, Banstead-down, Wil^shire, Bury-air, Norwich-air; what you
will.


Bruce. Would a man think it possible for a Virtuoso to arrive at this
extravagance?


Longv. Yes, I assure you; it is beyond the wit of man to invent such
extravagant things for them, as their folly finds out for themselves. Is it
possible to take all these several Country Airs in your Chamber?


Sir Nic. I knew you were to seek. I employ men all over England, Factors for
Air, who bottle up Air, and weigh it in all places, sealing the Bottles
Hermetically: they send me Loads from all places. That Vault is full of
Countrey-air.


Bruce. To weigh Air, and send it to you!


Sir Nic. O yes, I have sent one to weigh Air at the Picque of T^nerifs, that is
the lightest Air. I shall have a considerable Cargo of that Air. She^rness and
the Isle of Dogs Air is the heaviest. Now if I have a mind to take Country
Air, I send for, may be, forty Gallons of Bury Air, shut all my windows and
doors close, and let it fly in my Chamber.


Bruce. This is a most admirable invention.


Longv. But to what purpose do you weigh Air?


Sir Nic. That I shall tell you as we are taking it. Now let us see this Bawd
disposed of: every thing in its order.

[Exeunt.
Sir Samuel in the Chamber solus. Sir Sam. How long shall I expect my fate?
Well! there never was such a Ma^tyr in Love, to be kicked, be^en, pumped; tossed
in a blanke^ about business, and now in danger of being whipped with a slap-dash.
But she loves me! come, 'ts well it is no worse! but to miss my Masquerade,
that is the sum of all: but I Will bribe my Justice and escape. It Is a Trade; some
of the Justices are liker Malefactors than Magistrates: but 'twill cost me a
plaguey deal, for this damned Vertuo^o* will prosecu^e furiously. Ha! what is
h^re, a Rope? I am delivered as Rabby Busy was by Miracle. I Will slide down
from the window into the garden* The back-door's open: so I save my money ipso
facto, and go to my Ball; and, Whip stich, your (...) in my Breech, Sir
Nicholas. I Will leave my C^oaths behind me. Though I am Bawd above, I am Sir
Samuel underneath. So Tyre-woman, lie thou there, and away Knight. It Is well
it is no worse --

Ex Sir Sam.
Enter Sir Nicholas, Longv. Bruce, L. G. Clar. Mir. Servants, Constables,
Officers. Sir Nic. Come! where is this Bawd? now we shall make her an example.
Here! where are you? Ha! here is no body.


L. G. I am sure I saw her locked in.


Serve. The door was locked when we came in: here are her Clothes to^.


Longv. The Rogue has stripped himself, and has escaped ^aked.


L. G. O Heaven! this must be the Devil: the House is haunted.


Enter Sir Formal. Sir For^. I have set all the sick men in order, and they
wait for your prescription.


Mir. O Sir Formal, your Mistress is flown, and has left her case behind her*


L. G. The doors are fast, and she is flown out of the Chimney: have a care,
Sir Formal, if you were naught with her, you will be torn in pieces.


Sir Form. Not I upon my sincerity.


Sir Nic. It was undoubtedly a Spirit. I could have told you that before, but I
was afraid I should fright you all.


Bruce. How, Sir! was it a Spirit say you?


Sir Nic. You must know, Sir, I am much skilled in Rosacrucian Lea^ning. I am
one of the Vere ad^pti, as simple as I stand here. I discovered i^ by my sight,
having familiar Conversation with Spirits.


Clar. O the subtilty of this Vertuoso. This notable Spirit Sir Sa^el makes a
ball to night; we will steal out one way or other.


Bruce. You Will remember the Masquerade Ladies.


Mir. Yes, yes! we will se^ the Spirit.


L. G. I see your cross Love, and will plague ye, ye young Sluts, for it.


Sir Nic. You converse with a great many people which you take to be men and
women* but we Rosa-crucians know 'em to be spirits. Now let us go to my sick
people, and administer.

[Exeunt.
SCENE, is the Courtyard full o^ several Lame and Sick people.
Enter Sir Nicholas, Sir Formal, Longvil, and Bruce. Sick peo. Heaven bless
your Worship.


Sir Nic. Come, Gentlemen, you must know I have studi'd all manner of C^ses,
and have Bills ready written for all Diseases; that is my way, I give 'em advice
for nothing.


Sir Form. Not more resorted to the Temple of Aesculapius; I am sure not so
many found relief, as from my Noble Friend: You have reason, good languishing
people, to be Trumpeters to his Illustrious Fame, whose indefatigable care, for
the good of feeble and distressed Mankind, with his transcendent skill, each
day cures even incurable diseases.


Long. Your Orators are very subject to that Figure in Speech, called a Bull.


Sir. Nic. I still administered to the incurable in Italy, and never failed of
success. Here are my Bills. Where is the Roll? call it over.


Sir Form. Gout.


2 Gout. Here --

[halting.
Sir Nic. There Is a Bill for you two, take it betwixt you.


Sir Form. Stone.


2 Stone. Here, Sir.


Sir Nic. There Is one for you two.


Sir Form. Scurvy.


4 Scurv. Here, Sir.


Sir Nic. There Is a Bill for you four.


Serve. Go, pass by as you are served.


Sir Form. Consumption.


2 Consum. Here.


Sir Nic. Take your Bill.


Sir Form. Dropsy.


2 Drops. Here, Sir.


Sir Nic. There Is for you two.


Sir Form. There is a Madman I have set by for transfusion of blood.


Sir Nic. That Is well. The truth on it is, we shall never get any but Madmen,
for that Operation. But proceed.


Sir Form. These are the last, but not the least.

Pox.


Ent^r a great number of Men and Women. All. Here, here, here --


Sir. Nich. There are three or four Bills for you, you are so many.


All. Heaven bless your Worship --

[Ex^unt omnes.
ACT. V.
Enter Sir Formal and Clarin^a. Sir. Form. HOw long shall I languish in
expectation of your noble favor, for the enjoyment of whic h, my desires are
as great, as my deserts are little?


Clar. Truly, Sir Formal, I am so sensible of your service, and so troubled
with my confinement under my Uncle, that at length I have determined by you, to
free my self from him.


Sir Form. Hold, Madam, I am too suddenly blessed, I am all Rapture, all Ecstasy,
my Soul, methinks, is fled from its corporeal clog, and I am all unbodi'd,
Divinest Lady. Let me kneel and adore that hand, that snowy hand, to which the
Snow it self is tanned and Sunburned.


Clar. Not too mnch of this: but in short, conduct my Sisters and me out of
these doors to the Masquerade; for we canno' get out without your authority
with the Porter, and after you have returned to my Uncle sometime; procure the
habit of Scaramoncha, that I may know you, and come to us, and you shall
absolutely dispose of me.


Sir Form. Madam, I Will fly; nay, out-fly Sir Ni^holas himself, to do ^ou
service, or any Vertuoso in England* But how shall I know you? you will be
disguised.


Clar* ^ ll find you out; besides, you know this Ri^g and Bracelet. We must
have our Maids with us, for we ll no^ return. Let Us find my sister, and about
it instantly.


Sir Form. I am all obedience. I should not envy now an Universal Mona^ch -- I
hear my Ladies vo^ce --

[Ex^unt.
Ent^* Sir Nicholas, Longvil, and Servant to Sir Nicholas. Serve. Mr. Bruce is
coming to wait on you.


Enter Bruce. Sir. Nic. Sir, your Servant. Now open the Bottles, and let the
Air fly, Gentlemen, be ready to snuff it up. O this Bur^Air is delicate, it is
delicious; O very refreshing.


Bruce. O admirable -- who would go to Bury to take it?


Sir Ni^. Not I, it is much the better here; it takes so much the fresher for
being botled, as other Liquors do. For let me tell you, Gent^emen, Air is but a
thinner sort of Liquor, and drinks much the better for being botled.


Longv. Most certainly the world is very foolish, not to snuff up botled Air,
as they drink botled Drink.


Bruce. The foolish World is never to be mended. For all this, your Glass-Coach
will to Hide-park for Air. The Suburb-fools trudge to Lambs-Conduit or Totnam;
^our sprucer sort of Citizens gallop to Epsom; your Mechanic gross Fellows,
showing much conjugal affection, strut before their Wives, each with a Child in
his Arms, to Islington, or Hogsdon.


Sir Nic. Ay poor d^ll Fools!


Longv. But to what end do you weigh this Air, Sir?


Sir Nic. To what end should I? to know what it weighs. O knowledge is a fine
thing; why I can tell to a Grain what a gallon of any Air in England weighs.


Bruce. Is that all the use you make of these Pneumatick Engines?


Sir Nic. No, I eclipse the light of rotten Wood, stinking Whitings and
Thornback, and putrid Flesh when it becomes lucid.


Longv. Will stinking Flesh give light like rotten Wood?


Sir Nic. O yes; there was a lucid Surloin of Beef in the Strand, foolish
people thought it burnt, when it only became lucid and chrystalline by the
coagulation of the aqueous juice of the Beef, by the corruption that invaded
it. It Is frequent. I my self have read a Geneva Bible by a Leg of Pork.


Bruce. How, a Gen^va Bible by a Leg of Pork?


Sir Nic. O Ay, it is the finest Light in the World: but for all that, I could
eclipse the Leg of Pork in my Receiver, by pumping out the Air; but immediately
upon the appulse of the Air let in again, it becomes lucid as before.


Long. Is it so curious a Light?


Si^ Nic. O admirable! I am now studying of Glowworms, a fine Study; it is a
curious Animal: I think I shall preserve 'em light all the year, and then I Will
never use any other light in my Study but Glowworms and Concave-glasses.


Bruce. What do you with the Speaking-Trumpet?


Sir Ni^. O that Stentrophonical Tube, though not invented by me, yet is
improved beyond all men's expectation^.


Long. They can hear distinctly a League at Sea by them alrea^y.


Sir Nic. Pi^! ^hat's noth^ng; I have made one, you may hear e^ght mile about,
and I shall improve it very much more: for (...) no stop in Art. But of all
La^guages, none is heard so far as Greek; your Ioni^k Dialect of O^o does so
roll in the found. I make Sir Formal speak Gr^ek often in it.


Br^ce. This Sir Formal ^as a great many pretty Employments under him.


Sir Nic. I doubt not but in three months to improve it so, that from the
chief Mountain, H^ll, or Eminence in a County, a man may be heard round the
County.


Long. This will be above all wonder.


Sir Nic. I have thought of this to do the King service; for when I have
perfected it, there needs but one Par^on to Preach to a whole County; the King
may then take all the ChurchLands into his own hands, and serve all England
with his C^aplains in Ordinary.


Longv. This is a most admirable project. But what will become of the rest of
the Parsons?


Sir Nic. It is no matter, let 'em learn to make Woollen Cloth, and advance the
Manufacture of the Nation; or learn to make Nets, and improve the
Fishing-Trade; it is a fine sedentary life for those idle Fel^ows in black.


Bruce These illiterate Virtuoso's hate all that have relation to Learning.


Longv. You cannot blame 'em. But there being no stop in Art, you may advance
this Trumpe^ so far, ^ou may make 'em talk from one Nation to another.


Sir Nic So I may in time.


Bruce. By this Princes may converse, treat, congratu^ate, and co^dole, without
the great charge and trouble of Ambassadors.


Sir Nic. I hope to effect it* But I wonder Sir Form^l is not returned; I sent
hi^ to fix my Tellescopes for surveying the Moon.


Long. Do you believe the Moon is an Ear^h, as you told us?


Sir Nic. Believe it! I know it; I shall shortly publish a Book of Geography
for it. Why, it is as big as our Earth; I can see all the Mountainous parts* and
Valleys and Seas, and Lakes in it; nay, the larger sort of Animals, as
Elephants and Camels; but public Buildings and Ships very easil^. I ^ave seen
several Battles fought there. They have great Guns, and have the use of (...).
At Land they fight with Elephants and Castles. I h^ve seen 'em --


Bruce. No Phan^tick that has lost his Wits in Revelation, is so mad as this
Fool.


Longv. You are mistaken, this is but a faint Copy to some Originals among the
Tribe.


Sir N^c. Th^re's now a great Monarch, who has Armies in several Countries in
the Moon, which we find out, because the Colors which we see are a^l alike.
There are a great many S^ates, which we take to be Confederates against him. He
is a very ambitious Prince* and aims at Universal Monarchy; but the rest of the
Moon will be too hard for him.


Enter Sir Formal. Sir Form. I have fixed the Tubes in the Garden; and, if we
be not deceived, the great Monarch is making an Attaque upon a Town, and they
are in very hard Service.


Sir Nic. It Is probable -- W^'ll haste to see it. But first do me the favor to
speak two or three Greek Verses in this Trumpet.


Sir Form. With all my heart.


[Sir Formal sp^aks some ^erses out of Homer. Enter Sir Nicholas's S^rvant.
S^rv. Sir, Sir! stand upon your Guard; the House is beset by a great Rabble of
People, who threaten to pull yo^ out of it, and tear you in pieces.


Sir Nic. O Heaven! what is the matter?


Serve. Sir, they are Ribbon-weavers; who have been informed, that you are he
that invented the Engine-Loom, which has provoked 'em to rise up in Arms, and
they are resolved to be revenged for it: L^sten, Sir, you may hear 'em.


Sir. Nic. O what will become of me! Gentlemen, Gentlemen, for Heavens sake do
something for me; I protest and vow they wrong me, I never invented any thing
of use in my life, as gad shall mend me not I.


Bruce. We shall be beaten for being in such damned company, and faith we shall
deserve it.

[A noise without.
Sir Nic. Mercy on me! how loud they are!

O Gentlemen, What is to be done?


Longv. Get your Guns and Pistols charged. The Rabble, like wild Beasts, are
frighted at Firearms.


Sir Nic. Go, get 'em charged quickly.


Sir Form. Now is the time for me to show my parts. I have another Weapon. Let
me alone with them.


Sir Nic. What Weapon, Sir Formal?


Sir Form. Eloquence: I warrant ye. Let me alone. I Will go out among 'em.


Sir Nic. O 'twill never do; they are very outrageous Rogues. What will become
of us?


Sir Form. You know not the charms of Oratory.

'Twas my fortune to be near the Temple* stairs, when the Watermen, who had
drunk too deep of a Liquor, somewhat stronger than that which is the Scene of
their Vocation, were stirred up into so popular a heat and fervor, that its
fury threatened the adjacent Society -- The Watermen were themselves (as I may
so say) blown into a Tempest, when strait I ventured in among the intemperate
Crowd, and by the force of Rhetoric, dispelled the barbarity of their
over-boyling Ale, and too much fermented Choler, and gently recompos'd their
minds into a sedate and quiet temper: and I doubt not but to have the same
effect upon these.


Sir Nich. Quickly then, dispatch. Tell 'em I am innocent, I never invented any
thing in my life. Go-go, quickly.

[Exeunt.
The SCENE the Street, a great Rabble of People together, and Snarl, etc.
Snarl. What ever they say, this Sir Nicholas, and one Sir Formal that is with
him, invented the Engine-loom, to the confusion of Ribbon-weavers. I shall be
sufficiently revenged on the Rogues now.

[aside.
1. Weav. O Villains! we'll maul 'em. Are these the tricks of a Vertoso? have
they studi'd these fourteen years for this?


Snarl. Yes, for much less. The truth is, it is a burning sham^ that poor men
should be ruined by such Fellows, in sadness it is --


2. Weav. I never thought these Vertoso's would do any thing but mischief, for
my part.


3. Weav. Where are the Rogues? Come out of your Den.


All. Come ou^! where are the Vertoso's here?


1. Weav. Break open the house. Open the do,, or we'll demolish --


Porter within. What would you have? stand off?


1. Weav. What would you have, you S^n of a Whore; the Engine, and the Rogues
that invented it.


Porter within. Here Is no Engine, no Rogues, nor Inventers neither --


Enter Sir Formal. Sir Form. Now will I try my Eloquence. Come, Gentlemen, What
is it you would have? What is the fountain of your discontents? now for the
power of Oratory! Come, come, come --


1. Weav. Here Is one of the Rascals, take him amongst you.


Sir Form. Why, Gentlemen.


2. Weav. Tear him in pieces.


Sir Form. I say, Gentlemen --


3. Weav. Cut off his ears.


1. Weav. Take him and hang him upon the next Sign*


Sir F^rm. I beseech you.


All. Ay, hang him up quickly.


Sir Form. Hold! hold! shall I not speak?


2. W^av. Yes, if you can after you are hanged.


Sir Form. Why, Gentlemen, I am of your side. If you commit this rash outrage,
you will be soundly punished upon a Quare ^remuerunt G^ntes --


So^e. Let him speak.


Others. No, he shall not speak; hang him --


1. Weav. Hold, Neig^bours and Friends, let us hear him; he^ may perhaps
discover something of this business.


All. Let him speak --


Sir Form. By what occasion or accident this unheard of Torrent of
tempestuous-rage was thus in^lam'd, ^ very much ignore. But let it ^ot be said
that Englishmen, good commonwealth's men, and sober discreet Ribbon-weavers,
should be thus hurried by the rapid force of the too dangerous Whirlwind, or
Hurricane of passion.


1. W^av He speaks notably.


2. Weav. He Is a well-spoken man truly --


Sir Form. Of p^ssion, I s^y, which with its sudden and, alas! too violent
circumgyrations, does too often shipwreck those that are agitated by it, while
it turns them into such giddy confusion, that they can no longer trim the Sails
of Reason, or steer by the Compass of Judgment.


1. ^Veav. His Tongue's well hung, but I know not what he means by all this
stuff.


Sir Form. I say, Gentlemen.


2. VVeav. Pox on you, ^ou shall say no more. What Is this to the invention of
the Loom?


3. VVeav. This is one of the Inventers, hang him. Where Is the other? break open
the house


Enter Sir Nichola^, Bruce, and Longvil above. Sir Form. Do but hear me?


1. VVeav. No, Rascal, we will not hear you.


[Th^y beat him, kick him, and fling Oranges at him. Sir Form. All this I can
bear, if you will but hear me, Gentlemen -- I am a person --


2. VVeav. A person, a Rogue, a Villain! a damned Vertoso! A person!


Sir Form. I say, Gentlemen, I am a person --


1. VVeav. Pox on you -- we'll use you like a Dog -- Sir --


Sir Form. Quousque tandem efsrenata jactabit audacia.

This is a barbarity which Scythians would blush at.


1. VVeav. Scythians! What a pox does he call us names? take him, and hang him
up.


Sir Nic. I see Sir Formal's Oratory cannot prevail; What shall I do?


^. VVeav. O there he is. Come down, or we'll fetch you down, and your Engine
too.


Longv. Nay, then it is time to sally out --


Bruce. Give us Pistols, quickly --


Sir Nic. Hear me, Gentlemen, I never invented an Engine in my life; as gad
shall sa' me you do me wrong. I never invent^d so much as an Engine to pair
Cream* cheese with. We Vertuoso's (...) find out any thing of use, it is not our
way.


1. VVeav. Hang your way. You are a damned lying Vertoso. Break open the door
quickly --


Enter Longvil and Bruce below with Pistols, Servants. Bruce. Where are these
Dogs?


[Discharge their Pistols, all run out. Sir Form. Murder! murder!

[Falls down.
Enter Sir Nicholas creeping out with a Blunderbus. Sir Nic. Where are these
Rogues?


Long. Sir, go and call the Guard, least they should rally again.


Bruc^. Sir Formal is shot, and all the Rabble is escaped u^hurt.


Sir Nic. O my Friend! Sir Formal! Sir Formal!


Sir Formal. I am alive, Sir Nicholas, but surely I ^m shot.


Sir Nic. Let Us search -- Here is no hole in your clothes.


Sir Form. Hum -- I find no blood. Truly I did opine that I was shot -- but I
am exceedingly beaten and bruised, Though there be no discretion, I have
suffered much confusion.


Sir Nic. I see your Oratory could not prevail.


Sir Form. No, no, these Barbarians understand not Eloquence. I must go in, and
discover this disorder --

[Exit Sir Form.
Bruce. Let Us take this opportunity to get rid of the Vertuoso, and go to the
Masquerade.


Footm. Sir, the Guard was coming to suppress the tumult ere I went; they
seized some of the Mutineers, and dispersed the rest.


Long. Now we are safe, Sir. We humbly take our leaves till to morrow --

[Exit* Longvil and Bruce.
Sir Nic. Gentlemen, your humble Servant;

Where are my Wife and Nieces?


Porter. They are gone abroad, Sir.


Sir Nic* At this time of night? Did they go together?


Port. No, Sir, my Lady went alo^e*


Sir Nic. And did you let my Nieces go out, Villain, without your Lady?


Port. Sir Formal carried them out.


Sir Nic. 'Death! what design is this? they are gone to the Masquerade: My Wif^
alone too! I like not this* The story in German-^treet was very suspi^ious. I
shall find out ^hese practices.


The SCENE is a larg^ Room, with a great number of M^squeraders, Men and Women,
in many (...) habit^.
Enter Sir Samuel and Hazard. Sir Sam. Now, Hazard, let us enjoy our selves: I
am never in my Element, but when I am adventuring about an Intriguo, or
Masquerading about business. Now you shall see me show my parts.


H^z. Do. Sir Samuel, you are excellent at these things.


Sir Sam. Nay, if any man outdoes me about this business. Well, no more to be
said. Is not mine a very pretty Disguise? Ha!


Haz. An admirable one --


Sir Sam. I have forty of 'em upon Intriguo's and b^sinesses. But now to work.
Do you know me?

[To Clar.
Clar. No: yet methinks you look through your disguise like a foolish Fellow I
have seen.


Sir Sam. A foolish Fellow -- Hey poop! you were never so much in the wrong in
your life, as gad mend me --


Clar. I do not think so; a Mask might cover deformity, but not folly. You have
the very Mien of a Coxcomb; all the motions of your body declare the weakness
of your mind.


Sir Sam. Pish! what you are upon the high Ropes now. Whip st^ch, Your nose in
my breech. Pish! I*ll talk no more with her.


Haz. Do you know me?

[To Mir.
Mir. No; I neither know ye, nor care to know ye.


Haz. They who have so little curiosity, have less pleasure.


Mir. I ghess your inside to be no better than your outside.


Haz. Try 'em both, and you will be of another opinion.


Mir. The Conviction's not worth the Trial.


L. Gim. I wonder which is Haz^rd. But my business is not with him.


Sir Sam. These are very angry Ladies, Hazard. Just now we met ^wo were very
kind to us. Pretty Rogues. They had delicate hands, arms and necks -- and they
were Women of Quality, I Am sure by their Linen* --


Haz. That Is no rule -- for Whores wear as good Linen as honest Women: fine
Clothes and good Linen are the Working-Tools of their Trade.


Sir Sam. But I know by their Wit and Repertees they were fine persons. I am
confident my Woman knows me, and has a kindness for me.


Haz. Me-thought they seemed to be rank Strumpets --


Sir Sam. Prithee hold thy peace. T^ce is Latin for a Candle. I am used to
these Intregues and Businesses --


Enter Longvil and Bruce in their own Clothes, Masqued. Clar. Longv. and Br^ce!
let us watch them, and see where they will direct themselves.


Mir Like right-bred men o'th'Town; I warrant upon the next they light on.


Sir Sam. 'Ods my life, I have lost my Laced Handkercher --


Haz. 'Death! I ha^ 'lost mine too. Heart! all my money's gone --


Sir Sam. Ha! Money! what a pox, mine is all flown too. Whip, slap-dash --


Haz. Whip, slap-dash! a pox o'your Women of Quality, they are flown too. Whip,
slap-dash -- But you have been used to such Intriguo's and Businesses --


Sir Sam. I durst ha'sworn I could not be deceived. Though I ha* been often
served so by Vizard Masks in the Pit, they are mightily given to it; we men of
adventure must bear this* Come, no more to be said. Come, it is well it is no
worse. Come!


Longv. This is a fine civil Assembly ^ruly. The Knight has great conveniences
of Coaches and Retiring-Rooms.


Bruce. It is a very rank Ball; there is like to be very much Fornication
committed to night.


Longv. A M^squerade's good for nothing else, but to hide blushes, and bring
bashful people together, who are ashamed to sin barefaced. There Is a Lady
hovering about you, and longs to pickeer with you.

[Lady Gim. stares on Bruce.
^ruce. O that it were Cl^rinda in a good mind.


Longv. I wish it be not Miranda in a bad one; her shape's like hers --


Sir Sam. Come, Fidles, be ready -- Shall I wait on you in a D^nce about
business --

[Takes out Clar. The Bor^ --

[They D^nce, Sir Samuel leaves her, She tak^s in another.
Cl^r. A Corant.


Bruce. May I no^ have the honor to know who yo^ ar^*


L. Gim* It Is sufficient to tell you, I am one you have no ill wishes to, and
would not tell you this but in Masque.


Bruce. She Is finely shaped, and by her Jewels a Woman of some condition. Come,
off with this Cloud to a good face, and Ornament ^o a bad one.


L. Gim. No: but if you will withdraw into another Room, I Will let yo^ know more
of my mind, though not of my face.


Bruce. The temptation is too strong to be resisted. Let Us steal off.

[They steal out.
Entry of Scaramouchi and Clow^s. [Dance: Sir Sam. Very fine, I swear very fine
--

Where the Devil's this ^iranda? I cannot find her out for my life --


Cl^r. Did you not see Bruce steal off with a Lady?


Mir. Yes, and cannot bear it. I am so foolish, I would I were not.


Sir Sam. But hold. Who held my Sword while I danced? 'Twas a French Sword,
cost me fifteen Pistols: a curse on him, he*s rubbed off with -- But Come, it is
well its no worse yet --


Longv. This Bruce stays somewhat long, I like it not. If I could find out
either Clarinda or Miranda here, I should be out of doubt -- Let me see, who
are you?


Fig. What authority have you to examine me? --


[She speaks in a Poppets voice. Long. What have we here, a Poppet?


Fig. Such a Poppet as you will be glad to change for the Player you keep --


Longv. You are mistaken, I love the Stage too well to keep any of their women
to make 'em proud and insolent, and despise that Calling, to take up a worse.


Fig. Then you are none of the Fops I ^ook you for.


Enter Bruce and Lady ^imcrack. Bruce. I can never rest till I know who has
obliged me.


L. Gim. Since you are so importunate, I Will give you a Note will discover it,
if you will give me your Honor not to open it ^ill the Masquerade be done.


Bruce. Upon my Honor I will not.


L. Gi^. Now show your self a man of Hono^r.


B^uce. Gad I think I have already --


Enter Sir Formal in Scaramoucha's h^bit. Clar. Yonder Is Sir Formal. You have
your Cue, Be^ty.


Bett. I warrant you, Madam.

(To Sir F^rm) You see I am as good as my word.


Sir Form. It Is she by her Bracelet and Pendants. Madam, had not some disaster
intervened, I had sooner kissed your hands. But of that, more anon.


Enter L. Gimcrack in another dis^uise. L. Gim. Now for the rest of my Plot. I
shall disappoint these young Sluts, or make mischief enough.


[Exit Longv. and L. Gimcrack. Ent^r Snarl b^re-fac'd. Mir. Did not you see
Longvil steal out with a woman?


Cl^r. Too well Our ^overs are well matched.


S^arl. In sadness I think Bedlam's broke loose and come hither. What a
company of Antic Puppies are here? Pox on '^m all. But where is this Figgup?
by the Mass I Will not suffer her to go to these Schools of Bawdery; in sadness
she will be too ap^ a Scholar I am afraid.


Sir Sam. Hey Snarl! What, do you come to a Masquerade barefaced?


Snarl. Yes, that I do, nor am I ashamed of my face, as Rogues and Whores are.
Whose Fool are you?


Clar. Sir, will you please to dance?


Snarl. No indeed will not I. I thank God I am not such a Coxcomb yet in sadness.
-- What do you find in my face to think me such an Owl?


Mir. What do you come for then?


Snarl. Why to find one that should be wiser than to be here, by the Mass.


Fig. He means me, I shall be undone.


Clar. Whom do you mean? she that was in the Wood hole?


Mir. She that was discovered in Germin-street.


Snarl. Ounds! I shall be a Byword all over the Town, in sadness.


Ent^r Sir Nicholas. Sir Nic. My Uncle here?


Clar. Is it she you look for?


Snarl. What pert-snivelling, squeaking-Bagg^ges are you? here is a squealing
with you, with a pox to you.


Haz. To him, Sir Samuel.


Sir Sam. Sir, let me ask you one civil question.


[In a squeaking tone. Snarl. What civil question would you ask now?


[Mocking him. Sir Sam. Were not you with a Lady in Germin-^treet pulled out by
the heels to day?


Snarl. Ounds! What Rogue art thou? I could find in my heart to beat thee most
exorbitantly.


Haz. Your Land-lady in Germin-street is a School-mistris, is she not, Sir?


Snarl. O my shame comes upon me! In sadness you are all a company of squealing
Coxcombs; would you were all Eunuchs by the Mass, that you might always keep
your Treble Voices.


1. Bull. What, was this virtuous Gentleman taken with a Whore?


2. Bull. Sir, do you very much delight in Birch?


Sir Sam. Yes, for mortification-sake. He Is a great doer of Penance.


Haz. A fine old Gentleman, with gray hairs, to be over-taken.


Sir Form. Truly I am sorry a person of your gravity should so expose your
discretion.


Snarl. What damned antic Rascal's this?

[Kicks him.
Sir. Form. As gad mend me it was uncivil. But, Madam, we will retire, if you
please.


Sna^l. What a Devil, shall I be over-set with Rogues and Fools here --


1. Bull. Damn Rogues and Fools.


Snarl. So I say, in sadness. The Men are all Rogues and Fools, and the Women
all Strumpets, by the Mass, or which are ten times worse, scandalous honest
Women. In sadness it is a shame such Bawdy doings should be suffered in a civil
Nation; my heart bleeds for it, by the Mass. It was not so in the last Age. Why,
what do I talk with a company of Owls for? I come to find one whom I Will never
seek again; if she will not appear now --


Fig. O Buddy, I am here; but I was afraid you would be an angered.


Snarl. In sadness I wonder you are not ashamed ^o come to these vicious
scandalous bawdy places. Come away for shame --


[Exeunt Snarl and Fig. Enter Longvil and Lady Gimcrack. Longv. I never yet
knew one so free of her body, and so nice of her face before. Shall I know no
more of you?


L. Gim. Since you will have it so -- there is a Note will inform you more: But
upon your Honor you must not open it till the Masquerade be over.


Longv I will not.


Sir Ni^. My Dear, I wondered I could not see you before.


L. Gim. O Hazard, have I found thee? this is good luck, my Dear.


Sir Ni^. O infamous damned Woman!


L. Gim. It makes me break my Spleen almost to think, what an Ass we made of
Sir Nicholas to day.


Sir Nic. Ay, so it does mine. Ha-ha-ha -- A curse on Womankind!


L. Gim. He, poor Fool, believes ^s all this while to be as innocent. Now shall
you have free liberty to come home to me.


Sir Nic. Shall he so, Madam?

[L. Gim. shreeks out.
Sir Sam What Is here? one offering violence to a Lady!


Haz. Who, this my Lady Gimcrack?


L. Gim. It is my Husband! for Heaven's sake keep him here, till I run home.

[Exit Lady Gim.
H^z. Villain! how dare you abuse a Lady?

[Kicks him.
Sir Nic. It Is no matter for that, I shall not discover my self.


Haz. It is Sir Nicholas; now you may lock him up, and be revenged of him -- --


Sir Sam. No more to be said. Hey! who waits there? Take this Fellow and lock
him up, till I talk with him about business.


Sir Nic. 'Death! What will become of me?


Longv. I have fixed upon almost every Woman of the Masquerade, and cannot find
which is either Clarinda or Miranda.


1. B^ll. Ounds you lie. --


2. Bull. Take that, Rascal.

[They draw, and all draw.
Exeunt all, women shrieking. Sir S^m. These damned Bully Rogues have spoiled
my Intrigue; a pox o^'em all, the Ladies are gone. But I Will find a way ^o be
conveyed into Miranda's Chamber to night yet


[Exit Sir Sam. Enter Longvil, Bruce, and Porter. Long. Is not Sir Nicholas
within?


Port. No: but my Lady and the two Ladies are come; my Lady is gone up to my
Master's Closet, and the young Ladies are in the Garden.


Bruc^. We come to tell Sir Nicholas, we have wholly quelled the Mutiny, and seen
the Offenders committed.


Port. He will be within presently --

[Exit.
Long* I do not see the Ladies here: but this was a very strange adventure at
the M^squerade.


Bruce. The Circumstances are so like, had I not seen two several habits, I
should believe 'twas the same Woman I have a Note to, and received the same
injunction not to open it.


Longv. Let me read your Note, and you shall read mine; the Moonlight will
serve for that.

By that means I may discover something.

[Aside.
Bruce. Agreed. I may perhaps make a discovery.

[Aside Reads. You see I dare not own my kindness, but when I h^d something to
^ide ^y blushes. I hope you will use the Conquest like a Gentleman. Clarinda.


Longv. How! this is to the same effect, subscribed by Miranda. There needs no
further argument of your treachery, and such as I did not think a Gentleman
could be guilty of.


Bruce. 'Death! Do you accuse me of Treachery, who are your self so great a
Traitor? Draw --


Longv. Are you so ^imble? Have at you --

[Fight.
Enter Clarinda and Miranda. Cla. Hold! hold! hold! for Heaven's sake hold!


Mir. Hold! hold! hold! for Heaven's sake hold!


Clar. What means this madness in this place?


Bruce. I suppose you ghess at the meaning.


Longv. If not, Miranda can inform you.


Mir. This is absolute distraction, Gentlemen.


^ruce. You let Lo^gvil know mo^e of your mind* (...), in a private Room at the
Masquerade to night.


Longv. If she did not, this Lady was kind enough to you there.


Mir. What madness is this! I spoke never a word to either of you there.


Clar. Nor I, Heaven knows! but we saw each of you steal away with a Lady --


Bruce. Do you know that hand, Madam?

[To Clar.
Longv. Or you this, Madam?

[To Mir.
Clar. My name subscribed!


Mir. And here is mine.


Clar. This mischief is too evident. This is my Aunts hand.


Mir. And this is her Character too. This malice is beyond example, and your
baseness, so soo^ to entertain such thoughts of u^.


Clar. That senseless vanity, that makes them think so well of themselves, made
'e^ think so ill of us.


Longv. Oh Heaven! what have we done! I beg a thousand pardons for my fault.


Bruc^. Hear but my acknowledgment, on my knees I beg forgiveness for my ill
thoughts of so excellent a Lady.


Clar. Be gone, unworthy Men, and never see us more.


Mir. I Will never forgive the Man that thus dare injure me.


[Ex^t Clar. and Mir. Longv. This damned Lady ha^ put her self upon us for two
Women. Let Us not leave 'e^, till we have satisfied them of the occasion of our
jealousy.


Bruce. Let Us follow at a distance --


[ Longv. and Bruce (...). Enter Clarinda and Miranda, and go into an Arbor.
Long. They are gone into that Arbor: Let Us do an* ungenerous thing for once,
and listen.


Bruce. Agreed; we then perhaps may hear what their resentments are.


Mir. I see we must carry our selves with more reservedness, since Men of Wit
and Pleasure are so apt to think ill of our Sex.


Clar. For all this, I love Longvil ^o that height, I cannot be ^eserved to
him, I can forgive him any thing.


(...). (...) (...) (...) ^oo al^ost to distraction, and could venture any
thing but honor for him.


Clar. (...) lose (...) Life and Love a thousand times before my Virtue. But
our cross Love can never meet.


Mir. The breach was great enough before: but this falsehood and malice of my
Lady has made it wider. But hold, we are overheard.


Clar. O Heaven! here are Longvil and Bruce --


[They run away shr^king. Longv. Our case is plain, we have no hopes of
succeeding in our inten^ed Loves; or if I had, I would not have the Body
without the Mind.


Bruce. A man enjoyes as much by a Rape as that way. But I am so pleased to
find Miranda loves me, that I Would not change for any but C^arinda.


Longv. I have the same opinion of Clarinda's love; and could you be contented,
I would willingly change. Gratitude to her will move my heart, more than
Miranda's charms with her aversion can.


Bruce. Since our affections will not thrive in the soil we had placed them in,
we must trasplant them.


Longv* Love, like the Sunbeams, will not warm much, unless reflected back
again. It is resolved it shall be so.


Bruce. Let Us follow them now; and while the Metall's hot, 'twill take a Bent
the easier.

[Ex^unt.
SCENA ultima.
Enter Sir Nicholas, Lady Gimcrack. Sir Nic. Infamous, vile Woman, I^l be
revenged on all your lewdness.


L. Gim. I have broken open your C^oset, and her^ are all ^our Le^ters from
your several Whores: And do you think I^ll bear your falsehood without revenge?


Sir Nic. Be gone out of my doors, I cast you from me; and I have here another
Mistress of this House. Come in.

(...) Flirt. To you I give possession of all here, Madam. Out of m^ doors.


L. Gim. Is this one of the Creatu^es you converse with about Philosophical
matters? Fare ye well. I have, thanks to my Friends, a settlement for separate
maintenance, and I have provided for my sel^ too* A wo^hy (...): Com^ in, Sir;
he will defend my Person, and my Honor.


Enter Hazard. Sir Nic. Who e're shall make such settlemen^s hereafter, may
they be plagued as I am! Vil^ Creature --


L. Gim. Sir, I shall publish your Letters into b^rgain and send 'em to
Gresham-Colledge; then you will be more despised than now you are there --


Sir Nic. O misfortune! that will be worse than all the miseries can happen to
me. Hold, Madam, I have thought on it; and to show how much I can be a
Philosopher, I am content it should be a drawn Battle betwixt us: Do you
forgive, and you shall find that I can do so too.


Enter Steward. Stew. O Sir! I bring you the moft unfortunate news that ever you
heard.


Sir Nic. More c^osses still!


St^w. Several Engineers, Glass-makers, and other people you have dealt with
for Experiments, have brought Executions, and Extents, and seized on all your
Estate in the Country.


L. Gim. It Is very well; you were all this while Botling of Air, and studying
Spiders and Glowworms, stinking Fish, and rotten Wood.


Sir Nic. This last affliction is too great to bear; but I am resolved to
^orgive ^hee, my Dear, and be a good Husband, and redeem all.


L. Gim. No, Sir, I thank you; my Settlement is without inbrance, and I Will
preserve it without you, which you are the greatest a Woman can have.


Enter Sir Forma^ and Be^y. Sir Form. Sir, I humbly implo^ your pardon, for a
crime, which Love, w^ch was too s^ong for my resistance, caused in me.


Sir Nic. What do you mean?


Sir Form. I have m^rrid' Clarinda; the pretty Creature had an odd fancy to be
marr^d in (...)* I hope (...) I pardon it; Love is not in our power.


Sir Nic* O Heav^n! (...) is to (...) to all the r^st. No, base man, I never
will forgive it.


B^tty. ((...)) Si^, you man if you please, and he ^oo; consider, Sir, Love is
not in our power.


Sir Form. I am amazed, I am struck dumb, I never shall speak again!


Sir Nic. I am sorry for you, Sir Formal; but I have grea^er sorrows of my own:
Yet I have my Uncle Snarl in reserve, I Will try his bounty -- Oh here he is!


Enter Snarl and Figgup. Snarl. Here! Where is this Coxcomb? Nephew -- This
Ver^uoso, I was with a Whore in Germin-street, was I? and your Ladyship
reproached me too; she is your Aunt in sadness.


Si^ Nic. How, Sir! What do you mean?


Snarl. Mean! why what should I mean? she is my Wife, I am married to her --


Fig. Yes, Sir, we are married, I assure you.


Sir Nic. Oh this is worst of all, I have lost all hopes of his Estate, for
which I Have so long suffered all his frowardness.


Ent^r Long^il, Bruce, Clarinda, Miranda. L. Gim. Oh Heaven! are they so soon
come to a right understanding? I am undone. Curse on 'em!


Snarl. O Gen^lemen! that foolish V^rtuoso, and that wordy Puppy Sir Formal,
said, I was taken with a Whore in Germinstreet: This is the Lady, and she is my
Wife.


Haz. Be pleased to give Sir Formal joy; he is married to Mrs. Betty too.


Sir Form. Upon my sincerity, Madam, it was very uncivilly done, to slur your
Maid upon me in your stead: But I must rest contented; no more to be said.


Clar. B^tty, I wish thee joy; Sir Formal, she is as good a Gentlewoman as you a
Gentleman.


Snarl. I thought my foolish flashy Orator would be caught at last. Ha-ha-ha!
what, marry a Chambermaid!


Sir Form. But, Sir, I have not married a S^rumpet, as you have.


Longv. How! Is this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age so over-^aken?


Br^ce. Did Gentlemen and men of Honor marry Whores in the last Age?


(...) In sadness they have much ado to avoid it in this; if I have married
one, she is my own; and I had better marry ^y own than another man's, by the
Mass, as it is ^fty to one I should, if I had married elsewhere, in sadness.


Sir Ni^. I have yet a reserve: Nieces, my Land in the Country is Extended,
and my Goods are seized on: The Money which I have of yours will redeem all,
and I will account with you.


Clar. Sir, I can do nothing, but by my Guardian's consent; and I have chosen
Mr. Longvil for mine.


Mir. And Mr. Bruce has undertaken the pro^ection of my Fortune.


Sir Nic. 'Death! now all my hopes are cut off; I thought to have made a good
sum of money of my Nieces. Was this the Philosophy you came for, Gentlemen?

Enter two Porters with Sir Samuel in a Ch^st. How now? Whom have we here?


Port. Sir, here is a Chest of Goods directed to Mrs Miranda, and we were
commanded to bring it to her.


^ir. For me! set it down there.


P^t. Shall we not carry it into your Chamber, Madam?


^ir. No: there is something for you: ^e gone.

[Ex. Port.
Clar. It stands in the way; Footmen, set it upon one end.


[They ofs^r to turn Sir Samuel with his head down. Sir Sam. Hold, hold;
murder, murder!


Sir Ni^. How Is this? some Rogue and Thief! pull him out.


Sir Sam. Rogue and Thief! I scorn your words.


Snarl. An Antic Coxcomb; I have seen a Baboon with more common sense.


Sir Sam. I came hither to my Mistress Miranda, and would marry her about this
business.


Bru^e. You must ask my leave, she has chosen me for her Guardian; and I will
cut your throat if you attempt to make Love to her any more.


^ir Sam. And do you own what he says, Madam?


Mir. I must be ruled by my Guardia^.


Sir Sam. Why then I have been kicked, beaten, pumpt, and tossed in a blanket,
etc. to no purpose: I am unfortunate in this Intriguo. But no more to be said.
Come; it is well its no worse yet.


Sir. Nic. Su^e, Sir Form^l, you will not deny me that.


Sir Form. Truly I opine it not reasonable for one, who has married one with
nothing, to be security for another.


Sir Nic. that I should know Men no better! I would I had studi'd Mankind
instead of Spiders and Insects. Sure, my Dear, thou will not leave me!


L. Gim. I am resolved to part this moment.


Sir Nic. Well, I have something left yet; and here is one loves me, she has
told me so a thousand times.


Flirt Sir, trust not to that; for Women of my profession love Men but as far
as their Money goes.


Sir Nic. Am I deserted by all? Well, now it is time to study ^or use: I will
presently find out the Philosophers Stone; I had like to have gotten it last
year, but that I wanted MayDew, being a dry season.


Longv. I hope, Ladies, since you have put your Estates into our hands, you will
let us dispose of your persons.


Mir. You must have time to leave off your old Love, before you put on new.


Cla^. Nothing but time can fit it to you.


Brace. You have given us hope, and we must live on that a while; and sure
'twill not be long that we shall live upon that slender D^et: For,

If Love can once a Lady's Outworks win,
It soon will Master all that is within.

[Exeunt Epilogue.
NOw you who think y^are Judges of the Pit,
Who never, but in finding faults, show wit;
Who to your dear dull s^lves are kind alone,
And never reflect on follies of your own:
Our Poet can from you no mercy find,
Who savage are to all but your own kind.
Nay, on the Stage if some of those appear,
Though never so like your selves, you hate 'em there,
As the whole Herd falls on a wounded Deer.
But of those Ladies he desp^irs to day,
Who love a dull Romantic whining Play;
Where poor frail Woman's made a Deity,
With sens^ss amoro^s Idolatry,
And s^ivelling Heroes sigh, and pine, and cry.
Though singly they beat Armies, and Hu^s Kings,
Rant at the Gods, and do impossible things;
Though they can laugh at danger, blood and wounds;
Yet if the Dame once chides, the milk-sop Hero swoons.
These doughty things, nor Manners have, nor Wit;
We never saw Hero fit to drink with yet.
But hold, I hear some say among the rest,
This Play is not well bred, nor yet well dressed;
Such Plays the Women's Poets can write best:
They difser from the Men's, you must allow,
As Women's Tailors Women's Poets too.
But know, good breeding sh^ws its excellence,
Not in small trifling forms, but in good sense.
Yet, Ladies, to Stage-fools some favor show,
Since off the Stage some Fops you can allow.
Few of the Sexes happy Favorites yet
Have been the most remarkable for Wit:
Sure you must like Copies of such as these,
If the Original Coxcombs can so please.
But to the Men of Wit our Poet flies,
And ^akes his Fops to them a Sacrifice:
You know the pangs, and many laboring throws,
By which your Brains their perfect births disclose.
You can the faults and excellencies find;
Pass by the one, and be to the other kind.
By you he is resolved to stand or fall:
What e'r's his doom he will not repine at all.
And if this Birth should want its perfect shape,
And cannot by your care its death escape,
Th'abortive Issue came before its day,
And the Poet has miscarri'd of a Play.
FINIS.

