THE Woman-Captain:

A COMEDY ACTED by His Royal Highnesses SERVANTS.

Written by THO. SHADWELL.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Carr, at the King's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1680.

TO HENRY Lord OGLE, SON to his GRACE HENRY Duke of NEWCASTLE, etc.
THE great Obligations I received from my most Noble Patron, your illustrious
Grandfather, and the favors conferred upon me by your Excellent Father
(amongst which, I can think none greater than his recommending me to your
Lordships Kindness and Protection) have engaged me to make this acknowledgment
of my Duty to your Lordship; and to beg that you will own me, and defend this
Comedy. I hope I shall, hereafter, be able to present you with something more
worthy your Acceptance; but let this suffice to give you a title to me, and all
my endeavors, which, as often as I can, shall be employed to serve you.

Had you not been obliged by the commands of your Father to favor and protect
me; yet, from you I should have hoped to have found Patronage; for the great
Love which you have for Arts and Sciences, which would have made you cherish my
endeavors toward them: By this inclination you give us early proofs of your
inheriting the Virtues of your Ancestors, as you are like to do their Fortunes;
which with the great accession by your Match with the Noble and Renowned Family
of the Piercies, will make your Lordship the greatest Subject of England. And,
by your early Virtues, you give all, that know you, hopes that you will be able
to maintain that Character, by all the qualities that become a great Man: And,
from the two Noble Stocks of Cavendish and Piercy, Posteri^y is like to see a
race of true*, and not Romantic Heroes, who may serve their Prince virtuously,
and that way oblige their Country as we doubt not but your Lordship will.

My Lord, it has been the custom of Dedicators of late to make the Praises they
give to their Patrons so* extravagant, that they become Abuses, and therefore I
am loath to say what I think: only one virtue of your Lordships I am too much
pleased with not to mention; which is, that in this Age, when Learning is grown
contemptible to those who ought most to advance it, and Greek and Latin Sense
is despised, and French and English Nonsense applauded, when the ancient
Nobility and Gentry of England, who not long since were famous for their
Learning, have now sent into the World a certain kind of spurious brood of
illiterate and degenerous Youth, your Lordship dares love Books, and labor to
have Learning. And may your Lordship go on in this virtuous race you have
begun, that so you may be a Protection to your Servants, a Consolation to your
Friends, and an Honor to your Country; which is the hearty Wish of

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obedient humble Servant Tho. Shadwell.

Prologue.
Spoken by Anthony Lee. LOrd! how the Poets in these times will pine,
For solid Dullness they must all design,
When Wit will not sell, and they shall lose French Wine.
And what can Players hope for in these days,
When ever the Idle Youth forsake our Plays.
The empty Head, that never thought before
But on New fashions, or a fresh new Whore:
Who, without us, no Afternoon could spend,
Nor show Himself, nor meet a secret Friend,
Whom mounting from the Pit we use to see
(For dangerous Intrigues) to'th' Gallery.
Where stead of Maidenheads it is often his hap
By bold advent'ring to at^hieve a Clap,
Or down he comes, and lolls in the Orange-wenches lap.
For News he now walks gravely up and down,
And every Fop's a Politician grown,
Instead of --
Pox here is no Company, let us to White Hall,
Or to the Park, or where is there a Ball?
What News! ha'ye been at Westminster to day?
How move the French? what do the great Ones say?
Things go not well, we wish we know not what;
But there are some can tell, we are sure of that:
With Politic shrug, and notable wise Look,
They censure Councels, who never read a Book.
The Citt, who with his Wife and hopeful Son
Would come to a merry Play, now all does shun,
And on the Guard learns to let off a Gun.
Others their Shops and precious Wares neglect,
With their wise Heads the Nation to protect:
Even Bulks all day of Tenants are bereft;
For News stitching, and singing Psalms are left.
Each Coffee-house is fill d with subtle folk,
Who wisely talk, and politickly smoke.
To them whose Right it is, leave Government*
And come to us, we'll give you all content:
Full Theaters, (...) overflowing Nil^,
Show Peace and Plenty in this happy Is^e.
The Nation's weather-glass a Playhouse is,
And when we thrive, you never do amiss.
Fear not that we'll offend you with much wit,
This day we promise you shall quiet sit,
And have a Play for men of business fit:
And though you cruelly should Damn that Play,
I Will hang, if I don't make you laugh to day.
Drammatis Personae.
Sir Humphrey Scattergood, A Prodigal, Extravagant, and Luxurious Knight.
Bellamy, His two Friends. Wildman, His two Friends. Gripe. A miserable Wretch,
that denies himself all Necessaries, very Jealous of his Wife. Richard, his
Man. Sir Christopher Swash, A foolish Debauched hotheaded Fellow, always
Drinking and Scowring, desirous to be thought a mad Fellow. Heildebrand, Two
Bullies, followers of Sir Christopher. Blunderbus, Two Bullies, followers of
Sir Christopher. Sir Nich. Peakgoose, A sneaking Cully, nosed by a Whore.
Steward to Sir Humphrey. Mrs. Gripe, Gripe's Wife, the Woman-Captain. Sergeant.
Phillis, Sir Humphrey's Whore. Cloris, Sir Christopher's Whore. Celia, Sir
Nicholas's Whore. Bawd, Fool, High-Constable, Constable, Watch, Servants,
MarketWomen, Apprentices, Parson, Soldiers, etc.
SCENE LONDON. THE Woman-Captain.
ACT. I.
Enter Sir Humphrey Scattergood dressing, Steward and Fool, with a number of
old Servants. 1 Serve. GOod your Worship! Turn us not away. I lived with my old
Master Thirty years and upwards.


2 Serve. And I fifty.


Sir Hump. Yes! he loved an old-fashioned block-headed greasy Servingman, whose
Clothes were died with Drippings of March Beer, and whose Beards stunk of Beef
and Brewis, and his Breath like the fume of an Alms-Tub.


3 Serve. We are all old, and have lived a long time here.


Sir Humph. Ye have the more reason to go away now, you are pursy, lazy, clumsy
Rogues; The time my Father's will required you to be here is out. This is my
happy Day of four and twenty, till which long time my Father's Will kept me
from my Estate. I now discard ye all; now I Will be Master, I have provided a set
of French* fellows to serve me; they are fit for Service.


Stew. They are for Slavery, They are born and bred to it: But it was never
good time since English Fools were served by French Rogues.


Sir Humph. Hey! Dubois! give 'em 40 s. a piece to drink, and send 'em packing.


Servants. Good my Lord, We beseech your Lordship. --


Dubois. Wait without!

[Ex. all, but Steward and Fool. Sir Hum and Valet de Chamber.
Sir Humph. How now, why stays that Fool?


^ool* Because that Fool has more wit than to go away.


Sir Humph. Sirrah! begone! I will not keep you. --


Fool. Some body I see has used wicked Court Policy to supplant me in my
employment.


Sir Humph. I^ll keep no Fool, it is out of fashion for great Men to keep Fools.


Fool. Because now adays they are their own Fools, and so save Charges: But for
all that they delight in Fools out of Livery. When do you see any of em favor
a Wit?


Sir Humph. I^ll have none, it is exploded even upon the Stage.


Fool. But for all that Shakespeare's Fools had more Wit than any of the Wits
and Critics now adays: Well, if the History of Fools were written, the whole
Kingdom would not contain the Library; yet a vast number of ^ools have been in
Print, and written their own Histories.


Sir Humph. You are a Satirical Fool, and will give offense.


Fool. Indeed this Age is not able to bear Satyr; and yet it is a very laughing
jeeri^g age: all Fools laugh at one another, and scarce any one i^ such a Fool,
but he has a sub-Fool that he can laugh at --


Sir Humph. Begone Sirrah! I Will have no fooling.


Fool. Good Sir Humphrey, I will be a fashionable Fool, and learn ^o lisp,
speak French, and be very much aff^cted. I will be a well^red Fool, a
Flatterer, or a Pimp, if you please, you may turn away a K^ve or a Chap^in for
me.


Sir Humph. Who waits there! take away the Fool!

[They thrust. Well, Mr. Steward, upon condition you will leave off your
miserable (...) and follow my Instructions, I receive you again*


Stew. Since it must be* I Will endeavor to obey you in all.


Sir Humph. Put some Pulv^lio into my Peruke! give me some Tuberose. You old
Fool reach some Orange^Flower water for my Handkerchief, how do you like this!


Stew. I dare not tell you*


(...). I Will give you leave*


Stew. Methinks! it is unmanly to keep such a stir about ones Body, I Would rather
be embalmed, like an Egyptian body, once for all, and make no more trouble of
it.


Sir Humph. Thou do not consider what a stinking Animal man is, exceeding all
Beasts in stinking, and would thou not have one mollify these Natural
imperfections --


Stew. I would have you cleanly, and serve God as my old Mr. did; sure your
Worship does not consider --


Sir Humph. Yes fool -- I do nothing but consider how I may please every sense,
I have. They were not given me in vain. No -- all my study shall be bent to
find variety of Delights, and when my own too barren fancy stops, I Will have a
Council wittier than Nero's, to invent new Pleasures.


Enter Bellamy and Wildman. Bell. Good morrow to my Lord of Land and Timber!
long may thou live and flourish in thy pleasures. The happy day is now
arrived that makes thee Master of thy Acres, and thy self.


Wildm. A Thousand Joys fall on you. The Slavery you did endur^ under your
wretched Father, will make you relish the Liberty you now arrive at.


Sir Humph. And I will use it to the full! nor Land nor Sea shall bound my
pleasures -- what e^r the Globe affords I Will have to satisf^e my Luxury.


Bell. Virtuously resolved.


Wildm. Joy of my heart: go on.


Sir Humph. I Married one young fond fool, and broke her heart already; But now
I keep a Whore, or Whores.


Stew. Yes, all the Parish from fifteen to five and thirty.


Bell. Virtuous still.


Stew. Excellent Counselors for the speedy confounding of an Estate.


Sir Humph. You that were my Father's good old Steward, and are my formal
Coxcomb: I have taken a new course, and so must you: I Will not be served so
nastily as in my days of Nonage, or as my Father was; as if his Meat had been
dressed at Pye-Corner, by greasy S^ullions there. His boiled meat, a little
Mutton with a sprig of Rosemary, and a vast deal of lean Oatmeal Pottage.


Wildm. And Mutton roasted as if it were prescribed for the Pox, and of huge
Leicestershire pease-fed Sheep, as rank as old He-Goat^, and the Poultry died
all of Hectic Fevers.


Bell. And Sallets withered, the fruit Crab apples, Sweetings and Horse Plumbs;
and for Confections, a few Carraways in a small Sawcer, as if his Worship's
House had been a Lousy Inn.


Sir Humph. Then three or four monstrous Olives, with a spoonsul or two of
damnable sharp Capers, and Suffolk Cheese.


Stew. These things my good old Master was pleased with, or he had not so
increased his Wealth.


Sir Humph. He did well: and I will revel now with what he le^t. Choke not me
with your Providence with a Pox to you --


Bell. Would you feed my Lord like a Country Justice of 300 l. a year, that has
no gusto? --


Wildm. Or like a Lawyer in Ram-Alley, or Attorneys joining their 6 d. a piece
at a greasy Cooks.


Bell. That for their Suppers score their penyworth of Tallow-cheese at a
Chandlers, with every one his Jug and Pipe of Mundungus. --


Stew. Be pleased to instruct me, and I shall obey.


Sir Humph. My chief Cook has a Book drawn up by these Gentlemen, and my self:
Read and be learned. -- There you shall find what is in season still -- the
youngest Meat always most nourishing. -- The new fallen Lamb. The tender Kid, and
young fat Pigs. Veals fed with Milk, Whitebread, and new-laid Eggs, with young
fat Beefs, and smallest Forest Mutton, fat Bucks for Summer, Barren Does for
Winter.


Wildm. Fawns out of their Dams Bellies ripped, Gelt Goats, Bruised Venison,
Su^king Rabbits, Leverets, Dousets, White Haws, Velvet Head and Ears, Shoulders
of Venison in the Kell with blood.


Bell. Turkeys, Pea^Hens, Pullets, Capons, Ducks, with Geese so cramb'd as to
be drowned in fat; squab Pigeons, Chickens in the Grease, fat Swans, and
Barn-dore Hens -- with clustered Eggs, that are provocative. --


Sir Humph. The young plump Partridge, with the tender Powt; The Pheasant and
the Quail, the Rail and Plover, roasted with the blood in 'em.


Wildm. The mounting Lark, the Messenger of Day, the long bill'd Cock, that
Winter brings in Mists-with Snipe, Duck, Teal, the Curlew and the Wild^goose,
the Brant-goose, Solon-goose and Puffi^.


Bell. Young Rooks, and new hatched Martins, the Blackbird, Felfare, Thru^h
and Wheat-Ear, which far excels the Roman Beca fica.


Sir Humph. Lincolnshire Fowl that is fatted with sweet Curds; as Pewits,
Dottrils, Gulls, Knats, Ruffs and Reeves. All these I have had, and you must
now provide.


Stew. All this shall be done, and your Worship undone. --


Sir Humph. And then for Fish what the vast Seas afford, Ponds, Immense Lakes
and Rivers too! Brett, Mullet, Turbet, Smelt, Plaice, Seat, Cod-whiting, and
the old Organ Ling with gold Flakes, with ^eightning Sturgeon to stir up my
blood* provoking Oisters, and the lusty Lobster: Crabs, ^hrimps, Crafish
Pottage, Muscles and Cookles, and dissolved Pearl and Amber in my sauce*


Wildm. The Luscio, Eel, the Trout, Char Tench, Per^h, calverd Salmon* And from
the Ponds, over grown Pikes, Carps, Breams, Torecells. The German Fish as fat
as Bucks in August.


Sir Humph. And when I would cocker up my self, Rams-Cods, Lambstones, Bucks,
Dowsets, Sparrows, Brains, the spawn of Fish, flakes of piled buttered Eggs
with Ambergreece; and when my taste grows Wanton, I will feed on Mushroons, and
on Frogs, and have a race of large Italian Snails, young Tortoises dressed costly
in their shells, and Squirrels flesh, which is dissolved Nuts, and the Indian
BirdsNest mollifi'd in Broth.


Wildm. Then Virmicelti, Potato and Tartonphily, and slatulent Roots to stir up
and to enable Appetite.


Stew. I should have taken these hard Words for conjuring, bu^ why must your
Worship have French Cooks. Methinks my Masters old English Cookmaid, with good
store of Parsley and Butter, did very well.


Sir Humph. Away you Coxcomb: Let it be your care to keep my Cellar always full
as it is now.


Stew. I am acquainted with my old Master's Merchant, h^ used to let him have
very good Langoon and Bordeaux.


Sir Humph. Porters and Carriers shall drink that; I Will have Vin d' aye, high
Country Wine, Frontiniac; all the delicious Wines of Italy and Spain; the
richer Wines of Greece and Sicily.


Bell. And Celery, Champaign and Burgundy, with Vin de Bon, Vin Celestine, and
Hermitage, and all the Wines upon the fruitful Rhine.


Sir Humph. When I debauch, the Yeoman of my Wine cellar, dre'st like God
Bacchus, squeezes his twined Wreaths of Grapes upon us -- And we have floods of
this Poetic Juice.: But do you hear, Steward, I must have Whores in abundance;
see you provide a world of Strumpets.


Stew. Does not your Worship mistake me? I am your Steward.


Sir Humph. Yes, to provide me all things necessary; and are any things so
necessary as Whores. I say, let me have Whores innumerable, and let it be your
special care -- That every Gentleman that comes within these Walls may h^ve his
Cher entire*


Stew. Your Worship has a Mistress, I dare not call her Whore --


Sir Humph. I keep one high, because it is the fashion; But for my use I Will
have as many Whores as mortal man can turn himself to.


Wildm. Live, live! my Noble Knigh^, and be Immortal --


Bell. Push Nature on, my Friend, and live apace.


Stew. He Will soon be at his Journeys end; But the chief Material is wanting
ready Money, I understand the Cash your Father left is flown, to pay in part
your Debts.


Sir Humph. Go to Gripe, my foolish Kinsman the Usurer. That is such an Ass to
deny all hi^ Senses, to live miserably to dye rich: Take 10000 l. and let him
have a Mortgage till I cut down Timber to redeem my dirt -- begone --


Bell. This damned Usurer has a pretty Wife, I have a devilish mind to her;
but she is kept so close, though I have gone to b^rrow Money when I have had no
need on it, I cannot get access to her; the Rogue suspects every Male, from a
Prince to a Kitchen* Boy.


Sir Humph. She Is so pretty on my Conscience, none would refuse her; I have set
snares for her, she can never be seen but out of a Window, which is no bigger
than the hole of a Pillory.


Wildm. He locks her up, and always carries the Key about him.


Sir Humph. Nay, at Night he sows his Shirt and her Smock together, that upon
any violent motion the twitch may wake him: There Is a Horn-preventing Design.


Bell. Faith, that shall not do, his jealousy shall pimp for me. Let us but
wait upon you in a visit to him, and let us alone.


Enter a Footman. Footm. An't please your Honor, yonder is a reverend fat old
Gentlewoman desires to be admitted.


Sir Humph. Bring her in: a Bawd I warrant you.

[Enter Bawd. Oh honest Bawd! How do thou do?


Bawd. Do! why I am e'n worn out in your Worships Service; I have gotten a
hoarseness will never leave me, with rising a Nights, to let in your Worship,
and your unseasonable Company to save my Windows: Well, I cannot live long.


Sir Humph. Thou will dye nobly then, in the Service of thy Country.


Bawd. Nay, Heaven be praised, I have been diligent in my Calling, very
diligent to supply the Necessities of young Gentlemen.


Stew. What a despicable thing a Bawd is! I hate 'em with my Heart, filthy
Creatures.


Wildm. They are something filthy; -- But they are necessary, very necessary.


Bell. Poor Bawds are carted, while great Men's Pimps are Company for Lords!


Bawd. I have no less than three Maiden-heads upon my hands, I have agreed with
their Mothers, who ^ruly are careful honest Parents, and love to provide for
their Children with a Motherly affection. I shall have 'em cheap, considering
the ^arity of Maiden-heads in this Town. I thought to give your Worship notice,
if you have use for one of 'em.


Sir Humph. For one! Ownds! I Will have 'em all. I Will spare no Money. Let me have
'em to Morrow, or to Night; for fear they should not keep.


Bawd. I cannot have 'em till to Morrow, I fear.


Bell. If so -- then let us have a Bevy of Whores for a rank Ball, for we
intend to be luxurious to Night.


Bawd. It shall be done: But I am almost faint with running up and down, and
taking pains. --


Sir Humph. Let her be taken in and rubbed and cawdled, as the Good Wives use
the Phanatick Laborers in the Gospel; and let the Bawd have Sack enough.


Footm. It shall be done: yonder are Milleners, Periwigg-men and Perfumers, and
Tradesmen of all sorts waiting without.


Sir Humph. Bid my Steward and Valet de Chamber dispatch 'em; I hate Business:
Now let us revel, this Day I dedicate to all my Senses; I'il Feast 'em all
after we have Dln'd with all the Luxury Wit^an invent, with choicest Music,
and the best of Women --


Bell. Whores, you mean.


Wildm. Ay, ay! What use can we make of honest Women?


Bell. None: They are as bad as Drones in a Hive.


Sir Humph. Whores I do mean: With whom after we have Danced and Toy'd -- I Will
have my Baths prepared full of most fragrant Scents. Where we will play and
wanton with our Concubines; there we ll lie soaking till we be refreshed. Then
we'll come out, be rubbed, and be anointed with precious Oils and Essences; and
then we'll roll our selves in Beds of Orange-Flowers.


Bell. How I dissolve at the Description.


Wild. I am all Ecstasy already.


Enter Celia, Phillis, and Cloris. Sir Humph. Oh, here is my Mistress.


Omn. We come to wi^ you Joy, my dear Lord, of this happy Day.


Sir Humph. Ye bring it with you! Gentlemen, salute these fair Ladies.

[They salute.
Bell. Are these Friends of your Mistress, Whores?


Wild. If they be, as a hundred to one they are, They are glorious ones!


Sir Humph. Fie, fie, Whores! That Is a naughty word. They are Ladies; there are
no Whores but such as are poor and beat Hemp, and Whipped by Rogues in Blew Coats.


Bell. They are brave Magistrates to commit Adultery themselves, and whip poor
Wenches for simple Fornication.


Wild. There Is no Law to whip but that of Vagrants, and when a poor Wench has
labored in her Calling seven years in the same Parish; These Fellows will whip
her for a Vagrant.


Bell. These old Fellows, that love it themselves, think the Wenches do so too,
perhaps.


Chlo. You are the pattern of all Knights; you keep your Mistress so fine; I Will
swear it is very commendable --


Celia. Oh it is admirable! all the Town admires you: You win the Hearts of all
the Ladies with it, I vow.


Sir Humph. No! we must all yield to your Friend Sir Nicholas Peakgoose: He is
the most liberal and most obsequious Keeper, and ^tarves his Wife and Children
for you.


Celia. I must confess he does pretty well. --


Sir Humph. Why did you not bring him hither?


Celia. I should be willing enough; but if I use him to it, he will be always
going abroad in my Coach with me: No! that must not be.


Chlo. She has a rare hand over him; if I could govern my Gallant so, I were a
Princess.


Phill. I desire not to govern, my Dear; if I have but thy Love, Child, I wish
for nothing else -- But thy Money.

[Aside.
Sir Humph. No more! No more! Call in my Music, and let 'em Sing and Play --
Come in.


SONG.
LOve thee till there shall be an end of matter,
So long, till Courtiers leave in Courts to flatter;
While empty Courtlings shall laugh, jeer, and jibe,
Or till an old lean* Judge refuse a Bribe.
Till Young'men Women bate, I will love thee;
Till greedy Lawyers shall renounce a Fee,
And till Decrepit Misers Money hate,
Or Statesmen leave to juggle in a State.
While Priests Ambition troubles Commonwealths,
Till Whores grow chaste and Thieves forsake their Stealths;
Till Tradesmen leave to Cozen and to Lie,
Till there is a Worthy Flatt'rer, or Brave Spy.
Till Honest Valiant Men can be afraid,
Till Kings by Favorites are not betrayed;
Till all Impossibles do meet in one,
I Will love thee Phillis, and love thee alone.
Sir Humph. Now let us retire and take the Pleasure of our Gardens: Music
follow us --

[Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Gripe and Richard. Gripe. Come Richard, because thou art but new come, I
must instruct thee -- Thou see my whole Design is to be Rich.


Rich. Yes, and to keep your Servants Poor.


Gripe. And to that end, I deny and keep my ba^e unruly Senses under: for if
any one sense get the better of a man; he will never be rich.


Rich. I am sure I have not pleased one since I came.


Gripe. That Is well: Let me have three Ribs of Mutton boiled in a Pipkin for
our Dinners; go, buy me a lean Breast -- lean meat is wholsomest.


Rich. If I could light of a Sheep that died in a Ditch.


Gripe. Ay, that should be cheap -- besides, I like a Natural Death better than
Murder. To Morrow is Holy day -- I will have four Ribs, and some Cabbage.


Rich. This is feasting, b^t our ordinary Diet of Oatmeal and Water --


Gripe. It Is very wholesome and cleansing --


Rich. It Is the Scotch-Diet, very good for Mangy Hounds; What Sauce will you
have for your Mutton?


Gripe. A Pox on Sauce! it spoils the Natural appetite; yet some Onion or
Garlic you may get: I have some Ferkin'Butter and Suffolk Cheese, fine lean
Cheese, twill go so far --


Rich. Sir, I have a great Inclination to a (...)* May I not get one? it is
cheap --


Gripe. Not so cheap, yet next Holy Day I will buy one for my Family: But Ox
Livers and the Entrails o^ (...), are very nourishing.


Rich. He cannot b^ content to ^ob and oppress men with his Extortion, but he
must rob the D^gs of their diet; you (...) Kids and Lambs of your own, if it
please your Worship.


Gripe. It does not please my Worship, sure you have lived with some Epicure:
No, sell 'em to Luxurious fools, that will die Beggars.


Rich. I hear Sir Humphrey Scattergood intends to send a Buck.


Gripe. I Will sell it then; 'twill cost more the Baking than it is worth -- we
kill our selves in England with filthy pampering.


Rich. I can go a Fowling with my Piece, and catch Wild-fowl for your Worship.


Gripe. By my troth but your Worship shall not; you will spend more in Powder
and Shot than your Body's worth; Besides, a waterSpaniel with his ravenous gut
will ^at me out of house and home: Wild-fowl? They are fit for Lucullus or
Apiciu^.


Rich. Sir, we can steal Coneys, if it please you --


Gripe. No Sir! I must find you Butter. What damned Luxurious Fellow have thou
lived with?


Rich. Sir, I beseech you be pleased to let us have some Wheat Bread, for I
have gotten the Griping, and the Iliaca Pas^io, with Rye and Barley Bread.


Gripe. Peace Fool! I am not so Prodigal, thank Heaven.


Rich. Must we never have any Wine or Strong -- Beer --


Gripe. Why! you Impudent fellow, would you have us dye of F^avers? To drink
Wine shall be Treason, and strong Beer Felony without Clergy: I have wholesome
very, very small Beer, so clear, so fine, the Malt not to be tasted in it --
The Patriarchs drank nothing but Water.


Rich. That I deny, ask Lot else*


Gripe. Go -- Unlock my Wife's Chamber, and bid her come to me* This damned
pampering Rogue would ruin me with his Gut.


Enter Mrs. Gripe. Mrs. Gripe. Will this Tyra^nie never be at an end? must I be
always thus abridg'd of Liberty? a ^am*d Fowl ha^ a better tim^ on it, for
that is fed well; but I am cooped up and starv^* ^ay have no Necessary of life,
that is fit for a young Woman --


Gri^e. Come Love, you have very good wholesome food, it is fit a young Woman
should mortify and keep down her Lusts.


Rich. Especially when she marries an old Man, he will fast her down to his own
appetite --


Mrs. Gripe. Nay, in the Winter I am kept without Fire or Candle. I have
neither Natural or Artificial heat from --


Gripe. It Is to preserve thy life, my Love. Did thou ever see Cooks or
Glassmen long lived? Fire destroys the Natural heat, they live longest in cold
Countries.


Rich. Yet Meat is always raw for want of fire.


Gripe. I will save fire, and have it roasted by Burning* Glasses; and instead
of Candles (and by the way the Grand Signior, suffers none of his Wives to have
any,) I will have Glowworms, rotten Wood and fish Bones -- Fire suffocates
Natural heat.


Mrs. Gripe. I have heard your Servants in Winter wi^h for the Plague or any
hot Disease; and I for my part could be contented with a Fever.


Gripe. Can you not use Exercise to stir up your Natural heat.


Mrs. Gripe. You let me have Exercise little enough! Heaven knows.


Gripe. Can you not play at Shuttlecock, or carry a Handful upon occasion?


Rich. I will play at Stool-ball with the Maids, and that will stir up Natural
heat.


Mrs. Gripe. No -- I have endured your cruel Tyranny too long; but above all,
your Jealousy is most provoking.


G^ipe. It Is nothing but my love, my great love. Do thou think I do not love
my Money -- why I am Jealous of that, and lock it up as I do thee -- I know
what a Treasure thou ar^*


Mrs. Gripe. Give me leave to know my own value too: And that I deserve not to
be used so, I will have the liberty of a She-Subject of England.


Gripe. What a Pox! The liberty of Cuckolding your Husband, for that it comes
to, to receive Visits, and sculk about in Chairs in Vizors, to meet damned
Roguy Whoremasters, which they call Admirers with a Pox to 'em.


Mrs. Gripe. Thou deserve to be used so. When you are at home I am never out
of my Prison, but in your presence, my cruel Jailor; and when you are abroad, I
am fed at a Grate like the Lions in the Tower (if I may call it feeding.) If
there be any means under the Sun to get ^y liberty, I will attempt it.

[Enter Rich.
(...). Nay then I will use my Conjugal authority.


Rich. Sir Humphrey Sca^ergood's Steward is come ^o ^peak with you.


Gripe. Go into your Chamber! go, I say.


Mrs. Gripe. Well Tyrant, I shall be quit with you.


Gripe. No, you shall not; I Will take care not to be a Cuckold.


[She goes, he follows her, lock's ^er in, and returns. Enter Steward. Rich.
Your humble Servant.


Stew. Sir, I am your Friend and Serva^t to command. Mr. Gripe, Good Morrow to
your Worship.


Gripe. Mr. Steward, What brings you hither.


Stew. My Master's Command.


Gripe. What can his Worship honor me withal?


Stew. It is to borrow Money on a Mortgage.


Gripe. Look you Richard, this is an Ass that will please all his Senses, and
he must borrow* Oh damned Senses! Well, the Money's ready, 10000 l. we treated
for.


Stew. E're long we shall have occasion to trouble you for more, as Sir
Humph^ey goes on.


Gripe. See what becomes of foolish Sense-pleasers! Poor Puppies! Miserable*
Fools! I pity 'em: I Will not please one, not ^* Richard: Come, let us about this
Business, and get my Lord to Seal.


Rich. Well said, old Chaucer, say I. --

'Twould make one*scratch where it does not i^ch,
To see Fools live poor to dye rich.
[Exeunt.
The End of the First Act.
ACT. II.
Enter Sir Humphry, Bellamy, Wildman, Phillis, Celia, Chloris. Servants waiting
at Dinner. Sir Humph. CAll in my Music! I Will consecrate my Birthday to all my
Senses: He is a narrow-hearted Ass that pleases one at once; I Will please as
many as I can together.


Bell. It is Ingenious Luxury!


Sir Humph. I hate a mere Glutton, a mere Drunkard, or a mere Wencher; They are
as bad as mere Scholars or mere Lawyers, good for nothing else: That man is
happiest that takes delight in most things: There Is not a Virtue or a Vice I Will
leave untried for Pleasure or for Curiosity.


Wildm. There spoke a Cherub; Fill up the Bowl then, fill it high; fill all the
Glasses up; for why, here is our noble Friend's, Sir Humphrey's Health.


Bell. Give me a Brimmer to celebrate his Birthday. Ladies, There Is no scaping
this Health. Men of Rosin and Cats-guts, strike up.


Sir Humph. Strike up! D' hear Rascals! Let me have costlier Scents, and fume
the Room; my Nostrils are not pleased enough.


Bell. Are all ready? a Thousand years to you.


Wildm. And all the while the joy of Wine, Youth, and Beauty with you.


Phill. Thy everlasting Health, my Dear!

[Sound an Alarm all together. They flourish.
Enter Gripe, Steward, and Richard* Stew. My Lord, Mr. Gripe has drawn Bills;
they are accepted, and he is come to have you Sign and Seal --


Sir Humph. Kick that old Fool out, is he come to interupt my pleasure with
damned confounded Business? which always must with me give way to my delight.


Stew. How this must rejoice my old Master's Ghost, could he but see it!


Gripe. Good! How fast his Worships Land will m^lt into my Coffers; these are
foolish Sense-pleasers, Richard.


Sir Humph. Sit down and eat with us, Mr. Gripe.


Gripe. I will not eat luxurious Meats: I love no Surfeits.


Bell. Give him a Beer Glass to Sir Humphrey's Health.


Gripe. I have renounced Wine, I do not care for Fevers, nor will I please one
Sense I have.


Cel. Out on him! Filthy fellow* will he not please his Senses?


Bell. Methinks a Fever should be a very pleasant Disease for an old Man.


Rich. Are you mad Sir! why 'twill cost you nothing; at least give me leave to
snap at a little Meat and Wine.


Gripe. You Rascal! will you Disgrace my Housekeeping. They Will think you are
Hungerstarv'd --


Rich. They Will not think much amiss.


Gripe. Peace you damned Epigram! contein your self, or I will mawl your Pate
for you: Laugh at these Sense* pleasers; They will dye in Ditches, fool.


Richard. Better dye than live in Ditches, and we live worse -- for Frogs have
a better life than we.


Phill. Let us not mind this Brute. But let your Servants Dance their Entry you
promised --


Sir Humph. Let 'em begin!

Dance. Does not this please you?


Gripe. What is the worth of any thing, but so much Money as 'twill bring: He
was a brave Poet that wrote that.


Sir Humph. But here are fine Ladies! here is a sight for you, and to enjoy 'em
in Dalliance, were pleasure infinite --


Gripe. A huge Trunk-full of Bonds and Mortgages, and another great Coffer-full
of Money to roll and wanton in; There Is a sight! there is rapture for you --


Sir Humph. Yes, for Fools that make Money the end of their wishes, and not the
means to other things. Come on! Sing the Song I love so well --


Gripe. Pox on Songs! give me the Jingling of Money-bags.


SONG.
LEt some great joys pret^nd to find
In empty Whim^ies of the mind;
And nothing to the Soul can come,
Till the ushering Senses make it roo^.
Nor can the Mind be ever at ease,
Unless you first the Body please.
Lif^ is, what ^'re (...) M^n may doub^,
But taking in and putting out.
Since Life's but a Span,
Live as much as you can:
Let none of it pass without Pleasure;
But push on your Strength
Of what Life wants in length:
In the Br^adth you must make up the Measure.
2.
All solid Pleasures, Fo^s lay by;
And seek they know not what, nor why:
Imperfect Images the enjoy,
Which Fancy makes, and can deftroy.
Wh' in immaterial things delight,
Dream in the Day as well as Night:
In that how can they Pleasure take,
Of which no Image Thought can make.
Since Life's, etc.
3.
In vain no moment then be spent,
Fill up the little Life that is lent;
Feasts, Music, Wine the Day possess;
The Night, Lov^, Youth and Beauty bless.
The Senses now in parcels treat,
Then all together by the great;
No empty space in Life be found,
But one continued Joy go round.
Since Life's, etc.
Phill. Very fine, I vow --


Celia. Upon my word it is delicate!


Chl. Well, Sir Humphrey's a sweet man.


Sir Humph. How do you like this, Mr. Gripe?


Gripe. It Is abominable, profane, scandalous, and scurvy.


Sir Humph. I Will try to please you; you shall hear an Italian Eunuch.


Gripe. I had as lieve hear a Greyhound with Trillo's and long Graces, sing a
Love Song to the Moon; But much rather hear my Mastiff ^eaching my Neighbor's
Hog his Gamut, when he comes into my Ground.


Sir Humph. What think you of a broken Con^ort of Violins and Theorbo's joined
(...) Italian Voices. I Will have that for you. --


Gripe. I had rather hear a Broken Consort in my Hogyard: My Bores and Sows
grunt out Harmonious Bases, my Hogs sing out their Brisker Countenours, my
swee^ voic'd Pigs squeak out Melodious Trebles. --


Bell. What think you of a Consort of Cathedral Voices.


Gripe. I had rather h^ar sweet Frogs chant out their Anthems against Rain,
joined with the passionate voices of old Toads. And for my more sprightly
Music -- Schreech Owls, and a Consort of Cats run mad for Love, with the
Harmonious braying of some Asses; joined to these a Paper-Mill for an Organ, a
Pewterer, Silver-Smith, Trunk-Maker, with Tinkers playing thorough Bases upon
Kettles. Tell not me of Music; dispatch my Business.


Sir Humph. Come I will withdraw with you, and Sign and Seal.


Phill. Ladies, I will wait on you again instantly.


[Exit all but Bell. Wild. Celia, Chloris. Bell. Survey my youth, and reslect
upon your own Beauty, and immagin whether it be possible to forbear thinking or
talking of Love when we meet --


Celia. Neither thinking nor talking of Love will do the business, I am engaged
to Sir Nicholas Peakegoose, and would not be false for the whole world, I swear
--


Bell. True to him, it is impossible; you cannot love him, he is ugly and foolish
--


Celia. Oh, but he is very good natured, and admires me extremely -- you that
call your selves witty men, have some Love indeed; but it is like French
Courage, hot in the Onset, and as swift in the retreat --


Wildm. True to a keeper, sure you will not be a thing so out of fashion --


Chlo. Oh Lord, I would not be false to Sir Chri^topher Smash for all this
earthly good: It Is a shame Women should be so false to their Intrigues, as some
are; I wonder at their Consciences. What do they think will become of their
Souls another day?


Wildm. Love heartily, as I do, and 'twill take away that scruple; let me tell
you, (...) a great Sin, and I wonder you can have the Conscience not to pity
^e: For you have struck me to the hea^ --


Chlo. You are pleased to say so.


Wildm. Will you hear me swear bloodily? by --


Chlo. Hold! hold! have you no Religion in you? Lord, how I tremble for fear of
an Oath!


Bell. It Is true, he pays for your Body; but it is not fit he should have your
mind: let me but have that --


Celia. That will not serve your turn.


Bell. No, -- But if I have the Mind once, I am sure the Body is not far off,
which would be never the worse for Sir Nicholas should I leave it, which I never
would --


Celia. Shall it ever be said that I am false to my Keeper? --


Bell. No, it shall never be told; and if it were, he would never believe it, who
is so conceited of himself, that he thinks you love him.


Celia. We of our Profession must be as careful of our Credit as Merchants and
Bankers should be; if we break with one, we shall never be trusted by another.


Bell. Care to conceal is good; but barren Truth is good for nothing: The
falsest Women like the greatest Knaves, thrive most.


Wild. I should love at another rate than your Friend Swash; I should not leave
you for the love of Bottles and the Company of Bullies, to roar, and scowr, and
break Windows.


Chlo. Indeed he is a little too wild, but he has the prettiest merry humors
with him --


Wild. I desire but to visit you, while Drink makes him unfit for you; I am
sure you do not love him.


Chlo. No, why he is the prettiest wittiest wild Gentleman about the Town: He
says the Wits love him dearly.


Bell. All Love is in equality. I am sure you cannot love him whom you keep
under like a Spaniel.


Celia. Indeed I keep him in Discipline; do not Fathers love their Children,
yet keep 'em at a distance.


Enter Sir Christopher Swash, Blunderbus, and Heildebrand. Sir Christ. and
Bullie^ Sing. Let Us Drink, let us Drink all Day and Night Give each a lusty Bowl:
This is the ravishing Delight Of every Thirsty Soul;
Let others soak all Night in Beds And live but half their time,
The Wine that is always in our Heads Shall still preserve us in ou^ prime,
Shall still, etc.
Sir Christ. The Devil take me Blunderbus and Heild^brand, if we be nt very mad
Fellows.


Celia* This is Sir Christopher Swash, and his two Bullies.


Blund. Ounds! what Prigg is yon talking with your Natural --


Heild. Shall I pluck out Porker, and lay him on thick?


Sir Chr. No, he is my friend, an honest fellow, and as mad a fellow as the best
of us. Honest Wildman Oily, how do thou do? How do Prigg Bellamy? Gad we
have had a rare Night on it, we have roared, and sung and ranted; kick't all
Males, kissed all Females, swing'd Constables and Watches, trounced Bailiffs,
broke Windows and stormed Bawdy-houses, and committed other outrages to the
confusion of much people --


Celia. Oh, fie my Dear; why would thou venture thy Person, when thou know
how I love thee? get thee gone, Thou art such a wild thing.


Sir Chr. Peace, my Buttock, no harm done; we have not been in Bed these four
and twenty hours.

Let others soak all Night in Beds, etc. [Sings.
And live but half their time, etc.
On my Conscience and Soul we broke Fourscore pounds worth of Windows.


Bell. Is not this a pretty Gentleman to be in Love with?


Sir Chr. Pray, know my Friends, Blunderbus and Heildebrand: They are as honest
fellows as ever drank Beer-glass, and as brave as ever stood Cannon-bullet --
But where is Sir Humphrey? hey -- hey --

The Wine that is always in our Heads
Shall still preserve us in our prime.
Am not I a very mad fellow, Ha, Sir Humphrey -- Hey boys! let* me kiss thee,
Oyl^e --


Enter Sir Humphrey, Phillis, and Steward. Sir Humph. Sir Christopher Swash,
your Servant.


Sir Chr. Let me present these Gentlemen to you they are of good Families;
Their Name Blunderbus and Heildebrand.


Sir Humph. They are great Names indeed; but they are something negligently
dressed --


Sir Chr. That Is all one, they are as brave as Lightning; and will kick
^ailiffs like Thunder, and faith they will scowr and roar like Cannon. They are
the best Company in the world, and are my Lifeguard against Bailiffs.


Sir Humph. They look dreadfully --


Sir Chr. Dreadfully! so they do; why each of 'em has killed his man. But as
they are very brave, so they are very ingenious, and rare Company -- Here Is
Heildebrand has a number of the purest Bawdy Songs, and will Sing and Play a
through* base with his fingers rubbing too and fro upon a Table thus, most
incomparably; and then Blunderbus will hoop, hollow, and hunt over a Bottle
with any man in Europe, and they are the bravest Catch-singers both of 'em --


Blund. Nay, gad Sir Nicholas, you make me blush.


Heild. Upon my honor, you Compliment!


Sir Chr. Because they say so now, you shall hear 'em sing -- a Boat, a Boat.


Blund. Come on.


Heild. To please you --

A Boat, a Boat, haste to the Ferry, etc.

[They Sing.
Sir Chr. Are not we mad Fellows? Faith we can be merry and we set on it; we
have roared and scowr'd, and kept Covent Garden waking all last Night.


Blund. On my Conscience we beat Threescore people.


Sir Chr. Ay, Fourscore, Men, Women, and Children -- ha, was not that well?


Sir Humph. Oh very well! Hark you Gentlemen, a Design comes into my Head of
carrying this roaring Company, the Women and the Fiddles to that wretch Gripe's
House --


Bell. That will be very well -- 'Twill fright him out of his Wits, and perhaps
free his Wife into the Bargain --


Blund. Whose Caravan is that other which yon spruce Prigg talks with --


Sir Chr. A Coxcomb's, one Sir Nicholas Peak-goose. --


Heild. Does yon fellow manage her?


Sir Chr. No, she is kept I tell you: Do you think a Woman that is kept would lie
with another?


Phill. We shall certainly have very good sport.


Sir Humph. It Is resolved, Sir Christopher -- we have resolved that all this
Company, and my Fiddles, shall forthwith go to the wretch Gripe's House, and
Rant and Sing, Dance and Roar, and play pranks there --


Sir Chr. Hey Boys! Hey! a most admirable Design -- We Will tear the ground, and
roar, and make more noise than a Sea Fight.

Good store of brisk Claret supplies, etc.
And the Man that is Drunk is as great as a King.

Sir Humph. Well said, Sir Christopher, do you hear Steward, bid all my Coaches
be brought to the Gate; and provide a Collation fit for us, as you tender your
Ears; and send all my Fiddles and Voices to Gripe's with the Collation --


Sir Chr. Come! let us march on, Blunderbus and Heildebrand; we will break
Windows all the way we go, Kick every Male from a Link-boy to a Lord upwards;
Kiss every Female, from the Simpering Lady to the Widemouth Jade that cries
Sprats; Swinge Bum-bailiffs excessively, and commit filthy outrage, to the
astonishment of the Mobile: Come along.


Good store of good Claret supplies, etc. [Exeunt Omn^s. SCENE Gripe's House.
Gripe and Richard. Gripe. Where have you been roguing Sirrah, that you did not
wait on me home?


Rich. I stayed to do a thing I am not used to, fill my Belly, enjoy my
Friends, and be Merry.


Gripe. Oh Devil -- I think the Rogue stinks of Strong-Beer, foh -- *


Rich. That Is a lie. It Is Wine! Cry you mercy Sir, is that a stink? here is Sir
Humphrey's good Health -- He Is a Noble person, will you pledge me, Sir --


Gripe. Heaven and Earth! the Impudent Rogue's Drunk --


Rich. I have Drank and Victual'd at Sir Humphrey's for a Months Famine I am to
endure here -- I am hung round with Bottles and stuffed full of Provision; will
you eat a Pullet?


Gripe. Oh impudent Villain! bring Drunkenness into my House --


Rich. Ay, or else I never should have found it here --


Gripe. Audacious Villain! Thou stay'st not in my House -- I will turn thee
away presently --


Rich. The best News I have heard these ten days --


Gripe. Say thou so Rogue, no, I will have thee whipped soundly* And in the
mean time I will beat thee damnably, to tame thy damned unrul^ Senses. Thou
base, filthy Swine --


Rich. Here Is Twelve Go-downs more upon Reputation, to Sir Hump^rey's Health --


Gripe. I Will health you Rogue! take that -- I Will mawl your Rogue^hip --


Rich. 'Twas base to take advantage of my Drinking. Stand off, I say; for if
you strike once more, take notice good Claret has taken away the relation
betwixt us, and I shall grow damnably passionate --


Gripe. Ha! the Rogue may kill me in his Drink, and for ought I know rob me,
which is worse. Go, and bid the Maid set on the Pipkin with the black Pudding
for your Mistresse's Supper and mine.


Rich. A Pox on Pipkins -- I have brought my Mistress some crammed Chickens,
Westphalia Bacon, Neats Tongues, and some^hing else in my Breeches -- I have an
honor for my Mistress, and should be loath to see her want.


Gripe. Thy Back shall be mawl'd for this at Bridewell to Morrow; Rogue, Dog,
Son of a Whore: Richard, sell that Wine and Provision, and I will put the Money
out for thee. 'Twill come to a pretty Sum in a year --


Rich. I scorn Usury: Do you think I Will be cursed as you are?


Gripe. As I am! Rogue --


Rich. Good words, I say, -- for I am in an ill h^mour, and shall be suddenly
provoked; but to show I am in perfect Charity with you, here is to my
Mistresse's health, I honor her most immaculately --


Gripe. Go, go -- out, and sleep and be sober --


Rich. Well, farewell; I Will not keep such base sober Company --


Gripe* To morrow shall thy Carcass suffer, and thy Senses be tamed. Here
Mally! where art thou? Come we will walk and take the Air, that thou may get
a Stomach to thy Supper.


Enter Mrs. Gripe* Mrs. Gripe. 'Twere well if I could get a good Supper to my
Stomach.


Gripe. I keep a temperate Diet to preserve us. Do not they that fare hardest
live longest?


Mrs. Gripe. I can endure your dissembling no longer. It Is for the love of vile
Money, and not care of my Health. I have born thy Tyranny too long.


Gripe. I Save* to make thee a rich Widow -- I think the Woman begins to be
peevi^h. Come, I will kiss thee, and put thee in good ^umour, feth I will.


Mrs. Gripe. Kiss a Death's head! a Coffin! my Mother betrayed me in my Youth
to the slavery of thy Age. Thou did promise to be a Father to me; thou can
not be a Husband, and wilt not be a Father -- but a cruel Tyrant.


Gripe. Be not perverse; for by Cock and Bottle, Heaven forgive me for Swearing
-- I will give thee Conjugal Chastisement --


Mrs. Gripe. Sheart! talk no more to me of that, you have worn out all my
patience; and I henceforward will be a Tigress to thee.


Gripe. Audacious!


Mrs. Gripe. I have a Brother, who comes this Night to Town, he loves me, we
were Twins, he will right me; Thou never saw him, but shortly to thy cost thou
shall -- His Sergeant spoke to me out at my Prison Window, he is beating up
Drums for a supply for Flanders. There is not a fiercer young Officer in the
Army: He Will cut thy Throat if thou abusest me so.


Gripe. Death, is that Hectorly Fellow come, you use to threaten me with? Oh
Impudence! my Family is turned Topsy-turvy --


Mrs. Gripe. I will have the same Christian Liberty that others of my quality
have, I will visit and be visited --


Gripe. Visits with a Pox; ay, that way come Messages, Tokens, Letters and
Bawding for one another, and the Frolic goes round.


Mrs. Gripe. I will have Money enough to venture 50 l. in a Night at Ombre.


Gripe. Ounds 50 l. she makes me tremble!


Mrs. Gripe. I Will make you know the right of an English Woman before I have
done.


Gripe. Prodigious and amazing! the right of an English Woman to cheat and
cuckold her Husband! in into your Chamber! go in, I say!


Mrs. Gripe. Peace, old Fool. I say not in.


Gripe. Nay then Correction will ensue*


Mrs. Gripe. Yes! that it shall old Tyrant --

He lifts up his Cane, she wrests it out of his hand.
Gripe. What noise is that?


Enter a Servant of Sir Humphrey Scattergood. Serve. Sir, My Master is just
entering with a great Train of Gentlemen and Ladies, and has sent a Collation
and Bottles of Wine, that you may not be at Charges.


Gripe. Confound him and his Train. Do You hear Mrs. go into your Chamber.


Mrs. Gripe. I will stay to entertain the Ladies.


Gripe. Ladies! Whores* a Plague on 'em all! in, in, or this knife shall be
embrued in thy Blood.


Mrs. Gripe. Help! help! I will not go in.


Enter Sir Humphrey, Sir Christopher, Bellamy, Wildman, Heildebrand and
Blunderbus, with Phillis, Celia, Chloris. Servants, Fiddles, etc. Sir Humph.
What Is the matter! at wars with your Wife?


Gripe. My dear Wife! No -- She is not well, she will endanger her health;
which is very dear to me.


Mrs. Gripe. I am well -- I shall not endanger my health, nor is it dear to
him. Ladies, your humble Servant, I am proud of the honor of this visit.

[Men and Women salute Mrs. Gripe.
Gripe. Ounds! she can Compliment. Death they kiss too most Lasciviously --


Sir Chr. How do thou do, old Boy! we are come to Drink, Sing, Roar, and be
merry with thee,

The Kings most faithful Subjects ^e
In's Service are not Dull,
We drink to show our Loyalty
And make his Coffers full.
Would all his Subjects dr^nk like us,
We'd make him richer far,
More Powerful and more Prosp'rou^*
Then all the Eastern Monarchs are,
Then all, etc.

Sir Humph. Madam! I come to endeavor your release, and therefore be ready at
the first opportunity.


Mrs. Gripe. You oblige me.


Gripe. Have you any private business with my Wife?


[Comes* betwixt ^em. Sir Chr. What a Pox, do you interrupt a Gentleman, that is
talking to your Wife -- hah!


Heild. He deserves Chastisement, you uncivil old Prigg.


Blund. If he had offered that to me, I would have blow^ him into Atoms.


Sir Chr. Shall I beat him, and kick him damnably, and break his Windows, Sir
Humphrey, ha!


Sir Humph. Not yet! Come Ladies, I have brought my Fiddles. Let Us have a Dance
in the first place.


Mrs. Gripe. With all my heart.


Grip^. What will becom^ of me! Hell is broke loose. Huswife, remember this.


Sir Humph. Come Mr. Gripe, will you join with us?


Gripe. No Sir, I thank you Richard; raise the Constable and a strong Watch
against these outrageous Rascals.


Rich. Sir, I will not for the world; Sir Humphrey is my Friend, and I love and
honor him; and here'^ another Rous to his health.


Gripe. Hell and Confusion! Damned Rogue! I Will murder thee.


Rich. You shall not starve me as long as Sir Humphrey lives, i'gad.


Gripe. Ounds! She dances, a very damned confounded TownJade.

They dance a Country Dance, at the end of which Sir Humphrey leads her out
Dancing. Hell and Devils! what trick's this -- oh my Wife, my Wife, come in you
Baggage.

[He runs out and pulls her in.
Sir Humph. Are you mad? It Is part of the Dance.


Gripe. You shall lead her no such Dan^e. Here Huswife, get you into your
Chamber. --


Sir Chr. What do you interrupt the Dan^e? Earthquakes, Inundations, roaring
Seas and Thunder, I Will mawl ye.

[Kicks him.
Rich. There Is rare taming of you^ Senses for you.


Mrs. Gripe. Excellent -- I Will not take 200 l. for this beating.


Sir Chr. Break all the Windows -- Heildebrand ^d Blunderbus --


Mrs. Gripe. Hold, hold! what do you mean?


Gripe. Good again, very good.


Sir Chr. At your Command much may be done, Madam.


Sir Humph. Sirrah! Fill every one a Brimmer to Mrs. Gripe's health. Give Gripe
one.


Sir Chr. Take it, and drink it to your Lady's health; or by the Soul of
Scanderbeg I will carbonado thy old musty Body.


Gripe. Pl^gues! and Curses! well, there is no remedy.


Sir Chr. Down on your Knees all. Strike up Fiddles, an Alarm, Fire all -- Hey
Boys --

Good store of brisk Claret s^pplies every t^ing,
And the Man, etc.
Am not I a very mad fellow, Sir Humphrey?


Celia. Did you ever see such an odious old fellow?


Bell. Women, I see can lie by any na^useous Ras^als, if they will marry them or
keep 'em -- I am sure you cannot nor shall not love Sir Nichol^


Wildm. Prithee! think no more of that Roister.


Chlo. Really ^e's a pretty witty wild Creature.


Gripe. Gentlemen, what have I done to deserve these Outrages?


Sir Chr. Done! Damm'e you are a Rogue, and an Usurer, Sirrah!


Phill. Done! filthy fellow to shut up your Wife against the Law of Nature.


Sir Humph. We come to oblige you, to visit and be merry with you and your Lady
--


Sir Chr. Hands all around* We'll Dan^e ab^ut him, till you run away with his
Wife. Play Fiddles -- fa, la, la, la, la.


Sir Hum. Come Madam, -- break off --

He breaks off with Mrs. Gripe* -- As he is going off, Gripe creeps under their
Legs.
Gripe. Come back Whoremaster! have I caught you, Strumpet? remember there is
Law Sir. Remember that --


Blund. What does the Scoundrel talk of Law?


Heild. Beat his Brains out.

[Boy with a Flambeux ready.
Mrs. Gripe. Now Gentlemen, you must give me leave to say you do not well to
triumph over an old Man. He is my Husband, and I must love him; though he uses
me tyrannically, and shuts me up in Prison --


Celia. How, shut up your Wife!


Chlo. How, shut up your Wife!


Phill. How, shut up your Wife!


Celia. Oh thou old Do^rd. Thou shame of Mankind!


Chlo. Woman was meant to go at large: Thou filthy Creature.


Phill. Shall Woman, that is wild by Nature, be tamed by thee base Fellow?


Sir Humph. He invades the right of Whoremasters, and it is not to be born; we
have the right of Commonage, and he impales.


Gripe. Heaven protect me but this once, I seldom trouble it.


Mrs. Gripe. I am resolved to escape, but not in such lewd Company. Richard, Do
you stand here whatever happens till I come to you, and do as I direct you, and
I Will reward you --


Rich. Any thing; for I love and honor you, and scorn and hat^ my Master.


Gripe. Yet I say, Mally, good Mally go into my Chamber.


Mrs. Gripe. I perceive their intentions are base -- I will my dear, instantly*
Sir, put out all the Candles, and I Will secure my Escape.


Sir Humph. With all my heart, Gentlemen, assist me in this Design.


Gripe. The Candles are out -- murder, murder, help, help. I am cuckolded,
robbed, undone. Murder! Villains, Thieves, Murderers, Whoremasters, Sons of
Whores, Rascals, Strumpets --

[Mrs. Gripe puts a loose Gown on Richard.
Mrs. Gripe. Where art thou, my Dear? I will go in with thee, I am convinced I
was in the wrong.

[She puts Rich. hand in Gripe's.
Gripe. Come my Dear, give me thy hand, my good Dear; I Will mawl thee with a
Plague to thee for this -- anon --

[Aside. [ Gripe leads Rich. into the Chamber for his Wife.
Mrs Gripe. Now -- farewell old Tyrant, and all the rest of ye; if I had escaped
by violence, I had had a hue and cry after me, and been stopped presently --

[Exit Mrs. Gripe.
Heild. Gad! its dark -- have at these Women -- Ounds you Son of a Whore.

Kisses Cel. Bell. strikes him, he strikes Blunder.
Blund. Lightning and Thunder! what Rascal cufft me? have at somebody.


Sir Humph. What Is the Matter! Flamboyes come in.

They draw, Women shriek and get out.
Sir Chr. I Will stand up against the Wall. Fight on my merry men all --


Gripe. Oh for some Murder among themselves.

Enter Footmen with Flambeaux:
Sir Humph. What Is the matter here?


Blund. I was boxt!


Heild. I was cufft!


Sir Chr. Come brave Boys: 'twas in the dark, and it is no dishonor, never mind
it.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares handsomely do,
Is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.

Sir Humph. Some other time let this be examined --


Gripe. Now you will be gone; She you came for is safe! all your force cannot break
open that Door. There lies your way --


Footm. He is mistaken, the Lady took one of the Coaches by your order, she
said, and is gone --


Sir Humph. Let Us be gone and look after the Ladies.


Blund. I shall make some smoke.


Heild. Blood shall ensue --

[Ex. all but Gripe.
Gripe. I will arrest every man, and when I have recovered Damages, indict 'em
for a Riot, poor Fools! This was a lucky adventure, since I have saved my Wife.
They have left their Banquet and Wine, I will make Money of it. Let me go
fasten my Doors.

[Exit.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT. III.
Enter Mr. Gripe. Gripe. SO! I have laid up their Provisions, and shall make
Money of 'em, as I intend to do of my beating I have had, and the Riot they
have committed; I have taken order my drunken Rogue shall be apprehended. But
now to my Wife! per^idious Jade! I shall keep her Prisoner during life, for all
her Hectorly Brother --

[Exit Gripe.
Rich. within. I think this disguise will fright him, and secure me from a good
substantial beating into the bargain: If I can get once out of the Chamber -- I
am sure I will face him down I never was in it --


Enter Gripe with a Candle. Gripe. Here! where is this vile (...) of
Womankind? Do thou hide thy self -- hah! Mercy upon me! who is here, the
Devil! the Devil! --

[He runs roaring out, the Candle falls.
Rich. I thought my Face was pretty well before; but I see I could make it
uglier; Art may improve Nature much. Now will I shift for my self --

[Exit.
Gripe. Help, help! the Devil! the Devil!


Richard Reenters in his own Habit. Rich. What Is the matter Sir?


Gripe. Oh! the Devil! the Devil in my Chamber!


Rich. Where! where! Let Us see. I have lighted the Candle again!


Gripe. Oh Rogue! art thou here! I think thou art the Devil, how could thou
get in else? I locked all my doors and searched every Room in the house, and
thou were not in any of 'em --


Rich. Sir, I was grown a little soberer with the fright of the Swords drawn,
and sensible of my fault, I hid my self from your Indignation under my
Flock-bed, where I have lain and sweat and trembled, till I heard you cry out,
and I could not but come to your assistance:


Gripe. That makes some amends. Let Us into my Wife's Chamber and see what is the
matter, may be 'twas a trick of the lewd Woman's to fright me, I am sure I put
her in there -- I led her by the hand my self --


Rich. Be not afraid, Sir, sure 'twas no Devil you saw! have you not some guilt
upon your Conscience?


Gripe. Saw^y Rogue, I guilt -- I have none -- I am as innocent as the Child
new born. Come -- let us in Rasoal. Oh Heaven! what noise is that, Richard? I
say, Richard, keep close to me Sirrah, close --


Rich. Here Is no body in the Chamber --


Gripe. What do you say, no body? Look about the Bed, and in and under it
quickly --


Rich. Here is no body: Did you lead any body in here?


Gripe. Yes, yes, I did -- I had her by the hand I thought. And she spoke to me
as she went in.


Rich. Without doubt it was the Devil, and he is vanished --


Gripe. Hell and Confusion!


Rich. Now I think on it, when I ran out at the quarrel, I thought I saw my Mrs.
go out hastily, take one of Sir Humprey's Coaches, and hurry away with it.


Gripe. Oh horror! oh infamous Strumpet! I am robbed, cuckold'd, abused; oh
vilainous queen, she is now in the filthy act of cuckolding me. Hell and
Devils! give me my broad Sword.


Rich. Good Sir, call upon no Devils; we shall be torn in pieces.


Gripe. I care not what becomes of me; give me my broad Sword, I Will fetch a
Warrant to search that Rogue Scattergood's house, apprehend the Strumpet, bring
her home, and murder her; seize upon his Estate, sue him to Outlaries
innumerable, indict him and all the Rogues for Riots, etc. give me my broad
Sword. Come along with me:


Rich. I dare not.


Gripe. I Will cut you off in the middle if you do not; get you before, I Will lock
the doors: Oh whore, whore, whore!


Enter Sir Chr. Swash, Heildebrand, and Blunderbus. Sir Chr. Hey Boys, bravely
done! scowr on! break those Windows, it is Normandy Glass, scowr, scowr.


Heild. Have at 'em.


Blund. Fall on, fall on.

[They break Windows.
Sir Chr. It Is enough, march on; My Blunderbus and Heildebrand, we will
overrun the Town, as easily as Alexander did Asia.

[A Citizen and his Wife walk by.
Heild. A Prize! a Prize!


Blund. Lay her aboard.


Citiz. She Is my Wife, Gentlemen, what would you have?


Sir Chr. All kiss her -- fall to, Boys.


Citiz. Help, help! Watch, Watch!


Wife. Murder, murder! help, help.


Sir Chr. Ounds you Rogue do you call the Watch! Swinge him. There Is for you
Sirrah!


Blund. Does she cry out? lay her on.

Citizen and Wife run out calling out help. Heild. strikes her.
Sir Chr. 'Gad we are very mad fellows, Are not we? my Bullies.


Heild. Damme as ever wore Swords. I take it.


Sir Chr. More game, more game; have at 'em perverse Whores, a Pox on 'em, they
are past squeaking in private, though they do it in public.


Enter two or three Old Women. Blund. Who are these? Curse on 'em, they are old
and ugly --


Heild. Herb-women, going to Market.


Sir Chr. Let 'em be what they will, I spare no Sex nor Age. Beldams, you must
be kissed for being women, and kicked for being ugly. The Devil take me if the
Town can match us for tearing Blades now.

[They run out crying Murder.
Enter two or three Apprentices singing and breaking Windows. Sir Chr. Stand!
who are these? Rascals without Swords, Apprentices? must such Rogues as you
usurp the privilege of Gentlemen? such Scoundrels as you scowr? lay 'em on
thick. let us swinge 'em --


Apprentices. Help, help! Watch, Watch! Murder.

[They run out.
Sir Chr. Death! Shall such pitiful fellows think to do like us?


Enter three or four Fiddlers. Blund. Who Is here? stand.


Heild. Stand Rogues: ha! they are Fiddlers.


Fiddlers. We are going to Play under a window for a Wedding.


Sir Chr. We'll stop your Journey, Rascal; strike up, and play to us while we
break windows.


Fidl. Good Gentlemen! we shall lose our Wedding; there are other Companies out
that will be there before us.


Sir Chr. We will cut and hack you first, and then your Fiddles.


Fiddler. Hold, hold Gentlemen! we will Play --

[They play scurvily.
Sir Chr. Now let us break Windows to this Music. It Is good for nothing else.
Pull down all the Knockers, and wipe out the Milk scores: will this Rogue my
Footman never come with Lamb-black, and a Brush that we may blot out the signs.


Enter Citizen, with the Constable and Watch. Citiz. These are the Rogues that
set upon me and my Wife.


Consta. Rogues! Sir Christopher Swash, and his Friends; They use to give us
Money every night Neighbors.


Watchmen. Ay, ay, very honest Gentlemen.


Consta. You are a saucy fellow.


Sir Chr. Oh, Mr. Constable, let me kiss you; There Is half a piece for your
Watch to drink.


Consta. Thanks, noble Sir Christopher. Who are you Sir? I must have an account
of you.


Watch. Ay, what are you?

[To Citizen.
Citiz. I am an honest Man, and pay Scot and Lot in my Parish, and these
Fellows set upon my Wife and me.


Consta. Stay Fiddlers* whither are you sneaking?


Sir Chr. This fellow is a Rogue, and picked up a Whore, and called her his Wife.


Consta. Away with him to the Gatehouse --


Citiz. Very fine. --

[Two hale the Citizen away.
Sir Chr. Now honest Constable we are well met. And I have Fiddles, 'G^d you
shall Dance to 'em.


Constable. Any thing Master that you please.


Sir Chr. When that is done, go into your Huts, drink Brandy like Dutch
Skippers, and smoke like double Chimneys for the good and security of the
Nation! while we scowr afresh.


Constable. Come fellows, strike up --

[Dance.
Sir Chr. Very well -- I vow.


Constable. Good morrow to your Worship.


Sir Chr. Good morrow!


Constable. We are undon, yonder is the High Constable going the Rounds to Night!
haste every one to his Post --

[Ex. Constable. and Watch.
Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose. Sir Chr. Who Is here, Sir Nicholas Peakgoose!
in faith thou shall roar and sing, and break Windows --


Sir Nich. Not for the world, Gentlemen; I am going to fetch my Celia from Sir
Humphrey's house, if she find me in drink, she will be outrageous.


Sir Chr. Gad you shall: hang sneaking after a Whore; Keep her under.


Sir Nich. Pray Sir excuse me.


Sir Chr. Gad do as I bid you, or fight.


Sir Nich. Fight! oh Lord, fight! what would she say to me, if I should venture
my self to fight?


Sir Chr. Prithee don't stand prating, but roar and break Windows, or draw.


Sir Nich. I am resolved, I Will not draw: What will you have me do? what will
become of me?


Sir Chr. Follow us --

[Sings. Diseases and Troubles are never to be found,
But in the damned place where the Glass goes not round.
Sing with a Pox to you.


Sir Nich. Well, well -- Diseases and Troubles, etc.

[Sings.
Enter H. Constable. H. Constable. These are the Bullies that made the Havoc last
Night in Covent Garden, and this Night hereabouts; fall on, knock 'em down.


Sir Chr. How now! we must to Battle --


Constable and Watch fall on, Sir Nicholas running away is knocked down and
taken, the rest with broken Heads escape, and get to Sir Humphrey's House. H.
Constable. Come Sirrah! have we taken ye? we see where the others are gotten in.


Sir Nich. Gentlemen, as I hope to be saved I was none of their Company; but
they set upon me, and threatened to kill me if I went from 'em. I will be a
witness against them.


Watch. It Is Sir Nicholas Peakgoose; a very civil Gentleman.


H. Constable. I know him! you will be forth coming in the Morning to witness
against 'em --


Sir Nich. I will.


H. Constable. Go! good night. Beset Sir Humphrey Scattergood's house, we'll have
'em and they be alive.


Sir Nich. Good night Gentlemen: Oh my Head and Shoulders! a deuce take their
scowring, for me --

[Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Steward. SCENE Sir Humphrey's House. Soft Music plays. Stew. Heaven how
he melts his Time and Land away in Luxury and Sloth, and I by force must be an
Instrument in his wickedness; now must I keep the Door, while he, his Friends
and Whores are lolling in their Baths, prepared with cost befitting Emperors;
nay, They Are perhaps revelling in the height of Sin -- but I will pray and read
these godly Meditations by my self --

[A Song is sung to 'em within.
Enter Sir Christopher, Blunderbus, and Heildebrand. Sir Chr. Hear you old
formal Steward, where is your Master?


Stew. Bless me, what ails you all? are your Brains beaten out?


Sir Chr. No, we have had a Battle with the Myrmidons of St. Martins, we have
swinged, and are swinged --


Blund. I am sure my Porker is embrued in Blood.


Heild. And mine is stained in gore of filthy Peasant.


Stew. Bless us! Heaven! Have you committed Murder?


Sir Chr. Prithee leave prating, and open the door; we heard the Music this
way, thy Master's there.


Stew. You must not pass; my Master and his Friends are all in Baths.


Sir Chr. And where are the Women, the Cockatrices?


Stew. The Cockatrices are bathing too.


Sir Chr. What mine?


Stew. Yes, yours.


Blund. What a Pox, does he manage the Body of your Caravan?


Sir Chr. Peace Oily -- his own Convenient's there, we will all run roaring in.


Stew. You cannot pass; there is a Blunderbuss within charged with 15 Bullets,
in the hands of a damned desperate Rogue.


Sir Chr. Pox on it -- I know my Buttock's honest; but I care not, for the Devil
take me, I drink too much to be a man at Arms. Gad! I only keep her ^or the
lewdness of the matter.


Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose. Blund. Halloo -- Here Is Peakgoose. Now you shall
drink --


Heild. 'Gad -- ^e have caught you; you shall drink like a Devil.


Sir Chr. Ay 'gad shall you -- and roar and have the other Battle too, Boy --

[Sings. The Stars which you see,
In the Hemisphear be
But the st^ds in your faces with Drinking, etc.

Sir Nich. Good Gentlemen, Pardon me. I must go to my Dear. Where is Madam
Chloris, Friend?


Stew. You cannot come at her: the Ladies are in one Bathing Room, and the
G^ntlemen in another just by 'em.


Blund. Sir Humphrey will swinge your Buttock away --


Heild. Yes, He or some of them will manage your Natural gallantly.


Sir Nich. Who! my Birds n'eyes. I am sure she would not do such a thing, as I
may say, for the world.


Sir Chr. Pish! Pox of Whores. Let Us go drink 'em out of our heads. Where Is the
Yeoman of the Cellar?


Stew. Why he, or his Servant is nev^r out on it! 'Twill come to a fine pass.


Sir Chr. Come along to the Cellar.


Sir Nich. Excuse me, I will not go -- what to make a Beast of my self?


Sir Chr. If you will not go, Draw! for 'foregod you shall fight.


Sir Nich. What will become of me? with these roaring Fellows I must go.


Sir Chr. The Sun's gone to Tipple all Night in the Sea Boys,
To morrow he will rise, and be paler than we Boys;
Give us Wine, give him Water, it is Sack makes us The Boys.

Enter Sir Humphrey, Bellamy, and Wildman, in morning Gowns. Bell. With what
variety of pleasure you melt away your hours.


Wild. There Is need of Fancy and Invention for such Luxury.


Sir Humph. It is beyond the sense of Fops; a Fool has not wit enough to be
pleased, he but seems merry, when he is sad at heart. Is not this better than
venturing life for Ambition, being perpetually anxious for a Blew-Ribbon, or a
white-Staff, to have a crowd of Clients sneaking two hours in my Anti*Chamber,
who crouch like Slaves when I appear; yet hate and scorn me for my Pride the
while?


Bell. These are the irregular appetites of Men, whose Minds are Sick. The
vigorous Body and the healthful mind can find no pleasure but in Sense.


Wild. Fools are led away by shadows, and let the substance go; while the rash,
giddy, and magnanimous Fool runs abroad, is delicately lousie, and kills men
for Honor, who never angered him: We stay at home and get 'em.


Sir Humph. Which I take it, is the more honorable employment of the Two.
Another Fop breaks his Brains with Metaphysical Nonsense, a Mathematical
Coxcomb besots himself with a, b, c, Superficies, Lines and Angles; our
Virtuoso contemplates Lice in Microscopes; your Orator studies to show his
parts in Whipt-Creamspeeches; your Schoolman wastes his time in Bulls and
Nonsensical Distinctions to make the same thing differ from it self; and your
politi^k. Owl drudges and makes a business of what is none --


Wild. And all the while the Senses are neglected.


Sir Humph. Your drudging Millhorse Block-head, is useful for Government, while
we most wisely find out Pleasures for every Sense; we are Lords of the world,
and enjoy all in it, while they are Slaves --


Bell. It Was not our fault, we did not please every Sense even now. These pretty
Whores are skittish.


Wild. We could do nothing with 'em but put them to the squeak a little.


Sir Humph. Some of these kept-Ladies, will no more treat you with Love, than
Taverns will with Wine; it is against their Trade: But I have had 'em all for
Money. I cannot, like the grand Signior, make a Wench come when I give my
Handkerchief: But if I see a pretty Whore I like, I send her 50 l. and to that
Lure she stoops, and strait I Truss her: if not, a 100 l. brings her down: my
Money is less precious than my Time.


Bell. Faith, you are in the right: I see what 'twill come to -- for I have a
damnable mind to that pretty Jade Celia.


Wild. And I must have my Chloris, whatever becomes of me.


Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose. Sir Nich. Sir Humphrey! Your humble Servant.


Sir Humph. Sir Nicholas Peakgoose! your Servant.


Sir Nich. Where is my Mistress, poor Rogue?


Sir Humph. Within, with her Companions.


Sir Nich. I long to see her, pretty Rogue. I have not seen her these six
hours, and yonder is Sir Christopher Swash -- and his Hectorly Companions will
kill me with drinking Bumpers, as they call 'em, if you protect me not; they
draw and threaten to fight with me, if I do not drink; I have been knocked down
by the Watch, for being taken for one of his lewd Company already. Hide me --
hide me.


Enter Sir Christopher, Blunderbus, and Heildebrand. Sir Chr. Where is this
Scoundrel, that basely flies from a Bumper? Draw! I will have satisfaction. I
will Tap him, and let out the Claret he has drank already.


Sir Humph. Good Sir Christopher, spare his life for my sake.


Sir Chr. For your sake he lives; but upon condition, he shall come down and
drink lustily --


Sir Humph. What makes you bloody?


Sir Chr. We have had a Skirmish, faith. Would you had been with us, I never
saw better scowring days of my life; but now we are here, let us all down and
drink bloodily.


Blund. There Is no life to drinking, roaring, and lying rough.


Heild. There Is no pleasure in a single Drunkenness. But Sir Nicholas and we
lead a life, we!


Sir Humph. Let us borrow Sir Nicholas a quarter of an hour, till he sees his
Mistress, and then we'll restore him --


Sir Chr. Do You hear Nick? Be sure you come, or by Heaven I Will run you through
the Lungs next time I meet you --

They go out Singing.] March on bravely! forward let us go,
Tara ra rant tan tant, tan tan tan ta ra ra
rant tan tan! The Trumpets they do blow.

Sir Nich. Oh Lord have have mercy upon me! what shall I do? I^ll swear the
Peace against him, if I live and breath.

Enter Phillis, Celia, and Chloris. Oh my Dear! Art thou there?


Celia. Yes, you Fop; But what do you do here?


Sir Nich. Prithee be not angry Miss. I come to wait on Thee home --


Celia. I^ll not go -- Go home by your self! go I say, go quickly --


Sir Nich. Good, dear Madam, let me stay.


Celia. I shall have people think you are jealous of me! How dare you come
after me thus?


Sir Nich. I jealous! I Would have 'em to know I scorn their words.


Celia. Go home then! get you gone! Why do you stay, when I bid you go? Must
you come sneaking after me? Do you think you are fit to be seen in good
Company, because I am so?


Sir Nich. I know I am not; but good, sweet Madam, let me stay here: I beg^ it
on my knees.


Phill. Nay, nay, now you are too Cruel: let me intercede for him.


Sir Nich. Ay!


Chlo. Madam! Pray let me beg for him.


Sir Nich. Look you there.


Cel. He shall not stay. Ladies, you don't know what you do, If I should suffer
him, he would always be peaking after me -- Go, I say, I will be obeyed --


Sir Nich. I Will give thee all the Money I have about me, if thou wilt go home
with me.


Celia. Come, give it me.


Sir Nich. There.


Celia. Well, I will go home, but go you out and wait an hour, till I come.


Sir Nich. Well, my Dear, what you will. Good, Sir Humphrey, let your Servants
guard me from these Roarers.


Sir Humph. Well, poor Rogue, I Will stay. Go! thou art a pretty one.

[Ex. Sir Nicholas.
Stew. Sir, the fat Gentlewoman is come with three young Girls.


Phill. There Is a Collation waits you; will you come in to it, my Dearest?


Sir Humph. Go! we will follow you --

[Ex. Phill. Cel. Chloris. Now Gentlemen, a consultation: Here are Maiden-heads
coming, we'll divide 'em equally. Steward, send her in, and convey her
Attendants the back way into my Apartment. And let 'em be bathed, new rigged
with Linen.


Stew. It goes against my Conscience, and is below my Dignity.


Sir Humph. Sirrah! Begone! obey me, or you have no Tips of Ears to Morrow --

[Exit Steward.
Enter Bawd. Bawd. Well, I have taken such pains for you, I am ready to expire
-- I had gotten my house full of handsome Wenches for your Worships use: But I
thought the Maiden-heads I spoke of would be more fit, and I have brought 'em
all three with much ado.


Sir Humph. And will you warrant 'em Maids?


Bawd. That I will upon my sincerity; did I ever deceive you? I have more
Conscience than to be corrupt in my Calling, not for this Earth I would not --
But these are dearer than I thought. They are 50 l. a piece, if you have 'em: I
never higgle or make words with you.


Sir Humph. Talk not of Price! it is my Birth-Night. Gentlemen, I Will treat you
like a man of Honor. We'll cast Lots for 'em.


Bell. You are too obliging.

[Enter Steward.
Stew. I hae conducted the Gentlewomen -- Whores in.


Sir Humph. Prithee honest Bawd, go and bring all the Whores in at my
back-gate. Do you hear, old Fool? see you entertain 'em well: and let every
Stranger and Servant in my House have his Cher entire. I Will not have a
Manservant idle, nor a Maidservant honest: Chastity shall be Felony, and
Sobriety High Treason.


Bawd. Well Sir, I Will fetch 'em all.

[Ex.
Stew. Good Sir, will you whip me, hang me, or --


Sir Humph. Peace, thou hypocritical old Sot; do you hear, be you Drunk
soundly, and Whore lustily, or Wars will ensue between us --


Stew. Whore! oh Lord! I whore? What will become of me?


Sir Humph. Come on my Friends, Let Us in and survey my Markettings --


Wild. Lead on, my noble Prince of Pleasure; and we'll follow --


Stew. To the Devil all! and thither I shall follow, unless I suddenly get
loose from these clutches.

[Exit Steward.
Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose, Sir Christopher, Blunderbus, and Heildebrand.
Sir Chr. Are you so nimble in faith! we have caught you again!


Sir Nich. You have made me drunk with these Bumpers. What will you murder me?
have some pity on me, on my Knees I beg you will let me drink no more; what will
my Mrs. say?


Sir Chr. You are in a good posture. Kneel all! Fill us the other Bumper. 'Death!
Drink it, I say. Drink it, or Blood will ensue --


Sir Nich. What will become of poor Sir Nicholas? --


Sir Chr. All together clash.


Sir Nich. Well, I must do it.


Sir Chr. The Other round.


Sir Nich. Mercy upon me! I am dead! I am killed! I Will lay my death to your
charge -- no more to be said.

[He lets fall the glass, and breaks it.
Sir Chr. Ah Rascal, Do you spill your Drink! 'Ownds! fling the rest of the
Bumpers in's face.


Sir Nich. Murder! Help, -- help. I am slain.

They fling all the glasses in's face.
Without. Open the Door! we'll break it open --

[A great noise without.
Sir Chr. What Is the matter? Now draw the Fool away; he is dead drunk.

[A noise again.
Enter Sir Humph. Bell. and Wildman. Sir Humph. How now! What Is the m^tter
without?


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir! The High Constable with a huge Guard, and Mr.
Gripe in the head of 'em is come with a Warrant to search the house. --


Sir Humph. Call up my Servants! fetch my Guns.


Sir Chr. Hey Boys! we shall have more scowring!


Blund. Now we shall show our valor.


Enter Servants with Guns and Pistols. H. Constable and Watch break in. Gripe
and Richard. Sir Humph. What means this violence?


H. Constable. We have a Warrant to search for Mrs. Gripe. --


Sir Humph. Fall on! fall on. We are victorious, and have taken Prisoners.


They fall on, beat the Constable and Watch out, return with Gripe, and Richard
Prisoners. Gripe. What will become of us! we shall be Murdered.


Sir Humph. Lock 'em up, Safe! and guard my house with Guns and Muskets!
unseasonable Rascals to interrupt our pleasure.


Blund. Shall we plunder, strip, and take the spoil of the Field?


Sir Humph. No* we'll call 'em to a Council of War, and condemn 'em; away with
'em.

[They carry Gripe and Richard away.
Gripe. O mercy, mercy!


Sir Humph. What is Sir Nicholas killed in the fray?


Sir Chr. No -- in our fray; Dead drunk. This was a brave Battle!


Sir Humph. Now all to bed: Carry Sir Nicholas to bed.


Sir Chr. Not we! we'll go drink and lie rough! fare you well upon those terms.
Come Bullies, I think we have behaved our selves like Emperors!


Enter Mrs. Gripe like a ^oung Officer, and her Brother's Sergeant. Mrs. Gripe.
Am I completely set out like a young Officer? Do my Brother's Accoutrements sit
well upon me?


Serj. They become you admirably; you are as brisk, as fierce an Officer as the
best of 'em; and so like your Brother, it is amazing, had not I been privy to
your Design and his, I should have sworn you were my Captain.


Mrs. Gripe. That likeness between us will further my design. My Husband knows
nothing of my Brother, but that he has heard we are so like, that upon an
Experiment I dressed my self in man's clothes once, and we were not known from
one another. But do I strut, cock, and look fierce enough?


Serj. To a Miracle! But since you have this design upon your Husband to fright
and make him yield to good terms, why would you not let your Brother carry it
on?


Mrs. Gripe. He resents so much the base usage of me, that I know not what his
passion might have provoked him to: Besides, it seems to be the right of an
English Woman to Hector her own Husband; and faith, I Will have him under my
Command now, or press him for Flanders.


Serj. Bravely resolved.


Mrs. Gripe. I Will teach Husbands to provoke their own Flesh.


Serj. That is out of his power or yours to do to him --

[Aside.
Mrs. Gripe. I Will make him such an example. I Will make all Husbands have a care,
how by Injuries they sower their Wive's love into revenge, or their meekness
into rage. I know he is a Coward, as all Tyrants are; and I Will make him e're I
have done, as dearly as he loves his Money, part with a good Sum for fear of
his lif^ --


Serj. Methinks they that live so miserably, should not fear to dye --


Mrs. Gripe. Oh yes! They are such ^ools to choose the worst part of life, and
are yet greater Fools, and prefer it to Death, which is far better: to be dead,
is to be insensible; but to have senses and deny 'em all, is worse. Do you find
him out, and get him to a private place, and let me alone.


Serj. I will, Madam! 'Sheart I shall forget to call you Captain.


Mrs. Gripe. Well, I shall strut, look big, and huff enough for a Captain, I
warrant you* by your leave Modesty for a while. A desperate ill, must have a
desperate cure: But these words of Command stick in my Throat, and I cannot
swear worth a farthing.


Serj. Oh use, use! it is nothing but use --


Mrs. Gripe. But why must we use French Discipline? we did not so when Henry
the Fifth beat 'em.


Serj. Why, by plaguing the world this Ten years, they have found a better way
than we have.


Mrs. Gripe. Well, I Will try! Let me con -- Even your Ranks. Straiten your
Files. Shoulder all. Rest your Arms. To the right, to the right, to the right.
To the left, to the left, to the left. Dam'me what awkard Rogue is this?

[She canes the Sergeant.
Serj. O brave Captain! well done! But 'twas a little o'th hardest.


Mrs. Gripe. I Will warrant you -- I Will lay it on -- let me alone for Discipline
-- allons.

[Exeunt.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV.
Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose Drunk at play, with Blunderbus and Heildebrand.
Sir Nich. PRay Gentlemen, let me give over play. You have gotten my Gold Watch,
and Diamond Ring, and 20 l. upon Tick.


Blund. Nay, 'gad you shall play the other 20 l.


Sir Nich. Lord! what would you have of a man? I cannot abide play: I hate it
mortally, so I do.


Heild. What a Pox! you don't take us for Cheats, do you?


Sir Nich. Who I? Not I Gentlemen, for the world! yet I doubt they are little
better!

[Aside.
Blund. Dam'me! It Is not your best course.


Heild. You shall find us Gentlemen: That scorn to do or suffer an ill Thing.
Therefore play on.


Sir Nich. Heaven deliver me from these dreadful Bullies: They will get all my
Money, or quarrel with me.


Blund. What a Devil do you mean? will you play, or no?


Sir Nich. Pray Gentlemen don't be angry, I will then double, or quit. I Will set
you the 20 l. because I will make an end, Mr. Heildebrand; but I vow and swear,
I Will play no more after that.


Heild. Are you sure the Doctors are in, Blunderbus?


Blund. Yes, I am sure! at it Man!


Heild. Come then! here'sat it, ^7.


Sir Nich. 12! it is out! quit.


Heild. I Nickt you! ask Blunderbus.


Sir Nich. Nay, then I Will never play more* 12* Nick 7. Do what you will with
me, I Will not throw a Die more. What a Pox* Do you think I am a Fool?


Blund. If you do this Heildebrand, you will lose him for ever; a Plague of ill
luck --


Heild. Was it 12?


Sir Nich. Ay marry was it! ask Mr. Blunderbus else.


Blund. Yes it was: Sir Nicholas is in the right, look you ther^ now.


Sir Nich. Look you there now.


Heild. No more to be said.


Sir Nich. Well, Good morrow, Gentlemen, your humble Servant. Now we are quit
I Will play no more really.

[Running off is stopped.
Blund. Nay, you shall not go* the Devil take me if you don't play one 20 l.
more.


Heild. Never speak on it, you shall play for one 20 l. more, if you were my
Father. Zounds! you don't take us for Snaps, do you?


Sir Nich. I will not play, I will not! I will not! what will you do with me?
Help, help.

[They hale him, ^e struggles.
Enter Mrs. Gripe and Sergeant. Heild. Run Blunderbus, we shall lose our Bubble.

[Sir Nich. runs o^t they after him.
Mrs. Gripe. I see already that this is a fine civil well-governed Family. You
must guard me.


Serj. I warrant you, Captain. Where are the Serv^ts? they have been all drunk,
and roaring all night, and I believe are all asleep.

Enter Steward. Oh! here is one.


Mrs. Gripe. I must needs speak with Sir H^ Sc^ttergood. Pray let him know I
wait for him. My Business is earnest.


Stew. I shall Sir --

[Exit Steward.
Mrs. Gripe. You are sure my Husband is here?


Serj. Yes, one of the Wat^h told me, That when they were beaten Sir Humphrey
took him Prisoner.

Enter Sir Humphrey. This is Sir Humphrey.


Mrs. Gripe* Sir, your most humbl^ S^rvant. I hope you will excuse this
Disturbanc^, when you s^all know my Busmess.


Sir Humph. A Gentleman's Commands can never disturb me.


Mrs. Gripe. Sir, I am Brother to the unfortunate Mrs. Gripe, the Wife of a
wretche^ Usure^; who, I am informed is in your House.


Sir Humph. He is Sir, but I should have taken you for her, Her self in man's
habit.


Serj. A Woman! He has been my Captain abroad these four years; if you had seen
what brave Actions he has performed in the midst of fire and smoke, you would
not have taken him for a Woman.


Mrs. Gripe. I should not wonder much at your mistake; for just before I went
out of England, she was dress*d in man's habit; and we were so like, we could
not be known asunder.


Sir Humph. Indeed I have heard there was a s^range likeness betwixt you; the
very Look and Voice! hah!


Mrs. Gripe. But Sir, if I be informed right, you cannot mistake; for she is in
your House.


Sir Humph. She is not, upon my Honor. This is most amazing. I ^ever saw such
likeness -- They speak so like too --


Mrs. Gripe. If he be here, I beg you will deliver him over to me to used as he
deserves; for the Barbarity he has practiced on my Sister.


Sir Humph. With all my heart Sir! use him at your discretion. My house is free
for you, and do you hear, Steward, Bid all my Servants be at the Captain's
Command -- I should almost have sworn it had been s^e.


Mrs. Gripe. I give you many thanks for this favor, and should be glad to
serve you with my Sword.


Sir Humph. You honor me, Sir* Fetch down Gripe and his Man: Sir, I will go in
and dress me, and then wait on you; and I beg you will make use of my house,
and accept of what ever it affords for your Entertainment.

[Ex. Sir Humph.
Mrs. Gripe. You are very generous and obliging. So, thus far I have ac^ed ^
(...) well (...)*


Enter O* Gripe and Richard. S^rj* Oh, here are the R^scals, Captain.


Mrs. Gripe. Which is Gripe?


S^rj. That old Fellow!


Gripe. Look Ri^hard, was ever any one so like my (...) Wife? Oh Lord, it is
her Brother sure, by the description I have ^eard.


Mrs. Gripe. Is your name Gripe?


Gripe. Her very Voice too, Richard.


Mrs. Gripe. Speak, you Rascal, are you that damned fellow Gripe, that Married
my Sister -- my name is Bevil.


Gripe. I did M^rry one Bevil, and if I did not see you in this Accoutrement, I
should take you for her.


Mrs. Gripe. Her! had you done me one such Injury as she has suffer*d Thousands
from you, I would have cut your Throat long since: But you know, old villainous
Murderer, I am not she: I have been at her house, she is missing, and I doubt
not but you have killed her; for she is no where to be found, and I am resolved
to have your Blood for it.


Gripe. Ha! hum -- It must be he! I murder her! Heav*n fo^bid! she is run away
from me, and I believe she is in the house playing the Whore here with Sir
Humphrey.


Mrs. Gripe. Villain! Thou lie --

[She strikes him. I know her virtue; all thy damned Generation put together,
have not half her Honesty.


Gripe. What will become of me! I tremble all over. *It Is he, I heard his Drums
beat up yesterday.


Mrs. Gripe. I see your Conscience strikes you! had she not been murdered, she
would have come to some of her Relations. Prepare, old Viper* and pray; for
thou have not a quarter of an hour to live* upon my Honor.


Rich. Good Sir -- Let me go! if she be killed, Heaven knows I had no hand in
her Murder.


Mrs. Gripe. Sirrah* stay, or I Will knock your Brains out.


Rich. I see it is her Brother; she had a great respect for me, and would not
have used me so. *It Is he by his hard blows.


Mrs. Gripe. Kneel and Pray, or by Heaven I Will kill you before you prepare --


Gripe. I cannot Pray, I cannot prepare -- what have I done?


Mrs. Gripe. I have lost a Sister* and if she be not murdered, she has been so
abusd by you, that nothing but your life shall satisfy, and I shall do my
Country good Service in ridding it of such a Monster.


Rich. Take your course -- if he were dead, I should eat ^gain.


Mrs. Gripe. I Will stay no longer -- have at you --

[O^ers at him.
Gripe. Hold, hold! sweet Sir! good Brother Captain! d^ but adjourn the
Execution till I go home and settle my affairs, and I Will wait on you again.


Mrs. Gripe. No Villain, thou shall die now, at ye --


Gripe. O Heaven* I cannot endure it. I cannot pray, do not murder my Soul. I
confess I have been a great Sinner: I have wronged many young Orphans, and
Comfortless Widows --


Rich. And starved your Servants --


Gripe. Besides, upon the words of a dying man, your Sister run away from me. I
locked her up indeed to save the Honor of your Family; for she is a most
salacious Woman --


Mrs. Gripe. He angers me to the quick with that -- Thou ly'^t old Dotard, Thou
dy'st for that --


Gripe. Oh hold! hold! Let me but live to repent awhile; I do confess I have
wronged her --


Serj. Hold Sir! Spare his life --


Gripe. Thank you, good Sir --


Mrs. Gripe. Dissuade me not!


Grip^. Hold! hold! here is my Man can tell you she ran away from me.


Rich. Indeed Captain she did go away, as she had reason; and I helped her to
escape.


Mrs. Gripe. Are you such a Rascal to lie for him? No, he dies.


Serj. Hear me, good Captain, your Recruits are not yet full: He seems to be a
lusty old Fellow, and can carry Arms yet.


Mrs. Gripe. Say you so?


Gripe. What a Devil does he say, Arms? that is as bad!


Mrs. Gripe. If you think so -- take him to your Custody. When he is in
Flanders, if I hear not of my Sister in a reasonable time I Will kill him. In the
mean while I Will put him into the Van on all occa^ions --


Gripe. Sir, Sir! why Captain, Noble Captain, I am a most hideous Coward, I
shall run away, and spoil all your Men.


Mrs. Gripe. If you do, I will hang you. No resisting, here take a Shilling.


Grip^. I must confess I have a great respect for a Shilling, and never could
refuse one in my life*


Mrs. Gripe. Enroll his name, and put his Coat on.


Gripe. Now I hope you will let me go upon Parol to furnish my self with
Necessaries --


Serj. No: We'll furnish you with them --


Mrs. Gripe. Now Sirrah, you are listed; if you run from your Colors, I can
hang you by Law --


Gripe. Heaven! what am I condemned to?


Serj. Here put on your Coat.


Mrs. Gripe. Kill him if he resist --


Gripe. There is Law, and I have Friends --


Mrs Gripe. You lie Sirrah, you have no Friends; and for Law, I Will make you
know that Inter arma silent Leges. Put his Man a Coat on, and List him. There Is
a Shilling --


Rich. What shall I do -- I am a vile Coward! I am as much afraid of Guns, as
Indians or Wild-Beasts are --


Serj. Come sirrah, put it on -- What Is your Name?


Rich. My Name is Richard ^rubb --


Mrs. Gripe. Carry them into the Court, and teach 'em the use of their Arms:
But do you hear Sergeant, be not (...) of my whistle --


Serj. Come! Hon^st Comrade Gripe, give me thy hand.


Gripe. Pox on your Comradeship; I desire no such base Company: Did ever I
think to be Comrade to such a fellow?


Rich. Now must I learn to lie rough, filch Linen, steal Poultry, lie with a
Sutler's Wife, and be Lousie. Now Master give me your hand, we are Comrades too
--


Gripe. Rogue! I shall live to remember you. What shall I do? All my Writings
will be embezz'^ed, I shall be utterly ruined, my Mortgages lost, my Money
concealed --


Rich. Fear not, Sir, you will live better with 8 d. a day, than ever you did. I
make no doubt but you will save Money at the years end to put out to use -- For
my part, I am glad that I shall wear Clothes, and eat.

[Exit Mrs. Gripe.
Gripe. Now (...), your Captain is gone in; honest Comrade, it is in your power
to oblige your self and me very much: I*ll*give you Ten Shillings, and your own
again, if you will let me escape.


Serj. How the Rogue values his Liberty.

[A^ide. No, good Sir, get you out. I Will borrow two of Sir Humphrey's Muskets,
and Exercise you --


Gripe. I Will give, a 11.


Serj. No, -- go out, I say.


Gripe. Good Comrade -- I Will give you 12.


Serj. Get you out --


Gripe. Hold -- 13.


Serj. No -- I Will not be cashiered for you --


Gripe. Cashier me; I Will give 14.


Serj. No -- I tell you --


Gripe. 15.


Serj. No.


Gripe. 16.


Serj. Out I s^y --


Gripe. 17.


Serj. Out, or I*ll send you out.


Gripe. 18.


Serj. Go.


Gripe. 19.


Serj. I Will knock you down.


Gripe. 20. Have you no mercy in you?


Serj. The Rogue bids for his Liberty, as if it were a stock at 12 d. Gleek.

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Humphrey, Mrs. Gripe, Bellamy, and Wildman. Bell. Was there ever
such likeness between two, as betwixt this Captain and his Sister*


Wild. It is Prodigious -- I never heard her speak but once, and methinks their
Voices have some likeness.


Bell. They have so -- This is a very Effeminate man to look at, yet they
report him to be a brave Fellow.


Mrs. Gripe. You oblige me beyond return.


Sir Humph. I have often heard of your worth, and think my self happy in this
opportunit^ of knowing you -- My house is a house of freedom, Command it. If
you have a mind to a fresh hansom Wench, as that is no great question to a young
Officer, you shall have her --


Enter Phillis* Celia, and Chlo^* Mrs. Gripe. To us that have been in the Camp,
That Is no ill Propo^al; and faith Gentlemen, you shall find me a Man at Arms in
all points --


Sir Humph. In the mean time here is my Mistress, I bar her -- But the other
two, if you can win 'em, do --


Mrs. Gripe. And faith I ll try 'em. I am resolved to carry on this frolic as
far as 'twill go.

[Aside.
Sir Humph. This is the Captain that is so like his Sister

[They salut^.
Phill. Ther^ is a strange resemblan^ betwixt 'em --


Chlo. I never saw one so like another days of my breath.


Celia. He is a mighty pretty Man.


Chlo. A fine Gentleman as e're I saw --


Celia. He is a very sweet Person indeed.


^ell. Ha! I'like not th^se proceedings. This Beardless Officer will be too
hard for us.


Wild. Oh these Wenches love a fellow with a Scarf, or an Ar^e Belt mightily.


Phill. My Dear, I have a Lawyer and Writings ready for that Settlement thou
were pleased to promis^ me, if thou will dispatch it now, ^ot that I desire it;
but in case of Mortality: for while thou live I desire nothing but thee, and
when thou art dead twill do, me little good -- for I shall scarce outlive
thee. So I am very indifferent, do* what thou will.


Sir Humph. No -- come my Dear, I Will dispatch it now. Sir your pardon for a
moment.

[Exit Sir H^mph. and Phillis.
Bell. Prithee* let us withdraw and observe 'em a little.


Wild. Sir, He Will wait on you suddenly, in the mean time we leave the Ladies
with you --

[Ex.
Mr^. Gripe. Your Servant: These I humbly conceive are Whores, or they would
not be here; how the Devil shall I talk to 'em both?


Chlo. Well -- he is the prettiest Man that e're was b^rn --


Celia. You cannot have been long a Soldier, you are so young and smooth-faced
--


Mrs. Gripe. I have no youth, -- but what is at the Lady's Service --


Chlo. Pray what manner of Ladies have you beyond Sea?


Mrs. Gripe. Not half so pretty as the E^glish Ladies.


Chlo. How do they make love there?


Mrs. Gripe. Faith Madam thus -- we fall of board as fast as we can, thus, and
thus --

[Kisses 'em.] and thus and thus --


Celia. Hold, hold Sir, you are very brisk.


Chlo. Well -- he is a pretty good natured thing, I warrant him --


Celia. Have you been in many Battles? I see you are a valiant Man.


Mrs. Grip^. Ye^, many -- I have been used to Fire, Smoke, and Cannon; Yells of
Matrons, and groans of dying men, and cannot Boggle at a Lady; as for example
--

[Kisses 'em again.
Chlo. He is a gallant Officer, no doubt --


Celi^. You are a rare man* you think to storm a Lady, and carry her by Fire
and Sword.

Mrs. Gripe to Celia. My time is but ^ort, and I wish I were rid of her, that I
might tell you how much I am taken with you; and if you would not believe my
words, to show it by my actions --


Celia. You flatter me. I am infinitely pleased with this Captain.


Chlo. Captain, one word with you --


Mrs. Gripe. Dear pretty Creature -- how you transport me; if yon Lady (...)
absent. I have such a passion to disclose to you.


Chlo. A most admirable man -- Sir, I should be loath to be esteemed ungrateful.


Wild. What a condition we are in! S'heart -- They Will ravish him.


Bell. These Wenches are stark mad after smooth-faced fighting fellows, let 'em
be never such Puppies.


Mrs. Gripe. Dear pretty Rogue, you are the sweetest Creature I ever saw, and she
is disagreeable -- oh that I had thee alone.


Celia. You Compliment me, he is a fine bred man; what a mein he has?


Chlo. By your leave. Sweet Captain, I believe you met with little resistance
from the Ladies in Flanders.


Mrs. Gripe. I should be overjoyed to meet none from thee, My dear pretty one,
would yon Creature were away. I do not like her at all -- I have that to tell
you --


Chlo. Are we not uncivil, both us to leave Madam Phillis -- (...) you will go
to her, I Will come presently.


Celia. I am not to be taught Civility from you, good Madam, go you --


Chlo. Nor am I to be taught by you, and you go to that.


Bell. Very fine, they will fight for him by and by.


Celia. But Captain.


Chlo. I Will tell you Captain.


Celia. 'Ti^ not good breeding, Madam, to interrupt one in speaking.


Chlo. Tell me of breeding. There has been some difference in our breeding.


Celia. That there has to my advantage: 'Slife your breeding.


Wild. We are like to have very constant Mistresses, if we get 'em.


Mrs. Gripe. So -- I am a very pretty fellow: I have got the hearts of both of
'em, and now I am afraid I shall find it hard to get rid of 'em.


Celia. I wonder at your Impertinence.


Chlo. My Impertinence: You are a confident Creature.


Celia. Thou art below my anger.


Chlo. Am I so? well -- I know what you are*


Celia. Why! what am I Mrs. Minx?


Mrs. Gripe. N^y, good Ladies hold. Let this go no farther; for as I am an
Officer, I am bound to secure you, faith --


Chlo. At your Command, good Captain -- I shall desist --


Celia. If it were not for your presence, sweet Captain, I should say more --


Bell. It Is time to appear. This young

[ Bell. and Wild. appear. fellow will have 'em both else.


Wild. What at Wars, Lady? You are a happy Man, C^ptain.


Bell. And a brisk one at Women, I see that.


Mrs. Gripe. So, so: We that come from the Camp are pretty well set, and are
seldom over-bashful --


Bell. I see, Madam, you can be gracious to the Captain, though you are cruel
to me.


Celia. What because I show a little outward Civility. Though really, he is the
prettiest Gentleman I ever saw. But Captain, as we were saying --


Bell. Very fine.


Wild. I see you are most infinitely taken with the Captain: But I cannot get a
good look of you --


Chlo. Lord! that you should say so: Would not you have one wellbred to a
stranger? But Captain, you were saying something to me even now --


Bell. This is excellent -- I see we must rout the Captain, or lose the Wenches.


Wild. Pox on all these whiffling young Officers! all the Whor^ run mad after
'em; and a good ^ubstantial solid Whoremaster cannot keep one in quiet for 'em*


Enter Sir Humphrey. Sir Humph. Captain, your humble Servant -- There Is a
Collation, and some Bottles w^iting for you, and my Friends, and I beg your
Company --


Mrs. Gripe. I will but see how my two new Soldiers are disposed of, and I Will
wait on you. Do not stay for me, I beseech you --


Sir Humph. Ladies! do you retire; there will be Drinking.


Chlo. Your Servant, sweet Captain.


Celia. Your humble Servant, good Captain --

[Ex. all but Mrs. Gripe.
Mrs. Gripe. What shall I do amongst 'em; I cannot drink: yet I have a great
Curiosity to see what it is that charm^ men to s^t up whole Nights at eating
Houses and Taverns.


Enter Phillis with a Note. Phill. Sweet Captain, I have no time to stay, nor
dare I be seen alone with you; but That will tell you something, which I might
blush to speak -- Farewell --

[Ex. Phillis.
Mrs. Gripe. Most excellent Women! what is this, another Conquest? hah --

[Reads. That I was extremely surpised at the sight of you, This Paper will
sufficiently prove; for could I have resisted your Charms, you had never seen
it: But now I am afraid you have the power to make me entirely Yours, Phillis.

What a F^rce will this be when I am discov^r'd? Poor Wenches, how miserably I
shall disappoint 'em --

[Exit.
Enter Sir Humphrey, Bellamy, Wildman, Sir Christopher, Blunderbus, and
Heildebrand. A Banquet. Table and Wine. Sir Humph. Come on, Sir Christopher!
are you ready for a Bottle?


Sir Chr. Ready! I warrant you! I have lain rough and recruited. I need less
baiting for the Journey than a Carrier's Horse. Give me a Glass in my right
hand.


Sir Humph. Sit all --

[All sit down.
Sir Chr. Come faith, let us be all very merry, and roar extremely.


Enter Mrs. Gripe, and Se^geant. Sir Humph. Take your course; Captain, your
most humble Servant. Sir Christopher, this is the Captain you heard of.


Sir Chr. I honor him, and here is his Health in a Bumper --


Mrs. Gripe. Sir Humphrey, I must desire my Liberty. Wine doe^ not agree with
me, I never drink hard.


Sir Humph. Every Gentleman is free in my House.


Sir Chr. Hey! we shall have fine work inde^d. What a Devil, a Captain, and
cannot Drink? Can you Whore?


Mrs. Gripe. So, so -- well enough for a young Beginner.


Sir Chr. No^ Drink! 'Sheart! a man is not fit for a Captain that cannot Drink.
Shall I ask you a question?


Mrs. Grip^. Yes.


Sir Chr. Can you Fight?


Sir Humph. Hold, good Sir Christopher, no Bullying here --


Mrs. Gripe. You had best try, if you dare: Death! what a question was that!
What Scou^drel art thou that ask such a question? This Company preserves thy
life.


Sir Chr. I have done, I have do^: (...), H^! he is damned stout, I believe.


Mrs. Gripe. I could tell Thee Actions I have been in, would freeze thy blood
to hear of! Fight -- quoth a! Can thou fight up to the knees in blood? and
at Midnight with no light ^ut what Guns make, with Shot like hail about thy
ears, clamber over mountains of dead Bodies, and fight thy way to a General's
Tent, and bring the General Prisoner through all his Mir^idons? hah --


Sir Chr. Sir, I beg your Pardon, I believe it. He Is a plaguey stout fellow.


Mrs. Gripe. It Is not your best way to question it. Can you lead your Soldiers
up to a wall, and scale it, when Bullets, melted Pitch and Sulphur rain upon
you? Fight! the man never lived that asked me yet that question!


Sir Chr. 'Sheart, he will cut my Throat -- Sir, I beg your Pardon, I say --


Sir Humph. Come Captain, It Is enough: fall on upon this Collation, and we'll
have a Ch^son a boire to compose the matter.


Mrs. Gripe. With all my heart.


Sir Humph. Some Music! Sing me a Song --


A Drinking SONG.
LEt the daring Adven^rers be tossed on the Main,
And for Riches no dangers decline;
Though with hazard the spoils of both Indies they gain,
They (...) bring us no Treasure like Wine.
Enough of such Wealth would a Beggar enrich,
And supply greater wants in a King;
'Twould sooth all the Griefs in a comfortless Wretc^,
And inspire we^ping Captives to Sing.
There is none that groans under a burdensome life,
If this sovereign Balsom he gains*
This will make a man bear all the Plag^s of a Wife,
And of Rags, and Diseases in Chains.
It swells all our Veins with a kind purple flood,
And puts Love and great Thoughts in the mind:
There Is no Peasant so rank, but it fills with good blood,
And to gallantry makes hi^ inclined.
There Is nothing our Hearts with such Joy can bewitch,
For on Earth it is a Power that*s Divine;
Without it, we are wretched though never so Rich,
Nor is any man Poor tha^ has Wine.
Sir Chr. Pox! This is a pretty Musical business; but this will not make a man
merry -- I Will sing you a Song: Fill the Glasses first. Come on. When I sing
Down, down, Then you must all drink --

SONG.
I Love some body, I love no body,
Some body, no body dearly:
I love some body, etc.
Be she black, or be she brown,
She Is the best in all the Town,
So she keep her Belly down.
Down, down, down down:
There Is no fault to be found,
So she keep her Belly down.
Hah! I think this is well, hah!


Mrs. Gripe. A very merry fellow -- Give me thy hand.


Sir Chr. I am your most humble Servant to comman^ -- I love a brave fellow
with my heart.


Mrs. Gripe. Come on, I have provided some Entertainment instead of a Dance --
you shall see my two new Soldiers Exercised -- fetch'em in Sergeant --

[Exit Serj.
Sir Humph. You have found out an admirable way to plague an old cowardly
Usurer, to make a Soldier of him --


Mrs. Gripe. I warrant I shall plague him e're I have done with him.


Wild. This is an excellent Trick found out for 'em.


Enter Sergeant with Gripe and Richard. G^ipe. Well, There Is Law, Sir -- yet --
I say.


Mrs. Gripe. 'Sheart, does he talk of Law again? Knock him o'th'head.


Gripe. Hold, hold, I say no more --


Mrs. Gripe. Next Tide he takes Boat, and away for Flanders.


Sir Chr. Oh! honest Gripe! Art thou turned Soldier? Thou art a good hopeful
Musketeer of thy age.


Blund. A very pretty old Fellow, and stands lustily under a Musket.


Heild. A brave old Soldier, in faith! Can thou stare a Cann^n in the face?


Gripe. What Is that to you, you Coxcombs -- Well, I shall outlive this,
Rogues; and all this may turn to my profit in the end.


Mrs. Gripe. Order your Arms --

[They Poise their Muskets. Did you ever see such dull Rascals? order your arms
thus, set 'em down -- Take that to make you remember another time

[She canes 'em.
Gripe. I must suffer! there is no re^edy.


Mrs. Gripe. Poise your Muskets.


Rich. What a Devil must we do now?


Mrs. Gripe. Poise your Muskets thus, you Rascals -- Pox on you for dull Rogues.

[Strikes 'em again.
Gripe. Well, so we do: What a Devil would you have?


Mrs. Gripe. What with both hands?


Serj. In one hand, thus.


Ric^. Well, thus then?


Mrs. Gripe. Shoulder.

[They put'em on the wrong shoulder.
S^rj. That Is the wrong shoulder --


Mrs. Gripe. On the other shoulder! ye Blockheads, you have less sense than
Statues --


Gripe. Ay -- I am so dull, you had better let me go --


Mrs. Gripe. I Will make you do it -- Shoulder, I say. March.


Gripe. I thank you Sir, -- with all my heart -- that -- we will march --

They lay their Muskets down, and offer to go out.
Rich. We'll march well enough, I warrant you.


Mrs. Gripe. Is that your marching? Take up your Arms, Rogues, I Will run you
through else -- take 'em up I say --

[She canes 'em.
Gripe. Well -- well -- what a Devil would you have? Did you not bid us march?


Mrs. Gripe. I Will make you march against the mouth of a Cannon, before I have
done.


Gripe. O damned T^rant, I must try to compound with him.


Sir Humph. This is admirable Discipline indeed, Captain.


Enter Steward. Stew. Sir Christopher, Mr. Bl^nderbus and Heildebrand, take
car^, and shift for your selves. There are Threescore Bailiffs waiting for you
in the Street, and they have beset the House round, that there is no
possibility of escaping --


Sir Chr. O Heaven! what shall I do? if I be once carried to Goal, I shall lie
and rot there. Hold, let me see --


Blund. We shall starve if we go to Prison --


Heild. Let us think of some way, They are too many for us to beat.


Sir Chr. Captain, if you would but do us the favor to send for three Red
Coats, and own us to be your Soldiers, we may escape.


Blund. A rare way.


Heild. An excellent way; good Captain favor us.


Mrs. Gripe. My Footmen have a Bundle of red Coats here; but I cannot in Honor
pass you for my Soldiers, unless you be so -- if you will take each a Shilling
of me and be listed, you may* otherwise I can do you no good.


Sir Chr. With all our hearts.


Blund. With all our hearts.


Heild. With all our hearts.


Mrs. Gripe. There Is 12 d. a piece, Serje^nt take their Names -- I shall order
them too -- I Will teach 'em to roar and bully up and down the Town. Get their
Coats and Bandeleers on.


Rich. Come on Comrades, fellow Soldiers, give me your hands all -- The more
the merrier*


Sir Chr. How now saucy Rogue -- Do you long very much for a broken -- head --


Sir Humph. You may command all my House, and I beg of you to make it your own
while you stay in England.


Mrs. Gripe. I give you humble thanks.


Sir Chr. So -- how do these Accoutrements become us?


Bell. Oh rarely -- you are the feirce^t Soldiers I have seen*


Sir Chr. Now, noble Captain, we'll march under your Command.


Gripe. A Soldier must I be? Here Is company for the Devil.


Mrs. Gripe. Come! we'll go into the Courtyard* There I Will exercise ye, and
send for the Head-Bailiff, and let him know ye are my Soldiers.


Sir Chr. Very well, I vow, that will do rarely --


Sir Humph. Come Gentlemen, in the mean time, we'll to the Women; your Servant,
Captain.


Mrs. Gripe. Your Servant* Was ever design so well begun, and so hopefully
carried on? They all take me for my Twin*Brother.


Serj. I that know you both, don't wonder at it.


Mrs. Gripe. Come Soldiers March -- March, I say --

[Ex. Omnes.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT. V.
Enter Sir Humphrey, Bellamy, Wildman. Bell. PRithee, Sir Humphrey, let*s not
leave off our Dehau^h* but drink on: we have just wound our selves up, and
tun'^ our Instruments, and now we give over playing.


Wild. It Is unreasonable -- I would as soon turn my back upon a Woman I was in
love with, just as I had gotten her consent, or run away when a Battle were
first joined, as leave my Bottle now.


Sir Humph. I do confess I am an Epicurean in this, and in every thing. I Would go
no further than the pleasing of my Senses: I would have just so much Wine, as
would give me an Appetite to Woman, and just so much Woman, as would give me a
desire to Wine.


Bell. After a Bottle and a half, the man that says Consider, is my Foe.


Wild. This has but raised me --

You only Court, and keep a pother
To make me Gamesome for another*

Sir Humph. Faith Gentlemen*We have had the best of our selves; we have drawn
off the Spirit, and nothing but the Lees remain.


Bell. We have but just kindled the fire and you would put it out.


Sir Humph. Rather than that should put me out --


Wild. No; 'twill make our Souls burn clearer. Do but consider, that none but
Fools are merry without Wine, such unthinking Coxcombs as ^re extremely pleased
with their own foolish persons.


Bell. But the thinking man comes to good (...), and that pulls him back in the
height of his Career, (...) makes us think what frail Engines we are: But Wine
makes us (...) with the Coxcombs, merry and pleased with our selves.


Sir (...)* A man of sense is (...), because he must make the best* I (...)
Market; but Fool^ are never truly pleased, they find themselves despised by
those they really admire; for Wit is ^n Idol of all; and Fools only hate witty
men, as ^ poor man does a rich one.


Bell. I know not whether they are pleased; but they laugh and make a noise, as
if they were merry.


Sir Humph. So Children that ar^ afraid of Spirits sing and make a noise in the
dark, but are devillishly afraid for all that; and Coxcombs are damnably dull
and sad for all their laughing; and eve^ when they drink, They have the Pain,
but never the pleasure of Drunkenness.


Wild. A man would think Coxcombs the serenest Animals breathing; yet sure if
they be happy, they are so for ought they know --


Bell. Pox on 'em, let 'em be what they will: but nothing but Wine can make us
merry; and therefore to our Celery again.


Sir Humph. We Northern people that want the Sun without, ought indeed to put
good store of Wine, and create a Sun within us.


Wild. That Is right, to our Celery again, I say,


Sir Humph. It Is pleasant while it is Flood within us; but we shall Ebb, and
grow dull standing Water after a little while.


Bell. Prithee don't think to similize us out of our Bottles --


Sir Humph. Nay, if you be resolved, you shall find me Coy no longer --


Wild. I knew he would* come to it at last: But thou art such a Jilting
Drunkard --


Sir Humph. Let Us in then, if you will not, let me take the air a little.


Bell. Air! Open the Window* and take it that way --


Enter Steward. Stew. I bring you News that will stop you in your Career of
mirth -- I can scarce tell it you for weeping.


Sir Humph. What means the fellow --


Stew. I little thought to live to see this day --


Sir Humph. Pox o* your Formality! out with your dismal News --


Stew. All your Land in Essex is extended by your Creditors. And your Furniture
the richest in the County all seized upon.


Sir Humph. What says the (...)? --


Stew. Would you had tak^ the Fool's counsel, it had not been so. I remember
when my old Master purchased it, and little thought I should have seen it go
out of the Family; and now ther^ (...) ^o remedy* for all the Land you had
free, you have this day (...) our Mistress -- Whore.

[Aside.
Sir Humph. *Sdeath is this true thou tellest me?


Stew. Too true, would Heaven it were not; your Bailiff who is turned out of
Possession, is come up with the News: And all this Money is run out to Rogues,
from whom you have taken up Commodities upon Judgments; most of which you sold
again for half value --


Sir Humph. This is surprising News! what a damp it has struck upon me -- I
begin to come to my self now.


Stew. Many a good Christmas has my old Master kept there, and must it now be
parted from his Family --


Sir Humph. Gentlemen, my Friends -- if you would oblige me so much as to be
bound with me for a Sum of Money to stop these ravenous Creditors mouths for
the present, I will sell my Timber, and redeem my House and Land afterward,
and secure you in the mean time.


Bell. How Sir! be Bound -- hum -- your Steward says, you have no Land to give
Counter-Security with -- I should be glad to serve you --


Wild. I Will venture my life for you, whenever you command me; but for being
Bound you must excuse me. I have taken an Oath against that: besides, if I
would, you cannot give CounterSecurity --


Sir Humph. So! This is the world, I find; yet I could not have believed the
Companions of all my Pleasures and Extravagancies could have thus deserted me
-- I thank you Gentlemen, for clearing my Understanding. It Is time to be Sober
now: Well -- I will try some sudden way; A desperate ill, must have a desperate
cure -- Farewell.

[ Exit Sir Humphrey.
Stew. So -- What is become now of my Employment? it is not worth above six
hours purchase. That I should live till now. --

[Ex. Steward.
Bell. So here ends all our Revelling in this House: This is a sudden turn.


Wild. Beyond my expectation! what a Coxcomb he was to run out thus!


Bell. Indeed, I never thought he had much in him; he had but ordinary Sense at
the best; but this was such a Folly, I am ashamed of him.


Wild. We must e'n leave his Company; but this Wench Celia runs in my mind. I
must have her at any rate: though I keep --


Bell. I am in the same condition; and if we do keep- we must watch 'em from
young Officers; or they will run devillishly astray else.


Wild. Whatever these Officers do abroad -- I am sure they are always invading
the Territories of the Keepers at home --


Bell. Though they are in a friends Country, they will make Excursions for
forage of that kind -- But let us seek out these pretty Whores --

[Exeunt.
Enter Mrs. Gripe and Celia. Mrs. Gripe. 'Slife! what shall I do? these Wenches
will overrun me.


Celia. Dear Captain, I must confess for all my Modesty, that I am transported
at the Assurance which you give me of having your Love -- I am not ashamed to
say, You are the first that ever won my heart, and shall be the last to whom I
ever will give it.


Mrs. Gripe. And it is a Treasure I will never part with: Come seal the Promise
with a kiss.


Celia. O! thou sweet Creature. I can deny thee nothing.


Mrs. Gripe. We are so vexed with that troublesome Creature, Chloris, who
watches us.


Celia. This House is large, and in the Evening! if you will meet in the farther
end of the long Gallery. There is a Room where we may discourse further of our
Love.


Mrs Gripe. Discourse! I hate Discourse, I am too vigorous for that -- I shall
so -- kiss thee there --


Celia. Well! Thou art a pretty Rogue, I vow --


Enter Chloris. Chlo. How, kissing her!


Celia. Yonder Is that envious Creature: Farewell, at Eight in the Gallery --

[ Ex. Celia.
Mrs. Gripe. Oh my dear sweet one, now that malicious Woman's gone, I can tell
thee how I love thee.


Chlo. Me! what did you kiss her for then?


Mrs. Gripe. The poor thing is so fond, she would kiss me; but I shall make
such an Ass of her.


Chlo. Nay! will you though, dear Captain?


Mrs. Gripe. Will I? why, I hate her Person and Conditions: Methinks she is ugly.


Chlo. Indeed, I think she is not handsome, that is the short and the long on it.


Mrs. Gripe. Handsome! Thou art an Angel to her! Oh how I love thy Beauty and
thy Shape --

[Kisses and touses her.
Chlo. Nay! be quiet now -- I vow you make me blush --


Mrs. Gripe. Oh dear Rogue! That I were in bed with Thee and the Cand^es out,
and blush what thou could.


Chlo. Well, I cannot help telling of you, you are the prettiest Man I ever saw.


Mrs. Gripe. Thou know not half that is in me! we are watch't now -- But meet
me at the farther end of the long Gallery this Night at Eight, and you shall
find me a Lion --


Chlo. And you would have me your Lamb then. Well, I Will meet and venture --
Here comes Madam Phillis -- Farewell.

[ Exit Chloris.
En^er Phillis. Mrs. Gripe. Here Is another! No Mortal Captain could tell what
to do with these Three: (As gad save me) it is unreasonable.


Phill. Sweet Captain, I have blu^h't sufficiently at the little Billet I gave
you; I scarce have Confidence enough to see you after it.


Mrs. Gripe. Dear fair one, If you had not resolved to see me, your Letter had
been in vain; if I could tell you my Transport at the reading of it, I should
be more Eloquent than Sir Formal himself*


Phill. Can you forgive my Confidence?


Mrs. Gripe. I am sure it is so much to my advantage, that I should never have
forgiven your Bashful^ulness.


Phill. This is excess of Generosity.


Mrs. Gripe. Bashfulness in Love! you prevented me, or you should have seen I
was not bashful.


Phill. But that I feared your sudden Departure for Fla^ders, you should have
learned my Love from other Signs --


Mrs. Gripe. Depart for Flanders! while my dear Mrs. is here! It cannot be;
I Will this Night give up my Commission.


Phill. My Dear! you are not sure in earnest?


Mrs. Gripe. Upon my Honor, Madam -- I am. Sir Humphrey has made me promise
him to lie here this Night: My Chamber is at the farther end of the Gallery, at
Eight if you will meet me there, I Will show you I am in earnest; by this Kiss I
will!


Phill. Sure there is Wi^chcraft in you, that you should charm me thus.


Mrs. Gripe. I confess it is ungrateful, Sir Humphrey has so obliged me --


Phill. Never think on that; who shall tell him? I fear we are watch't --
Farewell -- at Eight --

[ Ex. Ph^llis.
Mrs. Gripe. Good constant Turtles these kept Ladies are, I*ll say that for
'em: And good charitable public spirited men the Keepers to maintain women, as
they wear Perfumes for the use of others --

Enter Sergeant. Oh Sergeant! what effect of your Negotiation with my Husband?


Serj. Very little; for when I told him my Captain's Proposals to have the 3000
l. his Sister brought, paid back, or 400 l. a year separate maintenance, be
started, stamped and star'd like a man distracted: He bid me knock him on the
head, shoot him -- cut his Throat, or what I would -- I had better do it, then
give him such Words --


Mrs. Gripe. Indeed that was very ill language to give him.


Serj. I told him at last, there was no other Composition to be made, but he
must this Tide for Flanders; and you would take all the care that could be to
put him upon such desperate Actions as might bring him to be knocked of the
head, and that if he did not meet death that way, he should be sure to have it
from my Captain's hand, for the Injuries he had done his Sister: I left him
Cursing, and in Despair.


Mrs. Gripe. It Is a great question whether he had rather dye, or part with the
Money: But I Will try one Experiment more, and if I cannot get it by Stratagem,
away he goes with my Brother to Flanders: And my last refuge shall be open
Force, I Will e'n take possession of his Writings, and rob him: I Will exercise him
first, and swinge my Bullies too. Have you a File of Musketeers ready in case
of Resistance?


Serj. I have.


Mrs. Gripe. Come on --

[Exeunt.
Enter Sir Humphrey and Phillis. Sir Humph. I have found you out, to confer
with you about something that concerns our Honor, and our Love.


Phill. And I am to tell you of something that concerns my Honor, and your
want of Love.


Sir Humph. How Madam?


Ph^ll. Do you think I am to be valued at the rate of the ordinary ill-bred
kept things of the Town.


Mrs. Gripe. I have not valued you so! What does she mean?


Phill. You must know Sir -- I look upon my self to be in a manner your Lady --


Sir H^mph. Very well -- I have been a fine Coxcomb.


Phill. And do you imagine that I, who am in a manner your Lady will suffer
such Debauchery and Wickedness in my House?


Sir Humph. How long has it been your House?


Phill. Since yesterday; and it is as much mine, as if it had descended from my
Ancestors these 500 years.


Sir Humph. To whose bounty do you owe it?


Phill. To no bounty; I owe it to my own Beauty, and those Charms that made you
settle it on me, and my Faith and Constancy has deserved it fully --


Sir Humph. Most exc^llent!


Phill. Shall I throw away the flower of all my youth, and re^ist all the
temptations of the fine Gentlemen about the Town, without those usual
Settlements which Ladies of my Condition have: In short, I am to let you know
it is my House, and I will have no Abominations ^ommitted here! it goes against
my Conscience.


Sir Humph. So -- I have parted with most part of my Estate, and Liberty to
boot! Oh negligence, and want of thinking.


Phill. To have you and your lewd Companions Sotting and Drinking, and using
all Licentiousness. But above all, to have Whores brought into my House too!
such filthy Creatures, whom you know I hate with all my heart* it melts me into
tears to think on it --


Sir Humph. ^e mollify'd, good Madam; I hope the Sin you speak of is not so
great; for your sake --


Phill. Do you think I will dishonor my self any longer, to suffer those
little ill-bred Kept-things, Celia and Chloris, to come to my House? No! your
Sisters and your Mother shall be welcome to me; provided they give me that
respect which is due to me: I intend to visit and keep Company with none but
Persons of Quality --


Sir Humph. Pray Madam, who is it that has kept you?


Phill. My Beauty, and my Merit; not your Bounty --


Sir Humph. And are not you a Tailor's Daughter?


Phill. My Fortune makes me of a good Family, and you must know, Sir -- I have
been kept so long, that I look upon my self as your Lady now.


Sir Humph. See the damned Insolence and Unreasonableness of these Creatures
called Whores; if a man keeps 'em from starving one year, they would plague a man
ever after. If I mistake not, you have told me that you loved me.


Phill. Yes, till your wicked Courses have provoked me beyond all measure! and
therefore pray consider of it, and give me an answer, if you resolve to persist
-- pray quit my House. Farewell --

[ Ex. Phillis.
Sir Humph. O damned Whore! I have a way to circumvent thee though: I must
plague my self to punish Thee --

[ Ex. Sir Humph*
Enter Mrs. Gripe, Sergeant, Gripe, Richard, Sir Christopher, Heildebrand and
Blunderbus. Mrs. Gripe. Come! Where are my Soldiers? I must lose no time, but
exercise you often; for we shall enter upon Action as soon as we come in
Flanders --


Gripe. I am not for Flanders, nor any Action; but Actions upon the Case.


Mrs. Gripe. Heart! does he mutter? Tie him neck and heels quickly --


Gripe. Hold, hold -- you will stifle me. I am so stiff I cannot bend. Hold, I
say, I will obey.


Sir Chr. Come Captain, you have done enough with us; now you have owned us
before the Bailiffs. Let us go, we'll go to the Temple or Alsacia for refuge
till the Business be over.


Blund. Good Bully Captain, you over-acted your Part, and laid on too hard
before the Bailiffs though -- let me tell you that.


Heild. You broke my head; I do not use to put it up, but upon this occasion.


Mrs. Gripe. I must keep strict Discipline amongst my Soldiers, you shall find
that was nothing.


Sir Chr. It Is no matter, let that pass; but now Captain, let us be in earnest,
and go you along and sup with us in White-Fryers, we'll have Fiddles and Whores
to entertain you, and roar like Dragons, and be as merry and as mad as
Lightning.

Be she black* or be she brown,
She Is the best in all the Town.
How now, old Fool? How do you like a Soldier's life?


Mrs. Gripe. Come Gentlemen, no fooling; you have received the King's Money,
and his Clothes, and I will make you know you are my Souldier^ -- Stand to your
Arms all!


Sir Chr. Hah -- What a Devil does he say?


Mrs. Gripe. Handle your Arms, all: Dam'me! what am I disobeyed?

[Cudgels'em.
Sir Chr. 'Sheart! my Head and Shoulders! prithee Captain leave fooling. What a
Devil, are you mad?


Mrs. Gripe. Death! Handle your Arms all -- I Will make you know your Officer.

[Cudgels'em again.
Heild. Ounds! if you strike again, I Will draw --


Blund. Out comes Porker, if you strike once more.


Sir Chr. Prithee Captain leave off, you have carried o^ the Frollick long
enough.


Mrs. Gripe. Nay then have at you! Musketeers make ready.

[Enter a file of Musketeers.
Sir Chr. Make ready? ha! what a D^vil do you mean?


Mrs. Gripe. Present.


Sir Chr. Hold! hold! I Will obey.


Blund. Hold, hold -- we'll obey.


Heild. Hold, hold -- we'll obey.


Mrs. Gripe. 'Sdeath you Dogs* no trifling with me! shall such Rascals as you
think it enough to be Drunk, and Swagger, beat B^wds, kick Drawers, squabble
with Constables and Watches, break Windows, and triumph in Drunken Brawls and
Street-quarrels, and never serve your Country? -- If you have Valor, I ll
make you turn it that way.


Sir Chr. Good Captain, we did not think you would have used us thus! we did
not intend to be Soldiers; we only desired to be protected by you -- for this
present Occasion --


Mrs. Gripe. What ever you intended, my Company is not complete, and I Will make
you know you are the King's Soldiers now -- I shall protect no Rascally
Poultroons -- if any thing can do it -- do brav^ly, and your valor may defend
you; Death! shall such idle lazy Scoundrels bully, and roar and boast of
drunken bloodless quarrels here at Home -- While we lie hard, suffer weary
marches, and fight all in blood, for our Country abroad, hah! --


Sir Chr. Very fine! we have brought our selves into a pretty Condition.


Blund. Pox on your Project, we had as good have been in the Bailiffs hands.


Heild. This damned C^ptain -- has ten Bullies in him --


Sir Chr. Who the Devil -- would have thought it? a little pitisul^ fellow -- I
thought I could have beaten two of him --


Mrs. Gripe. Ground your Arms.


Sir Chr. Thank you, good Captain, with all my heart; shaw! Pox I knew he did
this but to try us. Come, all is well now --


Mrs. Gripe. Tie 'em neck and heels in^tantly.


Sir Chr. Nay, prithee Captain don't fool with us any more now.


Mrs. Gripe. Sergeant, see it done.


Serj. You shall find it is no fooling --

He with the Musquetee^s. tie them neck and heels.
Sir Chr. Why Captain, what a Devil?


Blund. What a Pox!


Heild. Is the Devil in you?


Mrs. Gripe. This is for example: Next mutiny I Will hang ye!


Gripe. Now Rogues and Bulli^s, why don't you sing and roar now? How do you
like Soldiers lives now?


Rich. Why look you, Comrades, This it is to want experience in your Duty! you
must learn to ride the wooden*Horse, once or twice a day too.


Sir Chr. Why Captain -- good Captain.


Blund. Captain, Zounds, Captain.


Heild. Why Captain -- Death and Heart --


Mrs. Gripe. No remorse yet! What you old Villain, you are resolved not to do
my Sister Right, and return her Portion, or settle her Jointure on her
presently --


Gripe. Ounds! part with 3000 l. I had rather dye.


Mrs. Gripe. And that by Heaven thou shall do; nay more, she shall take
possession of thy Writings, thy Money, and thy Pawns; and satisfy her self.


Gripe. How Is that? That Is worst of all --


Enter Sir Nicholas Peakgoose. Sir Nich. Oh Gentlemen! where are you? you are
turned Soldiers, I hear: you have almost killed me amongst you, and won my
Money, a deuce take ye! My Celia will be dreadful angry, I am afraid.


Sir Chr. Rogue! we shall meet you.


Sir Nich. I am glad to see you in this Condition, now one may safely keep you
Company.


Mrs. Gripe. How now Sirrah! who are you? a Soldier in no condition is to be
laughed at, by such an Insect, a Maggot as thou art.


Sir Nich. A Maggot! an Insect -- I am a Knight, Sir.


Mrs. Gripe. You are a Rascal, Sir! take that --

[Cudgels him.
Sir Nich. Nay! I have done, Captain, -- if you be angry, I beg your Pardon, I
am going to find out my Mistress, Farewell, Sir -- I am sure they have made me
cruel Sick, a poise take 'em.

[ Ex. Sir Nich.
Blund. Good Captain, let us be untied! we'll obey --


Heild. Good Captain, let us be untied! we'll obey --


Sir Chr. Prithee dear Captain do -- I will be correspondent to command, and be
a gentle Spirit.


Mrs. Gripe. Unty 'em --

They unty 'em. This is call*d a Receipt to tame a Bully -- I shall show you
there is more than roaring goes to true Valor: Come, Handle your Arms --

[They bandle their Arms. Poise your Mus^ets -- awk^d Rascals!

Shoulder all -- Now, Puppy, the wrong shoulder, Sot. [ To Sir Chr. Rest your
Arms.

To the Right -- Now old fool, can you not tell your right hand from your left
yet?


Gripe. What will become of me? I cannot bear this! Heaven deliver me from this
damned Tyrant; my Wife will rob me too, that is worst of all --


Rich. You are the strangestawkard old Fellow, Comrade, that ever I saw --
learn of me --


Mrs. Gripe. To the right! to the right! now Rascal you are to the left.


Sir Chr. Well, well -- what a Devil would you have?


Mrs. Gripe. To the left, to the left! so, so -- Now march -- very well -- you
will come on I see in time -- Sergeant, March 'em to their Quarters here in
this House; and set a Sentinel over every one of them.


Serj. I will Captain. Come march --

[They march after the Serj.
Mrs. Gripe. I do not find that this old Fellow mollifies at all; yet I Will try
one Experiment more upon him, and if he relents not, my Brother carries him in
earnest.

[ Exit Mrs. Gripe.
Enter Chloris. Chlo. It Is Eight a clock, sure the Captain's come by this time!
I hope I have not made him stay -- It Is very dark --

[ Enter Celia.
Celia. It has struck Eight, where is this dear, sweet Captain -- I hope he is
punctual to his assignation --


Chlo. Ha -- I hear a noise of some body -- who is there?


Celia. It Is I, my Dear!


Chlo. Where are you?


[Both grope about. Celia. Here! Give me yourhand --


Chlo. Oh my sweet Captain. Both together.


Celia. Dear, dear Captain. Both together.


Celia. Ha! who is this, a Woman?


Chlo. Heaven what is this, a Gown and Petticoat?


Celia. Mercy upon me, who are you?


Chlo. What Is that to you, I will not'tell you, a malicious Slut, to watch me
and spoil my Assignation --


Celia. Oh! Thou poor envious Fool, Thou expect to meet the Captain, I know
thee -- Vengeance on this Fool --


Chlo. Yes! and so do I you; and wonder you should be such a Fool to expect the
Captain: He meet such a one as Thee?


Enter Phillis. Phill. This is the place and time of meeting, now for my pretty
dear Captain.


Celia. Thee! poor inconsiderable Creature! He laughs at Thee to my knowledge.


Chlo. Did he tell you so?


Celia. Yes, he did -- he scorns Thee for thy Folly, and loathes Thee for thy
Person.


Chlo. Thou bely'st him! He scorns thy words! my Person! it is an other -- guess
Person than thine: I Would have thee to know I am sure he hates Thee.


Phill. 'Slife I have escaped a fine discovery of my self to these two Wenches.
They are my Rivals, and are quarreling for the Captain here.


Chlo. I wonder at thy Confidence, to think the Captain should meet thee! He
appointed me to meet him at this time here, about a little Business --


Celia. A little Business -- I know your Business -- but he has no such
Intention -- prithee Impudence begone, he appointed me to meet him here, where I
was to confer with him, without being troubled with Thee --


Chlo. You confer!


Phill. What say They -- This must be false -- They are conceited! Vain Sluts!
I am sure he would meet none but me -- I Will rout 'em out of my House, I am sure
--


Chlo. If I could see thee, I Would pull thy eyes out --


Celia. Fool begone -- I laugh at Thee.


Phill. How shall I send 'em away, and get the Captain to my Self?


Celia. I hear some body! Who Is there -- Captain -- my Dear!


Chlo. Thy Dear -- here am I, Captain.


Phill. I am the Devil come to meet you both --

[In a big Voice.
Chlo. Oh Lord.


Celia. Help --

[Shreik and run to g^t out.
Enter Sir Humphrey, with a Candle, and a Parson with him. Sir Humph. How now!
what is the matter here?


Phill. Oh unlucky time! must he come too! Nothing my Dear, but I played the
Rogue, and frighted these two in the dark.


Celia. Am I discovered to her -- oh mischief --

Ex. Celia.
Chlo. Must she over-hear me. I could have born the other down, if she had
Spoken of it --

[ Exit Chl^.
Sir Humph. Since you are grown so pious -- I have brought a Lea^ned Churchman
to confer with you about a Case of Conscience, I have been in every Room in the
House to find you out, pray come along with me --


Phill. I obey.

[ Ex. Sir Humph. Parson, Phillis*
Enter Gripe and Richard, Mrs. Gripe in Woman's habit, a Mantea^, a Petticoat,
and a Hood. Gripe. Oh Heaven and Ear^h! is the perfidious Jade my Wife here?
were ever two so like in Face and Nature, as these accursed Twins --


Mrs. Gripe. My Dear, look not so strangely on me -- for I am sadly sensible of
my own rashness, and your great Injuries from my cruel Brother.


Gripe. What Is the meaning of this -- I will, if possible, make use of her to
get my liberty, and if I can get her home to me, I Will murder her --


Mrs. Gripe. I am come full of Sorrow and Repentance, having been at my
Brother's Lodging ever since the moment of my Escape; and not hearing of your
usage till now -- if you will pardon me, I will propound some means for your
Liberty, and go home and submit wholly to your pleasure --


Gripe. My dearest Wife! now thou art thy self again -- I shall be transported
to receive thee into my Arms.

I think strangling will be a very good Death -- for her as can be --

[Aside.
Mrs. Gripe. Can thou forgive me, Dearest?


Gripe. O yes, my Dear, and love thee as well as ever I did -- Or if I should
run her through with my Sword, and say she killed her self --

[Asid^.
Mrs. Gripe. I would go for my Lord Chief Justices Warrant, and raise the Town,
but I Would release Th^e; but my rash Brother knowing what my Conjugal affections
would prompt me to, when I came to solicit for your Liberty, he put me under
the hands of his Sergeant, and I am as much confined as you: The time grows
short, and we must think of some sudden way to prevent your Voyage --


Gripe. Dear heart! I can never reward thee enough for thy kindness to me -- if
we get home again together, thou shall be as free as thou can wish to be --

Let me see, a small knitting Needle under her left Arm when she is asleep* will
do the business rarely --

[Aside. What can thou propound for me to do? my dearest Heart.


Mrs. Gripe. There Is no way left, but to seem to comply with him; for he is
re^olutely bent --


Gripe. Comply! what to go for Flanders?


Mrs. Gripe. No -- in that ^ettlement he proposes for me.


Gripe. Mercy on me! What 3000 l. or 400 l. a year separate Maintenance! oh --
I shall ^aint! y have struck me dead. 'Sheart! what a Sum is that?


Rich. I have a small Brandy-Bottle, '^is Soldier-like, and very Comfortable.


Mrs. Gripe. It Is nothing in thy Wealth.


Gripe. Nothing! Damnation! knock me o'th head, or cut my Throat -- If I should
smother her with a Bolster, and give out she died of an Apoplexj! that is the
most secret way I have thought on yet.

[Aside. If you love me, why d^d you not refuse that settlement?


Mrs. Gripe. I did, and told him I would not accept on it! at which he was
enraged, and told me, though I was a Fool for my self, he would not be so for
me; he was resolved you should do it, or suffer the last extremity; and he is so
inflamed, he may for ought I know throw thee overboard in the Voyage, if thou
refusest.


Gripe* Let him do it: Ounds, 3000 l. or 400 l. a year! let him do it, let him
do it, let him do it, I say.


Mrs. Grip^. Why my Dear! if thou sign'st that Deed, I Will return it thee again.
And be thy most obedient Wife.


Gripe. Poor Rogue! will thou? that is kind indeed; prithee kiss me, my pretty
Dear: Thou overjoy'st me with thy Love!

Hah -- I have thought on the bent way, if I can get her home with me, I Will
give her Opium in her drink, and that never a Doctor or Chyrurgeon on 'em all
can discover, when they open her. Ay, it shall be so! --

[Aside.
Mrs. Gripe. The least thing I could hear him propound, was to seize upon thy
Jewels and thy Deeds, and secure 'em in a Friend's hands of his, till he had
reduced you to comply.


Gripe. O Devil! that is worst of all.


Mrs. Gripe. Trust me, we are one flesh, our interests are one: I shall restore
Thy Deed, and be subject; for my Conscience will not let me part from Thee,
though the rashness of my passion made ^e fly.


Gripe. Poor Lamb! if I had thee sase at home, I Would never give thee Occasion
more: prithee go to thy damned Brother, and try to mollify ^im f^rther, while
I retire and consider of this.


Mrs. Gripe. I will, my Dear -- one kiss first.


Gripe. Oh! it is a Dear Soul!

Well, she takes Opium, that is certain; for while she lives, I shall never be
at rest from this Devilish Rascal her Brother.


Serj. Go into your Quarter! come Madam --

[Exeun^.
En^er Bellamy, Celia, Wildman, Chloris. Bell. If you don't sind me as
obsequious, and as kind a Keeper as the best of 'em --


Celia. I must confess you speak reasonably, and like a Gentleman. But I shall
break Sir (...)'s heart --


B^ll. You have broken his Fortune, and when that is gone, it is no matter for
his heart.


Celia. That indeed is undeniable, and I can no longer resist those Charm^
which before subdued me.


Chlo. I must confess you speak so like a worthy person, and show such signs of
Love to me, that I cannot but think you the finest person in the world; but Sir
Christopher will kill me if I should le^ve him.


Wild. Let me alone to defend the heart I gain: Besides, he is undon! a beggarly
fellow, and is going a Redcoat into Fland^rs.


Chlo. Indeed he has been extravagant, and run out a great part of his Estate;
and I hate a man that has run out his Fortune: I vow I do, with my heart.


Enter Sir Nicholas P^akgoose. Sir Nich. Ah my Dear, art thou there? I am come
at last to thee, pretty one.


Celia. Get you gone, you drunken Sot; you were drunk with Bulli^s, and lost
your Watch and Ring.


Sir Nich. Why look you there, I thought what 'twould come to: As I hope to be
saved I could not help it; They wo^ld have killed me if I had not drank and
played with them, and I knew you would have been very angry, if I had been
killed.


Celi^. Get you gone, you impertinent Coxcomb! must you come and interrupt me,
when I am talking with a Gentleman; have you no breeding?


Sir Nich. Well, well, say no more. I Will stand by* and wait till you have done.


Enter Sir Humphrey, Phillis, Parson and Steward. Sir Humph. Call in all my
Servan^s. Now all this Company take notice, I am married to this Lady -- Here Is
the Canonical Officer that executed us.


Pars. I did Marry 'em as the Church appoints.


Bell. How Married!


Wild. To his Wench?


Sir Humph. Gentlemen, you seem to wonder at my proceeding! I found my self
involved on a sudden, beyond any other redemption, and therefore chose this,
which I hope will set me free. This shepyrat had robbed me of what my
extravagance had left free, and I have taken Letters of Reprisal, and have
gotten my own again.


Bell. I wish you Joy.


Wild. Much happiness to you.


Sir Humph. She is the greatest Fortune I could have gotten, nor do I know why
a Man should not fit a Woman that perhaps may last him his life time, and yet
draw on a Shoe that he is to wear but two days before he take it.


Chlo. I wish your Ladyship much Joy; it is a great honor to our Function to
have one of it so advanced.


Celia. I wish your Ladyship much Happiness -- but there is no Wife lives like
one of us -- let me tell her that.


Enter Mrs. Gripe, Sergeant, Gripe, Sir Christopher, Blunderbus and
Heildebrand. Mrs. Gripe. Sir Humphrey, I have sudden Orders from the General to
Embark this Tide with my Soldiers; I came hearing of your Marriage, to wish you
joy, and take my leave of you --


Sir Humph. Sir, I humbly thank you, and wish you a good Voyage.


Wild. Now I desire all this good Company to be Witnesses to the Agreement made
between me, and this Lady.


Sir Chr. What a Pox does he say?


Wild. It is agreed by and between the Parties above mentioned, that I am to
have the sole use of this Ladies Person, to my own proper behoof, paying the
Sum of 400 l. a year, and buying a pretty convenient Coach and Horses: what say
you?


Chlo. It is a bargain.


Sir Chr. Oh damned confounded Jade, wilt t^ou leave me?


Wild. Good words Red-Coat, or I Will cut your Throat.


Chlo. You are going for a Soldier, and leaving me.


Sir Nic. Ay! you are going for a Soldier! what would you have her do? I
warrant you will not take my Celia at this; I Will trust her pretty Rogue --


Sir Chr. You damned Impudent Rascal! must you prate? Sirrah! take that.


Sir Nich. Ay! it is no matter, I have not lost my Mistress.


Bell. Now hear us a little: Item, It is articled and agreed between this Lady
and me, that I am to use, possess and enjoy the Tenement of of her Person
without any let, hinderance, or molestation whatsoever, buying a Coach and
Horses, as aforesaid; and paying the annual Rent of 400 l. per annum, of lawful
Money of England; half yearly by true and equal portions* The first payment to
be made at the Temple-Hall, at the Feast of the Annun^iation, and the next at
the Feast of St. Michael.


Sir Nich. Hold Sir! not so fast, I forbid the Banes! she is mine! why I have
spent half my Estate upon her.


Bell. Stand away, poor Coxcomb! what say you Madam.


Celia. It is a Match.


Sir Nich. O Lord! Oh Lord! will you serve me so? what will become of me?


Celia. Go! get you home, and live civilly with your Wife; and look after your
Children as an honest man should. It Is time.


Sir Nich. Ay -- It may thank you that I did not do it before, that it may -- I
will go hide my head in a hole, and never be seen again.

Enter Mrs. Gripe, Sergeant, Gripe, and the rest.
Mrs. Gripe. Come Sergeant! get the Barge ready.


Gripe. What a Devil shall I do? If I Seal that Deed, and ever get her into my
Custody, I Will have it again, and her life to boot.


Mrs. Gripe. Gentlemen and Ladies, your humble Servant.


Gripe. Hold, hold -- If there be no remedy, I will Seal that Deed --


Mrs. Gripe. Come on then! do it, and I Will release you.

[He signs and seals.
Gripe. I deliver this as my Act and Deed.


Mrs. Gripe. Now Gentlemen, be pleased to witness it --


Sir Humph. With all my heart --

[ Sir Humphrey writes.
Mrs. Gripe. So! Now there remains another thing! you must release these
Gentlemen for their Riot at your H^use, or go still.


Gripe. Well -- I do release 'em.


Rich. Good Sir! do not release me; for I must go home and starve with him -- I
had better go and be killed with you.


Mrs. Gripe. No -- I retain you as my Servant. And now good Mr. Gripe, your
much abused Wife is free, and thanks you for her Liberty.


Gripe. O Devil! Is it she all this while?


Ladies. A Woman!


Mrs. Gripe. Yes Ladies, I am; but wish my self a Man, for your sakes, and my
own.


Sir Humph. How this Mistake was carried?


Mrs. Gripe. I Will bring my Brother to thank* you for your favors to me, and
then you will Mistake as much.


Gripe. Am I thus Cozened -- I Will go home, and starve to Death. The Devil take
you all -- and so farewell --

[ Exit Gripe.
Sir Chr. Cudgel'd and beaten thus damnably by a Woman! I hope She Captain, you
will release us now --


Mrs. Gripe. Yes go -- I Will have no Bullies in my Company now.


Blund. 'Sheart! were ever men so dishonored as we!


Heild. Beaten and bruised by a Woman!


Sir Chr. As for that damned Jade, I will s^owr and break her Windows every
night in the year.


Mrs. Gripe. Now all ye Husbands, let me Warn ye!

If you would preserve your Honors, or your Lives;
Never dare be Tyrants over your Lawful Wives.
[Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.
Epilogue.
Spoken by Mrs. Barrey, who acted the Woman-Captain. WHo dares deny the Poet
his applause
When I am Champion, and assert his cause?
Let him be Bully, never so stout and tall,
'Sdeath I Will not fear the briskest of ye all:
No, though ye Rant and Roar, and sometimes Fight,
I Have that which never fails to do me right.
Your would-be Wits love what is slight and bright
In Tinsel-wit, just like their own delight,
And Plays like Birthday Suits, made for a Night,
These are o'rejoy'd to have a jest at hand
That costs but little Wit to understand.
Good sense, like solid Meat to sickly Men,
As soon as swallowed, is thrown up again;
And for strong Meats, but few of ye are fit,
Who to meet Wit, should come with equal Wit,
And faith of late, that is but thin sown in the Pit.
He found by*s last, you would not like what is good,
Though it was praised by all that understood.
Remembering how you used that last he writ,
He made this Low, so to your Level sit;
Plenty of Noise, and scarcity of Wit --
The Devil's in you all, if this don't hit:
Yet after all, if any one there be
So careless of his Life to anger me,
In daring to dispraise the Play, or Action,
There take my Glove, for I ll have Satisfaction.

