Epsom-Wells. A COMEDY, Acted at the DUKE'S THEATER.

Written by THO. SHADWELL.

(...)

LICENSED, Feb. 17. 1672/3 Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by I. M. for Henry Herringman at the Sign of the Blew Anchor
in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. M.DC.LXXIII.

Dramatis Personae.
Rains, Men of Wit and Pleasure. Bevil, Men of Wit and Pleasure. Woodly, Men of
Wit and Pleasure. Clodpate, A C^^ntry Justice, a public, spirited, politic,
^^scontented Fop, an immoderate hater of London, and a lover of the Country
above measure, a hearty true English Coxcomb. Toby, Clodpate's Man. Kick, Two
cheating, sharking, cowardly Bullies. Cu^^, Two cheating, sharking, cowardly
Bullies. Biscuit, A Comfit-maker, a quiet, humble, civil Cuckold governed by his
Wife, whom he very much fears and loves at the same time, and is very proud of.
Fribble, A Haberdasher, a surly Cuckold, very conceited, and proud of his Wife,
but pretends to govern and keep her under.

Two Country Fellows.

Footboy.

Mrs. Woodly. Woodly's Wife, Jilting, unquiet, troublesome, and very Whorish.
Lucia, Two young Ladies of Wit, beauty, and Fortune. Carolina, Two young Ladies
of Wit, beauty, and Fortune. Mrs. Biscuit, An impertinent imperious Strumpet,
Wife to Biscuit. Dorothy Fribble. Wife to Fribble, an humble submitting Wife who
Jilts her Husband that way, a ver^ Whore. Mrs. Iilt, A silly affected Whore
that pretends to b^ Love with most me^, and thinks most men i^ Love with her,
and is always boasting of Love Letters and men's favors, yet a Pretender to
Virtue. Peg, Her Sister, Mrs. Woodly's Maid. Parson, Hectors, Constable and
Watch, and Fiddlers.
To his Grace the Duke of NEW CASTLE, etc.
May it please your Grace,
YOur Grace has by so many and extraordinary favors so entirely made me your
own, that I cannot but think what ever is mine is so. This makes me bold to
present you with this Comedy, which the Town was extremely kind to, and which I
confess I am more fond of than of any thing I have ever wrote, and therefore
think my self obliged to dedicate it to your Grace, since whatever I can value
most among my small Possessions is your due. And though the return be in no
measure proportionable to the obligations I have received; yet I h^p^ I shall
not be thought ungrateful, since I offer the b^st I have to your Grace: who I
think I may say are the only Mecenas of our Age, I am sure the only one that ^
can boast of

You are he who still preserves and maintains the Magnifi^^nce and Grandeur of
our ancient Nobility; and being one that is truly great in Mind as well as
Fortune, you take delight in the rewarding and encouraging of Art and Wit: And
while others detract from Poetry, or at least neglect it, your Grace not only
encourages it by your great Example, but protects it too. Welbeck is indeed the
only place where the best Poets can find a good reception. Your Grace well
understanding their noble Science, and admiring it, while some men envy it, and
others are grossly ignorant of it; and indeed none but the latter can slightly
esteem it, who commonly are solid Block-heads, that value business and
drudgery, which every industrious Fool is capable of before refined W^t and
Sense. It is a certain sign of a sordid and fooli^^^ Age, when Poetry is
depressed, men, by reason of their folly and looseness of Manners, either not
caring to imitate the generous Characters represented by it, or fearing the
Satyr of it.

Your Grace is above the imitating of generous Characters, made by Poets, being
your self an Original which they can but faintly copy, nor are you less for
your Greatn^ss, Wisdom, and Integrity above their Satyr. So that your Grace is
fitly qualified in all particulars for the support of poor neglected Poetry.
Your Exc^ll^nce in the Art is enough to keep up the Dignity of it, and your
Greatness to encourage and protect it. And accordingly your Grace does so
magnificently extend your favors to the Poets, that your great Example is
enough to atone the neglect of all the Nation, and among all whom your Grace
has obliged, there is none shall be more ready upon all occasions to testify
his Gratitude, than,

My Lord, Your Graces most obedient, humble Servant, Tho. Shadwell.


Prologue
written by Sir C. S.
POets and Thieves can scarce be rooted out,
Escape never so hardly, they will have th^other bout;
Burnt in the hand the Thieves fall to it again,
And Poets hist, cry they did so to Ben --:
Like Boys, who have at School too o^t been stripped,
They have no feeling in the part that is whipped.
They Are for your pity, not your anger, fit,
They Are even such fools, they would be thought to have wit.
Elsewhere you all can flatter, why not here;
You Will say you pay, and so may be severe:
Judge for your selves then Gallants as you pay,
And lead not each of you his Bench astray:
Let easy Citts be pleased with all they hear,
Go home and to their Neighbors praise our Ware.
They with good stomachs come, and fain would eat,
You nothing like, and make them loath their meat.
Though some men are with Wine, Wit, Beauty cloyed,
The Creatures still by others are enjoyed.
It Is not fair Play, that one for his Half Crown
Should judge, and rail, and damn for hal^ the Town.
But do your worst; if once the Pit grows thin,
Your dear loved Masks, will hardly venture in.
Then we are revenged on you, who needs must come
Hither, to shun your own dull selves at home:
But you kind Burgers who had never yet,
Either your Heads or Bellies full of wit:
Our Poet hopes to please; but not too well;
Nor would he have the angry Critics swell.
A moderate Fate best fits his humble mind,
Be neither they too sharp, nor you too kind.
Prologue to the King and Queen, spoken at Whitehall.
POets and Soldiers used to various chance,
Cannot expect they should each day advance;
Sometimes their Wreaths they miss, sometimes obtain;
But whensoe're one luckie hit they gain,
Loudly the triumphs of that day they boast,
And never reflect on all their Battles lost,
So, Royal Sir, the Poet of this night,
Since he contributed to your delight,
No thoughts of ^ormer losses does retain,
But boasts that now he has not lived in vain:
His tide of joy will to ambition swell,
He that would think his whole life managed well,
Once pleasing him --
TO whom all the l^bours of our lives are due,
Has now lived twice, since he has twice plea^'d you.
These two Lines were writ in answer to the calumny of some impotent and
envious Scriblers, and some industrious Enemies of mine, who would have made
the Town and Court believe, though I am sure they themselves did not, that I
did not write the Play; but at last it was found to be so ^rivolous a piece of
malice, it left an impression upon few or none.
If this for him had been by others done,
After this honor sure they would claim their own.
Yet, to complete his wishes, does remain
This new addition, which he hopes to gain,
That you, the other glory of our Isle,
Would grace his labors with your Royal smile.
Though he has ^aults, yet, Madam, you will save
The Criminal your Royal Lord forgave;
And that indulgence he will much prefer
To all the applauses of the Theater.
A common Audience gives but common praise,
The applause of Princes must confer the Bays.
Epsom Wells.
ACT. I. SCENE. I.
Enter Mrs. Woodly, Biscuit, Mrs. Biscuit, Frible and his Wife, Kick, Cuff,
Dorothy and Margaret; to Toby and others, drinking at the Wells. Bisk. I Vow it
is a pleasurable Morning; the Waters (...) so finely after being fudled last
Night. Neighbor Fribble, here is a Pint to you.


Fribb. I Will pledge you Mr. Biscuit, I have drunk eight already.


Mrs. Bisk. How do the Waters agree with your Ladyship?


Mrs. Wood. Oh Soveraignly; how many Cups are you arrived to?


Mrs. Bisk. Truly six, and they pass so kindly --


Mrs. Wood. It Is a delicious Morning.


Cuff. Honest Kick, how is it? you were drunk last night; I was so, and was
damnably beaten.


Kick. I was drunk, Ned Cuff, and was not beaten, but beat; I am come to wash
away my Claret, but you will scarce wash away your black Eye.


Mrs. Fribb. I am glad to see your Ladyship this Morning, you look so fresh and
fair; my service to you, Madam.


Kick. How the white Aprons scuttle, and leap, and dance yonder; some of 'em
are dancing the Hey.


Kick. Many a London Strumpet comes to Jump and was^ down her unlawful Issue,
to prevent shame; but more especially charges.


Cuff. Others come hither to procure Conception.


Kick. Ay Pox, that is not from the Waters, but something else that shall be
nameless.


Cuff. I have a great mind to run roaring in amongst 'em all.


Kick. Thou had as good fling thy self among the Lions in the Tower when they
are fasting. They Will tear thee in pieces, but we will have a course as they are
going from the Wells.


Cuff. Agreed: we seldom use to miss of some kind good body to supply our
necessities that way.


Fribb. Is your Ladyships Coach here?


Mrs. Wood. It goes before, I Will follow it on foot for the pleasure of the walk.


Mrs. Bisk. Madam, good Morrow, have your Ladyships Waters passed well.


Mrs. Wood. Yes wonderfully, I Will be going. Exit Mrs. Wood.


Biscuit. Mr. Kick, and Mr. Cuff, good Morrow to you, we shall have you at the
Bowling-Green in the afternoon.


Kick. I play on your side.


Bisk. I know it, and I Will lay all I am worth on it.


Kick. I hope he will, Cuff, that we may ruin him.


Fribb. And I am on my Neighbor Biskets side all I can rap and rend.


Cuff. Let Us be sure to bet all we can. I have known a great Bowler, whose
Betters place was worth above 200 l. a year without venturing a farthing for
himself.


Kick. They begin to go homewards, let us be gone.


Enter Raines and Bevil. Bev. Jack, how is it this Morning? we are late, the
Company is going from the Wells; how does thy last nights work agree with thee?


Raines. Whether that agrees with me or no, I am resolved to agree with that;
for no distemper can trouble me that comes from so generous a Cause, as lusty
Burgundy, and good Company.


Bev. Thou art in the right, we should no more be troubled at the Fevers we get
in drinking, than the Honorable wounds we receive in Battle.


Raines. It Is true, the first are the effects of our pleasure, and the last of
our honor; which are two things absolutely necessary to the life of a
Gentleman.


Bev. Yet your dull spleenatick sober Sots will tell you, we shorten our lives,
and bring Gouts, Dropsies, Palsies, and the Devil and all upon us.


Raines. Let 'em lie and preach on, while we live more in a week, than those
insipid-temperate-fools do in a year.


Bev. We like subtle Chemists extract and refine our pleasure; While they like
Fulsom Galenists take it in gross.


Raines. I confess, a disorder got by Wine in scurvy company, would trouble a
man as much as a Clap got of a Bawd; but there are some women so beautiful,
that the pleasure would more than balance the disaster.


Bev. And as your honest Whore-master makes haste to his cure only to be at it
again; so do we take Pills and the Waters to prepare us for another heat.


Raines. For my part I hate to hoord up a great stock of health, as Misers do
Gold, and make no use on it: I am resolved to lay it out upon my Friends as far
as 'twill go; and if I run my self out, I Will be a good Husband for a while to
lay it out again when I have it.


Bev. But, Jack, there are duties to our she, as well as he^neighbours, which
the Dull, Grave, and Wise say, is lighting our Candle at both ends.


Raines. Let 'em be light at both ends. Is it not better to let life go out in
a blaze than a snuff?


Bev. I see thou art a brave fellow, and not to be moved by the formal Fops of
this world.


Raines. I will converse with grave fellows in their Books; but with such as
thou art over a bottle Ned. But where is Woodly this morning? I warrant he was
drunk last night, and has had a tedious lecture from his Impertinent Wife; who
impudently rails at him, as she says, because she loves him.


Bev. He Is an honest fellow, and ventures hard when ^e drinks with us; for to
say truth, she is a damned Wife, but a very good Mistress.


Raines. Art not thou a Villain to Cuckold this (...) and thy friend Ned?


Bev. Gad it is impossible to be a man of honor in these Cases. But my intrigue
with her began before my Friendship with him, and so I made a friend of my
Cuckold, and not a Cuckold of my friend.


Rains. An admirable School distinction.


Enter Woodly. Wood. Raines and Bevil, good Morrow to you.


Rains. O Frank Woodly, where were thou last night? you escaped a bloody night
on it.


Wood. Faith Rains there is no scaping, a Coward may be killed as well as a
brave man; I ran away from you but to little purpose. See how my hand shakes
this Morning.


Rains. O let me kiss that hand; he must be an illustrious Man whose hand
shakes at 22.


Wood. You are pleased to say so, but faith I take pains and live as fast as I
can that is the truth on it.


Bev. Thou art in the right, and a Pox on them that live slowly, lazily, and
soberly. I love riding Post in a Journey, I hate a damned dull Carriers pace.


Wood. But I was in damned Company with that Public spirited Fool, and Country
Justice, Mr. Clodpate, and one or two as bad.


Bev. Thou art often seduced by Fools, Frank; have a care of 'em I say, have a
care of 'em.


Rains. He Counsels you well; for conversation is to the mind, as the air we
live in is to the body; in the good we by degrees suck in health, and in the
ill Diseases. Wit is improved in good Company; but there is a Contagion in
Folly, that insensibly in^inuates into one that often converses with Fools, let
his constitution of mind be never so good.


Bev. But Clodpate is a Clownish-Country Fool. The Murrain among Cattle is not
infectious to men, nor can his blunt folly ever insinuate it self into an
honest debauchee.


Enter C^odpate, and Toby. Rains. Here he comes, let us observe him a little.


Clodp. Did you call upon my Cozen Spatter-Brain for that Interest money due to
me this Midsummer?


Toby. I have, Sir, every day since he came to Epsom, and yesterday he said
upon his Honor he would pay me, and went immediately to London.


Clodp. Honor, a Pox on his Honor, I Will sooner trust the honor of a Country
Horse-Courser, than one of the Publicans and Sinners of that odious Town. They
never pay so much as a Taylors-Bill till it comes to Execution: But i will have
Spatter-Brain by the back the next Term, though he be my Sisters Son. But how
does my dapple Mare?


Toby. She Is much discontented to hear her Neighbors Whiney over their Oats
and Beans, while she is fain to mortify with a poor lock of Hay.


Clodp. You Rogue, you would have her as fat, and as foggy, as my Landlady the
Hostess. I care not what I spend amongst my Neighbors in Sussex, but I Would not
have a Rogue so near that damned Town of London get a farthing by me.


Wood. Besides, some dull Encomiums upon a Country life, and discourse of his
serving the Nation with his Magistracy, popularity, and Housekeeping, you see
the best and worst of him.


Bev. But is his hatred to London so inveterate as is reported?


Wood. Six times more. Since 'twas burnt he calls it nothing but Sodom; he is
such a Villain, he swears the Frenchman that was hanged for burning on it was a
Martyr; he was so glad at the burning of it, that ever since he has kept the
second of September a Festival; he thinks a Woman cannot be honest, scarce
sound that comes within the smell on it, he is shocked at the very name on it.


Bev. I have heard that the reasons of his hatred, are, because he has been
beaten, clapped, and cheated there.


Rains. Pox on him, he has found us, and there is no avoiding him.


Clodp. O Mr. Woodly, how is it? You drink no Waters; but have you had your
other Mornings draught yet.


Wood. Yes, I never leave off my Evenings draught till it becomes my Mornings
draught.


Clodp. Mr. Rains and Bevill, gad save ye; how de'e like the Country? is it not
worth a hundred of old Sodom yonder? good Horses, good Dogs, good Ale, hah --


Rains. Good Wine, good Wit, and fine Women, may I take it, compare with them.


Clodp. I find you will never leave that place of sin and sea-coal, give me drink
for all that, that breeds no Gout; a wholesome plain Wench, that will neither
bring my body to the Surgeons hands, nor my Land to the S^rivners: and for Wit,
there is such a stir amongst you, who has it, and who has it not, that we
honest Country Gentlemen begin to think there is no such thing, and have hearty
Mirth and good old Catches amongst us, that do the business every whit as well.


Rains. He Is in the right.


Clodp. But Mr. Woodly, how do you like my Dapple Mare?


Wood. Not comparable to a Hackney Coach.


Clodp. But she shall run with e're a Hackney Coach in England for all that, or
e're a Horse in your stable, weight him and inch him.


Wood. I would not keep a running horse, though a running horse would half keep
me.


Bev. We are for London to morrow; shall we have your company?


Codp. Ud's bud, I go to London! I am almost sick at Epsom, when the wind sits
to bring any of the wind this way, and by my good will would not talk with a
man that comes from thence till he has ayr'd himself a day or two.


Wood. Why, there is no Plague.


Clodp. There Is Pride, Popery, Folly, Lust, Prodigality, Cheating Knaves, and
Jilting Whores; Wine of half a crown a quart, and Ale of twelve pence, and what
not.


Rains. This is a terrible regiment you have mustered; but neither the Priests
nor the Women will ravish you; nor are you forced to take the Wine, as the
French are their Salt, there are twelve penny Ordinaries.


Clodp. Ay, and Cards and false Dice, and Quarrels, Hectors and reformed
Officers to borrow a Crown, and beat a man that refuses it, or asks for it
again; besides, I Will sum you up the beastly pleasures of the best of ye.


Wood. What are those?


Clodp. Why, to sit up drunk till three a clock in the morning, rise at twelve,
follow damned French Fashions, get dressed to go to a damned Play, choke your
selves afterward with dust in Hide-park, or with Sea-coal in the Town, flatter
and fawn in the drawing room, keep your Wench, and turn away your Wife,
Gods-ooks.


Bev. The Rogue is a tart and witty whoreson.


Clodp. I was at Sodom at eighteen, I thank 'em, but now I serve my Country,
and spend upon my Tenants what I get amongst them.


Rains. And so, indeed, are no better than their Sponge, which they moisten
only to squeeze again. But what important service do you do your Country?


Clodp. S'bud I -- why I am Justice of Quorum in Sussex, and this County too,
and I make the Surveyors mend the High ways; I cause Rogues to be whipped for
breaking fences or pilling trees, especially if they be my own; I swear
Constables and the like.


Bev. But is this all?


Clodp. No: I call Over-^eers for the Poor to an account, sign Rates, am a
Game-keeper, and take away Guns and Greyhounds, bind fellows to the Peace,
observe my monthly Meeting, am now and then an Arbitrator, and License
Alehouses, and make people bury in Flannel, to encourage the Woollen
Manufacture; which never a Justice of Peace in England does but I.


Wood. Look you, what would you have?


Clodp. Besides, I am drunk once a week at my Lord Lieutenants; and at my own
house spend not scurvy French kick-shaws, but much Ale and Beef, and Mutton,
the Manufactures of the Country.


Bev. The Manufactures of the Country, that is well.


Rains. Ay, and, I warrant, by the virtue of that, can bring as many wide
mouthed Rogues to Ball and holloa for a Knight of the shire, as any man.


Clodp. Ay gods-ooks can I.


Rains. That men should be such infinite Coxcombs to live scurvily to get
reputation among thick-scull'd Peasants, and be at as a great a distance with
men of wit and sense, as if they were another sort of Animals.


Bev. It Is fit such fools should govern and do the drudgery of the world, while
reasonable men enjoy it.


Clodp. Mr. Woodly, I Will go now and wait upon your Cousin Lucia, and if I can
get her to marry me, and fill up my pack of dogs, my two great works are over
in this world. God-by-gentleman. Ud's-bud, I had forgot, I have the rarest
stand of Ale to drink out in the afternoon, with three or four honest Country
fellows; you shall be very welcome to it I^ack; and we will dust it away.


Bev. We thank you, Sir.


Clodp. I am now in haste to read a Gazette, this is the day, I am impatient
till I see it -- Oh, I love Gazetes extremely, and they are the only things I
can endure that come from London. They are such pretty penned things, and I do
so love to hear of Wisnowisky, Potosky, General Wrangle, and Count Tot, and all
those brave fellows -- Gad save ye. Ex.


Six Women cross the Stage in great haste. Rains. Look how the women begin to
trip it from the Wells; I see some of 'em well dressed in Masks; oh that
admirable invention of Vizor-masques for us poor Lovers; Vizors are so
provocative, the Devil take me, I cannot forbear 'em.


Bev. Thou art such a Termagant fellow, thou art as eager at a woman in a
Vizard-masque, as thou Exit Rains. would be if she showed all. Faith I Will
not be behind hand with ye -- Enter Mrs. Woodly, and pulls Bevil by the sleeve.
How now, what am I boarded first?

Oh Mrs. Woodly is it you?


Mrs. Wood. I dare not stay a minute, read that note, adie^.


Bev. Short and sweet, let me see -- Ex. Mrs. Woodly. Reads. My Husband staid
up late, and was very drunk last night, and I have had a happy quarrel with him
this morning, that has driven him from home, where I shall have the happiness
not to see him till night, so that I safely may enjoy your sweet society most
part of this day.

Yours Woodly.


Well, the sin's so sweet, and the temptation so strong^ I have no power to
resist it. Ex. Bevil.


Enter Carolina, and Lucia, and Footman. Caro. Let the Coach walk up the Hill,
we'll follow it.


Foot. It shall, Madam. Ex. Footman.


Caro. But as I was saying, Lu^ia, here is very scurvy company.


Luc. We have no body near us here, but some impertinent ill-bred City-wives,
where they have more trading with the youth of the Suburbs, than their Husbands
with their Customers within the walls.


Caro. Sometimes we have their tame Husbands, who gallop hither upon their
Tits, to see their faithful Wives play a game at Ninepins, and be drunk with
stum'd wine; and strait are gone to their several and respective couzening
vocations. Therefore, prithee, let us go to Tunbridge; for London is so empty,
it is a very Wilderness this Vocation.


Luc. No faith, Carolina, I have a project in my head shall stay me here a
little longer, and thee to --


Caro. What, you hanker after an acquaintance with Rains and Bevil? thou art a
mad wench, but they are so very wild.


Luc. An they be naturally wilder than I, or you either, for all your
simpering; I Will be condemned to Fools and ill company for ever.


Caro. Do not wish that dreadful curse; we are already so much pestered with
gay Fools, that have no more sense than our Shock-dogs; that I long for an
acquaintance with witty men as well as thou do. But how can we bring it about
without scandal?


Luc. Let this brain of mine alone for that. I blush for my Sex, to see the
Ladies of London (as if they had forsworn common sense) make insipid young
Fools their greatest Favorites.


Caro. It Is a shame that a company of young wall-fac'd fellows, that have no
sense beyond Perruques and Pantaloons, should be the only men with the Ladies;
whilst the acquaintance of witty men is thought scandalous.


Luc. For my part, I am resolved to redeem the honor of our Sex, and love Wit,
and never think a Fool a fine Gentleman.

Enter Cuff and Kick. What Ruffins are these that come to interrupt us in our
great design?


Ki^k. Ah, Ladies, have we caught ye in faith; you shall go along with us.


Caro. What pitiful fellows are these?


Cuff. Pitiful fellows, Gad have a care what you say, we do not use to put up
such words, either from man or woman.


Lu^. What would you do you dowty Hectors?


Kick. Hectors? upon my honor, if we can find them out, we'll beat your
Gallants for this.


Caro. If I had a Gallant that kept a Footman, that would not beat either of
ye, I Would disown the Master for the cowardice of the man.


Cuff. God's Death, I could ^ind in my heart to draw upon her.


Kick. Would you had two of the bravest fellows in Christendom to defend ye,
you should see how we would swinge 'em.


Luc. Avaunt, you Hectors, we are not fit for you. I am sure, neither of you;
yet were ever honored with a favor from a Chambermaid.


Caro. Your acquaintance never rises higher than a Landress or an Hostess.


Cuff Be not perverse and foolish, we are persons of quality, and have money.
Look ye, let this tempt you.


Kick. Come faith, we'll pay you well upon my honor.


Caro. Upon my honor you shall be well paid with a couple of sufficient
beatings, if you leave us not.


Cuff. Hilts and blades, men of honor beaten, ye proud Flirts.


Enter Rains and Bevil following some Women who run cross the Stage. Luc.
Gentlemen, ye look like men of quality; pray own us to be of your
acq^aintance, and protect us from a couple of troublesome Ruffians.


Rains. Own thee! that I will faith in any ground in Christendom, and I hope
thou will be of my acquaintance before we part. I embrace the adventure as
greedily as a Knight errand could.


Bev. to Caro. This is the Dame that I Will defend.


Rains. Gentlemen, have you any business with these Ladies?


Kick. Why, Sir, what if we have?


Cuff. May be we have not, Sir, may be we have.


Bev. Nay, Gentlemen, no huffing, know your'e men and vanish.


Rains. You may else, unawares, pull down a beating upon your own heads.


Kick. Beating, Sir.


Cuff. We are Gentlemen of quality; never tell us of this, and that, I gad --


Rains. Do not provoke us, but be gone.


Kick. Well, Sir, fare ye well; who cares? I care no more for 'em. --


Cuff. No, nor I neither. What a pox care I; tell me -- fare ye well. But who
the Devil thought they would have come hither?


Kick. Pox on 'em for me.


Luc. softly. These are our Gallants: Gentlemen, let us see how you will swinge
'em.


Kick. 'Pshaw, prithee hold thy tongue, talk to me -- fa, la, la.


Ex. Kick, and Cuff Singing. Luc. This is lucky Carolina for our design.
Gentlemen, you have obliged us extremely.


Rains. We are like Knights Errands, or Knights of the Bath, bound to relieve
Ladies by our Order.


Bev. But i^ we have obliged you; pray let us see whom we have had the honor
of obliging.


Caro. Generous men should be content with the Action, without knowing whom
they have obliged. But let it satisfy you, we are women of no small quality.


Luc. This desire of knowing us, looks as if ye expected a reward; the seeing
of our faces would be none; and upon my word, Gentlemen, we can go no farther
if we would do that --


Caro. Besides, you may think us handsome now, and if we show our ^aces, we
shall convince you to the contrary, and make you re^^^t the obligation.


Bev. I like thy shape and humor so well, that gad if thou wilt satisfy my
Curiosity; I Will not repent, though you want that great ornament of a face,
called a Nose.


R^ins. I am sure mine is handsome; I have an instinct that never ^ails me.


Luc. Your infallable instinct has guessed wrong now.


Bev. Come, Ladies, faith off with these Clouds and shine upon us.


Rains. We can never leave you till we see your faces; and if ye don't show 'em
us, we shall think you desire to keep us with ye.


Luc. Nay, rather than have that scandal upon us, we'll show 'em.


Caro. With all my heart, but upon these terms; you shall promise, upon your
honor, not to dog us, or inquire further after us at this time.


Luc. You hear the conditions.


Bev. The conditions are very hard -- but I promise --


Rains. Come, Ladies, I find you are handsome, and think your s^lves so; or you
would not be afraid of our dogging you, when we have seen you.


Luc. No seeing our faces but upon these terms.


Rains. You are cruel Tigers -- but since there is no remedy, I promise --


Luc. Look you, Sir, do you like it now?


Caro. You Will believe us another time.


Bev. By Heaven a Divine Creature!


Rains. Beyond all comparison! where have I lived?


Bev. Gad mine has killed me. Since they were so much too hard ^or us at
Blunts, we were fools to go to sharps with them.


Rains. I will never believe a Ladies word of her self again.


Luc. Come you flatter now.


Rains. To show that I don't, I cannot help making my honor yield to my love;
and must beg the favor of you to know who you are; and that I may wait on you
home.


Bev. And, Madam, had I sworn by your self, I must have been perjured, the
temptation is so powerful.


Caro. Have you seen so much Love and Honor upon the Stage, and are so little
Judges of it here?


Luc. In short, if you are men of Honor, you will keep your words; for we will
never release you of 'em.


Bev. Shall we have hopes of seeing you hereafter?


Caro. As you behave your selves now.


Rains. Give me hopes of once more seeing you -- and I Will trust you, and let
you carry my heart away with you.


Luc. You shall hear further from us, and suddenly.


Rains. Upon your Honor?


Luc. Upon my Honor.


Caro. And mine.


Bev. Farewell then, but let me tell you, it is very cruel.


Caro. Why did leave 'em so soon, I could have stayed longer with all my
heart.


Luc. It Is enough at first -- and let me alone hereafter.


Ex. Luc. and Caro. Rains. This was a lucky Adventure, and so much the more
lucky, that I lighted upon the Lady I love best, though they are both beautiful.


Bev. And I am even with you in that too.

Enter Woodly. Here Is Woodly; the Intrigue is not ripe for his knowledge yet;
where have you been, Franck?


Wood. I have had two damned unlucky Adventures. The first Vizor Masque I
pursued after, I had followed her a Furlong, and importuned her to show her
Face; when I thought I had got a Prize beyond my hopes, proved an old Lady of
threescore, with a wrinkl'd pimpl'd Face, but one Eye, and no Teeth; but which
was ten times a worse disappointment, the next that I followed proved to be my
own Wife.


Rains. This was for your good, Franck; Heaven designs to keep you virtuous.


Wood. But I like not virtue that springs from necessity. Mine is so Noble, I Would
have it tried often.


Rains. Well, Gentlemen, where shall we waste the latter part of the day? for I
must spend this former part on it with a convenient sort of Utensil, called a
Citizens Wi^e.


Wood. I must divert that design, and carry you to my Cousin whom you never
saw, the prettiest Girl in Christendom, she has seen you, and likes you
extremely.


Rains. Prithee, Woodly, what should I do with her? I love thee and thy Family
too well to lie with her, and my self too well to marry her; and I think a man
has no excuse for himself that visits a Woman without design of lying with her
one way or other.


Wood. Why, Jack, eight thousand pound and a handsome Wench of seventeen were no
ill bargain.


Rains. But here is eight thousand pound, there is liberty, Franck. Would you be
content to lie in Ludgate all your life time for eight thousand pound?


Wood. No, certainly.


Rains. Marriage is the worst of Prisons.


Bev. But by your leave, Rains, though Marriage be a Prison, yet you may make
the Rules as large as those of the Kings Bench, that extend to the East Indies.


Rains. O hang it. No more of that Ecclesiastical Mouse-Trap.


Wood. Prithee, speak more reverently of the happiest condition of life.


Rains. A married man is not to be believed. You are like the Fox in the Fable
that had lost his Tail, and would have persuaded all others to lose theirs; you
are one of the Parsons Decoy-Ducks, to wheedle poor innocent Fowls into the Net.


Wood. Why should thou think so ill of my Wife, to think I am not in earnest?


Rains. No application, Franck, I think thy Wife as good a Woman as a Wife can
be.


Wood. She loves me extremely, is tolerable handsome, and I am sure virtuous.


Rains. That thou know, Ned Bevil. Aside.


Wood. It Is true, she values her self a little too much upon her Virtue, which
makes her sometimes a little troublesome and impertinent.


Rains. I never knew a Woman that pretended over much to Virtue, that either
had it, or was not troublesome and impertinent.


Enter Biscuit. Rains. Mr. Biscuit, good morrow to you.


Bisk. Your humble Servant, Sir.


Bev. This is Rains his most obsequious humble Cuckold, his Wife is a pretty
impertinent Strumpet, and scorns to have any other Pimp but her own Husband,
who all the while thinks her the innocentest Creature.


Wood. A glorious Punk! but what a despicable thing a Cuckold is; they look as
if they had the mark of Cain upon 'em. I would not be a Cuckold for the World.


Bev. How blind a thing a Husband is! Aside.


Bisk. Now as I am an honest man, and would I might never stir, if I have not
had such a life about you with my pretty Mollie, I would not have her so angry
again for fifty pound, Cod-sniggs.


Rains. About me, what is the matter, man?


Bisk. Why, I promised to bring you to her last night, and got a little
tipsy'd, as they say, and forgot it. She says you play the best at Cribach of
any body, and she loves gaming mightily, and is as true a Gamester, though I
say it.


Rains. I know it, man.


Bisk. Besides, she would fain learn that new Song of you; she says it is a rare
one. SINGS Thou shall have any thing, thou shall have me,
And I have one thing that will please thee.
It Is such a pretty little innocent Rogue, and has such odd Fancies with her,
ha, ha, ha --


Wood. Lord, what a strange Creature a Cuckold is! Aside.


Bisk. But I swear all that I could do to her could not please her this
morning. I fackings no body can satisfy her but you; therefore as you tender
the quiet and welfare of a poor humble Husband, come and play at Cribach with
her to day; for she loves Cribach most intemperately. I do wonder that a Woman
should love Gaming so.


Rains. Faith I am half engaged.


Bisk. For Heavens sake, as you love me do not deny me, I shall have no quiet
with her; besides, some Cheapside Neighbors of mine are to have a Game at
Bowls, and a merry meeting this Afternoon, and she wishes the Waters may never
go through her, if she will give me leave to go to 'em, unless I bring you to her
to keep her Company, and sing and play at Cards with her, therefore dear Mr.
Rains.


Wood. This is beyond all Example.


Rains. Well, there is not in Nature so tame and inoffensive a Beast as a
London Cuckold, I Will say that for him. Aside.


Wood. Prithee, Jack, do not refuse to go to my Cousin for a little Strumpet.


Rains. I cannot be so inhumane to refuse a Husband that invites me to his own
Wife alone, Mr. Biscuit.


Bisk. Come, good Sir, I thank you for this favor a thousand times; my Wife
will be in a very good humor to day, Sir.


Rains. Go before, I Will follow you, and carry her this Kiss from me.


Bisk. I thank you, Sir, I Will carry it her, poor Rogue, she will be overjoyed;
but pray don't stay long. Exit Biscuit.


Enter a Boy with a Letter. Boy. Are Mr. Rains and Mr. Bevil here?


Bev. Yes, we two are they.


Boy. Here Is a Letter for you.


Wood. How now, Gentlemen, what an Assignation to both of you!


Rains. Upon my life, Ned, it is from the Ladies.

Reads You two have injured a couple of Gentlemen that will expect you with
your Swords in your hands at eleven in a Field on the North-side of the Church.
If you sail, you shall not fail of being posted. 'Till you meet us, you shall
not know our names, but know that we are worth the meeting, etc.





Bev. This is a business of another nature, Rains.


Rains. We must to Tilts and Tournaments, Ned, sure they are the Bullies we saw
just now.


Bev. From whom did you bring this, Boy?


Boy. From a couple of Gentlemen in Buff Belts, Red Coats, and Shammey Breeches.


Rains. It Is from them; sure they will not fight.


Bev. But we must try whether they will or no: tell 'em we'll not fail.


Boy. I shall, Sir. Exit Boy.


Rains. I have a business of another nature to dispatch, Ned; I Will meet before
eleven at your lodging.


Bev. I have just such another business too; but I Will not fail to meet you --
But how can you relish Mrs. Biscuit after the Lady you saw this morning?


Rains. I am not sure of her I saw this morning; besides, if I were, is it
reasonable that a man that has a good stomach should refuse Mutton to day,
because he expects Quails to morrow? but how can you in conscience think of
Concupiscence, when for ought you know, we may venture our lives within two
hours?


Bev. Since, for ought I know, my life may be in danger, I Will make use on it
while it is not.


Rains. Adieu, Woodly, let us meet on the Bowling^green in the afternoon. Ex.
Rains.


Wood. You are happy men, Gentlemen, but I am going to visit one that I love
more than my eyes, and would give both of them to enjoy.


Bev. Aside. That Is not his own Wife; I shall be safe enough there. I have an
engagement too, and must leave you.


Wood. Adieu, we'll meet about five.


Bev. Agreed; -- Ex. Bevil.


Wood. Now for my dear Carolina. -- Thus all the world by several ways does
move,
But all the Mighty business ends in love.
Exit.


ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Clodpate, Lucia, and Carolina. Luc. Prithee stay with me, that I may be
no longer pestered with this Country Coxcomb.


Caro. Would thou have me so barbarous to interrupt Lovers.


Luc. He a Lover! yes, of a clear Title in his next Purchase, his Dapple Mare,
a dear year of Corn, or so.


Caro. Come, he has as violent a substantial country passion for you, as one
would wish; and I will leave you to him.


Luc. You mischievous creature, I Will be revenged on you.


Exit Carolina. Clodp. If my propositions be not reasonable, ^'ll never pretend
to serve my Country more.


Luc. A pretty Country to be served by such fellows. Aside.


Clodp. In that noble Brick-house, moted round with Turrets and ^ine things,
that I now spoke of, in the best hunting Country in Europe, with a thousand
pounds a year will I jointure you.


Luc. It Is not profit, but honor I respect; and I have vowed never to Marry
one that cannot make me a Lady, and you are no Knight.


Clodp. A Knight, no I thank you; why, I have known a Fishmonger Knighted:
Knigthhood's a pretty bawble for a fellow to play with that is no Gentleman. But
what needs he that is a Gentleman desire to be more?


Luc. But, methinks, the name of Clodpate does not sound well without a title.


Clodp. I thank you heartily; my name is now Hugh Clodpate; and I should give
two or three hundred pounds to add three letters to it, Sir Hugh Clodpate: no,
no, I cannot make so much on it again.


Luc. Oh, a Knight is such a thing!


Clodp. Such a thing! has he more hands or legs, or more brains than another
man?


Luc. But if I could be content without being a Lady, I have vowed to spend all
my life in London.


Clodp. Pox on her; live in London did she say? Aside to her. Death, have you
vowed to live in London say you?


Luc. Yes, is that so wonderful? why people do really live no where else; they
breath, and move, and have a kind of insipid dull being: but there is no life
but in London.


Clodp. London! that sink of sin.


Luc. I believe there is no Village but sins as much in proportion to the
bigness; only your Country sins are something the more block-headed sins.


Clopd. Madam, give me leave to ask you one question.


Luc. You may.


Clodp. Do you resolve to live honest?


Luc. It Is a familiar question; you had need to ask my leave first.


Clodp. Why? you may as reasonably expect to preserve your health in a
Pesthouse, as your Chastity in that damned lascivious Town.


Luc. You are rude, Sir.


Clodp. Come, Madam, plain dealing is a jewel. But can you prefer an idle
scandalous London-life, before a pretty innocent huswifely-life in the Country
to look to your Family, and visit your Neighbors.


Luc. To see my Ducks and Geese fed, and cram my own Chickens.


Clodp. Ay.


Luc. To have my Closet stink like a Pothecaries shop with Drugs and Medicines,
to administer to my sick Neighbors; and spoil the next Quacks practice with
the receipt book that belongs to the family.


Clodp. Very well.


Luc. And then to have one approved Green-salve, and dress sore legs with it;
and all this to deserve the name of as good a neighbourly body as ever came
into Sussex.


Clodp. Very good.


Luc. Never to hear a Fiddle, but such as sounds worse than the Tongs and Key,
or a Gridiron; never to read better Poetry, than John ^opkins, or Robert
Wisdoms vile Meter; nor hear better singing than a company of Peasants praising
God with doleful untunable hoarce voices, that are only fit to be heard under
the Gallows.


Clodp. However you make bold with the Country, be not profane. Is not this
better than any thing in that stinking Town?


Luc. Stinking Town! I had rather be Countess of Puddledock, than Queen o^
Sussex.


Clodp. Oh foh -- but ah, the excellent fresh air upon the Downs.


Luc. So there is fresh air in a Wilderness, if one could be content with Bears
and Wolves for her companions. But, Sir, in short, I am resolved to live at
London, and at, or very near the Court too.


Clodp. God's Death the Court? I shall not only be C^ckolded, but lose all my true
Country interest; Madam, I beg your pardon, I shall take my leave; I am not cut
out for a Londoner, or a Courtier; fare you well, good Madam, though I like
your person pretty well, I like not your conditions; I Would not Marry a London
Cherubin.


Luc. Farewell, Sir, but I Will not be wholly ungrate^ul for the address you have
honored me with: know then my friend Carolina is the most averse to London,
and most infatuated with the love of the Country.


Clodp. Ud's bud infatuated; pray change that word if you please.


Luc. You know my meaning by it; she and I are parting, because she will not
with patience hear of returning to London; she calls it nothing but vain,
obscene, wicked, filthy, Popish place.


Clodp. Ha! how is this? I did not think she had so much sense. Aside.


Luc. She often says she had rather marry a Country Justice of five hundred
pounds a year, than a man of five thousand pounds a year in London. Nay, than a
Duke at Court.


Clodp. Aside. She Is an ingenuous woman Guds-sooks; I had rather marry her
naked, than you with all your portion, Madam. To her. But a Pox on it, I had
damned ill luck to make my application to you first, as the Devil would have it.


Luc. This is a very Country Courtier -- Here she comes, let us withdraw; I will
tell you more, and we'll consult about this business.


Clod. Your servant, Madam. Exeunt Clodpate, Lucia.


Enter Carolina and Woodly. Wood. How can you mistrust a man in so credible a
thing?


Caro. As what?


Wood. As that he would love the pretiest, sweetest, dearest creature he ever
saw --


Caro. So far from that, I believe, he will love all the pretyest, sweetest,
dearest Creatures, as he calls 'em, that he ever shall see: but you have paid
that tribute already to virtuous Madam Woodly, and are Married.


Wood. I am so, and there is the less danger in my love; I should else be
tempting you to accept me for better for worse till death us depart, etc. Now,
Madam, take my heart upon its good behavior, as much as you have use on, and
the rest again, and no hurt done.


Caro. Where there are so many free; why should I venture upon a heart with so
manifest a flaw, in the title as a Married man's.


Wood. Faith, there are none without their encumbrances; your fashionable Spark
has his Miss in the Playhouse; your Ladies eldest Son his Mothers
Chambermaid; The Country Gentleman his Tennants Daughter; A handsome young
fellow that is to make his fortune, some elderly Sinner, that keeps him fine,
so that Marriage is the least engagement of all; for that only points out where
a man cannot love.


Caro. Since Marriage obliges men so little, and women so much; I wonder we
endure the cheat on it.


Wood. You Are in the right, it is worse than cross I win, pile you lose: but
there are some left that can love upon the square.


Caro. A woman may be undone upon the square, as well as a Gamester if she
ventures too much.


Wood. Never so long as you play for nothing but what you have about you; and,
upon my honor, I would engage you no deeper at this time; it is tick and after
reckonings that ruin Lovers, as well as Gamesters; and, gad, if you mistrust
me, I am ready to make stakes; and because you are a young beginner, I Will play
three to one.


Caro. Not so fast, good Sir, you will make me quit the few good thoughts I had of
you, if you persist.


Wood. Persist in loving you I must till death; but the method and ceremonies I
leave to you to prescribe. I guessed you would not care for a whining Lover.


Caro. Nor do I care for one in your extremity the other way.


Wood. Take your choice; I can make love from the stiff formal way of the year
42. to the gay brisk way of this present day and hour.


Caro. Since I suppose it is for diversion, pray let me see how that is.


Wood. Look you thus Sings, dances and combs his Peruque.


Caro. Is this it? why, you don't mind me?


Wood. I mind my self though, and make you fall in love with me after a
careless way by the by.


Caro. When do you begin?


Wood. Begin, why? I am at it all this while. Sings and Dances again. Now have
at you, these Breasts are not hard to speak on; no, nor this Neck white; nor
those Eyes black. Lord, how you look to day! that ever a man should love such a
Creature; what will you give me for a piece when you are mother of the maids?


Caro. Must I answer you like a Lady of the times too?


Wood. Ay, by all means, Madam.


Caro. This, Mr. Woodly, is the strangest man, he would make one dye to hear
him, I vow, ha, ha, ha.


Wood. Lord, what a set of teeth you show when you laugh! if they were mine,
I Would pull 'em out; sure your breath cannot be sweet, let me see. Offers to kiss
her.


Caro. Well, I vow your a pleasant man, but you go too fast.


Wood. For your Lover of the last Age I grant you; but the World is well mended
since, fair Ladies and fortified Towns yield upon easier terms now adays.
Offers to kiss her again. Now I see you dare not stand the trial, it is even so;
I Will be hanged if you have not crooked Legs too.


Offers to lift up her Coats. Caro. I had rather you should think so than take
the pains to satisfy you; but I vow you would make one burst, you have such a way
with you, ha, ha, ha.


Wood. I hate to live in doubt, you have a pretty Face; but an ill Breath, and
crooked Legs, Gad, are insufferable.


Caro. Is this your new way? I have enough on it, no more drinking my health in
a Beer-glass, and quarrelling with the man that cannot pledge. Scribbling your
passion in Glass-windows, and wearing my Colors continually I can better
endure; but now I talk of scribbling, divert me a little better, and give me the
Song you promised me.


Wood. I have taught it your Woman, who I conceive has something a better voice
than I, she is here too.


Caro. Sing that Song Mr. Woodly taught you.

She Sings. How pleasant is mutual Love that is true,
Then Phillis let us our affections unite;
For the more you love me, the more I love you,
The more we contribute to each others delight:
For they that enjoy without loving first,
Still eat without stomach, and drink without thirst.
Such is the poor Fool who loves upon duty,
Because a Canonical Coxcomb has made him,
And never tastes the sweets of love and of beauty,
But drudges because a dull Priest has betrayed him;
But who in enjoyment from love take their measure,
Are raped with delight, and still ravished with pleasure.
Each night he is a Bridegroom, and she is a Bride.
When their minds and their bodies shall both so agree;
That neither shall pleasure from the other divide,
But that at one instance shall satisfied be;
Let Fools ^or convenience be drawn to their love,
But this the way real pleasure to prove.

Enter Clodpate and Lucia. Luc. So, you are pleasant here, Mr. Clodpate, how do
you like this Song? it is a London Song.


Clodp. Ay, Pox on it, I hate it for it; when I had the misfortune to know that
damned Town first, they had better Songs by half; they put no wit in their
Songs now adays.


Caro. Pray do us the favor to Sing one of those you speak of.


Clodp. Faith, Madam, I have but an ordinary voice, but I cannot disobey you.

Sings ridiculously this old Song. Lay by your pleading,
Law lies a bleeding, etc.



Wood. What an incomprehensible block-head is this.


Clodp. This pleases us in the Country; I know you like it never the worse,
Madam.


Caro. Nor much the better.


Clodp. Come, Madam, I am sure you love a Country life, and hate that vile Town
of London; and I honor you for it.


Caro. I hate London.


Clodp. I knew you would dissemble it, but I know your heart; it is true,
indeed, it is a vain obscene wicked filthy popish place.


Caro. What means the Worshipful Fop.


Clodp. And a Virtuous Lady had better Marry a Country Justice of five hundred
pounds a year, than one in London of five thousand pounds; nay, than a Duke at
Court -- it is granted Madam, it is granted.


Caro. It may be granted by you, but not by me.


Clodp. There are some such fools to refuse good offers; but there are others
have more wit, Heaven be praised.


Caro. Sure you have been at cross purposes of late, Mr. Clodpate.


Clodp. No, Madam, but I know you hate Sodom yonder; foh -- methinks I smell it
hither; let me tell you in private; I would not marry Mrs. Lucia if she had
fifty thousand pounds; Ud's bud, marry one that would live at London, nay at
Court; No, I had rather go to Sea in a Fire-ship; but I Will show you the finest
seat in Sussex which you shall call your own.


Caro. What do you mean by this?


Clodp. All this I know very well, and though by the Sot her Uncle I was
misguided to Mrs. Lucia, it is to you, Madam, my affection first inclined.


Caro. Ah mischief, have you contrived this? you thought to punish me much, but
I had rather have such a fellow to Fool with, than a lap Dog, or a Squirrel;
abusing of a Fool is almost as pleasant as conversing with a witty Man.


Luc. It Is true, now I consider it, and he that is laughed at is often times as
good Company as he that laughs, nay some have raised their fortunes by it; but
you forget our appointment; pray let us go?


Caro. Ay, prithee. My dear, Gentlemen we must leave you; your servant.


Wood. Will you not let me wait on you?


Caro. By no means it is a private affair.


Clodp. Shall not I wait on you?


Caro. I shall not refuse the favor another time, but now I must beg your
pardon.


Luc. Allons, let us meet the Duellists, I warrant you they are men of honor.


Clodp. Come, I am going a setting, will you go?


Ex. Luc. and Caro. Wood. No, I must go home. Ex. Clodpate.


Enter Fribble, and Dorothy his Wife. Fribb. Whither are you a going Mr.
Woodly? will you not go to the Bowling^Green to day?


Wood. Yes, perhaps in the Afternoon, -- Adieu Ex. Woodly.


Fribb. Why do you follow me with your Impertinence?


Doro. My dear honey, how have I offended thee? did I not with my own hands put
the to Bed when thou were sudled last night? did I not set thy Bottle of small
Beer by thy Bedside? did I not rise early and make thee a Caudel when thou
were puking, and gave thee Aqua Mirabilis, to fetch up the Water off thy
Stomach?


Fribb. All this you did, and 'twas your Duty, but you are strangely troublesome.


Dor. Think not my love a trouble Dear; I speak for thy good, prithee do not go
abroad to day, thou wilt kill thy self with drinking, and thy Death will be sure
to kill me.


Fribb. You are impertinent, I Will go, let that suffice.


Dor. You are shrewdly mistaken if you think I desire your Company. But I am
sure this is the way to be rid on it. Aside.


Frib. I am to meet Mr. Biscuit, and some Cheapside Neighbors, be silent, my
will is like the Laws of the Maids and Parsons.


Dor. I cannot hide my love and fears from thee; prithee, dearest, kiss me.


Frib. I say again, Peace, I shall be much offended.


Dor. Thou art a naughty man, and always abroad while I am languishing for
thee; and I have thee but two days in a Week at Epsom.


Frib. Know your Lord and Master, and be subject to my Government; I though but
a Haberdasher will be as absolute a Monarch over you, as the great Turk over
his Sultan Queen.


Dor. Well, I can but submit and weep for thy absence.


Frib. Cannot you keep Company with Mrs. Biscuit?


Dor. What thou please, my Dear.

So you will go and not hinder me from better Company. Aside.


Frib. Well, I have the most Virtuous, and best Governed Wife in all the Ward;
but I must observe Discipline, and keep a strict hand over her.


Dor. I am an unfortunate Woman not to have thy Company; so I am.


Enter Mrs. Biscuit. Mrs. Bisk. What, in tears Mrs. Fribble! this is that
naughty man; out on thee, thou art a shame to all Husbands, thou would be so
insolent to command thy own Wife; do thou use thy own flesh, thy own rib so,
out upon thee.


Frib. I am my own Master, and will be hers.


Mrs. Bisk. Ah, thou art a good one in faith; and thou were mine, I Would teach the
better manners.


Frib. Dorothy, listen not to this lewd Woman, her Husband is a sneaking,
sniveling Cuckold; if you should be like her, I would make you such a terrible
Example! Mrs. Biscuit, you are impertinent, were I your Husband, I would swinge
you much.


Mrs. Bisk. Swinge me, say you, I could tear thy Eyes out. Death if you provoke
me, I Will show you what the Courage of an enraged Woman can do.


Doro. Nay, good Mrs. Biscuit, Mr. Fribble is a good Man for all his passion.


Mrs. Bisk. Swinge me --


Frib. This Woman is as outrageous as a Milch Bear that wants her Breakfast.
Fare you well. Ex.


Mrs. Bisk. Come Neighbor, you are a shame to all Wives to be so ^ame and
foolish; pluck up a Spirit, and order him as I do my Biscuit.


Dor. This is the only way to order a surly Husband.


Mrs. Bisk. I am ashamed of you, you betray our cause; submit to a Husband; I Would
fain see that Husband that I Would crouch to. I say again pluck up a Spirit; I keep
a strict hand of Discipline over mine.

Enter Biscuit. Here he comes, you shall see how I order him.


Biscuit. How now my pretty Dear, poor Duck.


Mrs. Bisk. Duck, you Widgeon; how came you and I so familiar? observe me now.
Aside.


Bisk. Well, Mrs. Fribble, it is such a pretty Rogue, and has such pleasant
fancies with her, ha, ha, ha. I protest and vow I could kiss the very ground
she goes on. If she would eat Gold, nay Pearls and Diamonds, she should have
them, I vow and swear.


Mrs. Bisk. You Beast, you had best be drunk again, i^aith I Will order you, I Will
keep you in better awe, you shall neither have Caudel nor Custard for it this
week.


Bisk. Nay, good Dear, be not so cruel, I protest and vow I could not help it:
my Neighbor Fribble is a very merry man, I could not forbear, we were at it,
Tory Rory, and sung old Rose, the Song that you love so, Duck. Thou shall have
any thing, thou shall have me, etc.



Mrs. Bisk. Ay, Mr. Fribble maintains his Wife like a Lady, and she has all
things about her as well as any Woman in the Parish, he keeps her the prettiest
pacing Nag with the finest Side-saddle of any Woman's in the Ward, and lets her
take her pleasure at Epsom two months together.


Doro. Ay, that is because the Air's good to make one be with Child, and he
longs mightily for a Child; and truly, Neighbor, I use all the means I can,
since he is so desirous of one.


Bisk. All this thou shall do, my Dear; I Will omit nothing that shall please
thee.


Mrs. Bisk. Yes, you Nicompoop, you are a pretty Fellow to please a Woman
indeed.


Bisk. But prithee, my Dear, let me go to the Bowling-green to my Neighbors:
would I might never stir, if I drink above a pint of Wine, or a quart of Mum
for my share at most.


Mrs. Bisk. You impertinent Puppy, I wonder you have the impudence to ask me
such a question.


She gives him a slap on the face. Bisk. Mrs. Fribble^ my pretty Mollie has
some humors, but this is the worst you will see of her.


Doro. How rarely she ord^rs a Husband; I vow I think I must pluck up a spirit
asshe does, that is the truth on it.


Mrs. Bisk. Where Is Mr. Rains, you Lolpoop? do you think you shall go, and he
not here?


Bisk. O Duck, he will be here presently, and sent thee a kiss by me.


Mrs. Bisk. Yes, I warrant he would kiss such a Fellow as thee.


Bisk. I vow he did; prithee take it of me, my Dear.


Mrs. Bisk. I Will swear he is a fine person. Well, because it comes from him,
I Will take it; he is the compleatest man, and so courteous and well-behav'd.


Bisk. Now thou wilt let me go.


Mrs. Bisk. No not till he comes.


Bisk. Nay, good Dear.


Mrs. Bisk. I tell you you shall not; get you in.


Bisk. Pray, Duck, now.


Doro. I never saw any thing so admirable as this Discipline of hers; I am
resolved to try my Fribble, that is once.


Bisk. Why, look here he is now already.


Enter Rains. Doro. Oh me! is he acquainted with her? Aside.


Mrs. Bisk. Does he know her? Aside.


Bisk. I Will steal away and say nothing. Ex. Biscuit.


Mrs. Bisk. Come, Mr. Rains, let us in. Mrs. Fribble, your Servant.


Doro. Madam, I Will wait on you in; Mr. Rains will not think my Company
troublesome.


Mr. Bisk. Ah, shame on her. Aside. We shall entertain you but ill. Mr. Rains
is pleased to come and play at Cribach with me, and 'twill be no sport to look
on.


Doro. I Will make one at Gleek, that is better than any two-handed Game.


Mrs. Bisk. I do not think so, by your leave, Madam Fribble, Oh Impertinence!


Doro. Well then, I Will be content to be a looker on for once. She would fain
have him to her self, but I Will look to her for that. Aside.


Ex. Rains, Dorothy, Mrs. Biscuit. Enter Mrs. Woodly in a Dining Room. Mrs.
Wood. Mr. Bevil stays mighty long, pray Heaven he be not diverted by some
paltry Citizens Wife; here are such a Company of them that lie upon the snap
for young Gentlemen, as Rooks and Bullies do for their Husbands when they come
to Town.


Enter Bevil. Bev. Madam, your Servant.


Mrs. Wood. O Mr. Bevil, are you come? I vow I was afraid I had lost you. A
Woman that is apt to be jealous as I am should not make such a person the object
of her affections.


Bev. Words are the common payment of those that intend no other. There is no
such sign of being long fasting, as falling to with a good stomach.


Mrs. Wood. I am so afraid you should be seduced by some of these naughty Women
at Epsom. A shame take 'em, I hate a lewd Woman with my heart, I vow I do now.


Bev. Madam, I have a very pressing affair that requires some speedy conference
with you in your Bedchamber.


Mrs. Wood. No, Sir, no -- I wonder you have the confidence to ask me, when you
were so rude to me there last time.


Bev. I do not know what she calls rude. I am sure I obliged her as often I
could there.


Mrs. Wood. One cannot be private with you, but you are so uncivil presently. I
can scarce forgive you; I wonder who learnt you such tricks for my part.


Bev. If I were never so backward, she would soon instruct me. I am not so
ill-bred, but I know what I owe to a Lady. Come, Dearest.


Mrs. Wood. Do not ask me; I vow I will not. You are the strangest man that I ever
met with, you will not let one alone; nay pish, fie, Mr. Bevil, arn't you ashamed?


Bev. No more, nay, Dear, come in, come in.


Mrs. Wood. Nay, pish, ha, ha, ha, ha. I vow you make me blush; get you gone,
you naughty man you.


Bev. You Will make me outrageous; I shall force you, have a care.


Mrs. Wood. Well, I vow you are a parlous man. Will you promise me then ^o sit
still when you are there, and not stir hand or foot.


Bev. Ay, Ay, come, come.


Mrs. Wood. Nay, but will you swear?


Bev. Yes, yes, come allons, my Dearest, she will soon dispense with that Oath.
Well, I am so ashamed, I vow I would not go, but that you said you would force
me, and swore too besides.


As they are going into the Bedchamber enter Peg. Peg. Madam, here is my Master
just coming in a doors.


Ex. Peg instantly. Mrs. Wood. Heaven! what shall I do?


Bev. I told him I had private business, to get rid of him, and he will discover
all.


Mrs. Wood. Go into the Bedchamber, I Will lock it.


Bev. But how will you get rid of him?


Mrs. Wood. Let me alone, this is an unlucky surprise, in quickly.


Bev. If I should be locked up so long till I fail Rains, and our fighting
appointment, I shall get much honor, I take it.


Bev. goes in. Mrs. Wood. In, in. Exit Woodly. O you unworthy Fellow; have you
the impudence to appear before me after your beastly usage?


Wood. I thought your fit might have been off by this time.


Mrs. Wood. No, it shall never be off, thou inhumane Beast; to sit up a nights
late, and come home drunk and wake me, and lie like a Statue by me all the rest
of the night, flesh and blood cannot bear it; you make me cry my Eyes out, to
see that you will kill your self by your villainous debauchery.

Woodly while she scolds sings. Fa, la, la, la, fa.


Mrs. Wood. Fa, la, la, la -- Is that the notice you take of me? If I were not
the best Woman in the World, and did not love thee, thou base Fellow, 'twould
not trouble me. Oh that I should be so unfortunate, so bewitched, to love such
a Monster of a man!


Wood. Fa, la, la, la, Oh Impudence!


Mrs. Wood. I wonder what I should see in thee to love thee so, out on thee for
a Villain. Oh that I could withdraw my affection from thee, thou Brute! but I
cannot for my life, it is that makes me miserable, thou barbarous wicked Wretch.


Wood. If to seek quiet abroad, when one cannot have it at home, is a sin,
Heaven help the wicked, but pox on it.


Mrs. Wood. Ay, now you ban and curse, you Wretch; this you get by keeping
Company with Wits, as you call them, a Company of wicked Fellows, the Scum of
the Nation, Fellows that have no Religion in 'em, that swear and drink, and
wench, and never consider me that am disconsolate at home.


Wood. Oh the incomprehensible blessing of Matrimony!


Mrs. Wood. If I were so perfidious and false to take pleasure in a Gallant in
the absence of my Husband; but I am too honest, too virtuous for thee, thou
ungrateful Wretch: besides, if my Conscience would give me leave, I love you
too well for that, you barbarous base Fellow.


Wood. A Pox on her troublesome Virtue, would to Heaven she were a Whore, I
should know then what to do with her. Aside.


Mrs. Wood. Other Women can be happy, and have their Husbands carry 'em abroad
and delight in their Company, and be proud to be seen with them; but I have
such an inhumane ungrateful Creature to mine!


Wood. Come, come, I confess I am behind-hand with you, but I Will pay thee all
thy arrears, I have a stock in bank.


Embraces her. Mrs. Wood. Heaven, what shall I do?


Wood. Where Is the Key, I Will break open the door.


Mrs. Wood. Let the Key alone, go get you gone, I am not so impatient, but I Will
trust you till night, I should leave open the door, and let all my things be
lost; go get you gone, you naughty man, I love you too well to hold out long.


Wood. Well, now you are come to your self, and speak reason, and have left off
railing, I Will go and encourage my self with eating and drinking well, and
return and pay you the foresaid sum with interest. Exit.

Mrs. Wood. opens the door. Are you gone? Joy be with you, and more with me,
Mr. Bevil.


Enter Bevil. Bev. Madam, is he gone?


Mrs. Wood. Yes, now I hope we shall be safe from further interruption.


Bev. God's Death, this accident has frighted me so, that I am afraid to venture,
lest I should be taken Prisoner again, and disappoint the Duellists. Aside.

And yet I will; come, Madam.


Enter Peg. Peg. Madam, here is Mrs. Iilt coming up to give you a Visit.


Mrs. Wood. Why did you not deny me, Huswife, must that vain silly Wench come
to trouble us at such a time too. Aside.


Bev. That is she that reports every man that she see's is in Love with her,
and would marry her, and has been a Whore these seven years. I will take my
leave, I see this is an unfortunate day.


Mrs. Wood. No, I Will get rid of her soon by some Trick or other.


Bev. It Is impossible. I Will wait on you an hour or two hence, but now I am
engaged upon my reputation, and must not break my engagement. Your Servant. Ex.
Bevil.


Mrs. Wood. In such haste there must be something more than ordinary in it, I
long to know it. Peg, go and dog Mr. Bevil at a distance, till you have fixed
him somewhere, and let me have an account of the reason of his haste.


Peg. I Will not fail. Exit.


Enter Rains in the Field. Rains. I wonder Bevil stays so long, this Mrs.
Woodly has no no mercy him, there is some cross accident or other; for methinks
after a year or two's intrigue he should not be so very Termagant a Fellow, if
these Roguy Bullies should come; but methinks they are a little slow too. Oh
Bevil, are you come?


Enter Bevil. Bev. I beg your pardon, Jack, I have been locked up to save the
Honor of a Lady, whose Husband came in most uncivilly without giving us
warning enough of it.


Rains. Was that it? But the Rogues begin to think 'twill come to Battaille,
and their hearts misgive 'em.


Bev. I was afraid of this. A Hector dares no more fight than be honest, and
yet it is strange they should make it their Trade when they are so little fit
for it.


Rains. It Is so in all Mankind, they are most violently bent upon the things
they are least capable of, as if it were in spite of Nature.


Bev. It Is true, so I have observed while a wiseman that is fit for employment
is restrained by his modesty; your pragmatick dull Fool thrusts himself forward
into policy and business.


Rains. Great dullness qualifies men for great business, there is nothing but
order and road in it; your Mill-horse is a Creature of great business. The
methodical Block-head that is as regular as a Clock, and as little knows why he
is so, is the man cut out by Nature and Fortune for business and government.

Enter Carolina and Lucia disguised. Hold, here come two sprightly Girls, this
may prove the softer and pleasanter encounter of the two.


Caro. I see they are men of Honor, and will answer a Challenge.


Luc. Now are they meditating on blood, what a disappointment they will have.
Well, men that are so punctual in their anger would sure be so in in their love.


Bev. Ladies, having the Honor to meet you in so solitary a place, we cannot
but offer you our Service.


Luc. You look as if you stayed here to make Ladies stand and deliver.


Enter Peg. Rains. If you should deliver your best Jewel, I Would be very honest,
and make but a little use on it for the present, and you should carry it away
with you never the worse.


Luc. I know the Law too well to compound a Felony. If you should take any
thing of mine, you should even keep it as long as you live, but I Would prosecute
you for it.


Peg. It Is enough, this is Mr. Bevils engagement, that is Carolina, and the
other is Mrs. Lucia. Exit.


Caro. Ye don't look as if you would make Love, but War; ye have long Swords,
and your hair tucked up.


Bev. If we were never so much inclined to War, you have power to soften us
into Peace.


Rains. They are pleasant Wenches; if they are handsome, we are undone. To Bevil.


Bev. Twice in a day caught with Vizor Masks!


Caro. What wild Fellows hands are we fallen into? they run at all, you see,
they know us not. To Lucia.


Luc. Oh, if witty men had but the constancy of Fools, what Jewels were they?
To Carolina.


Rains. Ladies, pray lay by your disguises, and let us converse upon the square.


Caro. You make all Prize, Gentlemen; but I Will venture to show my face to you,
Sir, if you will give me your word not to discover it to your Friend. To Rains.


Rains. I do, Madam.


Luc. And you shall see mine upon that condition. To Bevil.


Bev. Upon my Honor I will not discover you.


They pull off their Masks. Rains. Ha, who is this? this is a Trick. Aside.
Madam, I confess you are very beautiful. I had the misfortune to lose a Heart
this morning in your Company, but I think, Madam, you did not take it up; but
my Friend has something to accuse you of.


Bev. I cannot invade the propriety of my Friend, though I must confess the
great temptation would excuse the crime.


Rains. This is the Lady I must apprehend. To Lucia.


Bev. And, Madam, I must seize upon you. To Carolina.


Caro. Who ^ays they are not a couple of constant men?


Bev. What, I warrant, you think we did not know you?


Luc. O yes, as Falstaff did the true Prince by instinct. You are brisk men, I
see you run at all.


Rains. The wilder we are, the more honor you will have in reclaiming us.


Bev It Is in your power to m^ke us a couple of as constant dull Fellows as ye
could wish.


Caro. Ye have constancy enough of all conscience, for the use we shall have of
it.


Luc. And for dullness, for our own sakes we do not wish it you, since I find ye
are resolved to be acquainted with us, whether we will or no.


Caro. Is it not pity that witty men should be so sc^ndalous, that if we
converse with them, we must do it with the same privacy that Statesmen debauch.


Bev. If wit be a scandalous thing, you are the most scandalous Women I have
met with; but methinks Fools should rather be scandalous, since they can have
but one way of passing their time with.


Lu^. You rally well, but your wit is never without extravagancy; you drink
Burgundy perpetually, and Scower as you call it.


Bev. We hate debauching, but love complaisance, Madam. And can no more deny a
Friend that calls for another Bottle, than you can deny to turn up a Card at
Ombre.


Rains. We use Wine, Madam, to elevate our thoughts; but Love has don't for me
a pleasanter way.


Bev. And, Madam, your Beauty has already reclaimed me.


Luc. If you are as soon drunk as you are in love, you are the weakest Drinkers in
Christendom.


Rains. You see, Madam, the strength and spirit of your Beauty.


Luc. For love I bar you, cannot we converse without remembering we are of
different Sexes.


Caro. If you will accept of such conditions, we may sometimes admit you into
our Privy Council.


Rains. Would you have us spend our time like some visiting Fools, that never
aspire at more, than playing at Langtriloo with Women, all days of their lives,


Bev. Our communication would then be as dull and insipid, as the mirth of
Statesmen.


Enter Cuff and Kick. Luc. Yonder Is Company coming; such scandal has want of
discretion brought upon your wit, that we dare not stay with you.


Rains. Let Us have the honor to know your Names and Lodgings before you go?


Caro. Our Names are Carolina and Lucia; our Lodgings next House to Mr.
Woodly's nearer the Wells.


Bev. The Rogues are come at last. Car. and Luc. retire.


Cuff. Let Us make to the Bowling^Green, we shall be too late to begin to engage
and bubble the Citizens.


Kick. Who are these make toward us?


Luc. What do Rains and Bevil make up to yon two for?


Caro. We have done finely, if our feigned Challenge should occasion a real
Duel -- Let Us stay and observe.


Rains. Come, Gentlemen, you are very late.


Cuff. I hope we shall be time enough there.


Bev. You Have done scurvily to make us wait so long, we are not used to it.


Kick. What the Devil do they mean, Cuff?


Bev. Come, prepare.


Cuff. Prepare, to what?


Rains. 'Sdeath, ye Rascals, do you trifle with us? Come Draw.


Kick. Draw, Sir, why should we draw, Sir?


Cuff. What this is for the Ladies in the morning, never be jealous of us, Gad
take me we resign to ye.


Rains. Why what impudent Rascals are ye, did not you send this Challenge?


Kick. We send a Challenge, Sir!


Rains. You Are a couple of hardened Cowards.


Kick. Cowards, Gad take me, ye were never so much in the wrong in your life.


Cuff. But I believe if you did not think us Cowards, you would scarce call us so.


Bev. Ye shall be very much kicked.


Kick. We scorn to be kicked, Sir.


Cuff. I see some body behind the Trees, Kick; draw and be valiant. Kicked, d'
ye say? I Would fain see that.


They draw, and fight retiring. Enter Lucia and Carolina. Luc. Hold, hold,
Gentlemen.


Caro. Hear us, what do you do?


Luc. Hold for Heavens sake.


Rains. Oh you nimble-footed Rogues! we cannot run so fast forward as you do
backward.


Caro. What Is the matter, Gentlemen?


Bev. These Fellows sent us a Challenge, and then disowned it.


Kick. As Gad mend me, not we: But if we be not revenged on 'em Cuff.


Cuff. What a Pox ail they, we never trouble such as they are, if they will be
quiet we know our men.


Luc. No, to our knowledge they did not send the Challenge.


Caro. The Challenge was sent by better Friends of yours, but such as would be
as loath to engage with you at this Weapon, as they are, and would not have
discovered this but to prevent bloodshed.


Rains. Oh, is it so, Ladies?


Bev. 'Sdeath, what dull Rogues were we. Gentlemen, ye may go.


Kick. Well, Sir, fare you well.


Cuff. Who cares, you may pay for this though --


Ex. Cuff and Kick. Rains. Had you a mind to try our courage? Gad we would have
met ye in any ground in Christendom, without being dared to it.


Luc. We did send the Challenge, and are here to answer ye; make your best on it.


Bev. Faith, Ladies, if you shrink from us now, we shall think ye have as
little Honor as yo^ Bullies have.


Caro. We did not doubt your Honor, and pray don't you doubt ours.


Luc. We know you have too much wit to be vain upon this, and too much
generosity to impute it to our weakness. We told ye you should hear from us,
and we kept our words, not thinking of this accident.


Caro. We had no way to quit the obligations you did us in the morning, but
this.


Rains. But, Ladies, I hope you will give us leave now, to meet without these
preparations, though we should be glad to meet you upon any terms.


Bev. Shall we have free admittance?


Caro. So long as you use your freedom wisely.


Luc. But let us now part in the next Field, and when you see us, still take
this rule with you.


Think not what is pleasant, but what is just and fit,
And let discretion bridle in your wit.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Woodly and Peg. Mrs. Wood. ARE you sure Bevil met with Carolina?


Pegg. I am sure 'twas one in her dress, and Mr. Rains walked with Mrs. Lucia;
but I do not know but they might meet by accident.


Mrs. Wood. I Will soon try that. Find some means to convey this Note to Bevil,
as from Carolina.


Pegg. I will, Madam, and give you an account of it.


Exit Pegg. Mrs. Wood. If he be false, I shall soon turn my love into revenge.


Enter Mrs. Jilt. Iilt. Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, I have staid too
long within; my Maid brought me a Love Letter from a sweet fine person indeed,
and I vow I could not but answer it.


Mrs. Wood. No doubt you had reason.

Am I sacrificed to Carolina? Aside.


Iilt. He Is in the saddest condition for me, just for all the world like a man
in a Consumption; I Will swear 'twould grieve your heart to see him: I Will swear
it would, Madam --


Mrs. Wood. And why were you so cruel?


Iilt. I vow I am the strangest person for that in the whole world; I could not
marry a Prince if I did not like his person strangely, and I have a world of
choice, upon my word that is all, I Will swear it is.


Mrs. Wood. Since you have such choice, why are you unmarried two days?


Iilt. I have such an odd fancy, Madam, I am so nice and hard to please, and I
vow I don't care for Marriage, but that I would be a little settled in the
World, that is all; there is Mr. Bevil, Oh he loves me dearly!


Mrs. Wood. Love her, how she stabs me. Aside.


Iilt. And I Will swear he is a fine person, I have the prettiest, sweetest,
delicate Letters from him every day.


Mrs. Wood. What says she? Aside.


Iilt. Your Ladyship will be secret, I know: he has a strange passion for me;
upon my word he sighs and sits with his Arms across, and makes Doux yeux upon
me; I Will swear 'twould do your Ladyship good to see him. Now I think on it I Will
show your Ladyship the kindest Letters from him. I have so many Love Letters, I
vow I can scarce find it. I have twice as many come to me in a week. She pulls
out a great bundle of Letters.


Mrs. Wood. Vain silly Creature!


Iilt. Oh here is one of his hand!


Mrs. Wood. Heaven, it is his hand. Mrs. Iilt,
Mrs. Wood. Reads, I wonder at the occasion of your mistrust, unless you have
been tampering with some body else; I am very well, and drink much Hockamore,
and per^aps have given you more occasion for a Midwife than a Surgeon.

July 22. 72. Bevil.


O perfidious Wreth! this is since my Intrigue with him. This will distract me;
I could tear him in pieces.


Iilt. Your Ladyship is disturbed at something.


Mrs. Wood. No, no; but this is a very familiar Love-letter, as you call it.


Iilt. Oh mischief! that I should put this among the rest of my Letters; but
I'l^ face her down in it it, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Wood. What Is the cause of your laughter?


Iilt. Ha, ha, ha, to see what a ridiculous mistake this was. It seems there is
a Wench in Coven-garden of my Name, and Mr. Bevils Man brought this Note to me
instead of her; I Will swear he did, ha, ha, ha.


Mrs. Wood. Oh Impudence!


Iilt. We had such a quarrel about it; I did not speak to him ^or three days
after, I vow I did not. Enter Peg.


Mrs. Wood. How now, Peg, what News of Bevil?


Peg. I got a Maid of my acquaintance to deliver the Note to him, which he
received with the greatest Joy imaginable, and said he would wait on her
instantly.


Mrs. Wood. Oh perfidious Wretch! I Will to him immediately. Excuse me, Mrs.
Iilt, I am in great haste. Ex. Mrs. Woodly.


Iilt. Your Servant, sweet Madam. She Is strangely nettl'd about something.
Well, now we are alone, Sister, I Will own thee; I hope your Lady knows not that
we are of Kin.


Peg. No nor any body else here.


Iilt. Prithee keep it secret still, that I may be taken for a greater person
than I am; it will further my designs.


Peg. But I wonder you will not bend all your designs upon Mr. Clodpate.


Iilt. I have baits ready for him, I can humor him to a hair; but I Will lay by
no design that can get me any manner of Husband, that is once. But it is strange
Clodpate and I should not meet, I lying in this house too where he comes often.


Peg. Next time he comes to visit my Master, I Will give you notice.


Enter Clodpate. Iilt. Oh me! he is here to our wish, and we alone; remember
your Cue.


Clodp. Mr. Woodly is not here I see.


Iilt. Oh that villainous lewd Town of London! how happy am I that am out on it,
nothing shall ever persuade me thither again.


Peg. Why? Sir William your Father sent you thither for Breeding.


Iilt. Breeding, yes; could I not play, I am the Duke of Norfolk, Green
Sleeves, and the fourth Psalm upon the Virginals; and did I not learn, and
could play six Lessons upon the Viol de Gambo before I went to that nasty,
stinking, wicked Town; out on it?


Clodp. Ud's bud, this is an ingenious Woman.


Peg. Besides, Madam, though you be a Person of Quality, and have a good
portion, yet London is the properest place to get a Husband in.


Iilt. Oh foh -- I Will swear I had rather marry a Farmer of forty pound a year
in the Country, than a vain, idle, fluttering, foolish London-Fellow of two
thousand pound a year. Oh the pleasure of a pretty innocent Country-life!


Clodp. Ud'sooks she^s in the right; as God judge me, she is a judicious person.


Peg. Oh hang a dull silly Country-life.


Clodp. A Pox on that Carrion, how I could beat her.


Iilt. Out on thee for a foolish Wench; were I thy Lady, I Would turn thee away
for that word.


Peg. Pray pardon me, Madam, I am sorry I offended your Ladyship.


Iilt. Can thou talk so after the Song the Fiddler sung this morning in
praise of the Country? Oh that he were here, I should never be weary of hearing
that Song.


Peg. I see him yonder, I Will call him to you. Ex. Peg.


Clodp. Madam, I have overheard and admired your excellent Discourse upon the
Country.


Iilt. Who are you, some bold, jeering, fleering Londoner? avoid my presence.


Clodp. Ud's bud, you wrong me, I am a Country Justice, God'sooks.


Iilt. Pray be gone, and leave me, you are some rude London Fellow; foh you
smell rank on it.


Clodp. As Gad shall save me she is a fine person: if I were not engaged to
Carolina I should like her strangely.


Enter Peg and Fiddler. Peg. Here Is the honest Fellow that sings the Song, Madam.


Iilt. I have nothing to say to him, I am troubled with an impertinent Fellow
here, and he shall not sing.


Clodp. By your leave, Madam, it is in praise of the Country, and he shall sing.
Sing, dear Rogue.

Fiddler sings. Oh how I abhor
The tumult and smoke of the Town,
The Clamours of War.
The glittering Court, the fraudulent Gown,
The Suburb debauches,
The Cheats of the City,
The rattling of Coaches,
And the noise of the men they call witty.

Clodp. Admirable. But give me the man from all vanity ^ree,
with good store o^ Land,
And a Country Command,
who honest dares be.
Who Justice dares do, and the Nation will serve,
And never from his true Country principal swerve.
This, this is the man for me.



Iilt. Very fine. While the fluttering vain Gallant in London consumes
His Estate in rich Clothes and Per^umes,
And with drinking and swilling corrupts all his health;
Or on Punk and on Bawd spends his youth and his wealth,
While such shall his wit and his bounty applaud.



Clodp. Admirable.

Give me the good man that lives on his own grounds,
And within his own bounds
Has room for his Hawks and his Hounds,
Can feast his own Tenants with Fowls and with Fishes,
And from his own plenty with good store of Dishes,
And not with damned Wine, but with good English Ale
Over their faith^ul hearts can prevail,
And nothing to others does owe.
But from his own house hears his ow^ Oxen low,
And his own Sheep bleat,
While the grate^ul sounds sweet Echoes repeat^
This, this is the man that is truly called great.

Iilt. Excellent, there is a Crown; pray come and sing this to me twice a day as
long as I stay in Epsom.


Fid. I will, Mad^m.


Clodp. It Is incomparable, let me embrace thee, there is ten shillings for thee;
and if thou will live with me in Sussex, thou shall never see London again.


Fid. Pardon me, Sir, I was born and bred in London, and would not live out
on it for five hundred pound a year.


Iilt. Out on you, you s^urvy Fellow.


Clodp. aside. A Pox on him for a Rascal. Thou art a very honest Fellow, give
me my ten shilli^gs again, and I Will make it a Guinny.


Fid. There it is and please you.


Clodp. Ay, and here it is, and shall be. Do you think I Will let a London Rogue
carry away ten shilling^ o^ my money?


Fid. Why, you will not take it away thus.


Clodp. Yes, I will, and you may thank Heaven that it is unseemly in a
Magistrate to break heads. Be gone you insolent Rascal, lest you should tempt
me to condescend to break yours.


Fid. What the Devil, are they both mad? farewell. Ex.


Clodp. An insolent London Rogue to sing against his Conscience; but pray,
Madam, let me salute you, you're a fine person.


Iilt. No, Sir, ^are you well; Sir, you're a Stranger, fare you well, I am none
of those. Exit Jilt.


Clodp. Who Is this Mrs. Margaret?


Peg. She Is a Person of Quality comes to Epsom for her plea^ure, I must wait on
her. Exit Peg.


Clodp. She Is a fine Lady, but I must to Carolina. Exit Clodp.


Enter Bevil in a Field. Bev. Carolina write to me to meet her alone? She Is
very frank; let me see, she says meet me alone, that we may freely confer about
an affair which nearly concerns us both. 'Sdeath I have dropped my Letter,
unlucky accident, I must go back for it. I cannot now, she is here. Enter Mrs.
Woodly disguised. It Is a solitary place, and I hope no body will find it.


Mrs. Wood. Ah false wretch! how punctual he is. Aside.


Bev. Ah my dear Carolina.


Mrs. Wood. Ah my cursed Bevil. Aside.


Bev. I have not words enough to acknowledge and thank you for this favor.


Mrs. Wood. No^ I words enough to upbraid you for this injury. Aside.


Bev. How now, what is she dumb? Madam, you see how conscientious I am in my
duty of assignation; you shall always find me a man of Honor.


Mrs. Wood. Yes, I thank you, you are a man of Honor unmasks


Bev. ^Sdeath Mrs. Woodly! how unlucky is this, she will stay too, and prevent my
meeting with Carolina; I am undone, I must conceal the Intrigue. Nothing but
impudence can bring me off. Aside.


Mrs. Wood. Unworthy man.


Bev. You do well, pray who was this assignation made to? I can watch your
private haunts, you see, Madam.


Mrs. Wood. Are you past all sense of modesty?


Bev. We shall soon see your Lover here, I suppose.


Mrs. Wood. Have I caught you, and do you accuse me? I have been as virtuous
and as constant to my Intrigue as any Woman breathing: have I not had as many
Addresses made to me by the fine persons of the Town and Court as any Lady has?


Bev. And have refused as few, I Will say that for you. Aside.


Mrs. Wood. Have I not denied all to be constant to you?


Bev. Gad I hate cons^ancy in a Woman, after a little while; especially in an
impertinent one, as much as constancy in a Quartane Ague.


Mrs. Wood. And all this to be betrayed to Carolina! per^idious man!


Bev. Ha, ha, ha -- I knew I should catch you; there was no way I knew to make
you show your face, but my pretending to another: Carolina I think I called her.


Mrs. Bev. Oh abominable treachery! I forged that Letter from Carolina, which
you even now received with the greatest joy imaginable: Ungrateful man!


Bev. Well, give me your little Punck, for Marriage is not so troublesome as the
imperiousness of your Whore of Honor. Aside.


Mrs. Wood. Have I deserved this from you?


Bev. Well, I confess you have caught me. I was indeed amazed at the Letter,
having only heard of Carolina, and had a curiosity to see the meaning on it.


Mrs. Wood. Yes 'twas curiosity made you walk with her in the Forenoon, in a
Field beyond the New Inn.


Bev. 'Sdeath, how came she to know it? Aside. Was that Carolina? To her.


Mrs. Wood. As if you did not know it, inhumane Creature. Nor is this all; I
saw a Letter just now to one Mrs. Iilt, wherein you tell her you have given her
more occasion for a Midwife than a Surgeon.


Bev. 'Sdeath, how came she to see that, she deals with the Devil?


Mrs. Wood. You shall find, ungrateful man, that love does as naturally
degenerate into revenge, as Wine into Vinegar: do you abuse me, a virtuous
Lady, a Lady of Honor, for such a Creature, without any consideration of my
Quality?


Bev. Pox on her Quality. This is all a mistake, Madam.


Mrs. Wood. I know your Hand too well for that: you might use your little
tawdry mercinary Creatures so, that flutter about the Town in their short-lived
bravery: but a Woman of my Quality --


Bev. Well, however it is in other things, I would have no liberty of Conscience
in whoring: I would have none but those women hold forth that are in lawful
Orders, it is the more settled way, and has more the face of Discipline.


Mrs. Wood. If I be not revenged for this --


Enter Woodly with a Note in his hand. Wood. How the Devil came Bevil to lose
this Note in the Fields, Carolina appoint to meet him privately? I thought he
never had seen her -- Death how she Jilts me. Reads. That we may freely confer
about an Affair which nearly concerns us both.

Carolina.


Hell and Devil he is with her there; I Will steal behind 'em and surprise 'em.
So. Bevil, is this your private business?


Mrs. Wood. My Husband, I dye, I dye.


Bev. You have done well, you have frighted a Lady into a swound; Heaven knows
what will become of her.


Wood. I knew she would be surpised.


Bev. Unlucky man.


Wood. Death, Ned, you will stifle her, pull off her Mask and give her more air.


Bev. Pray forbear, Sir, you are not to see her; she recovers.


Mrs. Wood. Give her more air, quoth a'? How he frighted me?


Wood. Good Sir Pol make a secret on it no longer; she may as well unmask, she
and I are no strangers to one another.


Mrs. Wood. What says he? Aside.


Bev. You may have seen her, but you are not acquainted with her.


Wood. Ad autre prithee leave fooling.


Bev. Upon my Honor you are not -- A Gentleman ought in Honor to lie for his
Mistress. Aside.


Wood. I could sooner believe a Country Gentleman that swears and lies for the
honor of his Horse, when he is selling him.


Mrs. Wood. He knows me; I am lost, undone for ever.


Bev. Whatever happens, do not discover your self.


Wood. I am obliged to you, you can be kind to others.


Mrs. Wood. Can any thing be more plain?


Bev. Prithee, Woodly, trouble us no farther; I assure you you neither do nor
shall know this Lady.


Wood. Is it so? Fare you well. I will let 'em alone at present. Ex. Woodly.


Bev. He Will go home, and discover that it is you.


Mrs. Wood. As good luck would have it, I have the Key of the back Gate, and
can be there before him: I hope I shall bear him down that it was not I. Ex.
Mrs. Woodly.


Bev. I doubt not. Oh Woman, Woman! impudence and invention never fail thee at
a pinch. Exit.


A noise within of rub, rub, narrow, short, gone a thousand yards, and such
like words of Bowlers. Enter Biscuit, Fribble, Cuff, and Kick. Cuff. Come, Mr.
Biscuit, let us hold 'em the other Game.


Bisk. As I am an honest man I have lost all my money.


Frib. And so have I, and yet you bowl'd like an Emperor, Neighbor Biscuit,
the two last Games, but Mr. Cuffs hand was quite out.


Bisk. A Deuce take it, we never won one Game since Mr. Kick laid against us;
and in my Conscience and Soul he is a Witch, for Mr. Cuff never played well
after.


Cuff. I Will make you amends if you will play again.


Frib. But we have no money.


Kick. I have 40 or 50 l. to spare, you shall have it betwixt you.


Mrs. Biscuit and Mrs. Fribble look out at the Window. Bisk. No, we'll drink a
Bottle first and rest, my thighs ache with bowling. Cods me, yonder are our
Wives looking out at the Window to see us bowl; poor Rogues, in fack we'll have
a Bo^tl^ with them.

I warrant you they have been dancing in a Barn yonder, with some Neighbors, I
hear their Fiddles.


Dor. Mr. Rains is not yonder; I Will swear he is rare company.


Mrs. Bisk. A Murrain take you; and you had not troubled us with your
impertinence, he had been better company to me to day than he was. Aside.


Dor. Yonder are our Husbands, I am resolved as you have advised me to pluck up
a spirit. But let us down to 'em now, for fear we lose 'em. They go down.


Bisk. Now here is my Wife, I Will be bold to say, I Will show you the handsomest
Woman in Epsom.


Frib. It must be my Wife then, I Will tell you that.


Bisk. Your Wife handsomer than mine! that is pleasant, ha, ha.


Cuff. This may prove as good as bowling with them.


Kick. I never saw two so cut out for honest tame suffering Cuckolds.


Cuff. There are many as fit here, if their Wives be as handsome as they say
theirs are.


Frib. Come, I Will hold you 20 s. to be spent, and these Gentlemen shall be
Judges here.


Bisk. With all my heart. But I am sure mine is the prettiest, neatest, titest
Woman in the Ward.


Frib. I have seen our Minister stare at my Wife in her Pew, 'till he has been
out in his Sermon, she is so pretty. And you shall see, Gentlemen, what
discipline I keep her in; it is the obedientest poor Creature!


Bisk. Nay, mine has some humors, but they become her so prettily, and it is
the sweetest little Rogue! I vow she has had more temptations than any Woman in
Cheapside, never stir.


Frib. More temptations than my Wife, I scorn your words. There are a company
of the bravest Gallants come to my Shop to see her, and she will not speak to any
of them -- in faith not she.


Bisk. I have known Knights, nay Lords in love with my Wife, and she does make
such Fools of 'em all. Poor Rogue, ha, ha, ha, my dear Lamb art thou come?


Enter Mrs. Biscuit and Dorothy. Mrs. Bisk. Yes, you Sot; but is it not time for
you to come home? Mr. Rains has been gone this three hours.


Bisk. I told you she had some humors. Pretty Duck, in ^ack now I have caught
you, I Will give you a Bottle of Wine and a Quart of Mum.


Frib. These are my Friends, Gentlemen, an please you.


He presents them to his Wife, and they salute her. Bisk. This is my Duck,
Gentlemen. They salute Mrs. Biscuit. Has not my lamb a rare way of kissing? I
warrant you for the Wager, Neighbor.


Frib. I ^ear you not.


Cuff. What admirable Cuckolds and Bubbles have we met with.


Frib. Now, Gentlemen, observe here is a stately forehead.


Bisk. But here is a delicious Eye-brow, and sweet rolling wanton Eye: She Is my
Cacara camouchi, my pretty Pigs nigh, as Mamamouchi notably has it.


Kick. Excellent fine.


Mrs. Bisk. Alas, a^as! I but what do you mean by this, you are always fooling
thus before Company.


Bisk. Peace, I have laid a Wager on thy head Against Mrs. Fribble.


Frib. Here are pretty plump red lips.


Bisk. But see my Ducks teeth, and smell her sweet breath. Breath on 'em Duck.


Frib. Here Is pure red and white; here is a shape.


He turns her round. Cuff. Most admirable.


Frib. It Is your goodness, Sir.


Ki^k. These Fools praise their Wives, as Horse-Coursers do their Horses, to
put 'em off.


Bisk. Prithee Dear do but show them a little of your Foot and Leg, good Duck
now if thou love me, do prithee now.


Mrs. Bisk. Well, well, so I can: there it is.


Bisk. A little higher, but ^p to your G^rter, good Lamb.


Mrs. Bisk. You are such a simple Fellow.


Cuff. Oh, it is charming!


Mrs. Bisk. You are so obliging really.


Frib. Here Is a fine round small white hand.


Kick. Extreme fine.


Mrs. Frib. You are pleased to Complement.


Frib. Now you shall see how obedient my Wife is, she durst as well eat he^
Nails as refuse what I command. Doll, pray kiss these^ two Gentlemen
immediately. Now you shall see.


Dor. Pray, Dear, what do you mean?


Frib. How now, Huswife, dare you dispute my Commands, Hah?


Dor. Be not angry, I must obey.


Kick. Your Servant, dear Madam. They kiss her.


Cuff. Your humble Servant.


Frib. Look you, did I not tell you what Discipline she was under.


Bisk. Good sweet dear Lamb, do thee as much if thou love me do.


Mrs. Bisk. Not for your bidding: but they shall find I am not behind Mrs.
Fribble in good breeding.


Bisk. Gentlemen, my Dear shall salute you too.


Frib. Ay it will not do.


Kick. Your Servant, dear Lady.


Cuff. Sweet, Madam, your humble Servant.


Frib. Come now, let us in, and be very merry, and decide the Wager.


Kick. Allons, this is the most extraordinary adventure, but you know we have a
weighty Affair in hand; our Bullies will be all ready immediately.


Cuff. We'll swinge the Rascals, Rains and Bevil: but we must make haste, this
is the time they use to come to the Bowling-Green, we'll meet them.


Kick. There is another weighty affair. Clodpate is to dust his St^^d of Ale,
and he must be bubbled; we have not long to stay with 'em.


Cuff. We must borrow our selves of 'em for a while.


Frib. Gentlemen, will you please to walk in?


Cuff. Come on. Ex. omnes.


Enter Rains and Lucia. Luc. A man of wit and make love, leave off this foolish
old fashioned subject: I Would have all discourse between us tend to something.


Rains. It Is as unseasonable for a young Lady not to entertain love, as for a
Judge or a Bishop to make love.


Luc. Love is so foolish and scandalous a thing, none now make use of any thing
but ready money.


Rains. Methinks ready Love is a pretty thing.


Luc. But there are few in this Age have it about 'em.


Rains. I have as good a Stock, and am as full of love, Madam --


Luc. That you squander it away upon every one you see, as a young Prodigal
newly of age, treats and pays reckonings for every body.


Rains. How prodigal soever I have been, I am resolved to take up in my
expenses, and reserve all my love for you.


Luc. For me? I am as hard to be fixed as you: I love liberty as well as any of
ye.


Rains. Say yo^ so? Faith let us make use on it.


Luc. Not the lewd liberty you mean: Come, to divert us better, go a little
further and try the Echo, here is an extraordinary one that will answer you to
as much purpose as I can.


Rains. It Is a fine Echo, but, Madam --


Ex. Rains and Lucia. Enter Woodly and Carolina. Caro. Nothing but love, love:
always one Note like a Cuckoo.


Wood. Fine Iilt I can no more restrain my self, than a Fanatic full of new
lights and revelations can himself.


Caro. Can I suffer this any longer without prejudice to my virtue and honor;
let me hear no more you will not suffer me to use you like a Gentleman.


Wood. I am too loyal to rebel against you, but I may attack your ^vil
Counselors, your virtue and honor.


Car^. You Will find them impregnable.


Wood. Virtue and Chastity unsociable foolish qualities! I hope to live till
every such Woman shall be thought vicious, or at least as much scandalous as a
Lawyer with a tattered Gown out of practice:

We are in a fair way to it.


Caro. If you resolve to persist in this subject, I will ask the advice of your
Lady before I treat further.


Wood. Say you so, Madam? there is a pleasant Field behind my Lodgings, it is
delicate walking there at this this time o'day, especially if you have one you
like there.


Caro. What say you, Sir?


Wood. No, no, Madam, you were not there, you know not what I mean.


Caro. What Riddle's this of yours?


Wood. But the Lady was not so ill to pull off her Mask, and discover her face,
though for more Air.


Caro. You are mad, that I confess is one sign of a Lover.


Wood. Oh Womankind, the original of all lying, I confess he said upon his
Honor, I did not know her, but I could read her Note, it would not do.


Caro. This is so extravagantly ridiculous, it deserves no serious Answer.


Enter Bevil. Wood. Here Is Bevil, I Will not show her Note till I have an
opportunity to push this business home. I knew you were not far off, Ned, come.


Caro. Does he know of our interviews? Aside.


Bev. What mean thou, Franck?


Wood. You are not acquainted with this Lady, no.


Bev. I wish nothing more than the acquaintance of so fine a Lady. Rains and
Lucia appear.


Wood. What impudence is this that makes thee fool with me and longer thus?
Yonder Is Rains, he is not acquainted with my Cousin Lucia neither. No, no,
come, Rains, you may show your self, your Intrigue is discovered.


Rains. What Intrigue, Franck?


Wood. Cousin Lucia, your Servant; I see, Sir, you can serve your self without
the help of your friends.


Rains. Is this his Cousin Lucia?


Luc. Oh! is that the Intrigue? These two Gentlemen rescued us this morning
from the insolence of two Hectors.


Caro. Yes, and with their Swords protected us from their violence, and
revenged the affront.


Luc. We are not so ungrateful to disowne those that had obliged us so much.


Caro. This morning was the first time they ever saw us.


Wood. You are grown very familiar already, Madam.


Caro. If I be, you are not concerned, I assure you.


Wood. I fear too much. But how do you like Lucia, Jack? have you a design of
lying with her one way or other?


Rains. Mum, Woodly, or I will discover all your Rogueries to your Lady Bright
at home; be satisfied I like her too well to dishonor her. But to divert this.


He whistles and the Fiddles flourish. Wood. What a Devil's this?


Bev. We are fallen into an Ambuscade of Fiddlers.


Luc. Do you conjure?


Caro. You charm the Air to give us Sounds.


Rains. The truth is, Madam, it is a Trap I have laid for you, and you have no
way but to dance your self out on it.


Caro. No, then I am resolved to free my self as soon as I can. Play a Jigue.
She dances.


Enter Clodpate with a Dog. Clodp. What you are merry with your Fiddles. I have
been hunting up and down for Madam Carolina; I came to present you with some
Country Partridges; here is dear Tray, a Sussex-Dog, set 'em for you, Oh he
ranges with such mettle, and points so true. Poor Tray, G^d I love and honor
him.


Bev. That Tray is the bett^r qualified Beast of the two.


Clodp. Pray, Madam, kiss him a little.


Caro. Kiss a Dog?


Clodp. A Dog, Ud'sooks he has as sweet a breath as any man, I will not say Lady
has. Your scurvy London-Ladies feed their Dogs at their Tables, and have Jo^nts
of Mutton roasted on purpose for 'em, and make them their Bed-fellows for want
of better. But since you don't love a Dog, Madam, I Will be bold to say, yonder is
the beautifull'st Dapple Mare of mine that my Man leads there. There Is a
Buttock, Madam, how clean she treads upon her Pasterns. There Is a Body round as
a Barrel; there is a Head and Neck finely raised, a delicate broad Chest.
Gods'ooks she is the finest fore-handed Mare in Christendom, there is Beauty, and
you talk of Beauty.


Rains. He describes his Mare so passionately, I shall begin to suspect her
virtue.


Clodp. But I must desire some words with you in private.


Caro. I am going to visit now; but shortly I will hear you.


Clodp. I had waited on you sooner, but that I have been giving out Warrants,
and binding some London Rogues to the Peace, and the like. Thus I represent the
Kings Person, I.


Caro. You are the worst Picture of him that ever I saw.


Clodp. I am content, Madam, to employ my self in business, and to serve my
Country, while your London Sparks lascivious libidinous Swines follow their
beastly lusts and sensual pleasures. Poor Fools, I pity 'em.


Wood. Why, we have Justices of the Peace that serve the Nation at London.


Clodp. What, honest ones? thank you for that; they are the greatest
Malefactors there; they make a pretty Trade on it in the Suburbs with Bribes
received from Pads, Pick-pockets, and Shop-lifts, with the Taxes they raise
from laboring Whores, and Contributions from Tributary Bawds; but Gentlemen,
will you dust a stand with me?


Enter Kick and Cuff with six more. Rains. We are all engaged.


Kick. Here they are, they shall find that none shall affront any of our Gang
unpunisht.


Cuff. As long as we Bullies hold together, we defi^ the Wo^ld, we'll chastise
their insolence: fall on.


They fight, and Lucia and Carolina shreek and run away. Kick. Come, have at
you.


Rains. How now.


Bev. Rogues.


Wood. You Dogs.


Clodp. Hold, I command you in the Kings Name keep the Peace. I am a Justice of
Quorum, and represent the Kings Person. I say keep the Peace, or I Will bind you
all over to the Sessions.


The Bullies are beaten off. Wood. Let Us pursue the Rogues, and now we have won
the field take them Prisoners.


Rains. Dam 'em, they are not worth our persuit; I know two of 'em, and shall
find out the rest.


Clodp. Go, I say, and bring 'em before me, and I will bind 'em to the Peace,
and make 'em be of good abearing till the next Sessions, or they shall forfeit
their Recullisence.


Bev. We are obliged to you for your help, you fought bravely.


Clodp. It Is very indencent for a Magistrate to fight, I will give you Law.


Wood. 'Pox of his Cowardice; but what mean these Rogues?


Rains. Let Us find the Ladies, I Will tell you as we go.


Exeunt. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Clodpate, two Country-Fellows, Cuff, and Kick in Country-Habits. Kick.
THese Disguises have done us Knights Service.


Cuff. He Will begin to be drunk by and by, preach the Parson upon him, or try
Coal under the Candlestick, even or odd with a Witness, or the grande Game at
Put, for I find he hates Dice.


Clodp. Come, Gentlemen, put about a Cup of Ale. It Is stingo in faith; is not
this better than your foolish French Kickshaw Claret? This is of the growth and
product of our own Country, and we encourage the noble Manufacture of Ale. How
say you? come fill all. Drinks.


1 Count. His Worship is a notable man in the Politics as e're a Justice of
England, no dispraise --


2 Count. He has a brave Headpiece of his own.


Clodp. Fill again once, Oh Gentlemen, things do not go well. There Is the
Streights Trade I was speaking of, why it signifies not a Farthing to us; for,
look you, if the Manufacture or Commodity exported, be not equal to the
Commodity imported, we must ruin our Trade, that is clear demonstration. Now we
send them money in specie for foolish superfluities, for Currants to make
Mince-pyes with; it grieves my heart to think on it: but come, dust it away.


Kick. Your Worship speaks like an Oracle.


Clodp. Then there is your Canary Trade takes away not one of our Manufactures.
Well, no more to be said, I am not thought worthy, but here is to you. Drinks.


Cuf^. A very politic Coxcomb. Aside.


1 Count. What News is there in the Gazette, an't please you?


Clodp. Why there it is. We keep a puther about the honest Dutch, I say nothing,
but I hate French Fricasies and Ragousts, and French Dances too; but no more to
be said, fill again. Gud'sooks here is your true English Ale and your true
English Hearts. He drinks^


2 Count. I purtest he is incomparable man.


Clodp. In the mean time poor Poland's in danger, and yet Sobieski's a pretty
man, and Wisnoweski, and Lubomirski, and Potoski too pretty men, very pretty
men; but alas! they are but men, we never think of assisting 'em, and poor
Poland may be lost, and we are in in a fine condition; but here is to'ther Pot.
All drink.


Kick. Excellent Coxcomb! but what hurt can the loss of Poland do us, Sir?


Clodp. Lord, that you should ask such a question, why 'twill spoil our Trade
of Tin, no people in the World can make Lattin Ware, or work our Tin well but
they; the Germans indeed pretend to it: this would trouble a man that loves his
Country as I do.


2 Count. What Religion are they of in Poland, an't please your Worship?


Clodp. Why they are Christians, they are not within the Pale indeed, but they
are very good out-liers.


Cuff. Let Us ply him hard. Come here is a Health to all your Deputy Li^utenants.


Clodp. Come on, I hope to be one my self, I serve the Nation upon a true
Country principle, and have as many friends as any man upon a National account.


1 Count. Here Is News from Ditto; an't please your Wo^ship, what place is that?
I ask't our Minister, and he could not tell me.


Clodp. Fie upon him; why Ditto is a Town in Pomerania, a very fine Town: but
fill again.


Kick. Here Is a Health to the Bishop of Munster.


Clodp. Excuse me, Sir, he is a Popish Bishop, and I Will drink never a Papists
Health on 'em all; he a Clergyman, and run up and down souldiering and
fighting! truly he may be ashamed on it; and he were a godly man, he would stay at
home and preach; I hate a lazy Bishop that will not preach; but here is my Cup.
Come on, Udsooks, I begin to be fox't.


Cuff. That Is good News, Kick.


Clodp. Well, Poland's a brave Nation, and they have a Company of the fiercest
magnanimous Fellows, your Iskies, Oskies, Irskies, Ouskies, Erskis, and the
Cossacks upon the Vkrain, there is a Monarchy as it should be, every thing
governed by the great Council.

Uds bud they have the best Diet in Christendom.


2 Count. Nay, with his Worships leave, an' they have better Diet than English
Beef. I Will be sacrificed --


1 Count. An't please your Worship we'll present you with a Country-dance; we
have Companions without, if you please, Sir.


Clodp. With all my heart.

Dance of two Clowns and two Country Wenches. Uds bud, my head begins to turn
round; but let us into the house. It Is dark, we'll have one Bellarmine there,
and then Bonus Nocius, I must to my Mistress, she is the prettiest Rogue --
Sings Her Lips are two Brimmers of Claret,
Where first I began to miscarry,
Her Breasts of delight
Are two Bottles of white,
And her Eyes are two C^ps of Canary. Ex. omnes.



Enter Rains. Rains. Mrs. Iilt appointed to meet me here, she is handsome, and I
hope sound. I love Lucia even to the renouncing of Wine and good Company; but
flesh and blood is not able to hold out her time without some refreshment by
the bye.


Enter Mrs. Jilt. Iilt. O are you here! well you think me a strange confident
person to meet you thus; but if I had not known you to be a fine sweet man, and
it is dark, and you cannot see my blushes, Sir, I would have suffered all the
extremities in the World before I would have done it, I Will swear I would.


Rains. What extremities can you suffer, pretty Mrs. Iilt.


Iilt. No, it is no matter what I suffer, Alas! Alas!


Rains. What Is the matter?


Iilt. I am the most unhappy Lady in the whole World, I Will swear, ah, ha; but
it is no matter, I may thank my self for it, I vow.


Rains. What have you lost friends or money?


Iilt. No, no, I have something nearer my heart than all that. It Is not money
that I care for, I Will swear, not I.


Rains. I find that some body has caught you, you are in Love.


Iilt. If I were not in Love, I were a happy Woman; but now I am the most
unfortunate Maid in the whole World, I Will swear, oh, oh.


Rains. Fie on it, young and pretty, and despair in this Age.


Iilt. Oh, but this is so fine, so excellent a person, he will never love me, I
am ruined, oh, oh.


Rains. Who is this bewitching man?


Iilt. Oh it is no matter, alas! who cares what becomes of me? a poor
inconsiderable person, though none can say I am not a Gentlewoman, and well bred,
but it is no matter. Oh, oh, but the Gentleman is no ill friend of yours, upon
my word, now.


Rains. Prithe^ who is it?


Iilt. A great acquaintance of Mr. Bevils, a Norfolk Gentleman.


Rains. God's Death, she will not put this upon me at last, he is acquainted with none
of my Country but my self. Aside.


Iilt. He Is the wittiest, finest, handsomest, well-bred Gentlem^n in the whole
World, I Will swear.


Rains. Prithee tell his N^me, I can be secret.


Iilt. The first Letter of his Name is R. but why should I say so much? I am a
lost Woman, he will never love me, oh, oh.


Rains. Though not by your fine description, yet by my Country and my Name you
would persuade me, that I am the happy man.


Iilt. She kisses his hand. Now shall I never see you again, you will hate me for
my confidence. Oh that my Tongue should betray me thus! Oh that I had bit it
out before I had said this! Oh my heart will break, I Will swear.


Rains. Gad, her Tears have mollifi'd me: it shall never be said a Woman shall
dye under my hands; but she might have brought it about without all these
Circumstances. Aside.


Iilt. Oh unfortunate Woman! I know you will hate me for this, oh, oh.


Rains. No, my Dear, I am none of those, do but step into my Lodging where
there is a good Convenience as can be; and if I do not give you as good proof of
my affections --


Iilt. Good Sir, you mistake me; do you take me for a Strumpet? No, Sir, I Would
have you to know I am no such, I swear.


Rains. I know you are modest; but Lovers should lay by that.


Iilt. I lay by my modesty! Heaven forbid, you are a wicked libidinous person;
I wonder you have the confidence to affront one of my Birth and Breeding thus
like a base man.


Rains. Oh, oh, all this talk of love is a trick, is it? you might have placed
it better, good Madam Iilt.


Iilt. No, Sir, it is no trick, and that you should find, if you would but --


Rains. But what?


Iilt. But marry me, that is all I swear. Cries.


Rains. All, in the Devils name! Marry, quoth she, Zounds what a word was that?


Iilt. I knew how I should be used by an ungrateful man; oh that I should
betray my weakness, oh, oh!


Rains. Fare you well, good Mrs. Iilt: 'Sbloud, marry? ha, ha, ha, ha. ^x.
Rains.


Iilt. Miserable Woman, how unlucky am I? but I am resolved never to give over
'till I get a Husband, if I live and breath. Exit Jilt.


Enter Mrs. Woodly, Lucia, and Carolina. Lucia. This is your Husbands story.


Mrs. Wood. No, it is their own, I assure you: why did you intend your
acquaintance with Rains and Bevil should be a secret? that is pleasant, they
have only proclaimed it in the Town, yet no where else.


Caro. They cannot be so base; we saw 'em but by accident.


Mrs. Wood. By accident! you are pleasant, Madam, ha, ha, ha.


Luc. What Is the cause of your unseemly mirth, Cousin?


Mrs Wood. By accident Mr. Rains applys himself wholly to you, and by accident
Mr. Bevil makes love to you, Madam; by accident ye all met in a Field this
Forenoon, by accident, Madam, Mr. Bevil expected you to meet him alone in a
Field on the backside of my Lodging.


Caro. Me: you drive a jest too far, do you intend to affront me?


Mrs. Wood. I have no mind to fall under the lash of their malicious tongues;
but I walked over that Field in a Masque, Bevil meets me, calls me dear
Carolina, said he had obeyed my summons, and that I was punctual in my
assignation, thankt me for the favor of my Note --


Caro. Heaven! what do I hear? this is your project, you must be acquainted
with witty men.


Luc. Unworthy men! have they no sense of honor?


Enter Mr. Woodly. Mrs. Wood. Yonder, I believe, comes one of them; I Will leave
ye lest I should be suspected to tell this.


Ex. Mrs. Woodly. Wood. I love Carolina so, I must underm^^e Bevil, whom I fear
she is inclined to; I must render Rain^ ^uspected too, lest they should clear
one another.


Luc. If this be true, we have been finely mistaken.


Wood. Oh Ladies, are you here, you're punctual, are your new Gallants come yet
-- Perhaps I may guess right. Aside.


Caro. What Gallants?


Wood. Nay, perhaps it may be a mistake; but I was told by 5 or 6 Gentlemen
upon Clay-Hill, that you were to meet with Rains and Bevil privately this night
here in Mawses Garden; that is all.


Caro. O base perfidious men!


Luc. We meet 'em?


Wood. Why, did you think it had been a secret, so is a Proclamation, they
themselves have bragged on it.


Caro. Do they already boast of our easiness, vile men! Well I see we must
condemn our selves to the conversation of dull sober Fools.


Luc. Or which is as bad, confine our selves to the impertinence of our own Sex.


Wood. I proffered to day to bring Rains acquainted with you, Cousin; but he
refused it, and said he would not marry you for his own sake, nor lie with you
for mine; and that a man had no excuse for himself, that visited a Woman
without design of lying with her one way or other.


Luc. Oh Impudence!


Wood. They are men of wit and good company, but not so fit for young Ladies
that love reputation; but I hope my Cousin is not so intimate with Rains, as
you are with Bevil, Madam?


Caro. I intimate with him, what mean you?


Wood. You are pleasant, Madam; I mean she does not meet him alone, as you do
Bevil.


Caro. Had he the impudence to say this? or have you so little honor to
believe the words of a vain idle fellow?


Wood. But I must believe my eyes: did I not see you with him masked? and speak
to you, by the same token you fell into a swound at the surprise?


Caro. You are mad, Sir, or would make me so.


Wood. To show you I am not mad, there is the Note you wrote to Bevil.


Caro. That I wrote? Heaven! Lucia do you hear what Monsters of men our ill
fate, or your worse Conduct have thrown us upon? Let Us in and read this Note.


Lucia. How am I amazed?


Wood. All this confidence will not clear her with me; I know Womankind too well.
Exeunt.


Enter Rains and Bevil. Rains. Lucia and Carolina are slipped into the House, or
some Arbor, I see a Hackney Coach, for they resolved not to bring their own.


Bev. Death, that we lewd young fellows should be caught thus; I never had any
love yet, that I could not satisfy with Gold, or wash away with Burgundy; but
to be content to leave all the numerous Ladies of the Game in London, for two
that on my conscience are foolishly honest.


Rains. But by your leave, Bevil, London is overstock'd with Wenches, that like
too many Hares in a Hare-Warren, they cross our hunting, and we can make no
work on it; the difficulty of finding is one part of the Game.


Bev. I love these Women the more, for declaring against Fools, contrary to
most of their Sex.


Rains. I hate a woman that is in love with a fulsom Coxcomb, she is a foul
feeder, and I can no more have an appetite to her, when I think of her diet,
than to a tame Duck, when I think it feeds on Toads.


Bev. Well, I love Carolina beyond all sense of modesty, so much, that I am
resolved if she will to turn recreant and marry her, let what will be the
consequence.


Rains. To forbear pleasing our selves to day, for fear of being troubled to
morrow, were to adjourn life and never to live.


Bev. I am sure of the present pleasure, and but venture the future pain.


Rains. But I am resolved to venture, though the Galleys were the consequence.


Bev. And I too. I will live 50 years in that one night I first enjoy her; and
care not if I were to be a Slave all the rest of my life. Yonder I believe they
are.


Enter Carolina and Lucia. Caro. Ungrateful men!


Luc. It Is not too late to retreat from this adventure.


Bev. Ladies, your humble Servant: I see you are to be trusted.


Caro. But you are not, you treacherous ungrateful men!


Bev. How Is this, Madam?


Luc. Your infamous dealing with us exceeds all barbarousness, Indians and
Cannibals would have used us better.


Rains. What mean they? do you think, Madam, we would eat you? we have a
pleasanter way of using Ladies.


Luc. Do you make our anger your mirth?


Caro. It may thank our selves to trust such perfidious men.


Bev. You amaze us, you are just declaring War, when we thought to have
concluded a Peace with you.


Caro. Avoid our sight, thou vain man.


Luc. And take thy lewd Companion with thee.


Rains. Ladies you have so much wit that I cannot think you are in earnest.


Bev. Our love is not so dull, that it needs to be spurred with anger.


Rains. I hope this is only to make us relish your kindness the better. Anger
is a Sauce to Love, as Sickness is to Health.


Bev. For my part I love so violently, that every look of yours charms me, your
anger pleases, I am in love with your frowns.


Caro. It seems so, you would not else so justly have provoked 'em.


Rains. It Is some honor, Madam, to be thought worth your anger. I could never
be angry with those I despised.


Luc. But you shall find I can. Let Us leave 'em Carolina.


Exit Lucia. Rains. Death, this is madness, I Will not leave you so.


Exit Rains. Caro. I write Letters, and make private appointments with you?
perfidious man! to blast my reputation thus --


Bev. This is Mrs. Woodly's malice -- Aside. Pray hear me, Madam --


Caro. No, Sir. Farewell.


Enter Woodly as they are going out. Wood. There go Bevil and Carolina. Ex.
Bev. and Carolina. Now jealousy assist me, I may o'rehear something, it is not
so like a Gentleman, but it is like a wise and jealous Lover: I Will follow. Exit
Woodly.


Enter Mrs. Woodly at the door on the right hand of the Stage. Mrs. Wood. I
long to hear what my information has wrought upon 'em. Mischief enough I hope.
Enter Bevil and Carolina at the door on the left hand, at which Mrs. Woodly
starts back and conceals her self. Here are the two who I am most concerned in;
it is dark, and I shall easily conceal my self.


Woodly enters a little after Bevil and Carolina, and stands close. Caro. Why
do you follow me thus far? begone, inhumane Creature!


Mrs. Wood. Oh it works ^inely.


Bev. Hear me but one word: if you condemn me then, I will own my self the
Rasc^l you speak of.


Caro. What can you say in defense of your treachery? I write Notes to you?


Bev. I know who is my Accuser, and the reason of my Accusation.


Caro. Who is your Accuser besides your self --


Bev. I have had the misfortune to be pursued by the love and jealousy of a
Woman, choleric, haughty, and revengeful, Mrs. Woodly, I am sure she is my
Accuser.


Mrs. Wood. Heaven! what says the Villain? I will tear him in piece^.


Wood. Death, Hell, and the Devil! the love of my Wife. But I will hear further.


Caro. Is this possible?


Bev. It Is true, I assure you; she wrote that Letter as from you to me, and met
me in the Field; I was amazed at the Letter, and resolved to see the event
on it: but I found her instead of you.


Wood. Damnation on this Woman.


Mrs. Wood. I could stab the Traitor: but I Will yet have patience.


Bev. Her Husband came by in the mean time, and as I believe took her for you,
said he knew her, and seemed to be much concerned; and she swounded.


Caro. Now the Riddle's cleared.


Wood. I will yet hear farther.


Caro. But how came you to part with the Note which I have now? I see you are
not to be trusted with a Ticket.


Bev. I am glad you have it, Madam, I unluckily dropped it I know not how; and
have been a^raid of the effects a strangers finding it might have produced.
With all my diligence I could not find it; but how came you by it?


Caro. You have told a plausible Story, and I will let you know, but I conjure
you to take no notice of it.


Bev. You shall command me, Madam --


Caro. Know then I have been perpetually importuned since I came to Epsom, by
the love of Mr. Woodly, and I suppose he having the same jealousy of me, that
his virtuous Lady has of you, though there is no danger, gave me this Note, with
an excellent character of Mr. Rains and you --


Woodly and his Wife both start, as suprised at the News. Wood. Hell and
Devils! now all is out.


Both appear, and speak together. Mrs. Wood. Where Is the Traitor that has
abused me thus?


Wood. Madam Carolina, I thank you, you have obliged me much.


Mrs. Wood. My Husband! I am undone.


Wood. 'Sdeath, is she here?


Caro. Heaven! what will this come to?


Bev. Unlucky accident!


Mrs. Wood. Oh let me stab this perjured man!


Caro. Hold, Madam.


Wood. Sir, I must have a farther account of you.


Bev. Let it suffice to tell you my anger against your Wife; for contriving
this mischief against me, made me say more than was true: She Is innocent of any
Intrigue with me, only the Letter she did write, what made her I know not.


Wood. But, Sir --


Bev. But, Sir, I must demand an account of you, concerning the Letter and the
fair Character you gave me; 'twas not so like a Gentleman.


Wood. 'Sdeath, not like a Gentleman.


Lays his hand on his Sword. Caro. Hold, Gentlemen.


Wood. Oh, Madam, I thank you for your favors.


Caro. If I have any power with you, follow me, or I shall distrust all you
have said.


Mrs. Wood. Oh base inhumane Villain! so falsely to asperse my Honor.


Bev. Madam, I must obey you. Monsieur ne mettez vous pas en peine, je
trouverai l' occasion de vous voir demain an Matin.


Wood. Et Bien Monsieur si faites.


Caro. None of your French to show your breeding; come along. Ex. Car. and
Bevil.


Mrs. Wood. I am basely abused by a forsworn Wretch. If you have honor in you
be^r it not. Heaven knows, I know nothing of the Letter, nor have I seen him
this day before.


Wood. No! what can provoke him to so injurious an accusation.


Mrs. Wood. Do you wonder at the malice of base lascivious men, that cannot
have their ends: I was loath to make a quarrel between you, not knowing how
fatal it might be: but I have never r^sted from the importunity of his love --


Wood. I know how to deal with him; but for you Madam --


Mrs. Wood. For me! Heaven knows I am innocent and virtuous; but it is too
apparent thou art false; Carolina speaks truth certainly: besides I have heard
this day that you are pleased to keep a Wench too, nay one that was a Bawd, and
you pervert the use of her, and turn her into a Whore; an honest Gentleman
complained on it; I Will not endure it.


Wood. It Is well invented: but methinks, Madam, you should have too much to do
to clear your self, to think of accusing me.


Mrs. Wood. If thou had courage in thee, thou would revenge me of this
false Rascal. But why should I expect such honor from you? you are one of
those keeping Coxcombs; that rather than not keep will keep a Bawd: Nay, your
Mistress, forsooth, has turned from Bawd to Punk, from Punk to Bawd, as often
as they say Thames Water will stink and grow sweet again at Sea.


Wood. 'Sdeath, none of your foolery, clear your self, or I Will make you an
example. Ex. Woodly.


Mrs. Wood. Now all the power of revengeful rage assist me: here is company I Will
away.


Exit Mrs. Woodly. Enter Rains, Lucia, and Roger, as Mrs. Woodly is going out.
Rains. There can be nothing plainer than that the jealousy and malice of Mrs.
Woodly contrived this. Can you believe we can be such Rascals wihtout
provocation?


Luc. It Is probable Woodly has d^ne this for Love and Jealousy of Carolina,
and his Wife for Love and Jealousy of Bevil. Aside. But if you were not
monstrously lewd, the freedom of Epsom allows almost nothing to be scandalous.


Rains. Do you know, Madam, there is no such thing as scandal in this Age.
Infamy is now almost as hard to get as preferment.


Enter Clodpate. Clodp. Who Is here, Mr. Rains? Udsbud I am almost fox't, we
have dusted it away, Gudsooks; but there were two Country-fellows there that I
never saw before, won above forty pound of me at Put, but they are honest
Country-fellows; one of 'em is a chief Constable, a very honest Fellow. But
where is Madam Carolina? I have been at her Lodging.


Luc. Oh Mr. Clodpate! I am glad I have found you, I sent all up and down the
Town for you.


Clodp. Udsbud, Madam, what is the matter, is my Mistress not well?


Luc. Her Brother is come this Evening to Town; with a resolution to force her
to London, to marry one, he has provided for her: the poor Lady is almost
distracted, and bid me tell you, if you will relieve her from this distress,
she will be for ever yours.


Clodp. Udsooks, does he take her vi and armis, I Will send my Warrant for him,
and stop his Journey.


Luc. No, she has designed a better way; her Brother has carried her in his
Coach to see a Kinswoman that lodges near the Church, and intends to sup there,
and not to come home till eleven of the Clock.


Clodp. Good.


Luc. If you will go and stay for her in the Churchyard, and have your man with
Horses just by, she will steal away and come to you, and go where e're you will
dispose of her, she would rather dye than live in London.


Clodp. As Gad judge me, she is a fine person; but why the Churchyard? that is a
place to meet in when we are dead, not while we are living, there are Sprights
and dead Folks walk: I tremble to think on it.


Rains. This Fellow has not yet out-grown the belief of Raw-head and
Bloody-bones.


Luc. There is now no remedy; if you omit this opportunity, you will for ever
lose her.


Clodp. Nay, rather than that I Will venture; but I Will take my Practice of Piety
in my Pocket.


Luc. Do so, and then let 'em walk their hearts out.


Clodp. Well, Gad save you, I Will marry her to night.


Exit Clodpate. Luc. If I had not sent him away, we had been pestered with him
all night.


Rains. Since you have gone thus far with him, I Will have my share in the sport.


Luc. If he should see Bevil and Carolina, 'twould spoil all.


Enter Footboy. Footboy. Madam, my Lady sent me to tell you, that she is gone
home with Mr. Bevil, and desires your Company.


Luc. I Will follow her. Exit Boy.


Rains. Roger, you heard what passed, pray go you with my Valet de Chamber, and
take each of you a Sheet, and wait in the Church Porch till Clodpate comes into
the Churchyard, and then sally out upon him, and fright him to purpose.


Rog. I will, Sir, and am glad of the employment: let us alone for mischief.


Rains. He believes in Spirits and dead Folks walking, as steadfastly as in his
Creed.


Luc. This may make excellent Sport.


Rog. I Will about it instantly; if we do not fright him out of that little wit
his Justiceship has, I am mistaken. Exeunt.


Enter Fribble, Mrs. Frib, and Biscuit. Frib. Where Is Mr. Kick and Cuff, Doll,
we left 'em here but even now when we went to drink with our Neighbors.


Mrs. Frib. They were sent for upon extraordinary business, they paid the
Reckoning.


Bisk. I vow they are very civil fair conditioned Gentlemen as one would wish
to drink or bowl with; but I vow there were some Bullies there swore so
bloodily, I was afraid the Bowling-green would have fallen upon our heads; but
where is my Lamb?


Mrs. Frib. She Is stepped to a Neighbor in the Bowling-green, she will come
instantly.


Frib. Come, Neighbor Biscuit, will you go? our friends expect us to be merry
with them, I could be so brisk to night, fa, la, la, etc.


Brisk. Ay, and I too, fa, la, la; we'll sing old Rose, faith, hey, Boys.


Mrs. Frib. Why, have you the confidence to offer to leave me when the
Gentlemen are gone, and you in this condition?


Frib. How, what say you?


Mrs. Frib. I have been too tame; it is time now to pluck up a spirit, you
scurvy Fellow.


Frib. As Gad judge me, the Jade's drunk.


Mrs. Frib. It Is you are drunk, Beast, every night; you are sipping off your
half-pints all day long, and one has no more comfort of you at night than of a
Bed-staff, nay not so much.


Frib. Oh monstrous impudence! the Woman's possessed, as I hope to breathe.


Bisk. Pish, this is nothing, my Duck says more to me than this every day; they
will have these humors with 'em, mine has abundance, pretty Rogue, ha, ha.


Frib. But if you be a fool, Neighbor, I Will be none, I Will not endure it. Know
your Lord and Master.


Mrs. Frib. I am my own Mistress. Did I marry a foolish Haberdasher to be
governed by him? out upon thee, Nickcompoop, I Will order thee, in faith.


Bisk. Just, my Duck, to a hair, ha, ha, ha.


Frib. Oh unheard of impudence!


Mrs. Frib. All my Neighbors cry out on me, for suffering you in your
impudence. Shall I endure a Fellow to be drunk and loose, and spend that abroad
that he should spend with me at home; you villainous man, I Will not endure it.


Bisk. Just, my Mollie, for all the world, ha, ha ha.


Frib. Nay then, it is time to be in earnest. Huswife, know your Lord and
Master, I say know your Lord and Master.


Mrs. Frib. My Lord and Master, I scorn thee, thou insolent Fellow, know your
Lady and Mistress, Sirrah, I Will order you better, you scurvy Fellow.


Frib. Oh horrible! she is distracted. Huswife, get you home and sleep, and be
sober, or I Will send you home with a Flea in your Ear.


Mrs. Frib. Get you home, you pitiful Fellow, or I Will send you home with a Flea
in your Ear, and you go to that, thou fumbling Fool.


Frib. This is prodigious. Do you know, Huswife, that I will give you much
correction.


Dor. You give me correction, you Coward?


Frib. The Law allows me to give my Wife due correction. I know the Law,
Huswife, consider and tremble.


Dor. You give me correction, you Wittal? I Will teach you Law. She gives him a
dash on the Chaps.


Frib. Oh Impudence! nay then have at you. If you be mad, I Will cure you without
the help of Bedlam. Beats her.


Dor. Help, help, murder, murder.


Bisk. Nay hold, Neighbor, for Heaven sake.


Frib. Stand by, let me alone, or I will mischief you. Would you be so wicked
as to part man and wife, a curse will follow you, if you do.


Bisk. Nay then, whom Heaven has joined I will not put asunder.


Frib. Come, Huswife, ask me pardon, or I will swinge you immoderately. Frib.
strikes her again.


Dor. Hold, I do ask you pardon. She kneels.


Frib. Will you never be so insolent again?


Dor. No, I will never pluck up a spirit again.


Frib. Go, get you home.


Dor. Yes I will; but if I do not make your head ache for it before to morrow
morning. Aside. Exit Doro.


Frib. Castigo te, non quod odio habeam, sed quod amen, is an excellent
Sentence I learnt in my Grammar.


Bisk. This is incomparable. Oh that I could govern my Wife thus! if I thought
I could, I would swinge my Duck extremely, I Would beat my Lamb inordinately.


Frib. I warrant you, try. This is the only way to govern her; let her feel, if
she cannot understand that you are her head.


Bisk. I vow and swear I have a good mind, really, though she is a pretty
Rogue. She does lead me such a life sometimes, I protest and vow, flesh^ and
blood is not able to bear it.


Frib. I tell you, Neighbor, it is a dishonorable thing to bear an affront
from a Woman, specially your own Wife.


Bisk. Uds me, here she is, I tremble.


Frib. Bear up for shame.


Enter Mrs. Bisk. Mrs. Bisk. Where have you been, you Fop Doodle?


Bisk. What Is that to you Jilt-Flirts?


Mrs. Bisk. What says the Fellow?


Bisk. I say know your Lord and Master.


Mrs. Bisk. Oh Heaven! the Boar's drunk, and has lost his senses.


Bisk. No, the Sow is drunk, and has lost her manners.


Mrs. Bisk. Oh horrid insolence! you Villain, I Will order you, I can hear you
have lost all your money at Bowls. Get you home, Sirrah, you drunken Beast, you
shall have money again, you shall.


Bisk. Peace, you impertinent unseasonable Ass, or I shall grow passionate.


Mrs. Bisk. You scurvy Fellow, I Will tear your eyes out. I am amazed what can
this insolence mean.


Bisk. Stand by me, Neighbor, I have too long endured your impudence. I will
give you a great deal of Correction: I am your head, Huswife.


Mrs. Bisk. You my head, you Cuckold; nay then it is time to begin with you.
I Will head you before I have done.


She gives him a douce on the Chaps. Frib. Now it begins.


Bisk. Nay then have at you. He strikes her.


Mrs. Bisk. Strike your own Wife, I Will tear your Throat out.


She takes away the stick and beats him, he tumbles down. Bisk. Help, murder,
murder, Neighbor, help, help, help.


Mrs. Bisk. I Will make an Example on you. Hah would you govern your own Wife?
Lord and Master, Quoth a!


Bisk. Oh my Throat, Oh my Eyes!


Frib. Come off for shame, you are an insolent Woman, and were you my Wife, I
would take off your Woman-hood.


Biscuit gets up and runs away as hard as he can drive. Mrs. Bisk. Oh you are
one of the Rascal^ that put him upon this! I Will try a pluck with you, I Will tear
your Eyes out, you Villain, you Cuckoldly Villain. She beats Fribble.


Frib. Hold, hold -- Oh Cowardly Rogue! Has he left me in the Lurch?


Mrs. Bisk. I Will order all such Rascals.


Frib. Hold, hold, this is a she-Devil.


Fribble runs from her^ and Exit. Mrs. Bisk. So, are you routed? now the
field's my own; but I Will order my Cuckold. Attempt to conquer his own Wife -- I
to my Husband scorn to be a Slave,
I never can fear the beast whose horns I gave.



ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Kick and Cuff. Kick. THis has been a lucky day; but this last business
you drew me into, frighted me devilishly.


Cuff. We that are to live by virtuous industry, ought to stand out at nothing.


Kick. But no more of this, if you please, yet 'twas well designed to rob
Clodpate; a false Rogue to have threescore pounds in his Pocket, and leave us
off at Put. He robbed us of that first, and we took it by way of Reprisal.


Cuff. His Man is gagged and bound far enough from helping him.


Kick. And away the Horses are gone for London. The Rogue will neither go nor
send to London for a discovery, he hates it so; but what a Pox made the Sot in
the Churchyard.


Cuff. Nay, I know not, unless he waited to kill some body, and then give him
Christian Burial. I am sure it furnished me with a good invention.


Kick. If thou had not been a thorough-pac'd Rogue, thou could never have
been so present to thy self. If we had only bound him, some body might have
passed by by accident and unloos'd him; but to tie his hands behind him, and
take a sheet off the next Hedge, and tie him up in it like a Ghost, and gag
him, was a Masterpiece of Roguery.


Cuff. This way will not only secure us from present pursuit, for no body durst
come near him to unbind his hands. But it will make excellent sport, he will
fright all the Town out of their wits.


Enter Rains and Roger. Kick. There Is Rains, let us retire for fear of broken
heads.


Exeunt Kick and Cuff. Rains. How now, what news of Clodpate?


Roger. Oh, Sir, we had like to have been frighted out of our wits our selves.


Rains. How so?


Roger. When we expected to have frighted Mr. Clodpate, we saw another in a
sheet, at which at first we cried out for fear, which he (to our comfort)
hearing, roared like a Bull at a Country Bear-bating, and run from us with all
the speed he could.


Rains. It Is strange! who should it be?


Roger. We know not, Sir; but the amazement made us soon pull off our Ghostly
Habits, and come home.


Enter Woodly. Rains. Who Is here?


Wood. Mr. Rains, I am glad I have found you.


Rains. Oh, Sir, is it you? we are to thank you for the favor you did us in
giving those excellent Characters of us to our Mistresses.


Wood. Your Mistresses? you are men of dispatch, you take Women as fast as the
French Towns; none of 'em endure a Siege, but yield upon the first Summons to
you.


Rains. You are in the wrong, such as we can buy or corrupt the Governors of,
may be easily had; but there are your Nimmegen Ladies that will hold out, and
pelt damnably. But, Sir, I must be a little more serious with you. Do you think
you have used a couple of honest Fellows as you ought?


Wood. Why, I could do no less for the honor of my Kinswoman, or the securing
my own love to Carolina, which was desperate; and let me tell you, it is a
silly Honor that will hinder a man the satisfying of his love, and is never to
be found but in foolish Rhiming Plays and Romances.


Rains. I could however be no rub in your way, since all my pretenses are to
your Cousin Lucia, and I Will assure you as honorable --


Wood. That Is as she pleases; for you have no more honor in love than needs
must. There Is no trusting young Ladies now adays to the Invasion of Audacious
men.


Rains. But they may to the men of easy Phlegm.


Wood. You are no man of easy Phlegm; but this is not my business. I suppose
you have heard of the Bustle at Mawse's Garden to night.


Rains. I have.


Wood. I have no more to say, but that you would tell Bevil I desire to see him
with his Sword in his hand.


Rains. Sure you are too well grounded in the belief of your Wifes virtue, to
entertain a slight suspicion of her.


Wood. I am sure they never shall know that I suspect her. Aside. Sir, since I
do not question her honor, do not you make bold with it, it is for his false
accusation that I require satisfaction.


Rains. The same love that provoked you to accuse him falsely, made him do the
same to your Wife; he loves Carolina almost to madness.


Wood. The Honor of my Wife is too nice a thing to be used at that rate,
especially by one that rivall'd me in my Mistress, without further dispute I
will fight with him; if he refuses to meet me, I shall think he dares not.


Rains. That you shall not think; since you are so brisk, provide one to
entertain me, I am his Friend.


Wood. Such a one you shall not want instantly.


Rains. We cannot possibly meet to night, at 5 in the morning we'll meet you at
Box Hill.


Wood. I will expect you there, adieu. Ex. Woodly.


Rains. Goodnight.


Enter Fribble, Biscuit drunk, with Fiddlers. Bisk. Come on Fiddles, play us a
Serenade; a Serenade's a fine merry Tune; we'll be as merry as the veryest
Roysters of of 'em all, and as drunk too, an we set upon it, Neighbor Fribble.


Frib. I warrant you, come we are choice Lads; come play a Serenade at this
Window, fa, la, la, la.


Bisk^ sings. Fa, la. Hold, cannot you sing Hey for Cavaliers, ho for Cavaliers,
Dub, a dub, dub, have at old Beelzebub, Oliver stinks for fear.


Fid. No an't please you, Sir.


Frib. Ah brave Neighbor Biscuit, you are a merry man i'fack.


Bisk. I, am I not? I defy any man in Epsom to be merrier, i'fags. Come let us
all be Musitioners, and all roar and sing, Here Is a Health unto his Majesty,
With a Fall, la, la, la, la lero.



Frib. Come on, hey Boys, strike up --


Bisk. Now have I as much courage as any man upon the face of the Earth, if my
Sweeting were here I Would beat her extremely, I Would Chastise my Pigs^ye
immoderately: I love her, poor Bird, but she is too unruly.

An old senseless Song.
If she prove constant, obliging, and kind,
Perhaps I Will vouchsafe for to love her,
But if pride or inconstancy in her I find,
I Would have her to know I Am above her.

Frib. Bravely resolved. But for all that you left me engaged basely and
scurvily.


Enter Mrs. Biscuit and Mrs. Fribble. Mrs. Frib. Mr. Rains should be here by the
Fiddles. O lamentable, our Husbands are drunk and roaring and serenading.


Mrs. Bisk. Oh my fingers itch at 'em, I Will order my Rogue.


Bisk. 'Slife here they are; now does my heart fail me: Fiddlers do you keep
back; they shall be the Reserve, you shall lead the Van, and I Will bring up the
Rear: There Is discipline for you.


Frib. We are fallen into an Ambush, bear thy self bravely.


Mrs. Bisk. Where Is my drunken beast? do you sneak behind? I Will make you an
example.

Bisk. sings. But if pride or inconstancy in her I find,
I Would have her to know I am above her.

Mrs. Bisk. Above me! a pitiful Comfit-maker above me! I Will have better men
above me. Sirrah, I Will spoil your singing.


Enter Kick and Cuff, with Fiddles. Kick. They are our Bubbles drunk, but not
drunk enough, and their Wives with them too. Now for some stratagem to part 'em
--


Cuff. Ladies a word of consultation.


Mrs. Bisk. Your Servant, Sir.


Bisk. Oh Gentlemen, your Servant; now we'll be merry as Princes in faith: who
cares for you now, come strike up Fiddles.


Frib. Ay come, fa, la, la, let 'em alone, who cares.


Bisk. Ay come, let 'em alone, who cares.


Kick. Ladies let me desire you to walk away, your Husbands are too drunk for
your company; we'll carry 'em to our Lodgings, and they shall sleep till they
be sober.


Cuff. And we'll come back and wait on you with our Fiddles.


Mrs. Frib. Your Servant, sweet Sir, you are very obliging.


Mrs. Bisk. We shall be proud to wait on you. Your humble Servant. Ex.


Frib. Are you gone. Come, Gentlemen, let us join our forces, and away
serenading, fa, la, la, la.


Kick. Come on toward our Lodging.


Bisk. Strike up fa, la, la, la.


Enter people crying the Devil, the Devil, Clodpate with his hands bound behind
him in a sheet like a Ghost. Biscuit and Fribble run with the Fiddles, crying
the Devil, the Ghost, etc. Kick. He Is here, the Rogue has made haste; (...)
will our Ladies be afraid to lie alone to night.


Cuff. We must even be content to supply their Husbands places. Come along.
Exeunt.


Clodp. Oh, oh, oh, Udsooks there is my Gag broke at length, thanks to the
strength of my teeth; unmerciful Rogues, if it had been like Dappers Gag of
Ginger-bread, it would have melted in my mouth; never man has been so
unfortunate as I have been this night, I have been frighted out of my Wits, I
saw two Ghosts in the Church yard, I have almost sweat my^elf into a
Consumption, my man's gone, for ought I know murdered; nay which is worse, my
Dapple Mare's lost, I am robbed of Threescore Pounds, my hands tied behind me,
every one takes me for a Ghost; oh, oh, oh.


Enter a Countryman. Count. Oh the Devil, the Devil! Exit.


Clodp. Do you hear, I am no Devil, stay, stay. If I should run after him he would
run ten times faster. If I go home they will shut the doors upon me, no body will
come near me this night, nor for ought I know to morrow.


Enter Landlord and two more with him whistling. Landl. Oh here is the Ghost,
the Ghost. Ex.


Clodp. Stay, I am no Ghost, Landlord; Rogue stay, I will pursue that Rascal.
He runs out after him, and both run over the Stage ag^in, and Exeunt.


Enter Toby. Toby. How luckily was I relieved? I had been sure for one night,
if an honest Fellow had not come by, by Miracle; but he told me a dreadful
story of a Spirit walking to night. Enter Clodpate. Who Is this? my man Toby?


Toby. Oh the Devil, the Devil!


He runs off the Stage, Clodp. follows him, and they enter again. Clodp. Why
Toby, Rogue, Rascal, I am your Master Clodpate. As they run cross the Stage
Clodp. overtakes Toby, and strikes up his heels. Justice Clodpate, Rogue,
Rascal.


Toby. Devil I defy thee, and all thy works: oh, oh, oh!


Clodp. Lie still, or I will stamp thy guts out, hear me, hear me; why Rogue
Toby, Rascal, I am thy Master.


Toby. Ha, I think it is my Masters voice.


Clodp. Oh I am robbed and abused, rise and unbind my hands.


Toby. Oh it is he, let me recover the fright. Oh! how came you in this
condition?


Clodp. Ask no questions, but unty my hands.


Toby. Oh, Sir, your Dapple Mare's gone.


Clodp. Oh what shall I do? oh miserable man! Oh poor Dapple -- I love her so,
I could go into mourning for her. I had as good almost have lost Carolina.


Toby. Nay you had better, Sir; she was in the Plot against you to night, and
abused you all this while with a story of the Churchyard.


Clodp. Gudsooks, abuse me?


Toby. She has no Brother hates the Country, is an absolute vain London-Lady,
and has made sport with you all this night.


Clodp. Now I reflect upon it, Udsbud, the Assignation in the Churchyard was
very odd.


Toby. Mrs. Woodly's Maid has told me all; she has been laughing at you, and
her design upon you all this night.


Clodp. Gudsooks, laugh at me, a Magistrate? I could find in my heart to bind
her to her good behavior.


Enter Peg. Toby. Ha, who is this, Mrs. Margaret? Look you, Sir, she is come in
time. I have told my Master what you told me.


Peg. It Is true; but I shall be ruined, if he tells it again.


Clodp. Fear not that, Godsbud, I tell! but if I be not revenged on her. Hold,
it comes into my head; what is become of the pretty Country-Lady I saw to day?


Peg. At her Lodging, the same we lie in; but why do you ask, Sir?


Clodp. As Gad judge me, it is the finest Lady I ever saw.


Peg. I could tell you, Sir, but I dare not?


Clodp. What could thou tell me? Upon the honor of a Country-Justice I Will be
secret.


Peg. Sir, she is extremely taken with your Worship. Alas! she is a poor
innocent Country thing.


Clodp. Nay, but is she, poor Rogue?


Peg. She loves your honest, true, English Country Gentlemen, and wonders what
Ladies can see in foolish London Fellows, to charm 'em so.


Clodp. And so do I, a Company of Spindle-shank Pocky Fellows, that will scarce
hold together: I am of your true tuff English heart of Oak, Gudsooks.


Peg. But, Sir, I am in haste, my Lady sent me of an Errant, and I must go.


Clodp. Hold, Mrs. Margaret; if you can bring about my Marriage with this Lady,
I will give you 50 l.


Peg. That I know not whether I can do or no; but, Sir, I Will endeavor to serve
you without a reward, if you be in earnest.


Clodp. I am, prepare a Visit for me presently.


Peg. I Will do what I can to serve you, but I must go, your Servant. Exit.


Clodp. If I do not give Carolina such a bob, she shall repent it all her life
time. Ex. Clodp. and Toby.


Enter Rains, Bevil, Lucia, and Carolina. Caro. Good Brisk; Sir, you shall not
meet with Woodly this night.


Luc. And you, Sir, shall pass your word for your self and him. I know you will
offer your help to commit a Gentlemanlike murder for his Honor.


Rains. Faith, Ladies, there is no way to secure us, but to take each of us and
keep us in your several Chambers all night.


Luc. No, Sir, we shall be in more danger with that than you will be with
fighting.


Caro. We shall find a better way with a Constable and Watch, if you will not
pass your words to go home peaceably to night.


Bev. If I could think this care of me proceeded from a value you have for me,
I would renounce my Honor for my Love.


Caro. Perhaps I have such a value for you, as in time might grow to a kind of
Friendship. But that is the farthest point I shall ever stretch it to.


Bev. Friendship's a dull, foolish, phlegmatic affection, which you might a
had, being a Woman for the matter; but if it could ever grow to Love, I would
renounce my dear Friends, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil for you.


Rains. A Lady will be little pleased with one that should renounce the Flesh
for her sake.


Luc. Are not you angry in your heart to be kept from your beloved Bottles?


Rains. The Devil take me, I love you so, that I could be content to abjure
Wine for ever, and drink nothing but Almond-milk for your sake.


Bev. We never meet like Country-Sots to drink only, but to enjoy one another,
and then Wine steals upon us unawares, as late hours do sometimes upon your
selves at Cards.


Rains. And it makes your dull Fools sit hickupping, sneezing, drivelling, and
belching, with their eyes set in their heads, while it raises men of heat and
vigor to mirth, and sometimes to extravagance.


Bev. And which is most scandalous, witty extravagance, or drivelling,
snivelling, sneaking dullness.


Enter Peg with a Note. Peg. Is my Lady here, Ladies? it is past eleven, and
she is not come home yet.


Luc. No, she is not here.


Peg. My Lady is at home, and bid me give you that Note. Gives a Note to Rains.
Not a word to Mr. Bevil, good night. I have taken order the other Note shall be
given to Mr. Bevil. Aside.


Caro. Gentlemen, we are not used to your late hours, we must retire; but if
you will not promise to go home peaceably I will send for the Constable.


Rains. Take my word, Madam, there shall be nothing done to night.


Luc. Gentlemen, your Servant.


Rains. I hope the noise of Fiddles under your Window will not offend you.


Luc. In a Town where there are such vile noises all night long, we may suffer
good Music to come into the Consort.


Caro. Adieu.


Bev. Your Servant, dear, dear Madam. Ex. Women.


Enter Messenger with a Letter, and delivers it to Bevil. Bev. Is this for me?


Mess. It was left in the house for you.


Rains. What Is this? Reads, I know you to be a generous person, and that you
will succor a distressed Lady, who stands in need of your Advice immediately.
Sarah Woodly. Gad I believe she stands in need of something else than my
Advice, she has a design on my Chastity; shall I go? good Devil, don't tempt
me, I must be constant, I will be constant: nay, Gad I can be constant when I
resolve on it, and yet I am a Rogue. But I hope I shall have Grace, and yet I
fear I shall not; but come what will, I must suffer ^his trial of my Virtue.


Bev. How now, Jack, and Assignation?


Rains. Peace, Ned, peace, go home, I Will be with you in half an hour.


Bev. Farewell Constancy. Exit Rains. I am glad he is gone; Woodly has repented
him of fighting in the morning, and would dispatch the business to night, it is
a Moonlight night, and we shall do it well enough. Reads, Meet me in the Field
behind my Lodging, and I will, Sir, since you are pleased to doubt whether I
durst or no. Exit.


Enter Clodpate and Mrs. Jilt. Clodp. Udsooks, do you suspect me? my word will
go for ten thousand pounds in Sussex.


Iilt. Alas! I am a poor innocent Country thing unexperienced in the World; do
not go about to betray a harmless Maid as I am, God wot.


Clodp. As I am an honest man, I am in earnest; here is a Parson lies in the
house, and I Will marry you immediately.


Iilt. Alas! I am an inconsiderable person, and not worth your Love, though I
have been offered the Love of Knights, nay Lords, upon my word; but they were
scurvy London ones, and I swear I scorn 'em all.


Clodp. As Gad judge me, you are in the right.


Iilt. Oh I hate that Town, my Father forced me thither for Breeding, forsooth.
Excellent Breeding is learnt there indeed, to wash, daub, paint, and be proud,
and senseless; out on 'em for Iezabels.


Clodp. Very fine, she is an Angel, Gudsbud.


Iilt. I had rather wait upon a Lady in the Country, than be that vain thing at
London; upon my word now.


Clodp. Leave all, and cleave to me, we'll into Sussex far enough off that lewd
Town.


Iilt. Alas! I am a silly innocent poor creature, I cannot abide marriage, upon
my word not I; yet I would undergo any thing rather than live at London; I had
rather milk Cows in the Country, than be a Maid of Honor there.


Clodp. Maid of Honor! I Will make you a Wife of Honor, if you will go with me;
that is better.


Iilt. Well, I vow I use to go sometimes for my pleasure to Milk a Cow; it is a
very pleasant recreation to stroke the Cows Teats, I delighted in it extremely.


Clodp. Admirable --


Iilt. Nay I have gone a Hay-making in a frollick, upon my word now; but my
Father was stark mad with me, and forced me to London, to learn breeding, and
to break me of those tricks as he called 'em.


Clodp. Gudsooks, he was to blame. If you will be my Wife you shall milk and make
Hay as much as you will.


Iilt. Sir, you are in a manner a stranger to me, though Mrs. Margaret has told
me your condition and quality; yet an innocent simple thing as I am must take
advice of Friends.


Clodp. Friends! Gad take me, I have 2000 l. a year, take advice of that,
'twill be the best friend you can advise with.


Enter Mrs. Woodly. Mrs. Wood. It Is strange this Husband of mine is not come
home yet; but I hope Mr. Rains will not fail his appointment.


Clodp. Here Is company, let us retire and discourse of this business. If I do
not give Carolina such a bob as she never had in her life -- Ex. Clodpate and
Jilt.


Mrs. Wood. Mr. Rains seems to be a person of worth, and fitter to be trusted
with an intrigue, than that Villain Bevil.


Enter Rains. Rains. What a Rogue am I to run into temptation; but Pox on it,
Lucia will never miss what I shall lose. Madam, your humble Servant; I have
obeyed your Summons.


Mrs. Wood. Sir, I hope you will pardon the confidence of a stranger, that
blushes for it, as I do.


Rains. I must thank you for the honor. I Will never stand out at serving such a
Lady with my soul and body too; I Gad as far as it will go -- I am a Rogue,
poor Lucia, forgive me.


Mrs. Wood. Your Friend Bevil is the falsest of men, but I do not doubt your
honor; you are fit to make a friend of, and advise a Lady in the dangerous
actions of her life.


Rains. It was an unlucky embroilment you were in this night.


Mrs. Wood. It was, Sir; but I am the more easily appeased, since it has
offered me an occasion of knowing, in some measure, so worthy a person as your
self.


Rains. Why there it is -- I see what it must come to. Aside.


Enter Peg. Peg. Madam, Mr. Bevil is walking yonder, but my Master is coming in.


Rains. 'Sdeath, Madam, I shall be discovered.


Mrs. Wood. Fear it not, go in. Exit Rains. Peg, go down.


Enter Woodly. Wood. So, Madam, does not your Ladishp blush, and tremble at my
presence?


Mrs. Wood. You are an unworthy man to suspect my virtue, I am the most abused
Woman upon the earth.


Wood. Abused! it is impossible.


Mrs. Wood. I can clear my self, would you could do so, barbarous man!


Wood. You clear your self!


Mrs. Wood. That false Villain, Bevil, has again had the impudence to solicit
my virtue, and after he had asked me a thousand pardons, he was so audacious to
press me to a meeting, saying, he would defend me against all your rage, and
that there was no way for me left, but to fling my self upon him for protection.


Wood. God's Death and Hell, and I Will reward him for it.


Mrs. Wood. Lord, how I tremble, do not quarrel, good Dear; though you are a
naughty man, I cannot but love you yet, and would not have told you this but to
clear my honor; take two or three of your Servants, and beat him soundly; do
not quarrel, good Dear.


Wood. I Will warrant you, let me alone. Ex. Woodly.


Mrs. Wood. I know he has two much honor not to meet him singly; if he kills
Bevil I am ^eveng'd, if Bevil kills him he rids me of the worst Husband for my
humor in Christendom; but I Will to Mr. Rains, he is a Gentleman indeed.


Ex. Mrs. Woodly. Enter Bevil in the field. Bev. Where is this Woodly? It Is as
fine a Moonlight night to run a man through the Lungs in, as one would wish;
'Twas unlucky he should over-hear me to night, but it is too late to retreat now.


Rains and Mrs. Woodly appear at the Window above. Rains. 'Slife yonder is
Bevil; I must to him, for I gave my word to keep him from meeting your Husband
to night.


Mrs. Wood. You need not fear, my Husbands gone another way.


Rains. However, Madam, I must secure him in my Lodgings, and I Will wait on you
again presently.


Mrs. Wood. But, Sir, I have an immediate occasion for your assistance and
advice.


Rains. Madam, I Will return immediately.


Mrs. Wood. My affair is so pressing and urgent, it must be dispatched
instantly.


Rains. I Will not stay a moment from you.


Mrs. Wood. Stay but one minute; they will not meet I tell you.


Rains. Madam, I passed my honor, and dare not venture it.


Mrs. Wood. Excellent honor, to leave a Lady that has such occasion for you as
I have.


Rains. I have as much occasion, Madam, for you; but those old Enemies Love and
Honor will never agree.


Mrs. Wood. Sir, you shall not stir, for a reason I have to my self.


Rains. For a reason I have to my self, I must, Madam.


Breaks from her and Exit. Mrs. Wood. Farewell you ill-bred, rude, unworthy
Fellow: Heaven! how unlucky this is? I am ruined. Ex. Mrs. Wood.


Enter Woodly. Wood. All Is true she has said, he is here.


Bev. Oh, Sir, are you come, I have waited sufficiently for you.


Wood. Oh cunning! how ready he is at a lie to excuse himself? Do you think to
carry it off thus?


Bev. Carry what off? you see, Sir, I dare meet you.


Wood. Rare impudence, meet me! have at you, Sir. Draws.


They fight, Woodly falls and is disarmed. Bev. Your life --


Wood. Take it -- I deserve to lose it Since I defended it no better.


Bev. No, Sir -- live -- and live my friend if you please; and know your Lady's
innocent: I had not gone so far, but that you were pleased to make a question
to Rains, whether I durst meet you or no.


Enter Rains. Rains. How, Gentlemen, you have put a fine trick upon me, to
engage me, and then leave me out at this business.


Wood. He came hither to meet another, Sir, not me.


Bev. Another, you are mad, Sir.


Enter Lucia and Carolina in Night-Gowns. Luc. So, Gentlemen, you are men of
honor, you keep your words well, but we would not trust you -- we had you
dogged --


Caro. This will redound much to our reputation, to have our names used in one
of your quarrels.


Rains. There Is a mistake, Madam, hear it out.


Wood. Did not you come to meet a Lady of my Acquaintance?


Bev. I received a Challenge from you, there it is --


Wood. From me? I sent none. Ha, this must be my damned Wife. 'Sdeath and Hell;
but no more, I am resolved. Ladies and Gentlemen, do me the favor to go into
my Lodgings with me, and you shall see I will behave my self like a man of
Honor, and doubt not but to have all your approbations.


Rains. What does he mean?


Luc. Come, let us in. Exeunt.


Enter Bisk. and Fribble in the Hall. Bisk. A deuce take Mr. Cuff and Mr. Kick
for looking us up. I Will take him up roundly for it to morrow^ it is well his
Landlord took pity on us and released us.


Frib. Well, I am so loving in my drink, I Will go to bed to my Dear, and forgive
her all.


Bisk. I can hold out no longer, I Will go to bed and make peace with my Bird,
there is no such peace as that concluded between a pair of sheets. Prithee,
Neighbor, go you first gently into her Chamber, and try to appease her, a
little to prepare my way.


Frib. Well, I Will venture a Broken-head for you once.


Bisk. Gently, gently.


Frib. 'Sdeath, what do I see? Peeps in.


Bisk. Be not afraid, man, what is the matter?


Frib. Mr. Kick is in a very indecent posture upon the Bed with your Wife.


Bisk. peeps in. 'Slife what do you say? Oh, it is true, it is true, what shall I
do? If I should go in, he would grow desperate at the discovery, and for ought I
know kill me.


Frib. You must get a Constable and apprehend him; but for my Jade I Would maul
her, if I should find her at it.


Bisk. I will, I will, come along with me, Neighbor.


Frib. Stay but a minute till I see how my poor Rogue does, and I Will go with
you; I beat her damnably, and am very sorry for it, i'^aick.


Bisk. Oh make haste, make haste!


Frib. Oh Lord! Oh Lord! Peeps.


Bisk. What Is the matter.


Frib. Oh Lord!


Bisk. What Is the matter, come away?


Frib. As Gad judge me, my Jade's at the same recreation with Mr. Cuff. Oh
look, look, Neighbor, that you may be my Witness as w^ll as I am yours. Bisk.
peeps.


Bi^k. She h^s given you occasion to maul her, Neighbor.


Frib This I may thank you for; you must be bringing Fellows acq^ai^^^d with
your Wife, ye Sot.


Frib. And you m^st be laying wagers upon your Wifes head. Come, come, let us
fetch a Constable, the World shall know what lewd Creatures they are. Exeunt.


Enter Rains, Bevil, Lucia, and Carolina. Rains. Since Mr. Woodly is so busy
within, settling his great affair with his Lady, let us mind our business.
Ladies, our Loves to you two are so violent, they must end in Marriage.


Luc. Your Love is violent indeed, it is a hot Spur French Love.


Bev. I am sure I have loved out a year of ordinary Love in this one day.


Caro. Marriage! that were time to talk of when we have known you seven years.


Rains. 'Sdeath, would you have a man have the patience of a Patriarch?


Luc. Methinks 'twere enough to arrive at Platonic Love at first.


Bev. The pretense to that is more out of fashion in this active Age, than
Ruffs and Trunk-breeches are.


Caro. If we hear one word of Marriage more, we'll discard you. We may perhaps
admit of a little harmless Gallantry.


Luc. This is no Age for Marriage; but if you will keep your distance, we will
admit you for a Couple of Servants as far as a Country Dance or Ombre, or so.


Enter Clodpate. Clodp. So, Ladies, I thank you for the Tricks you have put
upon me; but, Madam, I am even with you for your London Tricks, I have given
you such a bob.


Caro. Me?


Clodp. You have lost me, Madam, you have. I have married a pretty innocent
Country-Lady worth fifty of you. Come in my Dear. Here Is the Parson too that
dispatched the business for us. I think I have met with you now.


Enter Jilt with a Parson. Rains. Mrs. Iilt.


Bev. Old Acquaintance.


Clodp. How Is this!


Iilt. I have got a Husband at last, though much ado, I Will swear.


Enter Peg. Peg. Sister, I wish you Joy. Now I hope I may be owned by you.


Clodp. Is she her Sister? Cursed Instrument of Hell, I am cheated, abused.


Bev. Is this your Country-Lady? she has lived in London all her life.


Clodp. Udsbud, is this true?


Iilt. I was never so far out of London, nor ever will be again, I Will swear.


Clodp. Nay, now I am sure she has lived in London, she could not have been so
impudent else.


Caro. I wish you happy in her, Sir, though it was not my good Fortune to be
made so by you; but let us in, and hear Woodly's resolution. Ex. Rains, Bevil,
Lucia, and Carolina.


Iilt. Did you think I would be mop'd up in a house in Sussex? Sister, take a
place in the Coach, and go to morrow to London, get my Brother to bespeak me a
fine Coach and Horses, and to hire me a House in Lincolns-Inn-fields, I shall
find Credit for Furniture; but now I think on it, my Dear, you shall go with me.
You are so strangely Rustical, I swear, you must be better bred, if you think
to please me; upon my word you must.


Clodp. Gudsooks, Gudsbud, I Will go hang my self.


Iilt. A person of your Quality keep Company with Boars and Rascals, it is a
shame. I Will have you to London, and bring you acquainted with Wits and
Courtiers, upon my word, and you shall learn such Breeding of 'em. I am beloved
and courted at a high rate by 'em all, I Will swear.


Clodp. Oh miserable m^n! I have not only married a Londoner, and consequently
a Strumpet, and consequently one that is not sound, but the most audacious of
her Sex, a Mall Cutpurse, a Doll Common.


Iilt. My Dear, you are strangely unkind upon your Wedding night. We'll to
London together to morrow, you will find great r^spect the^e for my sake. I have
had so many Lovers I have been cruel to, that I Will swear you will be the most
envied man in the whole World, upon my word you will.


Clodp. I am distracted, I know not what to do or say.


Iilt. Why are you troubled, my Dear? you shall find I have interest at Court,
and can keep you from being Sheriff; nay, I believe I could get you Knighted.


Clodp. K^ighted with a Pox; would you had interest enough with the Parson, and
would get me unmarry'd, I would willingly give a Leg or an Arm.


Iilt. Unmarried; nay, Sir, an' you despise me, I scorn such a pitiful Fellow
as you are; matters are not gone so far, but upon good terms I can release you.


Clodp. How, Gudsbud, what say you?


Peg. Leave it to me, give me a handsome reward, and her some consideration for
the loss she shall have in such a Husband, and I Will do it.


Clodp. I will, any thing that you can in reason demand.


Iilt. We'll in, and consult about the business.


Ex. Jilt, and Peg, and Parson. Clodp. 'Sbud I Would give half my Estate to be rid
on her.


Enter Biscuit and Fribble, with a Constable and Watch, bringing in Mrs.
Fribble, Mrs. Biscuit, Kick, and Cuff. Bisk. Sir, an please your Worship, I have
brought a Malefactor before you here, that in most unseemly manner did make an
assault upon the body of my Wife.


Frib. And I another, that committed the same insolence upon mine.


Clodp. Ha, Rogues! I Will vent some of my anger upon them: Hah, you were the
Rogues in Country Habits, to day, that won my money at Putt: I Will make you
Examples, cheating Villains; you, for ought I know, robbed me, bound me, and
stole my Dapple Mare.


Kick. Shameless Rascals, to publish thus your own disgraces. To Bisk. and Frib.


Cuff. Rogues! we shall meet with you.


Clodp. Away with 'em, cheating Slaves! adulterous Rogues!


Cuff. Mr. Justice, you are a Coxcomb; and I shall find a time to cut your Nose.


Kick. And I will make bold to piss upon your Worship.


Clodp. Oh impudence! Constable secure 'em to night, and I Will send 'em in the
morning to Kingstone Goal without Bail or Mainprize.


Cuff. Pheu, our party is too strong for that, here in Town.


Ex. Constable, Cuff, and Kick. Clodp. Oh this cursed Match of mine! I Will see
what they do within. Ex. Clodp.


Mrs. Frib. Good Dear forgive me: I will never do the like again.


Frib. Again, quoth she! no she had not need -- They Kneel.


Mrs. Bisk. Good Duck, now forgive me; I will never commit Adultery again, nay
I will never pluck up a spirit against thee more. Thou shall command me for
ever, if thou wilt say no more of this business.


Bisk. Well, my heart melts -- I cannot deny my Lamb when she begs any thing
upon her Knees. Rise, poor Bird -- but i'fack you were to blame, Duck.


Mrs. Bisk. I was; but I will never do so again.


Bisk. But will you swear, as you hope to be saved.


Mrs. Bisk. Ay, as I hope to be saved.


Mrs. Frib. Pray, Dear, forgive me.


Frib. Ay, now you are upon your Knees; but you were in another posture just
now.


Mrs. Frib. And I wish I may never stir out of this place alive, if I ere do so
again. Pray forgive me.


Frib. Well, I Will pass it by for once; but I Will not fail to sue Cuff upon an
Action of Assault and Battery.


Bisk. And I Will sue Kick too. If we order our business wisely and impannel a
good substantial Jury, of all married men, they will give us vast damages.


Frib. I have known a man recover 4 or 500 l. in such a Case, and his Wife not
one jot the worse.


Bisk. No not a bit. But shall I always command you?


Mrs. Bisk. Yes, you shall, you shall.


Bisk. Why then this is the first day of my reign.


Enter Woodly, Mrs. Woodly, Rains, Bevil, Lucia, and Carolina. Wood. I desire
you all here to stay, and be Witnesses of what I now shall do.


Rains. Be not rash, consider 'till to morrow.


Wood. I have considered, dissuade me not: next to the obligation she did me to
let me enjoy her when I liked her, is the giving me occasion to part with her
when I do not like her.


Bev. I am ex^ream sorry, Madam, that I was the occasion, though unwillingly,
of this breach.


Mrs. Wood. You are not the occasion, he believes you not; but if you were, I
should thank you; for you would rid me at once of him and your self too: but
the business is, we like not one another, and there is an end on it.


Wood. But let us execute our Divorce decently; for my part I Will celebrate it
like a Wedding.


Mrs. Wood. To me it is a more joyful day.


Enter Clodpate, Jilt, Peg, and Parson. Peg. Do but sign this Warrant, to
confess a Judgment to my Sister, and this Bond to me; and I Will null your
Marriage, or declare these Writings before all these Witnesses to be void.


Clodp. Give me the Writings^ I will do it with all my heart.


Luc. What Is here another Divorce? Clodpate begins betimes.


Clodp. Here they are, take 'em.


Peg^ Well now, Sir, know the Parson would not marry you, because the hour was
not Canonical, but I was fain to steal a Cassock, and counterfeit a Beard for
Mr. Woodly's man. Look you^ this is the first Parson I ever ordained. Pulls his
Beard off.


Iilt. I release you of your Marriage and thank you, you have qualified me to
marry one I like better, for I am resolved to marry upon my word, and suddenly
too.


Clodp. 'Sdeath and Hell, if ever I come so near London again, I Will commit
Treason, and have my head and quarters set upon the Bridge. Ex. Clodpate.


Wood. Now listen, and be witnesses to our agreement.


Mrs. Wood. This I think is the first time we e're agreed since our Wedding.


Wood. Imprimis, I Francis Woodly, for several causes me thereunto especially
moving, do declare I will for ever separate from the compa^y of Sarah my now
Wife.


Mrs. Wood. Your lewd disorderly life made you separate before. The said Sarah
having ^o^ ^hi^ ^wo y^ar^ s^^rce seen you by daylight.


Wood. And that I will never hereafter use her like a Wife.


Mrs. Woo^^ That is scurvily. Also all Obligations of conjugal affections,
shall from henceforth cease, be null, void, and of none effect.


Wood. Then, that I am to keep what Mistress I please, and how I please, after
the laudable custom o^ other Husbands.


Mrs. Wood. And that I am to have no Spies upon my company or actions, but may
enjoy all Privileges of other separate Ladies, without any let, hindrance, or
molesta^ion whatsoever.


Wood. And if at any time I should be in drink, or otherwise in a loving fit,
and should be desirous to visit you, it shall and may be lawful for you to deny
me ingress, egress, and regress.


Mrs. Wood. Yes, though you serve me as you do others, and break my Windows.


Wood. I restore you all your Portion, and add 2000 l. to it for the use I have
had on you.


Mrs. Wood. So^ it is done.


Wood. Is not this better than to live and quarrel, and to keep a pother with
one another. Faith take a Kiss at parting for old acquaintance. Kisses her.


Mrs. Wood. Farewell, dear Husband.


Wood. Adieu, dear Wife.


Frib. to his Wife. This it is to marry a Gentleman, forsooth; if you had
married one, you certainly had been turned away for the prank you played to
night.


Bisk. Ay, but we Citizens use our Wives better: let me tell you, Neighbor
Fribble, I would not part from my Lamb for all the world, let her do what she
will, she is such a pretty Rogue.


Luc. See what Matrimony comes to --


Rains. Madam, since we cannot agree upon better terms, let me claim your
promise, and admit me for your Servant.


Luc. I do receive you upon trial.


Caro. And I you upon your good behavior: I think you have gone far enough in
one day.


Luc. If you should improve every day so, what would it come to in time?


Rains. To what it should come to, Madam.


Bev. 'Twill come to that, Ia^k; for one Fortnights conversing with us will lay
such a scandal upon 'em, they'^^ be glad to repair to Marriage.


Wood. To show you, that there was never yet so decent a Divorce, I have
Fiddles to play at it, as they use to do at Weddings.


Mrs. Wood. And to show you I am extremely pleased, I Will dance at it.


Wood. How easy and how light I walk without this Yoke! methinks it is air I
tread -- Come let us Dance, strike up.


Dance. Marriage that does the hearts and wills unite,
Is the best state of pleasure and delight:
But --
When man and Wife no more each other please,
They may at least like us each other ease. Ex. omnes.
FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
A Play without a Wedding, made in spite
Of old Black-Fryars; it is a fine way they write;
They please the wicked Wenchers of the Age,
And scoff at civil Husbands on the Stage:
To the great decay of Children in the Nation,
They laugh poor Matrimony out of fashion.
A young man dares not marry now for shame,
He is afraid of losing his good name.
If they go on thus, in a short time we
Shall but few Sons of honest Women see:
And when no virtuous Mothers there shall be,
Who is it will boast his ancient Family?
Therefore, for Heavens sake, take the first occasion,
And marry all of you for the good of the Nation.
Gallants, leave your lewd whoring and take Wives,
Repent for shame your Covent Garden lives:
Fear not the fate of us, whom in the Play
Our bawdy Poet Cuckolded to day;
For ours are Epsom Water-drinking Wives,
And few in that lewd Town lead stricter lives:
But for the rest, he would have it understood
By representing few ill Wives he would
Advance the value of the many good.
He knows the wise, the fair, the chaste, the young,
A party are so numerous and strong,
Would they his Play with their protection own,
They might each day fill all this House alone.
He says, none but ill Wives can ever be
Banded in ^action against this Comedy.
Therefore come all, who wish to have it known,
Though there are scurvy Wives, that they are none.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. after he is in the right, insert, The Wits are as bad as the Divines,
and have made such Civil Wars, that the little Nation is almost undone. p. 6.
for Wind this way, r. Smoke this way. p. 9. for this vocation, r. this
vacation. p. 16 for alone, r. Allons. p. 17. for meet, r. meet you. p. 19. for
Aside to her, r. Aside. p. 20. for most infatuated, r. the most infatuated. p.
21. for would love, r. should love. p. 22. for and make, r. and am to make. p.
24. for that at one instance, r. both at one instant. p. 27. for do thou, r.
would thou. p. 30. for being long fasting, r. having been long fasting. p. 31
for is a sin, r. be a sin. p. 3^. for blessing, r. blessings. p. 33. for Exit,
r. Exeunt. p. 36. for their time with, r. their time with you. p. 43. for
principal, r. principle. p. 56. for indencent, r. indecent. p. 57. for
Wisnoweski, r. Wisnowiski. p. 68. for can provoke, r. could provoke. p. 68. for
an honest Gentleman complained, r. and honest Gentlemen complain on it. p. 77.
for Amen, r. Amem.


