Innocence modestly vindicated and truth impartially, though (but partly
discovered) by Thomas Shadforth, Esquire, against George Lilburne, Esquire.
For right information of all those who have perused a late false Remonstrance
by him the same George Lilburne published, and attested under his hand.
HAd this great and zealous Pretenders Cause, been so good and he himself so
clear, as his specious, but false and cunning Insinuations would make it and
him, his Case being now stated, witnesses examined, a fair way made (and that
by his own Petition) for an impartial hearing, he would not offer (at least
he would not need, in this by and uncouth way of inveagling all the several
Members appointed for his Judges though in vain) to endeavor the forstalling
of the greatest Mart of Justice (for it was select and called out of the whole
on purpose) that ever yet was in any particular man's cause, since this present
Parliament begun; casting du^t ^n the face (as much as in him lies) of a Member
thereof whole integrity is so known, and he so clear as I should wrong him in
offering the least Apology, and therefore spare it: But would have stood or
fallen, according to the Allegata and Probata of his cause, and wholly relied on
the merits thereof, as I my self shall do on mine, (prosecu^ed with much more
malice, and as I doubt not the effect will make appear, much less truth, and
merely upon private spleen) yet in so doing he ^ath but beaten the Winds,
the Rocks his si^ly and mightlesse waves beat against, will neither be worn
nor moved with such impotent assaults; however le^t either his Accusations and
scurrilous Aspertions of my self and friends, friends of mine merely because
of and for the truth) or his own evasions may pass for current, amongst those
who either through non knowledge or prejudice are strangers both to us, our
cases and ends, I shall briefly, but very truly (so truly as I shall appear
to the candid leisure and knowledge of our whole County, where all our
transactions, ways, and designs are apparent) both offensively and defensively
take up the Buckler against this Goliath of the peoples Liberty and Idempni^y,
viz. his own dearly beloved self, and more dearly beloved Family, and now
Mr. Lilburne to your Remonstranoe.

How serviceable you have been in your Generation for preservation either of
your Nations Interest, or indeed any other save your own, your dear brothers,
your kindreds and servants; let them speak that know it, for to any but your
self, and those Ditto dear friends, it is a Ridle: But to your own and their
Interest you have indeed (to speak modestly) bin no way wanting. Your own
enjoyment of Foord field worth three hundredth pounds per An. due and p^yable to
a Delinquent, without either account to that Delinquent, his wife or children,
or indeed to the State in the least manner, for ought I know, for whose use it
was sequestrable: your making use of Mr. Henry Lambtons Delinquency to force
him to a Composition inconsiderable for Coals by you and your Agent, imbesled
and intended to be concealed both from him and the State, by which you gained
some thousands: Your farming of Delinquents Lands, and Collyeries of very great
value, by your self or your Trustee sharers, at very low and inconsiderable
Rates and yet paying all your Rents in Items and imprimesses, in or by such
accounts as you pleased to make and allow of: For a great while you and your
party swayed all the whole County, (and I believe it is both your greatest
grief and anger that you cannot do so still) to the oppressing of whom you
pleased to call or make Delinquents, or clear such as you deigned to cast a
favorable glance upon: Your taking of goods, and disposing of them first, then
making Delinquents of the owner, who upon evidence and full bearing being
discharged, must either accept a third of the true value or lose all, as the
Lady Tempests Case, to the very great scandal of the Parliament, who would
have Justice done with mercy, no^ violence with rigor: The procuring your
self and Agent Husband into the Commission for surveying of Bishops Lands, and
by that receiving ten sh^lling per d^em whilst you for your particular sit at
home in your shop vending your hard penny-worths of Soape and Rasins unless
when for recreation you were pleased (once perchance in two Months) to ride
half a score o^ miles, and feed at the Trustees Charges, and then knowing
what particulars were aimed at, and by whom making so much as in you and your
man Husband lay the rates and returns high or low, as your affection or malice
dictated, though you failed of your purpose in Sanderland and Newbottle, come
to a more worthy hand; but intended to your self as you Agent Husband within
few days confessed. Your employing your po^re N^phew Blacket, and others of
your kindred Sequestrators who have by that means made their 000 hundreds,
accounting for goods worth some hundreds at under 20l. as in Sir George Bakers
C^se. You^ brothers taking and buying much go^ds of that nature, never yet
accounted for, as M^. P. his Pla^e, and the like will fully demonstrate that
you have indeed been s^rviceable in but not to you^ Generation.

Your opposing of ship money (if any such) was probably an innate disposition
(which you have extraduce) of thwarting what your self was not employed in;
and yet making use of you power in this Parliament; you gained a considerable
sum by forcing Constables then impl^yed to distrain for ship money ^o compound
with you for fear of further trouble, as may be instanced in Rich Sm^th, Rob.
Pattison* Ralph Holmes, and seven or eight more. For Proj^cts name any of them
you ever withstood, till the whole Vogue went against them. And for Bishops,
you may call to mind it was a Bishop who first made you Right worshipful, and
enabled you from Mr. Humphry Whartons fitter, to si^ upon the Bench as a
Justice of Peace (no great sign of opposition as I take i^) yet I confess
with one Clergy man you had some squable about a Doctrine you understood not,
and with another you fell out, for revealing how grossly you abused him in a
bargain of Coals under trust, full 6l. in 20l. Do not therefore think by
your pretended blowing of the dust cast upon you to besmeare Mr. John
Blakiston, he will appear in his splendour, and I hope I shall in time make you
appear in your Colors, so right as believe it if you strive to absterge
(there I am quit with you for one of your hard words) you will but wash the
Ethiop. Only let me tell you (by the way) it is a new and odd kind of
defense to Calumniate one of your Judges, who was as far from any such indirect
and underhand procuring either of a false Certificate, or favorable Abatement
as you are from truth and honesty; and for Mr. Coulston and others,
scandalously by you made his Instruments to that purpose, the truth of that
will I doubt not appear upon his Trial in the Action of the Case brought, or
intended to be brought against you by him, for that gross and false slandering
of him in the execution of his office; but he is big enough to answer for
himself. Non ad me pertinet ole.

To what purpose Mr. Thomas Midfords Certificate brings up the Van of your
impertinencies I confess I understand not; yet since it is crowded in, the
truth of that story will very little advantage you (no more then the credit of
your Certifier (who stands at this day legally indicted of) and the truth is
this, that such information about Papists mustering, and riding Armed was given
to the then Deputy Lievetenants, of whom the Knights named probably were two,
is true, and a Letter procured as I verily believe from the Honorable Speaker
of the Parliament. It is as true that they instantly fell into inquiry and
search of the truth of it, finding no color for it, urged the informer to make
proof of it, and after many faylings, they were ashamed to have taken such
pains upon and from so trivial an information and informer: what honor this
was to the cause and Parliament to abuse the Speaker and House so grossly and
falsely, let the world Judge.

What power Judge Heath had to put any man out of Commission or whether he did
so or no, it concerns me not, neither will I dispute it, probably the
Jndictment has been for some other matter, etc. from the Bench to plead to it;
neither is it impossible, it is not the first time you were at the Bar you
know it.

At the beginning of the Earl of Newcastle Arraying of men, you were so long
present and acting with them, till some small distaste of your not having equal
respect or power made you petted as is believed, and sent you perchance
privately into Scotland; you say you were there, and I will not gainesay it;
but I am confident you see them in a posture likely to prevail ere you
stirred, and yet both went and returned so privately as you had a reserve, at
least a design to make sure what side soever should prevail. A trick which
probably you had not forgot at their very last invasion, however you acted with
such seeming Iehu like Zeal against them, as even being out of Commission and
employment (a thing you could never endure) you still drove on with the rest;
who neither needed nor I believe thanked you for that your double diligence. I
will tell you a short story. There was one T. C. your neighbor drove in those
times beyond Seas by your violence: Warrants signed by you for Attaching him;
it seems he met with some friends about the then Princes Court in France,
advised and encouraged him (upon hearing his case) to repair back to his
habitation, and do his service to you; he did so, met you on the Key, stood a
volley of your frowns, at last accourted you with a private commends from the
party you wot of, was dismissed, your Warrant recalled, and had not death
prevented it, probably might still have lived quietly, your Malignant
Neighbor: But dead men can tell no tales; however you know this is more then a
vision: But to Scotland you went, and that by your Brother in Law Mr. Levers
persuasion. It is strange his opinions should so soon alter as from an high
Preacher and Practiser too, and all Tenants and Ceremonies (then even in their
height) to fall to a Classical way; but since you have been both inspired, he
with Dr. Cosins his fat living, and you with profit and employments.

At your return, it seems after (some small interruption by Baron Lyddall (a
Baron by the way never heard of before) you used such means with Colonel
Carnaby, as to have the Earl of Newcastles protection, and I doubt not it will
appear in the close of your Case that you did somewhat to deserve it. What
your ing^gement was (for he was not very forward in admitting suspected men
without engagement, as I have credibly beard) I will not take upon me to
discover, time will do it. Truth is, your play was always to save stakes, and
now you have run through C^val^er, ridged P^esbyterian, Independent, and
arrived at -- and I doubt will never prove a Martyr, if yet there should be a
further G^^da^ion or Charge.

You were indeed made a Prisoner and ill used, and I believe (^he Cause on the
other side being almost desperate) did no little Glory in it: For any loss in
your esta^e I wonder you are not ashamed to allege it: Your best things were
conveyed safe to Scarborough, and nothing considerable of the ^^st lost, I
could name you friends on the other pa^^y, who did protect and conceal them.

What courtisies Mr. Ralph Lamb^on did for you, I know not, but I believe your
arresting him without C^use, was but a mean requital, examine him to that
point too. It is not denied you were imp^isoned and exchanged, you l^st nothing
by the bargain, nor by your dearly beloved imploym^nt in the Committee of
Sequestrations; a place it seems you are lo^h to part with, by your so often
desiring to continue in it. I know not whether the States will own John
Husband for their Agent; sure I am he was yours, and merely isntrumental that
frivolous p^e^ended Charge against me, contrived by your self and party, and
managed by him according to your directions: that good man some twelve days
since, said that this Parliament had sit too long, and he see corruption in
that Court as well as others, we will have it d^ssolved and another Parliament
chosen and that he would j^yne wi^h the Soldiers indissolving of it, and
assure himself, when the cries of Widows and Fatherless, and others wronged
by him shall appear, he shall hardly escape justice. But the truth is, the
envy grew on your side against me (who ought you none) I durst not with you and
your brother go so high as make Orders against verdicts in law, as in John
Adamsons Case, or declare you were in a power above Law, as in Mr. William
Powers. I never held it fitting to sit as Judge and Accuser, nor to vote a
Gentleman a Delinquent in October, and after in February to prosecute and make
him so by your endeavors and Oaths: Nor cross an Order of Lords and Commons
of Sequestrations in denying a fifth part where it was allotted, and giving no
other reason, but it is my pleasure and it shall be so, as your Brother of late
did in another business: I went according to the Dictates of my conscience
impartially, and I hope justly.

What was done in the Business of the three Ministers, was by Ordinance of
Parliament; It is strange how you knew by whom procured; however not one of the
three have been convinced of or for Malignancy. The Charge you pretend against
me you did indeed so imminently appear in, as by your parties means and
power, I then a Committee man, and suffered to act with you by Authority of
Parliament for three years together, which you ought not to have done; but
rather to have sequestered me (take your own words, with the clauses following
in your Remonstrance most true against your self) at least an Englishman, was
bebarred of hearing or seeing the Witnesses produced against me, kept forceably
out by that your precious Agent, whom I could touch ^arrowly, should I tell him
that to have two Waves at once is Fello^y, or that Mr. Stockdale the Minister
of South-Church dyed of a wound he gave him in Auckland, with the Iron of his
staff under ^he ^are; but these belong to another Jurisdiction: How
consisttent this was to a free borne English man to be debarred of Legal
^xception to the Witnesses produced against him, or to make his ^efence
against; what was said against him, I will not ^etermine.

For the long and impertinent story of M. Blackistons, and his wives
solicitations and transactions, with you and others about the surveigh; as it
is most false, scandalous and unsufferable, so is it nothing at all either to
your defense or my charge, but only in slanders you know always something
sticks: It had been proper to have made a Lega^ Charge against the Gentleman,
to which he might have answered; but it concerns him^ one I doubt not in due
time both can, and will right himself, though his fello^ Members (equally all
engaged in the scandal of one) would (as I hope they will not^ pass it over.

Are your Crimes of seven years standing? Pray what are those you so
eminen^^^ appear in against me? but for my part if they be true, I will never
quote them in (...) Month, or stand upon their Age* However yours had not been
thus long in dispatching bad not your party been so potent that we could not
have hop^d for Justice, till we (...) a man both of Worth and Honor amongst
us; who without partiallity durst and wo^^^ do right against the Greatest and
for the Meanest.

And is not a word of your Charge proved to this day? Let the event judge of
the tru^^ or falsity; of that I hope enough is proved to put off your F^x^^k^^,
though not the (...) part of what may: if Commissions be issued into the
County, and men not affrighted (...) persuaded from speaking their conscience.

As you are not careful what to answer; so I think you are careless what you
(...) so many impertinencies, so little truth; so much malice and showing of
teeth where y^^ cannot bite, were never crowded into two innocent sheets of
p^p^r.

You fear not Justice, you beg not Mercy truly I wish you both, and am co^
you will stand in need of the last of them. Your uprightness in all men's
opinion h^^ been no less; h^d not your self proclaimed it; you know who it
was, cast up hi^ eye^ and cried, Lord I thank thee I am not like this
Publican, etc. Neither will your innocen^^ shine any brighter by your making it
a blazing star, probably a falling one. Y^u a^^ bold indeed to say you will do
so in spite of Mr. Blakistons Accomplices, who never though^ you worthy of his
envy, nor yet does of his revenge. He has not such Accomplices (...) one of your
prime ones, who both in his own, and other men's Cases has witness^^ ready for
any Instructions, which made him tell an Agent of his, find but you (...) will
do it, I will find Oaths: and in another Case instruct his servant into an
app^^^^ perjury, almost to the ruin of a Gentleman.

In this you^ concluding resolution of asserting of reputation, having done it
with (...) many unprobable untruths, avoiding that Scylla, you have fallen into
a worse Ca^y^^ and if you did not doubt (what you seem to be confident on)
what need you pressent obt^ine a fair and legal trial, or implicitly tax
your Court by appealing to all ra^^onall men to be your Judges, or beg that
Justice might take place, and Truth be ma^^fest, which very thing in doubting,
you do tac^tely deny, or at least fear, which is (...) make up the total of
spleen and causeless jealousies, in inducing the World to belie^^ either that
Mr. Blackiston (on whom you would cast all you (...)) can sway ^he (...) or
that they are all as partial as you would besmatter him to be; but Magna est
veri^^ and prevalebit.

FINIS.

