A True Widow. A COMEDY, Acted by the DUKE's Servants.

Written by THO. SHADWELL.

Odi profanum Vulgus and arceo. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Ship
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1679.

To Sir Charles Sedley.
Sir,
THIS Play, which I here recommend to your Protection, either through the
Calamity of the Time, which made People not care for Diversions, or through the
Anger of a great many, who thought themselves concerned in the Satyr, or
through the want of taste in others, met not with that Success from the
generality of the Audience, which I hoped for, and you thought, and still
think, it deserved; and I have the Judgment of Men of the best Sense, besides
the best of the Poets, on my side in this Point.

But no Success whatever, could have made me alter my Opinion of this Comedy,
which had the benefit of your Correction and Alteration, and the honor of your
Approbation: And I heartily wish, you had given your self the trouble, to have
reviewed all my Plays, as they came incorrectly and in have from my hands;
'twould have been more to my advantage, than the assistance of Scipio and
Laelius was to Terence; and I should have thought it at least as much to my
Honor, since by the effects, I find I cannot but esteem you to be as much
above both of them in Wit, as either of them was above you in Place in the
State.

I shall not, according to the Custom of Dedications, make a Decla^ion upon
your Wit, the common Theme of all that have any, at least of such as know you,
who will acknowledge, they have heard more of it drop carelessly from your
Mouth, than they have ever seen from the laboring Pen of any other. And my
greatest satisfaction is, that I have the Honor of his Friendship, and my
Comedies have had his Approbation, whom I have heard speak more Wit at a
Supper, than all my Adversaries, with their Heads joined together, can write in
a year. Nor are your Writings unequal to any Man's of this Age, (not to speak
of abundance of excellent Copies of Verses) you have in the Mulberry-Garden
shown the true Wit, Humor, and Satyr of a Comedy; and in Antony and Cleopatra,
the true Spirit of a Tragedy, the only one (except two of Johnson's, and one of
Shakespeare's) wherein Romans are made to speak and do like Romans: there are to
be found the true Characters of Antony and Cleopatra, as they were; whereas a
French Author would have made the Egyptian and the Roman both become French
(...) his Pen. And even our English Authors are too much given to make (...)
History (in their Plays) Romantic and impossible; but in this Play, the Romans
are true Romans, and their Style is such: and I dare affirm, that there is not
in any Play of this Age so much of the Spirit of the Classick Authors, as in
your Antony and Cleopatra. This Opinion I have, unbiased by my Friendship, and
the Obligations which I owe to you, often declared, and shall always persist in.

After all this, since my Comedies are approved and commended by you, and Men
of your sort, the rest of the Audience must forgive me, if I am much more
ex^lted by the praise of such as you, than I can ever be humbled by their
censure.

Satyr will be always unpleasant to those that des^rve it. It was not my design
in this Play to please a Bawd of Quality, a vain Selfish, a senseless, noisie
Prig, a methodical Blockhead, having only a form of Wisdom, or a Coxcomb that is
run stark mad after Wit, which uses him very unkindly, and will never be won by
him; nor did I think to please the Widows in the Name. The three first of
these Characters are wholly new, not so much as touched upon before, and the
following ones are new in the greatest part. And till I see more variety of new
Humor, than I have produced in my Comedies, and more naturally drawn, I shall
not despair of bearing up near my Contemporaries of the first rate, who write
Comedy, and of always surmounting the little Poetasters of the fourth rate, who
condemn me; such as hold, that Wit signifies nothing in a Comedy; but the
putting out of Candles, kicking down of Tables, falling over Joynt-stools,
impossible accidents, and unnatural mistakes, (which they most absurdly call
Plot) are the poor things they rely upon: But'tis the Opinion of the best
Poets, that the Story of a Play ought to be carried on, by working up of Scenes
naturally: by design, not accidents. I have endeavored to do so in this Play,
and I doubt not, but the Scene in the second Act, wherein La. Busy would
persuade Isabella to be kept, will live, when the Stuff of such Scriblers (more
fit for Drolls than Plays) shall be consumed in Grocery-ware, Tobacco,
Band-boxes, and Hatcases, and be rased out of the memory of Men.

I should not say so much in my own behalf, if I had not met with palpable
injustice from some, ^se design is to set up Quacks, and put down true
Professors; nor can I find any Reason, why a Man that is to live by his Wit,
should not vindicate that, when it is traduced, as well as he, who is to live by
his Reputation, may assert his Honesty, when it is aspersed especially since
neither of 'em are q^alities of a Man's own making. But I must ask your pardon,
for troubling you so long with my Resentments, when I should be boasting of the
many Favors you have done me, and giving you my thanks for 'em; yet I know you
look for no returns where you oblige; however I am too proud of your Kindness
to conceal it, and therefore shall take all opportunities I can publicly to
declare my self,

Sir, Your most obliged humble Servant, Tho. Shadwell.
London, Feb. 16. 167^.
PROLOGUE, By Mr. DRYDEN.
Heaven save ye Gallants, and this hopeful Age,
You Are welcome to the downfall of the Stage:
The Fools have labored long in their Vocation;
And Vice, (the Manufacture of the Nation)
Over stocks the Town so much, and thrives so well,
That Fopps and Knaves grow Druggs, and will not sell.
In vain our Wares on Theaters are shown,
When each has a Plantation of his own.
His Cruse never fails; for whatsoever he spends,
There Is still God's plenty for himself and friends.
Should Men be rated by Poetic Rules,
Lord what a Poll would there be raised from Fools!
Mean time poor Wit prohibited must lie,
At if 'twere made some French Commodity.
Fools you will have, and raised at vast expense,
And yet as soon as seen, they give offense.
Time was, when none would cry that Oaf was me,
But now you strive about your Pedigree:
Bawble and Cap no sooner are thrown down,
But there is a Muss of more than half the Town.
Each one will challenge a Child's part at least,
A sign the Family is well increased
Of Foreign Cattle! there is no longer need,
^hen we are supplied so fast with English Breed.
Well! Flourish, Countrymen: drink swear and roar,
Let every freeborn Subject keep his Whore;
And wandering in the Wilderness about,
At end of 40 years not wear her out.
But when you see these Pictures* let none dare
To own beyond a Limb, or single share:
For where the Punk is common! he is a Sot,
Who needs will Father what the Parish got.
Drammatis Personae.
Bellamour, A Gentleman of the Town, who had retired some time into the
Country. Carlos, A Gentleman returned from Travel, with Wit enough left to
love his own Country. Stanmore, A Gentleman of the Town. Selfish, A Coxcomb
conceited of his Beauty, Wit and Breeding, thinking all Women in Love with him,
always admiring and talking of himself. Old Maggot. An old credulous Fellow, a
great Enemy to Wit, and a great Lover of Business, for Business-sake. Yo.
Maggot. His Nephew: An Inns of Court-Man, who neglects his Law, and runs mad
after Wit, pretending much to Love, and both in spite of Nature, since his
Face makes him unfit for one, and his Brains for the other. Prig, A Coxcomb
that never talks or thinks of any thing but Dogs, Horses, Hunting, Hawking,
Bowls, Tennis, and Gameing; a Rook, a most noisie Jockey. Lump, A methodical
Blockhead, as regular as a Clock, and goes as true as a Pendulum, one that
knows what he shall do every Day of his Life by his Almanac, where he sets
down all his Actions beforehand, a mortal Enemy to Wit. La. Cheat. The true
Widow, that comes to Town, and makes a show of a Fortune, to put off her self,
and her two Daughters. Isabella, Her Eldest, a Woman of Wit and Virtue.
Gartrude, Her Youngest, very foolish and whorish. La. Busy, A Woman of
Intrigue, very busy in Love-Matters of all kinds, too old for Love of her own,
always charitably helping forward that of others, very fond of young Women,
very wise and discreet, half Bawd, half Match-maker. Steward, To Lady Cheatly.
Players, Door-keepers, and many other Persons, the Audience to the Play in the
Play.
Scene, LONDON.

Reader,
MAny Faults in the Printing have escaped, by reason of my absence, while the
third and fourth Acts were in the Press: I shall only give you an account of
some notorious Errors; as Page 44. for 5 s. read 50 l. p. 47. for in favor r.
infamous. p. 48. instead of (...) (...) r. take me: But the greatest Mistake
was, in not printing the Play in the Play in another Character, that that might
be known in the Reading, which a great many did not (...) in the Acting of it;
but take notice, 2 Lovers, Wife and Husband, are all that speak in that. In the
Action, many (...) which belonged to the Farce in the Play, and which to the
Play it self, by re^ of promiscuous speaking; and I found by venturing upon
that new Thing, I ran a great Risque: For some, I believe, wished all the Play
like that part of a Farce in it; others knew not my intention in it, which was
to expose the Style and Plot of Farce-Writers, to the utter confusion of
damnable Farce, and all its wicked and soolish Adherents. But I had rather
suffer, by venturing to bring new things upon the Stage, than go on like a
Mill-Horse in the same Round.

A True Widow.
ACT I.
Enter Bellamour and Stanmore* Stan. COme Bellamour, what not dressed yet?
methinks after so long a fast from Wit and fine Women as you have had in the
Country, you should be sharper set after both, than to fool away a morning
thus in your Chamber.


Bell. There is a respect due from a Country Gentleman to a new Suit and
Peruque, they must not be hastily put on. And the Women of this Town, if you
don't take care of your own outside, will never let you be acquainted with
their insides.


Stan. Thou art mistaken, men succeed now according to the Clothes they give,
not those they wear.


Bell. Amongst your little Whores, Stanmore.


Stan. And amongst your great Whores too Bellamour. I knew a Gentleman, who was
so ugly, a modish Spark would scarce have given him a Livery. yet by a
correspondence he kept with a Tailor, and Shoemaker at Paris, and two or three
of that sort, got one of the finest Women in England.


Bell. How so?


Stan. Why she had always the fashion a month before any of the Court-Ladies,
never wore any thing made in England, scarce washed there, and had all the
affected new Words sent her, before they were in print, which made her pass
among Fops for a kind of French Wit.


Bell. But were not these French Petticoats, though given by one man, taken up
by many.


Stan. 'Faith I think not, she considered her own vanity above any man's
address, though one Lord made Coaches at her, another squeezed in his fat sides
at her, till he looked like a full sack; a third writ lamentable Sonnets to
her; a fourth observed her motions in the Park, which, by the way is the new
method of making Love.


Bell. What, do they make Love without speaking to one another?


Stan. A great many very sine Gentlemen, to look at, better then with it, your
side glass let down (...), when the party goes by, is very (...) if she side
glass you again, for that s^the new word, ply her next day with a billet doux
and you have her sure.


Bell. What if we chance to go the same way, or she will not receive my billet
doux, as you call it?


Stan. For the first it must never chance; you must instruct your Coachman, and
for the second after such an advance as side-glassing of you* if she refuse
your Billet she is a Jilt, and you must rail at her in all Companies.


Bell. I am pretty good at railing, but not so good as thou a^, Stanmore.


Stan. I had forgotten half; you must turn as she turns; quit the Park when she
goes out, pass by her twice or thrice between that and St. James'; talk to her
at night in the drawing Room --


Bell. Before forty Coxcombs, and then the business is sufficiently proclaimed,
is it not think you?


Stan. It Is all one, it must be so, or you will pass for an old fashion d Lover,
and never succeed beyond a Chambermaid.


Bell. This is a folly of our own growth, it came not to us out of France.


Stan. That Nation has at this time no folly so harmless.


Bell. But if there be any stirring of what kind soever, our empty young
fellows will be sure to fill themselves with it, and prefer it to all the sense
and good breeding of their own Country: But now we talk of France, I wonder we
see not Carlos, he was expected from thence two or three nights since.

[ Enter Carlos.
Stan. See where he comes. Dear Carlos, I could not run more hastily upon my
Mistress after a long absence; thou art the delight of all thy friends, and
even thy Enemies take a malignant pleasure to behold that shape, that feature,
and that mien.


Car. Hold Stanmore, I think thou takes't me for a Mistress indeed by thy
Complements, which I know not how to return.


Stan. Thou art so improved, a man must love as I do, not to envy thee.


Car. Enough Stanmore, your friendship blinds you, I never knew any of these
loving Rogues good for any thing.

[aside. Bellamour, I am o'rejoy'd to see thee here, I heard thou had for
sworn the Town.


Bell. Now I see Carlos here, methinks I am a perfect man of the Town again; I
only forswore it for a time; 'Faith, Money is a thing gotten in ill Company,
and spent in good; I have been laying up.


Car. Men of War after a warm Engagement, must into the Docks to be new built
for Fight.


Bell. Right, but how go matters in France? What new Foppery is turned up Trump
there?


Car. What with Governors, Ladies eldest Sons, Ambassadors and Envoyes, you
have 'em here almost as soon as the French themselves.


Stan. No alteration since we were there?


Car. Wit and Women are quite out of Fashion, so are Flutes, Doux and Fiddlers,
Drums and Trumpets are their only Music.


Bell. It Is but ill Music for their Neighbors.


Car. At home they are always roaring out Te Deums for Stealing of some Town
or other: War and Equipage is their discourse, which by the way is so Pompous,
that should they conquer Europe they should scarce be savers.


Stan. How came Wit and Women out of fashion?


Car. Why in Camps they learn to live without Women; and for Wit, great men
that love to play the fool in quiet, find it troublesome.


Bell. 'Faith the latter of these is a great grievance here; our great men hate
Wit, but love damned Flattery, though never so fulsom.


Car. Pray what Fools does this Town afford?


Stan. Very choice ones, we will bring you where you shall enjoy 'em: there is a
Widow lately come to Town who sets up for a great fortune, has taken a good
House, and lives very splendidly, I suppose with intention to put off her self
and two Daughters, who are very pretty, one of which Bellamour is in love with.


Bell. I make love to her, I confess, but it is a harmless Lambent flame, and
aims but at fornication; but Stanmore is in love with the other, and Heaven
knows what that may end in.


Stan. I nave no designs upon her fortune, I aim only at her person, I yet run
at the whole herd.


Car. Come, you know your own tempers, no more in love then in play, where
those who are very stingy at first, will bleed deeply at last.


Bell. This Widow, by name the Lady Cheately, has made her House the Rendevouz
of Fools, Knvaes, Whore-masters, Ladies of all sorts, and young Heirs: Amongst
the rest of Fops, there is Young Maggot, one whom his Uncle, whose Heir he is,
bred at the Inns of Court, and intended for the Law, but he has left that, and
is run Wit-mad; thinks of nothing, endeavors at nothing, but to be a Wit and a
Lover, and both in spite of Nature.


Stan. And though he has made Love and Wit his whole business, he is gotten no
farther yet than to be thought a Wit by the Fools, and an Ass by the Witty men.


Car. This is a choice Spirit: Indeed it is a general Folly; for Wit is a common
Idol that every Coxcomb worships in his heart, though some Blockheads of
business dissemble it.


Bell. But there is another Coxcomb of that extreme vanity, that Nature amongst
all her variety of Fops, has not produced the like: He draws all lines of
Discourse to the center of his own Person, and never was known to speak, but I
did, or I said, was at the beginning or end of it.


Stan. He is lean as a Skeleton, and yet sets up for shape; he changed his
Tailor twice, because his Shoulder Bone sticks out.


Bell. He thinks all Women in love with him, and all Men his intimate Friends;
he will make doux oeux to a Judge upon the Bench, and not despair of getting a
Widow at her Husband's Funeral; thinks himself very well bred, and welcome at
all times to all People, though sober among Drunkards, and without a Penny in
his Pocket to Men deep at Play.


Car. Oh! I remember this Coxcomb, he has no fortune, and yet is always talking
of Equipage and Dressing: It Is Selfish; but do any Women favor that Fop?


Stan. Oh yes! There is no more account to be given of their Love before they
know Man, than their longings after; but both are most commonly for nauseous
nasty things.


Car. They do most things by chance; but when they choose, it is ever for the
worst.


Enter Footman. Foot. Mr. Selfish is combing his Peruque below stairs, and will
be here instantly.


Bell. Retire while I show him.

[They retire.
Enter Selfish; sets his Peruque, and bows to the Glass. Sell. How do thou do,
Bellamour? You fat Fellows have always Glasses that make one look so thin.


Bell. You look in it much as you do out on it.


Sell. Sure I am not so lean; I was told I looked pretty plump to day: hah! my
damned Rogue has put me into the most bustling Stuff; Bellamour, I like thy
Breeches well.


Bell. Why you don't see *em.


Self. Yes, I see 'em in the Glass; your Tailor shall make mine! a Pox on my
Valet de Chamber, how he has tied my Cravat up to day; a man cannot get a good
Valet de Chamber, French or English.


Bell. A French one is fittest for him, because he can fast best.


Sell. I begin to Belly I think very much; I must go into France and flux,
'twill do my Complexion good as well as my Shape.


Bell. Why thou art fit to be hung up at Barber-Surgeons-Hall for a Skeleton; a
Woman had as good lie with a Faggot.


Sell. Thou art envious, the Ladies are of another mind; I am sure you are above
Whore masters weight, and a Woman had as good lie with a pound of Candles.


Bell. Enough of this: There is a Friend of mine, one Carlos, lately come from
France, that understands Dressing, I must bring you together.


Sell. You talk of my Leanness: I had the most lucky Adventure; I was happy in
the Conversation of a pretty Person of Quality, young and witty, I went in a
Coach with my hand in her neck from the Duke's Playhouse to the Pell-mell,
kissing her all the way.


Bell. There is a thing happened to me, in which I have occasion for your
assistance and advice.


Sell. I have lately succeeded in the Affections of so many pretty Creatures,
faith, I know not how to turn my hands to 'em, poor Rogues; if you did but see
the Advances that all the Ladies that come to the Widow's and her Daughters,
make to me, you would stand amazed, and so should I, but that I am used to
those things.


Car. This Fool is much improved since I went into France.


Stan. Fools always improve in Folly, as witty men in Understanding.


Car. Indeed he has great acquired Parts.


Sell. Bellamour fare thee well, I must go home and answer two or three Billet
doux from Persons of Quality, I have a bushel in a year. Adieu.

[Exit.
Car. A most admirable Coxcomb; he is so full of himself, he never minds another
man, and so answers quite from the purpose.


Bell. He never answers any man (...) cares to the answe^d, he desires but to
be heard; but come Carlos let us take the air and while away a dineing time.


Car. I hate a Dinner, it is a good meal sor a dull plodding Fellow (...)
business that must bait like a Carriers Horse, and then to plodding again; but
the Supper is the meal of pleasure and enjoyment.


S^n. Supping indeed is a sole^ thing, and should be used but with few, every
Block head can Dine.


Bell. That is, fill a Belly: but there are few men fit to Sup, there is more
then eating required for that mystery, there must be Wit and Sense.


Enter Young Maggot. Yo. Mag. Your (...) Gentlemen, I see Bellamo^ you are
going abroad, I only come to show you my* last Verses.


Bell. Your last Verses, I would I could be so happy to see them.


Yo. Mag. You have Company, and I have Busin^, some other time.


Bell. What Business?


Yo. Mag. Why, Wit and Beauty, I know no other, I am longed for by the Ladies
now to give account of the Play, for the Poets will not write, the Players Act,
nor the Ladies censure without my Judgment first.


Bell. The Ladies are indeed your finger Watches, that go just as you set them.


Yo. Mag. Faith, that is very well imagined, well said, I think thou have never
as much Wit as one of us Writers.


Car. What is your opinion of the Play?


Yo. Mag. I saw it Scene by Scene, and helped him in the writing, it breaks
well, the Protasis good, the Catastasis excellent, there is no Episode, but the
Catastrophe is admirable, I lent him that and the love parts, and the Songs.
There are a great many sublimes that are very Poetical.


Stan. Poetical, in his Judgment, is always Fustian and Nonsense in another, I
warrant it is some Roaring Ranting Play that is upon the fret all the while.


Bell. Will you carry us to a Rehearsal?


Y. Mag. It Is a famaliarity among us Writers to see one another naked, you are
men of Wit, and desperate Critics, and we Poets fear you as singing Birds do a
Hawk.


Car. Thank you for your Hawk.


Yo. Mag. Ay was it not well said?


Car. But methinks Fools should be your only Enemies.


Yo. Mag. They cannot hurt us, besides, a Dedication, writing Songs for their
Mistresses, or showing them a Play before hand, will take them off.


Enter Footman. Foot. Sir, Mr. Prig is coming up.


Y. Mag. Now shall we be troubled with Fools, a man can never enjoy thee half
an hour to himself, thou art so haunted with Fops.


Bell. How insupportable the Rogues are to one another.


Carl. What is this Prig?


Stan. He is an universal Gamester, an admirable Horse and Dog Herald, knows
all the Remarkable ones, their Families, and Alliances, is indeed more
intimately acquainted with Beasts, then Men; and it is fit he should be so.


Bell. He is in short a Led-eater, Intelligencer, and dry-jester to Gameing,
and Jocky-Lords; flatters, rooks, and passes for a Jolly Companion amongst 'em;
and makes those things which are but the Recreations of men of Sense, his whole
Business.


Enter Prig. Prig. Gentlemen good Morrow, tho I think it is almost Noon, where
were you last Night? if you had been at my Lord Squanders, you had seen the
best Play you had seen this Month. My Lord lost a Thousand pound, Jack Sharper
won three Hundred. Tom Whiskin an Hundred, my Lord Whimsey lost five Hundred,
Sir Thomas Rantipol lost six Hundred, Sir Nicholas Whachum won two Hundred, and
the Rooks were very busy.


Stan. Then you were not idle?


Prig. No faith: But I am come to get you to look upon the best bred Horse in
England. Woodcock was his Grandfather, he is the Son of Bay Lusty, and the
Brother of Redrose; his Sister is the WhiteMare, the Cozen-german of
Crack-a-fart, Cozen once removed to Nutmeg, third Cozen to my Lord Squanders
Colt, allied to ^lea-bitten by the second Venture; in short he is of an
excellent Family, and I am going to make a civil Visit to him, he is to run for
the Plate at Brackley, Stamford and Newmarket, and goes out of Town to Morrow.


Bell. We cannot see him, we are engaged.


Prig. Engaged! no faith let us make a match at Tennis to day, I was invited to
Dine by two or three Lords, but, if you will let me have Pen, Ink and Paper,
I Will send my dispatches, and dis-engage my self: How will that Gentleman and
you play with Stanmore, and I keep his back hand at Gibbonses?


Bell. I do not know his Play.


Prigg. We'll take a Bisk of you.


Bell. No, you shall not.


Prigg. You Are half fifteen better than I to a Grain.


Stanm. No, that he is not.


Prigg. I never heard the like in my life; gad, you will never let me make a
reasonable Match with you; you beat Sharper at a Bisk, and he beats me; what
will Stanmore and you give Maggot and me at White Hall, and play the best of
your play? hah.


Young Maggot. I never play, I stay at home and write.


Prigg. Pish, it is all one for that, we'll play with you at a Bisk, and a
fault, for twenty pound.


You. Mag. I will not Sir.


Prigg. Come, I Will hold you twenty pound, you do not make a fairer Match; Let
me see -- hold -- anon -- hum -- ha -- Ay -- it is just so to a hairs breadth;
Come, we'll play it.


Bell. I tell you I am engaged to day.


Prigg. We'll play or pay to morrow at ten; where shall we sup?


Stanm. No where, you cannot sup.


Prigg. Not sup?


Bell. No, you are not fit to sup.


Prigg. No? I am sure I have as good a stomach, and will eat two meals a day
with any man that wears a head.


Car. That will not do.


Prigg. No? I Will eat three then; what say you Maggot, will you play?


You. Mag. I will never play as long as I live, at that or any thing else,
while I can have Pen, Ink and Paper.


Prigg. O Lord! O Lord! I would not say so for all the world.


Bell. A man must use Exercise to keep himself down, he will Belly else, and
the Ladies will not like him.


Young Magg. I have another way to bring down my Belly.


Stanm. Another? What Is that?


Young. Magg. Why I study, I study and write; it is exercise of the Mind does
it; I have none of the worst Shapes or Complexions, it is writing and inventing
does my business.


Car. Will that do it, Sir?


Prigg. Think? What a Pox should a Gentleman think of but Dogs Horses, Dice,
Tennis, Bowls, Races, or Cock-fighting? The Devil take me, I never think of any
thing else, but now and then of a Whore (when I have a mind to her.)


Carl. This is strange, Mr. Maggot, and very curious; how do you know how much
you fall away in a days time?


Yo. Mag. I have an Engine to weigh my self when I sit down to write, or think;
and when I unbend my self again.


Prigg. How do you unbend?


Yo. Mag. Why I unbend my imagination, my intellect.


Prigg. Your intellect, pray Sir what is that, is it a new word for a Cross-bow?


Y. Mag. How I scorn Fops! Why I have been in love these two Months, and I have
wasted above fourteen pound; Love is a great preserver of the shape, a very
great one: You know my Mistress, the Widows youngest Daughter.


Carl. This is a curious Coxcomb.


Prigg. Love! Ay, if a man gets a Clap, 'twill take him down.


Yo. Mag. May it take down your Nose, you unthinking Animal.


Prigg. What a Devil does he mean?


Yo. Mag. Why I weighed my self, when I writ my last Song, and I wasted six
ounces, aver du pois weight in the writing: And I was not above twelve hours
about it.


Carl. I beseech you let us hear it Sir.


Yo. Mag. Withal my heart.

Damon see how charming Chloris,
Who gives love to all that see her,
Burning us yet in coldness glories,
And is never never freer.
Though darts and flames from her eye fly Sr.
And her Breast is warm and spicy,
Yet there is coldness in her eye Sr.
And her heart's all over Icy.
By coldness I am more inflamed,
As in Winter is Spring water,
My love by scorn can not be tamed,
But I the rather would be at her.

Prigg. Did this make you waste six ounces? I writ a Song the other day, and it
did not make me waste at all.


Bell. Prithee Prigg let us hear it.

ONE Night walking in a Wood,
I met one was a Maid as good
[Prigg sings. As e're she coud:
But she ^red my Blood,
And to her I stood.
With a hey Boys, ding, ding, ding Boys hey,
^h a hey Boys, ding, ding, ding.
Quoth I, my pretty Buxom Lass,
From me this time thou shall not pass
In any Case;
For the sake of thy Face!
I Will lay thee on the Grass.
With a hey Boys, ding, etc.

Yo. Mag. Oh what violence does he to my Ears,


Prigg. What he does not like it? Pox! these Wits like nothing but what they do
themselves, I love a Tavern Song, that will Roar, and make one Merry, a Pox of
his Strephons and Phillises.


Bell. What will become of you Young Maggot your Uncle Maggot? that common Foe
to Wit, is coming up.


Yo. Mag. Hide me Gentlemen, hide me, I am undone if he finds me in your
Company.


Bell. Step in there.

[Yo. Mag. retires.
Enter Maggot Magg. Gentlemen I come to look out an ungracious Nephew of mine,
who I hear by virtue of your Company, sets up for a Wit: Will any of you keep
him him when you have made him good for nothing.


Bell. Good for nothing* why, he is the darling of the Ladies, they dote on him
for his Songs, and fear him for his Lampoons, and the men think no Debauch
perfect without him.


Magg. Yes, I hear h^ writ a Libel, I shall have him scrible away his ears, or
write himself so far into the Ladies favors, to lose his Nose, or be knocked
o'th head; these are the fruits of Wit.


Carl. The disasters rather.


Magg. The World will bear with you that have Estates, tho you have a little;
but it is enough to undo a man that is to make his Fortune. My roguy Nephhew
must leave Cook upon Littleton for Beaumont and Fletcher.


Stan. Poetry is an ornament to a man of any profession.


Magg. It Is a damned Weed, and will let nothing good or profitable grow by it,
it is the Language of the Devil, and begun with Oracles. Where did you know a
Wit thrive, or indeed keep his own?


Carl. They part with their Money for Pleasure, and Fools part with their
Pleasure for Money; the one will make a better Last Will and Testament, but the
other lead a happier Life.


Y. Mag. Profit begone, what art thou but a breath.
I Will live proud of my Infamy and shame,
Graced with the Triumphs of a Poets name:
Men can but say, Wit did my Reason blind,
And Wit's the noblest srailty of the Mind.
Methinks it runs well thus.


Mag. What noise is that? ha* My ungracious Nephew repeating Verses. Come out
you Rascal; do thou not tremble at my anger? Thou that might have been a
Judge in time, to make a Wit of thy self thus!


Bell. Good Sir be patient; Did not the great Pleader Cicero make Verses?


Mag. And you see what came on it, he died a Beggar, and of a violent death.


Y. Mag. Sir, The Verses were not my own.


Mag. Sir, Be gone to the Temple, and let me once more find you at Wit, and
I Will dis-inherit you.


Y. Mag. Good Sir hear me.


Mag. Be gone, I say.


Carl. This is ridiculous enough, and odd.


Bell. There is a powerful faction against Wit.


Stan. Come, let us take the Air.

[Ex. omnes.
Enter Lady Cheatly, and Mr. Lump her Brother. Lump. I see, Lady Sister, you
are resolved to push on the remnant of your Estate, and make the Snuff of your
Fortune burn clearest.


L. Cheatly. As my Fortune was, it would do us no good; but this Town, and the
way I take, may advance it, or at least dispose of my own Person.


Lump. You shall not want my Money, so long as I have Deeds of Trust from you;
you shall have the Name on it. I have helped you to sober, solid, godly men, who
will help to carry on your design.


L. Cheatly. Some cautions old Fellow or other (who is wise enough to have his
own Wisdom contribute to the cheating of him) may snap at me; and some rash,
amorous, young Fellows may catch at my Daughters.


Lump. I wish you had set up in the City among our Party, and gone to Meetings,
it might have been a great advantage; I my self have made much benefit of
Religion, as to my temporal Concerns, and (so long as it be directed to a good
end) it is a pious fraud, and very lawful.


L. Cheat. No Brother, The godly have two qualities, which would spoil my
design; great Covetousness (which would make 'em pry too narrowly into our
Fortune) and much Eating (which would too soon devour what I have left.)


Lump. Reproach not the godly, Lady Sister, I do not like it.


L. Cheat. Where is there a better Market for Beauty, than near the Court? And
who will more likely snap at the shadow of a good Fortune, than the Gentlemen
of this end of the Town, who are most of 'em in debt? And I have chosen the
best Instrument in the world to make 'em believe me Rich.


Lump. Who is that?


L. Cheat. A very busy old Gentleman, and very credulous, that loves to tell
News, and always magnifies a true Story till it becomes, a Lie, one Mr. Maggot.


Lump. I know he is a Person of Parts, but he is not solid, he is hotbrain'd,
and has not Method in him; for my own part, I think not* any one wise, who does
not know what he shall do this day fifty years, if he lives; I for my part do.


L. Cheat. I hope it is dining with me, Brother.


Lump. No, Upon the one and twentieth of March, I shall fifty years hence, dine
with Mr. Ananias Felt, an E^der of our Church, if we live, and he observe his
Method; my Journal tells what I shall do each day of my lise.


L. Cheat. Can you tell what you shall do next Midsummer-day fifty years?


Lump. I shall go down to my House in Kent.


L. Cheat. Do you never alter your Day?


Lump. By no means; if one link of the Chain be broken, Wisdom ^alls to the
ground.


L. Cheat. What do you do upon the sixth of May come ^ifty year?


Lump. This Book will tell you -- May -- May -- 6th -- 6th. Let me see -- 6th
-- I take Physic, and shave my self.


L. Cheat. What, sick or well, Beard or no Beard?


Lump. It Is all one for that, I never break my Method -- Let me see -- the next
day -- I walk to Hampstead, Dine at the Queens-Head, Come back in my Coach,
Visit Sr. Formal Trifle, and at night I do Communicate with my Wife.


L. Cheat. Not fifty years hence; you will go near to break that Method.


Lump. I never break any -- No man can be wise without this Principle -- But
Sister, I am to give you a main Caution; Have a care of Wits at this end of the
Town; Wits are good for nothing, of no use in a Commonwealth, they understand
no^ Business.


L. Cheat. The better for my purpose. They value pleasure, and will bid high
for it.


Lump. I say they are good for nothing; they are not men of Method and Business.


L. Cheat. So Fools say, who seem to be excellent men of Business, because they
always make a business of what is none, and seem to be always very industrious,
because they take great pains for what a witty man does with ease.


Lump. You are out, you are out; hang 'em Wits, when did you see any of them Rise?


L. Cheat. No, Because the Fools are so numerous and strong, they keep 'em
down; or rather because men o^ Wit (that have Fortunes) know what a senseless
thing the drudgery of Business and Authority is, and those that have none, want
the Impudence, Flattery, and Importunity of Blockheads.


Lump. I fear you are tainted, vilely tainted with Wit; if you had fixed in the
City, you might have ^ap'd the Insection, no body would have put you in the
head of Wit there. But hold, my hour is come -- At three a Clock I will throw
away a quarter of an hour upon you. Farewell.

[ Ex. Lump.
L. Cheat. Who waits there?

Enter Steward. Oh my good Steward! Are the Scriveners come?


Steward. Yes, Madam, Your design prospers beyond our hopes; it has taken fire
like a train, and run through all the Town* and all believe you to be a great
Fortune.


L. Cheat. I have chosen as proper an Engine for my Business as can be, my Lady
(...), a perpetual Gossiper, and Visiter in all Families, a very wise Lady, a
great Tattle and News Monger, who being (...) too old sor an ^trigue of her
own, is as good a body to help on those os others as can be, and is glad to
bring Lovers of any kind together.


Steward. Already the belief of your Wealth has spread so far, that I have had
two of the (...) this morning with me (who having been shrewdly bitten by
(...)) are very desirous to trust their Money in your hands, hearing what
Mortgages you have, and believing you can (...) it better than any body.


L. C^. You did not sure refuse 'em?


S^rd. No, I ^l warrant you, Madam, they will bring their Money presently; Mr.
Maggot too entreats me, that I will be very importunate with your Ladyship, to
employ a thousand pound of his for him.


L. Ch^t. There needs no importunity, subtle Rogue; he thinks to lay it here
for a (...)* and that I sh^l lay many more to it, which he hopes he may have
again, together with my Person.


Steward. N^, Madam, It Is held in Mortmain, never to return again: Besides, we
have Presents enough to keep your House this Month, brought in this Morning; A
red Deer potted, a brace of fat Does, ^ms of Bav^n Bacon, a brace of Swans,
potted Charrs, Brant Geese, and (besides all this) a piece of the best Wine in
England. Here are the Names of the Presenters.


L. Cheat. Let me see all Well-willers to my Self or Daughters: Cunning Fools;
how very politiek they are? Well, Policy is most commonly the foolishest thing
in the world.


Steward. Madam, there are a great many waiting about moneybusiness without,
shall I call any of 'em in?


L Cheat. By no means -- when I am alone: when Company is with me, they are of
use, and spread my fame abroad: Entertain 'em well, and bid 'em hasten Dinner.

[Ex. Omnes.
The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Lady Cheatly and Lady Busy. L. Cheat. MAadm I am infinitely obliged to
your Ladyship, who can be so careful of my whole Family.


L. Busy. Why truly Madam I love to do good Offices, we are bound in Christian
Charity to one another, and I wished Mr. Maggot to your Ladyship, if he be not
somewhat too old for the Vigor of your Ladyship: he is rich, and is discreet,
and his other Defects may be supplied elsewhere.


L. Cheat. Your Ladyship's very obliging.


L. Busy. If not, there is Mr. Prigg, an ingenious Gentleman, of a pretty
Fortune, whom I wished to you; he is in great favor with Lords, I warrant you,
you shall seldom take him without a Lord in his mouth, they do so court him,
they love him mightily.


L. Cheat. And he loves Lords mightily for being so.


L. Busy. Oh mightily! Well Madam, your two Daughters are accounted the
Beauties of the Drawing Room; there is no body while they there, will vouchsafe
to look upon a Maid of Honor, no, not they, and they are as mad at it.


L. Cheat. It Is not the Beauty of my Daughters makes *em look at 'em so, but
they like an indifferent new face better than those faces they are used to
every Night. They are weary of 'em.


L. Busy. Oh, no really your Daughters are the prettiest Creatures in Town, and
I would fain have 'em well settled, one way or other; I have had several offers
of Husbands for 'em, but I do not think I have yet met with Fortunes good
enough; but that great Lord I told you of, is very pressing to enjoy your
Eldest, and as I said, he offers a Thousand pounds down, and three Hundred
pound per Annum during life; but that I know your Ladyship is discreet, and one
that has seen the World, I dared not have propounded this to you.


L. Cheat. My Daughters have Fortunes enough to Marry 'em to good Estates, but
your Ladyship is wise, it is good to treat with all persons, and all ways, to
settle a young -- Girl in the World.


L. Busy. Why Madam this will be a great Addition to her Fortune, and besides
you do not know how he may prefer her, or for ought we know, after he has tried
her, he may like her so well as to own her -- who knows? Be pleased to consider
how Marriage is cried down, and that there are few that are good for any thing
will think on it now adays: besides, Custom alters all things mightily --
Mothers very frequently do this for their Daughters now, and if it be a fashion
you know --


L. Cheat. I am very much obliged to your Ladyships advice, I have propounded
it to my Daughter, but she is so perverse, she will not listen to me, but says
she had rather Marrya Groom, than be Mistress to a Prince.


L. Busy. Oh fie, she has a wrong Notion of the thing, I will try to advise her
better.


L. Cheat. Your Ladyship will do me a great favor, here they come both.


Enter Isabella and Gartrude. L. Bus^. Ladies, your Servant.


^sab. Gart. Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


L. Bus^. Mrs. Isabella, I have something to advise you for your good.


Isab. For my good, Madam?


L. Busy. Yes, Madam, and therefore be pleased to give attention to me.


Isab. Good Manners will make me do that.


L. Busy. Why look you, You are young, I am in years, an ancient Woman, and
have seen the World, as they say.


Isab. Ancient? Your Ladyship looks very youthfully.


L. Busy. No, no, You are pleased to Complement me; but, as I said, my Lady
and my Self have known the World, as the saying is.


Isab. And you the Flesh, and the Devil, as the saying is.

[Aside.
L. Busy. And it is sit the Young should submit themselves to the gravity and
discretion of the Old.


Isab. Yes, where they can find it.


L. Busy. Go to -- My Lady is a Person whose aim is to settle you well in the
World -- Do you conceive me -- And she knows what is sit and most convenient
for you -- And Obedience is the best Virtue.


Isab. Very well, Madam.


L. Busy. Now there is a certain Lord, whom my Lady has mentioned to you.


Isab. A Lord? a Beast, and one that would make me as bad as himself.


L. Cheat. Good Mrs. Pert, Keep in that foolish Instrument, your Tongue: A
Beast? there are a great many like him.


L. Busy. Be not so forward, all things have two Faces -- Do not look upon the
wrong one -- Go to -- You are a fine young Lady, and are brought by your Lady
Mother to Town, the general Mart for Beauty. Well -- you would be so settled in
the World, as to have a certain Fond, whereon you may rely, which in Age may
secure you from Contempt -- Good.


Isab. I hope I shall have enough to keep me honest.


L. Busiy. Nay, Heaven forbid I should persuade you to be dishonest: Virtue is
a rare thing, a heavenly thing. But I say still, be mindful of the main --
alas a Woman is a solitary, helpless Creature without a Man, God knows -- good
-- how may this Man be had in Marriage say you? -- very well -- if you could
get a fine Gentleman with Money enough, but alas! those do not Marry, they have
left it off. The Customs of the World change in all Ages.


Isab. In ours for the worse.


L. Busy. Very well said, -- but yet the wisest must obey 'em as they change,
-- do you conceive, Madam. --


Isab. Yes, I do conceive you to be doing a very Reverend Office.

[aside.
Gart. Methinks her Ladyship speaks a great deal of Reason, she is a a fine
spoken Lady truly. --


L. Busy. Now I say since Custom has so run down Wedlock, what remains? but
that we should make use of the next think to it -- good -- Nay, not but that
Virtue is a rare thing, -- Heaven forbid I should detract from that; -- But, I
say, the main is to be respected, a good deal of Money, there is the point. --


Isab. With little or no Reputation, -- there is the point.


L. Cheat. Money brings Reputation, Fool, or at least puts one into that
Condition, that Fellows dare not question it.


L. Busy. Nay Heaven forbid you should lose that, but I say the next thing to
Marriage, is being kind to a noble Lord, etc. And if good terms be made, and
you be well settled in the World.


Isab. That would be to be settled out of the World: for I should never dare to
show my face again.


L. Cheat. There are as good faces as yours, and better, my nimble Chaps, that
are shown every day in the Playhouse, after it, and with the best quality too.


L. Busy. Yes, and in the front of Boxes, -- nay, nay, not but that a good
Wealthy Marriage is beyond it.


Isab. A very Comfortable thing, for a Gentlewoman to bring her self into a
Condition of never conversing with a Woman of Quality, who has Wit, and Honor,
again; but must sort with those Tawdry painted things of the Town.


Gart. Cannot you keep Company with my Mother and me.


L. Busy. Look you Madam, you are under a great mistake, for do not Ladies of
Wit and Honor, keep daily Company with those things as you call them? But de'e
conceive me, the finest things, -- the gayest things, -- and some the richest
things, I say no more, I pray conceive me, as long as you are true to one Man,
Madam, you are in a manner his Lady, I say in a manner his Lady, it is a kind of
Marriage, and great Persons most commonly cohabit longer with Mistresses, than
they used to do with Wives.


L. Cheat. My Lady says right, it is, now adays, more like Marriage than
Marriage it self.


Gart. Oh Sister! do what my Lady says, she is a rare person.


L. Busy. A Thousand pound, and three Hundred pound per Annum, say we bring him
to four Hundred pound, good -- a great Lord -- that is in the way to prefer
you, very good -- or may be, may like you so well, as to own you -- best of
all; consider, it is enough, Madam, at once, let her ruminate upon this.


Gart. O Lord, pray Sister do; why, we shall be all made, prithee do.


Isab. Go you to your Mr. Maggot that Dies, and makes Songs for you.


Gart. No, I Will swear he is a fine witty person, but he has such a grievous face,
I cannot abide it; but there is Mr. Selfish is the most gentile, well-bred
Gentleman, and has the finest ways among Ladies; he will tell you such pr^tty
things of himself, he talks of himself always so prettily, and says such neat,
gentile, well-bred things to one.


Enter Steward. Stew. Madam, some Gentlemen are coming in.


L. Cheat. Bid the Scriveners and the rest of the people come in, Daughters go,
and walk in the Garden: I hope your Ladyship will pardon me, this
Money-business must be minded.

[Exeunt Daughters.
L. Busy. By all means, Madam: I Will go make a Visit; your Servant.

[Exit L. Busy.
Enter Scriveners, and several others. Scriv. I have brought the Mortgage, and
the Mortgager is here ready to seal, upon the payment of the within named Sum.


L. Cheat. Has my Council perused it?


Council. Yes, and find it to be very well drawn.


L. Cheat. Let me read it.


Enter Stanmore, Bellamour, Carlos and Maggot. Steward. The Company is come.


L. Cheat. Peace, I see 'em.


Mag. Look you, did I not tell you, she is always thus busy; I warrant upon a
Mortgage, or a Purchase; she is a vast Fortune, I know where her Money lies, and
in what hands; she has a vast deal, do not interrupt her, you shall hear.


Bell. Then you know all?


Mag. Know all, ay why, Sir William, her late Husband, was my intimate friend:
Know, why, I hired this House, and bought all the Furniture for her; her
Daughters will be worth ten Thousand pound apeice, at least, to my knowledge.


Stan. This Fellow will outly any Traveller.


Mag. I knew her Father as well as any man in the World; know, why, I know all.


Carl. This Lady must be a Cheat, by doing her business so publicly.


Mag. Mr. Carlos, I knew your Father as well as any man in England: honest
James, his Keeper! I have had many a Buck of him.


Bell. Did you know my Father?


Mag. Did I? no flesh alive better, I did more for him, than any man in
England, I was a Father to him.


Bell. Ay! then you are my Grandfather; but how were you a Father to him?


Mag. How? Why I gave him his second Wife.

Council reads. To have and to hold.


L. Cheat. It Is very well; five thousand pound is the sum; Steward, pay him the
Money, and take the Writings.


Mag. Look you there, did not I tell you?


1 Citizen. Well, She Is a rare Woman at Business.


2 Citizen. As ever I saw.


Stev. Here are the two Gentlemen I spoke of, who humbly desire to place some
Money in your Ladyships hands.


L. Cheat. I do not love to meddle with other People's Money, you know;
besides, I shall have no occasion. I have a great sum to be paid in within this
Fortnight.


Stew. I know it, Madam, but if a Purchase should be offered in the mean time.


1 Citiz. I beseech your Ladyship, take our Money, we have been so cheated by
base Goldsmiths, we are afraid to trust any body but your Ladyship.


L. Cheat. I do not love to stand charged for other People's Money. Oh me
Gentlemen! I was so busy I did not see you, you have not waited long, I hope;
pray forgive my Rudeness.


Bell. The Rudeness is on our side, to intrude into your Ladyships Privacies.


L. Cheat. By no means; you do me Honor.


Stan. Madam, We take the liberty to present Mr. Carlos, a Friend of ours,
lately come out of France, to your Ladyship?


L. Cheat. Sir, I have heard of your Noble Family, and you will honor mine in
your acquaintance with it. Sweet Mr. Maggot; your Servant: Gentlemen, Have but
a little patience, till I have dispatched some Business, and I Will wait on you.


Mag. God, She Is the finest Person in the World, and a vast Fortune; I would my
ungracious Nephew had one of her Daughters.


Enter Prigg. Prigg. Madam, Your most humble Servant.


L. Cheat. Your Servant, sweet Mr. Prigg.


Prigg. Sweet Mr. Prigg! good; Matters go on well: Come, Gentlemen, since my
Lady*s busy, let us go to Langtriloo, or Ombre.


Carl. Is there no way of spending our time but playing?


Prigg. None so good: Why what a Pox should one do?


Carl. Read; it is a manly Diversion.


Prigg. Read? So I have read Markham, The Complete Farrier, and two or three
Books about Horses; a Book that is written about Ombre, and that about Picket;
and for other Books, Pox there is nothing in 'em at all: What think you,
Bellamore?


Bell. You are in the Right.


Prigg. Look you there, there is nothing in 'em, hah.


Stan. Methinks Discourse is a pretty good way of passing ones time.


Prigg. Gad, So it is: I talk as much as any Man in England, my Tongue seldom
lies still; Oh! I love Discourse mightily; and though I say it, I am able to
run down all I meet about Dogs and Horses. Now I think on it, Have you ever
hunted with my Lord, Squande'rs Fox-Dogs, Bellamore?


Bell. No: Now he is in.


Prigg. They are the best in England; but there is one Dog we call Ranter, I
Christened him, I was his Godfather; he was gotten upon my Lord's famous
Bitch-Lady; you remember what a Bitch she was; Oh poor Lady! I was not sorryer
when my Sister died, than when poor Lady died. But let that pass; Ranter was
gotten by your Father's Dog, Rockwood.


Bell. Did you know Rockwood?


Prigg. Know him? As well as any Man in the World; his Father was a Dog of my
Father's, called Jowler; his Mother was my Noble Lord Squanders Father's famous
Bitch* Venus, which you have heard of: I remember, Mr. Carlos Venus was Sister
to your Father's Dog Ringwood; Rockwood? I knew him as well as I knew your
Father, well rest their Souls of a Dog and a Man, I shall never see two better
in the Field than Rockwood and your Father.


Carl. How the Rogue has coupled them.


Prigg. Yet Ranter's an admirable Dog, the best at a cold Scent that ever I
saw; if there be forty Couple in the Field, I Will hold an hundred pound he works
it out soonest, and leads 'em all when he has done. I love and honor Ranter, I
care not who knows it; I made a Song of him, have his Picture by my Bedside,
and some of his Hair here in a crystal Locket.


Mag. I beseech your Ladyship, Accept of my thousand pound, 'twill make up the
Money for that Purchase, sweet Madam.


L. Cheat. Well, Sir, Since you will have it so, I Will give my Bond for it.


Mag. Oh Madam! I scorn it, I Will have nothing under Hand for it.


L. Cheat. Then I will not take it; nay, I have sworn first.


Mag. Well, I Will go and fetch it, and your Ladyship and I will agree upon that.

[ Ex. Maggot.
Prigg. Ha! The young Ladies are in the Garden.


Bell. Say you so? Prithee let us steal down to 'em.


Prigg. Do, and leave me with the Widow.

[ Ex. Bell* Stan. Carl.
L. Cheat. Steward, Do you take care of all the rest, while I retire from (what
I do not care for) Business. Now I am at leisure; Are the Gentlemen gone?


Prigg. They are gone but into the Garden, and will wait on your Ladyship
presently. They have left me that happy opportunity I wished for, to renew the
Suit I have so often made to your Ladyship; I beseech you, Madam, be pleased to
consider my Passion, which ^s so violent to your Ladyship, I cannot rest since
first I saw your Ladyship; for it h^s indeed put me besides my self. I have not
the heart to ride so much as one heat at New Market since, and I used to go
once in ten days down on purpose; nor have I been able to ride a Fox-Chase,
since I have had your Ladyship in chase; I shall be undone, if your La'ship
don't quiet my mind with some assurances: I over-see at Trick track, dealt my
self ten at Ombre, and all through my Passion for your dear Self.


L. Cheat. Sir, Though I have a great esteem for your Person, yet we Widows
that have some Fortune, are to consider something besides Passion.


Prigg. As I have told you before, my Estate is not inconsiderable, besides the
great Favor I have with the Gameing and Jocky Lords; and besides, if the King
frequents New Market, I doubt not but in a short time to Rise.


L. Cheat. But you are a Gamester.


Prigg. Ay Madam, but I never Play, I do but Rook.


L. Cheat. Rook? What Is that? Cheat?


Prigg. No, Madam, I go to Twelve, and the better of the Lay; besides, I get
five hundred pound a year at Horse-Races, and CockMatches, by being in fee with
the Grooms, and Cock-keepers; and, Madam, I play as well at Tennis, Ombre,
Back-gammon, Trick track, and Crimp, as any Man, which is no small addition to
my Estate. I gave you these things in my particular, if your Ladyship please to
remember.


L. Cheat. But you cannot make a Jointure of these things, and therefore I must
consider a little longer.


Prigg. With all my heart, Madam; but in the mean time let you and I play a Set
at Trick track, and when the rest come in, well make a Match at Ombre.


Enter Steward. Stew. Madam, There are some Tenants wait without to speak with
you.


L. Cheat. You Will pardon me, I must go to 'em.

[ Ex. L. Cheatly.
Prigg. Come on, Mr. Steward, what say you to a Game at Backgammon?


Stew. If you will retire to my Chamber, have at you.


Prigg. With all my heart.

[ Ex^nt. Enter
Enter Theodosia, Isabella, Bellamour, Carlos, Stanmore. Carlos. Who Is there,
the Lady Pleasant's Daughter, Theodosia?


Bell. It is: She Is young and handsome, has a great deal of Wit, and a very good
Fortune, which makes her set up for Marriage, and is impregnable to any thing
else.


Carl. She Is extreme pretty; I loved her violently, before I went into F^ance,
but now she is a Thousand times more Beautiful.


Stanm. Ladies, your humble Servant.


Bell. A Gentleman, a friend of ours, lately come out of France.

[ He salutes 'em.
Carl. And glad I am so, for all that Nation could not show me so much Beauty.


Theod. I see, Sir, you have not been in France for nothing; you have imported
French goods, I mean Compliments, they are a Nation full of Complimenters.


Carl. They are so, Madam; and the Tailor does it full as well as the
Gentleman, it is a Road of speaking which all of 'em have, I was not dull enough
to get it of 'em, nor would I bring so common a thing as a Compliment to you,
Madam.


Theod. You can bring it to no Body that dislikes it more.


Carl. Or needs it less.


Theod. Thus have I heard of a very Rhetorical Oration against Eloquence.


Enter Gartrude. Gart. O'Lord, Mr. Stanmore, here.

[runs out.
Bell. Run Stanmore, your business is more than half done; it is a certain sign,
when a Woman seeks Corners, that she means some good by it.


Stanm. I Will try that.

[Ex. Stanmore.
Bell. I see my friend's caught again, for all his Travel; I have a
fellow-feeling of his Case, let us retire and give him opportunity.


Isab. With all my heart, opportunity is safe in the beginning of an Amor,
though it may be dangerous afterward.

[They retire.
Theod. I hear never a French word from you, and that is strange: for all our
Sparks are so refined, they scarce speak a sentence without one; and though
they seldom arrive at good French, yet they get enough to spoil their English.


Carl. If a man means nothing, he cannot choose a better Language* for it makes
a pretty noise, without any manner of thought.


Theod. You have scarce brought one substantial Vanity over with you, what
have you learnt there?


Carl. To love my own Country, and to think that none can show us so fine
Women; in France they buy their Beauty, and sell their Love.


Theod. That Fashion is coming up apace here.


Carl. True Beauty, Madam, can no more be bought than true Love; in me behold
the one, while I admire the other in your self.


Theod, How many French Ladies have you said as much to?


Carl. I went thither to be cured of Love, not to make it.


Theod. What Love?


Carl. My love of you, which began so early in my Heart, sel^-love was scarce
before it. When your disdain could not remove it; I tried absence, but in vain
too.


Theod. It Is impossible you could bring a Heart unhurt from France.


Carl. My Love to you preserved me from all Foreign Invasion.


Theod. If you make Love, you will grow dull, it spoils a man of Wit, as much as
Business.


Carl. If Love be predominant in Conversation, I confess it, but a little
relish of it does well.


Theod. The imitation of it may be borne, but the thing its* self is a dead
weight upon the mind; and a man can no more please under that disadvantage,
than a Horse can run a Race with a pair of Panni^rs on his Back.


Carl. And yet that Horse may do it, if the match be well made.


Theod. I must have my Servant all Wit, all Gaiety, and the Ladies of the Town
run mad for him: I would not only triumph over him, but over my whole Sex in
him.


Carl. This is hard Doctrine for a man of my sincerity and truth in Love.


Theod. Make Isabella slight Bellamour, little Gartrude sacrifice Selfish: Be
the third word in every Ladies mouth, from fifteen to five and thirty; and you
shall find what I Will say to you.


Carl. To attempt this, were great vanity, and no less dishon^sty, to my friend
Bellamour.


Theod. If you love, you will think any thing lawful: This must be done, I dare
not trust my own judgment; I will have you in vogue, e're I favor you in the
least.


Carl. Well, since these Ladies are your outwork^, I will on, and by the force
of imagination, make every one Theodosia, but if I fail, think on my constant
love, which will not suffer me to use deceit.


Theod. Suppose I should answer you in your whining strein, and say, my love
were true as yours, my flame as great, and all your wishes mine.


Carl. Then were Carlos the happiest man on Earth.


Theod. No, then the Game were up betwixt us, and there were no more to do but
to pay the stakes, and then to something else.


Carl. We might play Set after Set for ever.


Theod. No, one of us would be broke; go get you about your task I say.

[Ex. Carl. and Theod.
Enter Selfish and Young Maggot. Yo. Mag. Did you see how the Ladies flockt
about me at Court, when I made a relation of the Rehearsal, and afterward when
I read my Song to 'em.


Self. I think I am as well with the Ladies there as any Man, and they like my
Songs too, they say they are so easy, so gentile, and well bred, and so pat to
the Women's understandings: the Men say they are silly, but they are envious.


Yo. Mag. I Will secure you the Play takes, I have done the Poet's business with
the Ladies, who, you know govern the Men, as the Moon does the Sea.


Self. There is a pretty Creature, not past Eighteen, whom I have formerly
enjoyed, has to oblige me, taken upon her the figure of a procurer, and is to
bring me a maidenhead anon, which fell in love with me at a Play.


Yo. Mag. But I Will show you my Song.


Self. Of late I have had no leisure to make a Song, I am so overrun with new
Acquaintances.


Yo. Mag. Reads. Damon see how charming Chloris, etc.

How do you like it?


Self. It Is soft, and very much after my own way, and I like it well. But how
like you this Peruque?


Yo. Mag. It Is very proper.


Self. I have five as good by me, I have an hundred pound I got at Ombre, Mr.
Whimsey ows me two hundred, I have a Pad or two, and when I get this debt in, I
will buy a Chariot, and perhaps have as good Equipage as any Man, if I can get
an hundred pound Sir Nicholas Whachum ows me; I only want a couple of Hunters
for Windsor, and then.


Yo. Mag. You don't mind my Song, it is to my Mistress.'


Self. Yes, but I was saying, now I am at ease in my Fortune till next
Michlemas.


Yo. Mag. But to go on.


Self. I have lately got such a Conquest over a Lady, the prettiest Creature* I
snatched a Rose from her soft Bosom, she is of quality, all the Town were mad
after her, and she threw her self into my Arms, and I am the happy Man.


Yo. Mag. Well, to be in love is the greatest pleasure in the World, it makes
one so sweetly Malancholly, and Composed, and so fit to write; besides, it
keeps one in shape.


Self. I have not much occasion for Love, the Ladies follow me and love me so,
I have no time for it, why, I have had three Maidenheads this week.


Yo. Mag. I would not be without love, and writing, for all the World; I had a
Billet from the prettiest Creature of Sixteen to Day, I Will tell you.


Enter Carlos, Bellamore, Theodosia and Isabella. Yo. Mag. I have an Amor.


Self. I.


Yo. Mag. I.


Self. I.


Yo. Mag. I.


Self. This Fellow is always talking of himself, one cannot speak to him, bus he
is always at I, I. I wonder at the impertinence of such people.


Theod, These Fools are always talking of themselves.


Isab. They are the worst things they can talk of.


Carl. Or we either; therefore, Madam, hear me on the last Subject.


Theod. That Is as bad.


Bell. He went a Mile to put on that fair Peruque, for the sake of his
Complexion.


Theod. Prithee Isabella let us find fault with em both, and break his heart.


Enter Stanmore and Gartrude. Gert. Fie upon you Mr. Stanmore; I Will never come
near you again, if you use me so, you nothing but kiss one, and ruffle one, and
spoils one things, that you do.


Stan. Why are you so pretty then, to provoke a man beyond all patience?


G^rt. Why, how do I provoke you? I have done nothing to anger you, have I?


Bell. What are you fallen out with your Mistress?


Stan. No, but since she is insensible of all, I can (...) to her, and yet so
pretty, I cannot but love her; if words will not move her, actions must.


Self. Oh! here are the Ladies; now you shall see what Advances they will make
to me, but especially Gartrude, that pretty Creature.


Yo. Mag. This is a very conceited Fellow, and would call a Gypsee that liked
him, pretty Creature.


Self. Ladies, your most humble Servant; now you shall see Maggot, dear pretty
Creature, le^ me kiss that Nosegay; well, it is a Thousand times sweeter in that
pretty Bosom, than in its own Bed, though at the Sun rising, when the Morning
Dew is in drops upon it, sweet Madam, let me kiss that hand that gathered it.


Gart. Oh fine, what rare words are these! He uses me like a Princess: Sir,
it is more your goodness, then my desert. Sister, this is a rare man, Mr.
Stanmore is a Wit they say, but I don't understand him half so well, I always
think they Jeer one.


Isab. Indeed it is a hard thing for Wit to descend to your Capacity.


Self. I was with some Ladies last Night did so commend you, and said you were
the most delicate Creature; they did me the favor to say your Eyes were black,
and sparkling like mine, and your Nose very much resembling mine, and that you
have a pretty pouting about the mouth like me, and fine little blub-lips, I am
very well with the Ladies at Court, but I see none like you.


Stan. Do you know I love that Lady?


Self. If you do, I pity you, she is otherwise engaged to my knowledge.


Enter Prigg. Prig. Come, faith, since we are all together, let us go to Ombre,
two Companies, and make an Afternoon on t.


Yo. Mag. I desire you will not interrupt me; I a^ singing the Ladies a new
Song.


Prig. Song? Pish, Is not Gaming better than hearing of Songs? here is such a
stir with these Wits.


Isab. No, pray let us hear it.

[ Yo. Mag. Sings, Damon, etc.
Prig. I observe you Wits are always making Songs of the Love of Shepherds, and
Shepherdesses, a company of block-headed, clownish, ugly, tawny, Sunburned
People; I had even as live hear Songs upon the Love of their Sheep as their own.


Car. I see these Fools need no body to show 'em, they show themselves well
enough.


Prig. Methinks that old Song is very pretty: My Mistress is a Tennis Ball, etc.


Yo. Mag. This Rogue has nothing but Tennis Courts and Bowling-Greens in his
Head.


Bell. Prithee Prigg sing one of your own making.


Prig. With all my heart.


Enter Lady Cheatly. L. Cheat. Mrs. Theodosia, your humble Servant: Gentlemen,
I hope you will pardon me, I could not neglect Business; I think one had better
be poor, than be troubled with Money thus: But if you please to walk in,
there is a small Banquet waits, and Fiddles, to dance, if you please.


Isab. Pray, Madam, let us hear Mr. Prigg's Song first, it is his own.


Prig. I am glad your Ladyship is come to hear it.

[Sings. Hey ho, hey ho,
The merry Horn does blow.
It Is broad day,
Come away.
Twivee, twivee, twivee, hey,
Do not stay.
Then have at the Hare,
Let old Puss beware.
Twivee, twivee, twivee, ho,
The merry Horn does blow.
Come away.

Yo. Mag. What a happy thing it is to have Wit.


Prig. Hang Wit, give me Mirth. This is a Catch that I made, and my Lord
Squander and I always roar it out after a Fox Chase; Pox, I hate your Swains
and your Nymphs.


Sell. Do they wear Breeches thus out in Prance?


Car. Y^s, Sir.


Sell. What Blockheads are our English Tailors; I must have some new Clothes
made immediately in this Fashion, I cannot rest till I bespoak 'em.


Isab. Pray, Madam, join with us, we shall have very good sport. Are you well,
Mr. Selfish? Sure you are not, I never saw you look so ill before.


Theod. He looks extreme ill; your Complexion seems tohav e too much of the
Olive in it to day.


Sell. Pardon me, Ladies, I think my Complexion is well enough, or my Glass is
false, I never looked clearer.


Car. That Trimming too, with your favor, is very dis-agreeable, and does not
cohere with your Complexion at all.


Sell. I assure you, Sir, all the Ladies I saw to day, are of another opinion,
they said, my Complexion was much like pretty Mrs. Gartrudes here.


L. Cheat. Methinks you look mighty lean and thin, I fear you are going into a
Consumption, Sir.


Sell. Oh no, Madam! I am very plump, I am only afraid of being too gross, and
bellying; I am very fat, I assure your Ladyship, pray feel my Ribs, Madam.


Prig. They laugh at him. The Devil take me, I never saw a Fellow so altered in
my life; thou can not live long, thou smell'st of Earth, foh.


Sell. You mistake, I am one of the vigourest Fellows, the strongest Bodies in
England; I was taken for Mr. Carlos to day at a little distance.


Bell. Prithee Selfish do not play the fool with thy self, get a Physician, I
never saw your Complexion so sallow, thou look prodigiously ill.


Sell. Good Sir, I know what I am; my Cheeks are as plump, and my Complexion as
fresh as any here, my Eyes and Mouth as cheerful, and every thing.


Car. Nothing will mortify the Rogue; he thinks so well of Selfish, that he
thinks Selfish can never look ill, nor be ill, I believe he thinks Selfish can
never die.


Sell. I have a Face that will not alter, if I were a dying, '^would look well;
indeed my Complexion changes sometimes, but never looks ill, I assure you.


Gart. I wonder you should be so mistaken all, methinks he looks very neatly.


Bell. This is a damned Perruque, why did you put it on, to day?


Car. But indeed that Suit is an odious thing, (...) the Trimming the worst I
ever saw; it is your (...) (...) (...) you very (...).


Sell. Methinks it is very pretty, I think they are all out of their wits.


L. Cheat. It Is enough, we shall make the man hang himself.


Y. Mag. Do you think I Will suffer you for ever to cross me with your damned
insipid Songs? let me tell you, it is a grand impertinance.


Prig. Gad, I do not know what you mean by your Gi^berish but I suppose you
call me impertinent, and therefore I'^l be beforehand with you, you are a Son
of a Whore.

[gives Y. Mag a box on the Ear.
Sell. I will wait upon the Ladies.

[ They dra^, the Ladies run out
Bell. Hold, hold.

[shrieking.
Carl. Let Them alone, if you offer to part 'em, they will hurt one another.


Y. Mag. Ill not be Brutal, you shall answer for it* Sir, you are lately come
out of France, and cannot deny a Man of Honor your assistance.


Prig. Prithee Stanmore be my Second, Ill wit him with a Pox to him.


Y. Mag. To morrow morning, done.


Prig. Let my Second appoint the place.


Y. Mag. With all my heart; Monsieur Carlos agree with him.


Stan. Come, let us in, and put it off to the Ladies as if you were friends.


Prig. Ay, with all my heart; what care I?


Y. Mag. Morbleau, Brutal.


The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Enter (...) Cheatly, Carlos, Bellamore, Stanmore, Isabella, Theodosia,
Gartrude, La. Busy, Young Maggot, Selfish, Prigg, Maggot, Lump. Lump. LAdy
Sister, I am much offended to see you take this course of Vanity; would any
wise Woman make use of Fiddlers, Minstress and Singers? I am very much ashamed
of it; it is folly, great folly, not becoming the blood of the Lumps.


Isab. Lets withdraw, we shall have a Lesson from this formal Uncle.

[ Ex. all but L. Cheat. Lump, Prigg, and Old Maggo^*
Gart. I cannot abide him.


Lump. What pleasure can there be to hear Fellows scrape upon Cats-guts?
There Is nothing in it.


L. Cheat. It Is the way to get credit at our end of the Town, as singing
Psalms, and praying loud in a fore-Room, is at yours.


Lump. You talk not wisely; do not several godly men by those means, and by
frequenting Meetings, get credit enough to break for a hundred thousand pound,
and are made by it for ever.


Mag. He is one of the wisest men of the Nation, he is a mighty sober, solid
Fellow, and a rare man at business, and loves business mightily.


Lump. And for the Wits that come hither, I doubt not but these Gentlemen are
of my opinion; I say, they are dangerous, scandalous, and good for nothing.


Mag. It Is true* Madam, they are a company of flashy, frothy Fellows; and have
no solidity in them.


L. Cheat. I find these Coxcombs mistake dullness for solidity.

[aside.
Prig. They talk of Wit, and this and that, and keep a (...) and a Pother about
Wit, there is nothing at all in^, what a Pox is it good for? I would not give a
farthing for Wit; here is Young Maggot, and Selfish, why they don't know how to
bett at a Horse-Race, or make a good Match at Tennis, and are cross-bitten at
Bowls; hang Wit.


Mag. Wit is one of the Grievances of the Nation.


Lump. It is, as this Gentleman has wisely observed, a Grievance, a fore
Grievance, and I would have an Act of Parliament against it.


Mag. Let me take a Wit at Business, see how I Will handle him, I would not be a
Wit for all the World.


Prig. Nor I neither, I hate it, they are a company of fleering, jeering, ill
natured Fellows to boot too.


L. Cheat. Be comforted, Gentlemen, you are in no dange^*


Lump. I say they are in danger, and you too, of catching it; if you suffer
them to come amongst ye; I have known solid men by keeping that base company,
become Witty, and have ruined themselves; for my own part, I would as soon
catch the Plague, as that Disease of Wit.


L. Cheat. Oh Brother! you have a strong Antidote against it.


Lump. Thanks be to Heaven, I have Wits! out upon 'em; they write S^tyrs upon
good men, and will laugh at wise men.


L. Cheat. Why truly, Brother, sometimes wise men will provoke 'em very much.


Lump. You are in the wrong.


Enter Steward. Steward. Here is your Scrivener, Mr. Lump, and several others
met, upon Money-business.


Lump. I ordered mine to come to you; I have four thousand pound paid in this
day, which you may use; I will leave my Scrivener to take your Assignments,
either of Bonds, Judgments, or Mortgages, as it shall happen to be disposed by
you.


L. Cheat. But will the Scrivener be true, and publish it to be my Money?


Lump. I warrant you, he is a godly Man, and you may trust him, he has
contributed more to your Fame than any one; I my self have brought in Ananias,
and he will send Money to you, to put out for him. It Is near four, I must be
gone; though have does not become a wise man, yet at the present I have some
upon me.


L. Cheat. The have of a Fool is the slowest thing in the World.


Lump. It is my hour of Walking.


L. Cheat. Will you not stay and take the Assignments?


Lump. I will not break my Method for the World; I have these twenty years
walked through Turn-stile Alley to Holborn Fields at Four, all the good WOmen
observe me, and set their Bread into the Oven by me, and by no other Clock;
when I go by, I hear 'em call, Carry the Bread to the Oven, the old Gentleman
is going by; I do love to be taken notice of for my Method. Farewell.

[ Ex. Lump.
L. Cheat. Let Us into the Garden.

[Exeunt omnes.
Enter Bell. and Isab. Bell. By Heaven, I love thee more than light or liberty,
joy of my heart.


Isab. Such hearts as yours are seldom near their mouths.


Bell. A kiss of this fair hand will bring mine thither; it is there, but if it
were your lips, where would it be?


Isab. Raptures in Love have no more meaning in 'em than Rants in Poetry, mere
Fustian; it is the stum of Love that makes it fret and ^ume, and fly, and never
good.


Bell. Can a young Lady in so warm an Age be insensible of Love?


Isab. A virtuous Woman is ever insensible of such a Love as is unfit for her;
but you Sparks, like Wolves, after many battles, by often preying upon
Carcasses, come at last to venture upon the living: modest or not, it is all one
to you, you are so well ^esht.


Bell. Not so, Madam; I know my duty and your worth, and would time stand
still, I could be content to gaze upon that face, and not tempt you; but our
Love is frail, and we must take our pleasures while we may.


Isab. I must consider while I may, and on the shore think on the ruins of a
ship wrackt Fame.


Bell. We shall never reach Love's Indies, if we fear tempests already.


Isab. Think not to conquer me by dint of Simile, I Will never venture the pain
and peril of such a bold Voyage.


Bell. As tender Barks make it daily, and return home richly fraught, keep
Coaches, and live splendidly the rest of their lives.


Isab. Infamously rather.


Bell. I know not that; but they have their days of Visiting, play at Ombre,
make Treats as high and as often as the Persons of Quality, wear as good
clothes, and want no fashionable Folly that Woman's heart can wish for, and of
all such my Isabella shall ride Admiral.


Isab. Can you pretend to love, and tempt me from my Honor? Coaches and
Clothes! so Rogues will (...) (...) live like Gentlemen.


Bell. '^is no dishonor, custom has made it otherwise.


Isab. When a Man of Honor can turn Coward, you may prevail on me; the case is
equal*


Bell. On the contrary, Kindness in Women is like Courage in Men.


Isa^. Did not the gene^l license of the time excuse you, I never would see you
^re*


Bell. What will nothing down, but to have and to hold? I Will marry no body
else, and when my inclination dies, leave you its wealthy Widow, you may marry
after it.


Isa^ (...) (...) (...) (...), where I bring my person.


Bell. This coldness (...) me more* consent to my desires, and none of all the
Ladies shall outshine, no Equipage exceed yours.


Isab. And I the while shall be but a part of your Equipage, to be kept; what
is it but to wear your Livery, and take Board-wages?


Bell. I love you well enough to marry you, but dare not put my self into your
hands, knowing what a Jade I am at a long Journey.


Isab. If you ever loved, (...) (...) (...) hate, and I can be content where I
have had the best, to keep the (...) and if you love me less, shall lay the
fault on Nature, not on you.


Bell. It (...) more against (...) (...) (...) (...) fall in his (...), than
his Expense, and they that do either, most (...) remove for it* there is no
enduring it in the same place. Think on my Love, my Fortune shall be yours.


Isab. I scorn a Fortune, with the ruin of my Honor.


Bell. It is but heading with another sort of People, leaving the melancholy
hypocrites for the gay cheerful sinners, the envious for the envyed.


Isab. These tales may catch unheedful silly Creatures, whom Nature half
debauches to your hands; but for my self I swear.

[La. Busy appears to 'em.
La. Bus. Swear not, ungracious Child, I have heard all your Discourse; the
Gentleman is a fine Gentleman, and his proposals are as reasonable as any Lady
^an wish for; every man cannot bring himself t^ marry, and yet may love better
and longer than those that do.


Bell. Right, Madam: this is an unexpected assistance.


La. Bus. There Is Mr. Maggot kept Mrs. Wagtail, after the whole Town had done
with her, and loves her very well still; nay, some have not grutch'd to spend
ten thousand pounds upon a Mistress, though they have starved their Wives and
Children.


Isab. Have you fee'd this Lady to plead for you, or is it the baseness of her
own Nature?


La. Bus. Is my Charity thus rewarded? my Honor questioned I that am companion
to the Ladies of the best quality, the jealousest Lord thinks his Lady safe in
my company, my Honor is dearer to me than all the World, and but for
endeavoring to have you well settled in the World, as I have my Daughters, do
I deserve this?


Isab. She is as silly as she is naught; when you see me next, bring nobler
thoughts and better purposes. And so farewell.

[ Ex. Isabella.
Bell. What a Devil shall I do? She Is virtuous, and fit enough for a Wife;
Ounds, how that word makes me start? but all this may be a copy of her
countenance, there may be Huffs in virtue as well as courage.


La. Bus. I hope, Sir, you will not conceive amiss for what she says.


Bell. No, Madam: Pox on this Bawd, I love the treason, but I hate the traitor.

[ Ex. La. Bus. and Bellamore.
Enter Stanmore. Stan. Your humble Servant, Madam; has your Ladyship had the
goodness to mind my Affair?


L. Busy. I have, Sir; I see her coming, retire, and let me alone. Come pretty
Mrs. (...).

Enter Mrs. Gartrude.
Gart. Your Servant, Madam.


L. Busy. Thou art a pretty Creature, ah! 'twould do a man good to lie by such
flesh and blood as thou art; all the matter is to choose a good Bedfellow, and
for that trust me; there is the prettiest man, and the finest Gentleman not far
off. --


Gart. Ay, so there is really; Mr. Selfish is the finest person, so civil, and
well bred, and is very ingenious too, I vow 'twould do one good to have such a
Bedfellow.


L. Busy. You are out, it is Mr. Stanmore is the Man, and will make a good
Settlement, go to, which the other cannot.


Gart. He is a fine Gentleman indeed, but really I don't care for a Wit, I do
not know what to say before 'em; but I can talk with Mr. Selfish all the day
long, oh! he does tell such pretty Stories of himself! he is a very fair spoken
man, and I Will swear he is the purest company for a Lady that ever was, and so
handsome.


L. Busy. Not comparable to Stanmore.


Gart. Oh Gemini! that your Ladyship should say so.


L. Busy. I have experience in the World, I know what I say, your Lady Mother
has desired me to take care to put you into the World: youth is indiscreet and
unwary, trust us, and 'twill be your own another day; I say, Mr. Stanmore will
settle ten times more upon you than the other is worth.


Gart. But really, Madam, I must confess I don't love a Wit, they say they are
not good natured, and they don't admire one half so much as others do neither.


L. Busy. Come, come, Madam, if a Wit will keep, he will serve as well as a
Fool (let 'em say what they will) and you have a way to be too hard for the
best of 'em for all their Wits.


Enter Selfish. Gart. Oh Lord, here he is! I wonder you should say Mr. Stanmore
is as handsome as he; well, he is a lovely Man.


Self. Ladies, I kiss both your hands* methinks I see the freshness of the
Spring in one, and the fruitfulness of the Autumn in the other.


Gart. Oh rare, what a saying that is, and so like a Gentleman?

[Stanmore enters.
Stan. Now it is time to speak for my self; she is very pretty, but why should I
love a Fool, that loves a Fool* I see I am a devi^ carnal Fellow, and mind
nothing but the Body.


L. Busy. I Will steal out to my Lady, and leave you, we have business of
consequence.

[ Ex. L. Busy.
Stan. Madam, your humble Servant.


Self. Mr. Stanmor^, your Servant; were you not at the Audience this Afternoon?


Stan. No, Sir.


Self. Indeed I have committed a great fault, to wait upon these Ladies, when
the Court was to appear in all the splendour it could be, with all the
well-drest and well-bred men about it, and I was not there; I wish it be not
taken ill.


Stan. O Vanity, vanity!


Self. I know I was miss't, and ask't for there, but I can mind nothing when
Ladies are in the way, especially such pretty Creatures as Mrs. Gatty.


Gart. You are pleased to say so.


Stan. Well, my dear little one, I am resolved to be revenged upon this Beauty
of yours, for making me so mad in Love with you.


Gart. Why, what will you do with it?


Stan. I Will have no mercy on it, I Will never spare it, faith, you shall not think to
make me in Love with you for nothing.


Self. I shall have a new Suit come home to morrow morning, in Mr. Carlos his
fashion; but I assure you it is something better fancied, both for the Color
and the Garniture.


Gart. Really, Sir, methinks Mr. Selfish is the prettiest modish person, and so
gentile, is not he?


Stan. S'heart, what an entertainment is this to me, that I should love such a
thing? don't mistake him, he is an Ass, I assure you.


Gart. Oh Lord, that you should say so now! he does every thing so like a
Gentleman, as my Lady Busy says, and is so well-bred.


Stan. Well-bred? hang him, he is a finical Clown, he has not breeding enough
for a Valet de Chamber.


Gart. What a strange man are you? well, you Wits never speak well of one
another, I vow.


Stan. Ounds, what a pretty Fool she is? but I am vigorous still, her folly
cannot thrust me off, so much as her beauty pulls me to.


Self. I am going to buy me a pretty convenient Coach, what Color do you
fancy, dear Mrs. Gatty? I think Purple will suit best with my Complexion.


Gart. O yes, Purple will be very pretty.


Self. Nay, I Will say that for my self, my fancy always pleases the Ladies.
Pretty Miss, let me see that delicate Busk, I will write a Distick upon it, and
present it to you.


Gart. Pray do.


Self. Let me kiss that happy Busk, that goes so near your lovely body, and
that delicate, sweet, white, soft hand that gave it me.


Gart. Well, he is a rare Man, and is so full of fine Courtship.


Stan. Do you know that I will not suffer you to smile, and cringe, and play
the Monkey here?


Self. I cannot help it; if Ladies will love me, and be affected with my
person, what is it to me?


Stan. Get you gone, you Coxcomb, I Will endure it no longer.

[he fillips him, and pulls off his Peruque.
Gart. Nay, what have you done to poor Mr. Selfish?


Self. I wonder you should have no more breeding, one would have thought I
might have taught you more in this time.


Gart. Pray let me help you, I Will set it right again.


Stan. Death and damnation! what is this?


Self. The Devil take me, if I could not find in my heart to ruffle your
Cravat, before the Lady, for this outrage of yours.


Stan. Do you hear, Sir? be gone, and leave us, or by Heaven I will cut your
Throat.


Self. Well, I cannot be ill bred, though you can, and therefore I take my
leave.

[ Ex. Selfish.
Gart. Nay, look you now, udds fiddles, what have you done? you have made Mr.
Selfish go away. I Will follow him, that I will.


Enter Lady Cheatly and Maggot. L. Cheat. Do you hear, Minx? be civiller, than
I hear you are, to Mr. Stanmore, and know, I Will turn yo^ out of my house, if
you think on Selfish. Sir, your Servant.


Gart. Oh lack! what does she say?


Stan. Nay, I Will follow you.

[ Ex. Gartrude and Stanmore.
Mag. Catch her, Man, she will be a vast Fortune, my Lady wallows in money, she
knows not what to do with it. But, good Madam, let me humbly petition you to
consider my passion, and have some regard to my Estate, which is a plentiful
one. And then, Madam, for business, you see a proof; did you ever see a man
tell money better than I do; I do all the Ladies business hereabouts, and great
Persons, (...).


L. Cheat. I must first consider of reducing my Estate into some order, before
I think of disposing my Person.


Magg. If any Man sollicits your business like me -- try me, Madam, I do every
thing for the Ladies.


Enter Steward. Stew. Madam, I have private business for your Ladyship's Ear.


Mag. Your Servant, Madam, I will retire, be pleased to consider me.

[ Ex. Maggot.
Stew. My business concerns your Ladyship and my self so nearly, that you must
pardon me, if I urge it home.


L. Cheat. What means he?

[Aside.
Stew. That I have served you faithfully, your self can witness.


L. Cheat. I can, and I Will reward you largely.


Stew. It Is that I ask. Think, Madam, I have in your Service lost my honesty,
laid by my conscience, and while I contribute to your fraud or others, I must
not be dece^v'd my self.


L. Cheat. What will he drive at? I am sorry you ask for what I intended to
give you; I did resolve to give you a thousand pound.


Stew. Do not I know that all the Bonds you have given to people, and the
Assignments, and Declarations of Trust to your Brother, are written with the
ink I bought of a great Artist, and that within a month it will wear out, and
nothing will remain but blanks?


L. Cheat. What then? my Husband was cheated of his Estate by my Brother, and
other Rascals, and it is fit I should take Letters of Reprisal.


Stew. No doubt. Your Bounds you have taken from others are written with ink I
had of the same man, which (rubbed over with a spirit) makes impressions into
many sheets, so that you have many Bonds for one, the sums are easily altered.


L. Cheat. What would this Rascal have?

[aside.
Stew. A thousand pound! I scorn it, I aim at higher things, I am a Gentleman
in birth, your Equal.


L. Cheat. Heaven and Earth! what have I brought my self to? When my Estate is
out of dispute, I will in^rease your reward.


Stew. No, Madam; I have long honored and loved your Ladyship, and nothing
less than your Person can ever satisfy me.


L. Cheat. How, Sir!


Stew. Hold, Madam; if you use me roughly, I in a moment will blast all your
Fortunes, and you shall fly from hence as naked as you came; but if you will
marry me, Ill be as humble a Servant as I have been before.


L. Cheat. Insolent Villain.

[aside. Sure thou art not in earnest.

[to him.
Stew. By Heaven, I am, and I will perish, or attain my ends.


L. Cheat. He may undo me; Oh that I should lay my Plots so shalllow! I must
have a trick for the Rogue.

[aside. Give me time to consider of it.


Stew. I can give none, nor will.


L. Cheat. Marriage would stop my business, and I shall get no more money of my
Brother, or others.


Stew. We'll keep it private.


L. Cheat. (Though modesty would not let me propose it to you, and I would
rather have died than done it) I must confess the thing I wished for upon Earth.


Stew. Then I am happy, and will serve you 'till my death.


L. Cheat. Forgive this frailty, and use me well, shame and blushes will
confound me.


Stew. Dear Madam! there is no shame in Love and Marriage. I see she loves me.

[aside.
L. Cheat. There yet remains one difficulty* You are my main Witness, and (when
we are married) you can be none* therefore if you will go to a Master in
Cha^ery, and swear to all my Deeds, and make Affidavit to my false Estate, the
next hour shall make you Master of me, and mine.


Stew. Hah! I may be caught, and after I have sworn to that* I have no hank
upon her.

[aside. Before, Madam, I never will; but after, for my own sake, I must. I Will
get a Parson (whom I can trust) and none shall know of the Marriage but himself.


L. Cheat. This will not do, I must have another-trick for the Rascal. [ aside.
You have con^'d me; but I am engaged to a Parson already, whom I promised (...)
Office to* I Will send for him present'y.


Stew. I am transported with my happiness.


L. Cheat. Withdraw, Sir, I Will come to you instantly.

Enter Prigg. Hah! this Fellow shall be my Engine, and I must lose no tim^*


L. Cheat. I am glad you are come; I have a business to commun^cate to you,
that concerns you nearly, in which you must be secret.


Prig. Does it concern my Honor? Madam, I Will cut their throats.


L. Cheat. No, Sir, it concerns your Love.


Prig. Then I Will cut their throats too.


L. Cheat. No, it is not come to (...), but just as I was resolved (...)
considered your passion, to bestow my self upon you.) -- *


Prig. Oh dear Madam! let me kiss your fair hand.


L. Cheat. Would you believe it? this villainous Steward having Writings in his
hands for the greatest part of my Estate, is arrived to that insolence, he
threatens to burn 'em, unless I will instantly marry him.


Prig. Oh dog! Rogue! your Servant, Madam, I Will cut his throat immediately.


L. Cheat. Hold, Sir, he is an odd humorous Fellow, and will not have his throat
cut.


Prig. Will he not? why then I will not.


L. Cheat. I have designed a better way* to put a false Marriage upon him, and
you shall be my Chaplain, you can get the habit of a Parson.


Prig. Ay, ay, this is very pretty; I your Chaplain? ha, ha! if my face would
but look solid enough for a Divine.


L. Cheat. I warrant you, it is a very judicious face, and will be very
Parsonical.


Prig. Not so, a Gamster's at your service.


L. Cheat. And you can read the Common Prayer, that is material; for some
Gentlemen can scarce read now adays.


Prig. I warrant you, Madam: this will be the prettiest trick.


L. Cheat. When you have married him and me, about an hour hence (no body else
being by) I Will take care to pack him far enough afterward, and thus re^rve my
self for you. Get a Habit quickly, and lay it in the Closet, here is the Key,
there you shall shift; I must be gone.

[ Ex. La. Cheatly.
Prig. Oh happy Man! I shall never need to sneak after a Lord, to sing Catches,
break Jests, to eat and rook with him; well, I Will go no more to Twelve, that is
certain; I Will get me a pack of Fox-Dogs, hunt every day, and play at the
Groom-Porter's at night.

[ Ex. Prig.
Enter Theodosia and I sabella in the Garden. Theod. Dear Isabella, how I love
these solitary Walks, free from the noise and importunity of Men.


Isab. So much the contrary, that should you hear the rattling of a Coach, you would
be ready to leap over the Wall.


Theod. If it were Bellamour's.


Isab. Why Bellamour's? no, though you knew it to be a tired Ha^kney, with six
dusty Passengers in it; thou art the giddiest Creature.


Theod. I do not love to be solid as you are, and fix upon one Man; it is better
to like all, and love none.


Isab. Thou hypocrite; do not I know that none but Carlos can please you, he
has caught you fast?


Theod. No, never think so: Do but hear the Men talk of another, and it is
antidote enough against 'em, they are as malicious as we Women, and would
quarrel as often, if it were not for fear of fighting.


Isab. Of all men I wonder Stanmore scapes it, he speaks well of no man.


Theod. It Is ^t to speak ill of Fops, who were lost to the World, if men of Wit
might not show 'em.


Isab. For ought I see, laughing at them does them no hurt; for they rise and
get Fortunes for all that; Fools are lawful prize; but Stanmore speaks ill of
witty men.


Theod. When the witty men fall upon one another, they make sport for the
fools, and so laughing goes round, no matter how.


Isab. Stanmore says, Carlos has an ill breath, and takes Phy^ck of a French
Surgeon; and that Bellamore keeps a Player, and will run out his Estate.


Theod. And yet you see how dear they are one to another when they meet, *it is
the fashion.


Enter Gartrude. Gart. Oh Sister, come hither! here are four men measuring of
swords, I believe they are going to fight in the next field.

[ Carlos, Prigg, Stanmore, and Young Magg^t in the field.
Yo. Mag. How shall I kill this Prigg? he wants two of his vital parts, a Brain
and a Heart.


Prig. I Will spoil your writing* have at your Madrigal arm, you Wit you.

[Prigg disarms Yo* Mag. and comes up to Carlos.
Stan. Carlos, you see our advantage.


Car. And scorn it; have at you first.

[ He disarms Prigg. Now, Sir, for you.

[ to Stanmore.
Stan. We are friends, I love thee, prithee let it alone.


Car. Not so great friends, I overheard you speaking ill of me to my Mistress.


Stan. Prithee Carlos, that is nothing, we all speak ill of one another, and it
goes for nothing.


Car. I am not of your opinion, have at you.

[Carlos disarms Stanm.
Stan. At you? well, you have it, and I am glad I had to do with a brave man.


Car. You are men of Honor, and may be trusted with your swords; let us in
amongst the Ladies, as if nothing had passed between us.


Prig. You may do what you will; but the valiant Prig desires his Widow may
hear of his prowess at least.


Yo. Mag. That I should be worsted by an Ass.

[Exeunt.
The Ladies re-enter. Gert. I am afraid Carlos has hurt honest Mr. Stanmore;
but Carlos is a fine Gentleman, and fights so like a Gentleman* he said the
prettiest things to me in an Arbor, Mr. Sel^h could not have courted me at a
higher rate, I vow I begin to like him strangely, I like a Wit better than I
did.


Isab. Thou Wilt like any Body.


Theod. Pray Heaven Carlos be not hurt.


Isab. You seem disordered.


Theod. No, no, what make thou think so?


Isab. I am confident Carlos is not hurt.


Theod. I think not of him.


Isab. I cannot blame you; I believe he has honesty to his wit, and honor to
his courage, I never saw a finer Gentleman.


Gert. He has almost as taking a way with him as Mr. Selfish.


Theod. I don't like his face, it is too serious; his mien is stiff, and he
dances ill.


Is^. You are too nice; his looks and mien are manly, and he dances like a
person of quality; you are for a Page's face, and a dancing Master's legs, and
I hate both.


Theod. Nay, never let us fall out about him.


Isab. If we should, he is here to part us.


Enter Carlos, Prigg, and Young Maggot. Theod. He goes on faster with his task
than I Would have him.


Yo. Mag. There is no living two hours out of the Beau mond; I am out of the
Lady's company like a Fish out of the water, is not that well said, Prigg?


Prig. Not at all* the Devil take me.


Theod. Not so mute as a Fish, I hope*


Yo. Mag. No; we witty men are always talking, now and then two or three of us
at a time, invention does so flow; but I had rather say one fine thing to a
Lady, than twenty to the best Wits in Town.


Prig. Say fine things* what a Pox don't we all speak alike? don't we all speak
English?


Theod. Had you never a Mistress that was a Fool?


Yo. Mag. None are so gross but they guess when a man says a witty thing; when
I say it, I am sure.


Prig. Pox on saying, I love doing a witty thing; to w^ a (...) money is to
out-wit him, I think, and I Will undertake to win yours at ten several Games.


Yo. Mag. What, cheat me?


Prig. No, upon the square, by mere judgment. A Wit is like (...) running
Horse, godd for no earthly thing beside; when did you ever know any of *em well
with a great Man, or so much as taken down to a Lord's house a Buck-hunting?
they can drink some of 'em; but then they talk of Philosophy, History, Poetry,
as if they came into company to study; this is stuff the Devil would not hear.


Theod. What would you have 'em talk of?


Prig. Why Dogs, Hawks and Horses, Crimp, Trick ^ack, and Primero; make me a
match at Bowls or Tennis over a Bottle; ^ome, even or odd for two Pieces, I
hate to be idle.


Isab. What an intolerable Fool is this?


Prig. There are three matches to be run at New Market, I Will bett money on
every one of 'em: I*ll hold you six to four of the ^lding against the Mare;
gold to silver on the bay Stone-horse against the Flea-bitten; and an even
fifty pound, or what you will. --


Yo. Mag. You need not run your self out of breath, I will never be^ while I
live.


Prig. Ladies, what think you of five merry Guineys? will either of you bett?


Theod. I do not like Carlos his talking so long with that Fool; she is young
and handsome, she has beauty enough to invite, and folly enough to grant.


Prig. I hold five pound I make a Tennis-ball lie upon that Stand once in
thrice.


Isab. This Fellow has no Genius but to play, nor no argument but a wager.


Yo. Mag. One that wants Wit, deserves not to bear the figure of a Man.


Theod. Such Fellows are but ciphers to you men of Wit, they make you of
greater value.


Yo. Mag. I Will swear that is well said, I don't think I could have said better
my self.


Prig. What will you give me for this Ring at the day of Marriage?


Carlos. You are so pretty, and so obliging, there is no resisting both. But
will you come and see my Lodgings? I have the finest French things.


Gert. Really, Sir, you are so courteous and well-behaved, I cannot deny you
coming; you put me so in mind of Mr. Selfish, you have his way with you to a
hair: do you write too? he is a very pretty Poet.


Car. Were I not sharp set, this would turn my stomach: Selfish* ^eals all he
writes out of French Poetry; he has neither Wit nor Money but what he borrows,
forget him, and I Will be your Servant.


(...). ^


(...). ^

[(...). -- Well, Theodosia, if I be false, it is your command has (...) me into
temptation.


Prig. Come, here is ten Guineys, I Will lay 'em upon my Toe, and in ^x times kick
*em all into my mouth.


Isab. And what if you do?


Prig. Talk of Wit; Ill play at Prick-penny for twenty pound* with any one here.


Car. I am for you at Tennis.


Prig. I Will give you a bisk at Longs for ten pound.


Theod. Bowling methinks is better.


Prig. I Will give him one in seven for five shillings.


Car. We had better reserve our strength; I Will hunt to morrow.


Prig. With all my heart; hollo, hey Ringwood, Rockwood* Jowler, hey. Well,
I Will go and play in the mean time: Pox, this is the basest company, there is no
money stirring.

[ Ex. Prigg.
Theod. What could you do with that Fool all this while?


Car. In obedience to your command, I suffered her impertinence: You are a very
Tyrant; your Beauty obliges me to lov^ none but you, and yet you will have me
make Love to all; flesh and blood is not able to bear it.


Theod. Not so: I would have you gain their esteem, and be cried up among 'em;
using us scurvily, often does that; Women love the ^areless, insolent, and loud.


Car. Faith, Madam, I am a moral man, I do as I would be done by.


Theod. I would not be in Love with you for a m^llion* 'twould tempt you
horribly.


Car. It would tempt me to vanity, but never to ingratitude.


Theod. Vanity and ingratitude are as inseparable as old (...) (...) ^gliness;
they that think too well of themselves, ever think too ill of others; and I
will give you no temptation of any kind.


Car. You are nothing but temptation; your face, your shape, your voice, nay,
your very coldness is a tempter, and therefore have (...) care on it.


Isab. You have met with the greatest Tyrant of our Se^.


Car. The greatest Conqueror: But she has too much goodness for a Tyrant*
however, I Will tire her cruelty with my patience, and I Will ^old her the greatest
wager in the World that I get her heart at last.


(...). ^


(...). A Wedding night*


Theod. Who shall be ^udg?


Car. Your Friend here.


Theod. I cannot have a better; done.


Car. Done, Madam; I am sure good service and perseverance will gain a
reasonable Woman, where there is not a downright antipa* thy, and I am
resolved never to give you over.


Theod. Love in this Age is as well counterfeited as Complexion; what with the
Men's lying and swearing, and the Women's* waters* and washes, we know not what
to make of one another.


Car. Try me with Commands.


Theod. I must have you Poetical, that is a great s^gn of Love in (...) Man of
Wit; I must have Songs and Sonne^s plenty.


Car. Very well.


Theod. I must never have you see a Play but when I am there.


Car. That is, I must see none at all; for when you are there, I can* see
nothing but your self.


Theod. Then upon no pretense whatsoever must you go behind the Scenes.


Car. That Is grown the sign of a Fop, and for my own sake I Will avoid* it.


Theod. But the Women have Beauty and Wit enough to ^arken* to a Keeper.


Car. Some of 'em are so far from having Wit of their own, that they spoil that
little the Poets put into 'em, by base utterance; and for Beauty they lay it on
so, that it is much alike from fifteen to five* and forty.


Theod. Item, You must not talk with Vizors in the (...)* th^gh they look never
so like Women of quality, and are never so coming.


Car. Be it so: I never knew any good come of that way of fooling yet; for if
they were afraid of me, I was ever more afraid of them. But how shall I arrive
at the general Fame and Reputation you spoke of, with these restraints? The Men
in vogue forbear none of all these things; they dive like Ducks at one end of
the Pit, and rise at the other, then whisk into the Whore-Boxes, then into the
Scenes, and always hurry up and down, the Devils in an Opera are not so busy.


Theod. You must take other Courses.


Car. I have bespoken a Play for you, and all the good company of this House;
when the other is done, I hope, Madam, you will honor it with your presence.


Theod. I Will do as the rest do.


Isab. This is a new piece of Gallantry, Theodosia.


Theod. The invitation's general.


Gar. How mad would they be, if they knew this were mean^ to me?


Enter Maggot, unseen by the rest. Yo. Mag. Now pretty Mrs. Gartrude, and the
rest of the good company, I have the Poem about me, which I told you I writ
upon Beauty; it is elaborate, I kept my Chamber about it as long as a Spark
does, of a Clap, or a Lady of a Child; I purged, and bled, and entered into a
Diet about it, and that made me have so clear a Complexion, and write so well,
and brought down my Belly too.


Mag. How now, Wit! let me see that damned Poem you lay in of so long, when you
should have studied the Law.


Yo. Mag. Oh Heaven! I am undone.


Mag. I shall spoil that Month's Work.


Yo. Mag. Ladies, pray intercede for me, and save my Poem.


Theod. Hold, Sir, reprieve it.


Yo. Mag. It Is not mine, it is a Friend's of mine.


Mag. Ah graceless Fool! the worst Friend thou have, thy self thou meanest.

[He tears it, and scatters it.
Yo. Mag. Save this, and I will never be witty again.


Mag. No, Sir, there, there, so, it is done: By Heaven, touch a piece on it, and
I Will dis-inherit you.

[Yo. Mag. goes to gather up the pieces.
Car. Let me intercede for him, he will mend, and be less witty every day.


Yo. Mag. Forgive me once, and I Will mend, and be as dull as an old fat
Alderman, that sleeps over Justice at the Old Bailey.


Mag. At your Simile's again, Oh you incorrigible Wit! let me see what Poetry
you have about you.


Yo. Mag. Ladies, for Heaven's sake, plead for me, or I am utterly ruined: Sir,
will you disgrace me before my Mistress Gartrode?


Mag. Hang you, Coxcomb; she hates Wit, because she is a fool, as I do, because
Iam wise. Stand still.

[He pulls out bundles of Papers.
Yo. Mag. Mercy upon me! what will become of me?


Isab. Good Mr. Maggot, be more merciful.


Mag. What Is here? A Poem called, A Posie for the Ladies Delight. A second, The
Flower of Love's Constancy. An Answer to it. (...) to write upon Lady's Busks.
Epigram written in a Lady's Bible in Covent Garden- Church. Oh wicked Wit!
Posies for Wedding-Rings, Oh idle Rake-hell! I shall have you come to write to
Tobacco Boxes and Sword-Blades, and Knives, and to all the Iron-work at
Sheffeild; all these go to it.


Yo. Mag. Hold, good Sir, hold; upon my knees I beg you would hold: here cut off
this Joint, this, this, any Joint about me, so you will spare my Poetry.


Theod. Have pity on the poor Gentleman.


Gar. Oh pray give me those upon the Busks.


Mag. Not one shall live to make him in favor: Must you needs be a Wit, to the
dishonor of your Family, and the distrubance of your good old Father's ashes?
I never knew one of our Family before. I Will alter my Will instantly.

[ Ex. Maggot.
Yo. Mag. Nay, now you may hang me and you will, now you have torn my Poetry, I
have never a Copy of any of 'em; I will go hide my self in a hole and never
show my head again.

[ Ex Yo. Mag.
Car. Come, Ladies, shall we prepare for the Play after this Farce?


Isab. With all our hearts.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Carlos, Theodosia, Prigg, La. Cheatly Maggot, L^ Busy, Bellamore,
Isabella, Stanmore, Gartrude, Young Maggot, and Selfish, and others coming into
the Playhouse, seating themselves. The Scene, The Playhouse. Isab. BY being
masqued, I shall observe Bellamore's Actions.


Gart. Now no Body will know me; they will take me for you in this Petticoat.


Isab. If you hold your Tongue, Sister; but that makes a great difference
betwixt us.


Gart. Ay; but I Will whisper, and they shall not know my voice.


Isab. But they will soon discover your sense.


Car. My dear Mistress, since you accept my service, I am resolved to ply you
so, that I must win at last.


Theod. You are very resolute, and shall find me so; you think to go on like
the French King; we shall have you do as he does by a Town in Flanders, set a
day when you will take it.


Car. I hope to corrupt you within with Love, and make my conquest the easier.


Bell. I wonder Isabella is not here, Stanmore; I am so damnably in Love, I am
afraid thou wilt never own me; I am a very Recreant.


Stan. My Mistress is not here neither; her folly has a little cooled my Lov^;
but I have a most abominable lust to her, the wiser passion of the two, and no
despair: Though that Rogue Selfish has her Mind, I do not doubt but to get her
Body, which is worth two of it for my use.


Yo. Mag. I wonder pretty Mrs. Gartrude is not here.


Self. I am amazed at it; for she knew I was to come.


A great knocking at the Door. Enter Doorkeeper. Car. How now! What means that
knocking?


Door-keep. Sir, Ladies and several Gentlemen knock to get in.


Car. Let the Ladies in for nothing, but make the Men pay.

[Ex. Doorkeeper.
Prig. Had you ever such a Chaplain? I was so disguised, he could not suspect
me; methinks I dispatched the business as well, as if I had been used to be
married my self.


L. Cheat. 'Twas very well, I have since gotten my Deeds from him; and because
he was a main Witness to many of my Bonds, and Mortgages, I have made him swear
to 'em all before a Master in Chancery, upon pretense that when it should be
known he was my Husband, his testimony would not be good.


Prig. Ha! ha! ha! This was the prettiest invention, and will make well for us.
But where is the Fool?


L. Cheat. There is a Kinsman of mine going for the Indies, I sent him to him
with an hundred pound for a Venture, and have taken care he shall not come back
again; for he will clap him under Hatches, carry him away, and sell him for a
Rogue as he is; he say^s this Tide.


Several more come in, Women m^k'd, and Men of several sorts. Several young
Coxcombs fool with the Orange-Women. Orange-Wo. Oranges; Will you have any
Oranges?


1 Bull. What Play do they play? some confounded Play or other.


Prig. A Pox on it, Madam! what should we do at this damned Playhouse? Let Us
send for some Cards, and play at Lang-trilloo in the Box: Pox on'em! I never saw
a Play had any thing in it; some of 'em have Wit now and then, but what care I
for Wit.


Self. Does my Cravat sit well? I take all the care I can it should; I love to
appear well. What Ladies are here in the Boxes? really I never come to a Play,
but upon account of seeing the Ladies.


Car. Doorkeeper, Are they ready to begin?


Door-keep. Yes, immediately.


Self. Now you shall see the Ladies make up to me; where e^re I am, they flock
about me: I think I am one of the happiest Men on Earth; I thank Heaven every
day for making me just as I am, Bellamore.


Bell. That Is Isabella, I am sure, I know the Petticoat; what a Devil makes her
talk to that Rogue?

[Gartrude chooses to sit by Selfish.
Yo. Mag. You Will find it an admirable Plot; there is great force and fire in the
writing; so full of business, and trick, and very fashionable; it passed
through my hands; some of us helped him in it.


1 Bull. Dam'me! When will these Fellows begin? Plague on it! here is a staying.


2 Man. Whose Play is this?


3 Man. One Prickett's, Poet Prickett.


1 Man. Oh hang him! Pox on him! he cannot write; prithee let us to White Hall.


Y. Mag. Not write, Sir? I am one of his Patrons; I know the Wits don't like
him; but he shall write with any of 'em all for an hundred pound.


Prig. Ay that he shall. They say, he puts no Wit in his Plays, but it is all
one for that, they do the business; he is my Poet too; I hate Wit.


Enter several Ladies, and several Men. Door-keep. Pray, Sir, pay me, my
Masters will make me pay it.


3 Man. Impudent-Rascal! Do you ask me for Money? Take that, Sirrah.


2 Door-keep. Will you pay me, Sir?


4 Man. No: I don't intend to stay.


2 Door-keep. So you say ^very day, and see two or three Acts for nothing.


4 Man. I Will break your Head, you Rascal.


1 Door-keep. Pray, Sir, pay me.


3 Man Set it down, I have no Silver about me, or bid my Man pay you.


Theod. What, do Gentlemen run on tick for Plays?


Car. As familiarly as with their Tailors?


3 Door keep. Pox on you, Sirrah! go, and bid 'em begin quickly.

[Ex. Door keeper. They play the Curtain-time, then take their places.
Car. Now they ll begin.

[Selfish and Young Maggot go to sit down.
Y. Mag. Don't come to us; let you Wits sit together.


Prig. These Fellows will be witty, and trouble us; go to your Brother Wits,
and make a noise among your selves, Brother Wits.

[ They go on the other s^de.
Self. I am always hated by the Fools; but I think it rather out of envy than
malice.


Bell. Faith! you shall not sit by us.


Stan. Gentlemen, Do not mistake your selves, for you are no Wits, though you are
Poets, and we will not own you of our Party.


Yo. Mag. This is mere envy against us Writers, Selfish.


Self. It is so: I for my part will throw my self at a Lady's feet, play with
her Fan, and fan her gently with it.


The Play begins. Enter Lover and Wife. Lover. Dear Madam, Let us not omit any
occasion; but take every opportunity by the hand, to improve those Amors,
which have rendered us so happy, to be elevated above the reach of Envy.


Wife. Sir, I should not entertain a thought, that might in any wise be
prejudicial to our Amors, or the improvement thereof, if I were not so
extremely obnoxious to the great infelicity of being subject to a Husband,
whose Jealousy has so much the Ascendant over him, that it renders him so
vigilant, not seldom to interrupt our happiest hours.


Lover. That turbulent temper does too often disorder the fair quiet of his own
mind, as well as discompose ours; and Jealous^e proves as often an obstruction
to his own tranquillity, as it does an impediment to our fruition.


Wife. It is a privilege too absolutely imperious (which by a seeming Conjugal
right) our Husbands claim over us, to make so subtle a scrutiny into all our
enterprises, since they, with too great a regretentertain the least motion of
ours, whereby we would insinuate into their Affairs.


Lover. But since Fortune (by so many frequent Signalizations) has demonstrated
how much she is a friend to us, in assisting us with so many Subterfuges, when
most we have needed them, it will be a heinous tergiversation from her, to
abandon that trust we formerly have reposed in her, and she may justly take a
Picque at our infidelity, and, in that Caprice, may contrive a revenge suitable
to our delinquency.


Wife. Rather Fortune may be apt to believe us too audacious, in tempting her
with so much importunity, that it must needs be more vexatious than agreeable;
and while we make such vigorous addresses to another Deity, for ought we know,
Love may wax jealous of our Applications to it: For though he is blind, he can
descry, and will greatly resent our Dereliction; and, when he is incensed, his
Nature is highly vindicative.


Lover. When Fortune takes such pains to assist us in our Amors, Love will
certainly be very sensible of our Omission; and when he is once provoked, he
seldom buries Injuries in the grave of Oblivion.


Theod. This is very lewd Stuff: Is this the new way of Writing?


Car. A Man would think these Lovers in Plays did not care a farthing for one
another, when they find nothing to do but to be florid, and talk impertinently
when they are alone.


Yo. Mag. This is a very strong, sinewy, and correct Style, and yet neat, and
florid.


Self. I have taught 'em all this way of Writing; I always strive to write like
a Gentleman, so easy, and well bred.


Prig. These are very good Lines, faith.


Y. Mag. Nay, it is admirably worded, that is the truth on it:


1 Man. Dam'me! I don't like it.


2 Man. Pox on the Coxcomb that writ it! there is nothing in it.


1 Man. God I love Drums, and Trumpets, and much ranting, roaring, huffing, and
fretting, and good store of noise in a Play.


Lover. I have sufficiently confuted all your Argumentation; and nothing then
remains, but that I should humbly petition to hold the Honor of your fair
Embraces.


Wife. The Motion is so civil, and savours so much of a sincere Affection, that
I can no longer resist it.


Lover. Let us retire.


Wife. Come.

[Ex. Lover and Wife.
Bell. So: now they are come to the Matter in hand: But here comes the Husband.

The Husband knocks at the Door, and turns his back. The Lover kicks him
several times, and retires:
Yo. Mag. Now it begins to warm; it is an admirable Plot.


Self. Bellamore, See how kind the Ladies are to me: Pretty Rogue! Let me
repose my Head in thy soft Bosom.


Bell. 'S death! What Is this? She will not speak to me, yet suffers that
familiarity with that Rascal, as if it were on purpose to provoke me.


Car. Why does not the Fool look where the Blows come?


Theod. Oh! that would spoil the Plot.


Husband. This must be the Devil that strikes me: Some whoring Rogue or other
is gotten with my Wife, and the Devil pimps for him; but I have a Key to a
Backdoor, and will surprise him.

[Ex. Husband.
Stan. I cannot find my Mistress; but I Will divert my self with a Vizard in the
mean time.


1 Man. What, not a word? all over in disguise: Silence for your Folly, and a
Vizard for your ill Face.


2 Man to a Vizard. Gad! some Whore, I warrant you, or Chambermaid, in her
Lady's old Clothes.

[He sits down, and lolls in the Orange-wench's Lap.
3 Man. She must be a Woman of quality; she has right Point.


4 Man. Faith! she earns all the Clothes on her Back by lying on it; some Punk
lately turned out of Keeping, her Livery not quite worn out.


Isah. I deserve this by coming in a Masque; and if I should now discover my
self, 'twould make a Quarrel.


Prig. You shall see what tricks I Will play; faith! I love to be merry.

[Raps people on the Backs, and twirls their Hats, and then looks demurely, as
if he did not do it.
Enter two Lovers, and Wife. 2 Lover. Have I caught them? I was jealous of this
before; but now I will make further discovery.

[2 Lover goes under the Table.
1 Lover. In verity it savours of Incivility, to interrupt our Joys in the
middle of our Felicity; but since the barbarous Intruder is defeated, let us
embrace the present occasion, which seems to court us.


Wife. If any thing which I can do can felicitate you, you may command my
Person.


2 Lover. Oh damned Jade!


Enter Husband. The Husband falls over a Form, and breaks his Shins, and puts
out the Candle. Wife. Oh God! my Husband.


1 Lover. 'S death! What shall we do?


Yo. Mag. Now it thickens; an admirable Plot.


Husb. Oh my Shins, my Shins!

Takes up the Candle, and blows it in again.
Wife. It Is as we wished.


Yo. Mag. There Is a turn: Who would expect that? As great a turn as can be,
from darkness to light: Can any thing be greater?


1 Lover. Now we are undone again.


Husb. Now tremble at my Vengeance, thou most perfidious Strumpet; for I will
kill thee before thou prayest.


Wife. What means my dearest Honey?


Husb. Oh thou salacious Jade! Can thou ask, when that stallionRogue is there?


Wife. What Rogue? Art thou mad? Here Is no Body.


Husb. No Body? Why, who is that? thou most lascivious Queen!


Wife. Where?


Husb. There.


Wife. I see no Body; thou art distracted.


1 Lover. How I adore her for her Wit.


Husb. What Fellow's that, Huswife?


Wife. Which? I see none.


Husb. But I do; and have at him first.


Wife. Hold, my Dear; if thou see any Body, it is the Devil; and if thou
strik'st it, it will tear thee in pieces.


Husb. Are you mad? Do you see no Body there?


Wife. No, Heaven knows, not I. Oh Heaven! the House is haunted: What does it
look like?


Husb. Oh Lord! it looks like a Man: hah! Methinks he has glaring Eyes: Oh! Oh!
I see his cloven Foot; this is that that struck me just now: Oh Heaven help me!


Wife. Oh help? I swound, I swound.


Husb. Oh my dear Wife! Oh the Devil!


2 Lover. Have I caught you, Sir?

[1 Lover goes under the Table.
2 Lover. Since you have, for the Lady's sake, don't discover me.


Wife. Oh! Is it there still my Dear?


Husb. No, I think it is gone; hah! it is vanished.


Yo. Mag. Well, it concerns me so, Iam not able to bear it.


Husb. My poor Dear! I have wronged thee; prithee forgive me.


Wife. I am always abused thus by you; I am too honest.


Husb. Prithee forgive me, I will never tax thee more; but I must change my
House, if it be thus haunted.


Wife. I am afraid to live here any longer; do, my Dear.


Isab. I see Bellamore minds no Woman but my foolish Sister (whom, I fear, he
takes for me) yet she is so ridiculously fond of that Fool, that he cannot
reasonably imagine I would be.


Self. Do you not see how fond that pretty Creature is of me? I make no doubt
but I shall enjoy her Person.


Bell. Damnation on this Rascal! Can a Woman of so much Wit like him? Ill watch
her; Women have odd, fantastic Appetites, and there is no trusting of 'em.


2 Lover. It Is too apparent that she is false to me, and I Will revenge it, by
discovering her to her Husband, for all her trick.

[They scussle under the
1 Lover. I will cut your throat, if you offer it.

[Table, rise with it on
2 Lover. Nay then, you Rascal, have at you.

[their Backs; the Table
Husb. Oh villainous Woman! Are these Spirits? Now I am convinced I know one
Whoremaster too well to believe it.

[falls down; they draw [their Swords, and fight. [prig strikes a Bully over
1 Man. Zounds you R^gue! Do you play your tricks with me?

[the Back he takes it to be [another, and strikes him.
2 Man. Have at you, Dog.

[They fight; Bell. Stan.
Car. Impudent Rascals! Have at you all.

[Car. beat the Bullies out of the House; the Actors run off; Ladies run out
shricking.
Self. I will make good the Lady's Retreat.

[He retreats behind the Ladies, with his Sword drawn.
Bell. Where is this Selfish gone? I must watch him and the Lady.

[Ex. Bellamore.
Car. What Rascals and Cowards are these Bullies? Where are the Ladies? Boy, go
out, and bid the Players go on.

Enter Theodosia and Isabella. Oh Madam! I am ashamed of this disorder.


Theod. Are you not hurt, Sir?


Car. Only a little in the Hand.


Theod. Come to morrow, and my shock Dog shall lick you whole. A Hurt in the
Hand? Why, it is gotten with opening of Oysters, and cured with a Cobweb.


Car. If you will but pity the Wounds you give your self, I Will never complain to
you of any other.


Isab. Theodosia may affect ill Nature, which perhaps her Heart is no more
guilty of than mine. But, I am sure, I am extremely troubled at your Hurt, and
would not have you neglect it.


Car. You are too obliging; it is slight, and worth neither of our cares.


Gart. Oh Lord! Mr. Carlos is hurt, I shall swoun: Oh dear Sir! my Heart went
pit a pat all the while you were fighting.


Car. That pretty Heart should only leap for joy.


La. Busy. Sir, Pray let me be so happy, as to apply my white Ointment; it is
very sovereign for a green Wound.


La. Cheat. I have a Balsom that never fails, and I were most unhappy, if one I
esteem so well, should miscarry for want of it.


Theod. Here Is a do about a slight Hurt; a Butcher at the Bear Garden makes
nothing of forty such: I would have the Sun shine through my Servant now and
then.


Car. You would have one serve you as they do a Mountebank, to be run through
for him.


Isab. I cannot rest till I see if Bellamore be wounded.

[Ex. Isab.
Enter one of the Actors. Actor. Sir, We cannot go on with our Play, one of our
young Women being frighted with the Swords, is fallen into a Fit, and carried
home sick.


Car. Boy, Go and find the Company; I have prepared an Entertainment upon the
Stage; we'll have an Entry, a Song, or some Music; there is no loss of the
Play; this Prickett can write none but Low E^rce, and his Fools are rather
odious than ridiculous.


Theod. You are once in the right.


Car. My cruel Mistress! You see I had some Favor from every one but your self.


Theod. I believe it has cost you five pound in penny gleek, to get the good
Will of the old Ladies; and the hopes of Marriage has prevalled upon the young
ones.


Car. I was never so serious as that comes to, with any but yourself.


Theod. No more of this; I accept your Entertainment.

The Scene changes to the Stage and Scenes.
Enter Selfish and Gartrude* Self. Now if your Love has any resolution, you may
enjoy me, and mal^e your self the happiest Lady in Town, and please me too.


Gart. Indeed you are so well bred, and so much a Gentleman, the Ladies cannot
but love you.


Self. I have no reason to complain.


Gart. And then you dress so finely.


Self. Indeed most young Fellows when they come to Town, dress at me: But,
pretty Creature, let us retire.


Gart. What you please, dear Sir, if you will be civil.


Self. Pr^tty Soul! how she loves me? I am a Rogue to be false to these poor
Creatures: While they divert themselves with the vulgar Entertainments of
Music and Dancing, I will steal the happiest minute that Love and Beauty can
afford.


Gart. You shall not need to steal, I Will give you any thing: But will you make
a Song on me?


Self. Thou shall be my Chloris, my Phyllis, Coelia, my All: Let Us away my Dear.

[Ex. Selfish and Gartrude.
Enter Bellamore. Bell. Whither is that Rascal carrying Isabella? She must do
this on purpose to make me mad; for I can never believe she can like Selfish.
I Will follow.

[Ex. Bell.
Enter Stanmore and Isabella. Stan. Well, You must be my Mistress; my Heart
beats, and I have a thousand Disorders upon me, which none but she can cause.


Isab. It beats a false Alarm for once; you see I am not she, but she is
some-where behind the Scenes; pray go, and look after her.

[Ex. Stan.
Enter Carlos and Theodosia. Theod. Prithee pull off thy Mask, and conceal thy
self no longer.


Isab. Do not discover me. I hear Bellamore keeps a Player; I am resolved to
watch him, and see if I can make any Discovery.


Enter Lady Cheatly, Lady Busy, Prigg, and Maggot. Mag. Madam, Your Ladyship is
so pestered with this Gamester Prigg, that I cannot have time to talk with you.


L. Cheat. I am so; and I have Business of great concernment, to confer with
you about; would I were rid of him.


Mag. I Will have a trick for him.


Prig. Sirrah Maggot! I will not suffer you to talk to my Lady; she is mine,
you old Fool.


Mag. Come out, you young Blockhead, and let our Swords try whose she is.


Prig. Let Us fight here; I would have my Mistress see how I put in my Pass, and
what a yerk I give it.


Mag. Thou o're-grown Coward!


L. Cheat. Gentlemen, I must not suffer quarrelling before me; Mr. Prigg be
more temperate.


Prig. I will, Madam; though it is hard, when Love or Honor bids me draw.

Enter Young Maggot.
Yo. Mag. Gentlemen, Be not so much troubled, that the Play was interrupted by
the Bullies; for I have a Poem about me, which I Will entertain you with, that
perhaps may be more agreeable; I will read it to you.


Car. But first let us have a Dance.


Yo. Mag. With all my Heart.


L. Cheat. Do you hear, Carpenter? Can you make the Machine's Work? I shall
have use of them.


Carpent. Yes, Madam.


L. Cheat. Pray be ready when I give you Order: Do you hear? Thus. Let us all
sit and see this Dance.

[An Entry of Clowns.
Enter Lump. L. Cheat. My Brother's here; what shall we do now?


Lump. I am ashamed, Sister, of your Sin, and Vanity, and cannot in conscience
let you alone in your evil ways. What makes you in this wicked place? this sink
of sin? this house of Abominations? where wise men, and godly men are abused:
It is great wickedness, and I cannot be silent; my zeal and wisdom will not let
me be silent.


L. Cheat. Brother, Have a little Breeding, as well as Zeal and Wisdom, and do
not disturb the Gentlemen.


Lump. I care not for Breeding; shall Zeal and Wisdom give place to that? I
say, it is not lawful, it is sinful, it is abominable, to come under the Roof with
these Hornets; there is Wit, flashy Wit stirring here; and I would as soon be
in a Pesthouse.


L. Cheat. I must comply with those I have designs upon, for my Fortune's sake,
and for my Daughter's.


Lump. That does something mollify the sin; but it is too great, and I cannot
bear it: Cannot you take religious Courses, in order to your design, and then
you may serve Heaven and your self together? You are foolish, very foolish and
have no method in you.


Car. This Gentleman is going to read a pious Poem to us; pray do not interrupt
him.


Lump. Sir, I must interrupt him, I have a Call, a great Call to it; all Poetry
is abominable, and all Wit is an Idol, a very Dagon, I will down with it; all
the wise and godly Party of the Nation hate Wit.


Yo. Mag. None but Fools hate Wit, and those that cannot think; for my part, I
will venture my Blood in defense of Poetry.


Lump. I will preach against it, while I have breath.


Yo. Mag. Peace, Fool! I will read on.


Lump. Sister, You shall not hear it; it is profane, abominable, a

Grace-resisting, Soul-destroying, Conscience-choaking, most unutterably
Sin-nourishing thing, and I cannot bear it; I cannot suffer it.

Lady Cheatly whistles, two mock-Devils descend and fly up with Lump. Murder,
murder, What do thou do, Satan? whither do thou fly with me?


Yo. Mag. This is very well: Ha! ha! ha! now I may read in quiet.


Prig. Pray, my Dear, let us be going; I hate this Wit; I think Mr. Lump is in
the right.


L. Cheat. Sit but a while, and I Will go.


Yo. Mag. [reads. Beauty, thou great preserver of the World,
By which into dead Lumps quick life is hurled.

L. Cheat. So, now I shall have time to speak with you.

[Ex. Mag. L. Cheatly, Lady Busy. Prigg and Young Maggot are carried up in
their Chairs, and hang in the Air.
Prig. Hold! hold! Murder! murder! What a Devil do you mean? My Dear! Honey!
Where is my Lady? Madam! Madam!


Yo. Mag. What can this mean? But hold, I Will read on, if you will. Beauty, thou
great, etc.

[All go out, and leave 'em hanging.
Prig. They are all gone; what shall I do? Pox on your Wit, Sirrah! This is
your Wit, you damned Wit, you.


Yo. Mag. You lie, Fool! it is a Wheedle, a Cross-bite of the Widow's.


Prig. Oh you damned scribbling, senseless, sing-Song Wit!


Yo. Mag. Oh you damned, gaming, Jocky, hunting, Tennis-Fool!


Enter Bellamore. Bell. Hell, and Damnation! What have I seen? A Curse on all
the Sex! Is this the Virtue she pretended to? To be lewd with so despicable a
Coxcomb as Selfish, so nauseous a Fellow! Death and Hell!


Prig. Hark you, Bellamore: Prithee help me down.


Yo. Mag. Pray let me down.


Bell. Pox on you both!


Enter Selfish. Self. Ah Bellamore! I am the happiest Man, I think, that ever
the Sun shined on: I have enjoyed the prettiest Creature, just now, in a Room
behind the Scenes: I cannot help telling of thee, because thou art my Friend;
Faith! telling is half the pleasure to me; for I confess to thee, I think, we
that are happy in Lady's Affections, make Love, as much for Vanity, as any
thing else: You know the Lady.


Bell. Damn the Dog.

[aside. 'Twas one of my Lady Cheatly's Daughters; which of them was it?


Self. Well, I can keep nothing from thee; it was one of 'em; but upon your
Honor keep it secret; guess which; they are both desperately in Love with me,
hah!


Bell. Impudent Rascal and Coxcomb!

[He strikes him, then beats him with his Sword.
Self. What ill Breeding is this? Are you distracted?


Isab. Heaven! What Is the matter? Hold, hold.


Bell. Be gone, Rascal, or I Will run you through.


Self. I will not be uncivil before a Lady, another time I shall call you to an
account; an ill-bred Fellow!


[Ex. Selfish. Isab. What Is the reason of this Quarrel?


Bell. Here, Carpenter.


Carpent. Here, Sir.


Bell. Let down those Fools, and dispose of 'em, so they may not trouble us.


Prig. So, this is well.


Yo. Mag. Bellamore, I thank you.

[Carpenter lets 'em down and presently they sink down and roar out.
Bell. You know too well the occasion of the Quarrel.


Isab. What do you mean?


Bell. Is all your pretense of Virtue come to this? and must my Love be thus
rewarded?


Isab. This rudeness of yours amazes me.


Bell. It Is I have cause to be amazed, to be refused the Favor, and you to
grant it to that filthy Fool, Selfish; there is nothing but dissembling,
treachery, and ingratitude in your whole Sex.


Isab. A Favor to Selfish? The Fool of all the World, I scorn and hate the
most; but now I see you will give me occasion to rank you with him.


Bell. No, you shall never rank me with him; I scorn to be obliged to one, who
is so free to lay out her self upon such an Ass.


Isab. Has that ^ain Rascal lied on me? and do you believe him?


Bell. My Eyes will not lie, Madam; I will trust them; and though you have let
down your Skirt, I know the Petticoat too well.


Isab. Unworthy Man! I could stab thee for this Affront, but that thou art not
worthy of a serious thought. Is this the Petticoat you mean? What has my
foolish Sister done?


Bell. How? this is not the Petticoat.

Enter Stanmore and Gartrude barefaced. Heaven and Earth! 'twas Gartrude, I
see now.


Isab. I scorn and hate thee for thy base susp^ion, more than all Mankind.


Bell. Madam, I am a Dog, a Villain, not fit to live; kill me, for if you
forgive me not, I Will do it my self.


Isab. I ll never see thy odious Face again, do what thou will; farewell base
Man.

[Ex. Isabella.
Bell. Hell and Devils! What has my Rashness brought me to?

[Ex. Bell.
Stan. Pretty Miss! Be not so troubled; I have used thee kindly, very kindly.


Gart. Kindly? Oh sad! I Will tell my Mother what you have done to me, so I will.


Stan. Thou art not mad, Child! Prithee don't.


Gart. But I was mad to let you be so uncivil, and I will tell her; here she is.


Enter La. Busy, La. Cheatly, and Maggot. Stan. S'heart! What a Fool she is?
I Will not stand the brunt.

[Ex. Stan.
Mag. Well, Madam, I Will dispatch the business, and wait on you again.

[Ex. Maggot.
Gart. Oh Madam! what shall I do? what shall I do?


L. Cheat. What Is the Matter?


Gart. I thought what 'twould come to; you charged me to be civil to Stanmore,
and I am deflowered, so I am.


L. Cheat. Oh Heaven! What did he ravish you?


Gart. No; because you bid me be civil to him, I consented; I was afraid to
anger you, Madam.


L. Cheat. Civil? that was civil with a vengeance; let me come, I Will knock her
on the head, filthy Creature.


L. Busy. Hold, Madam; be wise, and make the best on it; let me alone to manage
this Affair: Come, pretty Mrs. Gartrude, has he made no Settlement upon thee?


Gart. He settled nothing but himself upon me, that I know.


L. Cheat. No, that is the Plague; I knew there was no Settlement, if that had
been done, it had been somewhat.


L. Busy. Go to; be patient; let me alone; withdraw, good Madam, and trust me.

[Ex. L. Cheatly. Enter Stanmore. Com^ on, Mr. Stanmore, I must talk with you a
little.


Stan. Now for a wise Lecture.


L. Busy. Look up, pretty Miss, come on.

Sir, My Lady Cheatly is a worthy Person, and of good quality; right -- Mrs.
Gartrude is a very pretty young Lady -- true -- nor is it fit my Lady (who has
entertained you so often, and so nobly, in her house) should be abused -- do
you conceive me -- nor is it fit that this pretty young thing should be injured
-- you understand me --


Stan. Your Ladyship speaks like an Oracle.


L. Busy. Very good -- this pretty thing, I understand, has been very kind to
you. Very well --


Stan. Fie Miss! fie! tell tales out of School? if she has, I am sure, I was as
kind as she could be for her heart.


L. Busy. Very good -- Come, I understand you -- Ah what pleasure it is to lie
by such a sweet Bed fellow! such pretty little swelling Breasts! such delicate
black sparkling Eyes! such a fresh Complexion! such red powting Lips! and such
a Skin! I say no more -- in short, she would make a Husband very happy -- Come,
let it be so -- and let no more words be made of this Matter.


Stan. I Will do what I can to help her to one.


L. Busy. Go to -- that is well said -- your self then be the Man -- Oh how the
Town will envy you the enjoyment of so fine a Lady!


Stan. S'heart, Madam, what do you take me for? if you knew all, what need I
marry for the Matter?


L. Busy. Go to; she may make as good a Wife as can be for all that; have you
not many Examples?


Stan. No, Madam; I have made a Vow of Chastity that way, which I will never
break.


L. Busy. I would not my Lady should know this for the World, she would be
revenged to the last degree: Let me tell you, you have been very uncivil.


Stan. Faith, Madam! I think not.


Gart. Yes, but you have been un^ivil though, that you have.


L. Busy. Go to -- do you mind? Do you think a Family is to be dishonored? is
that like a Gentleman -- nay, not but that humane frailty must be passed by --
for young people, when they meet, are apt and liable -- it is confessed -- but
then -- ay what then? -- why, your Gentlemen and your worthy Persons strive to
make it good: Very wel^ -- but how is it to be made good? hum -- why, either by
Marriage, or Settlement.


Stan. I have a private Reason must keep me from doing either.


L. Busy. No, no, that will not pass: I know you are too much a Ge^tleman;
besides, you made me promise you would keep; and let me tell you, my Honor is
concerned in it, and I would not have my Honor touched for the World.


Stan. I did not promise to keep for another, as I must if I keep her.


Gart. You do not say true then.


L. Busy. Fie, Mr. Stanmore, that you should say such an unge^tile thing! Come,
Miss, bear up, and do not cry: how can you endure to see a young Lady's tears,
and not melt: Come on; pretty Mi^s, I am sure you will be kind, and constant to
Mr. Stanmore, will you not?


Gart. Yes, yes.


L. Busy. Good. Why look you, Sir, I know you are a worthy Gentleman, and will
consider of a Settlement, such as befits a Gentlewoman.


Stan. No, Madam: Selsish, this Evening, in a green Room, behind the Scenes,
was beforehand with me; she never tells of that: Can I love one that
prostitutes her self to that Fellow?


L. Busy. How Is this?


Gart. Oh sad, that you should say such a thing! I am sure, he will not say so
for the World; would I might never stir out of this place alive now, if I did.


Stan. I had it from his own Mouth.


Gart. O Lord, I ll be far enough, if you had! I Am sure, he is too fine a
Gentleman, and too well bred, to tell such a grievous lie of a Lady; I am sure,
he did not say so, that he did not.


Stan. How she commends him?


L. Busy. You know, Selfish is the vainest Fellow that ever was born; can you
believe that Coxcomb? it is not generous.


Stan. Shall I believe Bellamore's Eyes? He saw it: Good Madam, be pleased to
forbear your Tricks upon me. Farewell, I hate the leavings of a Fool; I Will as
soon eat the Meat he has chewed, or wear his foul Linen after him. Adieu, good
Madam.

[Ex. Stanmore.
L. Busy. Now see what your Indiscretion has done; did I not tell you, Selfish
would undo you?


Gart. Oh what shall I do! what shall I do! Does your Ladyship think, you could
not get Mr. Selfish to marry me? Oh! he is the prettyest Man; I could live and
die with him.


L. Busy. Go to; you will utterly ruin your self: Do you think, a Fellow that
has been so base to boast of your Kindness, will marry you? Peace, I say; I
will try another; Young Maggot shall be the Man.


Gart. I cannot abide him.


L. Busy. I say, go to -- you must marry him, if he will, and be glad on it too:
Stanmore has forsaken you; Selfish cannot keep you; your Mother will turn you
out of doors, and you will starve. Come, come, along with me, and be better
advised.

[Exeunt.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Prigg and Lady Cheatly. Prig. NOw, Madam, Ihope, you will be persuaded
to dispatch this business of Wedlock this Morning; 'twould be much more
convenient for me than to morrow, because I am to go to Newmarket to a
Cock-Match: I have laid fifty pound upon Jack-an. Apes, against Tom Prigg's
Boxen Beak; my Dun fights a Battle with Tom Whiskin's Duck Wing, for fifty
pound.

'T will be the best Sport in the World; I would fain marry to day, and go
thither to morrow: Will your Ladyship go and see it?


L. Cheat. No, pray, Sir, if that be the best Sport in the World, see that
first, and marry afterward.


Prig. New market's a rare place, there a Man's never idle: We make Visits to
Horses, and talk with Grooms, Riders, and Cock keepers, and saunter in the
Heath all the Forenoon; then we dine, and never talk a word but of Dogs, Cocks,
and Horses; then we saunter into the Heath again; then to a Cock-Match; then to
a Play in a Barn; then to Supper, and never speak a word but of Dogs, Cocks,
and Horses again; then to the Groom-Porters, where you may play all night. Oh,
it is a heavenly Life! we are never idle.


L. Cheat. For ought I see, you are never otherwise.

Enter Steward. Heaven! Is this Villain returned?


Stew. Yes, Perfidious Woman! I am returned, and will make you know, that I am
not to be used so. What? to be clapped under Hatches, and carried to the Indies,
to be sold for a Slave? a fine Design truly: But, come, Madam, I will make you
know your Lord and Master.


L. Cheat. What means your Impudence?


Stew. Impudence! to command my Wife? Know your Duty.


Prig. Your Wife? Why, you are her Man; are you not?


Stew. What Fellow's this? I must have new Orders; I must have no such
Customers about my House.


L. Cheat. Call a Constable, the poor Fellow's distracted.


Stew. No, but I may make the Lady so, if she persists in her Impudence.


Brig. Thou art very saucy to thy Lady and Mistress.


Stew. Peace, Fool! Saucy to my Wife?


Prig. Fool? hah, Fool! What a Pox would you be at?


L. Cheat. Impudent Villain! thy Wife?


Stew. Most audacious Woman! Dare thou deny it? Was I not married to you
yesterday in your own Chamber, by a Parson of your own choosing.


L. Cheat. How dare thou affirm so impudent a Lie? Where did thou dream
this?


Prig. I have my Que; I Will have my hand in the Plot.

[Ex. Prig.
Stew. Why, thou most infamous of Women! Can thou deny this?


L. Cheat. Yes, thou most impudent of Rascals, I will deny it to all the World,
and I have taken care that thou shall never prove it.


Stew. Hell and Devils! Is there one amongst you like this Woman?


L. Cheat. Well, if you will be quiet, and stir no farther in this Business, a
thousand pound is yours; if not, you never shall have me, nor any thing of
mine. Marry such a Fellow?


Stew. No, base Woman! I Will undo thee.


L. Cheat. It Is out of your power, Fool, you have sworn to all my Bonds and
Deeds already.


Stew. Most Vile of Cheats! I Will find your Parson, if he be in England.

Enter Prigg, in the Habit of a Parson. Oh happy Fortune! here he is.


L. Cheat. What means this Coxcomb, Prigg?


Stew. Now, Madam, did not you marry me to this Lady yesterday? Speak, upon the
word of a Priest.


Prig. Yes, I did.


Stew. Now, what says your Impudence? I thought I should catch you: Were you so
cunning to deny it? Where do you live, Sir?


Prig. Madam, Pray help me off with my Habit.


L. Cheat. This is well enough.


Stew. Hah! What a Devil's this? Were you the Parson?


Prig. Yes, good Sir.


L. Cheat. Yes, This was my Chaplain, you saucy Fool! Could you think, I would
marry such a filthy Fellow as you are?


Stew. I will give you to understand, Madam, that it is a good Marriage, and
I Will bring you into the Court to swear it, Sir.


Prig. If you do, Sir, I Will hold six to four, I forswear it, Sir.


Stew. Why, sure you dare not?


Prig. By Heaven, I dare, and will not forswear my self for such a Wi^ow,
Gentlemen forswear themselves to get Whores, and make nothing on it: Be gone out
of my house, she is mine, Fellow, be gone, I say.


Stew. Curse on my shallow head! that I should be so credulous, to believe her
to be true to me, when I was an hourly Witness of her falsehood to others: I
will have you my Wife, or be revenged to that degree; you shall repent this
Treachery your whole life: I am going to visit all those you have had Business
with this month, and I shall tell 'em such a Tale.

[Ex. Steward.
Prig. I Will cut his Throat; say no more.


L. Cheat. Pray haste^ after this malicious, clamourous Rascal, and stop him
some way or other; he will invent a thousand lies of me; get him arrested upon an
Action of ten thousand pound at my Suit.


Prig. Let me alone; I Will do as becomes a Gentleman.

[Ex. Prig.
L. Cheat. This Trouble joined with that Fool my Daughter, will undo me; but I
will find out Maggot, and he shall help to salve up all.

Enter Maggot. Oh Mr. Maggot! I have Business to communicate to you, of the
greatest concernment to me tha^ ever happened.


Mag. Gad, Madam ^o! If any Man in England understands Business, or loves it
better than I do, I Will be burnt.


L. Cheat. Every Man loves what he is good at; give me a Man of Business for my
Friend: the fine Gentlemen of the Town, are like Fiddlers, only good at idle
hours.


Mag. There are no great Persons at this end of the Town, have any Business,
but I do it for (...)* I am the busiest Man in England, and, I hope, Madam,
you will consider of my Love to Business, and to your Ladyship.


L. Cheat. Why, that is part of the Business I am to confer with you about.


Enter Lady Busy and Young Maggot. L. Busy. Madam, I beg you will retire; I
have an Affair with Young Mr. Maggot, that concerns you, and Mrs. Gartrude.


L. Busy. Mr. Maggot, I can never enough admire your Uncle Maggot's aversion to
Wit and Breeding; nor can I choose but pity you, who are like to be so great a
sufferer for your Love to both.


Yo. Mag. I glory in my suffering for so good a Cause.


L. Busy. Well, many a Man would be proud of such a Nephew; but is it true,
that you are like to be dis-inherited?


Yo Mag. It is as true, as I my self will ever be to Wit and Beauty; unless I
will recant my Works, and for the future renounce Tropes, Figures, Similes, and
all ornaments of Speech.


L. Busy. These are hard Conditions.


Yo. Mag. A Man of my vigorous Imagination, had as good have been born dumb: I
will sing, and starve to death, like a Grasshopper, e're I submit.


L. Busy. Go to: Suppose some Friend of yours, more careful of you, than you
are of your ^elf, should find a way to compose this matter, without prejudice
to your Poetry.


Yo. Mag. (...) Friend should be another Apollo, if a Man, and a tenth M^e to
me, if a Woman.


L. Busy. Good. There is a Woman, a pretty one, young and rich too in the case:
Very well; but how shall I come by this Woman, say you? Go to; let me alone; a
fine Woman, with a good Fortune, were no ill refuge from the anger of your
Uncle, hah!


Yo. Mag. But if I should marry, what will the World say of my Wit? I had
rather lose my Honor, and starve, than lose the name of a Wit.


L. Busy. Your Reputation is established already; go to, consider.


Yo. Mag. But, Madam, my Heart is engaged, and the poor Soul loves me again to
madness; I did but kiss my hand to a Lady in a window the other day, and the poor
Thing fell into a Fit; she will never outlive such a heinous Tergiversation.


L. Busy. Come, come, you know not the World; this is some softhearted Fool,
that will be as fond of another in three days. Go to; I know the Sex better
than you; but such a Reputation, such a Face, and such a Fortune!


Yo. Mag. N^y, if she have a better Face, and Reputation, than my Gartrude, I
will forswear Poetry, and write Shorthand at Conventieles, all the rest of my
Life.


L. Busy. Is she the Woman? My Lady Cheatly looks very high for her Daughter,
Stanmore and several Fortunes are about her; do you conceive me?


Yo. Mag. That Is all one.

As for my part I have chosen one,
And I Will have my Love, or I Will have none.

L. Busy. Hold: A Lady of Fortune, Beauty, and one that loves you, and admires
you for your Wit, is not to be neglected.


Yo. Mag. How? then she has Wit too.


L. Busy. How else should she admire it in you?


Yo. Mag. Since she has Wit, I will see her, that is certain, and love her, if I
can; if not, I Will make her some handsome excuse for it in my next Song*

Enter Gartrude.
L. Busy. Well then, here she comes.

It is this pretty Gartrude: Ah! what a Bedfellow is this, with above ten
thousand pound too.


Yo. Mag. Pretty Creature! Are you she?


Gart. Yes, that I am.


Y. Mag. But, Madam, do you not think Marriage will spoil my Poetry?


Gart. I would not marry you, if I thought it would; for I love your Verses
dearly.


L. Busy. Stanmore and Selfish will hang themselves, when they hear of your
good Fortune.


Yo. Mag. Ay, so they will.


Gart. Every Body says, they love one to ones face; but you said so behind my
back; I heard you tell my Lady so, and I am resolved I will have you, though my
Mother turn me out of doors, that I will.


L. Busy. Go, get you together, loving Rogues, and let me alone to make your
peace with my Lady Cheatly.

[Exeunt.
Enter Selfish and Isabel. Self. Consider my Person, and my Breeding; think not
of Bellamore, he has two Ladies with Child by him, and one claims Marriage.


Isab. You had best marry her for him, he will give a good Portion.


Self. I did not think so harsh a Repartee could have come out of that pretty
mouth: Sure you take something ill from me; my conduct among the Ladies does
not please you: I confess, I have been somewhat too general in my Addresses;
but I am resolved to apply my self to you, and be less Gallant hereafter.


Isab. Be less vain, and less a Coxcomb, and know, that nothing you forbear or
do, can please or trouble me.


Self. Were I not skilled in ^he various Dispositions of your soft Sex, these
words would make me despair; but I have often known such peevishness the Child
of Love.


Isab. Were I a Man, I Would cudgel you out of this conceit of your self; but as I
am, I can only despise, and laugh at you.


Self. Hah! hah! hah! You are pleasant, and I am glad to find you so: I often
discover Lady's Affections to me that way; for I am sure they love me, when
they are so familiar with me, my pretty Raylleur.


Isab. Monster of Vanity! be gone.


Enter Bellamore. Bell. I beg upon my knees, you will once more hear me.


Isab. I never will.


Self. It is in vain: Give her over, Bellamore; what would you have her do,
poor Lady? she loves me; do thou think ever to get a Lady where I am? Why, my
Mother has often told me, I was born with a Cawl upon my head, and she wrapped me
up in her Shift, to make me lucky to Ladies.


Bell. Impudent Coxcomb! I will not disturb the house; but follow me, or I Will
cut your Throat here; you are the occasion of this Storm.


Self. With all my heart: I did intend to demand satisfaction for your ill
Breeding at the Playhouse, and you shall find I can fight, as well as I can
make Love.


Bell. Come on, Vanity.


Enter Carlos and Theodosia. Theod. I see you are resolved to watch me, to make
me confess Love, as they do Witches, to make 'em own their Contracts with the
Devil.


Car. If you would but look a little guiltily, I would take you upon suspicion.


Theod. And so hurry me away to Execution. Alas, poor Carlos! Don't I look as
if I died for thee? Are not my eyes languishing enough?


Car. You are pleasant, Madam, as becomes a winning Gamester.


Theod. If I should play on, luck may turn, I think it is best to give over as I
am.


Car. But consider how entirely I love you.


Theod. Consider how little I care for you.


Car. The greatest Beauties are not always most sincerely loved.


Theod. No, they are commonly like great Places, courted, and won by vain
designing Knaves; and were I such, I should be yet more suspicious.


Car. A Man that is ready to die a Martyr, need make no other Professions, I
should else --


Theod. Talk like an Ass, of Charms and Tyranny of mine, of Chains and Slavery
of yours; a Man that should over-hear you, would think you had been taken by
the Turk.


Car. It Is not in your power, to make me leave loving you.


Theod. It Is very unreasonable, that my indifference should not make you love
me less.


Car. It Is very unreasonable, that my indifference should not make you love me
more; but I will yet hope.


Theod. Hope is a thin Diet, and may be allowed in your Feverish condition,
and indeed is the only Food that Love can live on.


Car. Oh, Madam, Marriage!


Theod. Is to Love, as the Jesuit's Powder to an Ague, it stops the ^t, and in
a litt^e time wears it quite off.


Enter Isabella. Isab. My Dear, how do thou?


Carlos, Will you forgive me? Lovers take it as ill to be parted, as Men of
Honor.


Car. I was just upon the point of yielding.


Theod. I scorn to take Advantages; but I had reduced him to offer Marriage.


Isab. Then, it seems, he is weary of being your Slave, and would make you his.


Car. Madam, you should be generous, and take the weakest side. No, I am
resolved ever to be her Servant, but would be glad of a nearer employment about
her Person.


Theod. Come, prithee Isabella, let us take a Turn in the Garden, and see if we
can talk of something else.


Car. Where e're I go, I shall carry my Love with me, and that will not suffer
me to talk or think of any thing but your dear Self.

[Exeunt.
Enter Bellamore and Selfish in the Field. Bell. Come, Sir, I hope you like
this Place, you are very nice in choosing one.


Self. Yes, I like this; for here I ran one Man through, and gave another his
life.


Bell. Let me see if you be Armed, or not.


Self. No, I am too well bred for that.


Bell. Make ready.

And yet I am damnably afraid: But if I should not fight, the Ladies will not
be so apt to love me, as they are.


Bell. Come, will you never have done?


Self. Yes, Sir, What great have are you in?

Beauty, What art thou? But a fading Flower.


Bell. Beauty? What a Devil have thou to do with Beauty? You are a damned ugly,
ill bred Coxcomb, and the Ladies care not one jot for you. Draw.


Self. Come on, I will vindicate my self and the Ladies.

Now for the Ladies: Do not kill me; consider, how the Ladies will hate you, if
you should.

They sight; Bell. throws Self. down, and takes his Sword.
Bell. No, prithee live, and be an Ass still; but trouble me no more.


Self. Thou art a strange, rough, ill-bred Fellow, to fight so, to ^ing a Man
down, and spoil his Clothes; you have dirted all my Garniture, and spoiled my
Cravat: Could not you have fought easily, handsomely, and like a Gentleman? You
were never bred in an Academy; they never fight thus brutally in France.


Bell. This is ridiculous enough.


Self. I warrant, you have done me ten pounds worth of hurt, with fighting with
me; I do not know how to appear before the Ladies; I cannot abide such Tricks.


Bell. Fare thee well: if I were not extremely troubled about Isabella, I would
divert my self with this Coxcomb.

[Ex. Bellamore.
Self. A Brutal Fellow! to spoil one's things thus: But I Will go home, and dress
me.

[Ex. Selfish.
Enter Lady Chcatly and Maggot. L. Cheat. You see I have considered your
Passion, and how apt you are for Business; I am afraid of a Suit or two in Law,
which I know you can manage.


Mag. As well as any Man in the World.


L. Cheat. I have told you of the Insolence of the Steward, and the Artifice I
used to get rid of him.


Mag. That shows, your Ladyship understands Business; how happy shall I be? how
I shall laugh at, and triumph over all my Rivals?


L. Cheat. Not a word of what has passed betwixt us, till a fitter opportunity.

Enter Prigg, with a Plaster upon his Fa^e. How now, Mr. Prigg; what ayls your
Face?


Prig. Be not frighted, my Dear; it is no great hurt.


Mag. My Dear! Poor Fool, how I pity him?


Prig. I went to stop that Rogue, your Steward, and demand satisfaction, as
becomes a Gentleman; and, in fine, we drew, and after some two or three and
thirty Passes, I found my self run into the Arm, and the Face; but I worsted
him: Yet when I was at a Surgeon's, the Raseal got away.


L. Cheat. I am sorry you should venture so much for me.


Prig. Oh, Madam! 'Twas for my self; for we are to be all one Flesh: Now
nothing troubles me, but that this Hurt will hinder my Journey to New Market to
morrow.


Mag. He, all one Flesh with her? poor Coxcomb!


Enter two Scriveners. 1 Scriv. Madam, I wonder, a Lady of Quality should be
guilty of such Fraud and Covin, to write Bonds with Ink, that will wear out in
a Month.


2 Scriv. Other Ink, you have too, that with a Spirit rubbed upon the Paper,
will make Impression through a whole Quire.


L. Cheat. What mean these Fellows? Are you mad?


1 Scriv. No, but this is enough to make us mad, for our selves, and our
Clien^s, to be cheated of such Sums.


2 Scriv. Pray, Madam, give us Security, and let me renew the Bonds with my own
Ink.


L. Cheat. Go home, and sleep, and be sober.


Mag. What Is the meaning of this? is my Lady a Cheat?


Prig. This is the Rogue, your Steward's Lie.


L. Cheat. Oh, Gentlemen! You have been with that Rascal, my Steward, the most
impudent Villain, who having most of the Writings, that concern my Estate, in
his hands, had the Impudence to threaten to burn 'em, unless I would marry him.


Prig. It Is very true, upon my Honor.


L. Cheat. I, by a Wile, got'em out of his hands, and he, out of revenge, for
being so disappointed, has invented these malicious Lies; but I shall lay him
fast enough.


Enter two Citizens. 1 Cit. Madam, We did not think your Ladyship would put
such things upon us, to give us false Notes for our Money.


2 Cit. Notes written with Ink that will wear out; we shall have nothing but
Blanks for our Money.


1 Cit. Pray let me have my five hundred pound again.


2 Cit. And me, mine; you have not laid it out yet.


L. Cheat. What, my Rogue Steward, has been with you too; has he?


2 Cit. Rogue! He Is an honest Man, to give us notice of this Deceit: Madam, I
wonder, your Ladyship is not ashamed.


Prig. How now, Impudence! I tell you, the Steward is the Cheat, and Rogue, he
has ly'd and abused you; my Lady is a Person of Honor.


Mag. Hah! There must be something in this; he would not be so foolish, to tell
so silly a Lie.


2 Scriv. My Lady is a worthy Person, and the Steward has invented these Lies,
out of revenge; because he had the Impudence to pretend to marry my Lady, and
would have kept all her Writings; he would force her to do it, but she was too hard
for him: We know all.


2 Cit. This is strange.


Enter Lump. Lump. Oh thou vile Woman! thou Reprobate! thou most auda cious,
seared, Conscienced Creature! Could such a wicked Branch spring from our
Family, who are precious, godly Men and Women, all but thy self?


L. Cheat. Are you mad, Brother?


Enter Steward. ^ump. I knew you would cheat the rest.
But must you betray me, and give me false Deeds?
Must I have nothing but Blanks for my Money?

1 Scriv. What ayls she?


1 Cit. How are we cheated?


Mag. God's Death! There must be some Fire under all this Smoke.


Lump. Had it not been for this honest Man, who was troubled in Conscience, and
could no longer conceal your Fraud, I had never known it; but now I will make an
example of you.


1 Cit. How, Sir? Are you a precious, godly Man, and knew of a Cheat, and would
not discover it?


2 Cit. One of our own Church, to suffer us to be betrayed?


Lump. I had no Call to it, till now I am my self concerned.


L. Cheat. Will you believe this most infamous Rascal, that would have
dishonored your Family, and having all my Writings, would have married me, or
have burnt 'em? I, by seeming to consent to his desires, got 'em out of his
hands, made him swear to 'em before a Master in Chancery, then I turned him
away for a Villain, as he is.


Lump. What say you, Sir?


Prig. Say? I Will hold six to four, he cannot say a word.

Upon my Honor, this is all true, to my knowledge.


Stew. She caused me to be clapped under Hatches, in a Ship going to the
Indies, because I knew this Secret; and I do assure you, ye are all cheated,
and in less than a Month, will have nothing to show for all your Money: I
cannot in Conscience but reveal this.


L. Cheat. Impudent, lying Varlet! how dare thou affirm so devilish a Lie?


Stew. Will you marry me yet, and I will retrieve all?

[Whispers.
L. Cheat. Oh Heaven and Earth! The Villain whispers me in the Ear now, and
tells me, if I will marry him, he will deny all.


Stew. Mercy upon me! Will your Ladyship's Conscience give you leave to say
that? Pray, Madam, consider your Soul.


1 Cit. Ay, Madam, consider your Soul.


2 Cit. And the payment of my Money.


L. Cheat. Heaven can witness what I say is true; even just now he asked me to
marry him.


Lump. If this be true, Lady Sister, I will ask your pardon.


Stew. What need I ask that, which I have already? I am married to her.


All. How!


Stew. And her great Anger, and the Reason she would have sold me to Jamaica,
was, because I could not in Conscience conceal these Deceits, though I might
have had the benefit of them.


L. Cheat. This is so extravagantly ridiculous, it makes me laugh: I will not
give a serious Answer to it.


Mag. Ha! Married? You did not consummate, I hope* Who married you?


Stew. Why, the truth is, she thought to put a false Marriage upon me: When she
discovered my intention, of making Restitution to those she had injured, she
dressed that Fellow Prigg in the disguise of a Parson, and he married us in her
Bedchamber: But I Will make her know, it is a good Marriage.


Mag. Did you know him in the disguise?


Stew. No, till this day he appeared in it to me, and then pulled it off, to
show me 'twas a mock-Marriage, as they thought; but I will make 'em know
otherwise.


L. Cheat. This is the most amazing Impudence: Mr. Prigg, declare your self;
deny it, or we are undone.

[aside.
Prig. Is there ever a Magistrate here? I will swear, that there is not one
word of all this true; I know not what he means; I hold Gold to Silver he is mad.


L. Cheat. Do you see, Brother, what a Rascal you have believed? and how you
have injured me?


Lump. Why thou wicked Locust! thou spawn of a Serpent! to invent such cursed
Lies: I Will lay thee within four Walls.


Stew. By Heaven, it is all true; I Will swear it; nay, I Will swear with you for a
thousand pound.


Mag. Let him swear it, that we may have his Ears.


1 Cit. Madam, We ask your pardon, with all our hearts.


2 Cit. Impudent Fellow! to abuse my Lady so.


Stew. Let me but speak.


1 Scriv. No, base Fellow! thou sh^lt not speak.


2 Scriv. Abuse so worthy a Lady? Out thou wicked Fellow!


Stew. It Is very fine.


Lump. Lay an Action of ten thousand pound upon him; see who will bayl him: To
my certain knowledge, she has a great Estate, and has been always a very
conscientious Woman; indeed I was something amazed at this Story.


1 Cit. Ay, Sir, we believe your Worship.


2 Cit. We know, you are a precious, godly Man.


Stew. Are you distracted? Well, be all ^ eated, and you will, I have
discharged my Conscience.


Lump. Conscience? thou Seed of Beelzebub!


Prig. Conscience? An impudent Rogue! that offers to forswear himself: I
offered to lay him ten to one, 'twas all false, and you saw he durst not bett.


1 Scriv. Hang him.


2 Scriv. Base, lying Rogue!


Enter Sergeants. 1 Serg. I arrest you at the Suit of my Lady Cheatly, in an
Action of ten thousand pounds.


Stew. Oh vile Woman!


L. Cheat. Away with him.


2 Cit. Away with him.


All. Away with the Rogue.


Lump. I do beseech your pardon, Sister: I was mistaken, which I do not use to
be; yet that Trick at the Playhouse was base.


L. Cheat. I could not help it; I knew not of it.


Enter two Creditors. 1 Cred. Madam, You have undone us; you gave us Bonds for
two hundred pound a piece, about six Weeks since, and we have nothing but the
Seals left.


2 Cred. All the Ink is worn out; behold here, Madam.

[Shews a Paper.
L. Cheat. Impostors! lying Rogues! I owe you nothing.


Lump. These are Instruments of this Rascally Steward's; how come they by the
Seal?


L. Cheat. From the Steward.


1 Cred. Are ye all mad? We had it from you, for which you had two hundred
pounds a piece from us.


Prig. Out you impudent Rogue! Get you gone.


1 Cit. Away, lying ^llows!


Lump. Be gone, ye Vipers!

[They thrust'em out.
L. Cheat. Now, Gentlemen, I desire you that remain, to take part of ^
Collation with me, and I will show all the Evidences of my Estate to you.

[Exeunt.
Enter Isabella and Bellamore. Isab. There can be no defense to suspect me, and
with that Wretch Selfish too.


Bell. Jealousy, like the Smallpox; if it comes out kindly, is never mortal;
and my Love will be the stronger, and the more vigorous, for this short
Distemper.


Isab. It may relapse again.


Bell. It Is past all danger now.


Isab. And will you still give a thousand pounds down, and three hundred pounds
a year, for this Tenement, notwithstanding the encumbrance of Selfish upon it.


Bell. When I made these offers, I did not know half your worth: I was a fair
Chapman for your Beauty; but your Virtue, and other Perfections, are
inestimable.


Isab. And shall I flant it in the Park with my gray Flanders, crowd the Walk
with my Equipage, and be the Envy of all the Butterflyes in Town?


Bell. Forget that vain Discourse, as I have done, and take me and all I have
for ever.


Isab. Sure a Man of your Wit will never marry; every rich Fool can get a Woman
that way.


Bell. Do not insult, but take me quickly to your mercy.


Isab. I Will not deceive you: Whatever show my Mother makes, I have no Portion,
nor was ever troubled at the thought of it till now.


Bell. I am glad of it; for now my Love will be the more easily believed, and
better taken.


Isab. No, Bellamore.


Bell. How, Madam?


Isab. No, I say -- for were I Queen of Europe, your Love would be as well
accepted as it is now.


Bell. You surprise me with an Honor too great to bear.


Enter Lady Cheatly. L. Cheat. What? Are you agreed yet? She is a foolish Girl,
Sir, and looks as high as better Women.


Bell. She Is very humble, and is pleased to accept of me for a Husband, and
there wants only your consent, and a few words from a Parson, to complete my
happiness.


L. Cheat. You honor our Family, and cannot doubt of my consent: She is yours.


Enter Lady Busy, Young Maggot, and Gartrude. L. Busy. I present you here with
a Son and Daughter: I saw 'em married; give 'em your Blessing.


L. Cheat. Heaven bless you! Madam, I can never thank you enough; you have made
me happy, in removing my greatest affliction.


Enter Selfish and Stanmore. L. Busy. I love to put Lovers together: Virtuous
actions reward themselves.


Stan. Young Maggot married? Give you Joy, Sir: Your Love to Wit and Beauty is
at length rewarded.


Yo. Mag. I will now keep company with none but the top-Wits, and write Plays,
Songs and Lampoons, in defiance of the Fop my Uncle.


L. Busy. Not so fast: Get him to settle first.


L. Cheat. I Will call my Brother, and the rest of my company, to be Witnesses to
my happiness.

[Ex. L. Cheatly.
Self. Pretty Mistress! You look to day like a delicate Picture, and Young
Maggot your Foyl.


Gart. I vow, you court me so gentilely, I shall die to part with you: I cried
in the Church, that I did, and had like to have spoiled all.


Self. But will you promise me a Meeting?


Yo. Mag. Stand off: She Is mine.


Self. You are to have her ever after; methinks you should allow her one day,
to take leave of her Friends.


Enter Lady Cheatly, Lump, Maggot, Prigg, etc. Yo. Mag. Uncle, Your Unkindness
has made me look about me, and Heaven has blessed my Wit and Poetry with a rich
Wife here, Mrs. Gartrude: I won her by 'em.


Mag. Ay, Boy, I know it, and know her Fortune as well as my own: Thou art a
mettled Lad, and I like thy Humor well; give me a Phillis with ten thousand
pounds, I could sing one of thy own Songs my self, I am so taken with this
Match.


Yo. Mag. I hope then you will settle your Estate, as you always promised, if I
married to your liking.


Mag. If I have no Children by my dear Wife, her Mother here.


Prig. La Cheatly, your Wife, she has promised me Marriage.


Mag. What-e're she has promised you, she has performed Marriage with me this
Morning. Be gone, Rook, they stay for thee at the Twelve-penny Ordinary.


Prig. What say you, Madam?


L. Cheat. It Is very true.


Prig. Then you are very false.


Mag. As your Dice: Gamester, I Will hold you Cockpit Lay, ten pound to a Crown,
she is Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my Flesh.


L. Cheat. This is the Gentleman I Will live and die with.


Prig. Death and Hell! I Will declare all I know.


L. Cheat. You will declare your self a perjured Knave, if you do. Hark here.

[aside.
Mag. What do they whisper for?


L. Cheat. All the Steward says, is true: I am worth little or nothing; my
whole Fortune a Cheat; this old Gentleman I chose, because he is governable,
and loves Business, of which my broken Fortune will give him enough.


Prig. What a Cross-bite have I escaped? This Sham was well carried on, Madam:
Did you hear, old Fool?


Mag. Ounds! I am cheated, undone, and my Nephew ruined, and married to a
Beggar.


Yo. Mag. I must even write hard for the Playhouse; I may get the reversion of
the Poet Laureat's place: I thought, Uncle, you had known every foot of her
Estate.


Prig. Well, I Will go to New Market, and never have to do with a two-legg'd Jade
more: I shall rook, and go to Twelve, let what will come on it.


Mag. Since she has no Fortune, I shall have no Business neither.


Yo. Mag. None, but that which I am afraid you cannot do, Uncle.


Mag. Is this a time for Wit, you Rascal, when we are both undone.

He beats Yo. Mag. Perri^ig off, from under it drop several Copies of Verses.
Stan. A Muss, a Muss.

A Copy of Verses upon a Flea, presented to his Mistress, in a gold Chain.

Oh happy Flea! that may both kiss and bite,
Like Lovers, in their height of Appetite,
Her Neck so white.
Pretty black Alderman, in golden Chain,
Who suck'st her Blood, yet putt'st her to no pain,
Whilst I in vain.

Mag. What would become of the writing-Coxcombs, if it were not for reading
ones? I Will hear no more.


L. Cheat. If you will go on, and maintain what I have done, I shall have a
good Estate yet, though it belongs of right to other People.


Mag. Right? It Is no matter for Right: I Will show 'em Law.


Th^od. The Plague of Marriage rages in this House; let us fly from the
In^ction.


Car. I am so sar gone, it is to no purpose to remove. Well, if you continue to
be so unkind, you will ruin my Soul, Body, and Estate.


Theod. How so?


Car. Why, I can never marry any other; and in despair of you, I shall turn the
most debauched whoring Rogue, 'twould grieve your heart to see it: I shall
never be able to sleep without my three Bottles, and a fresh Woman every night.


Isab. It Is an act of Charity to redeem him.


Theod. The Devil seldom los^s any thing by Matrimony; they most commonly grow
worse for it.


Car. I will lead a solid, sober, Husbandly life, if you will marry me; if not,
Whoring and Drinking will ensue.


Isab. Nay, now I must judge against you: You have lost your Wager, and you
must pay it; you have confessed to me you loved him infinitely.


Theod. Believe her not, I deny it.


Car. Though I distrust my self, I must believe my fair Judge: I will have a
Canonical Bom-Baily, and arrest you upon Execution.


Theod. I will have a Month's time; you shall be so long a Probationer, before
you enter in the Order.


Car. In hope of your good Nature, I will press no farther at this time: Now
you that have reached at your Inn of Matrimony, will pray for us Travelers upon
the Road.


Stan. So, Gentlemen, we have lost ye, ye are not Men of this World* now make
much of your Matrimonial Bonds; I am glad, I have done my Business without 'em.


Self. Ladies are so kind to me, I need never marry one for the matter. Well, I
will go home, and put on a very delicate, neat, convenient Suit, to dance with
the Brides in here.


Lump. I give you all Joy. You see. Sister, how things prosper, when godly Men
are the Instruments. I say to all, to all of you I say,

Be godly, observe Method, and be wise;
Car. Most excellent means to cover Cheats and Lies.

EPILOGUE, By the AUTHOR.
IN troubled Times, like these -- the Ancients chose
T'exhibit Feasts and Plays, and public Shows.
By such Diversions t'allay men's Fears,
Compose their Minds, and mollify their Cares.
If they did well then, now your Mirth to raise,
Were of such merit, you the attempt should praise.
But it is a Task too hard for Comedy,
Which never again expects good Days to see.
The numerous Herd of Fopps and Knaves arise,
Such as to Poets should be lawful prize*
Whom they like Magistrates ought to cha^ize.
The Embargo's lay on Wit, and stop our Trading,
If noted Knaves or Coxcombs be the Lading:
But this Proceeding would be too severe,
Whom the Town scorns sure we may laugh at here.
All Prodigies to public Marts should come,
Heaven made not Coxcombs for a private Room.
If sullen Fools would make no sport to the Nation
We lose the only use of their Creation.
If such be drawn unlike, we punish none,
And if too like some Fopps those persons own.
Our Poet therefore Sale-work Habits makes,
But of particular Men no Measure takes.
Variety of Garments we expose
For Wits for Knaves, for Fools, all sort of Clothes.
If any want that Honesty, or Wit,
To think o^r Fools or Knaves their Persons hit,
Here they may have 'em, and w' are glad they sit.
FINIS.

