THE Amorous Bigotte: WITH THE SECOND PART OF Tegue O Divelly. A COMEDY, Acted
by Their Majesty's Servants.

Written by THO. SHADWELL, Poet Laureat, and Historiographer Royal to Their
MAJESTY'S.

LONDON: Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1690.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES E. of Shrewsbury, etc.
My Lord,
I Have ever been ready to own all Obligations received from any Man; but being
favored by so great and good a Man as your Lordship, I think it so much to my
honor, that I cannot but be proud of it, which makes me take the first
occasion to publish my Gratitude, and boast of your Patronage. Nor have I any
other end in making bold with your Lordships Name before this Trifle. I would
not be so unreasonable to desire your Lordship to defend the weakness of my
Writings: I have been by long sickness made very unfit for that Task. A man
ought not to hope to Please the world very much, who is not at ease, and
somewhat pleased himself: Tho I have no reason to complain of the reception of
this Play.

For my own, but much more for my Countries sake, I rejoice that there is a
TALBOT still left to sustain the Honor of that Illustrious Family; so able, so
sincere, and so disinterested a Minister; so real a Lover and Honourer of his
King, equally faithful in his Services to him, and true to the Interest of his
Country. (Nor can any one be faithful to the first, who is not true to the
latter); for in effect they are but one; and they can never be odious enough
who endeavor to divide it.

We still have a Talbot who is a firm Friend to the English, and a just Enemy
to the French; and I doubt not, my Lord, but you will live by your Counsels and
Actions to become as terrible to them as any of your brave Ancestors have been.
I dare not be too forward in your just Commendations, Praise being not the end
that a man who is truly great ever aims at; nor does an ingenuous Man delight
in it: To such the conscience of doing well is the only satisfaction. But one
thing out of the abundance of my heart I cannot restrain my self from observing
in your Lordship.

The most important business of this world, the Education of Youth (which ought
to be put into the hands of the ablest, wisest, most learned and virtuous men,
who have no other interest but the bettering of men's minds; and because of the
great trouble of the Office, it ought to have great Rewards and Dignities
affixed to it by the public) is for want of those encouragements put upon such
mean, weak, or corrupt persons, that it is the greatest task of a man's life to
break loose from his Education, and shake off the prejudices he contracted by
it; which none but a great Genius ever does* The rest, tho of the highest rank,
swallow every thing unchew'd, and take every thing unexamind from their first
Dry-Nurses in Petticoats to their last in Square-Caps: Women begin with them,
and young Priests end with 'em, who are sure to bring 'em up to the interest of
the Clergy, tho it be never so much against that of the Laity.

Your Lordship, by strength of Understanding, and industrious Enquiry, early
performed this great Task, and freed your self from those Principles instilled
into you in your Youth; which would have made you incapable of being a good
Subject and a great Patriot in your riper age; and have since became so eminent
in both characters, that every man that heartily loves the constitution of our
English Government, has a profound Respect and Veneration for your Lordship.

Nor will your share of Honor deserve to be less in History than that of the
bravest of your Ancestors* since none could ever more freely adventure Life,
Estate and Honor for their Countries Freedom than your Lordship did. And it
appears to me to be much a greater Glory to be highly instrumental in the
Redemption of ones own, than in the Conquest of another. And I beseech your
Lordship pardon this interruption of your business or diversion, from him who
is, without any mixture of fawning, most sincerely,

My Lord, Your Lordships most obedient Humble Servant.
May 5. 1690*
Drammatis Personae*
Bernardo, a Spaniard, Colonel of a Regiment in Flanders, a vapouring
blustering Soldier. Mr. Underhill. Luscindo, his Son, a well-bred Gentleman,
and a man of Honor. Mr. Williams. Doristeo, a young Gentleman of Gallantry and
Courage. Mr. Bowman. Finardo, his Friend. Mr. Alexander. Tegue O Divelly, an
Irish Friar. Mr. Leigh. Hernando, a Gentleman that waits upon Bernardo. Mr.
Boen. Diego, Bernardo's Servant; his Barber. Young Lee. Sancho, Doristeo' s
Servant. Belliza, the Amorous Bigottee. Mrs. Corey. Elvira, her Daughter. Mrs.
Jordan. Rosania, her Neice. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Grycia, the old Governante. Mrs.
Orsborne. Levia, a fine Courtezan. Mrs. Butler. Gremia, her Aunt. Mr. Noakes.
Bravos and Servants.
Scene, Madrid.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Butler. SOme of our Authors special Friends will say,
That the whole Audience is trepanned to day,
And for a new, shall find a damned old Play.
He on a Spanish Plot once writ before,
And some the Priest with great impatience bore;
But tho the Party took it much amiss,
They had not the good breeding then to hiss.
Our own Sir Roger on the Stage appears,
And why should not a foolish Priest of theirs?
On that foundation then he built, it is true,
But like Drake's Ship, it is so repaired it is new;
Newer than his Contemporaries show,
Who all to Novels or Romances owe,
And from whose Native Springs naught e're did flow.
Nor should you his of Barrenness accuse,
Who graced the Thefts of any other Muse
Nor tie him up alone to new invention;
And if to want of Wit it is no pretension
To lose, he is sure it is none to gain the Pension.
But hold, my business now is to declare
Against Bear-garden Hissers open War;
He d'at is after Hishing in dish plaash,
I Will Shing Lilli-burlero in his faash.
Not the brave Wolsely can do more in quelling,
Those nimble Teagues with Men of Inniskilling,
Than I subduing these; for at the Head,
Of our brave Party, I will look them Dead.
But to prevent much Brutal Hiss and Stamp,
Send out the fiercest Champion of your Camp:
Let me the proudest of the Hissers see,
I Will make him know he is no Match for me;
Soon shall the Lists your doubty Warrior quit,
Taught by my single Courage to submit.
You might have better Words, were it not plain
The gentlest usage of you is but vain;
E'n take your course, our Poet bid me say,
If all of you be such dull Fools to pay
For being displeased, come and Hiss every day.
If good the Play, your Hisses will be vain;
If bad, no Claps its weakness can sustain.
If this be lost, he is not of all bereft,
He hopes he still shall have some credit left
He Is sure by this his Friends he shall not lose,
And keeping them he cares not for his Foes.
Plays Printed for James Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.
SQuire of Alsatia. Bury-Fair. The True Widow: Comedies. Written by Tho.
Shadwell. The Fortune-Hunters: Written by Mr. Carlisle. Mr. Anthony: Written by
the Earl of Orrery. Widow Ranter: Written by Mrs. A. Behn. English Friar, or
the Town-Sparks: Written by Mr. Crown. The Devil of a Wife: Written by Mr.
Ievon. The Forced Marriage: Written by Mrs. A. Behn. All Comedies. Pope Joan: A
Tragedy.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Elvira, Rosania. Elvi. Where Is my Mother, Rosania?


Ros. In her Closet Cousin, where should she be?


Elv. Close at her Beads I warrant you.


Rosa. She has been very devout since Horatio went off from his Honorable
proposals of Matrimony.


Elvi. Thou art a mischievous Girl, art not thou ashamed to railly thy good
Aunt so?


Rosa. Well, she has been most grievously devout ever since his apostasy, to
the vexation of us all: But should he turn about again, she would soon lay down
her Beads, and quaver to her Guitarr, like an old Spinstress to a Wheel.


Elv. Yes, and discard the Irish Friar, Father Tegue and his Lay Brother, for a
brace of unclean Tyre-women: It Is somewhat hard to set ones heart upon the
other World, till we grow unfit for the uses of this.


Rosa. Very true, for my part, I believe there are none weary of the World,
till the World are weary of them; the World begins with them first.


Elvi. Thou art in the right; methinks it is a very pretty World; they may talk
what they will of Vanity, the most pious Christians in Madrid are loath to leave
it.


Rosa. I am resolved for my part, to have a good opinion of the World, till the
World has an ill opinion of me; and there is an end on it.


Enter Grycia. Gryc. Mrs. Rosania, my Lady calls for you.


Rosa. I go.


Elvi. Pray say I am retired, here is my office.


Gry. Madam, the Ghostly Fathers are with my Lady.


Elv. Now is their time indeed; have they no Collation?


Gry. Lord Madam, that you should ask that, when were they here without one?


Elv. Good men, they are content to suffer here on Earth, and with much eating
and drinking, they painfully consult about affairs of Heaven.


Rosa. Will you not go to 'em, and take part of what they eat and talk?


Elv. No; much good may't do my Mother with her Irish Hypocrite, the Reverend
Father Tegue O Divelly; I have at present no Stomach to Sweetmeats or
Confessors. Office lie thou there, and now to my Novella's. Exeunt Ros. and
Gryc. So, to my wish, I am alone, and now can freely think of him who has so
often Charmed me. Hah, what Madness is this to fall in Love with one I know
not! Nor does he know me, or my Love! Oh, if his Mind be like his Body, (and
certainly it must be so) 'twill justify my passion to the World. But let me
see Cervantes, what say thou? Ha, who s there? whither now?


Elvira shuffles Cervantes under the Cushion, and takes up the Office. Enter
Grycia Gry. The good men are gossiping with my Lady, and zealously expecting a
recruit of Sweetmeats.


Elv. Good men, they thrive well, and grow fat upon Mortification. But now to
my Legend of Lovers. She walks and Reads. Ha Madam, that was a subtle way of
discovering your passion, but it will not serve in my case. But I must find
some means to let him see my face, and if he like it, so, if not, mercy on me,
I dare not think on what must follow.

Let me see.

She pulls out her Pocket Glass. Ha! what noise is that?

She puts up her Glass hastily. These Liquorish Priests dispatch their
Sweetmeats with as much haste as a hunted Bear would a Honey-Pot.


Enter Rosania. Rosa. The Fathers (at present up to the knuckles in Jelly of
Quinces, with three or four Bottles of the richest Wines) desire your sweet
company.


Elv. Tell 'em I am retired, and cannot come.


Rosa. Ha, ha, Novella's and a Pocket glass instead of Beads and Office.


Elv. Get you gone Huswife, you grow as mischievous as a Monkey.


Rosa. Well, well, l'le leave you to your pious Meditations, Farewell.

[Exit.
Elv. Let me see, will this Face do any Execution, [ Elv. takes up the Pocket
Glass.] If it will, look to thy Heart, my unknown Gallant. The Poets call these
hairs our Snares and Nets; if they be l'le set them, let who will be entangled
with them -- Now for my Patches, these are to Powder our Ermin Skins with; --
ha, my dear unknown Love, have at thee.


Enter Belliza, Father Tegue and Lay Brother. Bell. Bless me Father! what use
she makes of her Retirements! these are her Devotions.


Elv. Have they caught me, I Am undone.


She shuffles away her Glass and Novella's. Bell Come Mistress I Will see what
you have here, Belliza finds the Book. Benedicite! what is here? a wicked and
profane Love Book; good Father, I besecch your Reverence, make her Heart ache
with penance for this.


Teg. In trot it is great pity of dee, and a great faable, by my shoul I vould
have all handsome Ladies dewout indeed* and I do love to put my Eye upon them,
and maake a great faash upon them, when I do instruct them, indeed gra.


Elv. No doubt on it.


Teg. I do love to caast de look upon de pretty Laady indeed, vid pious
meditaation, and consideraation dat Heaven did maake them she handshom gra.


Bell. Good holy Man, we are bound to admire the works of Heaven.


Teg. Vel shayd Daughter, dou dosht spoke like an aable shaint, indeed gra; but
I must complain upon you for dis waanity, if dou musht have some waanity, joy
pridee now taake shome fit days for dat occaasion of waanity.


[To Elv. Bell. This is a sweet preparation in procession week, to be pruning
your self, like an unclean Bird.


Teg. Phaat will I spaake unto you for dese spotts and blemishes upon die shweet
faash gra, arrah I will maake you do de greaat penance for dish.


Bell. What Is the reason Father I may not wear patches?


Teg. Aboo, boo, boo, what am I dat dou dosht maake expostulaation, and demand
a Reason of me?


Elv. One that has it not about him.


Teg. Reashon of me, dou dosht maake indignaation and affront upon me, by my
shoulwation. Am I not a Priesht, and vil I give a Reashon.


Bell. 'Twas wickedly done to affront the good Man so.


Teg. Have I Converted sho many Heretics dogs and was sho deep in our braave
Plott, and had like to have bin after being slain upon a Gibbet, and been a
great Martyr for de Plott, and dosht dou require a Reashon of me?


Elv. Why would you escape? You would have done great service to the Church, by
being hanged for it, no doubt Sir a man of your Reverence.


Teg. I will agree vid dee upon daat, but I do not caare for being hanged, it
dosh maake a Priest look sho like a Beasht and a Dogue indeed, and besides I
vould not be hanged but vid a with, as our Forefathers in Ireland used to be
Hanged.


Bell. You Are a right Sanctified Man; and Heaven be praised for thy
deliverance.


'Teag. Ah good shoule dou vilt be a greaat Shaint indeed joy. I will tell unto
dee I did escaape because I did deshire to be a Caardinal, and by my
Shoulwaation I tink I will be a Caardinal before I will have Death, dear has
not bin one Eerish Caardinal a great while, I did Plot as well, and could hang
as well as de best of them, but if I be a Caardinal I know what I will do.


Elv. Well I am corrected, I will never ask a reason of you more, I would as
soon beg of a Spanish Soldier.


Teg. Do not, for de Church is infaallible, and de Pope is infaallible, and de
Caardinals are infaallible, and I will spoke more unto you, de Prieshts are
infaallible too. And I shay blesh die shweet Faash from patches, dou hasht a
pretty Faash pull of dese Spots, He pulls them off and Chucks her under the
Chin. I would not veare patches upon my faash for de Vorld indeed joy, no sait
vould I not. By my shoul she is a brave Lady --


aside. Elv. The wisest may sometimes be loosers by their scruples.


Teg. I do not caare for all dat I will be content vid mine own Faash, vid out
patches fait and be Abo'o! dou haasht shome upon die breasht joy I will put them
off.


He presses her breast, she resists. Elv. What do you do, hold off.


Bell. Oh wicked Child! do you resist the good Man?


Teg. By my shoul I will take them off, Mash it is gallant Flesh and Blood,
Ab'oo, I cannot bear it, farewell I will meet dee upon de prado!


Bell. Go to, you have angered the good Man, Grycia!


Enter Grycia. Gryc. Madam.


Bell. Get our Vails, we will make visits to the Saints at several Churches.


[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Luscindo, Hernando. Luscin. Put on thy Hat Hernando, thou
have been too long my Fathers good Servant, not to be my Companion, and art to
have the next Commission that falls in my Flanders Regiment.


Hern. I shall ever be your Servant: but Sir.


Luscin. Thou mutterst and art angry with me, prithee speak thy mind with
freedom.


Hern. I am angry with you because I love you.


Luscin. Thou have wit and courage, and I know thou love me.


Hern. Pox on this insolent Curtezan for me.


Luscin. Will thou not allow me one folly.


Hern. Not when that folly allows you nothing of your self. Dote upon a Wench,
jealous, vexed, and disquieted for a Wench!


Luscin. Speak with more Reverence of a Wench, why from Mexico to Iapan, is
there such a joy, such a comfort as a Wench: What do Kings War for but for
power, and power for what? To have what Concubines they please, there is the
end. What do we Officers fight for, but for Money and a little Honor, to get a
Wench? what have Priests, Bishops and Cardinals profits and Dignities, but to
procure Wenches? Is there a man in Spain, Lay or Spirititual without a Wench,
who has Wit or Money enough to get one? And then to speak thus irreverently of
one!


Hern. Pardon me Sir, -- I would have a Wench to please me, but not to trouble
me.


Luscin. Of all our Art and Industry, our toil and hazard, Woman's the sweet
end; who would give a doyt to govern Men, but by that means to have power over
Women?


Hern. A Gentleman may have a little innocent lust, or so, but to fall in love,
and with a Mercenary thing.


Luscin. Thou art no Philosopher Hernando, prithee what is Love? why nothing
but great Lust.


Hern. Oh sye Sir; Your true Lover sighs and pines, and seeks out shady Groves,
and murmering Brooks, and tells his mournful tale, with Arms a cross to Echo,
and never thinks his Mistress is a Woman, but a Goddess.


Luscin. No where but in Romances, why there is no diversion or conversation in
Madrid, but with a Curtezan. The men are too grave (not to be uncivil and
saydull) and the honest Women are locked up; besides none in Spain are so well
bred as your Curtezans, Hernando, no more.


Hern. Why will you put your self in pain because you think another Courts this
Levia, and she is wavering, there are others as handsome in Madrid, see her no
more


Luscin. Pain is but a relishing bit, to make us taste our pleasure better; she
has made me jealous, which spurs up my restive Love, that would have Jaded
otherwise whilst she loved only me, I could have loved another, but now she
loves another, I can love none but her.


Hern. A very pretty riddle, make her believe you love another and she perhaps
may then love none but you.


Luscin. I have it in my Head, come along with me to her, thou shall see me use
her scurvily, and try what that will do.


Hern. You know how angry your Father will be.


Luscin. Let what will come on it, I will go through.


Hern. I have stood by you when Bullets have whistled about our Ears, and will
not leave you now.


Luscin. Come on.


[ Ex. Luscindo and Hernando* Enter Gremia and Levia. Gre. Are you stark mad
Neice, by your extravagance to lose the finest, properest, kindest and most
liberal Lover in Madrid.


Lev. Come Aunt, you understand not my business:


Gre. Go to Mistress; I not understand a Woman's business with a Man, that is
fine.


Lev. Nay I must confess you have been used to bring the Young together, and
make mere strangers Friends.


Gre. Oh cry you mercy, have I so, I Will breed no bate nor division between
young People, if they agree not in their Youth, they will hardly be brought
together in their Age.


Lev. You can procure the beginning of Love; but know not how to make that Love
continue.


Gre. Marry come up, you shall keep School and teach new tricks to Widows above
Fifty, did not I take you a poor sorry Girl, out of your Mothers hands, rest
her Soul, she little thought what preferment you would come to? did not I
bestow all Accomplishments of good breeding to fit you for a shining Mistress
in Madrid?


Lev. Well Aunt.


Gre. And has not Heaven blessed my endeavors, and made you a very Paragon. And
you with your extravagance to cast away the fruit of all my care and Prayers
for you.


Lev. Why so froward Aunt, what all Age, and no Gravity?


Gre. You will make me Gray with sorrow.


Lev. Luscindo began to cool upon my fondness, and seek out new Adventures; and
I Am resolved to plague him for it.


Gre. You say you Love him?


Lev. Yes, with such madness as admits no rest.


Gre. And will you anger him?


Lev. Yes, therefore, if we don't season our love with anger sometimes, 'twill
be too luscious, and men will surfeit of it.


Gre. Well I have another Neice who shall obey me, but pray make ready to Mass,
you will consider the day I hope; I shall never live to neglect good days, how
can we look for a blessing upon our endeavors else. Here he comes, why Neice.


Enter Luscindo and Hernando at one door, Doristeo and Finardo at the other.
Levia. Let me alone, by Heaven I will have my own way, Fa, la, la, la, are you
there, were you sent for?


Luscin. No, had I been so, it is ten to one I had not come.


Levi. You Are very haughty on the sudden Sir.


Finar. Where is the pretty Miss that I must treat for?


Gre. Bless me do you know what day it is, and what week, you make me tremble,
will you make no difference of days, Benedicite?


Dorist. A very pious Bawd.


Gre. Upon a Holy Day in a Holy week, have you no conscience, have you no grace
left?


Finar. Be not transported, good Madam.


Gre. Never tell me, I must serve Heaven sometimes as well as Minister to the
necessities of young Gentlemen.


Dorist. Be not so hot, but hear me but one word.


Gre. 'Lass I must confess Gallants will have occasion sometimes, but then they
must be sure to choose fit days.


Dor. Madam, I must be possessed of Levia, I cannot live without her, she is
yonder, she seems fallen out with her Gallant, and has of late given me some
hopes.


Lev. My love like the wind shall never stay long in a Corner.


Luscin. I am pleased so it never blows on me again.


Lev. What does he mean? I Will try him to the quick.


aside. Luscin. Did you give her my Letter, Hernando?


Hern. Yes, and she Kissed it as eagerly as if she would have swallowed it.


Luscin. What was she doing?


Hern. Singing to her Guittar, with such a ravishing Melody I know not which
expressed more skill, her Voice or Fingers, but they both excelled all I have
ever heard, her Face, her Mine, her Shape beyond all parallel.


Lev. Thou lie, base parasite and pimp, she is some Dowdy Queen.


Luscin. Good, she resents it to the full, and cannot bear it.


Lev. What have I done? I shall blow up my whole design by showing Anger; Ha,
ha, ha, this is a pretty tale indeed, Ha, ha, ha.


Luscin. For old acquaintance sake, I could not conceal my good Fortune from
you, and now you know the reason of my coming I shall take my leave.


Lev. And as a sign that I have been provident, behold? kind Doristeo excuse
me: the parting with a tedious old friend whom I shall never see more, has made
me not so civil to my new one as I ought.


Dor. My dear, my sweet, I am transported.


Finar. Pox on it, where is my Mistress; I Would fain be transported too.


Lev. (aside) Ha, ha, ha, this touches him I see. (to Dor.) Let your Coach
attend here after Mass, we'll see the Pictures which came from Rome: And in the
Evening we will drive in the Parado.


Luscin. Death shall I bear this?


Hern. S' Heart Sir are you mad? will you spoil your own design by being angry,
laugh Sir, laugh, ha, ha, ha.


Lev. Aside. Walk this way a little. To Dotisteo. Ah Luscindo, I have thee fast
upon the Hook, and I will play with thee.


[aside. Hern. Madam, there is a Lady will revenge our quarrel.


Lev. I Will not do thee the honor to laugh at thee.


Gre. Come, where are you young Gentlewomen? to Church, come on.


Minia. Here Madam.


[ Exeunt Doristeo, Finardo, Gremia, Levia and Minia. Hern. This haughty
Curtezan by her Pride, is a Mistress fit for none but Lucifer himself?


Luscin. I am provoked to the disordering of my Temper: But I shall not want
occasion of that, Don wants not Courage.


Hern. 'Life Sir fear nothing, you may be sure of her Love, by her anger; she
swelled at what I told her like a Dutch Trumpeter, she had fire in her face,
and flames in her Eyes.


Luscin. Let Us see which way they go.


Hern. Sir if you dog her, you're undone; in Love as in War, they that strike
first, have the worst on it: You must dodge like an Old General.


Luscin. Well she shall not be too hard for me, I will have my will on her.


[ Exeunt Luscindo and Hernando. Enter Belliza, Elvira, Rosania. Bell. Why
Daughter, Oh wicked Girl, what wandering eyes you fling about you, whom would
you entangle? Why Rosania! you wanton Minx, you are stareing up at every
Window, like an Indian who had never seen a City. A modest Maid should have no
other object but the ground*


Elv. The Earth is a prospect for Beasts, and Heaven for us Madam.


Rosa. Would you have me always look upon my Nose, and learn to squint?


Elv. If you always looked upon the ground, how did you get a Husband?


Bell By the reputation of my modesty, I was indeed forced. My inclination was
to a Nunnery, why Rosania?


Rosa. I was only looking at a Balcony to see a young Gentleman play with a
Ladies Fan.


Bell* How now, have you your distinctions already, and observe who is Young
and Old.


Enter Father Tegue and Lay Brother. Bell. Oh Father, we walked softly, waiting
for you here.


Teg. I will tell de Laady what I have seen indeed, all dee Shaints are in dear
besht Apparel, and are very brave Joy, arrah my Lady, it vould do good to your
Heart in your Body, to she them dat I have sheen.


Elv. This is a very silly Fellow, Rosania.


Teg. A Shick Tailor, has shent a very braave Pettycoat to Shaint Clare, and by
my Shoul she does look very gallantly.


Bell. Well that good Tailor may be an Example to us all, who ever he be, I Will
warrant him a good Soul, and a devout Workman.


Teg. Oh yes, Tailors are very honest, phen dey be very sick introt.


Bell. What else Father have you observed?


Teg. Why Shaint Teresia, has new habitts from Cap a pie shent from Paris, I
tell you she is now ash fine and braave, as e're a Shaint in Madrid, no
dishpraise to any; she may show her Faace before them all; phat vill I shay more?


Bell. I Am glad on it, for to say truth, 'twas a shame to keep her so poor and
Thredbare upon Holy days, and I may say in private, without shifts of under
Linen.


Elv. Now she is Dead, and can neither work nor beg for her self.


Teg. Dou shayst vel Daughter, it vas a great pity and a shaame and a great
Faable too.


Enter Doristeo and Finardo. Rosa. Cousin, Cousin, methinks yonder is the
finest Gentleman I ever saw.


Dor. I have ordered my Coach to be here about, and I must wait for my humorous
Mistress, she may be as slippery as an Eele for ought I know.


Rosa. Did you ever see so delicate a Man?


Elv. Oh yes, many a one.


Rosa. I am sure you never did, it is impossible.


Elv. Ah ha Cousin art thou thereabouts?


Finar. Who can that young Lady be, that fixed her Eye upon you, as if she
would dart you through.


Dor. I cannot imagine, she has the brightest Eye I ever saw, and a Mine beyond
any of the Sex. I am resolved I Will have her dogged, but let us not seem to mark
them.


[ Ex. Doristeo, and Finardo. Rosa. He minds us not.


Elv. Sure I shall be so happy to have one sight of my Love, at some of the
Churches.


All this while Bell. is kissing the Friars Beads and paying great Reverence to
them. Enter Luscindo and Hernando. Luscin. Pox on this Curtezan, she vexes me
at heart.


Elv. Ha, this is he, there is no other like him.


Rosa. Can you not guess Cousin, what fine Gentleman that was even now?


[ Elvira minds her not. Luscin. What shape, what motion's there? If her face
be answerable, she threatens Death to all who look on her, she seems to observe
us!


Elv. I am resolved to try if my face can conquer him, who with such force has
vanquished me.


Luscin. If I could get but one glimpse of her face.


Elv. I Will drop my Handkerchief, sure he will take it up and give it me.


[Drops her Handkerchief, Luscinda takes it up. Luscin. Madam, vouchsafe a
moment but one look.


Elv. What is your meaning Sir?


Luscin. Be pleased to accept this little service, this Handkerchief dropped from
you Madam.


Elv. From me Sir, you are mistaken, sure, I Will search; the truth is Sir, mine
is missing, but I think mine had not so fair a Lace.


Luscin. It can be none but yours Madam.


Elv. I Will put it up in hope it may be mine; but if you hear of one who has
more right to it; I live in Garden-street at the Blue and Gold Balcony, near the
House of Don Bernardo.


Luscin. He is my Father, most Divine Creature.


Elv. His Father?


She steps from him. Bell. Why Elvira, where are you? There are Gallants here,
bless us, Temptation is approaching, Fly.


Rosa. Ah Cousin, I find something, that I had not this way to give a sample of
my self!


aside. Luscin. By Heaven she is the brightest thing I ever saw.


[ Exit Bell. Priest, Lay Brother, Elvira and Rosania. Hern. If ever any Angel
wore a Petticoat, this may be one.


Luscin. The World has not a Beauty like her, I am all on Fire.


Hern. And Sir I can tell you some news which may make well for you; your
Father is resolved not to return to Flanders, but to Marry the devout Widow
Belliza, who undoubtedly is this Ladies Mother, what think you now of Levia?


Luscin. Name not that paltry thing, this beauty came from Heaven.


Hern. And truly* the other Beauty is going to Hell.


Luscin. As suddenly as Lightning she struck, and as soon vanished, she has
kindled in me in a wild and desperate flame; and I am resolved I will possess
her or perish in the attempt.


[Exeunt. ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Belliza, Elvira, Rosania. Bell. CAst not your wandering Eyes on either
hand, I Will lead, pray follow one another singly; and look strait forward thus.


Enter Doristeo and Finardo, and Servant. Elv. Like Mules in a Draught.


Rosa. Look forward thus, quoth she, would my Aunt have one of us look like her.


Elv. Indeed it is a little unreasonable.


Bell. D' ye hear young ones.


Dor. What would I give to have one glimps of this unknown Mistress, or to find
who she is.


Finar. I thought your known Mistress might have been enough for you for some
time.


Dor. There Is no comparison betwixt an adventure and a purchase, especially
where the Mistress seems the Aggressor.


Finar. Yes, for an Adventure you may have your Throat cut, for your purchase
you are safe.


Bell. Come follow me as I direct you.


Rosa. I am ruined, the sight of this young Cavalier has put me into wildness
and confusion*


Bell. Why you Minx, I see you there; whither do you throw your wicked Glances?


Dor. She is her Daughter by the authority she exercises over her.


Rosa. What e're come on it he shall see my Face.


[She stumbles and falls down on her hands and knees, Dor. steps in and helps
her up, she shows her Face as if by accident. Dor. Though I Am sorry for your
misfortune, yet I Am glad I was so happy to have the honor to serve you, Madam.


Rosa. Your Civility deserves my thanks Sir, which I heartily return and wish
it in my power to requite.


Bell. Oh Heaven, Complements and showing her Face to a Man the Saints defend
us, you are defiled, get you gone Huswife before me; I shall set a Watch upon
you; avoid Sir, come not near.


Dor. Blame not common Civility Madam, if I had given her a fall you might be
angry, but not for helping of her up when she was down.


Bell. Fly, fly.


[ Exit Rosa. Elv. and Bell Dor. She is the most surprising Beauty I ever saw,
she has struck me to the heart; Sancho follow at some distance till you find
where she goes in.


Sancho. I need not do it I know her Mother, it is Belliza the Biggotte Widow
that lives at the Blue and Gold Balcony, in Garden street.


Dor. She shall soon hear from me, and as I guess it will not be unacceptable,
this Levia will tarnish and grow dull upon my hands; I never knew Love before
this day, these killing Beams have pierced me through and through.


Finar. For my part I Am for good safe Wenching, without Knight errantry.


Dor. Thou have a gross unelevated fancy, it is difficulty makes the pleasure
high and racy.


Finar. Well I can eat my Venison without venturing my Neck to Hunt it down,
it is want of appetite that requires such circumstances.


Dor. If I could enjoy the whole Sex as easily as one Wife, there would be no
pleasure in 'em all; the whole Sex would be but one Wife.


Finar. Then farewell Levia.


Enter Gremia. Dor. No, I may have a long Journey to this Paragon, and must be
forced to bait by the way. Besides in this Race I have Rival strains against
me, and I Am resolved to whip and spur against him.


Gre. Are you so, this is fine what will become of my reputation, what scandal
will be brought upon me and my yet unblemisht House; for two of you to fall out
like Ruffians, and perhaps Murder one the other, for a Damsel of my bringing
up; but lle prevent you if I can, Oh wicked men upon such a day too!


Dor. lle hear no more teasing, yonder is my Coach attends on Levia, lets away.


[ Exit. Dor. and Finar. Gre. Oh she is a wicked Girl, and breaks my heart with
obstinacy. Enter Tegue of Devilly and Lay Brother. But let me see here is, the
good Irish Father, I will endeavor to interest him in my affair; good Father
stay and let your reverence attend my story which concerns your Function*


Teg. Out and awoyd my presence I will loose my Reputaation, if I will be after
spaaking vid dee in de Street indeed.


Gre. I defy any one to say black's my Eye, I beseech your reverence come into
my House.


Teag. Die Houshe is of ill report, and day shay dat young People of different
Sexes meet dare for Carnal Recreaation indeed by die appointment, and
Assignation Joy.


Gre. Alas Father, every Gentleman and Cavalier cannot Marry; it is fit they
should be supplied, and I have now and then bred up one with Civil Education
for that purpose.


Teg. Dou shayst vell.


Gre. But I defy all my Neighbors to say that e're we miss our Church, or
that ever I suffer any Man to come within my doors upon a Vigil or Fast; and
never a Woman in Madrid observes Lent and Fish days more strictly.


Teg. Dou dosht spaake like unto a good pious voman indeed, if dou dosht
observe die Lents, die Wigils and Embers, dou dosht vell.


Gre. I would not break one of 'em for the World.


Teg. I believe dou art a very good Laady, and dosht love de Church, vel joy,
as dou shayst every one cannot Marry; and Fornicaation is Venial but vee vil
pass by some Peccadillo's as Shwearing, Wenching, and Lying and de like; in
dose who love de Church indeed. Are dese young Gentlewomen handsome dat dou
dosht breed up for de Occaasions of de young Cavalliers Joy.


Gre. The very Parragons of all the City, and they Dance with Castanietto's
most Charmingly and Sing to the Guittar most Melodiously.


Teg. By my Shoul, a shivil and a good Pious Voman, and I will go vid a good
Priesht my Friend a gallant Man indeed, and vee vil Fornicate and Absolve,
Absolve and Fornicate by turns every day at her House, vel I will come and
spaake vid die Damshels and inshtruct them joy, phaat vil I shay more.


Gre. Bless your Reverence, I beseech you go with me now and hear my story
there is like to be Blood shed, which I would entreat you to prevent; it is
about a wicked Neice of mine.


Teg. Vel since dou dosht observe die Wigills and die Fashts, and dosht love de
Church I will go vid dee Joy.


Gre. Thanks Holy Father, follow me.


Teag. Now I will be after having a very good Strumpett, and I will maake hashte
to Donna Belliza too.


[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Elvira, Rosania. Elv. with a Pocket Glass. Well you have
found me out, I Am in Love all over Love; but do thou think thou art
concealed.


Rosa. Perhaps I might be in Love, if I should see that gallant Cavallier
osten; but now I know not who he is, or whether ever I shall see him more* He
is the most Charming Man that ere was seen.


Elv. Pish he a Charming Man Oh my Luscindo.


Rosa. Pish too good Cousin, there is no comparison betwixt 'em.


Elv. No, lle be sworn is there not, do not provoke me to forget my Friendship
and Relation.


Rosa. Pray Cousin do not anger me, who am as much concerned for one, as you
can be for the other.


Enter Belliza, and snatches the Glass from her. Bell. Bless me, ungracious
Girl, are you always at your Pocket Glass, you are resolved to be no stranger
to your countenance, if this be a true intelligencer.


Elvir. We should know our selves, Madam.


Bell. How Mrs. Pert, what by a Looking-glass, this comes of your Novella's,
they put fine thoughts into your head, how to please a Man, and all dressing,
patching, and curling is at a Man; the Saints defend us.


Elvir. Did Saints never use Looking-glasses.


Rosa. If they did not, they were scurvily dressed I warrant 'em.


Bell. You Mrs. Male-pert, I hear you have not been at Confession this
fortnight: I will make you confess, Huswife, to Father Tegue who will be here
soon: withdraw, and prepare your self for it.


Rosa. Why should Old fellows know the Secrrts of the Young? But it must be so,
I cannot help it.

Ex. Rosa.
Bell. Now Vanity, this is to inform you, what force and strength your Beauty
has to conquer men with, and if you pursue that Train of thoughts: Heaven
bless us! whether do they carry us?


Elvir. Sure it is lawful to adorn our Faces, and we had better have our own
Opinions, than our Maid's in the matter.


Bell. Yes, what d' ye think when you adorn, as you call it? But to please
some Man with that, and its appurtenances. A modest Maid should hide her Beauty
from the World.


Elvir. To what purpose, is it given her then?


Bell. I Will take care, your Jewel shall be a Prisoner in my Close.


Enter Grycia. Gry. Madam, Don Bernardo, the great Officer lately come from
Flanders, bid me say he has business with you, and desires admittance.


Bell. With me! it cannot be; alas, I have given over all Business.


Gry. It Is true Madam, I assure your Ladyship.


Elvir. I can tell you more, my Maid had it in a whisper from one of his
Servants, that he is become your Lover.


Bell. My Lover, Ha, ha, ha, No, no, did thou say so Elvia.


Elvir. I protest Madam, it is true.


Bell. Good lack, how troublesome Men are.


Elvir. There Is no such inconvenience in the Match, He Is rich, and a Man of
Honor.


Bell. Nay I should be loath to do any Man wrong by too hasty an Exception, what
manner of Man is he, I never saw him?


Gryc. A goodly proper comely Gentleman.


Bell. To think of me, good lack a day, a Widow of my long abstinence.


Elv. Why so Mother, you are in the prime of your Age.


Bell. That Is true, but on the sudden, when I am so ill dressed; where have you
left him?


Gry. In the drawing Room, what shall I say to him Madam.


Bell. Perhaps he did not mean to surprise me, say lle attend him soon; what
manner of Glass is this?


Exit Grycia. Elv. A very true one Madam.


Bell. That Is the reason you make so much on it, ha.


Elv. It Is to examine our defects; but you have none, pray give it me.


Bell. No no, if that be the use on it, it is good to Examine our defects.


[She looks in the Glass. Elv. Let me hold it Madam.


Bell. Lord how like the Image of Negligence shall I look, there is no elegance
at all in my Dressing.


[ Bell. makes ridiculous Grimaces, and prinks her self at the Glass. Elv. I Will
put your hair in order.


Bell. Do Daughter, we should be orderly.


Elv. You see Madam, Glasses sometimes may be necessary.


Bell. Yes, to set out our selves somewhat, to stir up or provoke a Person to
Conjugal affection, prithee how do I look to day humph?


Elv. Your Face is very powerful, exceeding moving.


Bell. Really is it truly! fetch my best scented Gloves, my Pastils and
Pomanders?


Elv. And a little health to lay in your Cheeks.


Bell. By all means.

Exit Elvira. Love to me, blessing on's Heart, to me! but I must contain my joy.


Re-enter Elvira. Elv. Here Madam.


[Gives her the things and smiles. Bell. Why do thou smile Girl?


Elv. To think how little you cared for a Young Husband at my years, that grow
so warm at the approach of an Old Colonel at yours.


Bell. Go to, Mistress you're too bold, very pious women may fall in Love; this
Man is Rich, Wife and Grave: My House and your Honor both need a Man of
Reputation to guard 'em.


Elv. Methinks a Husband should guard my Honor better than a Father-in-Law.


Bell. Why, who knows but the addresses the Father makes to me, may breed in
time some good Occasion between the Son and you.


Elv. Well chanced, as if you knew my heart good Mother.


Bell. Farewell, I Will lay Red on at the Glass in my Chamber, be sure be not you
seen.


Enter Tegue of Devilly. Teag. Shweet Laady the Shaints blesh dee.


Bell. Good Father I Am busy.


Teg. Busy, phaat vidout me,

Exit Belliza. I will not bear this, no fait will I not, to put contempt and
Indignaation upon me.


Elv. What Is the matter Father?


Teag. Dee matter! dosht dou not she de maater; she did slight my Salutaation
and vou'd not spaake a vord to me, and by my fait she hash put de outshide of
de door upon me.


Elv. Indeed it is very hard.


Teg. By my Soulvaation is it. I will go upon my faash in de business vith her,
and vill speak plaain vords to her, very Teeth, and her Faash too; I do not
caare for her, if she vil put de out-shide of the door upon me.


Elv. She has great business, for Colonel Don Benardo is come to make Love to
her.


Teg. Ha, hoo, hoo, hoo, vil she taake dose toughts of Flesh upon a Fish day
indeed, phaat vil I shay? By my Shoul I will make I ennance unto her, that vil
make her groan upon dish occaasion.


Elv. May a Woman not think upon a Husband on a Fasting day?


Teg. Is not a Husband Flesh indeed, you do not take him for Fish do you you
must not put Flesh into any part of your Body upon a Fish day indeed: But I will
spaake no more; have I done so much for de Caatolick Church, and am I thus
affronted in this plaash.


Elv. Why what have you done for the Church?


Teg. phaat vil I shay unto you dear is my Paaper that vil maake Testificaation
upon me, and I believe I will be a Caardinal, or a Shaint at least indeed.


Elv. What Is this I cannot read it.


Teg. I will reshite it unto you, it is a Lisht of Heretics names that I did
reconshile phan I was in England, and I will speak a proud vord unto any
Jesuits faash dat shimple as I shtand here, I did bring over more than any shix
of them.


[Reads. Imprimis, Of Chambermaids dat vas maade vid Child by their Laadies
Husbands, or, their Laadies Sons. Two and Taarty.


Item, Of Caash-keepers, dat did run avay vid de money, and some broken winged
Shopkeepers. Eighteen.


Item. Three Masters of Colleges, and shix Fellows.


Item, Of Whores, Eighty two.


Elv. That Is a jolly Number indeed. I see you kept ill company, Father.


Teg. It was for deir shoules, indeed Joy.


Item. Of Teives de housh breaktief, de shtreet tief dat does Robb upon de
Pockett, de pad teife of de Road, and de horse teife, de Sodomite, and de
Murderer; just as day vere going to be hanged. Nine and Fourscore.


Elv. Did you make all these good Catholics?


Teg. Yes, braave Catholics, gallant Catholics Fait and Trott.


Item. Of ancient faat women, day call Bawds, Thirty shix.


Item. Of Knights of de posht. Forty.


Elv. What are those Knights of the Post?


Teg. Phy it is a great Order of Knighthood which they have in England, but day
shwarm in Ireland.


Item, Of Cookmaids. Two.


Elv. How comes that number so small?


Teg. De Cookmaid find de greaat trouble in dressing de Fish, and day do not
caare for fish days. All dese have I reconshile, and to be thus affronted; I will go and meditate upon Revenge, and my Nature is Vindicative.

[Exit.
Elv. I long to steal into the wooing between this mighty Colonel and my
Mother.

Ex. Elvira.
Enter Bernardo, Hernando, Belliza, Rosania. Bell. Good noble Colonel be more
considerate, this is not like the Spanish Conversation.


Burn. No Madam, I have learned better things in France, and in the
Netherlands: We men of War are not for words, I love to march up close to
friends of foes, it is all one to me.


Bell. By your carriage, I know not which you take me for.


Bern. I take all for Foes, till they have yielded.


Rosa. Hold hold, good man of steel, pray keep the Peace.


Bern. This I suppose is your Trinket; Hernando, entertain her nimble chopps


Rosa. Your man, know Old Gentleman I Am too good for his Master.


Bern. Old Gentleman! peace Child peace; had the prodest Grandee in Madrid
called me Old, he had, by my beard, e're this fallen by my hand.


Rosa. Pray, let your Valor spare my Aunt and me.


Bern. Her Neice, ha! I will not mind her.


(aside) Bell. Pray be not so pert, young Gentlewoman.


Bern. This young Bud interrupts us; be pleased to require her abscence.


Bell. How Sir, shall a sincere widow of my Reputation, be in Company with a
Colonel alone? you have leave to speak, Sir; do you minx, hold your peace.


Bern. You must excuse the heartiness of men of my profession, when I charge I
love to charge home, as all Europe knows.


Hern. Home, ay Madam, my Master always charges through and through, routs every
party, and levels all that are before him, he loves no Music like the
whistling of Bullets, and no perfume like the smoke of Gunpowder.


Bern. I was ever given to Valor, and Magnanimity from my Youth upwards, and
everlov'd to take a Fort or Citadel by storm, therefore consider Madam, what
you do.


Rosa. He intends to make Love with fire and sword, Madam, have a care of him.


Bern. Again, my little Blossom.


Rosa. Stand off, what would you fight my Aunt?


Bell. Peace Huswife, I doubt not, but you are a gallant Commander as I have
heard, but what is all this discourse to me?


Rosa. He talks of his Valor, why they are always beaten by the French.


Bern. Voto, have a care, provoke me not, here stands the man, that always
stood, and never ran, as can witness Monts, Seneff, Stratsburg, etc. my
Regiment of Horse of four hundred.


Hern. Being at least, Eight and Thirty effective men.


Bell. What Is all this Valor to me? (aside) He mentions not one word of Love.


Rosa. You hear Madam he can praise himself sufficiently, but cannot find in
his heart to give your Ladyship a good word.


Bern But come sweet Widow, what do we trifle for? (He stands up close to her.)
I hate this pickeering; Let Us lay aside our forlorn hopes, and let our bodies
join.


Ros. Help, help, my poor Aunt.


Bell. Sir, Sir, methinks you are too abrupt; this is not civil.


Bern. In Affairs of Love, he that shows most Love is most civil; and we cannot
show it more than by eagerness and haste: Treaties of Conjugal Affection are
always short and pithy. A word to the wife: Don Bernards D' Alcantara would
make Donna Belliza his Spouse, and enjoy her Person incontinently: hah, Widow,
say thou, hah?


Bell. Sir, this roughness of your carriage is somewhat unusual with me; but I
suppose this is a fashion of speaking you make use of to many Ladies.


Ros. Now my Aunt comes home to the point.


Ber. 'Ounds, do you not take me for a man of honor? Bernardo is known all
over Europe to be a man of honor: Not take me for a man of honor!


Bell. I hope I may, Sir; yet men are frail and fickle.


Ber. What, love another besides you! You take me for a monster, sure: I Would have
you know I Am none of those that are all Love, and no Conscience.


Ros. Good Sir do not beat my Aunt, I beseech you.


Ber. Sweet Prattle-basket be quiet; peace little one, or I shall grow
passionate. In short, Belliza is young, handsome and rich, Bernardo is rich,
brave and honorable, active and sprightly, yet grave and civil.


Hern. The Widow melts like Snow before the Sun.


Ber. I have summoned you; your Flag of Treaty is hung out; we have parley'd:
Speak quick, Do you yield, or no? Know, I never had man or woman stand long
before me.


Bell. You are a valiant man, I must confess; but your Valor does very much
surprise and disorder me.


Ber. We must not loyter in Love, what we do we must do heartily.


Bell. In truth he seems a hearty Gentleman; Are you in earnest, Sir? Sure you
dare not swear what you profess.


Ros. That Is home indeed.


Ber. Yes, if your house be strong built, though swearing may seem a little
uncivil at my years; yet when my Constancy is touched: Let me see, is your main
beam strong? let me see: Ay, 'twill do: now have at you; By all the --


Bell. Hold, hold, Sir, do not swear, I beseech you.


Bern. Not swear when my honor and constancy are in question! Voto, I will
out-swear the deepest Gamester in Madrid.


Bell. In professions of conjugal Love swearing may be lawful.


Ber. By the blood of all my Ancestors, by the unblemished Honor of my heard.


Ros. Oh horrid Oaths! you make my hair stand an end.

( Ex. Ros.
Ber. Silence: By all -- Heaven! who is this?


( Enter Elvira. Bell. You are free, Sir, to go on.


Ber. By all the beards of Arragon, an unknown Star.


Bell. Daughter, ha, what make you here?


Bern. Is she her Daughter? what ignorant Devil led me to the Mother?


Bell. You should have stayed without, I should have told you all.


Bern. I am Plannet struck; this is the beauty I must worship: A Pox on the
Widow for me; I must get off from my wrong Visit with speed before she expects
me to swear again.


Bell. How are you, Sir, not well?


Bern. A sudden indisposition; I am troubled with a Fit of -- a -- Madam, good
night.


Hern. What a Devil ails the Old Fellow?


Elv. Sure this great Soldier has been wounded often in the head, his brain
seems somewhat tender.


Exit Ber. and Her. Bell. No, Girl, his wound's in the heart; his heart is
tender. Good lack* did not think my poor remaining beauty had that power.


Elv. Pray Madam be civil after mischief, and bring him to the Stairs.


Bell. You are so forward; pray keep your distance.

Exit Bell.
Enter Rosania: Ros. Oh Cousin, I am transported with joy, too mighty for me, I
cannot bear it.


(She kisses a Letter she has in her hand, very often.) Elv. Prithee don't run
mad, Rosania, thou have none of the strongest heads.


Ros. Look there, read, read, and be happy, for every one who touches that
Paper must be so.


Elv. Love-madness is the same in all; let me see, this is to me. To the fair
Daughter of Belliza.


Ros. Look within, the happy messenger that brought it, said, it was for the
Lady that fell down; from the Gentleman that helped her up.


Elv. reads) Madam, The Adventure, as you came from Church, though of little
danger to you; yet is like to cost me my Life: The wound I received by your
beauty is mortal, without your help, to

Your Miserable, DORISTEO,
From my House, in St. Jago-street.




Elv. This is short, but very much to purpose: How came you by this?


Ros. By an holy woman that belongs to the Sisterhood of St. Clare. I Will tell
you more, he mistakes me for the Daughter; and unless you give me leave to
carry on this Intrigue in your Name, I am a lost creature.


Elv. Thou art far gone, I see, poor Rosania, I may trust thee with my Name,
thou will use it well.


Res. I Will write instantly. Farewell.

(aside.) Ex.
Elv. Oh dull Luscindo, could thou not apprehend me, or do thou not like
me? Thou, in both cases, art unworthy of me: but I understand his signs too
well to think the latter, I would he understood mine as well,

Ob how could Love in any shape e're be
Disguised so much to make it strange to thee.
Ex.
Luscindo, Hernando. Luse. Oh, Hernando, I am mad till I have discovered my
Passion to my Mistress: it is plain enough she made advances: And what a dull
Clod of Earth must she think I am who have not design enough to let her know my
Love.


Hern. Have patience, Sir, some few hours, and if your Father, who is the most
vigorous Wooer I ever saw, makes not way for you, I Will do it.


Lusc. How, Hernando? for if I find not some way, I Will storm the house, but she
shall know I love her.


Enter Doristeo, Finardo, Levia, on the other side of the Stage. Lev. The Sun
is set, and the Prado is cool and pleasant; but I am all on fire.


(to her self.) Dor. I never saw a siner Evening: we shall have some curious
Fruits, Confections and Lymonades, will you honor me to taste them?


Lev. With all my heart.


Dor. My Servant waits yonder: but, dear Madam, be pleased to add to the
pleasure of the Evening by charming me, and all the company, with a Song to the
Guittar.


Lev. If you can endure it, send for a Guittar.


Fin. We have one ready.


(she sings.) Lusc. There she is that is her Voice.


Hern. How the Devil can you think of her?


Lusc. Revenge, revenge: I am resolved to conquer her, then laugh at her. But
where is the Lady Estifania, you promised should be here?


Hern. At hand, Sir; she is my Mistress, but shall be yours at present, and
pray use her civilly; and d'hear, Sir, be sure to let me have her again
untouched.


Lusc. Pox on it, this Farce will never take, and if she discovers it, she will
triumph most unmercifully.


Hern. Play you your part, as well as I mine; and I Will venture my Life on it:
Come here is your Lady Bright, your Mrs. Estifania.


Enter Estifania. Lusc. Ha, she by this light may guess at me, but cannot
distinguish you*


Hern. Gently, Sir, this way.


(They advance near the Company, they are moving toward the Music, Levia
steps aside toward Luscindo, Lusc. My dearest Estiphania.


Lev. It Is he, he calls her Estiphania: all my Arts are suddenly turned upon my
self: Hell take him, court her before my face!


Dor. What means this sudden, and this strange Distemper, Lady!


Lev. If he discovers my disgrace, he will turn a Rebel too. (aside) I feel a
sudden faintness in my Spirits, pray help me to some water from you Fountain.


Dor. I Will run and fetch you some.

[ Exit. Doristeo.
Lev. Sir, I beseech you step for some strengthening Spirits, I find cold water
will be too weak a Remedy.


Fin. You shall have them instantly.

[ Exit Finardo.
Lev. Music, though you are in tune, I am not: There Is your Cordial, jog off.


(She gives them Money. Ex. Music. Lusc. Sweet Estifania, wonder of all
Widows, Mirror of thy Sex, thou brightest thing on Earth.


Estif. You find you are dear to me, who venture my Life and Honor for you.
Name not my Name once more; should any one o're-hear it, and carry it to my
Brother, I were lost: think on his Quality.


Lus. Thou art dearer to me than my Life, and I Will defend thee better. My
Passion now exceeds all other men's, as thou out-shin'st the rest of all thy Sex.


Lusc. Oh that I knew thy Brother.


Esti. I warrant you have said as kind things to Levia.


Lus. Brand me with infamy, if ever I considered her, but as a wandering wench,
a trifle, only fit for too much leisure.


Lev. Thou lie, thou Villain, thy tongue is black and rotten, as thy heart;
I Will have another hand for my revenge on thee, but on this Serpent mine shall
serve the turn.


Lus. Do you know the quality and tenderness of this young Lady?


Lev. I Will give her marks to be known by.


Estrp. Pray keep your Nails in, beshrew your heart for never paring 'em.


Lus. Stand off, what will you rob her in the dark?


Esti. Death! the Jade scratches like a Griffon.


( Lusc. leads her off. Enter Doristeo with a glass of Water, after him Finardo
with a Vial. Dor. Here Is the water, Madam. What do you mean?


(She snatches it, and breaks the Glass. Fin. Here Is the Cordial.


Finar presents the Cordial, she does the like.) Dor. What is it has inflamed
you thus?


Lev. No Cordial can relieve me, nor Water cool my Flame; Nothing can quench it
but the Traitors blood; it is no time to dissemble now: I esteemed your Passion,
but had no power to answer it, I was so madly engaged to Luscindo, the worst of
men.


Dor. I have spent my time well the while.


(Aside.) Lev. I frankly own I have dissembled with you* to urge his Love by
jealousy.


Dor. A very pretty account of all my Money.


(Aside.) Lev. Now I detest him, and if you will aid me in revenge, by Heaven you
shall entirely govern me.


Dor. What can he now have done so to provoke you?


Lev. He had the impudence to court a Lady here, even now, before my face, and
talked of me with scorn and hatred.


Dor. Do you know his new Mistress?


Lev. Nothing of her but what I overheard ere they were aware on it: He called
her Estiphania, and Widow; and she talked of her Brothers Honor, Quality, and
her apprehension of his Rage.


Dor. Furies and Hell, Finardo, this Description can agree with none but my
Sister.


Fm. It cannot be, she is a woman of Honor.


Dor. Woman and Honor, pish, Woman's Honor is a Bulrush.


Lev. I am infinitely obliged to you, that you so soon should interest your
self in my Revenge.


Dor. Yes I Will revenge: ( to Dor.) Shall he think because I make Love to a
Courtezan here of his, to wound the Honor of my Family? His Life shall pay
for it


Lev. I see you are wound up to high Resentments of my injury, I shall from,
this moment entirely love you, and for ever detest him.


Dor. Pox on this Courtezan, I cannot think on her, my Honor! We'll wait on
you home, and then revenge.


Lev. Dear Doristeo, now I find you are a Man of Honor.


ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Belliza, Elvira; Rosania. Bell. IT is not fit Elvira that we trust this
impertiment Girl with any Love affair, for I intend her suddenly for a
Monastry: Her Fortune then will come to me. [To her self.] Rosania quit the
Room.


Ros. I go Madam.

[ Ex. Rosania.
Bell. I wonder Girl at the disorder of the Colonel, that my Autumnal Beauty
should so wound him; indeed my Coyness made your Father fall into fainting
fits, but now alack, alack.


Elv. Sure Madam, he is infinitely taken with you?


Bell. He is the heartiest Lover in Madrid, I Will say that for him; and I have
him fast, and as soon as he recovers shall have a visit. The Son may make a
very good Husband for you.


Elv. I shall have no need of a Husband, having such a Father-in-Law.


Bell. Come, come, you know not how you will like him.


Elv. Too well, I know it; would Heaven that he liked me as well.


aside. Enter Grycia. Gry. Madam here is a Letter from Don Bernardo.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, I told thee Elvira I had fired him.


Reads. You are like to have me from Generation to Generation, you first
possessed my Love, then it succeeded to your Daughter.

What do I read?

Reads. My Estate is your Daughters if she will make her claim, while I am in
perfect senses, which I find I am now, because I have the judgment to Love her.

Perfidious Wretch!


Elv. What can be the matter? Reads. But if she takes not pity on me, I shall
dye distracted, and my Testament will not stand good in Law. Therefore, let me
wake one Visit before I depart, in adoration of her, who is your beautiful
Image.

Your most humble Servant Bernardo.




Is there no Constancy in vile Mankind?


Elv. What swift change is in you, or in the Colonel?


Bell. Let me see, his admittance may bring his Son into the House, who they
say is a fine handsome Gentleman; who perhaps may be glad of my Person and
Fortune.


[To her self. Elv. Madam you seem disordered.


Bell. Surpised I am, but cannot be troubled since you are so concerned, this
inconstant Colonel has transplanted his affection from me to you. Read that.


Elv. reads to her self. Out on him Vile Apostate, and can he think I would be
false to my dear Mother?


Bell. Me! No, no, Girl think not on that, Bernardo's Rich; and if he presses
for a Marriage yield to him.


Elv. How Madam!


Bell. It will be convenient I will have it so, dispute not with me; I Will
retire and send him his Answer, take him at first, you need no other argument
of his inconstancy than his leaving me.

[ Ex. Bell.
Elv. What Miracle's this that she can so easily part with a Lover!


Enter Rosania. Ros. Oh Cousin this wicked Duoena, this Grycia suspects the
good Woman who brought the Letter, and has forwarn'd her the House.


Elv. I have considered this matter, and your using my Name may breed dangerous
Consequences.


Ros. Say you so, it is now too late, I have settled the correspondence; but I
intend not to tell her how: I have observed a loose Board in our Balcony, and,
for fear the Woman should be discovered, have ordered my dear Doristeo to take
his Letters there, and put his Answers under every Night.


[To her self. Elv. Have you written to him?


Ros. I have.


Elv. Some way must be found out to retrieve this business; the least air or
this mock Love may ruin me with Luscindo.


Ros. Since you will have it so, I Will rectify the Error and let Doristeo know
who I am.


Enter Tegue O Devilly. Teg. Come little Daughter! die Mother sent me to dee to
Confess dee.


Ros. To avoid you her self, she sent you to me.


Teg. I will maake de heart in her Body beat, and aake for dat indeed g^a. [To
Elv.] Daughter do you awoyd de Plaash. [ Ex. Elv.] Now little Pretty Daughter
dou must approach vid humiliation, and vid reverence unto me to die Confession,
and dou musht give die shelf up unto me gra.


Ros. I do Father.


Teg. Begin den, and I will spaake unto de fait and trot she is a braave young
Laady indeed by my Shoul I vou'd I vere aafter being in bed vid her.


[To himself. Ros. With great sorrow and grief of heart, I confess I told my
Aunt two lies since I confess last.


Teg. Indeed dosh two lies vere one offense gra, arrah Daughter dou musht say
Forty Aves and Two Paters, and dou musht faasht tree Holy days for daat indeed
joy, dou should Equivocate and maake use of mental Reservaation and keep die
lies for shome great and pious occasion.


Ros. I saw a fine Embroidered Petticoat, and I wished for it.


Teg. No great matter, yet it is a kind of a Shin too.


Ros. But Reverend Father I beg Heavens and your Pardon, I have laughed at you
several times.


Teg. Ahoo, boo, boo, maake laugh upon me, why did dou laugh upon me? arrah
dou shall maake great Penance for dat, dou musht kneel vid die bare kneesh
Naaked upon a cold shtone, one of de longest hours in de phole tay gra, but
perhaps I will take off daat too. I will not anger her too much [To himself. Now
I will spaake unto dee. Dousht dou not taake great pleasure vid dosh pretty eyes
to maake shweet looksh upon shome man or anodder I warrant you.


Ros. Oh yes, Father, and I was transported this day at the fight of a fine
young Cavalier.


Teg. Peash den, dat is very vel, I will inshite and provoke her. aside. And dou
dosht desire shome communicaation in bed some night or anodder vid him I
warrant you gra.


Ros. Not for the World unless I were Married to him, and then I must confess I
should desire it.


Teg. But hold I predee dosht dou not dream shometime of a Man and art
pleash'd? by my Shoul her eyes does work Fascinaation upon me.


Ros. Yes Father, I do dream very often.


Teg. Daat is vel indeed, phaat dosht dou dream?


Ros. I dreamt last night that a fine young Gentleman came and took me by the
hand.


Teg. Very vell, and I warrant dee he did shtroake die Ame to die Elbow, dush
dush.


Ros. Yes indeed I dreamt so.


Teg. And he did squeesh die shweet hand, and kish it hard dush? dush, dush Joy.


Ros. Hold, hold, Father, what d' ye mean?


Teg. I do only maake demonstraation phaat dis young man did unto deetrot, By
my shoul she has maude great inflamaation upon me, and if she vil not agree and
beat under me, I will maake a raape upon her Body, Aside. But predee spaake
did dou not dream shomphat further?


Ros. Yes, Heaven forgive me, I did dream that he took me hard about the waste,
and did kiss me.


Teg. Vell gra, an dou vert not angry vid him Joy?


Ros. No, no, I was too well pleased Heaven help me.


Teg. Phaat he did taake de about middle and did kish de, dush, dush, dush,
dush, dush.


Ros. Hold, hold, hold.


Teg. Peash de kish of de Priesht vil absolve de prophaane kish of de Lay Maan,
vell and he did trow dee down upon de plaash, I will show de how.


Ros. No, no, I dreamt not so far.


Teg. He did, dou dousht not spaak right, and I will show de how by my Shoul; I will maake a Raape upon her*


[He lays hold on her. Ros. Help, help, help, help, ah, ah.


Enter Bell. Bell. Heaven, what is the matter here? Why Father.


Ros. Help, help, help.


Tegue O dear Daughter, help me to hold her, she is poshesht, or obshesht vid
an evil Shpirit.


Ros. Oh Madam, I am not possessed, he is a wicked wretch, and if you had not
come, would have ravished me.


Tegue. Oh help, help, how de foul fiend dosh spaake vid in her, vid a hollow
woysh?


Ros. This is beyond all impudence and wickedness, Madam, Madam.


Tegue. Listen how hollow and terrible is dee woysh of de fiend.


Bell. Avoid, Satan, a dreadful hollow voice: Peace fiend, peace.


Tegue. I will carry her into de next Room, and exorcise her. Laady, dou maysht
retire, I varrant de I am shtrong enough, de fiend begins to know me; he vill
frighten die Ladyship.


Ros. Madam, for heaven's sake hear, he is the most wicked Villain.


Bell. Benedicits, Avoid Satan, thou malicious fiend, to blast the holy man
thus.


Tegue. Look, look, he appears, and peeps out at her mout, indeed in de shape
of a Polecat, do dou not she him.


Bell. Oh, yes, plain; oh what a misery is this, and what distraction will it
cause in our Family? Don Bernarda is with my Daughter, and is to be her
Husband, let him not hear this.


Tegue. I will turn him out in a moment, conjuro te Demonem.


Bell. Get her into some Room at a distance, where the fiend may not be heard,
while I retire, and watch the Colonel.

( Exit Bell.
Ros. Madam, Madam, are you out of your wits, hold, hold.


Tegue. By my shoul I will conjure upon her.


(He struggles which her, to run her into another Room. Ros. Oh, help, help, ah,
ah, murder, murder.


Tegue. By my shoul, Joy, I will not murder dee.


Ros. Oh impudent Devil!


Tegue. Ahoo, I have losht dis braave occasion; (She gets loose, and runs, he
runs after her. now phaat vill I do for anodder?


Enter Bernardo, Hernando. Ber. Wonder not, Madam, at my fierceness, we
Military men never whine and make love like Ladies eldest Sons, who have been
bred out of harms way, but like Cocks of the Game, and are all for dispatch;
besides Madam, your Mother and I am agreed.


Enter Rosania in haste. Elv. How now Cousin, what haste?


Ros. Oh Cousin! this Tegue O Divelly is the wickedst Villain you ever heard
of, I Will give you an account by and by.


Bern. Hah, my little twig of Beauty are you there? But pray Madam, let her not
stop my course of Love, for if it has not vent with me, the ribb'd with Iron I
shall crack.


Ros. What love to my Cousin? Why she is a young Lady.


Bern. Ay, Gad take me, why do I make love to her else? But prithee sweet
blossom, contain that nimble Instrument thy tongue.


Rosa. What, a Reverend white-headed, white-hearded old Gentleman with one foot
in the grave, make love to a fine young Lady?


Bern. Old! because I Am white! why all our Family are so by that time they are
of Age, we are known by it, as the house of Austria by long chins, thick lips,
and lank flaxen hair. Hernando do you back what I say.


Hern. I warrant you, if any man out lies me, then I am a Baboon. My Master,
Madam, was gray at sixteen; I have known some of 'em gray at Seven: nay some of
'em have been born gray.


Bern. Ounds! the Rogue will ruin me with his lies, this it is for a fellow to
lie that has no discretion.


Ros. He is pure White and Red, White on his Head, with his Nose full Red, like
Aetna's top, that still is flaming with the Snow about it.


Bern. I shall grow chollerick, Madam: for all these white hairs, I did last
Campaign, without Pole, or any thing in my hand, leap a Moat of 20 foot wide,
over a Fauxbray.


Her. (aside.) from thence to the Parapet, at the next standing leap, next to
the Glaeis of the Counterscarp, and then whipped over the Pallizado's.


Bern. Oh, Rogue, have a care.


Hern. Pish, they understand me not: you shall see, he took the Counterscarp
about his middle, and the Bastion in his hand, and, whip, he took the Town in a
twinkling.


Bern. A Pox on this Rogue, why sirrah.


Hern. And I will not lose my life for any man living, Madam, my Master is a
man of the greatest activity of any man in the Army; I am sure he will put off
the Spanish gravity when he runs away.


(aside.) Ber. He tells you true, Madam, I was noted for it all over the Camp.


Ros. Can you creep through a Hoop, Sir?


Hern. He shall do it with any man in Europe; I Will go see for a Hoop, he shall
do it presently.


Ber. Why sirrah, impudence.


Hern. Or, Madam, he can leap over Three Joint-stools one upon another; you
have them in the Room, Madam, you shall see that done presently.


Ber. Rogue, saucy Rogue, I Will cut your throat, would you have me play the
Tumbler?


(He goes to set the Stools. Her. Madam, have a care of the Old Gentleman, my
Young Master is the finest Gentleman in the world, is desperately in love with,
and must perish without you.


Elv. Oh blessed news, but I must contain my self.


(aside. Ber. What say you to the Lady, you insolent Rascal.


Her. Are you angry, Sir, that I speak a good word for you.


Elv. Be not offended, Sir, nothing in the world could have pleased me better
than what he said to me.


Ber. I am glad, Madam, any thing said in my behalf could please you; your hand
upon it, Madam, is it a match then?


Elv. You know in Spain our Wills are not our own, our Parents have 'em in
keeping for us.


Ros. Why, Cousin, are you mad, will you marry shat Emblem of Mortality, that
Death's head?


Ber. Thou little sprig of Envy, avoid, or I shall be furious.


Enter Grycia. Gry. Madam, you must go to my Lady.


Ros. Is the Priest gone?


Gry. He is.


Ros. Come on then, I Will venture.


( Ex. Grycia and Rosania. Ber. The vigor of my Love can bear no delay.


Elv. There must be some time allowed me in decency: But, Sir, since you begin
to grow so particular, I must tell you a secret which concerns us both; have
you not a Son named Luscindo?


Hern. What does she mean now?


(aside. Ber. A Son, Madam! I have a stripling, a tall boy, but he is very
young, he is not above sixteen.


Hern. Madam, my Master mistakes, he is but fourteen.


Ber. I was married at thirteen, and had him before I was fourteen.


Hern. Sir, you were married at eleven, did not I live ( Bern bites his Thumb,
and Makes signs to Hern. with you? He was married before I was born:


(aside.) Ber. Curse on the Rogue. It Is true, Madam, but I had no Children till
I was fourteen.


Elv. It Is not for that I mention him, but if he be so Young, he is very
forward, and I desire you will give a check to his ambition of serving me.


Ber. Hell and Furies! he dares not offer you his Love sure.


Elv. Yes, he has endeavored to corrupt my Maid, with this Heart of Ruby set
in Gold: do you know it, Sir?


Ber. No: but by the largest Whisker in Madrid, (Gad forgive me for swearing)
it shall cost the owner the best blood in his body.


Elv. Be not rash, proceed with calmness: if some fool has taken his Name upon
him, bid him, from me, endeavor to find the Owner, which will be no hard
matter, that I may know who has injured me; and if it be he, advise him to
leave no more Letters under a loose board in our Balcony.


Ber. Cannons and Culverins! have you a Letter of his?


Elv. No, I tore it in indignation.


Ber. Voto, I helped to bring him into the world, and I Will send him out again.


Elv. Have a care, Sir, Extremities will fill the Town with noise, and hurt my
Honor: I conjure you, let a private Rebuke serve.


Ber. Well, Madam, I Will obey, I kiss your hands; I Will find him instantly.


Her. Fare thee well, thou art an Angel of thy Sex.


Ex. Bern. and Hern. Enter Tegue O Devilly, Gremia and Luscindo. Grem. Was ever
such a Tyrant! you draw a stood of Tears from my poor Eyes, to see you use my
Niece so savagely: Did ever woman write so passionate a Letter, did ever Lady
so bewail her fault? With sobbing and tears, upon her knees, she asked your
pardon.


Tegue. Dou hasht a Rock inshtead of a heart indeed: I did maake a cry upon her
phen I did she her, vid dee poor Laady.


Gre. How are we all obliged to this good Man!


Lusc. Ha, ha, ha.


Tegue. Phaat dosht dou maake a graat laugh upon me, gra, arrah; I will tell de
now dou art very wicked, if dou dosht not taake pity upon de Laady, fait and
trot.


Lusc. Doristeo will pity her.


Tegue. I tell unto you, she dosh not caare for dat fellow; Joy, phaat vill I
shay more? Hasht dou no Conshence, by my shoul?


Lusc. Thou were an excellent Pimp in Flander, I see thou have not forgot thy
faculty here.


Tegue. I do love to maake peash indeed between man and man, and man and voman;
I do not know phaat dou dosht call Pimp, indeed.


Lusc. I laugh at her.


Grem. O wicked wretch! will thou not hear the good man? So, here is the Rival,
how we shall have fine work.


Enter Doristeo and Finardo. Tegue. Peash voman, I will spaake to him, I musht
be aafter shpaaking vid de gra; I vonder dou hasht no more Religion in dee, den
to offer to taake anodder man's Mistress from him?


Dor. A Pretty Habit, for a He-Baud.


Tegue. Lay it upon die Conshence; is not Levia Luscindo's Laady? phaat hasht
dou to do vid her? De Casuists are clear in de point, it is a graat Shin, and a
graat Faable.


Dor. I am too nearly concerned to have time for fooling, I am glad, Sir, I
have met you.


(To Luscindo.) Enter Hernando. Lusc. Have you ought to command me, Sir?


Hern. Ha, what is the matter now?


Dor. Having wounded my honor in so sensible a part, you must repair it by
fighting with me.


Lusc. With your favor, Sir, you invaded my Right, but I have considered the
matter, fighting is a solemn thing, and little Competitions about a Courtezan
are not worth it.


Gre. Good Father, as you love Heaven, prevent their fighting.


Dor. Sir, you have not carried your commerce with my sister so subtly, that
I am ignorant of it.


Lusc. Your sister! upon my honor this is the first time I ever heard you had
one.


Dor. I am not to be trifled with, you know not Estiphania, the Widow, not her
quality? you walked not invisibly in the Prado, nor did you talk so softly, but
your Discourses came to my Ear.


Lusc. Is that it? ha, ha, what say you, Hernando?


Dor. Have you courage?


Lusc. Ha, then it is no time to talk.


(They draw. Hern. comes between them. Gre. Now Father.


Tegue. No, I will fly now; we Priests maake dee vorld fight, but we do not
caare for it our shelves.


( Exit Tegue O Devilly. Enter Levia. Fin. Guard your self.


( To Hernando.) Grem. Hold, hold, hold.


Hern. For Heavens sake hear me; is it true that the Lady Estiphania, whom
Luscindo entertained in the Prado, was your sister?


Dor. Why am I so concerned else?


Hern. I did not think my Mistress had been so well allied, her Mother fells
fish, and she is little better than a Bulker.


Dor. Death and Hell, do you continue your mockery?


Hern. By heaven it is true: I gave her a sounding Name, to put a trick upon
Levia.


Lev. Oh Rascals, Villains, Poultrons! O Coward Doristeo, dare you not cut his
throat? will you believe this lie?


Grem. Hold, hold, ungracious Niece.


(She flings Gremia down, who shrieks, and halts out. Lev. Avaunt thou Bawd.


Gre. Oh my huckle-bone, my huckle-bone, ah, ah, ah.


Dor. Sir, you are a man of honor, and I must believe you; I ask your pardon
for the trouble I have given you: pray give my friend and me leave to be your
humble Servants.


Lusc. Sir, I shall be glad to serve you, and if that can do it, I give you all
my interest in that Lady.


Lev. Ah Coward, I Will dispatch the Villain my self.


Dor. Hold, hold, Finardo, help. (She snatches Doristeo's Sword, Sir, your
humble Servant, I must endeavor to quiet this Lady, and runs at Luscindo.


Lev. Let me go, Coward, Rascal; I hate thee of all mankind: Help, help,
Murder, Murder.


Her. How could you think on this creature?


( Exit Dor. and Fin. Lus. I am revenged, and now I have done.


Her. Oh, Sir, I have the best news for you, Elvira is infinitely in love with
you.


Lusc. What say thou, dear Hernando?


Enter Bernardo. Hern. Here Is my Master, I must not be seen with you.


Lusc. Now has he heard of my Visit to Levia, and is come with a dull wise
Lesson.


(Hern. retires.) Bern. You stripling, I am come to tell you of a crime, which
if you have the impudence to persist in, I Will make you the greatest Example of
my fury that ever fell by this Arm.


Lusc. Is it such a crime, Sir, for a Young Man in the heat of his blood, to
love a handsome Wench?


Ber. Do you capitulate, Rascal? I Will make you know there is a difference of
persons, sirrah.


Lusc. I hope I may pretend where others are freely admitted.


Ber. How others?


Lusc. Yes, others; if you have better thoughts of her, you are much mistaken,
I assure you, Sir.


Bern. Death, you Villain! dare you blast the honor of so innocent, so
virtuous a Lady?


Lusc. She innocent and virtuous! ha, ha, ha.


Bern. Peace, thou abominable Varlet, or I shall forget my blood, and pierce.
hy heart.


Lusc. Sir, are these terms fit for a Son?


Bern. Dogbolt, to blast the honor of my Mistress; by my beard thy Mother
never was a chaster.


Lusc. Heaven forbid, Sir; if so, it would be doubtful, whether I owe you that
Respect I pay you, Sir.


Bern. Audacious Coxcomb, her innocent freedom is above all malice, which
joined with her Wit and Beauty, has made her worthy of me, of Don Bernardo.


Lusc. What a Devil will the old man commit incest?


Bern. I tell you, sirrah, she is your Mother-in-law, I am contracted to her.


Lusc. What do I hear! she my Mother-in-law! you will not prostitute the honor
of our family, by marrying a Courtesan.


Bern. Abandoned slave and liar, she a Courtesan! Earthquakes, inundations,
roaring Seas, and thunder! thou Puppy-dog, thou die for it.


Hern. Hold, hold, Sir, your Dagger, Bern. draws his Dagger, drawn upon your
son!


Hernando enters. Bern. Let me go, sirrah.


Lusc. Sir, I beseech you hold, there is some mistake.


Bern. Can any thing be so plain as thy blasphemy against Elvira? I will
chastise thy black mouthed insolence with Death.


Hern. Hold, hold, Sir.


Lusc. Hell and Furies! is she contracted to him? then let his Dagger pierce my
heart: but sure it cannot be.


(aside.) Bern. Abuse my Mistress Elvira! does your guilt alarm you?


Lusc. 'Twas Levia! I meant, what have I to do with Elvira?


Bern. And what have I to do with Levia? shall that excuse?


Lusc. By heaven, Sir, I thought you had all this while spoken of Levia, the
fine Courtesan, from whose house I now came: and do you think I ought not to be
transported to hear you speak of marrying such a creature?


Ber. No, no, Mr. Jackanapes, you know not Elvira, you, you?


Lusc. Not I: how, where, or when should I know her? I cannot guess your meaning.


Ber. You know not this neither, which you gave her Maid, to corrupt her to
your interest.


(He gives him the Ruby. Lusc. Not I, I never saw it till now.


Bern. Know, Young Coxcomb, she has made another-guess choice, nor you left no
Letters under a loose board in her Balcony?


Lusc. I could as well understand you if you spoke Arabic.


Bern. She dispises you, bids you leave no more Letters: and if that Gem be not
yours, she would have you use all diligence to find the Owner, which will not
be hard to do, that she may have satisfaction from him that has injured her:
and I swear by all my former Achievements, and magnanimous Deeds, I Will see her
have it.


Lusc. Thou dearest creature upon Earth, I admire thy Wit as much as thy
Beauty. (to himself.) Be pleased to tell her, I will never rest till I see the
owner, and that I resent this injury so, that I am resolved she shall have full
satisfaction.


Ber. Now you say somewhat: come prepare your self, I Will carry ye to see your
Mother, and you shall ask her blessing.


Lusc. It Is in her power to give me the greatest in the world.


(to himself*) Ber. I Will carry you to her, because I Am resolved the day after
to morrow you shall go to Flanders, while I settle here. Sirrah, Hernando, I
have not reckoned with you for your damned Lies, Rogue, but go now and tell
Belliza we are coming to wait on her.


Hern. I will, Sir,

( Ex Hern.)
Bern. Come stripling, follow me, I Will get some Pasteels, and stiffen my
Whiskers, and so go.


Lusc. I follow, Sir. ( Ex. Bernardo. For Flanders! I Will see it under water,
or, which is worse, all under the French King, e're I leave my Dear, my sweet
Elvira?

( Ex. Lusc.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Bernardo, Elvira. Bern. I hope, my Dear, thou have not afflicted thy
self for my absence: it seems to me an Age since I kissed this fair hand: Your
Mother and I have sealed and dispatched, and now you are mine, my Dear, when
shall a Domine do the Office? by my hilt and blade, I am all on fire for
consummation.


Elv. No haste, I beseech you, Sir.


Bern. By my honor, but there is haste on my side, why, I am in a Fever, in a
fiery Fever.


Elv. What noise is that?


(A flourishing of Fiddles. Ber. Some Music, my Dear, I have provided for
thee, though I must confess I delight in nothing but Haut-boys, Trumpets,
Drums, Kettle-Drums, Whole Cannon, Demi-Cannon, Culverin, Half-Culverin,
Musket and Pistol, neighing of Horses, clattering of Arms, Groans of dying
men, and such magnanimous military noises, fit for Hero's, yet I have provided
softer Music, befitting your soft sex: come in and sing a Love-Song, ye
Scrapers, fit for the occasion


[Ent. Fiddlers. Elv. Sure this vapouring old Fool must be a coward.


SONG.
The Fire of Love in youthful blood,
Like what is kindled in brush-wood,
But for a moment burns,
Yet in that moment makes a mighty noise,
It crackles, and to vapor turns,
And soon it self destroys.
But when crept into aged Veins,
It slowly burns, and long remains,
And with a sullen heat,
Like fire in logs it glows, and warms 'em long,
And though the flame be not so great,
Yet is the heat as strong.
Bern. Love in aged Veins, you damned Fiddlers, you Scoundrels of Rosin and
Catsgut, what have I to do with aged Veins, you Caterpillars, Vermin, most
confounded Minstrils, I will crack your empty Noddles, and demolish your
squeaking Fiddles, that you shall not be able to play before a Maypole.


(He kicks and beats the Fiddlers out. Enter a Drummer. Elv. Methought they
sung very well, what made you so passionate?


Bern. Uncivil Rogues, did I choose them to entertain my Mistress, and must they
Lampoon me with aged veins? aged, quoth they. But come, Madam, I Will entertain
you with a heroic Song of my own, and I had provided this Drum to sing to,
which is better than a Theorb, or Harpsycord.


Elv. Pray bless my Ears with it.


(Drum beats. Bern. I will, my Dear, strike up.

The bullets are roaring, and Cannons are flying,
Wiih a thump, a thump, thump, thump, thump:
Cheer up my lads, never think of dying,
With a dump, a dump, dump, dump, dump.
Fall on my brisk boys of the blade,
With a dub, a dub, dub a dub.
Tara, tan, tan-tara, ra.
This is the Soldiers Tradc.
Play the Ritomells. There Is a Song, if you talk of a Song.


Elv. It Is admirable.


Bern. I see, my dear, thou have Judgment: Go on.


(Drum beats. Enter Belliza. Bell. Hold, hold, must my devout house be taken
for a lewd Garrison? Thou creature of most military noise, be gone, must this
wicked rattling be heard in my house?


Bern. He shall go, but I take it ill you should call it, a wicked noise which
the Hero loves above all pitiful effeminate Fiddles.


Hern. Sir, your Son waits without.


Bern. Call him in: now my dear, thou shall see thy Son-in-law, he is very
young, and somewhat wild, he takes like his Father for that. He denies every
thing thou do tax him with, and knows nothing of the matter. ( Enter
Luscindo. Come Youth, come forward, and pay your Duty to your Mother-in-law.


Bell. Is this your Son, Noble Sir?


[ Bern. goes to present Luscindo to Elvira. Bern. It is, Madam.


[ Belliza interposes. Bell. Sir, I am your most obedient servant, and you are
welcome, and ever shall be, under my Roof.


Lusc. You honor me exceedingly.


Bell. He is a most excellent accomplished Person; oh heaven! how my poor heart
pants and throbs at him.


Bern. Is he not prodigiously tall of his age? Simple as he stands there, he is
bare sixteen years old.


Her. Madam, my Master speaks too modestly, he is but between fourteen and
fifteen.


Bell. Good lack, I never saw the fellow of him.


Bern. Rogue, will you never take warning? Sirrah, get you out. Indeed, Madam,
I thought he had been sixteen. [ Ex. Hern. My dear, this is your Son-in-Law.


Elv. I shall be proud of my Relation to him.


Bern. Let him do his Duty to you.


[She pulls off her Glove, he kisses her hand and puts a Note into it. Luse.
Madam, it is already a blessing to have kissed your fair hand, but I aspire at
another benediction.


Elv. You shall not fail of all that I can give you, Sir.


Bern. Fair hand, I like not that expression; his eager kiss, and his fixed
looks. Come, Madam, give him your blessing; I have appointed him his business,
he must be gone.


[He kneels down, she lays her hand on him. Elv. Under a loose board, in our
Balcony, you shall find an answer this Night. Heaven bless you.


Bell. He is a sweet young Gentleman, I am enamored to the last degree, and
methinks he looks amorously upon me.


Lusc. Heaven let me contain my joys.


Bern. His smooth Chin must be out of my way. Come, stripling, be gone, be gone.


Bell. Hold, hold, Noble Sir.


Bern. No, no, be gone, be gone.


He thrusts Luscindo out. Bell. Ah, me! Elvira, is he gone? What will become of
me, I shall faint?


Bern. I have appointed him to go toward Flanders the day after to morrow: He
shall go where Honor calls him, while I stay here and sacrifice to Love.


Bell. O Daughter, help me to stop his Journey, or I am a lost Woman.


Elv. Is she caught already? Well, these melancholy devout Women, are the
lovingest Worms upon occasion. Pray entertain my Lover, while I peruse a Note,
wherein I have set down the things I must have before Marriage, and I Will
endeavor to serve you.


Bell. Good Noble Sir, one word with you.


Bern. With all my heart, a hundred if you please.


Bell. You seem too severe to this sweet young Gentleman your Son.


Bern. Not at all, Lady, he is a pert Boy, and w^ll be too forward if I use him
otherwise.


Elv. reads. Dear Madam, no passion ever equaled mine, I adore your Beauty and
your Wit, and am infinitely transported that you are pleased to let me know my
happiness; but all this serves but to heighten my misery, unless your power,
and your Mothers, can prevail with my Father to stop my Journey into Flanders,
which he has resolved shall begin the day after to morrow.


Enter Hernando. Hern. Sir, one of your Flanders Officers has extraordinary
business with you; he is at your House.


Bell. But why so soon for Flanders? methinks you should be pleased to have him
in your sight, as I my self am.


Elv. I beseech you let him be present at my Wedding. [To him. I am sure he
shall be so.


[Aside. Bern. When he has performed as many brave actions as I have done, he
shall think of peace, but now Honor calls and he must go.


Elv. Does Honor call so soon?


Bell. I beseech you, Sir, let me have interest enough to prevail with you for
his stay till my Daughters Wedding.


Bern. No, Madam, I have reasons to dispatch him away which I do not express.


Bell. And I have reasons to stay him here which I do not express.


Bern. My dear good-by, afflict not thy self for my absence, I Will see thee
again e're bedtime; I kiss thy hand. Farewell my beauteous Mother-in-Law.


Ex. Bernardo and Hernando. Bell. Oh I faint, I die, my dear Luscindo.


Elv. Why Mother, Madam, Madam, this is a mighty Love-qualm: she recovers.


Bell. Ah, my Luscindo.


(Enter Tegue O Divelly, who stands by unseen. Elv. How, Madam, your Luscindo?


Bell. Come, Daughter, it is in vain to endeavor to hide that Passion which has
thus, in spite of me, betrayed it self: but it is wonderful to observe the
power of Love, and sympathy, and all that, but to lose this sweet Young Man.


Elv. Trouble not your self, I Will bring all about yet; I spoke even now of a
Note, it was not what I told you, but a Ticket from Luscindo to me.


Bell. To you! ah me, ah me! you are anoter man's wife, will you give ear to him?


Elv. Hold, Madam, mistake me not, he begs me to be his Advocate of Love to you.


Bell. Ah, my dear child, to me, say thou?


Elv. He is infinitely taken with your person.


Bell. With me, that am wholly spiritual! but this sympathy of Lovers hearts is
a great secret in Nature, enough to puzzle all Philosophers. But where is the
note?


Elv. I tore it, lest his Father should spy it, who is ignorant of all. Know,
Madam, I am now your Mother-in-law by a double way, and will not bate an ace of
my prerogative.


Bell. Ha, ha, ha, dear child, thou art an arch one, I profess: well, go thy
ways.


Elv. Take notice then, Daughter Belliza, you must be at your Balcony between
Eleven and Twelve, and Luscindo will entertain you there, while I stand
Sentinel at the Wicket, and watch who comes by.


Bell. Oh blessed news! I am transported. (aside.) You make me angry, Daughter: I
entertain a man at midnight, when I should be at my Beads!


(to her. Elv. Come, Daughter, I will have my Title, and use my Authority: I
advise, nay, command you as a Mother.


Bell. Well, thou art a wag, I vow.


Elv. There Is no fear, I your Mother-in-law will take care of you.


Bell. Well, Daughter.


Elv. Daughter.


Bell. Mother, then since thou will have it so, I give my self up wholly to
your conduct.


Tegue. Aboo, boo, boo, vilt dou sho joy, arrah, I will put Excommunication
upon dee, art dou not ashaam'd, and dosht dou not tremble to look me upon de
faather, gra, didsht dou not maake Vow unto me, never to commit marriage, and
like a pioush Vidow, to give die estaate unto de Caatolick Church; Joy Trot, I will maake dee know it is a mortal sin to maary, and I will give dee up unto
shaatan for dis gra.


Bell. Heaven, what shall I say! I am confounded.


Tegue. Dou dosht behaave die shelf gaallantly by my shoulwaation, how didsht
dou dare to put dee outside of the door upon me, hoh?


Bell. Good Father hear me, I would marry to persuade my Husband to give his
Estate to the Church.


Tegue. Den dou voudsht be a pious Laady indeed, Joy, but he vill be aafter
keeping die Estaate and his own too an be.


Bell. While he thinks to have power over my Estate, he is deceived; for I have
by a private Deed put it out of his reach.


Tegue. It is very laudable and pious, if dou dosht cozen him to a holy and
good end gra, but I will maake de groan under die penance indeed, for talking
of deese fleshly matters upon a fish-day.


Enter Rosania. Ros. Ah, who is here?


Tegue. Ah, by my shoul have I cought dee again in my clutches, dou art
possesht, I will exorcise dee now.


Rosan. Stand off, let me go, thou beast, thou Swine.


[ Belliza sneaks out. Tegue. Dosht dou hear? dee fiend speaks in her body, and
calls a Priest a Swine indeed. I will conjure dee, phaat is dee Vidow gone?
aboo, boo, she hash put dee outside of de door upon me again: Daughter, awoyd
dis plaash dat I may exorcish.


Rosa. Help, help, Cousin, I will tear his eyes out.


Elvira Be gone, you lustful Villain, we will complain to the Fathers of the
Inquisition.


Tegue. By my shoul I will maake a great laugh upon dee, de inquisition is for
de rich Jew, and de Heretic dog; come into another Chamber, Joy. Hold, hold,
hold, die wicked nails.


( Rosania scratches him, and gets loose. Elv. You a Priest! a Devil. Be gone.


[They tear his Hood and Habit, and beat him out) Tegue. Murder, murder, I will
excommunicaat, I will excommunicaat.


Rosa. Let Us follow him, and see him out.


[ Exit Priest. Elvira. My mother threatens to send you to a Monastery to
morrow.


Rosa. To a Monastery! I am for ever lost.


Elv. Let Us retire, and consult how to prevent it; it grows very late, and it
will be time to write, and lay my Note under the board in the Balcony. Rosania
shall write it, that if my Mother should chance to find it, I may disown it:
fear not, Rosania, I will contrive thy escape.


Rosa. A thousand blessings on thee.


( Exit Elvira and Rosania. Levia, Gremia in the street, Levia in Man's Habit,
Gre. Will you never go home? Though you care not for your Reputation, I will
not lose mine.


Lev. Again thy stale advice, thy Reputation! thou art a Bawd, and a foolish
one.


Gre. Ah me, that I should live to see this hour: I a Bawd! out on thee; thou
art a* Whore, and a silly one, to run up and down in this lewd manner* at these
wicked hours; can thou not be a Whore, and keep thy Reputation?


Lev. In short, good impertinent froward Aunt, either follow my directions, or
we will part for ever.


Gre. What shall I do if she leaves me? I am ruined. You know my good Nature
too well, you will make me gray with sorrow.


Lev. Come, come, be a good towardly Aunt, and I Will pass by all; but do you
hear, fail not of getting admittance to Belliza and Elvira, and tell them the
story I have instructed you in.


Gre. You ever make a fool of me thus.


[She cries.] Lev. Too well I know now Elvira is the cursed Object of
Luscindo's Love, and the cause of his deserting me.


Grem. I see you love him still.


Lev. I hate him beyond all aversion, and will be revenged though I perish with
him: Where are my Rogues? Oh, are you come?


(Enter Six Bravo's* 1 Bra. I never broke my word in my life, do you think I
have no honor in me?


Lev. Fire this house, the Villain will then come out, and you may dispatch him.


1 Bra. We will dispatch him, but no firing of a house; that were to make a
light to be caught by.


Grem. O heaven, will you commit murder? I have contributed toward the making
of many a man, and cannot in conscience consent to the destroying one.


Lev. Stir not, nor oppose me, if thou do, by heaven I Will have thee killed.


Gre. Well, well, I Will say nothing, do what you will.


Lev. Here will I stand a statue at his door till he comes forth. Gentlemen, go
ye and wait at the corner of the street, and when I whistle come. [ Ex. Brav.
Stand close, Aunt.


Enter Elvira in the balcony, with a Ticket in her hand. Elv. Go thou, dear
Paper, and good luck atttend thee.


(Which she lays under a board, then Exit. Enter Luscindo and Hernando in the
street. Lev. Here comes company, I shall be discovered before my time; let us
retreat to our Main-Guard.


( Ex. Gremia and Levia) Luscindo, Hernando, with a Dark-lanthorn. Lusc. Place
the Ladder here. (He goes up to the balcony, finds a Note.) Oh, here is the
sweet Paper, away, dispatch, and hide the Ladder.


[ Hern. carries out the laadder, and reenters immediately. Luscindo reads by
his Dark-lanthorn. Lusc. What do I read! I am transported beyond my self.
Reads. Joy of my Soul, The thoughts of our Separation are insupportable, which
to prevent, I have persuaded my Mother, That you wrote, conjuring me by the
Kindness of a Mother-in law, to propose you in Marriage to her, which took as I
could wish, and she has, at my request, consented to entertain you at her
balcony at midnight; fail not to be there with Hernando: She cannot know your
voice; your statures are alike, and 'twill be too dark to distinguish Faces. If
Hernando has Wit enough to act his part, and entertain my Mother, I shall have
you free to my self at the Wicket, where we may provide for our happiness: And
if my Art succeeds not, for your stay, assure your self, I will not stick at
the boldest resolution you shall fix upon,

Yours entirely, ELVIRA.





Lusc. Was there ever so charming a creature! Ah, dear Elvira, each minute is
an age, till I have got thee within these arms. Time runs too fast for every
other man, but for expecting Lovers is too slow, dear happy paper.


Hern. We shall have you transported here, till your Father finds you.


Lusc. Thou say right, let us in and bustle, as if we were putting up my
Goods for Flanders.


( Ex. Luscindo and Hernando. Enter Rosania in the balcony, and puts her Note
under the board. Rosa. Go, thou dear Messenger of Love, and fall into the hands
of him, who alone can deserve it.


Her. You need not go in, I Will bring you word if your Father be in bed.

[ Ex. Hernando.
Lusc. Do so, Oh Elvira, let me kiss this Relic in absence of my Saint, my
Joy is too great to bear.


Enter Hernando. Hern. Your Father is fast, he snores as loud as the Drone of a
Bag pipe; an Alarm would not awaken him.


Lusc. To our business quickly, the Balcony-door opens, it is near midnight.


Belliza and Elvira in the balcony. Bell. Will Luscindo never come? I profess
this is the longest night.


Elv. Hold, hold, I hear some coming this way, it must be he and his trusty
Hernando.


Bell. Lord, how my heart does heave and pant, my breath grows short, and every
part of me is affected with the Passion.


Hern. Is my most divine and adorable Lady there?


Bell. Divine and adorable! I warant him a fine spoken man. [To her self.
Hither your own, and your Mother-in-laws importunity has brought me, noble Sir.


Hern. May I not have the liberty of entertaining you alone?


Bell. (To Elv.) Go down to the Street-gate, and entertain Hernando at the
Wicket, while Luscindo and I confer about our virtuous ends; and if any company
comes by, give a hem.


Elv. My dearest Saint of a Mother, who would not have trusted me with a Cat,
now delivers me up, for her own ends, to a Young Man in the dark.

( Ex. Elvira.
Bell. I shall never hold out without some Aqua Mirabilis, I grow so chill, and
quake. Hold, I hear Rosania's Guittar; if she discovers me I am ruined.


Her. Thou Cordial of my Soul, art thou alone?


Bell. Yes, my dear, but I hear some up in the house, I Will go and secure them,
and wait on thee in a moment.

( Ex. Belliza.
Enter Elvira. Lusc. (At the Wicket) My most incomparable Elvira, I know not
which to admire most, thy Wit or Beauty, they are both so Angel like, thou do
so much transcend the rest of all thy Sex, that they appear but splendid
trifles when compared to thee.


Elv. I know my self too well to apply this; all my hope is, that you have love
enough to deceive your self; and since all happiness is but imagination, 'twill
serve your turn as well as truth.


Lusc. It Is so real a blessing, and so great an honor, that to be King of
Arragon, is a less title than the love of Elvira.


Elv. This is the foolish dialect of lovers, which one who is not in love,
would laugh at, and never think it were in earnest.


Lusc. By heaven, I am so much in earnest, that all the happiness you have
raised me to, will prove my utmost torment, unless you take this opportunity to
complete it.


(He offers to embrace and kiss her. Elv. Stand off, mistaken young man, I
confess my loose carriage has deserved this, but know Luscindo, that though my
inclination was headstrong, that by indecent ways I sought to make my person
and my passion known: Yet tho I have as much Love as ever woman had, I have as
much Honor too, and the first minute of your attempt to lessen that, this
poignard shall make the last of your life and mine.


Lusc. kneels. Dearest Elvira, by this I find but what I knew before, That your
Virtue and Honor were equal to your Wit and Beauty. I beg a thousand pardons
for my rash offer, but beg you will not too far mistake me; for when I once
have so impious a thought as to attempt your honor, my poignard should do you
Justice on me.


Elv. Sir, pray rise, this posture does not become you to me.


Lusc. Should my love to you have the least mixture of dishonor in it, I
should hate my self as much as I love you.


Elv. May I believe you?


Lusc. Upon the honor of a Cavalier, the completing of the happiness which I
desired, was our instant marriage; a man can no more love Elvira with
dishonor, than he can love heaven, and be vicious; it were a contradiction.


Elv. Then my dear Luscindo, I ask thy pardon, here take this chaste Embrace,
and with it heart and soul; I am thine, nor is it in the power of Fate to alter
me.


Lusc. Hold heart, my joys come now too thick upon me.


Elv. But oh, Luscindo! I fear that all mine, and my Mothers Arts, will prove
vain to procure a respite of your Journey.


Lusc. Then I am lost, unless your Love be strong enough to carry you to the
Noble resolution of --


Elv. What Resolution? Can you doubt my Courage?


Lusc. The resolution of making an escape, and flying to some distant place.


Elv. Your faith so plighted as it is, leaves no room for doubt, in such a
heart as mine; I am resolved to run all fortunes with you.


Lusc. My Saint, my Angel, let me adore thee.


Elv. Come, come, talk like a Mortal, and consider of our escape.


Hern. So, I have coun'd enough, and have all my piteous Lovesick language
ready. Let me see, Suns, Moons, Stars, Planets, Lightning for Eyes: Roses,
Cherries, Crimson, Scarlet, Tyrian Purple, for the Spanish Wool upon the
Cheeks: Snow, Lillies, Milky way, for the Skin: Rubies and Coral for the Lips:
And Gums, Pearls Oriental for the Teeth: Sunbeams and Golden Tresses for the
Hair, that is sandy: Fire, Flames, Fry, Burn, Wounds, Pistols, Daggers, Halters,
for my self; and there is an end on it.


Enter Belliza in the Balcony. Bell. I have secured all, and am returned Noble
Sir, and if you please you may proceed.


Hern. My most venerably amiable, and amiably venerable Belliza, I am come to
lay my heart before you.


Bell. Most transcendently generous, and generously transcendent Luscindo, I
must thank you for the passion which you bring.


Hern. A Pox on it, I do not know what to say to her. Let me see, I Will make Love
in Rhyme, out of Heroic Plays; it is even as natural here as upon the Stage.

Dearest Ursa Major,
Which signifies a Bear.
[To himself. I am so dazzled with your radiant Eye,
That like the silly, and unheedful fly,
As sweetly the Heroic Poet sings;
At that bright flame I Have singed m' adventurous wings.
Ha, that runs well enough.


Bell. My Noble Lindamour, I find you are an errant Courtier; now you cannot
see my luster in the dark.


Her. Can it be dark, dear Ursa, while those eyes
With such fierce beams my feeble sight surprise?
You shine so brightly that the vigilant Fowl,
Sacred among the Athenians, called the Owl,
Keeps in his silent Cloister with the Batts,
And conscious of the light, the sullen Cats,
Forbear to Caterwaul, forget their passions,
And fail their several scratching assignations.

Bell. He has a bewitching Tongue, but comes not to the point.


Lusc. Here Is company coming; at Ten to morrow Night I Will not fail to have a
Coach in the back-lane. Joy of my heart, farewell.


Elv. My Life, my Soul, farewell: Hem, hem.


Bell. Good lack, she calls, I must be gone.


Lusc. Hernando, here let us retire.


Enter Doristeo, Finardo and Sancho. Doristeo. My dearest friend, I am
infinitely obliged to you for your assistance.


Finar. Not at all, it is the duty of a friend.


Lusc. Who are these? they go toward the Balcony: 'Sdeath! he is going up,
I Will stop his proceedings.


( Doristeo gets up on his man's shoulders, and takes the Note from the balcony.
Dor. Here Is the dear Note, let me read. Reads, Life of my Soul, my Mother
threatens me with a Nunnery as soon as it is light, and except you come and
rescue me, I am lost to you and all the world; for you are all I value in it.

Yours wholly, ELVIRA.





Lusc. Let me draw, and see who this Traitor is, and punish his insolence. Ha,
Doristeo.


[He opens his lanthorn. Dor. What lanthorn's that? let us retire.


Enter Levia and Gremia, with Six Bravo's. Lev. This is the Villain, fall on.


(They fight, Doristeo, Finardo and Sancho come in to Luscindo, they beat the
Bravo's off. Lusc. What Villains are these?


Grem. Ah, ah, murder, murder.


[She runs about squeaking. Lev. Ah, cowardly Dogs.

[ Ex. Levia.
Dor. Hah, Luscindo, I am glad it was in my power to assist you against these
Villains.


Lusc. (aside) Sir, I must confess I owe my life to you, let me see if I can
fairly discover this Intrigue: What lucky accident brought you hither?


[to him. Dor. You are a man of honor: I shall have need of your assistance:
Elvira, the daughter of this devout Widow here, is my Mistress, and has left a
letter, by appointment under a loose board in her Balcony, to let me know, that
as soon as it is light, her mother intends to force her to a Nunnery, and
conjures me to rescue her, I may have of so gallant a man's Sword, which I know
you will not deny me; there is the Note.


Lusc. Oh heaven and earth, it is her hand, the same with my Note! O Devil can
so much beauty have so much falsehood? Draw, and defend your self; you saved my
life, but have now forfeited your own: this Elvira is my mistress, whom if you
resign not to me, you must die.


Dor. You mistress! resign or die! Nay, then have at you. Sancho, stir one
step, and I will cut your throat.


Lusc. Take your life, I now am even with you.


(Luscindo and Doristeo fight, and Finardo and Hernando: Luscindo and Hernando
disarm the other two. Dor. Accursed fortune!


Hern. Take your Sword, and say you are beholding to me.


Enter Bernardo in his Nightgown, with Servants and Flambeaux, and Swords
drawn. Bern. What clashing of Swords and fighting has been here?


Dor. Let us retire from these lights.


Bern. Ungracious boy, is it you? whom have you fought with? what had you to do
here? I Will pack you away for Flanders.


Lusc. I must confess I was somewhat late taking leave of my Mistress, and as I
was coming home, I found a Gentleman, and Two with him, he climbed the Balcony,
and I not knowing but it might be to violate the honor of your Mistress,
Hernando and I fell upon them, disarmed them, and gave them their lives at
present.


Bern. Voto, Voto, Diabolo, why did you give them their lives? let us follow,
and murder them.


Lusc. They are fled out of distance, but I know the Gentleman, whom I will go
to in the morning, and make him promise under his hand to make no more
attempts, or I Will cut his throat.


Bern. Damnation, you foolish boy, why did you give him his life? Shall any
Villain live who attempts the honor of Don Bernardo's Mistress?


Lusc. I gave him his life, because I ought mine to him; for just before, I was
set upon by half a dozen Bravo's, and he fought gallantly, and relieved me.


Bern. How Bravo's! what a Devil's this?


Lusc. Let Us in, Sir, and we'll consult what is to be done.


Bern. Come on, I am in a mist, I know not what to think on it.


ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Elvira, Rosania. Rosa. IF ever life or liberty were dear to thee; if
ever love entered thy tender breast, and thy Luscindo has possession there,
pity my sad condition. Must I be buried while alive with Melancholy and
Green-sick^^s'd Nuns? your pious hypocrites and Chalk-eaters, and lose for ever
my dear Doristeo? Upon my knees I beg thy help; if ever thou had compassion
in thee, show it now.


Elv. I will, my dear Rosania, fear not, I will prevent thy going to this
dreadful Nunnery.


Rosa. There is but one way left: thou art entrusted by my Aunt with the keys
of the house, I have appointed Dcristeo to be ready this morning, let me out,
and I shall owe my life, my love, and all the world to thee.


Elv. I am entrusted, and would thou have me false to that trust?


Rosa. It Is to be true to love, the greatest power upon earth, oh, be not false
to that.


Elv. I must consult my conscience.


Rosa. Oh, look not, dear Elvira, to succeed in any of thy wishes, if thou
desertest me now.


Elv. I will not quit thy interest.


Rosa. There is no way left but this, which if thou should deny me, I am for
ever miserable.


Elv. How know thou Doristeo is not wicked, and may violate thy honor?


Rosa. I know first, that I will part with my life before I yield my honor;
besides, he has the reputation of a gallant man.


Elv. Well, I will strain a point for thee, and let thee out, and I wish thee
all the happiness fond lovers can imagine.


Rosa. Millions of blessings fall on thee, my dear, dear Elvira, author of my
life; and liberty; haste, haste, lest my Aunt, or the Duoena, should surprise
us. Farewell my dear, dear Elvira.


Elv. Adieu, my dear Rosania, ( Elvira unlocks the Wicket, and lets Rosania
out. thou art very near thy happiness; I would I had as little difficulty; but
let it be never so great, I am resolved to surmount all, for my dear Luscindo's
fake.


Enter Belliza. Bell. What do you up so soon?


Elv. My concern for you, daughter, would not let me rest: I came out of my
Chamber, thinking I had heard the door open; did not you hear something?


Bell. Yes: which made me come out of my Chamber.


Elv. We were deceived, the door's shut, and I have the keys in my pocket.


Bell. Well, this Luscindo is a charming person, he so bewitched me with his
Tongue, my Eyes have never come together, dear daughter.


Elv. Again, daughter!


Bell. Dear Mother then, take care of me, or I am lost in the flower of my age.
Hah, what knocking's that?


(Knocking at the Wicket. Elv. I know not: If some body has caught Rosania, and
brought her back, both she and I am ruined.


(aside Enter Grycia. Gry. Madam, yonder is the Irish Father with a grave Old
Gentlewoman at the door, desire Entrance; your Ladyship has the Keys.


Elv. Here they are.


(She gives Grycia the Keys. Bell. What can this mean?


Elv. I know not.


Ex. Grycia. Enter Tegue O Divelly and Gremia. Tegue. Good morning Daughters,
the Saints bless ye; here is a good pious ancient and reverend Laady that vould
be after spaakeing vid die Faaders child and dine own der gra arrah: She is a
Gaallant Laady, and Lovet de Church, and is very dewout indeed, a Laady of
great rank, and wertue.


Bell. Would your Ladyship have ought with me?


Gre. Are you Donna Belliza?


Bell. I am.


Gre. Your Ladyships most obedient Servant: and is this your Daughter, Madam?


Bell. It is*


Gre. I am your Ladyships most humble servant to command.


Tegue. Do you not she now she is a graat Laady of great solidity, of much
breeding, good behaviors, and formalities and be?


Gre. You are then the mother, and she the daughter; good, I have somewhat to
impart to both your Ladyships, which concerns me and both of ye.


Tegue. She is a fine-spoken Laady as any in Madrid, no dispraise, I tell you
Joy.


Gre. There is nothing so dear, so precious in the world to a Lady as her
Honor and Reputation; very well; and my concern for this is the occasion of my
waiting upon you now: do you conceive me?


Elv. Not I, Madam, truly.


Gre. Go to: I have a Niece whom I have educated from her first budding, till
she is become mature, as I may so say, and ripe for gathering, good.


Bell. She has a fine tongue truly.


Tegue. Did I not shay sho to dee gra?


Gre. In this Niece did I place all my Joy, having brought her up to all the
rules of strictest Virtue? right; do you understand me? Now this Niece, de
conceive me, is one of the g^eatest beauties in Madrid; de see? well.


Elv. What is her Name?


Gre. Henrietta de Sylvia


Tegue. Ab^o, by my shoul she is aafter telling a great lie indeed.


(aside. Gre. Now there is a Neighbor of your Ladyships, one Don Bernardo, and
he has a Son named Luscindo, very good, as fine a person as the Sun e're shined
on, a person, de understand me? but to go on.


Bell. Whither does her discourse tend? pray heaven he be not inconstant.


(aside. Gre. Now this Luscindo is a man of shining honor, by his Deeds in
Arms, de conceive me now? what does me this Luscindo, I say, what does me he do?


Elv. What does this impertinent creature drive at?


Gre. I say, what does me he but prune himself, and strut before her window
with amorous contenance and mien? very well: dogs her when she goes to Church,
whispers in her ear at Mass; de see; Serenades her every night: good now, what
does me she.


Tegue. She has a raare shilver tongue, fait, an be, she dosh talk gaallantly
by my shoulwaation:


Gre. I say, what does me she, alas, good Ladies, you cannot but conceive, that
we of the frail Sex are liable, and so forth, de understand me? Good, my Neice,
my poor frail Niece; alack, alack! I cannot speak for tears.


Bell. My mind misgives me; I am miserable; I scarce dare stay to hear the
fatal Story.


(aside.) Gre. I say, what does me my Niece but become amorous of this young
charming person? well, gives him a meeting, signs a contract as he to her, and
since he has left her for this young Lady, and has the impudence to own his new
Passion. My poor Niece lies distracted, tearing of her hair, bound in her bed.


Bell Ah, ah, ah.


Elv Oh, savage Monster, I Will not bear this vile affront; she tells it so
naturally it cannot be feigned.


Tegue. I will maake testification upon Oat, dat all dis is true and shartain,
fait and trot gra.


Bell. Ah, ah, Luscindo, Luscindo.


( Belliza falls into a fainting fit. Gre. Ah me, help, help my Lady, cut her
Lace, cut her Lace, get some Arsa foetida, blew Inkle, or Patridge Feathers,
and burn under her Nose. I hope I did not occasion this.


Tegue. By my shoul I will fling shome holy vater in her faash, and cross it,
and it vill maake cure upon her. (He pulls out a bottle of Holy Water, and
sprinkles some upon Belliza's face, and crosses, and mutters. Dey call defe
fits, but by my shoul dey are de evil Spirits dat vill get in at de mout, if
vee do not ta^ke great caare of them.


Bell. Oh, vile Luscindo! but heaven has justly punished me for leaving my
Beads for the vanity of Love: Oh, holy Father, it is you must give me comfort, I
wholly resign my self into your hands, and will ever give my heart to heavenly
matters, and retiring from the world.


Elv. Retire, Madam, into your Chamber.


Bell. I will, follow me holy man.


Ex. Bell. and Tegue Gre. I am sorry to find I am the cause of so much
disturbance in this good family, but I thought I was as well concerned for the
Love to my Niece, as in honor to you, to let you know of Luscindo's contract;
and so I kiss your hand.


Elv. Farewell Madam. ( Ex. Gremia. O vile Luscindo, think thou that I can be
content with a false title to thee, with a heart that is mortgaged to another? I
will revenge this base indignity by instant marriage with thy Father this
morning: Oh, false, false Luscindo!

Ex.
SCENE, Bernardo's House. Bernardo within. Bern. Why, Diego, Sirrah, Drone,
Bear, Dormouse, stir, Rogue; by my beard I think an Earthquake would not wake
thee: why sirrah, are you in a dead sleep?


Enter in his Morning-Gown, and Diego to him. Diego. Oh, oh, I was, Sir, till
you were pleased to call me to life, but to a wearisome one, if you will not
suffer me to take out my sleep.


Bern. Thou would out-sleep the seven sleepers: it is broad day.


Diego. I see that as well as you, Sir, and better too; for my eyes are younger.


Bern. Lazy Rascal, the Rising-Sun upbraids thy sloth.


Diego. I am sure he went to bed before me.


Bern. But sirrah, leave your prating, and tell me, did I not hear the Wicket
open?


Diego. How can I tell whether you heard it? you can resolve your self much
better of that than I.


Bern. Peace, thou son of a Strumpet, what have you a mind to be witty? I am
confident I heard it: this lewd boy of mine has been abroad all night; I shall
never rest till he be in Flanders: Sirrah, go see if my Son be in his chamber,
and bring me word.


( Ex. Diego Enter Luscindo, Hernando and Diego. Luscin. Tell my Father we have
been packing up my Goods for Flanders.


Diego. I will Sir.

( Ex. Diego.
Lusc. Is It possible Elvira should be false? How can it yet be otherwise? this
Note to Doristeo is too plain a proof to leave me any room for doubt; Was e're
misfortune yet like mine.


Her. There must be some mistake, it cannot be.


Enter Grycia. Gry. Sir, there is a Letter for you from my Young Lady.


Lusc. For me?


Gry. Yes, Sir. Hernando, which is Don Bernardo's apartment?


Hern. Go in there.


( Ex. Grycia. Lusc. Hah, this is another, hand. He reads, You may spare your
self and friends the pains of coming to carry me away, your falsehood and
unworthiness shall be revenged by my instant marriage with your father, nor
will I ever see you more in any other quality than that of your Stepmother,

Elvira.




Ha, what means she by my falsehood? This may be her mothers hand, they are
afraid this dishonorable falsehood with Doristeo should take air, and her
mother would marry her instantly to my Father: I will go to her, and do
whatever jealousy and fury may prompt me to.


Enter Bernardo, Grycia, Diego. Per. Ho there, call all my Servants, bid 'em be
ready for my Wedding, which is to be out of hand this morning. Oh my sweet
Elvira. Now Youth, Stripling, now you shall see my Wedding, and let the Young
Coxcomb break his heart: what care I? (aside) bid all my Servants come in to
me, and sirrah, Diego, bid my Apothecary come, I will have a strengthening
Cordial to enable me to carry my self like a man of honor.


( Ex. Luscindo. Her. What good will that do? she will soon find you out.


Bern. Gad take me, if I pay down a lusty Fine, she shall be content to bate of
her Rent. De hear? let me have Music, and do you get me good Kettle-Drums and
Trumpets, I will have pomp as well as dispatch: Away, let all the rest of my
Servants come to me.


(Ex. Bernardo, Hernando, and Servants. Gremia and Levia in the Street, Elvira
in the Balcony, veiled, and standing close. Elv. I Will watch him coming out of
his Father's house, and see how my Letter works on the persidious man. Who Is
yonder? the old Lady with a Young Genman; I suppose he is the brother or the
Kinsman of her injured Neice.


Lev. I am extremely pleased that your story caused such distraction in the
family; Now you are a good Aunt.


Gre. Ay, too good for you, how can I be rewarded?


Elv. Here he is: can there be falsehood in that charming person?


Enter Luscindo in the Street. Levia. Here comes the Villain: Stop, Hell-hound,
stop.


Gre. Oh heaven, what now will her madness prompt her to?


Lev. Now look me in the face.


Lusc. Take it away, I like it not.


Levia. Audacious wretch, take that.


(She gives him a box on the ear, Gremia steps between. Lusc. A fair Ladies
hand can give no affront.


Elv. What, a Coward too! nay, then all must be true I have heard of him; I Will
see no more, I am distracted: would I had seen a Basilisk when I saw thee.

Ex. Elvira.
Lusc. If you give not over, I will expose you to the last degree of infamy.


Levia. Poor fool, I Will have thy Life, or make Madrid too hot for thee.


( Levia and Gremia retire. Lusc. Whither will my despair hurry me? Now to my
cruel and my false Elvira.

( Ex. Luscindo.
Enter Elvira in Belliza's House. Elv. Unhappy creature, to what miseries have
my too fatal eyes betrayed me? Had I never beheld this false Luscindo, I had
rested, and undisturbed, enjoyed my quiet sleeps, and all the wonted calmness
of my Soul; but Love, vile Love, disordered all my frame, and had no sooner
taken possession here, but I must turn him out again. But, Oh! What sharp
convulsions must I suffer, e're I dispossess this most distracting inmate? Oh
Heaven! What Is this!


Enter Luscindo with his Dagger drawn. Lusc. Ah, Madam, fear not me, I can
commit no violence on you: This is to execute whom you condemn: Your cruel
Falsehood and your Tyranny, might do it soon without the help of this.


Elv. My Falsehood, vilest of men, how dare you accuse me of a black Crime which
I detest and scorn, as much as I should thee, who art so evidently false, that
thou have forced me in a just resentment, to execute my self, and bury all my
Youth in thy loathed Fathers arms for my revenge.


Lusc. I false! witness ye Saints in heaven, how I am injured: Had a blessed
Angel said this, I would have pronounced it a false and evil Spirit; but
Doristeo has confessed your falsehood, showed me your Ticket, at which I fought
with him, and being severed in the streets, I kept your Billet to upbraid your
falsehood with, which here behold. And I suppose you have found this Doristeo
false! and fling your self upon my Father.


Elv. Doristeo, ha, ha, ha.


Lus. Am I become your scorn, as well as your aversion? then it is time to fall.


Elv. You do not, Sir, from me, deserve a serious answer, that bring a heart.
already vowed to another, Henrietta de Sylvia: you find you are discovered. I
am to blame in holding this long commerce with so perfidious a man as you.


Lusc. By heaven, and all the powers above, I never once heard of her Name till
now; but you can write, and make a sacrifice of me, the most passionate and
faithful Lover your Beauty e're shall gain, to Doristeo.


Elv. Though you deserve not any satisfaction, in vindication of my honor yet
I do avow it is not my hand.


Lusc. Nor this?


(Showing her other Note. Elv. Nor that.


Lusc. It Is well you had your Confident to write, that whensoe're you pleased,
you might disown it: Falsehood to the height, then this is yours.


Elv. It is, and you deserve it from me; and I resent your injury so much, I
have condemned my self to misery, perpetual misery, for my revenge. Ah! think
then how I could have loved.


Lusc. Could you? By Heaven, and all its Powers, I am not false, nor ever heard
the Name you mentioned.


Elv. Did you not even now, part with her Aunt, and a young Gentleman, who I
suppose is of her kindred? But what can I expect from one so mean, as could
receive a blow?


Lusc. Oh Heaven and Earth! I am the vilest Wretch, the basest Miscreant, if
that young Gentleman be not one Levia, a famous Courtezan! The other Person is
a Baud, her Aunt. This Courtezan unfortunately cast her love on me, and has for
my neglect, and scorn of her, pursued my life.


Elv. Father Tegue introduced her Aunt to my Mother and me, and vouched her for
a Lady of Quality, and all she said for truth.


Lusc. Did you once know the vileness of that Priest, you would as soon believe
the Devil.


Elv. I know he is a Villain. [aside. His story looks like truth; indeed, I
cannot on second thoughts believe that he could take a blow from any man. I
fear I Have been too rash, and am undone. To my own honor this is due; the last
Nights Note, to you, was written by my Cousin Rosania, if my Mother found it I
might disown it to her. That to Doristeo, was from, and for her self; he fell
in love with her, took her for the Daughter, me for the Niece; and Rosania has
carried on her correspondence with him in my Name; and this the Powers of
Heaven can witness is all true.


Lusc. O Heaven, what fatal accidents have hurried me even to the brink of
Ruin? Low on the earth, and at your feet I will for ever lie, till you shall
pardon me my base suspicion that you were false, and will believe me true.


Elv. Rise, Sir, I do.


Lusc. Then am I happier than all the prosperous Monarchs of the Earth: I was
plunged into the lowest Gulf of Darkness, and now am raised to visit Light
again.


Elv. Hold, not too fast, I see no prospect yet of a clear light, but Clouds
and Storms about us. Our most unfortunate mistakes, have carried me so far to
make the engagement to your Father, and I can see no way to break it.


Lusc. How, Elvira! Those fatal Words contain my sentence, since you can be so
unkind as now to think of quitting me, to make my Father happy,

And give that Heart to him engaged to me,
This fatal Instrument shall set you free.

Elv. Hold dear, and more than ever dear Luscindo, I am entirely yours; nor
Fate, nor Time, nor Death, shall fever us.


Lusc. Let me for ever hold you within these Arms, and let our Love, like to a
broken Limb, grow stronger.


Elv. We have no time for Raptures, no escape can now be made; the Streets are
full, and we shall soon be forced from one another.


Lusc. It remains that we must do what cannot be undone, and find a Priest to
join us instantly.


Enter Tegue. Elv. Here Is one at hand, I must confess, a wicked one.


Lusc. Most opportunely come, I Will make him him do it. Father, let us withdraw,
we have some business to consult your wisdom in.


Teg. Come den, I will do phat I can for your Fauders Child, joy; and I will
employ all my visdom upon you gra.


[Exeunt. Bernardo in his House, with his Servants in the Barbers hands. Ber.
Are all my servants ready, to wait in their best accountrements?


Diego. They are without, Sir, and Hernando is gone for a Priest, and Music,
and Kettle-Drums.


Bern. This is a joyful day, and I will celebrate it with all the pomp I can:
come Washball, refresh my countenance, and take off the superfluous crop; but
as thou love thy Ears, or Nose, that bolt-sprit of thy face, profane not my
inviolate Whiskers: for every single hair thou shall diminish there, I will lop
off from thee a member, sirrah.


Barber. I warrant you, Sir, I know the value of a Whisker in Madrid.


Bern. Come, Snip, Snap, begin. (He puts his Cap and Cloth on. Enter Levia.
How now, Springall, who art thou?


Levia. Pardon, Sir, my abrupt intrusion. I doubt not but you are so much a
Cavalier as to protect a Gentleman in distress.


Bern. I am as much a Cavalier as any man; my manifold achievements witness
for me, the world rings of 'em; and one thing, sprig of honor, I tell thee, no
man in Madrid has more Castilian blood running in his Veins than I.


Lev. I am happy to fall into the hands of such a gallant man.


Bern. Thy story, Lad, thy story: thou art as safe here as in the Castle of
Millain.


Lev. I Will tell it, Sir, in whisper and in short.


Ber. Stand back all.


Lev. I have been several times of late dogged and assaulted by Bravo's, and by
the confession of one of 'em, whom I took, I found that they were hired by a
Young Lady of your Neighborhood, Elvira, daughter to Donna Belliza.


Bern. How say thou, stripling?


Lev. And which makes me apply my self to you, they say your Son Luscindo joins
with her in the bloody business; and except you can take him off, and get him
to prevail on her, one time or other I must fall a sacrifice to their fury.


Ber. Diabolo, Elvira and my Son!


Lev. By heaven it is true, the fellow is here ready to testify it; but did you
know me, my honor would pass with you.


Ber. But hold stripling, why should they pursue your life?


Lev. You are a man of honor, and have promised me protection, and I Will hide
nothing from you; the truth is Elvira is my Mistress, I have enjoyed her, and
she has sacrificed me to Luscindo.


Ber. Hell and damnation.


Lev. Her barbarous usage, and your generosity, will clear my honor for
revealing this, they thinking that they cannot enjoy themselves in freedom
while I live, endeavor to dispatch me, and but last night.


Ber. Last night! Furies and Devils, this must be true, I thought he had not
known her.


Lev. I saw him this morning sneak into the house; she let him in, and there he
was even when I entered here.


Ber. Where Is my Sword? Come Youth, by Beelzebub and all his host of Devils,
thou shall see 'em both fall by this arm, come along.


Barb. Shall I take my Clothes off.


Bern. Damn thee Nit.


Diego. Will you not put on your clothes, Sir, Sir?


Ber. I Will cut thy throat, Dog, follow me all,


(Ex. Omnes* Belliza, Elvira, Tegue O Divelly in Belliza 's House. Bell. Oh
this good man has fixed my wandering mind,
And set it all on Heaven, and things above:
How had I given the reins to Vanity,
That I should suffer Love to enter here,
And justle out devotion? Holy Father,
I am resolved to expiate my crime,
The remnant of my life within a Cloister:
Ah, what a ^ound comfort shall I find?
Daughter, I am glad that thou art resolved so soon to marry; and I will leave
my House to thee.


Tegue. ( to Elvira.) She tinks not dat I am after maaking Luscindo and you
one; and now I have revenged her contumely upon me, in putting de outside of
de door upon me. Daughter, phen dou dosht die, dou vilt be a gallant Saint
indeed.


Elv. A brace of Hypocrites well met, Is this wicked woman here?


Enter Gremia. Gre. Oh, Ladies, upon my knees I humbly beg your pardon, I
apprehend the mischief I have caused; I was wrought upon by my wicked Neice to
tell you a story, every word of which was false; Luscindo is unblemished.


Bell. How! is Luscindo true?


Elv. Yes sure, but you are resolved for a Monastery.


Bell. Who tells you so? that was on supposition of his falsehood. Luscindo
true, then I am happy.


(aside.) Elv. Did not you say, all was true?


Tegue. 'T was for a pious end dat I speak it.


Enter Grycia. Grycia. Oh, Madam, I am undone, ruined, Mrs. Rosania is fled,
gone out of the house, and no where to be found.


Bell. Oh heaven, I am undone, I should have sent her this day to a Monastery.
Ah, who is here?


Enter Bernardo, Levia, Hernando, and Servants holding him, his Sword drawn.
Bern. Let me go, Dogs, Rogues, Villains, Caterpillars.


Bell. Call my menservants to help to hold him.


[ Grycia goes out, and Men enter with her, who lay hold on Bern. Bern. Where
is this Strumpet Elvira, and this Son of a Whore Luscindo? They shall both fall
a sacrifice to my fury. Let me go.


Bell. Hold him fast, he is distracted.


Tegue. He is possesht, let me alone vid him, Joy.


Bern. Are you there, foul creature?


Tegue. Benedicite, dear is shome Holy Vater in de fash of dee. (He flings Holy
Water in his face. Conjuro te demonem Beelzebub Satanam per

Caesare camestres festino Baraco darapti

Felapton Disamis Datisi Bocardo Farison.


Bern. Let me go, dogs, and first I will exorcize you, Rascal.


(He beatt the Priest, knocks him down, and stamps on him, who all the time
roars out the Exorcism. They lay hold on Bern, the Priest gets up, and goes on
in exorcizing. Bell. O heaven, he is possessed, and has committed Sacrilege
upon the good man.


Enter Luscindo. Bell. Oh my dear Luscindo, art thou here?


Lusc. Hold, hold, what is the matter? unhand my Father.


[They let him loose* Bern. Ungracious Rascal, have at thy heart, Let me go. Oh
Villain, had you and that Strumpet Elvira, none to put your vile affronts on,
but on me? Must I marry your Wench, and one that was a Whore to another before?


[He runs at him with his Dagger. Hernando stops him. Bell. Oh save my dear
Luscindo.


Lusc. If any man but my Father said this, it should be his death.


Bern. How now, Ruffian!


Tegue. Let me come, he is possesht I tell dee, Exorcizo te.


Lusc. Stand by, Fool.


Tegue. Fool! I tink dou art possesht too, Joy, and I must exorcise dee, to
call a Priest Fool, and be, aboo, boo, boo.


Bern. There Is a Young Gentleman can tell, and you, base wretches, pursue his
Life for it.


Lev. It Is all true.


Elv. Hold, let me speak; If you presume that I am such a creature, you freely
will resign me.


Bern. Resign thee to the Devil; but think not I Will sit down with this Affront;
I Will be patient for a moment,


Enter Rosania and Doristeo. Bell. This is all false, the ancient Gentlewoman
has confessed it, and my Luscindo, my dear Luscindo's true. Oh vile Girl, art
thou there?


Ros. Yes, Madam, I am returned, but with another Guardian, my Doristeo.


Dorist I am come to wait upon you with my Wife; and since your denial cannot
undo what is already done, I beg your consent.


Bell. I Will never give it while I live.


Levia. Hell and Furies, have I lost him too!


(aside.) Dorist. Pardon me, dear Luscindo, for my mistakes, and impute them to
our evil fortune. You are a man of honor, and I beg your friendship.


Luscind. You have shown your self a Gentleman, and I shall take it for an
honor to be called your friend.


Bern. I Will slit your Windpipe, and spoil your complements, sirrah.


Elv. Your fatal using of my Name, has caused such mischievous mistakes, as did
go near to ruin me.


Bell. Now, dear Luscindo, we are free.


Elv. Since you are pleased to resign me, my Husband Luscindo, will own me with
all my Faults.


Bell. Ah me, ah me! Father stand by me.


Lusc. Own thee, yes, while I have life and motion, as my greatest happiness.
Were this a man, I Would send his soul into another world, but it is a woman, a
malicious one, and a Whore.


Lev. Heavens curses on ye all, here take my Life, and I shall thank you for it.


Lusc. Keep it to be a torment to thee.


Lev. Most violent Love, and invincible impotence, possess thee, and continual
rage and jealousy her; and so with curses on ye all, farewell.

( Ex Levia.
Bern. Devil, what has my rashness brought me to? I could kill the dog; but let
me think on some firm and lasting vengeance. I have it.


Bell. Oh Father, I wholly now give my self up to a Cloistered Life.


Tegue. Daat is my good daughter.


Bern. If you can forgive your poor Soldier, Bernardo, who finds that you alone
are worthy of him, I return to my first Love, and am ready, dear Widow, to
consummate, without more delay.


Bell. What says he? are you in earnest?


Tegue. Out, phat dosht dou do now? dou vilt not hearken to the tempter gra*


Bern. Lady, I seldom kneel, Lady, but in this posture humbly beg you to
receive me.


Bell. To show I am in charity with all the world, and can forgive, I receive
you as my husband.


Bern. A thousand blessings on thee, my dear Widow, Sirrah, Young Rogue, I will
get every year a child these twenty years, and make thy heart ache.


Lusc. I wish you Joy, Sir,


Elv. Much Joy, Madam.


Bell. Go, perfidious wretch, thee I will never forgive.


Tegue. Hold, hold, I do forbid the Baanes: dou vert espoused unto the Church
first, and that does dirimere contractum, and irritum reddere sponsalia.


Lusc. Well said Priest, with false Latin.


Bern. Sirrah, Priest, if you do forbid the Banes, I will cut your throat. Do
you hear? You that were my unlawful Pimp, and joined me to many Whores in
Flanders, shall be my lawful Pimp, and join me to one Wife in Madrid, or by
Heaven I will exorcise you with a vengeance.


Tegue. Vel, vel, shay no more Joy, I will do phat dou spakest. By my shoul I
will pronounce the words of de maarriage without intention, and den it is no
maarriage, and all deir posterity vill be aafter being Bashtards, as all de
School men say; and by my shoulwaation dear is a trick for them.


(aside. Lusc. Now dear Elvira, may our mutual Love shine clear, without one
cloud upon it. Heaven let me but possess my dear Elvira,

And I renounce all earthly joys beside.
Thus Fortune kindly does for Love provide.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Bracegirdle. MEthinks I hear some Ladies nicely wise,
(I do not mean the virtuous, but precise)
Cry down us Spanish ones, and call us light,
Who entertain our Lovers at first sight.
But Ladies think, were you like us confined,
Alas! you would soon be of another mind.
You at the first fair game before you eye,
As fiercely as unhooded Hawks would fly.
Though Nature largely does for us provide,
Yet all its beauteous store, we are forced to hide,
Which but by dangerous stealths is never spied.
You can your Faces every where expose,
And throw your piercing Darts against the Beaux:
But we are wiser yet than you; for we
Never wait a second opportunity.
You shall for Months your amourous glances cast,
And bring it but to Scandal at the last.
We never spread our loving Nets in vain,
We soon come to a point, and ease the pain:
Your Beauties you so often in public show,
That Gallants of your Faces weary grow.
So that before you're known, you are enjoyed,
And Sparks, before they come to taste, are cloyed.
To feed their Pride, not Love, some have a train
Of fluttering Slaves, to grace their stately Reign;
Their sickly appetites are so diseased,
They make men jealous, and themselves not pleased.
We Are seldom seen, and but by those we like,
And when the Iron's hot, never fail to strike.
But though we are wiser, you are happier still,
As if we had no Souls, we have no Will:
For our Tyrannick Country thinks it fit,
To Kindred or to Husbands we submit.
Whene're we are discovered by ill chance,
A life is forfeit for a single glance.
Your Sisters or your Daughters safely stray,
And with a Groom or Parson run away:
On this affront the Kinsmen never think,
But as they use to do, hunt on and drink.
For every Favor a poor Spanish wife
Bestows on her Gallant, she ventures life.
The wanton English ones need never fear,
By their good men they are ever held most dear,
And none such hands over their Husbands bear:
The Husband none so closely does embrace
As the sweet Gallant who supplies his place.
Well --
Though on the Stage we Spanish women be,
Elsewhere we can use English Liberty.
Now for the Poet, I have naught to say,
Has cast himself upon you, and ye may
Do what ye please, or save, or damn his Play.
FINIS.

