A safe and easy way to obtain free and peaceable Elections, without
Imposition, Noise or Charge: Proposed to Consideration now the Regulation of
Elections is under debate.
THat none, upon Penalty of being made incapable to be elected, do by himself,
Friends, or Court-Letters, seek to impose himself upon the Freeholders.

That the Writ being issued forth, and broken up by the Sheriff in the County
Court, the Freeholder being sworn, or otherwise attesting his Right to Elect,
by having a clear Freehold Estate of Forty Shillings per Annum, and his Name,
and place of abode taken by the Clerk.

Let the Freeholder put into a Box the Names of the Knights he judges most
meet to serve in Parliament, writ in a small Scroll of Paper, rolled and sealed
up; then let the Judges of the Poll with the Sheriff open the Box, search and
sort the Papers, and find who by this Suffrage are the Elected Knights, who are
then to be proclaimed by the Sheriff, and Indentures being sealed by the
Sheriff and the Judges aforesaid, to be returned accordingly.

Let these Judges of the Poll be one or two of the most substantial Freeholders
out of every Hundred, chosen for that purpose by the Freeholders of the
Hundred, at the Summons of the High Constable, to some convenient Place in the
Hundred, eight or ten days before the Election, and sworn to be faithful to
their Trust.

To avoid Charge or Trouble, the Court may be adjournd to so many Places in the
County as may be most convenient, provided at the end of every Court the Box be
sealed by the Sheriff, and five or six of the Judges.

Whereby the Sheriffs miscarriages in Delays, false and double Returns, will be
prevented.

The vast profuse and intolerable Expenses of Competitors in Elections,
avoided.

The undue Impositions of Landlords and great Men, disappointed.

The shameful Drunkenness and unneighbourly Quarrels and Feuds, prevented.

The chargeable and troublesome Contests in Committees of Elections, removed.

And an Obligation laid upon the Gentry to live virtuously, to gain the
Affections of their Country.

After this way may the Elections in Corporations be regulated, the Right of
Election being settled by Act of Parliament in the Freemen, paying Scot and Lot.


