A Congratulatory Poem On His HIGHNESS the PRINCE OF ORANGE His Coming into
ENGLAND.

Written by T. S. A True Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the Sign of the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

A Congratulatory Poem On His HIGHNESS the PRINCE OF ORANGE His Coming into
ENGLAND.
OUR Glorious Realm, o'reall the Earth Renowned,
Once with the Noblest Government was Crowned;
By which all Foreign Tyrannies were awed,
Easy we were at home and Terrible abroad.
All our wise Laws of Empire were designed
Not for the Lust of one, but good of all mankind;
The great Prerogative was understood
A vast unbounded power of doing good:
From doing ill, by Laws it was confined;
If Sanctions, Pacts, or Oaths, could Princes bind,
By Ancient usages and Laws they swayed,
Which both were by the choice of Subjects made
Old Customs grew to Laws by long consent,
And to each Written Law of Parliament:
Freedom in Boroughs, and in Land Freehold;
Gave all, who had them, Voices, uncontrolled:
But few new Rights were by new Laws obtaind,
Only some ^^vis^^d liberties regan'dd.
Who had no Voices, yet alike were bound
By the Protection, which from laws they found,
For every one in those had equal right;
And no great man could injure, or affright
Where Subjects in the Laws can claim no share,
'Twixt them and Cattle no distinctions are.
This was the Constitution of our State,
And true Religion flourished in its height:
From lying Legends, false Traditions, free,
From Monkish Ignorance, Schoolmens Frippery,
From Idols, and from Papal Tyrunny.
Their building made of Stubble and of Hay,
Was by our Wise Reformers swept away;
Thus we enjoyed a happy Union,
Under the great Eliza, perfect grown,
Hers and the Peoples Interests, were thought one,
She, and the Realm, with mutual kindness strove,
Great its Obedience, and as great her Love;
Long might such happiness have been enjoyed,
Had it not been b' Ambitious Priests destroyed,
Those haughty Priests could not contented be
With what remained from Popish Dignity,
But would their Hierachy have greater made,
With cast off Rights the Laity th'invade,
And call in Ius Divinum to their aid.
With that invisible Commission armed
Our Kings, which Sovereign, and Inherent charmed,
With Sacred Person, power without a bound,
Prerogative unlimited, no ground
Whereof is in our Constitution found.
Thus they, by Ecclesiastic Flattery,
Turned Kings to Tyrants, and to Slaves, the free;
These Furious Fools yet Wise Divines contemned,
And their rash Doctrines, privately condemned;
None dare in public say they were unsound,
But Fines, and Pillories, and Brands, were found.
For now Commissioned from above the Sky,
Kings soon were deemed for Laws, and Oaths too high;
Hotly it was taught they were not bound by Oaths,
Because no Power above them to impose.
'Twas now no Kingly Office nor a Trust,
No Laws to Rule by but their Sovereign lust;
And all the Land for their Estate they owned,
The Subjects were their Stock upon the Ground.
At length, to rivet on the Chains we wore,
Lewd Knaves in Quoifs yield the Dispensing power,
Which never Tyrant here had claimed before.
The Scandals of the Bar must now be found
To give the Government this mortal wound;
Which at one blow took all its strength away,
And down in pieces dashed, the Noble Structure lay.
Ruin and Rubbish covered all the Ground,
And no remains were of the building found
Monsters of Roman and Hybernian Race,
With Phangs and Claws infect the wasted place:
With one of British kind, who swallowed more
Than any other Bloody Beast of Power;
Fiercely he goggled, his Iaws opened wide,
Louder he roared than all the Beasts beside.
Some like Iaccals, before him Preyed for Blood,
And to his Ravenous Maw brought all they could:
Against the Rapine of these Beasts of Prey,
First Londons Noble Prelate stood at Bay;
One fit to atone for all the Clergies Blots,
For three vile English Bishops, and twelve Scots.
Then Valiant Fairfax and brave Hough made head,
But by these Monsters were discomfited:
And now the trembling Church began to reel,
And the effects of Non-resistance feel
Where Ius Divinum was not on their side;
They strove to stop the fierce impetuous Tide.
Seven Suffering Heroes gave it such a shock,
It seemed to dash its Surges on a Rock:
But Showers of Locusts came with thickest Fogs,
From Tybers Marshes and from Shanons Bogs;
Vast clouds of Vermin hasten to their aid,
And intercepting light thick darkness made;
All clouded was our Sullen Hemisphere,
But Lo! the Gloirous Orange does appear!
And by his Universal influence,
Does to our drooping Land new Life dispense;
His heat ferments that Lump, was dead before,
Which now in every part exerts its power;
To purge its self, that it may clean become,
The fermentation soon throws off the Scum.
And every part does toward Perfection move,
Toward Strength, and Soundness, Harmony and Love:
When Earth oppressed, with darkness over spread,
From filthy Boggy exhalations bred.
The Sun with noiseless marches of his light,
Discusses Vapors, and dispels the Night;
With Equal Silence in his Glorious Race,
Our noisome Fogs does the Brave Orange Chase:
Does all the powers of Darkness put to flight,
And the Infernal Ministers of Night;
The Guilty Spirits shun the approach of light.
When undistinguished in the Mighty Mass,
And in Stagnation Universal matter was;
Huddled in heaps the differing attones lay,
Quiet, and had no Laws of Motion to obey:
The Eternal mover threw the ferment in,
The Solid Attoms did their course begin;
The Quickening Mass moves now in every part,
And does its Plastic Faculties exert.
The jarring Attomes move into a peace,
And all Confusion, and disorders cease:
The Ugly undigested Lump became,
The perfect Glorious, and well ordered Frame.
Let there be light, the Almighty fiat Run,
No sooner 'twas pronounced, but it was done:
Inspired by Heaven, thus the Great Orange said,
Let there be liberty, and was obeyed.
Vast wonders Heaven's great Minister h'as wrought,
From our dark Chaos, Beauteous order brought:
H' Invaded us with Force, to make us free,
And in another Realm, could meet no Enemy.
Hail Great Assertor, of the Greatest Cause;
Man's Liberty, and the Almighty's Laws:
Heaven Greater Wonders has for thee designed,
Thou Glorious deliv'rer of Mankind!
FINIS.

