Squire of Alsatia. A COMEDY, As it is Acted by Their Majesty's Servants.

Written by Tho. Shadwell.

Creditur, ex medio quia res arcessit, habere
Sudoris minimum, sed habet Comoedia tanto
Plus oneris, quanto veniae minus.
Hor. Ep. ad Aug. 1. lib. 2 LONDON, Printed for James Knapton, at the
Queens-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1688.

An Explanation of the Cant.
ALsatia. White-fryers. Prig, Prigster. Pert Coxcombs. Bubble, Caravan. The
Cheated. Sealer. One that gives Bonds and Judgments for Goods and Money. A
Pult. One who is easily wheadled and cheated. Coal, Ready, Rhino, Darby. Ready
money. Rhinocerical. Full of money. Megs. Guineas. Smelts. Half-Guineas. Decus.
A Crown piece. George. A Half-Crown. Hog. A Shilling. Sice. Sixpence. Scout. A
Watch. Tattler. An Alarm, or Striking Watch. Famble. A Ring. Porker, Tilter. A
Sword. A Rumm Nab. A good Beaver. Rigging. Clothes. Blowing, Natural,
Convenient, Tackle, Buttock, Pure, Purest pure. Several Names for a Mistress,
or rather a Whore. To Equip. To furnish one. A Bolter of White-fryers. One that
does but peep out of White-fryers, and retire again like a Rabbit out of his
hole. To lugg out. To draw a Sword. To Scamper, to rubb, to scowre. To run
away. Bowsy. Drunk. Clear. Very Drunk. Smoaky. Jealous. Sharp. Subtle. A
Sharper. A Cheat. A Tattmonger. A Cheat at Dice. Tatts. False Dice. The Doctor.
A particular false Die, which will run but two or three Chances. Prog. Meat.
To the Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, etc.
My Lord,
I Having had the Honor to have lived so many years in Your Lordships favor,
and to have been always exceedingly obliged by Your Lordship, ought to be glad
of any opporttunity of Publishing my Gratitude. And the offering this Comedy to
Your Lordship may not perhaps be thought an improper occasion of doing it; for
the first Act of it was written at Copt-Hall; and Your Lordships Approbation of
it (whose Wit and Judgment have ever been unquestioned) encouraged and inspired
me to go on: When I had finished it, which was in a Months time, Your Lordship,
upon the perusal of the whole, was pleased to say that you thought it a true,
and diverting Comedy.

This, I must confess, made me hope for success upon the Stage, which it met
with, but so great, as was above my expectation (in this Age which has run mad
after Farces) no Comedy, for these many years, having filled the Theater so
long together: And I had the great Honor to find so many Friends, that the
House was never so full since it was built, as upon the third day of this Play;
and vast numbers went away, that could not be admitted.

This extraordinary success the more emboldens me to lay the Play at Your
Lordships Feet; in whose service, I should be glad to employ my whole Life.

I shall not, according to the Custom of Dedications, make a long Panegyric to
Your Lordship, it is superfluous and impertinent, to praise him whom all men
speak well of, and of whom I never heard any man speak ill: Your Lordship is
the Favorite of Mankind; and You deserve to be so, for You are ever obliging,
and seeking out occasions of doing good, and exerting Your Charity and
Generosity, in which You never lose a day.

I must acknowledge my self infinitely obliged to Your Lordship every way; but
particularly, that I have the freedom of being received as one of Your Family
at Copthall; where not only the excellence of the Air, and regulariy of Living
contribute to my Health, but I have the Honor of enjoying the conversation
which in all the World I would choose.

It is to me, and it must needs be to all who wish Your Lordship well, an
extraordinary satisfaction to observe that You have laid so certain a
foundation of solid happiness, for all the remaining part of Your Life; in
retiring from all the unsatisfying pleasures, and noisie troubles of the Town,
to so sweet a place, with so admirable a Lady, who in Beauty is exceeded by
none, and has all those qualities of mind besides, which serve to make an
excellent Lady, an extraordinary Governess of a Family, and an incomparable
Wife; whose Fruitfulness is like to bless Your Lordship with a Beauteous, Noble
and Numerous Issue. And may Your Lordship and She long enjoy one another, and
all the Blessings You Your selves can imagine or desire. I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships Most Humble Servant, THO. SHADWELL.

PROLOGUE, To the Squire of Alsatia. Spoken by Mr. Mountfort.
HOw have we in the space of one poor Age,
Beheld the Rise and Downfall of the Stage!
When, with our King restored, it first arose,
They did each day some good old Play expose;
And then it flourished: Till, with Manna tired,
For wholesome Food ye nauseous Trash desired.
Then rose the whiffling Scribblers of those days,
Who since have lived to bury all their Plays;
And had their issue full as numerous been
As Priams, they the Fate of all had seen.
With what prodigious scarcity of Wit
Did the new Authors starve the hungry Pit?
Infected by the French, you must have Rhyme,
Which long, to please the Ladies ears, did chime.
Soon after this came Ranting Fustian in,
And none but Plays upon the fret were seen:
Such Roaring Bombast stuff, which Fops would praise,
Tore our best Actors Lungs, cut short their days.
Some in small time did this distemper kill,
And had the savage Authors gone on still,
Fustian had been a new Disease in the Bill.
When Time, which all things trys, had laid Rhyme dead,
The vile Usurper Farce reigned in its stead.
Then came Machines, brought from a Neighbor Nation,
Oh how we suffered under Decoration.
If all this stuff has not quite spoiled your taste,
Pray let a Comedy once more be graced:
Which does not Monsters represent, but Men,
Conforming to the Rules of Master Ben.
Our Author, ever having him in view,
At humble distance would ^his steps pursue.
He to correct, and to inform did write:
If Poets aim at naught but to delight,
Fiddlers have to the Bays an equal right.
Our Poet found your gentle Fathers kind,
And now some of his works your favor find.
He Will treat you still with somewhat that is new,
But whether good or bad, he leaves to you.
Baudy the nicest Ladies need not fear,
The quickest fancy shall extract none here.
We will not make 'em blush, by which is shown
How much their bought Red differs from their own.
No Fop no Beau shall just exceptions make,
None but abandoned Knaves offense shall take:
Such Knaves as he industriously offends,
And should be very loath to have his Friends.
For you who bring good humor to the Play,
We'll do our best to make you laugh to day.
Dramatis Personae.
Sir William Belfond. Mr. Leigh. A Gentleman of above 3000 l. per annum, who in
his Youth had been a Spark of the Town; but married and retired into the
Country, where he turned to the other extreme, rigid, morose, most sordidly
covetous, clownish, obstinate, positive and froward. Sir Edward Belfond. Mr.
Griffin. His Brother, a Merchant, who by lucky hits had gotten a great Estate,
lives single with ease and pleasure, reasonably and virtuously. A man of great
humanity and gentleness and compassion toward mankind; well read in good
Books, possessed with all Gentlemanlike qualities. Belfond Senior. Mr. Ievon.
Eldest Son to Sir William, bred after his Fathers Rustic, swinish manner, with
great rigor and severity; upon whom his Fathers Estate is entayled; the
confidence of which makes him break out into open Rebellion to his Father, and
become lewd, abominably vicious, stubborn and obstinate. Belfond Junior. Mr.
Mountfort. Second Son to Sir William, adopted by Sir Edw. and bred from his
Childhood by him, with all the tenderness, and familiarity, and bounty, and
liberty that can be; instructed in all the Liberal Sciences, and in all
Gentlemanlike Education: Somewhat given to Women, and now and then to good
fellowship; but an ingenious, well-accomplish'd Gentleman; a man of Honor and
of excellent disposition and temper. Truman. Mr. Bowman. His Friend, a man of
Honor and Fortune. Cheatly. Mr. Samford. A Rascal, who by reason of Debts
dares not stir out of White-fryers, but there inveigles young heirs in tail;
and helps 'em to Goods and Money upon great disadvantages; is bound for them,
and shares with them, till he undoes them. A lewd, impudent, debauched fellow,
very expert in the Cant about the Town. Shamwell. Mr. Powel Jun. Cousin to the
Belfonds, an heir, wh^ being ruined by Cheatly, is made a Decoy-Duck for
others; not daring to stir out of Alsatia, where he lives; is bound with
Cheatly for heirs, and lives upon them, a dissolute debauched life. Captain
Hackum. Mr. Bright. A Block-headed Bully of Alsatia; a cowardly, impudent,
blustering fellow; formerly a Sergeant in Flanders, run from his Colors,
retreating into White-fryers for a very small debt; where, by the Alsatians he
is dubbed a Captain; marries one that lets Lodgings, sells Cherry-brandy, and
is a Bawd. Scrapeall. Mr. Freeman. A hypocritical, repeating, praying, Psalm,
singing, precise fellow, pretending to great piety, a godly Knave, who joins
with Cheatly, and supplys young heirs with goods and money. Attorney, Mr.
Powell Sen. To Sir William Belfond, who solicits his business, and receives all
his Packets. Lolpoop. Mr. Underhill. A North Country fellow, servant to Belfond
Senior, much displeased at his Masters proceedings. Termagant. Mr. Alexander. A
Sharper, Brother to Mrs. Termagant. La Mar. Parson. French Valet de Chamber. An
Indebted Alsatian Divine. Teresia. Mrs. Knight. Daughter to Scrapeall, in Love
with, and beloved by Truman. Isabella. Mrs. Mountford. His Niece, in Love with,
and beloved by Belfond Junior. Lucia. Mrs. Bracegirdle. The Attorneys Daughter,
a young, beautiful Girl, of a mild and tender disposition; debauched by Belfond
Junior. Mrs. Termagant. Mrs. Bowtell. A Neglected Mistress of Belfond Junior,
by whom he has had a Child: A furious, malicious, and revengeful Woman;
perpetually plaguing him, and crossing him, in all his designs; pursuing him
continually with her malice, even to the attempting of his Life. Mrs. Hackum.
Mrs. Betty. Wife to Captain Hackum. Lolpoops Whore. Mrs. Margaret. His Masters
Whore. Fiddlers, Constables, Tipstaff, Watch, Sergeant, etc. Musketeers, Rabble,
etc.
THE Squire of Alsatia.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Belfond Senior, meeting Shamwell. Belf. Sen. COusin Shamwell well met;
Good morrow to you.


Sham. Cousin Belfond your humble Servant: What makes you abroad so early? It Is
not much past seven.


Belf. Sen. You know we were Bowsy last night: I am a little hotheaded this
morning: And come to take the fresh Air here in the Temple-walks.


Sham. Well: And what do you think of our way of living here? Is not rich
generous Wine better than your poor Hedg-Wine stum'd, or dull March-Beer? Are
not delicate well-bred, well-dress'd Women better than Dairy-Maids, Tenants
Daughters, or Barefoot Strumpets? Streets full of fine Coaches, better than a
yard full of Dung-Carts? A Magnificent Tavern, than a Thatcht Alehouse? Or the
society of brave honest, witty, merry Fellows, than the Conversation of
unthinking Hunting, Hawking Block-heads, or High-shoo'd Peasants and their
wiser Cattle?


Belf. Sen. O yes, a world adad. Never stir, I could never have thought there
had been such a gallant place as London: Here I can be drunk over night, and
well next morning: Can ride in a Coach for a shilling as good as a Deputy
Lieutenants; and such merry Waggs, and ingenious Companions. -- Well, I vow and
swear, I am mightily beholding to you, Dear Cousin Shamwell: Then for the
Women! Mercy upon us, so civil and well bred. And I Will swear upon a Bible,
finer all of them than Knight Baronets Wives with us.


Sham. And so kind and pleasant!


Belf. Sen. Ay, I vow pretty Rogues! No pride in them in the World; but so
courteous and familiar, as I am an honest man, they will do whatever one would
have 'em presently; Ah sweet Rogues: While in the Country, a pies take 'em,
there is such a stir with pish, fie, nay Mr. Timothy, what do you do? I vow I Will
squeak, never stir I Will call out, ah hah --


Sham. And if one of 'em happen to be with Child: There Is strait an uproar in
the Country, as if the Hundred were su'd for a Robbery!


Belf. Sen. Ay so there is: And I am in that fear of my Father besides adad,
he would knock me in the Head, if he should hear of such a thing: To say truth, he is
so terrible to me I can never enjoy my self for him: Lord! What will he say
when he comes to know I am at London? Which he in all his lifetime would never
suffer me to see, for fear I should be debauched forsooth; And allows me little
or no money at home neither.


Sham. What matter what He says? Is not every Foot of the Estate entailed upon
you?


Belf. Sen. Well, I Will endur't no longer! If I can but raise Money; I Will teach
him to use his Son like a Dog, I Will warrant him.


Sham. You can never want that: Take up on the Reversion: It Is a lusty one; And
Cheatly will help you to the Ready: And Thou shall shine and be as gay as any
Spruce Prigg that ever walked the Street.


Belf. Sen. Well: adad, you are pleasant men: And have the neatest sayings with
you: Ready, and Spruce Prigg, and abundance of the prettiest witty words. --
But sure that Mr. Cheatly is as fine a Gentleman as any wears Head: And as
ingenious; never stir I believe he would run down the best Scholar in Oxford,
and put 'em in a Mouse-hole with his Wit.


Sham. In Oxford! Ay, and in London too.


Belf. Sen. Goodsookers Cozen! I always thought they had been wittiest in the
Universities.


Sham. O fie Cozen: A Company of Putts! mere Putts!


Belf. Sen. Putts, mere Putts: very good I Will swear, ha ha ha.


Sham. They are all Scholar Boys, and nothing else, as long as they live there:
And yet they are as confident as if they knew every thing; when they understand
no more beyond Magdalen-Bridge than mere Indians. But Cheatly is a rare fellow:
I Will speak a bold word, He shall Cut a Sham or Banter with the best Wit or Poet
of 'em all.


Belf. Sen. Good again! Cut a Sham, or Banter! I shall remember all these quaint
words in time: But Mr. Cheatly's a prodigy that is certain.


Sham. He is so; and a worthy brave fellow, and the best friend where he takes,
and the most sincere of any man breathing.


Belf. Sen. Nay, I must needs say, I have found him very frank, and very much a
Gentleman, and am most extremely obliged to him and you for your great kindness.


Sham. This morning your Clothes and Liveries will come home, and thou shall
appear rich and splendid like thy self, and the Mobile shall worship thee.


Belf. Sen. The Mobile! That Is pretty. Enter Cheatly. Sweet Mr. Cheatly, my
best friend, let me embrace thee.


Cheat. My sprightly Son of Timber and of Acres: My noble Heir I salute thee:
The Cole is coming, and shall be brought in this morning.


Belf. Sen. Cole? Why it is Summer, I need no firing now. Besides I intend to
burn Billets.


Cheat. My lusty Rustic, learn and be instructed. Cole is in the language of
the Witty, Money. The Ready, the Rhino; thou shall be Rhinocerical, my Lad,
thou shall.


Belf. Sen. Admirable I swear! Cole! Ready! Rhino! Rhinocerical! Lord, how long
may a man live in ignorance in the Country?


Sham. Ay: But what Asses you will make of the Country Gentlemen when you go
amongst them. It Is a Providence your are fallen into so good hands.


Belf. Sen. It Is a mercy indeed. How much Cole, Ready, and Rhino shall I have?


Cheat. Enough to set thee up to Spark it in thy Brothers face: And e're thou
shall want the Ready, the Darby, Thou shall make thy fruitful Acres in
Reversion to fly, And all thy sturdy Oaks to bend like Switches! But thou must
squeeze my Lad: Squeeze hard, and Seal my Bully. Shamwell and I are to be bound
with thee.


Belf. Sen. I am mightily beholding to you both I vow and swear; my Uncle Sir
Edward took my Brother when he was a Child, and Adopted him: Would it had been
my Lot.


Sham. He is a noble Gentleman, and maintains him in Coach and Equipage fit for
him.


Cheat. Thou shall not see the Prigg thy Brother till thou shall out-jingle him
in Ready, outshine him in thy Ornaments of Body, out-spark him thy Coach and
Liveries; and shall be so Equipt, that thou shall dazzle the whole Town with thy
Outrageous Splendour.


Belf. Sen. I vow his Tongue is rarely hung!


Cheat. Thy Brothers heart shall break with Envy at thy Gallantry: The Fops and
Beaux shall be astonished at thy brightness. What Ogling there will be between
thee and the Blowings: Old staring at thy Equipage. And every Buttock shall
fall down before thee.


Belf. Sen. Ha ha ha! I vow you are the pleasant'st man I ever met with, and
I Will swear the best friend I ever had in my life; that I must needs say. I was
resolved not to let my Brother see me till I was in Circumstances dee see: And
for my Father he is in Holland. My Mothers Brother died and left him sole
Executor. He Will not be here these six Weeks.


Sham. Well, when you see your Brother he will envy you, and rail at those who
made you flourish so. We shall be cast off.


Belf. Sen. Gudzookers Cousin! I take it very unkindly that you should say so.
I Will cast off all the Relations in the World before I Will part with such true,
such loving Friends, adad. Enter Captain Hackum. O noble Captain Hackum, your
Servant; Servant Captain.


Hack. Your humble Trout, good noble Squire, you were brave and bowzy last
night; i'saith you were.


Belf. Sen. Yes really, I was Clear: For I do not remember what I did, or where
I was: Clear, Clear; is not that right?


Sham. Ay ay! Why, you broke Windows: scoured, broke open a House in Dorset
Court, and took a pretty Wench, a Gentleman's Natural, away by force.


Cheat. Very true: And this Magnanimous Spark, This Thunderbolt of War,
Captain Hackum, laid about him like a Hero, as did some other of your friends,
or else the Watch had mauled us: But we made them scour.


Belf. Sen. Nay of my Conscience, the Captain's mighty Valiant; there is Terror
in that Countenance and Whiskers: He Is a very Scanderberg incarnate. And now
you put me in mind, I recollect somewhat of this matter: My Shoulders are
plaguey sore, and my Arms black and blue; but where is the Wench, the Natural, ha
Captain?


Hack. Ah Squire, I led her off. I have her safe for you.


Belf. Sen. But does not the Gallant thunder and roar for her?


Hack. The Scoundrel dares not: He knows me, who never knew fear in my life;
For my part, I love Magnanimity and Honor, and those things; And fighting is
one of my Recreations.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,
Is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.

Belf. Sen. O brave Captain.


Cheat. The Prigster lugg'd out in defense of his Natural; the Captain whipped
his Porker out, and away rubbed Prigster and called the Watch.


Belf. Sen. Prigster, lugg'd out, Natural, Porker, rubbed, admirable! This is
very ingenious Conversation: You Are the purest Company; Who would not keep
Company with the Wits; Pox of the Country I say.


Hack. But Squire, I had damned ill luck afterward: I went up the Gaming
Ordinary, and lost all my Ready; they lest me not a Rag or Sock: Pox of the
Tatts for me: I believe they put the Doctor upon me.


Belf. Sen. Tatts, and Doctor! what is that?


Sham. The Tools of Sharpers, false Dice.


Hack. Hark you, prithee Noble Squire, Equipp me with a Couple of Meggs, or two
Couple of Smelts.


Belf. Sen. Smelts! What shall we bespeak another Dish of Fish for our Dinner?


Sham. No no, Meggs are Guineas, Smelts are Half Guineas: He would borrow a
Couple of Guineas.


Belf. Sen. Meggs, Smelts! Ha ha ha. Very pretty by my troth. And so thou
shall, Dear Captain: There are two Meggs; and I vow and swear I am glad I have
'em to pleasure you, adad I am.


Hack. You are so honest a Gentleman, Quarrel every day and I Will be your
Second; once a day at least: And I Will say this for you, There Is not a finer
Gentleman this day walks the Friars; no dispraise to any man, let him be what
he will.


Belf. Sen. Adad you make me proud Sir. Enter Lolpoop. O Lolpoop, where have
you been all this morning Sirrah?


Lolpoop. Why it is but rear marry, it is meet a bit past Eight: By'r Lady yeow
were so fow drunken last neeght I had thoughten yeow wouden ha leen a bed aw
the morn: Well, mine eyne ache a gazing up and down on aw the fine sights; but
for aw that send me North to my own Caunty again.


Belf. Sen. O silly Rogue: You are only fit for Cattle. Gentlemen, you must
excuse him, he knows no better.


Lolp. Marry, better quoth a! By the Mess, this is a life for the Deel: To be
drunken each night, break Windows, Roar, Sing and Swear in the Streets; go to
Loggerheads with the Constable and the Watch, han Harlots in Gold and Silver
Lace: Hea'n bless us, and send me a whom again.


Belf. Sen. Peace, you saucy Scoundrel, or I Will Cudgel you to Pap: Sirrah do
not provoke me, I say do not.


Lolp. Ods flesh, where is Money for aw this? Yeowst be run agraunt soon and you
takken this caurse, Ise tell a that.


Belf. Sen. Take that Sirrah: I Will teach you to mutter: What my Man become my
Master?


Lolp. Waunds! give me ten times more and send me whom again at after. What
will awd Maaster say to this? I mun never see the Face of him I wot.


Sham. Hang him Rogue. Toss him in a Blanket.


Cheat. Let me talk with him a little. Come on Fellow.


Lolp. Talk! Well, what sen ye?


Cheatly bantering. Your Master being in this matter, to deport his Countenance
somewhat obliquely, to some principles, which others but out of a Mature
Gravity may have weighed, and think too heavy to be undertaken; what does it
avail if you shall precipitate or plunge your self into affairs, as unsuitable
to your Physnomy as they are to your Complexion.


Lolp. Hah, what sen you? yeow mistaken me: I am not Book-learn'd: I understand
a not.


Cheat. No, it is the strangest thing! Why, put the Case you are indebted to me
20 l. upon a Scire facias: I extend this up to an Outlawry, upon Affidavit upon
the Nisi prius: I plead to all this matter Non est inventus upon the Panel;
what is there to be done more in this Case, as it lies before the Bench, but to
award out Execution upon the Posse Comitatus, who are presently to issue out a
Certiorari.


Lolp. I understand a little of Sizes, Nisi prizes, Affidavi, Sussurari! But by
the Mess I cannot tell what to mack of aw this together not I.


Belf. Sen. Ha ha. Puppy! Owl! Loggerhead! O silly Country Put! Here Is a Prigg
indeed: He Will never find out what it is to Cut a Sham or Banter: Well, I swear
Sir you do it the best of any man in the World.


Cheat. No no, I swear not I.


Belf. Sen. I protest Sir you do it Incomparably.


Cheat. Nay, now you Complement: Faith you make me blush.


Lolp. Sham and Banter are Heathen Greek to me: But yeow have cut out fine wark
for your sell last Neeght: I went to see the Hause yeow had Brocken, aw the
Windows are pood dawne. I asked what was the matter, and by the Mass they haw
learnt your Nam too; they saiden Squire Belfond had done it, and Ravished a
Wench: and that they hadden gotten the Lord Chief Justice Warren for you, and
wooden bring a pawr of Actions against yeow.


Belf. Sen. Is this true?


Lolp. Ay by the Mass.


Cheat. No matter; we'll bring you off with a wet finger* trust me for that.


Belf. Sen. Dear Friend, I rely upon you for every thing.


Sham. We value not twenty such things of a rush.


Hack. If any of their Officers dare invade our Privileges, we'll send em to
Hell without Bail or Mainprize.


Lolp. But I can tella a worcester news than aw this; I never saw flesh alive, and I
saw not your Fathers man Roger come out oath Temple-yate even now. Your Father's
in Town that is certain.


Belf. Sen. How! my Father say you? It Is impossible.


Cheat. Courage my Heir in Tail: Thy Father's a poor sneaking Tenant for Life;
thou shall live better than he can: And if we do contract a Debt upon thy dirty
Acres in the North, I have designed for you a fine young Lady with a swinging
Fortune to redeem all; And it is impossible my Lad to miss her.


Belf. Sen. Sir, let me embrace you, and love you* Never man embraced a better
Friend! Amicus Certus in re incerta Cernitur, as the saying is.


Lolp. Sir, Sir, let me speak one word with you; Ods-flesh, I Will dye the Death
of a Dog, and aw these yeow seen here, be not Rogues, Cheats, and Pick-pockets.


Belf. Sen. Peace, you Rascal; Adad I would not have any of em hear for five
hundred pounds; you were a dead man.


Lolp. What is the reason they dare not stir out of this priviledg'd place, but
on Sabbath Days.


Belf. Sen. You Blockhead, Mr. Cheatly had an Aldermans young Wife run away
with him, is sued for it, and is in fear of a substantial Jury of City Cuckolds.
Shamwells unnatural Father lays wait for him, to apprehend him and run him into
the Country. The Brave and Valiant Gentleman, Captain Hackum, who is as stout
as a Lion, beat a Judges Son the other day. And now your questions are fully
answered, you Put you.


Cheat. Honest Shamwell, thou art a rare fellow: Thy Cozen here is the
wealthiest Caravan we have met with a long time; the hopefullest Sealer that
ever yet touched Wax among us: But we must take off that evil Counselor of His.


Sham. I warrant you. Enter Tailor with a Bundle, a Perriwig-maker, Hatter,
Shoemaker. Oh Cozen, here is your Tailor, with your Clothes and Liveries,
Hatter, Shoemaker, Perriwig-maker.


Cheat. All your movables together; go into your Lodging and sit them: your
new Footmen, and your French Valet de Chamber are there, I Will wait on you there
presently.


Lolp. Odsflesh, here is whaint wark: By'r Lady this is fine! whaw whaw!


Belf. Sen. Get you in, you Rogue: An you mutter one word more, adad I Will mince
you, Sirrah: Well, go in all of you. Gentlemen, I shall see you presently. Exit.


Cheat. Immediately: Let us hugg our selves, my dear Rascal, in this adventure
you have done very well to engage him last night in an Outrage; and we must
take care to put him upon all the expense we can: We must reduce him to have as
much need of us as possible.


Sham. Thou art in the right: But Captain, where is the Convenient, the Natural?


Hack. Why at my House: my Wife has wrought her into a good humor: She is very
pretty; and is now pleased to think the Squire will be a better Keeper than her
former; for he was but a Sharper, a Tatmonger, and when he wanted Money would
kick and beat her most immoderately.


Sham. Well: I Will say that for the Captains Wife, she is as good an able
Discreet Woman to carry on an Intrigue, as e're a Woman in the Friars! Nay
better.


Hack. Your Servant good Mr. Shamwell; she is a very good Woman thanks be to
Heaven, I have great comfort in her; she has a Cup of the best Cherry-Brandy in
the Friars.


Sham. aside. And commonly a good Whore to boot: But prithee Captain, go home
and let her and the young Girl prepare to Dine with us; we must have a great
Dinner and Fiddlers at the George, to season the Squire in his new Equipage.


Hack. Well, well, it shall be done. Exit.


Sham. You Will find this Fellow a necessary Tool in Consort with his Wife, who
is, indeed, a Bawd of parts: He is a good Ruffian enough: For tho he be not
stout, he is impudent, and will roar and keep a filthy pother, which is enough
to make Fools believe he is stout.


Cheat. Let him, and the small Fry pick up the Squires loose Crumbs, While we
share in the lusty Sums. Enter Scrapeall. Oh here comes Mr. Scrapeall with all
his Zeal; our godly Accomplice in all designs; leave him to me. Ex. Sham. Oh
Mr. Scrapeall! Have you brought the money for the Squire?


Scrap. I come to tell you that my man approaches with the Money and the Goods
for your Squire.


Cheat. I hope you have not burdened him with too many Goods at first?


Scrap. No: But a fourth part: It Is true the Goods are somewhat stale, but I
will take them off at small under rates: You know I am not seen in furnishing
of the Goods and Money, but only in the buying of the Goods. My Lawyer
accompanies my Man to testify the Writings.


Cheat. It Is as it should be: He is a fat Squire; the Estate in Tail is full
3000 l. a year. He will yield well.


Scap. aside. This Squire is to take to Wife a Niece I have in Charge: His
Father is to give me 5000 l. out of her Fortune; and the Squires Leudness and
Prodigality will soon let me deep into his Reversion. Besides his lighting into
these hands, will make his Father, when he finds it, hasten to agree with me
for his Redemption; I like the business well. I am going to the man you call
Crump, who helps Sollicitors to Affidavit-men, and Swearers, and Bail.


Cheat. His Office is next door; his Wardrobe for Bail and Witnesses. Here he
comes; let us meet him. Exeunt.


Enter Sir William Belfond, and an Attorney. Sir Will. Sure I should know the
Face of that Fellow, that is going there into White-Friers.


At. It Is a most Notorious one; you have seen him often, this that most
audacious Rogue, Cheatly; who has drawn in so many young Heirs, and undone so
many Sealers: He is a Bolter of White-Friers.


Sir Will. It is that Villain!


At. I am very glad Sir, you have dispatched your business so soon in Holland.


Sir Will. I had great success, and finished all six Weeks at least e're I
expected; and had time to come by the way of Flanders, and see that Country
which I desired: And from Newport I came to Dover; and riding Post from thence,
I took a Boat at Southwark, and landed just now here at the Temple: But I am
troubled you had sent my Packet to Holland e're I came.


At. I received none from you of late: No Packet has arrived this Fortnight
from Holland.


Sir Will. Have you heard no News from my Son, nor my Steward in the Country?


At. None these ten or twelve days.


Sir Will. That Son is all the joy of my life; for him I hurry up and down,
take pains, spare and live hard to raise his Fortune.


At. Indeed, I hear he is a fine Gentleman, and understands his Country affairs
as well as e're a Farmer of them all.


Sir Will. I must confess he proves after my own Heart: He Is a solid Young man,
a Dutiful Child as ever man had, and I think I have done well for him in
providing him a Wife with such a Fortune, which he yet knows nothing of. But
will not this Godly Man, this Mr. Scrapeall, take a Farthing less say you for
his Niece?


Attor. Not a sowce: I have higgled with him as if I were to buy of a
Horse-courser, and he will not take a farthing less than 5000 l. for his Niece.


Sir Will. He Is a strange Mixture, a perpetual Sermon-hunter, repeats and sings
Psalms continually, and prays so loud and vehemently, that he is a Disturbance
to his Neighbors; he is so Heavenward Pious, and seems a very Saint of a
Scrivener.


At. He finds the sweet of that, it gets him many a good Trust and
Executorship.


Sir Will. Pox on him for a Damned godly knave, forsooth, cannot he be
contented to sell her, whom his own Brother committed to his Charge; but he
must extort so much for her? well I must agree with him: I know she has full
20000 l. left her: And has bin brought up as strictly as my Son: Get writings
ready: I Will send Post for my Son Timothy this Day.


Attor. They are ready; you may Seal in the afternoon if you please.


Sir Will. And I will then. I Will detain you no longer: get my Writings ready: I
am resolved to settle my other Boy well: But my Town Son afflicts me when e're
I hear him named.


Attor. Your humble Servant Sir Will. Belfond. Ex. Attorn.


Enter Servant to Sir William. Serve. Sir, I have been at your Brothers house,
and they say he is come to some Lawyers Chamber in the Kings-Bench-buildings.


Sir Will. That Is lucky enough: I Will walk here then, and do you watch. Enter
Hackum, and another Bully. Who are these? Some Inhabitants of White-Fryers;
some Bullies of Alsatia.


Hack. I was plaguey Bowsy last night with Squire Belfond: We had Fiddles,
Whores, Scoured, broke Windows, beat Watches, and roared like Thunder.


Bully. Ay, I heard you?


Sir Will. What says he? aside.


Hack. He Drinks, Whores, Swears, Sings, Roars, Rants and Scours with the best
of us.


Sir Will. Sir, with your favor, are you acquainted with young Belfond?


Hack. Yes, that I am. What Country Putt's this? aside.


Sir Will. What Countryman is he Sir?


Hack. Prithee, old Prigster, why do ask? He is a Northern man: He has a
damned Rustic, miserable Rascal to his Father, who lives a nasty brutal life
in the Country like a Swine: But the Squire will be even with him I warrant him.


Sir Will. I have something to say to him if I could see him.


Hack. You, you old Prigg, you damned Country Putt: You have somewhat to say to
him! I am ready to give you satisfaction: Lugg out; come you Putt: I Will make
you Scamper.


Sir Will. Dee hear Bully Rascal, put up and walk your way, or by Heaven I Will
beat you as long as you are able to be beaten.


Bully. I Will stand by you: You may easily beat this old fellow.


Hack. No man e're gave me such words, but forfeited his life; I could whip
thee through the Lungs immediately: But I Will desist at present. Who the Devil
would have thought this Putt durst have drawn a Sword? Well Sir we shall take a
time Sir, another time Sir.


Sir Will. You lie, you Rascal; you will take no time. Here Is a fine Companion
of my Sons! Exit Bully.


Enter Sir Edward Belfond. Sir Edw. Who Is this I see? my Brother! Sir William
Belfond! Your humble Servant. You are welcome into England. I looked not for
you these six weeks.


Sir Will. I landed at the Temple-stairs even now: My man has been at your
House, and he heard there you were here.


Sir Edw. I hope you have done your business.


Sir Will. Beyond my Expectation.


Sir Edw. Has your Wives Brother done by you in his Will, as you would have had
him.


Sir Will. Truly yes: He has made me sole Executor, and left my two Sons 5000
l. apiece, to be paid at each of their days of Marriage, or at my Death.


Sir Edw. Well Brother, you are a happy man; for Wealth flows in upon you on
every side, and Riches you account the greatest happiness.


Sir Will. I find that Wealth alone will not make happy. Ah Brother, I must
confess it was a kindness in you, when Heaven had blessed you with a great Estate
by Merchandise, to adopt my Younger Son, and take him and breed him from his
Childhood: But you have been so gentle to him, he is run into all manner of
Vice and Riot; no bounds can hold him; no shame can stop him; no Laws nor
Customs can restrain him.


Sir Edw. I am confident you are mistaken: He has as fair a Reputation as any
Gentleman about London: It Is true, he is a good fellow, but no Sot; he loves
mirth and society, without Drunkenness: He is, as all young Fellows I believe
are, given to Women; but it is in private; and he is particular: no Common
Whore-master: and in short, keeps as good Company as any man in England.


Sir Will. Your overweening makes you look through a false Glass upon him.
Company! why he keeps Company for the Devil: Had you come a minute sooner, you
might have seen two of his Companions; they were praising him for Roaring,
Swearing, Ranting, Scouring, Whoring, beating Watches, breaking Windows: I but
asked one of em if he knew him, and said I had somewhat to say to him; the
Rogue, the most seeming terrible of the two, told me, If I had any thing to say
to Squire Belfond, he would give me satisfaction.


Sir Edw. What kind of fellow?


Sir Will. He came out of White-Fryers: He Is some Alsatian Bully.


Sir Edw. It Is impossible; he never keeps such Company.


Sir Will. The Rogue drew upon me: bid me Lugg out, called me Old Prigg,
Country Put; and spoke a particular Language which such Rogues have made to
themselves, called Canting, as Beggars, Gypsies, Thieves and Jayl-Birds do: But
I made his Bullies go away very tamely at the sight of my drawn Sword.


Sir Edw. I am sure he keeps no such Company: it must be some other of his Name.


Sir Will. You make me mad to excuse him thus: The Town rings of him; You have
ruined him by your Indulgence: Besides, he throws away Money like Dirt; his
Infamy is notorious.


Sir Edw. Infamy: Nay there you wrong him; he does no ungentleman-like things:
Prithee consider Youth a little: What if he does Wench a little; and now and
then is somewhat extravagant in Wine? Where Is the great Crime? All young
fellows that have mettle in em will do the first; and if they have wit and good
humor in em, in this drinking Country, they will sometimes be forced upon the
latter: And he must be a very dull phlegmatic Lump, whom Wine will not elevate
to some Extravagance now and then.


Sir Will. Will you distract me? What are Drinking and Whoring no faults? His
courses will break my heart; they bring Tears into my Eyes so often.


Sir Edw. One would think you had been Drinking and were maudling: Think what
we our selves did when we were young fellows: You were a Spark, would Drink,
Scour and Wench with the best of the Town.


Sir Will. Ay, but I soon repented, married and settled.


Sir Edw. And turned as much to the other extreme: And now perhaps I mislike
these faults, caused by his heat of Youth. But how do you know he may not be
reclaimed suddenly?


Sir Will. Reclaimed? How can he be reclaimed without severity? You should
Cudgel him, and allow him no Money: make him not dare to offend you thus. Well,
I have a Son whom by my strictness I have formed according to my heart: He
never puts on his Hat in my presence; Rises at second Course, takes away his
Plate; says Grace, and saves me the Charge of a Chaplain. When ever he
committed a fault, I mauled him with Correction: I Would fain see him once dare to
be extravagant: No, he is a good Youth, the Comfort of my Age; I weep for joy to
think of him. Good Sir, learn to be a Father of him that is one: I have a
Natural Care of him.


Sir Edw. You are his Father by Nature, I by Choice: I took him when he was a
Child, and bred him up with gentleness, and that kind of Conversation that has
made him my friend: He conceals nothing from me, or denies nothing to me.
Rigor makes nothing but Hypocrites.


Sir Will. Perhaps when you begin late; but you should have been severe to him
in his Childhood: abridg'd him of Liberty and Money: and have had him soundly
whipped often: he would have blessed you for it afterward.


Sir Edw. Too much streightness in the minds of Youths, like too much lacing
the Body, will make em grow Crooked.


Sir Will. But no lacing at all, will make them swell and grow Monsters.


Sir Edw. I must govern by Love. I had as leive govern a Dog as a Man if it
must be by fear: This I take to be the difference between a good Father to
Children, and a harsh Master over Slaves.


Sir Will. Yes, and see what your government is come to; his Vice and
Prodigality will distract me.


Sir Edw. Why should you be so concerned? He is mine, is he not?


Sir Will. Yes, by Adoption, but he is mine by Nature.


Sir Edw. It Is all but Custom.


Sir Will. Mine is a tender Care.


Sir Edw. Your passion blinds you: I have as tender care as you can have: I
have been ever delighted with him from his Childhood: He is endeared to me by
long custom and familiarity. I have had all the pleasure of a Father, without
the drudgery of getting a Son upon a damned Wife, whom perhaps I should wish
hanged.


Sir Will. And will you let him run on in his Lewdness and Prodigality?


Sir Edw. He is mine: If he offends, it is me: If he squanders away Money, it is
mine; and what need you care? Pray take care of your own: If you will take care
of this too, what do you but take him from me?


Sir Will. This you come to always! I take him from you: No, I Would not be
troubled with him. Well, let him run on, and be ruined, hanged and and damned
-- I Will never speak word more about him. Let him go on.


Sir Edw. This heat of youth will be allayed e're long I warrant you.


Sir Will. No, no, let him go on, let him go on; I Will take care of my own at
home: and happy were this Rake-hell if he would take Example by his Brother:
But I say no more; I ha done; let him go on.


Sir Edw. Now you are angry, your passion runs away with you.


Sir Will. No no, I have done; what would you have more?


Sir Edw. Let us go and see him: I Will lay my life you will find him perusing some
good Author; he ever spends his whole morning in study.


Sir Will. I must into the City, the first thing I do, and get my Bills
accepted; and then if you will we'll see him: and no doubt but we shall find
him perusing of some Whore or other, instead of a Book.


Sir Edw. I am not of your Opinion: I at I Will carry you in my Coach into the
City, and then bring you back to him: He is of so good a disposition: So much a
Gentleman: And has such worth and honor, that if you knew him as well as I,
you would love him as well as I do.


Sir Will. Well, well, I hear you Sir: I must send for my Son Post: I Will show
you a Son. Well, Heaven bless him, I should be weary of this wicked World: but
for the Comforts I find in him: Come along, I Will show you a Son. Ex. ambo.


ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Belsond Junior, and Lucia. Belf. Iun. WHY do thou sigh? and show such
sadness in thy looks? My pretty Miss.


Lucia. Have I not reason?


Belf Iun. Do thou mislike thy entertainment?


Lucia. Ah Cruel Belfond, thou have undone me.


Belf. Iun. My pretty little Rogue, I sooner would undo my self a thousand
times.


Luc. How I tremble to think what I ha done! I have made my self for ever
miserable.


Belf. Iun. Oh say not so, dear Child: I Will kiss those tears from off thy
Beauteous Eyes. But I shall wrong thy Cheeks, on which they fall like precious
drops of dew on flowers.


Luc. Heaven! what have I done?


Belf. Iun. No more than what thy Mother did before thee: No more than thy
whole Sex is born to do.


Luc. Oh had I thought you would have been so Cruel, I never would have seen
your face; I swear I would not.


Belf. Iun. I swear thou would, I know thou woul'dst: Cruel! no Billing
Turtle e're was kinder to his tender Mate; in Billing, Cooing, and in gentle
Murmurs, we expressed our kindness; and Coo'd and Murmured and Loved on.


Luc. The more unhappy Fool was I: go go, I hate you now.


Belf. Iun. Oh my sweet little one; thou can not sure be so unkind: Those
pretty Tell-tales of thy heart, thy Eyes, say better things.


Luc. Do they so? I Will be revenged on em for it: For they shall never see you
more.


Belf. Iun. Ah say not so; I had rather much the Sun should never shine on me;
than thou be hidden from my sight: thou art not sure in earnest?


Luc. Yes sure, I think I am.


Belf. Iun. No, my sweet Love, I think thou art not.


Luc. Oh Lord, how shall I look! How shall I bear my self! if any of my Friends
shall fix their Eyes upon me, I shall look down and blush, and think they know
all.


Belf. Iun. How many fair ones daily do the same, and look demurely as any
Saints?


Luc. They are Confident things I warrant em.


Belf. Iun. Let Love be made familiar to thee, and thou will bear it better:
Thou must see me every day. Can thou be so hard-hearted to forbear the sight
of me?


Luc. Perhaps I may desire now and then a look, a sight of thee at some
distance: But I will never venture to come near thee more I vow.


Belf. Iun. Let me kiss that Vow from off thy lips, while it is warm there. I
have it here: It Is gone. Thou will not kill me sure? Did thou not say thou
lov'dst me?


Luc. Yes, I loved too much; or this had never happened: I could not else have
been undone.


Belf. Iun. Undone; thou art made: Woman is but half a Creature, till she be
joined to man; now thou art whole and perfect.


Luc. Wicked man! Can I be so confident once to come near thee more?


Belf. Iun. Should thou but fail one day, I never should survive it; and then
my Ghost will haunt thee. Can thou look on me, pretty Creature, and talk thus?


Luc. Well, go thy ways; that flattering Tongue, and those Bewitching Eyes were
made to ruin Womankind.


Belf. Iun. Could I but think thou were in earnest, these Arms should clasp
thee ever here: I Would never part with thee.


Luc. No no, now I must be gone: I shall be mist: How shall I get home and not
be known? Sure every body will discover me?


Belf. Iun. Thy Mask will cover all: There is a Chair below in the Entry to
carry thee, and set thee down where thou will.


Luc. Farewell, Dear Cruel man! And must I come to morrow morning say you? No
no.


Belf. Iun. Yes yes; to morrow and to morrow, and every morning of our lives; I
dye else. Enter Footboy.


Foot. Sir your Singing-Master is coming.


Belf. Iun. My Singing Master, Mr. Solfa is coming.


Luc. O Lord hide me! He is my Master, he will know me! I shall not be able to go
by him for trembling.


Belf. Iun. Pretty Miss, into the Closet: I Will dispatch him soon. Goes in.
Enter Singing Master and his Daughter. Come Master, let your Daughter sing the
Song you promised me.


Solfa. Come Betty. Please to put in a Flute Sir.


Belf. Iun. Come on.


Song with two Flutes and a thorough Base. The Expostulation.
Still will thou sigh, and still in vain
A cold neglectful Nymph adore;
No longer fruitlesly complain,
But to thy self thy self restore.
In Youth thou caught'st this fond disease,
And should abandon it in age;
Some other Nymph as well may please,
Absence or business disingage.
On tender hearts the wounds of Love,
Like those imprinted on young Trees,
Or kill at first, or else they prove
Larger b' insensible degrees.
Business I tried, she filled my mind;
On others Lips my Dear I kissed;
But never solid Joy could find,
Where I my charming Sylvia mist.
Long Absence, like a Greenland night,
Made me but wish for Sun the more;
And that inimitable light,
She, none but she, could e're restore.
She never once regards thy Fire,
Nor ever vents one sigh for thee.
I must the Glorious Sun admire,
Though he can never look on me.
Look well, you will sind she is not so rare,
Much of her former Beauty's gone;
My Love her Shadow larger far
Is made by her declining Sun.
What if her Glories faded be,
My former wounds I must endure;
For should the Bow unbended be,
Yet that can never help the Cure.
Belf. Iun. It Is very easy and natural: Your Daughter sings delicately. Enter
Truman.


True. Belfond, good morrow to thee: I see thou still take care to melt away
thy hours in soft delights.


Belf. Iun. Honest Truman! All the pleasures and diversions we can invent, are
little enough to make the Farce of Life go down.


True. And yet what a Coil they keep: How busy and industrious are those who
are reckoned grave and wise, about this Life, as if there were something in it.


Belf. Iun. Those Fools are in earnest, and very solid; they think there is
something in it, while Wise men know there is nothing to be done here but to make
the best of a bad Market.


True. You are mighty Philosophical this morning. But shall I not hear one Song
as well as you?


Belf. Iun. Have you set that Ode in Horace?


Solfa. I have.


Belf. Iun. Then I hope you will be encouraged to set more of em; we then shall
be sure of Wit and Music together: While you great Musicians do often take
most pains about the silliest words. Prithee Truman sing it.


True. sings. Integer vitae Scelerisque purus, etc. Hor. Ode 22. l. 1.

Belf. Iun. Very well; you have obliged me: Please to accept of this. And
Madam, you shall give me leave to show my gratitude by a small Present.


Solfa and Daught. Your Servant Sir. Exeunt.


True. You are so immoderately given to Music; methinks it should justle Love
out of your thoughts.


Belf. Iun. Oh no! Remember Shakespeare; If Music be the Food of Love, Play on
-- There Is nothing nourishes that soft passion l^ke it, it imps his Wings, and
makes him fly a higher pitch. But prithee tell me what news of our dear
Mistresses? I never yet was so sincerely in Love as with my pretty Hypocrite;
There is Fire in those Eyes that strikes like Lightning: What a constant
Churchman she has made of me?


True. And mine has made an entire Conquest of me: It Is the most charming pretty
Creature, that e're my Eyes beheld.


Belf. Iun. Let us not fall out, like the Heroes in the Rehearsal, for not
being in Love with the same Woman.


True. Nothing could be so fortunate as our difference in this case: The only
one we disagree in.


Belf. Iun. Thou art in the right: Mine has so charmed me, I am content to
abandon all other pleasures, and live alone for her; she has subdued me even to
Marriage.


True. Mine has no less vanquished me; I Will render upon discretion. Ah Rogue
Belfond, I see by your Bed, for all your Constant Love, you have had a Wench
this night.


Belf. Iun. Peace peace, man: It Is dangerous to fast too long, for fearing of
losing an appetite quite.


True. You are a sincere honest Lover indeed.


Belf. Iun. Faith Truman, we may talk of mighty matters; of our Honesty and
Moraility; but a young Fellow carries that about him that will make him a Knave
now and then in spite of his Teeth. Besides, I am afraid it is impossible for us
profane fellows to succeed in that Sanctified Family.


True. You will not say so, when you know what progress I have made in our
affairs already.


Belf. Iun. Thou reviv'st my drooping hopes: Tell me, are we like to succeed!
Oh if I can but prevail upon my little pretty Churchwoman, I am resolved to
conform to her for ever.


True. Look under my Coat: Am I not well habited? with a plain Band, Bob Peruke,
and no Cuffs.


Belf. Iun. Verily, like one of the pure ones.


True. Yea; and our frequenting of Sermons and Lectures, (which Heaven knows we
did out of no good, but for the sake of these little ones) has used me to their
style: Thus qualified, I got access into the House, having found that their
Governante is Sister to a Weaver in the West, whom I know; I pretended to be
her Cousin, and to bring a Token sent to her by her Brother, and was very
welcome to her.


Belf. Iun. Most fortunate: Why does he keep em so strictly? Never to see the
face of Man?


True. Be not troubled at that, 'twill forward our design; they will be the more
earnest to be delivered. But no Italian Women are so closely confined; the pure
Knave intends to sell em: Even his Daughter, who has a good Fortune left her by
a Widow, that was her Aunt: And for his Niece, he has as good as agreed already
with your Father for 5000 l. to marry her to your Brother in the Country: Her
Uncle gave her 20000 l. and this is the reason of Confining em; for fear of
losing the Money.


Belf. Iun. With my Father say ye?


True. Most certain: This I learnt out of Madam Governante, at the first
enterview.


Belf. Iun. This is a very odd Accident: 'Twill make my difficulty greater.


True. Not at all: As Liars are always readiest to believe Lies, I never knew an
Hypocrite but might easily be cozened by another Hypocrite. I have made my way,
and I warrant thee a good event. I intend to grow great with the Father.


Belf. Iun. Thy Sanguine temper makes thee always hope in every Enterprise.


True. You might observe, whenever we star'd upon em, they would steal a look at
us; by stealth have often twisted Eye-beams with us.


Belf. Iun. The sour and devout look indeed seems but put on: There is pretty
warmth and tenderness in their Eyes, that now and then gilds over the godly
look; like the Suns light, when breaking through a Cloud, it swiftly glides
upon a Field of Corn.


True. The Air of their Faces plainly show they have Wit, that must despise
those trifling forms; their precise looks most surely are constrained.


Enter Mrs. Termagant. Belf. Iun. How, Madam Termagant here! then we shall have
fine work. What wind blows you hither.


Term. How dare you think that I of all womankind should be used thus?


Belf. Iun. You mean not used; that is your Grievance.


Term. Good Mr. Disdain; I shall spoil your scoffing: Has my Love deserved to
be thus slighted? I that have refused Princes for your sake? Did not all the
Town court me? And must I choose such an ungrateful Wretch?


Belf. Iun. When you were first in season, you were a little courted by some of
Quality: Mistresses, like Green Pease, at first coming are only had by the
Rich, but afterward they come to every Body.


Term. Curse on your saucy similes: Was not I yours, and only yours.


Belf. Iun. I had not faith enough for that; but if you were, I never had any
that was mine and only mine, but I made em all mankinds before I had done.


Term. Ah Traitor! And you must pick me out to make this base Example of: Must
I be left?


Belf. Iun. Left! Yes sure, Left! Why you were not married to me: I took no
Lease of your frail Tenement: I was but Tenant at my own will.


Term. Insolent! How dare you thus provoke my Fury? Was ever Woman's Love like
mine to thee? Persidious man! weeps.


Belf. Iun. So: after the Thunder, thus the heat drops fall.


Term. No; I scorn that thou should bring Tears into my Eyes.


Belf. Iun. Why do you come to trouble me?


Term. Since I can please no longer, I Will come to plague thee; and if I dye
before thee, my Ghost shall haunt thee.


Belf. Iun. Indeed your Love was most particular with spitting and scratching,
like Caterwauling: And in the best of humors you were ever murmuring and
complaining: Oh my Head aches: I am so sick: And Jealous to madness too.


Term. Oh Devil incarnate!


True. Belfond, thou art the most ungentle Knight alive.


Term. Methinks the pretty Child I have had by you should make you less
inhumane.


Belf. Iun. Let me have it; I Will breed it up.


Term. No, thou shall never have it while thou live. I Will pull it Limb from
Limb e're thou shall have it.


Belf. Iun. This is so unnatural, that you will make me so far from thinking it
mine, that I shall not believe it yours: But that you have put a false Child
upon me.


Term. Unworthy Wretch.


Belf. Iun. When thou art old enough, thy malice and ill humor will qualify
thee for a Witch; but thou had never Douceurs enough in thy Youth to fit thee
for a Mistress.


Term. How dare you provoke me thus? For what little Dirty Wench am I thus
used? If she be above ground I Will find her, and tear her Eyes out. Hah -- By
the Bed I see the Devil has been here to night -- Oh oh, I cannot bear it.
Falls into a Fit.


True. Belfond, help the Lady for shame; lay hold on her.


Belf. Iun. No no, let her alone; she will not hurt herself I warrant thee: She
is a rare Actor: She acts a fit of the Mother the best of any one in England.
Ha ha ha.


True. How can thou be so cruel?


Belf. Iun. What a Devil should I do? if a man lies once with a Woman, is he
bound to do it for ever?


Term. Oh oh.


Belf. Iun. Very well says: Admirably well acted.


Term. Is it so? Devil, Devil: i will spoil your Point de Venice for you. Flies
at him.


Belf. Iun. Will you force me to make my Footman turn you out? Enter Footman.


Foot. Sir, Your Father and your Uncle are coming hither.


Bell. Iun. Sdeath my Father! It Is impossible.


Foot. By Heaven it is true; they are coming up by this time.


Belf. Iun. Look you Madam, you may if you will ruin me; and put me out of all
means of doing for you or your Child: Try me once more, and get into the Bed
and cover your self with the Quilt, or I am undone.


Term. Villain, you deserve to be ruined: But I love my Child too well.


True. For Heavens sake hide your self in the Bed quickly.


Term. No no, I Will run into the Closet.


Belf. Iun. Death and Hell! I am ruined: There Is a young Girl there; she will
make yet a worse uproar.


True. Peace, let me alone. Madam, whatever happens, ruin not your self and
Child inevitably.


Enter Sir William Belfond, Sir Edward, and Servants. Sir Edw. Ned, good morrow
to thee.


Belf. Iun. Your Blessing Sir.


Sir Edw. Heaven bless thee. Here Is one unexpected.


Belf. Iun. My Father! I beg your Blessing Sir.


Sir Will. Heaven mend you: it can never bless you in the lewd course you are
in.


Belf. Iun. You are misinformed Sir; my courses are not so lewd as you imagine.


Sir Will. Do you see; I am misinformed: He Will give me the lie.


Belf. Iun. I would first bite my Tongue in pieces, and spit it at you:
Whatever little heats of Youth I have been guilty of, I doubt not but in a
short time to please you fully.


Sir Edw. Well said Ned: I dare swear thou will.


Sir Will. Good Brother Credulous: I thank Heaven I am not so. You were not
drunk last night with Bullies, and roared and ranted, scoured, broke Windows,
beat the Watch, broke open a House, and forced away a Wench in Salisbury-Court.
This is a fine life. These he calls heats of Youth.


Belf. Iun. I was at home by Eight a Clock last night, and supped at home; and
never keep such Company.


Sir Will. No no; you are not called Squire Belfond by the Scoundrels your
Companions? 'Twas not you: No no.


Belf. Iun. Not I upon my faith; I never keep such Company or do such actions:
If any one should call me Squire I Would break his Head: Some Rascal has usurped my
Name.


Sir Edw. Look you Brother, what would you have? This must be some mistake.


Sir Will. What a Devil! You believe this too? Ounds! you make me mad! Is there
any of our Name in England but our selves? Does he think to flam me with a Lie?


Belf. Iun. I scorn a Lie, it is the basest thing a Gentleman can be guilty of:
All my Servants can testify I stirred not out last night.


True. I assure you Sir, he was not abroad last night.


Sir Will. You assure me! Who are you? one of his hopeful Companions! No, your
Clothes are not good enough, you may be his Pimp.


True. You are the Father of my Friend, an old Gentleman, and a little mad.


Sir Will. Old! Walk down; I Will try your youth: I Will fight with the bravest
Ruffian he keeps company with.


Sir Edw. Brother! Are you mad? Has the Country robbed you of all good manners,
and common sense?


Sir Will. I had a Bout with two of your Bullies in the Temple-walks.


Belf. Iun. Whom does he mean? This is a Gentleman of Estate and Quality; He
has above 2000 l. a year.


Sir Edw. You are a mad man: I am ashamed of you. Sir, I beseech you pardon my
Brothers Passion, which transports him beyond Civility.


Belf. Iun. I know you will for my sake.


True. He is the Father of my dearest Friend; I shall be glad to serve him.


Sir Edw. Will you never be of age of Discretion? For shame use me, your Son,
and every Body better.


Sir Will. Well, I must be run down like a tame Puppy.


Luc. within. Murder, murder; Help, help; ah, ah!


Belf. Iun. Oh this damned She Devil. Termagant pulls Lucia out by the hair;
they part em.


Term. I Will make you an Example: Will you see him whether I will or no, you
young Whore!


Sir Will. Here Is a Son! Here Is a fine Son! Here Is your breeding! Here Is a
pretty Son! Here Is a delicate Son! Here Is a dainty Son!


Sir Edw. If he be mad, will you be madder?


Belf. Iun. Turn out this She Bear; turn her out to the Rabble!


Term. Revenge, you Villain, Revenge. Exit Term. and Foot.


Belf. Iun. Dear Friend, prithee see this innocent Girl safe in the Chair, from
that outrageous Strumpets fury. Exit True. and Lucy.


Sir Will. Here Is a Son, here is a Son! Very well; make much of him: Here Is the
effect of Whoring.


Belf. Iun. No Sir, it is the effect of not Whoring: This Rage is because I have
cast her off.


Sir Will. Yes yes, for a younger; a sweet Reformation! Let me not see your
Face, nor hear you speak; you will break my heart.


Belf. Iun. Sir, the young Girl was never here before; she brought me Linen
from the Exchange.


Sir Will. A fine Bawd her Mistress in the mean time.


Belf. Iun. This furious Wench coming in to rail at me for my leaving her, I
was forced to put the other into that Closet, and at your coming up, against my
will, this run into the same Closet.


Sir Will. Sirrah, most audacious Rogue, do you sham me? Do you think you have
your Uncle to deal with? Avoid my presence Sirrah: Get you out Sirrah.


Belf. Iun. I am sorry I offended: I obey. Exit Belf. Jun.


Sir Will. I could have found in my heart to have Cudgelled him.


Sir Edw. Shame of our Family; you behave your self so like a Madman and a
Fool, you will be begged: These fits are more extravagant than any thing he can
be guilty of. Do you give your Son the words of Command you use to Dogs?


Sir Will. Justify him, do! He Is an excellent Son! a very pretty Son! a
delicate Son! a virtuous Son! a discreet Son! he is.


Sir Edw. Pray use me better, or I Will assure you, we must never see one
another. Besides, I shall entail my Estate for want of Issue by this Son here,
upon another Family, if you will treat me thus.


Sir Will. What says he? aside. Well Brother I ha done: His lewdness distracted
me! Oh my poor Boy in the Country; I long to see him, the great support of my
declining Age.


Sir Edw. Let us calmly reason: What has your breeding made of him (with your
Patience) but a Blockhead?


Sir Will. A Blockhead! When he comes the World shall judge which of us has
been the wiser in the Education of a Son: A Blockhead? Why he knows a sample of
any Grain as well as e're a fellow in the North: Can handle a Sheep or Bullock
as well as any one: Knows his seasons of Plowing, Sowing, Harr^wing, laying
fallow: Understands all sorts of Manure: And never a one that wears a Head can
wrong him in a Bargain.


Sir Edw. A very pretty fellow, for a Gentleman's Baily.


Sir Will. For his own Baily, and to be a rich --


Sir Edw. Swine, and live as nastily; and keep worse Company than Beasts in a
Forest.


Sir Will. He knows no Vice, poor Boy.


Sir Edw. He will have his turn to know it then; as sure as he will have the
Small Pox; and then he will be fond on it, when his Brother has lest it.


Sir Will I defy the Omen: he never Whores, nor Drinks hard* but upon design,
as driving a Bargain, or so; and that I allow him.


Sir Edw. So: Knavish and designing Drunkenness you allow; but not good
fellowship for mirth and conversation.


Sir Will. Now Brother, pray what have you made your Son good for, with your
breeding you so much boast of? Let Us hear that now: Come on, let us hear.


Sir Edw. First, I bred him at Westminster-School, till he was Master of the
Greek and Latin Tongues; then I kept him at the University, where I instructed
him to read the Noble Greek and Roman Authors.


Sir Will. Well, and what use can he make of the Noble Greek and Latin, but to
prate like a Pedant, and show his parts over a Bottle?


Sir Edw. To make a man fit for the Conversation of Learned Gentlemen is one
noble end of Study: But those Authors make him wiser and honester, Sir, to boot.


Sir Will. Wiser! Will he ever get Sixpence, or improve or keep his Estate by
em?


Sir Edw. Mean Notions: I made him weil versed in History.


Sir Will. That Is a pretty study indeed: How can there be a true History, when
we see no man living is able to write truly the History of the last week?


Sir Edw. He by the way read Natural Philosophy, and had insight enough in the
Mathematics.


Sir Will. Natural Philosophy! knows nothing: Nor would I give a sart for any
Mathematician, but a Carpenter, Bricklayer, Measurer of Land, or Sailor.


Sir Edw. Some moderate skill in it will use a man to reason closely.


Sir Will. Very pretty: Reason! Can he Reason himself into six Shillings by all
this?


Sir Edw. He needs it not: But to go on; after three years I removed him from
the University (lest he should have too strong a tincture of it) to the Temple;
there I got a modest learned Lawyer, of little practice, for want of Impudence;
and there are several such that want, while empty impudent fellows thrive and
swagger at the Bar: This man I got to instruct my Son in some old Common Law
Books, the Statutes, and the best Pleas of the Crown, and the Constitution of
the old true English Government.


Sir Will. Does he get a Shilling by all this? But what a Devil made you send
him into France, to make an arrant vain Coxcomb of him?


Sir Edw. There he did all his manly Exercises; saw two Campaigns; studied
History; Civil Laws, and Laws of Commerce; the Language he spoke well e're he
went. He made the Tour of Italy, and saw Germany, and the Low Countries, and
returned well skilled in Foreign Affairs, and a Complete accomplished English
Gentleman.


Sir Will. And to know nothing of his own Estate, but how to spend it: my poor
Boy has traveled to better purpose: for he has traveled all about my Lands,
and knows every Acre and Nook, and the value of it: There Is travel for you!
Poor Boy.


Sir Edw. And he enjoys so little of that Estate he sees, as to be impatient
for your Death: I dare swear mine wishes my Life, next to his own. I have made
him a Complete Gentleman, fit to serve his Country in any Capacity.


Sir Will. Serve his Country! Pox on his Country: It Is a Country of such
Knaves, it is not worth the serving: All those who pretend to serve it, mean
nothing but themselves. But amongst all things, how came you to make him a
Fiddler, always Fluting or Scraping? I had as leive hear a Jews-Harp.


Sir Edw. I love Music: Besides I would have young Gentlemen have as many
helps to spend their time alone as can be; most of our Youth are ruined by
having Time lie heavy on their hands, which makes them run into any base
Company to shun themselves.


Sir Will. And all this Gentleman's Education is come to Drinking, Whoring and
Debauchery. Enter Servant to Sir William.


Serve. Sir, Mr. Scrapeall is at your Attorneys Chamber in the Temple, and
desires to discourse you.


Sir Will. Brother, I must go: I shall tell you when I see you next, what is my
Business with him.


Sir Edw. Be sure to Dine with me.


Sir Will. I will -- Exeunt.


Enter Belfond Senior, Shamwell, Cheatly, Hackum, Lolpoop, French Valet, two
Footmen, at the George, in White-Friers. Cheat. Now thou look like an Heir
indeed, my Lad: when thou came up thou had the Scurvy Phiz of a mere
Country Put -- He did thee a kindness that took thee for a Chief Constable.


Sham. Now thou shinest, Cousin, like a true Belfond! What 3000 l. a year
entailed, and live like a Butcher, or Grazier, in the Country?


Hack. Give you joy, noble Sir, now you look like a true Gallant Squire.


Lolp. Like a Squire, like a Puppy by the Mass: Odsflesh, what will the awd man
say; he will be stark wood.


Belf. Senior. Well, I was the fortunat'st man to light upon such true, such
real Friends: I had never known any Breeding or Gentility without you.


Sham. You buried all your good parts in a sordid Swinish life in the North.


Belf. Senior. My Father kept me in ignorance, and would have made a very silly
Blockheadly Put of me: Why, I never heard a Gentleman Banter, or cut a Sham in
my life before I saw you, nor ever heard such ingenious Discourse.


Hack. Nay, the World knows Mr. Cheatly, and Mr. Shamwell, are as Complete
Gentlemen as ever came within the Friars: And yet we have as fine Gentlemen as
any in England; we have those here who have broke for a 100000 l.


Belf. Senior. Well, I protest and vow, I am so very fine, I do not know where
to look upon my self first: I don't think my Lord Mayor's Son is finer.


Cheat. He is a Scoundrel compared to thee: There Is never a Prigg at Court
out-shines thee. Thou shall strut in the Park, where Countesses shall be
enamored on thee.


Belf. Senior. I am overjoyed: I can stand no ground: My dear friend Cheatly!
My sweet Cousin Shamwell! Let me embrace such dear, such loving friends: I
could grow to you, methinks, and stick here for ever. They embrace.


Lolp. Ah! Dear loving Dogs! They love him by'r Lady, as a Cat loves a Mause.


Belf. Senior. What Is that you mutter, Sir? Come hither, Sir! you are finer
than any Squire in the Country.


Lolp. Pox of finery, I say; yeow maken a mere Ass, an Owl of me: Here are
Sleeves sit for naught but a Miller to steule with when he takes Tole: and
damned Cuffs here, one cannot dip ones Meat ith Sauce for them: Odsflesh, give
me my awd Cloths again; would I were a whom in my Frock, dressing of my
Geldings; poor Titts, they wanten me dearly, I warrant a.


Belf. Sen. Well, there is no making a Whistle of a Pigs Tail; This Puppy will
never learn any breeding. Sirrah, behold me: here is Rigging for you; Here Is a
Nabb: you never saw such a one in your life.


Cheat. A rum Nab: it is a Beaver of 5 l.


Belf. Sen. Look you there Blockhead.


Lolp. Look yeow there Blockhead I say. aside.


Hack. Let me see your Porker: Here Is a Porker; here is a Tilter: Hah ha. Oh how
I could whip a Prigster through the Lungs! Ha ha. Thrusts at Lolpoop.


Cheat. It cost sixteen Louydors in Paris.


Hack. Ha, ha. He pushes toward Lolpoop.


Lolp. Hawd you, hawd you: And I tak kibbo, Is It raddle the Bones of thee; Ise
tell a that: for aw thou art a Captain mun.


Belf. Sen. Look Sirrah, here is a show you Rogue: Here Is a sight of Cole,
Darby, the Ready, and the Rhino, you Rascal, you understand me not; you
Loggerhead, you silly Put, you understand me not: Here are Meggs and Smelts: I
never had such a sight of my own in my life. Here are more Meggs and Smelts,
you Rogue; you understand me not.


Lolp. By'r Lady not I: I understand not this South-Country speech not I.


Belf. Sen. Ah methinks I could tumble in em. But dee hear Putt, Putt, Putt,
Sirrah. Here Is a Scout: What Is a Clock? what is a Clock Sirrah. Here Is a Tatler;
Gold, all Gold, you Rogue. Look on my finger Sirrah, look here: Here Is a
Famble, Putt, Putt: You don't know what a Famble, a Scout or a Tatler is, you
Putt.


Lolp. Fine sights for my awd Master! Marry would I were sent from Constable to
Constable, and whipped whom again by'r Lady,


Belf. Sen. Let Us whett: bring some Wine. Come on: I love a Whett: Pray let us
huzza: I love huzzaing mightily: But where is your Lady, Captain, and the
Blowing, that is to be my Natural* my Convenient, my Pure. Enter Servant with
Bottles.


Hack. They Are just coming in. Come Betty.


Enter Mrs. Hackum and Mrs. Margaret. Mrs. Hack. Come in Mrs. Margaret, come.


Marg. I am so ashamed.


Belf. Senior. Madam, your Servant; I am very much obliged to your favors.


Mrs. Hack. I shall be proud to do a Gentleman, like you, any service that lies
in my power, as a Gentlewoman.


Belf. Senior. Oh Lord, Madam, your most humble Servant to Command: My pretty
Blowing let me kiss thee: Thou shall be my Natural: I must manage thee. She is
a Pure Blowing. My pretty Rogue -- how happy shall I be? Pox of the Country I
say. Madam Hackum, to testify my gratitude, I make bold to Equip you with some
Meggs, Smelts, Decus's and Georges.


Mrs. Hack. I am your faithful Servant, and I shall be glad of any occasion,
whereby to express how ready I am to serve any Gentleman, or person of Quality,
as becomes a Gentlewoman; and upon honor Sir, you shall never find me tardy.


Cheat. Come on Sir, fill up all the Glasses; a Health to this pretty Lady.


Belf. Sen. Ay, and in faith I Will drink it, pretty Rogue.


Sham. Let them be Facers.


Belf. Sen. Facers! What are those? Nay, give the Lady and the Captains Lady
too.


Marg. No, I cannot drink, I am not dry.


Mrs. Hack. Give it me.


Sham. There Is a Facer for you. Drinks the Glass clear off, and puts it to his
Face.


Belf. Sen. Excellent adad! Come to our Facers. All do the like. It is the
prettiest way of Drinking: Fill again, we'll have more Facers. Fiddles flourish
without. Ha Boys! the Musicians are come. Ha Boys, we'll sing, dance, roar,
fling the house out of the Windows; and I will manage my pretty Natural, my
pure Blowing here. Huzza: My dear Friends, Shamwell and Cheatly, I am
transported! My pretty Natural: Kiss me, kiss me. Huzza.


Marg. Nay puh, you do so ruffle one things.


Belf. Sen. I Will ruffle thee more, my little Rogue, before I have done with
thee. Well, I shall never make you amends, my dear Friends. Sirrah, Lolpoop, is
not this better than the Country, Sirrah? Give the Rogue a Facer to my
Mistress. Come, fill about the Fucers. Come on, my Lads, stand to it. Huzza. I
vow it is the prettiest way of Drinking, never stir!


Enter four Servants with four Dishes of Meat, who cross the Stage. Cheat. So
here is the Prog, here is the Dinner coming up; the Clothes laid in the next
room: Here Is a noble Dinner.


Belf. Sen. Ha Boys, we'll sing and roar, and Huzza, like Devils.

Enter Sir William Belfond at the Door. Ounds! Who Is here? my Father! Lolpoop,
Lolpoop, hide me: give me my Joseph. Let Us sneak into the next Room.


Sham. Death! What shall we do? This is the Bully's Father.


Cheat. Let me alone: I warrant you.


Hack. This is the old Fellow I had like to have had a Rubbers with in the
morning.


Sir Will. Is he fallen into these hands? Nay, then he is utterly lost: His
Estate is spent before he has it.


Cheat. How now Prigg, what makes you come into our Room?


Sir Will. I would speak with Squire Belfond.


Cheat. Here Is no such man.


Sir Will. Oh Bully, are you there? and my ungracious kinsman too? would you
bring my Son to the Gallows! you most notorious seducer of young heirs, I know
you too. I warrant you I Will keep my dear Boy in the Country far enough from
your Clutches. In short, I would speak with my Rebellious Town-Son, who is
here, and bespoke this great Dinner.


Cheat. bantering. Why look you Sir, according to your Assertion of things
doubtful in themselves; you must be forced to grant that whatsoever may be, may
also as well not be, in their own essential differences and degrees.


Sir Will. What stuff's this? Where Is my Son?


Cheat. Your question consists of two terms: the one ubi, where: But of that I
shall say nothing, because here is no Son, nor any thing belonging to you, to
be the subject matter of debate, at this time; forasmuch as --


Sir Will. Do you hear me Sir, let me see my Son; and offer to Banter me, or
Sham me once more, and I will cut your Throat, and Cudgel your brace of Cowards.


Cheat. Nay, then it is time to take a course with you. Help, help; an Arrest,
an arrest; a Baily, a Baily.


Hack. and Sham. An Arrest, an Arrest. All cry out an Arrest: Drawers, and some
of the Rabble come in, and join with the Cry, which gets into the street; there
they cry out too: He joins the Cry, and runs away: Cheat. Sham. Hack. Drawers
follow him, and cry out, stop, stop, a Baily. Cheat. Sham. Hack. in the street.
Stop, stop, a Baily, a Baily. Sir William runs, the Rabble pursue him cross the
Stage.


Sir Will. You Dogs? Am I a Baily?


Cheat. You shall be used like one, you old Prigg. An Arrest.


Sir Will. Impudent Dogs! I must run, or I shall be pulled in pieces. Help,
help, an Arrest, an Arrest.


ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Mrs. Termagant and her Brother. Term. AS I told you, I have had a Child
by him; he is my Husband by Contract; and casts me off: Has dishonored me, and
made me infamous. Shall you think to Game and Bully about the Town, and not
vindicate the honor of your Family?


Brother. No man shall dare to dishonor our Family.


Enter Belfond Junior. Term. If you do not cut his Throat, you will be kicked up
and down for a Damned Coward: And besides you shall never see a penny of mine
more.


Brother. I Will fight him an be above ground.


Term. There, there is the Traitor, walking before his Unkles door: Be sure
dispatch him: on, I Will withdraw. Exit.


Brother. Do you hear Sir, do you know Mrs. Termagant?


Belf. Iun. What makes you ask such a familiar question Sir?


Brother. I am her Brother.


Belf. Iun. Perhaps so: Well, I do? What then Sir?


Brother. Ours is as ancient a Family as any in England, tho perhaps
unfortunate at present: The Termagants came in with the Conqueror.


Belf. Iun. It may be so: I am no Herald.


Brother. And do you think you shall dishonor this Family, and debauch my
Sister unchastiz'd? you are contracted to her, and have lain with her.


Belf. Iun. Look you Sir, I see what you would be at: She Is mad, and puts you
upon this: Let me advise you, it is a foolish quarrel.


Brother. You debauched her, and have ruined her.


Belf. Iun. It Is false; the silliest Coxcombly Beau in Town had the first of
her.


Brother. You have had a Child by her.


Belf. Iun. Then I have added one to your Ancient Family that came in with the
Normans: Prithee do not provoke me to take away one from it.


Brother. You are contracted to her; and if you will marry her I will save your
life.


Belf. Iun. It Is a Lie; I am not contracted to her: Be gone, urge me no more.


Brother. Draw.


Belf. Iun. Have at you. Enter Sir Edward Belfond. Belf. strikes up his heels,
and disarms him.


Sir Edw. Hold, hold: Oh my Son, my Son! What Is the matter? my dear Son, art
thou not hurt? let me see.


Belf. Iun. No Sir, not at all, dear Sir. Here take your Sword, and be gone:
Next time you come to trouble me, I Will cut your throat. Exit Brother.


Sir Edw. What Is the matter, dear Ned? This is about some Wench I warrant.


Belf. Iun. It Is a Brother of that furious Wench you saw Sir; her violent Love
is converted into hatred.


Sir Edw. You young fellows will never get Knowledge but at your own cost; the
Precepts of the old weigh nothing with you.


Belf. Iun. Your precepts have been ever sacred to me; and so shall your
example be henceforward: You are the best of men; the best of Fathers: I have
as much honor for you as I can have for humane Nature: And I love you ten
thousand times above my life.


Sir Edw. Dear Ned, thou art the greatest joy I have: And believe thy Father,
and thy Friend, there is nothing but Anxiety in Vice: I am not straight Laced;
but when I was young, I never knew any thing gotten by Wenching, but Duels,
Claps, and Bastards: And every drunken fit is a short madness, that cuts off a
good part of Life.


Belf. Iun. You have Reason Sir, and shall ever be my Oracle hereafter.


Sir Edw. It Is time now to take up, and think of being something in the World:
See then, my Son, tho thou should not be over busy, to side with Parties and
with Factions, yet that thou take a care to make some figure in the World,
and to sustain that part thy Fortune, Nature, and thy Education fit thee for.


Belf. Iun. Your wise advice I Will strive to follow: But I must confess, I am
most passionately in Love, and am with your consent, resolved to Marry: Though I
will perish ever I do it without it.


Sir Edw. Be sure to know the humor of the Woman; you run a mighty hazard: But
if you be valiant enough to venture, (which, I must confess, I never was.) I Will
leave it to your own choice: I know you have so much honor, you will do
nothing below your self.


Belf. Iun. I doubt not of your Approbation; but till I can be sure of
obtaining her: Pardon me if I conceal her Name.


Enter Sir William Belfond. Sir Edw. Your Father comes, retire a little within
hearing, till I soften him somewhat: He is much moved, as he always is, I
think. He retires.


Sir Will. Now Brother, as I was saying, I can convince you, your Son, your
Darling, whom you long have fostered in his Wickedness, is become the most
profligate of all Rascals.


Sir Edw. Still upon this Subject.


Sir Will. It Is very well; my Mouth must be stopped, and your Ears: It Is wondrous
well. But I have had much ado to escape with life, from him, and his Notorious
fellow Rogues: As I told you when I had found that the Rogue was with his
Wicked Associates, at the George in White-Fryers; when they saw I was resolved
to see my Son, and was rough with 'em, Cheatly and his Rogues set up a Cry
against me: An Arrest! A Baily: An Arrest: The Mobile, and all the Rakehells in
the House, and thereabout the Streets assembled: I run, and they had a fair
Course after me into Fleetstreet, thanks to the Vigor I have left, my Heels
have saved my Life: Your Infamous Rogue would have suffered me to have been
Sacrificed to the Rabble.


Sir Edw. Ha ha ha, very pretty in faith; it runs very well: Can you tell it
over again think you?


Sir Will. Ounds! Am I become your Scorn? Your Laughter?


Sir Edw. Ned, You hear all this? Belf. Iun. appears.


Belf. Iun. Yes; and am distracted to know the meaning of it.


Sir Will. Vile Parricide! Are you gotten here before me? You are monstrous
nimble Sir.


Belf. Iun. By all the Powers of Heaven! I never was at the George in my Life.


Sir Will. Oh then they stay for you, you have not yet been there; you will loose
your Dinner, it is served up -- Vile Wretch.


Belf. Iun. All this is Cross purposes to me: I came to my Unkle's House from
my own Lodgings immediately; when you were pleased to banish me your presence,
and here have been ever since.


Sir Will. Nay, he that will be a through Villain, must be a complete Liar:
Were not you even now with your Associate Rascals at the George?


Belf. Iun. No, by Heaven! Nor was I ever in the Company of any of that Gang: I
know their Infamy too well, to be acquainted with their Persons.


Sir Will. I am not Drunk, nor Mad; but you will make me one of 'em.


Belf. Iun. These Rascals have gotten some body to Personate me; and are
undoubtedly, carrying on some Cheat in my Name.


Sir Edw. Brother it must be.


Sir Will. Yes, yes, no doubt it must be so: And I must be in a Dream all this
while, I must!


Sir Edw. You say your self, you did not see my Son there?


Sir Will. No, he was too nimble for me, and got out some back way, to be here
before me; so to face down the truth.


Belf. Iun. I Will instantly go thither, and discover this Imposture, that I may
suffer no longer for the faults of others.


Sir Edw. Dine first: My Dinners ready.


Belf. Iun. Your pardon Sir, I will go instantly: I cannot rest till I have
done my self right.


Sir Edw. Let Us in, and discourse of this matter: Brother, I must say this, I
never took him in a Lie since he could speak.


Sir Will. Took him: No, nor ever will take him in any thing.


Sir Edw. Let Us in -- and send your own Man with him.


Sir Will. It shall be so, though I am convinced already. Is there any of the
Name but you, and I, and my two Sons in England?


Belf. Iun. Be pleased to send my Footmen out to me, Sir.


Sir Edw. Have a care of a Quarrel, and bringing the Alsatians about your Ears.
Come Brother. Ex. Sir Edw. and Sir Will.


Enter Lucia running, Termagant pursuing her. Luc. Help, help, help.


Term. Now I have found you, you little Whore -- I Will make you an Example.


Luc. Oh Lord! Are you here! Save me, Save me, this Barbarous Woman threatens
to murder me for your sake.


Belf. Iun. Save thee, Dear Miss: That I would at the peril of my Life: No
danger should make me quit thee, Cannons, nor Bombs.


Term. Damned false Fellow: I Will take a time to slit her Nose.


Luc. Oh Heaven! She Will kill me.


Belf. Iun. Thou Devil! In thy properest shape of Furious, and Malicious Woman:
Resolve to leave off this Course this moment, or by Heaven I Will lay thee fast
in Bedlam: Had thou fifty Brothers, I Would fight 'em all, in defense of this
dear pretty Miss.


Luc. Dear kind Creature! This sweet Love of thine, methinks does make me
valiant, and I fear her not so much.


Enter Roger, and his two Footmen. Belf. Iun. Dear pretty Miss: I Will be thy
safeguard.


Term. Thou Falsest, Basest of thy Sex: Look to see thy Child sent thee in
pieces, Baked in a Pie, for so I will.


Belf. Iun. Though thou hat'st every thing living besides thy self; yet thou have
too much tenderness for thy own person to bring it to the Gallows: Offer to
follow us one step, and I Will set the Rabble upon thee: Come my dear Child.
Exeunt.


Term. Thou shall be dogged; and I Will know who she is: Oh Revenge! Revenge! if
thou do not exceed, thou equall'st all the Ecstasies of Love. Exit. Term.


Enter Cheatly, and Shamwell. Cheat. Thus far our Matters go swimmingly: Our
Squire is as Debauched, and Prodigal, as we can wish.


Sham. I told you, all England could not afford an Heir like this for our
purpose, but we must keep him always hot.


Cheat. That will be easy; we made him so Devilish Drunk the first two or
three days, the least Bumper will warm his addle Head afresh at any time: He
paid a great Fine; and may sit at a little Rent: I must be gone for a moment;
our Suffolk Heir is Nabb'd, for a small Business; and I must find him some
Sham-Bail: See the Captain performs his Charge. Exit.


Enter Hackum. Sham. Here he comes. See, Captain, you make that Blockhead
Drunk, and do as we directed.


Hack. He Is almost Drunk, and we are in readiness for him; the Squire is
retired with his Natural, so fond.


Sham. It Is well; about your business: I Will be with you soon.


Enter Lolpoop. Exit Shamwell. Hack. Come on, Mr. Lolpoop: You and I Will be
merry by our selves.


Lolp. I must needs say Captain, yeow are a Civil Gentleman, but yeow han given
me so many Bumpers: I am meet Drunken already.


Hack. Come on, I warrant you: Here Is a Bumper to the Squire's Lady.


Lolp. With all my Heart. Enter Betty.


Hack. Oh Mrs. Betty, art thou come? I sent for this pretty Rogue to keep you
Company: She Is as pretty a Company-keeper as any's in the Friars.


Lolp. Ods-flesh, what should I do in Company with Gentlewomen: It Is not for
such Fellee's as I.


Hack. Have Courage Man: You shall have her; and never want such a one while I
am your Friend.


Lolp. O Lord I! Don yeow know what yeow saen.


Bett. A Proper, Handsome Gentleman, I swear.


Lolp. Who I, no, no: What done yeow mean forsooth?


Bett. I vow, I have not seen a handsomer: So proper, so well shaped!


Lolp. Oh Lord, I! I! Yeow jeern me naw.


Hack. Why don't you salute her, Man?


Lolp. Who I? By the Mass, I dare not be so bold: What I kiss such a fine
Gentlewoman?


Hack. Kiss, Kiss her Man: This Town affords us such every where? You Will hate
the Country when you see a little more: Kiss her I say.


Lolp. I am so ha la: I am ashamed.


Bett. What must I do it to you then?


Lolp. Oh rare! Byth' Mass! Whoo Kisses daintily: And whoo has a Breath like a
Caw.


Hack. Come, the other Bumper: To her Health let this be Here Is to you.


Lolp. Thanka forsooth and yeow pleasen. Drinks to her.


Bett. Yes, any thing that you do, will please me.


Lolp. Capt. Capt. What done yeow leave me? Hack. steals out and leaves them
together.


Bett. What are you afraid of me?


Lolp. Nay, By'r Lady: I am ashamed, who is farinely a pratty Lass! Marry.


Bett. A Handsome Man, and ashamed! She edges nearer to him.


Lolp. Who I, a Handsome Mon! Nay, Nay.


Bett. A Lovely Man, I vow: I cannot forbear Kissing you.


Lolp. O dear: it is your goodness: Ods-flesh, whoo Loves me! who will make me
stark wood even naw: An yeow kissen me, By'r Lady, I's kiss yeow.


Bett. What care I?


Lolp. Looka there naw! Waunds, whoo's a Dainty Lass, pure white and red: And
most of the London Lasses are pure white and red: Welly aw alike; and I had her
in some Nook. Ods-flesh, I say no more.


Bett. I Will stay no longer, farewell. She retires.


Lolp. Nay, I's not leave a so: Marry whoo's a Gallant Lass.


Ex. following her. Enter Hackum. Hack. So, he is caught: this will take him off
from teazing his Master with his damned good Counsel.


Enter Cheatly, and Shamwell. Cheat. I have sent our Alsatian Attorney, and as
Substantial Bail as can be wis^'d for the Redemption of our Suffolk Caravan;
he is ripe for another Judgment, he begins to want the Ready much.


Sham. Scrapeall is provided for him: How now Captain, what is become of your
Blockhead?


Hack. He Is nibling at the Bait: He Will swallow presently.


Cheat. But hark you, Shamwell! I have chosen the subtlest and handsomest Wench
about this Town for the great Fortune I intend to bestow this hopeful Kinsman
of yours upon: It Is Mrs. Termagant, his Brothers Cast Mistress, who resents her
being lest to that degree, that though she meditates all the revenge, besides,
that Woman's Nature is capable of against him: Yet her Heart leapt for joy at
this design of Marrying his Elder Brother: If it were for nothing but to plague
the younger, and take place of his Wife.


Sham. I have seen her: She will personate a Town Lady of Quality admirably,
and be as Haughty and Impertinent as the best of 'em: Is the Lodging, and
Plate, and things ready for her?


Cheat. It is, she comes there this Afternoon; she is set her Hand to a good
swinging Judgment; and thou and I will divide my Lad: And now, all we have to
do, is to preserve him to our selves from any other Correspondence, and at
downright Enmity with his Father, and Brother: And we must keep him
continually hot, as they do a Glass-House, or our work will go backward.


Enter Belfond Senior, Mrs. Margaret, Mrs. Hackum, and his Servants. Belf. Sen.
Oh my dear Friend and Cousin; tread upon my Neck: Make me your Footstool, you
have made me a happy Man to know Plenty and Pleasure, good Company, good Wine,
Music, Fine Women: Mrs. Hackum and I have been at Bumpers hand to fist: Here Is
my pretty Natural, my dear pretty Rogue: Adad, she is a Rare Creature, a
Delicious Creature! And between you and I, dear Friend, she has all her Goings
as well as ever a Blowing in Christendom: Dear Madam Hackum, I am infinitely
obliged to you.


Mrs. Hack. I am glad, Sir, she gives your Worship content, Sir.


Belf. Sen. Content: Ah my pretty Rogue! Pox of the Country, I say, Capt. Capt.
here: Let me Equip you with a Quid.


Hack. Noble Squire: I am your Spaniel-Dog.


Belf. Sen. 'Pox of the Country, I say: The best Team of Horses my Father has,
shall not draw me thither again.


Sham. Be firm to your Resolution, and thou wilt be happy.


Cheat. If you meet either your Father, or Brother, or any from those
Prigsters, stick up thy Countenance, or thou art ruined, my Son of Promise, my
brisk Lad in remainder, when one of 'em approaches thee, we'll all pull down
our Hats, and cry bow wow.


Belf. Sen. I warrant you; I am hardened, I knew my Brother in the Country, but
they shant sham me, they shall find me a smoaky Thief: I vow 'twill be a very
pretty way: Bow wow. I warrant thee I Will do it.


Enter Belfond Junior, two Footmen, and Roger. Sham. Who the Devil's here! Your
Brother, Courage.


Cheat. Courage, be rough and haughty my Bumpkin.


Belf. Sen. Hey, where are all my Servants. Call 'em in. Capt. calls'em.


Belf. Iun. Who is that in this House here, who usurps my Name, and is called
Squire Belfond?


Belf. Sen. One who is called so without usurping. Bow wow.


Belf. Iun. Brother, Death do I dream! Can I trust my Senses! Is this my
Brother?


Belf. Sen. Ay, ay, I know I am Transmography'd: But I am your very Brother*
Ned.


Belf. Iun. Could you be so unkind, to come to Town, and not see your nearest
Kindred, your Uncle, and my self?


Belf. Sen. I would not come to disgrace you, till my Equipage was all ready.
Hey, La Mar, is my Coach at the Gate next to the Green-Dragon?


Valet. Ouy Monsieur.


Belf. Sen. But I was resolved to give you a Visit to Morrow Morning.


Belf. Iun. I should have been glad to have seen you any where but here.


Belf. Sen. But here! Why it is as good a Tavern, as any's in Town. Sirrah, fill
some Bumpers: Here Brother, here is a Facer to you: We'll Huzza, Call in the
Fiddlers.


Belf. Iun. I am struck with Astonishment: Not all Ovid's Metamorphosis can
show such a one as this.


Belf. Sen. I see you wonder at my Change: What would you never have a Man
learn breeding Adad? Should I always be kept a Country Bubble, a Caravan, a
Mere Putt. I am brave and bowsy.


Belf. Iun. S'life! He has got the Cant too.


Belf. Sen. I shall be clear by and by: The Other Bumper, Brother.


Belf. Iun. No: I Will drink no more: I hate drinking between meals.


Belf. Sen. Oh Lord! Oh Lord! hate drinking between meals! What Company do you
keep? But it is all one. Here Brother, pray salute this pretty Rogue: I manage
her, she is my Natural, my pure Blowing: I am resolved to be like a Gentleman
and keep, Brother.


Belf. Iun. A thorough-pac'd White-Friers man! aside.
I never refuse to kiss a pretty Woman. Salutes her.

Belf. Sen. This is Mrs. Hackum: I am much obliged to her: Pray salute her.


Belf. Iun. What a Pox! Will he make me kiss the Bawd too. Salutes her.


Belf. Sen. Brother, now pray know these Gentlemen here; they are the prettiest
Wits that are in Town: And between you and I Brother, brave gallant fellows,
and the best friends I ever had in my life: This is Mr. Cheatly, and this my
Cousin Shamwell.


Belf. Iun. I know em, and am acquainted with their worth.


Cheat. Your humble Servant, sweet Sir.


Sham. Your Servant Cousin.


Belf. Sen. And this is my dear Friend Captain Hackum: There is not a braver
fellow under the Sun.


Belf. Iun. By Heaven, a downright Alsatian!


Belf. Sen. Come Musicians, strike up; and sing the Catch the Captain gave you,
and we'll all join In Faith. We can be merry Brother, and we can roar.


Hack. It Is a very pretty magnanimous military business upon the Victory in
Hungary.


Hark, how the Duke of Lorrain comes,
The brave Victorious Soul of War;
With Trumpets and with Kettle Drums,
Like Thunder rolling from afar.
On the Left Wing the conquering Horse
The brave Bavarian Duke does lead;
These Heroes with united force,
Fill all the Turkish Host with dread.
Their bright Caparisons behold;
Rich Habits, Streamers, Shining Arms,
The glittering Steel and burnisht Gold;
The pomp of War with all its Charms.
With solemn March, and fatal pace,
They bravely on the Foe press on;
The Cannons roar, the Shot takes place,
Whilst Smoke and Dust obscure the Sun.
The Horses Neigh, the Soldiers shout,
And now the furious Bodies join,
The slaughter rages all about,
And men in groans their Blood resign.
The Weapons Clash, the Roaring Drum,
With Clanger of the Trumpets sound,
The bowls and yells of men overcome,
And from the Neighboring Hills rebound.
Now, now the Infidels give place,
Then all in Routs they headlong fly,
Heroes in Dust pursue the Chase,
While deafning Clamors rend the Sky.
Belf. Sen. You see Brother, what Company I keep: What Is the matter you are
melancholy.


Belf. Iun. I am not a little troubled Brother, to find you in such cursed
company.


Belf. Sen. Hold Brother, if you love your life: They are all stout; but that
same Captain has killed his five men.


Belf. Iun. Stout say you? This fellow Cheatly is the most notorious Rascal and
Cheat that ever was out of a Dungeon: This Kinsman a most silly Bubble first,
and afterward a betrayer of young Heirs, of which they have not ruined less
than two hundred, and made em run out their Estates before they came to em.


Belf. Sen. Brother, do you love your Life? the Captain's a Lion!


Belf. Iun. An Ass is he not? He is a Ruffian, and Cock-bawd to that Hen.


Cheat. If you were not the Brother to my dearest Friend, I know what my Honor
would prompt me to. Walks in a buff.


Sham. My dear Cousin, thou shall now find how entirely I am thine: My Honor
will not let me strike thy Brother.


Hack. But that the punctilio's of Honor are sacred to me; which tell me
nothing can provoke me against the Brother of my noble friend, I had whipped him
through the Lungs e're this.


Belf. Sen. Well, never man met with such true, such loving Friends.


Belf. Iun. Look you Brother, will this convince you, that you are fallen into
the hands of Fools, Knaves, Scoundrels and Cowards.


Belf. Sen. Fools! nay there I am sure you are out: They are all deep, they are
very deep and sharp; sharp as Needles, adad; the wittiest men in England.
Here Is Mr. Cheatly in the first place shall Sham and Bantor with you, or any
one you will bring for 500 l. of my Money.


Belf. Iun. Rascally stuff; fit for no places but Ram-alley, or Pie corner.


Belf. Sen. Persuade me to that: They are the merriest Companions, and the
truest Friends to me: It Is well for you adad, that they are so; for they are
all of em as stout as Hector.


Belf. Iun. This is most amazing.


Sham. Did I not tell you he would envy your condition; and be very angry with
us that put you into it.


Cheat. He must needs be a kind Brother: We prove our selves your true Friends;
and have that respect for your blood, that we will let none of it out,
where-e're we meet it upon any cause.


Belf. Sen. You see Brother, how their Love prevails over their Valor.


Belf. Iun. Their Valor! look you Brother, Kicks Cheatly and Shamw. here is
Valor.


Cheat. I understand Honor and Breeding, besides I have been let blood to day.


Sham. Nothing shall make me transgress the rules of Honor I say.


Belf. Iun. Here! Where are you? Sirrah; Kill-Cow. Takes Hackum by the Nose,
and leads him.


Hack. It Is no matter; I know Honor: I know punctilio's to a hair. You owe
your life to your Brother: besides, I am to be second to a dear Friend, and
preserve my vigor for his service: but for all that, were he not your brother


Belf. Iun. Will not this convince you, brother, of their Cowardice?


Belf. Sen. No, I think not; for I am sure they are Valiant; this convinces me
of their respect and friendship to me: My best Friends, let me embrace you: a
thousand thanks to you.


Belf. Iun. I will redeem him yet from these Rascals if I can: You are upon the
brink of ruin, if you go not off with me, and reconcile your self to my
Father; I Will undertake it upon good terms.


Belf. Sen. No, I thank you; I Will see no Father; he shall use me no more like a
Dog: he shall put upon me no longer. Look you Sir, I have Ready, Rhino, Cole,
Darby; look here Sir!


Belf. Iun. Dear brother, let me persuade you to go along with me.


Belf. Sen. You love me! and use my best Friends thus? never stir, I desire none
of your Company: I Will stick to my friends: I look upon what you have done as an
affront to me.


Hack. No doubt it is so.


Sham. That Is most certain; you are in the right, Cousin.


Cheat. We love you but too well, that angers him.


Belf. Iun. Well, I shall take my leave: You are in your Cups: You will wish
you had heard me. Rogues, I shall take a course with you.


Belf. Sen. Rogues! They scorn your words.


Belf. Iun. Fare you well.


Belf. Sen. Fare you well Sir, and you be at that sport.


Belf. Iun. Roger, do not discover him to my Father yet; I Will talk with him
cool in a morning first; perhaps I may redeem him.


Roger. I Will do as you will have me. Ex. Belf. Iun. Roger and 2 Foot.


Belf. Sen. So now we are free. Dear Friends, I never can be grateful enough:
But it is late, I must show my new Coach: Come Ladies. Exeunt.


Enter Attorney and Lucia. Attor. How now, Daughter Lucia, where have thou been?


Luc. I have been at Evening Prayers at St. Brides, and am going home through
the Temple.


Attor. Thou art my good Girl. Enter Mrs. Termagant.


Luc. Oh Heaven! Who Is here!


Attor. What Is the matter?


Luc. I am taken ill on the sudden: I Will run home.


Term. Stay, stay; thou wicked Author of my misfortune.


Attor. How Is this? Stay Lucia! What mean you Madam The Girl's strangely
disordered.


Luc. Oh Heaven! I am utterly ruined, beyond redemption.


Term. Is she your Daughter Sir.


Attor. She is.


Term. Then hear my story: I am contracted with all the solemnity that can be
to Mr. Belfond, the Merchants Son; and for this wicked Girl he has lately cast
me off: And this morning I went to his Lodging, to enquire a reason of his late
Carriage to me, I found there in his Closet this young shameless Creature, who
had been in Bed with him.


Attor. Oh Heaven and Earth! Is this true, Huswife?


Luc. Oh Lord I: I never saw the Gentleman nor her in my life: Oh she is a
Confident thing!


Term. May all the Judgments due to Perjury fall on me, if this be not true: I
tore her by the hair, and pomell'd her to some tune; till that inhumane Wretch
Belfond turned me out of doors, and sent her away in Chair.


Luc. O wicked Creature! Are you not afraid the Earth should open, and swallow
you up? As I hope to be saved I never saw her?


Term. Tho young in years, yet old in Impudence; did I not pursue thee since in
the street, till you run into Belfonds Arms just before his Fathers House? Or I
had marked thee for a young Whore.


Luc. As I hope to live Sir, it is all false: Every Word and Tittle of it: I
know not what she means.


Attor. Have I bestowed so much, and taken so much care in thy Education, to
have no other Fruit but this?


Luc. Oh Lord Sir! Why will you believe this wicked Woman?


Attor. No young Impudence! I believe you: What made you ready to Swoon at the
sight of this Lady, but your Guilt.


Luc. She mistakes me for some other, as she did to day when she pursued me to
have killed me; which made me tremble at the sight of her now.


Attor. And yet you never saw her before* I am convinced: Go, wicked Wretch, go
home: This News will kill thy Mother: I Will to my Chamber, and follow thee.


Luc. But if I ever see her, or you either, to be locked from my Dear ^e^fond:
I shall deserve whatever you can do to me. Exit.


Attor. Madam, I beseech you make as few words as you can of this.


Term. I had much rather for my own honor have concealed it. But I shall say
no more, provided you will keep her from him.


Attor. I warrant you Madam, I Will take a Course with her. Your Servant. Exit.


Enter Cheatly. Cheat. Madam, your most humble Servant: You see I am punctual
to my Word.


Term. You are Sir.


Cheat. Come Madam, your Lodging, Furniture, and every thing are ready, let us
loose no time: I Will wait on you thither, where we will Consult about our
Affairs.


Term. Come on: It is a rare design; and if it succeeds, I shall sufficiently
be revenged on my Ungrateful Devil.


Cheat. I Will warrant the Success. Exeunt.


Enter Isabella, and Teresia. Isab. We must be very careful of this Book: My
Uncle, or our Dame Governante will burn it if they find it.


Teres. We cannot have a pleasant, or a Witty Book, but they serve it so: My
Father loads us with Books, such as the Trial of Man, in the Isle of Man, or
Man-Shire: A Treatise on Sabbath Breakers: And Health out-drinking, or Life
out-healthing Wretches: A Caustic, or Corrosive, for a Seared Conscience.


Isab. A Sovereign Ointment for a Wounded Soul: A Cordial for a sick Sinner:
The Nothingness of good Works: Waxed Boot Grace, for the Sussex ways of
Affliction; and a deal of such stuff: But all Novels, Romances, or Poetry,
except Quarles and Withers, are an Abomination. Well, this is a Jewel, if we
can keep it. Enter Ruth behind them.

Anger in hasty Words or Blows,
It self discharges on our Foes;
And Sorrow too, finds some relief
In Tears, which wait upon our grief:
Thus every Passion, but fond Love,
Unto its own Redress does move.

Teres. It Is sweet Poerry: There is a pleasing Charm in all he writes. She
snatches the Book.


Ruth. Yea, there is a Charm of Satan's in it: It Is Vanity and Darkness, this
Book hates, and is contrary to the Light: and ye hate the light.


Isab. That Is much: And this Evening a little before Night, thou blamedst us
for looking out of the Window, and threatened to shut the Painted Shashes.


Teres. Now if thou shut'st those: Thou hate the Light, and not we.


Ruth. Look thee Teresia: Thou art wonton, and so is thy Cousin Isabella: Ye
seek Temptacion: You look out of the Casement to pick and cull young Men;
whereby to feed the Lust of the Eye: Ye may not do it. And look thee Isbel and
Teresia, if you open the Casements once more, I will place ye in the back
Rooms, and lock the Fore Rooms up.


Teres. We will obey thee, Ruth.


Isab. We will not resist thy power: But prithee leave us that Book.


Ruth. No, it is wanton and treats of Love: I will instantly commit it to the
Flames. Exit.


Isab. Shame on this old Wall-ey'd Hypocrite: She is the strictest sort of
Jailer.


Teres. We are as narrowly looked to, as if we had been clapped up for Treason,
we are kept from Books, Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Isab. Well, it is a most painful life to dissemble constantly.


Teres. It Is well we are often alone, to unbend to one another, one had as good
be a Player, and Act continually else.


Isab. I can never persuade my self, that Religion can consist in Scurvy out of
fashion Clothes, stiff constrained Behavior, and Sour Countenances.


Teres. A tristful Aspect, looking always upon ones Nose, with a Face full of
Spiritual Pride.


Isab. And when one walks abroad, not to turn ones Head to the right or left,
but hold it strait forward, like an Old blind Mare.


Teres. True Religion must make one cheerful, and affect one with the most
ravishing Joy which must appear in the Face too.


Isab. My good Mother had the Government, and brought me up to better things,
as thy good Aunt did thee.


Teres. But we can make no use of our Education under this Tyranny.


Isab. If we should Sing or Dance, 'twere worse than Murder.


Teres. But of all things: Why do they make such a stir to keep us from the
Conversation of Mankind: Sure there must be more in it, then we can imagine;
and that makes one have more mind to try.


Isab. Thou have been so unquiet in thy sleep of late, and so given to sigh,
and get alone when thou art awake: I fancy thou do imagine somewhat of it.


Teres. Ah Rogue, and I have observed the same in thee: Can thou not guess at
Love: Come, confess, and I Will tell all.


Isab. Sometimes in my Dreams, methinks I am in Love, then a certain Youth
comes to me; and I grow chill, and pant, and feel a little pain: But it is the
prettiest thing methinks: And then I wake and blush, and am afraid.


Teres. Very pretty: And when I am awake, when I see one Gentleman, methinks I
could look through him: And my Heart beats, beats like the Drums in the Camp.


Isab. I dare not ask who it is, for fear it should be my Man; for there are two
come often to our Church, that stare at us continually, and one of them is he.


Teres. I have observed 'em: One, who sat by us at Church, knew 'em by their
Names: I am for one of 'em too.


Isab. I will remember it.


Teres If it be any Man thou like, I Will kill thee.


Isab. And if thou love my Man, we must not live together.


Teres. Name him.


Isab. Do thou name first.


Teres. Let Us write their Names. They write their Papers and give 'em to one
another, at which they both speak together and start.


Isab. Agree: We each have a Black-Lead Pen.


Teres. Truman, Mercy on me!


Isab. Belfond, Oh Heaven's!


Teres. What Is this I see! Would I were blind.


Isab. Oh my Teresia!


Teres. Get thee from me.


Isab. It Is as it should be; I wrote the wrong Name, on purpose to discover who
was your Man more clearly; the other's my Beloved. Belfond's my Hearts delight.


Teres. Say thou so my Girl! good Wits-jump. I had the same thought with
thee. Now it is out, Truman for me; and methinks they keep such a staring at us,
if we contrive to meet 'em, we need not despair.


Isab. Nay, they come not for Devotion, that is certain; I see that in their
Eyes. Oh that they were ordained to free us from this odious Jail.


Enter Ruth, and Truman disguised. Ruth. Go into your Chamber; here is a Man
comes about business: Ye may not see him.


Teres. We go: Come Cousin.


Ruth. Come Friend: Let us retire also. Exeunt.


ACT. IV. SCENE I.
Belfond Junior, and Lucia. Luc. I Never more must see the Face of a Relation.


Belf. Iun. I warrant thee, my pretty Rogue, I Will put thee into that condition
the best of all thy kindred shall visit thee, and make their court to thee;
thou shall spark it in the Boxes, shine at the Park, and make all the young
fellows in the Town run mad for thee: Thou shall never want, while I have any
thing.


Luc. I could abandon all the World for thee; if I could think that thou
would love me always.


Belf. Iun. Thou have so kindly obliged me, I shall never cease to love thee.


Luc. Pray Heaven I do not repent of it: You were kind to Mrs. Termagant; and
sure it must be some barbarous usage, which thus provokes her now to all this
malice.


Belf. Iun. She was debauched by the most nauseous Coxcomb, the most silly Beau
and Shape about the Town; and had Cuckolded him with several before I had her:
She was indeed handsome, but the most froward, ill-natured Creature; always
murmuring or scolding, perpetually jealous and exceptious, ever thinking to
work her ends by Hectoring and Daring.


Luc. Indeed! Was she such a one? I am sure, you were the first that ever had
my Heart, and you shall be the last.


Belf. Iun. My Dear, I know I had thy Virgin Heart, and I Will preserve it. But
for her, her most diverting minutes were unpleasant: Yet for all her Malice
which you see, I still maintain her.


Luc. Ungrateful Creature! She is indeed a Fury. Should thou once take thy
Love from me, I never should use such ways: I silently should mourn and pine
away; but never think of once offending thee.


Belf. Iun. Thou art the prettiest, sweetest, softest Creature! And all the
tenderest Joys that wait on Love, are ever with thee.


Luc. Oh, this is Charming kindness! May all the joys on Earth be still with
thee.


Belf. Iun. aside. Now here is a mischief on the other side; For how can a good
natured man think of ever quitting so tender, and so kind a Mistress, whom no
respect, but Love has thrown into my Arms: And yet I must: But I will better
her condition. Oh, how does my Friend. Enter Truman.


Luc. Oh Lord! Who Is here?


Belf. Iun. My Dear, go to the Lodging I have prepared for thee; thou will be
safe, and I Will wait on thee soon. Who Is there? Enter Servants. Do you wait on
this Ladies Chair, you know whither.


True. Thou art a pretty fellow, Belfond, to take thy pleasure thus, and put thy
Friend upon the damnedst drudgery.


Belf. Iun. What drudgery? a little dissembling.


True. Why that were bad enough, to dissemble my self an Ass; but to dissemble
Love, nay Lust, is the most irksome task a man can undergo.


Belf. Iun. But prithee come to the point: in short, have we any hopes?


True. It Is done; the business is done: Whip on your habit; make no words.


Belf. Iun. I Will put it on in my Dressing Room. This News transports me.


True. If you had undergone what I have done, 'twould have humbled you: I have
enjoyed a Lady; but I had as lieve have had a Lancashire Witch, just after she
had alighted from a Broomstaff: I have been uncivil, and enjoyed the Governante
in most lewd dalliance.


Belf. Iun. Thou art a brave fellow, and make nothing of it.


True. Nothing? Sdeath, I had rather have stormed a Half Moon: I had more
pleasure at the Battle of Mons.


Belf. Iun. But have thou done our work as well as hers?


True. I have: For after the enjoyment of her person had led me into some
familiarity with her. I proposed, she accepted, for she is Covetous as well as
Amorous: and she has so far wrought for us, that we shall have an Interview
with our Mistresses; whom, she says, we shall find very inclinable; and she has
promised this night to deliver 'em into our hands.


Belf. Iun. Thou art a rare Friend to me, and to thy self. Now, Farewell all the
vanity of this lewd Town, at once I quit you all. Dear Rogue, let us in.


True. Come in, in, and dress in your Habit. Exeunt.


Enter Sir William, Sir Edward and Scrapeall. Scrapeall. Look ye Sir William, I
am glad you like my Niece: and I hope also, that she may look lovely in your
Sons Eyes.


Sir Edw. No doubt but he will be extremely taken with her: Indeed both she and
your Daughter are very Beautiful.


Sir Will. He like her! What Is matter whether he like her, or n^^ Is it not
enough for him, that I do? Is a Son, a Boy, a Jackanapes, to have a will of his
own? That were to have him be the Father, and I the Son. But indeed they are
both very handsome.


Scrapeall. Let me tell you both, Sir William, and Sir Edward, Beauty is but
Vanity, a mere nothing; but they have that which will not fade; they have Grace.


Sir Edw. They look like pretty spirited witty Girls. aside.


Scrapeall. I am sorry I must leave thee so soon: I thought to have bidden face
to dinner, but I am to pay down a sum of Money upon a Mortgage this afternoon:
Farewell.


Sir Will. Farewell Mr. Scrapeall.


Sir Edw. Pray meet my Brother at my House at Dinner.


Scrapeall. Thank you Sir Edward, I know not but I may.


Sir Edw. The person of this Girl is well chosen for your Son, if she were not
so precise and pure.


Sir Will. Prithee, what matter what she is, has not she Fifteen Thousand
Pounds clear?


Sir Edw. For a Husband to differ in Religion from a Wise.


Sir Will. What, with Fifteen Thousand Pound?


Sir Edw. A precise Wise will think her self so pure, she will be apt to
contemn her Husband.


Sir Will. Ay, but Fifteen Thousand Pound, brother.


Sir Edw. You know how intractable misguided Zeal and Spiritual Pride are.


Sir Will. What with Fifteen Thousand Pound!


Sir Edw. I would not willingly my Son should have her.


Sir Will. Not with Fifteen Thousand Pound?


Sir Edw. I see there is no Answer to be given to Fifteen Thousand Pound.


Sir Will. A Pox of this Godly-knave, it should have been Twenty.


Sir Edw. Nor would I buy a Wife for my Son.


Sir Will. Not if you could have her a good pennyworth: Your Son, quoth ye? He
is like to make a fine Husband. For all your precious Son --


Sir Edw. Again, Brother?


Sir Will. Look you, Brother, you fly out so: Pray, Brother, be not passionate;
passion drowns ones parts; let us calmly reason: I have fresh matter; have but
patience, and hear me speak.


Sir Edw. Well, Brother, go on; for I see I might as soon stop a Tide.


Sir Will. To be calm and patient; your Jewel, tho he denied that outrage in
Dorset-Court, yet he committed it, and was last night hurried before the Lord
Chief Justice for it.


Sir Edw. It cannot be, on my certain knowledge. I could convice him, but it is
not time. Aside


Sir Will. What a Devil, are all the World mistaken, but you?


Sir Edw. He was with me all the Evening.


Sir Will. Why, he got Bail immediately, and came to you. Ounds, I never saw
such a man in my life!


Sir Edw. I am assured of the contrary.


Sir Will. Death and Hell, you make me stark mad! You will send me to Bedlam:
You will not believe your own senses: I Will hold you a Thousand pound.


Sir Edw. Brother, remember passion drowns ones parts.


Sir Will. Well, I am tame, I am cool.


Sir Edw. I Will hold you a hundred; which is enough for one Brother to win of
another. Enter Attorney. And here is your own Attorney comes opportunely enough
to hold stakes. I Will bind it with ten.


Sir Will. Done.


Sir Edw. Why, I saw your man Roger, and he says, your Son found there a
Rascal, that went by his Name.


Attor. Oh, Sir William, I am undone, ruined, made a miserable man!


Sir Will. What Is the matter, man?


Attor. Tho you have been an exceeding good Clyent to me, I have reason to
Curse one of your Family that has ruined mine.


Sir Will. Pray explain your self.


Attor. Oh, Sir, your Wicked Son, your most Libidinous Son.


Sir Will. Look you, Brother, Do You hear? Do You hear? Do you Answer?


Attor. He Is Corrupted, Debauched my only Daughter, whom I had brought up with
all the care and charge I could, who was the Hopes, the Joy of all our Family.


Sir Will. Here Is a Son! Here Is a rare Son! Here Is a hopeful Son! And he were
mine, I Would lash him with a Dog-Whip: I Would cool his Courage.


Sir Edw. How do you know it is he?


Attor. I have a Witness of it, that saw her rise from his Bed the other Day
Morning; and last Night she ran away to him, and they have lain at a private
Lodging.


Sir Edw. Be well assured, ever you conclude; for there is a Rascal that has
taken my Son's Name, and has swagger'd in and about White-Fryars, with Cheatly,
and that Gang of Rogues, whom my Son will take a Course with.


Attor. Oh, Sir, I am too well assured: My Wife tears her Hair; and I, for my
part shall run distracted.


Sir Will. Oh, Wicked Rascal! Oh, my poor Tim! My dear Boy Tim! I think each
Day a Year, till I see thee.


Sir Edw. Sir, I am extremely sorry for this, if it be so; but let me beg of
you, play the part of a Wise Man; blaze not this Dishonor abroad, and you shall
have all the Reparation the case is capable of.


Sir Will. Reparation, for making his Daughter a Whore! What, a Pox, can he
give her her Maidenhead again?


Sir Edw. Money, which shall not be wanting, will stop that Witnesses Mouth: and
I will give your Daughter such a Fortune, that were what you believe true and
publicly known, she should live above Contempt, as the World goes now.


Attor. You speak like the worthy Gentleman the World thinks you; but there can
be no Salve for this Sore.


Sir Will. Why, you are enough to damn Forty Sons, if you had 'em; you
encourage 'em to Whore: You are fit to breed up youth!


Sir Edw. You are mad: But pray Sir, let me entreat you to go home, and I will
come and wait upon you; and we will consult how to make the best of this
misfortune, in which I assure you, I have a great share.


Attor. I will submit to your Wise Advice, Sir: My grief had had made me
forget; here is a Letter comes out of the Country for you. Ex. Attorney.


Sir Will. For me! It Is welcome: Now for News from my dear Boy! Now you shall
hear, Brother: He is a Son indeed.


Sir Edw. Yes, a very hopeful one: I will not undeceive him, till Ned has tried
once more to recover him. aside.


Sir Will. reads. On the tenth of this month, your Son, my young Master, about
two of the Clock in the Morning, rode out with his Man Lolpoop; and
notwithstanding all the search and enquiry we can make (Oh Heaven) he cannot be
found or heard of. He drops the Letter not able to hold it.


Sir Edw. How Is this?


Sir Will. Oh, my poor Boy! He is Robbed and Murdered, and buried in some
Ditch, or flung into some Pond. Oh, I shall never see thee more, dear Tim! The
Joy, and the Support of all my life! The only Comfort which I had on Earth:


Sir Edw. Have patience Brother; it is nothing but a little Ramble in your
Absence.


Sir Will. Oh, no; he durst not Ramble: He was the dutifullest Child! I shall
never see his face again: Look you, he goes on. We have searched and made
enquiry in three Adjacent Countries, and no Tidings can be heard of him. What
have I done, that Heaven should thus afflict me?


Sir Edw. What, if after all, this Son should be he that has made all this
noise in White-Friers, for which mine has been so blamed*


Sir Will. My Son, my Son play such Pranks? that is likely! One so strictly, so
soberly Educated! One that is Educated your way cannot do otherwise. Enter Roger.


Roger. Sir, Sir, Sir, mercy upon me, here is my young Masters Man Lolpoop,
coming along in the Streets with a Wench.


Enter Lolpoop leading Betty under the Arm. Sir Will. Oh Heaven! What say you?


Sir Edw. Now it works: Ha ha ha. To himself.


Betty. How now! What have Sir William lays hold on Lolpoop ere he or she sees
him. you to say to my Friend, my Dear?


Sir William and Lolpoop start, and stand amazed at one another; and after a
great pause, Sir William falls upon Lolpoop, beats the Whore, beats Roger,
strikes at his Brother, and lays about him like a mad man; the Rabble get all
about him. Sir Will. Sirrah, Rogue, Dog, Villain! Whore! and you Rogue, Rogue!
Confound the World! Oh that the World were all on fire!


Sir Edw. Brother, for shame be more temperate: Are you a mad man?


Sir Will. Plague of your dull Philosophy.


Sir Edw. The Rabble are gathered together about you.


Sir Will. Villain, Rogue, Dog, Toad, Serpent! Where Is my Son? Sirrah, you have
Robbed him, and murdered him.


He beats Lolpoop, who roars out Murder. Lolp. Hold, hold; your Son is alive,
and alive like: He Is in London.


Sir Will. What say you, Sirrah? In London? and is he well? Thanks be to Heaven
for that: Where is he Sirrah?


Lolp. He is in White-Fryers, with Mr. Cheatly, his Cousin Shamwell, and
Captain Hackum.


Sir William pauses, as amazed: Then beats him again. Sir Will. And you Rogue,
you damned Dog, would you suffer him to keep such Company, and commit such
villainous Actions?


Lolp. Hold, hold* hold, I pray you, Sir: I am but a Servant, how could I help
it, marry?


Sir Will. You could not help being with a Whore your self; Sirrah, Sirrah,
Sirrah. Here honest Mob, course this Whore to some purpose. A Whore, a Whore, a
Whore. She runs out, the Rabble run after, and tear her, crying, a Whore, a
Whore.


Sir Edw. This is wisely done! If they murder her, you will be hanged: I am in
Commission for Middlesex; I must see to appease them.


Sir Will. Sirrah, Rogue, bring me to my Son instantly, or I Will cut your
Throat. Exeunt.


Enter Isabella, Teresia, Ruth. Isab. Dear Ruth, thou do for ever oblige us.


Teres. And so much, that none but our own Mothers could ever do it more.


Ruth. Oblige your selves, and be not silly, coy, and (...)* Strike me when the
Iron's hot, I say. They have great Est^^^^, and are both Friends, I know both
their Families and Conditions. Enter Belfond Iun. and Truman. Here they are:
Welcome Friends.


True. How do thou?


Ruth. These are the Damsels, I will retire, and watch, lest the Old Man
surprise us. Ex. Ruth.


Belf. Iun. Look thee, Isabella, I come to confer with thee, in a matter which
concerns us both, if thou be'st free.


Isab. Friend, it is like I am.


True. And mine with thee is of the same nature.


Teres. Proceed.


Belf. Iun. Something within me whispereth, that we were made as helps for one
another.


Teres. They Act very well, Cousin.


Isab. For young beginners. Come, leave off your Canaanitish Dialect, and talk
like the Inhabiters of this World.


Teres. We are as errant Hypocrites as the best of you.


Isab. We were bred otherwise than you see, and are able to hear you talk like
Gentlemen.


Teres. You come to our Meeting like Sparks and Beaux, and I never could
perceive much Devotion in you.


Isab. It Is such a pain to dissemble, that I am resolved I Will never do it, but
when I must.


Belf. Iun. Dear Madam, I could wish all forms were laid aside betwixt us: But
in short, I am most infinitely in love with you, and must be for ever miserable
if I go without you.


Isab. A frank and hearty Declaration, which you make with so much confidence,
I warrant you have been used to it.


True. There is not a difficulty in the World which I would stop at to obtain
your Love, the only thing on Earth could make me happy.


Teres. And you are as much in earnest now, as you were when you came first to
us even now.


Isab. That Is well urged: Cannot you Gentlemen counterfeit Love, as well as
Religion?


Belf. Iun. Love is so natural, it cannot be affected.


True. To show you mine is so, take me at my word: I am ready to render on
discretion.


Teres. And was this the reason you frequented our Parish Church?


Belf. Iun. Could you think our business was to hear your Teacher spin out an
hour, over a Velvet Cushion?


Isab. Profane men! I warrant they came to Ogle.


True. Even so: Our Eyes might tell you what we came for.


Belf. Iun. In short, dear Madam, our opportunities are like to be so few, your
confinement being so close, that it is fit to make use of this; it is not your
Fortune which I aim at, my Uncle will make a settlement equal to it, were it
more; but it is your Charming person.


Isab. And you would have me a fine forward Lady, to love Extempore.


Belf. Iun. Madam, you have but few minutes to make use of, and therefore
should improve those few: Your Uncle has sold you for 5000 l. and for ought I
know, you have not this night good for your deliverance.


True. Consider, Ladies, if you had not better trust a couple of honest
Gentlemen, than an Old Man, that makes his market of you: For I can tell you,
you tho his own Daughter, are to be sold too.


Teres. But for all that, our consents are to be had.


Belf. Iun. You can look for nothing, but a more strict confinement, which must
follow your Refusal: Now, if you have the Courage to venture an Escape, we are
the Knights that will relieve you.


True. I have an Estate Madam, equal to your Fortune: But I have nothing can
deserve your Love: But I Will procure your freedom, then use it as you please.


Belf. Iun. If you are unwilling to trust us, you can trust your Governess,
whom you shall have with you.


Isab. And what would you and the World say of us for this?


Belf. Iun. We should Adore you: And I am apt to think the World would not
condemn your choice.


True. But I am sure, all the World will condemn your delay, in the condition
you are in. Enter Ruth.


Ruth. I see Mr. Scrapeall coming at the end of the Street: Begone, I Will bring
them to your Chamber in the Temple, this Evening. Have, have out at the
Backdoor.


Belf. Iun. This is most unfortunate.


True. Dear Madam, let me Seal my Vows.


Ruth. Go, go: begone, begone, Friends. Exeunt.


Enter Scrapeall, crosses the Stage; enter Mrs. Termagant and her Brother.
Term. You see, Brother, we have dogged Belfond, till we saw him enter the House
of this Scrivener with his Friend Truman, both in disguises; which, with what
we have heard even now, at the neighboring Alehouse, convinces me, that it is
he is to marry the rich Niece.


Bro. They say she is to be Married to the Son of Sir William Belfond, and that
Sir William gives a great sum of Money to her Uncle for her; by this it should
seem to be the Elder Son, and not our Enemy, who is disguised for her.


Term. If so, the Villain would not at full day go thither.


Bro. But it is in a disguise.


Term. With that, I suppose the Son pretends to be a Puritan too, or she would
not have him; it must be he. And if you will do as I directed you, I warrant
I Will break off his Match; and by that work an Exquisite piece of Revenge.


Bro. I am wholly at your dispose.


Term. Now is the time, the Door opens; pursue me with a drawn Dagger, with all
the seeming Fury imaginable, now as the Old Man comes out. Scrapeall passes
over the Stage.


Brother pursues her with a drawn Dagger, she runs and gets into the House, and
claps the Door after her. Enter within, Ruth, Teresia, Isabella, Termagant.
Bro. Where is the Jade? Deliver her to me, I Will cut her in piece meal: Deliver
her, I say. Well, you will not deliver her: I shall watch her.


Term. Oh, Oh! Where is the Murderer? Where is he? I die with fear, I die.


Ruth. Prithee, Woman, Comfort thy self, no Man shall hurt thee here. Take a
Sup of this Bottle. She pulls out a Silver Strong-Water Bottle.


Ter. Thou art safe.


Isab. We will defend thee here, as in a Castle. But what is the occasion of
this Man's fury?


Term. You are so generous, in giving me this Succor, and promising my
defense, that I am resolved not to conceal it from you: Though I must confess, I
have no reason to boast of it; but I hope your Charity will Interpret it as
well as you can on my side.


Ruth. Go on: Thou need'st not fear.


Term. Know then, I am a Gentlewoman, whose Parents dying when I was sixteen,
left me a moderate Fortune, yet able to maintain me like their Daughter. I
chose an Aunt my Guardian, one of those Jolly Widows who love Gaming, and have
great resort in the Evenings at their Houses.


Ruth. Good: Proceed.


Term. There it was my misfortune to be acquainted with a young Gentleman,
whose Face, Air, Mein, Shape, Wit, and Breeding not I alone, but the whole Town
Admires.


Ruth. Very good.


Term. By ^ll his Looks, his Gestures, and Addresses, he seemed in Love with
me: The Joy that I conceived at this, I wanted Cunning to conceal, but he must
needs perceive it flash in my Eyes, and kindle in my Face; he soon began to
court me in such sweet, such Charming Words, as would betray a more experienced
Heart than mine.


Ruth. Humh: Very well; she speaks notably.


Term. There was but little left for him to do, for I had done it all before
for him: He had a Friend within too ready to give up the Fort; yet I held out
as long as I could make defense.


Ruth. Good lack a day! Some Men have strange Charms, it is confessed.


Term. Yet I was safe by Solemn mutual Oaths, in private we were contracted: He
would have it private, because he feared to offend an Uncle, from whom he had
great expectance; but now came all my Misery.


Ruth. Alack, alack, I warrant he was false.


Term. False as a Crocodile: He watched the fatal Minute, and he found it, and
greedily seized upon me, when I trusted to his Honor and his Oaths; he still
swore on, that he would Marry me, and I Sinned on: In short, I had a Daughter
by him, now three years old, as true a Copy as ever Nature drew, Beauteous, and
Witty to a Miracle.


Ruth. Nay, Men are faithless, I can speak it.


Teres. Poor Lady; I am strangely concerned for her.


Isab. She was a Fool, to be caught in so common a Snare.


Term. From time to time he swore he would Marry me; though I must think I am
his Wife as much as any Priest can make me; but still he found Excuses about
his Uncle. I would have patiently waited till his Unkle's death, had he been
true; but he has thrown me off, abandoned me, without so much as a pretended
Crime.


Ruth. Alack, and well-a-day! It makes me weep.


Term. But it is for an Attorney's Daughter, whom he keeps, and now is fond of;
while he treats me with all contempt and hatred.


Isab. Though she was a Fool, yet he is a base inhuman Fellow.


Teres. To scorn and hate her, for her Love to him.


Term. By this means, my Dishonor, which had been yet concealed, became so
public, my Brother coming from the Wars of Hungary, has heard all, has this
day fought with the Author of my Misery, but was disarmed; and now by Accident
he spied me by your House, I having fled the place where I had lodged, for fear
of him; and here the Bloody Man would have killed me, for the dishonor done to
his Family, which never yet was blemished


Ruth. Get the Chief Justices Warrant, and bind him to the Peace.


Teres. She tells her story well.


Isab. It Is a very odd one; but she expresses it so sensibly, I cannot but
believe her.


Term. If they do not ask me who this is, I have told my Tale in vain. Now,
Ladies, I hope you have charity enough, to pardon the weakness of a poor Young
Woman, who suffers shame enough within.


Teres. We shall be glad to do you what kindness we can.


Term. Oh, had you seen this most bewitching person, so Beautiful, Witty, and
well bred, and full of most Gentleman-like Qualities, you would be the readier
to have Compassion on me.


Isab. Pray, who is it?


Term. Alas, it is no secret, it is Belfond, who calls Sir Edward Belfond
Father, but is his Nephew.


Isab. What do I hear? Was ever Woman so unfortunate as I, in her first Love.


Teres. It Is most unlucky.


Term. That is the Niece: I see 'twas he who was to Marry her.


Isab. But I am glad I have thus early heard it: I Will never see his face more.


Ruth. All this is false: He is a Pious man, and true Professor. This vile
Woman will break the Match off, and undo my hopes. aside.


Term. It Is as I thought. He is a Ranting Blade, a Royster of the Town. aside.


Ruth. Come you are an idle Woman, and belie him; begone out of the doors;
there is the back-way, you need not pretend fear of your Brother.


Term. I am obliged enough in the present defense you gave me: I intended not
to trouble you long; but Heaven can witness what I say is true.


Isab. Do you hear Cousin? it is most certain, I Will never see him.


Ruth. Go, wicked Woman, go, what evil Spirit sent thee hither? I say begone.


Term. I go. I care not what she says, it works where I would have it. Your
Servant Ladies. Exit.


Ruth. Go, go, thou wicked Slanderer.


Teres. See him but once, to hear what he can say in his Defense.


Isab. Yes, to hear him lie, as all the Sex will: Persuade me not; I am fixed.


Ruth. Look thee, Isabella.


Isab. I am resolved. Exit Isabella hastily.


Teres. Dear Ruth, thou dearest Friend, whom once we took for our most cruel
Gaolor, let us follow, and help me to convince her of her Error; but I am
resolved, if she be stubborn, t^ undo her self, she shall not ruin me: I will
escape.


Ruth, Let us persuade her. Exeunt.


Enter Belfond sen. and Hackum. Belf. sen. Captain, call all my Servants, why
don't they wait? Enter Margaret, and Mrs. Hackum with a Cawdle. O, my pure
Blowing, my convenient my Tackle!


Marg. How do thou, my Dear?


Mrs. Hack. I have brought you a Cawdle here; there is Amber-greese in it, it is
a rare refreshing, strengthening thing.


Belf. sen. What, adad, you take me for a Bridegroom; I scorn a Cawdle, give
me some Cherry brandy, I Will drink her Health in a Bumper: Do thee eat this,
Child.


Mrs. Hack. I have that at hand -- here, Sir. She fetches the Brandy.


Enter Captain Hack. and Servants. Belf. Sen. Come, my dear Natural, here is a
Bumper of Cherry-brandy to thy Health; but first let me kiss thee, my dear
Rogue.


Enter Sir William. Sir Will. Some Thunderbolt light on my Head; what is this I
see?


Belf. Sen. My Father!


Enter Cheatly and Shamwell. Sir Will. Hey, here is the whole Kennel of
Hell Hounds.


Cheat. Bear up to him, bow, wow.


Shamw. Do not flinch, bow, wow.


Belf. sen. Bow, wow, Bow, wow.


Sir Will. Most impudent abandoned Rascal; let me go, Let me come at him;
audacious Varlet, how durst thou look on me?


He endeavors to sly at his Son, Footmen hold him. Bell. sen. Go strike your
Dogs, and call them names, you have nothing to do with me, I am of full Age;
and I thank Heaven, am gotten loose from your Yoke, don't think to put upon me,
I Will be kept no longer like a Prigster, a silly Country Put, fit for nothing
but to be a Bubble, a Caravan, or so.


Sir Will. A most perfect downright Canting Rogue; am I not your Father,
Sirrah? Sirrah, am I not?


(...) sen. Yes, and Tenant for Life to my Estate in Tail, and I'^^ look to
you, that you commit no waste; what-a-Pox, did you think to Nose me for ever,
as the Saying is? I am not so dark (...), I am sharp, sharp as a Needle, I can
smoke now, as soon as another.


Sir Will. Let me come at him.


Cheat. So long as you forbear all Violence you are safe; but if you strike
here, we command the Friars, and we will raise the P^sse.


Sir Will. O Villain! thou notorious undoer of young Heirs: And thou pernicious
Wretch, thou art no part of me; have I from thy first swaddling nourished thee
and bred thee up with Care.


Belf. sen. Yes, with care to keep your Money from me, and breed me in the
greatest Ignorance, sit for your Slave, and not your Son; I had been finely
dark if I had staid at home.


Sir Will. Were you not Educated like a Gentleman?


Belf. sen. No like a Grasier or a Butcher; if I had staid in the Country, I
had never seen such a Nab, a rum Nab, such a Modish Porker, such spruce and
neat Accoutrements; here is a Tatle? here is a Famble, and here is the Cole, the
Ready, the Rhino, the Darby; I have a lusty Cod Old Prigg, I Would have thee know,
and am very Rhinocerical, here are Meggs and Smelts good store, Decus^s and
Georges, the Land is Entailed, and I will have my Snack of it while I am young,
adad, I will. Hah!


Sir Will. Some Mountain cover me, and hide my Shame for ever from the World;
did I not beget thee, Rogue?


Belf. sen. What know I whether you did or not? but 'twas not to use me like a
Slave, but I am sharp and smoaky, I had been purely Bred, had I been Ruled by
you, I should never have known these Worthy Ingenious Gentlemen, my dear
Friends, all this fine Language had been Heathen Greek to me, and I had never
been able to have cut a Sham or Banter while I had lived, a Dad; Odsookers, I
know my self, and will have nothing to do with you.


Sir William. I am astonished!


Belf. sen. Shall my younger Brother keep his Coach and Equipage, and shine
like a Spruce Prigg, and I be your Bailey in the Country? Hi, La Mar; bid my
Coach be ready at the Door; I Will make him know I am elder Brother, and I will
have the better Liveries, and I am resolved to manage my Natural, my pure
Blowing, my Convenient, my Peculiar, my Tackle, my Purest Pure, as the rest of
the young Gentlemen of the Town do.


Sir William, A most confirmed Alsatian Rogue! Aside. Thou most ungracious
Wretch to break from me, at such a time, when I had provided a Wife for you, a
Pretty Young Lady, with fifteen thousand Pound down, have settled a great
Jointure upon her, and a large Estate in Present on you, the Writings all
sealed, and nothing wanting but you, whom I had send for Post out of the
Country to marry her!


Belf. sen. Very likely, that you, who have cudgel'd me from my Cradle, and
made me your Slave, and grutch'd me a Crown in my Pocket, should do all this.


Cheat. Believe him not; there is not one Word of Truth in it.


Sham. This is a Trick to get you in his Power.


Sir Will. The Writings are all at my Attorney's in the Temple; you may go with
me, and see'm all; and, if you will comply, I Will pardon what is past and marry
you.


Belf. sen. No, no, I am sharp, as I told you, and smoaky; you shall not put
upon me, I understand your Shams; but to talk fairly, in all occurrences of
this nature, which either may, or may not be, according to the different
accidents which often intervene upon several opportunities, from whence we may
collect either Good or Bad, according to the nature of the things themselves;
and forasmuch as whether they be Good or Bad (...) only the Understanding, so
far ^orth as it employes (...)Now since all this is premised, Let us come to
the (...)


Sir Will. Prodigious Impudence! O Devil! I Will to my (...) Chief Justice, and
with his Tipstaff I Will do your Business, Rogues Dogs and Villains, I will. Exit
in (...).


Cheat. This was bravely carried on.


Sham. Most admirably.


Belf. sen. Ai, was it not? Don't I begin to Banter pretty well? ha!


Cheat. Rarely: But a Word in Private, my r^splendent (...)* You see your
Father resolves to put some Trick upon you; be beforehand with him, and marry
this Fortune I have prepared; loose not Time but see her, and treat with her,
if you like her, as soon as you can.


Belf. sen. You are in the right; let not my Blowing hear a Word; I Will to her
instantly.


Cheat. Shamwel and I Will go and prepare her for a Visit; you know the place.


Belf. sen. I do, come along. -- Exeunt.


Enter Cheatly, Shamwell, and Mrs. Termagant, in her fine (...). Cheat. Madam,
you must carry your self somewhat Stately, but Courteously, to the Bubble.


Sham. Somewhat reserv'dly, and yet so as to give him hopes.


Term. I warrant you, let me alone; and if I effect this business, you are the
best Friends; such Friends as I could never yet expect: 'Twill be an exquisite
Revenge.


Cheat. He comes! come Noble Esquire. Enter Belfond Senior. Madam, this is the
Gentleman whom I would recommend to your Ladyships favor, who is ambitious of
Kissing your Hand.


Belf. Sen. Yes, Madam, as Mr. Cheatly says, I am ambitious of Kissing your
Hand, and your Lip too, Madam; for I vow to gad, Madam, there is not a Person
in the World, Madam, has a greater honor for your Person: And, Madam, I assure
you I am a Person --


Term. My good Friend, Mr. Cheatly, with whom I entrust the Management of my
small Fortune --


Cheat. Small Fortune! nay it is a large one --


Term. He Is told me of your Family and Character: To your Name I am no
Stranger, nor to your Estate, though this is the first time I have had the
honor to see your Person.


Belf. Sen. Hold, good Madam, the Honor lies on my side; she is a rare Lady,
ten times handsomer than my Blowing: (And here is a Lodging and Furniture for a
Queen!) Madam, if your Ladyship please to accept of my Affection in an
Honorable way, you shall find I am no Putt, no Country Prigster, nor shall
ever want the Meggs, the Smelts, Decuses and Georges, the Ready, and the Rhino:
I am Rhinocerical.


Term. I want nothing Sir, Heaven be thanked.


Sham. Her worst Servants eat in Plate; and her Maids have all Silver
Chamber-pots.


Belf. Sen. Madam, I beg your pardon, I am somewhat Bowsie; I have been
drinking Bumpers and Facers till I am almost Clear: I have 3000 l. a year, and
2000 pounds-worth of Wood, which I can turn into Cole and Ready, and my Estate
never the worse; there is only the Encumbrance of an Old Fellow upon it, and I
shall break his heart suddenly.


Term. This is a weighty matter, and requires advice: nor is it a sudden work
to persuade my heart to Love. I have my Choice of Fortunes.


Belf. Sen. Very like Madam: But Mr. Cheatly and my Cousin Shamwell can tell
you that my Occasions require have, dee see! and therefore I desire you to
resolve as soon as conveniently you can. A noise of a Tumult without, and
Blowing of a Horn.


Cheat. What Is this I hear?


Sham. They are up in the Friars: Pray Heaven the Sheriffs Officers be not come.


Cheat. 'Slife, it is so; shift for your selves; Squire let me conduct you --
This is your wicked Father with Officers. Exit.


Cry without, The Tip staff, an Arrest, an Arrest; and the Horn blows. Enter
Sir William, Belfond, and a Tip-staff, with the Constable and his Watch men;
and against them the Posse of the Friars drawn up, Bankrupts hurrying to
escape. Sir Will. Are you mad to resist the Tip-staff, the King's Authority?
They cry out, An Arrest. Several flock to 'em with all sorts of Weapons. Women
with Fire-Forks, Spits, Paring-Shovels, etc.


Enter Cheatly, Shamwell, Belfond Sen. and Hackum. Cheat. We are too strong for
'em: Stand our ground.


Sir Will. We demand that same Squire, Cheatly, Shamwell, and Bully Hackum:
Deliver them up, and all the rest of you are safe.


Hack. Not a Man.


Sir Will. Nay then, have at you.


Tip-st. I charge you, in the Rabble beat the Constable and the rest into the
Temple. Tip-staff runs away. They take Sir William Prisoner. King's Name, all
to assist me.


Rabble. Fall on.


Cheat. Come on thou wicked Author of this Broil. You are our Prisoner.


Sir Will. Let me go, Rogue.


Sham. Now we have you in the Temple, we'll show you the ^ump first.


Sir Will. Dogs, Rogues, Villains.


Sham. To the Pump, to the Pump.


Hack. Pump him, Pump him.


Belf. Sen. Ay, Pump him, Pump him, Old Prigg.


Rabb. Pump, Pump, to the Pump; Huzza!


Enter Belfond Junior, Truman, and several Gentlemen, Porter of the Temple, and
Belfond 's Footmen. Belf. Jun. What Is the matter here?


Trum. The Rabble have caught a Bailiff.


Belf. Jun. Death and Hell, it is my Father; it is a Gentleman, my Father.
Gentlemen, I beseech you lend me your hands to his Rescue.


Trum. Come on, Rascals: Have All Draw, and fall upon the Rabble. Belfond Sen.
runs first away. The Templers beat 'em, and take Cheatly, Shamwell and Hackum
Prisoners. we caught you? We'll make you an Example.


Belf. Jun. Here! where are the Officers of the Temple? Porter, do you shut the
Gates into White Friars.


Port. I will, Sir.


Belf. Jun. Here Is a Guinea among ye. See these three Rogues well Pumpt, and
let 'em gothrough the whole Course.


Cheat. Hold, hold, I am a Gentleman.


Sham. I am your Cousin.


Hack. Hold, hold, Scoundrels, I am a Captain.


Belf. Jun. Away with 'em.


Sir Will. Away with 'em. Dear Son, I am infinitely obliged to you; I ask your
Pardon for all that I have said against you: I have wronged you.


Belf. Jun. Good Sir, reflect not on that; I am resolved, ^'er I have done, to
deserve your good Word.


Sir Will. 'Twas ill Fortune, we have missed my most ungracious Rebel, that
Monster of Villainy.


Belf. Jun. Let me alone with him Sir, upon my Honor I will deliver him safe
this Night. But now let us see the Execution.


Sir Will. Dear N^d, you bring Tears into my Eyes. Let me Embrace thee, my only
Comfort now.


Belf. Jun. Good Sir, let us on and see the Justice of this place.


Exeunt. ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Cheatly, Shamwell, Hackum. Cheat. O Unmerciful Dogs! Were ever Gentlemen
used thus before? I am drencht into a Quartan Ague.


Sham. My Limbs are stiff and numbed all over: But where I am beaten and
bruised, there I have some Sense left.


Hack. Dry Blows I could have borne magnanimously; but to be made such a Sop of
-- Besides, I have had the worst of it, by wearing my own Hair; to be Shaved
all on one side, and with a Lather made of Channel-dirt, instead of a
Wash-ball: I have lost half the best Head of Hair in the Friars; and a Whisker,
worth Fifty Pound in its Intrinsic Value to a Commander.


Cheat. Indeed your Magnanimous Phyz is somewhat disfigured by it, Captain.


Sham. Your Military Countenance has lost much of its Ornament.


Hack. I am as diconsolate as a Be that has lost his Sting; the other Moity of
Whisker must follow: Then all the terror of my Face is gone; that Face that
used to fright young Priggs into Submission. I shall now look but like an
Ordinary Man.


Cheat. We'll swinge those Rogues with Indictments for a Riot, and with Actions
Sans Nombre.


Sham. What Reparation will that be? I am a Gentleman, and can never show my
face amongst my Kindred more.


Cheat. We that can show our Faces after what we have done, may well show 'em
after what we have suffered. Great Souls are above Ordinances, and never can be
Slaves to Fame.


Hack. My Honor is tender, and this one Affront will cost me at least five
Murders.


Cheat. Let Us not prate and shiver in cold Fits here, but call your Wife with
the Cherry-Brandy, and let us ask after the Squire* If they have taken him, it is
the worst part of the Story.


Hack. No, I saw the Squire run into the Friars at first. But I Will go fetch
some Cherry-Brandy, Steps in for Brandy. and that will comfort us.

Here Is the Bottle, lets drink by Word of Mouth. Drinks.


Cheat. Your Cherry-Brandy is most sovereingn Cheatly drinks. and edifying.


Sham. Most exceeding comfortable after Drinks. our Temple Pickling.


Cheat. A Fish has a damned life on it: I shall have that Aversion to Water,
after this -- that I shall scarce ever be cleanly enough to wash my Face again.


Hack. Well! I Will to the Barbers and get my self Shaved; then go to the Squire
and be new Accouter'd. Exit Hack.


Cheat. Dear Shamwell, we must not for a little Affliction, forget our main
Business; our Caravan must be well manag,d: He is now drunk, and when he wakes,
will be very fit to be Married. Mrs. Termagant has given us a Judgment of 2000
l. upon that condition.


Sham. The sooner we dispose of him, the better; for All his Kindred are bent
to retrieve him; and the Temple joining in the War against us, will go near to
be too hard for us; so that we must make what we can of him immediately.


Cheat. If he should be once Cool, or Irresolute, we have lost him, and all our
hopes; but when we have sufficiently dipped him, as we shall by this Marriage and
her Judgment, he is our own for ever.


Sham. But what shall we do for our White-Friers Chaplain, our Alsatian Divine?
I was in search of him before our late Misfortune, and the Rogue is hol'd
somewhere, I could not find him, and we are undone without him.


Cheat. It Is true; pray go instantly and find him out; he dares not stir out of
this Covert; beat it well all over for him, you will (...) him tappes'd in some
Alehouse, Bawdy House, or (...) shop.


Sham. He Is a brave swinging Orthodox, and will Marry any (...) at any time; he
desies License, and Canonical Hours, and all those foolish Ceremonies.


Cheat. Pr^ithe look after him, while I go to prepare the Lady.


Sham. You Rogue, Cheatly, you have a loving Design upon her; you will go to
twelve with the Squire: If you do, will have my snack.


Cheat. Go, go, you are a wag. Exeunt severally.


Enter Ruth, Belfond Junior and Truman at Scrapeall 's house. Ruth. She told
her Tale so passionately, that Isabella believes every word of it; and is
resolved, as she says, never to see thee more.


Belf. Iun. Oh, this most malicious, and most infamous of her Sex; there is not
the least truth in her Accusation.


True. That to my knowledge, he is not a Man of those Principles.


Ruth. I will send them to you, if I can; and in the mean time, be upon the
Watch.


True. Take this Writing with thee; which is a Bond from us, to make good our
Agreement with thee.


Ruth. It Is well, and still I doubt not to perform my part. Ex.


Belf. Iun. Was ever man plagued with a Wench like me? Well, say what they
will, the life of a Whore-Master is a foolish, restless, anxious life; and
there is an end of it. What can be done with this malicious Devil? A Man cannot
offer violence to a Woman.


True. Steal away her Child, and then you may awe her.


Belf. Iun. I have Emissaries abroad, to find out the Child; but she will
Sacrifice that, and all the World, to her Revenge.


True. You must Arrest her upon a Swinging Action, which she cannot get Bail
for, and keep her till she is humbled. Enter Teresia. Madam, I kiss your hands.


Teres. You have done well, Mr. Belfond: Here has been a Lady, whom you have
had a Child by, were Contracted to, and have deserted, for an Attorny's
Daughter which you keep; my Cousin says she will never see you more.


Belf. Iun. If this be true, Madam, I deserve never to see her more; which
would be worse than Death to me.


Teres. I have prevailed with her once more to see you, and hear what you can
say to this: Come, come, Cousin. She Leads in Isab. Look you, Cousin, Mr.
Belfond denies all this matter.


Isab. I never doubted that: but certainly it is impossible to counterfeit so
lively as she did.


Belf. Iun. Heaven is my Witness that her Accusation is false: I never was yet
contracted to any Woman, nor made the least promise, or gave any one the least
hope of it; and if I do not demonstrate my innocence to you, I will be content
for ever to be debarred the sight of you, more prized by me than Liberty, or
Life.


Isab. And yet perhaps these very words were said to her.


True. Madam, you have not time, if you value your own Liberty; to Argue any
longer: We will carry you to Sir Edward Belfonds, his Sister is his
Housekeeper, and there you may be entertained with safety of your Honor.


Teres. He is esteemed a Worthy Gentleman; nor could we choose a better Guardian.


Isab. At least, how could you use a Woman ill, you had a Child by.


Belf. Iun. Not all the malice of Mankind can equal hers. I have been frail, I
must confess, as others; and though I have provided for her and her Child, yet
every day she does me all the most outrageous mischief she can possibly
conceive; but this has touched me in the tender'st point.


Isab. 'Twould be much for my honor, to put myself into the hands of a known
Wencher.


Belf. Iun. Into the hands of one, who has abandoned all the thoughts of Vice
and Folly for you.


True. Besides, Madam, you neither of you trust us; your Governess is with you,
and yet we are ready to make good our words by the Assistance of a Parson.


Teres. That Is another point: But I am sure, Cousin, there is no dallying about
our Liberty: If you be in Love with your Jayl, stay; I, for my part, am
resolved to go.


Belf. Iu. My Unkle's a virtuous honorable Man; my Aunt, his Sister, a Lady of
great Piety: think if you will not be safer there, than with your Uncle, by
whom you are sold for 5000 l. to my knowledge, to one who is the most debauched
dissolute Fellow this day in London.


Teres. Liberty, liberty, I say; I Will trust my self, and my Governess. Enter
Ruth.


Ruth. Haste, and agree: Your Father has sent to have Supper ready in less than
half an hour.


Teres. Away, away; I am ready; Cousin, farewell.


Belf. Iun. For Heavens sake, Madam, on my knees I beg you to make use of this
occasion, or you have lost your self; and I too shall for ever lose you for
Marriage; which alone can keep me from being the most miserable: you may
advise, and all things shall be cleared up to your wish.


Teres. Fare^el, Dear Cousin: let us kiss at parting.


Isab. Sure thou have not the Conscience; thou will not leave me*


Teres. By my troth but I will.


Isab. By my troth but you shall not; for I Will go with thee.


Belf. Iun. May all the joys of Life for ever wait on you.


Ruth. Haste! haste! begone -- Exeunt.


Enter Sir William Belfond. Sir Will. That I should live to this unhappy Age!
to see the fruit of all my hopes thus blasted: How long, like Chemists have I
watched and toiled; and in the minute when I expected to have seen Projection,
all is slown up in Fumo.

Enter Sir Edward. Brother! I am ashamed to look on you, my disappointment is
so great. Oh this most wicked Recreant! this perverse and infamous Son.


Sir Edw. Brother, a Wise man is never disappointed. Man's life is like a Game
at Tables; if at any time the Cast you most shall need does not come up: let
that which comes instead of it be mended by your play.


Sir Will. How different have been our Fates? I left the pleasures of the Town,
to Marry, which was no small Bondage, had Children, which brought more care
upon me: For their sakes I lived a rustic, painful, hard, severe, and
melancholy Life: Morose, Inhospitable, sparing even Necessaries; Tenaceous,
even to griping, for their good: My Neighbors shunned me, my Friends neglected
me, my Children hate me, and wish my Death: Nay, this wicked Son in whom I had
set up my rest, and principally for whose good I thus had lived, has now
defeated all my hopes.


Sir Edw. 'Twas your own choice: you would not learn from others.


Sir Will. You have lived ever at ease, indulged all Pleasures, and melted down
your time in daily Feasts, and in continual Revels: Gentle, Complaisant,
Assable, and Liberal, at great expense: The World speaks well of you; Mankind
embrace you; your Son Loves you, and wishes your Life as much as he can do his
own. But I Will perplex my self no more: I Look upon this Rascal as an Excrement,
a Wen, or Grangren'd Limb, lop't off.


Sir Edw. Rather look on him as a Dislocated one, and get him Set again: By
this time you see, Severity will do nothing, entice him back to you by Love. In
short, give him his Liberty, and a good allowance: There now remains no other
way to reclaim him; for like a Stone-horse broke in among the Mares, no Fence
hereafter will contain him.


Sir Will. Brother, I look upon you as a true Friend, that would not insult
upon my Folly and Presumption, and confess you are nearer to the right than I:
Your Son I hope will be a Comfort to me.


Sir Edw. I doubt it not; but consider, if you do not reconcile your self, and
reclaim yours, as I tell you, you Lop off the Paternal Estate, which is all
Entailed forever from your Family: For, in the Course he is, the Reversion will
be gone in your Life time.


Enter Belfond Jun. Truman, Isabella, Teresia, and Ruth. Belf. Iun. Here are my
Father and my Uncle: Mask your selves, Ladies; you must not yet discover who
you are.


Sir Edw. Yonder Is Ned, and his Friend, with Ladies Masked: Who should they be.


Sir Will. Whores, Whores, what should they be else? Here Is a Comfortable sight
again! He is incorrigible.


Sir Edw. It Is you that are incorrigible: How ready are you with your Censures!


Belf. Iun. Sir, pardon the freedom I use with you; I humbly desire protection
for these Ladies in your House: They are Women of Honor, I do assure you, and
desire to be Concealed for some small time; an Hour hence I will discover all
to you, and you will than approve of what I do.


Sir Edw. Dear Ned, I will trust thy Honor; and without any Examination, do as
you would have me.


Sir Will. Why, Brother, what a Pox, will you Pimp for your Son? What a Devil,
will you make your House a Bawdy House?


Sir Edw. What, will the Must never be gotten out of your old Vessel? Ladies,
be pleased to Honor my House; and be assured, that while you are there, it is
yours. He waits on the Ladies, and Ruth.


Belf. Iun. Sir, my Friend and I are just now going to do you Service: I Will
pawn my Life to you, Sir, I will retrieve your Rebel Son, and immediately
restore him to you, and bring him, as he ought to come, on's Knees, with a full
Submission.


Sir Will. You will oblige me: Thou gain'st upon me hourly, and I begin to love
thee more and more.


Belf. Iun. There Is nothing in the World I aim at now but your Love; and I will
be bold to say, I shortly will deserve it: But this Business requires haste,
for I have laid every thing ^^ady; it is almost Bed time; come Friend. Ex. with
Truman.


Sir Will. Well, I Will say that for him, he is a good Natured Boy; it makes me
weep, to think how harsh I have been to him. I Will in to my Brother, and expect
the Event. Exit.


Enter Belfond Senior, Shamwell, and Hackum. Cheat. I value not misfortune, so
as I have my dear Friend still within my Arms.


Sham. My dear, dear Cousin! I will hug thee close to me; I feared to have lost
thee.


Belf. Sen. How happy am I in the truest, the dearest Friends that ever Man
enjoyed! Well, I was so afflicted for you, I was forced to make my self
Devilish Bowsie to comfort me.


Cheat. Your Brother has heard of this great Match you are toward: She has to
my knowledge, (for I do all her Law-Business for her) 1500 l. a year Jointure,
and Ten Thousand pound in Plate, Money, and Jewels; and this damned Envious
Brother of yours will break it off, if you make not haste and prevent him.


Belf. Sen. My dear Friends, you are in the right: Never Man met with such
before. I Will disappoint the Rogue my Brother, and the old Prig my Father; adad,
Ill do it instantly.


Cheat. Come, Squire, haste: Captain, do you follow us. Exeunt.


Scene Changes to Mrs. Termagants sine Lodgings. Enter Belfond Senior, Cheatly,
Shamwell, Hackum, Parson; Mrs. Termagant and her Servants. Cheat. Madam, the
time admits of no longer deliberation* If you take not this opportunity, my
Friend here will be ravished from us.


Belf. Sen. Ay, Madam, if you take me not now, you will lose me Madam, you will
consider what you do.


Term. Well, Mr. Cheatly, you dispose of me as you please: I have ever been
guided by your wise advice.


Sham. Come, Parson, do your Office; have you your Book about ye?


Pars. What, do you think I am without the Tools of my Trade?


Cheat. Cannot you come presently to the joining of hands, and leave out the
rest of the Formalities.


Pars. Ay, ay: Come, stand forth. Belf. Sen. and Mrs. Termagant stand forth.


Enter Belf. Iun. Truman, Constable, Sergeant, Musketeers. Belf. Iun. Here they
are: Seize them all.


Cheat. Hell and Damnation! We are all undone.


Belf. Sen. Hands off; let me alone: I am going to be Married. You envious
Rascal to come just in the nick.


Belf. Iun. Brother, be satisfied, there is nothing but Honor meant to you:
it is for your Service.


Term. Oh this accursed Wretch, to come in this unlucky minute, and ruin all my
Fortune.


Belf. Sen. She has fifteen hundred a year Jointure, and ten thousand pound in
Money, etc. and I had been Married to her in 3 minutes.


Belf. Iun. You have escaped the worst of Ruins: Resist not, for if you do, you
shall be carried by Head and Heels. Your Father will receive you, and be kind,
and give you as good an Allowance as ever I had.


Sham. Where Is your Warrant?


Constable. It Is here, from my Lord Chief Justice.


Belf. Iun. Let me see your Bride that was to be. Oh Mrs. Termagant! Oh Horror!
Horror! What a ruin have you escaped? This was my Mistress, and still maintained
by me: I have a Child by her 3 years old.


Term. Impudent Villain! How dare you lie so basely?


Belf. Iun. By Heaven it is true.


Term. I never saw him in my life before.


Belf. Iun. Yes, often, to my Plague. Brother, if I do not prove this, to you,
believe me not in ought I e're shall say.


Termagant goes to stab at Belfond Iun. Truman lays hold on her. True. Belfond,
look to your self.


Belf. Iun. Ha! Disarm her. This is another show of her good Nature. Brother,
give me your hand, I Will wait on you; and you will thank me for your deliverance.


True. I am assured you will: You are delivered from the most infamous, and
destructive Villains, that ever yet took Sanctuary here.


Belf. Iun. And from two mischiefs you must have for ever sunk under, Incest
and Beggary. Those three are only in the Warrant with my Brother; him I Will wait
upon, bring you the Rest. Hey! the cry is up; but we are provided. A great
noise in the Streets, and the Horn Blowing; an Arrest, an Arrest*


Cheat. Undone, undone, all is lost!


Sham. Ruined; for ever lost!


Hack. I am surpised, and cannot sight my way through.


Belf. Sen. What, are all these Rogues? and that a Whore^ and am I cheated!


Belf. Iun. Even so; come along; make ready Musketeers.


Belf. Iun. Do you take care of my Brother, and conduct him with the rest to my
Unkles House: I must go before, and carry my little Mistress, to make up the
business with her Father.


True. I Will do it, I warrant you.


Sergeant. We are ready. Exeunt all but Mrs. Termagant.


Term. Oh Vile Misfortune! had he but staid six minutes, I had Crowned all my
Revenge with one brave Act, in Marrying of his Brother. Well, I have one piece
of Vengeance, which I will Execute, or perish: Besides I Will have his Blood, and
then I Will dye contented.


Scene the Street. Enter Belfond Junior, Cheatly, Shamwell, Hackum, Truman,
Constable, Sergeant, Guards. True. What do all these Rabble here?


Constable. Fire amongst 'em.


Serj. Present. The Debtors run up and down, some with^^^ their Breeches,
others without their Coats; some out of (...) conies; some crying out, Oars,
Oars, Sculler, five pound for a Boat, ten pound for a Boat, twenty pound for a
(...). The Inhabitants all come out armed as before; but as soon as they see
the Musketeers they run, and every one shifts for himself.


True. Hey how they run! Exeunt.


Enter in Sir Edward's House, Sir Edward Belfond, and Attorney. Sir Edw. This is
the time I appointed my Son to bring your Daughter hither: The Witness is a
most malicious lying Wench, and can never have credit. Besides, you know an
Action will sufficiently stop her Mouth; for, were it true, she can never prove
what she says.


Attor. You say right, Sir: next to her being innocent, is the concealing of
her shame.


Enter Belfond Jun. and Lucia. Luc. And can I live to hear my fatal Sentence of
parting with you? Hold Heart a little.


Belf. Iun. It is with some Convulsions I am torn from you; but I must Marry, I
cannot help it.


Luc. And must I never see you more?


Belf. Iun. As a Lover, never; but your Friend I Will be while I have Breath.


Luc. to her self. Heart, do not swell so. This has awakned me, and made me see
my Crime: Oh, that it had been sooner!


Belf. Iun. Sir, I beg a thousand pardons, that I should attempt to injure your
Family, for it has gone no farther yet: For any Fact, she is innocent; but 'twas
no thanks to me, I am not so. (If a Lie be ever lawful, it is in this case.)
aside.


Sir Edw. Come, pretty Lady, let me present you to your Father: Though as my Son
says, she is innocent; yet, because his Love had gone so far, I present her with
1500 l. my Son and you shall be Trustees for her: To Morrow you shall have the
Money.


Belf. Iun. You are the best of all Mankind.


Attor. All the World speaks your Praises justly.


Luc. A thousand Thanks, Sir, for your Bounty: And if my Father please to
pardon me this slip, in which I was so far from fact, that I had scarce
intention: I will hereafter outlive the strictest Nun.


Attor. Rise: I do pardon you.


Sir Edw. That Is well: And if they be not kind to you, appeal to me. It will be
fit for you to go from hence with the least notice that can be: To Morrow I Will
bring the Money. Who are the Ladies you have entrusted me with, Ned? Ex. Attor.
and Luc.


Belf. Iun. Scrapealls Neice and Daughter! The Neice my Father, was to give
5000 l. for, for his Son: If you will give me leave, I shall Marry her for
nothing; and the other will take my Friend --


Sir Edw. How Ned! She Is a Puritan?


Belf. Iun. No more than you, Sir: She was bred otherwise, but was fain to
comply for peace; she is Beautiful, and Witty to a Miracle; and I beg your
consent, for I will die before I Marry without it.


Sir Edw. Dear Ned, thou have it; but what have thou done with the Alsatians?


Belf. Iun. I have the Rogues in Custody, and my Brother too; whom I Rescued in
the very Minute he was going to be Married to a Whore, to my Whore who plagues
me continually. I see my Father coming, pray prepare him, while I prepare my
Brother for a meeting with him; he shall not see me. Exit.


Enter Sir William Belfond. Sir Will. Your Servant Brother: No News of Ned yet?


Sir Edw. Oh, yes; he has your Son, and the three Rogues in Custody, and will
bring 'em hither: Brother, pray resolve not to lose a Son* but use him kindly,
and forgive him.


Sir Will. I will, Brother: And let him spend what he will, I Will come up to
London Feast and Revel, and never take a Minutes care while breath again.


Enter a Servant to Sir Edward. Servant. Sir, a young Gentleman would speak
with you.


Sir Edw. Bid him come in.


Enter Mrs. Termagant in Man's Clothes. Term. If you be Sir Edward Belfond, I
come to tell you, what concerns your Honor, and my Love.


Sir Edw. I am he.


Term. Know then, Sir, I am informed your Brother, Sir William Belfond's Son,
is to Marry Isabella the Niece of Mr. Scrapeall.


Sir Edw. What then Sir?


Term. Then he invades my right, I have been many Months Contracted to her, and
as you are a Man of Honor, I must tell you, we have sealed that Contract with
Mutual Enjoyments.


Sir Will. How! What was my Son to Marry a Whore? I Will to this Damned Fellow
instantly, and make him give up my Articles.


Sir Edw. Have patience; be not too rash.


Sir Will. Patience! What, to have my Son Marry a Whore.


Sir Edw. Look you Brother, you must stay a moment.


Enter Belfond Jun. Sir Will. Oh, Ned, your Brother has escaped a fine Match:
This same Isabella is Contracted to, and has been Enjoyed, by this Gentleman,
as he calls it: He had like to have Married a Whore.


Belf. Iun. Yes, that he had; but I will cut the Throat of him that affirms
that of Isabella.


Term. Sir, I demand the protection of your House.


Sir Edw. Hold, Son.


Term. What Devil sent him hither at this time? aside.


Belf. Iun. I Will bring 'em to Confront this Rogue, what a Devil's this? Have we
another Brother of that Devil Termagant's here? Exit.


Sir Edw. This is a very odd Story.


Sir Will. Let me go, Brother; it is true enough. But what makes Ned concerned?


Sir Edw. Let us examine yet farther.


Enter Belfond Jun. with Isabella, Teresia, and Ruth, and Truman. Sir Will.
Look, here they are all: How the Devil comes this about?


Term. O Madam, are you here! I claim your Contract, which I suppose, will not
offend you.


Isab. What means this Impudent Fellow? I never saw his Face before.


Term. Yes Madam, you have seen, and more than seen me often since we were
Contracted.


Isab. What Instrument of Villainy is this?


Term. Nay, if you deny: Friends come in. Enter two Alsatian Affidavit Men.
Friends, do you know this Gentlewoman.


1. Witness. Yes, she is Mr. Scrapeall's Niece.


2. Witness. We were both Witnesses to a Contract of Marriage between you too.


Isab. Oh Impious Wretches! What Conspiracy is this!


Sir Will. Can any thing be more plain? They seem Civil, Grave, Substantial Men.


Belf. Iun. Hold, hold, have I found ye? It Is she, it could be no other Devil
but her self. He pulls off her Peruke.


Sir William. A Woman!


Sir Edw. Secure those Witnesses.


Belf. Iun. A Woman! No: She has out-sinn'd her Sex, and is a Devil. Oh Devil,
most complete Devil! This is the Lady I have been so much of late obliged to.


Isab. This is she that told us the fine Story to day.


Teres. I know her Face again: Most Infamous Lying Creature!


Term. I am become desperate: Have at thee.


She snaps a Pistol at Belfond, which only flashes in the Pan, the Ladies
shriek. Belf. Iun. Thank you Madam: Are not you a Devil? 'Twas laden, 'twas
well meant truly. Takes the Pistol from her.


Sir Edw. Lay hold on her: I Will send her to a place where she shall be tamed, I
never yet heard of such malice:


Sir Will. Dear Ned, thou have so obliged me; thou melt'st my Heart: That thou
shoud'st steal away those Ladies, and save me 5000 l. Now, I hope, Madam, my
Son Tim shall be your Husband without Bargain and Sale.


Isab. No: I can assure you, Sir, I would never have performed that Bargain of
my Unkles: We had determined to dispose of our selves before that; and now are
more resolved.


Teres. We have broken Prison, by the help of these Gentlemen, and I think we
must even take the Authors of our Liberty.


Isab. Will not that be a little hard, Cousin, to take their Liberty from them,
who have given it to us?


Sir Will. Well, I am disappointed; but cannot blame thee, Ned. Truman goes to
Teresia.


Enter Belfond Sen. Sir Edw. Your Son: Pray use him kindly.


Belf. Sen. I have been Betrayed, Cheated, and Abused: Upon my Knees I beg your
Pardon, and never will offend you more; adad, I will not: I thought they had
been the honestest, the Finest Gentlemen in England; and it seems they are
Rogues, Cheats, and Blockheads.


Sir Will. Rise Tim, I prosess thou make me weep, thou has subdued me; I
forgive thee, I see all Human Care is vain, I will allow thee 500 l. a year,
and come, and live with Ease and Pleasure here: I Will Feast, and Revel, and wear
my self with pain and care no more.


Belf. Sen. A thousand Thanks: I Will never displease you while I live again; adad
I wont. Here Is an Alteration: I never had good word from him before.


Sir Will. I would have Married you to that pretty Lady: But your Brother has
been too hard for you.


Belf. Sen. She Is very pretty: But it is no matter. I am in no such haste, but I
can stay and see the World first.


Sir Edw. Welcome dear Nephew, to my House and me: And now my dear Son be free,
and before all this Company let me know all the Encumbrances you have upon you.


Belf. Iun. That good natured Lady is the only one that is heavy upon me, I have
her Child in my possession, which she says, is mine.


Term. Has he my Child; then I am undone for ever -- Oh cursed misfortune!


Sir Edw. Look you Madam, I will settle an Annuity of 100 l. a year, upon you
so long as you shall not disturb my Son: And for your Child I Will breed her up
and provide for her like a Gentlewoman: But if you are not quiet you shall
never see her more.


Term. You speak like a Noble Gentleman: I Will strive to compose my self. I am
at last subdued, but will not stay to see the Triumphs -- Ex. hastily.


Sir Edw. Well, dear Ned, do owe any Money?


Belf. Iun. No, my dear Father, no: You have been too bountiful for that: I
have five hundred Guineas in my Cabinet.


Sir Edw. Now Madam, if you please to accept him for a Husband, I will settle
Fifteen Hundred Pound a Year on him in present, which shall be your Jointure.
Besides that, your own money shall be laid out in Land and settled on you too.
And at my Death the rest of my Estate.


Isab. You do me too much Honor, you much out-bid my Value.


Belf. Iun. You best of Fathers, and of all Mankind, I throw my self thus at
your Feet; let me embrace your knees, and kiss those hands.


Sir Edw. Come rise, and kiss these hands.


Belf. Iun. A long farewell to all the Vanity and Lewdness of Youth: I offer my
self at your feet as a Sacrifice without a blemish now!


Isab. Rise, I beseech you, rise.


Teres. Your offers, Sir, are better much than I could expect or can deserve.


True. That Is impossible: the Wealth of both the Indies could not buy you from
me I am sure


Ruth. Come, come, I have been Governess, I know their minds. Come give your
hands where you have given your hearts. Here Friend Truman: first take this.


Teres. My Governess will have it so.


Sir Edw. Joy Sir, be ever with you: Please to make my House your own.


Isab. How can I be secure you will not fall to your old courses again?


Belf. Iun. I have been so sincere in my Confessions, you may trust me; but I
call Heaven to witness, I will hereafter be entirely yours. I look on Marriage
as the most solemn Vow a man can make; and it is by consequence, the basest
Perjury to break it.


Ruth. Come, come, I know your mind too: take him, take him.


Isab. If Fate will have it so.


Belf. Iun. Let me receive this blessing on my knees.


Isab. You are very devout of late.


Sir. Edw. A thousand blessings on you both.


Sir Will. Perpetual happiness attend you both.


Belf. Sen. Brother and Madam! I wish you Joy from my heart, adad I do: Though
between you and I Brother, I intend to have my swing at Whoring, and Drinking,
as you had, before I come to it tho.


Sir Edw. Here! bring in these Rogues! The Constable brings in Cheatly,
Shamwell and Hackum. Come Rascals, I shall take a care to see examples made of
you.


Cheat. We have substantial Bail.


Sir Edw. I Will see it shall be substantial Bail: it is my Lord Chief Justices
Warrant, returnable to none but him: but I will prosecute you, I assure you.


Cheat. Squire, dear Squire.


Hack. Good noble Squire speak for us.


Sham: Dear Cousin!


Belf. Sen. Oh Rogues! Cousin, you have Cozened me: you made a Putt, a
Caravan, a Bubble of me: I gave a Judgment for 1600 l. and had but 250. but
there is some Goods they talk of; but if e're I be caught again I Will be hanged.


Sir Will. Unconscionable Villains! the Chancery shall relieve us.


Sir Edw. I Will Rout this knot of most pernicious Knaves, for all the Privilege
of your Place. Was ever such impudence suffered in a Government? Ireland's
Conquered: Wales Subdued: Scotland United: But there are some few spots of
Ground in London, just in the face of the Government, unconquered yet, that
hold in Rebellion still. Methinks it is strange, that places so near the Kings
Palace should be no parts of his Dominions: It Is a shame to the Societies of
Law to Countenance such Practices: Should any place be shut against the Kings
Writ or Posse Comitatus? Take them away and those two Witnesses. The Constab.
and Watch hales em away.


Belf. Sen. Away with em, Rogues! Rascals, damned Priggs.


Sir Edw. Come Ladies, I have sent for some Neighbors to rejoice with us. We
have Fiddles: Let Us dance a brisk round or two, and then we'll make a Collation.


In the Flourish before the Dance enter Scrapeall. Scrap. Oh Sir William, I am
undone ruined: The Birds are flown. Read the Note they left behind 'em.


Sir Will. Peace, they are Dancing, they have disposed of themselves.


Scrap. Oh Seed of Serpents! Am I cheated then? I Will try a Trick of Law, you
Froggs of the bottomless Pit, I will and instantly -- What Dancing too? then
they are fallen indeed.


They Dance. Exit Scrapeall hastily. Sir Edw. Come Brother, now who has been in
the right, you or I?


Sir Will. You have: Prithee do not triumph.


Belf. Iun. Farewell for ever all the Vices of the Age:
There is no peace but in a Virtuous Life,
Nor lasting Joy but in a tender, Wife.

Sir Edw. You, that would breed your Children well, by Kindness and Liberality
endear em to you: And teach em by Example.

Severity spoils ten, for one it mends:
If you would not have your Sons desire your ends,
By Gentleness and Bounty make those Sons your Friends.

Exeunt Omnes. EPILOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. Mountfort. YE mighty scowrers of these narrow Seas,
Who suffer not a Bark to sail in peace,
But with your Tire of Culverins ye roar,
Bring 'em by the Lee, and Rummidge all their store;
Our Poet duck'd, and looked as if half dead,
At every Shot that whistled over his Head.
Frequent Engagements never could make him bold,
He sneaked into a corner of the Hold.
Since he submits, pray ease him of his fear,
And with a joint Applause bid him appear,
Good Critics don't insult and domineer.
He fears not Sparks, who with brisk dress and mien,
Come not to hear or see, but to be seen.
Each prunes himself, and with a languishing Eye,
Designs to kill a Lady by the by.
Let each fantastic ugly Beau and Shape,
Little of Man, and very much of Ape,
Admire himself, and let the Poet escape.
Ladies, Your Anger most he apprehends,
And is grown past the Age of making Friends
Of any of the Sex whom he offends.
No Princess frowns, no Hero rants and whines,
Nor is weak Sense embroidered with strong lines:
No Battles, Trumpets, Drums, not any dye;
No Mortal Wounds, to please your Cruelty;
Who like not any thing but Tragedy.
With fond, unnatural extravagancies,
Stolen from the silly Authors of Romances.
Let such the Chamber-maids diversion be,
Pray be you reconciled to Comedy.
For when we make you merry, you must own
You are much prettier than when you frown.
With charming smiles you use to conquer still,
The melancholy look's not apt to kill.
Our Poet begs you who adorn this Sphere,
This Shining Circle, will not be severe.
Here no Chit chat, here no Tea Tables are.
The Cant he hopes will not be long unknown,
It Is almost grown the language of the Town.
For Fops, who feel a wretched want of Wit,
Still set up something that may pass for it.
He begs that you will often grace his Play,
And lets you know Munday's his visiting day.
FINIS.
Books newly Printed for James Knapton, at the Queens-Head, in St. Pauls's
Churchyard.
HIstory of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa. Written by the
Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who labored 5 years under those Severities.
Translated into English. With an Account of his Deliverance. Price 1 s. The
Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom, a Tragi-Comedy, as it is Acted by
His Majesty's Servants at the Queens Theater. Written by A. Behn. Va Mon
ensant! prend ta fortune.

