A Lenten Prologue Refused by the PLAYERS.
OUR Prologue-Wit grows flat: the Nap's worn off;
And howsoever We turn, and trim the Stuff,
The Gloss is gone, that looked at first so gaudy;
It Is now no Jest to hear young Girls talk Baudy.
But Plots, and Parties give new matter birth;
And State Distractions serve you here for mirth!
At England's cost Poets now purchase Fame
While factious Heats destroy us, without Shame
These wanton Neroes fiddle to the Flame.
The Stage, like old Rump-Pulpits, is become
The Scene of News, a furious Party's Drum.
Here Poets beat their brains for Volunteers,
And take fast hold of Asses by their Ears.
Their jingling Rhyme for Reason here you swallow;
Like Orpheus Music it makes Beasts to follow.
What an enlightening Grace is want of Bread?
How it can change a Libeller's Heart, and clear a Laureats Head!
Open his eyes till the mad Prophet see Medal P. 14

Plots working in a future power to be
Traitors unformed to his Second Sight are clear;
And Squadrons here, and Squadrons there appear;
Rebellion is the Burden of the Seer.
To Bays in Vision were of late revealed
Whigg-Armies, Rehearsal Com. p. 31.
that at Knights-bridge lay concealed.
And though no mortal eye could see it before
The Battle was just entering at the Door! Rehearsally Comedy p. 52

A dangerous Association -- signed by None!
The Joyner's Plot to seize the King alone!
Stephen with College made this Dire compact;
The watchful Irish took 'em in the Fact --
Of riding armed! Oh Traitorous Overt Act!
With each of them an ancient Pistol sided;
Against the Statute in that Case provided.
But why was such an Host of Swearers pressed?
Their succor was ill Husbandry at best.
Bayes's crowned Muse, by Sovereign Right of Satyr,
Without desert, can dubb a man a Traitor.
And Toryes, without troubling Law, or Reason,
By loyal Instinct can find Plots and Treason.
But here is our Comfort, though they never scan
The merits of the Cause, but of the Man,
Our gracious Statesmen vow not to forsake
Law (...) that is made by Judges whom they Make.
Behind the Curtain, by Court-Wires, with ease
They turn those Plyant Puppets as they please.
With frequent Parliaments our hopes they feed,
Such shall be sure to meet -- but when there is Need.
When a sick State, and sinking Church call for 'em,
Then it is our Tories most of all abhor 'em.
Then Prayer, that Christian Weapon of defense,
Grateful to Heaven, at Court is an Offense,
If it dare speak the untamper'd Nations sense.
Nay Paper's Tumult, when our Senates cease;
And some Men's Names alone can break the Peace.
Petitioning disturbs the Kingdom's Quiet;
As choosing honest Sheriffs makes a Ryott.
To punish Rascals, and bring France to Reason,
Is to be hot, and press things out of Season;
And to damn Popery is Irish Treason.
To love the King, and Knaves about him hate,
Is a Fanatic Plot against the State.
To Skreen his Person from a Popish Gun
Has all the mischief in it of Forty One.
To save our Faith and keep our Freedom's Charter,
Is once again to make a Royal Martyr.
This Logic is of Tories deep inditing
The very best they have -- but Oaths, and Fighting.
Let 'em then chime it on, if 'twill oblige ye,
And Roger vapor over us in Effigy.
Let 'em in Ballads give their folly Vent,
And sing up Nonsense to their Hearts content.
If for the King (as All Is pretended) they
May here drink Healths, and curse, sure We may pray.
Heaven once more keep him then for Healing Ends
Safe from old Foes -- but most from his new Friends!
Such Protestants as propp a Popish Cause,
And loyal men, that break all Bound of Laws!
Whose Pride is with his Servants Salaries fed,
And when they 've scarce left him a Crust of Bread,
Their corrupt Fathers foreigne Steps to follow,
Cheat even of scraps, and that last Sopp would swallow.
French Fetters may this Isle no more endure;
Spite of Rome's Arts stand England's Church secure,
Not from such Brothers as desire to mend it,
But false Sons, who designing worse to rend it
With lewd Lives, and no Fortunes would defend it.
FINIS.

