THE PRINCIPLES OF THE Cyprianic Age, With Regard to Episcopal Power and
Jurisdiction:

Asserted and Recommended from the Genuine Writings of St. Cyprian himself, and
his Contemporaries.

By which it is made evident, That the Vindicator of the Kirk of Scotland is
obliged by his own Concessions to acknowledge, that he and his Associates are
Schismatics.

In a Letter to a FRIEND.

BY I. S.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCV.

SAnctissimae Matri Ecclesiae SCOTICANAE,
Sub pondere pressae,
Sed and adhuc malis non cedenti,
Fidem Catholicam, Unitatem Apostolicam, Pietatem primaevam
Fortiter propugnanti:
Adversus Blasphemias, Calumnias, Sacrilegia, and Ruinas,
Invicto (quia vere Christiano) animo
Strenue decertanti:
Cultu, Fide, and Justitia,
In Deum, Regem, and proximos
Conspicuae:
Haereses omnes, tam antiquas quam novas,
Armis Evangelicis, and perpetua Ecclesiae traditione
Profliganti:
Undique Lachrymis suffusae,
Victrice tamen Cruce triumphanti;
(Tam Archiepiscopis, Episeopis, Presbyteris, and Diaconis,
Quam universo Fidelium Coetui,
Veris suis Pastoribus vinculo (...) primigeniae,
Adhaerescenti)
Sola spe Coelestis praemii, inter clades miseras and maximas,
Suffultae;
Hanc dissertationem Epistolarem (raptim and sermon
Vernaculo conscriptam) de Episcoporum aevi Cyprianici
Eminentia and Praerogativis,
Ea qua par est animi modestia and reverentia,
Clientelae and Censurae ergo
D. D. D.
THE PRINCIPLES OF THE Cyprianic Age, etc.
SIR,
I Acknowledge you have performed your Promise. The Author of the Defense of
the Vindication of the Church of Scotland, in Answer to an Apology OF (he
should have said FOR) the Clergy of Scotland, has indeed said so as you
affirmed: And I ask your Pardon for putting you to the trouble of sending me
his Book and Pointing to Sect. 39. Page 34. where he has said so. But now,
after all, what tho he has said so? And said so, so boldly? Do you think his
bare saying so is enough to determine our Question? Don't mistake it. That
which made me so backward to believe he had said so, was not any dreadful
Apprehension I had of either his Reason or Authority; but a Persuasion that
none of his Party would have been so rash, as to have put their being or not
being Schismatics upon such a desperate Issue. And that you may not apprehend
my Persuasion was unreasonable, I shall first take to Task what he has said;
and then, perchance, add something concerning our main Argument. His Words are
these.

Arg. 5. Cyprian's Notion of Schism is, when one separateth from his own
Bishop. This the Presbyterians do: Ergo. A. All the strength of this Argument
lies in the sound of Words. A Bishop, in Cyprian's time, was not a Diocesan,
with sole Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination. If he prove that, we shall Give
Cyprian and him leave to call us Schismatics. A Bishop, then, was the Pastor
of a Flock, or the Moderator of a Presbytery. If he can prove, that we separate
from our Pastors, or from the Presbytery, with their Moderator, under whose
Inspection we ought to be, let him call us what he will: But we disown the
Bishops in Scotland from being our Bishops; we can neither own their Episcopal
Authority, nor any Pastoral Relation that they have to us. Thus he.

Now, Sir, if one had a mind to catch at Words, what a Field might he have
here? For Instance; Suppose the Word Diocese was not in use in St. Cyprian's
time, as applied to a particular Bishop's District; Does it follow, that the
Thing now signified by it, was not then to be found? Again; What could move him
to insinuate, that we assign the sole Power of Jurisdiction and Ordination to
our Diocesan Bishop? When did our Bishops claim that sole Power? When was it
ascribed to them by the Constitution? When did any of our Bishops attempt to
Exercise it? When did a Scottish Bishop offer, e. g. to Ordain or Depose a
Presbyter, without the Concurrence of other Presbyters? When was such a sole
Power deemed Necessary for Raising a Bishop to all the due Elevations of the
Episcopal Authority? How easy is it to distinguish between a Sole and a Chief
Power? Between a Power Superior to all other Powers, and a Power Exclusive of
all other Powers? Between a Power, without, or against which, no other Powers
can Act; tho they may, in Conjunction with it, or Subordination to it: And a
Power, destroying all other Powers, or disabling them from Acting? Once more,
How loose and Ambiguous is that part of his Definition of a Bishop, in St.
Cyprian's time, in which he calls him, The Pastor of a Flock? May not a Bishop,
and his Diocese, be called a Pastor and a Flock, in as great propriety of
Speech, as a Presbyterian Minister and his Parish? Sure I am, St. Cyprian and
his Contemporaries thought so, as you may learn hereafter.

How easy were it, I say, for one to insist on such Escapes, if he had a mind
for it? But I love not Jangle; and I must avoid Prolixity: And therefore
considering the State of the Controversy between our Author and the Apologist,
and supposing he intended (however he expressed it) to speak home to the
Apologist's Argument; the Force and Purpose of his Answer, as I take it, must
be this.

That an Argument drawn from such as were called Bishops in St. Cyprian's time,
to such as are now so called in Scotland, is not good. That a Bishop, in St.
Cyprian's time, was nothing like one of our modern Scottish Bishops; i. e. a
Church Governor superior to, and having a Prelatick Power over, all other
Church Governors within such a District as we commonly call a Diocese. That a
Bishop then was no more than a Single Presbyter, or Pastor of a single Flock,
(such a Flock as could conveniently meet together in one Assembly, for the
Public Offices of Religion; such a Flock as the People of one single Parish
are, in the modern Presbyterian Notion of a Parish,) acting in Parity with
other single Pastors of other single Flocks or Parishes. Or, at most, That he
was but the Moderator of a Presbytery, taking both Terms in the modern current
Presbyterian Sense; i. e. as Moderator signfies One, who, as such, is no Church
Governor, nor has any Jurisdiction over his Brethren: One, whose Power is
merely Ordinative, not Decisive; To be the Mouth of the Meeting, not to be
their Will or Commanding Faculty: To keep Order in the Manner and Managing of
what comes before them; Not to Determine what is Debated amongst them. And as
Presbytery signifies such a Number of Teaching and Ruling Presbyters living and
having their Cures within such a District; meeting together upon Occasion, and
acting in Parity in the Administration of the Government, and Discipline of the
Church. That therefore our Scottish Presbyterians cannot be called Schismatics
in St. Cyprian's Notion of Schism, unless it can be proved, That they Separate
from their Pastor, or Teaching Presbyter, who has such a Parish assigned to him
for his Charge: Or, (not from the Moderator of the Presbytery, who is not; but)
from the Presbytery (which is the Principle of Unity) with their Moderator.

This, I say, I take to be the Purpose of our Author's Answer to the
Apologist's Argument; on the Force whereof he ventures his Parties being, or
not being, Schismatick^. If I have mistaken his Meaning, I protest I have not
done it wilfully. I am pretty sure, I have not, in the Definition of a
Moderator; for I have Transcribed it, Word for Word, from one whom I take to be
a dear Friend of his, entirely of the same Principles and Sentiments with him;
and whose Definitions, I am apt to think, he will not readily Reject. I mean,
the Author of The Vindication of the Church of Scotland, in Answer to the Ten
Questions Ad Quest. 1. Sect. 5.
. And does not our Author himself, in this same 39th Section, (part whereof I
am now considering,) affirm, That Fifty Years before the first Council of Nice,
(i. e. some 17 or 18 Years after St. Cyprian's Martyrdom,) the Hierarchy was
not in the Church? And that however some of the Names might have been, yet the
Church Power and Dominion, signified by them, was not then in Being? Plainly
importing, that the Church then was Governed by Pastors acting in Parity, after
the Presbyterian Model. In short, what our Author has said, when duly
considered, will be found to be no Answer at all to the Apologist's Argument,
if it is not to be understood in the Sense I have represented.

Taking it for granted, therefore, that I have hit his Meaning, I hope you will
not deny, that, If I shall prove that a Bishop, in Cyprian's time, was more
than a Pastor of a Flock, or the Moderator of a Presbytery, in the Presbyterian
Sense of the Terms: If I shall prove, that a Bishop then had really that which
cannot be denied to have been true, Genuine Episcopal or Prelaiick Power: If I
can prove, that he acted in a Real Superiority over, not in Parity with other
Church Governors, even Pastors: If I shall prove these Things, I say, I hope
you will grant, our Author is fairly bound by his Word to acknowledge, that he and
his Brethren Presbyterians are Schismatics. Let us try it then: And now, Sir,

Before I come to my main Proofs, consider if it may not be deemed a shrewd
Presumption against our Author in this matter, That generally the great
Champions for Presbytery, such as Cham^er, Blondel, Salmasius, the Provincial
Assembly of London, etc. do ingenuously acknowledge, That, long before St.
Cyprian's time, Episcopacy was in the Church; even Spanhemius himself grants,
That, in the Third Century, Bishops had a manifest Pre-eminence above
Presbyters and Deaco^s, and a Right of Presiding, Convocati^g, Ordaining
Episcoporum manifesta ubique (...) se^ jure praesidendi, Convocandi, Ordinandi
etc. Epit. Isag. ad Hist, Eccles. Nov. Test. Saec. 3. Sect. 6. page mi^i, 117.
, etc. By the way: I have cited this Writer particularly, because our Author
not only builds much on his Authority Sect. 32. p. 28.
, but honors him with the great Character of being That diligent Searcher into
Antiqui^y. How deservedly, let others judge; for my part, I cannot think he has
been so very diligent a Searcher: For in that same very Section, in which he
acknowledges the Episcopal Pre-eminence in the Third Century, he says expressly,
That, in that Age, there were no Door-Keepers, Acoly^ths, nor Exorc^ss Sed nec
hujus aevi Ordines Minores, quales Ostiariorum, Copiatarum, Acolythorum,
Exorcistarum. p. 119.
. And yet I not only find express mention of Exorcism in the Venerable Council
of Cartbage, in which St. Cyprian was Praeses Suffrag. 1, 8, 31, 37.
; But both Cyprian and Firmilian expressly mention Exarcists Ep. 23. p. 49. Ep.
69. p. 187. Ep. 75. p. 223.
. And as for Acolyths, how often do we find them mentioned in Cyprian's
Epistles? E. g. We have Narious an Ac^lyth, Ep. 7. Eavorinus, Ep. 34.
Nicephorus, Ep. 45. Saturnus, and Felicianus, Ep. 59. Lucanus, Maximus, and
Amantius, Ep. 77. And does not Corneius Bishop of Rome, in his famous Epistle
to Fabius Bishop of Antioch, Recorded by Eusebius Hist. Ecd. lib. 6. cap. 43.
, positively affirm, That there were then in the Church of Rome 42 Acolyths,
and 52 Exorcists, Lectors, and Door-keepers? But this, as I said, only by the
way.

That which I am concerned about at present, is, That when these great Patrons
of Presbytery, these truly Learned Men, whom I named, have all so frankly
yielded, that there was real Prelacy in the Church in, and before, St.
Cyprian's time; yet our Author should affirm, so boldly, that there was no such
Thing: That there was no Hierarchy in the Church then, nor for many Years
after. Has our Author been a more diligent Searcher into Antiquity, than those
great Antiquaries were, that he was thus able to contradict their Discoveries?
I am not apt to believe it. However, as I said, let this pass only for a
Presumption against him. I proceed to other Arguments. And,

1. I observe, that, in St. Cyprian's time, every Church all the World over, at
least, every Church, Constituted and Organized, according to the Principles
which then prevailed, had a Bishop, Presbyters, and Deacons, by whom she was
Ruled.

Thus, for Example, we find express Mention of the Bishop, Presbyters, and
Deacons, of the Church of Adrymetum Presbyteri and Diaconi in Adrum^tina
Consistentes, Polycarpo Co-^piscopo nostro absente, ignorabant quid nobis in
Commune placuissit, etc. Ep. 49. p. 91.
; for Cyprian tells Corneius, That when He and Liberalis came to that City,
Polycarpus the Bishop was absent, and the Presbyters and Deacons were ignorant
of what had been Resolved on by the Body of the African Bishops, about writing
to the Church of Rome, till the Controversy between Cornelius and Novatianus
should be more fully understood.

Thus Cyprian was Bishop of Carthage, and at the same time there were, in that
City, 8 Presbyters at sewest: For we read of three, Rogatianus, Britius, and
Numidicus, who adhered to him Ep. 43.
. And five who took part with Felicissimus against him, when that Deacon made
his Schism Ep. 59.
. I hope I need not be at pains to prove, that there were Deacons then in that
famous Church.

Thus Cornelius, in the aforementioned Epistle to Fabius, tells him, That
while himself was Bishop of Rome, there were in that City no fewer than 46
Pre^byters, and 7 Deacons, etc. A most flourishing Clergy, as St. Cyprian calls
it Ep. 59. p. 139.
. Whosoever pleases, may see the like Account of the Church of Alexandria, in the
same Times, in Eusebius H. E. lib. 7. cap. 11.
, Indeed,

If we may believe St. Cyprian, there was no Church then without a Bishop: For
from this Supposition, as an uncontroverted Matter of Fact, he Reasons against
Novatianus Cum sit, a Christo, una Ecclesia, per totum Mundum, in multa Membra
divisa, item Episcopatus unus Episcoporum multorum Concordi Numerositate
Diff^sus; ille, post Dei traditionem, post connexam and ubique conjunctam
Catholicae Eccl^siae Unitatu^m, humanam conetur Ecclesiam facere, and per
plurimas Civitates, noves Apo^tolos suos mittat, ut quaedam r^c^ntia
institutionis suae fundam^nta constituat; cumque jampridem per OMNES PROVINCIAS
and per URBES SINGULAS, Ordinati s^nt Episcopi, in aetate; antiqui, in ^ide
integri, in pr^ssura probati, in persecutione proscripti, ille super eos (...):
alios pseudo-episcopos aud^at. Ep. 55. p. 112.
. His Argument is, That there is but One Church, and One Episcopacy, all the
World over; and that Catholic and Orthodox Bishops were regularly planted in
every Province and City, and therefore Novatianus could not but be a
Schismatic, who, contrary to Divine Institution, and the Fundamental Laws of
Unity, labored to super-induce false Bishops into these Cities, where True and
Orthodox Bishops were already planted. And he Reasons again upon the same
Supposition, in the beginning of his 63d Epistle directed to Caecilius,
concerning the Cup in the Eucharist Quanquam sciam, Frater Charissime,
Episcopos plurimos Ecclestis Dominicis in TOTO MUNDO divina dignatione
praep^sitos, etc. Ep. 63. ab init.-
. From this Supposition, I say, as from an uncontested Matter of Fact, he
Reasons, in both Cases, which is a Demonstration, not only of the Credibility
of his Testimony, but that the Matter of Fact was then so Notorious, as to be
undeniable. He Reasoned from it, as from an acknowledged Postulate.

2. I observe, that the Presbyters, who, in these Times, were
contra-distinguished from the Bishop and Deacons, were Priests, in the Language
which was then current; Pastors, in the present Presbyterian Dialect, i. e. not
Ruling Elders, but such as labored in the Word and Sacraments. They were such
as were honored with the Divine Priesth^od; such as were Constituted in the
Clerical Ministry; such as whose Work it was to attend the Altar and the
Sacrifices, and offer up the Public Pray^rs, etc. as we find in the Instance
of Geminius Faustinus Divino Sacerdotio honorati, and in Claricis Ministeriis
constituti non nist Altari and Sa^rificii^ de fervir^, and precibus atque
Orationibus vacare debeant. Ep. 1. P. 1.
. Such as God, in his merciful Providence, was pleased to raise to the Glorious
Station of the Priesthood; as in the Case of Numidicus Ut eum Clero nostro
Dominus adjungeret, and desolatam per lapsum quorundam, Presbyterii nostri
copia Gloriosis Sacerdotibus adornar^t. Ep. 40. p. 79.
. Such as in the time of Persecution went to the Prisons, and gave the Holy
Eucharist to the Confessors Ep. 5. p. 11.
. Such as at Carthage (as St. Cyprian complains to Cornelius) presumed to
curtail the Pennances of the Lapsers, and gave them the Holy Sacrament while
their Idolatry was so very recent, that, as it were, their Hands and Mouths
were still a smoking with the warm Nidors of the Sacrifices that had been
offered upon the Devils Altars Ep. 59. p. 134. and De Lapsis, p. 128.
. Such as, contrary to all Rule and Order, absolved the Lapsers, and gave them
the Communion, without the Bishops License Ep. 15, 16, 17. sus^,
. Such as were joined with the Bishop in the Sacerdotal Honor Ep. 61. p. 144
. In a word, They were such Presbyters as St. Cyprian describes to Stephen
Bishop of Rome; such as sometimes raised Altar against Altar, and (out of the
Communion with the Church) offered False and Sacrilegious Sacrifices: Such as
were to be Deposed when they did so; such as, tho they should return to the
Communion of the Church, were only to be admited to LAY-COMMUNION, and not to
be allowed, thereafter, to act as Men in Holy Orders; seeing it became the
PRIESTS and Ministers of God, those who attend the Altar and Sacrifices, to be
Men of Integrity, and Blameless (...) plane and ad(...), Frater cariss^me,
(...) and Autho^itate communi, ^t etiam s^ qui Presbyteri -- Contr^ Altar unum
atque divi^um, Sacrifici^, foris, falsa and Sacril^g^ offerre conati sin^, cos
quoque ^ac condition suscipi, cum revertunt^^, at COMMUNICENT LAICI -- Nec
debere cos r^vertentes, e^, apud nos, Ordinationis and Honoris arma retinere,
quibus contra nos Rebellaverunt: Oport^t enim SACERDOTES -- qui Altari and
Sacrificiis deserviunt, int^gros atque immaculat^s ess^, etc. Ep. 72. p. 197.
. Such Presbyters they were, I say, who were then, contra-distinguished from
the Bishop: For, as for your LayElders, your Ruling, contra-distinct from
Teaching, Presbyters, now so much in vogue; there is as profound a Silence of
them in St. Cyprian's Works and Time, as there is of the Solemn League and
Covenant, or The Sanquhar Declaration: And yet, considering how much he has
left upon Record about the Governors, the Government, and the Discipline of
the Church, if there had been such Presbyters, then, it is next to a Miracle
that he should not, so much as once, have mentioned them.

3. I observe, that the Bishops Power, his Authority, his Pastoral Relation,
(call it as you will,) extended to all the Christians within his District. E.
g. Cornelius was immediately and directly Superior to all the Christians in
Rome, and they were his Subjects. So it was also with Fabius, and the
Christians of Antioch; Dionysius, and the Christians of Alexandria; Cyprian,
and the Christians of Carthage, etc. The Bishops prelation, whatever it was,
related not solely to the Clergy, or solely to the Laity, but to both, equally
and formally. How fully might this Point be proved, if it were needful? Indeed,
St. Cyprian defines a Church to be A People united to their Priest, and A Flock
adhering to their Pastor. And that by the Terms Priest and Pasto^, he meant the
Bishop, is plain from what immediately follows; for he tells Florentius
Pupianus there, That from that common and received Notion of a Church, he ought
to have learned, That the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the
Bishop; and that whosoever is not with the Bishop, is not in the Church Christo
sunt Ecclesia, plebs Sac^rdoti adunata, and pastori suo Grex adhaerens. Unde
scire d^bes Episcopum in Ecclesi^m esse, and Ecclesia in Episcopo, and si qui
cum Episcopo non sint, in Ecclesia non esse. Ep. 66. p. 168.
. And in that same Epistle, chastising the same Florentius for calling his
Title to his Bishopric in question, and speaking bitter Things against him, he
Reasons thus: What Swelling of Pride? What Arrogance of Spirit? What
Haughtiness is this? That thou should arraign Bishops before thy Tribunal?
And unless we be Purged by thee, and Absolved by thy Sentence, Lo! these Six
Years, The BROTHERHOOD has had no BISHOP; The PEOPLE no RULER; The FLOCK no
PASTOR; The CHURCH no GOVERNOR; CHRIST no PRELATE; And GOD no PRIEST Quis
namqu^ hic est superbiae tumor? Quae arrogantia animi? Quae mentis inflatio? Ad
cognitionem suam, praep^sitos and Sacerdotes vocare? Ac nis^ apud te purgati
fucrimus and sententia tua absoluti, ecce jam, sex annis, nec fraternitas
habuit Episcopum, nec pl^bs praepositum, nec Grex pastorem, nec Ecclesia
Gubernator^m, nec Christus Antistitem, nec Deus Sacerdotem? Ibid. p. 167.
? In short, He that bore the high Character of Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time,
was called the Ruler of the Church by way of Eminence Praepositus, passim.
. The Church was compared to a Ship, and the Bishop was the Master Christi
adversarius, and Ecclesiae ejus immicus. ad hoc Ecclesiae praep^situm sua
infestatione prosequitur, ut Gubernat^r^ sublato, atrocius atque violentius
circa Ecclesiae Naufragia Grassetur. Ep. 59. p. 130. Vide etiam Ep. 30. p. 56.
. He was the Father, and all the Christians within his District were his
Children Ep. 41. p. 79.
. He was the Governor Gubernator, passim,
, the Rector Rector. Ep. 59. p. 133.
, the Captain Dux. Ep. 60. p. 141.
, the Head Caput. Ep. 45. p. 86.
, the Judge Iudex. Ep. 59. p. 129.
, of all within his Diocese. He was the chief Pastor; and tho Presbyters; were
also sometimes called Pastors, yet it was but seldom; and, at best, they were
but such in Subordination, Indeed, the Presbyters of the Church of Rome, during
the Vacancy between Fabianus his Death and Cornelius his Promotion, looked only
on themselves as Vice-Pastors, saying, That, in such a juncture, they kept the
Flock in STEAD of the Pastor, the Bishop Et cum incumbat n^bis qui videmur
praepositi esse, and VICE PASTORIS custodire Gregem, etc.
. I could give you even a Surfeit of Evidence, I say, for the Truth of this
Proposition, if it were needful. Whosoever reads St. Cyprian's Epistles, may find
it in almost every Page. And I shall have occasion hereafter to insist on many
Arguments in the Probation of other Things, which may further clear this also.
Indeed, there is no more in all this, than Ignatius said frequently, near 150
Years before St. Cyprian (...). Ignat. ad Smyrn. Edit. Lon^. 1680. p. 6. (...)
(Episcopo, nempe, Presbyteris and Diaconis,) (...). Ad Trall. p. 48. and passon.
.

And now, Sir, tho the Monuments of the Cyprianic Age could afford us no more
than these three Things which I have proved from them, they would be of
sufficient force to overthrow our Author's Definition of a Bishop in St.
Cyprian's time, as to both Parts of it; and demonstrate to every thinking Man's
conviction, That he was neither The Pastor of the Fl^ck, nor The Moderator of a
Presbytery, in our Author's sense of the Terms.

1. Not the Pastor of a Flock, i. e. a single Presbyter, having the Charge of a
single Parish, after the Presbyterian Model: For, a Bishop, in those Times, had
many such Presbyters under him. Cyprian himself: (whatever he had more) had no
sewer than Eight under him in the City of Carthage, besides the adjacent
Villages. Cornelius was over Forty six in the City of Rome. I know not how many
Dionysius was over at Alexandria, or Polycarpus at (...) but it is certain,
they were in the Pl^ral Number. So it was all the Christian World over, as I
have proved. A Bishop then, in St. Cyprian's time, was a Pastor indeed, but it
was of a Diocese; i. e: all the Christians within such a District were his
Flock; and he had a direct, formal, and immediate Pastoral Relation to them
all, tho at the same time, within the same District, there were many inferior
Pastors who were subordinate and subject to him.

2. He was as little a mere Moderator of a Presbytery, in our Author's sense of
the Terms. A Presbyterian Moderator, (...) such, is no Church Governor at all:
A Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, as such, was Chief Pastor, Judge, Head,
Master, Rector, Governor, of all the Christians within his District. A
Presbyterian Mod^rator, as such, has no direct, immediate, formal Relation to
the People, but only to the Presbytery. He is the Mouth, and keeps Order in the
manner and managing of the Affairs of the Presbytery, not of the Church, or
rather Churches, within the Bounds of that Presbytery. But a Bishop, in St.
Cyprian's time, was quite another thing: His Prelacy, whatever it was, related
to the Laity, as well as to the Clergy. St. Cyprian's, e. g. to as many
Christians as required the subordinate Labors of, at least, Eight Presbyters:
Cornelius's to as many as required the subordinate Labors of Forty Six: To a
Body of Christians, in which, besides Forty six Presbyters, Seven Deacons,
Seven Subdeacons, Forty two Acolyths, Fifty two Exorcists, Lectors and
Door-keepers, there were more than Fifteen hundred Widows and poor People who
subsisted by Charity: And, besides all these, a mighty and innumerable Laity,
as himself words it (...) Apud Eusib. H. E. Lib. 6. cap. 43.
. These Things, I say, might be sufficient in all Reason to confute our
Author's Notion. But then, this is not all, for let us consider,

II. How a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, was Promoted to his Chair, to that
sublime Top of the Priesthood (as he calls it) Sacerdotii sublime fastigium.
Ep. 55. p. 103.
. And we shall easily collect another Demonstration against our Author's
Notion. For, by the Principles of those Times, it was plains,

I. That there could be no Lawful nor Allowable Promotion of One to a
Bishopric which had been Possessed before, unless there was a Clear,
Canonical, and Unquestionable Vacancy. It was a received Maxim then, That there
could be but one Bishop at once in a Church. When a See was once Canonically
filled, whosoever else pretended to be Bishop of that See, was not a second
Bishop, but none at all, in St. Cyprian's Judgment Et cum post primum secundus
esse non possit, quisquis post unum, qui solus esse debeat, factus est, non
(...) ille secundus, sed nullus est. Ep. 55. p. 104.
. Nay, he was so far from reckoning of him as another Bishop, that he deemed
him not a Christian Quisquis ille est and qualiscunque est, Christianus non
est. Ep. 55. p. 112. fuse.
. Innumerable are his Testimonies to this purpose Ep. 44. p. 86. Ep. 45. p. 86.
Ep. 46. p. 89. Ep. 59. p. 130. Ep. 61. p. 144. Ep. 68. p. 177. Ep. 69. p. 184.
Un. Eccl. p. 110.
. But I shall Transcribe only One from Ep. 69. because he fully reasons the
Case in it. There was a Controversy between Cornelius and Novatianus, whether
was Bishop of Rome. Now, consider how St. Cyprian decides it. The Church is one
(says he); and this one Chuch cannot be both within and without: If, therefore,
the True Church is with Novatianus, She was not with Cornelius. But if She was
with Cornelius, who succeeded to Bishop Fabianus by lawful Ordination, and whom
God honored with Martyrdom, as well as with the Episcopal Dignity, Novatianus
is not in the Church; nor can he be acknowledged as a Bishop, who, contemning
the Evangelical and Apostolical Tradition, and succeeding to none, has sprung
from himself, He can by no means either have or hold a Church, who is not
Ordained in the Church; for the Church cannot be without Herself, nor divided
against Herself, etc. And a little after, Our Lord recommending to us the Unity
which is of Divine Institution, says, I and my Father are One; and again,
Obliging the Church to keep this Unity, he says, There shall be One Flock, and
One Pastor: But if the Flock is One, How can he be reputed to be of the Flock,
who is not numbered with the Flock? Or how can be he deemed a Pastor, who (while
the True Pastor lives and rules the Flock by a succedaneous Ordination)
succeeds to none, but begins from himself? Such an one is an Alien, is Profane,
is an Enemy to Christian Peace and Unity. He dwells not in the House of God, i.
e. in the Church of God: None can dwell there but the Sons of Concord and
Unanimity Ecclesia enim una est, quae una and intus esse and foris, non potest.
Si e^xim apud Novatianum est, apud Cornelium non suit. Si vera apud Cornelium
suit, qui Fabiano Episcopo, Legitima Ordinatione successit, and qu^m, praete^
Sacerdotii honorem, Martyrio quoque Dominus Glorificavit, Novatianus in
Ecclesia non est, nec Episcopus computari potest, qui, Evangelica and
Apostolica Traditione contempta, nemini succedens, a seip^o Ortus est: Habere
namque aut tenere Ecclesiam nullo modo potest qui Ordinatus in Ecclesia non
est: Foris enim non esse Ecclesiam, nec scindi adversum se, etc. Et paulo post,
Idcirco Dominus insinuans nobis Unitatem de Divina Auctorstate veni^ntem, ponit
and Dicit. Ego and Pater unum sumus: Ad quam unitatem redigens Ecclesiam suam,
denuo dicit, Et erit Unus Grex, and Unus Pastor: Si autem Grex unus est,
quomodo potest Gregi annumerari qui in numero Gregis non ^st? Aut Pastor
quomodo haberi potest qui (manente vero pastore, and in Ecclesia D^i
Ordinatione succidanea praesidente) nomini succedens, and a seipso incipi^ns,
Alienus sit and profaxus, Dominicae pacis at Divine Unitatis inimicus; non
habitans in do^^ Dei, i. e. in Ecclesia Dei, in qua non nist Concordes and
Unanimes habitant? Ep. 69. p. 181, 182.
.

Neither was this Principle peculiar to St. Cyprian: Cornelius, in his so often
mentioned Epistle to Fabius, insists on it also, and in a manner Ridicules
Novatianus, if not for his Ignorance of it, at least for entertaining the vain
Conceit, that it was in his Power to counter-act it (...) Eus* b. H. E. Lib. 6.
cap. 43.
. And when Maximus, Urbanus, Sidonius, Macarius, etc. deserted Novatianus, and
returned to Cornelius his Communion, they made a Solemn Confession, That, upon
the score of that same common Maxim, they ought to have looked upon Novatianus
as a False and Schismatical Bishop. We know, say they, that Cornelius was
chosen Bishop of the most Holy Catholic Church by the Omnipotent God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. We co^fess our Error; we were imposed upon; we were
circumvented by Perfidy and Ensnaring Sophistry -- For we are not ignorant,
That there is One God; One Christ our Lord, whom we have confessed; One
Holy Ghost; And that there ought to be but One Bishop in a Catholic Church Nos
Cornelium Episcopum Sancti^^i^ae Catholice Ecclesiae Eleclum a Deo Omn^potente,
and Christo Domino nostro sci^us. Nos error^m nostsrum (...); nos imposturam
pass^ sumus; circumventi sumus perfidia and Loquacitate captiosa: Non enim
ignoramus Unum D^um (...); Unum Christ^^^ ^sse Dominum, quem Confess^ sumus;
(...) Spiritum Sanctum; Unum Epi^^opum in Catholica Eccl^sia esse d^bere. Ep.
49. p. 93.
. Indeed, two Bishops at once, of one Church or City, were then thought as
great an Absurdity as two Fathers of one Child, or two Husbands of one Wife, or
two Heads of one Body, or whatever else you can call Monstrous in either Nature
or Morality.

2. There was no Canonical Vacancy; no Place for a new Bishop, but where the
One Bishop, whose the Chair had been, was Dead, or had Ceded, or was
Canonically Deposed by the rest of the Members of the Episcopal College.
Vacancy by Death has no Difficulties. I don't remember to have observed any
Instances of Cession in St. Cyprian's time; (tho there were some before, and
many after;) Unless it was in the Case of Basilides, who, after he had
forfeited his Title to that Sacred Dignity by being guilty of the dreadful
Crimes of Idolatry and Blasphemy, is said to have Laid it down, and to have
confessed, That he should be favorably dealt by, if thereafter he should be
admitted to the Communion of Laics Ep. 67.
. We have Instances of Deposition in the same Basilides and Martialis Ibid.
, in Marcianus Ep. 68.
, Privatus Lambesitanus Ep. 36.
, Evaristus Ep. 50, and 52.
, Fortunatianus Ep. 65.
, and perhaps some more. However, these Three, I say, were the only Causes in
which there could be a Lawful Vacancy.

3. When a See was thus Canonically vacant, it was filled after this manner:
The Bishops of the Province, in which the Vacancy was, met, choosed and
ordained One in the presence of the People whom he was to Govern. This St.
Cyprian, with other 36 Bishops, tells us, was of Divine Institution, and
Apostolical Observation; And that it was the common Form, not only in Africa,
but almost in every Province all the World over Propter quo^diligenter de
Traditiove Divina and Apostolica Observatione s^r^andum and tenendum est, quod
apud nos quoque and fere per Provincias Un^versas tenetur, ut ad Ordinationes
rite celebrandas, ad ^am Plebem cut praepositus ordinatur, Episcopi ^jusdem
Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus deligatur, Plebe praesente,
etc: Ep. 67. p. 172. Praecter illud quod in hac eadem Epistola, De Sabino,
Legere est, h^jus ritus, tanquam jam tum triti, in Succ^ssore, Narcisso
Hierosolymitani., Substituendo exemplum luculentum habes apud Eusebius. l. 6. c.
10.
. I know, it is controverted whether a Bishop, in those Times, was Chosen by the
People, or only in the presence of the People? But my present purpose does not
engage me in that Controversy.

4. But Election was not enough: Tho the Person elected was already a
Presbyter, and in Priestly Order; yet when he was to be Promoted to a
Bishopric, he was to receive a new Imposition of Hands, a new Ordination. His
former Orders were not sufficient for that Supreme Office. Thus, e. g. St.
Cyprian was first a Presbyter, and then Ordained Bishop of Carthage, if we may
believe his Deacon Pontius, Eu^ebius, and St. Jerome Pontius in vita Cypr.
Eusebius. Chron. Hieron. C^tal.
. Thus our Holy Martyr tells us, That Cornelius had made his Advances,
gradually, through all the inferior Stations, and so, no doubt, had been a
Presbyter, before he was a Bishop Per omnia Ecclesiastica Offici^ promotus --
Ad Sacerdotii sublime fastigium cunctis gradibus ascendit. Ep. 55. p. 103.
. And yet we find, when he was Promoted to the Sea of Rome, he was Ordained by
16 Bis^^ps Ep. 55. p. 112.
. Thus we find also, in the Promotion of Sabinus to the Bishopric from which
Basilides had fallen, that he was Ordained by the Imposition of the Hands of
the Bishops who were then present at his Election Ep. 67. p. 172.
. Thus Fortunatus, Achimnius, Optatus, Privationus, Donatulus, and F^ix, 6
Bishops, Ordained a Bishop at Capsis Ep. 56. p. 115.
. Thus Heraclus was first a Presbyter under Demetrius, in the Church of
Alexandria, and then succeeded to him in the Episcopal Chair Eusebius. H. E. lib.
6. c. 19, 20.
. Dionysius was first a Presbyter under Heraclas, and then succeeded to him
Ibid.
. And Maximus, who had been a Presbyter under him, succeeded, to Dionysius Lib.
7. c. 11, 22, 28.
. And before all these, some 70 Years before St. Cyprian's time, Irenaeus was
first a Presbyter under Photinus, and afterward his Successor in the
Bishopric of Lions Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. c. 4, 5.
. Nor is it to be doubted, that each of these was Raised to the Episcopal
Dignity by a new Ordinatio^. The first of the Canons, commonly called
Apostolical, which requires, That a Bishop be Ordained by two or three Bishops,
was, doubtless, all along observed (...). Canon. Apost. 1.
. Nay, this Necessity of a new Ordination for Raising One to the Episcopal
Power, was so Notorious and Received then, that the Schismatics themselves
believed it indispensible. And therefore Novatianus, tho formerly a Presbyter,
(as Cornelius tells expressly in that so often cited Epistle to Fabius,) when he
Rivaled it with Cornelius for the Chair of Rome, that he might have the show,
at least, of a Canonical Ordination, he got three simple inconsiderate Bishops
to come to the City, upon pretense of Consulting with other Bishops about
settling the Commotions of the Church: And having them once in his Clutches, he
shut them up under Lock and Key, till they were put in a scandalous Disorder,
and then forced them to give him the Episcopal Mission, by an imaginary and
vain Imposition of Hands, as Cornelius words it (...) E^seb. l. 6. c. 43.
. Thus also, when Fortunatus, One of the Five Presbyters who joined with the
Schismatical Felicissumus against St. Cyprian, t^^ned bold to set up as an
Anti-Bishop at Carthage; He was Ordained by Five false Bishops Ep. 59. p. 113.
. And now, Sir, by this Accoun^, I think we have our Author's Definition of a
Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, fairly routed a second time: For,

How could the Maxim of but One Bishop, at once, in a Church hold, if that
Bishop was nothing but a single Presbyter? The Church of Rome was but One
Church; so was the Church of Carthage: And yet, in each of these Churches,
there were many single Presbyters. Again,

If a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, was no more than a single Presbyter, in
the Presbyterian Sense, what needed so much work about him? Why, e. g. convene
all the Presbyters of a Province, such as Africa or Numidia was, for the
Election and Ordination of a single Presbyter in Carthage, where there were
Presbyters more than enough to have performed all the Business? What needed the
Church of Rome to make such work about supplying such a Vacancy as was there,
before Cornelius was Promoted? Why a Convention of Sixteen Neighboring Bishops
to give him Holy Orders? Might not the Forty Six, who lived in Rome, have
served the turn? Might not these Forty Six, I say, have filled Fabianus his
Room with far greater Ease and Expedition? If they made such work, and had such
Difficulties, (as we find they had about a Bishop,) in settling One single
Brother Presbyter, when, according to our Author's Principles, they had the
full Power of doing it, what had become of them, if Thirty, nay Twenty, nay Ten
of the Forty six, had all died in one Year? Sure, they had never got so many
Vacancies filled. And then,

Were not Cornelius and Novatianus Presbyters of Rome, before the former was
the Tr^e, and the latter the False Bishop of that City? If so, what need of a
new Election, and a new Ordination for making them Presbyters of a Church, of
which they were Presbyters already? Had it not been pretty pleasant, in such a
grave, serious, persecuted State of the Church, to have seen two eminent Men,
already Presbyters of Rome, making so much work about being made Presbyters of
Rome? And all the Clergy and Christians of Rome, nay sooner or later, of all
the Christian World, engaged in the Quarrel? What had this been other than the
very Mystery of Ridiculousness? But this is not all.

The Premises will as little allow him to have been a Presbyterian Moderator:
For, to what purpose so much ado about the Establishment of a mere Moderator of
a Presbytery? Why, so much stress laid upon only one Moderator in a City? Why
no Canonical Vacancy of his Moderatorial Chair, unless in the case of Death,
Cession, or Forfeiture? Sure, if they had then understood all the Exigencies
and Analogies of Parity, they would not have been so much in love with a
constant Moderator; no, they would have judged him highly inconvenient, and by
all means to be shunned: If he had been imposed on the Meeting, it had been an
Encroachment on their Intrinsic Power; and so, absolutely unlawful, and
Prelacy: And tho Chosen by themselves, fatal; as having a violent Tendency to
Lordly Prelacy: And therefore they could never have yielded to have One with a
Good Conscience Vide, True Representation of Presb. Gov. Prop. 15.
. Again,

How often did the Presbytery of Rome meet, in the Interval between Fabianus
his Death, and Cornelius his Promotion? How many excellent Epistles did they
write to the Neighboring Bishops and Churches, and these, about the most
weighty and important Matters during that Vacancy? They wrote that which is the
Eighth in Number, amongst St. Cyprian's Epistles to the Carthaginian Clergy,
and, at the same time, One to St. Cyprian, then in his Retirement, which is
lost, They wrote that notable Epistle, which is the Thirtieth in Number, in
which they not only mention other of their Epistles which they had wrote to St.
Cyprian, and which are not now extant; but also Epistles, one or more, which
they had sent to Sicily. They wrote also that considerable Epistle, which is in
Number the Thirty sixth. It is not to be doubted that they wrote many more. How
many Meetings and Consultations had they, during these Sixteen Months, about
the Affairs of the Church, and particularly, the Case of the Lapsi, which was
then so much agitated? Is it probable, that they wanted a Moderator; a Mouth of
their Meeting; One to keep Order in the manner and managing of the Affairs were
brought before them all that time, and in all those Meetings? How could they,
without one, handle Matters with Order and Decency? And what was there to
hinder them from having one, if they had a mind for him? Might they not have
chosen one as safely as they met? Might they not have chosen one at every
Meeting, according to the Principles of Parity? Farther:

What need of so much Parade about the Election of a Moderator of a Presbytery,
as was then about the Election of a Bishop? Why the People chose him, according
to the Principles of those, who think that St. Cyprian was for Popular
Elections? What was the People's Interest? How was it their Concern, who was
Moderator of the Presbytery? What was his Influence, De jure, at least, in the
Government of the Church, more than the Influence of any other Member of the
Presbytery? Nay, is it not confessed, that, as Moderator, he was no
Church-Governour at all? That he had no Jurisdiction over his Brethren? That
his Power was only Ordinative, not Decisive? To be the Mouth of the Meeting,
not to be their Will, or Commanding Faculty? To keep Order in the Manner and
Managing of what came before them, not to determine what was Debated amongst
them? Why then were the People so much concerned about him? What Benefits, or
what Harm, could redound to them by ones being Moderator of the Presbytery,
whatever he was? Besides, as I have showed before, as Moderator of the
Presbytery, he had relation only to the Presbytery: At least, he had none
directly, immediately, and formally to the People. What pretense, then, could
the People have to Interest themselves in his Election? Nay, say, (as I am apt
to think it ought to be said, I am sure the contrary cannot be made appear from
St. Cyprian,) that he was not chosen by the People, but only in their Presence;
and the same Argument will take place, as is obvious to any body. Farther yet.

What need of Convocating so many from the Neighborhood for managing the
Election of a Moderator, E. g. for the Presbytery of Rome? If a Bishop, in St.
Cyprian's time, was nothing but a Presbyterian Moderator, then the Bishops
convocated for managing the Election of a Moderator, were Moderators too: And
so, by consequence, Sixteen Moderators of other Presbyteries met at Rome to
constitute a Moderator for the Roman Presbytery. And might not the Presbytery
of Rome have chosen their own Moderator without the Trouble or the Inspection
of so many Moderators of other Presbyteries? Once more.

What Necessity, nay, what Congruity, of a new Imposition of Hands, of a new
Ordination, a new Mission for constituting One a Moderator of a Presbytery? And
this too, to be performed by none but Moderators of other Presbyteries? Thus,
e. g. it behoved Six Moderators to meet at Capsis, to Ordain a Moderator for
the Presbytery of Capsis; and Sixteen at Rome, to Ordain a Moderator for the
Presbytery of Rome: And, after he was Ordained, it behoved Novatianus to be at
so much pains to get together Three Moderators, to Ordain himself an
Anti-Moderator. Who can think on these Things without smiling? But perhaps you
may think, I have insisted on this Argument more than enough; and therefore I
shall leave it, and proceed to other Considerations. To go on, then.

A Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, thus Elected, Ordained, and Possessed of his
Chair, did bear a double Relation, One to the particular Church over which he
was set, and another to the Church* Catholic, an integrant part whereof, the
particular Church, was, of which he was Bishop. The consideration of each of
these Relations will furnish us with fresh Arguments against our Author's
Hypothesis. I shall begin with the Relation he bore to his own particular
Church. And,

FIRST: The first Thing I observe about him, in that regard, shall be, That he
was the Principle of Unity to Her. Whosoever adhered to him, and lived in his
Communion, was in the Church a Catholic Christian. Whosoever separated from
him, was out of the Church, and a Schismatic. He was the Head of all the
Christians living within his District; and they were One Body, One Society, One
Church, by depending upon him, by being subject to him, by keeping to his
Communion. He was the Sun, and they were the Beams; he was the Root, and they
were the Branches; he was the Fountain, and they were the Streams; As St.
Cyprian explains the Matter Unit. Eccl. p. 108.
. This is a Point of great Consequence, especially considering that it is the
Foundation of the Apologist's Argument, our Author's Answer to which I am
examining: and therefore, give me leave to handle it somewhat fully. And I
proceed by these Steps.

I. There was nothing St. Cyprian and the Catholic Bishops, his
Contemporaries, valued more, reckoned of higher Importance, or laid greater
Stress upon, than the Unity of the Church: And there was no Sin they
represented at more Heinous, or more Criminal, than the Sin of Schism.

In their reckoning, Unity was the great Badge of Christianity; God heard the
Prayers that were put up in Unity Unit. Eccl. p. 112.
, but not those that were performed in Schism. Christian Peace, Brotherly
Concord, and the Unity of People in the true Faith and Worship of God, was
accounted of greater value by them, than all other imaginable Sacrifices
Sacrificium Deo majus est Pax nostra, and fraterna concordia, and de unitate
Patris and Spiritus Sancti plebs adunata. Cyp. de Orat. Dom. p. 149.
. Nothing afforded greater Pleasure to the Angels in Heaven, than Harmony
amongst Christians on Earth Firmil. Ep. inter Cyprianicas 75. p. 217.
. It were easy to collect a thousand such Testimonies concerning the
Excellency of Unity. But as for Schism, and Schismatics, how may it make Men's
Hearts to tremble, when they hear what hard Names, and what horrid Notions,
these Primitive Worthies gave them, and had of them? Schism, to them, was the
Devil's Device for subverting the Faith, corrupting the Truth, and cutting
Unity Cyp. Un. Eccl. p. 105.
. Christ instituted the Church, and the Devil Heresy Conc Carth. Suff. 60.
, or Schism; for both, then, went commonly under one Name. Schism was reckoned
a greater Crime than Idolatry it self: And St. Cyprian proves it by several
Arguments Un. Eccl. p. 117.
. Firmilian affirms it also Firmil. Ep. inter^ Cypr. 75. p. 227.
. So does Dionysius of Alexandria, in his notable Epistle to Novatianus. He
tells him, He ought to have suffered the greatest Miseries, rather than divide
the Church of God: That Martyrdom, for the Preservation of Unity, was as
Glorious, as Martyrdom for not Sacrificing to Idols: Nay, more, Because he who
Suffers rather than he will Sacrifice, Suffers only for saving his own Soul;
But he that Suffers for Unity, Suffers for the whole Church Eusebius. H. E. l. 6.
c. 45.
. Schismatics had not the Spirit Cyp. Ep. 69. p. 185.
; Were forsaken of the Spirit Ibid. Ep. 59. p. 138.
; Held not the Faith Un. Eccl. p. 108, 109.
, Had neither Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost Conc. Carth. Suff. 10.
. They were Renegadoes Cyp. Ep. 51. p. 95.
; Apostates Ep. 55. p. 103.
; Malignants Ibid. p. 105.
; Parricides Ep. 57. p. 117.
; Antichrists Conc. Carth Suff. 1, 11, 64, 87. Ep. 69. p. 180.
; False Christ's Conc. Carth. Suff. 5.
; Christ's Enemies Ib. Suff. 7, and 21.
; Blasphemers Suff. 1, 31.
; The Devil's Priests Suff. 1.
; Retainers to Corah Un. Eccl. p. 116.
; Retainers to Judas Cyp. de Orat. Dom. p. 150.
; Villainous and Perfidious Un. Eccl. p. 116.
; Aliens, Profane, Enemies Ibid. p. 109.
; Were without Hope Cyp. Ep. 69. p. 182.
; Had no Right to the Promises Un. Eccl. p. 109.
; Could not be saved Cyp. Ep. 4. p. 9.
; Were Infidels Conc. Carth. Suff. 1.
; Worse than Heathens Suff. 37.
; Self-Condemned Ep 59. p. 140.
; were no more Christians than the Devil Un. Eccl. p. 114. Con. Carth. Suff.
24. Ep. 55. p. 112.
; Could but belong to Christ Un. Eccl. p. 114.
; Could not go to Heaven Ibid.
; The hottest part of Hell their Portion Ep. 69. p. 18^.
; Their Society, the Synagogue of Satan Con. Carth. Suff. 60.
; Their Conventicles, Dens of Thieves Ep. 73. p. 207.
; They were Destroyers of Souls Ep. 72. p. 197.
; Their Preaching was poisonous Un. Eccl. p. 111. Con. Carth. Suff. 29. Ep. 43.
p. 83.
; Their Baptism pestiferous Un. Eccl. p. 112.
, and profane Ep. 69. p. 180.
; Their Sacrifices abominable Un. Eccl. p. 113.
; They could not be Martyrs P. 114, 117. in Ep. passim.
; Their Company was to be avoided Un. Eccl. p. 115. Ep. 59. p. 140.
: Whosoever befriended them, were Persecutors of the Truth Con. Carth. Suff. 38.
; Were Betrayers of Christ's Spouse to Adulterers Ibid. Suff. 49, 58, 61.
; Were Betrayers of Unity Ep. 73. p. 203.
; Were involved in the some Guilt with them Ep. 69. p. 184.
. In short, Schismatics, by being such, were, Ipso facto, Persecutors of the
Church Ep. 43. p. 82, 85.
, Enemies of Mercy Ep. 60. p. 142.
, Infatuated Salt Con. Carth. Suff. 7.
, and Cursed of God Ibid. Suff. 1.
.

Such, I say, were the Notions the Holy Fathers, in those early Times of the
Church, had of Schismatics; and such were the Names they gave them. And
certainly whosoever seriously considers how much Schism is condemned in Holy Writ;
what an Enemy it is to the Peace, the Power, and the Propagation of
Christianity; and how much it stands in opposition to the Holy, Humble,
Peaceable, Patient, Meek, and Charitable Spirit of the Gospel: Whosoever considers,
that our Blessed Savious's great Errand into the World, was to Unite all his
Disciples here into one Body, and one Communion, that they might Eternally be
Blessed in the full Enjoyment of one Communion with the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, in Heaven hereafter: Whosoever, I say, considers these Things, cannot
but confess, that Schism and Schismatics deserve all these hard Names, and
answer all these terrible Notions. Now

2. That, for the Preservation of Unity, and the Preventing of Schism, in every
particular Church, all were bound by the Principles of St. Cyprian's Age to
live in the Bishops Communion; and to own and look upon him as the Principle of
Unity to that Church of which he was Head and Ruler, might be made appear from
a vast Train of Testimonies. But I shall content myself with a few. Thus, for
Example, when some of the Lapsed presumed to write to St. Cyprian, and design
themselves, without a Bishop, by the Name of a Church; How did the Holy Man
resent it? Consider how he begins his Answer to them. Our Lord, (says he) whose
Precepts we ought to Honor and Obey, Instituting the Honor of a Bishop, and
the Contexture of a Church, says thus to Peter in the Gospel; I say unto thee,
thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it: And I will give unto thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. From thence by the Vicissitudes of Times and
Successions, the Ordination of Bishops, and the Frame of the Church, are
transmitted so, as that the Church is built upon the Bishops, and all her
Affairs are ordered by them as the chief Rulers: And therefore, seeing this is
God's appointment, I cannot but admire the bold Temerity of some, who, writing
to me, call themselves a Church; when a Church is only to be found in the
Bishop, the Clergy, and the faithful Christians. God forbid, that a number of
Lapsed should be called a Church, etc. Consider how he Reasons. By Divine
Institution, there cannot be a Church without a Bishop: The Church is founded
on the Bishop: The Bishop, as Chief Ruler, orders all the Affairs of the
Church: Therefore, those Lapsed ought not to have called themselves a Church,
seeing they had no Bishop, no Principle of Unity Dominus noster, cujus
praecepta metuere and observare deb^mus, Episcopi honorem, and Ecclesiae suae
Rationem disponens in Evangelio, Loquitur and dicit Petro; Ego dico tibi, quia
tu es Petrus, and super istam Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae
inferorum non vincent eam; Et tibi dabo claves regni Caelorum, etc. -- Inde per
temporum and successionum vices. Episcoporum Ordinatio, and Ecclesi^ ratio
decurrit, ut Ecclesia super Episcopos constituatur: Et omnes actus Ecclesiae
p^r eosdem praepositos Gubernetur. Cum hoc itaque Divina lege fund imeutum sit,
miror quosdam audaci ^emeritate sic mihi scribere voluisse, ut Ecclesiae ^omine
literas facerent: Quando Ecclesia in Ep^scopo and Clero, and in omn^bu^
stantibus sit constituta: Absit enim, ne Domini misericordia and potestas ejus
invidiam patiatur, ut Ecclesia esse dicatur Lapsorum numerus. Ep. 33. p. 66.
. We have another notable Reasoning, as well as Testimony of his, in his 43d
Epistle, written to his People of Carthage upon the breaking out of
Felicissimus his Schism. God is One, (says he) and Christ is One, and the
Church is One, and the Chair is One, be our Lord's own Voice, founded on St.
Peter. Another Altar cannot be reared, another Priesthood cannot be erected,
besides the One Altar, and the One Priesthood. Whosoever gathers elsewhere,
scatters. Whatever Human Fury institutes, against God's Appointment, is
Adulterous, is Impious, is Sacrilegious. And a little after: O Brethren! Let no
Man make you wander from the Ways of the Lord: O Christians! Let no Man rend
you from the Gospel of Christ: Let no Man tear the Sons of the Church from the
Church: Let them perish alone, who will needs perish: Let them abide alone out
of the Church, who have departed from the Church: Let them, alone, not be with
the Bishops, who have Rebelled against the Bishops Deus unus est, and Christus
unus, and una Ecclesia, and Cathedra una super Petrum Domini voce fundata.
Aliud Altar constitui, aut Sacerdotium novum fieri, praeter unum Altar, and
unum Sacerdotium, non potest. Quisquis alibi collegerit, spargit. Adulterum
est, impium est, sacrilegum est, quod^unque humano furore instituitur, ut
dispositio Divina violetur -- Nemo vos, fratres, errare a Domini viis faciat:
Nemo vos Christianos ab Evangelio Christi rapiat: Nemo filios Ecclesiae de
Ecclesia tollat: Pereant sibi soli, qui perire voluerunt. Extra Ecclesiam soli
remaneant, qui de Ecclesia recesserunt. Soli cum Episcopis non sint, qui contra
Episcopos Rebellarunt. Ep. 43. p. 83, 84.
, etc. And, as I observed before, in his Epistle to Florentinus Pupianus, he
defines a Church to be a People united to their Priest, and a Flock adhering to
their Pastor, etc. and from thence tells Pupianus, That he ought to consider,
that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop: So that if any
are not with the Bishop, they are not in the Church Vide supra, page 8.
. And how concernedly does he Reason the Case in his Book of the Unity of the
Church? Can he seem to himself, says he, to be with Christ, who is against
Christ's Priests? Who separates himself from the Society of Christ's Clergy and
People? That Man bears Arms against the Church: He fights against God's
Ordinance: He is an Enemy of the Altar: A Rebel against Christ's Sacrifice. He
is Perfidious, and not Faithful; Sacrilegious, and not Religious. He is an
Undutiful Servant, and Impious Son, an Hostile Brother, who can contemn God's
Bishops, and forsake his Priests, and dares to set up another Altar, and offer
up unlawful Prayers An ess sibi cum Christo videtur, qui adversus Sacerdotes
Christi facit? Qui s^ ^ Cleri ejus and plebis Societate sec^rnit? Arma ille
contra Ecclesiam portat. Contra Dei dispositionem pugnat. Hostis Altaris;
adversus Sacrificium Christi Rebellis; pro Fide, Perfidus; pro Religione,
Sacrilegus; inobsequens servus; Filius impius; Frater inimicus; contemptis
Episcopis and Dei Sacerdot^bus derelictis. Constituere audet aliud Altar,
precem alteram, illicitis vocibus facere, etc. De Unit. Eccl. p. 116.
, etc. Indeed, in that same Book he calls the Bishop, The Glue that cements
Christians into the solid Unity of the Church Deus unus est, and Christus unus,
and una Ecclesia ejus, and Fldes una, and Plebs in solidam Corporis unitatem,
Concordiae glutino copulata. Ibid. p. 119.
. And hence it is,

3. That St. Cyprian, every where, makes the Contempt of the one Bishop, or
Undutifulness to him, the Origin of Schisms and Heresies. Thus, Epist. 3. he
makes this Observation upon the Undutifulness of a certain Deacon to
Rogatianus, his Bishop; That such are the first Efforts of Heretics, and the
Out-breaking and Presumptions of ill^advised Schismatics: They follow their
own Fancies, and, in the Pride of their Hearts, contemn their Superiors. So
Men separate from the Church: So they Erect profane Altars without the Church:
So they Rebel against Christian Peace, and Divine Order and Unity Haec sunt
enim initia Haereticorum, and Ortus atque Conatus Schismaticorum male
cogitantium, ut sibi placeant, and Praepositum superbo tumore contemnant. Sic
de Ecclesia receditur; sic Altar profanum, foris, collocatur; sic contra pac^m
Christi, and Ordinationem atque Unitat^m Dei Rebellatur. Ep. 3. p. 6.
. And, Ep. 59. he tells Cornelius, That Heresies and Schisms spring from this
only Fountain, That God's Priest (the Bishop) is not obeyed; And Men don't
consider, that, at the same time, there ought to be only One Bishop, only One
Judge, as Christ's Vicar, in a Church Neque enim aliunde Haereses obortae sunt,
aut nata sunt Schismata quam inde, quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur: Nec
unus in Ecclesia, ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad t^mpus Iudex, vice Christi
cogitatur. Ep. 59. p. 129.
. And Ep. 66. to Florentius Pupianus, That from hence Heresies and Schisms have
hitherto sprung, and do daily spring; That the Bishop, who is One, and is set
over the Church, is contemned by the proud Presumption of some: And he that is
honored of God, is dishonored by Men Inde enim Schismata and Haereses Obortae
sunt and Oriuntur, dum Episcopus qui unus est, and Ecclesiae praeest. superba
quorundam Praesumptione contemnitur; and homo Dignitate Dei honoratus, indignus
ab hominibus judicatur. Ep. 66. p. 167.
. And a little after, he tells him, (alluding clearly to the Monarchical Power
of Bishops) That Bees have a King; and Beasts have a Captain; and Robbers, with
all humility, obey their Commander: And from thence he concludes, how
unreasonable it must be for Christians not to pay suitable Regards to their
Bishops Apes habent Regem, and ducem Pecudes, and fidem servant Latrones;
Mancipi obsequio pleno humilitatis ob^emperant. Quanto simpliciores and
meliores vobis sunt brutae pecudes, and muta animalia, and cru^nti licet ac
furentes inter Gladios, a^que inter arma praedones? Praepositus illic
agnoscitur and cru^nt licet ac furentes inter Gladios, a^que inter arma
praedones? Praepositus illic agnosciture and timetur, quem non S^ntentia Divina
constituit, sed in qu^m factio perdita, and noc^ns Caterva consentit. Ibid.
. And in another place, Then is the Bond of our Lord's Peace broken; then is
Brotherly Charity violated; then is the Truth adulterated, and Unity divided;
then Men leap out into Heresies and Schisms: When? When the Priests are
controlled; when the Bishops are envied; when one grudges that himself was not
rather preferred; or disdains to bear with a Superior Hinc Dominicae pacis
vinculum rumpitur; hinc Charitatis fraterna violatur; hinc adulteratur veritas;
unitas scinditur; ad Haereses and Schismata Prosilitur: Dum obtrectatur
Sac^rdotibus; dum Episcopis invidetur; cum quis aut quaeritur non s^ potius
Ordinatum, aut dedignatur alterum far praepositum. De Zelo and Livore, p. 223.
. Indeed,

4. By the Principles of those Times, the Bishop was so much the Principle of
Unity to the Church which he Governed; the whole Society had such a Dependence
on him, was so Vircuaily in him, and represented by him; that what he did, as
Bishop, was reputed the Deed of the whole Church which he Ruled. If he was
Oxthodox and Catholic, so was the Body united to him reckoned to be. If
Heretical or Schismatical, it went under the same Denomination. If he denied
the Faith, whosoever adhered to him, after that, were reputed to have denied it. If
he confessed the Faith, the whole Church was reckoned to have confessed it in
him Thus,

We find, when Martialis and Basilides, two Spanish Bishops, committed
Idolatry, and so forfeited their Bishoprics, and yet some of their People
inclined to continue in their Communion; St. Cyprian, with other 36 Bishops,
tells those People, That it behoved them not to flatter themselves, by
thinking, that they could continue to Communicate with Polluted Bishops, and
withal, themselves continue Pure and Unpolluted: For all that communicated with
them, would be Partakers of their Guilt: And therefore, (as they go on,) a
People obeying and fearing God ought to separate from Criminal Bishops, and be
careful not to mix with them in their Sacrilegious Sacrifices Ne^ sibi Plebs
blandiatur, quasi immunis esse a Contagio delict^ possit, ^um Sacerdo^e
peccatore Communicans, and ad injustum and illicitum praepositi sui Episcopat
um, consensum suum commoda^s; qu^^do per O^ee Prophetm (Hos. 9. 4.) comminetur
and dicat Cens^ra Divina -- Docens Scil. and Ostende^s, omnes omnino ad
peccatum constringi, qui fuerint profani and injusti S^cerdotis Sacrificio
contaminati -- Propter quod plebs obsequens praceptis Dominicis, and Deum
met^ens a (...) praeposit^ se debet, nec se ^d Sacrilegi Sacerdotis sacrificia
miscere. Ep. 67. p. 171.
. And again, in that same Synodical Epistle, they say, that it was a neglecting
of Divine Discipline, and an Unaccountable Rashness to Communicate with
Martialis and Basilides: For whosoever joyne^ with them in their Unlawful
Communions, were Polluted by the Contagion of their Guilt: And whosoever were
Partakers with them in the Crime, would not be separated from them in the
Punishment Quare et^^ aliq^i de Collegis nostris -- Deificam Disciplinam
negligend^m putant, and cum Basilide and Martiale ^emere communicant -- Tamen,
qui malis and peccatoribus -- (...) Communione (...), nocenti^^ lactibus (...);
and (...) junguntur in culp^, sic nec in p^na separantur. Ibid. p. 175.
. Indeed, this is the great Purpose of that 67th Epistle; as also of the 68th
concerning Marcianus, who, by Communicating with Novatianus, had rendered his
own Communion Infectious and Abominable Ep. 68.
.

On the other hand, when Cornelius Bishop of Rome confessed the Faith before
the Heathen Persecutors, St. Cyprian says, the whole Roman Church confessed
Virtus ill^c Episcopi praec^de^tis, public^ comprobata ^st; ad^natio sequen^is
fraternitatis Oste^s^ nitatis Ostensa est; dum apud vos, unus animus and (...)
vox est, Eccl^sia omnis Romana Confessa est. Ep. 61. p. 141.
. And when Cyprian himself, having confessed, received the Sentence of Death;
being then at Utica, he wrote to his Presbyters, Deacons, and People, at
Carthage, telling them how earnest he was to Suffer at Carthage; Because, as he
Reasons, it was most Congruous and Becoming, That a Bishop should confess
Christ, in that City, in which he Ruled Christ's Church; That, by confessing in
their Presence, they might be all Ennobled: For whatever, says he, in the
moment of Confession, the Confessing Bishop speaks, GOD assisting him, he
speaks with the MOUTH OF ALL. And he goes on, telling them, How the Honor of
their Glorious Church of Carthage should be mutilated, (as he words it.) if he
should Suffer at Utica; especially, considering how earnest and frequent he had
been in his Prayers and Wishes, that he might, both for HIMSELF and THEM,
Confess in their Presence at Carthage Eo quod congruat Episcopum in ea Civitate
in qua Ecclesiae Dominicae prae^st, illic Dominum confiteri, and Plebem
universam, praepositi praes^ntis Confessione clarificari. Qu^dcunque enim sub
illo conf^ ssionis momento, Co^f^ssor Episcopus l^quitur, aspirante D^o, ORE
OMNINM loquitur, caeterum mutabilitur Honor Ecclesiae nostrae tam Gloriosae, s^
ego Episcopus alterius Ecclesiae praepositus, accepta, apud Uticam, super
confession^ (...), exinde Martyr ad Dominum proficiscar; quandoquidem Ego and
pro ME and pro VOBIS apud VOS confiteri, and exinde ad Dominum proficisci,
Orationibus continuis D^precer, etc. Ep. 81. p. 238, 239.
. And upon the same Principle it was, that he so frequently called his People,
His Bowels, His Body, The Members of his Body: And that he affirmed, that their
Griefs were his Griefs; Their Wounds, his Wounds; Their Distresses, his
Distresses Vide Ep. 17. p. 39. and De Lapsis, p. 122, 123. fuse.
, etc. Upon the same Principle it was also, that Pontius his Deacon, having
accounted how our Holy Martyr was executed, in presence of the People, falls
out into this Rapture: O blessed People of the Church of Carthage, that
Suffered together with such a Bishop, with their Eyes and Senses, and, which is
more, with open Voice, and was Crowned with him! For tho all could not Suffer
in real Effect, according to their common Wishes, nor really be Partakers of
that Glory; yet whosoever were sincerely willing to Suffer, in the sight of
Christ who was looking on, and in the Hearing of their Bishop, did, in a
manner, send an Embassy to Heaven, by One who was a competent Witness of their
Wishes O beatum Ecclesiae populum, qui Episcopo suo tali, and Oculis pariter
and sensibus, and quod amplius est, publicata voce compassus est, and sicut
ipso tractante s^mper audierat, Deo jud ^e Coronatus est* Quamvis enim non
potuerit evenire, quod optabant vota communia, ut consortio pacis Gloriae simul
pl^bs tota pat^retur; quicunque sub Christi spectantis Oculis, and sub auribus
Sac^rdotis ex animo pa^i voluit, p^r idoneum voti sui testem, Legationis quodam
modo literas ad Deum misit. Pontius in vita Cyp. p. 10.
.

5. Neither was this of the Bishop's being the Principle of Unity to the Church
which he governed a Novel Notion, newly Minted in the Cyprianic Age: For,
besides that Episcopacy was generally believed, then, to be of Divine
Institution; besides, that St. Cyprian still Argues upon the Supposition of a
Divine Institution, as particularly, in the same very Case of the Bishops being
the Principle of Unity, as may be seen in his Reasoning against the Lapsed,
which I have already cited from Ep. 33. and might be more fully made appear, if
it were needful. Besides these Things, I say, we have the same thing frequently
insisted on by the Holy Ignatius, who was Contemporary with the Apostles, in
his Genuine Epistles. Thus, for Instance, in his Epistle to the Church of
Smyrna, he tells them, That that is only a firm and solid Communion which is
under the Bishop, or allowed by him; and, That the Multitude ought still to be
with the Bishop (...) Edit. Land. 1680. p. 6.
. Plainly importing this much at least, That there can be no True Christian
Communion, unless it be in the Unity of the Church; and there can be no
Communion in the Unity of the Church, in opposition to the Bishop. And, in his
Epistle to the Philadelphians, These who belong to God, and Jesus Christ, are
with the Bishops; and these are God's that they may live by Jesus Christ, who,
forsaking their Sins, come into the Unity of the Church (...) p. 40.
. And again, in that same Epistle, God does not dwell where there is Division
and Wrath: God only Pardons those, who, Repenting, join in the Unity of God,
and in Society with the Bishops (...). p. 43.
. And he has also that same very Notion, of the Bishops being so much the
Principle of Unity, that, as it were, the whole Church is represented in him.
Thus he tells the Ephesians, that he received their whole Body, in their Bishop
Onesimus (...). p. 17.
. And in his Epistle to the Trallians, he tells them, that in Polybius their
Bishop, who came to him at Smyrna, he beheld their whole Society (...). p. 47.
.

6. Indeed, this Principle, of the Bishop's being the Center of Unity to his
Church, was most reasonable and accountable in it self. Every particular Church
is an Organized Political Body; and there can be no Unity in an Organical Body,
whether Natural or Political, without a Principle of Unity, on which all the
Members must hang, and from which, being separated, they must cease to be
Members: And who so fit for being this Principle fo Unity to a Church, as he
who was Pastor, Ruler, Governor, Captain, Head, Judge, Christ's Vicar, etc. in
relation to that Church? This was the True Foundation of that other Maxim which
I insisted on before, viz. That there could be but One Bishop, at once, in a
Church? Why so? Why? Because it was Monstrous for One Body to have Two Head,
for One Society to have Two Principles of Unity.

If what I have said does not satisfy you, (tho, in all conscience, it ought,
it being scarcely possible to prove any thing of this Nature more
demonstratively,) then be pleased only to consider the necessary Connection that
is betwixt this Principle, and that which I am next to prove; and that is,

SECONDLY, That by the Principles of those Times, a Bishop, Cononically
Promoted, was Supreme in his Church; immediately subject to Jesus Christ;
independent on any, unaccountable to any Earthly Ecclesiastical Superior.
There was no Universal Bishop, then, under Jesus Christ, who might be the
Supreme visible Head of the Catholic visi^le Church. There was, indeed, an
Universal Bishopric; but it was not holden by any One single Person. There was
an Unus Episcopatus; One Episcopacy, One Episcopal Office, One Bishopric; but
it was divided into many Parts; and every Bishop had his sh^re of it assigned
him, to Rule and Govern with the Plenitude of the Episcopal Authority
Ep^scopatus unus est, cujus a singul^s in solidum pars tenetur. Cyp. de Un.
Eccl. p. 108.
. There was One Church all the World over, divided into many Members; and there
was One Episcopacy d^ffused in proportion to that One Church, by the Harmonious
Numer^sity of many Bishops Et cum sit a Christo una Ecclesia, per to^u^ Mundum
in multa Membra (...); item, Episcopa^us unus Episcoporum multorum Concordi
numerositate diffusus, etc. Ep. 55. p. 112.
. Or, if you would have it in other words, the One Catholic Church was divided
into many Precincts, Districts, or Diocesses; call them as you will: Each of
those District^ had its singular Bishop; and that Bishop, within that District,
had the Supreme Power. He was subordinate to none but the Great Bishop of
Souls, Jesus Christ, the only Universal Bishop of the Universal Church. He was
independent on, and stood collateral with all other Bishops. There Is nothing
more fully, or more plainly, or more frequently insisted on by St. Cyprian,
than this Great Principle. I shall only give you a short view of it from him
and his Contemporaries. And,

I. He lays the Foundation of it in the Parity which our Lord instituted
amongst his Apostles. Christ, says he, gave Equal Power to all his Apostles
when he said, As my Father has sent me, even so I send you, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost Et quamvi^ Apostolis omnibus PAREM potestatem tribuat and dicat,
etc. Un. Eccl. p. 107.
, etc. And again, The rest of the Apostles were the same that St. Peter was,
endued with an Equality of Power and Honor Hoc ^rant utique caet^ri Apostoli
quod fuit Petrus; PARI CONSORTIO praediti and honoris and potestatis. Ibid.
. Now St. Cyprian, on all occasions, makes Bishops Successors to the Apostles,
as perchance I may prove fully hereafter. Thus, I say, he founds the Equality
of Bishops, and, by consequence, every Bishop's Supremacy within his own
Diocese. And agreeably, he Reasons most frequently. I shall only give you a few
Instances.

2. Then, in that excellent Epistle to Antonianus, discoursing concerning the
Case of the Lapsed, and showing how, upon former Occasions, different Bishops
had taken different Measures about restoring Penitents to the Peace of the
Church, he concludes with this General Rule, That every Bishop, so long as he
maintains the Bond of Concord, and preserves Catholic Unity, has Power to
order the Affairs of his own Church, as he shall be accountable to God Man^nte
concordiae vinculo, and p^rseverante catholicae Ecclesiae individuo Sacramento,
actum suum disponit and dirigit unusquisque Episcopus, rationem prop^siti sui
Domino redditurus. Ep. 55. p. 110.
. Plainly importing, that no Bishop can give Laws to another, or call him to an
Account for his Management. To the same purpose is the conclusion of his
Epistle to Iubaianus, about the Baptism of Heretics and Schismatics. These
Things, most dear Brother, says he, I have written to you, as I was able,
neither prescribing to, nor imposing on any Man, seeing every Bishop has full
Power to do as he judges most fitting Haec tibi breviter, pro nostra
Mediocritate, rescripsimus, Frater carissime, nemini praescribentes aut
praejudicantes quo minus unusquisque Episcoporum, quod putant, faciat, hab^ns
arbitrii sui liberam potestatem. Ep. 73. P. 210.
, etc. The same way he concludes his Epistle to Magnus, concerning that same
Case of Baptism performed by Heretics Ep. 62. p. 188.
. To the same purpose is the whole Strain of his Epistle to Florentius Pupianus
Ep. 66.
. And what can be more clear, or full, than his excellent Discourse at the
opening of the Council of Carthage, Anno 256? More than Eighty Bishops met, to
determine concerning that same matter of Baptism administered by Heretics or
Schismatics. St. Cyprian was Praeses; and having briefly represented to them
the Occasion of their Meeting, he spoke to them thus: it remains now, that each
of us speak his sense freely, judging no Man, refusing our Communion to no Man,
tho he should dissent from us: For none of us costitutes himself Bishop of
Bishops, nor forces his Colleagues upon a necessity of Obeying by a Tyrannical
Terror; seeing every Bishop is entirely Master of his own Resolutions, and can
no more he judged by others, than he can judge others: But we all expect the
Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has Power of making us Governors
of his Church, and calling us to an Account for our Administrations Superest ut
de hac ipsa re, singuli, quid sentiamu, proferamus; neminem judicantes, aut a
jure Communionis, aliquem, si diversum senserit, ameventes. Neque enim quisquam
nostrum Episcopum se Episcoporum constituit, aut tyrannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitatem Collegas suos adigit; quando habeat omnis Episcopus,
pro licentia libertatis and potestatis suae, arbitrium proprium; tamque ab alio
judicari non possit, quam nec ipse poterit judicare: Sed expectemus universi
judicium Domini nostri Jesus Christi, qui unus and solus habet potestatem and
praeponendi nos in Ecclesiae suae Gubernatione and de act^ (...) nostro
judicandi. Opp. Cyp. Tom. 1. p. 229.
.

3. Neither did the Principle hold only in respect of this or the other Bishop;
but all without Exception, even the Bishop of Rome, stood upon a Level* And for
this, we have as pregnant Proof as possibly can be desired: For when the
Schismatical Party at Carthage set up Fortunatus as an Anti-Bishop, and
thereupon sent some of their Partisans to Rome toi inform Cornelius of their
Proceedings, and justify them to him; Cyprian wrote to him also, and thus
Reasoned the Case with him. To what Purpose was it for them to go to Rome to
tell you, that they had set up a false Bishop against the Bishops? Either they
continue in their Wickedness, and are pleased with what they have done; or they
are Penitent, land willing to return to the Churches Unity: If the latter, they
know whither they may return: For seeing it is determined by us all, and
withal, it is just and reasonable in it self, That every one's Cause should be
examined where the Crime was committed; and seeing there is a Portion of Flock
(the Catholic Church) assigned to every Bishop to be Governed by him, as he
shall be accountable to God, our Subjects ought not to run about from Bishop to
Bishop, nor break the Harmonious Concord which is amonst Bishops by their
subtle and fallacious Temerity* But every Man's Cause ought there to be
discussed, where he may have Accusers and Witnesses of his Crime Quae autem
causa veniendi and Pseudo-Episcopum contra Episcopos factumnuntiandi? Aut ^^im
placet illis quod fecerunt and in s^to scelere perseverant; aut si displicet
and recedunt, sciunt quo revertant^r. Nam cum st^tutum sit omnibus nobis, and
aequum sit pariter ac justum, at uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est
Crimen admissum, and portio Gregis singulis pastoribus sit adscripta, quam
regat U^usquisque and Gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino redditurus, oportet
utique eos quibus praesumus, no^ circumcurfare, nec Episcoporum concordiam
cohaerentem sua subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere, sed agere illic
causam saum ubi and accusatores habere, and testes sui Criminis possint. Ep.
59. P. 36.
, etc. In which Reasoning, we have these Things plain: 1. That, by St.
Cyprian's Principles, evey Bishop was judge of his own Subjects; of all the
Christians who lived within his District. 2. That no Bishop, no not the Bishop
of Rome, was Superior to another Bishop; nor could receive Appeals from his
Sentences. And, 3. That this Independency of Bishops, this Unaccountableness of
one Bishop to another, as to his Superior, was founded on every Bishop's
having his Portion of the Flock assigned to him, to be Ruled and Governed by
him, as he should answer to God; i. e. upon his visible Supremacy in his own
Church; his being immediately Subordinate to God only. To the same purpose he
writes to Stephen Bishop of Rome also: For having told him his Mind freely
concerning those who should return from a State of Schism, to the Unity of the
Church; how they ought to be Treated, and how Recceived, etc. he concludes
thus: We know that some are tenacious, and unwilling to alter what they have
once determined, and that they will needs retain some Methods peculiar to
themselves; but still with the Safety of Peace, and Concord with their
Colleagues: In which case, we offer Violence, we proscribe Laws to no Man,
seeing every Bishop has full liberty in the Administration of the Affairs of
his Church, as he will answwer to God Caeterum scimus quosdam quod semel
imbiberint, nolle deponere; nec propositum suum facile mutate; sed salvo, inter
Collegas, pacis ac Concordiae vinculo, quaedam propria, quae apud se semel sint
usurpata retinere. Qua in re, nec nos vim cuiquam facimus aut legem damus; cum
habeat, in Ecclesiae administratione, voluntatis liberum, unusquisque
praepositus, rationem sui actus Domino redditurus. Ep. 72. p. 198.
. And how do both St. Cyprian and Firmilian resent Stephen's Extravagance, in
threatening to refuse his Communion to those who had not the same Sentiments
with himself about the Baptism of Heretics? Let any Man read St. Cyprian's
Epistle to Pompeius, and Firmilian's to St. Cyprian Vide Ep. 74, and 75.
, and he may have enough to this purpsoe. Would you have yet more? Then take a
most memorable Acknowledgment from the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome. St.
Cyprian had written to them, while the Bishop's Chair was vacant, and given
them an account of his Resolutions about the Lapsed; those who had Sacrificed
to the Heathen Idols in time of Persecution. Now, consider how they begin their
answer to him. Although, say they, a Mind that is without Checks of Conscience,
that is supported by the Vigor of Evangelical Discipline, and bears witness to
it self, that it has squared its Actions by the Divine Commandments, uses to
content it self with God, as its only Judge; and neither seeks other Men's
Approbations, nor fears their Accusations; yet they are worthy of doubled
Praises, who, while they know their Conscience is subject to God only as its
Judge, do yet desire that their Administrations should have their Brethrens
Comprobations Quanquam been sibi conscius animus; and Evangelicae Disciplinae
vigore subnixus; and verus sibi, in Decretis Caelestibus, testis effectus,
soleat, solo Deo judice, esse contentus; nec alterius aut Lauds petere, aut
Accusationes pertimescere; Tam^n geminata sunt laud Condigni, qui, cum
Conscientiam sciant Deo soli deb^re se judici, actus tamen suos desiderant
etiam ab ipsis suis fratribus comprobari, etc. Ep. inter Cyprianicas 30. p. 56.
. So clearly acknowledging St. Cyprian's (and by consequence, every Bishop's)
Supremacy within his own District; and his Independency, or Non-Subordination,
to any other Bishop; that even Rigaltius himself, in his Annotations on St.
Cyprian, tho a Papist, confesses it. And no wonder; For,

4. By the Principles of those Times, every Bishop was Christ's Vicar within
his own District -- Iudex vice Christi cogitatur. Ep. 59. p. 129.
; Had a Primacy in his own Church Cathedram sibi constituere, and primatum
ass^mere, etc. Ep. 69. p. 184.
; Managed the Balance of her Government Gubernandae Ecclesiae Libram tenentes
-- Ep. 68. p. 177.
; Was, by his being Bishop, elevated to the sublime Top of the Priesthood
Sacerdotii sublime fastigium, 55. p. 103.
; Had the Episcopal Authority in its Vigor Cum pro Episcopatus vigore, and
Cathedrae authoritate, haberes potestatem; etc. Ep. 3. p. 5. -- Si it^ res est,
-- Actum est de Episcopatus vigore. Ep. 59. p. 126.
; the Prelatick Power in its Plenitude In Solidum. Un. Eccl. p. 108.
; A Sublime and Divine Power of Governing the Church -- Actum est de Ecclesiae
gubernam^ae sublimi ac Divina potestate. Cyp. ad Cornel. Ep. 59. p. 126.
. And none could be called Bishop of Bishops Neque enim quisquam nostrum
episcopum se Episcoporum constituit. Cyp. in Conc. Carth. p. 129. Nam nec
Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit, and super quem aedificavit Ecclesiam suam,
cum secum Paulus de circumcisione post modum Disc^ptaret, vindicavit sibi
aliquid insolenter, aut arroganter assumpsit, ut diceret se Primatum tenere --
Ep. 71. p. 194, 195.
. Every Bishop was Head of his own Church Vide supra.
; and she was built upon him in her Politic Capacity Passim.
. He, and he only, was her visible Judge Vide supra.
; and he did not stand Subordinate to any visible Superior. In short, The
Constitution of every particular Church, in those Times, was a Welltempered
Monarchy: The Bishop was the Monarch, and the Presbytery was in Senate; all the
Christians within his District depended on him for Government and Discipline,
and he depended on no Man: So that I may fairly conclude this Point with that
famous Testimony of St. Ierom's in his Epistle to Evagrius: Wherever a Bishop
is, whether at Rome or Eugubium, Constantinople or Rhegium, Alexandria or Tani,
he is of the same Merit, and the same Priesthood. Neither the Power of Riches,
nor the Humility of Poverty, makes a Bishop higher or lower; but they are all
Successors of the Apostles Ubicunque fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive
Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii, sive Alexandriae, sive Tanis,
ejusdem Meriti est, and ejusdem Sacerdotii, potetia divitiarum and Paupertatis
humilitas, vel sublimiorem vel inferiorem Episcopum non facit. Caeterum omnes
Apostolorum Successores sunt. Hieron. ad Evagrium.
. It Is true indeed, St. Ierom lived after the Cyprianic Age: But, I suppose,
our Author will pretend to own his Authority as soon as any Father's in the
point of Church Government. Let me represent to you only one Principle more,
which prevailed in the Days of St. Cyprian: And that is,

THIRDLY, That whatever the High Priest, among the Jews, was to the other
Priests and Levites, etc. The Christian Bishop was the same to the Presbyters
and Deacons, etc. and the same Honor and Obedience was due to him. This was a
Principle which St. Cyprian frequently insisted on, and Reasoned from. Thus in
his Third Epistle, directed to Rogatianu, he tells him, That he had Divine Law
and Warrant for Punishing his Rebellious and Undutiful Deacon. And then cites
that Text, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest, or unto the Judge, even that man shall die: And all
the people shall bear and fear, and do no more presumptuously. And confirms it
farther, by showing how God punished Gorah, Datham, and Abiram, for Rebelling
against Aaron, Numb. 16. 1. And when the Israelites, weary of Samuel's
Government, asked a King to judge them, The Lord said to Samuel, Hearken unto
the voice of the People in all that they say unto thee; for they have not
rejected thee, but they have rejected me that I should not reign over them: 1.
Sam. 8. 7. Therefore, he gave them Saul for a Punishment, etc. And when St.
Paul was challenged for reviling God's High Priest, he excused himself, saying,
He wist not that he was the High Priest: Had he known him to have been so, he
would not have Treated him so, for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of
the Ruler of they People: Act. 23. 4, 5. And.(as he goes further on) Our Lord
Jesus Christ, Our God, King, and Judge, to the very hour of his Passion paid
suitable Honor to the Priests, tho they neither feared God, nor acknowledged
Christ: For when he had cleansed the L^per, he bade him go show himself to the
Priest, and offer his Gift: Matthew. 8. 4. And at the very instant of his
Passion, when he was beaten, as if he had answered irreverently to the High
Priest, he uttered no Reproachful Thing against the Person of the Priest, but
rather defended his own Innocence, saying, If I have spoken Evil, bear witness
of the Evil; but if well, why smitest thou me? John 18. 22, 23. All which
Things were done humbly and patiently lby him, that we might have a Pattern of
Patience and Humility proposed to us; for he taught us to give all dutiful
Honor to true Priests, by behaving so toward false Priests Ep. 3. p. 5.
.

Thus St. Cyprian Reasoned, and these were his Arguments for obliging all Men,
Clergy as well as Laity, to Honor and Obey their Bishops. To the same purpose
he wrote in his Fourth Epistle to Pomponius, concerning some Virgins and
Deacons that lived Scandalously. Let them not think they can be saved, says he,
if they will not obey the Bishops, seeing God says in Deuteronomy, and then he
cites Deuteronomy. 17. 12 Ep. 4. p. 9.
. He insists on the same Arguments in his 59th Epistle directed to Cornelius,
when he is giving him an account of the Rebellion, and Schismatical Practices
of Fortunatus and Felicissimus, the one a Presbyter, and the other a Deacon Ep.
59. p. 128.
. He insists on them over again, in his 66th Epistle to Florentius Papianus Ep.
66. p. 166.
. He insists largely on the Argument drawn from the Punishment inflicted on
Corah and his Accomplices for Rebelling against Aaron; and makes it the same very
Sin in Schismatics, who separate from their lawful Bishop, in his 69th Epistle
directed to Magnus Ep. 69. p. 183.
; and in his 73d Epistle, directed to Iubaianus Ep. 73. p. 201.
. And Firmilian also, St. Cyprian's Contemporary, insists on the same Argument
Ep. 75. p. 225.
. Indeed, the Names, Priest, Priesthood, Altar, Sacrifice, etc. so much used
those Times, are a pregnant Argument of the Notions Christians had then, of the
Christian Hierarchy's being Copied from the Jewish. Neither was it a Notion
newly started up in St. Cyprian's time, for we find it in express Terms in that
notable Epistle written to the Corinthians by St. Clement Bishop of Rome, who
was not only contemporary with the Apostles, but is by Name mentioned by St.
Paul, as one of his Fellow Laborers, whose Names are in the Book of LIfe,
Philip. 4. 3. For he persuading those Corinthians to lay aside all Animosities
and Schismatical Dispositions, and to pursue and maintain Unity and Peace,
above all things; proposes to them as a proper Expedient for this, that every
Man should keep his Order and Station; and then enumerates the several
Subordinations under the Old Testament, which sufficiently proves, That the
Hierarchy was still preserved in the New. His Method of Reasoning, and the
Design he had in hand to compose the Schisms that arose amongst the
Corinthians, make this evident beyond all Contradiction, That a Bishop in the
Christian Church was no less than the High Priest among the Jews, else he had
not argued from the Precedents of the Temple to persuade them to Unity in the
Church. The High Priest (says he) has his proper Office, and the Priests have
their proper Place or Station; and the Levites are tied to their proper
Ministeries; and the Layman is bound to his Laick Performances (...). Clem.
Epist. ad cor. p. mihi, 53.
.

Having thus demonstrated, that these were three current and received
Principles in St. Cyprian's time, viz. That a Bishop was the Principle of Unity
to his Church, to all the Christians within his District; That he was Supreme
in his Church, and had no Earthly Ecclesiastical Superior; and, That he was
the same amongst Christians, which the High Priest was amongst the Jews: Let me
try a little, if our Author's Definition of a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time,
can consist with them. I am afraid, it can consist with none of them singly,
much less with all these together.

I. Not with the first; for, if a Bishop, then, was the Principle of Unity to a
Church, in which there were many Presbyters; as Cyprian, e. g. was to the
Church of Carthage, and Cornelius to the Church of Rome, and Fabius to the
Church of Antioch, and Dionysius to the Church of Alexandria, etc. If thus it
was, I say, then, to be sure, a Bishop was another thing than a mere single
Presbyter of a single Parish in the Presbyterian sense: For, if a single
Presbyter could have been the Principle of Unity to a Church in which there
were, e. g. 46 single Presbyters, he must have been it as a single Presbyter,
or as something else: Not as a single Presbyter, for then there should have
been as many Principles of Unity in a Church, as there were single Presbyters;
for Instance, There should have been 46 Principles of Unity in the Church of
Rome: Which, besides that it is plainly Contradictory to the Notion of One
Bishop, at once, in a Church; what is it else, than to make a Church such a
Monster as may have 46 Heads? Than by so multiplying the Principles of Unity,
to leave no Unity at all? Than, in stead of One Principle of Unity to an
Organized Body, to set up 46 Principles of Division? Indeed, what is it else
than the very Extract of Nonsense, and Cream of Contradiction? A single
Presbyter then, if he could have been the Principle of Unity to such a Church,
mut have been it, as something else than a mere single Presbyter. But what
could that Something else have been? A Presbyterian Moderator? Not so neither;
for by what Propriety of Speech can a Moderator of a Presbytery, as such, be
called the Principle of Unity to a Church? How can he be called the Principle
of Unity to a Church, who, as such, is neither Pastor, Head, nor Governor of a
Church? Who, as such, has no direct, immediate, or formal Relation to a Church?
Who, as such, is only the Chairman, the Master-Speaker, not of the Church, but
of the Presbytery? Nay, who may be such, and yet no Christian? For however
inexpedient or indecent it may be, that an Heathen should, on occasion, be the
Moderator, i. e. the Master-Speaker of a Presbytery; yet it implies no
Repugnancy to any Principle of Christianity. But however this is, it is certain,
that, according to the Presbyterian Principles, (not the Moderator, but) the
Presbytery is the Principle of Unity to the Church, or rather Churches, within
the Bounds of that Presbytery. And, to do our Author Justice, he seems to have
been sensible of this, as a I observed already: And therefore, he said not, If
he (the Apologist) can prove, that we separate from our Pastors, or from the
Moderator of the Presbytery; but, from our Pastors, or from the Presbytery with
their Moderator. Neither,

2. Can our Author's Definition consist with the second Principle, viz. That
every Bishop was Supreme in his Church, Independent, and not Subordinate, to
any Ecclesiastical Superior on Earth. To have such a Supremacy, such an
Independency, such an Unaccountableness, is notoriously inconsistent with the
Idea of either a single Presbyter, or a Presbyterian Moderator. How can it be
consistent with the Idea of a single Presbyter acting in Parity with his
Brethren Presbyters, that of 46, for Example, One should have a Primacy, a
Supremacy, a Plenitude of Power, the Sublime and Divine Power of Governing the
Church, an Unaccountable and Eminent Power, as St. Ierom himself calls it Ex^rs
quaedam and ab omnibus emi^^^^^ potestas.
. And all the rest should be Accountable, and Subordinate to him? What is this
but reconciling Contradictions? Besides, the Independency of single Presbyters
is notoriously inconsistent with the Presbyterian Scheme. It Is Independency,
not Presbytery. And as for the Presbyterian Moderator, In what sense can he be
called Supreme, or Independent, or Unaccountable? In what sense can he be said
to be raised to the Sublime Top of the Priesthood? Or to have an Exors
Potestas, an Unaccountable Power? Or to be Accountable to God only? Or to have
the Sublime and Divine Power of Governing the Church? Is he, as such, raised to
the Sublime Top of the Preisthood, who, as such, may be no Priest at all? For
why may not a Ruling Elder be a Moderator? How can he be said to have (...)
Unaccountable Power, who can be Voted out of his Chair with the same Breath
with which he was Voted into it? How can he be said to be Accountable to God
only, who is Accountable to the Presbytery? How can he be said to have the
Sublime and Divine Power of Governing the Church, who, as such, is no Church
Governor? Has he a Supreme Power in a Society, who, as such, has no imaginable
Jurisdiction over any one Member of that Society?

3. But what shall I say to the Consistency of our Author's Definition with the
third Principle I named? Even no more than that I have proved it to have been
one of St. Cyprian's, and one that was generally received in his time; and that
I can refer it to our Author himself to Determine, Whether the High Priest of
the Jews bore no higher Character than that of a single Presbyter, or a
Presbyterian Moderator? And so I proceed to another Head of Arguments, which
shall be,

FOURTHLY, To give you, in a more particular Detail, some of the Branches of
the Episcopal Prerogative in St. Cyprian's time. And I think I shall do enough
for my purpose, if I shall prove these three Things: I. That there were several
considerable Acts of Power relating to the Government and Discipline of the
Church, which belonged solely to the Bishop's several Powers lodged in his
Person, which he could manage by himself, and without the Concurrence of any
other Church-Governour. II. That in every Thing relating to the Government and
Discipline of the Church, he had a Negative over all the other
Church Governors within his District. And, III. That all the other Clergymen
within his District, Presbyters as well as others, were subject to his
Authority, and obnoxious to his Discipline and Jurisdiction.


I. I say, there were several considerable Acts of Power relating to the
Government and Discipline of the Church, which belonged solely to the Bishop;
several Powers lodged in his Person, which he could manage by himself, and
without the Concurrence of any other Church-Governour. Take these for a Sample.
And,

First, He had the sole Power of Confirmation; of imposing Hands on Christians,
for the Reception of the Holy Ghost, after Baptism. For this, we have St.
Cyprian's most express Testimony in his Epistle to Iubaianus, where he tells,
It was the Custom to offer such as were Baptized to the Bishops, that, by their
Prayers, and the laying on of their Hands, they might receive the Holy Ghost,
and be Consummated by the Sign of our Lord, i. e. by the Sign of the Cross, as
I take it: And he expressly founds this Practice on the Paterm of St. Pater and
St. John, mentiond Acts 8. 14. etc. -- Et. iccirco quia legitimum and
Ecclesiasticum Baptisma consecuti fuerant ( quos Philippus tinxerat) Baptizari
cos ultra non oportebat; sed tantummodo quod deerat id a Petro and Joanne
factum est; ut Oratione pro iis habita, and manu imposita, invocaretur and
infundaretur super eos Spiritus Sanctus: Quod nunc quoque apud nos Geritur, ut
qui in Ecclesia Baptizan ur, Praepositis Ecclesiae offerantur, and per nostram
Orationem ac manus impositionem, Spiritum Sanctum consequantur, and signaculo
Dominico Consummentur. Ep. 73. p. 202.
Firmilian is as express in his Epistle to Cyprian, saying in plain Lanugage,
That the Bishops, who Govern the Church, possess the Power of Baptism,
Confirmation, and Ordination Omnis potestas and Gratia in Ecclesia est, ubi
Praesident Majores Natu, qui and Baptizandi and Manum imponendi and Ordinandi
possident potestatem. Ep. 75. p. 221.
. It Is true, he calls them Majores Natu, Elder: But that he meant Bishops, as
distinguished from Presbyters, cannot be called into Question by any Man, who
reads the whole Epistle, and considers his Style all along; and withal,
considers what a peculiar Interest, by the Principles of these Times, the
Bishop had in these three Acts he names. But whatever groundless Altercations
there may be about his Testimony, as there can be none about St. Cprian's, so
neither can there by any shadow of Pretext for any about Cornelius's, who, in
his Epistle to Fabius, (so often mentioned before,) makes it an Argument of
Novatianus his Incapacity of being a Bishop; that tho he was Baptized, yet he
was not Confirmed by the Bishop (...) etc. Apud Eusebius. H. E. lib. 6. cap. 43.
.

Secondly, He had the sole Power of Ordination, and that of whatsoever
Clergymen within his District. Ordinations could not be performed without him;
but he could perform them Regularly, without the Concurrence of any other
Church Officer. This has been so frequently and so fully proved by Learned Men,
that I need not insist much on it. Forbearing therefore to adduce the
Testimonies of such as lived after St. Cyprian's time, such as Ambrose, Ierom,
Chrysostom, etc. I shall confine my self to St. Cyprian, and his
Contemporaries. Toi begin with St. Cyprian.

It Is true, so humble and condescending he was, That when he was made Bishop,
he resolved with himself to do nothing by himself, concerning the Public
Affairs of the Church, without consulting not only his Clergy, but his People
-- Solus rescribere nihil potui, quand^ a primordio Episcopatus m^i, STATUERIM
nihil sine consilio v^siro, and sine consensu plebis, mea privatim sententia
gerere. Ep. 14. p. 33.
. I call this his own free and voluntary Condescension: It wa a thing he was
not bound to do by any Divine Prescript, or any Apostolical Tradition, or any
Ecclesiastical Constitution. His very Words import so much, which you may see
on the Margin. And yet, for all that, we find him not only in extraordinary
Junctures, Ordaining without asking the Consent of his Clergy or People; but
still insisting on it as the Right of all Bishops, and particularly his own, to
Promote and Ordain Clergymen, of whatsoever Rank, by himself, and without any
Concurrence. Thus,

In his 38th Epistle, having Ordained Aurelius a Lector, he acquaints his
Presbyters and Deacons with it, from the Place of his Retirement: Now consider
how he begins his Letter. In all Clerical Ordinations, most dear Brethren, says
he, I used to Consult you beforehand, and to examine the Manners and Merits of
every one with common Advice In Ordinationibus Clericis SOLEMUS vos ante
consulere, and mores ac merita singulorum Communi Consilio ponderare. Ep. 38 p.
74.
. And then he proceeds to tell them, How, that notwithstanding that was his
ordinary Method, a Rule he had observed for the most part; yet, for good
Reasons he had not observed it in that Instance. In which Testimony, we have
these Things evident: 1. That his Power was the same, as to all Ordinations,
whether of Presbyters or others: For he speaks of them all indefinitely; In
Clericis Ordinationibus. 2. That he used only to ask the Counsel and Advice of
his Clergy, about the Manners and Merits of the Person he was to Ordain, but
not their Concurrence in the Act of Ordination; not one word of that: On the
contrary, That they used not to Concur, fairly imported in the very Instance
of Aurelius. 3. That it was entirely of his own Easiness and Condescension,
that he Consulted them in the Matter: He USED to do it, but needed not have
done it: He did it not in that very same Case. Which is a demonstration of the
Truth of what I said before, viz. That his Resolution, which he had made when
he entered to his Bishopric, was from his own Choice, and absolutely Free and
Voluntary.

We have another remarkable Testimony to the same purpose in his 41st Epistle,
where he tells, that, Because of his Absence from Carthage, he had given a
Deputation to ^aldnius and Herculanus, two Bishops; and to R^gatian^s and
Numidicus, two of his Presbyters, to examine the Ages, Qualifications, and
M^its, of some in Carthage, that he, whose Province it was to promote Men to
Ecclesiastical Offices, might be well informed about them, and Promote none but
such as were Meek, Humble, and Worthy -- Cumque (...) vos pro (...) Vicaris
miserim, -- Ut aetates c^rum, and Conditiones, and Merit a discerneret^s; ut
jam EGO CUI CURA INCUMBIT, omnes ^ptime nossem, and dignos atque humiles and
mites, ad Ecclesiasticae Administrationis ^fficia promoverem, Ep. 41. P. 79.
This, I say, is a most remarkable Testimony for our present Purpose; for he
not only speaks indefinitely of all Ranks or Orders, without making Exceptions;
but he speaks of himself in the Singular Number, as having the Power of
Promoting them; and he founds that Power, and appropriates it to himself, upon
his having the Care of the Church and her Government committed to him.

We have a third Testimony as pregnant as any of the former, in his 72d Epistle
written to Stephen Bishop of Rome. For, representing to him what the Resolution
of the African Bishops were concerning such Presbyters and Deacons as should
return from a State of Schism, to the Communion of the Church, he discourses
thus. By common Consent and A^thority, Dear Brother, we tell you further, That
if any Presbyters or Deacons, who have either been Ordained before in the
Catholic Church, and have afterward turned Perfsidious and Rebellious against
the Church; or, have been Promoted by a Profane Ordination, in a State of
Schism, by FALSE BISHOPS and Antichrists, against our Lord's Institution --
that such, if they shall return, shall only be admitted to Lay-Communion, etc.
Addimus plane and conjungimus, fracer c^rissime, ^onsensu and Auctoritate
communi, ut etiam si qui Presbyteri ^ut Diaconi; qui vel in Ecclesia Catholica
prius Ordinati fu^int, and postmod^m perfidi and R^bell^s coontra Ecclesiam
^teterins; vel apud Hereticos a PSEUDO-EPISCOPIS and Anti-Christ^s contra
Christi disposition^m, profan^ Ordinatione promoti sint, and contra Altar unum
atque Divinum, Sacrificia foris falsa ac Sa^ilega ^fferre conati sint; cos
quoque l^^c Condition suscipi, cum revertuntur, ut Communic^nt Laici, etc. Ep.
72. P. 197.
By which Testimony, you may clearly see, 1. That all Ordinations of
Presbyters, as well as Deacons, were performed by Bishops; by True Bisho^^ in
the Catholic Church; and by False Bishops in a State of Schism. 2. That to
Ordain Presbyters and Deacons, was so much, and so acknowledged by, the
Bishop's Work, and peculiar to him, that, herein, even Schismatics themselves
oberved the Common Rule. They found their Ordinations were indispensibly to be
performed by Bishops, that they might not be Obnoxious to the Charge of
Invalidity.

So clear and full is St. Cyprian on this Head: And not only he, but Firmilian,
as I have cited him already. Nay, further yet,

Our Martyr's Practice was always suitable and correspondent to these
Principles. He not only Ordained Aurelius a Lector, as I have showed, without
either the Consent or Concurrence of his Clergy; but also Saturus a Lector, and
Optatus a Subdeacon, Epst. 29. and Celerinus a Lector, Ep. 39. In which we
have also a most considerable Evidence of the Bishops Power in Ordinations, in
St. Cyprian's Discourse concerning Aurelius and Celerinus: For there he tells
his Presbyters, Deacons, and all his People, and tell them in an Authoritative
Style, in the Style, by which Superiors used to signify their Will and
Pleasure to their Subjects, with a Be it known to you; He tells them, I say,
That tho he had only Ordained these two, Lectors, for the time, because they
were but young; yet he had designed them for the Presbyterate, and to sit with
him, as soon as their Years would allow of it Caeterum Presbytcrii henorem
designasse nos illis jam SCIATIS -- S^^^uris nobiscum, provectis and
corr^boratis annis suis. Ep. 39. P. 78.
.

And what can be more pat to this purpose, than that uncontrolable Account we
have of Novatianus his Promotion to the Presbyterate, which we have in that so
often mentioned Epistle written by Cornelius to Fabius of A^tioch? There he
tells, how Novatianus was Ordained a Presbyter, merely by the Favor of the
then Bishop of Rome. That all the Clergy, and many of the People, opposed it,
as being Unlawful, considering that he had been Baptized while on the Bed of
Sickness. And that, after much work, the Bishop prevailed, and Ordained him,
promising that he would not make a Precedent of it. I refer you to the
Testimony which I have transcribed faithfully on the Margin. Consider it, and
tell me if any thing can be more clear, than that the Bishop, then, had the
sole Power of Ordination (...) Eus^b. Hi^t. Eccl l. 6. c. 43.
.

Neither do we read in all St. Cyprian's Works, or in any Monuments of those
Times, of any Concurrence of Presbyters with Bishops, in any Ordinations, and
far less, that ever Presbyters Ordained without a Bishop. It Is true, we read in
St. Cyprian's 52d Epistle, that Novatus made Felicissimus a Deacon: And I read,
that several Learned Men understand it so, as if he had Ordained him Vide
Annal. Cyp. ad Ann. 250. Sect. 21.
. And Blo^del particularly, because Novatus was nothing but a Presbyter,
con^ludes, that this was a notable Instance of the Power of Presbyters in
Ordinations. But when one reads the whole Passage, as St. Cyprian has it, and
ponders all Things duly, he cannot but think it strange, that ever that Fancy
should have been entertained: For all that St. Cyprian says, amounts to no more
than this, That Novatus turned a Schismatic in the time of Persecution, and
thereby became another P^rsecution to the Church; and that having thus given
himself up to the Spirit of Schism, he, by his Faction and Ambition, got
Felicissimus made a Deacon, without either St. Cyprian' s knowledge or
Allowance Id^m est Novatus qui quosdam istic ex fratribus ab Episcopo
Segregavit, qui in ipsa persecutione ad evertendas fratrum ^eu^es, alia quaedam
persecutio nostris ^uit. Ipse est qui Felicissi^um satelli^^^^ suum, Dia^^nu^,
nec permittente me, nec scient^, sua factione and ambitione constituit. Ep. 52.
P. 97.
. St Cyprian's Words, I say, do not import, that Novatus Ordained Felicissimus:
They import no more, than that Novatus his Ambition and Faction prevailed to
get Felicissimus Ordained a Deacon, tho himself did not Ordain him. ('It Is
probable he was Ordained by some Neighboring Bishop, St. Cyprian being then in
his Secession.) And it is as evident as any thing can be made, from what
immediately follows, that St. Cyprian designed them for no more. For he goes
on, and tells, in that same Breath, That Novatus having done so and so at
Carthage, went next to Rome, and attempted just the like things there; only
with this difference, That as Rome, by it^s Greatness, had the Pre^edency of
Carthage, so he attempted greater Wickedness, at Rome than at Carthage: For he
(says Cyprian) who had made a Deacon at Carthage against the Church, made a
Bishop at Rome, meaning Novatianus Et cum su^ tempestate Romam quoque Navigans
ad evertendam Ecclesiam; similia illic and paria molitus est, a Clero porti^nem
Pl^bis avellens, Fraternitatis been sibi cohaerent is and se invicem diligentis
Concordiam scindens, plane, quoniam pro magnitudine sua debeat Carthaginem Roma
praeced^re, illic major^^ and gra^ior^ commisit: Qui istic adversus Ecclesiam,
Diaconum secerat, illic Episcopum fecit, etc. Ep. 52. P. 97.
. Now it is certain that not Novatus, but Three Bishops, Ordained Novatianus;
and, by consequence, that St. Cyprian never meant that Novatus Ordained
Felicissi^us. This is irre^ragable. But then, suppose the worst; Suppose
Novatus had really Ordained Felicissimus, what stress is to be laid on the
Example of a Schismatic? Especially when what he did was done Schismatically?
Antonianus asked of St. Cyprian, what was Novatianus his Heresy? And Cyprian
answered, It was no matter what he taught, seeing he taught in Schism Qu^d vero
ad N^vatiani personam pertinet: F. C. de quo desiderasti tibi seribi, quam
haeresin introd^xisset, scias nos prim^ in l^co, nce curiosos ^sse debere quid
ille doceat, cum f^ris doceat. Ep. 55. P. 112.
And may we not say with the same Reason, That it matters not what Novatus did,
seeing what he did was done in Schism? One Thing indeed we learn from this
Matter, and that is another Argument of the Bishop's peculiar Interest in the
matter of Ordination; For St. Cyprian most plainly imputes it to Schism, that,
without his Allowance, Novatus should have presumed to have got Felicissimus
Ordained a Deacon.

One Word more: The Bishops being thus possessed of the sole Power of
Ordination in St. Cyprian's time, and his Practicing suitably, was exactly
agreeable to the Second of the Canons commonly called of the Apostles; which
is, Let a Presbyter be Ordained by One Bishop, as likewise a Deacon and the
rest of the Clergy (...)
. A Canon, without doubt, universally received then, as Beveregius has fully
proved; and a Canon highly agreeable with the then current Principles, which I
have insisted on already, viz. That a Bishop was the Principle of Unity, and
Supreme Ecclesiastical Magistrate within his District. For what can be more
suitable to, or rather, more necessary by all the Fundamental Rules of Society,
than that it should belong to the Supreme Power, wherever it is lodged, to
promote and give Commissions to all Inferior Officers? It Is one of the Rights
of Majesty, and one as intrinsic and unal^enable, or incommunicable, as any.
It Is true, a good many Years after St. Cyprian's time, it was appointed by the
(...), That Presbyters should concur with the Bishop in the Ordination of
Presbyters: But then, I say, it was many Years after St. Cyprian's time; and it
was for new emergent Reasons; That Ordinations might be performed more
deliberately, or with the greater Solemnity, or so; but it is evident, that
nothing of the substantial Validity of the Orders were to depend upon it. And
so much, at present, for the Bishop's Power of Ordination. But this is not all.
For,

Thirdly, He had full Power, without asking the Consent or Concurrence of
either Clergy or People, to settle Presbyters within his District. Of this, we
have a most remarkable Instance of St. Cyprian's planting Namidicus a Presbyter
of the City of Carthage: Our Martyr wrote to his Presbyters, Deacons, and
People, to receive him as such, (probably he had been Ordained before,) and
there was no more of it: It was instantly done Ep. 40.
. As we learn from the very next Epistle Ep. 41, and 43.
, where we find the same Namidicus, as a Presbyter of Carthage, receiving a
Commission for a Deputation to oversee such and such Things in St. Cyprian's
absence. So negligent, shall I say? Or so ignorant was St. Cyprian of Christ's
Testament, at least of his Leaving, in it, to his People, by way of Legacy, a
Right, a Grant, a Privilege, of Cho^sing their own Ministers! What a Stranger
has he been to all the Analogies and Principles of Presbyterian Government! But
I proceed.

Fourthly, In St. Cyprian's time, the Bishop had the disposal of all the
Revenues of the Church. All the Churches Incomes, then, were Oblations, and
Charitable Contributions. The Civil Magistrate was Heathen, and treated her
commonly with Persecutions, never with Encouragements. Now, the Bishop, I say,
had the full Power of disposing of these Contributions and Oblations.

In the first place, he had his own Quantitas Propria, His proper Portion; and
it was, no doubt, a considerable One. It Is commonly reckoned to have been the
Third. The other Two belonged to the Clergy and the Poor; but so, as to be
dispensed by the Bishop.

That he had his own Portion, and that a Liberal One, is evident from his 7th
Epistle; For there he tells how, before he retired, he gave the Trust of it to
Rogatianus, one of his Presbyters, ordering that if there were any necessitous
Strangers at Carthage, they should have Maintenance out of it. Sed and
Per^^grinis, si qui indigentes fuerint, suggeratis, de Quantitate mea propria,
quam apud Rogatianum Compresbyterum nostrum dimisi -- Ep. 7. P. 14.
. And it is observable, that when St. Cyprian gives an account of
Fortunatianus, who had been Bishop of Assurae, but had forfeited by Sacrificing
in time of Persecu^ion, and yet was earnest for all that to retain his
Bishopric; he says expressly, that it was upon the account of the Perquisites,
and not from any Love to Religion Stipes and Oblationes and Lucra desiderant,
quibu^ prius insatiabiles in^ubabant, and coenis atque ^pulis etiam nunc
inhiant, quarum crapulam ^^per sup^rstite indics Cruditate r^ctabant; nunc
manif^stissime Comprobantes, (...) ^^te se Religioni, sed ventri potius, and
quaestai, profan^^ Cupiditate serviss^. Ep. 65. P. 163.
. And it is not to be doubted, that the same Reason moved Basilides to be so
much concerned for the recovery of his Bishopric, after he had forfeited it
also Vide Ep 67. P. 173.
Indeed, the Bishop's proper Portion was settled on him by the 40th of the
Apostolic Canons.

And that he had the disposal of the rest, particularly that which belonged to
the Clergy, is as plain. For, in his 41st Epistle, he makes it an aggravation
of Felicissimus's Guilt, that, contrary to the Duty which he owed to his
Bishop, he should have made such a Clutter, about the Division of the
Contributions. And on the other hand he praises the Dutifulness of others, who
would not follow F^licissimus his bad Example, but continued in the Unity of
the Church, and were satisfied to take their Shares, as the Bishop should
please to dispense them Cumque post haec ^mnia, nec Loci mei honor motus -- In
quo quid^m gratulor pluri^^^s Fratres ab hac audacia r^cessisse, and vobis
acqu^escere maluiss^, ^t cum Ecclesia matre reman^rent, and stipendia ^jus,
EPISCOPO DISPENSANTE perciperent. Ep. 41. P 80.
. And it is a most remarkable Instance of this his Power, which we have in the
aforementioned Case of Aurelius and Celerinus; for tho he promoted them only to
the Degree of Lectors, yet he Entitled them to the Maintenance of Presbyters.
Caeterum Presbyteri^ honorem designasse nos illis jam sciatis ut and sportu^is
iisd m cum Presbyteris hon^r^ntur, and divisiones mensur^as equatis
quantitatibus particu^ur. Ep. 38. P. 78.
. And as for that part that belonged to the Poor, his Power in the Distribution
of it is so evident from his Fifth and Forty first Epistles, that I need not
insist upon it. Indeed, this Power was expressly asserted to them by the Thirty
eighth and Forty first of the Apostolic Canons (...)
. And we find Bishops in Possession of it long before St. Cyprian's time; as is
evident from Justin Martyr's second Apology, not far from the end. Not now to
mention that it seems fairly to be founded on express Scripture Vid^ Clariss.
Dodwel. Differt. Cyp. 1. Sect. 9.
. Indeed,

Fifthly, He seems to have had a Power of imposing Charitable Contributions on
all the Christians within his District, for the Relief of Distressed Strangers,
whether Captives, Prisoners, or condemned to the Mines or Galleys, etc. Of this
Power, we have famous Instances in his 62d and 78th Epistles. You may Consult
them at your Leisure. And long before St. Cyprian's time, Soter Bishop of Rome,
as the Venerable Dionysius Bishop of Corinth, (cited for it by Eusebius,) tells
us, Managed this Power to excellent purpose, as his Predecessors, from the
Apostles times had done before him. Take his own Words, for he was a very
ancient Father, having flourished about an Hundred Years before St. Cyprian.
They are in an Epistle of his to the Church of Rome, in which he thus bespeaks
them. This has been your Custom from the beginning, (i. e. ever since the
Church of Rome was planted,) to do manifold good Offices to the Brethren, and
send Supplies to most Churches in most Cities, for sweetning their Poverty, and
refreshing those that are Condemned to the Mines. You, Romans, observe the
Custom of the Romans handed down to you by your Fathers; which Custom, your
blessed Bishop Soter has not only observed, but improved, etc. Eus^b. H. E. I.
4. c. 23.
What can be more clear than it is from these Words, That Soter, as Bishop of
Rome, had the chief Management of the Charitable Contributions, imposing them,
and disposing of them for the Relief of the Afflicted Christians of whatsoever
Church? And now that I have gone higher than St. Cyprian's time, (tho it was
not necessary for my main Argument; and to make use of it, might swell this
Letter to too great a Bulk;) Let me mention another Power, which Tertu^lian
(who lived before St. Cyprian also) in plain Terms appropriates to the Bish^p.
A considerable Power, a Power that is a considerable Argument of the Episcopal
Sovereignty. And it is,

Sixthly, The Power of Indicting Solemn Fasts, as occasion required, to all the
Christians within his District. You have his Words, plain and home, upon the
Margin Been autem and quod Episcopi Universae Plebi j^junia mandare ^ssolent:
Non dice de industria stipium Conferend (...) at vestra captura est, s^d
interdum ex aliqua solicitudinis Eccle^iasticae causa. Te^t De Jejun. cap. p 3.


Sev^nthly, A Bishop in St. Cyprian's time, (for now I return to it,) as such,
had the sole Power of Convocating his Presbyters and Deacons; all those of his
Clergy and People, who either sat with him, or standing gave their Suffrages,
as they were asked, about any thing relating to the Church. All Learned Men
(even Spanhemius himself, our Author's diligent Searcher into Antiquity,)
confesses this. Indeed, this was a Point on which the Unity of the Church did
so much depend, that it could not but be a necessary Branch of his Prerogative,
who was the Principle of Unity to, and was entrusted with, the Supreme
Government of the Church. And, agreeably, we find Cornelius accounting about it
in an Epistle to Cyprian. For there he tells, how the Presbyter and Confessors,
who had sided with Novatianus, turning sensible of their Error, came (not
straight to himself, for it seems they had not the confidence to do that, or
rather, they would not have been allowed that freedom so suddenly; but) to his
Presbyters, acknowledging their Offenses, and humbly supplicating that they
might be Pardoned, and their Escapes forgotten: How, when all this was narrated
to him, He was pleased to Convocate the Presbytery: How Maximus, Urbanus,
Sidonius, and Macarius, being allowed to appear, made their Acknowledgments and
humble Addresses; and then, how after they were received in the Presbytery, the
whole matter was Communicated to the People; and they again renewed their
Acknowledgments before the People, confessing as I showed before, viz. That
they were convinced, that Cornelius was chosen by the Omnipotent God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ to be Bishop of the most Holy Catholic Church; and that they
were not ignorant, that, as there was but One God, One Christ our Savior, and
One Holy^host; so there ought to be only One Bishop in a Catholic Church --
Omni igitur actu ad M E perlato, placuit contrahi Pr^sbyt^rium -- His it^ (...)
in Pr^sbyteri^m venerant -- Summis precibus desiderantes ut ea quae ante
fu^rant Gesta in Oblivion^m cederent -- Quod erat c^ns qu^ns, ^mnis his actus
populo fuer at insinu^ndus, ut and ipsos vid^rent, in Eccl^sia constitutos --
Magn^s frat^rnitatis concursus factus est. -- Una ^r at v^x (...) grati^s (...)
^gentium -- Et ut ips^rum propria verba design^, nos inqui^nt Cornelium
Episcop^^ sanctissimae Ecclesiae, etc. Ep. 49. P. 92, 93.
. Here, I say, was a Noble Instance of a Bishop's Power in Convocating his
Presbyters at pleasure, and managing the Affairs of the Church like a Chief
Governor. The whole Epistle is well worth perusing. But I shall only desire
you to take notice of one Thing by the way, it is, That Cornalius sought not
the People's Consent for their Reception; no, he first received them again into
the Communion of the Church, and then acquainted the People with it. I observe
this, because it is another Demonstration, That what St. Cyprian determined
from the beginning of his Episcopacy, was merely the effect of his own Choice,
and Arbitrary Condescension, viz. To do nothing without his Peoples Consent:
This, I say, was not a Thing he was bound to do by the Rules of his Episcopacy,
for then Cornelius had been as much bound as he.

After these Persons were so solemnly Reconciled to the Church, they
themselves, by a Letter, gave an Account of it to St. Cyprian; an Account, I
say, which might bring more Light to the whole Matter, if it needed any. We are
certain, say they, most dear Brother, that you will rejoice with us, when you
know, that all Mistakes are forgotten, and we are Reconciled to Cornelius OUR
BISHOP, and to all the Clergy; to the Great Contentment and Good Liking of the
whole Church Certi famus, Frater carissime, t^ quoque nobiscum pari unto
conga^dere, nos habito C^nfili^, utilitati^us Ecclesiae and paci magis
Cons^^l^^tes, ^mnibus rebus pratermissis, and j^dicio Dei reservatis, cum
Corneli^ EPISCOPO NOSTRO Parit^r and cum Universo cl^ro pac^n fecisse cum
Gaudio (...) Universae Ecclesiae, pr^na etiam omnium Caritate. Ep. 53. P. 98.
.

But you may say, Did not the Roman Presbytery Conveen, during the Vac^^cy,
after the Death of Fabianus? And did not the Presbytery of Carthage meet
frequently, during the time of St. Cyprian's Secession? How then can it be
said, That the Bishop had the sole Power of Convocating Presbyters? I answer,
It Is true, it was so in both Cases: But how? To begin with the latter; There
was no Meeting of the Clergy at Carthage, during St. Cyprian's Secession,
without his Authority: And therefore we find, when he retired, he left a
Delegated Power with his Presbyters and Deacons, or an Allowance, call it as
you will, to meet and manage the Affairs of the Church, as occasion should
require; but still, so as that they could do nothing of Moment without first
Consulting him; and nothing, but what was of ordinary Incidence, is Regulated
by the Canons. This we learn from many of his Epistles: Thus, in his Fifth
Epistle directed to his Presbyters and Deacons, Because he could not be present
himself, he required them Faithfully and Religiously to discharge both his
Office and their own Et quoniam mihi inter^sse nunc non permittit Loci
conditio, Peto vos pro fide and Religione vestra, fungamini illic and vestris
partibus and mcis. Ep. 5. p. 10.
. Which not only imports, that they had distinct Offices from his, but also, in
express Terms, settles a Delegation on them. He bespeaks them after the same
manner in his 12th Epistle Atque utinam Loci and Gradus mei conditio
permitteret ut IPSE nunc praesons esse possem -- Sed Officium MEUM vestr^
diligentia Representet. Ep. 12. p. 27.
. And more Authoritatively yet, Ep. 14. where he not only Exhorts, but Commands
them to perform the Office of Vicars to him Hort^r and Mando -- Vice mea
fungamini. Ep 14 P. 31.
. But then, how warmly he re^ented it, when some of them ventured beyond the
Limits of the Allowance he had given them; when they began to encroach on his
Prerogatives; when they presumed to meddle in Matters for which they had no
Allowance, and which were not in the common Road, nor Regulated by the Canons,
you shall hear to purpose by and by. And from what I have already said, the
other Case, That of the Presbytery's Meeting in the time of a Vacancy, may be
easily cleared also; for tho they might meet, yet all they could do, was to
provide all they could for the Peace and Safety of the Church, by determining
in Ruled Cases; just as may be done by inferior Magistrates in all other
Corporations, or Societies, in the time of an Inter-Reign; but they could make
no new Rules: And there were several other Things they could not do; as I shall
also show fully within a little. In the mean time, having mentioned how St.
Cyprian, in his Absence, gave a Delegation to his Clergy, and Constituted them
his Vicars; let me give you one Example of it, which may well deserve to pass
for another Instance of Acts that were peculiar to himself: And that is,

Eighthly, His Delegating, not his Presbyters in common, but two of them only,
viz. Rogatianus and N^midicus, with two Bishops, Caldonius and Herculanus, not
only to consider the State of the Poor, and of the Clergy at Carthage; but to
pronounce his Sentence of Excommunication against Felicissimus and Augendus,
and all that should join themselves to that Faction and Conspiracy Cum ego vos
pro me Vicarios miserim. -- Felicissimus -- accipiat senteatiam quam prior
d^xit, ut Abstentum se a nobis sciat: -- Sed and Augendus s^nt^ntiam ferat --
Et quisquis se conspirationi and factioni ejus adjunxerit, sciat se in Ecclesia
nobiscum non esse Communicaturum. Ep. 41. P. 79.
. Which Delegation was accordingly accepted of, and the Sentence put in
Execution, as we learn by the Return, which these four Delegates, together with
another Bishop called Victor, made to our Holy Martyr Caldonius cum Herculano
and Victore Collegis (i. e. Episcopis) item cum Rogatiano and Numidico
Presbyteris, Cypriano salutem. Abstinuimus communicatione Felicissimum and
Augendum, etc. Ep. 42. P. 81.
. I might have easily collected more Instances of Powers and Faculties which
were peculiar to a Bishop in St. Cyprian's time, and which could not be
pretended to by Presbyters: But these may be sufficient for a Sample,
especially considering that more, perhaps, may be discovered in the Prosecution
of the next Thing I promised to make appear, which was,

II. That in every thing relating to the Government and Discipline of the
Church, the Bishop had a Negative over all the other Church Governors within
his District. He had the Supreme Power of the Keys. No Man could be admitted
into the Church; no Man could be thrust out of the Church; none Excommunicated
could be admitted to Penance, nor Absolved nor Restored to the Communion of the
Church; no Ecclesiastical Law could be made, nor Rescinded, nor Dispensed with,
without him. In short, all Ecclesiastical Discipline depends upon the
Sacraments, and neither Sacrament could be Administrated without his Allowance.
If this Point, well proved, does not evince, That a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's
time, was a real Prelate, and stood in a real Superiority above all other
Church Officers, I must despair of ever proving any thing. And I must despair
of ever proving any thing, if I prove not this Point.

1. To begin with Baptism, the Sacrament by which Persons are admitted into the
Church: That no Man could be Baptized without the Bishop's Consent, has as much
Evidence as can be well required for any Matter of Fact. For,

First, St. Cyprian could not have expressed any thing more fully, or more
plainly, than he has done this. To omit that Testimony which he gives in his
Exhortation to Mar^yrdom, where he says, Bishops, by our Lord's Allowance, give
the first Baptism to Believers Nos tantum qui D^mino permittente primum
Baptisma credentibus damus. P. 168.
. Let us turn over to Ep. 73. in which he insists directly to this purpose. The
Question was, Whether Baptism performed by Heretics, or Schismatics, was
Valid? St. Cyprian affirmed it was not. His Conclusion was such, as required
some other Argument to support it, than his own Authority. It was therefore
needful, that he should attempt to prove it; and that from received and
acknowledged Principles. Now consider his Argument, I shall give it in his own
Words as near as I can Translate them. It Is manifest, says he, where, and by
whom, the Remission of Sins can be given, which is given in Baptism. For, our
Lord gave, first, to Peter ( on whom he built his Church, thereby instituting
and demonstrating the Original of Unity,) that Power, That whatsoever he should
loose on Earth, should be loosed in Heaven: And then, after his Resurrection,
he gave it to all his Apostles, when he said, As my Father has sent me, etc.
(Joh. 20. v. 21, 22, 23.) Whence we learn, that none can Baptize
Authoritatively, and give Remission of Sins, but the BISHOPS, and those who are
FOUNDED in the Evangelical Law, and our Lord's Institution: And, that nothing
can be Bound or Loosed out of the Church, seeing there is none, there, who has
the Power of Binding or Loosing. Further; Dearest Brother, we want not Divine
Warrant for it, when we say, That God has disposed all Things by a certain
Law, and a proper Ordinance; and that none can USURP any thing against the
BISHOPS, all being subject to them: For Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, attempted to
assume to themselves a Privilege of Sacrificing against Moses and Aaron the
Priest, and they were Punished for it, because it was unla^ful Manif^stum est,
aut ubi and per quos Remissa peccatorum da^i potest, quae in Baptismo scilicet
dat^r; nam Petro primum Dominus, ^^per quem ^dificavit Ecclesiam, and unde
unitatis Originem instituit and ostendit, potestatem ^^tem dedit ut id
solveritur in Caelis quod ille solvisset in Terris. Et post R^surrectionem
quoque ^d Apostolos loquitur, dicens, Sicut misit me Pater, etc. -- Unde
intelligimus non ni^i in Ecclesia praepositis, and in Evangelica lege ac
Dominica Ordinatione fundatis, licere Baptizare, and Remissum peccat^rum dare:
Foris autem nec lig^ri aliquid posse nec solvi, ubi non sit q^i aut ligari
possit, aut solvere. Nec hoc F. C. sine Scripturae divine Auctoritate
proponimus, ut dicamus certa lege cuncta esse disposita nec posse quenquam
contra Episcopos and Sacerd^tes Usurp^re sibi aliquid, quod non sit sui juris
and potestatis; nam and Chore, and Dathan and Abyron, contra Moysen and Aaron
Sacerdotem sacrifi^andi sibi Licentiam Usurpare conati sunt: N^c (...) quod
illicite ausi sunt, impune s^cerunt. Ep. 73. P. 201.
. Thus St. Cyprian argued; and the force of his Argument lies visibly in this,
That Baptism performed by Heretics or Schismatics cannot be Valid, because
not performed by the Bishop, nor with his Allowance. Now whatever comes of his
Inference, sure, it had been Ridiculous in him to have so Reasoned, if his
Antecedent had not been a received Principle.

Neither was St. Cyprian singular in this, for Firmilian Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia is as plain, saying, (as I have cited him before) That the Bishops,
who Govern the Church, possess the Power of Baptism, Confirmation, and
Ordination. And Fortunatus Bishop of Thuraboris, another of St. Cyprian's
Contemporaries, in his Suffrage at the Council of Carthage, is as plain as
either Cyprian or Firmilian. Jesus Christ, says he, our Lord and God, the Son
of God the Father and Creator, built his Church upon a Rock, and not upon
Heresy, and gave the Power of Baptizing to Bishops, and not to Heretics, etc.
Jesus Christus Dominus noster and Deus, Dei Patris and Creatoris Filius, super
Petram aedificavit Ecclesiam suam, non super Haeresin; and Potestatem
Baptizandi Episcopis dedit, non Haereticis: Quare qui extra Ecclesiam sunt, and
contra Christum stantes, oves ^jus and Gregem spargunt, Baptizari non possunt.
Conc. Carth. Suff. 17.
Indeed, before St. Cyprian's time, we have Tertullian, who spent most of his
Days in the Second Century, and who, in his Book about Baptism, against
Quintilla, to the Question, Who may Baptize? answers positively, The
High Priest, who is the Bishop, has the Power of Baptizing; and after him, or
in Subordination to him, Presbyters and Deacons, but not without the BISHOP's
AUTHORITY Dandi quidem jus habet summus Sacerdos qui est Episcopus; dehinc
Presbyter^ and Diaconi, won tamen sine Episcopi Auctoritate. Cap. 17.
. And before him, we have the Apostolical Ignatius, who spent almost all his
Days in the First Century, and who says in express Terms, That it is not lawful
to Baptize without the Bishop (...), etc. Ad Smyrn. p. 6.
.

2. A Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, had as much Power about the Holy
Eucharist: No Presbyter within his District could Administer it without his
Leave, or against his Interdict. St. Cyprian's Testimonies to this purpose are
innumerable. Let me give you only One or Two, for Instance; Thus in his 16th
Epistle written to his Presbyters and Deacons, he resents it highly, that some
of his Presbyters should have dared to admit the Lapsed to the Sacrament
without his Allowance. Such, says he, deny me the Honor of which by Divine
Right I am possessed, etc. Indeed, the 15th, 16th, and 17th Epistles, are to
this purpose Hi sublat^ honor qu^m n^bis beati Martyrs -- Servant, contempt^^
Domini lege -- quam iidem Martyrs -- tenendam manda^t -- ante reditum nostrum
Commumunicent cum lapsis, and offerant, and Eucharistiam trad^nt. Ep. 16. P. 38.
. And in his 59th Epistle, having cited Mal. 2. v. 1, 2. he Reasons thus
against all such Presbyters as presumed to Celebrate the Eucharist without the
Bishop's allowance. Is Glory given to God, when his Majesty and Discipline is
so contemned, that, when He says, He is Angry and full of Wrath against such as
Sacrifice to Idols, and when He threatens them with everlasting Pains and
Punishments, Sacrilegious Persons should presume to say, Think not on the Wrath
of God: Fear not the Divine Judgments: Knock not at the Church of Christ: That
they should cut off Repentance, and the Confession of Sins; and PRESBYTERS
CONTEMNING and TRAMPLING ON THEIR BISHOPS, should preach Peace with Deceiving
Words, and give the Communion, etc. Honor ergo datur Deo, quando sic Dei
Maj^stas and Censura contemnitur ut cum se ille indignari and irasci
Sacrificantibus dicat, and ne ira cogitetur Dei; ne timeatur judicium Domini;
ne puls^tur ad Ecclesiam Christi: Sed sublata paenitentia, nec ulla e^
homologesi Criminis facta, Despectis Episcopis atque Calcatis, Pax a
Presbyteris verbis fallacibus praedicetur and Communicatio a non
Communicantibus offeratur. Ep. 59. P. 135.


And, it is a Passage very remarkable to this purpose, which we read in an
Epistle of Dionysi^s of Alexandria to Fabius of Antioch, (both St. Cyprian's
Contemporaries) in which he tells, how one Serapion, an aged Man, after a long
Per^everance in the Christian Faith, had first fallen from it in time of
Persecution, and then into a deadly Sickness: How, after he had been dumb and
senseless for some Days, recovering some use of his Tongue, he called quickly
for one of the Presbyters of Alexandria, (for he lived in that City) that he
might be Absolved, and have the Sacrament, being persuaded he should not die
till he should be Reconciled to the Church: And how the Presbyter being sick
also, sent the Sacrament to him: But by what Right or Authority? By Dionysius
the Bishop. For, says he, I had COMMAND that any Lapsed, if in danger of Death,
especially if he was an humble Supplicant for it, should be Absolved, that he
might go out of this World full of good Hopes, etc. (...) Eusebius. H. E. lib. 6.
c^p. 14.
He being Bishop of that City, had given a COMMAND for it, otherwise it could
not have been done. And all this was nothing more than Ignatius had told the
World long before, viz. That that is only to be deemed a firm and valid
Eucharist, which is Celebrated by the Bishop, or by his Authority (...) Ign. ad
Smyrn p. 6.
.

Let me only add one Testimony more from St. Cyprian concerning both
Sacraments; but such an one as ought not to be neglected. It is in his 69th
Epistle written to Magnus. The great Purpose he pursues in it, is to represent
the Atrocious Guilt of Schism, and the forlorn Condition of Schismatics; that
they cannot have Valid Sacraments, and that all their Acts are Nullities, etc.
Amongst many Arguments to this effect, he insists on that famous one; Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, were of that same Religion that Moses and Aaron were of,
and served the same God whom Moses and Aaron served: But because they
transgressed the Limits of their own Stations, and Usurped a Power of
Sacrificing to themselves, in opposition to Aaron the Priest, who was only
legally Invested with the Priesthood by God's Vouchsafement and Appointment:
They were forthwith punished in a miraculous manner; neither could their
Sacrifices be Valid or Profitable, being offered Unlawfully and Irreligiously,
and against the Divine Ordinance. -- And yet these Men had made no Schism: They
had not departed from the Tabernacle, nor raised another Altar, etc. which now
the Schismatics do, (meaning the Novatians,) who dividing the Church, and
rebelling against Christ's Peace and Unity, are bold to Constitute an
[Episcopal] Chair, and assume to themselves a Primacy, an Episcopal Authority,
and a POWER OF BAPTIZING and OFFERING, that is, Celebrating the Holy Eucharist.
What can be more plain than it is here, That no Sacraments could be Administered
but in dependence on the Bishop Nam etc Core, and Dathan, and Abyron, cum
Sacerdote Aaron and Moyse, eundem Deum noverant, pari leg^ and Religio^^
viventes, ^um and verum Deum qui (...) atque invoc^ndus fuer^s, inv^^abant.
Taman qu^^ Loci sui Ministerium transgressi contra Aaron Sacerdotem, qui
Sacerdotlum legitim^m Dignatione Dei atque Ordinatione percep^rat, Sacrificandi
sibi Licentiam vindicar^nt, Divinitus percussi -- Nec (...) rata ess^ and
proficere Sacrificia, irreligiose and illicite contra jus Divinae dispositionis
oblata. -- Et tamen illi Schisma non fecerant; n^c for as egressi -- Quod nunc
hi Ecclesiam scindentes, and contra pa^em and unitatem Christi rebels,
Cathedram sibi constituere, and primatum assumere, and Baptizandi atque
Offerendi licentiam vindi^are conantur. Ep. 69. P. 184.
? Indeed,

3. Considering that, as I have fully proved, a Bishop was, then, the Principle
of Unity to the Church; that he was Chief Governor of the Church; and that, by
consequence, the Supreme Power of the Keys could not but belong to him:
Considering that the Church was a Visible Society; that he was the Visible Head
of that Visible Society; and, by consequence, that it belonged to him as such,
to take care that Society might suffer no Detriment: Considering these Things,
I say, it was highly reasonable, that he should have the Chief Power of
Dispensing the Sacraments: Such a Power, as that neither might be dispensed
without him. What can be more Detrimental to a Society, especially such a
Society as a Christian Church, than admitting Unworthy Persons to the
Privileges of it? Or allowing them to continue in it? Or restoring them to
their Membership in the Society, after they have been justly thrust from it,
without considering whether they have given any Evidences of a serious
Reformation? And who so proper to judge of these Matters, as the Chief
Governor of the Society? And now,

Having thus made it evident, that a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, had a
Negative over all other Church Officers within his District, in the grand
Concern of Dispensing both Sacraments; and that neither could be Administered
without him, or against his Authority, I might fairly supersede the trouble of
making either a Minute or a laborious Demonstration of his Sovereign Interest
in the Acts of Excommunication, or injoyning Penances, or reconciling
Penitents, or making, or rescinding, or dispensing with Ecclesiastical Laws or
Canons; in a word, in every thing relating to the Government or Discipline of
the Church. All these Acts depend upon the Sacraments. His Negative therefore,
about the Dispensation of the Sacraments, had been in vain, and to no purpose,
if he had not had a Negative likewise about all these Acts. Besides, you will
not readily say, I think, that he could have had a Greater Trust by having a
Negative, in any other Matter than in the Dispensing of the Sacraments. Having
that, therefore, he might well be entrusted with a Negative in all other
Things, either of equal (if any such can be imagined) or lesser Importance on
which, the Order, the Subsistence, the Unity, the Peace, the Purity, the
Prosperity, or whatsoever Interest of the Church could any way depend. Yet that
I may give you all possible satisfaction, I shall proceed a little further, and
give you, by way of Historical Deduction, such an account of Powers lodged, e.
g. in St. Cyprian's Person, as you may fairly judge thereby, concerning the
Preheminences of Bishops in his Time.

The most current Account we have about him, is, that he was not Converted to
Christianity, at least, not Baptized, till the Year 246. That he was Ordained a
Presbyter, Anno 247; and Bishop of Carthage, Anno 248. Chronologists do
generally agree in this last Step of his Preferment. Now, as we learn both from
himself, and from Pontius his Deacon, some of the Carthaginian Clergy were
mighty Enemies to his Promotion Vi^e ^p. 43. and vit. (...) po^^ea (...).
. Belike, they took it ill, that he, so lately converted to the Faith, so
lately made a Presbyter, should have been preferred to themselves. However it
was, certain it is, as I said, that they appeared against him with all their
might and main. But the People were so Generally and so Zealously for him, to
have him their Bishop, that these his Enemies were overpowered. Made Bishop he
was; and he was a Person so well Qualified, so Eminent in every Virtue, and
withal so Strict and Cautious in his Life and Government, after he was made
Bishop, that it was not easy for the Mutineers to wreck their Malice on him:
But this was so far from softening them, and bringing them to a better temper,
that, on the contrary, it imbittered them the more, and made them the more
watchful of all Opportunities to breed him Troubles, and disturb his
Government. At last, they caught hold of one, and that a very dangerous one,
in the time of the Decian Persecution.

This Persecution beginning toward the end of the Year 249, and lasting for a
full Year; coming on the Church, after a long Peace, with a surprising
Violence, had very sad Effects. Vast numbers turned Apostates, Renouncing the
Holy Faith, and Sacrificing to the Heathen Idols: And Cyprian himself,
commanded by God, had retired from Carthage till there should be some
Relentment of the Fury of the Persecution. Here, I say, his subtle Enemies
found their so long wished Opportunity: For, the Lapsed, so soon as the Hazard
was over, resumed their Christian Profession, and turned mighty forward, if not
furious, to be restored to the Communion of the Church. 'Tho they knew full
well, that they were bound by the Canons to have continued, for a long time, in
the state of Penitents; yet they thought their Numbers, and perhaps their
Qualities, might overpower the Canons, and claim Indulgences and Dispensations.
With them struck in those Clergymen, who had still retained the old Grudges
against St. Cyprian's Promotion, encouraging their Presumptions. They knew, he
was a Man of Principles, and had a mighty Zeal for the real Interests of
Christianity; and, by consequence, that he would stand Resolutely by the Canons
of the Church, and be clear, that the Lapsed should perfect their Terms of
Penance: They saw the Eagerness of the Lapsed to be sooner reconciled, than the
Canons allowed: They resolved therefore to fall in with them, thinking that
thereby they should effectually put a Thorn in his Foot; they should inflame
the Lapsed, and their Relations, perchance, the great Body of the People
against him. But this was not all.

It was not enough for them themselves to encourage the Lapsed in their
Petulancies: The Bishops Prelation over Presbyters was then so Notorious, that,
as malicious as they were, they had not Impudence enough to set up theirs in
opposition to his Authority, and Reconcile the Lapsed to the Church, merely
upon the score of their own Credit, against his Will and Orders; and therefore,
they fell upon another Project. If it was possible for any other to stand up
against the Bishops Authority, it was that of the Martyrs and Confessors.
These, for their Faith and Patience; their fervent Zeal, and fragrant Graces;
their glorious Courage, and good Example; that they might Persevere themselves,
and others might be encouraged to follow their Pattern; were held in mighty
Reputation. They were reputed as dearer to God, and in a closer Communion with
him, and nearer Approximation to him, than Christians of the common size: And
their Intercessions had been in use of being much regarded in former
Persecutions. These, therefore, as the only Persons whose Credit could be
feasibly put in the Balance with the Bishops Authority, the Holy Man's
Supplanters instigated to espouse the Quarrel of the Lapsed; to become their
Patrons, for having themselves Absolved against the Bishop's Resolutions. And
truly, some of them were so far wrought upon, as to turn Zealous for it: And,
armed with their Authority, these discontented Presbyters adventured to Absolve
and Lapsed, and receive them to the Sacrament, without the Bishop's Allowance.
Now consider what followed, and speak your Conscience, and tell me, if St.
Cyprian was not more than either Single Presbyter, or Presbyterian Moderator.

Tho he was one of the mildest and most humble Men that ever lived; yet, so
soon as this was told him, where he was, in his Retirement, he was not a little
alarmed: The Practice was surprising, and the Presumption, new, as well as
bold: The like had never been done before in any Christian Church: And such
preposterous Methods clearly tended to shake all the Foundations of Order and
good Discipline: And therefore he thought it high time for him, if he could, to
give the Check to such irregular and unexampled Methods. In short, he drew his
Pen, and wrote Three notable Epistles; one to the Martyrs and Confessors;
Another to his Clergy; and a third to his People: Insisting, in each of them,
upon the Novelty and Unwarrantableness of the Course was taken; the Dishonours
and Indignities were done himself by it; and the great Mischiefs and fatal
Consequences might, nay would, unavoidably follow upon it, if it were not
forborne. More particularly,

In that to the Martyrs and Confessors, he told them, That his Episcopal Care,
and the Fear of God, compelled him to Admonish them, That, as they had devoutly
and courageously kept the Faith, so they ought, suitably, to be observant of
Christ's Holy Laws and Discipline: That, as it became all Christ's Soldiers to
obey their General's Commands; so it was their Duty, in a special manner, to be
Examples to others: That he had thought, the Presbyters and Deacons, who were
with them, might have taught them so much: But that now, to his extreme Grief,
he understood, they had been so far from doing that; that, on the contrary,
some of them, especially some Presbyters, neither minding the Fear of God, nor
the Honor of their Bishop, had industriously misled them. He complained
mightily of the Presumption of such Presbyters, that against all Law and
Reason, they should have dared to Reconcile the Lapsed without his Consent.
That herein they were more Criminal than the Lapsers themselves: That it was
somewhat Excusable in the Lapsed to be earnest for an Absolution; considering
the uncomfortable State they were in, so long as they were denied the Communion
of the Church: But it was the Duty of Office-bearers in the Church to do
nothing rashly, lest, in stead of Pastors, they should prove Worriers of the
Flock, etc. And then he told these Martyrs and Confessors, how far their
Privileges reached: All they could do, was, by way of humble Supplication, to
Petition the Bishop for a Relaxation of the Rules of Discipline: But they had
neither Power to Command him, nor Grant Indulgences without him Sollicitudo
Loci nostri, and timor Domini compellit, fortissimi and ^eatissimi Martyrs,
admonere vos literis ^ostris, ut a quibus tam devote and fortiter servatur
fides Domino, ab iisdem Lex quoque and Disciplina Domini reservetur. Nam cum
omnes milites Christi custodire oporteat praecepta imperatoris sui, tum vos
magis praeceptis ejus obtemperare plus convenit, qui exemplum caeteris facti
estis and virtutis and tim^ris Dei. Et credideram quidem Presbyteros and
Diaconos qui illic praesentes sunt, monere vos and instruere plenissime circa
Evangelii legem, sicut in praeteritum s^mper sub Antecessoribus nosiris factum
est -- Sed ^unc cum maximo a^^imi dolor cognosco, non tantum illic vo^is non
suggeri Divina Praecept^^, sed adhuc potius impediri, ut ea -- a quibusdam
Presbyteris r^solvantur, qui nec timorem Dei, nec Episcopi honorem cogitantes
-- Contra Evangelii legem -- ante actam paenitentiam, ante exomologesin
gravissimi atque extremi delicti factam, ante manum ab Episcopo and clero in
paenitentiam impositam, offerre pro illis, and Eucharistiam dare, i. e. sanctum
Domini Corpus profanare audeant. -- Et Lapsis quidem potest in hoc venia
concedi: Quis enim no^^ mortuus vivificari properet? Quis non ad salutem suam
venire festinet? Sed praeposit^^rum est praecept^^m tenere, and vel
properantes, vel ignorantes instrucre, ne qui ovium Pastores esse debe^^^.
Lanii fiant. -- Petitiones and desideria vestra Episcopo servent, etc. Ep. 15.
P. 33, 34.
. Indeed, this he told them frequently, and that they went beyond their Line if
they ventured any further Vide De Lapsis, P. 129, 131, 138. Ep. 16. P. 37. EP.
17. P. 39. Ep. 36. P. 70.
.

In that to his Presbyters and Deacons, he wrote in a yet more resenting
Strain. He told them, He had long kept his Patience, and held his Peace; but
their immoderate Presumption and Temerity would suffer him no longer to be
silent. For what a dreadful Prospect, says he, must we have of the Divine
Veng^^nce, when some Presbyters, neither mindful of the Gospel, nor their own
Stations, nor regarding the future Judgments of God, nor the Bishop, who, for
the time, is set over them; dare attempt what was never attempted before, under
any of my Predecessors, namely, so to Affront and Contem^^ their Bishop, as to
assume all to themselves? And then he proceeds to tell them, how he could
overlook and bear with the Indignity done to his Episcopal Authority, if there
were no more in it: But the course they followed was so wicked; they were so
injurious to the Lapsed whom they presumed to Reconcile so Uncaononically;
their Pride and Popularity were so apparent in their Method; it was such a
Crime, so to Expose the Martyrs to Envy, and set them at Variance with their
Bishop, etc. that he could ^tifle it no longer. In short, all over the Epistle
he wrote like a Bishop, and concluded it with a Peremptory Threatening of a
present Suspension from the Exercise of their Office, and then an Infliction of
further Censures when he should return from his Retirement, if they should
Persevere in such a Lawless Course Di^ patientiam m^am tenui. F. C. quasi
verccundum silentium n^strum pr^ficeret ad quiet^m. S^d cum qu^r^ndam
immeder^ta and abrupta praesumptio, temeritate sua, and honorem Martyrum, and
Confessorum pudorem, and Pl^bi^ (...) tranqui^^ia^em turbare conetur, tacere
ultra non oportet. -- Quid enim non periculum metuere deb^^us de offensa
Domini; quando aliqui de Presbyteris, nec Evangelii, n^c Loci sui memores; sed
n^que futurum Dom^ni judicium, neque n^nc sibi Praepositum Episcopum
cogitantes, quod nunquam ^mnin^ sub antecessoribus factum est, cum Contumeli^
and C^ntemptu Praepositi totum sibi vindicnt? Cont^^umeliam Episcopatus nostri
dissimulare and far possem, sicut dissimulavi semper and pertuli, sed
dissimulandi nunc L^cus non est, quand^ decipia^ur fratcrnitas nostra, a
quibusdam vestrum; qui du^ si^e rati^ne restituendae salutis plausibil^s esse
cupiunt, magis Lapsis obsunt -- Exponunt deinde invidiae Beatos Martyrs, and
Glorios^s s^rvos Dei cum Dei Sacerdot^ committunt. -- Interim Temerarii and
Incauti and Tumid^ quidam inter vos, qui hominem non cogitent, vel Deum
timeant; scientes quoniam si ^ltra in iisdi^ pers^veraverint, utar ea
admonitione, qua me uti Dominus jubet, ut interim prohibeantu^ offerre; Acturi
and apud nos and apud Conf^ssores ipsos, and apud Plebem universam, causam
suam, cum, D^m^na permittence, in (...) matris Ecclesiae Colligi caeperimus.
Ep. 16. P. 36, 37, 38. imo l^ge totam Epist.
.

In that to his People, he proceeded on the ^ame Principles; condemned these
Presbyters, who had acted so disorderly, not reserving to the Bishop the Honor
of his Chair and Priesthood: Told them, That those Presbyters ought to have
taught the People otherwise; Laid to their Charge the Affectation of
Popularity; and required such of the People as had not fallen, to take Pains
upon the Lapsed; to try to bring them to a better Temper; to persuade them to
hearken to his Counsel, and wait his Return, etc. Audio tamen quosdam de
Presbyteris ne^ Evangelii memores -- Nec Episcopo honorem Sacerdotii sui and
Cathedrae r^servantes, jans cum Lapsis communicare caepisse -- Vos quid^m
Nostri Presbyteri and Diaconi (...) as sibi Oves fov^rent. -- Eg^ Plebis
nostrae and quietem (...) pariter and tim^rem, qui in satisfactione Dei and
deprecatione vigilar^nt, nisi illos quidem de Presbyteris GRATIFICANTES
dec^pissent. Vel vos itaque' singulos regite, and Consilio ac M^deratione
v^stra, and secundum divina praec^pta Lapsorum anim^s temperate, etc. Ep. 17.
P. 39.


Here were three Epistles written, I think, in plain Prelatick Style; sure,
neither in the Style of Single Presbyter, nor Presbyterian Moderator:
Especially if we consider the very next, written to his Presbyters and Deacons
upon the same Principles, still. He had written to them several times before
from the Place of his Retirement, but had received no Answer from them. Now
consider how he Resents this, and, Resenting it, asserts his own Episcopal
Authority; his own Sovereign Power in Ecclesiastic Matters: For thus he
begins; I wonder, dear Brethren, that you have returned no Answers to the many
Letters I have sent you; especially considering, that now, in my Retirement,
you ought to inform me of every thing that happens; that so I may, advisedly
and deliberately, give Orders concerning the Affairs of the Church Miror v^s,
F. C. ad multas Epistolas meas qua^ ad vos frequenter, misi, nunqua^t mihi
rescripsisse, cum fraternitatis n^strae vel utilitas vel necessitas sic utique
guber^^tur, s^ ^ vobis instructi, rerum gerendarum Consilium limare po^^mus.
Ep. 18. P. 40.
. Let any Man lay these four Letters together, and weigh them impartially, and
then let him judge if St. Cyprian wrote in the Style of Parity, if he claimed
not a Sovereign Power, a Negative, to himself, over all the Christians,
Presbyters as well as others, living within his District.

But did not Cyprian show too much Zeal in this Cause? Possibly, he attempted
to stretch his Power a little too far; as afterward many did: He was a Holy
and Meek Man, but such may be a little too High. So I read, indeed, in a late
Book Rational Defense of Nonconformity, P. 179.
. But it seems, the Author has found himself very sore put to it when he said
so: For how can one not be fore put to it, when he cannot escape but by seeking
for Refuge in a Reconciliation between Pride and Patience, Superciliousness and
Selfdenial, Huffyness and Humility, Carnal Height and Christian Holiness? But
to let this pass,

Had that Author any solid Ground for saying so? Or rather, had it been
possible for him to have said so, had he had but an ordinary Acquaintance with
St. Cyprian, or his Epistles? Charge Pride on the Humble Cyprian! Cyprian, who
was so very Humble, that from the Conscience of his own Nothingness, he has
still been looked upon as a Pattern of Humility! Cyprian, whose Humility would
not allow him almost to speak in the Style of Authority, even to Female Laics
Ad has l^quimur, has ad hortamur ^ffectione potius quam potestate: Non quod
extremi and minimi and humilitatis nostrae admodum conscii, aliquid adCensuram
licentiae vindicemus, etc. De Hab. Virg. p. 94.
! Cyprian, who was persuaded, that God would hear none but the Humble and Quiet
Si nos Dominus humiles and quietos -- Conspexerit, tutos ab inimici
infestationibus exhibebit. Ep. 11. P. 26.
! Cyprian, who believed, that none could be a Christian, and withal, be Proud
and Haughty Et quisquam per ipsum (Christum) nunc, atque in ipso vivens
ext^llere se audet and superbire? Ep. 13. P. 30.
! Who insisted on his own Humility in that very Epistle, for which that Author
charges him with Pride Vide Superius Citata, ex Ep. 16.
! Who, if in any thing, Gloried most in his Humble and Bashful Modesty Nec nos
putes, F. C. nostra and human^^ conscribere, at ultronea voluntate hoc nobis
audacter assumere, cum Mediocritatem nostram semper humili and verecunda
m^deratione ten^amus. Ep. 63. P. 148.
! Who, when accused of Pride, could Appeal not only to all Christians, but even
to the Heathen Infidels, as Witnesses of his Innocence Humilitatem meam and
Fratres omnes, and Gentiles quoque optime norunt and diligunt. Ep. 66. P. 166.
! Cyprian, who had this Great Testimony from some of his Contemporaries, That
he was the Greatest Preacher, the Most Eloquent Orator, the Wisest in Counsel,
the Simplest in Patience, the Most Charitable in Alms, the Holiest in
Abstinence, the Humblest in Obligingness, and the Most Innocent in every Good
Action Et enim omnibus in Tractatu major, in Sermon facundior, in Consilio
sapientior, in patientia simplicior, in Operibus largior, in Abstinentia
sanctio^, in Obsequio humilior, and in actu bon^ innocentior. Ep. 77. P. 234.
! And from others, That he had a Candid and a Blessed Breast! etc. Pectus illud
tuum Candidum ac Beatum -- Ep. 78. P. 235. -- De Animi (...) -- Ep. 79. P. 236.
In a word, Cyprian, whose Humility was such, that, if we may believe his
Deacon Pontius, He fled and lurked when they were going to make him a Bishop
Pontius in vi^ a Cyp. P. 3.
! Such, that when St. Augustine, many years after, was pressed with his
Authority, he came off with this, The Authority of Cyprian does not fright me,
because the Humility of Cyprian encourages me Non me terret Auctoritas
Cypriani, quiae reficit humilitas Cypriani. August. l. 2. De Baptism^.
! Such a Person was Cyprian; And yet to Proud was he, forsooth, for doing his
Duty; for asserting his Episcopal Authority, when most undutifully trampled on
by his presuming Presbyters.

What I have said, methinks, might be enough in all conscience, for defeating
for ever that Uncharitable, shall I say, or Ignorant Suggestion, That it was
Pride, perhaps, that prompted Cyprian to write so Magisterially to the
Carthaginian Presbyters; yet, because a farther Discussion of it may contribute
not a little for clearing up the Bishop's Negative, in St. Cyprian's time, I
shall not grudge to give it you.

St. Cyprian had three sorts of People to deal with in that Controversy, which
bred him so much Trouble. He had the Lapsed themselves; the Martyrs and
Confessors; and these Presbyters and Deacons, who had encroached so much on his
Episcopal Authority.

I am apt to think, the Author himself, with whom I have now to do, will not be
shy to grant, That St. Cyprian, without incurring the Reputation of either
Proud or Presumptuous, might have chided the Lapsed, as we find he did: They
had Cowardly renounced their Christianity, to save their Lives and Fortunes;
and the Canons subjected them to a strict and a long Penance for it: And I
think, without the imputation of either Height or Humor, one in St. Cyprian's
Station might have put them in mind of the Respect they owed to the Canons of
the Church, and the Governors of it. Indeed, all the Lapsed were not engaged
in the disorderly Course. There were some of them who were sensible of their
Duty, and subjected themselves to their Bishop, resolving to wait his time, and
entirely to depend upon him for their Absolution, as we learn from his 33d
Epistle.

His Difficulty was greater with the Martyrs and Confessors, who appeared as
Patrons to the Prejudicating Lapsed; but neither need I insist on that, nor how
he conquered them in point of Right and Argument: For, this Author told Dr.
Stilling fleet, He was wholly out of the way in meddling with that Matter,
seeing none ever imagined that every Martyr had Church Power. Tho I must tell
you, Sir, That whosoever reads St. Cyprian's Works, and particularly observes the
State and Management of this whole Controversy about the Lapsed, cannot but be
convinced, that the Reputation and Authority of Martyrs and Confessors, made a
far greater Figure in it, than the Reputation or Authority of Presbyters. To
come therefore to that which is the main Point with this Author,

Let us try, if St. Cyprian stretched his Power too far in his Treatment of the
Presbyters, who appeared against him in this Controversy. Consider the
following Steps, and then judge.

I. Consider that St. Cyprian does not fall a buffing or hectoring, or running
them down by Noise or Clamor. No, He Reasons the Case with them, and Reasons
all along from known and received Principles. He tells them plainly indeed.
That in Presuming as they had done, they had forgotten both the Gospel, and
their own Station: That he was their Superior: That they did not pay him the
Honor that was due to his Chair and Character: That the like had never been
attempted before by Presbyters, under any of his Predecessor-Bishops: That it
was a Factious, Selfish Temper, and too great Love of Popularity that prompted
them to Measures so in no wise Presidented: That he knew the Secret of the
Matter, and that it was the old Grudge against his being preferred to the
Bishopric that biased them to their Insolences: That is belonged to him as
having the Chief Power of the Keys, as being Bishop, i. e. as having the
visible Sovereignty in Church Matters, to straiten or slacken the Sinews of
Discipline; to prolong or shorten the Courses of Penance; to grant Absolutions,
and reconcile Penitents, etc. That such Presumptions were Encroachments upon
the very Foundations of the Church, to the Subversion whereof, their pretending
to any Power, in opposition to the Bishops, tended: In short, That such
Practices were against Christ's Institution, and the Analogies of Government,
and all the Laws of Order, Peace and Unity: And they deserved the sharpest
Censures for them. These, I say, are a Sample of the Arguments St. Cyprian
insisted on against those Presbyters; and most of them were founded on Matter
of Fact: And now, suppose St. Cyprian had had considerable Doses of Pride, yet
if you will but allow him, withal, to have had some Grains of Common Sense or
Honesty, can you so much as imagine he could have used such Arguments, if they
had wanted Foundation? Would he not have been ashamed to have used them, if he,
and not his Presbyters, had been guilty of the Usurpations he was Condemning?
But what needs more? Have I not fully proved already, That a Bishop, in St.
Cyprian's time, was the Principle of Unity to all the Christians, Presbyters as
well as others, within his District? And that he was a Sovereign and Peerless
Governor of the Church which he Ruled. And were not all his Reas^nings founded
on these Principles? But this is not all; for,

2. Consider that they were not all the Presbyters of Carthage, who were
engaged in the Quarrel. No: R^gatianus, Britius, Numidicus, and, perhaps, many
more, whose Names are not trasmited to us, would never join with those of the
Faction; but still continued in their Duty to St. Cyprian. And can we think,
they would not have joined with their Brethren for the Maintenance of their own
Rights and Privileges, if Cyprian had been the Usurper? If he had been
Claiming a Sovereign Power, without any Pretense of Right to it? If he had been
driving at a Prelacy, when the Government of the Church belonged to Presbyters
acting in Parity? We learn from St. Cyprian* himself, That, in those Times, it
was a mighty Wickedness for Men to part tamely with their Rights and Powers in
Divine Matters. Quam periculosum sit ^ut^m in Divinis rebus ut quis cedat jure
(...) and po^estate, etc. Ep. 73. p. 209.
And can we think, that Rogatianus, B^itius, and Numidicus, were ignorant of
this? Or, supposing that should have had small Weight with them, is Power such
a gustless Thing, that Men will easily part with it without any Reason? But to
go on.

3. Even those very Presbyters and Deacons of the Faction came once to
something like a Dutiful Submission in the Matter. They lowered their Sails,
and began to wave Apologies, and knit Excuses for what they had done. They
endeavored to put a fair Face upon the foul Steps they had made: They wrote to
Cyprian, That they had done what they could to bridle the Heats of the Lapsed,
and oblige them to continue in their Penances, till his Return from his
Retirement; but that they were so Ungovernable and Stiff, and urged a present
Absolution so eagerly and irresistibly, that they were forced, in a manner, to
comply with their Humors: But now seeing they found, that he, their Bishop,
was so much displeased with what they had done, they asked a FORM from him, i.
e. his Will and Pleasure in the Matter. L^gi literas vestras, F. C. quibus
scripsist is salubre Consilium vestrum non deesse fratribus nostris, ut
temeraria festi^atione deposita^, Religios^m patientiam Deo praebeant, ut cum
in unum per ejus mis^ricordiam venerimus, de omnibus speciebus secundu^m
Ecclesiasticam Disciplinam tractare possimus. -- Quoniam tamen significastis
quosdam immoderatos ^sse and Communicationem accipiendam festinanter urgere;
Et. desiderastis in hac re FORMAM ^ me vabis dari, etc. Ep. 19. p. 41.
And now, let any Man consider, whether St. Cyprian or these Presbyters had
been in the Wrong before? Whether He or They had acted beyond their Lines? But
I have more to tell you: For,

4. These Presbyters, who had thus transgressed the Bounds of their Station,
were generally Condemned for it, by their Brethren Presbyters, all the World
over: At least, we have a most remarkable Instance in the Presbyters of Rom^.
Take it thus.

St. Cyprian being a Wise and Watchful, as well as an Holy and Humble Prelate;
one, who had still before his Eyes the Conservation of the Order, the Peace,
and the Unity of the Church Catholic; and perceiving that the Controversy
concerning the Restitution of the Lapsed, might be of bad Influence on those
great Interests, if not prudently determined; thought fit to acquaint his
Brethren of the Episcopal College with it, and ask their Sentiments about it:
And because there was no Bishop then at Rome, he wrote to the Presbyters and
Deacons, the Roman Presbytery. The Epistle is the 20th in Number. In which he
deduced the whole Matter to them, and told them particularly, how he had
Exerted his Episcopal Authority, in its Vigor, against such of his Presbyters
as, without his Leave, had boldly and presumptuously Absolved the Lapsed, and
given them the Sacrament. Item Presbyteris and Diaconibus non defui^ Sacerdotii
vigor, ut quidam D^sciplinae minus m^mores, and t^meraria festinatione
praecipites qui tam lapsis communicare jam caeperant compri^mer^^tur. Ep. 20.
p. 43.
Now consider their Return to him: You have it in the 30th Epistle.

They begin with the Acknowledgment of his Supreme and Unaccountable Power
within his own District, which I observed before Page
: They impute it to his Modesty and Caution, (not to his Pride and Fetulancy,)
that he had been pleased to communicate his Measures to them: They approve the
Course he had taken with the Lapsed: They compare him to the Master of a Ship,
sitting at the Helm, who, if he steers not right, and keeps not a steady
Course, especially in a Storm, endangers the Ship, and runs her upon Rocks or
Shelves: And I think, the Master of a Ship does not act in Parity with the rest
of the Mariners. And further, They compare those who, at that time, endeavored
to interrupt the Course of his Discipline, Presbyters as well as others, to the
Tumbling Waves, striving to shake the Master from the Helm, and expose all to
the Hazards of Shipwreck. In plain Terms, they condemn the Course of
Reconciling the Lapsed, so Undutifully and Rebelliously. As for themselves,
they tell him, (and pray take notice of it,) That, wanting a Bishop, they could
define nothing in the Matter: They tell him, I say, That since the Death of
Fabianus of most Noble Memory, through the Difficulties of the Times, and the
Encumbrances of their Affairs, they had not got a Bishop Constituted; who only
could define in these Matters, and determine in the Case of the Lapsed with
AUTHORITY and Counsel Quanqua^ nobi^ diff^r^ndae h^jus rei necess^tas major
incumbat, quibus, post excessum nobilissimae memoriae viri Fabiani, nendum est
Episcopus propter re^^^n and te^porum difficultates constitutus, qui ^mnia
ist^^ mod^r^tur, and eorum qui Lapsi sunt possi^ cum AUCTORITATE and Consilio
habere Rationem. Ep. 30. p. 59.
But withal, they tell him, That, for their parts, they were extremely well
pleased with the Course he had taken; namely, That he had resolved to do
nothing rashly, to take no sudden Resolutions in a Matter of such Consequence;
but to wait till God should grant him opportunity of Treating about it with
others, and determining with common Advice in such a ticklish Case Q^anquam
nobis in tam ingenti negotio place at quod and tu ipse tractasti, prius
Ecclesiae pa^^m sustinendum, deinde, sic collatione Cons^lior^m cum Episcopis,
Presbyteris, Diaconis, Confessor^bus p^^riter ac st^ntibus lai^is facta,
Laps^ram tractar^ rationem. Perquam ^nim nobis and invidiosum and On^rosum
vid^^^r, non per mult^s Examinare, quod per ^ultos Comm^ssum videatur fuisse;
and (...) sententiam dicere cum tam grande Crimen per mul^os diffusum not^tur
exisse; quoniam nec^firmum d^cr^^^um pot^^^ esse^quod non plurimorum v^debitur
habuisse consensum. Ibid.
: Where observe by the way, That they do not found the Wisdom of this his
Resolution on any thing like the Incompetency of his Power, for having
determined by himself concerning the Lapsed, within his own District: No, the
Reason they give for it, supposes his Power to have been fully Adequate and
Competent for that Effect; and, that if he had given the final Stroke, no body
could have Quarreled it: For they insist only on the Rules of Prudence, which,
if I mistake not, are quite, different from the Rules of Power. They tell him,
it might prove Invidious and Burdensome for one Bishop to Determine by himself,
in a Case in which all Bishops were concerned; and that it was Providently done
of him to d^^ire the Confent of his Colleagues, that his Decrees might be
Approved and Confirmed; That they might not be made void through the want of
the Brotherly Ratification. These are the Reasons, I say, for which they
justify his Caution; and these Reasons suppose he had Power to have done
otherwise tho not so wisely, nor so warily. And then they tell him over again,
That they had met frequently, and canvassed the Matter seriously; They had
tossed it, not only amongst themselves, but with sev^ral Bishops, far and near,
as they had occasion to be in the City; and that still the Conclusion was, That
they should attempt no Innovations till a Bishop should be settled: All they
had Resolved was, That th^se of the Lapsed, whose Health might allow, should
continue in the State of the Penitents, till God should grant them a Bishop
Cujus temperam^nti Moderamen nos hic tenere quaerentes, diu, and quide^ m^lti,
and quidem cum quibusdam Episc^pi^ (...) nobis and appropinquantibus and quos
ex aliis provinciis long p^sit is Persecutionis i^tius ardor ej^^^rat, antc
Constitu^ionem Episcopi nih^l i^^ovandum put avimus, sed L^psorum curam
Medi^criter temperandam esse Credidimus, ut, in^erim, dum Episcopus dari a Deo
nobis sustinetur, in suspenso ^orum qui Moras possunt dilationis sustin^r^,
caus^^ t^neatur. Ibid. p. 60.


Neither was this a mere Complement to our Holy Martyr: Indeed, in all this,
they gave him a true Account of their Real Sentiments and Principles, as we
learn from another Epistle of theirs, wherein they had neither Occasion nor
Temptation to Complement Bishops. The Epistle is that which is the Eigh^h,
amongst St. Cyprian's. An Epistle written by them to the Presbyters and Deacons
of Carthage; to Persons of their own Rank and Quality: By consequence, an
Epistle, in which, had they understood it, had the Principles of those Times
allowed it, they might have spoken their Minds very freely concerning the Power
of Presbyters. Never had Presbyters, I am sure, more Freedom, or better
Opportunity, to have asserted their own Power, and Vindicated Parity, and
Condemned Prelatical Usurpations, in an Epistle, than they had on that Occasion;
for Fabianus Bishop of Rome was dead, and Cyprian Bishop of Carthage was
retired; and so it was written by Presbyters who had no Bishop, to Presbyters
in the absence of their Bishop: And yet, in that Epistle, they were so far from
having any such Notions, that they said expressly, That both Themselves who
wanted One, and those of Carthage who wanted the Presence of One, were only
seemingly the Governors of those respective Churches; and only kept the
Flocks, in stead of the respective Pastors, the Bishops Et cum incumbit nobis
qui VIDEMUR praep^siti esse, and VICE PASTORIS custod^re Gregem. Ep. 8. p. 16.
. And ^urther, telling what Pains they had been at to keep People from
Apostatizing in the Day of Trial, they account how they Treated those who had
fallen, particularly, that they did separate them from the Flock indeed, but
so, as not to be wanting in their Duty and Assistance to them: They did what
was proper for their Station: They exhorted them to continue patiently in their
Penances, as being the most plausible Method for obtaining Indulgences from him
who could give them Sed ipsos cohortati s^^us and hortamur ager^ p^^nitentiam
(...) qu^m^do indulgentiam p^terunt recipere ab ^O QUI POTEST PRAESTARE. Ibid.
p. 17.
That is, without Controversy, from the Bishop when he should be settled. For
so I read in an Epistle, written at that same time by Celerin^s a Roman, to
Lucianus a Carthaginian, and the 2Is It in Number among St. Cyprian's, that when
the Cause of Numeria and Candida, two Female Lapsers, was brought before the
Presbytery of Rome, the Presbytery commanded them to continue as they were, i.
e. in the State of Penitents, till a Bishop should be Inthroned Quarum jam
^ausa audita, praeceperunt (...) Praep^siti tantisper sic esse, donec Episcopus
Constituatur. Ep. 2^ p. 46.
And now, let any Man judge, whether, according to the Principles and
Sentiments of the Presbyters of Rome, St. Cyprian or his presuming Presbyters
had taken too much upon them at Carthage. But neither is this all yet; for,

^. These Carthaginian Presbyters were also Condemned by the Roman Martyrs and
Confessors, who, the they were in Prison, had learned the State of the
Controversy, from the Accounts St. Cyprian had sent to Rome, two of them,
Moses and Maximus, being also Presbyters. These Martyrs and Confessors wrote
also to St. Cyprian, and to the same purpose the Roman Clergy had done: Their
Epistle is the 3Is It in number: In which, they not only beg with a peculiar
Earnestness, That he, being so Glorious a Bishop, would pray for them; They not
only lay a singular stress upon his Prayers beyond the Prayers of others, by
reason of the Opinion they had of his Holy Virtues, which, I am apt to think,
such Men as they would not probably have done, had they believed him to have
been a Proud aspiring Pr^late, that is, indeed, a Limb of Antichrist, as this
Author would ^ain give him out to have been: But also they heartily
Congratulate his discharging, so Laudibly, his Episcopal Office; and that even
in his Retirement, he had made it so much his Care to acquit himself, that he
had halted in no part of his Duty; and particularly, That he had suitably
Censured and R^buked, not only the Lapsed, who, little regarding the Greatness
of their Guilt, had, in his Absence, extorted the Churches Peace from his
Presbyters; but even these Presbyters for their profane Facility, in giving
that which was Holy to Dogs, and casting Pearls before Swine, without any
Regard to the Gospel. In short, They Approve his whole Proceeding, as having
done nothing Unsuitable to his Character, nothing Unbecoming either an Holy or
an Humble Bishop Pete ergo Cypriane carissim^ ut nos gr^tia su^ Dominus --
armet and illustret -- Cui ^nim magis haec ut pro nobis p^tat, mandare debemus,
quam tam Glorioso Episcopo? -- Ecce aliud gaudium nostrum quod in Officio
Episcopatus tui, licet interim, a fratribus pro temporis condition distractus
es, tamen non defu^sti -- Animadvertimus enim te congruente censura and eos
digne ^bj^rgass^, qui immemores ^elictorum su^rum, pac^m a Presbyteris, p^r
absentiam tuam, f^stinata and praecipiti cupiditate extorsissent, and ILLOS qui
^ine respectu Evangelii, Sanctum Dom^ni Ganibus, and Margari^^^ por^is, profan^
facilitate donassent. Ep. 31.
. Further yet.

6. These same Carthaginian Presbyters resuming their former Boldness, and
Topping it over again with their Bishop, were Excommunicated by him, and his
Sentence was Approved and Ratified by all Catholic Bish^ps in all Catholic
Churches all the World over, as shall be shown you fully by and by. And then,

7. And lasty, That in all this Matter St. Cyprian did nothing either Proudly
or Presumptuously, is evident from this, That in his Time, and long before his
Time, even from the Apostles Times, it was not Lawful for Presbyters to Attempt
any thing relating to the Church without the Bishop. (...) Presbyters and
Deacons attempt nothing without the Bishop's Allowance; for it is he to whom the
Lord's People are committed, and it is he that must Account for their Souls
(...). Can. Ap. 39.
, is the 39th of the Canons called Apostolical. And no doubt it was in force in
St. Cyprian's time. And this was no greater Power than was assigned him by the
Apostolical Ignatius, I cannot tell how many times. Take these Testimonies for
a Sample. Let no Man do any thing that belongs to the Church without the Bishop
(...) Ignat. Epist. p. 6.
. He that h^noureth the Bishop, is honored of God; but he that does any thing
in opposition to the Bishop, serves the Devil (...) P. 7.
. If any Man pretend to be wiser than the Bishop, (i. e. will have Things done
against the Bishop's Will,) he is Corrupted (...) P. 13.
. Let us be careful not to resist the Bishop, as we would be subject to God
(...) P. 20.
. The Spirit has spoken, Do ye nothing without the Bishop (...) P. 43.
. It Is necessary that you continue to do nothing without the Bishop (...) P. 47
.

And now, let any of Common Sense determine, Whether there was Ground, or
shadow of Ground, for insinuating that St. Cyprian showed too much Zeal in this
Cause, or attempted to stretch his Power a little too far, (indeed, it had not
been a little, but very much, nay monstrously too far, had those of Parity been
then the current Principles,) or was a little too high in this Matter? But if
there was no Ground to say so, if it was contrary to all the then current
Principles, and to the common Sentiments of all Catholic Christians, nay, even
to the Convictions of all Honest, Orderly, Dutiful, and Conscientious
Presbyters, who then lived, to say so: If thus it was, I say, and it is hard to
prove any Matter of Fact more evidently than I have proved that it was thus;
then, I think, it follows by good Consequence, not only that this Author was a
little in the wrong to St. Cyprian, when he said so; but also, that, in St.
Cyprian's time, a Bishop had fairly a Negative over his Presbyters, which was
the Thing to be demonstrated. And so I proceed to the next Thing proposed,
namely,

III. That all the other Church Governors within his District, Presbyters as
well as others, were, in St. Cyprian's time, subject to the Bishop's Authority,
and obnoxious to his Discipline; I do'nt think you very sharp sighted, if you
have not seen this already. Yet that I may give you all reasonable
Satisfaction, I shall insist a little further on it. And,

I. This might appear sufficiently from this one Consideration, (the no more
could be produced for it,) That, still in the Style and Language of those
Times, the Bishop was called the Praepositus, the Ruler, the Governor, the
Superior, of all the Christians within his District, Clergy as well as Laity:
And they, without Distinction or Exception, were called His People, his Flock,
his Subjects, etc. This may be seen almost in every one of his Epistles. Thus,
Ep. 3. he says, That Deacons ought to remember that our Lord chose his
Apostles, that is, Bishops and Governors: But the Apostles chose Deacons to be
the Bishop's and the Churches Ministers: And therefore a Deacon ought with all
Humility to give Satisfaction to the Bishop, his Superior Meminisse autem
Diaconi debent, quoniam Apostolos, i. e. Episcop^s and Praepositos Dominus
elegit: Diaconos autem post ascensum Domini in Caelos Apostoli sibi
constituerunt Episcopatus (...) and Ecclesiae Ministros -- Et ideo op^rtet
Diaconum de quo scribis ag^re ^udaciae suae paenit^ntiam and honorem Sac^rdotis
agnoscere, and Episcopo PRAEPOSITO su^ pl^na humilitate satisfacere. Ep. 3. p.
6.
And Ep. 9. He praises the Roman Clergy for having the Memory of Fabianus, who
had been their Superior, in so great Honor In quo vobis quoque plurimum
gratulor quod ^jus m^moriam tam celebri and illustri testimonio pros^quamini,
ut per vos innotescat nobis quod and vobis ess^t ^^rca PRAEPOSITI memoriam
Gloriosum, and nobis qu^que fidei a^ virtutis praeberet Exemplum. Ep. 9. p. 19.
. And Ep. 13. writing to Rogatianus his Presbyter, and the rest of the
Confessors, and praising God for their Faith and Patience, he says, That, as
all Christians were bound to Rejoice when Christ's Flock was illuminated by the
Examples of Confessors; so he himself, in a special manner, as being the
Bishop, seeing the Churches Glory was the Ruler's Glory Nam cum gaudere in hoc
omnes fratres opor^et, tum in gaudio communi major est Episcopi portio:
Eccle^iae enim Gloria, PRAEPOSITI Gloria ^st. Ep. 13.
. And in that famous Passage which I have cited already from Ep. 16. he
complains of it as an unexampled Petulancy, that Presbyters should so contemn
the Bishop, their S^periour Vide supra, (...)
. And in another place, We Bishops, who have the Chief Power in the Church Quam
unitatem firmiter ten^re and vindicare d^bemus, maxim Episcopi qui in Ecclesia
PRAESIDEMUS. De Unit. Eccl. p. 108.
. And Ep. 62. I, who, by the Divine Mercy, Govern the Church, have sent to you
[Januarius, Maximus, Proculus,] etc. 100000 Sesterc^s, as the Charitable
Contribution of my Clergy and People. Misimus aut^m ^sest^rtium c^nt^m millia
nummum, quae istic in Ecclesia cui Domini indulgentia PRAESUMUS, Cleri and
Plebis apud nos consistentis collatione collecta sunt. Ep. 62. p. 147.
And Ep. 66. Hence spring Heresies and Schisms, etc. That the Bishop who is
one, and is set over the Church, is Contemned, etc. Inde enim Schismata and
Haereses obortae sunt and Oriuntur, d^^m Episcopus qui unus est and Ecclesiae
PRAEEST, superba quorundam praesumptione cont^mnitar -- Ep. 66. p. 167.
Such was the Dialect of those Times, I say, and thus Bishops were called
Rulers, Governors, Superiors, etc. and that in regard of all within their
Districts, making no Discrimination betwixt Clergymen and Laics; and not only
so, but more particularly,

2. It was as common in that Dialect, to call the Clergy The BISHOP'S CLERGY.
Thus for Example, Ep. 14. It was my Wish, that I might have saluted all my
Cl^^gy safe and sound, etc. Optaveram quidem F. C. ut Universum clerum NOSTRUM
integrum and incolumem meis literis salu^arem. Ep. 14. p. 31.
My Presbyters and Deacons ought to have taught you, etc. Vos quidem n^stri
Presbyteri and Diaconi, monere debuerant -- Ep. 17. p. 39.
Because I cannot send Letters but by Clergymen, and I know that many of mine
are absent. Et quoniam oportuit me per Cler^cos scribere, sci^ autem NOSTROS
plurimos abesse -- Ep. 29. P. 55.
Numidicus was preserved alive by God, that he might join him my Clergy -- Ut
^um cler^ NOSTRO Dominus adjunger^t, and desolatam per Lapsum quorundam
PRESBYTERII NOSTRI copiam Gloriosis Sacordotibus adornaret. Ep. 40. p. 79.
Urbanus and Sidonius came to my Presbyters -- Urbanus and Sidonius Confessores
ad Presbyters NOSTROS venerunt. Ep. 49. p. 92.
If any of my Presbyters or Deacons shall turn precipitant -- Interea^^^^si
quis imm^deratus and praeceps, ^ive de NOSTRIS Presbyteris vel Diaconis -- Ep.
34. p. 68.
I have sent you Copies of the Letters which I wrote to my Clergy and People
concerning Felicissimus and his Presbytery -- Ad te, Exempl^^ literarum --
miseram, quae de ^odem Felicissimo and de Presbyterio (...) ad (...) istic
NOSTRUM -- scripseram. Ep. 45. p. 8^.
And, as I observed before, when Maxim^s a Presbyter, and Urbanus, etc.
returned from the Novatian Schism to Cornelius's Communion, We are Reconciled
(say they to Cyprian) to Cornelius OUR BISHOP, and to all the Clergy. -- Cum
Cornelio Episc^p^ NOSTRO pariter and cum universo cler^ pacem fecisse -- Ep.
53. p. 98.


Such was the Language of those Times. Now, I say, by what Propriety of Speech
could a Bishop have been called Praepositus, Superior to his Clergy? Could
they have been called HIS Clergy? Could he have been said to have been Their
Bishop? Their Ruler? Their Governor? By what Rule of either Grammar or
Rhetoric, Logic or Politic, could he have been said to have been set over
them, or they to have been his Subjects or Inferiors, if he had no Power nor
Jurisdiction over them? If they were not Subjected to his Authority, nor
Obnoxious to his Discipline? But let all this pass for mere Prolusion if you
will. I am not pinched for want of Arguments. For,

3. The three great Principles which I proved so fully before, viz. That a
Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, was the Principle of Unity to the Church which
he Governed; that he had a Supreme Power in it; and that by the Principles
which then prevailed, he was the same in the Christian Church, which the High
Priest was in the Jewish; and the last Thing I proved also, viz. That he had a
Negative over his Presbyters; Each of these is demonstration for the present
Conclusion, and you need not Artificial; Natural Logic is enough to let you
see the Consequences. Indeed,

4. We find Cyprian all along both Reasoning and Practicing to this purpose.
Thus, he told Bishop Rogatianus, Ep. 3. That the Case was plain between him and
his Deacon: H^ might punish him, forthwith, by his Episcopal Power, and his
C^thedral Authority: Et tu quid^m ^^^orifice circa nos, and pro soli^a tua
humili^at^ facisti, ut malles de co Conqueri cum pro Episcopatus vigore and
Cathedrae Auctorita^^ haberes potestatem, qua posses de illo statim vindicari.
Ep. 3. p. 5.
He might make him sensible of his Episcop^ Honor: Oportet Diaconum, agere
audaciae suae paenitentiam, and honorem Sucerdotis agnoscere --
He might Exert the Power of his Honor against him either by Deposing, or by
Excommunicating him: Qu^d si ultr^ te Contumeliis suis exacerbav^rit and
pr^vocaveri^, fungeris ciroa cum (...) state honoris (...) ut ^um vel DEPONAS
vel ABSTINEAS.
Nay, He might Excommunicate all such as should Rebel against him: Et si qui
alii tales extiterint, and contra Sacerdotem Dei fecerint, vel COERCERE
poteris, v^l ABSTINERE.
For all these Censures, his Sovereign Authority was competent. -- SACERDOTALI
LICENTIA -- Ibid. p. 6, 7.


Thus he praises Pomponius, another Bishop, for Excommunicating another
Scandalous Deacon, Ep. 4. p. 9. And did not he himself Suspend Philumenus and
Fortunatus, two Subdeacons, and Favorinus an Acolyth, from their Livings? As we
learn from his 34th Epistle.

But you may say, These Instances extend no further than to Deacons, or more
inferior Clergymen; but, What is this to Presbyters? Why? Sir, indeed, the
Instances are pat and home; and you must acknowledge so much, if you consider,
that, by the Principles of those Times, there was no Disparity between
Prebyters and Inferior Orders in this respect: But the Bishop's Power extended
equally to all; just as a King can censure his Chancellor, as well as a
Sub-Collector of his Customs; a Justice-General, as well as a Justice of Peace:
Nothing clearer from the abovementioned Principles. But that I may leave you
no imaginable Scruple, I shall even account to you about Prebyters also.

5. Then, I have told you already, how some of the Carthaginian Presbyters
conspired against St. Cyprian, and used their utmost Arts to hinder his
Pre^erment to the Bishopric. Now, if we may believe either himself, or Pontius
in his Life, whatever it was they did on that Occasion, he might have punished
them for it; punished them not only with Deposition, but with Excommunication,
had he pleased. Take first his own Account in Ep. 43. there he tells his
People, That through the Malignity and Perfidiousness of some of his
Presbyters, he durst not adventure to return to Carthage so soon as he would:
And he describes those Presbyters thus; That being mindful of their Conspiracy,
and retaining their old Grudges against his Promotion, they reinforced their
ancient Machinations, and renewed their Attempts for Undermining him, by siding
with Feliciss^mus in his Schism: And then he proceeds thus; I neither willed
nor wished their Punishment for their Opposition to my Promotion; yea, I
Pardoned them, and kept my Peace: And yet, now, they have suffered Condign
Punishment: Tho I did not Excommunicate them then, their own Guilty Consciences
have done it now: They have Excommunicated themselves, etc. Hoc enim quorundam
Presbyterorum malignitas and perfidia perfecit, ne ad vos ante diem Paschae
venire licuisset: Dum Conjurationis suae memores, and antiqua illa contra
Episcopatum meum -- ven^na retin^ntes, instaurant veterem contra nos
impugnationem suam, and Sacrilegas Machinationes insidiis solitis denuo
revocant. Et quidem de Dei providentia nobis hoc nec volentibus, nec
optantibus, imo and ignoscentibus, and tacentibus, p^^nas quas meruerant
rependerunt, ut a nobis non ^jecti, ultro se ej^cerent; ipsi in se, pro
Conscientia sua, s^ntentiam darent; -- Conjurati and Scelesti de Ecclesia
sponte se pell^rent. Ep. 43. p. 81, 82.
Take it next from Pontius his Deacon, Tho I am unwilling, says he, yet I must
speak it out: Some resisted his Promotion, but how Gently, how Patiently, how
Generously, how Mercifully, did he forgive them? Did he not thereafter admit
them to his most intimate Friendship and Familiarity, to the Astonishment of
many? Indeed, he therein showed a Miracle of Clemency Invitus dico, s^d dicam
necesse est: Quidam illi restiterunt, etiam ut vinceret. Quibus tamen quanta
l^nitate, quam patienter, quam b^nevolenter indulsit, quam Clementer ignovit,
amicissimos cos postmodum and inter nec^ssarios computans, mirantibus multis?
Cui enim possit non esse Miraculo, tam memoriosae mentis oblivio? P^nt. in Vita
Cyp. p. 3, 4.
. Lay these two Accounts together, and then tell me, if these Presbyters were
not Obnoxious to his Discipline? If his Power over them might not have extended
to their very Excommunication, for their old Tricks against him, had he been
willing to have put it in Execution? But this is not all. For,

Have I not accounted already, How, when they first Engaged in the Controversy
concerning the Lapsed, he threatened them, that if they should continue to
Absolve and Reconcile any more of them without his Allowance, he would Suspend
them from their Office, and inflict severer Censures on them when he should
return to Carthage? And have I not justified him in this, and made it manifest
to a Demonstration, that herein he did not stretch his Power too far? That he
took not too much on him? Further yet.

When they resumed their Impudence, and, after a little Interruption, would
needs be Absolving the Lapsed, tho he was then in his Retirement, and by
consequence, had few or none of his Clergy to Consult with; yet he gave out
this plain and peremptory Order, That if any of his Presbyters or Deacons
should prove ^o Lawless, or Precipitant, as to Communicate with the Lapsed
before his Determination in the Matter, and, by consequence, without his Leave,
that they should be forthwith Suspended from the Communion, and should be more
fully ^ried and Censured when he should return. Int^rea si quis immoderatus
(...) praeceps sive de nostris Presbyteris v^l Diaconibus, ^ive de P^regrinis,
ausus fuerit ante SENTENTIAM NOSTRAM Communicare cum Lapsis, a Communicatione
nostra acceatur; apud omines (...) n^s c^us^m (...) Permittente Domino,
conve^^^^^nus. Ep. 34. p. 68.
And then,

Lastly, When they proceeded so far as to Commence the Schism with
Felicissimus; mark it well, He not only gave a Delegation to Caldonius and
Herculanus, two Bishops; and Rogatianus and Numidicus, two of his own
Presbyters, to Judge and Excommunicate Fe^icissim^s and his Partisans, as I
have showed already; but he likewise Excommunicated the five Presbyters who
joined with him, and all who should adhere to them. Si quis autem paenitentiam
agere, and D^o satisfacere detrectans, ad Felicissimi and satellitum ejus
parts concesserit, and se haereticae factioni c^^junx^rit; sciat se postea ad
Ecclestam redire and (...) Episcopis and Plebe Christi C^mmunicare non posse.
Ep. 43. p. 85.
And he gave an Account of his Proceedings to all Catholic Bishops,
particularly to Cornelius Bishop of Rome; Vide Ep. 45. p. 98.
and his Sentence was not only ratified by Cornelius and Felicissimus, and all
his Party refused his Communion, but they met with the same Treatment; St.
Cyprian's Sentence was Approved, and Confirmed by all Catholic Churches all
the World over Legi literas tuas, F. C. -- quibus significasti, Felicissimum
host^m Christi -- abstentum and non tantum me^, sed plurimor^m Co-episcoporum
sententia condemnat^m (...) illic ^sse rejectum, etc. Ep. 59. P. 126.
.

I might easily have proved this more fully, but, I think, I have said enough.
And now, Sir, lay these three Things together, viz. That there were several
considerable Acts of Church Power peculiar to a Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time,
and which those in the Order of Single Presbyters could not meddle with: That a
Bishop, as such, had a Negative over all the Presbyters within his District:
And, That they were all Subordinate to him, and Obnoxious to his Dis^ipline:
And then I can refer it to your self to determine, Whether a Bishop, then, was
not quite another thing than either Single Presbyter, or Presbyterian Moderator.

Thus, I think, I have sufficiently defeated our Author's Definition of a
Bishop, in St. Cyprian's time, by giving a fair and just Account of him* as he
stood related to his own particular Church which he Governed. I come now to
consider him as he stood related to the Church Catholic. And here also I am
very much mistaken, if I shall not find Matter enough for another Demonstration
against him. I shall endeavor to dispatch this Point with all possible Brevity.

I. Then, by the Principles of the Cyprianic Age, all Bishops were Colleagues,
and made up One College. St. Cyprian calls them so, and speaks of the Episcopal
or Sacerdotal College so frequently, (no fewer than 6 or 7 times in one
Epistle, and 4 or 5 times in another Ep. 55, and 68
) that I need not adduce Testimonies. Indeed, being all Men of the same
Character, the same Order, the same Dignity; being all of them equally Supreme,
and First in their own Churches; and all standing Collateral to one another;
they were most properly called Colleagues, and their Society, a College, if we
may rely on A. Gellius his Skill in the Latin Tongue, or rather Messala's cited
by him Lib. 13. c. 14.
. And it is observable to this purpose, That St. Cyprian no where calls
Presbyters his Colleagues. He calls none so, but Bishops. And the Notion of the
Episcopal College had such an Impression on him, it was so Common and Received
in those Times, that speaking even of Schismatical Bishops, who run one course,
he calls them a College also, (...) quite different from the True College of
Catholic and Orthodox Bishops Privatus Lambesitanus -- Fortunatum sibi
Pseudo-Episcopum dignum COLLEGIO SUO fe^it. Ep. 59. P. 132.
. Now,

2. As the One Bishop was the Principle of Unity to a particular Church, so
this College of Bishops was the Principle of Unity to the Catholic Church: And
Jesus Christ was the Principle of Unity to the College of Bishops. I hope, not
being a Romanist, you will not require that I should prove the Highest Step of
this Gradation. All that remains then, is to Explain how the College of
Bishops, by the Principles of those Times, was the Principle of Unity to the
Church Catholic; or, the One great Aggregated Body, consisting of all the
particular Churches all the World over, whereof, their particular Bishops were
the particular Principles of Unity. Neither needs this be a Laborious Task. For
all that is necessary for it, is, To show how they were so United into One
College, as to make them capable of being justly denominated One Principle of
Unity. Now, they were thus United by the Great and Fundamental Laws of One
Faith, and One Communion.

That the One Holy Catholic Faith is Essential in the Constitution of the One
Holy Catholic Church, is, even to this day, a received Principle, I think,
amongst all sober Christians. But then, I say, That the Christians, in St.
Cyprian's time, reckoned of the Laws of One Communion as every whit as forcible
and indispensible to the Being of One Church, as the Laws of One Faith. It was
a prime, a fundamental Article of their Faith, That there was but One Church;
and they could not understand how there could be but One Church, if there was
more than One Communion. By their Principles and Reasonings, a Multiplication
of Communions made, unavoidably, a Multiplication of Churches: And by
consequence, seeing there could be but One True Catholic Church, there could
be likewise but One True Catholic Communion. All other Churches or Communions
were False, i. e. not at all Christian Churches or Communions. These
Principles, and suitable Reasonings from them, are so frequently and so fully
insisted on in St. Cyprian's Writings, that to Transcribe his Testimonies to
this purpose, were almost to Transcribe his Works. Now from these Principles,
it follows clearly,

3. That the Grand Concern of the Episcopal College was, to Preserve and
Maintain this One Communion: To Guard against all such Doctrines as destroyed,
or tended to destroy, the the One Holy Catholic Faith; and all Schisms and
Schismati^al Methods which destroyed, or tended to destroy, the Unity of the
One Church. These being the Great and Fundamental Interests of the One Church;
and they being her Supreme Governors, they could not but be chiefly bound by
the most Fundamental Laws of their Office to be Conscientious Conservators of
these Great and Fundamental Interests. And indeed, so they believed themselves
to be, as will evidently appear from the following Considerations. And,

I. They looked upon themselves as bound indispensibly to maintain the Peace,
the Unity, the Concord, the Unanimity, the Honor, (they are all St. Cyprian's
Words) of the College it self. Every Error, every Defect, every Thing
Disjoy^ted, or out of Tune in it, tended naturally to endanger the great
Interests, for the Conservation and Procuration of which it was instituted. For
this End,

2. Because every Man, by being Promoted to the Episcopal Dignity, was, Eo
ipso, a Principle of Unity to a particular Church, and so a Member of the
Episcopal College; all possible Care was taken, that a fit Person should be
promoted, and that the Promotion should be Unquestionable. Therefore, he was
not to be Promoted, as I have proved, but where there was an Unquestionable*
Vacancy. Therefore, he was not to be Promoted, if there was any thing
Uncanonical or Challengeable in his Baptism, or his Confirmation, or his
Pr^motion to any former Order, as I have ^hewn also in the Case of Novationus.
Therefore he was Solemnly Elected in the Presence of the People, That either
his Crimes might be detected, or his Merits published; because the People was
best acquainted with every Man's Life and Conversation. -- Ut Plebe pr^^sente
vel detegantur malorum Crimina vel bonorum merita praedicentur -- Episcopus
deligatur Plebe praesente quae singulorum vit^m plenissime (...) vit, etc. Ep.
67. P. 172.
Therefore he was to be Solemnly Ordained in the Presence of the People also.
Ibid.
And that by two or three Bishops at fewest; (tho an Ordination performed by
One Bishop was truly Valid:) Commonly there were more; all the Bishops of the
Province.

3. Being thus Canonically Promoted, his first* Work* was to send his
Communicatory Letters to all other Bishops, to give them thereby an Account of
his Canonical Promotion, his Orthodoxy in the Faith, his Fraternal Disposition,
etc. Thus, Cornelius was no sooner Ordained Bishop of Rome, than he instantly
dispatched his Communicatory Letters to St. Cyprian Ep. 45. P. 87.
And no doubt, as the Custom was, to all other Bishops; at least, to all
Metropolitans, by them to be Communicated to the Bishops within their
Provinces: I say, to Metropolitans, for nothing can be clearer than that there
were Metropolitans in St. Cyprian's time. He was undoubtedly One himself De
Cypri^no Metropolitano, Vide Ep. 43. p. 82. Ep. 44. p. 85. Ep. 45. p. 87. Ep.
48. p. 91. Ep. 55. p. 110. Ep. 56. p. 116. Vide etiam Conc. Carthag, De
Agrippino, Ep. 71. p. 196. Ep. 73. p. 199.
and Agrippi^^s, his Predecessor Bishop of Carthage, was One long before him.
Spanhemius himself, our Author's Diligem Searcher into Antiquity, acknowledges
it Metropolitanor^m, seu Episcoporum in Urbe Matrice, vel prima sede, sua
fuerunt, hac ^tate, supra reliquos ejusdem Provinciae jura. Spanhem. Epit. I
say. ad H. E. N. T. Saec. 3. Sect. 6. p. 117.
. But to return from this Digression. Novatianus also, tho Illegally and
Schismatically Ordained, found it necessary to send his Communicatory Letters
to St. Cyptian; as if he had been Ordained Canonically, and in the Unity of the
Church Ep. 44. p. 83.
. So also Fortunatus, when made a Schismatical Bishop at Carthage, sent his
Communicatory Letters to Cornelius Bishop of Rome Ep. 59. p. 135.
. Indeed, this was never omitted.

4. If there was no Competition, no Controversy in the Ca^e; the Matter was at
an end. The Promoted Bishop's Communicatory Letters were sufficient, and he was
forthwith faithfully joined with all his Colleagues, as St. Cyprian words it
Collegis omnibus fidelit^r junctu. Ep. 59. p. 130.
. But if there was any Competitor, any Debate, then the rest of the College,
before they received him as a Colleague, made further Enquiries. Sometimes they
sent some from the Neighborhood to examine the Matter: Sometimes the Ordainers
were obliged to Account for the Person Ordained, and the whole Procedure of the
Ordination: Sometimes both Methods were practiced. We have a famous Instance of
both Methods in one Case; the Case of Cornelius and Novationus. Cornelius, as I
have said, upon his Promotion wrote to St. Cyprian: So did Novatianus. Here was
a Competition. Cyprian therefore, with his African Colleagues, sent Caldonius
and Fortunatus, two Bishops, to Rome, that upon the Place it self, where they
might have the surest Information, they might enqu^re into the Merits of the
Cause, and try the Competition Ep. 45.
. And on the other hand, the Sixteen Bishops, who Ordained Cornelius, wrote to
St. Cyprian, and the rest of the Bishops of Africa, and satisfied them upon the
whole Qvestion, demonstrating Cornelius's Title, and Condemning Novatianus Et
factus est Episcopus a plurimis Collegis nostris qui tun^ in Urbe Roma aderant,
qui ad n^s lit^ras h^m^rificas and laudabiles, and testimonio su^
praedicationis illustres, de ejus Ordinatione miserunt, Ep. 55. p. 104.
Such Care was taken, that none should be admitted Unworthily or Uncanonically
into the Episcopal College. But then,

5. There was equal Care taken to purge him out of the College again, if he
turned either Heretical or Schismatical: If he kept not close to the Laws of
One Faith, and One Communion. If he swerved from these, he was forthwith
refused the Communion of the whole College. Therefore, (says St. Cyprian to
Stephen Bishop of Rome, in the Case of Marcianus Bishop of Arles, who had
joined with Novatianus,) The Corporation of Priests, (the Episcopal College) is
Copious, being cemented by the Glue of Mutual Concord, and the Bond of Unity,
that if any of the College shall turn Heretic, or attempt to divide or waste
the Flock of Christ, the rest may interpose, and, as profitable and merciful
Shepherds, collect our Lord's Sheep, and restore them to the Flock Iccirco
enim, F. C. copiosum corpu^ est Saccrdotum concordiae mutuae glutino, atque
unitatis vinculo copulatum, ut si quis ex Collegio nostro baer^sin facere, and
Gregem Christi lacerare and vastare t^ntavr^t, subveniant caet^ri, and quasi
Pastores utiles and m^sericord^s, oves Dominic^s in Gregem colligant. Ep. 68.
p. 178.
. And this they were bound to do by the Fundamental Laws of One Church, and one
Communion; for, as our Martyr subjoyns, Tho they were many Pastors, yet they
all fed but one Flock. Nam etsi Pastores multi sumus, unum tam^n Gr^g^m
pascimus. Ibid.
. And therefore all the Bishops in the World were bound to give the desolate
Christians of Churches, whereof the Bishops had turned Heretical or
Schismatical, the Comfort of their Aid and Assistance -- S^latium nostrae
^pitul^tionis -- Ibid. p. 177.
It Is true, no Bishop was Superior to another Bishop in point of Power or
Jurisdiction, but all stood Collateral, as I have proved, and so no Bishop as
Superior to another, in a straight Lin^, could pass Sentence on him, as they
might have done to Presbyters. Yet all being United into One College, which
College was the Principle of Unity to the Church Catholic, it was necessary,
as well as natural, that that College should be empowered to take care of its
own Preservation, and by consequence, they could do the Equivalent of a formal
and authoritative Deposition; they could refuse the Heretical or Schismatical
Bishop their Communion, and thereby exclude him from the Episcopal College: And
they could oblige all the Christians within his District to abandon his
Communion, and choose another Bishop, as they valued the invaluable Privileges
of the One Church, and the One Communion. But then,

6. So long as a Bishop, worthily, and legally Promoted, kept the Faith and the
Unity of the Church, he was Treated, he was Encouraged, he was Consulted, he
was Corresponded with; in a word, Every way used as became the Head of a
particular Church, and a Fellow-Member of the College. All the rest of the
Members were bound, by the Fundamental Laws of the College, to Ratify all his
Canonical, nay, Equitable Acts of Priesthood, Government, and Discipline.
Whosoever was Baptized by himself, or by his Clergy, with his Allowance was to
be owned as a Baptized Christian, a True Denison of the Church, and to have the
Privileges of such all the World over. Every Bishop of the Christian Church,
living at how great a distance soever, was bound to Communicate his Dutiful
Subjects, duly attested by him; and to Excommunicate his Excommunicates. Thus,
for Instance, Cornelius Bishop of Rome rejected Felicissimus, and all his
Retainers; and Fortunatus, and all his; and would not grant them his Communion,
because Excommunicated by St. Cyprian. Ep. 59. p. 126.
And Cyprian rejected Novatianus and all his Party, because not in Communion
with Cornelius. Ep. 44
In short, By the Laws of the College, he that was Injurious, Undutiful, or
Disobedient to his Bishop, was such to all the Bishops on Earth: He that set up
an Altar against his Bishop's Altar, set up his Altar against all the Altars of
the whole College: If a Bishop Deposed or Excommunicated any of his Presbyters
or Deacons, it was not lawful for any other Bishop to Receive him, nor to
Absolve him: He was still to be reserved for that, to his own Bishop, so long
as he lived. He that was Reconciled to his Bishop, (whether he was of the
Clergy or Laity,) and Restored by him to the Peace of the Church, was thereby
Restored to the Peace of all other Churches, and by consequence, of the Church
Catholic. And of this we have a remarkable Instance in St. Cyprian's time.
Therapius Bishop of Bulla, in the Proconsular Province of Africa, Absolved
Victor, who had been a Presbyter, but had fallen, in time of Persecution,
Prematurely and Uncanonically: And yet, by a Synod of Sixty six Bishops,
whereof Cyprian was One, the Absolution was Ratified, and Victor was allowed
their Communion; as we learn from their Synodical Epistle. -- Librato apud nos,
diu, Consilio, satis fuit Objurgare Therapium Collegam nostrum, quod tem^re h^c
fecerit -- pacem t^men quomodocunqu^ a Sacerdote Dei s^mel d^tam, non p^tavimus
aufere^dam, ac per hoc Victori communicatione^ sibi concessam usurpare
permisimus. Ep. 64. p. 158.
. So Eminent and Considerable was a Bishop then, as he stood related to the
Catholic Church. Let me only add one Thing more in pursuance of his Dignity,
as to this Relation; and that is,

7. That so long as Bishop continued a sound Member of the College, all
Informatory, Consultatory, Recommendatory, Communicatory, Congratulatory,
Apologetick, Testimonial; in a word, all Letters concerning the Peace, the
Unity, the Government, the Discipline of the Church; or the Concord, the
Correspondence, the Harmony, the Honor, the Hazards, or any other considerable
Interest of the College, were directed to him, or received from him, as having
the Supreme Power of the Church which he Gov^rn'd.

All the great Concerns of both the Catholic Church, and the Episcopal
College, were, in th^se Times, transacted by Letters. There was no possibility
of General Councils then: All that could be done, was either to meet in
Provincial Synods, upon great Emergencies; or, if that could not be neither, to
transact Matters, and bring them to a General Determination, by particular
Letters from Bishop to Bishop.

Provincial Synods were ordinarily kept twice a Year; and by them, in the
ordinary Course, all Matters of Moment were Determined; and so by the
Reciprocation of Synodical Letters, Matters came sometimes to such a General
Agreement and Determination, as, in the Result, was fully Equivalent to the
Definition of a General Council. We have several Instances of such Transactions
by Provincial Synods. Thus in the Grand Case of the Lapsed, in the time of the
Decian Persecusion, the Matter was so managed by Provincial Synods in Africa,
Rome, Alexandria, Anti^ch, etc. that at last, as St. Cyprian tells us, it was
brought to this General Conclusion, That the Lapsed should complete their Terms
of Penance, and should not be restored to the Peace of the Church before the
Time appointed by the Canons, unless it was in the case of Deadly Sickness. Ep
55. p. 102, 103.
Thus, without doubt, also that considerable Canon mentioned by St. Cyprian in
the Synodical Epistle, which is the 67th in Number, amongst his Epistles, viz.
That the Lapsed, however they might be restored to the Communion of the Church,
should never be received into Holy Orders. Ep. 67. P. 174.
And that other Canon mentioned by him also, That no Clergyman should be Tutor
to Minors. Ep. I. p. I.
Thus also, long before St. Cyprian, the great Controversy concerning the
Observation of Easter, was managed in many Synods, as Eusebius tells us. Vide
Eusebius. H. E. l. 5. a c. 23. ad c. 28.
And a few Years after his Martyrdom, the Case of Paulus Samosatenus. Eusebius. l.
7. c. 30.
These Instances are only for a Sample.

When Provincial Synods could not be kept, or emergent Matters of Consequence
could not be conveniently determined in them, then Recourse was had to the only
remaining Method, viz. particular Letters from Bishop to Bishop. And to make
this Method both sure and effectual, all possible Pains was taken. It was
necessary that each Bishop should sign his Letter, and send it, not by every
common Carrier, but by a Clergyman. Et quoniam oportuit me per Clericos
scribere -- Ep. 29. p. 55.
In short, They had such Marks, that it was not easy, if possible, to
Counterfeit them. And the Bishop who received it was bound by the Laws of the
College to transmit it, for his Share, to the rest of the Members. And so it
went through, and the whole College was acquainted with the Accident, the Case,
the Controversy, whatever it was that had Emerged, we have many Instances and
Evidences of this Method and Diligence in St. Cyprian's Writings. Thus, e. g.
When Caldonius writes to Cyprian concerning some Lapsed within his District,
Cyprian returns him an Answer, telling him, He had written his Mind to that
purpose already, and so sends him Copies of five Epistles concerning the Case,
requiring him to transmit them to as many Bishops as he could; adding this as
the Reason, That One Course, One Resolution, might be kept by all the College.
Librum tibi cum Epistolis numero quinque mist -- Quae Epist^l^ jam plurimis
Collegis nostris missae placu^runt, and rescripserunt se quoque nobiscum in
^^dem Consili^ secundum Catholicam fidem stare; quod ipsum et^am-tu ad Coll^gas
nostros, quos p^tueris transmitte; ut apud omnes unus Actus, and una Consentio
secundum Domini praecepta t^neatur. Ep. 25. p. 50.
And so we find, that the Letters written by him about that Controversy were
trasmitted from hand to hand, till they were dispersed all the World over Ep.
55. p. 102.
Thus, I say, sometimes the greatest Affairs of the Church were managed: And,
it is plain, this Method* was every was Equivalent, if not Preferable, to a
General Council: So that the Christian Church might have still subsisted, and
its Unity been provided for, and preserved in all Ages, without such Councils,
as it was, effectually, during the First Three Centuries. Now, that which I am
principally concerned for in all this Matter, is,

That all these Circular Letters, of whatsoever Nature, relating either, to the
great Interests of the Catholic Church, or of the Episcopal College, were
regularly directed only to the Bishops, as being the Heads, and Principles of
Unity to their respective Churches, as well as written and sent by those of the
same Order. And we have a notable Account of this in St. Cyprian's 48th Epistle
directed to Cornelius; for there we learn, That the Presbyters and Deacons of
the Church of Adrumetum, having received Cornelius's Communicatory Letters,
directed to Polycarpus their Bishop; and, seeing their Bishop was absent,
finding it necessary that they should return an Answer, in his Name, as having
his presumed Allowance for it, they wrote to Cornelius in the common Form,
acknowledging him as Bishop of Rome, and subjoyning Polycarpus his Name to the
Letter: A clear Evidence, That where there was a Bishop, it behoved all the
Letters that concerned the public State of the Church to be subscribed by him,
no other Name but his could give them Force, and make them Current. Well! but
there was one Thing amiss: St. Cyprian, and the rest of the African Bishops
having Intelligence of the Competition that was at Rome between Cornelius and
Novatianus, and being unwilling to do any thing rashly, had determined to
continue to write only to the Roman Presbyters and Deacons, as before, during
the Vacancy; till Cornelius his Title should be fully cleared to them. This the
Clergy of Adrum^tum were ignorant of when they wrote the abovementioned Letter.
And being afterward told it by Cyprian and Liberalis, they directed their next
Letter not for Cornelius, but for the Roman Presbyters and Deacons. Hereat
Cornelius was not a little stumbled, and, according to the then current
Principles, interpreting it to be a disowning of him as Bishop of Rome, he
wrote a Letter of Complaint to Cyprian about it, who was then Metropolitan of
that Province. In Answer to which, our Holy Martyr wrote a full Apology to him,
showing him what was true Matter of Fact: Upon what Reasons the Bishops of
Africa had taken the aforesaid Resolution: How it was in consequence of that
Resolution, that the Clergy of Adrumetum had changed their Direction: And how,
by the whole Method, no^^^ng was less intended than to disown him as Bishop of
Rome, or Invalidate his Title. And was there not here as clear an Evidence,
that Regularly, and in the current Form, all Letters were directed to the
Bishop? Shall I give you another History to clear this Matter further? When
Maximus and Nicostratus retaining to Novatianus, and so separating from
Cornelius, did thereby cut themselves off from the Communion of the Church;
Cyprian wrote to them, as well he might, considering that his Design was to
Reconcile them to their True Bishop Cornelius. But how did he write? Why? so,
as that his Letter should not be delivered till Cornelius should see it, and
judge whether it was proper to deliver it Ep. 47.
Such a special regard was then paid to the Bishop of a Church, as being
Supreme in it, and the Principle of Unity to it.

If all this does not satisfy you, then listen a little further, and resist
this Evidence if ye can: Because, by the Fundamental Principles of One Faith,
and One Communion, every Heretical and Schismatical Bishop was, ipso facto, out
of the Church; and all who retained or adhered to him, whether Bishops, Clergy,
or Laics, did run the same Risque with him: Therefore, so soon as any Bishop
turned Heretic or Schismatic, the Catholic Bishops of the Province,
especially the Metropolitans, formed Lists of all the True, Orthodox, and
Catholic Bishops, within their respective Provinces, and sent them to other
Metropolitans: And so they were transmitted all the World over. That their
Communicatory Letters, and theirs only* might be received, and their Communion,
and theirs only, might be allowed; and that all Heretical or Schismatical, or
Retainers to Heretical or Schismatical Bishops, might be rejected, and their
Communion refused. And for this we have two notable Testimonies from St.
Cyprian, the one is in his 59th Epistle directed to Cornelius, where he tells
him, That upon Fortunatus his starting out of the Church, and pretending to be
Bishop of Carthage, He had sent him the Names of all the Bishops in Africa, who
Governed their Churches in Soundness and Integrity, and that it was done by
common Advice: But to what purpose? That you and all my Colleagues may readily
know to whom you may send, and from whom you may receive Communicatory Lett^s.
-- Et miserim tibi proxime nomina Episcoporum istic constitutorum qui integri
and sani in Ecclesia Catholica fratribus praesunt. Quod utique ideo de omnium
nostrorum C^nf^lio placuit scribere; ^t ^rroris diluendi -- c^mpendium fieret,
and sciru ^u and College n^strl, quibus scribere, and literas mutuo a quibus
vos accipere op^rteret. Ep. 59. p. 132.
The other Testimony is in Ep. 68. where Cyprian having given his Senti^ents
fully concerning Marcianus; that he had forfeited his Dignity; and that it was
necessary, that another should be substituted in his room, and c. requires
Stephen Bishop of Rome to give himself, and the rest of the Bishops of Africa,
a distinct Account of the Person that should be Surrogated in Marcianus his
Place, That we may know, says he, to whom we may direct our Brethren, and write
our Letters. Significa plane nobis quis in locum Marciani Arelate fuerit
substitutus, ut sciam^s (...) quem fratres nostros dirigere, and cui scribere
debeamus. Ep. 68. p. 179.


I have only given you a Taste of the Methods and Expedients which were put in
Practice in those Times, for preserving the Unity, the One Communion of the One
Catholic Church; and how nicely and accurately it was provided for, by the
Incorporation of all Bishops into Ou^ College; of all particular Principles of
Unity of particular Churches, into one Aggregated Principle of Unity,
proportioned to the Extent of all those Churches in their Aggregation: And by
the mutual Support of all Bishops one toward another. It had been easy to
have collected more Particulars, as well as to have insisted more largely on
these I have collected: But from the small Collection I have made, I think I
have laid Foundation enough for another Demonstration against our Author's
Notion of a Bishop in St. Cyprian's time. For,

How could either Single Presbyter, or Presbyterian Moderator, taking the Terms
in the Presbyterian Sense, have born such a Part, in relation to the Unity of
the Catholic Church, and the Preservation of One Communion? Besides, that the
College of Bishops, in those Times, is still considered and insisted on, as
consisting of Church Governors notoriously distinguished from Presbyters:
Besides, that in all St. Cyprian's Writings, or in any Monument of those Times,
you shall never, so much as once, find a Bishop calling a Presbyter his
Colleague: Besides, that we have not the least Vestige of any such stated,
ordinary current Office, in any Record of those Times, as that of a mere
Presbyterian Moderator: Besides these Things, I say,

How had it been consistent with the Principles or Analogies, the Scheme or
Plot of Presbyterian Parity, to have committed to any Single Presbyter,
Moderator, or other, the bearing of such a Part, as that He, and He alone, of
God knows how many, should have been Constituted a Member of a College, which
College, and which alone, had the Supreme Power of Preserving the Faith, and
the Unity, and managing all the Affairs of the Church Catholic? As that all
his Admissions into the Church; his Exclusions from the Church; his Extrusions
out of the Church; his Suspensions, his Abstentions, his Excommunications, his
Injunctions of Penances, his Absolutions, his Ordinations, his Degradations,
his Depositio^^; in a word, all his Acts of Government and Discipline, within
his own District, and his alone, should have had Authority, and been deemed
Valid, and merited a Ratification all the World over? As that whosoever,
Presbyter or other, within such a District, in which there might have been many
Decads of Presbyters, was Disobedient to him, or Top't it with him, or Rebelled
against him, should have been reputed Disobedient to, and Rebellious against,
the whole College of the Supreme Governors of the Church Catholic? As that
raising an Altar against his Altar, and his only, should have been deemed
Raising an Altar against all Catholic Christian Altars? As that from him, and
from him only, in the regular Course, all Communicatory, Informatory,
Con^olatory; in short, all Letters concerning the Public Affairs of the
Catholic Church, or the Sacred College that Ruled the Catholic Church, should
have been R^ceived? As that to him, and to him alone, all such Letters have
been directed? As that by the Circulation and Reciprocation of Letters betwixt
him and his Colleagues, and their General Agreement upon any Thing, by that
Circulation and R^ciprocation, Laws should have been given to the whole
Catholic Church, Canons, as Binding and Obligatory as the Supreme
Ecclesiastical Power on Earth could make them? How could one raised to such a
Post, I say, have been no other than a Single Presbyter, or a Presbyterian
Moderator? Does not his very bearing such a Part, his having such a Trust, his
being Clothed with such an Eminence, argue him Demonstratively to have been
something other, something Greater, something Higher and more Honorable than
either?

Thus I have considered a Bishop in St. Cyprian's time, as he stood related to
his own Particular, and to the Church Catholic; and, in both respects, have
discovered a vast Discrepance betwixt him, as he was really, and our Author's
Notion or Definition of him. Let me only add one Consideration more; and that
is,

What Character he bore, what Figure he made, in the Eye of those who were
without; of the Heathen World, especially the Roman Emperors and Magistrates.
And here I need not be at much Pains; the Thing is Obvious: The Christian
Bishops, as being the Chief Rulers, the Supreme Governors, the Heads of their
respective Churches, were the Chief Butts of all the Heathen Rage and Malice.
Take these few of many Evidences.

After St. Cyprian had retired from Carthage, in the time of the Decian
Persecution, he wrote to his Presbyters and Deacons, and told them how earnest
he was to return to the City, but Prudence would not let him. When he
considered the Public Peace of the Church, and how much he, as Bishop, was
concerned to Provide for it, and for the Quiet and Safety of the Brethren, he
found it necessary for him, tho with mighty Grief, to forbear returning for a
time, lest HIS PRESENCE should provoke the Rage and Fury of the Gentiles. So he
wrote, I say, in his 7th Epistle. Oportet n^s t^men pac^ c^mmuni consu^re, and
in^erdum deesse vobis, ne PRAESENTIA NOSTRI INVIDIAM ET VIOLENTIAM GENTILIUM
PROVOCET. Ep. 7. p. 14.
And in the 12th, directed also to his Presbyters and Deacons, I wish, says he,
that my Station and Character, would allow me to be present with you. Atque
utinam LOCI and GRADUS mei cond^^^o permitt^r^t, ut IPSE PRAESENS esse possem,
Ep. 12. p. 27.
In his 20th Epistle directed for the Roman Presbyters and Deacons, he
Apologizes for his Retirement after this manner. In compliance with our Lord's
Commands, (pointing, no doubt, at Matthew. 10. 23.) so soon as the Persecution
began, and the Rabble, with mighty Clamor, pursued me, I retired for a time,
not so much to save my self, as for the public Quiet of the Church; and that
the Tumult which was already kindled, might not be the more inflamed by MY
OBSTINATE PRESENCE. Nam sic^t Domini mandata instruunt, ort^ statim turbationis
impetu primo, cum ME cl^more violento frequenter popul^s flagitasset, non tam
mean salutem quam quietem fratrum p^blicam cogi^ans, interim s^cessi ne per
INVERECUNDAM PRAESENTIAM NOSTRAM, seditio quae caeperat, plus pr^vocaretur. Ep.
20. p. 42.
And to the same purpose, he Apologizes to his own People for his so long
Absence, Ep. 43. Tho he had been long away, yet he durst not return, because of
the Threats and Snares of these perfidious Men, (Felicissimus, and his
Fellow-Schismaticks,) Lest, says he, upon MY COMING, there should be a greater
Uproar, and, while as a Bishop ought, in all Things, to provide for Peace and
Tranquillity, I should seem to have added Fuel to the Sedition, and to have
imbittered the Persecution. Acc^ssi^ ^uic tabescenti animo nostro Dolor major,
qu^d in tanta sollicitud^ne, ac necessitat^, excurrere ad vos IPSE non possum;
dum per minas and per insidias perfid^rum Cavemus, ^e. ADVENIENTIBUS NOBIS
Tumultus illic major oriatur; and cum paci and tranquillitati EPISCOPUS
Providere in omnibus debeat, IPSE materiam Seditioni dedisse, and Persecutionem
exacerbasse videatur. Ep. 43. p. 83.


Here, I think, is clear Demonstration of the Episcopal Eminence in the Eye of
the Heathen Persecutors: It was a Grief, a Burden, a Torment, a very
Crucifixion to St. Cyprian's Soul, to be separated from his Flock, as himself
words it. Ep. 43. p. 83.
But he was bound by the Laws of his EPSICOPAL PROVIDENCE, by all means, to
study the Peace, the Quiet, the Tranquillity of the Church, and his LOCUS and
GRADUS, his Station and Dignity, were so Conspicuous and Eminent, that HIS
PRESENCE would have provoked the Gentiles, and increased the Persecution, and
therefore he durst not return. And yet this is not all. Consider if what
follows is not yet clearer.

In his 14th Epistle written to his Presbyters and Deacons, he tells them, That
tho he had strong and pressing Reasons to hasten his return, yet he found it
more expedient and useful for the public Peace to continue longer in his
Lurking Places; and Tertullus, one whom they knew, and could not but value, had
seriously advised him to be Calm and Cautious, and not to commit himself rashly
to the public View, especially of that Place where he had been so often lain
in wait, and made search for; and therefore he Exhorts and Commands them, (his
Presbyters and Deacons,) That THEY, whose PRESENCE was neither so INVIDIOUS,
nor by far so DANGEROUS, might perform the part of Vicars to him. -- a.
Tertullo -- qui etiam ^uj^s C^^silii auctor suit, ut cautus and m^leratus
^x^ster^m, ne me in conspectum publicum, and maxim ejus loci ubi toties
flagitat^^ and quasitus fuissem, temere commiiterem. Fretns ergo Dilectione and
Religion^ vestra, quam satis novi, his literis and Hor^^r and Mondo ut VOS
quor^m minime illic INVIDIOSA, and non ^deo* PERICULOSA PRAESENTIA est, VIGEMEA
(...), etc. Ep. 14. p. 31.
Here, I think, we have a full Evidence of a fair Discrimination was made
betwixt him and his Presbyters by the Heathen Persecutors. And not only so; but.

He tells Cornelius Bishop of Rome, Ep. 59. That he was Proscribed in the Days
of the Decian Persecution, and that by Name, as Bishop of the Christians in
Carthage, and that he was destined for the Lions, and c -- in tempestate
pros^riptus, applicito and adjuncto EPISCOPATUS SUI NOMINE, tot^es ad Leonem
petitus, etc. Ep. 59. p. 130.
And again, Ep. 66. he tells Florentius Pupianus, That his Proscription ran in
this Form: If any Man holds or possesses any of the Goods of CAECILIUS
CYPRIANUS BISHOP OF THE CHRISTIANS, etc. And thereby makes an Argument, that it
was Unaccountable in Florentius not to own him as a Bishop. Si quis tenet vel
possidet de bouis Caecil^ i Cypriani Episcopi Christianorum: Ut ^^iam qui non
credebant Deo Episcopum constitu^nti, vel Diabol^ crede^^nt Episcopum
pr^scribenti. Ep. 66. p. 166.
And Pontiu^ his Deacon tells us, That, when he at last commenced Martyr in the
Valerian Persecution, in the very Sentence that was given out against him, he
was called SECTAE SIGNIFER, the Ringleader, the Head, the Chiftain of the Sect
of the Christians in Carthage. Vide Pont. in vita Cyp. p. 9, 10.
Would you have yet more? Then,

Take it, not about St. Cyprian's Person, for I think we have enough of him
already, but in St. Cyprian's Words: You have them Ep. 55. there he tells
Antonianus, That the Emperous Dec^us (from a Sense, no doubt, that, as Heads of
their respective Churches, they were, under God, the great Supporters and
Promoters of our Most Holy Faith,) had such a Spite, such a Pique, at the
Christian Bishops, that for Example, He could have heard with greater Patience
and Composure, (...) another ^mulous Prince should have Rivaled it with him for
the Roman Empire, than that a Bishop should have been settled in the City of
Rome. Cum mult^ patientius atque tolerabilius audiret levari adversus se
aemulum principem, quam constitui Romae Dei Sacerdotem. Ep. 55. p. 104.
And does not Eusebius tell us, That the Emperor Maximinus, in that
Persecution of which he was the Author, some 22 or 23 Years before St.
Cyprian's Martyrdom, Ordered, that the (...), the chief Governors of the
Christian Churches, should only be put to Death, as being the Authors of the
Propagation of the Gospel? (...)Eusebius. H. E. l. 6. c. 24.
So Eminent, in those Times, was the Episcopal Character; such a Sense had the
very Heathens of their being Bishops indeed; so much, as Bishops, were they
Obnoxious to the Fury and Malice of Persecutors; and so much Reason had St.
Cyprian to say, That it mattered not, whence (whether from Heathens without, or
Schismatics within, if they may be called any way within,) Terrors or Perils
threatened a Bishop, seeing, as such, he was still obnoxious to Terrors or
Perils. Nec interest unde Episcopo aut terror aut periculum veniat, qui
terroribus and periculis vivit obnoxious. Ep. 59. p. 126.
Meaning, that, in those Times, Bishops, as Bishops, were still exposed to the
first burnt of all Persecutions. As, on the other hand, when the Human
Galien^s, who succeeded to Valerianus, stopped the Persecution which his
Predecessor had begun, he began his Imperial R^script, thus, The Emperor
Publius Lic^nius Galie^^s, etc. To Dionysius, Pinnas, Demetrius, and the rest
of the BISHOPS, etc. and so went on, telling them, How he had ordered his Edict
of Grace and Clemency to be Published all the World over; allowing them to rely
upon it, as full Security against all Molestation for the future. (...) etc.
Eusebius, l. 7. c. 13.
Thus, I say, that Heathen Emperor stopping the Current of a fierce
Persecution, and designing Favor and Security to Christians, directed his
Letters to the Christian Bishops, as the Persons who were Heads of the
Christian Churches, and in all Persecutions had wont to be exposed to the
greatest Hazards.

Thus, Sir, I have examined our Author's Definition of a Bishop in St.
Cyprian's time; and, if I mistake not, have demonstrated by many solid
Arguments, that he was neither Single Presbyter, nor Presbyterian Moderator, in
the Presbyterian Sense of the Terms; but a True Prelate in the strictest
propriety of Speech. Consider my Arguments thoroughly, and weigh them only in
the Balance of Justice, without Prejudice, and without Partiality, and try
whether Each of them singly, and much more, all together do not Conclude
irrefragably against him. And if they shall be found to be Concludent, I leave
it next to you to Determine, whether our Author is not both fairly and formally
bound by his Word to confess himself a Schismatic.

When I first put Pen to Paper, I had in my Project to have proceeded further,
and made it appear as evidently, as what I have now dispatched, That the
Episcopal Pre-eminence which was so notoriously and unquestionably Prelatical
in St. Cyprian's time, was no Novel Usurpation, no Late Invention, not at all
the Production of the Cyprianic Age, nor any Age later than the Apostles: That
St. Cyprian, and all his Contemporaries, firmly believed it to be of Divine
Institution; That they had not Entertained it, having so little Temporal
Encouragement, nay, so great and many Temporal Discouragements to Entertain it,
if they had not so believed: That they had great Reason for this their Belief;
as fairly founded on our Savior's own Ordinance; and fully handed down to them
in the constant Practice of the Universal Church from the First Plantation of
Christian Churches: That it passed amongst them as a common Principle, That
Bishops, as I have represented them, Bishops, as they were then, that is,
clearly contradistinct from Presbyters and Superior to them, Bishops as the
Heads of, and Principles of Unity to, their respective Churches, were the
Rightful, True, and Genuine Successors of the Apostles, in the Supreme visible
Ecclesiastical Power of Governing the Churches, whereof they were Bishops.

These Things, I say, I had once in my Prospect; but this Letter has swelled to
such a Bulk already, as, perhaps, may fright you from Reading it: And you may
Command me to Prosecute what is lest undone, when you will: And what I have
written, as I said, seems to me sufficient, in Point of Argument, for bringing
your Author to a Sense of his State, as well as a Candid Confession of it, when
it is thus plainly represented to him: And therefore I Conclude with my Best
Christian Wishes to you and him, and all Men.

March 28. 1695.
FINISH.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will be Published by Michaelmas next, [ An
Enquiry into the New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in
Scotland. By A. M. D. D.]


