VOTUM PRO PRINCIPE.

A POEM TO Her MAJESTY.

By G. S.

Jam nova progenies coelo demittitur alto;
Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem.
LONDON, Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1688.

Votum pro Principe.
JUno (and if of Goddesses there be
Those who preside at Births more kind than she)
Attend the Happy Hour, and safely bring
To our long Hopes, what they have formed, a King.
Malicious Saturn, hide thy fatal Light,
And let auspicious Venus rule the Night,
And cast the fortune of the Royal Child
Fair as her self, and as its Parents mild;
As great and glorious as we wish, their Reign,
And constant as the Graces we obtain;
That the Perfection of the Blessing may
Atone for the Unkindness of the stay:
Though Bliss, too hasty, does it self destroy,
And Expectation does enhance a Joy.
When Providence designs some mighty thing,
(To send a Savior, or to form a King)
The weighty Project does require delay,
And is not (like a Mushroom) of a day:
Near twice two thousand rolling years were spent,
E're a Messiah to the World was sent;
And if the Abraham.
Faithful Patriarch bends with years,
Before the Fruit of Promised Seed appears,
Yet then an Offspring to the Sire was given
As bright and numerous as the Stars of Heaven;
Now, when kind Beauty, and soft Youth conspire
To heighten vigor, and to charm desire,
What long and lasting Progeny will prove
The blessed effect of such immortal Love?
Though yet unhappy Albion (almost grown,
With Niobe, for grief like hers, a Stone)
With fleeting joy, and lasting tears has seen
A fruitful Parent, but a childless Queen,
(When short-lived Blessings did delude the womb,
Or hastened from the Cradle to the Tomb)
Yet this new Birth may for the past atone,
Crowding the lives of Many into One.
At least could Poets future Truths relate,
Or might we make our pleasing Wishes, Fate;
A Prince should show, that a Diffusive Good,
And Public Prayers can never be withstood:
And as three Monarchs did Obedience pay
To the blessed Babe who in the Manger lay,
As many Kingdoms now should Incense bring,
An humble Tribute, to their Infant King.
FINIS.

