THE Lord Chancellor's SPEECH Upon the Lord Treasurer's Taking his OATH IN THE
EXCHEQUER, The 26th of June, 1673.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1673.

The Lord Chancellor's Speech, upon the Lord Treasurer's taking his Oath in the
Exchequer the 26th. of June, 1673.
My Lord Treasurer,
THe King of His Grace and Favor has made choice of you to be Lord High
Treasurer of England, as also Treasurer of His Exchequer, which are two
distinct Offices. The first you are already possessed of, by the Kings delivery
of the White Staff, and have taken the Oath for that Office before me in
another place. The other His Majesty has conferred on you by His Letters
Patents, under the Great Seal, which I am to deliver your Lordship, after you
have been Sworn into that Office in this Court; of which, by this Patent, you
are made a Chief Judge.

Kings are as Gods, and bestow Honor, Riches, and Power where they please; but
in this They are as Men, that They can only Choose, not Make a person Adequate
to their Employment: For if Their Choice be merely Favor, not Fitness, their
Omnipotency is quickly seen through. Our Great Master has therefore chosen
you, one He has had Experience of these many years, as a Member of this House
of Commons, which has been so fruitful a Nursery of our English Ministers and
Statesmen. Besides, your Lordship was some years since joined with another
very able and worthy Person in the Treasury of the Navy, and after that managed
it alone: So that you have before this been trusted with Three parts of Five of
the Revenue of the Crown.

My Lord, Place, the very best that any English Subject is capable of,
therefore you are in another Position, not only to the King our Master, but to
us All, then you were ever before. He and we have all reason to look upon you
as a Man at Ease, and that has nothing to wish, but the Prosperity of his
Master and the Nation, that you may quietly and long enjoy so Great a Place,
under so Good a Master. There is no more to be asked of you in this Condition,
but that you know your own Interest, and that will secure you to the King's and
the Nation's. I repeat them thus together, because none but Mountebanks in
State-matters can think of them asunder. And let me say to your Lordship, That
however happy you have been in arriving to this High Station, yet Parta tueri
non minor est virtus. Many great men have proved unfortunate, in not observing
that the Address and Means to Attain great things, are oftentimes very
different from those that are necessary to Maintain and Establish a sure and
long Possession of them.

My Lord, Civility to you, to hold you longer; The Visits you are to make to
the several Offices of the Exchequer will take you up the rest of this Morning.
I shall only add my good wishes, That your Lordship may long enjoy the Honor
of this Great Employment, and His Majesty the Satisfaction of His Choice.

FINIS.

