THE HISTORY OF Timon of Athens, THE MAN-HATER. As it is acted at the DUKES
THEATER. Made into a PLAY.

By THO. SHADWELL.

Licensed, Feb. 18. 1677/8. To. L'Estrange.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman, at the Blue Anchor, in the
Lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1678.

To the Most ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE GEORGE DUKE of BUCKINGHAM, etc.
May it please your Grace,
NOthing could ever contribute more to my having a good opinion of my self,
than the being favored by your Grace: The thought of which has so exalted me,
that I can no longer conceal my Pride from the World; but must publish the Joy
I receive in having so noble a Patron, and one so excelling in Wit and
Judgment; Qualities which even your Enemies could never doubt of, or detract
from. And which make all good men and men of sense admire you, and none but
Fools and ill men fear you for 'em. I am extremely sensible what honor it is
t^ me that my Writings are approved by your Grace; who in your own have so
clearly shown the excellency of Wit and Judgment in your Self, and so justly
the defect of 'em in others, that they at once serve for the greatest example,
and the sharp^st reproof. And no man who has perfectly understood the
Rehearsal, and some other of your Writings, if he has any Genius at all, can
write ill after it.

I pretend not of an Epistle to make a Declamation upon these and your other
excellent Qualities. For naming the Duke of Buckingham is enough: who cannot
have greater commendations from me than all who have the honor to know him
already give him. Amongst which number I think it my greatest happiness to be
one, and can never be prouder of any thing can arrive to me, than of the honor
of having been admitted sometimes into your Graces Conversation, the most
charming in the World. I am now to present your Grace with this History of
^imon, which you were pleased to tell me you liked, and it is the more w^rthy
of you, since it has the inimitable hand of Shakespeare in it, which never made
more Masterly strokes than in this. Yet I can truly say, I have made it into a
Play. Which I humbly lay at your feet, begging the continuance of your Favor,
which no man can value more than I shall ever do, who am unfeignedly,

My Lord, Your Graces Most Obedient, humble Servant, THO. SHADWELL.

Prologue TO TIMON.
SInce the bare gleanings of the stage are grown
The only portion for brisk Wits of the Town,
We mean such as have no crop of their own;
Methinks you should encourage them that sow,
Who are to watch and gather what does grow.
Thus a poor Poet must maintain a Muse,
As you do Mistresses for others use:
The wittiest Play can serve him but one day,
Though for three months it finds you what to say.
Yet you your Creditors of wit will fail,
And never pay, but borrow on and rail.
Poor Echo's can repeat wit, though they have none,
Like Bag-pipes they no sound have of their own,
Till some into their emptiness be blown.
Yet --
To be thought Wits and Judges they are so glad,
And labor for it, as if they were Wit-mad.
Some will keep Tables for the Wits o'th'Nation,
And Poets eat them into reputation.
Some Scriblers will Wit their whole business make,
For labored dullness grievous pains will take;
And when with many Throes they have travailed long,
They now and then bring forth a Foolish Song.
One Fop all modern Poets will condemn,
And by this means a parlous Judge will seem.
Wit is a common Idol, and in vain
Fops try a thousand ways the name to gain.
Pray judge the nauseous Farces of the Age,
And meddle not with sense upon the Stage;
To you our Poet no one line submits,
Who such a Coil will keep to be thought Wits:
It Is you who truly are so, he would please;
But knows it is not to be done with ease.
In the Art of Judging you as wise are grown,
As in their choice some Ladies of the Town.
Your neat shaped Barbary Wits you will despise,
And none but lusty Sinewy Writers prize.
Old English Shakespeare stomachs you have still,
And judge as our Forefathers writ with skill.
You Coin the Wit, the Witlings of the Town
Retailers are, that spread it up and down;
Set but your stamp upon it, though it be brass,
With all the Wou'd-be-Wits, 'twill current pass.
Try it to day and we are sure 'twill hit,
All to your Sovereign Empire must submit.
Timon of Athens, OR THE MAN-HATER.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Demetrius. Them. HOw strange it is to see my Riotous Lord
With careless Luxury betray himself!
To Feast and Revel all his hours away;
Without account how fast his Treasure ebbs,
How slowly flows, and when I warned him of
His following dangers, with his rigorous frowns
He nipt my growing honesty in the Bud,
And killed it quite; and well for me he did so.
It was a barren Stock would yield no Fruit:
But now like Evil Councillors I comply,
And lull him in his soft Lethargick life.
And like such cursed Politicians can
Share in the headlong ruin, and will rise by it:
What vast rewards to nauseous Flatterers,
To Pimps, and Women, what Estates he gives!
And shall I have no share? Be gone, all Honesty,
Thou foolish, slender, thredbare, starving thing, be gone!
Enter Poet. Here Is a fellow-horseleech: How now Poet, how goes the world?


Poet. Why, it wears as it grows: but is Lord Timon visible?


Them. He Will come out suddenly, what have you to present him?


Poet. A little Offspring of my fruitful Muse: She Is in travel daily for his
honor.


Them. For your own profit, you gross flatterer.
By his damned Panegyricks he has written [Aside.
Himself up to my Lords Table,
Which he seldom fails; nay, into his Chariot,
Where he in public does not blush to own
The sordid Scribler.

Poet. The last thing I presented my Noble Lord was Epigram: But this is in
Heroic style.


Them. What do you mean by style? that of good sense is all alike; that is to say,
with apt and easy words, not one too little or too much: And this I think good
style.


Poet. O Sir, you are wide of the matter! apt and easy*
Heroicks must be lofty and high sounding;
No easy language in Heroic Verse;
It Is most unfit: for should I name a Lion,
I must not in Heroicks call him so!

Them. What then?


Poet. I Would as soon call him an Ass. No thus --
The fierce Numidian Monarch of the Beasts.

Them. That Is lofty, is it?


Poet. O yes! but a Lion would sound so baldly, not to be
Endured, and a Bull too- - - but
The mighty Warrior of the horned Race:
Ah - - - how that sounds!

Them. Then I perceive sound's the great matter in this way.


Poet. Ever while you live.


Them. How would you sound a Fox as you call it?


Po^t. A Fox is but a scurvey Beast for Heroic Verse.


Them. Hum - - - is it so? how will a Raven do in Heroic?


Poet. Oh very well, Sir.
That black and dreadful fate-denouncing fowl.

Them. An excellent sound - - - But let me see your Piece.


Poet. I Will read it - - - It Is a good morrow to the Lord Timon.


Them. Do you make good morrow sound loftily?


Poet. Oh very loftily! --

The fringed Vallance of your eyes advance,
Shake off your Canopy'd and downie trance:
Phoebus already quaffs the morning dew,
Each does his daily lease of life renew.
Now you shall hear description, it is the very life of Poetry.

He darts his beams on the Larks mossie-house,
And from his quiet tenement does rouse
The little charming and harmonious Fowl,
Which sings its lump of Body to a Soul:
Swiftly it clambers up in the steep air
With warbling throat, and makes each noat a stair.
There Is rapture for you! hah! --


Them. Very fine.


Poet. This the sollicitous Lover straight alarms,
Who too long slumber'd in his Coelia's arms:
And now the swelling Spunges of the night
With aching heads stagger from their delight:
Slovenly Tailors to their needles have:
Already now the moving shops are placed
By those who crop the treasures of the fields,
And all those Gems the ripening Summer yields.
Who do you think are now? Why -- Nothing but Herb-women: there are fine lofty
expressions for Herb-women! ha!- - - Already now, etc.


Them. But what is all this to my Lord?


Poet. No, that is true, it is description though.


Them. Yes, in twenty lines to describe to him that it is about
The fourth hour in the morning -- I Will in and let
Him know in three words it is the seventh.

[Exit Demetrius. Enter Musician. Poet. Good morning Sir: whither this way?


Mus. To present his Honor with a piece of Musiek.


Enter Demetrius. Them. My Lord will soon come out.


Poet. He Is the very spirit of Nobility --
And like the Sun when ever he breaks forth,
His Universal bounty falls on all.

Enter Merchant, Jeweller, Painter, and several others. Jewel. Good morrow
Gentlemen.


Paint. Save you all.


Them. Now they begin to swarm about the house!


Poet. What confluence the worthy Timon draws?
Ma^ick of bounty -- These familiar Spirits
Are conjured up by thee.

Merch. It Is a splendid Jewel.


Jewel. It Is of an excellent water.


Poet. What have you there, Sir?


Paint. It is a Picture Sir, a dumb piece of Poetry: but you present a speaking
Poem.


Poet. I have a little thing slipped idly from me:
The fire within the flint shows not it self
Till it be struck; our gentle flame provokes
It self --

Them. You write so scurvily, the Devil's in any man that provokes
You, but your self.

Poet. It is a pretty mocking of the life.


Paint. So, so.


Them. Now must these Rascals be presented all,
As if they had saved his honor or his life;
And I must have a feeling in the business.

Enter certain Senators going in to Timon. Poet. How this Lord is followed!

[Enter more who pass over.
Paint. See more, well, he is a noble spirit!


Jewel. A most worthy Lord!


Poet. What a flood of Visitors his bounty draws!


Them. You see how all conditions, how all minds,
As well of glib and slippery Creatures, as
Of grave and austere quality, present
Their services to Lord Timons prosperous fortune.
He to his good and gracious nature does subdue
All sorts of tempers, from the smooth faced flatterer
To Apemantus, that Philosophical Churl
Who hates the world, and does almost abhor
Himself --

Paint. He is a most excellent Lord, and makes the finest Picture!


Poet. The joy of all mankind; deserves a Homer for his Poet.


Jewel. A most accomplished person!


Poet. The Glory of the Age!


Paint. Above all parallel!


Them. And yet these Rogues, were this man poor, would ^ly him,
As I would them, if I were he.

[Soft Music. Poet. Here Is excellent Music!
In what delights he melts his hours away!

Enter Timon and Senators, Timon addressing himself courteously to all. Tim. My
Lord, you wrong your self, and 'bate too much
Of your own merits: It Is but a trifle.

Aelius. With more than common thanks I must receive it.


Isidore. Your Lordship has the very soul of bounty.


Phaeax. You load us with too many Obligations.


Tim. I never can oblige my friends too much.
My Lord, I remember you the other day
Commended a Bay Courser which I rode on.
He Is yours, because you liked him.

Phaeax. I beseech your Lordship pardon me in this.


Tim. My word is past: is there ought else you like?
I know my Lord, no man can justly praise
But what he does affect; and I must weigh
My Friends affections with my own:
So kindly I receive your visits, Lords:
My heart is no^ enough to give, me thinks,
I could deal Kingdoms to my Friends and never be weary.

Aelius. We all must stand amazed at your vast bounty!


Cleon. The spirit of Magnificence reigns in you!


Phoeax. Your Bounty's as diffusive as the Sea.


Tim. My Noble Lords, you do me too much honor.


Isand. There lives not such a Noble Lord on Earth.


Thrasil. None but the Sun and He oblige without
A prospect of Return.

Enter a Messenger and whispers Timon. Tim. Lampridius imprisoned! say you?


Mess. Yes, my good Lord, five Talents is his debt:
His Means are short, his Creditors most strict,
He begs your Letter to those cruel men,
That may preserve him from his utter ruin.

Tim. I am not of that temper to shake off
My Friend when most he needs me: I know him*
A Gentleman that well deserves my help;
Which he shall have: I Will pay the debt and free him.

Mess. Your Lordship ever binds him to your service.


Tim. Commend me to him, I will send his Ransom,
And when he is free, bid him depend on me:
It Is not enough to help the feeble up,
But to support him after -- tell him so.

Mess. All happiness to your honor.


[Exit Messenger. Enter an Old Athenian. Old Man. My Lord, pray hear me speak.


Tim. Freely, good Father.


Old Man. You have a Servant named Diphilus.


Tim. I have so, that is he.


^ld Man. That f^llow there by night frequents my house,
I am a man that from my first have been
Inclined to thrift, and my Estate deserves
A nobler Heir than one that holds a trencher.

Tim Go on.


Old Man I have an only Daughter: no Kin else,
On whom I may confer what I have got:
The Ma^d is fair, of the youngest for a Bride,
And I have bred her at my dearest cost.
This man attempts her love; pray my good Lord
Join with me to forbid him; I have often
Told him my mind in vain.

Tim. The man is honest.


Old Man. His honesty rewards him in himself;
It must not bear my Daughter.

Tim. Does she love him?


Old Man. She is young and apt.


Tim. Do you love her?


Diffil. Yes, my good Lord, and she accepts of mine.


Old Man. If to her marriage my consent be wanting,
I call the gods to witness, I will make
The Beggars of the street my Heirs e're she
Shall have a dram.

Tim. This Gentleman of mine has served me long;
There is a duty ^om a Master too:
To build his Fortune I will strain a little,
What e're your Daughters Portion weighs, this
Man's shall counterpoise.

Old Man. Say you so my Noble Lord! upon your honor
This, and she is his.

Tim. Give me thy hand: my Honor on my promise.


Diffil. My Noble Lord, I ^hank you on my knees:
May I be as miserable as I shall be base
When I forget this most surprising favor:
No Fortune or Estate shall e're be mine,
Which I Will not humbly lay before your feet.

Tim. Rise. I never do good with prospect of return,
That were but merchandising, a mere trade
Of putting kindness out to use.

Poet. Vouchsafe to accept my labors, and long live your Lordship.


Tim. I thank you; you shall hear from me anon:
What have you there my friend?

Paint. A piece of Limning for your Lordship.


Tim. It Is welcome. I like it, and you shall find I do.


Jewel. My Lord, here is the Jewel!


Tim. It Is Excellent!


Enter Apemantus. Jewel. Your Lordship mends the Jewel by the wearing.


Tim. Well mocked.


Poet. No, my good Lord, he speaks what all men think.


Apem. Scum of all flatterers, will thou still persist
For filthy gain, to gild and varnish over
This great Man's Vanities!

Tim. Nay, now we must be chidden.


Poet. I can bear with your Lordship.


Apem. Yes, and without him too: vain credulous Timon,
If thou believ'st this Knave, thou'art a foo^.

Tim. Well, gentle Apemantus, good morrow to thee.


Apem. Till, I am gentle; stay for thy good morrow
Till thou art Timons dog, and these Knav^s honest.

Tim. Why do thou call them Knaves*


Apem. They Are Athenians, and I Will not recant;
They Are all base Fawners; what a coile is h^e
With smiling, cringing, jutting out of Bu^s:
I wonder whether all the legs they make
Are worth the sums they cost you; friendship's full
Of dregs; base filthy dregs.
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth for cringes.

Ailius. Do you know us fellow?


Apem. Did I not call you by your names?


Tim. Thou preachest against Vice, and thou thy self art proud Apemantus.


Apem. Proud! that I am not Timon.


Tim. Why so?


Apem. To give belief to flattering Knaves and Poets,
And to be still my self my greatest flatterer:
What should Great Men be proud of stead of noise
And pomp and show, and holding up their heads,
And cocking of their noses; pleased to see
Base smiling Knaves, and cringing fools bow to 'em?
Did they but see their own ridiculous folly,
Their mean and absurd vanities; they would hide
Their heads within some dark and little corner,
And be afraid that every fool should find 'em.

Tim. Thou have too much sowrness in thy blood.


Poet. Hang him, -- never mind him --


Apem. What is this foolish animal man, that we
Should magnify him so? a little warm,
And walking Earth that will be ashes soon;
We come into the world crying and squalling,
And so much of our time's consumed in driv'ling infancy,
In ignorance sleep, disease and trouble, that
The remainder is not worth the being reared to.

Phaeax. A preaching fool.


Apem. A fool? if thou had half my wit thou would find
Thy self an Ass! Is it not truth I speak?
Are not all the arts and subtleties of men,
All their Inventions, all their Sciences,
All their Diversions, all their Sports, little enough
To pass away their happiest hours with,
And make a heavy life be born with patience?

Tim. I with the help of friends will make mine easier
Than what your melancholy frames.

Apem. How little do thou look before thee!
Thou, who take such great felicity in Fools and Knaves,
And in thy own enjoyments, wilt e're long
Find 'em such thin, such poor and empty shadows,
That thou will wish thou never had been born.

Tim. I do not think so.


Phaeax. Hang him, send him to the Areopagus, and let him
Be whipped!

Apem. Thus innocence, truth and merit often suffer,
Whilst injurers, oppressors and desertless fools
Swell in their brief authority, look big
And strut in Furs; it is a foul shame,
But it is a loathsome Age, -- it has been long
Imposthumating with its villainy;
And now the swelling's broken out
In most contagious ulcers; no place free
From the destructive Pestilence of manners;
Out upon it, it is time the world should end!

Tim. Do not rail so -- it is to little purpose.


Apem. I fear it is, I have done my morning lecture,
And I Will be gone --

Tim. Whither?


Apem. To knock out an honest Athenians brains.


Tim. Why? that is a deed thou wilt die for Apemantus.


Apem. Yes, if doing nothing be death by the Law.


Tim. Will nothing please thee? how do thou like this Picture?


Apem. Better than the thing 'twas drawn for, 'twill
Neither lie, drink, nor whore,
Flatter a man to his face, and cut his
Throat behind his back;
For since false smiles, and base
Dishonor traffic with man's nature,
He is but mere outside; Pictures are
Even such as they give out: Oh! did you see
The insides of these Fellows minds about you,
You Would loath the base corruptions more than ^ll
The putrid Excrements their bodies hide.

Aelius. Silence the foul mouthed villain.


Tim. He hurts not us. How like thou this Jewel?


Apem. Not so well as plain dealing, which will not cost a
Man a doit.

Tim. What do thou think this Jewel worth?


Apem. What fools esteem it, it is not worth my thinking.
Lo, now the mighty use of thy great Riches!
That must set infinite value on a Bawble!
Will It keep thee warm, or satisfy thy thirst,
Or hunger? No, it is comparison
That gives it value; then, thou look upon
Thy finger, and art very proud to think
A poor man cannot have it: Childish pleasure!
What stretched inventions must be found to make
Great wealth of use? Oh! that I were a Lord!

Tim. What would thou do?


Apem. I would cudgel two men a day for flattering me,
Till I had beaten the whole Senate.

Phaeax. Let the Villain be soundly punished for his
Licentious tongue.

Tim. No, the man is honest, it is his humor: It Is odd,
And methinks pleasant. You must dine with me Apemantus.

Apem. I devour no Lords.


Tim. No, if you did, the Ladies would be angry.


Apem. Yet they with all their modest simperings,
And varnished looks can swallow Lords, and get
Great bellies by it, yet keep their virtuous
Vizors on, till a poor little Bastard steals into
The world, and tells a tale.

Enter Nicius. Tim. My Noble Lord, welcome! most welcome to my arms*
You are the Fountain from which all my happiness
Did spring! your matchless Daughter, fair Mellissa.

Nic. You honor us too much my Lord.


Tim. I cannot, she is the joy of Athens! the chief delight
Of Nature, the only life I live by: Oh, that her vows
Were once expired; it is methinks an Age till that blessed day
When we shall join our hands and hearts together.

Nic. It Is but a week, my Lord.


Tim. It Is a thousand years.


Apem. Thou miserable Lord, have thou to complete
All thy calamities, that plague of Love,
That most unmanly madness of the mind,
That specious cheat, as false as friendship is?
Did thou but see how like a s^iveling thing
Thou look and talk, thou would abhor or laugh at
Thy own admired Image.

Tim. Peace: I will hear no railing on this subject.


Apem. Oh vile corrupted time, that men should be
Deaf to good Counsel, not to Flattery.

Tim. Come my dear friends, let us now visit our garde^s,
(...) ^resh our selves with some cool Wines and Fruit:
I am transported with your Visits!
There is not now a Prince whom I can envy,
(...) it be in that he can more bestow
Upon ^he men he loves.

(...). My Noble Lord, who would not wed your friend^, though without a Dowry?


Isodor. Most worthy Timon! who has a life you may not (...) your own?


Phaeax. We are all your slaves.


Poet. The joy of all Mankind.


Jewel. Great spirit of Nobleness.


Tim. We must not part t^is day my Friends.


Apem. So, so, crouching slaves aches contract and make your supple
Joints to wither; that there should be so little
Love among these Knaves, yet all this courtesy!
They hate and scorn each other, yet they kiss
As if they were of different Sexes: Villains, Villains.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Evandra. Re-enter Timon. Tim. Hail to the f^ir Evandra!
methinks your looks are changed*
And clouded with some grief that misbecomes 'em.

Evan. My Lord, my ears this morning were saluted with
The most unhappy news, the dismal'st story
The only one could have afflicted me;
My dream foretold it, and I waked aff^ighted
With a cold sweat over all my limbs.

Tim. What was it Madam?


Evand. You speak not with the kindness you were wont,
I have been used to tenderer words than these:
It is too true, and I am miserable!

Tim. What is it disturbs you so? too well I guess.

[Aside.
(...). I hear I am to lose your Love, which was
The only earthly bl^ssing I enjoyed,
And that on which my life depended.

Tim. No, I must ever love my Excellent Evandra!


Evan. Melissa will not suffer it: Oh cruel Timon,
Thou well may blush at thy ingratitude!
Had I so much toward thee, I never should show
My face without confusion: Such a guilt,
As if I had destroyed thy Race, and ruined
All thy Estate, and made thee infamous!
Thy Love to me I could prefer before
All cold resp^cts of Kindred, Wealth and Fame.

Tim. You have been kind so far above return,
That it is beyond expression.

Evan. Call to mind
Whose Race I sprung from, that of great Alcides,
Though not my Fortune, my Beauty and my Youth
And my unspotted Fame yielded to none.
You on your knees a thousand times have sworn,
That they exceeded all, and yet all these,
The only treasures a poor Maid possessed,
I sacrificed to you, and rather chose
To throw my self away, than you should be
Uneasy in your wishes; since which happy
And yet unhappy time, you have been to me,
My Life, my Joy, my Earth, my Heaven, my All,
I never had one single wish beyond you;
Nay, every action, every thought of mine,
How far soever their large circumference
Stretched out, yet centered all in you: You were
My End, the only thing could fill my mind.

Tim. She strikes me to the heart! I would I had
Not seen her.
[Aside*
Evan. Ah Timon, I have loved you so, that had
My eyes offended you, I with these fingers
Had plucked 'em by the roots, and cast them from me:
Or had my heart contained one thought that was
Not yours, I with this hand would rip it open:
Show me a Wife in Athens can say this;
And yet I am not one, but you are now to marry.

Tim. That I have loved you, you and Heaven can witness
By many long repeated acts of Love,
And Bounty I have showed you --

Evan. Bounty! ah Timon!
I am not yet so mean, but I contemn
Your transitory dirt, and all rewards,
But that of Love, your person was the bound
Of all my thoughts and wishes, in return
You have loved me! Oh miserable sound!
I would you never had, or always would.

Tim. Man is not master of his appetites,
Heaven swayes our mind to Love.

Evan. But Hell to falseshood:
How many thousand times y' have vowed and sworn
Eternal Love; Heaven has not yet absolved
You of your Oaths to me; nor can I ever,
My Love's as much too much as yours too little.

Tim. If you love me, you will love my happiness,
Melissa; Beauty and her Love to me
Has so inflamed me, I can have none without her.

Evan. If I had loved another, when you first,
My dear, false Timon swore to me, would you
Have wished I might have found my happiness
Within another arms? No, no, it is
To love a contradiction.

Tim. It Is a truth I cannot answer.


Evan. Besides, Melissa's beauty
Is not believed to exceed my little stock,
Even modesty may praise it self when it is
Aspersed: But her Love is mercenary,
Most mercenary, base, it is Marriage Love:
She gives her person, but in vile exchange
She does demand your liberty: But I
Could generously give without mean bargaining:
I trusted to your honor, and lost mine,
Lost all my Fri^nds and Kindred: but little thought
I should have lost my Love, and cast it on
A barren and ungrateful soil that would return no fruit.

Tim. This does perplex me, I must break it off.

[Aside.
Evan. The first storm of your Love did shake me so,
It threw down all my leaves, my hopeful blossoms,
Pulled down my branches; but this lat'er tempest of your hate
Strikes at my root, and I must wither now,
Like a desertless, sapless tree: must fall --

Tim. You are secure against all injuries
While ^ have breath --

Evan. And yet you do the greatest.


Timon. You shall be so much partner of my fortune
As will secure you full respect from all,
And may support your quality in what pomp
You can desire.

Evan. I am not of so course a Mould, or have
So gross a mind, as to partake of ought
That Is yours without you --
But, oh thou too dear perjured man, I could
With thee prefer a dungeon, a low and loathsome dungeon
Before the stately gilded fretted Roofs,
The Pomp, the noise, the show, the revelling,
And all the glittering splendor of a Palace.

Tim. I by resistless fate am hurried on --


Evan. A vulgar, mean excuse for doing ill.


Tim. If that were not, my honor is engaged --


Evan. It had a pre-engagement --


Tim. All the great men of Athens urge me on
To marry and to preserve my Race.

Evan. Suppose your Wife be false; (as it is not new
In Athens;) and suffer others to graft upon
Your stock; where is your Race? weak vulgar reason*

Tim. Her honor will not suffer her.


Evan. She may do it cunningly and keep her honor.


Tim. Her love will then secure her; which is as fervent


Evan. As yours was once to me, and may continue
Perhaps as long, and yet you cannot know
She loves you. Since that base Cecropian Law
Made Love a merchandise, to traffic hearts
For marriage, and for Dowry, who is secure?
Now her great sign of Love, is, she is content
To bind you in the strongest chains, and to
A slavery, naught can manumize you from
But death: And I could be content to be
A slave to you, without those vile conditions --

Tim. Why are not our desires within our power?
Or why should we be punished for obeying them?
But we cannot create our own affections;
They Are moved by some invisible active Power,
And we are only passive, and whatsoever
Of imperfection follows from the obedience
To our desires, we suffer, not commit
And it is a cruel and a hard decree,
That we must suffer first, and then be punished for it.

Evan. Your Philosophy is too subtle -- but what
Security of Love from her can be like mine?
Is Marriage a bond of Truth, which does consist
Of a few trifling Ceremonies? Or are those
Charms or Philters? It Is true, my Lord, I was not
First lifted over the Threshold, and then
Led by my Parents to Minerva's Temple:
No young unyok'd Heifers blood was offered
To Diana; no invocation to ^uno, or the Parcae:
No Coachman drove me with a lighted torch;
Nor was your house adorned with Garlands then;
Nor had I Figs thrown on my head, or lighted
By my dear Mothers torches to your bed:
Are these slight things, the bonds of truth and constancy?
I came all Love into your arms, unmixt
With other aims; and you for this will cause
My death.

Tim. I Would sooner seek my own, Evandra.


Evan. Ah, my Lord, if that be true, then go not to Melissa,
For I shall die to see another have
Possession of all that e're I wished for on earth.

Tim. I would I had not seen Melissa: --


Evan. Ah my dear Lord, there is some comfort left;
Cherish those noble thoughts, and they will grow stronger,
Your lawful gratitude and Love will rise,
And quell the other rebel-passion in you;
Use all the endeavors which you can, and if
They fail in my relief, I Will die to make you happy.

Tim. You have moved me to be womanish; pray retire,
I will love you.

Evan. Oh happy word! Heaven ever bless my Dear;
Farewell: but will you never see Mellissa more?

Tim. Sweet Excellence! Retire.


Evan. I will -- will you remember your Evandra?


Tim. Yes, I will.
How happy were Mankind in Constancy,
'Twould equal us with the Celestial Spirits!
O could we meet with the same tremblings still,
Those panting joys, those furious desires,
Those happy trances which we found at first!
But, oh!
Unhappy man, whose most transporting joy
Feeds on such luscious food as soon will cloy,
And that which should preserve, does it destroy.

[Exit Timon. ACT II.
Enter Melissa and Chloe. WHat think thou Chloe? will this dress become me?

Chlo. Oh, most exceedingly! This pretty curle
Does give you such a killing Grace, I swear
That all the Youth at the Lord Timon's Mask
Will die for you.

Mel. No: But do thou think so Chloe? I love
To make those Fellows die for me, and I
All the while look so scornfully, and then with my
Head on one side, with a languishing eye I do so
Kill 'em again: Prithee, what do they say of me, Chloe?

Chlo. Say! That you are the Queen of all their hearts,
Their Godd^ss, their Destiny, and talk of Cupids flames,
And darts, and Wounds! Oh the rarest language,
'Twould make one die to hear it; and ever now
And then steal some gold into my hand,
And then commend me too.

Mel. Dear Soul, do they, and do they die for me?


Chlo. Oh yes, the finest, properest Gentlemen --


Mel. But there are not many that die for me? humh --


Chlo. Oh yes, Lamachus, Theodorus, Thessalus, Eumolpides, Memnon, and indeed
all that see your Ladyship.


Mel. I Will swear? how is my complexion to day? ha Chloe?


Chlo. O most fragrant! it is a rare white wash this!


Mel. I think it is the best I ever bought; had I not best
Lay on some more red Chloe?

Chlo. A little more would do well; it makes you look
So pretty, and so plump, Madam.

Mel. I have been too long this morning in dressing.


Chlo. Oh no, I vow you have been but bare three hours.


Mel. No more! well, if I were sure to be thus pretty but seven
Years, I Would be content to die then on that condition.

Chlo. The gods forbid.


Mel. I Will swear I would; but do thou think Timon will
Like me in this dress?

Chlo. Oh he dies for you in any dress, Madam!


Mel. Oh this vile tailor that brought me not home my new
Habit to day; he deserves the Ostracisme! a Villain,
To disorder me so; I am afraid it has done harm
To my complexion: I have dreamt of it these two nights,
And shall not recover it this week --

Chlo. Indeed Madam he deserves death from your eyes.


Mel. I think I look pretty well? will not Timon
Perceive my disorder? -- hah --

Chlo. Oh no, but you speak as if you made this killing
Preparation for none but Timon.

Mel. O yes, Chloe, for every one, I love to have all the
Young Blades follow, kiss my hand, admire, adore me,
And die for me: but I must have but one favored
Servant; it is the game and not the quarry, I
Must look after it in the rest.

Chlo. Oh Lord, I would have as many admirers as I could.


Mel. Ay so would I -- but favor one alone.
No, I am resolved nothing shall corrupt my honesty;
Those admirers would make one a whore Chloe,
And that undoes us, it is our interest to be honest.

Chlo. Would they? No I warrant you, I Would fain see
Any of those admirers make me a Whore.

Mel. Timon loves me honestly and is rich --


Chlo. You have forgot your Alcibiades:
He is the rarest person!

Mel. No, no, I could love him dearly: oh he was the beautiful'st man,
The finest wit in Athens, the best companion, fullest of mirth
And pleasure, and the prettiest ways he had to please Ladies,
He would make his enemies rejoice to see him.

Chlo. Why? he is all this, and can do all this still.


Mel. Ay, but he has been long banished for breaking Mercuries
Images, and profaning the mysteries of Proserpine;
Besides, the people took his Estate from him,
And I hate a poor Fellow, from my heart I swear:
I vow methinks I look so pretty to day, I could
Kiss my self Chloe.

Chlo. Oh dear Madam -- I could look on you for ever: oh
What a world of murder you will commit to day!

Mel. Do thou think so? ha! ha! no, no --


Enter a Servant. Serve. The Lord Timon's come to wait on you, and begs
Admittance.


Enter Timon. Mel. Desire his presence.


Tim. There is enchantment in her looks,
A fresh I am wounded every time I see her:
All happiness to beautiful Melissa.

Mel. I shall want none in you my dearest Lord.


Tim. Sweetest of Creatures, in whom all the excellence
Of heavenly Womankind is seen unmixt;
Nature has wrought thy mettle up without allay.

Mel. I have no value, but my love of you,
And that I am sure has no allay, it is of
So strong a temper, neither time nor death,
Nor any change can break it --

Tim. Dear charming sweet, thy value is so great,
No Kingdom upon Earth should buy thee from me:
But I have still an enemy with you,
That guards me from my happiness; a Vow
Against the Law of Nature, against Love,
The best of Nature, and the highest Law.

Mel. It will be but a week in force.


Tim. It Is a whole age: in all approaching joys,
The nearer they come to us, still the time
Seems longer to us: But my dear Melissa,
Why should we bind our selves with vows and oaths?
Alas, by Nature we are too much confined,
Our Liberties so narrow, that we need not
Find fetters for our selves: No, we should seize
On pleasure wheresoever we can find it,
Lest at another time we miss it there.

Chlo. Madam, break your Vow, it was a rash one.


Mel. Thou foolish Wench, I cannot get my things*
In order till that time; do think I will
Be married like some vulgar Creature, which
Snatches at the first offer, as if she
Were desperate of having any other?

Tim. Is there no hope that you will break your vow?


Mel. If any thing, one word of yours would do it:
But how can you be once secure, I Will keep
A vow to you, that would not to my self?

Tim. Some dreadful accident may come Melissa*
To interrupt our joys; let us make sure
Of The present minute, for the rest perhaps
May not be ours.

Mel. It is not fit it should, if I should break a vow;
No, you shall never find a change in me,
All the ^ixt stars shall sooner stray
With an irregular motion, than I change:
This may assure you of my love, if not
Upon my knees I swear --
Were I the Queen of all the Universe,
And Timon were reduced to rags and misery,
I would not change my love to him.

Tim. And here I vow,
Should all the frame of Nature be dissolved,
Should the firm Center shake, should Earthquakes rage
With such a fury to disorder all
The peaceful and agreeing Elements,
Till they were huddled into their first Chaos,
As long as I could be, I Would be the same,
The same adorer of Melissa!

Mel. This is so great a blessing Heaven cannot add to it*


Tim. Thou art my Heaven, Melissa, the last mark
Of all my hopes and wishes, so I prize thee,
That I could die for thee.

Enter a Servant of Timons. Serve. My Lord, your dinner's ready, and your
Lordships
Guests wait your wished presence: the Lord
Nicias is already there.

Tim. Let Us have to wait on him Melissa.


Mel. It is my duty to my Father.

[Exeunt.
Enter Poet, Apemantus, Servants setting things in order for the Feast. Poet.
His honor will soon be here, I have prepared the Maskers;
They are all ready.

Apem. How now Poet? what piece of ^oppery have thou to present to Timon?


Poet. Thou art a senceless snarling Stoic, and have no taste of Poetry.


Apem. Thy Poetrie's insipid, none can taste it:
Thou art a wordy foolish Scribler, who
Writ'st nothing but high-sounding frothy stuff;
Thou spread'st, and beat'st out thy poor little sense,
It Is all leaf-gold, it has no weight in it.
Thou love impertinent description,
And when thou have a rapture, it is not
The sacred rapture of a Poet, but
I^coherent, extravagant, and unnatural,
Like mad-mens thoughts, and this thou call'st Poetical.

Poet. You are judge! shall dull Philosophers judge
Of us the nimble fancies, and quick spirits
Of the Age?

Apem. The Cox-combs of the Age:
Are there such eminent fopperies as in the
Poets of this time? their most unreasonable heads
Are whimsical, and fantastic as Fiddlers,
They are the scorn and laughter of all witty men,
The folly of you makes the Art contemptible,
None of you have the judgment of a Gander.

Enter Aelius, Nicias, Phaeax, and the other Senators. Poet. You are a base
snarling Critic; write your
Self, do and you dare.

Apem. I confess it is a daring piece of valor, for a man
Of sense to write to an Age that likes your spurious stuff.

Nici. What time of the day is it, Apemantus?


Apem. Time to be honest.


Aelius. That time serves always.


Apem. Then what excuse have thou, that would thus long
Omit it?

Isid. You stay to be at the Lord Timons feast.


Apem. Yes, to see Meat fill Knaves, and Wine heat Fools.


Cleon. Well, fare thee well.


Apem. Thou art an Ass to bid me farewell.


Cleon. Why so?


Apem. Because I have not so little reason or honesty to
Return thee one good wish for it.

Phaeax. Go hang thy self.


Apem. I Will do nothing at thy bidding, make thy requests to
Thy friend, if there be such a wretch on earth.

Phaeax. Be gone* unpeaceable dog, or I will spurn thee from me.


Apem. Though I am none, I Will fly like a dog the heels of
The Ass.

Nici. He Is opposite to all humanity --


Aelius. Now we shall taste of Timons bounty.


Phaeax. He has a heart brimful of kindness and good will --


Isid. And pours it down on all his friends, as if Plutus
The god of Wealth were but his Steward.

Phaeax. No Meed but he repayes sev'n-fold above
Its self, no gift but breeds the giver such
Return as does exceed his wishes.

Thrasil. He bears the noblest mind that ever governed man.


Phaeax. Long may he live with prosperous fortunes.
But I fear it --

Aelius. I hear a whisper, as though he fails his Creditors,
Even of their interest.

Phaeax. I fear it is too true -- well it is pity: but he is a good Lord!

Enter Timon with Melissa, Chloe, Nicias, and a great train with him. Here he
comes my Noble Lord.


Nici. Most worthy Timon!


Aelius. My most honored Lord.


Tim. You over-joy me with your presence! is there
On Earth a sight so splendid, as Tables well
Filled with good and faithful friends, like you?
Dear Melissa! be pleased to know my friends:
Oh Apemantus! you are welcome.

Apem. No, thou shall not make me welcome;
I come to tell thee truth, and if thou hear'st me not
I Will lock thy Heaven from thee hereafter: think
On the ebb of your Estate, and flow of debts;
How many prodigal bits do slaves and flatterers gorge?
And now it is noble Timon, worthy Timon, royal Timon,
And when the means is gone that buys this praise,
The breath is gone, whereof the praise is made.

Tim. It is not so with my Estate.


Apem. None are so honest to tell thee of thy vanities,
So the gods bless me.
When all your Offices have been oppressed
With riotous feeders, when every Vault has wept
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
Has blazed with lights, and brayed with Minstrels,
Or roaring ^inging drunkards; I have retired
To my poor homely Cell, and set my eyes
At flow for thee, because I find something in
Thee that might be worthy -- but as thou art I
Hate and scorn thee.

Tim. Come, preach no more, had I no Estate, I
Am rich in Friends, my Noble Friends here,
The dearest loving Friends that ever man
Was blessed with.

Nic. Oh might we have an happy opportunity to show how
We love and honor you!

Aelius. That you would once but use our hearts.


Isand. We'd lay 'em out all in your service.


Phaeax. Yes, all our selves, if you would put us to a
Trial, then we were perfect.

Tim. I doubt it not, I know you would serve me all;
Shall I distrust my Friends? I have often wished
My self poorer that I might use you -- We are
Born to do good one to another: Friends,
Unless we use 'em, are like sweet instruments hung
Up in cases: But oh, what a precious comfort
It Is to have so many like Brothers, commanding
One another fortunes! Trust me, my joy brings water
To my eyes.

Phaeax. Joy had the like conception in my eyes.


Apem. Ho, ho, ho -- I laugh to think that it conceived a Bastard.


Tim. What do thou laugh for?


Apem. To hear these smell-feasts lie and fawn so,
Not only flattering thee, but thy Mutton and thy Partridge,
These Flies, who at one cloud of winter-showers
Would drop from off you.

Cleon. Silence, the Dog.


Phaeax. Let the snarling Cur be kicked out.


Apem. Of what vile earth, of what mean dirt a Lord is Kneaded!


Tim. The man I think is honest, and his humor hurts us not.


Apem. I would my reason would do thee good, Timon.


Mel. This is an odd snarling fellow; I like him.


Apem. If ^ could without lying, I Would say the same of thee.


Mel. Why? prithee what do thou think of me?


Tim. He Will s^rl at thee.


Mel. No matter.


Apem. I think thou art a piece of white and red Earth,
The Picture of Vanity drawn to th'life;
I am thinking how handsome that Skull will
Be when all the Flesh is off; that face thou art
So proud of, is a poor vain, transitory thing,
And shortly will be good for nothing.

Mel. Out on him, scurvy poor Fellow.


Tim. No more of this, be not so sullen; I Will be kind
To thee and better thy Condition.

Apem. No, I Will have nothing; should I be bribed too,
There would be none left to rail at thee, and the^
Thou Would sin the faster: Timon, thou give so long,
Thou Wilt shortly give thy self away.

Tim. I Will hear no more: let him have a Table by Himself.


Apem. Let me have some Roots and Water, such as Nature intended for our Meat
and Drink before Eating and Drinking grew an Art.


[The Meat is served up with Kettle Drums, and Trumpets. Tim. Sit Dear Melissa,
this is your Feast:
And all you see is yours.
And all that you can wish for shall be so.
Come, sit Lords, no Ceremony,
That was devised at first to set a gloss
On feigned deeds, and hollow-hearted welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere it is shown:
True friendship needs 'em not: you're more welcome
To my Fortunes, than my Fortunes are to me.
[They sit. Will you not have some Meat Apemantus?


Apem. I scorn thy Meat, 'twould choke me; for I should
Never flatter ye; Ye Gods, what a number of men
Eat Timon! and yet he sees 'em not.
It grieves me to see so many dip their meat
In one m^n's Blood, and all the madness is
He cheers 'em to it, and loves 'em for it:
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men;
Methinks they should invite them without knives,
'Twere safer far. That fellow that sits next him,
Now parts bread with him, pledges his breath
In a divided Draught, may next day kill him;
Such things have been. If I were a Huge Man
I should be afraid to drink at meals,
Left they should spy my Wind Pipes dangerous places.
Great Men should drink with Harness on their Throats.

Tim. Now my Lords, let Melissa's health go round


Aelius. Let it flow this way --


[Kettle-Drums and Trumpets sound. Apem. How this pomp shows to a little Oil
and Roots?
These healths will make thee and thy State look ill.

Phaeax. Peace Villain.


Apem. Here Is that which is too weak to be a Sinner;
Here Is honest Water never left man i'th'mire,
This and my Root will still keep down
My saucy and presumptuous Flesh,
That it shall never get the better of me --
Apemantus'^ Grace.
Immortal Gods I crave no Pelf,
I pray for no man but my self,
^rant I may never be so fond
To trust man on his Oath or Bond;
Or a Harlot for her weeping,
Or a Dog that seems a sleeping,
Or a Jailer with my freedom,
Or my Friends if I should need 'em.
Amen, Amen, and so fall to it,
Great Men sin, and I eat Root.
Much good may't do thee good Apemantus.


Nici. Our noble Lord Timon's health, let it go round,
And Drums, and Trumpets sound.

[ Kettle Drums, etc. Apem. What madness is the pomp, the noise, the splendour,
The frantic Glory of this foolish life!
We make our selves fools to disport our selves,
And vary a thousand antic ugly shapes
Of Folly and of Madness, these fill up
The scenes and empty spaces of our lives.
Life's nothing but a dull repetition,
A vain fantastic dream, and there is an end on it.

Tim. Now my good Lords and Friends, I speak to you,
You that are of the Council of four hundred,
In the behalf of a dear Friend of mine.

Nici. One word of yours must govern all the Council,
And any thing in Athens.

Tim. I Speak chiefly
To you my Lord and Father; and to Phaeax.

Phaeax. My good Lord command me to my death and I Will obey.


Tim. I have received notice from Alcibiades.,
(Whose Enemies you have been, and whose Friends
I beg you will be now) that he in private
Will venture into Athens;
Not openly because he will not trust
The Insolence of the tumultuous Rabble;
If he sollicites his recallme^t with you,
There lives not on this earth a man that has
Deserved so well from the Nobility;
He has preserved even Athe^s in his Exile,
By Tissaphernes power he has kept us from
The Lacedemonian Rage, and other Foes
That might have laid this City low in ashes.
How many famous Battles has he wo^?
But which is more, by his advice and power,
Even in his absence he has wrested
The Government from the insulting Vulgar;
Whose Wisedom's Blindness, and whose Power is Madness:
And placed it in your noble Hands; methi^ks
You in return should take off his hard entence
Of Banishment, and render back all his Estate.

Phaeax. Is there a thing on Earth you would command us
That we would disob^y?

Nici. I am absolutely yours in all Commands.


Aelius. How proud am I that I can serve Lord Timon!


Apem. Think thou thy self thy Countries friend now Timon*
His foul Riot and his inordinate Lust,
His wavering Passions, and his headlong Will,
His selfish Principles, his contempt of others,
His Mockery, his various Sports, his Wantonnes^,
The Rage and Madness of his Luxury
Will make the Athenians hearts ache, as thy own
Will soon make thine.

Isod. Hang him, we never mind him.


Isand. When will he speak well of any man?


Apem. When I can find a man that is better than
A beast, I will fall down and worship him.

Tim. Thou art an Athenian, and I bear with thee.
Is the Masque ready?

Poet. It Is, my noble Lord.


Apem. What odd and childish folly Slaves find out
To please and court all thy distempered Appetites!
They spend their flatteries to devour those men
Upon whose Age they will void it up again
With poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives that is not depraved, or else depraves?
Who die that bear not some spurns to their Graves
Of their friends giving? I should fear that those
Who now are going to dance before me,
Should one day stamp on me: it has been done.

Tim. Nay, if you rail at all Society,
I Will hear no more -- be gone.

Apem. Thou may be sure I will not stay to see
Thy folly any longer, fare thee well; remember
Thou would not hear me, thou will curse thy self for it.

Tim. I do not think so -- fare thee well.


[Exit Apemantus. Enter Servant. Serve. My Lord, there are some Ladies masqu'd
desire admittance.


Ti^. Have not my doors been always opento
Every Athenian? They do me ho^ur,
Wait on 'em in, were I not bound to do
My duty here, I would.

Chloe. I have not had the opportunity
To deliver this till now, it is a Letter
From Al^ibiades.

Mel. Dear Alcibiades, Oh how shall I love him,
When he is restored to his Estate and Country!
He will be richer far than Timon is,
And I shall choose him first of any man;
How lucky it is I should put off my Wedding.

Enter Evandra with Ladies masqu'd. Tim. Ladies, you do my house and me great
honor;
I should be glad you would unmask, that I
Might see to whom I owe the Obligation.

1. Lad. We ask your pardon, we are stolen out upon
Curiosity, and dare not own it.

Tim. Your pleasure Ladies, shall be mine.


Evan. This is the fine gay thing so much admired,
That Is born to rob me of my happiness,
And of my life; her face is not her own,
Nor is her love, nor speech, nor motion so:
Her smiles, her amorous looks, she puts on all,
There Is nothing natural: She always acts
And never shows her self; How blind is Love
That cannot see this Vanity!

[Masque begins. Enter Shepherds and Nymphs. A Symphony of Pipes imitating the
chirping of Birds. Nymph. Hark how the Songsters of the Grove
Sing Anthems to the God of Love.
Hark how each amorous winged pair,
With Loves great praises fill the Air.

Chorus. On every side the charming sound
Does from the hollow Woods rebound.
Retornella


Nymph. Love in their little veins inspires
Their cheerful Notes, their soft Desires:
While Heat makes Buds or Blossoms spring,
These pretty couples love and sing.

Chorus with Flutes. But Winter puts out their desire,
And half the year they want Loves fire.
Retornella.


Full Chorus. But Ah how much are our deligh^s more dear,
For only Humane Kind love all the year.

Enter the Maenades and Aegipanes. 1 Bach. Hence with your trifling Deity
A greater we adore,
Bacchus, who always keeps us free
From that blind childish power.

2 Bach. Love makes you languish and look pale,
And sneak, and sigh, and whine;
But over us no griefs prevail,
While we have lusty Wine.

Chorns with Hout-boys Then hang the dull Wretch who has care in his soul,
Whom Love, or whom Tyrants, or Laws can control,
If within his right hand he can have a full Bowl.

Nymph. Go drivel and snore with your fat God of Wine,
Your swelled faces with Pimples adorning,
Soak your Brains over night and your senses resign,
And forget all you did the next Morning.

Nymph. With dull aching Noddles live on in a mist,
And never discover true Joy:
Would Love tempt with Beauty, you could not resist,
The Empire he slights, he would destroy.

1 Bach. Better our heads, than hearts should ache,
His childish Empire we despise;
Good Wine of him a Slave can make,
And force a Lover to be wise.
Better, etc.

2 Bach. Wine sweetens all the cares of Peace,
And takes the Terror off from War.
To Loves affliction it gives ease,
And to its Joy does best prepare.
It sweetens, etc.

Nymph. It Is Love that makes great Monarchs fight,
The end of Wealth and Power is Love;
It makes the youthful P^0ets write,
And does the Old to Youth improve.
Retornella of Hout-boys.
Bach. It Is Wine that Revels in their Veins,
Makes Cowards valiant, Fools grow wise,
Provokes low Pens to lofty strains,
And makes the young Loves Chains despise.
Retornella.
Nymphs and Shepherds. Love rules the World.


Maenades and Aegipanes. It Is Wine, it is Wine.


Nymphs and Shepherds. It Is Love, it is Love.


Maenades and Aegipanes. It Is Wine, it is Wine.


Enter Bacchus and Cupid. Bacchus. Hold, Hold, our Forces are combined,
And we together rule Mankind.

General Chorus. Then we with our Pipes, and our Voices will join
To sound the loud praises of Love and good Wine.
Wine gives vigor to Love, Love makes Wine go down.
And by Love and good Drinking, all the World is our own.

Tim. It Is well designed, and well performed, and I Will
Reward you well: let us retire into my next
Apartment, where I Have devised new pleasures for you,
And where I will distribute some small Presents,
To testify my Love and Gratitude.

Phaeax. A noble Lord!


AElius. Bounty it self.


Tim. Thus my Melissa will we always spend
Our time in Pleasures; but who e're enjoys
Thee, has all this life affords sum'd up in that.

Evan. These words did once belong to me, but Oh!
My stubborn heart, will thou not break at this?

Tim. Ladies I hope you will honor me with you presence,
And accept of a Collation.

1 Lady. We ask your pardon, and must leave you.


Tim. Demetrius, wait on them.


Evan. My Lord, I Would speak with you alone.


Tim Be pleased Madam, to retire with your father,
I Will wait on you instantly.
[to Melissa. [Exeunt all but Timon and Evandra. Who are you Madam?


Evan. One who is come to take her last leave of you.


Tim. Evandra! What confusion am I in!


Evan. I am sorry in the midst of all your joys
I should disturb you thus: I had a mind
To see you once before I died; I never
Shall trouble you again.

Tim. Let me not hear these killing words.


Evan. They Will be my last, and therefore give'em room:
I am hastening to my death, then you will be happy,
I never shall interrupt your joys again,
Unless the Memory of me should make
You drop some tears upon my dust; I know
Your noble Nature will remember that
Evandra was, and once was dear to you,
And loved you so, that she could dye to make
You happy.

Tim. Ah dear Evandra! that would make
Me wretched far below all misery;
I Would rather kill my self than hear that news:
I call the gods to witness, there is not one
On Earth I more esteem.

Evan. Esteem! alas!
It is too weak a Cordial to preserve
My fading life, I see your passion's grown
Too headstrong for you. Oh my dearest Timon!
I, while I have any breath, must call you so;
Had you once struggled for my sake,
And striven to oppose the raging fury of
Your fatal Love, I should have died contented.
But Oh! false to your self, to all my hopes,
And me; you sucked the subtle poison in
So greedily, you would not stay to taste it.

Tim. She moves me strongly; I have found from her
The truest and the tenderest Love that ever
Woman yet bore to Man.

Evan. I find you're gone too far in the disease
TO admit a Cure: I will persuade no longer;
Death is my remedy, and I Will embrace it.

Tim. Oh talk not of Death: I Will love you still:
I can love two at once, trust me I can.

Evan. No, Timon, I will have you whole, or nothing:
I love you so, I cannot live to see
That dear, that most adored person in another arms:
My Love's too nice, 'twill not be fed with crumbs,
And broken meat, that falls from your Me^issa.
No dear false Man, you soon shall be at rest,
I came but to receive a parting Kiss:
You Will not deny me that?

Tim. I will not part with you; we will be friends for ever.


Evan. No, no, it cannot be, forgive this trouble,
Since it is the last, I Will never see you more;
And may Melissa ever love you as
The Excellence of your form deserves; and may
She please you longer than the unfortunate
Evandra could.

Tim. Gods! Why should I not love this Woman best?
She has deserved beyond all measure from me;
She Is beautiful, and good as Angels are; Aside.
But I have had her Love already.
Oh most accursed Charm, that thus perverts me!

To Her. Y' have made a Woman of me.


Evan. I Will have but one last look of that
Bewitching Face that ruined me.
Oh, I could devou^ it with my eyes: but I Will
Remove it from thee. I never
Shall die contented while I look on thee.

Tim. Be patient till I give thee satisfaction.


Evand. No, dearest Enemy, I Will remove the guilt
From thee, and thus I Will place it on my self.

[Offers to stab her self. Tim. Hold, dear Evandra, if thou love my life
Preserve thy own; for here I swear, that minute
When thou attemptst thy life, I will lose mine.
Where Is Diphilus?

Enter Diphilus. Diph. Here my Lord.


Tim. Wait on Evandra home, and take a care
Sh' attempts not any mischief on her self:
Sh'is agitated by a dangerous passion*
My dear! let Diphilus wait on thee home;
As soon as ever my Company is gone,
I Will see thee, and convince thee that I love thee.

Evand. No, no: I cannot hope -- farewell for ever.


[Ex. Diph. and Evand. Tim. I must resolve on something for her comfort;
For the Empire of the Earth I would not lose her;
There is not one of all her Sex exceeds her
In Love, or Beauty --
O miserable state of humane life!
We slight all the enjoyments which we have;
And those things only value which we have not:
Where is Demetrius?

Them. My Lord!


Tim. Where is the Casket which I spoke for?


Them. It *is here my Lord: I beg your Lordship hear me speak.
I have business that concerns you nearly --

Tim. Some other time; of late thou do perplex me
Each moment with the hateful ^me of business,
That mortal Foe to pleasure, I Will not hear it.
[Ex. Timon.
Them. So! all now is at an end!
He does command us to provide great gifts,
And all out of an empty Coffer.
His promises fly so beyond his 'state,
That what he speaks is all in Debt; He owes
For every word; His Land is all engaged,
His money gone; would I were gently turned
Out of my Office; lest he should borrow all
I have gotten in his service. Well!
Happier is he that has no friend to feed,
Than such who do even Enemies ex^eed.

[Ex. Demet. ACT III.
Enter Timon and Demetrius. Tim. Demetrius!

How comes it that I have been thus incounter'd
With clamorous demands of broken Bonds,
And the unjust detention of money long since due?
I knew I was in debt, but did not think
I had gone so far; wherefore before this time
Did you not lay my state fully before me?

Them. You would not hear me.
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid 'em before you -- you would throw 'em off,
And say, you found 'em in my Honesty.
I have beyond good manners, prayed you often
To hold your hand more close and was rebuk't for it.

Tim. You should have pressed it further.


Them. What e're I durst I did, it was my interest,
For if my Lord be poor, what then must I be?
Call me before the exactest Auditors,
And let my life lie on the proof:
Oh my good Lord, the world is but a world,
If it were yours to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone?

Tim. Have you no money in the Treasury?


Them. Not enough to supply the riot of two meals.


Tim. Let all my Land be sold.


Them. It Is all engaged;
And some already's forfeited and gone,
That which remains will scarce pay present dues;
The future comes apace.

Tim. To Lacedaemon did my Land extend.


Them. How many times have I reti^'d and wept,
To think what it would come to.

Tim. Prithee! no more, I know you are honest.


Them. It grieves me to consider amongst what Parasites
And trencher Friends your wealth has been divided.
I cannot but weep at the sad reflection,
When every word of theirs was greedily
Attended to, as if they would been pronounced
From Oracles. I never could be heard.

Tim. Come; preach no more, thou soon shall find that I
Have not misplaced my Bounty, why do weep?
I am rich in friends and can use all their wealth
Freely as I can bid thee speak.

Them. I doubt it.


Tim. You soon shall see how you mistake my fortune.
Now I shall try my friends. Who waits there?

Enter three Servants. 1 Ser. My Lord!


Tim. Go you to Phaeax and to Cleon, you to Isand^
And Aelius, you to Isodore and Thrasillus.
Commend me to their loves, and let them know,
I Am proud that my occasions make me use 'em
For a supply of money. Let the request
Be fifty Talents from each man.

1 Serve. We will, my Lord.


Tim. Thou, Demetrius, shall go to the Senate, from whom
Even to the States best health I have deserved
This hearing. Petition them to send me 500 Talents.

Them. I must obey. The next room's full of
Importunate slaves and hungry Creditors, go not to 'em.

[Ex. Them. Tim. What! must my doors b' opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and those been open
For all Athenians to go in and out
At their own pleasure? My Porter at my Gate
Never kept man out, but smiled and did invite
All that past by it, in, and must he be
My Jailer, and my House my Prison! no,
I Will not despair: my friends will never fail me.
[Exit. Scene is the Porch or Cloister of the Stoics.
Apemantus speaking to the people and several Senators. Apem. Amongst all the
loathsome and base diseases of
Corrupted Nature, Pride is most contagious.
Behold the poorest miserable wretch
Which the Sun shines on; in the midst of all
Diseases, rags, want, infamy and slavery,
The Fool will find out something to be proud of.

Aelius. This is all railing.


Apem. When you deserve my precepts, you shall have 'em,
Mean while, if I Will be honest, I must rail at you.

Cleon. Let Us walk, hang him, hear him not rail.


Phaeax. Our Government is too remiss in suffering the
License of Philosophers, Orators, and Poets.

Apem. Show me a mighty Lordling, who is puffed up,
And swells with the opinion of his greatness;
He Is an Ass. For why does he respect himself so,
But to make others do it? wretched Ass!
By the same means he seeks respect, he loses it.
Mean thing! does he not play the fool, and eat,
And drink, and void his excrements and stink,
Like other men, and die and rot so too?
What then should it be proud of? It Is a Lord;
And that is a word some other men cannot
Prefix before their names: what then? a word
That it was born to, and then it could not h^lp it.
Or if made a Lord, perhaps it was [ Enter Timons 3 Servants.
By blindness or partiality in the Government.
If for desert, he loses it in Pride;
Who ever's proud of his good deeds, performs
Them for himself; himself should then reward 'em.
Oh but perhaps he is rich, It Is a million to one
There was villainy in the getting of that dirt,
And he has the Nobility to have knaves for his Ancestors.

Phaeax. Hang thee thou snarling Rascal, the Government's
To blame in suffering thee to rail so long,

Apem. The Government's to blame in suffering the things
I rail at.
In suffering Judges without Beards, or Law, Secretaries that
Cannot write;
Generals that durst not fight, Ambassadors that cannot speak sense;
Block-heads to be great Ministers, and Lord it over witty men;
Suffering great men to sell their Country for filthy bribes,
Old limping Senators to sell their Souls
For vile extortion: Matrons to turn incontinent;
And Magistrates to pimp for their own Daughters.
Ruin of Orphans, treachery, murder, rapes,
Incests, adulteries and unnatural sins,
Fill all your dwellings, here is the shame of Government,
And not my railing. Men of hardn'd foreheads,
And seared hearts. It Is a weak and infirm Government,
That is so froward it cannot bear me^ words.

Aelius. Well, babbling Philosophy, call Rascal, we shall man
You tremble one day.

Apem. Never.
Sordid great man! it is not in your power,
I fear not man no more than I can love him.
'Twere better for us that wild beasts posseft
The Empire of the Earth, they would use men better,
Than the^ do one another. They Would ^'re prey
On man but for necess^y of Nature.
Man undoes man in wantonness and sport,
Bruits are much honester than he; my dog
When he fawns on me i^ no Courtier,
He is in earnest; but a man shall smile,
And wish my throat cut.

Cleon. Money of me, say thou?


1 Serve. Yes! he says he is proud he has occasion to make
Use of you.

Cleon. Is It come to that? [Aside.
Unfortunate man! I have not half a Talent by me!
But here are other Lords can do it.
I honor him so, that if he will, I Will sell my Land for him;
But prithee excuse me to him, I am in great haste
At this time.
[Ex. Cleon.
1 Serve. It Is as I thought. How monstrous and deformed a
Thing is base ingratitude! Here Is Phaeax. My Lord?

Phaeax. Oh! one of Lord Timons men? ^ gift I warrant you.
Why this hits right. I dreamt of a silver Basin and
Ewer to night. How does that honorable, complete,
Free-hearted Gentleman, thy very bountiful good Lord?

1 Serve. Well in his health, my Lord.


Phaeax. I am heartily glad, what have thou under thy
Cloak, honest youth?

1 Serve. An empty Box which by my Lords Command
I come to entreat your Honor to supply with fifty Talents
He has instant need of. He bids me say he does not
Doubt your friendship.

Phaeax. Hum! not doubt it! alas, good Lord!
He'^ a noble Gentleman! had he not kept so good a House,
'Twould have been better: I Have often dined with him,
And told him of it, and come again to Supper for
That purpose to have him spend less, but 'twould not do:
I ^m sorry for it: but good Lad thou art hopeful and of
Good parts.

1 Serve. Your Lordship speaks your pleasure.


Phaeax. A prompt spirit, give thee thy due. Thou know
What Is reason. And eanst use thy ti^e well, if the time use
Thee well -- It Is no time to lend money. Thou art wise,
Her^ money for thee -- good Lad wink at me and say
Thou saw me not.

1 Serve. Is It possible the World should differ so,
And we alive that lived in it?

Apem. What art thou sent to invite those Knaves again
To feast with thy luxurious Lord?

1 Serve. No: I came to borrow fifty Talents for him,
And this Lord has given me this to say, I did not see him.

Apem. Is It come to that already?
Base slavish Phaeax, thou of the Nobility?
Let molten Coin be thy damnation.

Phaeax. Peace Dog.


Apem. Thou worse! thou trencher* fly, thou flatterer,
Thou have Timons meat still in thy gluttonous paunch,
And do deny him money. Why should it thrive,
And turn to nutriment when thou art poison?

2 Serve. My noble Lord.


Isand. Oh how does thy brave Lord, my noblest friend?


2 Serve. May it please your honor, he has sent --


Isan. Hah -- what has he sent? I am so much obliged
To him, he is ever sending. How shall I thank him? hah,
What has he sent?

2 Serve. He has sent me to tell you he has occasion
To use your friendship, he has instant need
Of fifty Talents --

Isan. Is that the business? hah*
I know his honor is but merry with me,
He cannot want as many hundreds.

2 Serve. Yes, he wants fifty, but is assured of your Honors Friendship.


Isan. Thou art not sure in earnest?


2 Serve. Upon my life I am.


Isan. What an unfortunate Wretch am I? to disfurnish
My self upon so good a time,
When I might have shown how much I love
And honor him: This is the greatest affliction
E're fell upon me: the Gods can witness for me
I was just sending to my Lord my self:
I have no power to serve him, my heart bleeds for it.
I hope his honor will conceive the best;
Beast that I am, that the first good occasion
Should not be in my power to use; I beg
A thousand pardons. -- Tell him so --

Apem. Thou art an excellent Summer friend!
How often have thou dipped in the dish with him?
He has been a Father to thee with his purse,
Supported thyestate; when e're thou drink'st,
His silver kisses thy base Lip^, thou rid'st upon
His Horses, lie on his Beds.

Isan. Peace, or I Will knock thy brains out.

[Ex. *san.
2 Serve. My Lord, Thrasillus --


Thra. He Is comes to borrow, I must shun him.
I hope your Lord is well.

2 Serve. Yes, my Lord, and has sent me --


Thra. To invite me to Dinner. I am in great have --
But I Will wait on him if I can possible.
[Ex. Thra.
Apem. Good Fool, go home. Do think to find a grateful
Man in Athens?

3 Serve. If my Lord's occasions did not press him very much
I would not urge it.

Aelius. Why would he send to me? I am poor. There Is Phaeax, Cleon, Isodore,
Thrasillus, and Isander, and many Men that owe their fortunes to him.


3 Serve They have been touched and found base mettle.


Aelius. Have they denied him; and must you come to me?
Must I be his last refuge? it is a great slight,
Must I be the last sought to? he might have
Considered who I am.

3 Serve. I see he did not know you.


Aelius. I was the first that e're received gift from him,
And I will keep it for his honors sake,
But at present I cannot possibly supply him:
Besides, my F^ther made me swear upon
His Death, I never should lend money.
I Have kept the Oath e're since. *Fare thee well.
[Ex. Aelius.
3 Serve. They all fly us!


Apem. The barbarous Herd of mankind shun
One in affliction, and turn him out as
Deer do one that is hunted, go, go home
To thy fond Lord, and bid him Curse himself,
That would not hear me: bid him live on root
And water, and know himself; he had better
Have shunned Mankind than be deserted by them.
[Ex. Omnes.
Enter Melissa and Chloe. Mell. Who could have thought Timon so lost in the
world?
With what amazement will the news of this
So sudden alteration be received by all Athenians?

Chloe. Is it for certain true?


Mel. Certain as death or fate! my father has assured me
Of it, that he is a Bankrupt, his Credit gone, and all
His ravenous Creditors with open Jaws will swallow him.
*It Is well I am informed, I Will stand upon my guard.

Enter Page. Page. Madam, a Gentleman below desires admittance.


Mel. See Chloe, if it be Lord Timon, or any one from him,
^ay I am not well. I will not be seen: be sure I
Be not.

Chlo. I warrant you.

[Ex. Chloe.
Mel. Seen by a Bankrupt! no, base poverty
Shall never enter here. Oh, were my Alcibiades
Recalled, he would adore me still, and would be
Rich too.

Enter Alcibiades in disguise, and Chloe. Chloe. It is a Gentleman in disguise,
I know him not.


Alcib. But my Melissa does.

[Pulls off his Disg^ise.
Mel. My Alcibiades! my Hero!
The Gods have hearkn'd to my vows for thee,
And have Crowned all my wishes. You Are more welcome
To me than the return of the Suns heat
Is to the frozen Region of the North,
That Is covered half the year with Snow and Darkness.

Alcib. My Joy, my life, my blood, my soul, my liberty,
And all that is precious in the earth, I have
Within my arms: This treasure far outweighs
The joys of Conquest, or deliverance
From banishment or slavery.

Mel. How proud am I of all thy victories!
'Twas thou that Conquered, but I triumphed for thee,
All day I sighed and wished, and prayed for thee,
And in the night thou entertain'dst my sleeps,
And whensoe're I dreamt thou were in danger,
I cried out, my Alcibiades, and in my dreams
I was valiant, and methought I fought for thee.

Alcib. Oh my Divine Melissa! the Cordial of thy love
Is of so strong a spirit, 'twill overcome me,
One kiss and take my soul; another and
'Twill sally out; Oh, I could fix whole ages on
Thy tender lip; and pity all the Fools
That keep a senseless pother in the world for power,
And pomp, and noise, and lose substantial bliss.

Mel. There is no bliss but love; and but for that
The world would fall in pieces! Oh, with what a grief
Have I sustained thy absence! had not my Father
Prevented my escape, I had come to thee.

Alcib. 'Twas well for Athens safety that thou did not;
I had neglected all my Conquests which
Preserved this base ungrateful town; for I
In thee should have all that I fought for; Thou
Would have been life, liberty, Country, and Estate to me.

Mel. I have the end of all my hopes and wishes,
If the ungrateful Senate will let me keep thee.

Alcib. 'Twas I that made them what they are, in hopes
They soon would call me home to thee.
It was the thought of that which fired my Soul,
At every stroke the memory of Melissa
Gave vigor to my arm, and made me conqu^r.

Mel. Oh, let ambition never more disturb
Thy noble mind, let love in peace possess it.
Let not the noise of Drums and Trumpets clangor,
Clashing of arm^, and neighing Steeds, and groans
Of bleeding men entice thee from me.

Alcib. The Sena^e shall not dare remove me from thee.
Should they once offer it, I Have an Army will
Toss their usurious bags about their ears,
Rifle their Houses, deflour their Wives and Daughters,
And dash their brains out of their doting heads.
But dear Melissa, since our hearts so long
Have been united, let us not stay for friends,
For ceremony* but come, complete our joys;
True love's above senseless formalities.

Mel. If any thing from you could anger me,
This would; but know, none shall invade my virtue
Without my life: but on my knees I vow
No other man, though Crowned the Emperor
Of all the World, should ever have my love,
And though thy Country basely should desert thee,
I would continue firm.

Alcib. And here
I swear, that could I conquer all the Universe,
I Would lay the Crowns and Scepters at thy feet
For thee to tread on. By thy self I swear,
An Oath more sacred far to me, than all
Mock Deities which knavish Priests invent,
Are to the poor deluded Rabble.

Chloe. Madam! Your Father is come in.


Mel. Let us retire: my Father has not yet
Forgotten his enmity, the breaking of the
Peace with the Lacedaemonians, and his foil
Which he thinks you caused in Sicily,
He Will not forgive.

Alcib. Had he injured me beyond all sufferance,
I would have forgiven him for begetting thee.
[Exeunt.
Enter Timon and Servant. Tim. Is It possible? deserted thus? what large
professions
Did all these make but yesterday? did they all refuse to lend,
Say you?

1 Serve. The rumor of your borrowing was soon
Dispersed, and then at sight of one of us
They would stop, start, turn short, pass by, or seem
To overlook us, and avoided us,
As if we had been their mortal Enemies;
And who suspected not when they were moved,
Came off with base excuses.

Tim. Ye Gods! what will become of Timon? I Will go to 'em
My self, they will not have the face to use me so.
Enter Demetrius. Oh Demetrius! what news bring'st thou from the Senate?


Them. I am returned no richer than I went.


Tim. Just Gods! it cannot be.


Them. They answer in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at ebb, want Treasure, cannot
Do what they would, are sorry; you are Honorable;
But yet they could have wished; they know not,
Something has been amiss; a noble nature
May catch a wrench; would all were well; it is pity;
And so intending other serious matters,
After distateful looks, and these hard fractions,
With certain half caps and cold careless nod^,
They froze me into silence.

Tim. The Gods reward their Vill^y, Old men
Have their ingratitude natural to 'em;
Their blood is cak'd and cold, it seldom flows,
It Is want of kindly warmth which makes 'em cruel,
And Nature as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashioned for the Journey, dull and h^avy.
Heaven keep my Wits! or is it a blessing to be mad?
Demetrius follow me; I Will try 'em all my self.

Them. The Senate is assembling again,
You Will find 'em in the Senate House.
[Exeunt.
Enter many Creditors with Bills and Papers, Re-enter Demetrius. Them. How now,
what makes this swarm of Rascals here?
Each looking big, and with the visage of demand.

1 Cred. We wait for certain sums of money due.


Them. If money were as certain as your waiting,
Why then proffered you not your Bills and Bonds
When your false Masters eat of my Lords meat?
Then they would smile and fawn upon him,
And swallow the interest down their greedy throats.

Enter Timon and Servants. Tim. If Melissa be at home, tell her I Will wait on
her suddenly.


1 Cred. Now, let us put in; my Lord, my Bill.


2 Cred. Here Is mine.


3 Cred. And mine.


4 Cred. My Master's.


Tim. Hold, hold, my wits. Knock me down;
Cleave me to the waste. What would you have, you Harpyes?

1 Cred. We ask our due.


Tim. Cut my heart in pieces and divide it.


4 Cred. My Master's is thirty Talents.


Tim. Tell it out of my blood.


2 Cred. Five thousand Crowns is mine.


Tim. Five thousand drops pays that.
What yours, and yours?

3 Cred. My Lord.


1 Cred. My Lord.


Tim. Here, take me, pull me in pieces, will you?
The gods consume, confound, and rot you all.

1 Cred. What a Devil, is he mad?


2 Cred. Mercy on us, let us be gone.


3 Cred. Let Us go, he will murder some of us.


Tim. They have even taken my breath from me. Slaves, Creditors, Dogs, preserve
my wits, you Gods.


Them. My Lord, be patient; passion mends it not.


[Lampridius crosses the stage and shuns Timon. Tim. See Lampridius, whom I
redeemed out of Prison.
His Father dead since, and he rich. Now the Villain
Shuns me.
Enter Phaeax. Oh my good Friend Phaeax.


Phaeax. Oh my Lord -- I am glad to see your Lordship.
I have a sudden occasion calls me hence,
I Will wait on you instantly.
[Ex. Phaeax.
Tim. I could not have believed this.

Enter Cleon. My Lord.


Cleon. Oh my good Lord, I am going to see
If I can serve your Lordship in the Command
I received from you by your Servant.
[Ex. Cleon.
Tim. Oh black Ingratitude! that Villain has
A Jewel at this moment on, which I presented him,
^ost me three thousand Crowns.

Them. You Will find 'em all like these.


Tim. There are not many sure so bad.
How have I loved these men, and shown 'em kindness,
As if they had been my Brothers, or my Sons!

[Enter Diphilus, seeing Timon, m^fles his face* and turns away. Look, is not
that my Servant Diphilus, whom I married to
The old Man's Daughter, and gave him an estate too;
And now he hides himself, and steals from me?
How much is a Dog more generous than a man;
Oblige him once, he will keep you Company,
Even in your utmost want and misery.
Enter Aelius. Who Is that? Aelius? my Lord -- Aelius.
Demetrius, go let him know Timon would speak
With him -- [ Them. goes to him, he turns back.
Do you not know me Aelius?
Aelius. Not know my good Lord Timon!


Tim. Think you ^ have the Plague?


Aelius. No, my Lord.


Tim. Why do you shun me then?


Aelius. I shun you? I Would serve your Lordship with my life.


Tim. I ll not believe, he who would refuse me money,
Would venture his life for me.

Aelius. I am very unfortunate not to have it in my Power
To supply you; but I am going to the Forum, to a Debtor,
If I receive any, your Lordship shall command it.

[Ex. Aelius. Tim. Had I so lately all the Caps and Knees of the Athenians,
And is it come to this? Brains hold a little.

Enter Thrasillus. Thras. Who Is there? Timon?

[runs back.
Tim. There Is another Villain.

Enter Isander. How is it Isander?


Isand. Oh Heaven! Timon!


Tim. What, did I fright you? am I become so dreadful
An Object? is poverty contagious?

Isand. Your Lordship ever shall be dear to me.
It makes me weep to think I could not serve you
When you sent your Servant. I am expected at the Senate.
I humbly ask your pardon; I Will sell all I have
But I Will supply you soon.
[Ex. Isander.
Tim. Smooth tongue, dissembling, weeping knave, farewell.
And farewell all Mankind! It shall be so -- Demetrius?
Go to all these fellows. Tell 'em I Am supplied, I have no
Need of 'em. Set out my condition to be as good
As formerly it has been. That this was but a Trial,
And invite 'em all to Dinner.

Them. My Lord, there is nothing for 'em.


Tim. I have taken order about that.


Them. What can this mean?

[Ex. Demetrius.
Tim. I have one reserve can never fail me,
And while Melissa's kind I cannot be miserable;
She has a vast fortune in her own disposal.
The Sun will sooner leave his course than she
Desert me.
Enter first Servant. Is Melissa at home?


1 Serve. She is, my Lord; but will not see you.


Tim. What does the Rascal say? Damned Villain
To belly her so?
[Strikes him.
1 Serve. By Heaven it is truth. She says she will not see you.
Her woman told me first so. And when I would not
Believe her, she came and told me so her self;
That she had no business with you; desired you would
Not trouble her; she had affairs of consequence; etc.

Tim. Now Timon thou art fallen indeed; fallen from all thy
Hopes of happiness. Earth, open and swallow the
Most miserable wretch that thou did ever bear.

Enter Melissa. 1 Serve. My Lord, Melissa's! passing by.


Tim. Oh Dear Melissa!


Mel. Is he here? what luck is this?


Tim. Will you not look on me? not see your Timon?
And did not you send me word so?

Enter Evandra. Mel. I was very busy, and am so now; I must ob^y my
Father; I am going to him.

Tim. Was it not, Melissa, said; If Timon were reduced
To rags and misery, and she were Queen of all the Universe,
She would not change her love?

Mel. We cannot command our wills;
Our fate must be obeyed.
[Ex. Mel.
Tim. Some Mountain cover me, and let my name,
My odious name be never heard of more.
O straggling Senses whither are you going?
Farewell, and may we never meet again.
Evandra! how does the sight of her perplex me!
I Have been ungrateful to her, why should I
Blame Villains who are so to me?

Evan. O^ Timon! I have heard and felt all thy afflictions;
I thought I never should have seen thee more;
Nor ever would, had thou continued prosperous.
Let false Melissa basely fly from thee,
Evandra is not made of that course stuff.

Tim. Oh turn thy eyes from an ungrateful man!


Evan. No, since I first beheld my adored Timon,
They have been fixed upon thee present, and when absent
I Have each moment viewed thee in my mind,
And shall they now remove?

Tim. Will thou not fly a wretched Caitif? who
Has such a load of misery beyond
The strength of humane nature to support?

Evan. I am no base Athenian Parasite,
To fly from thy Calamities; I Will help to bear 'em.

Tim. Oh my Evandra, they are not to be born.
Accursed Athens! Forest of two legged Beasts;
Plague, civil War, and famine, be thy lot:
Let propagation cease, that none of thy
Confounding spurious brood may spring
To infect and damn succeeding Generations;
May every I^fant like the Viper g^aw
A passage through his mothers cursed Womb;
And kill the hag, or if they fail of it,
May then the Mothers like fell ravenous Bitches
Devour their own base Whelps.

Evan. Timon! compose thy thoughts, I know thy wants,
And that thy Creditors like wild Beasts wait
To prey upon thee; and base Athens has
To its eternal Infamy deserted thee.
But thy unwearied bounty to Evandra
Has so enriched her, she in wealth can vie
With any of the extorting Senators,
And comes to lay it all at thy feet.

Tim. Thy most amazing generosity o'rewhelms me;
It covers me all over with shame and blushes.
Thou have obliged a wretch too much already,
And I have used thee ill for it; fly, fly, Evandra!
I have rage and madness, and I shall infect thee.
Earth! take me to thy Center; open quickly!
Oh that the World were all on fire!

Evan. Oh my dear Lord! this sight will break my heart;
Take comfort to you, let your Creditors
Swallow their maws full; we have yet enough,
Let us retire together and live free
From all the smiles and frowns of humane kind;
I shall have all I wish for, having thee.

Tim. My senses are not sound, I never can
Deserve thee: I Have used thee scurvily.

Evan. No, my dear Timon, thou have not.
Comfort thy self, if thou have been unkind,
Forgive thy self and I forgive thee for it.

Tim. I never will;
Nor will I be obliged to one,
I have treated so injuriously as her --
[Aside.
Evan. Pray, my Lord, go home; strive to compose
Your self. All that I have was and is yours; I wish
It never had been, that yet I might have shown
By stronger proofs how much I love my Timon.

Tim. Most Excellent of all the whole Creation,
Thou art too good that thou should e're partake
Of my misfortunes --
And I am resolved not to involve her in 'em. [Aside.
Prithee Evandra go to thy own House,
I am on^e more to give my flattering Rogues
An entertainment but such a one as shall befit 'em;
And then I Will see thee.

Evan. Heaven ever bless my Dear.


[Ex. Timon and Evandra. Enter Phaeax, Cleon, Isander, Isidore, Thrasillus,
Aelius. Phae. I think my honorable Lord did but try us.


Cleon. On my life it was no more. His Steward assured
Me hi^ condition was near as good as ever.

Isand. That I doubt -- but it is well at present
By his new feasting.

Aelius. I am sorry I was not furnished when he sent to me.


Isid. I am sick of that grief, now I see how all things go.


Enter Timon and Attendants. Tim. Oh! my kind friends! how is it with you all?
How I rejoice to see you! Come, serve in Dinner.

Phaeax. My noble Lord! never so well as when your
Lordship is so.

Aelius I am sick with shame that I
Should be so unfortunate a Beggar when you sent to me.

Tim. No more, no more, I did but make Trial: I have
No need of any sums; my Estate is in good health still.

Phaeax. Trial my good Lord? Would any one refuse
Your Lordship were it in his power? Command half
My estate! I am sorry I was so in have, I could
Not stay to tell you this. I have received Bills even now.
Pray use me -- I hope he will not take me at my word.
[aside
Isan. Take it not unkindly, my good Lord, that I could
Not ^ve you. Now my Lord command me -- I am able.

Tim. I beseech you do not think on it: I know ye love me,
All of ye.

Phaeax. Equal with our selves, my dear Lord.


Thra. If you had sent but two hours before to me? --


Cleon. Now I have money, pray command it.


Tim. No more, for Heav'^s sake; think you I distrust
My kind good friends! you are the best of friends.
My fortune never shall drive me from you, and should
Mine fail, which I hope it never will,
I know I may command all yours.

Phaeax. I shall think my self happy enough if you would
But command my utmost Dram.

Aelius. That were honor indeed; to serve Lord Timon,
I would with life and fortune.

Isan. Alas! who would not be proud of it?


Isid. Not a man in Athens.


Cleon. There Is no foot of my Estate your Lordship
May not call your own.

Thra. Nor mine, my noble Lord.


Tim. Thanks to my worthy friends. Who h^s such
Kind, such hearty friends as I have?

Aelius. All covered Dishes.


Isan. Royal cheer I warrant you.


Phaeax. Doubt not of that; if money or the season
Can afford it.

Isid. The same good Lord still.


Tim. Come, my worthy Friends, let us sit! make it
Not a City feast, to let the meat cool e're we agree
Upon our places.

The GRACE.
You great Benefactors, make your selves praised for your own gifts, base
ungrateful man will not do it of himself; reserve still to give, lest your
Deities be despised; were* your Godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake
ye: make the meat beloved more than the man that gives it. Let no Assembly of
twenty be without a score of Villains. If there be twelve women, let a dozen
of them be.... as they are. Confound I beseech you, all the Senators of Athens,
together with the common people. What is amiss make fit for destruction* for
these my present friends, as they are to me nothing so in nothing bless them,
and to nothing are they welcome, but Toads and Snakes: A feast fit for such
venomous Knaves.

Phaeax. What does he mean?


Aelius. He Is mad I think.


Tim. May you a better feast never behold.
You knot of mouth friends, vapors, lukewarm Knaves;
Most smiling, smooth detested Parasites,
Courteous destroyers, affable Wolves, meek Bears,
You Fools of Fortune, Trencher Friends, Time Flies,
Cap and knee Slaves; an everlasting Leprosy
Crust you quite over; what, do thou steal away?
Soft, take thy Physic first, and thou, and thou; stay I will
Lend thee money -- borrow none.

Phaeax. What means your Lordship? I Will be gone.


Cleon. And I. He Will murder us.


Aelius. This is raging madness; fly, fly.

[They run off.
Tim. What all in motion! henceforth be no feast,
Whereat a Villain's not a welcome guest.
Burn House, sink Athens, henceforth hated be
Of Timon, man and all humanity.
[Ex. Timon.
ACT IV.
Timon Solus. Tim. LET me look back upon thee! Oh thou wall
That girdlest in those Wolves! Sink in the Earth,
And fence not Athens longer; that vile Den
Of savage Beasts; ye Matrons all turn Whore^;
Obedience fail in Children; Slaves and Fools
Pluck the grave wrinkled Senate from the Bench,
And minister in their ^ead. To general filths
Convert of the instant green Virginity;
Do It in their Parents Eyes. Bankrupts hold fast,
Rather than render back, out with your Knives,
And cut your Trusters Throats. Bound Servants steal;
Large handed Robbers your grave Masters are,
And pill by law. Maid to thy Masters Bed,
Mistress to the Brothel. Son of twenty one,
Pluck the lined Crutch from thy old limping Sire:
And with it beat his brains out. Piety, Fear,
Religion to the Gods; Peace, Justice, Truth,
Domestic awe, night rest, and neighborhood,
Instruction, Manners, Mysteries and Trades,
Degrees, Observations, Customs and Laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries;
And let confusion live. Plagues incident to men,
Your potent and infectious feavours heap
On Athens ripe for vengeance. Cold Sciatica
Criple the Senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their manners. Lust and Liberty
Creep in the minds and marrows of your youth;
That against the stream of virtue they may strive
And drown themselves in riot. Itches, blains,
Sow all the A^henians bosoms, and their Crop
Be general Leprosy. Breath infect breath;
That their Society as their friendship, may
Be merely poison. Nothing, nothing I bear from thee:
Fa^ewel. thou most detested Town, and sudden
Rui^e swallow thee.
[Ex. Tim.
Scene the Senate House, all the Senate sitting -- Alcibiades. Nic. How dare
you, Alcibiades,
Knowing your Sentence not recalled, venture hither?

Alcib. You see my reverend Lords what confidence*
I place in you, that durst expose my person
Before my sentence be recalled: I am not now
Petitioner for my self; I leave my case
To your good and generous natures, when you shall
Think I Have deserved your favor for my service.
I am an humble Suitor to your virtue,
For mercy is the virtue of the Law,
And none but Tyrants use it cruelly:
It Is for a Gallant Officer of mine;
As brave a man as e're drew Sword for Athens.
It Is Thrasibulus, who in heat of blood,
Has stepped into the Law above his depth.

Nic. True, he has killed a man.


Alcib. I Have been before the Areopagus, and they refuse
All mercy. He is a man (setting his Fate aside) of comely
Virtues, nor did he soil the fact with Cowardice;
But with a noble fury did revenge
His injured reputation.

Phaeax. You strive to make an ugly deed look fair.


Nic. As if you would bring manslaughter into form,
And valor did consist in quarrelling.

Aelius. That is a base and illegitimate valor:
He Is truly valiant that can wisely suffer.

Isan. All single Combats are detestable,
And courage that is not warranted by law,
Is much too dangerous a vice to go unpunished.

Isid. If injuries be evil, death is most ill,
And then what folly is it for the less ill
To hazard life the chiefest good?

Cleon. There Is no such courage as in bearing wrong.


Alcib. If there be such valor in bearing, what
Do we abroad? Women are then more valiant
That stay at home. And the Ass a better Captain
Than is the Lion. The Malefactor that is
Laden with Irons, wiser than the Judge.

Nic. You cannot make gross sins look clean
With eloquence.

Alcib. Why do fond men expose themselves to Battle,
And not endure all threats, and sleep upon them,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats?
Come my Lords -- be pitiful and good.

Nic. He that is more merciful than Law, is cruel.


Alcib. The utmost law is downright Tyranny:
To kill I grant is the extremest guilt,
But in defense of Honor.

Phae. Honor! is any Honor to be fought for
But the Honor of our Country?

Alcib. Who will not fight for's own, will never fight
For that: Let him that has no anger judge him;
How many in their anger would commit
This Captains fault -- had they but courage for it?

Cleon. You speak in vain.


Alcib. If you will not excuse his Crime, consider
Who he is, and what he has done;
His service at Lacedaemon and Byzantium,
Are bribes sufficient for his Life.

Nic. He did his duty, and was rewarded with
His pay, and if he had not done it, he should
Be punished.

Alcib. How my Lords! is that all the return
For Soldiers toils, fasting and watching;
The many cruel ^ardships which they suffer;
The multitude of hazards, blood, and loss
Of Limbs?

Is^n. Come, you urge it too far, he dies.


Alcib. He has slain in fight hundreds of E^emies.
How full of valor did he bear himself
In the last conflict! what death and wounds he gave!

Isid. H'has given too many.


Aelius. He is a known Rioter, he has a fin
That often drowns him; in that beastly fury
He has committed outrages.

Phae. Such as we shall not name, since others were
Concerned in 'em, you know.

Nic. In short,
His days are foul, and nights are dangerous;
And he must die.

Alcib. Hard Fate! he might have died nobly in fight,
And done you service: if not for his deserts;
Con^der all my actions Lords, and join 'em
With his -- your reverend Ages love security,
And therefore should cherish those that give it you.

Phae. You are too bold -- he dies. No more --


Alcib. Too bold, Lord! do you know who I am?


Cleon. What says he?


Alcib. Call me to your remembrances.


Isan. Consider well the place, and who we are?


Alcib. I cannot think but you have forgotten me.
Must I sue for such common grace,
And be denied? my wounds ache at you!

Nic. You Are insolent! we have not forgotten yet
Your riot and destructive Vices; whoredo^s,
Profaneness, giddy headed passions.

Phae. Your breaking Mercury's Statues, and mocking
The mysteries of sacred Proserpine.

Alcib. Insolent! now you provoke me. I am vexed to see
Your private malice vented in a place
Where honest men would only think
On public Interest. It Is base, and in another place
You would not speak thus.*

Nic. How say you!


Alcib. I thought the Images of Mercury had only been
The Favorites of the Rabble, and the rites of
Proserpine: These things are mockery to men
O^*sence. What folly it is to worship Statues when
You Would kick the Rogues that made 'em!

Phae* How dare you talk thus? you have been a Rebel?


Alcib. Could any but the basest of mankind
Urge that to me by whom he keeps that head
That utters this against me? my Rebellion!
It was against the common people. And you all
Are Rebels against them.

Nic. Cease your Insolence! we sided not with Spartans.


Alcib. What means had I to humble the Athenian
Rabble but that?

Phae. It was well done to get your friend King Agis
His Wif^ with Child in his absence.

Alci^. He was a Blockhead, and I mended his breed for him.
But what is that to'th' matter now in hand?
You have provoked me (...), and I must (...) yo^,
It is by me you sit in safety ^ere.

Phae. By you, bold man?


Alcib. Yes by me! fearful man!
You have incensed me now beyond all patience,
And I must tell you what ye owe me, Lords.
'Twas I that kept great Tissaphern^s from
The Spartans aid, by which Athens by this
Had been one heap of Rubbish, I stopped
A hundred and fifty Galleys from Phoenicia,
Which would have fallen upon you: 'Twas I made
This Tissaphernes, Athens Friend, upon condition
That they would awe the common people, and take
The Government into the best men's hands;
Would you were so; I sent Pisander then
To form this Aristocracy, and promised
The Persian Generals Forces to assist you;
And when you had this power, you ^ast me off
That got it you.

Nic. My Lords! let him be ^lenc'd;
Shall he thus beard the Senate?

Alcib. I will be heard, and then your pleasure Lords.
Did not your Army in the Isle of Samos,
Offendeda at your Government, choose me General?
And would have marched to your de^truction,
Which I diverted? in that time your Foes
Would soon have ^on the Count^y of Ionia,
Of the Hellespont and all the other ^es,
While you had been ^ploy'd ^t home
With Civil Wars. I kept some back by force,
And by fair words others, in which (...),
This man of Stiria, whom you thus conde^,
Having the loudest voi^e of all the Athe^ians
Employed by me, cried out to all the Army;
And thus we kept 'em from you, Lords, and now
Athens a second time was saved by me.

Phae. It Is a shame that we should suffer this!


Alcib. It Is a shame these things are unrewarded.
Another time I kept five hundred Sail
Of the Phenicians from the aid
Of the Lacedaemonians, won from 'em a Sea Battle,
Before the City of Abidus;
In spite of Pharnabazus mighty Power.
Think on my Victory all Cizicum, where I
Slew Mendorus in the Field, and took the City;
I brought then the Bythinians to your yoke,
Won Silibraea on the Hellespont;
And then Byzantium: thus not only I
Diverted the Torrent of the Armies fury
From you, but turned it on the Enemies,
And all the while you safely told your money,
And let it out upon extorted Interest;
Must I be after all poorly denied
His life who has so often ventured it for you?

Phae. He dies, and you deserve it, but our sentence*
Is for your insolence, we banish you;
If you be two hours more within these wall^,
Your head is forfeited. Do you all consent?

All Sen. All, All!


Alcib. All, all! I am glad I know you all!
Banish me! Banish your dotage! your extortion!
Banish your foul corruptions and self ends!
Oh the base Spirit of a Commonwealth!
One Tyrant is much better than four hundred;
The worst of Kings would be ashamed of this:
I am only rich in my large hurts from you.
Is this the Balsome the ill natured Senate
Pours into Captains wounds? ha! banishment?
A good man would not stay with you, I embrace*
My Sentence: It Is a cause that is worthy of me.
[Ex. Alcib.
Nic. Was ever -- heard such daring insolence?
Shall we break up the Senate?

All Sen. Ay, Ay*


Timon in the Woods digging. Tim. O blessed breeding Sun, draw from the Fens,
The Bogs and muddy Marshes, and from
Corrupted standing Lakes, rotten humidity
Enough to infect the Air with dire consuming Pestilence,
And let the poisonous exhalations fall
Down on the Athenians; they are all flatterers,
And so is all mankind.
For every degree of fortune's smoothed
And soothed by that below it; the learned pate
Ducks to the golden Fool; There Is nothing level
In our conditions, but base Villainy;
Therefore be abhorred each man and all Society;
Earth yields me roots; thou common whore of mankind,
That put'st such odds amongst the rout of Nations;
I Will make thee do thy right office. Ha, what is here?
Gold, yellow, glittering precious gold! enough
To purchase my estate again: Let me see further;
What a vast mass of Treasure's here! There ly,
I will use none, 'twill bring me flatterers.
I Will send a pattern on it to the Athenians,
And let 'em know what a vast Mass I Have found,
Which I Will keep from 'em. I think I see a Passenger
Not far off, I Will send it by him to the Senate.
[Ex. Timon.
Enter Evandra. Evan. How long shall I seek my unhappy Lord?
But I will find him or will lose my life.
Oh base and shameful Villainy of man,
Amongst so many thousands he has obliged,
Not one would follow him in his afflictions!
Ha! here is a Spade! sure this belongs to some one*
Who Is not far off, I will enquire of him.

Enter Timon. Tim. Who Is there? what beast art thou that com'^t
To trouble me?

Evan. Pray do not hurt me. I am come to seek
The poor distressed Timon, did you see him?

Tim. If thou be'st born of wicked humane race,
Why come thou hither to disturb his mind?
He has forsworn all Company!

Evan. Is this my Lord! oh dreadful transformation!
My dearest Lord, do you not know me?

Tim. Thou walk'st upon two legs, and have a face
Erect toward Heaven; and all such Animals
I have abjured; they are not honest,
Those Creatures that are so, walk on all four,
Prithee be gone.

Evan. He Is much distracted sure? Have you forgotten
Your poor Evandra?

Tim. No! I remember there was such a one,
Whom I used ill! why do thou follow misery?
And add to it? prithee be gone.

Evan. These cruel words will break my heart, I come
Not to increase thy misery but mend it.
Ah, my dear Timon, why this Slave-like habit?
And why this Spade?

Tim. It Is to dig roots, and earn my dinner with.


Evan. I have converted part of my estate
To money and to Jewels, and have brought 'em
To lay 'em at thy feet, and the remainder
Thou soon shall have.

Tim. I will not touch 'em; no, I shall be flattered.


Evan. Comfort thy self and quit this savage life;
We have enough in spite of all the baseness
Of the Athenians, let not those Slaves
Triumph over thy afflictions; we will live free.

Tim. If thou disswad'st me from this life, Thou hat'st me;
For all the Principalities on earth,
I would not change this Spade! prithee be gone,
Thou tempt'st me but in vain.

Evan. Be not so cruel.
Nothing but death shall ever take me from thee.

Tim. I Will never change my life: what would thou
Do with me?

Evan. I Would live the same: Is there a time or place,
A temper or condition I would leave
My Timon in?

Tim. You must not stay with me?


Evan. Oh too unkind!
I offered thee all my prosperity --
And thou most niggardly deniest me part
Of thy Afflictions.

Tim. Ah soft Evandra! is not the bleak Air
Too boisterous a Chamberlain for thee?
Or do thou think these reverend trees that have
Outlived the Raven, will be Pages to thee?
And skip where thou appoint'st 'em? Will the Brook
Candid with Morning Ice, be Caudle to thee?

Evan. Thou will be all to me.


Tim. I am savage as a Satyr, and my temper
Is much unsound, my brain will be distracted.

Evan. Thou will be Timon still, that is all I ask.


Tim. It was a comfort to me when I thought
That thou were prosperous; Thou art too good
To suffer with me the rough boisterous weather,
To mortify thy self with roots and water,
'Twill kill thee* Prithee be gone.

Evan. To Death if you command.


Tim. I have forsworn all humane conversation.


Evan. And so have I but thine.


Tim. 'Twill then be misery indeed to see
Thee bear it.

Evan. On my knees I beg it.
If thou refusest me, I Will kill my self.
I swear by all the Gods.

Tim. Rise my Evandra!
I now pronounce to all the world, there is
One woman honest; if they ask me more
I will not grant it: Come, my dear Evandra,
I Will show thee wealth enough I found with digging,
To purchase all my land again, which I
Will hide from all mankind.

Evan. Put all my Gold and Jewels to it.


Tim. Well said Evandra! look, here is enough
To make black white, foul fair, wrong right;
Base noble, old young, Cowards valiant.
Ye God^ here is enough to lug your Priests
And Servants from your Altars. This thing can
Make the Hoar'd Lepros^e adored, place Thieves
And give 'em title, knee and approbation;
This makes the toothless, warped and withered Widows
Marry again. This can embalm and sweeten
Such as the Spittle-House and ulcerous Creatures
Would cast the gorge at: this can defile
The purest Bed, and make divorce 'twixt Son
And Father, Friends and Kindred, all So^iety;
Can bring up new Religions, and kill Kings.

Evan. Let the Earth that breeds it, hide it, there 'twill
Sleep, and do no hired mischief.

Tim. Now Earth for a root.


Evan. *It Is her unfathomed Womb teems and feeds all,
And of such vile corrupting mettle, as
Man, her proud arrogant -- Child is made of, does
Engender black Toads, and Adders blue, the gilded Newt
And eye-less venomed worm, with all
The loathsome Births the quickening Sun does shine on.

Tim. Yield him, who all thy humane Sons does hate,
From out thy plenteous bosom some poor roots;
Sear up thy fertile Womb to all things else;
Dry up thy marrow, thy Veins, thy Tilth and pasture,
Whereof ungrateful man with liquorish draughts
And unctuous morsels greases his pure mind,
That from it all consideration slips.
But hold a while -- I am faint and weary,
My tender hands not u^ (...) to toil* (...) (...)

Evan. Repose y^ (...) (...) (...) love (...) -- your head
Upon my lap, and when thou have refres^t
Thy self, I Will gather Fruits and Berries for thee.

Enter Apemantus. Tim. More Plague! more man! retire into my Cave.


[Ex. Evan. Apem I was directed hither, men report
That thou affect'st my manners, and do use 'em.

Tim. It Is then because I would not keep a Dog
Should imitate thee.

Apem. This is in thee a nature but infected*
A poor unmanly melancholy, sprung
From change of fortune* Why this Spade? this place?
This slave-like Habit, and these looks of care?
Thy sordid (...) (...) wear silk, lie soft,
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgotten
That ever Timon (...) Shome ^ot these woods,
By putting on the cunning of a Carper.
Be thou a flatt'rer now and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee. Hinge thy knee,
And let each Great (...) breath blow off thy Cap.
Praise his most monstrous deformities*
And call his foulest Vices excellent.
Thou were used thus.

Tim. Do thou love to hear thy self prate?


Apem. No; but thou should hear me speak.


Tim. I hate the sp^ch* and spit at thee.


Apem. Do not assume my likeness to disgrace it.


Tim. Were I like thee, I Would use the Copy
As the Original should be used.

Apem. How should it be used?


Tim. ^t should be hanged.


Apem. Before thou w^rt ^ Mad*man, now a Fool;
Art thou proud still? call any of those Creatures
Whose naked (...) live in all the spite
Of angry (...), whose (...) un-housed trunks
To the conflicting Elemen^s exposed,
Answer mee^ Nature, bid 'em (...) the,
And thou sh^lt fi^ --

Tim. An A^ of thee --


Apem. I love thee better now than e're I did --


Tim. I hate thee worse --


Apem. Why so?


Tim. Thou flatterest misery.


Apem. I flatter not, but ^ay thou art ^ Wretch --


Tim. Why do thou seek me out?


Apem. Perhaps to vex thee.


Tim. Always a Villains office or a Fools.


Apem. If thou do^ put on this sour life and habit
To castigate thy Pride, 'twere well, but thou
Do it infor^'dly, were (...) ^ot a Beggar,
Thou'd'st be a Cou^er again.

Tim. Slave thou ly'^t, it is next thee the la^t thing
Which I would be on earth.

Apem. How much does willing poverty ex^l
Uncertain pomp! for this is ^ing still,
Never complete, that always at high wish;
But thou have a contentless wretched being,
Thou shou'd'st desire to die being ^serable.

Tim. Not by his advice that is more miserable.


Apem. I am contented with my poverty*


Tim. Thou lie. Thou would not (...) so if thou we^.
But it is a burden that is light to thee,
For thou have been always used to carry it.
Thou art a thing whom For^es (...) (...)
With favor never cla^pt, but b^d a Dog;
Had thou like me from thy first swa^h (...)
To all the sweet, degrees, that this brief world
Afforded me; thou wou'd'st ^ave plunged thy self
I^ general riot, melted down thy youth
I^ different Beds of lust, and (...) learned
The Icy precep^s of Mor^lity,
But had pursued the ^lluring game before thee.

Apem. Thou lie -- I would have lived (...) as ^ do^


Tim. Poor Slave! thou do not know thy self! thou well
Can bear what thou have been bred to;
But for me, who had the world as my Confectionary,
The Tongues, the Eyes, the Ears, the (...) of all men,
At duty more than I could frame Employments for,
That numberless upon me stuck as leaves
Upon the Oak, they'ave with one Winters brush
Fallen from their boughs and left me open, (...)
To every storm that blows: for me to bear this
Who never knew but better, is a great (...);
Thy nature did commence in suff'^ance. Time
Has made thee hard in it. Why should thou hate me^?
They never flattered thee: If thou will Curse,
Curse then thy Father who in spite put stuff
To some She-Beggar, and compounded thee,
A poor Hereditary Rogue.

Apem. Poor As^!
The middle of humanity thou never
Did know, but the extremity of both ends;
When thou were in thy gilt and thy perfumes,
Men mocked thee for thy too much curio^ity;
Thou in thy rags k^ow'st none.

Tim. Be gone thou tedious prating Fool.
That the whole life of Athens were in this
One root, thus would I ^at it.

Apem. I Will mend thy Fea^t.


Tim. Mend my condition, take thy self away.


Ap^. What would thou have to Athens?


Tim. Thee thither in a Whirlwind.


Apem. When I have nothing else to do, I Will see thee again.


Tim. If there were nothing living but thy self,
Thou should not even then be welco^e to me;
I h^d r^ther be a Beggars Dog t^an (...).

Apem. Tho^ art a (...) Fool.


Tim. Would thou were clean enough to spit upon.


Apem. Thou art too ^d to Curse: no mi^ry
That I could wi^ thee but thou have already.

Tim. Be gone thou Issue of a Mangy Dog.
I swoun to see thee.

Apem. Would thou would burst.


Tim. Away, thou tedious Rogue, or I will cleave thy scull.


Apem. Farewell Beast.


Tim. Be gone Toad.


Apem. The Athenians report thou have found a Mass
Of Treasure; they will find thee out: The plague
Of Company light on thee.

Tim. Slave! Dog! Viper! out of my sight. [Ex. Apem.
Choler will kill me if I see mankind!
Come forth Evandra? Thou art kind and good.
Enter Evandra. Can thou eat roots and drink at that fresh spring?
Our feasting's come to this.

Evan. Whatever I eat
Or drink with thee is feast enough to me;
Would thou compose thy thoughts and be content,
I should be happy.

Tim. Let Us quench ou^ thirst at yonder murmuring Brook,
And then repose a while.
[Exeunt.
Enter Poet, Painter and Musician. Poet. As I took note of the place it cannot
be far off,
Where he abides.

Mus. Does the rumor hold for certain, that he is so full of Gold?


Poet. It Is true! H' has found an infinite store of Gold,
He has sent a Pattern of it to the Senate;
You will see him a Palm again in A^hens,
And flourish with the highest of 'em all.
Therefore it is fit in this supposed distress,
We tender all our services to him --

Paint. If the report be true we shall succeed.


Mus. If we should not --


Re-enter Timon and Evandra. Poet. We Will venture our joint labors. Yo^ is he,
I know by the description.

Mus. Let Us hide our selves and see how he will take it.


[A Symphony. Evan. Here Is Music in the Woods, whence comes it?


Tim. From flattering Rogues who have heard that I
Have Gold; but that their disappointment would be greater,
In taking pains for naught, I Would send 'em back --

Poet. Hail-worthy Timon --


Mus. Our most noble Master --


Paint. My most excellent Lord.


Tim. Have I once lived to see three honest men?


Poet. Having so often tasted of your bounty,
And hearing you were retired, your friends fallen off,
For whose ungrateful natures we are grieved,
We come to do you service.

Mus. We are not of so base a mold; we should
Desert our noble Patron!

Tim. Most honest men! oh, how shall I requite you?
Can you eat roots, and drink cold water?

Poet. Whatever we can, we will to do you service.


Tim. Good men! come you are honest, you have heard
That I have gold enough! speak truth, you are honest.

Poet. So it is said: but therefore came not we.


Mus. Not we my Lord.


Paint. We thought not of it.


Tim. You are good men, but have one monstrous fault.


Poet. I beseech your honor, what is it?


Tim. Each of you trusts a damned notorious Knave.


Paint. Who is that, my Lord?


Tim. Why one another, and each trusts himself.
Ye base Knaves, Tripartite! begone! make haste!
Or I will use you so like Knaves.
[He stones 'em.
Poet. Fly, fly, --

[All run out.
Tim. How sick am I of this false World? I Will now
Prepare my Grave, to lie where the light foam
Of the outrageous Sea may wash my Corpse.

Evan. My dearest Timon, do not talk of Death;
My Life and thine together must determine.

Tim. There is no rest without it; prithee leave
My wretched Fortun^, and live long and happy,
Without thy Timon. There is wealth enough.

Evan. I have no wealth but thee, let us lie down to rest;
I am very faint and heavy --
[They lie down.
Enter Melissa and Chl^e. Mel. Let the Chariot stay there.
It is most certain he has found a Mass of money,
And he has sent word to the Senate he is richer than ever.

Chlo. Sure were he rich, he would appear again.


Mel. If he be, I doubt not but with my love I Will charm
Him back to Athen^, 'twas my d^serting him has
Made him thus Melancholy.

Chlo. If he be not, you will promise love in vain.


Mel. ^f he be not, my promise shall be vain;
For I Will be sure to break it: Thus you saw
When Alcibiades was ba^ish'd last,
I would not see him; I am always true
To interest and to my self. There Lord Timon lies!

Tim. What wretch a^t thou come to disturb me?


Mel. I am one that loves thee so, I cannot lose thee.
I am gotten from my Father and my Friends,
To call thee back to Athens, and her arms
Who cannot live without thee.

Evan. It is Melissa! pri^hee listen not
To her d^structive Sirens voi^.

Tim. Fear not.


Mel. Do^t thou not know thy dear Melissa?
To whom thou ma^'st such vows!

Tim. O yes, I know that piece of vanity,
That frail, proud, inconstant foolish thing.
I do remember once upon a time,
She swore eternal love to me, soon after
She would not see me, shunned me, s^ghted me.

Mel. Ah now I see thou never lov'd^t me Timon,
That was a trial which I made of thee,
To find if thou did love me, if thou had
Thou (...) ^ave (...) ^ loved thee ^hen ^ch more
Tha^ ^ll the World -- bu^ t^ou (...) (...) I (...),
And any little change can drive thee from me,
And thou will leave me miserable.

Evan. Mind not that Crocodiles tears,
She would betray thee.

Mel. I^ there no truth among Mankind? had I
So much ingratitude, I had left
Thy fallen fortune, and never seen thee more:
Ah Timon! could thou have been kind, I ^ould
Rather have begged with thee, than have enjoyed
With any other all the Pomp of Gr^;
But thou ^rt lost ^d have forgotten all thy Oaths.

Evan. Why should you strive to inv^de another right?
He Is mine, for ever mine: The (...)
Shall keep him from thee.

Mel. Thine! poor mean Fool! ^s marriage made him so?
No, -- Thou art his Co^, di^st thing;
I would enjoy him honestly.

Tim. Peace, screech Owl: There is much more ho^y
In this one woman (...) in all thy Sex
Blended togethe^; our hearts are on^;
And she is mine for ever: were thou the Queen
Of all the Universe, I would ^ot change her for thee.

Evan. Oh my dear Lord! this is a better ^ordial
Than all the World c^ give.

Tim. False! pro^d! affec^d! vai^ fantastic thing;
Be go^e, I would not see thee, u^less I were
A Basil (...): thou ^st'st that thou art honest of thy Body,
As if the Body made one honest: Thou have a vile
Corrupted filthy mind --

Mel. I am no Whore as she is.


Tim. Thou lie, she is none: But thou a^t one in thy Soul:
Be gone, or thou'^ pr^ke me to do a thing (...),
And beat thee (...).

Mel. Farewell Beast. --

[Ex. M^l. ^d Chlo.
Evan. Let me kiss thy hand my ^st Lord,
If it were possible more (...) (...) ever.

Tim. Let Us now go seek some rest within my Cave,
If any we can have without the Grave.
[Exeunt.
ACT V.
Enter Timon and Evandra. Tim. NOW after all the ^ollies of this life,
Timon has made his everlasting Mansion;
Upon the beached Verge of the Salt Flood;
Where every day the swelling Surge shall wash him;
There he shall rest from all the Villainies,
Betraying smiles, or th'oppressi^g frowns
Of proud and impotent Man.

Evan. Speak not of death, I cannot lose thee yet,
Throw off this dire consuming Melancholy.
Oh could thou love as I do, thou'd'st not have
Another wish but me. There is no state on Earth
Which I can envy while I Have thee within
These Arms -- take comfort to thee, think not yet
Of Death -- leave not Evandra yet.

Tim. Think thou in Death we shall not think,
And know, and love, better than we can here?
Oh yes, Evandra! There our Happiness
Will be without a wish -- I feel my long sickness
Of health and living now begin to mend,
And nothing will bring me all things: thou Evandra
Art the thing alone on Earth would make me wish
To play my part upon the troublesome Stage,
Where folly, madness, ^alshood, and cruelty,
Are the only actions represented.

Evan* That I have loved my Ti^ faithfully
Without one erring thought, the Gods can witness;
And as my life was true, my death shall be,
If I one minute after thee survive,
The scorn and infamy of all my Sex
Light on me, and may I live to be
Melissa's Slave.

Tim. Oh my adored Evandra!
Thy kindness covers me with shame and grief,
I have deserved so little from thee;
Were not for thee I Would wish the World on Fire.

Enter Nicias, Phaeax, Isidore, Isander, Cleon, Thrasillus, and Aelius. More
Plagues yet!

Nici. How does the Worthy Timon?
It grieves our hearts to see thy low condition,
And we are come to mend it.

Phaeax. We and the Athenians cannot live without thee,
Cast from thee this sad grief, most noble Timon,
The Senators of Athens greet thee with
Their love, and do with one consenting voice
Entreat thee back to Athens.

Tim. I thank 'em and would send 'em back the Plague,
Could I but catch it for 'em.

Aelius. The Gods forbid, they love thee most sincerely.


Tim. I will return 'em the same love they bear me.


Nic. Forget, most noble Timon: they are sorry
They should deny thee thy request; they do
Confess their fault; the public body
Which seldom does recant, confesses it.

Cleon. And has sent us --


Tim. A very scurvy sample of that Body.


Phaeax. Oh my good Lord! we have ever loved you best
Of all mankind.

Thras. And equal with our selves.


Isid. Our h^arts and souls were ever fixed upon thee.


Isan. We would stake our lives for you.


Phae. We are all grieved to think you should
So mis-interpret our best loves.

Cleon. Which shall continue ever firm to you.


Tim. Good men, you much surprise me, even to tears;
Lend me a Fools heart and Women's eyes,
And I Will beweep these Comforts, worthy Lords.

Nic. We beg your honor will interpret fairly.


Phae. The Senate has reserved some special dignities
Now vacant, to confer on you. They pray
You will return, and be their Captain,
Allowed with absolute Command.

Nic. Wild Alcibiades approaches Athens
With all his force; and like a Savage Bear
Roots up his Countries peace; we humbly beg
Thy just assistance.

Phae. We all know you are worthy,
And have obliged thy Country heretofore
Beyond return.

Aelius. Therefore, good noble Lord.


Tim. I tell you Lords,
If Alcibiades kill my Countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not: But if he sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by the Beards,
Giving up purest Virgins to the stain
Of beastly mad-brain'd War; Then let him know,
In pity of the aged and the young,
I cannot choose but tell him that I care not,
And let him take it at worst; for their Swords care not*
While you have throats to answer: for my self
There Is not a Knife in all the unruly Camp,
B^t I do love and value more than the
Most reverent Throat in Athens, tell 'em so!
Be Alcibiades your Plague, ungrateful Villains.

Phae. Oh my good Lord, you think too hardly of us.


Aelius. Hang him! there is no hopes of him*


Nic. He Will never return; he truly is Misanthropos.


Phae. You have gold my Lord, will you not serve
Your Country with some of it?

Tim. Oh my dear Country! I do recant,
^ommend me kindly to the Senate, tell 'em
(...) they will come all in one Body to me,
And follow my advice, they shall be welcome.

Nic. I am sure they will, my noble Lord.


Tim. I will instruct 'em how to ease their griefs;
Their fears of Hostile strokes* their Aches, Losses,
Their covetous pangs, with other incident throes
That Natures fragil Vessels must sustain
In life's uncertain Voyage.

Phae. How my good Lord! this kind care is noble.


Tim. Why even thus --
I will point out the most convenient Trees
In all this Wood, to hang themselves upon.
And so farewell, ye Covetous fawning Slaves be gone!
Let me not see the face of man more, I
Had rather see a Tiger fasting --

Nic. He Is lost to all our purposes.


Phae. Let Us send a party out of* Athens to him,
To force him to confess his Treasure;
And put him to the torture, if he will not.

Nic. It will do well, let us away.

[Drums.
Aelius. What Drums are those?


Phae. They must belong to Alcibiades!
To Horse and fly, or we shall chance be taken.
[Exeunt.
Tim. Go fly, Evandra, to my Cave, or thou
May suffer by the rage of lustful Villains.

Enter Alcibiades with Phryne and Thais, two Whores. Al^i. Command a halt, and
send a Messenger
To summon Athens from me!
What art thou there? speak.

Tim. A two legged Beast, as thou art, Cankers gnaw thee
For showing me the face of man again.

Alci. Is man so hateful to thee! what art thou?


Tim. I am Misanthropos! I hate Mankind:
And for thy part, I wish thou were a Dog,
That I might love thee something.
But now I think on it, thou art going
Against yo^ Cursed Town: go on! it is
A worthy cause.

Alci. Oh Timon! now I know thee, I am sorry
For thy misfortunes; and hope a little time
Will give me occasion to redress 'em.

Tim. I will not alter my condition
For all you e're shall Conquer; no, go on,
Paint with man's blood the Earth: die it well.
Religious Canons, civil laws are cruel,
What then must War be?

Alcib. How came the noble Timon by this change?


Tim. As the Moon does by wanting light to give,
And then renew I could not like the Moon,
There were no Suns to borrow of.

Alcib. What friendship shall I do thee?


Tim. Why, promise me friendship and perform none;
If thou will not promise, thou art no man:
If thou do perform, thou art none neither.

Alcib. I am grieved to see thy misery.


Tim. Thou saw it when I was rich.


Alcib. Then was a happy time.


Tim. As thine is now, abused by a brace of Harlots.
What do thou fight with women by thy side?

Alcib. No, but after all the toils and hazards of the day
With men, I refresh my self at night with Women.

Tim. These false Whores of thine have more destruction
In 'em than thy Sword.

Phry. Thou art a Villain to say so --


Thais. Is this he, that was the Athenian Minion?
A snarling Rascal.

Tim. Be Whores still, they love you not that use you;
Employ all your salt hours to rui^e youth,
Soften their manners into a Lethargy
Of sense and action.

Phry. Hang thee Monster; we are not Whores, we
Are Mistresses to Alcibiades.

Tim. The right name is Whore, do not miscal it,
Ye have been so to many.

Thais. Out on you Dog*


Alcib. Pray pardon him;
His wits are lost in his calamities;
I have but little gold, but here is some for thee.

Tim. Keep it, I cannot eat it.


Alcib. Will thou go against Athens with me?


Tim. If ye were Beasts, I Would go with ye:
But I Will not herd with men; yet I love thee
Better than all men, because thou were born
To ruin thy base Country.

Alcib. I Have sent to summon Athens; if she obeys not,
I Will l^y her on a heap.

Tim. It were a glorious act; go on, go on!
Here Is gold for thee; stay, I Will fetch thee more.

Alcib. What mystery is this! where should he have this?


Tim. Here Is more Gold and Jewels! go on,
Be a devouring Plague; let not
Thy Sword skip one, spare thou no Sex or Age:
Pity not honored Age for his white Beard,
He Is an Usurer: strike the counterfeit Matron,
It is her habit only that is honest,
Her self's a Bawd: Let not the Virgins Cheek
Make soft thy Sword, nor Milk-Paps giving suck:
Spare not the Babe, whose dimpled smiles,
From Fools exhaust their mercy; think 'twill be
A Rogue or Whore e're long if thou should spare it.
Put Armor on thy eyes and ears, whose proof,
Nor yells of Mothers, Maids, nor crying Babes,
Nor sight of Priests in Holy Vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce one jot.

Phryn. Have thou more gold, good Timon? give us some*


Thais. What pity it is he should be thus Melancholy!
He is a fine person now.

Tim. Oh flattering Whores! but that I am sure you will
Do store of mischief, I Would not give you any:
Here! be sure you be Whores still,
And who with pious breath seeks to convert ye,
Be strong in Whore^ ^llure and burn him up;
Thatch your thin Sculls with bur^hens from the dead,
Some that were hanged, no matter,
Wear them! betray with them, Whore still;
Paint till a Horse may mi^e upon your faces --
A Pox on Wrinkles, ^ say.

Thais. Well, more Gold, say what thou will.


Tim. Sow your Consumptions in the bones of men;
Dry up their Marrows, pain their shins
And shoulders: Crack the Lawyers voice, that he
May never bawl, and plead false title more.
Entice the lustful and dissembling Priests,
That scold against the quality of flesh,
And not believe themselves; I am not well.
Here Is more, ye proud, lascivious, rampant Whores.
Do you damn others, and let this damn you;
And Ditches be all your Deathbeds and your Graves.

Phry. More counsel* and more money, bounteous Timon.


Tim. More Whore! more mischief first,
I Have given you earnest.

Alcib. We but disturb him! farewell,
If I thrive well, I Will visit thee again.

Tim. If I thrive well, I never shall see thee more:
I feel Death's happy stroke upon me now,
He has laid his Icy hands upon me at length;
He will not let me go again, Farewell.
Confound Athens, and then thy self.
[Ex. Timon.
Alcib. Now march, sound Trumpets and beat Drums,
And let the terror of the noise invade
The ungrateful, Cowardly, usurious Senate.
[Exeunt.
Enter Nicias, Aelius, Cleon, Thrasillus, Isidore, Isander, upon the works of
Athens. Nic. What shall we do to appease his rage?
He has an A^my able to devour us.

Phae. We must even humbly bow our necks, that he
May tread on 'em.

Aeli^s. He is a man of easy nature, (...) won by soothings.


Nic. I tremble le^t he should revenge our sentence.


Isid. If we should resist, he will level Athens.


Isan. And then woe to our selves,
Our Wives and Daughters.

Nic. What will become of you and me Phaeax?
We have been Enemies to him long. I tremble for it.

Phae. Let us appear most forward in delivering up the
Town to him.

Nic. If we resist, he will u^e a Conquerours Power,
And nothing then will escape the fury of
The Headstrong Soldiers, we must all submit.
See, he approaches. These Drums and Trumpets
Strike terror in me! Heaven, help all.
[Enter Herald.
Enter Alcibiades and his Ar^y. Alcib. What answer make they to my summons?


Herald. They are on the works to treat with you.


Alcib. There Is a white Flag! let us approach 'em.
Hoa! you on the works! give me and my Army entrance,
Or I Will let loose the fury of my Soldiers,
And make you all a prey to spoil and rapine;
And such a flame ^'ll light about your ears,
Shall make Greece tremble.

Nic. My noble Lord! we mean nothing less.


Phae. Only we beg your honor will forgive us.


Nic. W' have been ungrateful, and are much ashamed on it;
Your Lordship shall tre^d upon our necks if you think good;
We cannot but condemn our selves;
But we appeal to your known mercy and
Your Generosity.

Phae. March noble Lord into our City
With all the Banners spread;-we are thy Slaves.

Aelius. Your footstools.


Isid. What ever you will make us.


Thras. Enter our City, noble Alcibiades: but leave
Your rage behind you.

Isan. S^t but your Foot against our Gates, and they
Shall open -- so you will enter like a friend.

Alcib. Open the Gates without Capitulations,
For if I set my battering Rams to work,
You must expect no mercy.

Nic. We will my good Lord --

[They all come down, Nic. present Alcibiades the Keys upon his Knees. Our
lives and Fortunes now are in thy hands;
But we fly to thy mercy for protection.

Alcib. You merit as much mercy as you showed
To Thrasibulus, such monstrous ingratitude
Will make your villainous names grow odious
To all the race of men, but to your ^elves
To whom virtue is so.

Phae. 'Twas the whole Senates voice.


Alcib. A Senate, a Den of Thieves! I little thought
When I wrested the Power from the Rabble,
To give it you, you would be worse than they;
But most of you deserve the Ostracism:
Some of you are such Rogues you would shame the Gibbet.

Nic. Good my Lord! tread on our necks, but pardon us.


Phae. We Will be your Slaves if you will forgive us.


Alcib. Can you forgive Thrasibulus when he is dead?
Must we be used thus after our frequent hazards, and our
Toils, hard weary marching! watching! fasting!
Such dreadful hardships, lying out such nights
A Beast could not abide without a Covert,
And all for Pu^sy-lazy-knaves, that snort
In peace at home, and wallow in their bags?
Must we the Bullwarks of our Country be
Thus used?

Phae. Cease to reproach us, my good Lord.


Aelius. We are full of shame and guilt.


Cleon. Pardon us, good Alcibiades.


Thras. We heartily repent.


Isid. We Will kiss thy feet, good Lord.


Isan. Do with us what thou will.


Alcib. You six of the foremost here must meet me
In the (...), where I Will order the (...)
To Assemble all the people --
And on your Knees present your selves
With Halters 'bout your necks!

Phae. Oh my good Lord!


Alcib. Dispute it not, for by the Gods if you
Fail in this point, I Will hang ye all,
Rifle your Houses, and extirpate all
Your race -- March on.
Give order that not a man shall break his ranks,
Or shall offend the regular course of Justice,
On penalty of Death -- March on --
[Ex. Omnes.
Enter Timon and Evandra coming out of the Cav^. Evan. Oh my dear Lord! why do
you stoop and bend
Like Flowers ore-charg'd with dew, who is yielding stalks
Cannot support 'em? I have a Cordial which
Will much revive thy Spirits.

Tim. No, sweet Evandra,
I have taken the best Cordial, Death, which now
Kindly begins to work about my Vitals;
I feel him, he comforts me at heart.

Evan. Oh my dear Timon! must we then part?
That I should live to see this fatal day!
Had death but seized me first, I had been happy.

Tim. My poor Evandra! lead me to my Grave!
Lest Death overtake me -- he pursues me hard:
He Is close upon me. It Is the last office thou
Can do for Timon.

Evan. Hard, stubborn Heart,
Will thou not break yet? Death, why art thou coy
To me that court thee?

Tim. Lay me gently down
In my last tenement. Death's the truest Friend,
That will not flatter, but deals plainly with us.
So, now my weary Pilgrimage on Earth
Is almost fi^isht! Now my best Evandra
I charge thee, by our loves, our mutual loves,
Live! and live happy after me: and if
A thought of Timon comes into thy mind,
And brings a tear from thee, let some diversion
Banish it -- quickly, strive to forget me.

Evan. Oh! Timon! Think thou! I am such a Coward,
I will not keep my word? Death shall not part us.

Tim. If thou wilt not promise me to live, I cannot
Resign my life in peace, I will be with thee
After my Death; my soul shall follow thee,
And hover still about thee, and guard thee from
All harm.

Evan. Life is the greatest harm when thou art dead.


Tim. Can thou forgive thy Timon who involved
Thee in his sad Calamities?

Evan. It is a blessing to share any thing
With thee! oh thou look pale! thy countenance changes!
Oh whither art thou going?

Tim. To my last home. I charge thee live, Evandra!
Thou love me not, if thou will not obey me;
Thou only! dearest! kind! constant thing on earth,
Farewell.
[Dies.
Evan. He Is gone! he is gone! would all the world were so,
I must make haste, or I shall not o're-take
Him in his flight. Timon, I come, stay for me,
Farewell base World.
[Stabs her self. Dies.
Enter Alcibiades, Phrinias, and Thais, his Officers and Soldiers, and his
Train, the Senators. The Pe^ople by degrees assembling. Enter Melissa. Mel* My
Al^ibiades, welcome! doubly welcome!
The Joys of Love and Conquest ever bless thee.
Wonder and terror of Mankind, and Joy
Of Woman kind: now thy (...) happy:
She has lived to see the utmost day she wished for,
Her Alcibiades return with Conquest
Over this ungrateful City; and but that
I every day heard thou were marching hither,
I had been with thee long e're this.

Alcib. What gay, vain, prating thing is this?


Mel. How my Lord! do you question who Melissa is?
And give her such foul Titles?

Alcib. I know Melissa, and therefore give her such
Titles: for when the Senate banished me;
She would not see me, though upon her knees
Before she had sworn eternal love to me;
I see thy snares too plain to be caught now.

Mel. I never refused to see you, Heaven can witness!
Who ever told you so, betrayed me basely:
Not see you! sure there is not a sight on earth
I Would choose before you: You make me astonished!

Alcib. All this you swore to Timon; and next day
Despised him -- I have been informed
Of all your falsehood, and I hate thee for it;
I have Whores, good honest faithful Whores!
Good Antidotes against thy poison -- Love;
Thy base false love; and tell me, is not one
Kind, faithful, loving Whore, better than
A thousand base, ill-natured honest Women?

Mel. I never thought I should have lived to hear
This from my Alcibiades.

Alcib. Do not weep,
Since I once liked thee, I Will do something for thee:
I have a C^oral that has served me well,
I will prefe^ ^ou to him.

Mel. How have I merited this scorn -- Farewell,
I Will never see you more.
[Exit.
Alcib. I hope you will not.

Enter Soldiers with drawn Swords, haling in Apemantus. How now! what means
this violence?


1 Sold. My Lord! this snarling Villainous Philosopher,
With open mouth railed at the Army;
He said the General was a Villain: shall we
Cut his throat?

Alcib. No! touch him not! unhand him!
Why Apemantus did thou call me Villain?

Apem I always speak my thoughts: not all
The Swords of the Army bent against my throat
Can fright me from the truth --

Alcib. Why, do thou think I am one?


Apem. It Is true, this base Town deserves thy scourge,
And all the Terror and the punishment,
Thou can inflict upon it: the deed is good,
But yet thou do it ill; private revenge,
Base passion, headstrong lust, incite thee to it;
Had they not banished thee, thou would have suffered
Wrong still to prosper, and the insulting Tyrants
To thrive, swell and grow fat with their oppression,
And would have joined in them.

Alcib. Thou rail'st too much for a Philosopher.


Apem. Nay frown not, Lord, I fear thee not, nor love thee,
All thy good parts thou drown'st in vice and riot,
In passion, and vainglory: how proud art thou
Of all thy Conquests -- when a poor rabble
Of idle Rogues who else had been in Jails,
Performed 'em for thee; How false is Soldiers honor
With Drums and Trumpets, and in the face of day
With daring impudence Men go to murder
Mankind -- but in the greatest actions of their Lives
The getting men, they sneak and hide themselv^ ^'th' dark;
I scorn your folly and your madness.

Alcib. Thou art a snarling Cur.


1 Sold. Shall I run him through?


Alcib. Hold.


Apem. I fear thee not.


Alcib. My ever honored Socrates favored thee,
And for his sake I spare thee.

Apem. How much did Socrates lose his pains in thee!
Had thou observed his principles, thou'd'st been honest.

Enter Nicias, Thrafillus, Phaeax, Isidore, Isander, Aeli^s, and Cleon, with
Halters about their necks. Nicias. We come my noble Lord at thy Command,
And thus we humbly kneel before thy mercy.

Phae. Spare our lives, and we will employ 'em in
Thy service, worthy Alcibiades.

Alcib. Do you acknowledge you are ungrateful Knaves?


All. We do.


Alcib. And that you have used me basely.


All. We have, but we are very sorry.


Alcib. I should do well to hang you for the Death
Of my brave Officer; but thousand such base lives
As yours would not weigh with his! go, ye have
Your liberty. And now the people are assembled,
I will declare my intentions toward them.
[He ascends the Pulpit^ My Fellow Citizens! I will not now upbraid
You for the unjust sentence past upon me,
In the return of which I have subdued
Your Enemies and all revolted places,
Made you Victorious both at Land and Sea,
And have with continual toil and numberless dangers
Stretched out the bounds of your Dominions far
Above your hopes or expectations.
I will not recount the many enterprises,
No Grecian can be ignorant of. It Is enough
You know how I have served you. Now it remains
I farther should declare my self; I come
First to free you good Citizens of Athens
From the most insupportable yoaks
Of your four hundred Tyrants; and then next
To claim my own Estate which has unjustly
By them been kept from me that raised them.
I do confess, I in revenge of your decree*
Against me, set up them, but never thought
They would have been such Cu^ed Tyrants to you,
Till now, they have gone on and filled the time
With most licentious acts; making their wills,
Their base corrupted wills, the scope of Justice,
While you in vain groaned under all your sufferings.
Thus when a few shall Lord it over the rest,
They govern for themselves and not the People.
They rob and pill from them, from thence to increase
Their private stores; but when the Government
Is in the Body of the People, they
Will do themselves no harm; therefore henceforth
I do pronounce the Government shall devolve upon the
People, and may Heaven prosper 'em.
People shout and cry, Alcibiades! Alcibiades! Long live Alcibiades, Liberty,
Liberty, etc. [ Alcib. Descends.
Enter Messenger. Mes. My noble Lord! I went as you commanded,
And found Lord Timon dead, and his Evandra
Stabbed, and just by him lying in his Tomb,
On which was this Inscription.

Alcib. I Will read it.

Here lies a wretched Corse, of wretched Soul bereft,
Timon my name, a Plague consume you Caitiffs left.
Poor Timon! I once knew thee the most flourishing man
Of all the Athenians, and thou still had been so,
Had not these smiling, flattering Knaves devoured thee,
And murdered thee with base ingratitude.
His death pulled on the poor Evandra's too;
That Miracle of Constancy in Love.
Now all repair to their respective homes,
Their several Trades, their bus*ness and diversions;
And whilst I guard you from your active Foes,
And fight your Battles, be you secure at home.
May Athens flourish with a lasting Peace;
And may its wealth and power ever increase.
All the People shout and cry, Alcibiades! Alcibiades! Liberty, Liberty, etc.

Epilogue.
IF there were hopes that ancient solid Wit
Might please within our new fantastic Pit;
This Play might then support the Critics shock,
This Scien grafted upon Shakespears stock;
For joined with his our Poets part might thrive,
Kept by the virtue of his sap alive.
Though now no more substantial English Plays,
Than good old Hospitality you praise;
The time shall come when true old sense shall ri^e
In Judgment over all your vanities.
Slight kickshaw Wit ^'th' Stage, French meat at Feasts*
Now daily Tantalize the hungry Guests;
While the old English Chine used to remain,
And many hungry onsets would sustain.
At these thin Feasts each Morsel's swallowed down,
And every thing but the Guests stomach's gone.
At these new fashioned Feasts you' have but a Taste,
With Meat or Wit you scarce can break a Fast.
This Jantee slightness to the French we owe,
And that makes all slight Wits admi^e 'em so.
They Are of one Level, and with little pains
The Frothy Poet good reception gains;
But to hear English Wit there is use of brains.
Though Sparks to imitate the French think fit
In want of Learning, Affectation, Wit,
And which is most, in Clothes, we will never submit.
Their Ships or Plays over ours shall never advance,
For our Third Rates shall match the First of France,
With English Judges this may bear the Test,
Who will for Shakespeare's part forgive the rest.
The Sparks judge but as they hear others say,
They cannot think enough to mind the Play.
They to catch Ladies (which they dress at) come,
Or cause they cannot read or think ^t home;
Each here deux yeux and am^rous looks imparts,
Levells Creva^ and Perriwigs at Hearts;
Yet they themselves more than the Ladies mind,
And but for vanity would have 'em kind.
No passion --
But for their own Dear persons them can move,
The admire themselves too much to be in Love.
Nor Wit, nor Beauty, their hard Hearts can strike,
Who only their own sense or persons like.
But to the men of Wit our Poet flies,
To save him from Wits mortal Enemies.
Since for his Friends he has the best of those,
Guarded by them he fears not little Foes.
And with each Mistress we must favor find,
They for Evandra's sake will sure be kind;
At least all those to constant Love inclined.
FINIS.

