ODE ON THE KING's Birthday,
By THO. SHADWELL, Poet-Laureat and Historiographer-Royal.
I.
HAil! Hail, thou Blessed, thou most Auspicious Day,
On which broke forth such an Illustrious Ray,
As has over Europe since dispersed his Light,
And every Day still grows more Gloriously bright.
II.
The Hope of Europe dawned when he arose;
Oh happy was that Morn;
Blessed was the Princely Womb did him disclose:
Let Golden Letters this great Day adorn,
Which brought Him forth whom by Heaven designed,
Cho. The Universal Champion of Mankind.
III.
First, Belgia felt His Influence,
Which ere His Noon He amply did dispense;
When groaning underneath the Gallick Power,
What Nassau first did raise, this Nassau did restore:
And 'twas a Work of full as great a Weight,
Of His who did Redeem, as His who did Create.
IV.
Then Britain felt His Powerful Beams,
Eclipsed, and in her last Extremes,
He shed about His Heat and Light,
And Vigor did impart
To every English Heart,
He soon dispelled all Clouds of Night,
And Britain now again shines bright.
He invaded her with Liberty,
And set the Laws and Gospel free.
Cho. Oh Britain these great Acts He did for thee.
V.
Inflamed by Him your Ancient Warlike Name,
Which you had gained under Victorious Kings,
Is now restored with Never-dying Fame,
And loudly through the World your Valor rings,
Which you had lost in vile inglorious Peace,
Under soft Princes drowned in Vice and Ease,
He waked you from your sordid Lethargy:
Cho. Oh Britain, These great Acts H' has done for Thee!
VI.
Destroyed be then that Vip'rous Brood,
Who would their Mothers Bowels tear;
Or would oppose thy Hero's Good,
By whom thou do thy Honors bear;
By whom our Liberties and Lives,
Our Goods, our Children, and our Wives,
Our Altars and our Fires defended are.
VII.
He does to thickest Crowds of Foes,
His Sacred Breast for us expose:
Oh may His Toyls and Dangers cease;
And His Keen Sword give Europe Peace;
That Circled in His Sweet MARIA's Arms,
He may be free from Rough Alarms;
And in wise Sway His Mind employ,
And all the Calm Delights of Peace enjoy.
VIII.
Blessed be the Day which joined this Royal Pair,
The Wise and Valiant, with the Good and Fair.
And on that Day may Heaven for ever smile,
On which they both espoused this Happy Isle.
Small Cho.
Long may They Live in Happiness!
Long may They Reign with Glory and Success!
They one another, and We Them, possess.
Genesis Cho.
Let Us to Heaven Our Praises loudly sing,
For such a Gracious QVEEN, for such a Glorious KING.
Printed for Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New
Exchange. 1692.


