THE TEMPEST, OR THE Enchanted Island. A COMEDY. As it is now Acted at his
Highness the Duke of York's THEATER.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Herringman at the Blew Anchor in the
Lower-walk of the New-Exchange. MDCLXX.

PREFACE TO THE ENCHANTED ISLAND.
THe writing of Prefaces to Plays was probably invented by some very ambitious
Poet, who never thought he had done enough: Perhaps by some Ape of the French
Eloquence, which uses to make a business of a Letter of gallantry, an examen of
a Farce; and in short, a great pomp and ostentation of words on every trifle.
This is certainly the talent of that Nation, and ought not to be invaded by any
other. They do that out of gayety which would be an imposition upon us.

We may satisfy our selves with surmounting them in the Scene, and safely
leave them those trappings of writing, and flourishes of the Pen, with which
they adorn the borders of their Plays, and which are indeed no more than good
Landskips to a very indifferent Picture. I must proceed no farther in this
argument, lest I run my self beyond my excuse for writing this. Give me leave
therefore to tell you, Reader, that I do it not to set a value on any thing I
have written in this Play, but out of gratitude to the memory of Sir William
Davenant, who did me the honor to join me with him in the alteration of it.

It was originally Shakespeare's: a Poet for whom he had particularly a high
veneration, and whom he first taught me to admire. The Play it self had
formerly been acted with success in the Blackfriars: and our excellent
Fletcher had so great a value for it, that he thought fit to make use of the
same Design, not much varied, a second time. Those who have seen his
Sea-Voyage, may easily discern that it was a Copy of Shakespeare's Tempest: the
Storm, the desert Island, and the Woman who had never seen a Man, are all
sufficient testimonies of it. But Fletcher was not the only Poet who made use
of Shakespeare's Plot: Sir John Suckling, a professed admirer of our Author, has
followed his footsteps in his Goblins; his Regmella being an open imitation of
Shakespeare's Miranda; and his Spirits, though counterfeit, yet are copied from
Ariel. But Sir William Davenant, as he was a man of quick and piercing
imagination, soon found that somewhat might be added to the Design of
Shakespeare, of which neither Fletcher nor Suckling had ever thought: and
therefore to put the last hand to it, he designed the Counterpart to
Shakespeare's Plot, namely that of a Man who had never seen a Woman; that by
this means those two Characters of Innocence and Love might the more illustrate
and commend each other. This excellent contrivance he was pleased to
communicate to me, and to desire my assistance in it. I confess that from the
very first moment it so pleased me, that I never writ any thing with more
delight. I must likewise do him that justice to acknowledge, that my writing
received daily his amendments, and that is the reason why it is not so faulty,
as the rest which I have done without the help or correction of so judicious a
friend. The Comical parts of the Saylors were also his invention, and for the
most part his writing, as you will easily discover by the style. In the time I
writ with him I had the opportunity to observe somewhat more nearly of him than
I had formerly done, when I had only a bare acquaintance with him: I found him
then of so quick a faney, that nothing was proposed to him, on which he could
not suddenly produce a thought extremely pleasant and surprising: and those
first thoughts of his, contrary to the old Latin Proverb, were not always the
least happy. And as his fancy was quick, so likewise were the products of it
remote and new. He borrowed not of any other; and his imaginations were such as
could not easily enter into any other man. His corrections were sober and
judicious: and he corrected his own writings much more severely than those of
another man, bestowing twice the time and labor in polishing which he used in
invention. It had perhaps been easy enough for me to have arrogated more to my
self than was my due in the writing of this Play, and to have passed by his
name with silence in the publication of it, with the same ingratitude which
others have used to him, whose Writings he has not only corrected, as he has
done this, but has had a greater inspection over them, and sometimes added
whole Scenes together, which may as easily be distinguished from the rest, as
true Gold from counterfeit by the weight. But besides the unworthiness of the
action which deterred me from it (there being nothing so base as to rob the
dead of his reputation) I am satisfied I could never have received so much
honor in being thought the Author of any Poem how excellent soever, as I shall
from the joining my imperfections with the merit and name of Shakespeare and Sir
William Davenant.

December. 1. 1669. JOHN DRIDEN.

Prologue to the Tempest, or the Enchanted Island.
As when a Tree's cut down the secret root
Lives under ground, and thence new Branches shoot
So, from old Shakespeare's honored dust, this day
Springs up and buds a new reviving Play.
Shakespeare, who (taught by none) did first impart
To Fletcher Wit, to laboring Johnson Art.
He Monarch-like gave those his subjects law,
And is that Nature which they paint and draw.
Fletcher reached that which on his heights did grow,
Whilst Johnson crept and gathered all below.
This did his Love, and this his Mirth digest:
One imitates him most, the other best.
If they have since out-writ all other men,
It Is with the drops which fell from Shakespeare's Pen.
The Storm which vanished on the Neighboring shore,
Was taught by Shakespeare's Tempest first to roar.
That innocence and beauty which did smile
In Fletcher, grew on this Enchanted Isle.
But Shakespeare's Magic could not copied be,
Within that Circle none durst walk but he.
I must confess 'twas bold, nor would you now,
That liberty to vulgar Wits allow,
Which works by Magic supernatural things:
But Shakespeare's power is sacred as a King's.
Those Legends from old Priesthood were received,
And he then writ, as people then believed.
But, if for Shakespeare we your grace implore,
We for our Theater shall want it more:
Who by our dearth of Youths are forced t'employ
One of our Women to present a Boy.
And that is a transformation you will say
Exceeding all the Magic in the Play.
Let none expect in the last Act to find,
Her Sex transformed from man to Womankind.
Whatever she was before the Play began,
All you shall see of her is perfect man.
Or if your fancy will be further led,
To find her Woman, it must be abed.
Dramatis Personae.
Alonzo Duke of Savoy, and Usurper of the Dukedom of Mantua. Ferdinand his Son.
Prospero right Duke of Millain. Antonio his Brother, Usurper of the Dukedom.
Gonzalo a Noble man of Savoy. Hippolito, one that never saw Woman, right Heir
of the Dukedom of Mantua. Stephano Master of the Ship. Mustacho his Mate.
Trincalo Boatswain. Ventoso a Mariner. Several Mariners. A Cabbin-Boy. Miranda
and Dorinda (Daughters to Prospero) that never saw man. Ariel an aerie Spirit,
attendant on Prospero. Several Spirits Guards to Prospero. Caliban Two Monsters
of the Isle. Sycorax his Sister Two Monsters of the Isle.
THE Enchanted Island.
ACT I.
Enter Mustacho and Ventoso. Vent. WHat a Sea comes in?


Must. A hoaming Sea! we shall have foul weather.


[ Enter Trincalo. Trinc. The Scud co^mes against the Wind, 'twill blow hard.


Enter Stephano. Steph. Bosen!


Trinc. Here, Master what cheer?


Steph. Ill weather! let us off to Sea.


Must. Let Us have Sea-room enough, and then let it blow the Devils head off.


Steph. Boy!


[Enter Cabin-boy. Boy. Yaw, yaw, here Master.


Steph. Give the Pilot a dram of the Bottle.


[Exeunt Stephano and Boy. Enter Mariners and pass over the Stage. Trinc.
Heigh, my hearts, chearly, chearly, my hearts, yare, yare.


Enter Alonzo, Antonio, Gonzalo. Alon. Good Bosen have a care; where is the
Master?
Play the men.

Trinc. Pray keep below.


Anto. Where Is the Master, Bosen?


Trinc. Do you not hear him? you mar our labor: keep your Cabins, you help the
storm.


Gonz. Nay, good friend be patient.


Trinc. I, when the Sea is: hence; what care these roarers for the name of
Duke? to Cabin; silence; trouble us not.


Gonz. Good friend, remember whom thou have aboard.


Trinc. None that I love more than my self: you are a Counselor, if you can
advise these Elements to silence: use your wisdom: if you cannot, make your
self ready in the Cabin for the ill hour. Cheerly good hearts! out of our way,
Sirs.


[Exeunt Trincalo and Mariners. Gonz. I have great comfort from this Fellow;
methinks his complexion is perfect Gallows; stand fast, good fate, to his
hanging; make the Rope of his destiny our Cable, for our own do^s little
advantage us; if he be not born to be hanged we shall be drowned.


[Exit. Enter Trincalo and Stephano. Trinc. Up aloft Lads. Come, reef both
Topsails.


Steph. Let Us weigh, Let Us weigh, and off to Sea.


[ Ex Stephano. Enter two Mariners and pass over the Stage. Trinc. Hands down!
man your main-Capstorm


Enter Mustacho and Ventoso at the other door. Must. Up aloft! and man your
seere-Capstrom.


Vent. My Lads, my hearts of Gold, get in your Capstorm-Bar. Hoa up, hoa up,
etc.


[ Exeunt Mustacho and Ventoso. Enter Stephano. Steph. Hold on well! hold on
well! nip well there;
Quartermaster, get's more Nippers.

[ Exit Stephano. Enter two Mariners and pass over again. Trinc. Turn out, turn
out all hands to Capstorm?
You dogs, is this a time to sleep?
Heave together Lads.

[Trincalo whistles. [ Exeunt Mustacho and Ventoso. Must. within. Our Viall's
broke.


Vent. within. It Is but our Vial-block has given way. Come heave Lads! we are
fixed again. Heave together Bullyes.


Enter Stephano. Steph. Cut off the Hamocks! cut off the Hamocks, come my
Lads: Come Bullys, cheer up! heave lustily.
The Anchor's a peek.

Trinc. Is the Anchor a peek?


Steph. Is a weigh! Is a weigh!


Trinc. Up aloft my Lads upon the Fore-Castle!
Cut the Anchor, cut him.

All within. Haul Catt, Haul Catt, etc. Haul Catt, haul: haul, Catt, haul.
Below.


Steph. Aft, Aft! and loose the Misen!


Trinc. Get the Misen-tack aboard. Haul Aft Misen-sheat!


Enter Mustacho. Must. Loose the main Top-sail!


Steph. Furle him again, there is too much Wind.


Trinc. Loose Fore-sail! Haul Aft both sheats! trim her right before the Wind.
Aft! Aft! Lads, and hale up the Misen here.


Must. A Mackrel-Gale, Master.


Steph. within. Port hard, port! the Wind grows scant, bring the Tack aboard
Port is. Star-board, star-board, a little steady; now steady, keep her thus, no
nearer you cannot come.


Enter Ventoso. Vent. Some hands down: the Guns are loose.


[ Ex. Must. Trinc. Try the Pump, try the Pump!


[ Exit Ventoso. Enter Mustacho at the other door. Must. O Master! six foot
Water in Hold.


Steph. Clap the Helm hard aboard! Flat, flat, flat in the
Fore-sheat there.

Trinc. Over-haul your fore-boling.


Steph. Brace in the Lar-board.


[Exit. Trinc. A curse upon this howling,
[A great cry within. They are louder than the weather.
[ Enter Antonio and Gonzalo. Yet again, what do you here! shall we give over,
and drown? have you a mind to sink?


Gonz. A Pox of your throat, you bawling, blasphemous, uncharitable dog.


Trinc. Work you then.


Anto. Hang, Cur, hang, you whoreson insolent noise-maker, we are less afraid to
be drowned than thou art.


Trinc. Brace off the Fore-yard.


[Exit. Gonz. I Will warrant him for drowning, though the Ship were no stronger
than a Nut-shell, and as leaky as an unstanch'd Wench.


Enter Alonzo and Ferdinand. Ferd. For my self I care not, but your loss brings
a thousand Deaths to me.


Alonzo. O name not me, I am grown old, my Son; I now am tedious to the world,
and that, by use, is so to me: but, Ferdinand, I grieve my subjects loss in
thee: Alas! I suffer justly for my crimes, but why thou should -- O Heaven!

[A cry within. Hark, farewell my Son! a long farewell!


Ferd. Some lucky Plank, when we are lost by shipwreck, wast hither, and submit
it self beneath you.

Your blessing, and I dye contented.


[Embrace and Exeunt. Enter Trincalo, Mustacho, and Ventoso. Trinc. What must
our mouths be cold then?


Vent. All Is lost. To prayers, to prayers.


Gonz. The Duke and Prince are gone within t^ ^rayers. Let Us assist them.


Must. Nay, we may e'ne pray too; our case (...) (...).


Ant. We are merely cheated of our lives by Drunkards.
This wide chopped Rascal: would thou might lie drowning
The long washing of ten Tides.

[ Exeunt Trincalo, Mustacho, and Ventoso. Gonz. He Will he hanged yet, though
every drop of water fwears against it; now would I give ten thousand Furlongs
of Sea for one Acre of barren ground, Long-heath, Broom-furs, or any thing. The
wills above be done, but I would fain dye a dry death.


[A confused noise within. Ant. Mercy upon us! we split, we split.


Gonz. Let Us all sink with the Duke, and the young Prince.

[Exeunt. Enter Stephano, Trincalo.
Trinc. The Ship is sinking.


[A new cry within. Steph. Run her ashore!


Trinc. Luffe! luffe! or we are all lost! there is a Rock upon the Star-board
Bow.


Steph. She strikes, she strikes! All shift for themselves.


[Exeunt. Enter Prospero and Miranda. Prosp. Miranda! where is your Sister?


Miran. I left her looking from the pointed Rock, at the walks end, on the huge
beat of Waters.


Prosp. It is a dreadful object.


Mir. If by your Art, my dearest Father, you have put them in this roar, allay
'em quickly.

Had I been any God of power, I would have sunk the Sea into the Earth, before
it should the Vessel so have swallowed.


Prosp. Collect your self, and tell your piteous heart,
There Is no harm done.

Mir. O woe the day!


Prosp. There is no harm:
I have done nothing but in care of thee,
My Daughter, and thy pretty Sister:
You both are ignorant of what you are,
Not knowing whence I am, nor that I Am more
Than Prospero, Master of a narrow Cell,
And thy unhappy Father.

Mir. I never endeavored to know more than you were pleased to tell me.


Prosp. I should inform thee farther: wipe thou thine Eyes, have comfort; the
direful spectacle of the wrack, which touched the very virtue of compassion in
thee, I have with such a pity safely ordered, that not one creature in the Ship
is lost.


Mir. You often, Sir, began to tell me what I am,
But then you stopped.

Prosp. The hour's now come;

Obey, and be attentive, Can thou remember a time before we came into this
Cell? I do not think thou can, for then thou were not full three years old.


Mir. Certainly I can, Sir.


Prosp. Tell me the image then of any thing which thou do keep in thy
remembrance still.


Mir. Sir, had I not four or five Women once that tended me?


Prosp. Thou had, and more, Miranda: what see thou else in the dark
back-ward, and abyss of Time?

If thou remembrest ought e're thou came here, then, how thou came thou
may remember too.


Mir. Sir, that I do not.


Prosp. Fifteen Years since, Miranda, thy Father was the Duke of Millan, and a
Prince of power.


Mir. Sir, are not you my Father?


Prosp. Thy Mother was all virtue, and she said, thou wast my Daughter, and thy
Sister too.


Mir. O Heavens! what foul play had we, that we hither came, or was it a
blessing that we did?


Prosp. Both, both, my Girl.


Mir. How my heart bleeds to think what you have suffered.
But, Sir, I pray proceed.

Prosp. My Brother, and thy Uncle, called Antonio, to whom I trusted then the
manage of my State, while I was wrapped with secret Studies: That false Uncle
(do thou attend me Child ^)


Mir. Sir, most heedfully.


Prosp. Having attained the craft of granting suits, and of denying them; whom
to advance, or lop, for over-toping, soon was grown the Ivy which did hide my
Princely Trunck, and sucked my verdure out: thou attend'st not.


Mir. O good Sir, I do.


Prosp. I thus neglecting worldly ends, and bent to closeness, and the
bettering of my mind, waked in my false Brother an evil Nature:

He did believe
He was indeed the Duke, because he then did execute the outward face of
Sovereignty. Do thou still mark me?


Mir. Your story would cure deafness.


Prosp. To have no screen between the part he played, and whom he played it for;
he needs would be Absolute Millan, and Confederates (so dry he was for Sway)
with Savoy's Duke, to give him Tribute, and to do him homage.


Mir. False man!


Prosp. This Duke of Savoy being an Enemy,
To me inveterate, strait grants my Brother's suit,
And on a night
Mated to his design, Antonio opened the Gates of Millan, and in the dead of
darkness, hurried me thence with thy young Sister, and thy crying self.


Mir. But wherefore did they not that hour destroy us?


Prosp. They durst not, Girl, in Millan, For the love my people bore me; in
short, they hurried us away to Savoy, and thence aboard a Bark at Nissa's Port:
bore us some Leagues to Sea, where they prepared a rotten Carcass of a Boat,
not rigged, no Tackle, Sail, nor Mast; the very Rats instinctively had quit it:
they hoisted us, to cry to Seas which roared to us; to sigh to Winds, whose
pity sighing back again, did seem to do us loving wrong.


Mir. Alack! what trouble was I then to you?


Prosp. Thou and thy Sister were two Cherubins, which did preserve me: you both
did smile, infused with fortitude from Heaven.


Mir. How came we ashore?


Prosp. By Providence Divine, Some food we had, and some fresh Water, which a
Noble man of Savoy, called Gonzalo, appointed Master of that black design, gave
us; with rich Garments, and all necessaries, which since have steaded much: and
of his gentleness (knowing I loved my Books) he furnished me from mine own
Library, with Volumes which I prize above my Dukedom.


Mir. Would I might see that man.


Prosp. Here in this Island we arrived, and here have I your Tutor been. But by
my skill I find that my Mid-heaven does depend on a most happy Star, whose
influence if I now court not, but omit, my Fortunes will ever after droop: here
cease more question, thou art inclined to sleep: it is a good dullness, and give
it way; I know thou can not choose.

[She falls asleep. Come away my Spirit: I am ready now, approach
My Ariel, Come.

[ Enter Ariel. Ariel. All hail great Master, grave Sir, hail, I come to answer
thy best pleasure, be it to fly, to swim, to shoot into the fire, to ride on
the curled Clouds; to thy strong bidding, task Ariel and all his qualities.


Prosp. Have thou, Spirit, performed to point the Tempest that I bad thee?


Ariel. To every Article.

I boarded the Duke's Ship, now on the Beak, now in the Waste, the Deck, in
every Cabin; I flamed amazement, and sometimes I seemed to burn in many places
on the Topmast, the Yards and Bore-sprit; I did flame distinctly.


Prosp. My brave Spirit!

Who was so firm, so constant, that this coil did not infect his Reason?


Ariel. Not a soul

But felt a Fever of the mind, and played some tricks of desperation; all, but
Mariners, plunged in the foaming brine, and quit the Vessel: the Duke's Son,
Ferdinand, with hair upstairing (more like Reeds than Hair) was the first man
that leaped; cried, Hell is empty, and all the Devils are here.


Prosp. Why that is my Spirit;
But was not this nigh Shore?

Ariel. Close by my Master.


Prosp. But, Ariel, are they safe?


Ariel. Not a hair perished.
In Troops I have dispersed them round this Isle.
The Duke's Son I have landed by himself, whom I have left warming the air with
sighs, in an odd angle of the Isle, and sitting, his arms he folded in this
sad knot.


Prosp. Say how thou have disposed the Mariners of the Duke's Ship, and all the
rest of the Fleet.


Ariel. Safely in Harbor
Is the Duke's Ship, in the deep Nook, where once thou call'dst
Me up at midnight to fetch Dew from the
Still vexed Bermoothes, there she is hid,
The Mariners all under hatches stowed,
Whom, with a charm, joined to their suffered labor,
I have left asleep, and for the rest of the Fleet
(Which I dispersed) they all have met again,
And are upon the Mediterranean Float,
Bound sadly home for Italy;
Supposing that they saw the Duke's Ship wrackt,
And his great person perish.

Prosp. Ariel, thy charge
Exactly is performed, but there is more work:
What is the time of the day?

Ariel. Past the mid-season.


Prosp. At least two Glasses: the time 'tween six and now must by us both be
spent most preciously.


Ariel. Is there more toil? since thou do give me pains, let me remember thee
what thou have promised, which is not yet performed me.


Prosp. How now, Moodie?
What is it thou can demand?

Ariel. My liberty.


Prosp. Before the time be out? no more.


Ariel. I prithee!
Remember I have done thee faithful service,
Told thee no lies, made thee no mistakings,
Served without or grudge, or grumblings:
Thou did promise to bate me a full year.

Prosp. Do thou forget
From what a torment I did free thee?

Ariel. No.


Prosp. Thou do, and think it much to tread the Ooze
Of the salt deep:
To run against the sharp wind of the North,
To do my business in the Veins of the Earth,
When it is baked with Frost.

Ariel. I do not, Sir.


Prosp. Thou lie, malignant thing! have thou forgot the foul Witch Sycorax,
who with age and envy was grown into a Hoop? have thou forgot her?


Ariel. No Sir!


Prosp. Thou have; where was she born? speak, tell me.


Ariel. Sir, in Argier.


Prosp. Oh, was she so! I must

Once every Month recount what thou have been, which thou forgettest. This
damned Witch Sycorax for mischiefs manifold, and sorceries too terrible to
enter humane hearing, from Argier thou know was banished: but for one thing
she did, they would not take her life: is not this true?


Ariel. I Sir.


Prosp. This blew-ey'd Hag was hither brought with child,
And here was left by the Saylors, thou, my slave,
As thou report'st thy self, wast then her servant,
And 'cause thou wast a spirit too delicate
To act her earthy and abhorred commands;
Refusing her grand Hests, she did confine thee,
By help of her more potent Ministers,
(In her unmitigable rage) into a cloven Pine,
Within whose rift imprisoned, thou did painfully
Remain a dozen years; within which space she died,
And left thee there; where thou did vent thy
Groans, as fast as Mill-wheels strike.
Then was this Isle (save for two Brats, which she did
Litter here, the brutish Caliban, and his twin Sister,
Two freckel'd-hag-born Whelps) not honored with
A humane shape.

Ariel. Yes! Caliban her Son, and Sycorax his Sister.


Prosp. Dull thing, I say so; he, that Caliban, and she that Sycorax, whom I
now keep in service. Thou best know what torment I did find thee in, thy
groans did make Wolves howl, and penetrate the breasts of ever angry Bears, it
was a torment to lay upon the damned, which Sycorax could never again undo: It
was my Art, when I arrived, and heard thee, that made the Pine to gape and let
thee out.


Ariel. I thank thee, Master.


Prosp. If thou more murmurest, I will rend an Oak,
And peg the in his knotty Entrails, till thou
Have howld away twelve Winters more.

Ariel. Pardon, Master,
I will be correspondent to command, and be
A gentle spirit.

Prosp. Do so, and after two days I Will discharge thee.


Ariel. That Is my noble Master.
What shall I do? say? what? what shall I do?

Prosp. Be subject to no sight but mine; invisible to
Every eye-ball else: hence with diligence.
My daughter wakes. Anon thou shall know more.
[ Ex. Ariel. Thou have slept well my child.

Mir. The sadness of your story put heaviness in me.


Prosp. Shake it off; come on, I Will now call Caliban, my slave,
Who never yields us a kind answer.

Mir. It Is a creature, Sir, I do not love to look on.


Prosp. But as it is, we cannot miss him; he does make our Fire, fetch in our
Wood, and serve in Offices that profit us: what hoa! Slave! Caliban! thou Earth
thou, speak.


Calib. within. There Is Wood enough within.


Prosp. Come forth, I say, there is other business for thee.
Come thou Tortoise, when?
[ Enter Ariel. Fine apparition, my quaiut Ariel,
Hark in thy ear.

Ariel. My Lord it shall be done.


[Exit. Prosp. Thou poisonous Slave, got by the Devil himself upon thy wicked
Dam, come forth.


[ Enter Caliban. Calib. As wicked Dew, as e're my Mother brushed with Raven's
Feather from unwholesome Fens, drop on you both: A South-west blow on you, and
blister you all over.


Prosp. For this besure, to night thou shall have Cramps, sidestitches, that
shall pen thy breath up; Urchins shall prick thee till thou bleed'st: thou
shall be pinched as thick as Honey-Combs, each pinch more stinging than the
Bees which made 'em.


Calib. I must eat my dinner: this Island's mine by Sycorax my Mother, which
thou took'st from me. When thou came first, thou stroak'st me, and made
much of me, would give me Water with Berries in it, and teach me how to name
the bigger Light, and how the less, that burn by day and night; and then I
loved thee, and showed thee all the qualities of the Isle, the fresh-Springs,
brine-Pits, barren places, and fertile. Cursed be I, that I did so: All the
Charms of Sycorax, Toads, Beetles, Batts, light on thee, for I am all the
Subjects that thou have. I first was mine own Lord; and here thou stay'st me in
this hard Rock, whiles thou do keep from me the rest o'th Island.


Prosp. Thou most lying Slave, whom stripes may move, not kindness: I have used
thee (filth that thou art) with humane care, and lodged thee in mine own Cell,
till thou did seek to violate the honor of my Children.


Calib. Oh ho, Oh ho, would t'had been done: thou did prevent me, I had
peopled else this Isle with Calibans.


Prosp. Abhorred Slave!

Who never would any print of goodness take, being capable of all ill: I pitied
thee, took pains to make thee speak, taught thee each hour one thing or other;
when thou did not (Savage) know thy own meaning, but would gabble, like a
thing most brutish, I endowed thy purposes with words which made them known:
But thy wild race (though thou did learn) had that in it, which good Natures
could not abide to be with: therefore wast thou deservedly pent up into this
Rock.


Calib. You taught me language, and my profit by it is, that I know to curse:
the red botch rid you for learning me your language.


Prosp. Hag-seed hence!
Fetch us in fuel, and be quick
To answer other business: shrugst thou (malice)
If thou neglectest or do unwillingly what I command,
I Will wrack thee with old Cramps, fill all thy bones with
Aches, make thee roar, that Beasts shall tremble
At thy Din.

Calib. No prithee!
I must obey. His Art is of such power,
It would control my Dam's God, Setebos,
And make a Vassal of him.

Prosp. So Slave, hence.


[Exeunt Prospero and Caliban severally. Enter Dorinda. Dor. Oh Sister! what
have I beheld?


Mir. What is it moves you so?


Dor. From yonder Rock,
As I my Eyes cast down upon the Seas,
The whistling winds blew rudely on my face,
And the waves roared; at first I thought the War
Had bin between themselves, but strait I spied
A huge great Creature.

Mir O you mean the Ship.


Dor. Is It not a Creature then? it seemed alive.


Mir. But what of it?


Dor. This floating Ram did bear his Horns above;
All tied with Ribbands, ruffling in the wind,
Sometimes he nodded down his head a while,
And then the Waves did heave him to the Moon;
He clamb'ring to the top of all the Billows,
And then again he curtsy'd down so low,
I could not see him: till, at last, all side long
With a great crack his belly burst in pieces.

Mir. There all had perished
Had not my Father's magic Art relieved them.
But, Sister, I have stranger news to tell you;
In this great Creature there were other Creatures,
And shortly we may chance to see that thing,
Which you have heard my Father call, a Man.

Dor. But what is that? for yet he never told me.


Mir. I know no more than you: but I have heard
My Father say we Women were made for him.

Dor. What, that he should eat us Sister?


Mir. No sure, you see my Father is a man, and yet
He does us good. I would he were not old.

Dor. Methinks indeed it would be finer, if we two
Had two young Fathers.

Mir. No Sister, no, if they were young, my Father
Said that we must call them Brothers.

Dor. But pray how does it come that we two are not Brothers then, and have not
Beards like him?


Mir. Now I confess you pose me.


Dor. How did he come to be our Father too?


Mir. I think he found us when we both were little, and grew within the ground.


Dor. Why could he not find more of us? pray sister let you and I look up and
down one day, to find some little ones for us to play with.


Mir. Agreed; but now we must go in. This is the hour
Wherein my Father's Charm will work,
Which seizes all who are in open Air:
The effect of his great Art I long to see,
Which will perform as much as Magic can.

Dor. And I, methinks, more long to see a Man.


ACT II.
Enter Alonzo, Antonio, Gonzalo, Attendants. Gonz. BEseech your Grace be merry;
you have cause, so have we all, of joy for our strange escape: then wisely, good
Sir, weigh our sorrow with our comfort.


Alonz. Prithee peace! you cram these words into my Ears against my stomach,
how can I rejoice, when my dear Son, perhaps this very moment, is made a meal
to some strange Fish?


Ant. Sir, he may live,

I saw him beat the billows under him, and ride upon their backs; he trod the
Water, whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted the most swollen surge that met
him, his bold head 'bove the contentious waves he kept, and oar'd himself with
his strong arms to shore, I do not doubt he came alive to land.


Alonz. No (...) he is gone, and you and I, Antonio, were those who caused (...)
death.


Ant. How could we help it?


Alonz. Then, then, we should have helped it, when thou betrayedst thy Brother
Prospero, and Mantua's Infant, Sovereign to my power: And when I, too
ambitious, took by force another right; then lost we Ferdinand, then forfeited
our Navy to this Tempest.


Ant. Indeed we first broke truce with Heaven;
You to the waves an Infant Prince exposed,
And on the waves have lost an only Son;
I did usurp my Brother's fertile lands, and now
Am cast upon this desert Isle.

Gonz. These, Sir, it is true, were crimes of a black Dye,
But both of you have made amends to Heaven,
By your late Voyage into Portugal,
Where, in defense of Christianity,
Your valor has repulsed the Moors of Spain.

Alonz. O name it not Gonzalo.
No act but penitence can expiate guilt,
Must we teach Heaven what price to set on Murders?
What rate on lawless power, and wild ambition?
Or dare we traffic with the Powers above,
And sell by weight a good deed for a bad?

[Musick within. Gonz. Music! and in the air! sure we are shipwrackt on the
Dominions of some merry Devil.

Ant. This Isle's enchanted ground, for I have heard
Swift voices flying by my Ear, and groans
Of lamenting Ghosts.

Alonz. I pulled a Tree, and Blood pursued my hand; O Heaven! deliver me from
this dire place, and all the after actions of my life shall mark my penitence
and my bounty.

Hark!
[A Dialogue within sung in parts. The sounds approach us.

1 D. Where does proud Ambition dwell?


2. In the lowest Rooms of Hell.


1. Of the damned who leads the Host?


2. He who did oppress the most.


1. Who such Troops of damned brings?


2. Most are led by fighting Kings.
Kings who did Crowns unjustly get,
Here on burning Thrones are set.

Chor. Kings who did Crowns, etc.


Ant. Do you hear, Sir, how they lay our Crimes before us?


Gonz. Do evil Spirits imitate the good,
In showing men their sins?

Alonz. But in a different way,
Those warn from doing, these upbraid 'em done.

1. Who are the Pillars of Ambitions Court?


2. Grim Deaths and Scarlet Murders it support.


1. What Iyes beneath her feet?


2. Her footsteps tread,
On Orphans tender breasts, and Brothers dead.

1. Can Heaven permit such Crimes should be
Rewarded with felicity?

2. Oh no! uneasily their Crowns they wear,
And their own guilt amidst their Guards they fear,
Cares when they wake their minds unquiet keep,
And we in visions lord it over their sleep.

Cho. Oh no! uneasily their Crowns, etc.


Alonz. See where they come in horrid shapes!


Enter the two that sung, in the shape of Devils, placing themselves at two
corners of the Stage. Ant. Sure Hell is opened to devour us quick.


1. D. Say Brother, shall we bear these mortals hence?


2. First let us show the shapes of their offense.


1. We'll muster then their crimes on either side:
Appear! appear! their first begotten, Pride.

[Enter Pride. Pride. Lo! I am here, who led their hearts astray,
And to Ambition did their minds betray.

[Enter Fraud. Fraud. And guileful Fraud does next appear,
Their wandering steps who led,
When they from virtue fled,
And in my crooked paths their course did steer.

[Enter Rapine. Rap. From Fraud to Force they soon arrive,
Where Rapine did their actions drive.

[Enter Murder. Murd. There long they cannot stay,
Down the deep precipice they run,
And to secure what they have done,
To murder bend their way.

After which they fall into a round encompassing the Duke, etc. Singing.
Around, around, we pace
About this cursed place,
Whilst thus we compass in
These mortals and their sin.
Dance. [All the spirits vanish. Ant. Heaven has heard me! they are vanished.


Alonz. But they have left me all unmanned;
I feel my sinews slackened with the fright,
And a cold sweat trills down over all my limbs,
As if I were dissolving into Water.
O Prospero! my crimes against thee sit heavy on my heart.

Ant. And mine, against him and young Hippolito.


Gonz. Heaven have mercy on the penitent!


Alonz. Lead from this cursed ground;
The Seas, in all their rage, are not so dreadful.
This is the Region of despair and death.

Gonz. Shall we not seek some food?


Alonz. Beware all fruit but what the birds have peid,
The shadows of the Trees are poisonous too:
A secret venom slides from every branch.
My conscience does distract me, O my Son!
Why do I speak of eating or repose,
Before I know thy fortune?

[Exeunt. Enter Ferdinand, and Ariel, invisible, playing and singing. Ariel's
Song.
Come unto these yellow sands
And then take hands.
Curtsy'd when you have and kissed,
The wild waves whist.
Foot it featly here and there, and sweet sprights bear the Burden. [Burthen
dispersedly.
Hark! hark! Bow-waugh; the watch-dogs bark,
Bow-waugh.
Ariel. Hark! hark! I hear the strain of strutting Chanticleer Cry Cock a
doodle do.
Ferd. Where should this Music be? in the Air, or the Earth?
It sounds no more, and sure it waits upon some God
Of The Island, sitting on a bank weeping against the Duke
My Father's wrack. This music hovered over me
On the waters, allaying both their fury and my passion
With charming Airs; thence I have followed it (or it
Has drawn me rather) but it is gone;
No, it begins again.

Ariel. Song.
Full Fathoms five thy Father lies,
Of his bones is Coral made:
Those are Pearls that were his eyes,
Nothing of him that does fade,
But does suffer a Sea-change
Into something rich and strange:
Sea-Nymphs hourly ring his,
Hark now I hear 'em, Ding dong Bell.
[ Burden, Ding dong. Ferd. The mournful Ditty mentions my drowned Father,
This is no mortal business, nor a sound which the
Earth owns: I hear it now before me,
However I will on and follow it.

[Ex. Ferd. and Ariel. Enter Stephano, Mustacho, Ventoso. Vent. The Runlet of
Brandy was a loving Runlet, and floated after us out of pure pity.


Must. This kind Bottle, like an old acquaintance, swam after it.
And this Scollop-shell is all our Plate now.

Vent. It Is well we have found something since we landed.
I prithee fill a soop, and let it go round.
Where have thou laid the Runlet?

Must. In The hollow of an old Tree.


Vent. Fill apace,
We cannot live long in this barren Island, and we may
Take a soop before death, as well as others drink
At our Funerals.

Must. This is prize-Brandy, we steal Custom, and it costs nothing. Let Us have
two rounds more.


Vent. Master, what have you saved?


Steph. Just nothing but my self.


Vent. This works comfortably on a cold stomach.


Steph. Fill's another round.


Vent. Look! Mustacho weeps. Hang losses as long as we have
Brandy left. Prithee leave weeping.

Steph. He sheds his Brandy out of his eyes: he shall drink no more.


Must. This will be a doleful day with old Bess. She gave me a gilt Nutmeg at
parting. That Is lost too. But as you say, hang losses. Prithee fill again.


Vent. Beshrew thy heart for putting me in mind of thy Wife,
I had not thought of mine else, Nature will show it self,
I must melt. I prithee fill again, my Wife's a good old jade,
And has but one eye left: but she will weep out that too,
When she hears that I am dead.

Steph. Would you were both hanged for putting in thought of mine. But well, If
I return not in seven years to my own Country, she may marry again: and it is
from this Island thither at least seven years swimming.


Must. O at least, having no help of Boat nor Bladders.


Steph. Whoever she marries, poor soul, she will weep a nights when she thinks of
Stephano.


Vent. But Master, sorrow is dry! there is for you again.


Steph. A Mariner had even as good be a Fish as a Man, but for the comfort we
get ashore: O for any old dry Wench now I am wet.


Must. Poor heart! that would soon make you dry again: but all is barren in this
Isle: here we may lie at Hull till the Wind blow Nore and by South, e're we can
cry a Sail, a Sail at sight of a white Apron. And therefore here is another soop
to comfort us.


Vent. This Isle's our own, that is our comfort, for the Duke, the Prince, and
all their train are perished.


Must. Our Ship is sunk, and we can never get home again: we must even turn
Salvages, and the next that catches his fellow may eat him.


Vent. No, no, let us have a Government; for if we live well and orderly,
Heaven will drive the Shipwracks ashore to make us all rich, therefore let us
carry good Consciences, and not eat one another.


Steph. Whoever eats any of my subjects, I Will break out his Teeth with my
Scepter: for I was Master at Sea, and will be Duke on Land: you Mustacho have
been my Mate, and shall be my Viceroy.


Vent. When you are Duke you may choose your Viceroy; but I am a free Subject
in a new Plantation, and will have no Duke without my voice. And so fill me the
other soop.


Steph. whispering. Ventoso, do thou hear, I will advance thee, prithee give
me thy voice.


Vent. I Will have no whisperings to corrupt the Election; and to show that I
have no private ends, I declare aloud that I will be Viceroy, or I Will keep my
voice for my self.


Must. Stephano, hear me, I will speak for the people, because there are few,
or rather none in the Isle to speak for themselves. Know then, that to prevent
the farther shedding of Christian blood, we are all content Ventoso shall be
Viceroy, upon condition I may be Viceroy over him. Speak good people, are you
well agreed? what, no man answer? well, you may take their silence for consent.


Vent. You speak for the people, Mustacho? I Will speak for 'em, and declare
generally with one voice, one word and all; that there shall be no Viceroy but
the Duke, unless I be he.


Must. You declare for the people, who never saw your face! Cold Iron shall
decide it.


[Both draw. Steph. Hold, loving Subjects: we will have no Civil war during our
Reign: I do hereby appoint you both to be my Viceroys over the whole Island.


Both. Agreed! agreed!


Enter Trincalo with a great bottle, half drunk. Vent. How! Trincalo our brave
Bosen!


Must. He reels: can he be drunk with Seawater?


Trinc. sings. I shall no more to Sea, to Sea,
Here I shall dye ashore.
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral,
But here is my comfort.

[Drinks. Sings. The Master, the Swabber, the Gunner, and I,
The Surgeon, and his Mate,
Loved Mall, Meg, and Marrian, and Margery,
But none of us cared for Kate.
For she had a tongue with a tang,
Would cry to a Saylor, go hang:
She loved not the savor of Tar nor of Pitch,
Yet a Tailor might scratch her where e're she did itch.
This is a scurvy Tune too, but here is my comfort again.

[Drinks. Steph. We have got another subject now; welcome,
Welcome into our Dominions!

Trinc. What Subject, or what Dominions? here is old Sack
Boys: the King of good fellows can be no subject.
I will be Old Simon the King.

Must. Hah, old Boy! how did thou escape?


Trinc. Upon a Butt of Sack, Boys, which the Saylors
Threw overboard: but are you alive, hoa! for I will
Tipple with no Ghosts till I Am dead: thy hand Mustacho,
And thine Ventoso; the storm has done its worst:
Stephano alive too! give thy Bosen thy hand, Master.

Vent. You must kiss it then, for, I must tell you, we have chosen him Duke in
a full Assembly.


Trinc. A Duke! where? what is he Duke of?


Must. Of this Island, man. Oh Trincalo we are all made, the
Island's empty; all is our own, Boy; and we will speak to his
Grace for thee, that thou may be as great as we are.

Trinc. You great? what the Devil are you?


Vent. We two are Viceroys over all the Island; and when we are weary of
Governing thou shall succeed us.


Trinc. Do you hear, Ventoso, I will succeed you in both your places before you
enter into 'em.


Steph. Trincalo, sleep and be sober; and make no more uproars in my Country.


Trinc. Why, what are you, Sir, what are you?


Steph. What I am, I am by free election, and you Trincalo are not your self;
but we pardon your first fault,

Because it is the first day of our Reign.

Trinc. Umph, were matters carried so swimmingly against me, whilst I was
swimming, and saving my self for the good of the people of this Island.


Must. Art thou mad Trincalo, will thou disturb a settled Government?


Trinc. I say this Island shall be under Trincalo, or it shall be a
Commonwealth; and so my Bottle is my Buckler, and so I draw my Sword.


[Draws. Vent. Ah Trincalo, I thought thou had had more grace,
Than to rebel against thy old Master,
And thy two lawful Viceroys.

Must. Wilt not thou take advice of two that stand
For old Counselors here, where thou art a mere stranger
To the Laws of the Country.

Trinc. I Will have no Laws.


Vent. Then Civil-War begins.


[Vent. Must. draw. Steph. Hold, hold, I Will have no blood shed,
My Subjects are but few: let him make a rebellion
By himself; and a Rebel, I Duke Stephano declare him:
Viceroys, come away.

Trinc. And Duke Trincalo declares, that he will make open war wherever he
meets thee or thy Viceroys.


[ Ex. Steph. Must. Vent. Enter Caliban with wood upon his back. Trinc. Hah!
who have we here?


Calib. All the infections that the Sun sucks up from Fogs, Fens, Flats, on
Prospero fall; and make him by inch-meal a Disease: his spirits hear me, and
yet I needs must curse, but they will not pinch, fright me with Urchin shows,
pitch me in the mire, nor lead me in the dark out of my way, unless he bid 'em:
but for every trifle he sets them on me; sometimes like Baboons they mow and
chatter at me, and often bite me; like Hedge-hogs then they mount their
prickles at me, tumbling before me in my barefoot way. Sometimes I am all wound
about with Adders, who with their cloven tongues hiss me to madness. Hah!
yonder stands one of his spirits sent to torment me.


Trinc. What have we here, a man, or a fish?
This is some Monster of the Isle, were I in England,
As once I was, and had him painted;
Not a Holy Day fool there but would give me
Sixpence for the sight of him; well, if I could make
Him tame, he were a present for an Emperor.
Come hither pretty Monster, I Will do thee no harm.
Come hither!

Calib. Torment me not;
I Will bring thee Wood home faster.

Trinc. He talks none of the wisest, but I Will give him
A dram of the Bottle, that will clear his understanding.
Come on your ways Master Monster, open your mouth.
How now, you perverse Moon-calf! what,
I think you cannot tell who is your friend!
Open your chops, I say.

[Pours Wine down his throat. Calib. This is a brave God, and bears coelestrial
Liquor,
I Will kneel to him.

Trinc. He is a very hopeful Monster; Monster what say thou, art thou
content to turn civil and sober, as I am? for then thou shall be my subject.


Calib. I Will swear upon that Bottle to be true; for the liquor is not Earthly:
did thou not drop from Heaven?


Trinc. Only out of the Moon, I was the man in her when time was. By this
light, a very shallow Monster.


Calib. I Will show thee every fertile inch in the Isle, and kiss thy foot: I
prithee be my God, and let me drink.


[Drinks again. Trinc. Well drawn, Monster, in good faith.


Calib. I Will show thee the best Springs, I Will pluck thee Berries,
I Will fish for thee, and get thee wood enough:
A curse upon the Tyrant whom I serve, I Will bear him
No more sticks, but follow thee.

Trinc. The poor Monster is loving in his drink.


Calib. I prithee let me bring thee where Crabs grow,
And I with my long Nails, will dig thee Pig-nuts,
Show thee a Jay's Nest, and instruct thee how to snare
The Marmazet; I Will bring thee to clustered Filberds;
Will thou go with me?

Trinc. This Monster comes of a good natured race;
Is there no more of thy kin in this Island?

Calib. Divine, here is but one besides my self;
My lovely Sister, beautiful and bright as the full Moon.

Trinc. Where is she?


Calib. I left her clambring up a hollow Oak,
And plucking thence the dropping Honey-Combs.
Say my King, shall I call her to thee?

Trinc. She shall swear upon the Bottle too.
If she proves handsome she is mine: here Monster,
Drink again for thy good news; thou shall speak
A good word for me.

[Gives him the Bottle. Calib. Farewell, old Master, farewell, farewell.


Sings. No more Dams I Will make for Fish,
Nor fetch in firing at requiring,
Nor scrape Trencher, nor wash Dish,
Ban, Ban, Cackaliban
Has a new Master, get a new man.
Heigh-day, Freedom, freedom!

Trinc. Here Is two subjects got already, the Monster,
And his Sister: well, Duke Stephano, I say, and say again,
Wars will ensue, and so I drink.
[Drinks. From this worshipful Monster, and Mistress,
Monster his Sister,
I Will lay claim to this Island by Alliance:
Monster, I say thy Sister shall be my Spouse:
Come away Brother Monster, I Will lead thee to my Butt
And drink her health.

[Exeunt. Enter Prospero alone. Prosp. It Is not yet fit to let my Daughters
know I kept
The infant Duke of Mantua so near them in this Isle,
Whose Father dying bequeathed him to my care,
Till my false Brother (when he designed t'usurp
My Dukedom from me) exposed him to that fate
He meant for me. By calculation of his birth
I saw death threatening him, if, till some time were
Past, he should behold the face of any Woman:
And now the danger's nigh: Hippolito!

[ Enter Hippolito. Hip. Sir, I attend your pleasure.


Prosp. How I have loved thee from thy infancy,
Heaven knows, and thou thy self can bear me witness,
Therefore accuse not me for thy restraint.

Hip. Since I knew life, you have kept me in a Rock,
And you this day have hurried me from thence,
Only to change my Prison, not to free me.
I murmur not, but I may wonder at it.

Prosp. O gentle Youth, Fate waits for thee abroad,
A black Star threatens thee, and death unseen
Stands ready to devour thee.

Hip. You taught me not to fear him in any of his shapes:
Let me meet death rather than be a Prisoner.

Prosp. It Is pity he should seize thy tender youth.


Hip. Sir, I have often heard you say, no creature lived
Within this Isle, but those which Man was Lord of,
Why then should I fear?

Prosp. But here are creatures which I named not to thee,
Who share man's sovereignty by Nature's Laws,
And often depose him from it.

Hip. What are those Creatures, Sir?


Prosp. Those dangerous enemies of men called women.


Hip. Women! I never heard of them before.
But have I Enemies within this Isle, and do you
Keep me from them? do you think that I want
Courage to encounter 'em?

Prosp. No courage can resist 'em.


Hip. How then have you, Sir,
Lived so long unharm'd among them?

Prosp. O they despise old age, and spare it for that reason:
It is below their conquest, their fury falls
Alone upon the young.

Hip. Why then the fury of the young should fall on them again.
Pray turn me loose upon 'em: but, good Sir,
What are women like?

Prosp. Imagine something between young men and Angels:
Fatally beauteous, and have killing Eyes,
Their voices charm beyond the Nightingales,
They are all enchantment, those who once behold 'em,
Are made their slaves for ever.

Hip. Then I will wink and fight with 'em.


Prosp. It Is but in vain, for when your eyes are shut,
They through the lids will shine, and pierce your soul;
Absent, they will be present to you.
They Will haunt you in your very sleep.

Hip. Then I Will revenge it on 'em when I wake.


Prosp. You are without all possibility of revenge,
They are so beautiful that you can never attempt,
Nor wish to hurt them.

Hip. Are they so beautiful?


Prosp. Calm sleep is not so soft, nor Winter Suns,
Nor Summer Shades so pleasant.

Hip. Can they be fairer than the Plumes of Swans?
Or more delightful than the Peacocks Feathers?
Or than the gloss upon the necks of Doves?
Or have more various beauty than the Rainbow?
These I have seen, and without danger wondered at.

Prosp. All these are far below 'em: Nature made
Nothing but Woman dangerous and fair:
Therefore if you should chance to see 'em,
Avoid 'em straight, I charge you.

Hip. Well, since you say they are so dangerous,
I Will so far shun 'em as I may with safety of the
Unblemished honor which you taught me.
But let 'em not provoke me, for I Am sure I shall
Not then forbear them.

Prosp. Go in and read the Book I gave you last.
Tomorrow I may bring you better news.

Hip. I shall obey you, Sir.


[ Exit Hippolito. Prosp. So, so; I hope this lesson has secured him,
For I have been constrained to change his Lodging
From yonder Rock where first I bred him up,
And here have brought him home to my own Cell,
Because the Shipwreck happened near his Mansion.
I hope he will not stir beyond his limits,
For hither to he has been all obedience:
The Planets seem to smile on my designs,
And yet there is one sullen cloud behind,
I would it were dispersed.
[ Enter Miranda and Dorinda. How, my daughters! I thought I had instructed
Them enough: Children! retire;
Why do you walk this way?

Mir. It is within our bounds, Sir.


Prosp. But both take heed, that path is very dangerous.
Remember what I told you.

Dor. Is the man that way, Sir?


Prosp. All that you can imagine is ill there,
The curled Lion, and the rugged Bear
Are not so dreadful as that man.

Mir. Oh me, why stay we here then?


Dor. I Will keep far enough from his Den, I warrant him.


Mir. But you have told me, Sir, you are a man;
And yet you are not dreadful.

Prosp. I child! but I am a tame man; old men are tame
By Nature, but all the danger lies in a wild
Young man.

Dor. Do they run wild about the Woods?


Prosp. No, they are wild within Doors, in Chambers,
And in Closets.

Dor. But Father, I would stroke 'em and make 'em gentle,
Then sure they would not hurt me.

Prosp. You must not trust them, Child: no woman can come
Near 'em but she feels a pain full nine Months:
Well I must in; for new affairs require my
Presence: be you, Miranda, your Sister's Guardian.

[ Exit Prospero. Dor. Come, Sister, shall we walk the other way,
The man will catch us else, we have but two legs,
And he perhaps has four.

Mir. Well, Sister, though he have; yet look about you
And we shall spy him e're he comes too near us.

Dor. Come back, that way is toward his Den.


Mir. Let me alone; I Will venture first, for sure he can
Devour but one of us at once.

Dor. How dare you venture?


Mir. We'll find him sitting like a Hare in's Form,
And he shall not see us.

Dor. I, but you know my Father charged us both.


Mir. But who shall tell him on it? we'll keep each
Others Counsel.

Dor. I dare not for the world.


Mir. But how shall we hereafter shun him, if we do not Know him first?


Dor. Nay I confess I would fain see him too. I find it in my Nature, because
my Father has forbidden me.


Mir. I, there is it, Sister, if he had said nothing I had been quiet. Go
softly, and if you see him first, be quick and becken me away.


Dor. Well, if he does catch me, I Will humble my self to him,
And ask him pardon, as I do my Father,
When I have done a fault.

Mir. And if I can but escape with life, I had rather be in pain nine Months, as
my Father threatened, than lose my longing.


[Exeunt. The Scene changes, and discovers Hippolito in a Cave walking, his
face from the Audience. Hip. Prospero has often said that Nature makes
Nothing in vain: why then are women made?
Are they to suck the poison of the Earth,
As gaudy colored Serpents are? I Will ask that
Question, when next I see him here.

Enter Miranda and Dorinda peeping. Dor. O Sister, there it is, it walks about
like one of us.


Mir. I, just so, and has legs as we have too.


Hip. It strangely puzzles me: yet it is most likely
Women are somewhat between men and spirits.

Dor. Hark! it talks, sure this is not it my Father meant,
For this is just like one of us: methinks I am not half
So much afraid on it as I was; see, now it turns this way.

Mir. Heaven! what a goodly thing it is?


Dor. I Will go nearer it.


Mir. O no, it is dangerous, Sister! I Will go to it.
I would not for the world that you should venture.
My Father charged me to secure you from it.

Dor. I warrant you this is a tame man, dear Sister,
He Will not hurt me, I see it by his looks.

Mir. Indeed he will! but go back, and he shall eat me first: Fie, are you not
ashamed to be so much inquisitive?


Dor. You chide me for it, and would give your self.


Mir. Come back, or I will tell my Father.
Observe how he begins to stare already.
I Will meet the danger first, and then call you.

Dor. Nay, Sister, you shall never vanquish me in kindness.
I Will venture you, no more than you will me.

Prosp. within. Miranda, Child, where are you!


Mir. Do you not hear my Father call? go in.


Dor. 'Twas you he named, not me; I will but say my Prayers,
And follow you immediately.

Mir. Well, Sister, you will repent it.


[ Exit Miranda. Dor. Though I dye for it, I must have the other peep.


Hip. seeing her. What thing is that? sure it is some Infant of the Sun, dressed
in his Fathers gayest Beams, and comes to play with Birds: my sight is dazzled,
and yet I find I Am loath to shut my Eyes.

I must go nearer it -- but stay a while;
May it not be that beauteous murderer, Woman,
Which I was charged to shun? Speak, what art thou?
Thou shining Vision!

Dor. Alas I know not; but I Am told I am a Woman;
Do not hurt me, pray, fair thing.

Hip. I Would sooner tear my eyes out, than consent to do you any harm; though I
was told a Woman was my Enemy.


Dor. I never knew what 'twas to be an Enemy, nor can I e're prove so to that
which looks like you: for though I have been charged by him (whom yet I never
disobeyed) to shun your presence, yet I Would rather dye than lose it; therefore I
hope you will not have the heart to hurt me: though I fear you are a man, that
dangerous thing of which I have been warned; pray tell me what you are?


Hip. I must confess, I was informed I am a man,
But if I fright you, I shall wish I were some other Creature.
I was bid to fear you too.

Dor. Ay me! Heaven grant we be not poison to each other!
Alas, can we not meet but we must die?

Hip. I hope not so! for when two poisonous Creatures,
Both of the same kind, meet, yet neither dies.
I Have seen two Serpents harmless to each other,
Though they have twined into a mutual Knot:
If we have any venom in us, sure, we cannot be more
Poisonous, when we meet, than Serpents are.
You have a hand like mine, may I not gently touch it?

[Takes her hand. Dor. I Have touched my Father's and my Sister's hands
And felt no pain; but now, alas! there is something,
When I touch yours, which makes me sigh: just so
I Have seen two Turtles mourning when they met;
Yet mine is a pleasing grief; and so methought was theirs;
For still they mourned, and still they seemed to murmur too,
And yet they often met.

Hip. Oh Heavens! I have the same sense too: your hand
Methinks goes through me; I feel at my heart,
And find it pleases, though it pains me.

Prosp. within. Dorinda!


Dor. My Father calls again, ah, I must leave you.


Hip. Alas, I Am subject to the same command.


Dor. This is my first offense against my Father,
Which he, by severing us, too cruelly does punish.

Hip. And this is my first trespass too: but he has more
Offended truth than we have him:
He said our meeting would destructive be,
But I no death but in our parting see.

[Exeunt several ways. ACT III.
Enter Prospero and Miranda. Prosp. EXcuse it not, Miranda, for to you (the
elder, and, I thought the more discreet) I gave the conduct of your Sister's
actions.


Mir. Sir, when you called me thence, I did not fail to mind her of her duty to
depart.


Prosp. How can I think you did remember hers, when you forgot your own? did
you not see the man whom I command-ed you to shun?


Mir. I must confess I saw him at a distance.


Prosp. Did not his Eyes infect and poison you?
What alteration found you in your self?

Mir. I only wondered at a sight so new.


Prosp. But have you no desire once more to see him?
Come, tell me truly what you think of him?

Mir. As of the gayest thing I ever saw, so fine that it appeared more fit to
be beloved than feared, and seemed so near my kind, that I did think I might
have called it Sister.


Prosp. You do not love it?


Mir. How is it likely that I should, except the thing had first loved me?


Prosp. Cherish those thoughts: you have a generous soul;
And since I see your mind not apt to take the light
Impressions of a sudden love, I will unfold
A secret to your knowledge.
That Creature which you saw, is of a kind which
Nature made a prop and guide to yours.

Mir. Why did you then propose him as an object of terror to my mind? you
never used to teach me any thing but God-like truths, and what you said I did
believe as sacred.


Prosp. I feared the pleasing form of this young man
Might unawares possess your tender breast,
Which for a nobler Guest I had designed;
For shortly, my Miranda, you shall see another of his kind,
The full blown-flower, of which this youth was but the
Op'ning-bud. Go in, and send your sister to me.

Mir. Heaven still preserve you, Sir.


[ Ex. Miranda. Prosp. And make thee fortunate.
Dorinda now must be examined too concerning this
Late interview. I Am sure unartful truth lies open
In her mind, as Crystal streams their sandy bottom show.
I must take care her love grow not too fast,
For innocence is Love's most fertile soil,
Wherein he soon shoots up and widely spreads,
Nor is that danger which attends Hippolito yet overpast.

[ Enter Dorinda. Prosp. O, come hither, you have seen a man to day,
Against my strict command.

Dor. Who I? indeed I saw him but a little, Sir.


Prosp. Come, come, be clear. Your Sister told me all.


Dor. Did she? truly she would have seen him more than I,
But that I would not let her.

Prosp. Why so?


Dor. Because, methought, he would have hurt me less
Than he would her. But if I knew you would not be angry
With him, I could tell you, Sir, that he was much to blame.

Prosp. Hah! was he to blame?

Tell me, with that sincerity I taught you, how you became so bold to see the
man?


Dor. I hope you will forgive me, Sir, because I did not see him much till he
saw me. Sir, he would needs come in my way, and star'd, and star'd upon my
face; and so I thought I would be revenged of him, and therefore I gazed on him
as long; but if I e're come near a man again --


Prosp. I told you he was dangerous; but you would not be warned.


Dor. Pray be not angry, Sir, if I tell you, you are mistaken in him; for he
did me no great hurt.


Prosp. But he may do you more harm hereafter.


Dor. No, Sir, I Am as well as e're I was in all my life,
But that I cannot eat nor drink for thought of him.
That dangerous man runs ever in my mind.

Prosp. The way to cure you, is no more to see him.


Dor. Nay pray, Sir, say not so, I promised him
To see him once again; and you know, Sir,
You charged me I should never break my promise.

Prosp. Would you see him who did you so much mischief?


Dor. I warrant you I did him as much harm as he did me,
For when I left him, Sir, he sighed so as it grieved
My heart to hear him.

Prosp. Those sighs were poisonous, they infected you:
You say they grieved you to the heart.

Dor. It Is true; but yet his looks and words were gentle.


Prosp. These are the Day-dreams of a maid in love,
But still I fear the worst.

Dor. O fear not him, Sir,
I know he will not hurt you for my sake;
I Will undertake to tie him to a hair,
And lead him hither as my Prisoner to you.

Prosp. Take heed, Dorinda, you may be deceived;
This Creature is of such a Salvage race,
That no mild usage can reclaim his wildness;
But, like a Lyon's whelp bred up by hand,
When least you look for it, Nature will present
The Image of his Fathers bloody Paws,
Wherewith he purvey'd for his couching Queen;
And he will leap into his native fury.

Dor. He cannot change from what I left him, Sir.


Prosp. You speak of him with too much passion; tell me
(And on your duty tell me true, Dorinda)
What past betwixt you and that horrid creature?

Dor. How, horrid, Sir? if any else but you should call it so, indeed I should
be angry.


Prosp. Go too! you are a foolish Girl; but answer to what I ask, what thought
you when you saw it?


Dor. At first it star'd upon me and seemed wild,
And then I trembled, yet it looked so lovely, that when

I would have fled away, my feet seemed fastened to the ground,
Then it drew near, and with amazement asked
To touch my hand; which, as a ransom for my life,
I gave: but when he had it, with a furious gripe
He put it to his mouth so eagerly, I was afraid he
Would have swallowed it.

Prosp. Well, what was his behavior afterward?


Dor. He on a sudden grew so tame and gentle,
That he became more kind to me than you are;
Then, Sir, I grew I know not how, and touching his hand
Again, my heart did beat so strong as I lackt breath
To answer what he asked.

Prosp. You have been too fond, and I should chide you for it.


Dor. Then send me to that creature to be punished.


Prosp. Poor Child! thy passion like a lazy Ague
Has seized thy blood, instead of striving thou humour'st
And feed'st thy languishing disease: thou fight'st
The Battles of thy Enemy, and it is one part of what
I threatened thee, not to perceive thy danger.

Dor. Danger, Sir?
If he would hurt me, yet he knows not how:
He has no Claws, nor Teeth, nor Horns to hurt me,
But looks about him like a Callow-bird
Just straggl'd from the Nest: pray trust me, Sir,
To go to him again.

Prosp. Since you will venture,
I charge you bear your self reserv'dly to him,
Let him not dare to touch your naked hand,
But keep at distance from him.

Dor. This is hard.


Prosp. It is the way to make him love you more;
He will despise you if you grow too kind.

Dor. I Will struggle with my heart to follow this,
But if I lose him by it, will you promise
To bring him back again?

Prosp. Fear not, Dorinda;
But use him ill and he will be yours for ever.

Dor. I hope you have not cozened me again.


[ Exit Dorinda. Prosp. Now my designs are gathering to a head.
My spirits are obedient to my charms.
What, Ariel! my servant Ariel, where art thou?

[ Enter Ariel. Ariel. What would my potent Master? here I am.


Prosp. Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service
Did worthily perform, and I must use you in such another
Work: how goes the day?

Ariel. On the fourth, my Lord, and on the sixth you said our work should cease.


Prosp. And so it shall;
And thou shall have the open air at freedom.

Ariel. Thanks my great Lord.


Prosp. But tell me first, my spirit,
How fares the Duke, my Brother, and their followers?

Ariel. Confined together, as you gave me order,
In the Lime-Grove which weather-fends your Cell;
Within that Circuit up and down they wander,
But cannot stir one step beyond their compass.

Prosp. How do they bear their sorrows?


Ariel. The two Dukes appear like men distracted, their
Attendants brim-full of sorrow mourning over 'em;
But chiefly, he you termed the good Gonzalo:
His tears run down his Beard, like Winter-drops
From Eaves of Reeds, your Vision did so work 'em,
That if you now beheld 'em, your affections
Would become tender.

Prosp. Do thou think so, Spirit?


Ariel. Mine would, Sir, were I humane.


Prosp. And mine shall:
Have thou, who art but air, a touch, a feeling of their
Afflictions, and shall not I (a man like them, one
Who as sharply relish passions as they) be kindlier
Moved than thou art? though they have pierced
Me to the quick with injuries, yet with my nobler
Reason against my fury I will take part;
The rarer action is in virtue than in vengeance.
Go, my Ariel, refresh with needful food their
Famished bodies. With shows and cheerful.
Music comfort 'em.

Ariel. Presently, Master.


Prosp. With a twinckle, Ariel.


Ariel. Before you can say come and go,
And breath twice, and cry so; so,
Each spirit tripping on his toe,
Shall bring 'em meat with mop and more,
Do you love me, Master, I, or no?

Prosp. Dearly, my dainty Ariel, but stay, spirit;
What is become of my Slave Caliban,
And Sycorax his Sister?

Ariel. Potent Sir!
They have cast off your service, and revolted
To the wracked Mariners, who have already
Parcell'd your Island into Governments.

Prosp. No matter, I have now no need of 'em;
But, spirit, now I stay thee on the Wing;
Haste to perform what I have given in charge:
But see they keep within the bounds I set 'em.

Ariel. I Will keep 'em in with Walls of Adamant,
Invisible as air to mortal Eyes,
But yet unpassable.

Prosp. Make have then.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Alonzo, Antonio, Gonzalo. Gonz. I am weary, and can
go no further, Sir,
My old Bones ache, here is a Maze trod indeed
Through forth-rights and Meanders, by your patience
I needs must rest.

Alonz. Old Lord, I cannot blame thee, who am my self feiz'd
With a weariness to the dulling of my Spirits:
Sit and rest.
[They sit. Even here I will put off my hope, and keep it no longer
For my Flatterers: he is drowned whom thus we
Stray to find, and the Sea mocks our frustrate
Search on Land; well! let him go.

Ant. Do not for one repulse forego the purpose
Which you resolved to effect.

Alonz. I Am faint with hunger, and must despair
Of food, Heaven has incensed the Seas and
Shores against us for our crimes.
[Musick. What! Harmony again, my good friends, hark!

Anto. I fear some other horrid apparition.
Give us kind Keepers, Heaven I beseech thee!

Gonz. It Is cheerful Music, this, unlike the first;
And seems as 'twere meant t'unbend our cares,
And calm your troubled thoughts.

Ariel invisible Sings.
Dry those eyes which are over flowing,
All your storms are over-blowing:
While you in this Isle are bideing,
You shall feast without providing:
Every dainty you can think of,
Every Wine which you would drink of,
Shall be yours; all want shall shun you,
Ceres blessing so is on you.
Alonz. This voice speaks comfort to us.


Ant. Would 'twere come; there is no Music in a Song
To me, my stomach being empty.

Gonz. O for a heavenly Vision of Boiled,
Baked, and Roasted!

Enter eight fat Spirits, with Cornu-Copia in their hands. Alonz. Are these
plump shapes sent to deride our hunger?


Gonz. No, no: it is a Masque of fatten'd Devils, the
Burgo-Masters of the lower Region.
[Dance and vanish. O for a Collop of that large-haunch'd Devil
Who went out last!

Ant. going to the door. My Lord, the Duke, see yonder.
A Table, as I live, set out and furnished
With all varieties of Meats and fruits.

Alonz. It Is so indeed, but who dares taste this feast,
Which Fiends provide, perhaps, to poison us?

Gonz. Why that dare I; if the black Gentleman be so illnatur'd, he may do his
pleasure.


Ant. It Is certain we must either eat or famish,
I will encounter it, and feed.

Alonz. If both resolve, I will adventure too.


Gonz. Then good my Lord, make haste,
And say no Grace before it, I beseech you,
Because the meat will vanish strait, if, as I fear,
An evil Spirit be our Cook.

[Exeunt. Enter Trincalo and Caliban. Trinc. Brother Monster, welcome to my
private Palace.
But where is thy Sister, is she so brave a Lass?

Calib. In all this Isle there are but two more, the Daughters of the Tyrant
Prospero; and she is bigger than 'em both. O here she comes; now thou may
judge thy self, my Lord.


[Enter Sycorax. Trinc. She Is monstrous fair indeed. Is this to be my Spouse?
well she is Heir of all this Isle (for I will geld Monster). The Trincalos, like
other wise men, have anciently used to marry for Estate more than for beauty.


Sycorax. I prithee let me have the gay thing about thy neck, and that which
dangles at thy wrist.


[ Sycorax points to his Bosens Whistle, and his Bottle. Trinc. My dear
Blobber-lips; this, observe my Chuck, is a badge of my Sea-Office; my fair
Fuss, thou do not know it.


Syc. No, my dread Lord.


Trinc. It shall be a Whistle for our first Babe, and when the next Shipwreck
puts me again to swimming, I Will dive to get a Coral to it.


Syc. I Will be thy pretty child, and wear it first.


Trinc. I prithee sweet Babby do not play the wanton, and cry for my goods e're
I Am dead. When thou art my Widow, thou shall have the Devil and all.


Syc. May I not have the other fine thing?


Trinc. This is a sucking-Bottle for young Trincalo.


Calib. This is a God a mighty liquor, I did but drink thrice of it, and it
has made me glad e're since.


Syc. He is the bravest God I ever saw.


Calib. You must be kind to him, and he will love you.
I prithee speak to her, my Lord, and come nearer her.

Trinc. By this light, I dare not till I have drank: I must
Fortify my stomach first.

Syc. I shall have all his fine things when I Am a Widow.


[Pointing to his Bottle, and Bosens Whistle. Calib. I, but you must be kind
and kiss him then.


Trinc. My Brother Monster is a rare Pimp.


Syc. I Will hug thee in my arms, my Brother's God.


Trinc. Think o'thy soul Trincalo, thou art a dead man if this kindness
continue.


Calib. And he shall get thee a young Sycorax, will thou not, my Lord?


Trinc. Indeed I know not how, they do no such thing in my
Country.

Syc. I Will show thee how: thou shall get me twenty Sycoraxes; and I Will get thee
twenty Calibans.


Trinc. Nay, if they are got, she must do it all her self, that is certain.


Syc. And we will tumble in cool Plashes, and the soft Fens,
Where we will make us Pillows of Flags and Bull-rushes.

Calib. My Lord, she would be loving to thee, and thou will not let her.


Trinc. Every thing in its season, Brother Monster; but you must counsel her;
fair Maids must not be too forward.


Syc. My Brother's God, I love thee; prithee let me come to thee.


Trinc. Subject Monster, I charge thee keep the Peace between us.


Calib. Shall she not taste of that immortal Liquor?


Trinc. Umph! that is another question: for if she be thus flipant in her Water,
what will she be in her Wine?


[Enter Ariel (invisible) and changes the Bottle which stands upon the ground.
Ariel. There Is Water for your Wine.


[Exit Ariel. Trinc. Well! since it must be so.
[Gives her the Bottle. How do you like it now, my Queen that
[She drinks. Must be?

Syc. Is this your heavenly liquor? I Will bring you to a River of the same.


Trinc. Will thou so, Madam Monster? what a mighty Prince shall I be then? I
would not change my Dukedom to be great Turk Trincalo.


Syc. This is the drink of Frogs.


Trinc. Nay, if the Frogs of this Island drink such, they are the merryest
Frogs in Christendom.


Calib. She does not know the virtue of this liquor:
I prithee let me drink for her.

Trinc. Well said, Subject Monster.


[ Caliban drinks. Calib. My Lord, this is mere water.


Trinc. It Is thou have changed the Wine then, and drunk it up,
Like a debauched Fish as thou art. Let me see it,
I Will taste it my self. Element! mere Element! as I live.
It was a cold gulp such as this which killed my famous
Predecessor old Simon the King.

Calib. How does thy honor? prithee be not angry, and I will lick thy shoe.


Trinc. I could find in my heart to turn thee out of my Dominions for a
liquorish Monster.


Calib. O my Lord, I have found it out; this must be done by one of Prospero's
spirits.


Trinc. There Is nothing but malice in these Devils, I never loved 'em from my
Childhood. The Devil take 'em, I would it had bin holy water for their sakes.


Syc. Will not thy mightiness revenge our wrongs, on this great Sorcerer? I
know thou will, for thou art valiant.


Trinc. In my Sack, Madam Monster, as any flesh alive.


Syc. Then I will cleave to thee.


Trinc. Lovingly said, in troth: now cannot I hold out against her. This
Wife-like virtue of hers, has overcome me.


Syc. Shall I have thee in my arms?


Trinc. Thou shall have Duke Trincalo in thy arms:
But prithee be not too boistrous with me at first;
Do not discourage a young beginner.
[They embrace. Stand to your Arms, my Spouse,
And subject Monster;
[ Ent. Steph. Must. Vent. The Enemy is come to surprise us in our Quarters.
You shall know Rebels that I Am married to a Witch,
And we have a thousand Spirits of our party.

Steph. Hold! I ask a Truce; I and my Viceroys
(Finding no food, and but a small remainder of Brandy)
Are come to treat a peace betwixt us,
Which may be for the good of both Armies,
Therefore Trincalo disband.

Trinc. Plain Trincalo, methinks I might have been a Duke in your mouth, I Will
not accept of your Embassy without my title.


Steph. A title shall break no squares betwixt us:
Viceroys, give him his style of Duke, and treat with him,
Whilst I walk by in state.

[ Ventoso and Mustacho bow whilst Trincalo puts on his Cap. Must. Our Lord and
Master, Duke Stephano, has sent us
In the first place to demand of you, upon what
Ground you make war against him, having no right
To Govern here, as being elected only by
Your own voice.

Trinc. To this I answer, that having in the face of the world
Espoused the lawful Inheritrix of this Island,
Queen Blouze the first, and having homage done me,
By this hectoring Spark her Brother, from these two
I claim a lawful Title to this Island.

Must. Who, that Monster? he a Hector?


Calib. Lo! how he mocks me, will thou let him, my Lord?


Vent. Lord! quoth he: the Monster's a very natural.


Syc. Lo! lo! again; bite him to death I prithee.


Trinc. Viceroys! keep good tongues in your heads
I advise you, and proceed to your business, for I have
Other affairs to dispatch of more importance betwixt
Queen Slobber-Chops and my self.

Must. First and foremost, as to your claim that you have answered.


Vent. But second and foremost, we demand of you,
That if we make a peace, the Butt also may be
Comprehended in the Treaty.

Must. Is the Butt safe, Duke Trincalo?


Trinc. The Butt is partly safe: but to comprehend it in the Treaty, or indeed
to make any Treaty, I cannot with my honor, without your submission. These
two, and the Spirits under me, stand likewise upon their honors.


Calib. Keep the liquor for us, my Lord, and let them drink
Brine, for I will not show 'em the quick freshes of the Island.

Steph. I understand, being present, from my Ambassadors what your resolution
is, and ask an hours time of deliberation, and so I take our leave; but first I
desire to be entertained at your Butt, as becomes a Prince, and his Ambassadors.


Trinc. That I refuse, till acts of Hostility be ceased.
These Rogues are rather Spies than Ambassadors;
I must take heed of my Butt. They come to pry
Into the secrets of my Dukedom.

Vent. Trincalo you are a barbarous Prince, and so farewell.


[ Exeunt Steph. Must. Vent. Trinc. Subject Monster! stand your Sentry before
my Cellar; my Queen and I will enter and feast our selves within.


Syc. May I not marry that other King and his two subjects, to help you anights?


Trinc. What a careful Spouse have I? well! if she does
Cornute me, the care is taken.
When underneath my power my foes have truckl'd,
To be a Prince, who would not be a Cuckold?

[Exeunt. Enter Ferdinand, and Ariel (invisible.) Ferd. How far will this
invisible Musician conduct
My steps? he hovers still about me, whether
For good or ill I cannot tell, nor care I much;
For I have been so long a slave to chance, that
I Am as weary of her flatteries as her frowns,
But here I am --

Ariel. Here I am.


Ferd. Hah! art thou so? the Spirit's turned an Echo:
This might seem pleasant, could the burden of my
Griefs accord with any thing but sighs.
And my last words, like those of dying men
Need no reply. Fain I would go to shades, where
Few would wish to follow me.

Ariel. Follow me.


Ferd. This evil Spirit grows importunate,
But I Will not take his counsel.

Ariel. Take his counsel.


Ferd. It may be the Devil's counsel. I Will never take it.


Ariel. Take it.


Ferd. I will discourse no more with thee,
Nor follow one step further.

Ariel. One step further.


Ferd. This must have more importance than an Echo.
Some Spirit tempts to a precipice.
I Will try if it will answer when I sing
My sorrows to the murmurs of this Brook.
He Sings. Go thy way.

Ariel. Go thy way.


Ferd. Why should thou stay?


Ariel. Why should thou stay?


Ferd. Where the Winds whistle, and where the streams creep,
Under yond Willow-tree, fain would I sleep.
Then let me alone,
For it is time to be gone.

Ariel. For it is time to be gone.


Ferd. What cares or pleasures can be in this Isle?
Within this desert place
There lives no humane race;
Fate cannot frown here, nor kind fortune smile.

Ariel. Kind Fortune smiles, and she
Has yet in store for thee
Some strange felicity.
Follow me, follow me,
And thou shall see.

Ferd. I Will take thy word for once;
Lead on Musician.

[Exeunt and return. Scene changes, and discovers Prospero and Miranda. Prosp.
Advance the fringed Curtains of thine Eyes, and say what thou see yonder.


Mir. Is it a Spirit?
Lord! how it looks about! Sir, I confess it carries a brave form.
But it is a Spirit.

Prosp. No Girl, it eats and sleeps, and has such senses as we have. This young
Gallant, whom thou see, was in the wrack; were he not somewhat stained with
grief (beauty's worst Cancker) thou might call him a goodly person; he has
lost his company, and strays about to find 'em.


Mir. I might call him a thing divine, for nothing natural I ever saw so noble.


Prosp. It goes on as my Soul prompts it: Spirit, fine Spirit. I Will free thee
within two days for this.


Ferd. She Is sure the Mistress, on whom these airs attend. Fair Excellence, if,
as your form declares, you are divine, be pleased to instruct me how you will
be worshipped; so bright a beauty cannot sure belong to humane kind.


Mir. I am, like you, a mortal, if such you are.


Ferd. My language too! O Heavens! I am the best of them who speak this speech,
when I Am in my own Country.


Prosp. How, the best? what were thou if the Duke of Savoy heard thee?


Ferd. As I am now, who wonders to hear thee speak of Savoy: he does hear me,
and that he does I weep, my self am Savoy, whose fatal Eyes (e're since at
ebb) beheld the Duke my Father wrackt.


Mir. A lack! for pity.


Prosp. At the first sight they have changed Eyes, dear Ariel,
I Will set thee free for this -- young, Sir, a word.
With hazard of your self you do me wrong.

Mir. Why speaks my Father so urgently?
This is the third man that e're I saw, the first whom.
E're I sighed for, sweet Heaven move my Father
To be inclined my way.

Ferd. O! if a Virgin! and your affection not gone forth,
I Will make you Mistress of Savoy.

Prosp. Soft, Sir! one word more.
They are in each others powers, but this swift
Business I must uneasy make, lest too light
Winning make the prize light -- one word more.
Thou usurp'st the name not due to thee, and have
Put thy self upon this Island as a spy to get the
Government from me, the Lord of it.

Ferd. No, as I Am a man.


Mir. There Is nothing ill can dwell in such a Temple,
If the Evil Spirit has so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell with it.

Prosp. No more. Speak not you for him, he is a Traitor,
Come! thou art my Prisoner and shall be in
Bonds. Seawater shall thou drink, thy food
Shall be the fresh-Brook-Muscles, withered Roots,
And Husks, wherein the Acorn crawled; follow.

Ferd. No, I will resist such entertainment
Till my Enemy has more power.

[He draws, and is charmed from moving. Mir. O dear Father! make not too rash a
trial
Of him, for he is gentle and not fearful.

Prosp. My child my Tutor! put thy Sword up Traitor,
Who make a show, but dare not strike: thy
Conscience is possessed with guilt. Come from
Thy Ward, for I can here disarm thee with
This Wand, and make thy Weapon drop.

Mir. Beseech you Father.


Prosp. Hence: hang not on my Garment.


Mir. Sir, have pity,
I Will be his Surety.

Prosp. Silence! one word more shall make me chide thee,
If not hate thee: what, an advocate for an
Impostor? sure thou think there are no more
Such shapes as his?
To the most of men this is a Caliban,
And they to him are Angels.

Mir. My affections are then most humble,
I have no ambition to see a goodlier man.

Prosp. Come on, obey:
Thy Nerves are in their infancy again, and have
No vigor in them.

Ferd. So they are:
My Spirits, as in a Dream, are all bound up:
My Father's loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wrack of all my friends, and this man's threats,
To whom I am subdued, would seem light to me,
Might I but once a day through my Prison behold this maid:
All corners else of the Earth let liberty make use of:
I have space enough in such a Prison.

Prosp. It works: come on:
Thou have done well, fine Ariel: follow me.
Hark what thou shall more do for me.

[Whispers Ariel. Mir. Be of comfort!
My Father's of a better nature, Sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.

Prosp. Thou shall be as free as Mountain Winds:
But then exactly do all points of my command.

Ariel. To a Syllable.


[Exit Ariel. Prosp. to Mir. Go in that way, speak not a word for him:
I Will separate you.

[Exit Miranda. Ferd. As soon thou may divide the waters
When thou strik'st 'em, which pursue thy bootless blow,
And meet when it is past.

Prosp. Go practice your Philosophy within,
And if you are the same you speak your self,
Bear your afflictions like a Prince -- That Door
Shows you your Lodging.

Ferd. It Is in vain to strive, I must obey.


[Exit. Ferd. Prosp. This goes as I would wish it.
(...) (...) my second care, Hippolito.
(...) not need to chide him for his fault,
His passion is become his punishment.
Come sorth, Hippolito.

[Enter Hippolito. Hip. entering. It Is Prospero's voice.


Prosp. Hippolito! I know you now expect I should severely chide you: you have
seen a woman in contempt of my commands.


Hip. But, Sir, you see I am come off unharm'd;
I told you, that you need not doubt my courage.

Prosp. You think you have received no hurt.


Hip. No, none Sir.
Try me again, when e're you please I Am ready:
I think I cannot fear an Army of 'em.

Prosp. How much in vain it is to bridle Nature!
[Aside. Well! what was the success of your encounter?

Hip. Sir, we had none, we yielded both at first,
For I took her to mercy, and she me.

Prosp. But are you not much changed from what you were?


Hip. Methinks I wish and wish! for what I know not,
But still I wish -- yet if I had that woman,
She, I believe, could tell me what I wish for.

Prosp. What would you do to make that Woman yours?


Hip. I Would quit the rest of the world that I might live alone with
Her, she never should be from me.
We too would sit and look till our eyes ak'd.

Prosp. You Would soon be weary of her.


Hip. O, Sir, never.


Prosp. But you will grow old and wrinckl'd, as you see me now,
And then you will not care for her.

Hip. You may do what you please, but, Sir, we two can never possibly grow old.


Prosp. You must, Hippolito.


Hip. Whether we will or no, Sir, who shall make us?


Prosp. Nature, which made me so.


Hip. But you have told me her works are various;
She made you old, but she has made us young.

Prosp. Time will convince you,
Mean while be sure you tread in honors paths,
That you may merither, and that you may not want
Fit occasions to employ your virtue, in this next
Cave there is a stranger lodged, one of your kind,
Young, of a noble presence, and as he says himself,
Of Princely birth, he is my Prisoner and in deep
Affliction, visit, and comfort him; it will become you.

Hip. It is my duty, Sir.


[Exit Hippolito. Prosp. True, he has seen a woman, yet he lives, perhaps I
took the moment of his birth amiss, perhaps my Art it self is false: on what
strange grounds we build our hopes and fears, man's life is all a mist, and in
the dark, our fortunes meet us.

If Fate be not, then what can we foresee,
Or how can we avoid it, if it be?
If by free will in our own paths we move,
How are we bounded by Decrees above?
Whether we drive, or whether we are driven,
If ill it is ours, if good the act of Heaven.

[Exit Prospero. Enter Hippolito and Ferdinand. Scene, a Cave. Ferd. Your pity,
noble youth, does much oblige me,
Indeed 'twas sad to lose a Father so.

Hip. I, and an only Father too, for sure you said
You had but one.

Ferd. But one Father! he is wondrous simple!


[Aside. Hip. Are such misfortunes frequent in your world,
Where many men live?

Ferd. Such we are born to.
But gentle youth, as you have questioned me,
So give me leave to ask you, what you are?

Hip. Do not you know?


Ferd. How should I?


Hip. I well hoped I was a man, but by your ignorance
Of what I am, I fear it is not so:
Well, Prospero! this is now the second time
You have deceived me.

Ferd. Sir, there is no doubt you are a man:
But I would know of whence?

Hip. Why, of this world, I never was in yours.


Ferd. Have you a Father?


Hip. I was told I had one, and that he was a man, yet I have bin so much
deceived, I dare not tell't you for a truth; but I have still been kept a
Prisoner for fear of women.


Ferd. They indeed are dangerous, for since I came I have beheld one here,
whose beauty pierced my heart.


Hip. How did she pierce? you seem not hurt.


Ferd. Alas! the wound was made by her bright eyes,
And festers by her absence.
But to speak plainer to you, Sir, I love her.

Hip. Now I suspect that love's the very thing, that I feel too! pray tell me
truly, Sir, are you not grown unquiet since you saw her?


Ferd. I take no rest.


Hip. Just, just my disease.
Do you not wish you do not know for what?

Ferd. O no! I know too well for what I wish.


Hip. There, I confess, I differ from you, Sir:
But you desire she may be always with you?

Ferd. I can have no felicity without her.


Hip. Just my condition! alas, gentle Sir,
I Will pity you, and you shall pity me.

Ferd. I love so much, that if I have her not,
I find I cannot live.

Hip. How! do you love her?
And would you have her too? that must not be:
For none but I must have her.

Ferd. But perhaps, we do not love the same:
All beauties are not pleasing alike to all.

Hip. Why are there more fair Women, Sir,
Besides that one I love?

Ferd. That Is a strange question. There are many more besides that beauty which
you love.


Hip. I will have all of that kind, if there be a hundred of 'em.


Ferd. But noble youth, you know not what you say.


Hip. Sir, they are things I love, I cannot be without 'em:
O, how I rejoice! more women!

Ferd. Sir, if you love you must be tied to one.


Hip. Tied! how tied to her?


Ferd. To love none but her.


Hip. But, Sir, I find it is against my Nature.
I must love where I like, and I believe I may like all,
All that are fair: come! bring me to this Woman,
For I must have her.

Ferd. His simplicity
Is such that I can scarce be angry with him.
[Aside. Perhaps, sweet youth, when you behold her,
You will find you do not love her.

Hip. I find already I love, because she is another Woman.


Ferd. You cannot love two women, both at once.


Hip. Sure it is my duty to love all who do resemble
Her whom I Have already seen. I Will have as many as I can,
That are so good, and Angel-like, as she I love.
And will have yours.

Ferd. Pretty youth, you cannot.


Hip. I can do any thing for that I love.


Ferd. I may, perhaps, by force restrain you from it.


Hip. Why do so if you can. But either promise me
To love no Woman, or you must try your force.

Ferd. I cannot help it, I must love.


Hip. Well you may love, for Prospero taught me friendship too: you shall love
me and other men if you can find 'em, but all the Angel-women shall be mine.


Ferd. I must break off this conference, or he will
Urge me else beyond what I can bear.
Sweet youth! some other time we will speak
Further concerning both our loves; at present
I am indisposed with weariness and grief,
And would, if you are pleased, retire a while.

Hip. Some other time be it; but, Sir, remember
That I both seek and much entreat your friendship,
For next to Women, I find I can love you.

Ferd. I thank you, Sir, I will consider of it.


[Exit Ferdinand. Hip. This Stranger does insult and comes into my
World to take those heavenly beauties from me,
Which I believe I am inspired to love,
And yet he said he did desire but one.
He would be poor in love, but I Will be rich:
I now perceive that Prospero was cunning;
For when he frighted me from womankind,
Those precious things he for himself designed.

[Exit. ACT IV.
Enter Prospero, and Miranda. Prosp. YOur suit has pity in it, and has prevailed.
Within this Cave he lies, and you may see him:
But yet take heed; let Prudence be your Guide;
You must not stay, your visit must be short.
[She's going. One thing I had forgot; insinuate into his mind
A kindness to that youth, whom first you saw;
I would have friendship grow betwixt 'em.

Mir. You shall be obeyed in all things.


Prosp. Be earnest to unite their very souls.


Mir. I shall endeavor it.


Prosp. This may secure Hippolito from that dark danger which my art forebodes;
for friendship does provide a double strength to oppose the assaults of fortune.


[Exit Prospero. Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. To be a Prisoner where I dearly love,
is but a double tie; a Link of fortune joined to the chain of love; but not to
see her, and yet to be so near her, there is the hardship; I feel my self as on
a Rack, stretched out, and nigh the ground, on which I might have ease, yet
cannot reach it.


Mir. Sir! my Lord? where are you?


Ferd. Is it your voice, my Love? or do I dream?


Mir. Speak softly, it is I.


Ferd. O heavenly Creature! ten times more gentle, than your Father's cruel,
how on a sudden all my griefs are vanished!


Mir. I come to help you to support your griefs.


Ferd. While I stand gazing thus, and thus have leave to touch your hand, I do
not envy freedom.


Mir. Hark! hark! is it not my Father's voice I hear? I fear he calls me back
again too soon.


Ferd. Leave fear to guilty minds: it is scarce a virtue when it is paid to
Heaven.


Mir. But there it is mixed with love, and so is mine; yet I may fear, for I am
guilty when I disobey my Fathers will in loving you too much.


Ferd. But you please Heaven in disobeying him,
Heaven bids you succor Captives in distress.

Mir. How do you bear your Prison?


Ferd. It Is my Palace while you are here, and love and silence wait upon our
wishes; do but think we choose it, and it is what we would choose.


Mir. I Am sure what I would.
But how can I be certain that you love me?
Look to it; for I will dye when you are false.
I Have heard my Father tell of Maids, who died,
And haunted their false Lovers with their Ghosts.

Ferd. Your Ghost must take another form to fright me,
This shape will be too pleasing: do I love you?
O Heaven! O Earth! bear witness to this sound,
If I prove false --

Mir. Oh hold, you shall not swear;
For Heaven will hate you if you prove forsworn.

Ferd. Did I not love, I could no more endure this undeserved captivity, then I
could wish to gain my freedom with the loss of you.


Mir. I am a fool to weep at what I Am glad of: but I have a suit to you, and
that, Sir, shall be now the only trial of your love.


Ferd. You Have said enough, never to be denied, were it my life; for you have far
o'rebid the price of all that humane life is worth.


Mir. Sir, it is to love one for my sake, who for his own deserves all the
respect which you can ever pay him.


Ferd. You mean your Father: do not think his usage can make me hate him; when
he gave you being, he then did that which cancelled all these wrongs.


Mir. I meant not him, for that was a request which if you love I should not
need to urge.


Ferd. Is there another whom I ought to love?
And love him for your sake?

Mir. Yes such a one, who for his sweetness and his goodly shape, (if I, who am
unskilled in forms, may judge) I think can scarce be equaled: It Is a youth, a
Stranger too as you are.


Ferd. Of such a graceful feature, and must I for your sake love?


Mir. Yes, Sir, do you scruple to grant the first request I ever made? he is
wholly unacquainted with the world, and wants your conversation. You should
have compassion on so mere a stranger.


Ferd. Those need compassion whom you discommend, not whom you praise.


Mir. I only ask this easy trial of you.


Ferd. Perhaps it might have easier bin
If you had never asked it.

Mir. I cannot understand you; and methinks am loath
To be more knowing.

Ferd. He has his freedom, and may get access, when my
Confinement makes me want that blessing.
I his compassion, need and not he mine.

Mir. If that be all you doubt, trust me for him.
He has a melting heart, and soft to all the Seals
Of kindness; I will undertake for his compassion.

Ferd. O Heavens! would I were sure I did not need it.


Mir. Come, you must love him for my sake: you shall.


Ferd. Must I for yours, and cannot for my own?
Either you do not love, or think that I do not:
But when you bid me love him, I must hate him.

Mir. Have I so far offended you already,
That he offends you only for my sake?
Yet sure you would not hate him, if you saw
Him as I have done, so full of youth and beauty.

Ferd. O poison to my hopes!
[Aside. When he did visit me, and I did mention this
Beauteous Creature to him, he did then tell me
He would have her.

Mir. Alas, what mean you?


Ferd. It is too plain: like most of her frail Sex, she is false,
But has not learnt the art to hide it;
Nature has done her part, she loves variety:
Why did I think that any Woman could be innocent,
Because she is young? No, no, their Nurses teach them
Change, when with two Nipples they divide their
Liking.

Mir. I fear I have offended you, and yet I meant no harm:
But if you please to hear me --
[A noise within. Hark! Sir! now I am sure my Father comes, I know
His steps; dear Love retire a while, I fear
I Have stayed too long.

Ferd. Too long indeed, and yet not long enough: oh jealousy!
Oh Love! how you distract me?

[Exit Ferdinand Mir. He appears displeased with that young man, I know
Not why: but, till I find from whence his hate proceeds,
I must conceal it from my Fathers knowledge,
For he will think that guiltless I have caused it;
And suffer me no more to see my Love.

[Enter Prospero. Prosp. Now I have been indulgent to your wish,
You have seen the Prisoner?

Mir. Yes.


Prosp. And he spoke to you?


Mir. He spoke; but he received short answers from me.


Prosp. How like you his converse?


Mir. At second sight
A man does not appear so rare a Creature.

Prosp. aside. I find she loves him much because she hides it.
Love teaches cunning even to innocence,
And where he gets possession, his first work is to
Dig deep within a heart, and there lie hid,
And like a Miser in the dark to feast alone.
But tell me, dear Miranda, how does he suffer
His imprisonment?

Mir. I think he seems displeased.


Prosp. O then it is plain his temper is not noble,
For the brave with equal minds bear good
And evil fortune.

Mir. O, Sir, but he is pleased again so soon
That it is not worth your noting.

Prosp. To be soon displeased and pleased so suddenly again,
Does show him of a various froward Nature.

Mir. The truth is, Sir, he was not vexed at all, but only
Seemed to be so.

Prosp. If he be not and yet seems angry, he is a dissembler,
Which shows the worst of Natures.

Mir. Truly, Sir, the man has faults enough; but in my conscience that is none
of 'em. He can be no dissembler.


Prosp. aside. How she excuses him, and yet desires that I should judge her
heart indifferent to him? well, since his faults are many, I am glad you love
him not.


Mir. It Is like, Sir, they are many,
But I know none he has, yet let me often see him
And I shall find 'em all in time.

Prosp. I Will think on it.
Go in, this is your hour of Orizons.

Mir. aside. Forgive me, truth, for thus disguising thee; if I can make him
think I do not love the stranger much, he will let me see him oftener.


[Exit Miranda. Prosp. Stay! stay -- I had forgot to ask her what she has said
Of young Hippolito: Oh! here he comes! and with him
My Dorinda. I Will not be seen, let
[ Ent. Hippolito and Dorinda. Their loves grow in secret.

[ Exit Prospero. Hip. But why are you so sad?


Dor. But why are you so joyful?


Hip. I have within me all, all the various Music of

The Woods. Since last I saw you I have heard brave news!
I Will tell you, and make you joyful for me.

Dor. Sir, when I saw you first, I through my eyes drew
Something in, I know not what it is;
But still it entertains me with such thoughts
As makes me doubtful whether joy becomes me.

Hip. Pray believe me;
As I Am a man, I Will tell you blessed news.
I have heard there are more Women in the World,
As fair as you are too.

Dor. Is this your news? you see it moves not me.


Hip. And I Will have 'em all.


Dor. What will become of me then?


Hip. I Will have you too.
But are not you acquainted with these Women?

Dor. I never saw but one.


Hip. Is there but one here?
This is a base poor world, I Will go to the other;
I Have heard men have abundance of 'em there.
But pray where is that one Woman?

Dor. Who, my Sister?


Hip. Is she your Sister? I Am glad o'that: you shall help me to her, and I Will
love you for it.


[Offers to take her hand. Dor. Away! I will not have you touch my hand.
My Father's counsel which enjoined reservedness,
[Aside. Was not in vain I see.

Hip. What makes you shun me?


Dor. You need not care, you will have my Sisters hand.


Hip. Why, must not he who touches hers touch yours?


Dor. You mean to love her too.


Hip. Do not you love her?
Then why should not I do so?

Dor. She is my Sister, and therefore I must love her:
But you cannot love both of us.

Hip. I warrant you I can:
Oh that you had more Sisters!

Dor. You may love her, but then I Will not love you.


Hip. O but you must;
One is enough for you, but not for me.

Dor. My Sister told me she had seen another;
A man like you, and she liked only him;
Therefore if one must be enough for her,
He is that one, and then you cannot have her.

Hip. If she like him, she may like both of us.


Dor. But how if I should change and like that man?
Would you be willing to permit that change?

Hip. No, for you liked me first.


Dor. So you did me.


Hip. But I would never have you see that man;
I cannot bear it.

Dor. I Will see neither of you.


Hip. Yes, me you may, for we are now acquainted;
But he is the man of whom your Father warned you:
O! he is a terrible, huge, monstrous creature,
I am but a Woman to him.

Dor. I will see him,
Except you will promise not to see my Sister.

Hip. Yes for your sake I needs must see your Sister.


Dor. But she is a terrible, huge Creature too; if I were not
Her Sister she would eat me; therefore take heed.

Hip. I heard that she was fair, and like you.


Dor. No, indeed, she is like my Father, with a great Beard,
'Twould fright you to look on her,
Therefore that man and she may go together,
They are fit for no body but one another.

Hip. looking in. Yonder he comes with glaring eyes, fly! fly! before he sees
you.


Dor. Must we part so soon?


Hip. You Are a lost Woman if you see him.


Dor. I would not willingly be lost, for fear you
Should not find me. I Will avoid him.

[ Exit Dorinda. Hip. She fain would have deceived me, but I know her
Sister must be fair, for she is a Woman;
All of a Kind that I have seen are like to one
Another: all the Creatures of the Rivers and
The Woods are so.

[ Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. O! well encountered, you are the happy man!
Y' have got the hearts of both the beauteous Women.

Hip. How! Sir? pray, are you sure on it?


Ferd. One of 'em charged me to love you for her sake.


Hip. Then I must have her.


Ferd. No, not till I am dead.


Hip. How dead? what is that? but whatsoever it be I long to have her.


Ferd. Time and my grief may make me dye.


Hip. But for a friend you should make haste; I never asked
Any thing of you before.

Ferd. I see your ignorance;
And therefore will instruct you in my meaning.
The Woman, whom I love, saw you and loved you.
Now, Sir, if you love her you will cause my death.

Hip. Besure I Will do it then.


Ferd. But I am your friend;
And I request you that you would not love her.

Hip. When friends request unreasonable things,
Sure they are to be denied: you say she is fair,
And I must love all who are fair; for, to tell
You a secret, Sir, which I have lately found
Within my self; they all are made for me.

Ferd. That Is but a fond conceit: you are made for one, and one for you.


Hip. You cannot tell me, Sir,
I know I Am made for twenty hundred Women.
(I mean if there so many be in the World)
So that if once I see her I shall love her.

Ferd. Then do not see her.


Hip. Yes, Sir, I must see her.
For I would fain have my heart beat again,
Just as it did when I first saw her Sister.

Ferd. I find I must not let you see her then.


Hip. How will you hinder me?


Ferd. By force of Arms.


Hip. By force of Arms?
My Arms perhaps may be as strong as yours.

Ferd. He Is still so ignorant that I pity him, and fain
Would avoid force: pray, do not see her, she was
Mine first; you have no right to her.

Hip. I have not yet considered what is right, but, Sir,
I know my inclinations are to love all Women:
And I have been taught that to dissemble what I
Think is base. In honor then of truth, I must
Declare that I do love, and I will see your Woman.

Ferd. Would you be willing I should see and love your
Woman, and endeavor to seduce her from that
Affection which she vowed to you?

Hip. I would not you should do it, but if she should
Love you best, I cannot hinder her.
But, Sir, for fear she should, I will provide against
The worst, and try to get your Woman.

Ferd. But I pretend no claim at all to yours;
Besides you are more beautiful than I,
And fitter to allure unpracticed hearts.
Therefore I once more beg you will not see her.

Hip. I Am glad you let me know I have such beauty.
If that will get me Women, they shall have it
As far as e're 'twill go: I Will never want 'em.

Ferd. Then since you have refused this act of friendship,
Provide your self a Sword; for we must fight.

Hip. A Sword, what is that?


Ferd. Why such a thing as this.


Hip. What should I do with it?


Ferd. You must stand thus, and push against me,
While I push at you, till one of us fall dead.

Hip. This is brave sport,
But we have no Swords growing in our World.

Ferd. What shall we do then to decide our quarrel?


Hip. We'll take the Sword by turns, and fight with it.


Ferd. Strange ignorance! you must defend your life,
And so must I: but since you have no Sword
Take this; for in a corner of my Cave
[Gives him his sword. I found a rusty one, perhaps 'twas his who keeps
Me Prisoner here: that I will fit:
When next we meet prepare your self to fight.

Hip. Make haste then, this shall never be yours again.
I mean to fight with all the men I meet, and
When they are dead, their Women shall be mine.

Ferd. I see you are unskilful; I desire not to take
Your life, but if you please we'll fight on
These conditions; He who first draws blood,
Or who can take the others Weapon from him,
Shall be acknowledged as the Conqueror,
And both the Women shall be his.

Hip. Agreed,
And every day I Will fight for two more with you.

Ferd. But win these first.


Hip. I Will warrant you I Will push you.


[Exeunt severally. Enter Trincalo, Caliban, Sycorax: Calib. My Lord, I see 'em
coming yonder.


Trinc. Who?


Calib. The starved Prince, and his two thirsty Subjects,
That would have our Liquor.

Trinc. If thou were a Monster of parts I would make thee
My Master of Ceremonies, to conduct 'em in.
The Devil take all Dunces, thou have lost a brave
Employment by not being a Linguist, and for want
Of behavior.

Syc. My Lord, shall I go meet 'em? I Will be kind to all of 'em,
Just as I am to thee.

Trinc. No, that is against the fundamental Laws of my Dukedom: you are in a
high place, Spouse, and must give good Example. Here they come, we'll put on
the gravity of Statesmen, and be very dull, that we may be held wise.


Enter Stephano, Ventoso, Mustacho. Vent. Duke Trincalo, we have considered.


Trinc. Peace, or War?


Must. Peace, and the Butt.


Steph. I come now as a private person, and promise to live peaceably under
your Government.


Trinc. You shall enjoy the benefits of Peace; and the first Fruits of it,
amongst all civil Nations, is to be drunk for joy: Caliban skink about.


Steph. I long to have a Rowse to her Graces health, and to the Haunse in
Kelder, or rather Haddock in Kelder, for I guess it will be half Fish.


[Aside. Trinc. Subject Stephano here is to thee; and let old quarrels be
drowned in this draught.


[Drinks. Steph. Great Magistrate, here is thy Sisters health to thee.
[Drinks to Caliban.
Syc. He shall not drink of that immortal liquor,
My Lord, let him drink water.

Trinc. O sweet heart, you must not shame your self to day.
Gentlemen Subjects, pray bear with her good Huswifry:
She wants a little breeding, but she is hearty.

Must. Ventoso here is to thee. Is it not better to pierce the
Butt, than to quarrel and pierce one another bellies?

Vent. Let it come Boy.


Trinc. Now would I lay greatness aside, and shake my heels, if I had but
Music.


Calib. O my Lord! my Mother left us in her Will a hundred Spirits to attend
us, Devils of all sorts, some great roaring Devils, and some little singing
Sprights.


Syc. Shall we call? and thou shall hear them in the Air.


Trinc. I accept the motion: let us have our Mother-in-Law's
Legacy immediately.

Calib. sings. We want Music, we want Mirth,
Up Dam and cleave the Earth,
We have now no Lords that wrong us,
Send thy merry Sprights among us.

[Musick heard. Trinc. What a merry Tyrant am I, to have my
Music and pay nothing for it? come hands, hands,
Let Us lose no time while the Devil's in the
Humor.

[A Dance. Trinc. Enough, enough: now to our Sack again.


Vent. The Bottle's drunk.


Must. Then the Bottle's a weak shallow fellow if it be drunk first.


Trinc. Caliban, give Bottle the belly full again.


Steph. May I ask your Grace a question? pray is that hectoring Spark, as you
called him, flesh or fish?


Trinc. Subject I know not, but he drinks like a fish.


[ Enter Caliban. Steph. O here is the Bottle again; he has made a good voyage,
Come, who begins a Brindis to the Duke?

Trinc. I Will begin it my self: give me the Bottle; it is my
Prerogative to drink first; Stephano, give me thy hand,
Thou have been a Rebel, but here is to thee,
[Drinks. Prithee why should we quarrel? shall I swear
Two Oaths? by Bottle, and by Butt I love thee:
In witness whereof I drink soundly.

Steph. Your Grace shall find there is no love lost,
For I will pledge you soundly.

Trinc. Thou have been a false Rebel, but that is all one;
Pledge my Grace faithfully.

Steph. I will pledge your Grace Up se Dutch.


Trinc. But thou shall not pledge me before I have drunk again, would thou
take the Liquor of Life out of my hands; I see thou art a piece of a Rebel
still, but here is to thee, now thou shall have it.


[Stephano drinks. Vent. We loyal Subjects may be choked for any drink we can
get.


Trinc. Have patience good people, you are unreasonable, you would be drunk as soon
as I. Ventoso you shall have your time, but you must give place to Stephano.


Must. Brother Ventoso, I am afraid we shall lose our places.
The Duke grows fond of Stephano, and will declare him
Viceroy.

Steph. I have done my worst at your Graces Bottle.


Trinc. Then the Folks may have it. Caliban
Go to the Butt, and tell me how it sounds:
Peer Stephano, do thou love me?

Steph. I love your Grace and all your Princely Family.


Trinc. It Is no matter if thou love me; hang my Family:
Thou art my Friend, prithee tell me what
Thou think of my Princess?

Steph. I look on her as on a very noble Princess.


Trinc. Noble? indeed she had a Witch to her Mother, and the Witches are of
great Families in Lapland, but the Devil was her Father, and I have heard of
the Mounsor De-Viles in France; but look on her beauty, is she a fit Wife for
Duke Trincalo? mark her behavior too, she is tippling yonder with the
serving-men.


Steph. An please your Grace she is somewhat homely, but that is no blemish in a
Princess. She is virtuous.


Trinc. Umph! virtuous! I am loath to disparage her;
But thou art my Friend, can thou be close?

Steph. As a stopped Bottle, an't please your Grace.


[Enter Caliban again with a Bottle. Trinc. Why then I Will tell thee, I found her
an hour ago under an Elder-tree, upon a sweet Bed of Nettles, singing Tory,
Rory, and Ranthum, Scantum, with her own natural Brother.


Steph. O Jew! make love in her own Tribe?


Trinc. But it is no matter, to tell thee true, I married her to be a great man
and so forth: but make no words on it, for I care not who knows it, and so
here is to thee again, give me the Bottle, Caliban! did you knock the Butt? how
does it sound?


Calib. It sounds as though it had a noise within.


Trinc. I fear the Butt begins to rattle in the throat and is departing: give
me the Bottle.


[Drinks. Must. A short life and a merry I say.

[Steph. whispers Sycorax.
Syc. But did he tell you so?


Steph. He said you were as ugly as your Mother, and that he Married you only
to get possession of the Island.


Syc. My Mothers Devils fetch him for it.


Steph. And your Fathers too, hem! skink about his Graces health again. O if you
would but cast an eye of pity upon me --


Syc. I will cast two eyes of pity on thee, I love thee more than Haws, or
Black-berries, I have a hoard of Wildings in the Moss, my Brother knows not of
'em; But I Will bring thee where they are.


Steph. Trincalo was but my man when time was.


Syc. Were thou his God, and did thou give him Liquor?


Steph. I gave him Brandy and drunk Sack my self; will thou leave him, and thou
shall be my Princess?


Syc. If thou can make me glad with this Liquor.


Steph. I warrant thee we'll ride into the Country where it grows.


Syc. How will thou carry me thither?


Steph. Upon a Hackney-Devil of thy Mothers.


Trinc. What Is that you will do? hah! I hope you have not betrayed me? How does
my Pigs-nye?


[ To Sycorax. Syc. Be gone! thou shall not be my Lord, thou say
I Am ugly.

Trinc. Did you tell her so -- hah! he is a Rogue, do not believe him chuck.


Steph. The foul words were yours: I will not eat 'em for you.


Trinc. I see if once a Rebel, then ever a Rebel. Did I receive thee into grace
for this? I will correct thee with my Royal Hand.


[ Strikes Stephano. Syc. Do thou hurt my love?


[Files at Trincalo. Trinc. Where are our Guards? Treason, Treason!


[Vent. Must. Calib. run betwixt. Vent. Who took up Arms first, the Prince or
the People?


Trinc. This false Traitor has corrupted the Wife of my Bosom.
[Whispers Mustacho hastily. Mustacho strike on my side, and thou shall be my
Viceroy.

Must. I Am against Rebels! Ventoso obey your Viceroy.


Vent. You a Viceroy?


[They two fight off from the rest. Steph. Hah! Hector Monster! do you stand
neuter?


Calib. Thou would drink my Liquor, I will not help thee.


Syc. 'Twas his doing that I had such a Husband, but I Will claw him.


[ Syc. and Calib. fight, Syc. beating him off the Stage. Trinc. The whole
Nation is up in Arms, and shall I stand idle?
[Trincalo beats off Stephano to the door. Exit Stephano. I Will not pursue too
far,
For fear the Enemy should rally again and surprise my Butt in the Citadel;
well, I must be rid of my Lady Trincalo, she will be in the fashion else; first
Cuckold her Husband, and then sue for a separation, to get Alimony.


[Exit. Enter Ferdinand, Hippolito, (with their swords drawn.) Ferd. Come, Sir,
our Cave affords no choice of place,
But the ground's firm and even: are you ready?

Hip. As ready as your self, Sir.


Ferd. You remember on what conditions we must fight?
Who first receives a Wound is to submit.

Hip. Come, come, this loses time, now for the
Women, Sir.

[They fight a little, Ferdinand hurts him. Ferd. Sir, you are wounded.


Hip. No.


Ferd. Believe your blood.


Hip. I feel no hurt, no matter for my blood.


Ferd. Remember our Conditions.


Hip. I Will not leave, till my Sword hits you too.


[ Hip. presses on, Ferd. retires and wards. Ferd. I Am loath to kill you, you
are unskilful, Sir.


Hip. You beat aside my Sword, but let it come as near
As yours, and you shall see my skill.

Ferd. You faint for loss of blood, I see you stagger,
Pray, Sir, retire.

Hip. No! I will never go back --
Methinks the Cave turns round, I cannot find --

Ferd. Your eyes begin to dazzle.


Hip. Why do you swim so, and dance about me?
Stand but still till I have made one thrust.

[Hippolito thrusts and falls. Ferd. O help, help, help!
Unhappy man! what have I done?

Hip. I Am going to a cold sleep, but when I wake
I Will fight again. Pray stay for me.

[Swounds. Ferd. He Is gone! he is gone! O stay sweet lovely Youth!
Help, help!

[ Enter Prospero. Prosp. What dismal noise is that?


Ferd. O see, Sir, see!
What mischief my unhappy hand has wrought.

Prosp. Alas! how much in vain does feeble Art endeavor
To resist the will of Heaven?
[ Rubs Hippolito. He Is gone for ever; O thou cruel Son of an
Inhumane Father! all my designs are ruined
And unravelled by this blow.
No pleasure now is left me but Revenge.

Ferd. Sir, if you knew my innocence --


Prosp. Peace, peace,
Can thy excuses give me back his life?
What Ariel! sluggish spirit, where art thou?

[ Enter Ariel. Ariel. Here, at thy beck, my Lord.


Prosp. I, now thou come, when Fate is past and not to be
Recalled. Look there, and glut the malice of
Thy Nature, for as thou art thy self, thou
Can not be but glad to see young Virtue
Nipt in the Blossom.

Ariel. My Lord, the Being high above can witness
I am not glad, we Airy Spirits are not of temper
So malicious as the Earthy,
But of a Nature more approaching good.
For which we meet in swarms, and often combat
Betwixt the Confines of the Air and Earth.

Prosp. Why did thou not prevent, at least foretell,
This fatal action then?

Ariel. Pardon, great Sir,
I meant to do it, but I was forbidden
By the ill Genius of Hippolito,
Who came and threatened me if I disclosed it,
To bind me in the bottom of the Sea,
Far from the light some Regions of the Air,
(My native fields) above a hundred years.

Prosp. I Will chain thee in the North for thy neglect,
Within the burning Bowels of Mount Heila,
I Will sindge thy airy wings with sulfurous flames,
And choke thy tender nostrils with blew smoke,
At every Hick-up of the belching Mountain
Thou shall be lifted up to taste fresh Air,
And then fall down again.

Ariel. Pardon, dread Lord.


Prosp. No more of pardon than just Heaven intends thee
Shall thou e're find from me: hence! fly with speed,
Unbind the Charms which hold this Murtherer's
Father, and bring him with my Brother straight
Before me.

Ariel. Mercy, my potent Lord, and I Will outfly thy thought.


[ Exit Ariel. Ferd. O Heavens! what words are those I heard?
Yet cannot see who spoke 'em: sure the Woman
Whom I loved was like this, some aerie Vision.

Prosp. No, Murderer, she is, like thee, of mortal mould,
But much too pure to mix with thy black Crimes;
Yet she had faults and must be punished for 'em.
Miranda and Dorinda! where are ye?
The will of Heaven's accomplished: I have
Now no more to fear, and nothing left to hope,
Now you may enter.

[ Enter Miranda and Dorinda. Mir. My Love! is it permitted me to see you once
again?


Prosp. You come to look your last; I will
For ever take him from your Eyes.
But, on my blessing, speak not, nor approach him.

Dor. Pray, Father, is not this my Sisters man?
He has a noble form; but yet he is not so excellent
As my Hippolito.

Prosp. Alas poor Girl, thou have no man: look yonder;
There Is all of him that is left.

Dor. Why was there ever any more of him?
He lies asleep, Sir, shall I waken him?

[She kneels by Hippolito, and jogs him. Ferd. Alas! he is never to be waked
again.


Dor. My Love, my Love! will you not speak to me?
I fear you have displeased him, Sir, and now
He will not answer me, he is dumb and cold too,
But I Will run straight, and make a fire to warm him.

[Exit Dorinda running. Enter Alonzo, Gonzalo, Antonio. Ariel ( invisible.)
Alonz. Never were Beasts so hunted into toyls,
As we have been pursued by dreadful shapes.
But is not that my Son? O Ferdinand!
If thou art not a Ghost, let me embrace thee.

Ferd. My Father! O sinister happiness! Is it
Decreed I should recover you alive, just in that
Fatal hour when this brave Youth is lost in Death,
And by my hand?

Ant. Heaven! what new wonder's this?


Gonz. This Isle is full of nothing else.


Alonz. I thought to dye, and in the walks above,
Wandering by Starlight, to have sought thee out;
But now I should have gone to Heaven in vain,
Whilst thou art here behind.

Ferd. You must indeed in vain have gone thither
To look for me. Those who are stained with such black
Crimes as mine, come seldom there.

Prosp. And those who are, like him, all foul with guilt,
More seldom upward go. You stare upon me as
You n'ere had seen me; have fifteen years
So lost me to your knowledge, that you retain
No memory of Prospero?

Gonz. The good old Duke of Millain!


Prosp. I wonder less, that thou Antonio know me not,
Because thou did long since forget I was thy Brother,
Else I never had bin here.

Ant. Shame choaks my words.


Alonz. And wonder mine.


Prosp. For you, usurping Prince,
[ To Alonzo. Know, by my Art, you shipwrackt on this Isle,
Where, after I a while had punished you, my vengeance
Would have ended, I designed to match that Son
Of yours with this my Daughter.

Alonz. Pursue it still, I am most willing to it.


Prosp. So am not I. No marriages can prosper
Which are with Murd'rers made; look on that Corpse,
This, whilst he lived, was young Hippolito, that
Infant Duke of Mantua, Sir, whom you exposed
With me; and here I bred him up till that blood-thirsty
Man, that Ferdinand --
But why do I exclaim on him, when Justice calls
To unsheath her Sword against his guilt?

Alonz. What do you mean?


Prosp. To execute Heavens Laws.
Here I am placed by Heaven, here I am Prince,
Though you have dispossessed me of my Millain.
Blood calls for blood; your Ferdinand shall dye,
And I in bitterness have sent for you
To have the sudden joy of seeing him alive,
And then the greater grief to see him dye.

Alonz. And think thou I or these will tamely stand
To view the execution?

[Lays hand upon his Sword. Ferd. Hold, dear Father! I cannot suffer you
TO attempt against his life who gave her being
Whom I love.

Prosp. Nay then appear my Guards -- I thought no more to
Use their aids; (I Am cursed because I used it)
[He stamps, and many Spirits appear. But they are now the Ministers of Heaven,
Whilst I revenge this murder.

Alonz. Have I for this found thee my Son, so soon again
To lose thee? Antonio, Gonzalo, speak for pity:
He may hear you.

Ant. I dare not draw that blood upon my self, by
Interceding for him.

Gonz. You drew this judgment down when you usurped
That Dukedom which was this dead Prince's right.

Alonz. Is this a time t'upbraid me with my sins, when
Grief lies heavy on me? you are no more my friends,
But crueller than he, whose sentence has
Doomed my Son to death.

Ant. You did unworthily t'upbraid him.


Gonz. And you do worset'endure his crimes.


Ant. Gonzalo we'll meet no more as friends.


Gonz. Agreed Antonio: and we agree in discord.


Ferd. to Mir. Adieu my fairest Mistress.


Mir. Now I can hold no longer; I must speak.
Though I am loath to disobey you, Sir,
Be not so cruel to the man I love,
Or be so kind to let me suffer with him.

Ferd. Recall that Prayer, or I shall wish to live,
Though death be all the mends that I can make.

Prosp. This night I will allow you, Ferdinand, to fit
You for your Death, that Cave's your Prison.

Alonz. Ah, Prospero! hear me speak. You are a Father,
Look on my age, and look upon his youth.

Prosp. No more! all you can say is urged in vain,
I have no room for pity left within me.
Do you refuse! help Ariel with your fellows
To drive 'em in; Alonzo and his Son bestow in
Yonder Cave, and here Gonzalo shall with
Antonio lodge.

[Spirits drive 'em in, as they are appointed. Enter Dorinda. Dor. Sir, I have
made a fire, shall he be warmed?


Prosp. He Is dead, and vital warmth will never return.


Dor. Dead, Sir, what is that?


Prosp. His soul has left his body.


Dor. When will it come again?


Prosp. O never, never!
He must be laid in Earth, and there consume.

Dor. He shall not lie in earth, you do not know
How well he loves me: indeed he will come again;
He told me he would go a little while,
But promised me he would not tarry long.

Prosp. He Is murdered by the man who loved your Sister.
Now both of you may see what it is to break
A Father's precept; you would needs see men, and by
That sight are made for ever wretched.
Hippolito is dead, and Ferdinand must dye
For murdering him.

Mir. Have you no pity?


Prosp. Your disobedience has so much incensed me, that
I this night can leave no blessing with you.
Help to convey the body to my Couch,
Then leave me to mourn over it alone.

[They bear off the body of Hippolito. Enter Miranda, and Dorinda again. Ariel
behind'em. Ariel. I Have bin so chid for my neglect by Prospero,
That I must now watch all and be unseen.

Mir. Sister, I say again, 'twas long of you
That all this mischief happened.

Dor. Blame not me for your own fault, your
Curiosity brought me to see the man.

Mir. You safely might have seen him and retired, but
You would needs go near him and converse, you may
Remember my Father called me thence, and I called you.

Dor. That was your envy, Sister, not your love;
You called me thence, because you could not be
Alone with him your self; but I am sure my
Man had never gone to Heaven so soon, but
That yours made him go.

[Crying. Mir. Sister I could not wish that either of 'em should
Go to Heaven without us, but it was his fortune,
And you must be satisfied?

Dor. I Will not be satisfied: My Father says he will make
Your man as cold as mine is now, and when he
Is made cold, my Father will not let you strive
To make him warm again.

Mir. In spite of you mine never shall be cold.


Dor. I Am sure 'twas he that made me miserable,
And I will be revenged. Perhaps you think it is
Nothing to lose a man.

Mir. Yes, but there is some difference betwixt
My Ferdinand, and your Hippolito.

Dor. I, there is your judgment. Yours is the oldest
Man I ever saw except it were my Father.

Mir. Sister, no more. It is not comely in a Daughter,
When she says her Father's old.

Dor. But why do I stay here, whilst my cold Love
Perhaps may want me?
I Will pray my Father to make yours cold too.

Mir. Sister, I'e never sleep with you again.


Dor. I Will never more meet in a Bed with you,
But lodge on the bare ground and watch my Love.

Mir. And at the entrance of that Cave I Will lie,
And echo to each blast of wind a sigh.

[Exeunt severally, looking discontentedly on one another. Ariel. Harsh discord
reigns throughout this fatal Isle,
At which good Angels mourn, ill Spirits smile;
Old Prospero, by his Daughters robbed of rest,
Has in displeasure left 'em both unblest.
Unkindly they abjure each others bed,
To save the living, and revenge the dead.
Alonzo and his Son are Prisoners made,
And good Gonzalo does their crimes upbraid.
Antonio and Gonzalo disagree,
And would, though in one Cave, at distance be.
The Seamen all that cursed Wine have spent,
Which still renewed their thirst of Government;
And, wanting subjects for the food of Power,
Each would to rule alone the rest devour.
The Monsters Sycorax and Caliban
More monstrous grow by passions learned from man.
Even I not framed of warring Elements,
Partake and suffer in these discontents.
Why should a mortal by Enchantments hold
In chains a spirit of aetherial mould?
Accursed Magic we our selves have taught,
And our own power has our subjection wrought!

[Exit. ACT V.
Enter Prospero and Miranda. Prosp. YOu beg in vain; I cannot pardon him,
He has offended Heaven.

Mir. Then let Heaven punish him.


Prosp. It will by me.


Mir. Grant him at least some respite for my sake.


Prosp. I by deferring Justice should incense the Deity
Against my self and you.

Mir. Yet I have heard you say, The Powers above are slow In punishing, and
should not you resemble them?


Prosp. The Powers above may pardon or reprieve,
As Sovereign Princes may dispense with Laws,
Which we, as Officers, must execute. Our Acts of grace
To Criminals are Treason to Heavens prerogative.

Mir. Do you condemn him for shedding blood?


Prosp. Why do you ask that question? you know I do.


Mir. Then you must be condemned for shedding his,
And he who condemns you, must dye for shedding
Yours, and that is the way at last to leave none living.

Prosp. The Argument is weak, but I want time
To let you see your errors; retire, and, if you love him,
Pray for him.

[He's going. Mir. O stay, Sir, I have yet more Arguments.


Prosp. But none of any weight.


Mir. Have you not said you are his Judge?


Prosp. It Is true, I am; what then?


Mir. And can you be his Executioner?
If that be so, then all men may declare their
Enemies in fault; and Power without the Sword
Of Justice, will presume to punish what e're
It calls a crime.

Prosp. I cannot force Gonzalo or my Brother, much
Less the Father to destroy the Son, it must
Be then the Monster Caliban, and he is not here,
But Ariel strait shall fetch him.

[ Enter Ariel. Ariel. My potent Lord, before thou call'st, I come,
To serve thy will.

Prosp. Then Spirit fetch me here my salvage Slave.


Ariel. My Lord, it does not need.


Prosp. Art thou then prone to mischief, will thou be thy self the Executioner?


Ariel. Think better of thy aerie Minister, who
For thy fake, unbid, this night has flown
Over almost all the habitable World.

Prosp. But to what purpose was all thy diligence?


Ariel. When I was chidden by my mighty Lord for my
Neglect of young Hippolito, I went to view
His body, and soon found his soul was but retired,
Not sallied out, and frighted lay at skulk in
Th'inmost corner of his scarce-beating heart.

Prosp. Is he not dead?


Ariel. Hear me my Lord! I pruned my wings, and, fitted for a journey, from the
next Isles of our Hesperides, I gathered Moly first, thence shot my self to
Palestine, and watched the trickling Balm, which caught, I glided to the
British Isles, and there he purple Panacea found.


Prosp. All this to night?


Ariel. All this, my Lord, I did,
Nor was Hippolito's good Angel wanting, who
Climbing up the circle of the Moon,
While I below got Simples for the Cure, went to
Each Planet which o're-rul'd those Herbs,
And drew it is virtue to increase their power:
Long e're this hour had I been back again,
But that a Storm took me returning back
And flag'd my tender Wings.

Prosp. Thou shall have rest my spirit,
But have thou searched the wound?

Ariel. My Lord I have, and 'twas in time I did it; for
The soul stood almost at life's door, all bare
And naked, shivering like Boys upon a Rivers
Bank, and loath to tempt the cold air, but I took
Her and stopped her in; and poured into his mouth
The healing juice of vulnerary Herbs.

Prosp. Thou art my faithful servant.


Ariel. His only danger was his loss of blood, but now
He Is waked, my Lord, and just this hour
He must be dressed again, as I have done it.
Anoint the Sword which pierced him with this
Weapon-Salve, and wrap it close from air till
I have time to visit him again.

Prosp. It shall be done, be it your task, Miranda, because your
Sister is not present here, while I go visit your
Dear Ferdinand, from whom I will a while conceal
This news, that it may be more welcome.

Mir. I obey you, and with a double duty, Sir: for now
You twice have given me life.

Prosp. My Ariel, follow me.


[Exeunt severally. [ Hippolito discovered on a Couch, Dorinda by him. Dor. How
do you find your self?


Hip. I Am somewhat cold, can you not draw me nearer
To the Sun, I am too weak to walk?

Dor. My Love, I Will try.
[She draws the chair nearer the Audience. I thought you never would have
walked again,
They told me you were gone away to Heaven;
Have you bin there?

Hip. I know not where I was.


Dor. I will not leave you till you promise me you
Will not dye again.

Hip. Indeed I will not.


Dor. You must not go to Heaven unless we go together,
For I Have heard my Father say that we must strive
To be each others Guide, the way to it will else
Be difficult, especially to those who are so young.
But I much wonder what it is to dye.

Hip. Sure it is to dream, a kind of breathless sleep
When once the Soul's gone out.

Dor. What is the Soul?


Hip. A small blew thing that runs about within us.


Dor. Then I have seen it in a frosty morning run
Smoking from my mouth.

Hip. But if my soul had gone, it should have walked upon A Cloud just over
you, and peeped, and thence I would have Called you.


Dor. But I should not have heard you, it is so far.


Hip. Why then I would have rained and snow'd upon you,
And thrown down Hailstones gently till I hit you,
And made you look at least. But dear Dorinda
What is become of him who fought with me?

Dor. O, I can tell you joyful news of him,
My Father means to make him dye to day,
For what he did to you.

Hip. That must not be, my dear Dorinda; go and beg your Father, he may not
dye, it was my fault he hurt me,

I urged him to it first.


Dor. But if he live, he will never leave killing you.


Hip. O no! I just remember when I fell asleep I heard Him calling me a great
way off; and crying over me as You would do, besides we have no cause of
quarrel now.


Dor. Pray how began your difference first?


Hip. I fought with him for all the Women in the World.


Dor. That hurt you had was justly sent from Heaven,
For wishing to have any more but me.

Hip. Indeed I think it was, but I repent it, the fault
Was only in my blood, for now it is gone, I find
I do not love so many.

Dor. In confidence of this, I Will beg my Father, that he
May live, I Am glad the naughty blood, that made
You love so many, is gone out.

Hip. My Dear, go quickly, lest you come too late.


[Exit. Dor. Enter Miranda at the other door, with Hippolito's Sword wrapped up.
Hip. Who Is this who looks so fair and beautiful, as
Nothing but Dorinda can surpass her? O!
I believe it is that Angel, Woman,
Whom she calls Sister.

Mir. Sir, I am sent hither to dress your wound,
How do you find your strength?

Hip. Fair Creature, I am faint with loss of blood.


Mir. I Am sorry for it.


Hip. Indeed and so am I, for if I had that blood, ^ then Should find a great
delight in loving you


Mir. But, Sir, I am another, and your love is given Already to my Sister.


Hip. Yet I find that if you please I can love f^ll a little.


Mir. I cannot be unconstant, nor should you.


Hip. O my wound pains me.


Mir. I am come to ease you.


[She unwraps the Sword. Hip. Alas! I feel the cold air come to me,
My wound shoots worse than ever.

[She wipes and anoints the Sword. Mir. Does it still grieve you?


Hip. Now methinks there is something laid just upon it.


Mir. Do you find no ease?


Hip. Yes, yes, upon the sudden all the pain
Is leaving me, sweet Heaven how I am eased!

Enter Ferdinand and Dorinda to them. Ferd. to Dor. Madam, I must confess my
life is yours,
I owe it to your generosity.

Dor. I am o'rejoy'd my Father lets you live, and proud
Of my good fortune, that he gave your life to me.

Mir. How? gave his life to her!


Hip. Alas! I think she said so, and he said he owed it
To her generosity.

Ferd. But is not that your Sister with Hippolito?


Dor. So kind already?


Ferd. I came to welcome life, and I have met the
Cruellest of deaths.

Hip. My dear Dorinda with another man?


Dor. Sister, what business have you here?


Mir. You see I dress Hippolito.


Dor. You Are very charitable to a Stranger.


Mir. You are not much behind in charity, to beg a pardon
For a man, whom you scarce ever saw before.

Dor. Henceforward let your Surgery alone, for I had
Rather he should dye, than you should cure his wound.

Mir. And I wish Ferdinand had died before
He owed his life to your entreaty.

Ferd. to Hip. Sir, I Am glad you are so well recovered, you
Keep your humor still to have all Women.

Hip. Not all, Sir, you except one of the number,
Your new Love there, Dorinda.

Mir. Ah Ferdinand! can you become inconstant?
If I must lose you, I had rather death should take
You from me than you take your self.

Ferd. And if I might have chose, I would have wished
That death from Prospero, and not this from you.

Dor. I, now I find why I was sent away,
That you might have my Sisters company.

Hip. Dorinda, kill me not with your unkindness,
This is too much, first to be false your self,
And then accuse me too.

Ferd. We all accuse each other, and each one denis their guilt,
I should be glad it were a mutual error.
And therefore first to clear my self from fault,
Madam, I beg your pardon, while I say I only love
Your Sister.

[ To Dorinda. Mir. O blessed word!
I Am sure I love no man but Ferdinand.

Dor. Nor I, Heaven knows, but my Hippolito.


Hip. I never knew I loved so much, before I feared
Dorinda's constancy; but now I am convinced that
I loved none but her, because none else can
Recompense her loss.

Ferd. 'Twas happy then you had this little trial.
But how we all so much mistook, I know not.

Mir. I have only this to say in my defense: my Father sent
Me hither, to attend the wounded Stranger.

Dor. And Hippolito sent me to beg the life of Ferdinand.


Ferd. From such small errors, left at first unheeded,
Have often sprung sad accidents in love:
But see, our Fathers and our friends are come
To mix their joys with ours.

Enter Prospero, Alonzo, Antonio, Gonzalo. Alon. to Prosp. Let it no more be
thought of, your purpose
Though it was severe was just. In losing Ferdinand
I should have mourned, but could not have complained.

Prosp. Sir, I am glad kind Heaven decreed it otherwise.


Dor. O wonder!
How many goodly Creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is!

Hip. O brave new World that has such people in it!


Alon. to Ferd. Now all the blessings of a glad Father
Compass thee about,
And make thee happy in thy beauteous choice.

Gonz. I Have inward wept, or should have spoke e're this.
Look down sweet Heaven, and on this Couple drop
A blessed Crown, for it is you chalked out the
Way which brought us hither.

Ant. Though penitence forced by necessity can scarce
Seem real, yet dearest Brother I have hope
My blood may plead for pardon with you, I resign
Dominion, which it is true I could not keep,
But Heaven knows too I would not.

Prosp. All past crimes I bury in the joy of this
Blessed day.

Alonz. And that I may not be behind in justice, to this
Young Prince I render back his Dukedom,
And as the Duke of Mantua thus salute him.

Hip. What is it that you render back, methinks
You give me nothing.

Prosp. You are to be Lord of a great People,
And over Towns and Cities.

Hip. And shall these people be all Men and Women?


Gonz. Yes, and shall call you Lord.


Hip. Why then I Will live no longer in a Prison, but
Have a whole Cave to my self hereafter.

Prosp. And that your happiness may be complete,
I give you my Dorinda for your Wife, she shall
Be yours for ever, when the Priest has made you one.

Hip. How can he make us one, shall I grow to her?


Prosp. By saying holy words you shall be joined in marriage To each other.


Dor. I warrant you those holy words are charms.
My Father means to conjure us together.

Prosp. to his daughter. My Ariel told me, when last night you quarreled,
You said you would for ever part your beds,
But what you threatened in your anger, Heaven
Has turned to Prophecy.
For you, Miranda, must with Ferdinand,
And you, Dorinda, with Hippolito lie in
One Bed hereafter.

Alonz. And Heaven make those Beds still fruitful in
Producing Children to bless their Parents
Youth, and Grandsires age.

Mir. to Dor. If Children come by lying in a Bed, I wonder you
And I had none between us.

Dor. Sister it was our fault, we meant like fools
To look 'em in the fields, and they it seems
Are only found in Beds.

Hip. I am o'rejoy'd that I shall have Dorinda in a Bed,
We'll lie all night and day together there,
And never rise again.

Ferd. aside to him. Hippolito! you yet are ignorant of your great Happiness,
but there is somewhat which for

Your own and fair Dorinda's sake I must instruct
You in.

Hip. Pray teach me quickly how Men and Women in your
World make love, I shall soon learn
I warrant you.

[ Enter Ariel driving in Steph. Trinc. Must. Vent. Calib. Syc. Prosp. Why
that is my dainty Ariel, I shall miss thee,
But yet thou shall have freedom.

Gonz. O look, Sir, look the Master and the Saylors --
The Bosen too -- my Prophecy is out, that if
A Gallows were on land, that man could n'ere
Be drowned.

Alonz. to Trinc. Now Blasphemy, what not one Oath ashore?
Have thou no mouth by land? why star'st thou so?

Trinc. What more Dukes yet, I must resign my Dukedom, But it is no matter, I
was almost starved in it.


Must. Here Is nothing but wild Sallads without Oil or Vinegar.


Steph. The Duke and Prince alive! would I had now our gallant Ship again, and
were her Master, I Would willingly give all my Island for her.


Vent. And I my Vice-Roy-ship.


Trinc. I shall need no hangman, for I shall even hang
My self, now my friend Butt has shed his
Last drop of life. Poor Butt is quite departed.

Ant. They talk like mad men.


Prosp. No matter, time will bring 'em to themselves, and
Now their Wine is gone they will not quarrel.
Your Ship is safe and tight, and bravely rigged,
As when you first set Sail.

Alonz. This news is wonderful.


Ariel. Was it well done, my Lord?


Prosp. Rarely, my diligence.


Gonz. But pray, Sir, what are those misshapen Creatures?


Prosp. Their Mother was a Witch, and one so strong
She would control the Moon, make Flows
And Ebbs, and deal in her command without
Her power.

Syc. O Setebos! these be brave Sprights indeed.


Prosp. to Calib. Go Sirrah to my Cell, and as you hope for Pardon, trim it up.


Calib. Most carefully. I will be wise hereafter.
What a dull fool was I to take those Drunkards
For Gods, when such as these were in the world?

Prosp. Sir, I invite your Highness and your Train
To my poor Cave this night; a part of which
I will employ in telling you my story.

Alonz. No doubt it must be strangely taking, Sir.


Prosp. When the morn draws I Will bring you to your Ship,
And promise you calm Seas and happy Gales.
My Ariel, that is thy charge: then to the Elements
Be free, and fare thee well.

Ariel. I Will do it Master.

Sings. Where the Be sucks there suck I,
In a Cowslips Bell, I lie,
There I couch when Owls do cry,
On the Swallows wing I fly
After Summer merrily.
Merrily, merrily shall I live now
Under the Blossom that hangs on the Eough.

Syc. I Will to Sea with thee, and keep thee warm in thy Cabin.


Trinc. No my dainty Dy-dapper, you have a tender constitution, and will be
sick a Shipboard. You are partly Fish and may swim after me. I wish you a good
Voyage.


Prosp. Now to this Royal Company, my servant, be visible, And entertain them
with a Dance before they part.


Ariel. I have a gentle Spirit for my Love,
Who twice seven years has waited for my Freedom,
It shall appear and foot it featly with me.
Milcha, my Love, thy Ariel calls thee.

[ Enter Milcha. Milcha. Here!


[They dance a Saraband.. Prosp. Henceforth this Isle to the afflicted be
A place of Refuge as it was to me;
The Promises of blooming Spring live here,
And all the Blessings of the ripening year;
On my retreat let Heaven and Nature smile,
And ever flourish the Enchanted Isle.

[Exeunt. Epilogue.
GAllants, by all good signs it does appear,
That Sixty Seven's a very damning year,
For Knaves abroad, and for ill Poets here.
Among the Muses there is a general rot,
The Rhyming Mounsieur and the Spanish Plot:
Defy or Court, all is one, they go to Pot.
The Ghosts of Poets walk within this place,
And haunt us Actors wheresoever we pass,
In Visions bloodier than King Richard's was.
For this poor wretch he has not much to say,
But quietly brings in his part of the Play,
And begs the favor to be damned to day.
He sends me only like a Sh'riffs man here
To let you know the Malefactor's near;
And that he means to dye, en Cavalier.
For if you should be gracious to his Pen,
The Example will prove ill to other men,
And you will be troubled with 'em all again.
FINIS.

