TWO CLEAN BIRDS, OR, The cleansing of the LEPER.

As it was unfolded in a Sermon, Preached before the Right Honorable,
Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, General of the Northern Forces, and the most of his
Army, on the fifth day of February, 1642 (being the Lords day, and by his
Honor appointed to be kept as a Fast, upon special occasion) at Selbie, in
the West Riding of the County of York.

By John Shaw Pastor to the Church at Rotheram in the same County.

Levit. 16.7, 8. And Aaron shall take the two Goats, and present them before
the Lord, at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; And Aaron shall
^east lots upon the two Goats, one lot for the Lord, and the other Lo^^ for
the escape Goat.

1 Peter 3.18. For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust (that he might bring us to God) being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit.

1 Cor. 13.4. For though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives
through the power of God.

Printed at York by The. Broad, dwelling in Stone-Gate over against the
Star^e. 1644.

To his Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, Viscount Hereford, Baron Ferrars of
Chartley, Lord Bourchier and Lovaine; one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel, and General of the Army raised in defense of the true
Protestant Religion, his Sacred Majesty's person, Kingdoms, Parliament, etc.
Grace, Mercy, Truth, and Peace here, and everlasting filicity hereafter, by
Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable, I humbly crave leave to enshrowde these ensuing Notes under
your Excellencies patronage, and though there be (as the Philosopher speaks)
megiste diastasis, which might have deterred me; Eight Ew^s,
yet three things among others moved me to this boldness, First, that kind and
thankful acceptance of my poor pains, and that most Noble respect which your
Excelency was pleased to afford to me at Rippon; when it was (not my desert,
but) my duty and solace towaite on your Excellency, with E. of Belford E. of
Hartford (now Marquis) Earl of Essx. Ea. of Salisb^yr, E. of W^^iebe. E. of Be
^ssiolle, E of Helamd, E. of Barlishire: 8. Lords the L Wharton. L Paget L.
Mandevile, (now Earl of Manchester,) L. Brook. L. Pawlet. L Howard. L Savil^
L. Dunsmore, Commissioners for England. And for Scotland. 8. Viz. Earl of
Dumfermling. L. Lowdon. Sir Willian Dowglasse. Sir Partr^ck Hephurne Mr.
Satith. M. Wetherburne. M. Henderson. M. Johnston (since Knighted,)
fifteen other most noble Earls and Lords, at that great and successful
Treaty, betwixt the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, beginning in
October, 1640. (...) how much (though especially, yet not only I, but) all the
Kingdom, and the children yet unborne of both these sister Nation have cause
to bless God for you, and you all for God, though we already perceive in some
large measure yet hitherto but (...) And what an unspeakable loss, the whole
Land (and m^selfe in particular) had, by the death of that most Noble, and
worthy Patriot, the Right Honorable, the old Earl of Bedford and what a want
these present times have of him, your Excellency among others fully knows, and
I feel.

Secondly, these Notes were preached before our Joshua of the North, the Right
Honorable Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, and his Army, (of whose fidelity to his
Country, courage for God and his Cause, cordial and reciprocal affection of
his Country to him, and his to them, I need not tell the world, much less
this Kingdom. And therefore may with somewhat more boldness return to your
Excellency, as their Spring and Head. Thirdly, something in these Notes treats
of the honor and duty of Soldiers; your Excellency is (and has of long been)
known to be a man of War, 2 Chronicles. 8.9. Now these lines may serve (like King
Philips Monitor) sometimes to recall to your mind, first, a Soul^ diers place,
its lawfulness, antiquity and honor, etc. secondly, the quality of the
persons, Soldiers should be holy, God calls his Soldiers as well sanctified
ones as mighty, Isa. 13.3. Thirdly, of their duty, first, to take God with
them, they may not fotger the God of the Arc when they go to battle, they
had better leave behind them the Ark of God, 1 Samuel 4.3. 2 San 15.25. Saul
(as ill as he was) would not go out against the Philistines till he had prayed
and sacrified, Psalm. 76.2, 3 at Gods Tabernacle were the Arrows, Sword, Bow,
and Shield, breken, and batted wo^ne.
1 Samuel 13.12. Though Jeh^shapha had almost 1200000. valiant warring men, 2 Chronicles. 17.14. -- 19. (though but in about two Tribes, whereof the whole twelve
were not by the fourth part so big as England) an Army (one would think)
enough to have overrun a world, yet puts all his confidence in God by prayer,
and says still, without him they had no strength, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. Elishas
prayers,* slay as many as the sword of Hazael and Jehu. 1 King. 19.15, 16, 17.
Solomon had 40000. stalls of horses for his Chariots, 1400. Chari^^ts, 12000.
horsemen, 1 Kings 10.26. and 4.26. yet found no safety ^ot to run to God, 1
Kings 8.33, 34 Prove. 18.10. David had (in a Kingdom) as I said much less then
ours, they had but 12 Tribes, we 52 shires) fifteen hundred threescore and ten
thousand men that drew sword (and yet two Tribes were left unnumbred) 1 Chronicles.
21.5, 6. himself as gallant a man as drew sword, 1 Samuel 18.7. he had thirty
seven special choice Worthies, 2 Samuel 23.35. whereof one slew 300. men,
another slew 800. men, another slew a Lion, and two Lyon-like men of Moah, and
an Egyptian Cyant: another defended a field of barley, another a field of
Lentiles against an Army, (and many such like) 2 Samuel 23. yet makes God his
only Rock, Psalm. 18.2. and rests on him alone by praver for conquest. By Dr.
Smoking Flax, Ep^
Psalm. 56.9. be pleased to remember what was said to Generalt Vere [Souldiers
that carry their lives in their bands, had need above others to, carry grace in
their hearts.]

Secondly, to leave their sins behind them, Deuteronomy. 23.9, 14. Carry no wedge or
Babylonish garment, Josh. 7. may I not say as the Egyptians to their King, let
your sins go, else you know not, that England is destroyed, that we be all but
dead men, Exodus 10.7. and 12.33. Be pleased to call to mind that sweet and
experimental Speech of your Excellencies most renowned Father, [ Dr. B^ in his
S^sat Pa^^ Cr^sis, (...) 1.16 (...) the (...) day of or Earler de^
Sometimes in the Field encountering the Enemy, the weight of my sins lying
heavy upon my conscience quell my spirits, and l^nake me the most timorous and
fearful man that may be; whereas finding my peace with God in a morning,
makes me as bold as a Lion.]

Thirdly, to go by a right rule, from a right Principle, and aim at a right
end, not the desolating, but recovery of a sick and sinful Kingdom, the
sealing of a happy and holy peace; not any way at his sacred Majesty's least
hu^t, To be friend to King is a old s^inde^ Sar^bal Neb. ^.1. Jews, (...)
19.12. ye they but bour to be first in bring the K^ back, 2. S^ 19.41, and^
(Oh God forbid, 1 Samuel 24.5. and 26.9.) I am verily persuaded that no man does
more desire his Majesty's safety, honor and happiness, then your self,
(according to your Allegiance and late Protestation,) and that you would not
have one hair of his head to perish: else could you never have so many
wrestling crying prayers, as I think never any General or Army to this day
ever had, of those whose persons are precious, 2 Cor. 8 23. whose tears have
loud tongues, Psalm. 6.8. whose Prayers are most pleasant to God, Cant. 2.14.
and have (as I may say) a wrestling, Hos. 12.4. prevailing, Psalm. 50.15. nay, a
commanding power with God, Isa. 45.11. We have heard much fame of the Heathen
Generals, Achilles, Hector, Hanniball, Scipin, Seanderbag, etc. but what (alas)
did these regard God, his Church, his Cause, or God them? But we are confident
of other ends and principles in your Excellency, and hope that God will use
your Excellency as a blessed instrument for settling such a roall Peace, and
bringing in such happy times as our Kings Majesty, and all the Land, yea, the
child yet unborne, will see cause to bless God for you, and acknowledge Gods
goodness and mercy to England by you. We have had mercies hitherto a long
time on free cost; if we pay now a little dearer then formerly, we hope for so
much better days; the fulfilling of the Prophecy, Isa. 30.26. the fall of
Babylon, the advancing of Gods Church, clearing of his truth, the engrafting of
the broken branch into the true Olive; how have the people of God been scorned
and nicknamed a long time, for Waldenses, Hussites, Lollards, Lutherans,
Hugenots, Precisians, Puritans, (or all in one) Roundheads; (As a Parliament
man said well, the word Puritan in the mouth of an Arminian, signifies an
Orthodox Divine; in the mouth of a Drunkard, signifies a sober man, in the
mouth of a Papist, signifies a Protestant,) etc. And true it is, Gods Church
may have Winter and Summer, seed time and harvest, Genesis 8.22. and we hope ere
long to sing with the Spouse (through Gods mercy to his Majesty, the high Court
of Parliament, your Excellency, and these Kingdoms,) The Winter is past, the
Rain is over and gone, (...) 2.11, (...)
the Flowers appear on the earth, the time of finging of Birds is come. That
those that sowed in tears shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6. When God will
restore his outcasts, Jer. 30.16, 17. and that as the high and Honorable
Assembly spoke of that wonderful success at Leeds, that God had heard
prayers, so still he will, till his Temple be finished, his servants cleared
who have long suffered. My very Honorable Lord! such have been your tried
valor, fidelity to your Country, your kind respect to Gods Ministers, love to
Gods Servants, undaunted courage for Gods cause, etc. that were I not in awe of
your Excellencies humility, (more then of your Army) I might enlarge any one of
hese beyond and Epistle; but I well know, that your Excellency he more you
deserve, the less you desire praise. I will only do that which more suits
with my desire, and profession, humbly trave pardon for this boldness, and
leave, that these notes may pass under your Excellencies patronage and
protection; Job 32.22.
and shall not cease to bend my knees to the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
for my Sovereign, his great Counsel, your Excellencies prosperous success in
Gods way, increase of grace here, and eternal felicity hereafter; such are the
uncessant requests, of the poor Text.
earthen vessel, who is

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble servant, and daily Remembrancer at Gods
Throne, JOHN SHAW.
March 4. 1642.
To the Christian Reader: ESPECIALLY, To my most tenderly affected flock at
Rotheram in the West Riding of the county of YORK.
READER,
IF you that know me, wonder (as they of Saul, 1 Samuel 10.11.) to see me now
abroad in these heavy and quarrelling times, wherein men turn Plow-shares into
swords, Joel 3.10. and when my poor Library and I are so far a sunder, Now
quite plundered since this Sermin was Preached.
who have in fair Halcyon days, and when I had much more leisure affected
privacie: take my answer from the Prophet Amos, chap. 3. v. 8. The Lion has
roared who will not fear, the Lord has spoken who can but prophecy; the
child who had bin dumb from his birth when he saw his father in danger of
death, cried alond; how can I do less, when my Mother England lies a gasping?
we have hitherto lived under our own Vines and Fig Trees, which have bin
neither barren nor unfruitful, and have too much waxed fat and kicked; some
conceive, that after three years of famine, which God sent upon Canaan, for
Saul's slaying the Gibeonites, 2 Samuel, 21.1. God sent them one year of peace and
plenty, which the Israelites being unthankful for, and abusing to riot, that
was the sin, 2 Chronicles. 21.
that provoked God to leave their King to himself, and to Satan, for a sore
punishment to the people, 2 Samuel 24.1. and no wonder if the peoples abuse of
mercies, cause a King to be left to himself, (an ill stomach may make a good
head ache, good eyes dim) for (not only they a^e (...) body, but) the Kings
error will prove the peoples punishment and misery, Sam. 12.22
as in David's error, 70000, of the people dyed. So (...), God lays on us the
sorest of his Arrows, Ezekiel. 5.16. 2 Samuel ^^.14. viz. War, ill in it self,
Psalm. 87.63. ill in its attendants, pestilence, famine, Deuteronomy. 28.56. and
scandal, especially civil, (or rather barbarous,) War, twixt Fathers and
Sons, etc. Jer. 13.12, 13, 14. its God red horse, Revel. 6.4. (as the The
valley of ^ed H^rse.
valley was called where the late bloody Battle was fought, near Edgehill,
on the same day October. 23.
that the Rebellion of Ireland broke out, and the bloody Battle was fought
near Leipsick in Germany, (as some observe,) God keep us from being such
Acheldima's, such Golgotha's, as Ireland, as Germany,) and this to avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant, Lev. 26.25. to teach our Inhabitants righteousness,
Isa. 26.10. and to seek God early, Hos. 5.15.

But in especial let me say a word to thee (beloved Rotherham,) heretofore
poor and obscure, but the Sun of Gods mercy breaking in upon thee, has made
thee famous; Mr. Camhden says, that thou art well seared, but the iniquity of
the times has swallowed up thy Benefactors bounty; but the great Benefactor
who to other places has showed mercies, has to thee miracles, and I hope nor
you nor I shall ever forget these magnalia Dei, (as the Israelites did Psalm.
78.42.) until our memories fail us as ill as Mess^la Corvinus^s who forgot
his own name: many remporall mercies God has surrounded thee withal, but
this of late has (as God speaks, Jer. 23.7, 8.) overtopped the rest, thou
may hereafter Chronicle the 22. of January, for another Fall of black F^rers.
October 26. or 5. G^^powder Treasot.
of November, with which late mercy let me hereby acquaint others, that as I
have often begged for thee prayers, so now praises.

On the two and twentieth of January, being the Lords day, the people being at
Church (the poor Town of Rotherham, having neither Walls, Bulwarks, Garrison,
Fortification, Watch, etc.) betwixt ten and eleven of clock, about the middle
of the Sermon, suddenly came, betwixt six and seven hundred Cavalleers, with
Muskets, Dragoones, etc. (who had been billetted at Pontefract, and especially
at Do^caster, (and that (as after appeared,) by the solicitation of some
wicked Malignants in the Town, who had a formed them that there was no
strength nor powder in the ^owne,) but being through Gods mercy discerned, ere
they got ^^the Towns end, and with the rumor of it the people in the Church
much affrighted, (so as a Corpse Leo Rigg.
lay a long time unburied) about 24. or 25. men got Muskets, and without Order,
Rank, File, or almost any skill, (save only that God taught their hands to war
and their fingers to fight, (these few boldly and courageously resisted all
that great Company a full hour and half, so that bullets flew exreeding
sharply and thick in the streets, and in the end (though scarce any powder
left) slew and wounded many, and drove the rest away Yorkshire has found many
experiments of such mercies, witness Leede^, Selby, Bradford, Hall,
H^ssun-Moore, etc. Like as when Judge. 4. that great Army and 900. chariots of
Iron with the Lord General Sisera himself were delivered into the hands of
two weak women, Deborah and J^el, or of that Judge. 7.8, 12. where an
innumarable company were discomfited with Gideons 300 Lamps and Pitchers: But
it is usual with the Lord. Jericho's walls fell down without any warlike
instrument, Josh. 6.20. God cast stones from heaven upon the Enemies, Josh.
10.11. Caused stars to fight from heaven, Judge. 5. Angele, Thunder, Rain,
Hailstones, 1 Samuel 7.10. put an Army to flight at the sight of two men, 1 Samuel
15.13. affrighted Enemies when none appeared against them, 2 Samuel 5.24. 2 King.
7.6. destroying them by their own fancy, 2 King. 3.23.24. setting Enemies one
against another, Judge. 7.22. 2 Chro^. 20.22. dicom^iting them by Frogs, Flies,
Lice. We find Number. 31. that 12000. Israelites fought against five Kings and
their Armies, ver. 8. an innumerable company conquered them, took of prey,
675000. sheep, 72000. beeves, 61000. Asses, and abundance of prisoners, ver.
32, 33, 34, 35. and yet (which was the great wonder) lost not one man at all;
it is true, Rotherham had but a few men, but as Antigonus said to his Soldiers
(who did complain for want of men,) how many do you account me for? So if God
be for us it is enough, Romans 8.31. then are we more for number, 2 King. 6.16. 2 Chronicles. 32.7. and stronger for power then the Enemy can be, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. (...)

When your Enemies came out against (...) of Pharaoh, Exodus 15.9. I will
pursie, I will overtake, I will divide the spo^^ I will be satisfied upon them;
I will draw my sword, mine band shall destroy them; did not God turn the wind,
and blow against them, v. 10. and may not we all sing Moses song, Who is like
unto thee O Lord among the gods, as it is (...). But ah dear souls! what has
been done to the Lord for all this (as the King said concerning Mordecai, Est,
6.3. God indeed made a hedge about us, fenced and dressed us, but did we not
bring forth wild Grapes? Isa 5. and therefore how did God make a sad breach
upon us on Thursday, May 4. 1643.

For where as when we had no works, scarce any soldiers, Jan. 22. you slow
many of the enemy, and beat the rest back with shame, May 4. Now having strong
works, gallant Captains, and stout soldiers, yet our sins, distractions,
and wants within, compelled us to yield to an insulting and promise-breaking
Army without, who promised us our lives, Especially Th. St. N Esquire. L. Coll.
W.S. Maju W.F. Capt. H.W. Capt. G.W. Jo. S. Pastor, ^a An etc. Mr. K. Mr. G.
liberties, estates, etc. under their hands: and then fined, imprisoned,
plundered, banished, and most cruelly used diverse of us, yea scattered us a
sunder into corners, so as we durst scarce see one another since, Act. 8.1.
But first let us with Job through all the plundering enemies, see the hand of
our God, lay our hand upon our mouths with David, Psalm. 39. and say with Ezra
Chap. 9.13, 14. theu our God have punished us less then our iniquit^es deserve.

Secondly, let us not be cast down nor dismayed, God will carry on his great
work, which he has to do upon Mount-Zion, and in Jerusalem, and then his and
his Churches enemies shall down, Isa 10.12, 25. yea all such as clap their
hands, or cry aha at the Churches misery, Ezekiel. 25.3, 6.

Thirdly, spread poor Englands case (as sometimes Hezekiah did the Letter)
before the Lord, let not the Angel of the Covenant go ( Genesis 32.26.) till he
be at peace with our poor sick Mother, and (not a politic Kingdom-destroying
peace, as Dan. 8.25. but) a holy and happy Peace be settled among our selves; or
if that Robert Grosthead that great Bishop of Lincoln must needs be a Prophet,
who a little before his death (having seen much of the abomination of Popery)
prophesied in the days of H. 3. nunquam liberabitur Ecclesia ab Egyptiaca
servitute nisi in ore gladii cruentandi, oh then hold up your hands upon the
Mount, Exodus 17.11, 12. until the ^ish, Popish, Amalekites be subdued.

Fourthly, let us humble our selves for all our sins, that stop and hinder
Reformation; that furnish the enemy, and wound the Church, 2 Chronicles. 20.33.
Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. Lev. 26.41, 42. yea, and be humbled from our sins, God will
not have Satan cast out Satan, etc. Fifthly, Pray for, cry, beg our King at the
hands of God, that they who hear us may say, impossible est filium tantarum
laer^marum, perire; that if any do wickedly traduce us as no friends to the
King, we may cordially and comfortably with the two Tribes and a half make our
appeal to the All-seeing Searcher of hearts, in the words that (as common fame
reports, and their prisoners taken related) the enemies Chaplain took for his
Text on Hessam-Moore, on Tuesday, July 2. 1644. (immediately before that most
memorable battle, where God was so seen in the Mount) encour raging them to
sight, Joshua 22.22. [The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods he knows,
and-Israell shall know, if it be in Rebellion, or if in transgression against
the Lord, save us not this day,] we dare appeal to the most high, that we
heartily wish K. CHARLES may conquer, with such a Conquest, as was mentioned in
a paper set upon B^^dem Batre in York City, as King James rode under it, when
he first came from Scotland, and entered that ancient City [Suavissina vict^ria
amor populi.]

Sixthly, let us keep our godly Vows, and lawful Protestations we have made
with God, that is the way to root out all Rebels out of these Kingdoms, Ezekiel.
20.37, 38. [then will I purge out from among you the Rebels.] This is the way
to remove Gods heavy wrath from our Land, 2 Chronicles. 29.10.

Seventhly, go we our way and sin no more; remember we, and tell unto our
children, what God did for us, Jan. 22. 1642. what God did to us, May 4. 1643.
how God threatened us, Sept. 11. 1642. what a heavy Sabbath we then kept: how
God terrified us on Thursday, Januar. 19. 1642. let us now turn from our evil
ways, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. so may our Land yet be healed, and Jerusalems Wall be
built up in the mid dest of these troublous times. Dan. 9.25 God is now in
sifting out the Bran of the Kingdom, Amos 9.9. washing away of spots and
purging away our dross, Mall 3.2, 3. and will either cure or kill us, purge us
or burn us, Ezekiel. 24. hold out Faith and patience, (as the Martyrsaid)
Antichrist is falling, he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry.

And now to you blessed Doves that flock to peck up the (...) of Gods word, do
I bequeath these few Notes. 1. out of my de^^ and tender affection to you all
(and my Neighbor native So^^ and I desire heartily that by the common enemy we
may reap the good, that we may all more firmly and cordially be knit together
in the best bond of love. 2. That you may have these things in remembrance when
I am gone, I would leave this pledge with you. 3. Not knowing how soon I must
put off my Tabernacle (the circle of my years having run 34 times about,) I
would do all the good I can. 4. To Cronicle this mercy to posterity. Let me (to
conclude, for my affection stays me long) entreat you, First, to set a
special watch against all Malignants in thy heart, town, or abroad. Secondly,
prepare Oil ready, and a good Foundation against the worst times. Thirdly, do
all from God, and for God. Fourthly, to the Martyrs, pray, pray, pray; add
praise, praise, praise, and work, work, work, and whosoever reads these lines,
afford a prayer, for

The least of Gods mercies, JOHN SHAW,

Leviticus 14. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Then shall the Priest command to take for him
that is to be cleansed, two Birds alive, and clean, and Cedar wood, and
scarlot, and byssipe, 5. And the Priest shall command that one of the birds be
killed in an earthen vessel, over running water. 6. As for the living bird be
shall take it, and ths Cedar wood, and the skarlet, and the hyssop, and shall
dip them, and the living bird, in the blood of the bird that was killed over
the running water. 7. And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed
from his leprosy seven times, etc.


THis Book of Levitious is Moses Gospel, or the Gospel veiled; and what that
princely Preacher, Count Anh ilt, said of the whole Scripture, (that it is
nothing else but the swaddling clothes of the child Jesus,) is most true of
this Ceremonial Law, Heb. 10.1. All these Sacrifices in this Ceremonial Law,
of Beeyes, Sheep Goats, and lambs, etc. did with John Baptist point out and
say, Bebold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the wa^d; God
intending by all these Ceremonially, holy Persons, holy places, holy times,
John 1.29.
holy things, to teach us that as well the Fathers under the Law, as we under
the Gospel, could be saved by no other, but that holy thing which was borne of
a Virgin, and called the Son of God, Col. 2.17. And all those legal pollutions
and defilements by issues touches, leprosies, etc. did nothing else but shadow
out that most horrid filth, and grand abominable pollution of sin, which e^^ no
way else be washed away, but by the sprinkling of Christ blood upon our
consciences, Heb. 9.13, 14, till we wash in this Jordan, Zach. 13.1, 2. God
gave the moral Law which concerned all men, upon a mountain, Horeb, (or as it
was after upon occasion of the Bushes burning, Exodus 2. called Sinai,) to set
out the stability and firmness of it, which should last till Christ's second
coming to dissolve the mountains; but he gave the Ceremonial Law (which
concerned the Jews, and was (as the Greek Etymology of the word notes, eis
kairon monon, to last but for a time only,) in a tent or flitting Tabernacle
to Moses, noting the mutability of it, that it should last no longer then the
things of the tabernacle, i.e. Christ's first coming; who was the substance and
fulfilling of it, as St. Ambrose well; the shadow of Christ was in the Law, his
image in the Gospel, his fullness in Heaven.

Now in this Ceremonial Law (which directed the Jew in the duties of the first
Table of the moral Law toward God; as the Judicial Law did, in the duties of
the second Table, toward men.) There are diverse kinds of Legal pollutions
mentioned, one outward, by touching any unclean creature, etc. Levis. 11.
another inward, by issues from within the bodies of men and women, Lev. 12. A
third, (and worst of all,) both inward and outwand Lev. 13. and 14. here in
Text, and that is Leprosy.

In the words observe, First, the uncleanness or defilement he^ mentioned, for
the kind of it, what it was, viz. Lepr^sie, the word of all legal pollutions,
most loath some in it self, (...) to the party, most infectious to others.

Secondly, the materials appointed for the cleansing this Lep^ and they are
five, first, one bird that must be taken and killed out an earthen vessel full
of fresh spring running water. Secondly, another bird of the same kind as like
as may be (both clean) which must not be killed. Thirdly, Cedar-wood. Fourthly,
Hyssop-Fifthly, Skarlet, (or as it is, Heb. 9.19. Skarlet wool.

Thirdly, the preparation of these for, and application of these to the Leper,
viz. First the Priest must take the live bird, Cedar, Skarlet, and Hyssop in
his hand, and dip them all in the blood of the slain bird mingled with the
water in the earthen vessel. Secondly, he must besprinkle the Leper that is to
be cleansed, seven times (some conceive the Cedar wood to be the handle, the
hyssop ^e sprinkler, and Skarlet the tie of them together, with which ^e Priest
sprinkled the water and blood upon the Leper?) and let ^elive-bird loose into
the field.

Fourthly, the demeanor and carriage of the party himself thus cleansed; viz.
he must shave off his hair, wash his flesh and his clothes, and bring his
trespass Offering, etc. Now if any of you that hears and reads this Text,
should whisper his neighbor in the ear, and say as sometimes Phillip did to
the Ethiopian Eunuch, Act. 8.30. Understandest thou what thou read? Perhaps
he would return you that answer which the Eunuch did to Phillip, ver. 31. How
can I except some man should guide me. Let me entreat you therefore who are
the stronger sheep of Christ's flock, to stay a while, till I for the use of the
weaker flock unroll this stone, and drive the tender lambs softly; and that I
may be a pillar of fire (as was said of Basil,) to lead you in this
Wilderness, Genesis 33.13.14.
a star to lead you to Christ in the Text; the blessing of him that appeared
in the Bush, who only was found worthy to open the Seals, prosper our journey
amongst you this day. And first of the first, the pollution or defilement of
Leprosy; a disease (as I said) of all others most filthy. The Hebrews call it
by a name that signifies a fretting piercing sore, The Syriack and the Greek,
Rev. 5.5.
Scabbednesse, Scurfe or Scales: The Caldee, shutting out, or Seclusion: All
showing that it was a disease in it self most scurvy and loathsome; to the
party most painful and piercing, to others most infectious, so that the Lepers
were secluded and shut out, both from the congregation of God, and the society
and camp of men during their Leprosy: yea, though Kings, as Azariah (or
Vzziah,) 2 Chronicles. 26.21. 2 Kin. 15.5. though great persons as Miriam, Number.
12.14 Lepers were therefore without the City alone by themselves, 2 King. 7.3.
Mat. 8.1. Luke 17.11. so God commanded, Number. 5.2, 3. that they might not desile
the Camp or Church, God does hereby set out, and by these sensible objects
would lead the Jew as by the nose, and would have both Jews and Gentiles
hereby to discern and loath, that exceeding filth and loath somnesse of sin:
as if he had said, You are very sensible, and afraid of exceeding pained, with
and weary of the disease and defilemen, of Leprosy; Oh learn to hate and abhor
sin which is typed heret by, and is far more loathsome, as the substance goes
beyond the shadow, the body, the picture. Now that God did intend hereby to set
out the silth of sin, appears, First, because that this disease was more
common in the Land of Canaan, (to which people these Types and Ceremonies were
given) then in any other part of the world, nay the Jews say, that some kinds
of it were miraculous, and among no people but them, as Leprosy in walls, and
garments, etc. And as many think most raging and common in Christ's time, that
so Christ so commonly curing this disease, the Jews might learn that this was
the Messiab, Mat. 8.3, 4, 16, 17, and 11.3, 4, 5. Mark 1.41, 42. typed out in
all their Leviticall shadows, that came into the world to cleanse them from,
and take away the Leprosy and filth of sin. Secoudly, God sends them not to
the bodily Physician, to cure their disease, but to the Priest, a type of Our
High Priest Jesus Christ. Thirdly, the materials appointed for the cleansing
of the Leper, have no intrinsicall virtue, or medicinable quality to cure the
body, but (as we shall even now hear) typifie out Christ and his benefits,
that takes away the sin of the soul. Fourthly, the Apostle imimates this to be
the true meaning, Heb. 9.13, 14, 19, 22. and Chap. 12.24. and Chap. 10.1, 4,
14. when God would set out the baseness of wicked men, he calls them Wolves,
Lions, Bears, Foxes, Spiders, Cocatrises, Smoke, Dung, Isa. 11 6, 7, 8. and
59.5, 6 Cant. 2.15. Chafe, Psalm. 1.4. 1 Kin. 14.10. When God sets out the
pretiousnesse of his people, he calls them, Love, Dove, Jewels, etc. Cant. 2.
Mat. 3, etc. So when he would set cut the exceeding filth of sin, he shadows
it out by Leprosy, Uncle annesse, etc.

Secondly, For the five materials appointed for the cleansing; viz. two Birds,
Scarlet, Cedar, and Hyssop; some have thought the two Birds to have been
sparrowes, and so read the words; others (as far as I now remember, having now
neither Books nor papers to consult with) think they were no tame or
house-birds, because one of them must fly away into the field, so as in
likelihood to return no more, (as the scapegoat also) the more fitly to
resemble Christ who carries away our sins, not return to destroy us: I conceive
then, the two Birds did typisie Jesus Christ, two natures, the dying Bird set
out his humanity, according to which, he died, shed his blood, and lay in the
grave: The live-bird, set out his Divinity, by the power whereof he rose
again, flew away to heaven and carried away our sins; thus Peter expounds it,
1 Pet. 3.18. being put to death in the fiesh, but quickened by the Spirit; thus
Paul, 2 Cor. 13.4. He was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the
power of God, so Romans 4.25. And because no one Bird could both die and live
again, therefore here are two birds mentioned (as two Goats, Lev. 16.7, 10. to
shadow out, both Christ's shedding of his blood for the remission of our sins,
Heb. 9.22. and his bearing away our griefs, and carrying our sorrows, Isa.
53.4. Mat. 8.17. Now as these must be two little Birds both of a kind, so must
they be both clean, ver. 4. So was Christ as God, and as man, every way holy
and unspotted. That Christ was God, see the testimony of Scripture, Phil. 2.6.
1 Ioha 3.7. the testimony of the Devil, Mark 1.24. Christ's very enemies, Mat.
27.54. Christ's very works, raising dead, curing all diseases, turning water
into wine; multiplying loaves, all kinds of miracles; and (like the live-bird
in my Text,) his raising himself from the dead, and slying away to heaven. That
Christ was man also, witness his Birth, Life, and (like the dying bird in my
Text) his death and shedding his blood. The other three materials, viz. Cedar,
Scarlet, and Hyssop, (as I conceive) set out the several graces and virtues in
this precious Redeemer. The Cedar that rots not (yea the pitch that runs out
(as naturalists affirm) keeps dead bodies from rotting) shows Christ's
innocence, free from all corruption; The red Scarlet of a perfect dye, notes
Christ's fervent love to his Church. The savory Hyssop sets out Christ's savory
obedience, pleasing to the Father. Now Christ's innocence is proclaimed, not
only by God, by Prophets, Apostles, his own actions; but even by the Devil, by
Pilete and his Wife, and Judas, see Mark 1.24 Mat. 27.4, 19, -- 24, Mat. 3.17
Luke 2. etc. Behold the uncorrupted Cedar.

Christ's fervent love to his Church appears, in that for his peoples sake, he
being God became man (which is infinite more then for great Nebu^hadnezzar to
become a beast) nay, not only man, but poor man; nay, scorned and abused by
the worst and basest of men, yea, by Devils who had power to tempe, yea, to
carry his body (as I may say) from pou to pillar; yea, that he should do all
this and shed his blood (like a Scarlet thread) for poor worthless creatures
dust and ashes, yea, sinful dust, yea stranger (a little courtesy to a
stranger is much) Ephesians. 2.12. Yea, enemies, (now as Saul said, a man would
scarce spare his enemy; how few keep, how few dye for his enemy? yea, dead
enemies, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. especially considering that he knew how ill we
deserved this, how little many would profit by it, how much contemn, how ill
requite it; add to all this how voluntary and free, (no way compelled) all
this was, John 10.17, 18. So as though he knew he should die at Jerusalem,
yet he would go thither; though he knew and foretold that Judas would betray
him, yet he meets him; when Peter advised him to save himself, he rebukes
Peter: and when they asked him if he was the Christ, he denied not, but
witnested a good confession; was there ever love like this love? who hears
this, but will break out and say; his mercy, his mercy endures for ever;
behold his free scarlet love. Again Christ's savoury obedience he expressed,
in that he observed the whole Law, fulfilled all righteousness, Mat. 3.15.
Kept the Ceremonial Law, was circumcised the eight day, and offered for his
offering according to the Ceremonial Law. He kept the Judicial Law, in being
subject and obedient to their Magistrates Laws, Kept the Moral Law every
point of it, in both Tables, for the Object: with his whole man, heart, tongue,
and life, for the Subject: and all his life, for continuance: yea, denied
himself, and performed the most difficult points, Behold Christ's savoury
Obedience! Psalm 51.7, 9.

The third part is the preparation of these Materials for, and application of
these to the Leper, The dying bird, noting Christ's humanity, must be killed
over an earthen vessel full of running water, so that the blood of the slain
bird must fall into, and be mingled with the water in the vessel: This water
and blood typified that which Saint John expresses to have been fulfilled,
when water and blood came out of Christ's side, John 19.34. Noting our
justification by his blood, our sanctification by the water, 1 John 5.6. It
must be running water from a fountain, not pond or puddle water that dries up
in summer, but a fountain of mercy in Christ that flows continually for the
Churchesuse, Zac. 13.1. Heb. 9.14. The earthen vessels are the Ministers of the
Gospel (so Saint Paul expounds it, 2 Cor. 4.7.) though poor men like your
selves, yet we hold out to you most precious treasure, even the ^^^^irs of
Christ for the justification and Sanctification of his church: Its Gods way
that Christ should be revealed to us by these earthen vessels, and not by
Angels. God sent not the Angel to teach the Eunuch, but the Angel was sent to
the earthen ^^ssell, Philip, that he might hold out the water and blood to the
^thiopian, Act. 8.26, 35. If a Devil should come with a firebrand ^^t of
hel^, it would not do us so much good, as the teaching by earthen vessels.
Dives in his humane invention thought the former way the better, Luke 16.27,
30. that if one come from Heaven they would repent, but God that appoints the
end, and gives the blessing, must only appoint the means, Luke 16.29, 31.
which is not to speak to us by himself, Deuteronomy. 5.25. -- 28. nor Angel, nor
Devil, but to hold out Christ with all his benefits to us, in, and by earthen
vessels: take heed how you despise on Ministry, our Prophesying, 1 These. 5.19,
20. because though we are poor Vessels, yet we hold out Precious treasure;
look not upon our outside only as they on Christ, Is not this the Carpenter?
are not his kin^ed here with us, Mark 6.2, 3. for he that despises our
Ministry, despises not man but the Ordinance of God, These. 4.8. and 5.13. for
in so doing, you contemn this pretions water, and blood, and put away eternal
life, Act. 13.46.

The living Bird must be dipped in the blood of the dead Bird, ere the Leper be
sprinkled; noting to us, that he that must save us from sin, must not only
be God, nor only man, but both joined together, God and Man, for our
redemption, 1 Timothy 2.5. Man to suffer death (for God could not dye) God to
conquer death, (for mere man could not.) Man; because man had sinned God;
because God was offended, etc. yet as the cornerstone, he might reconcile
together in one both God and Man, Phil 2.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 2.16.

Yet all this will not do the Leper any good except it be sprinkled upon,
applied to him (so v. 7 the Priest must besprinkle the Leper seven times,)
shadowing hereby, b^th to Jew and Gentile, that Christ's coming from Heaven,
shedding his blood, sing again, and flying away to Heaven will not cleanse any
soul not ^u^e any Leper (though in it self a sufficient Plaster) except we be
sprinkled with it, except it be applied to us.

Fourthly, but when a poor leprous sinner is once cleansed converted, called,
justified, etc. when he is thus besprinkled with Christ's merits, may he now
live as he list? no, see the fourth part of the Text, viz. the cleansed Lepers
conversation; he must shave off his experements, all his hair, of head, beard,
etc. wash his flesh and cloths, offer sacrifice, etc. v. 8, 9, 10. he must
still be pumping out corruption, fighting daily, 1 Timothy 1.19. mortify the
deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. be daily cleansing himself from all pollution
both, of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. and shave off that supersiuity of
naughtiness, and wash away that filthiness that sticks close to the best,
James 1.21. If any poor captive soul marry with the God of Israel, Jesus
Christ, there must be pairing of nails, and shaving of hair; as the captive
Maid did, that married a man of Israel, Deuteronomy. 21.12. and be daily sacrificing
and sowing to the spirit, G^ll. 6.7.

Having now somewhat opened these four precious streams, that water this garden
of God, Genesis 2.10. let me, like a man that has run up a great hill, and
thereby himself out of breath, look down a little upon the Text, and draw from
every part one observation, like so many buckets full of these clear streams,
to water the lambs of Christ.

Obser. 1. And first from the pollution or defilements, observe; that sin is
a most filthy loathsome evil: the ceremonial type or shadow is gone, but the
substance or thing signified thereby ( viz. the filthiness of sin) that still
concerns both Jew and Gentile; the Jewish shell is broke, but the kernall has
a lasting morality: yet as all the types of Christ came far short of Christ the
Antitype, so all these pollutions come far short of the filth of sin, which
they signified.

Those sins which men count but jests or toys, how basely does the Scripture
style them? i. e. Covetousness which men call good husbandry, the Scripture
calls filthy lucre, Tit. 1.7. wanton talk which men call mirth and je^ing, the
Scripture calls filthy communication, Coll. 3.8. filthiness and foolish
talking, Ephesians. 5.4. yea the filthiness of the Daughter of Sion, Isa 4.4.
abomination, Lev. 18.22. pollutions of the world, 2 Pet. 2 22.

See what the Scripture compares it to; to the vomit of dogs, to wallowing in
the mire, etc. 2 Pet. 2.22. nay, sin is far worse then all mire, and dirt;
for 1 that can but defile the body, the cask, the shall; but sin defiles the
spiritual, invisible, and immortal precious soul which is a spirit. 2. All
the dirt in the world cannot ^ake a man one jot more ugly or loathsome in Gods
eyes. 3. It cannot shut a man out of heaven, or shut him in the everlasting
^^rboiles within the bars of Hell, Job. 17.16. but sin can do all this: see
how God esteems of it? surely as an abominable thing, Psalm. 14.1. hates it
perfectly, Psalm. 5.5. and 45.7. Revel. 2.6. See what good men (so far as they
are renewed) think of it. Surely its a very death to them, Romans 7.24. who shall
deliver me from the body of this death, Ephesians. 2.12. 1 Timothy 5.6. 1 John 3.14.
they esteem of it as darkness, Romans 13.12. Ephesians. 5.11. 1 These. 5.4. much worse
then that ninth plague of Egypt, Exodus 10.21; 22. there through the want of Sun,
Moon, and Starlight from above, and fire and candlelight from below, Wisd.
17.5, 17. both natural and artificial, and through the condensating of the
foggy Air, it was so dark, that no man had any mind to rise from his seat
(not that the Air was so thick they coald not rise, Exodus 10.23. for then
would it have hindered their breathing) for three days together; which caused
Famine, and being terrified with their own consciences, Wisd. 17.14, 15. and
evil spirits vexing them that while, Psalm. 78. v. 49. it was indeed a very
sore plague; oh but sinue is worse, chaining the soul to the Devil, starving
and famishing it, and that not for three days, but for many years, yea
oft-times to all eternity, where not only conscience and evil spirits vex,
but rend and tear for ever.

Sin is worse then the most stinging crosses, they are of Gods making and
^ending, Amos 3.6. they are only opposite to my particular good, bonummei; but
sin is opposite to that universal good bonum Dei; sin is worse then the
Devil, for it caused him to be so ill as he is; that which differenceth the
lowest Devil from the highest Angel is sin, take that away, and he is a
glorious Angel again; yet all the water at Noah's flood, and all the fire at
the day of judgment cannot do it. Sin is worse then Hell, for Hell is of
Gods making, as a prison to the contemners, of his great mercy, and his dear
Son; Sin, not so.

Reas. 1. And no wonder, for 1. sin comes from a filthy Fountain, that
stinking Sodom of man's deceitful heart, Mat. 15. Jam. 15.1. In the Angels,
and Adam (at the first) there was no sin, they were justified by inherent
righteousness, but now, etc.

Reas. 2. It has a filthy father and furtherer, the Devil, 1 John (...) 8.
John 8.44.

Reas. 3. It leads to a filthy end, and company Devils in Hell.

Reas. 4. It has filthy effects, it defiled heavenly Angels, and holy Adam; of
great Kings it made poor base slaves, much worse then for the highest
Nebuchadnezzar, to become a beast, it defile^ men and women, many by Creation,
and (to look upon) most pretty, fine, sweet, amiable, and comely men and women,
yet of this filthiness of sin become most ugly and loathsome creatures, yea
such as the Scriptures calls vipers, Mat. 3.7. Scorpions, Ezekiel. 2.6. Spiders
and Cocatries, Isa 59.5. Wolves, Bears, Lions, Leopards, Isa 11. Thorns,
Briars, Brambles, Thistles, Isa 10.17, Ezekiel. 2.6. Judge. 9.14. Mat. 7.6. yea
Devils, John 6.70. what a woeful thing would it be if any of you had a child,
having a head like a Bear^, feet like a dog, etc. oh its far better to be a
Beast, then to be like a Beast by living in beastly filthy sins: when a
Beast dies it ends, but when a wicked man dies, he begins his everlasting
misery.

Luther in his notes on the fourth Commandment, tells a remarkable Story,
viz. that two great Cardinals riding together, to the Counsel of Constance;
in their Journey, they espye^ Shepherd in the fields, exceedingly mourning;
one of them much pitying him, ^ides to him, asks him why he wept? the
Shepherd being much urged tells him, I looking upon this Toad, considered that
I had never plaised God as I ought, for making (...) such an excellent creature
as man, reasonable and comely, and not such a deformed Toad as this; seeing
both were made of the dust: how glad and thankful was this poor shepherd,
th^^ God made him a man and not a ^oade (the head and not the tay of the
creation) and sure so it is a very great mercy, we do noblesse God enough for
these common favors: when Pharaoh the greatest King then alive, that we read
of) had been seven day^ without water, and three days without light (the want
of which were the first and ninth of Egypts great plagues, and we read n^^
expressly that any other of the ten plagues lasted but one day. (...) Pharaoh
was then able to prize common mercies at a high ra^^ but yet it is much better
for one to have been a Toade (or any ^^^ther base creature) then to be a man
with an eternal and reasonable soul, if he live and dye in his sins, void of
grace. Should (...) a man going up and down the street, having frogs or
ser^^^ts in his belly, it would be thought a woeful and lamentable (...): oh
how much more to be full of unrighteousness and noysomeraigning lusts, Romans
1.29. and 3.13, -- 19, it is fin alone that defiles man, and every part of man?
Romans 3.13, -- 19. Mat. 15.19, 20. defiles his chief part, his heart, Jer.
17.9. his words, Mat. 15.18. his actions, Pro. 15.8, 9. both sacred, Pro.
21.27. Psalm. 109.7. Heb. 4. 1 Cor. 11.27, 29. his prayer, sacrifice, hearing,
Isa. 1.16. and his civil actions, Pro. 21.4. the very plowing of the wicked,
etc. yea, all, Tit. 1.15. as all that the Leper sato on, spit on, touched, etc.
was defiled, Lev. 16.16. Hag. 2.13. yea, he that touched a Leper, etc. So sin
defiles the very land, and place where it reigns, as Paradise, Sodom, etc.
Psol. 107.34.

But I forget too much your important affairs, and pressing necessities this
day, give me leave to coast upon an Use or two, and I will post to the next.

Ezekiel. 16.6. there is no better amongst us. Men talk much (but its only a
talk) of their good nature, there was never any such thing since the fall of
Adam; and not only an arm or foot defiled, or here or there a spot, but from
the head to the foot every part is full of this Leprosy, the whole man is
naturally desiled: by the fall we lost Gods image, made backward to all good,
prone to all ill, liable to condemnation, Romans 5.12, 16, 18.

John 2. (yet in time, water would have been wine, by the help of the vine, in
the ordinary course of Providence) had we a child that wanted a hand, a leg,
an eye, or had some limme extremely misshapen and disfigured, you would say to
one that should help you, you were bound to be his servant for over, and
proclaim it for a great work; Oh but to raise Lazarus from his four days
death, was yet much greater; but yet to turn a Lion into a Kid, a Wolf into a
Lamb, Isa. 11. is the greatest work of all. When Jacob gave to Benjamin his
coat of Arms, Genesis 49.27. he tells him that he should ravine as a Wolf, etc.
now if ever there was Wolf of the tribe of Benjamin, it was Saul, when others
did mischief against the Saints, he consented to it, Act. 7.58. and 8.1. Nay,
himself was bloody and cruel minded against any that called upon Jesus
Christ, or went that way, Act. 26.11. Yea, thirdly, he sought for commission
and power to execute his mischief like a Catch-poll, Act. 9.1. Fourthly, he
took much pains, rid a journey, (and got others with him) from Jerusalem in
the tribe of Benjamin to Damascus in Syria. Act. 9.2. and 22.5. Fifthly, when
he caught them, he beat them cruelly, Act. 26.10. and 22.19. Sixthly, many he
killed, Act. 22.4. and many he dragged and haled to prison, Act. 26.10.
Seventhly, some he punished, and some he banished, made them fly to strange
Countries, Act. 8.4. and 26.11. some way or other made havoc of them, Act. 8
3. And eighthly, which was worst of all, not content to plunder their estates,
mischieve their bodies, but (with that monster of Millai^e) endeavored to
undo their souls, by making them blaspheme the Name of Jesus Christ, Act.
26.11. every way as much as in him lay, assayed to overthrow the Church of
Christ, Act. 8.3. Gal. 1.13. And yet behold this raging and ravening Wolf of
Benjamin, become a Lamb, meek and humble, Act. 9.4 5, 6. changed, in name;
secondly, in nature; thirdly, condition or estate; fourthly, in practice, oh
what a great change! Christ puts this receiving of the Gospel among his great
miracles, Mat. 11.5.

Secondly, a needful change; we hear people cry daily in the streets, Alas,
great things lie at stake, Ireland is gasping, England is on the knee, and
other Churches and Kingdoms much endangered; Oh but till this change be
wrought on thy soul, there lies more at stake every night thou go to bed,
or morning thou uprisest, then 100. Englands, Irelands, etc. are worth, even
that immortal precious soul of thine. I hear men say sometimes, and rejoice,
oh such a Town, or such a Castle was taken with the loss only of ten, or
twenty, or ^^ve and twenty men: Alas, (then think I) these ten or twenty men,
had ten or twenty souls, and as soon as ever the poor vessel is cracked, the
poor shell, broke, the soul flies out to eternity; and if leprous souls not
changed, not converted, undone eternally: our heavenly Father knows that we
need meat, drink, etc. but much more need we to have our leprous souls
cleansed, because out eternal weal or woe depends thereon.

Thirdly, happiest change; for now that day, is salvation come to thy house.
First, thou may have comfort in every condition here, health, sickness,
prosperity, advernty, etc. having interest in Christ's benefits, privileges,
promises, intercession, etc. Secondly, freed from damnation, Romans 8.1. and
right to eternal life hereafter, John 3.36.

Nor will it serve to have a new tongue only, as Jehu to talk well: or a new
hand, as Herod, to reform well in many things; or a new outside, as five
foolish Virgins, to carry well in many things (was there ever any creature
borne, having only a tongue, only a hand, or outside; such would be a woeful
birth) but seeing we are leprous from top to toe, we must become new creatures,
sanctified throughout, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 These. 5.23. 2 Cor. 7.1. but I know to
whom I speak, and therefore hasten.

Use 3. Informs us, why it is so necessary to avoid evil company, why the
Scripture so often beats on it in both the Testaments, Prove. 4.14, 15, etc.
Psalm. 6.8. and 119.115. 2 Timothy 3.5. Ephesians. 5.11. etc. Alas, because wicked men
are Lepers, infectious, have the plague sore upon them (Lord have mercy upon
us) 1 King. 8.38. 2 Chronicles. 6.29. and by reason of this leprosy reigning in
them, they are loathsome to God, Zach. 11.8. loathsome to good men, Psalm. 15.4.
loathsome to all men, Lam. 1.18. yea, to all creatures, Romans 8.21. and if ever
God open their eyes will be loathsome to themselves, Job 42.6. Ezekiel. 36.31. If
the plague rage in any Town, you say to your children, families, etc. Oh look
to your selves, for the Lords sake come not there, take such and such
antidotes; oh so says Peter, as soon as ever he had won those three thousand,
he presently prescribes to those new converts, Act. 2.40. save your selves from
this untoward generation: Lepers were shut out of the City, camp, and
congregation, lest others should be infected by them, and were to give warning
unto others, Lev. 13.46. 2 Chronicles. 26.11. 1 King. 15.6. and 7.3. Numb. 12.
Matthew. 8.2, etc. to cry unclean, unclean, Lev. 13.45.

Use 4. It next shows us, that when Gods Ministers preach Gods judgments, and
threatenings, speak plain and home; its not (as people conceive) any ill will
or malice they bear to them, Rev. 11.10. nor any loss they wish them, alas
they wish no more loss then to part with their Leprofie, their plague soar; do
you account parting with a Disease, a wound, cold water out of your shoes, a
loss? and do you hate us, 1 King, 22.8. and account us your Fo^s for this,
Gall. 4.16.

Use 5. Let every Evangelicall Aaron then know what is one great part of our
Office, even to stand betwixt the living and the dead, to distinguish betwixt
the precious and the vile: one Office of the Priest was, to discover the
Leprosy, and by marks and signs (such as God laid down to him) to show who
were clean, and who were unclean: there is as much difference 'twixt wicked and
godly, as twixt blind and seeing, Leper and sound, dead and living, but seeing
self-conceit in the understanding, self-will in the will, self-love in the
affections, like Noah's three Sons have so planted and overspread the world, and
the heart of man is so deceitful, Jer. 17.9. and many think that they be in
the middlest of Samaria when they be in Dothan, 2 King. 6, pure only in their
own eyes, Prove. 30.12. it concerns the watchmen to look carefully into the
word, what marks God has laid down there, that they may pronounce of the
Leprofie accordingly, Lev. 13. look to that sure word of prophecy, that we
may in part do that now, which our Master Christ when he comes with his fan
in his hand, Luke 3. will do fully another day: and let the Church take care
that such as are scandalous sinners may be removed for their Leprosy, out of
the Tabernacles and Congregation, Jer. 15.19. especially such as glory in their
sin, alas they glory in their Leprosy, in their Scabs, and scurvinesse,
their Oaths, Drunkenness, etc.

Use 6. Lastly, let, oh let me (before I descend this Mount) prevail with some
poor (hitherto bespotted) soul, to be desirous, and use Gods means to be rid
and cleansed from his leprosy: (one would think the request reasonable) but
how have those Circeas cups befooled many?

Quest. What should I do?

Answ. First, as the Leper did, he felt the pain and loath somenesse of his
disease, was very sensible of it.

Secondly, he did highly prize those that were sound and clean.

Thirdly, he freely confessed his pollution, Lev. 13.45.

Fourthly, he rent his garments, and covered his lip, (signs of his forrow.)

Fifthly he cried out for help, Mat. 8.2. Luke 5.12.

Sixthly, do as Noamau did, 1. he hearkened to good and godly advise, though
from a poor servant captive maid, 2 King 5.1.2. Was at pains, took a long
journey. 3. Was content to be at any cost, 2 King. 5.23. 4. Content to use
means prescribed to wash in the River. v. 14. go thou and do likewise, wash in
the Ocean of Gods mercy, in the Fountain of Christ's merits in the tears of true
Repentance; but my have is legible to you, spare me a little patience for the
second point, of which never Angel can say enough: and that is from the means
or the five materials appointed for the Lepers cleansing, being the second
part, observe that.

Obser. 2. The only way to cleanse a sinner from the woeful Leprosy of Sin,
is the merits and satisfaction of Christ, God and Man; That the two birds, the
Cedar, Scarlet, and Flyssop, did typifie out Christ's two natures in one person,
and his merits, we have formerly cleared, and your business and my glass
forbids me, or to repeat, or enlarge: as there are three persons in one nature,
viz. the divine, so there are two natures in one person, viz. the second person
in the Trinity, like the living and the dying birds, and the Scarlet, Cedar,
and Hyssop, of his fervent love, perfect holiness, and savory obedience, are
fully expressed in his life, death, and intercession; whereby Christ satisfied
Gods justice, for the ill we had deserved; fulfilled the whole Law, to obtain
the good we had lost; intercedes in heaven still, to apply all this unto us, to
provide mansions for us, etc.

This was typisied by all those holy persons, holy places, holy times, holy
things in old Testament. Isaac. was the promised Seed in whom all the Nations
of the world should be blessed, herein typifying Christ; so did Joseph, who was
sent before to save his brethren Joshua brought Israel to the promised Land,
so Christ, in the first Adam mankind fell, and not in their individual, so in
the second Adam, do they rise again, Romans 5. Holy places, no Sacrifice
accepted, but at Temple or Tabemacle, nor any duty but in Christ. Again, in the
seventh year of release, and year of Jubllee, were servants freed, debts
released, lands restored; so ours only in and by Christ. Holy Ordinances; he is
the true pascall Lamb, the only propritiatory sacrifice, the only Jacobs
staff to lean on, and Jacobs ladder to ascend to heaven by, the true Brazen
Serpent, John 3.14, etc.

Reas. 1. And no wonder, none else could, none else would, who or what else
could satisfy the justice, or pacify the wrath of an infinite God:

Reas. 2. What Cornerstone could else reconcile and join together God and Man?

Reas. 3. What hyssop or niter else could wash away the spots of the soul, and
satisfy all the gaspes and chinkes of man's all-desiring heart? Or if, who
would have been at that cost and pains to do it, but Christ alone; but the
thing is so clear, and the time so short, I need not, I may not here enlarge;
take God upon his word for it, Act, 4.12. Mat. 1.21. Act. 10.43 Isa 53.4, 5.
etc.

But what if? what shall's make of all this, and that but briefly, in a word or
two.

Use 1. Oh bloody Antichrist! that to warm his own Kitchen, burn men's souls,
by selling supposed merits of feigned Saints, pickes at once both men's purses,
and consciences; and by teaching men to rest on their own merits, deprives them
of Christ's; telling us, we can as truly and properly merit heaven as hell. So
Maldonat; that we can condignly, not only by reason of Gods Covenant, but by
and of the work it self merit eternal life, so Bellarmine. Indeed selling of
souls is one great part of his trade, Rev. 18.13. and no wonder if he sell his
own to boot: Cornelius de lapide, a late learned Jesuit and great Commentator,
in his Commentary on the Numbers, says; That his holy Father the Pope, Pius
Quintus, was wont to say in his hearing, When first I entered in to holy Orders,
I conceived some possibility of my souls salvation; but being once a Cardinal
I did much doubt it; and now being a Pope I utterly despair; these are the
words of a Jesuit, and he says, that the next following Pope did often say as
much of himself; and no wonder. We often read in Scripture of three
Superstitious Altars. 1. At Damascus where they worshipped false gods, 2 King.
10.10. 2. At Bethell, where ^^ey worshipped the true God in a wrong manner, 2
King. 23.15. the 3. at Athens, where worshipped neither, Act. 17.23. or both
together, as an ancient King of the East Saxons in this Nation, after he was
baprized, had yet in his Church one Altar for Christ, another for the Devil;
so do these shavelings join together for Christ's merits, Saints merits, our
merits altogether, and so rob Christ of his honor and right, dearly bought, as
that Tyrant, moriua quinetiam, etc.

See what the Apostle says, Romans 11.6. if it be af grace, it is no more of
works, else were grace no more grace. And we all cry with Martyr Lambert, none
but Christ, none but Christ.

Use 2. Did Christ being God take our humane nature (both Birds were joined
together.) Let us men labor to partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
divine graces, divine communicable properties, privileges, etc.

Use 3. Did Christ deny himself, leave father and mother, and heaven, and glory
for us: let us poor creatures (when God calls) leave father, mother (as St.
Hierome somewhere) riches and pleasures, to serve and follow him.

Use 4. Did Christ shed his blood to free us from sin; let us rather suffer
our blood to be shed, then wilfully provoke him by wallowing in our sins; say
not as that great (but wicked) noble man, being asked whether he liked better
the pleasures of the wicked, or the piety of the godly, said cum illis mallem
vivere cum istis mori; I would rather live with the former, rather dye with the
latter.

Use 5. Bless God, yea let all within us bless God, that has provided so
precious and costly a remedy, to cleanse us from our Leprosy: alas, what would
all the riches and glory in the world do us good while we were all full of
Leprosy? 2 Kings 5.1. what would Vzziah, Naaman, Miriam, have given to be
cured of bodily Leprosy? how much more should we be thankful for curing
Souls Leprosy: especially,

First, if you consider, 1. the greatness of the gift, God sent his Son, his
only Son, his dearly beloved Son. Cyprian tells a story of one having three
Sons, one must needs be banished: the eldest was his first born and Heir, he
could not spare him; the youngest was the mothers darling, young and tender;
not could he (...) him; well then, the middlemost must go; but that was the
(...) express image and picture of the father, and therefore her world rather
dye then so part with any. But God sent his Son into a sinful naughty world,
though he was the very Image of his Father, these two clean Birds, to cleanse
us: the true mother (though none of the best) was loath to part with her child
to be divided, 1 King. 3.26. but God for our sakes parted with his Son to be
crucified.

Secondly, the freeness of the gift; by us neither desired, nor deserved, Ephesians.
1.5. Romans 5.8, 10. He loved us, because he loved us, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. none other
eye pittyed us, Ezekiel. 16.5.

Thirdly, the great cost it was to Christ, the great good to us; in Christ,
there was great vailing, of his glory, that the infinits God should become a
poor Carpenters Son, verbune infans, Phil. 2. 6, 7. 2. Vailing of his
holiness, that he should be called a Winebibber, Devil, etc. and be in the
similitude of sinful flesh, 1 Pet. 1.19. 3. Vailing of his happiness, he
deserved the first moment of his incarnation to have been in glory; but behold,
from whence he came, from his Father, Heaven, Glory. 2. Whither he came among
wicked men (or rather feinds.) 3. How used of all persons, Jews and Gentiles:
nay, because the Jews by their Law could not give above forty stripes,
therefore did they deliver him to the Gentiles, who lashed him so long, that it
was more like plowing then whipping; The Plowers plowed upon my back, etc.
Psalm. 129.3. again, in every part, from head to feet, in all his time from the
cradle to the cross, etc.

Again, consider what good this is to us; 1. hereby our nature is dignified,
being in Christ's person so highly advanced. All the Jew^ rejoiced, because
Ester one of their lineage was advanced; as a silver Ring, by having a precious
pearl in it; as a man may take possession of 1000 1. land a year, by one clod
of the same earth^ so has Christ taken possession of heaven for us in our
nature; a^ when King. James was made free of the Company of Cloth work^^,
Prince Henry of the Merchant Tailors, they dignified the Companies. So here, 2.
Sanctifies our nature, as a clear stream running through a filthy puddle.

And seeing I have begun to speak, lend me so much liberty (...) patience
(Right Honorable, and beloved) while I apply this destrine in a word or two to
your selves.

Use 6. Let this hearten and encourage all soldiers, that stand up for the
Truth of Religion, the Law of the Land, the true good of his Sacred Majesty and
Kingdoms, the flourishing of Christ's Church, to see what a General and
Captain they fight under; one that can from their sins cleanse them from
pollution of spirit prosper them now; and if a bullet or sword come, enshrine
their souls in Christ's arms, give them full pay, knight and crown them in
heaven: every soldier has a care when he goes to battle to take his musket,
powder, bullet, his arms, etc. with him; by no means will he leave these
behind; be sure you take this General Jesus Christ with you, and Truth and
Righteousness to be your Captains, 2 Timothy 2.3. This was Joshua's main care,
Josh. 5.13. 1. The calling of a soldier is very ancient, very honorable; what
was it that the four great Monarchies of the world most gloried in, especially
the Grecians and Romans, but in their valiant soldiers; whence have most of
our Titles of honor risen, but from Military employments, as Emperors, Dukes,
Earls, Knights, Esquires, etc. 2. It is also a lawful calling in it self, if
rightly managed, its an Art that God teaches, Psalm. 18.34. and 144.1. who
never taught any unlawful one, that God commanded, Numb. 31.2. commended; etc.
Heb. 11.33, 34. yea sometime war with men of the same Kingdom, and that
profess the same Religion may be lawful, thus twixt Israelites and
Benjunites, by Gods own advice, Ezekiel. 5.16, 17. and 6.11. Judge. 20.28. and so 2 Samuel 2.13. and 18.17. and though it be a sore evil, and (as I have Grand
Sacrifice.
elsewhere more largly proved) especially civil wars, yet sometimes a Pa^em
h^ bear debet veluntas, bell^^ necessitas Aug.
necessary evil: only remember wherein thy safety lies, in Christ alone. Let
men be for number, for strength, 2 Chronicles. 32.7, 8. never so mighty, yet if God
be against them, he can give a Commission to Angels, or Statres above, Judge.
5. to waters, or earth below, to wind and weather, to Frogs. Lice, Flies, etc.
and all the arm of flesh cannot withstand them, Exodus 8.9, 10. witness great
Pharaoh, Herod, Jesab^^, P^p^, (...) King of Poland, (whose ordinary oath or
curse was, Anno 134^.
Rats (...), all his Kingdom could not save him from being devou^^d by ^aes:)
Anno 940.
so Hatto Archbishop of Mentz by Mice. S^isillus Elkerka with Toads, etc. or
God can put a pannick fear into men, Josh. 2.11. or scare them with a conceit,
a King. 7.6. ruin them by their own fancy, 2 King. 3. 22, 23, 24. set one of
them against another, as 2 Chronicles. 20.23. Jndg. 7.22.

The Land of Caanan (as Cosmographers think) was not by the fourth part so big
as England; they had but twelve Tribes; and we in England and Wales have fifty
two Shires: and one with another its thought our shires were as big as their
Tribes; yet in two of these Tribes (as they were usually reckoned) there were
in Jeboshaphats days, almost 1200000. fighting men, 2 Chronicles. 17.14. -- 19.
enough one would think to over-runne a whole world, and yet Jehoshaphat cries,
2 Chronicles. 20.12. We have no strength, neither know we what to do, only our
eyes are upon thee. But if God go with them, 2 Chronicles. 32.8. then 185000. men
are less then so many Grasshoppers, three hnndred men with lamps and pitchers,
(God being their General) will destroy innumerable enemies, Judges 7.12, 16.
And seeing there are two sorts of Soldiers, spiritual and temporal, let me
say a word to both.

First, all of us are or should be spiritual Soldiers; Clergiemen (as some
call us) old aged men, women, etc. are usually freed from wars: some are poor,
can contribute no money, (the sinews of War) yet all, even Paul himself, yea
when aged, yea women, etc. must be spiritual soldiers of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.12.
2 Timothy 2.3, 4. and 4.7. fight under Christ against Devil, flesh and world,
with those spiritual weapons, Ephesians. 6. Among others, let me entreat you, 1.
To use Jacobs way, of prayers and tears, Hos. 12.4. Its said of Luther that he
prayed five hours a day, Easque studio aptissimos, that the Boards where he
used to pray, were rotten with his tears; he said that he kept out Pope,
Spain, and the Devil by prayer. Mr. Bolton (that Seraphick Divine) used to
pray fix times every day, twice with himself, twice with his Wife, twice with
his Family. That truly honorable and divinely noble Lord Harrington, prayed
constantly twice a day in secret, twice with his servants in his Chamber, and
joined at appointed times with the Family in prayer. The wrath of the greatest
Kings and rage of the fiercest Lions could not keep Daniel from prayer thrice a
day, Dan. 6. So David, Psalm. 55.17. and if David forgot not Jerusalem (...) his
mirth, surely much less in his prayers. Nehemiah and Daniel (two of the
greatest Courtiers to two of the highest Kings then under heaven) when they
wanted no outward favor for themselves, yet how did they mourn and weep for
the Churches miseries, Nebem. 1.4. Dan. 9.3. 2. Use Esthers way, prayer and
fasting, Esth. 4.16. some Devils are not cast out but that way: the Israelites
miscarried twice and lost 40000 men, till they went this way, Judges 20. 3. Use
David's way; enquire of God, and seek out in the Land, and thy heart, what is
the main sin that God is angry fore Sam 21.1. Lam. 3.40. Jer. 8.6. 4. Use
Ninevehs way; searching, praying, fasting and reforming, Jonah 3.8. Reformation
is the first, second, and third part of a Christian: let Joshua do, all else
that he can, till Reformation, no peace, no safety, and these ways of
soldiers are, 1. unquestioned ways, though some scruples and disputes about
other wars, this is unquestionable. 2. universal, old, young, rich, poor,
J^sh. 7, 10-13.
may all use these ways 3. safe. 4. cheap.


Secondly; to soldiers temporal; and because you would not have me long,
spare me a word or two. 1. I beseech you seek not your own ends, gains; etc.
add not more length to our miseries, to add more weight to your own purses.
Let your ends be, the advancement and establishing of the Truth, and purity of
Religion, against all Idolatry and Inuovations, the maintenance of the good
Laws of the Land ( which are the power that none ought to resist, Romans 13.1,
2.) His sacred Majesty's honor and true good, the peace and recovery of
distressed Ireland, and distracted England; the subjects just Liberties, etc.
according to Gods word, our Laws, and your late Protestation. 2. Rid thy heart
of sin by true repentance, carry to the field a clear conscience; it was the
usual saying of the old Earl of Essex. (his Excellencies father that now is)
When I go out to the field, if any sin or guilt lie on my Conscience, it
cowards and dampes my spirit; whereas if I find, peace within, I dunst
encounter an Army of men; so said old Latimer, Uprightness has Boldness.

Thirdly, take Christ's advice to soldiers Luke 3.14. Do violence to no man,
and be content with your wages; away, for ever away, with this smoking,
pillaging, plundering, for your own private gain; without either just and
public command and authority, or public good. It was called stealing the
last year, and deserved hanging and damming, what is it now? It was truly said
to, and well taken by, as valiant and pious a soldier as I think this age has
bred, ( viz. to General Sir Horatio Vere Knight, Lord Vere of Tilbury.
Vere) Soldiers that carry their lives in their hands, bad need above others
to carry grace in their hearts, that so having made peace with God, they my be
fit to encounter with men; and if holy at any time, surely now, when the Armies
go out to battle, Deuteronomy. 23.9. oh let not an Achans stolen wedge be found in
your Camp, Josh. 7. l. st God blast you, Deuteronomy. 23.14. if ye do otherwise, no
wonder the child of Reformation stick in the birth, or that things go
backward, by reason of transgression, Dan. 8.12. you say you display your
Banners in the name of the Lord of Hosts (and so you must do, if would rightly
prosper,) Psalm. 20.5. you say you serve under and for Christ your General, oh
but he is a holy God, Isa 6.3. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, Rev. 17.14.
would Christ your General swear, be drunk, whore, ly, etc.? follow your
leader. 2. Again, you say you stand up for a holy Cause, holy Doctrine, Life
and Laws. Do not you cry, Ocoelum! and point, and look at the earth.

Thirdly, I believe you would prevail, oh but David (as valiant a soldier as
ever drew sword,) see which way he meant to prevail, by holy crying unto God,
Psalm. 56.9.

Fourthly, you would be safe; this is the way, Zach. 2.5. and 10.3, 5 Holiness
has promise of protection. 5. Consider there is somewhat to be done after
dying, then comes the strongest try all, and greatest encounter; you are not
able to contend with God, 1 Cor. 10.22. prize your souls above all earthly
trash: Caesar swimming through the waters, was content to loose his rich Robe,
to save his Booke^ which he held in his hand; major fuit cura Caesari
libellorum quam purpurae. Your souls will quickly fly out to eternity, I
remember the saying of that famous Limmer Zeuxes; diu pingo, quia aeternitati
pingo. Let the greatness of this General CHRIST (who can pardon sins, cleanse
the soul, and is flowne away (...) heaven, to provide mansions for his there,)
encourage you; Ay^ but let Holiness and Piety also rule and direct; but enough
of this, I promised brevity.

Use 7. And now while this last sand runs, let me recall that Use which a good
while a go through posting have I forgot; it is this: a glass to show us
theuglinesse and poison ousnesse of sin, which nothing else could cleanse or
take away but these clean Birds, this Cedar, Skarlet, and Hyssop, the precious
blood and death of Jesus Christ: play not the fool to make a mock at sin,
Prove. 14.9. rejoice not thou in that, as sweet, Jer. 11.15. which caused the
Saints, as Mary Magdalene, Luke 7.38. David Psalm. 34.4. the incestuous
Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2.7. Peter, Mat. 26.78. etc. to weep so bitterly; do not
thou call bitter sweet: call not any sin little, that cost so great a price.
Moses would not leave a hoof; Oecebolius not give a halfe-penny to an Idol
Temple. Young King Edward the fixth, said he would rather lose his life, then
allow his sister the Lady Mary (afterward Queen) so much as one Chapel in
England for Mass, though Charles the Emperor, and two great persons in this
Kingdom, did sore solicit him: David. would rather choose punishment then
sin, 2. Sam. 24.10, 17. Joseph would rather lose his clothes off his back
then sin, Genesis 39.9, 10, etc. Moses would rather lose Lord Treasurer ship
then sin, Heb. 11.26. Martyrs rather be plundered, Heb. 10.34. yea endure
the fire, then sin; rejoice not at the sins of others; when any came to
Saint Ambrose for comfort, his eyes spoke before his tongue, in mourning for
their sin. Our Savior (whom we never read to have laughed, wept four times,
and all these when others rejoiced and tryumphed: it goes for a saying of
Anselmes, that he had rather be in Hell without sin, then Heaven with it.

And it shows us further the cause of all these great distractions fears,
troubles on this Kingdom, and of this days fasting and humiliation; alas, its
sin that does thus oppress us; and we have very great cause this day to wish
our heads fountains of tears, to make this place a Bochim to draw Buckets of
tears to quench these burning dissentions, to mourn for all our abominations,
the cause; and for the load of calamities, the fruits of our s^^^e for means to
help us herein, I have laid down lately on another text; Englands mercies,
Englands warnings, Englands rents, Englands dangers, Englands hopes, Irelands
miseries, Englands sins; these, and suchlike (as I said then) should move and
help us to wailing and lamentation, to floods of tears. Let me as a close to
this point, add a word to the last of those Motives, as most concerning out
present point; viz. Englands sins; was there ever such hatred of piety and
opposition of goodness, as has been in thee O England! I never heard of Turks,
Jews, Papists, or any other people in the world, but they did prize those best,
approve them most that lived most close according to the principles of their
own religion, what ever it be; but have not those been made a mocking-stocke,
opposed, nicknamed, and scorned most, that walk most close according to the
Word of God, and principles of our own religion: Did I ever think I should
have lived to have seen those days, wherein it should by many have been made a
discerning Shiboleth, or figne of one that is not the Kings friend, viz. if he
do not banne and swear; I am sure our great God, I hope our gracious Sovereign
thinks not so. Alas, swearing, cursing, banning wicked subjects are the worst
enemies that the King has, 1 Samuel 12.25. 2 Samuel 24.1. An ill Stomach may make
a good head ache, and good eyes dim. And alas, alas! do our sins decrease
for all our afflictions, now God has us on the knee? or Pharaoh and Ahaz-like,
do we not grow worse (...) worse? do not swearing and banning, stealing,
adultery, Sabbath-breaking and persecution of Gods Saints increase still more
and more? As a godly Divine somewhere says, The Turks call mad men Saints,
(because they conceive their thoughts are abstracted from the world) but we
here call Saints madd men: men accuse Daniel, why? no fault save in the matter
of his God.

And now (Right Honorable, and beloved) sure I am that your necessities and my
time both call for an end; and now all that I dare further presume on (having
thus far trespassed on your patience) is, in a word or two to tell you only
what I should have said, and so commit you to God.

Obser. 3. From the third part, which is the application of those materials to
the Leaper, the point is, That all the Incarnation, death and merits of Jesus
Christ will do a poor leprous sinner no ^^od, except, besprinkled on his heart,
applied to him. Hence it it that the sacred Scripture compares Christ and his
merits to such things as do us good only when applied as to meat, drink, bread,
^^ysick, Salve, water, clorhes, etc. what will a hungry, sick, naked man, etc.
be better for these, except they be applied. 2. The Scripture (that appoints
nothing in vain) affords plentiful means for application; as outward means,
Word and Sacraments; inward means, on Gods part his Spirit; on our part, faith.

Use 1. Confutes the grand and desperate error of many that ^ope and think to
be justified, glorified, saved by Christ, though never besprinkled with his
graces, though never applied to him, etc.

Use. 2. Of trial, whether we are of Simon Peter or Simon Magus lamp; whether
we have any part or portion in this matter of Christ's merits, Acts 8. whether
thou art cleansed or yet a loathsome Leper.

First, is thy heart purified, is Christ besprinkled on thee by faith, Act.
15.9. Secondly, is the thumb of thy right hand, the toe of thy right foot, and
thy right ear dipped in the blood of the Sacrifice, as the Lepers ought, Levit.
14.14. i. e. have thou a conscionable ca^ (...) ^earing, doing, walking.
Thirdly, do thou prize the earthen vessel, for the Treasure sake, i. e.
Gods Ambassadors and Ministers, for the Gospel sake, 2 Cor. 4.7. Isa 52.7.
Fourthly, do thou daily wash thy self in the tears of true repentance, and
shave off that superfluity of naughtiness, as the Leper ought, Lev. 14.8, 9.
J^^es 1.21, etc.
Use 3. Comfort from this Spring follows to all Gods Saints, that have Christ
besprinkled on them, applied to them, you are those (though dust and ashes)
that Jesus Christ glorie^^ in, 2 Cor. (...) 23. he rejoices that ever be shed
his blood for you, Isa 53.11. ^^ffer you may; be ruined you cannot, etc. 2 Cor.
4.8.

From the fourth part, viz. the demeanor or carriage of the par^y being once
cleansed, observe.

Obser. 4. That those whom God does wash, and cleanse from their sins, must
still wash and shave themselves, i. e. abstain from all evil and occasions of
sin.

Obser. 5. That scandalous sinners (while they continue Lepers) should be
carefully shut out of the Congregation, lest they infe^ others.

Oh we have many Lepers as in the days of Elisha, oh that they were upon good
grounds only, duly shut out; and not but upon good grounds duly readmitted;
that there were not too much levity, nor too much lenity in this Church-hooke
of Excommunication; not too much levity, in laying this heavy censure on men,
for pence, toys, trifles; nor too much lenity in readmitting Dogs, Swine,
Lepers, still into the Congregation again, because they have either a silver
file, or golden key, to open or break the Door. But enough of this, I remember
my promise, I close up all with that gallant and souldier-like Speech of that
brave General Joab, in 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, let us play the men,
for our people, and for the Cities of our God: and the Lord do that which
seems him good. *

FINIS.

