A SERMON Preached on the 28th. of June, AT St GILES in the Fields, BY John
Sharp, D. D.

Archbishop of YORK Elect, At his leaving yt Parish.

Published at the Request of the GENTLEMEN of the VESTRY.

LONDON: Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1691.

Philip. iv. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.
I Have the two last Lord's Days, made it my business to treat of this Text, in
a way that I thought did most tend to the informing your Judgments: And to that
purpose I have raised several Observations, and drawn several Inferences from
it.

I mean now to Treat of it in another way, and to apply my self wholly to the
pressing you to the Practice of it.

And indeed the Nature of the Sermon I am to make, does call for this from me.
For I am now to take my leave of you; this being the last time in all
probability that I shall Preach among you as your Minister: And therefore I
suppose good Advice and Exhortation will more become me at this time, than a
close Discourse upon a Text.

And yet, my Text does afford matter enough, without straining it, for such a
purpose: Nor indeed do I know a Text in the Bible, that I could more willingly
pitch upon to leave with you, as the last advice I would give you, and as the
Sum and Conclusion of my Preaching among you; than these Words of St. Paul I
have now read to you.

Let me therefore at this time address my self to you all, as the Apostle here
did at the conclusion of his Epistle to the Philippians, Finally Brethren
whatsoever things are true, etc.

Here are a great many things recommended by the Apostle to our thoughts and
pursuit. If we would make a distribution of them, I believe they will all
naturally enough fall under these Four Heads. For the things here recommended
are not so many as the words by which they are expressst; there being several
Words used in this Enumeration, that are of the same importance, and seem to
express much the same thing.

The Four Heads I would reduce them to are these,

I. A Constant Adherence to the true Religion. II. Honesty and Justice in our
Dealings. III. A Life of strict Purity, in opposition to Sensuality and
Lewdness. IV. The Adorning the Doctrine of God we do profess, by the constant
Practice of every other thing that is Virtuous or Commendable, or well thought
of by Mankind.
This, as I take it, is a fair account of the Parts of this Text: and these I
shall make the Heads of my following Exhortation.

I begin with the first. Finally my Brethren whatsoever things are true, think
on those things.

The Truths that S. Paul here exhorts them to think on are undoubtedly the
Truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ which he had delivered to them. These he
would have them to think upon, and persist in, and never to be prevailed upon
by any Temptation to depart from them.

Let me now apply this Advice of his to you. It is the particular Blessing of
God to this Kingdom, and an inestimable Blessing it is, that he has not only
vouchsafed us the Light of his Gospel for many years, but He has also taken
Care that the Truths of it should be delivered to us with greater Purity and
Sincerity, and freer from the mixtures of Error than to most, I was going to
say, than to any other People in the World.

If it lay in your way to make observations concerning the State of Religion in
other Countries; nay or but to read the Accounts that are given of it: I am
sure you would be convinced how exceedingly happy we of this Church are, above
all the other Churches in Christendom.

O therefore let us all firmly adhere to the Truths we have been taught; to the
Truths we have hitherto made Profession of. And let us firmly adhere to that
Church which has held forth these Truths to us, and taught us this Profession.

We do not pretend that any Church is Infallible, and therefore not ours: But
this we dare say and we can justify; that if we take our measures concerning
the Truths of Religion from the Rules of the Holy Scriptures, and the Platform
of the Primitive Churches, the Church of England is undoubtedly both as to
Doctrine and Worship, the Purest Church that is at this day in the World; the
most Orthodox in Faith, and the freest on the one hand from Idolatry and
Superstition, and on the other hand from Freakishness and Enthusiasm of any now
extant.

Nay I do farther say with great seriousness, and as one that expects to be
called to account at the dreadful Tribunal of God for what I now say, if I do
not speak in sincerity: That I do in my Conscience believe, that if the
Religion of Jesus Christ, as it is delivered in the New Testament, be the true
Religion (as I am certain it is:) Then the Communion of the Church of England
is a safe way to Salvation, and the safest of any I know in the World.

And therefore I do exhort you all in the Name of God, steadfastly to hold and
to persevere in this Communion.

Here you have the Things that are true. Think of them and embrace them
heartily; and Live and Die in the Profession of them. This is the Doctrine I
have always Taught you, and by the Grace of God I mean to Practice accordingly.

II. The next thing I have to recommend to you from these words of the Apostle
is Universal Honesty and Justice and Righteousness in your Conversation.
Whatsoever things (says he) are true, whatsoever things are honest; whatsoever
things are just; think on these things.

You see I join these two words Honest and Just together, as importing the same
thing. Tho yet I am aware that the word we here render Honest is often used in
another signification, that is to say for Grave or Venerable: But since that
other signification falls in most properly under my last Head, I wave it here
and take the word as our Translation renders it.]

Indeed it is in vain to expect any advantage from our profession of the Truth,
if we be not sincerely Just and Honest in our Actions.

Whosoever can allow himself in the practice of any dishonest, knavish,
indirect Dealing, let that Man be never so Orthodox in his Belief and Opinions;
yet I am sure he is no true Christian.

O therefore let me exhort you all, whatever Interests you have to serve;
whatever Dealings you are engaged in, to be always strictly Just and Upright in
your Conversation. Use no Tricks, practice no ill Arts for the serving your
ends, but in all your transactions with Men, deal with that Simplicity and
Integrity and good Conscience, that becomes those who would be accounted the
Disciples of Him who was the most Innocent, the most Sincere, and the least
Intrigueing Person in the World.

Assure your selves no dishonesty can prosper long. Whatever turns you may
serve by it at present, yet you will bitterly repent of it some time or other.
But Righteousness and Justice does establish a man's ways. And the upright Man,
tho he is not always the richest, yet always walks most surely. And as for
the final event of things; Remember this that God Almighty has pronounced that
no Unrighteous men, no Covetous, no Liars, no Extortioners shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. But to go on.

III. The next thing I have to exhort you to from the words of my Text is the
Practice of Purity. For after the Apostle has recommended the pursuit of
things that are true, and the things that are honest and just, he next adds the
things that are pure. Meaning hereby that we should study to be pure and chaste
and temperate both in our Hearts and Lives; avoiding all Excesses, and
Lewdness, and Sensuality.

And if he thought it convenient in that Age of strictness and severity and
devotion, to put the Christians in mind of this: I am sure it is not only
convenient but necessary to do it, in this Age of ours, when Luxury and
Debauchery, when Whoredom and Drunkenness, and all sorts of Vices that are
contrary to Purity, are grown to that height among us, that we seem to defy
God Almighty by our impudent Practice of them, and provoke Him to give us up to
Destruction.

I pray God make the whole Nation deeply sensible of the Folly and Wickedness,
as well as of the danger and dreadful Consequences of these Practices. And as
for you who are here present, let me bespeak you in the Words of the Apostle;
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from
flleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul. I beseech you as you have any Honor
for your Lord and Master, as you have any regard to the preservation of a Sense
of Religion in your Minds, as you have any concern for your Health, for your
Estates, for your Families; as you have any respect to the Public, that
Effeminacy and Sottishness and Diseases may not be entailed upon our Posterity;
lastly as you love your own Souls, and hope ever to see the face of God in
Heaven, learn to live Soberly, learn to live Chastely, learn to practice Purity
and Temperance in all your Conversation. Avoid Whoredom and Drunkenness as you
would the Plague, for certainly they are the worst of Plagues to them that use
them: For other Plagues do only put our Bodies in danger, but these do endanger
both our Souls and Bodies. Nay as to the one (I mean our Souls) they will prove
certain inevitable Destruction without Repentance and Reformation.

I know these things are made slight Matters of by a great many among us. But
assure your selves God will not account them so; it is certain he will not, if
we may believe his Word; for it is there told us expressly that Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge. And withal, that neither Adulterers, nor
Fornicators, nor unclean Persons, nor Drunkards shall ever inherit the Kingdom
of God or of Christ.

IV. I proceed to the last Head of Advice that is given in my Text. The Apostle
having instanced in Three things necessary to be daily thought upon and pursued
by all Christians, viz. Truth and Honesty and Purity, leaves off to meddle any
farther with particulars, and sums up the rest of his Advice in generals. And
that sum comes to this, that as we are Christians we should not only take care
of the three forementioned things, but should make it our business to improve
our selves in every other sort of Virtue; nay in every other sort of thing that
is Praiseworthy, or that is well esteemed of among Mankind. So that really it
should be the endeavor of our Lives to render our selves as excellent and as
exemplary for all sorts of amiable Qualities as it is possible for men to be in
this World.

This I take to be the full meaning of those four expressions that follow in my
Text, Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think of these things.

And now Brethren, see from hence what your Obligations are. You that have such
a glorious Light vouchasafed you; such unvaluable Promises, such mighty
Assistances made over to you by the Gospel of Christ: You must in Reason
imagine that in return of these great Advantages, great things are expected
from you.

It will not satissie your Engagements, that you do believe and profess the
Gospel, that you do no wrong to your Neighbors, that you are neither given to
Lewdness nor Drunkenness, (tho yet even these, as the World goes, are very
great things, and could all Men that profess Christianity truly say this of
themselves, we should soon see Heaven upon Earth) But your Christianity obliges
you to aspire after greater things; you must get your selves possessed of the
whole Circle of Virtues; you must be Kind and Charitable, as well as Just and
Honest; you must be Modest and Meek and Humble, as well as Temperate and Chaste

Nay not only so, but you are to labor after all these several Virtues, in the
full Latitude and Extent of them, even to that degree that every thing which
has but the appearance of Evil is to be avoided by you. You are not only to
abstain from Acts of Injustice, but even from doing a hard thing to any one;
you are not only to keep your selves within the known Limits of Temperance and
Chastity, but to avoid all those things that border upon the Vices opposite
thereunto, and so as to all other instances; If a thing be of ill Report, and
looks infamously to the sober part of Mankind, why that very Consideration is
enough to deter you from the Practice of it; For you are to recommend your
Religion to all the Men in the World, by all the ways that are possible.

In a Word you are to endeavor to be as free from blame in your whole
Conversation as you possibly can, and not only so, but to be as good, and to do
as much good as your Circumstances will allow you.

This now is to be a Christian indeed; by thus endeavoring you truly walk
worthy of that high and heavenly Calling, wherewith you are called, and you do
(as the Apostle advises) adorn the Doctrine of God in all things; and happy,
extremely happy are they that do thus, for great is their Reward: Great even in
this World in the solid Peace and Assurance of Gods Favor which they here
enjoy, and which indeed far exceeds all the Blessings that the Earth can
afford; but exceedingly great in the Life to come, when Jesus Christ shall come
with all the Powers of Heaven to do Honor to those that have thus here honored
him.

Thus have I gone through all the parts of my Text, but I do not think that I
ought so to leave it. I have given you an account of the things that St. Paul
has here directed us to, to be the main pursuit of our Lives. But I think
likewise it will be proper to speak something of the Methods of that pursuit,
or the means which we are to observe, if we would practice this Text; and here
I am to begin anew with my Advices. Several things I have to represent upon
this Occasion and to exhort you to. I am not much solicitous, whether they
strictly belong to my Argument or no. But I desire to leave them with you, as
things that I judge to be very useful, and which I wish may be ever remembered
by you.

And the First thing I would exhort you to is this, That you would endeavor to
possess your Minds with a hearty Sense of God Almighty, and the absolute
Necessity of being seriously Religious.

I do not mention this, as if I thought there was any need to caution you
against Atheism or Infidelity, for I hope not many among us are inclined that
way. Mankind are naturally disposed to believe a God and Religion, and since
through God's Blessing it is Christianity that is the Religion of our Country,
and in which we have been all Educated: I look upon an Atheist or an Infidel
among us, to be a sort of Prodigy, a strange unusual Creature, vastly different
from those of his own Kind.

But here is the thing. Though most of us profess Religion and the true
Religion, yet many of us have no lively or hearty Sense of it. We use Religion
as we do our Cloths. They are very convenient, nay perhaps necessary, and
therefore we wear them, and for the particular form or mode of them we follow,
as to that, the Custom of the Country where we live. Yet as the Cloths we wear
do not alter the Complexion or Features of our Body, so neither does the
Religion we Profess any more affect the Temper of our Souls. We serve our
selves in both Cases of the outward Conveniences that are to be had by them,
but we are still the same to our Persons both as outward and inward Lineaments.

But alas this is a very sorry way of being Religious and will do us no great
kindness. We may perhaps reap some secular advantages by it, but yet even the
very trouble and pains it puts us to, do equal the Conveniences we have from
it. The Men that live thus, are just served like those that work in rich Mines.
They are daily employed about Gold and Silver or Gems, and they work hard, and
they have their days wages for their Labor, but they are not a whit the richer
for the Treasures that come into their hands.

Your Religion will never serve you to any extraordinary purposes, till your
Hearts be affected with it as well as your Understandings. Let me therefore
advise you, as you love either your Happiness in this World, or in the next,
make it your principal care to get a lively and vigorous Sense of God impressed
upon your Minds. And look upon it as the greatest Interest you have to carry
on, the greatest Business you have to do in this World (as it really is) to
approve your selves to this God by a sincere endeavor in all your
Conversation, to walk as his Son Jesus Christ has taught you. If you do this,
you will certainly find the Sweet and Comfort of it both here and hereafter.

When all is said, it is a vain thing for any man to expect a tolerable easy
passage through this World, unless he have the Hopes of Gods Favor to support
him under the Multitude of evil Accidents which the State of Humane Life will
necessarily expose him to. And as for the other World, without these Hopes he
is perfectly lost: And to be able to entertain any rational Hopes of God's
Blessing and Favor, is a very vain thing likewise, unless we make it our
business with our whole Hearts and Souls to serve and please and obey Him.

There are a great many Rules and Maxims that we use to give to our Friends or
our Children for the making their Fortunes, and I cannot deny but they are
exceeding good ones. Thus for instance, we advise them to get a true
understanding of their Business, and to pursue it diligently, to keep out of
ill Company, to avoid Drinking or Gaming and Lewdness, and to study the Tempers
and Humors of Mankind, and to learn to apply themselves dexterously to those
they have occasion to converse with; why these and such others are excellent
Rules and most worthy of all Men to be studied and practiced. But still there
is one Rule above all these, and without which all the other will signify very
little to the making a Man's Life easy and comfortable; and that is to preserve
a lively sense of God upon our Spirits, to have his Fear always before our
Eyes, to love him above all things, to value his Favor more than Life, and to
dread his Displeasure as the worst of Evils. If we can but once get our Souls
into this frame, we have done our Business both for this World and for
Eternity; All the other particular Rules and Advices will be in a great measure
superfluous; for he that is possessed of this good Principle will of course
naturally fall into the practice of them. And besides this Fear and Love of God
in our Hearts, as it is the most effectual means, according to the usual
Disposition of the Divine Providence, to put us into good Circumstances of
Living; so it is the only means of making our Circumstances happy to us, if
they be good; or of making them easy and supportable, if they be bad.

I do therefore most earnestly recommend it to you, as you desire that either
you or yours may prosper, nay, as you would not be very miserable; be not
contented with a superficial outside Religion, but affect your minds as deeply
as is possible with a sense of God, and what you owe to him; and endeavor to
impress the same sense upon your Friends and Children, and all that are about
you. The truth of it is, so much does our present happiness, as well as our
future, depend upon this belief of God, and love to him, and hopes of his
favor; that were it not for this, the present World with all the imaginary
pleasures and glories of it would appear to all wise and good men, not only an
empty dull unsatisfactory place, but a dismal melancholy prison. If it was
supposed that all things here were the effects of blind Chance, or fatal
Necessity, and that there were no Wisdom and Goodness that did preside over the
World, or took care of Mankind; no considering man could desire to live here.

The Second thing I would leave with you, is this, That after you have got into
your minds a hearty sense of God and his Providence, and his presence and
goodness; so as that you mean to make it the business of your lives to
recommend your selves to him: you would in the next place, take care to keep up
that sense by a constant and daily Worship of him.

For God's sake, and for your own Souls sake, do not neglect your Prayers. You
must never think that God will bless you, if you do not make a Conscience of
daily paying him your tribute of Honor and Worship.

Be sure therefore, you be constant in your private Devotions. As you every day
receive the renewed pledges of God's love and goodness toward you in a
thousand instances: so let every day your affection and gratitude be expressed
to him, by hearty Prayer and Thanksgiving. This is absolutely necessary to be
done, as I have often told you, if you mean to preserve any hearty sense of
Religion in your minds.

But besides this I have another thing to recommend to all those that have
Families. They are Heads and Governors of a Society. For indeed the first
notion of Society is that of a Family. Every Family is a little Kingdom, and
every Kingdom is or ought to be a great Family. Now is it natural, is it
decent, that there should be any Society upon earth wherein God should not be
owned and worshipped? And yet woe be to us, how many thousands of Families are
there in this Kingdom, nay, I am afraid, even in and about this City, wherein
God is not so much as named in public, unless perhaps by the way of affront,
by the way of Cursing or Swearing.

We deservedly complain of the great looseness and profaneness and irreligion
that has overspread the face of this Nation. O! I doubt a great deal of the
blame of it lies upon the Householders, the Masters of Families among us. If
they would take better care of their Children and Servants, and let them know
what it is to worship God, things would not be so bad among us. But how can we
expect better, when there is no Religion either taught or practiced in our
houses. We give our domestics opportunities enough, of learning all our bad
qualities; but we give them none of learning our good ones, if we have any.

They see us offending God by many rash words and sinful actions; but they do
not see us repenting, and asking God's pardon by our solemn Prayers and
applications to the Throne of Grace. Let us therefore seriously lay this point
to heart. I am sure we have just cause to do it. Let us bring Religion into our
Families, and not be contented that once a week some of our people in their
turns should hear something of it. Let us every day call our family together,
and pay our common tribute of Prayer and Praise for the mercies we do daily
receive in common.

Methinks our Savior seemed to have a respect to this very duty, and to charge
it mightily upon us, when he made us that gracious promise that even, where two
or three were gathered together in his name, there would he be in the midst of
them. Sure, his words have most naturally a respect to the worship of God that
is performed in Families. As has likewise the very contrivance of the Lord's
Prayer: all the Petitions thereof being so framed, as to be most proper to be
said by more than one, and yet too when we have shut our doors for that
purpose. But,

Thirdly, As you ought to take care about the worship of God in your Closets
and in your Families; let me add, that it equally concerns you to frequent the
more public worship of God in his own house. It is a bad sign of some very ill
Principle or other, for any man to be much a stranger there. Even to have the
liberty and opportunity of worshipping God in public, is one of the greatest
blessings and privileges that we can have in this World; and has by good men
always been so accounted. Now sure, if we have this Notion of it, we shall
think our selves mightily concerned to take all opportunities that come in our
way, not only on Sundays, but on other days, of resorting to the public
Assemblies, and joining with them in the solemn sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving; and thinking it a good day to us wherein we have thus employed
our selves.

The Sacrifices of this kind that we offer to God with an honest and devout
mind, we cannot doubt will always find acceptance, and produce their effects;
nay perhaps when our Closet-prayers will not. For there are certainly more
promises to public prayers than to private ones. Though yet both are very good,
nay both are absolutely necessary. But to proceed,

Fourthly, Being upon this Argument of the means and instruments of Religion,
you may be sure I cannot omit the mentioning of another thing, as one of those
points that I would most seriously recommend to you, and that is the solemn
observation of the Lord's Day.

I am not for laying stress upon the keeping of this day, or any other, more
than the nature of the thing requires. I am sensible that the doctrine about
the observation of the Sabbath, as it is delivered by some Men, is
superstitious enough, and oftentimes, where it is believed, proves rather a
snare to men's Consciences, than of use to make them more Religious. Far
therefore am I from desiring you to be nice and scrupulous about the
Punctilio's of the Lord's day service. The Laws both of God and men have in
that matter left a great deal to your own discretion, and the circumstances you
are in. But however thus much is necessary, that every man who professes
himself a Christian should bear a constant Religious regard to the Lord's Day,
by devoting it to spiritual uses, more especially the public worship of God.

I do not much doubt of the truth of the observation which some good men have
made, viz. That a man shall prosper much better both in his Spiritual and
Temporal Affairs, all the week after, for his careful observance of the Lord's
day. And I am likewise of opinion that those men have little or no sense of
Religion, that make no conscience of sanctifying that day, or that put no
difference between it and other days. Sure I am, were there nothing of a divine
command for the setting apart this day to Religious uses (which yet I believe
there is); yet it is one of the most prudent and useful Constitutions that ever
was made. So that even upon that account, all men that have any honor for God,
or zeal for the public good, should think themselves obliged to observe it.

The benefits of it are indeed unspeakable. Not to mention the Civil or
Temporal conveniences of it; in truth to the keeping up the Religion of this
day we owe in a great measure that the very Face of Christianity has hitherto
been preserved among us. And were it not for this, for any thing I know, most
of us in a very few years would become little better than Heathens and
Barbarians. And so great an influence toward the making men better, or at
least keeping them from growing worse, has this practice always had; that you
may observe the most profligate men among us, who for their wickedness come to
an untimely end, do generally impute their falling into those sins which caused
their death, to their breaking the Sabbath, as they commonly express it. But,

Fifthly, Let me upon this occasion put you in mind of another thing, which by
many of us is too much neglected. And that is, the taking all opportunities of
coming to the holy Sacrament.

I have often spoken to you about this matter, and I now desire to remind you
of it. There are little hopes you will ever make any great progress in virtue
and holiness, till you can bring your selves to a frequent and constant
participation in this holy Mystery. Because indeed this is the solemn Ordinance
that Christ has appointed for the conveying his grace to us, and inabling us
to overcome our sins, and grow daily in virtue and goodness.

I know we have generally many and inveterate prejudices as to this matter. But
assure your selves they are mere prejudices and no good reasons. Every man that
means and designs honestly, and endeavors to lead his life as a Christian
ought to do, may certainly with as little scruple come every Month to the
Communion, as he may come every Week to say his Prayers or hear a Sermon. Nay,
and I say further, if a man do not so lead his life, that he may approach to
the Sacrament every Month, nay every Week, nay every Day, if there be occasion;
I am afraid that he does not live so, as to be fit for it, though he comes but
once in a year, or once in seven years. For the dueness of your preparation
does not depend upon your setting aside so many extraordinary days for the
forcing your selves into a Religious posture of mind, but upon the plain
natural frame and temper of your souls, as they constantly stand inclined to
virtue and goodness. A man that seriously endeavors to live honestly and
religiously may come to the Sacrament at an hours warning, and be a worthy
Receiver. On the other side, a man that lives a careless or a sensual life may
set apart a whole Week or a whole Month, for the exercising Repentance, and
preparing himself for the Communion, and yet not be so worthy a Receiver as the
other. And yet he may be a worthy Receiver too, provided he be really honest
and sincere in the matter he goes about; and provided that he remember his vows
afterward, and do not sink again into his former state of carelessness and
sensuality.

But to return to my point. I do verily think that most of the doubts and fears
and scruples that are commonly entertained among us about receiving the
Sacrament, are without ground or reason; and that every well disposed person
that has no other design in that action but to do his duty to God, and to
express his belief and hopes in Jesus Christ, and his thankfulness to God for
him, may as safely at any time come to the Lord's table, as he may come to
Church to say his prayers. And if the case be so (as I believe it is) then of
what a mighty privilege and benefit do they deprive themselves, who when they
have so many opportunities, do so seldom join in that solemn Institution of our
Lord, which (as, I said) was designed for no other purpose, but to be the means
of our growing in grace and virtue, in love to God and to all the World.

O therefore my Brethren, let me beg of you not to be strangers at the Lord's
Table. But I need not beg it of you, for I am sure you will not, whenever it
shall please God to put it into your hearts seriously to mind the concernments
of your Souls, and to be heartily sensible of the need you stand in of the
grace of Christ for the leading a holy and pure life.

I have but one thing more in the Sixth place, to leave with you, and I have
done. It is not indeed of the nature of those things I have last recommended to
you, that is, a means or instrument of growing more virtuous: but it is a
principal virtue it self. And I do therefore recommend it to you, because it is
at all times useful, at all times seasonable, but more especially it seems to
be so now: And that is, that you would walk in Love, and study Peace and Unity,
and live in all dutiful subjection to those whom God has set over you, and
endeavor in your several stations to promote the public Happiness and
Tranquillity as much as is possible: But by no means upon any pretense
whatsoever to disturb the public Peace, or to be any way concerned with them
that do; by no means ever to engage in any party or faction, and least of all
any faction in Religion, which is grounded upon a State-point.

I am sorry the posture of things among us gives me occasion to mention this
matter; but it is too visible to what a height our animosities and discontents
are grown, and what the consequences of them may be, unless there be a timely
stop put to them, I tremble to think.

With men's differences as to their notions about the Politics I am not
concerned; let men frame what Hypotheses they please about Government, though I
do not like them, yet I do not think my self bound to Preach against them. But
when these differences are come to that pass, that they threaten both the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Peace; there I think no Minister should be silent.

Church-divisions God knows we have, and have always had too many, but it is
very grievous that those who have always declared themselves the friends of our
Church and enemies to Schism, should at this time of day, set their helping
hand to promote a Separation.

And yet it seems to this height are our differences come. Some people among us
that formerly were very zealous for the established worship of the Church, are
now all of a sudden so distasted with it, that they make a scruple of being
present at our Service. Nay, some have proceeded so far as to declare, I know
not upon what grounds, open war against us, and set up Separate Congregations
in opposition to the Public.

What is the meaning of this? has Schism and Separation from the established
Worship, which heretofore was branded as so heinous a sin (and deservedly too,)
so changed its nature all of a sudden, that it is become not only innocent but
a duty?

Have we not the same Government both in Church and State that we formerly had?
Have we not the same Articles and Doctrines of Religion publicly owned and
professed and taught, without the least alteration? Have we not the same
Liturgy, the same Offices and Prayers used every day that have always been?
What is there then to ground a separation upon?

Yes, But the names in the Prayers are changed, and we cannot pray for those
that are now in Authority, as we could for those that were heretofore.

But how unreasonable is this, when S. Paul has bid us to put up prayers and
supplications and intercessions for all men, especially for Kings and all that
are in Authority. Does he make any restriction, any distinction what Kings, or
what persons in Authority we are to pray for, and what not? Does he not
expressly say, we must pray for all men, and for all that are in authority? And
does not the reason of his exhortation imply as much, if his words did not?
Namely, that we may lead quiet and peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty?

But I pray consider what this Doctrine leads to. If this principle be admitted
to be good Divinity, then farewell all the obligations to Ecclesiastical
Communion among Christians. For what Government is there in the World that will
not meet with such Subjects as are not satisfied with it? and if that
dissatisfaction be a just reason to break Communion with the Established
Church, what Ligaments have we to tie Christians together? What will become of
holding the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace? What is the consequence
of this, but endless Schisms and Separations?

But further, I wish these Persons would consider what an unaccountable humor
it is, to make a Rent and Schism in the Church, upon a mere point of State.

Great Revolutions have happened in all Ages and in all Countries, and we have
frequent instances of them in story. But I believe it will not be easily found
that ever any Christians separated from the Church upon account of them. Still
they kept unanimously to their Doctrine and their Worship, and never concerned
themselves farther in the Turns of State (how great soever they were) than
peaceably to submit* to the Powers in being, and heartily to pray to God so to
prosper their Government, and direct all their affairs, that all their Subjects
might lead quiet and peaceable lives under them in all Godliness and Honesty.
But when in a Revolution, a Prince was advanced to the Throne, that they looked
upon to be a good man, and an encourager of the True Religion; in that case
they did not only readily submit to him, but acknowledged it as the great
blessing of God to them, that he had raised up such a Man to rule over them.
This was the Notion, and this was the Practice of the Primitive Christians as
to this matter, I may indeed say of the Christians in all Ages. And whatever
you may have heard to the contrary, I doubt not to say that this is the very
Doctrine of the Church of England.

Let me therefore exhort all of you to be followers of Peace; to promote
public Unity and Concord as much as is possible; to study to be quiet and mind
your own business; to be more concerned for your Country and Nation than the
Interest of any single man in it; heartily to submit to the Government; and not
only so, but to thank God for the Blessings you enjoy under it, and most
earnestly to pray for the Continuance of them: Lastly, never to espouse any
party or faction against the Government, nor ever to be driven away from the
Communion of the Church, of which you have always professed your selves
members, by any of the pretenses which some warm men may suggest to you. This I
dare venture to say, how uneasy soever some of you now may be in joining with
our prayers, you will at last be ten times more uneasy in separating from us.
For Faction has no bounds, and God knows whither it will lead a man at last.
Were there nothing else but the Heat and Turbulency, the Passion and
Peevishness, the bitter Zeal and Uncharitableness that the being of a Party
does naturally engage men in: I say, were there nothing else but this, No man
that consults the peace of his own mind, would for any consideration leave the
public Communion, and espouse the cause of a separate Interest. But there are
worse Consequences than these, and I pray God we may never feel them.

And now I have done with my Exhortation. I have spoke my thoughts very freely
to you. And I hope you will receive what I have said with the same kindness
that I meant it. And truly I have no reason to doubt of it, after so long an
experience as I have had of your Civility and Candor. Indeed during all the
time I have been among you (which has been now near Sixteen years) I have been
so kindly treated by you, and have received so many Testimonies of your
Good Will, that I cannot but take this Opportunity of publicly acknowledging
my Obligations to you, and returning you my Solemn Thanks for Them.

I cannot indeed say that I have done my duty as I ought, and I heartily beg of
God to forgive all my defects. But I have this satisfaction, that I have
sincerely endeavored in all my Preaching, to instruct you in the true doctrine
of the Gospel, and to teach you the right way that leads to Salvation. And I am
so certain, that I have not been mistaken my self, nor misled you in that
matter; that I dare with Confidence address my self to you in some of the words
of the Apostle, which do immediately follow after my Text: Viz. Those things
which you have learned and received and heard from me, do; and the God of peace
shall be with you.

I shall ever bless God for that Providence of his which placed me among you;
and as I shall always, and do, earnestly desire all your prayers for me; so I
shall always heartily pray for you. That God would guide and prosper you, that
his good Providence would always watch over you for Good; that he would bestow
upon you and your Children after you all sorts of Blessings needful and
convenient for you; and especially that he would deliver you from every evil
work, and preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom. This God of his infinite mercy
grant, etc.

FINIS.

