K. HENRY IV. WITH THE HUMORS OF Sir John Falstaff. A TRAGI-COMEDY. As it is
Acted at the THEATER in Litttle-Lincolns-Inn-Fields BY His Majesty's Servants.
Revived, with Alterations.

Written Originally by Mr. Shakespeare.

LONDON, Printed for R. W. and Sold by John Deeve at Bernards-Inn-Gate in
Holborn, 1700.

Newly Published, The Practice of the Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Courts:
wherein is contained, their Original Style and Causes usually Tried in them;
with the manner of Proving Wills in common Form of Law. Together with the
manner of Proceeding in Cases of Defamation, Right of Patronage, Dilapidation.
Criminal Causes, etc. The Second Edition, Corrected. By H. Conset. Sold by Sold
by John Deeve at Bernards-Inn-Gate in Holborn, (...).

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
King Henry IV. Mr. Berry. Prince of Wales. Mr. Scudemore. John Earl of
Lancaster, Second Son to King Henry. Mr. Bailey. Northumberland. Mr. Boman.
Harry Percy, Surnamed Hotspur, his Son. Mr. Verbruggen. Westmerland. Mr. Pack.
Worcester. Mr. Freeman. Mortimer. Owen Glendower. Mr. Hodgson. Douglas. Mr.
Arnold. Sir Walter Blunt. Mr. Trout. Sir Richard Vernon. Mr. Harris. Sir John
Falstaff, The Prince's Companion. Mr. Betterton. Poins, The Prince's Companion.
Petto, The Prince's Companion. Gadshill,The Prince's Companion. Bardolph, The
Prince's Companion. Mr. Bright. Francis the Drawer. Mr. Bowen.
WOMEN.
Katherine Percy, Hotspur' s Wife. Mr. Boman. Hostess. Mr. Leigh.
Sheriff, Carriers, Chamberlain, Travelers, etc.

K. HENRY IV. WITH THE HUMORS OF Sir JOHN FALSTAFF.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter King, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of Westmorland, with others. King, SO
shaken as we are, so wan with Care,
Find we a time for frighted Peace to pant:
No more shall trenching War channel her Fields,
Nor bruise her Flowrets with the armed Hoofs
Of Hostile Paces.
The edge of War, like an ill-sheathed Knife,
No more shall cut his Master. Then let me hear
Of you my gentle Cousin Westmerland,
What yesternight our Council did decree,
In forwarding this dear Expedience.

West. My Liege: This haste was hot in question*
And many limits of the Charge set down
But yesternight: When all athwart there came
A Post from Wales, laden with heavy News;
Whose worst was, That the Noble Mortimer,
Leading the Men of Heresordshire to fight
Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
And a thousand of his People butchered:
Upon whose dead Corpse there was such misuse,
Such beastly, shameless transformation,
By those Welshwomen done, as may not be
(Without much shame) re-told or spoken of.

King. It seems then, that the tidings of this Broil,
Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

West. This matched, with other like; my gracious Lord,
Far more uneven and unwelcome News
Came from the North, and thus it did report:
On Holy-Rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and brave Archibald,
That ever valiant and approved Scot,
At Holmedon met, where they did spend
A sad and bloody hour:
As by discharge of their Artillery
And shape of likelihood the News was told:
For he that brought them, in the very Heat
And pride of their Contention, did take Horse,
Uncertain of the issue any way.

King. Here is a dear and true industrious Friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his Horse,
And he has brought us smooth and welcome News.
The Earl of Douglas is discomfited,
Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty Knights
Balk't in their own Blood did Sir Walter see
On Holmedon's Plains. Of Prisoners, Hotspur took
Mordake Earl of Fife, and eldest Son
To beaten Douglas, and the Earl of Athol,
Of Marry, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an Honorable Spoil?
A gallant Prize? Ha, Cousin, is it not? In faith it is.

West. A Conquest for a Prince to boast of.

King. Yea, there thou make me sad, and make me sin,
In envy, that my Lord Northumberland
Should be the Father of so blessed a Son:
Whilst I by looking on the Praise of him,
See Riot and Dishonor stain the Brow
Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved,
That some Night-tripping Fairy had exchanged,
In Cradle-cloaths, our Children where they lay,
And called mine Percy, his Plantagenet:
Then would I have his Harry, and he mine:
But let him from my Thoughts. What think you, Coze,
Of this young Percie's Pride? The Prisoners,
Which he in this Adventure has surpised,
To his own use he keeps, and sends me word
I shall have none but Mardake Earl of Fife.

West. This is his Uncles teaching. This is Worcester,
Malevolent to you in all Aspects:
Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
The crest of Youth against your Dignity.

King. But I have sent for him to answer this:
And for this cause a while me must neglect
Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next, our Council we will hold
At Windsor, so inform the Lords,
But come your self with speed to us again,
For more is to be said, and to be done,
Than out of anger can be uttered.

West. I will, my Liege.

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter Henry Prince of Wales, Sir John Falstaff. Fall. Now Hal, what time of day
is it, Lad?


Prince. Thou art so fat-witted with drinking of old Sack and unbuttoning thee
after Supper, and sleeping upon Benches in the afternoon, that thou have
forgotten to demand that truly, which thou would truly know. What a Devil
have thou to do with the time of the day? unless Hours were Cups of Sack, and
Minutes Capons, and Clocks the Tongues of Bawds. I see no reason why thou
should be so superfluous, to demand the time of the day.


Fall. Indeed you came near me now, Hal. For we that take Purses, go by the Moon
and seven Stars, and not by Phoebus, he, that wandering Knight so fair. And I
pray thee sweet Wag, when thou art King, as God save thy Grace, Majesty I
should say, for Grace thou will have none.


Prince. What! none?


Fall. No, not so much as will serve to be Prologue to an Egg and Butter.


Prince. Well, how then? Come roundly, roundly.


Fall. Marry then, sweet Wag, when thou art King, let not us that are Squires of
the Nights body, be called Thieves of the Days Beauty. Let us be Diana's
Foresters, Gentlemen of the Shade, Minions of the Moon: and let Men say, we be
Men of good Government, being governed as the Sea is, by our noble and chaste
Mistress the Moon, under whose countenance we steal.


Prince. Thou say well, and it holds well too: for the Fortune of us that
are the Moons Men, does ebb and flow like the Sea, being governed as the Sea
is, by the Moon: as for proof. Now a Purse of Gold most resolutely snatched on
Monday night, and most dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning; got with swearing,
Laid by: And spent with crying, Bring in: Now in as low an ebb, as the foot of
the Ladder; and by and by in as high a flow as the ride of the Gallows.


Fall. Thou say true, Lad: And is not my Hostess of the Tavern a most sweet
Wench?


Prince. As is the Honey, my old Lad of the Castle: and is not a Buff Jerkin a
most sweet Robe of durance?


Fall. How, how? how now mad Wag? What in thy quips and thy quiddities? What a
Plague have I to do with a Buff Jerkin?


Prince. Why, what a Pox have I to do with my Hostess of the Tavern?


Fall. Well, thou have called her to a reckoning many a time and often.


Prince. Did I ever call thee for to pay thy part?


Fall. No, I Will give thee thy due, thou have paid all there.


Prince. Yea and elsewhere, so far as my Coin would stretch, and where it would
not. I have used my Credit.


Fall. Yea, and so used it, that were it here apparent, that thou art Heir
apparent. But I prithee sweet Wag, shall there be Gallows standing in England
when thou art King? and Resolution thus fobb'd as it is, with the rusty curb of
old Father Antic the Law? Do not thou when thou art a King, hang a Thief.


Prince. No, thou shall.


Fall. Shall I? O rare! I Will be a brave Judge.


Prince. Thou judge false already. I mean, thou shall have the hanging of the
Thieves, and so become a rare Hangman.


Fall. Well, Hal, well: and in some sort it jumps with my humor, as well as
waiting in the Court, I can tell you.


Prince. For obtaining of Suits?


Fall. Yea, for obtaining of Suits, whereof the Hangman has no lean Wardrobe. I
am as melancholy as a Gyb-Cat, or a lugg'd Bear.


Prin. Or an old Lion, or a Lovers Lute.


Fall. Yea, or the Drone of a Lingcolnshire Bagpipe.


Prin. What say thou to a Hare, or the Melancholy of Moor-Ditch?


Fall. Thou have the most unsavory Similes, and art indeed the most comparative
rascallest sweet young Prince. But, Hal, I prithee trouble me no more with
vanity, I would thou and I knew, where a Commodity of good Names were to be
bought: an old Lord of the Council rated me the other day in the street about
you, Sir; but I marked him not, and yet he talked very wisely, but I regarded
him not, and yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.


Prince. Thou did well: for no man regards it.


Fall. O, thou have damnable iteration, and art indeed able to corrupt a Saint.
Thou have done much harm unto me, Hal, God forgive thee for it. Before I knew
thee, Hal, I knew nothing: and now I am (if a Man should speak truly) little
better than one of the wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give it
over: and I do not, I am a Villain. I Will be damned for never a King's Son in
Christendom.


Prin. Where shall we take a Purse to morrow, Jack?


Fall. Where thou will, Lad, I Will make one: and I do not, call me Villain, and
baffle me.


Prin. I see a good amendment of life in thee: From Praying, to Purse taking.


Fall. Why, Hal, it is my Vocation, Hal. It Is no sin for a Man to labor in his
Vocation.


Enter Poins. Prin. Good morrow, Ned.


Poin. Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse? What says Sir John
Sack and Sugar, Jack? How agrees the Devil and thee about thy Soul, that thou
soldest him on Good Friday last, for a Cup of Madera, and a cold Capons leg?


Prin. Sir John stands to his word, the Devil shall have his Bargain, for he
was never yet a Breaker of Proverbs; He will give the Devil his due.


Poin. Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the Devil.


Prin. Else he had been damned for cozening the Devil.


Poin. But, my Lads, my Lads, to morrow morning, by four a Clock early at
Gods-hill, there are Pilgrims going to Canterbury with rich Offerings, and
Traders riding to London with fat Purses. I have Vizards for you all; you have
Horses for your selves: Gads-hill lies to night in Rochester, I have bespoke
Supper to morrow in Eastcheap; we may do it as secure as sleep: If you will go,
I will stuff your Purses full of Crowns: If you will not, tarry at home and be
hanged.


Fall. Hear ye Yedward, if I tarry at home, and go not, I Will hang you for going.


Poin. You will, Chops.


Fall. Hal, Will thou make one?


Prin. Who, I rob? I a Thief? not I.


Fall. There Is neither honesty, manhood, nor good fellow-ship in thee, nor thou
came not of the Blood Royal, if thou dare not bid stand for ten Shillings.


Prin. Well then, once in my days I Will be a Mad cap.


Fall. Why, that is well said.


Prin. Well, come what will, I Will tarry at home.


Fall. I Will be a Traitor then, when thou art King.


Prin. I care not.


Poin. Sir John, I prithee leave the Prince and me a-lone, I will lay him down
such Reasons for this Adventure, that he shall go.


Fall. Well, may thou have the spirit of Persuasion; and he the Ears of
profiting, that what thou speak, may move; and what he hears may be
believed, that the true Prince may for (recreation sake) prove a false Thief;
for the poor abuses of the time, want countenance. Farewell; you shall find me
in East-cheap.


Prin. Farewell the latter Spring. Farewell Allhollown Summer.


Exit Fall. Poin. Now, my good sweet honey Lord, ride with us to morrow. I have
a jest to execute, that I cannot manage alone. Falstaff, Harvey, Rossil, and
Gads-hill, shall rob those men that we have already waylaid; your self and I
will not be there: and when they have the Booty, if you and I do not rob them,
cut this Head from my Shoulders.


Prin. But how shall we part with them in setting forth?


Poin. Why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of
meeting, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail; and then will they venture upon
the Exploit themselves, which they have no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon
them.


Prin. I, but it is like that they will know us by our Horses, by our Habits,
and by every other Appointment to be our selves.


Poin. Tut, our Horses they shall not see, I Will tie them in the wood; our
Vizards we will change after we leave them: and, Sarrah, I have Cases of
Buckram for the nonce, to immask our noted outward Garments.


Prin. But I doubt they will be too hard for us.


Poin. Well, for two of them, I know them to be as true-bred Cowards as ever
turned back; and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees Reason, I Will
forswear Arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the incomprehensible lies that
this sat Rogue will tell us, when we meet at Supper; how thirty at least he
fought with, what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the
reproof of this, lies the Jest.


Prin. Well, I Will go with thee, provide us all things necessary, and meet me to
morrow night in Eastcheap, there I Will sup. Farewell.


Poin. Farewell, my Lord.


Exit Poins. Prin. I know you all, and will a while uphold
The unyoak'd Humor of your Idleness:
Yet herein will I imitate the Sun,
Who does permit the base contagious Clouds
To smother up his Beauty from the World;
That when he please again to be himself,
Being wanted, he may be more wondered at,
By breaking through the foul and ugly Mists.
So when this loose Behavior I throw off,
And pay the debt I never promised:
By how much better than my Word I am,
Bo so much shall I falsify men's Hopes,
And like bright Metal on a sullen ground,
My Reformation glittering over my Fault
Shall show more goodly, and attract more Eyes,
Than that which has no soil to set it off.
I Will so offend, to make Offense a skill,
Redeeming time, when men think least I will.

SCENE III.
Enter the King, Northumberland, Worcester, Hotspur, Sir Walter Blunt, and
others. King. My blood has been too cold and temperate,
Unapt to stir at these Indignities,
And you have found me; for accordingly,
You tread upon my Patience: But be sure,
I will from henceforth rather be my self,
Mighty, and to be feared, then my condition,
Which has been smooth as Oil, soft as young Down,
And therefore lost the Title of Respect,
Which the proud never pays, but to the proud.

Worcester. Our House (my Sovereign Liege) little deserves
The scourge of Greatness to be used on it,
And that same Greatness too, which our own hands
Have holp to make so portly.

Nor. My Lord.

King. Worcester get thee gone: for I do see
Danger and Disobedience in thine Eye.
O Sir, your Presence is too bold and peremptory,
And Majesty might never yet endure
The moody Frontier of a Servant brow,
You have good leave to leave us. When we need
Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.

North. Yea, my good Lord.
Those Prisoners in your Highness Name demanded,
Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
Were (as he says) not with such strength denied
As was delivered to your Majesty:
Who either through envy, or misprision,
Was guilty of this fault: and not my Son.

Hot. My Liege, I did deny no Prisoners.
But, I remember when the fight was done,
When I was dry with Rage, and extreme Toil,
Breathless and faint leaning upon my Sword,
Came there a certain Lord, neat and trimly dressed;
Fresh as a Bridegroom, and his Chin new reapt,
Showed like a stubble Land at Harvest home.
He was perfumed like a Milliner,
And 'twixt his Finger and his Thumb, he held
A Civit-Box: which ever and anon
He gave his Nose, and took't away again:
Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
Took it in Snuff. And still he smiled and tlak'd:
And as the Soldiers bare dead Bodies by,
He called them untaught Knaves, Unmannerly,
To bring a slovenly unhandsome Coarse
Betwixt the wind, and his Nobility.
With many Holiday and Lady terms
He questioned me: Among the rest, demanded
My Prisoners, in your Majesty's behalf.
I then, all-smarting with my Wounds being cold,
(To be so pestered with a Popingay)
Out of my grief, and my impatience,
Answered (neglectingly) I know not what,
He should or should not: For he made me mad,
To see him shine so brisk, and smell so sweet,
And talk so like a Waiting-Gentlewoman,
Of Guns, and Drums, and Wounds: God save the mark;
And telling me, the Soveraign'st thing on Earth
Was Parmacity, for an inward Bruise:
And that it was great pity, so it was,
That Villainous Saltpeter should be dug
Out of the Bowels of the harmless Earth,
Which many a good tall Fellow had destroyed
So cowardly. And but for these vile Guns,
He would himself have been a Soldier.
This bald, unjointed Chat of his (my Lord)
Made me to answer indirectly (as I said.)
And I beseech you, let not this Report
Come current for an Accusation,
Betwixt my Love and your high Majesty.

Blunt. The Circumstance considered, good my Lord,
What ever Harry Percy then had said,
To such a person, and in such a Place,
At such a time, with all the rest retold,
May reasonably die, and never rise
To do him wrong, or any way impeach
What then he said, so he unsay it now.

King. Why yet he does deny his Prisoners,
But with Proviso and Exception,
That we at our own Charge, shall ransom straight
His Brother-in-law the foolish Mortimer,
Who (in my Soul) has wilfully betrayed
The lives of those, that he did lead to Fight,
Against the great Magician, damned Glendower,
Whose Daughter (as we hear) the Earl of March
Has lately married. Shall our Coffers then
Be emptied, to redeem a Traitor home?
Shall we buy Treason? and indent with Fears?
No: on the barren Mountains let him starve:
For I shall never hold that Man my Friend,
Whose Tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
To ransom home revolted Mortimer.

Hot. Revolted Mortimer?
He never did fall off, my Sovereign Liege,
But by the Chance of War: to prove that true,
Needs no more but one Tongue. For all those Wounds,
Those mouthed Wounds, which valiantly he took,
When on the gentle Severn's Sedgie Bank,
In single opposition hand to hand
He did confound the best part of an hour
In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
Three times they breathed, and three times did they drink
Upon agreement of swift Severn's Flood;
Who then affrighted with their Bloody looks,
Ran fearfully among the trembling Reeds,
And hid his crisped-head in a hollow Bank,
Blood-stained with these valiant Combatants.
Never did base, and rotten policy
Color her working with such deadly Wounds;
Nor never could the noble Mortimer
Receive so many, and all willingly:
Then let him not be slandered with Revolt.

King. Thou do belie him, Percy, thou do belie him;
He never did encounter with Glendower:
I tell thee, he durst as well have met the Devil alone,
As Owen Glendower for an Enemy.
Art thou not ashamed? But Sirrah, henceforth
Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer.
Send me your Prisoners with the speediest means,
Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
As will displease ye. My Lord Northumberland
We license your departure with your Son:
Send us your Prisoners, or you will hear of it.

Exit King. Hot. And if the Devil come and roar for them,
I will not send them. I will after straight
And tell him so: for I will ease my Heart,
Although it be with hazard of my Head.

Nor. What? drunk with Choler? stay, and pause a while,
Here comes your Uncle.

Enter Worcester, Hot. Speak of Mortimer?
Yes, I will speak of him, and let my Soul
Want mercy, if I do not join with him.
In his behalf, I Will empty all those Veins,
And shed my dear Blood drop by drop in the dust,
But I will lift the downfaln Mortimer
As high in the Air as this unthankful King,
And this ingrate and cankred Ballingbrook.

Nor. Brother, the King has made your Nephew mad.

Worcester. Who struck this heat up after I was gone?

Hot. He will (forsooth) have all my Prisoners:
And when I urged the Ransom once again
Of my Wives Brother, then his cheek looked pale,
And on my Face he turned an Eye of death,
Trembling even at the Name of Mortimer.

Worcester. I cannot blame him: was he not proclaimed
By Richard that dead is, the next of Blood?

Nor. He was: I heard the Proclamation,
And then it was, when the unhappy King
(Whose wrongs in us God pardon) did set forth
Upon his Irish Expedition:
From whence, he intercepted, did return
To be deposed, and shortly murdered.

Worcester. And for whose Death, we in the Worlds wide mouth
Live so scandalized, and foully spoken of.

Hot. But soft, I pray you; did King Richard then
Proclaim my Brother Mortimer,
Heir to the Crown?

Nor. He did, my self did hear it.

Hot. Nay then I cannot blame his Cousin King,
That wished him on the barren Mountains starved.
But shall it be, that you that set the Crown
Upon the Head of this forgetful Man,
And for his sake wore the detested Blot
Of murtherous Subornations? shall it be,
That you a world of Curses undergo,
Being the Agents, or base second Means,
The Cords, the Ladder, or the Hangman rather?
O pardon, if that I descend so low,
To show the Line, and the Predicament
Wherein you range under this subtle King.
Shall it for shame, be spoken in these Days,
Or fill up Chronicles in time to come,
That Men of your Nobility and Power,
Did gage them both in an unjust behalf
(As both of you, God pardon it, have done)
To put down Richard, that sweet lovely Rose,
And plant this Thorn, this Cancker Bullingbrook?
And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
That you are fooled, discarded and shook off
By him, for whom these Shames ye underwent?
No: yet time serves, wherein you may redeem
Your banished Honors, and restore your selves
Into the good Thoughts of the World again.
Revenge the jeering and disdained Contempt
Of this proud King, who studies day and night
To answer all the Debt he owes unto you,
Even with the bloody Payments of your Deaths:
Therefore I say --

Worcester. Peace, Cousin, say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secret Book,
And to your quick conveying Discontents,
I Will read your Matter, deep and dangerous,
As full of peril and adventurous Spirit,
As to o're-walk a Current, roaring loud,
On the unstedfast footing of a Spear.

Hot. If he fall in, good night, or sink or swim:
Send danger from the East unto the West,
So Honor cross in from the North to South,
And let them grapple: The Blood more stirs
To rowze a Lion, than to start a Hare.

Nor. Imagination of some great Exploit,
Drives him beyond the bounds of Patience.

Hot. By Heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
To pluck bright Honor from the pale-faced Moon,
Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
Where Fadom-line could never touch the ground,
And pluck up drowned Honor by the Locks:
So he that does redeem her thence, might wear
Without Co-rival, all her Dignities:
But out upon this half-fac'd Fellowship.

Worcester. He apprehends a world of Figures here,
But not the Form of what he should attend:
Good Cousin give me audience for a while,
And list to me.

Hot. I cry you mercy.

Worcester. Those same Noble Scots
That are your Prisoners.

Hot. I Will keep them all.
By Heaven, he shall not have a Scot of them:
No, if a Scot would save his Soul, he shall not.
I Will keep them, by this Hand.

Worcester. You start away,
And lend no ear unto my Purposes.
Those Prisoners you shall keep.

Hot. Nay, I will; that is flat:
He said he would not Ransom Mortimer:
Forbad my Tongue to speak of Mortimer.
But I will find him when he lies a sleep,
And in his Ear I ll holla, Mortimer.
Nay, I Will have a Starling shall be taught to speak
Nothing but Mortimer, and give it him,
To keep his anger still in motion

Worcester. Hear you, Cousin: A word.

Hot. All Studies here I solemnly defy,
Save how to gall and pinch this Bullingbrook,
And that same Sword and Backler Prince of Wales.
But that I think his Father loves him not,
And would be glad he met with some Mischance,
I would have poisoned him with a pot of Ale.

Worcester. Farewell, Kinsman: I Will talk to you
When you are temperd to attend.

Nor. Why what a wasp-tongu'd and impatient Fool
Art thou, to break into this Woman's mood,
Tying thine Ear to no Tongue but thine own?

Hot. Why look you, I am whipped and scourged with rods?
Netled and stung with Pismires, when I hear
Of this vile Politician Bullingbrook.
In Richard's time: What de'ye call the place?
A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire:
'Twas where the madcap Duke his Uncle kept,
His Uncle York, where I first bowed my Knee
Unto the King of Smiles, this Bullingbrook:
When you and he came back from Ravenspurg.

Nor. At Berkley Castle.

Hot. You say true:
Why what a gaudy deal of Courtesy
This fawning Gray-hound then did proffer me.
Look when his infant Fortune came to age,
And gentle Harry Percy, and kind Cousin:
O, the Devil take such Cozeners, God forgive me:
Good Uncle tell your tale, for I have done.

Worcester. Nay, if you have not, to it again,
We'll stay your leisure.

Hot. I have done, insooth.

Worcester. Then once more to your Scottish Prisoners.
Deliver them up without their Ransom straight,
And make the Douglas Son your only mean
For Powers in Scotland: Which for diverse Reasons
Which I shall send you written, he assured
Will easily be granted to you, my Lord.
Your Son in Scotland being thus employed,
Shall secretly in the bosom creep
Of that same noble Prelate, well beloved,
The Archbishop.

Hot. Of York, is it not?

Worcester. True, who bears hard
His Brothers death at Bristow, the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,
As what I think might be, but what I know
Is ruminated, plotted, and set down,
And only stays but to behold the face
Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

Hot. I smell it:
Upon my Life, it will do wondrous well.

Nor. Before the game's a foot, thou still lett'st slip.

Hot. Why it cannot choose but be a noble Plot,
And then the Power of Scotland, and of York
To join with Mortimer, Ha.

Worcester. And so they shall.

Hot. In faith it is exceeding well aimed.

Worcester. And it is no little Reason bids us speed,
To save our Heads, by raising of a Head:
For, bear our selves as even as we can,
The King will always think him in our debt,
And think we think our selves unsatisfied,
Till he has found a time to pay us home.
And see already, how he does begin
To make us strangers to his looks of love.

Hot. He does, he does, we'll be revenged on him.

Worcester. Cousin, farewell. No further go in this,
Than I by Letters shall direct your course;
When time is ripe, which will be suddenly.
I Will steal to Glendower, and lo, Mortimer,
Where you, and Douglas, and our Powers at once,
As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
To bear our Fortunes in our own strong Arms,
Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

Nor. Farewell, good Brother, we shall thrive, I trust.

Hot. Uncle, adieu: O let Hours be short,
Till fields, and blows, and groans applaud our sport.

Exit. ACT. II. SCENE. I.
Enter a Carrier, with a Lanthorn in his hand. 1. Car. HEigh ho, an't be not
four by the day I Will be hanged. Charles wain is over the new Chimney, and yet
our Horse not pack't. What, Ostler?


Ost. Anon, anon.


1. Car. I prithee Tom, beat Cuts Saddle, put a few Flocks in the point: The
poor Jade is wrung in the Withers, out of all cess.


Enter another Carrier. 2. Car. Pease and Beans are as dank here as a Dog, and
this is the next way to give poor Jades the Bots: This House is turned upside
down since Robin the Ostler died.


1. Car. Poor fellow never joy'd since the price of Oats rose, it was the death
of him.


2. Car. I think this House is the most Villainous House in all London road for
Fleas: I am stung like a Tench.


1. Car. Like a Tench? There Is never a King in Christendom, could be better
bit, than I have been since the first Cock.


2. Car. Why, you will allow us never a Jourden, and then we leak in your
Chimney: And your Chamber-lye breeds Fleas like a Loach.


1. Car. What Ostler, come away, and be hanged, come away.


2. Car. I have Gammon of Bacon, and two razes of Ginger, to be delivered as
far as Charing Cross.


1. Car. The Turkies in my Panniers are quite starved. What Ostler? a plague on
thee, have thou never an eye in thy head? can not hear? and 'twere not as
good a deed as drink, to break the pate of thee, I am a very Villain. Come and
be hanged, have no faith in thee?


Enter Gads-hill. Gad. Cood morrow, Carriers. What Is a Clock?


Car. I think it be two a Clock.


Gad. I prithee lend me thy Lanthorn to see my Gelding in the Stable.


1. Car. Nay, soft I pray ye, I know a trick worth two of that.


Gad. I prithee lend me thine.


2. Car. I, when, can tell? lend me thy Lanthorn (quoth-a) marry I Will see the
hanged first.


Gad. Sirrah, Carrier: what time do you mean to come to London?


2. Car. Time enough to go to bed with a Candle, I warrant thee. Come Neighbor
Mugges, we'll call up the Gentlemen, they will along with company, for they
have a great charge.


Exeunt. Enter Chamberlain. Gad. What ho, Chamberlain?


Cham. At hand quoth Pick-purse.


Gad. That Is even as fair, as at hand quoth the Chamberlain: For thou variest
no more from picking of Purses, than giving direction does from laboring. Thou
lay'st the plot, how.


Cham. Good morrow Master Gads-hill, it holds current that I told you
yesternight. There Is a Franklin in the wild of Kent, has brought three hundred
Marks with him in Gold: I heard him tell it to one of his Company last night at
Supper; a kind of Auditor, one that has abundance of Charge too, (God knows
what) they are up already, and call for Eggs and Butter. They will away
presently.


Gad. Sirrah, if they meet not with S. Nicholas Clarks, I Will give thee this
neck.


Cham. No, I Will none of it: I prithee keep that for the Hangman, for I know
thou worship'st S. Nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.


Gad. What talkest thou to me of the Hangman? If I hang I Will make a fat pair of
Gollows. For if I hang, old Sir John hangs with me, and thou know he is no
Starveling. I am joined with no Foot-Land-Rakers, no Long-staff six penny
strikers, such as will strike sooner than speak; and speak sooner than drink,
and drink sooner than pray; and yet I lie, for they pray continually unto their
Saint the Commonwealth; or rather, not to pray to her, but prey on her: for
they ride up and down on her; and make her their Boots.


Cham. What, the Commonwealth their Boots? Will she hold out water in foul way?


Gad. She will, she will; Justice has liquor'd her. We steal, as in a Castle,
Cock-sure: we have the receipt of Fern seed, we walk invisible.


Cham. Nay, I think rather, you are more beholding to the Night, than the
Fern-seed, for your walking invisible.


Gad. Give me thy hand. Thou shall have a share in our purpose, As I am a true
man.


Cham. Nay, rather let me have it, as you are a false Thief.


Gad. Go to: Homo is a common name to all men. Bid the Ostler bring the Gelding
out of the Stable. Farewell, ye muddy knave.


Exeunt. SCENE. II.
Enter Prince, Poyns, and Peto. Poyns. Come shelter, shelter, I have removed
Falstaff's-Horse, and he frets like a gumm'd Velvet.


Prin. Stand close.


Enter Falstaff. Fall. Poynes, Poynes, and be hanged, Poynes.


Prin. Peace ye fat kidney'd Rascal, what a bawling do thou keep?


Fall. What Poynes, Hal?


Prin. He is walked up to the top of the Hill, I Will go seek him.


Fall. I am accursed to rob in that Thiefs Company: that Rascal has removed my
Horse, and tied him I know not where. If I travel but four foot by the square
further a-foot, I shall break my wind. Well, I doubt not but to die a fair
death for all this, if I escape hanging for killing that Rogue. I have forsworn
his Company hourly any time this two and twenty year, and yet I am bewitched
with the Rogues company. If the Rascal have not given me Medicines to make me
love him, I Will be hanged, it could not be else: I have drunk Medicines. Poynes,
Hall, a Plague upon you both. Bardolph, Peto: I Will starve e're I rob a foot
further. And 'twere not as good a deed as to drink, to turn True man, and to
leave these Rogues, I am the veriest Varlet that ever chewed with a Tooth.
Eight yards of uneven ground, is threescore and ten miles a foot with me: And
the stony-hearted Villains know it well enough. A plague upon it, when Thieves
cannot be true one to another.

They whistle. Whew, a plague light upon you all. Give me my Horse, you Rogues:
give me my Horse, and be hanged.


Prin. Peace ye Fat-guts, lie down, lay thine ear close to the ground, and list
if thou can hear the tread of Travelers.


Fall. Have you any Leavers to lift me up again being down? I Will not bear mine
own flesh so far afoot again, for all the Coin in thy Fathers Exchequer. What a
plague mean ye to colt me thus?


Prin. Thou lie, thou art not colted, thou art uncolted.


Fall. I prithee good Prince Hal help me to my Horse, good Kings Son.


Prin Out you Rogue, shall I be your Ostler?


Fall. Go hang thy self in thy own heir-apparent Garters: If I be taken, I Will
peach for this: and I have not Ballads made on all, and sung to filthy tunes,
let a Cup of Sack be my Poison: when a rest is so forward, and a-foot too, I
hate it,


Enter Gads-hill. Gad. Stand.


Fall. So I do against my will.


Poyn. O it is our Setter, I know his voice: Bardolf, what News?


Bar. Case ye, case ye; on with your Vizards, there is Money of the Kings coming
down the Hill, it is going to the Kings Exchequer.


Fall. You lie, you Rogue, it is going to the Kings Tavern.


Gad. There Is enough to make us all.


Fall. To be hanged.


Prin. You four shall front them in the narrow Lane: Ned and I will walk lower;
if they escape from your encounter, then they light on us.


Peto. But how many be of them?


Gad. Some eight or ten.


Fall. Will they not rob us?


Prin. What, a Coward, Sir John Paunch?


Fall. Indeed I am not John of Gaunt your Grandfather: but yet no Coward, Hal.


Prin. We'll leave that to the Proof.


Poin. Sirrah Jack, thy Horse stands behind the Hedge, when thou need'st him,
there shall thou find him, farewell, and stand fast.


Fall. Now I cannot strike him if I should be hanged.


Prin. Ned, where are our Disguises?


Poin. Here hard by: Stand close.


Fall. Now my Masters, happy Man be his dole, say I: every Man to his business.


Enter Travelers. Tra. Come, Neighbor: The Boy shall lead our Horses down the
Hill: We'll a foot a while, and ease our Legs.


Thieves. Stay.


Tra. Jesu bless us.


Fall. Strike; down with them, cut the Villains throats; a whoreson Caterpillars:
Bacon-fed Knaves, they hate us Youth; down with them, fleece them.


Tra. O, we are undone, both we and ours for ever,


Fall. Hang ye gorbellied Knaves, are you undone? No ye Fat Chuffs, I would your
store were here. On Bacons on, what ye Knaves? Young men must live, you are
Grand Jurors? We'll jure ye i faith.


Here they rob them and bind them. Enter the Prince and Poyns. Prin. The
Thieves have bound the True-men: Now could thou and I rob the Thieves and go
merrily to London, it would be Argument for a Week, Laughter for a Month, and a
good Jest for ever.


Poynes. Stand close, I hear them coming.


Enter Thieves again. Fall. Come my Masters, let us share, and then to Horse
before day; and the Prince and Poynes be not two arrand Cowards, there is no
equity stirring. There Is no more Valor in that Poynes, than in a wild Duck.


Prin. Your Money.


Poyn. Villains.


As they are sharing, the Prince and Poyns set upon them. They all run away,
leaving the Booty behind them. Prince. Got with much ease. Now merrily to
Horse: The Thieves are scattered, and possessed with fear so strongly, that they
dare not meet each other: each takes his Fellow for an Officer. Away good Ned,
Falstaff sweats to death, and lards the lean earth as he walks along; were not
for laughing, I should pity him.


Poyn. How the Rogue roared.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Hotspur solus, reading a Letter. But for mine own part, my Lord, I could
be well contented to be there, in respect of the love I bear your House. He
could be contented: Why is he not then? in respect of the love he bears our
House. He shows in this, he loves his own Barn better than he loves our House.
Let me see some more, The purpose you undertake is dangerous. Why that is
certain: It Is dangerous to take a cold, to sleep, to drink: but I tell you (my
Lord Fool) out of this Nettle, Danger; we pluck this Flower, Safety. The
purpose you undertake is dangerous, the Friends you have named uncertain, the
Time it self unsorted, and your whole Plot too light, for the counterpoize so
great an Opposition. Say you so, say you so: I say unto you again, you are a
shallow cowardly Hind, and you lie. What a Lack brain is this? I protest, our
Plot is as good a Plot as ever was laid? our Friends true and constant: A good
Plot, good Friends, and full of Expectation: An excellent Plot, very good
Friends. What a Frosty-spirited Rogue is this? Why, my Lord of York commends
the Plot, and the general course of the action. By this hand, if I were now by
this Rascal, I could brain him with his Ladies Fan. Is there not my Father, my
Uncle, and my self, Lord Edmond Mortimer, my Lord of York, and Owen Glendower?
Is there not besides, the Douglas? Have I not all their Letters, to meet me in
Arms by the ninth of the next Month? and are there not some of them set forward
already? What a Pagan Rascal is this? An Infidel. Ha, you shall see now in very
sincerity of fear and cold heart, will he to the King, and lay open all our
Proceedings. O, I could divide my self, and go to buffets, for moving such a
dish of skim'd Milk with so Honorable an Action. Hang him, let him tell the
King we are prepared. I will set forwards to night.

Enter his Lady. How now, Kate, I must leave you within these two hours.


La. O my good Lord, why are you thus alone?
For what Offense have I this fortnight been
A Banished Woman from my Harry's Bed?
Tell me (sweet Lord) what is it that takes from thee
Thy stomach, pleasure, and thy golden sleep?
Why do thou bend thy Eyes upon the Earth?
And start so often when thou fitt'st alone?
O what Portents are these?
Some heavy business has my Lord in hand,
And I must know it: else he loves me not.

Hot. What ho; Is Gilliams with the Packet gone?


Ser. He is, my Lord, an hour agone.


Hot. Has Butler brought those Horses from the Sheriff?


Ser. One Horse, my Lord, he brought even now.


Hot. What Horse? a Roan, a Crop-ear, is it not?


Ser. It is, my Lord.


Hot. That Roan shall be my Throne. Well, I will back him straight. Esperance,
bid Butler lead him forth into the Park.


La. But hear you, my Lord.


Hot. What say thou, my Lady?


La. What is it that carries you away?


Hot. Why, my Horse (my Love) my Horse.


La. Out you mad-headed Ape, a Weazel has not such a deal of Spleen, as you
are tossed with. In sooth I Will know your business, Harry, that I will. I fear my
Brother Mortimer does stir about his Title, and has sent for you to line his
Enterprise. But if you go --


Hot. So far a foot, I shall be weary, Love.


La. Come, come, you Paraquito, answer me directly unto this Question, that I
shall ask. Indeed I Will break thy little Finger, Harry, if thou will not tell me
true.


Hot. Away, away, you trifler: Love, I love thee not,
I care not for thee, Kate: this is no World
To tilt with Lips.
We must have bloody Noses and cracked Crowns,
And pass them current too. Gods me, my Horse.
What say thou, Kate? what would thou have with me?

La. Do ye not love me? do you not indeed?
Well, do not then. For since you love me not,
I will not love my self. Do you not love me?
Nay, tell me if thou speak in Jest, or no.

Hot. Come, will thou see me ride?
And when I am a Horseback, I will swear
I love thee infinitely. But hark you, Kate,
I must not have you henceforth, question me,
Whither I go: nor reason whereabout.
Whither I must, I must: and to conclude,
This Evening must I leave thee, gentle Kate.
I know you wise, but yet no further wise
Then Harry Percies Wife. Constant you are,
But yet a Woman: and for Secrecy,
No Lady closer. For I will believe,
Thou will not utter what thou do not know,
And so far will I trust thee, gentle Kate.

La. How so far?

Hot. Not an inch further. But hark you Kate,
Whether I go, thither shall you go too:
To day will I set forth, to morrow you.
Will this content you Kate?

La. It must of force.

Exeunt. SCENE IV.
Enter Prince and Poynes. Prin. Ned, prithee come out of that fat Room, and
lend me thy hand to laugh a little.


Poynes. Where have been, Hall?


Prin. With three or four Logegerheads, amongst three or fourscore Hogsheads. I
have founded the very base string of humility. Sirrah, I am sworn Brother to a
lesh of Drawers, and can call them by their Names, as Tom, Dick, and Francis.
To conclude, I am so good a proficient in one quarter of an hour, that I can
drink with any Tinker in his own Language: but sweet Ned, to sweeten which name
of Ned, I give thee this penniworth of Sugar, clapped even now into my hand by an
under Skiner, one that never speak other English in his Life, then Eight
shilling and six pence, and, You are welcome: with this shrill addition, Anon
Sir, Anon Sir, Score a pint of Bastard in the Half Moon, or so. But Ned, to
drive away time till Falstaff come, I prithee do thou stand in some by-room,
while I question my puny Drawer, to what end he gave me the Sugar, and do never
leave calling Francis, that his Tale to me may be nothing but, Anon: step
aside, and I Will show thee a President. Poyn. Francis.


Prin. Thou art perfect. Poyn. Francis.


Enter Drawer Fran. Anon, anon Sir; look down into the Pomgarnet, Ralf.


Prince. Come hither, Francis. Fran. My Lord.


Prince. Hoa long have thou to serve, Francis?


Fran. Forsooth five years, and as much as to --


Poyn. Francis. Fran. Anon, anon Sir.


Prin. Five years; Berlady a long Lease for the clinking of Pewter? But
Francis, dare thou be so valiant, as to play the Coward with thy Indenture,
and show it a fair pair of heels, and run from it?


Fran. O Lord, Sir, I Will be sworn upon all the Books in England, I could find
in my Heart.


Poyn. Francis. Fran. Anon, anon, Sir.


Prin. How old art thou, Francis?


Fran. Let me see, about Michaelmas next I shall be --


Poyn. Francis.


Fran. Anon Sir, pray you stay a little, my Lord.


Prin. Nay but hark you Francis, for the Sugar thou gave me, 'twas a
penniworth, was it not?


Fran. O Lord Sir, I would it had been two.


Prin. I will give thee for it a thousand pound: ask me when thou will, and
thou shall have it.


Poyn. Francis. Fran. Anon, anon.


Prin. Anon, Francis? No, Francis, but to morrow Francis: or Francis, on
Thursday: or indeed Francis, when thou will. But Francis.


Fran. My Lord.


Prin. Away you Rogue, do thou hear them call?


Here they both call, the Drawer stands amazed, not knowing which way to go.
Enter Vintner. Vint. What stand'st thou still, and hear'st such a calling? Look
to the Guest within: My Lord, old Sir John with half a dozen more, are at the
Door: shall I let them in?


Prin. Let them alone a while, and then open the Door, Poynes.


Enter Poynes. Poyn. Anon, anon Sir.


Prin. Sirrah, Falstaff and the rest of the Thieves are at the Door, shall we
be merry?


Poyn. As merry as Crickets my Lad. But hark ye, what cunning match have you
made with this jest of the Drawer? Come, what is the issue?


Prin. I am now of all humors, that have showed themselves humors, since the
old days of goodman Adam, to the pupil Age of this present twelve a Clock at
midnight. What Is a clock Francis?


Fran. Anon, anon Sir.


Prin. That ever this Fellow should have fewer Words then a Parret, and yet the
Son of a Woman. His industry is up-stairs and down-stairs, his eloquence the
parcel of a reckoning. I am not yet of Percies mind, the Hotspur of the North,
he that kills me some six or seven dozen of Scots at a Breakfast, washes his
hands, and says to his Wife: Fie up on this quiet Life, I want work. O my sweet
Harry, says she, how many have thou killed to Day? Give my Roan Horse a dranch
(says he,) and answers, some fourteen, an hour after: a trifle, a trifle. I
prithee call in Falstaff, I Will play Percy, and that damned Brawn shall play
Dame Mortimer his Wife. Rivo, says the Drunkard. Call in Ribs, call in Tallow.


Enter Falstaff. Poyn. Welcome Jack, where have thou been?


Fall. A plague of all Cowards I say, and a vengeance too, marry and Amen. Give
me a cup of Sack, Boy. E're I lead this life long, I Will sow nether stocks, and
mend them too. A plague of all Cowards. Give me a Cup of Sack, Rogue. Is there
no virtue extant?


Prin. Did thou never see Titan kiss a dish of Butter, pitiful hearted Titan
that melted at the sweet Tale of the Sun? If thou did, then behold that
compound.


Fall. You Rogue, here is Lime in this Sack too: there is nothing but Roguery to
be found in Villainous Man; yet a Coward is worse than a Cup of Sack with Lime.
A villainous Coward, go thy ways old Jack, die when thou will, if Manhood, good
Manhood be not forgot upon the Face of the Earth, then am I a shotten Herring:
there lives not three good Men unhang'd in England, and one of them is sat, and
grows old, God help the while, a bad World I say. I would I were a Weaver, I
could sing all manner of Songs. A plague of all Cowards, I say still.


Prin. How now Woolsack, what mutter you?


Fall. A Kings Son? If I do not beat thee out of thy Kingdom with a Dagger of
Lath, and drive all thy Subjects before thee like a flock of Wild-geese, I Will
never wear hair on my face more. You Prince of Wales?


Prin. Why you horson round man? what is the matter?


Fall. Are you not a Coward? answer me to that, and Poynes there?


Prin. Ye fat Paunch, and ye call me Coward, I Will stab thee.


Fall. I call thee Coward? I Will see thee damned e're I call thee Coward: but I
would give a thousand Pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are straight
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: Call you that backing
of your Friends? a Plague upon such backing: give me them that will face me.
Give me a Cup of Sack, I am a Rogue if I drunk to day.


Prin. O Villain, thy Lips are scarce wiped, since thou drunk'st last.


He drinks. Falst. All Is one for that. A plague of all Cowards still, say I.


Prin. What Is the matter?


Falst. What Is the matter? here be four of us, have taken a thousand pound this
Morning.


Prin. Where is it, Jack? where is it!


Falst. Where is it? taken from us, it is: a hundred upon poor four of us.


Prin. What, a hundred, man?


Falst. I am a Rogue, if I were not at half Sword with a dozen of them two
hours together; I have escaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through the
Doublet, four through the Hose, my Buckler cut through, my Sword hacked like a
Hand saw, ecce signum. I never dealt better since I was a man: all would not
do. A Plague of all Cowards: let them speak; if they speak more or less than
truth, they are Villains, and the Sons of darkness.


Prin. Speak Sirs, how was it?


Gad. We four set upon some dozen.


Falst. Sixteen, at least, my Lord.


Gad. And bound them.


Peto. No, no, they were not bound.


Falst. You Rogue they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an
Ebrew Jew.


Gad. As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.


Falst. And unbound the rest, and then came in the other.


Prin. What, fought ye with them all?


Falst. All? I know not what ye call all: but if I fought not with fifty of
them, I am a Bunch of Radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon
poor old Jack, then am I no two-legg'd Creature.


Poin. Pray Heaven, you have not murdered some of them.


Falst. Nay, that is past Praying for. I have peppered, two of them: Two I am
sure I have paid, two Rogues in Buckrom Suits. I tell thee what, Hall, if I
tell thee a Lie, spit in my face, call me Horse: thou know my old word: here
I lay, and thus I bore my point; four Rogues in Buckrom let drive at me.


Prince. What, four? thou said but two, even now.


Falst. Four Hal, I told thee four.


Poin. I, I, he said four.


Falst. These four came all a-front, and mainly thrust at me; I made no more
ado, but took all their seven points in my Target, thus.


Prince. Seven? why there were but four, even now.


Falst. In Buckrom.


Poin. I, four, in Buckrom Suits.


Falst. Seven, by these Hilts, or I am a Villain else.


Prin. Prithee let him alone; we shall have more anon


Falst. Do thou hear me, Hal?


Prin. I, and mark thee too, Jack.


Falst. Do so, for it is worth the listening too: these nine in Buckrom that I
told thee of.


Prin. So, two more already.


Falst. Their Points being broken.


Poin. Down fell his Hose.


Falst. Began to give me ground: but I followed me close, came in foot and
hand; and with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.


Prin. O monstrous! eleven Buckrom men grown out of two?


Falst. But as the Devil would have it, three mis-begotten Knaves, in Kendal
Green, came at my Back, and let drive at me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou
could not see thy Hand.


Prin. These Lies are like the Father that begets them, gross as a Mountain,
open, palpable. Why thou Clay-brain'd Guts; thou Knotty-paited Fool, thou
Horson obscene greasy Tallow Catch.


Falst. What, art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth, the truth?


Prin. Why, how could thou know these men in Kendal Green, when it was so
dark, thou could not see thy hand? Come, tell us your Reason; what say
thou to this?


Poin. Come, your Reason Jack, your Reason.


Falst. What, upon compulsion? No; were I at the Strappado, or all the Racks in
the World, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a Reason on compulsion?
If Reasons were as plenty as Black-berries; I would give no man a Reason upon
compulsion, I.


Prin. I Will be no longer guilty of this sin. This sanguine Coward, this
Bed-presser, this Horse-back-breaker, this huge Hill of Flesh.


Falst. Away you Starveling, you Elf-skin, you dried Neats-tongue,
Bulls-pissel, you Stock Fish: O for breath to utter. What is like thee? You
Tailors Yard, you Sheath, you Bow-case, you vile standing Tuck.


Prin. Well, breathe a while, and then to it again; and when thou have tired thy
self in base Comparisons, hear me speak but thus.


Poin. Mark Jack.


Prin. We two, saw you four set on four and bound them, and were Masters of
their Wealth: mark now, how a plain Tale shall put you down. Then did we two
set on you four, and with a word, out-fac'd you from your Prize, and have it:
yea, and can show it you in the House. And Falstaff, you carried your Guts away
as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy, and still ran and
roared, as ever I heard Bull-Call, What a Slave art thou, to hack thy Sword as
thou have done, and then say it was in fight. What trick? what device? what
starting hole can thou now find out, to hide thee from this open and apparent
shame?


Poin. Come, let us hear Jack: What trick have thou now?


Falst. I knew ye, as well as he that made ye. Why hear ye my Masters, was it
for me to kill the Heir apparent? Should I turn upon the true Prince? Why, thou
know I am as valiant as Hercules: but be ware instinct, the Lion will not
touch the true Prince: Instinct is a great matter. I was a Coward on Instinct:
I shall think the better of my self, and thee, during my life: I, for a valiant
Lion, and thou for a true Prince. But Lads, I am glad you have the Money:
Hostess, clap to the doors: watch to Night, pray to Morrow. Gallants, Lads,
Boys, Hearts of Gold, all the good Titles of Fellowship come to you. What,
shall we be merry? shall we have a Play extempore.


Prin. Content, and the argument shall be, thy running away.


Falst. A, no more of that, Hal, if thou love me.


Enter Hostess. Host. My Lord the Prince?


Prin. How now, my Lady the Hostess, what say thou to me?


Host. Marry, my Lord, there is a Nobleman of the Court at door would speak
with you: he says he comes from your Father.


Prin. Give him as much as will make him a Royal man, and send him back again
to my Mother.


Falst. What manner of man is he?


Hostess. An old man.


Falst. What does Gravity out of his Bed at Midnight? Shall I give him his
answer?


Prin. Prithee do, Jack.


Falst. Faith, and I Will send him packing.


Exit. Prince. Now Sirs: you fought fair; so did you Peto, so did you Bardol:
You are Lions too, you ran away upon instinct: You will not touch the true
Prince; no, fie.


Bard. 'Faith I ran when I saw others run.


Prin. Tell me now, in earnest, how came Falstaffs's Sword so hackt?


Peto. Why, he hackt it with his Dagger, and said, he would swear truth out of
all England: but he would make you believe it was done in fight, and persuaded
us to do the like.


Bard. Yea, and tickle our Noses with Spear-grass, to make them bleed, and then
beslubber our Garments with it, and swear it was the Blood of true men. I did
that I did not these seven years before, I blushed to hear his monstrous devices.


Prin. O Villain, thou stolest a Cup of Sack eighteen years ago, and were taken
with the manner, and ever since thou have blushed extempore: thou had Fire and
Sword on thy side, and yet thou rannest away: what instinct had thou for it?


Bard. My Lord, do you see these Meteors? do you behold these Exhalations?


Prin. I do.


Bard. What think you they portend?


Prin. Hot Livers, and cold Purses.


Bard. Choler, my Lord, if rightly taken.


Prin. No, if rightly taken, Halter.


Enter Falstaff. Here comes lean Jack, here comes bare-bone. How now my sweet
Creature of Bombast, how long is it ago, Jack, since thou saw thine own Knee?

Falst. My own Knee? When I was about thy years, ( Hal) I was not an Eagles
Talon in the Waste, I could have crept into any Aldermans Thumb-Ring: a plague
of sighing and grief, if blows a Man up like a Bladder. There Is villainous News
abroad: Here was Sir John Braby from your Father; you must go to the Court in
the Morning. The same mad fellow of the North, Percy; and he of Wales, that
gave Amamon the Bastinado, and made Lucifer Cuckold, and swore the Devil his
true Liege-man upon the Cross of a Welsh-hook; what a Plague call you him?


Poin. O, Glendower. Falst. Owen, Owen; the same, and his Son in Law Mortimer,
and old Northumberland, and the sprightly Scot of Scots, Douglas, that runs a
Horseback up a Hill perpendicular.


Prin. He that rides at high speed, and with a Pistol kills a Sparrow flying.
Falst. You have hit it.


Prin. So did he never the Sparrow.


Falst. Well, that Rascal has good metal in him, he will not run.


Prin. Why, what a Rascal art thou then, to praise him so for running?


Falst. A Horseback, (ye Cuckoo) but a-foot he will not budge a foot.


Prin. Yes, Jack, upon instinct.


Falst. I grant ye, upon instinct: Well, he is there too, and one Mordake, and
a thousand blew-Caps more, Wercester is stolen away by Night: thy Fathers Beard
is turned white with the News: you may buy Land now as cheap as stinking
Mackerel.


Prin. Then it is like, if there come a hot Sun, and this civil buffetting hold,
we shall buy Maindenheads as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.


Falst. By the Mass, Lad, thou say true, it is like we shall have good
trading that way. But tell me, Hall, art not thou horrible afear'd? thou being
Heir apparent, could the World pick thee out three such Enemies again as that
Fiend Douglas, that Spirit Percy, and that Devil Glendower? Art thou not
horrible afraid? Does not thy blood thrill at it?


Prin. Not a whit: I lack some of thy instinct.


Falst. Well, thou will be horrible chid to morrow, when thou come to thy
Father: if thou do love me, practice an answer.


Prin. Do thou stand for my Father, and examine me upon the particulars of my
Life.


Falst. Shall I? content: This Chair shall be my State, this Dagger my Scepter,
and this Cushion my Crown.


Prin. Thy State is taken for a Joyn'd-Stool, thy Golden Scepter for a Leaden
Dagger, and thy precious rich Crown for a pitiful bald Crown.


Falst. Well, and the fire of Grace be not quite out of thee, now shall thou be
moved. Give me a Cup of Sack to make mine Eyes look red, that it may be thought
I have wept, for I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King Cambyses
vein.


Prin. Well, here is my Leg.


Falst. And here is my speech: stand aside Nobility.


Hostess. This is excellent sport, in faith.


Falst. Harry, I do not only marvel, where thou spendest thy time; but also,
how thou are accompanied: For though the Camomil, the more it is trodden, the
faster it grows; yet Youth, the more it is wasted, the sooner it wears. There
is a thing, Harry, which thou have often heard of, and it is known to many in
our Land, by the name of Pitch: this Pitch (as ancient Writers do report) does
defile; so does the company thou keep: for Harry, now I do not speak to thee
in Drink, but in Tears; not in Pleasure, but in Passion; not in Words only, but
in Woes also: and yet there is a virtuous Man, whom I have often noted in thy
company, but I know not his Name.


Prin. What manner of Man, and it like your Majesty?


Fall. A goodly portly Man in faith, and corpulent, of a cheerful Look, a
pleasing Eye, and a most noble Carriage, and as I think, his Age some fifty, or
(by'rlady) inclining to threescore; and now I remember me, his Name is
Falstaff: If that Man should be lewdly given, he deceives me; for Harry, I see
Virtue in his Looks. If then the Tree may be known by the Fruit, as the Fruit
by the Tree, then peremptorily I speak it, there is Virtue in that Falstaff:
him keep with, the rest banish. And tell me now, thou naughty Varlet, tell me,
where have thou been this Month?


Prin. Do thou speak like a King? Do thou stand for me, and I Will play my
Father.


Fall. Depose me: if thou do it half so gravely, so majestically, both in
Word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a Rabbet-sucker, or a Poulters
Hare.


Prin. Well, here I am set.


Falst. And here I stand: judge, my Masters.


Prin. Now Harry, whence come you?


Falst. My Noble Lord, from East-cheap.


Prin. The Complaints I hear of thee, are grievous.


Falst. In Faith, my Lord, they are false: Nay, I Will tickle ye for a young
Prince.


Prin. Swearest thou, ungracious Boy? henceforth never look on me, thou art
violently carried away from Grace: there is a Devil haunts thee, in the likeness
of a fat old man; a Tun of Man is thy Companion: Why, that Reverend Vice, that
gray Iniquity, that Father Ruffian, that Vanity in years, wherein is he good,
but to taste Sack and drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a Capon
and eat it? wherein Cunning, but in Craft? wherein Crafty, but in Villainy?
wherein Villainous, but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?


Falst. I would your Grace would take me with you: whom means your Grace?


Prin. That villainous abominable mis-leader of Youth Falstaff, that old
white-bearded Satan.


Falst. My Lord, the man I know.


Prin. I know thou do.


Falst. But to say, I know more harm in him than in my self, were to say more
than I know. That he is old (the more's the pity) his white hairs do witness
it: But that he is (saying your Reverence) a Whoremaster, that I utterly deny.
If Sack and Sugar be a fault, Heaven help the wicked: if to be old and merry,
be a sin, then many a Host that I know is damned: if to be fat, to be hated,
then Pharaoh's lean Kine are to be loved. No, my good Lord, banish Peto, banish
Bardolph, banish Poins: but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true
Jack Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff, and therefore more valiant, being as he
is old Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry's company; banish plump Jack,
and banish all the World.


Prin. I do, I will.


Enter Bardolph running Bard. O, my Lord, my Lord, the Sheriff with a most
monstrous Watch, is at the door.


Falst. Out you Rogue, play out the Play: I have much to say in the behalf of
that Falstaff.


Enter the Hostess. Host. O, my Lord, my Lord.


Falst. Heigh, heigh, the Devil rides upon a Fiddle-stick: what is the matter?


Host. The Sheriff and all the Watch are at the door: they are come to search
the House, shall I let them in?


Falst. Do thou hear, Hal? never call a true piece of Gold a Counterfeit:
thou art essentially mad, without seeming so.


Prin. And thou a natural Coward, without instinct.


Falst. I deny your Major; if you will deny the Sheriff, so: if not, let him
enter. If I become not a Cart as well as another man, a plague on my bringing
up: I hope I shall as soon be strangled with a Halter, as another


Prince. Go hide thee behind the Arras, the rest walk up above. Now my Masters,
for a true Face and good Conscience.


Falst. Both which I have had: but their date is out, and therefore I Will hide
me.


Prin. Call in the Sheriff.


Exit. Enter Sheriff and the Carrier. Prince. Now Master Sheriff, what is your
will with me?


She. First, pardon me, my Lord. A Hue and Cry has followed certain men unto
this House.


Prin. What Men?


She. One of them is well known, my gracious Lord, a gross fat Man.


Car. As fat as Butter.


Prin. The man, I do assure you is not here,
For I my self at this time have employed him:
And Sheriff, I will engage my word to thee,
That I will by to morrow Dinner time,
Send him to answer thee, or any Man,
For any thing he shall be charged withal:
And so let me entreat you, leave the House.

She. I will, my Lord: there are two Gentlemen Have in this Robbery lost three
hundred Marks.


Prin. It may be so: If he have robbed these Men, He shall be answerable: And
so farewell.


She. Good Night, my Noble Lord.


Prin. I think it is Good Morrow, is is not?


She. Indeed, my Lord, I think it be two a Clock.


Exit. Prin. This oily Rascal is known as well as Paul's: go call him forth.


Peto. Falstaff! Fast asleep behind the Arras, and snorting like a Horse.


Prin. Hark, how hard he fetches his breath: Search his Pockets. He searches
his Pockets, and finds certain Papers.


Prin. What have thou found?


Peto. Nothing but Papers, my Lord.


Prin. Let Us see, what be they? read them.


Peto. Item, a Capon. ii s. ii d. Item, Sauce. iiii d. Item, Sack, two Gallons.
v s. viii d. Item, Anchoves and Sack After Supper. ii s. vi d. Item, Bread. ob.


Prince. O monstrous, but one half pennyworth of Bread to this intolerable
deal of Sack? What there is else, keep close, we'll read it at more advantage:
there let him sleep till day. I Will to the Court in the Morning: We must all to
the Wars, and thy place shall be honorable. I Will procure this fat Rogue a
Charge of Foot, and I know his death will be a March of Twelve-score. The Money
shall be paid back again with advantage. Be with me betimes in the Morning:
And so good morrow Peto.


Peto. Good morrow, good my Lord.


Exeunt. ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Lord Mortimer, Owen Glendower. Mort. THese Promises
are fair, the Parties sure, And our Induction full of prosperous hope.


Hotsp. Lord Mortimer, and Cousin Glendower, Will you fit down? And Uncle
Worcester; a plague upon it, I have forgot the Map.


Glend. No, here it is; Sit Cousin Percy, sit good Cousin Hotspur: For by that
Name, as often as Lancaster does speak of you, His Cheeks look pale, and with a
rising sigh, He wishes you in Heaven.


Hotsp. And you in Hell, as often as he hears Owen Glendower spoke of.


Glend. I cannot blame him: At my Nativity,
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
Of burning Creslets: and at my Birth,
The frame and foundation of the Earth
Shak'd like a Coward.

Hotsp. Why so it would have done at the same Season, if your Mothers Cat had
but kitten'd, though your self had never been born.


Glend. I say the Earth did shake when I was born.


Hotsp. And I say the Earth was not of my mind: If you suppose, as fearing you,
it shook


Glen. The Heavens were all on fire, the Earth did tremble.


Hotsp. Oh, then the Earth shook.
To see the Heavens on fire.
And not in fear of your Nativity.
Diseased Nature oftentimes breaks forth
In strange Eruptions: And the teeming Earth
Is with a kind of Cholick pinched and vexed,
By the imprisoning of unruly Wind
Within her Womb: which for enlargment striving,
Shakes the old Beldam Earth, and tumbles down
Steeples, and moss-grown Towers. At your Birth,
Our Grandam Earth, having this Distemperature,
In passion shook.

Glen. Cousin: Of many Men
I do not bear these Crossings: Give me leave
To tell you once again, that at my Birth
The front of Heaven was full of fiery shapes,
The Goats ran from the Mountains, and the Herds
Were strangly clamorous to the frighted fields:
These Signs have marked me extraordinary,
A^^ all the Courses of my life do show,
I am not in the Roll of common Men.
Where is the Living, clipped in with the Sea,
That chides the Banks of England, Scotland and Wales,
Which calls me Pupil, or has read to me?
And bring him out, that is but Woman's Son,
Can trace me in the tedious ways of Art,
And hold me pace in deep Experiments.

Hotsp. I think there is no Man speaks better Welsh?
I Will to dinner.

Mort. Peace, Cousin Percy, you will make him mad.

Glend. I can call Spirits from the vastie Deep.

Hotsp. Why so can I, or so can any Man:
But will they come, when you do call for them?

Glend. Why, I can teach thee, Cousin, to command the Devil.

Hotsp. And I can teach thee, Cousin, to shame the Devil,
By telling Truth. Tell Truth, and shame the Devil.
If thou have power to raise him, bring him hither,
And I Will be sworn, I have power to shame him hence.
Oh, while you live, tell Truth, and shame the Devil.

Mort. Come, come, no more of this unprofitable Chat.

Glend. Three times has Henry Bullingbrook made head
Against my power: thrice from the Banks of Wye,
And Sandy-bottom Severn, have I sent him,
Bootless home, and Weather-beaten back.

Hot. Home, without Boots,
And in foul Weather too,
How scapes he Agues in the Devil's name?

Glend. Come, here is the Map:
Shall we divide our Right,
According to our threefold order taken?

Mort. The Archdeacon has divided it
Into three Limits, very equally:
England, from Trent, and Severn hitherto,
By South and East is to my part assigned:
All Westward, Wales, beyond the Severn shore,
And all the fertile Land within that bound,
To Owen Glendower: and dear Couze, to you
The remnant Northward, lying off from Trent.
And our Indentures Tripartite are drawn:
Which being sealed enterchangeably,
(A business that this Night may execute)
To morrow, Cousin Percy, you and I,
And my good Lord of Worcester, will set forth,
To meet your Father, and the Scottish Power,
As is appointed us at Shrewsbury.
My Father Glendower is not ready yet,
Nor shall we need his help these fourteen days:
Within that space, you may have drawn together
Your Tenants, Friends, and neighboring Gentlemen.

Glend. A short time shall send me to you, Lords:
And in my Conduct shall your Ladies come,
From whom you now must steal, and take no leave,
For there will be a world of Water shed,
Upon the parting of your Wives and you.

Hotsp. Methinks my moity, North from Burton here,
In quantity equals not one of yours:
See, how this River comes me cranking in,
And cuts me from the best of all my Land,
A huge half Moon, a monstrous Cantle out.
I Will have the Current in this Place damned up,
And here the smug, and Silver Trent shall run,
In a new Channel, fair and evenly:
It shall not wind with such a deep indent,
To rob me of so rich a bottom (...).

Glend. Not wind? it shall, it must, you see it does.

Mort. Yea, but mark how he bends his course,
And runs me up, with like advantage on the other side,
Gelding the opposing Continent as much,
As on the other side it takes from you.

Worc. Yea, but a little Charge will trench him here,
And on this North side win this Cape of Land,
And then he runs straight and even.

Hotsp. I Will have it so, a little Charge will do it.

Glend. I Will not have it altered.

Hotsp. Will not you?

Glend. No, nor you shall not.

Hotsp. Who shall say me nay?

Glend. Why, that will I.

Hotsp. Let me not understand you then, speak it in Welsh.

Glend. I can speak English, Lord, as well as you:
For I was trained up in the English Court:
Where, being but young, I framed to the Harp,
Many an English Ditty, lovely well,
And gave the Tongue a helpful Ornament;
A Virtue that was never seen in you.

Hotsp. Marry, and I am glad of it with all my Heart,
I had rather be a Kitten, and cry mew,
Than one of these same meeter-Ballad-mongers:
I had rather hear a Brazen Candlestick tuned,
Or a dry Wheel grate on the Axle-tree,
And that would set my teeth on Edge,
Nothing so much as mincing Poetry;
It Is like the forced gate of a shuffling Nag.

Glend. Come, you shall have Trent turned.

Hotsp. I do not care: I Will give thrice so much Land
To any well-deserving Friend;
But in the way of Bargain, mark ye me,
I Will cavil on the ninth part of a Hair.
Are the Indentures drawn; shall we be gone?

Exeunt. SCENE II.
Enter the King, Prince of Wales, and others. King. Lords, give us leave:
The Prince of Wales, and I,
Must have some private Conference,
But be near at hand,
For we shall presently have need of you.
Exeunt Lords. I know not whether Heaven will have it so,
For some displeasing Service I have do^^;
That in his secret Doom, out of my Blood,
He'll-breed Revengement, and a Scourge for me:
But thou do in thy passages of Life,
Make me believe, that thou art only marked
For the hot Vengeance, and the Rod of Heaven
To punish my Mistreadings. Tell me else,
Could such inordinate and low desires,
Such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean Attempts,
Such barren Pleasures, rude Society,
As thou art matched withal, and grafted too,
Accompany the greatness of thy blood,
And hold their level with thy Princely heart?

Prince. So please your Majesty, I would I could
Quit all Offenses with as clear excuse,
As well as I am doubtless I can purge
My self of many I am charged withal:
Yet such extenuation let me beg,
I may for some things true, wherein my youth
Has faulty wandered, and irregular,
Find pardon on my true submission.

King. Heaven pardon thee:
Yet let me wonder, Harry,
At thy Affections, which do hold a Wing
Quite from the flight of all thy Ancestors,
Thy place in Council thou have rudely lost,
Which by thy younger Brother is supplied;
And art almost an alien to the Hearts
Of all the Court and Princes of my blood.
The Hope and Expectation of thy time
Is ruined, and the Soul of every man
Prophetically do fore-think thy fall.
Had I so lavish of my Presence been,
So common hackney'd in the ways of men,
So stale and cheap to vulgar Company;
Opinion, that did help me to the Crown,
Had still kept loyal to Possession,
And left me in reputeless Banishment,
A Fellow of no mark, nor likelihood.
By being seldom seen, I could not stir,
But like a Comet, I was wondered at.
That Men would tell their Children, This is he*
Others would say, where? which is Bullingbrook?
But now there is not an eye
But is a-weary of thy common sight,
Save mine, which has desired to see thee more:
Which now does, that I would not have it do,
Make blind it self with foolish tenderness.

Prince. I shall heareafter, my thrice gracious Lord,
Be more my self.

King. For all the World,
As thou art to this hour, was Richard then,
When I from France set forth at Ravenspurg;
And even as I was then, is Percy now:
Now by my Scepter, and my Soul to boot,
He has more worthy Interest to the State
Than thou the Shadow of Succession;
For of no Right, nor Color like to Right,
He does fill Fields with Harness in the Realm,
Turns Head against the Lyon's armed Jaws;
And being no more in debt to years than thou,
Leads ancient Lords, and reverend Bishops on
To bloody Battles, and to bruising Arms.
What never-dying Honor has he got,
Against renowned Douglas?
Thrice has the Hotspur Mars, in swathing Clothes,
This infant-Warriour, in his Enterprises,
Discomfited great Douglas, taken him once,
Enlarged him, and made a Friend of him,
To fill the Mouth of deep Defiance up,
And shake the Peace and Safety of our Throne.
And what say you to this? Percy, Northumberland,
The Archbishops Grace of York, Douglas, Mortimer,
Capitulate against us, and are up.
But wherefore do I tell this News to thee?
Why, Harry, do I tell thee of my Foes,
Which art my near'st and dearest Enemy?
Thou art like enough, through Vassal Fear,
Base Inclination, and the start of Spleen,
To sight against me under Percie's Pay,
To dog his Heels, and courtsie at his Frowns.
To show how much thou art degenerate.

Prince. Do not think so, you shall not find it so:
And Heaven forgive them, that so much have swayed
Your Majesty's good Thoughts away from me:
I will redeem all this on Percie's Head,
And in the closing of some glorious day,
Be bold to tell you, that I am your Son,
When I will wear a Garment all of Blood,
And stain my Favors in a bloody Mask:
Which washed away, shall scowre my shame with it.
And that shall be the day, when e're it lights,
That this same Child of Honor and Renown,
This gallant Hotspur, this all-praised Knight,
And your unthought of Harry, chance to meet:
For every Honor sitting on his Helm,
Would they were multitudes, and on my Head
My Shames redoubled. For the time will come,
That I shall make this Northern Youth exchange
His Glorious Deeds for my Indignities:
Percy is but my Factor.
Or I will tear the Reckoning from his Heart.
This, in the the Name of Heaven, I promise here:
The which, if I promise, and do survive,
I do beseech your Majesty, may salve
The long-grown Wounds of my intemperature:
If not, the end of Life cancels all Bands,
And I will dye a hundred thousand deaths,
Ever break the smallest parcel of this Vow.

King. A hundred thousand Rebles die in this:
Thou shall have Charge, and Sovereign Trust herein.

Enter Blunt. How now, good Blunt? thy looks are full of speed.
Blunt. So has the business that I come to speak of.
Lord Mortimer of Scotland has sent word,
That Douglas and the English Rebels met
The eleventh of this Month, at Shrewsbury:
A mighty and a fearful Head they are,
(If promises be kept on every hand)
As ever offered foul play in a State.

King. The Earl of Westmerland set forth to day:
With him my Son, Lord John of Lancaster;
For this Advertisement is five days old.
On Wednesday next, Harry, thou shall set forward:
On Thursday, we our selves will march.
Our meeting is Bridgenorth: And Harry, you shall march
Through Gloucestershire: By which account,
Our business valued, some twelve days hence,
Our general Forces at Bridgenorth shall meet.
Our hands are full of business: Let Us away,
Advantage feeds them fat, while Men delay.

Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Falstaff, and Bardolph. Falst. Bardolph, am I not fallen away vilely,
since this last action? Do I not bate? do I not dwindle? Why my skin hangs
about me like an old Ladies loose Gown: I am withered like an old Apple John.
Well I Will repent, and that suddenly, while I am in some liking: I shall be out
of Heart shortly, and then I shall have no strength to repent. And I have not
forgotten what the inside of a Church is made of, I am a Pepper Corn, a
Brewers Horse: The inside of a Church. Company, villainous Company has been
the spoil of me.


Bard. Sir John, you are so freful, you cannot live long.


Falst. Why there it is: Come, sing me a bawdy Song, make me merry: I was as
virtuously given, as a Gentleman need to be; virtuous enough, swore little,
Dic'd not above seven times a week, went to a Bawdy House not above once in a
quarter of an hour, paid money that I borrowed three or four times: lived well,
and in good compass: And now I live out of all order, out of compass.


Bard. Why, you are so fat, Sir John, that you must needs be out of all
compass; out of all reasonable compass, Sir John.


Falst. Do thou amend thy Face, and I Will amend my Life. Thou art our Admiral,
thou bear the Lantern in the Poop, but it is in the Nose of thee; thou art
the Knight of the burning Lamp.


Bard. Why, Sir John, my Face does you no harm.


Falst. No, I Will be sworn: I make as good use of it, as many a Man does of a
Deaths-Head, or a Memento Mori. I never see thy Face, but I think upon Hell
Fire, when thou rann'st up Gads-hill in the night to catch my Horse, if I did
not think thou had been an Ignis fatuus, or a Ball of Wildfire, there is no
purchase in Money. O, thou art a perpetual Triumph, an everlasting
Bone-fire-light, thou have saved me a thousand Marks in Links and Torches,
walking with thee in the night betwixt Tavern and Tavern: But the Sack that
thou have drunk me, would have bought me light as good cheap, at the dearest
Chandlers in Europe. I have maintained that Salamander of yours with fire, any
time this two and thirty years, Heaven reward me for it.


Bard. I would my Face were in your belly.


Falst. So should I be sure to be heart-burn'd.


Enter Hostess. How now, Dame Parlet the Hen, have you inquired yet who picked
my Pocket?

Hostess. Why, Sir John, what do you think, Sir John? do you think I keep
Thieves in my House? I have searched, I have inquired, so has my Husband. Man
by Man, Boy by Boy, Servant by Servant: The tight of a Hair was never lost in
my House before.


Falst. Ye lie, Hostess: Bardolph was shaved, and lost many a Hair; and I Will be
sworn my Pocket was picked; go to, you are a Woman, go.


Hostess. Who I? I defy thee. I was never so called so in mine own House
before.


Falst. Go to, I know you well enough.


Hostess. No, Sir John: You do not know me, Sir John; I know you, Sir John: You
owe me Money, Sir John, and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: I
bought you a dozen of Shirts to your back.


Falst. Dowlas, filthy Dowlas: I have given them away to Bakers Wives, and they
have made Boulters of them.


Hostess. Now as I am a true Woman, Holland of eight shillings an Ill: You owe
Money here besides, Sir John, for your Diet, and by-Drinkings, and Money lent
you, four and twenty pounds.


Falst. He had his part of it, let him pay.


Hostess. He? alas! he is poor, he has nothing.


Falst. How? poor? look upon his face: What call you rich? Let him coin his
Nose, let him coin his Cheeks, I Will not pay a Denier. What, will you make a
Yonker of me? Shall I not take mine ease in mine Inn, but I shall have my
Pocket picked? I have lost a Seal-Ring of my Grandfathers, worth forty Mark.


Hostess. I have heard the Prince tell him, I know not how often, that that Ring
was Copper.


Falst. How? the Prince is a Jack, a Sneak-Cup: and if he were here, I would
cudgel him like a Dog, if he would say so.


Enter the Prince marching, and Falstaff meets him, playing on his Trunchion
like a Fise. Falst. How now, Lad? is the wind in that Door? Must we all march?


Bard. Yea, two and two, Newgate fashion.


Host. My Lord, I pray you hear me.


Prince. What say thou, Mistress Quickly? How does thy Husband? I love him
well, he is an honest Man.


Hostess. Good, my Lord, hear me.


Falst. Prithee let her alone, and list to me.


Prince. What say thou, Jack?


Falst. The other night I fell asleep here behind the Arras, and had my Pocket
picked: This House is turned Bawdy House, they pick Pockets.


Prince. What did thou lose, Jack?


Falst. Will thou believe me, Hal? Three or four Bonds of forty pound a piece,
and a Seal-Ring of my Grandfathers.


Prince. A trifle, some eight-penny matter.


Host. So I told him, my Lord; and I said, I heard your Grace say so: And (my
Lord) he speaks most vilely of you, like a foul-mouthed Man as he is, and said
he would cudgel you.


Prince. What, he did not?


Host. There Is neither Faith, Truth, nor Woman-hood in me else.


Fall. There Is no more faith in thee than in a stude Prune; nor no more truth in
thee than in a drawn Fox: and for Woman-hood, Maid-Marian may be the Deputies
Wife of the Ward to thee. Go you nothing, go.


Host. Say, what thing? what thing?


Falst. What thing? why a thing to thank Heaven on.


Host. I am nothing to thank Heaven on, I would thou should know it: I am an
honest Man's Wife: and setting thy Knighthood aside, thou art a Knave to call
me so.


Falst. Setting thy Womanhood aside, thou art a Beast to say otherwise.


Host. Say, what Beast, thou Knave thou?


Fall. What Beast? Why an Otter.


Prin. An Otter, Sir John, why an Otter?


Fall. Why? she is neither fish nor flesh, a Man knows not where to have her.


Host. Thou art an unjust man in saying so; thou, or any Man knows where to
have me, thou Knave thou.


Prin. Thou say true, Hostess, and he slanders thee most grossly.


Host. So he does you, my Lord, and said this other day, you owed him a
thousand pound.


Prince. Sirrah, do I owe you a thousand pound?


Fall. A thousand pound, Hal? a million: thy love is worth a million: thou ow'st
me thy love.


Host. Nay, my Lord, he called you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.


Fall. Did I, Bardolph?


Bar. Indeed, Sir John, you said so.


Fall. Yea, if he said my Ring was Copper.


Prin. I say it is Copper. Dare thou be as good as thy word now?


Fall. Why, Hal? thou know, as thou art but a man, I dare; but as thou art a
Prince, I fear thee, as I fear the roaring of the Lions Whelp.


Prin. And why not as the Lion?


Fall. The King himself is to be feared as the Lion: Do thou think I Will fear
thee, as I fear thy Father? nay if I do, let my Girdle break.


Prin. O, if it should, how would thy guts fall about thy knees. Why thou
horson impudent, imbost Rascal, if there were any thing in thy Pocket but
Tavern Recknings, Memorandums of Bawdy-Houses, and one poor pennyworth of
Sugar Candy to make thee long-winded: And yet you will stand to it, you will
not Pocket up Wrongs. Art thou not ashamed?


Fall. Do thou hear, Hal? Thou know in the state of Innocence, Adam fell;
and what would poor Jack Falstaff do, in the days of Villainy? Thou see, I
have more flesh than another man, and therefore, frailty. You confess then you
picked my Pocket?


Prin. It appears so by the Story.


Fall. Hostess, I forgive thee:
Go make ready Breakfast, love thy Husband,
Look to thy Servants, and cherish thy Guests:
Thou shall find me tractable to any honest Reason:
Thou see, I am pacified still.
Nay, I preethee be gone.
Exit Hostess. Now, Hal, to the news at Court for the Robbery, Lad?
How is that answered?

Prin. O my sweet Beef:
I must still be good Angel to thee.
The Money is paid back again.

Fall. O, I do not like that paying back, it is a double Labor.


Prin. I am good Friends with my Father, and may do any thing.


Fall. Rob me the Exchequer the first thing thou do, and do it with un-wash'd
hands too.


Bard. Do, my Lord.


Prin. I have procured thee, Jack, a Charge of Foot.


Fall. I would it had been of Horse. Where shall I find one that can steal well?
O, for a fine Thief, of two and twenty, or thereabout: I am hainously
unprovided. Well, God be thanked for these Rebels, they offend none but the
Virtuous. I laud them, I praise them.


Prin. Bardolph.


Bar. My Lord.


Prin. Go bear this Letter to Lord John of Lancaster, to my Brother

John. This to my Lord of Westmerland:
Go Peto, to Horse: for thou, and I,
Have thirty Miles to ride yet e're dinner time.
Jack, meet me to Morrow in the Temple-Hall
At two a Clock in the Afternoon,
There shall thou know thy Charge, and there receive
Money, and Order for their Furniture.
The Land is burning, Percy stands on hie,
And either they, or we, must lower lie.

Fall. Rare words: brave World,
Hostess, my Breakfast, come:
Oh, I could wish this Tavern were my Drum.

Exeunt omnes. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Harry Hotspur, Worcester, and Douglas. Hot. WELL said, my Noble Scot, if
speaking truth
In this fine Age were not thought Flattery,
Such attribution should the Douglas have,
As not a Soldier of this Seasons stamp,
Should go so general current through the World.
By Heaven I cannot flatter: I defy
The Tongues of Soothers. But a braver Place
In my Heart's love, has no Man than your Self.
Nay, task me to my word: approve me, Lord.

Dow. Thou art the King of Honor:
No Man so potent breathes upon the Ground,
But I will Beard him.

Enter a Messenger. Hot. Do so, and it is well. What Letters have thou there? I
can but thank you.


Mes. These Letters come from your Father.


Hot. Letters from him? Why comes he not himself?


Mess. He cannot come, my Lord, He is griveous sick.


Hot. How? has he the leisure to be sick now,
In such a justling time? who leads his Power?
Under whose Government come they along?

Mess. His Letters bear his mind, not I his mind.

Worcester. I prithee tell me, does he keep his Bed?

Mess. He did, my Lord, four days e're I set forth:
And at the time of my departure thence,
He was much feared by his Physician.

Worcester. I would the state of time had first been whole,
E're he by Sickness had been visited;
His Health was never better worth than now.

Hotsp. Sick now? droop now? this sickness does infect
The very Lifeblood of our Enterprise,
It Is catching hither, even to our Camp.
He writes me here, that inward Sickness,
And that his Friends by deputation
Could not so soon be drawn: nor did he think it meet
To lay so dangerous and dear a trust
On a Soul removed, but on his own.
Yet does he give us bold Advertisement,
That with our small Conjunction we should on,
To see how Fortune is disposed to us,
For, as he writes, there is no quailing now,
Because the King is certainly possessed
Of all our Purposes. What say you to it?

Worcester. Your Father's sickness is a maim to us.

Hotsp. A perilous Gash, a very Limb loft off:
And yet, in faith, it is not his present want
Seems more than we shall find it,
Were it good, to set the exact Wealth of all our States
All at one Cast? to set so rich a Mine
On the nice hazard of one doubtful Hour,
It were not good: for therein should we read
The very bottom, and the Soul of hope,
The very List, the very utmost bound
Of all our Fortunes.

Dowg. Faith, and so we should,
A comfort of Retirement lives in this.

Hotsp. A Rendezvous at Home to fly unto,
If that the Devil and Mischance look big
Upon the Maidenhead of our Affair.

Worcester. But yet I would your Father had been here:
The Quality and Heir of our Attempt
Brooks no Division: It will be thought
By some, that know not why he is away,
That Wisdom, Loyalty, and mere Dislike
Of our Proceedings, kept the Earl from hence.
And think, how such an Apprehension
May turn the Tide of fearful Faction,
And breed a kind of Question in our Cause:
This absence of your Father draws a Curtain,
That shows the ignorant a kind of fear
Before not dreamt of.

Hotsp. You strain too far.
I rather of his Absence make this use:
It lends a Luster, and more great Opinion,
A larger Dare to your great Enterprise,
Than if the Earl were here: for men must think,
If we without his help, can make a Head
To push against the Kingdom: with his help,
We shall o'return it topsie-turvy down.
Yet all goes well, yet all our joints art whole.

Dowg. As heart can think:
There is not such a word spoke of in Scotland,
As this Dream of Fear.

Enter Sir Richard Vernon. Hotsp. My Cousin Vernon, welcome by my Soul.

Vern. Pray God my News be worth a welcome, Lord.
The Earl of Westmerland, seven thousand strong,
Is marching hither-wards with Prince John.

Hotsp. No harm: what more?

Vern. And further, I have learned,
The King himself in Person has set forth,
Or hither-words intended speedily,
With strong and mighty Preparation.

Hotsp. He shall be welcome too,
Where is his Son,
The nimble-footed Mad-cap, Prince of Wales,
And his Comrades, that daft the World aside,
And bid it pass?

Vern. All furnished, all in Arms,
All plumed like Estridges, that with the Wind
Baited like Eagles, having lately bathed,
Glittering in Golden Coats, like Images,
As full of Spirit as the Month of May,
And gorgeous as the Sun at Mid-summer,
Wanton as youthful Goats, wild as young Bulls.
I saw young Harry with his Beaver on,
His Cushes on his thighs, gallantly armed,
Rise from the ground like feathered Mercury,
And vaulted with such ease into his Seat,
As if an Angel dropped down from the Clouds
To turn and wind a fiery Pegasus,
And witcht the world with noble Horsemanship.

Hotsp. No more, no more;
Worse than the Sun in March,
This Praise does nourish Agues: let them come.
They come like Sacrifices in their trim,
And to the fire-ey'd Maid of smoaky War,
All hot, and bleeding, will we offer them:
The mailed Mars shall on his Altar sit
Up to the ears in Blood. I am on fire,
To here this rich Reprizal is so nigh,
And yet not ours. Come, let me take my Horse,
Who is to bear me like a Thunderbolt,
Against the bosom of the Prince of Wales.
Harry to Harry, shall not Horse to Horse
Meet, and never part, till one drop down a Coarse?
Oh, that Glendower were come.

Ver. There is more News:
I learned in Worcester, as I rode along,
He cannot draw his Power this fourteen days.

Dowg. That Is the worst Tidings that I hear of, yet.

Worcester. I, by my faith, that bears a frosty sound.

Hotsp. What may the Kings whole Battle reach unto?

Ver To thirty thousand.

Hot. Forty let it be,
My Father and Glendower being both away,
The Power of us may serve so great a day.
Come, let us take a Muster speedily:
Doomsday is near; die all, die merrily.

Dowg. Talk not of dying, I am out of fear
Of death, or deaths hand, for this one half year.

Exeunt omnes. SCENE II.
Enter Falstaff and Bardolph. Falst. Bardolph, get thee before to Coventry,
fill me a Bottle of Sack, our Soldiers shall march through: we'll to
Sutton-cop-hill to Night.


Bard. Will you give me Money, Captain?


Falst. Lay out, lay out.


Bard. This Bottle makes an Angel.


Falst. And if it do, take it for thy labor: And if it make twenty, take them
all, I Will answer the Coynage. Bid my Lieutenant Peto meet me at the Towns end.


Bard. I will Captain: farewell.


Exit. Falst. If I be not ashamed of my Soldiers, I am a sowc't Gurnet: I have
mis-us'd the Kings Press damnably. I have got, in exchange of a hundred and
fifty Soldiers, three hundred and odd pounds. I press me none but good
House-holders, Yeomens Sons: enquire me out contracted Batchelors, such as had
been asked twice on the Banes: such a Commodity of warm Slaves, as had as lieve
hear the Devil, as a Drum; such as fear the report of a Caliver, worse than a
struck-Fool, or a hurt Wild-Duck. I pressed me none but such Tostes and Butter,
with hearts in their Bellies no bigger than Pins heads, and they have bought
out their Services: And now my whole Charge consists of Ancients, Corporals,
Lieutenants, Gentlemen of Companies, Slaves as ragged as Lazarus in the*
painted Cloth, where the Gluttons Dogs licked his Sores; and such as indeed
were never Soldiers, but dis-carded unjust Servingmen, younger Sons to younger
Brothers: Revolted Tapsters and Ostlers, Tradefaln, the Cankers of a calm
World, and long Peace, ten times more dishonorable, ragged, than an old-fac'd
Ancient; and such have I to fill up the Rooms of them that have bought out
their Services: That you would think, that I had a hundred and fifty tattered
Prodigals, lately come from Swine-keeping, from eating Draff and Husks. A mad
fellow met me on the way, and told me, I had unloaded all the Gibbets, and
pressed the dead Bodies. No eye has seen such Skar-Crows: I Will not march through
Coventry with them, that is flat. Nay, and the Villains march wide betwixt the
Legs, as if they had Gyves on; for indeed, I had the most of them out of
Prison. There Is not a Shirt and a half in all my Company: and the half Shirt is
two Napkins tacked together, and thrown over the Shoulders like a Heralds Coat,
without sleeves: And the Shirt, to say the truth, stolen from my Host of S.
Albans; or the Red-Nose Innkeeper of Dayntry. But that is all one, they will find
Linen enough on every Hedge.


Enter the Prince, and the Lord of Westmerland. Prince. How now, blown Jack?
how now, Quilt?


Falst. What, Hal? How now, mad Wag, what a Devil do thou in Warwickshire?
My good Lord of Westmerland, I cry you mercy, I thought your Honor had already
been at Shrewsbury.


West. 'Faith, Sir John, it is more than time that I were there, and you too:
But my Powers are there already. The King, I can tell you, looks for us all: we
must away all to Night.


Falst. Tut, never fear me, I am as vigilant as a Cat, to steal Cream.


Prince. I think to steal Cream indeed, for thy theft has already made thee
Butter: But tell me, Jack, whose Fellows are these that come after?


Falst. Mine, Hal, mine.


Prince. I did never see such pitiful Rascals.


Falst. Tut, tut, good enough to toss: food for Powder, food for Powder:
they will fill a Pit, as well as better: tush Man, mortal Men, mortal Men.


Westminster. I, but Sir John, methinks they are exceeding poor and bare, too
beggarly.


Fall. Faith, for their poverty, I know not where they had that; and for their
bareness, I am sure they never learned that of me.


Prin. No, I Will be sworn, unless you call three fingers on the Ribs, bare. But,
sirrah, make haste. Percy is already in the Field.


Falst. What, is the King encamped?


West. He is, John, I fear we shall stay too long.


Falst. Well, to the latter end of a Fray, and the beginning of a Feast, fits a
dull Fighter, and a keen Guest.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Hotspur, Worcester, Douglas, and Vernon. Hotsp. We'll fight with him to
Night.


Worc. It may not be.


Dowg. You give him then advantage.


Vern. Not a whit.


Hot. Why say you so? looks he not for Supply?


Vern. So do we.


Hotsp. His is certain, Ours is doubtful.


Worc. Good Cousin be advised, stir not to Night.


Vern. Do not, my Lord.


Dowg. You do not counsel well: You speak it out of fear, and cold heart.


Vern. Do me no slander, Douglas: By my Life,
And I dare well maintain it with my Life,
If well-respected Honor bid me on,
I hold as little counsel with weak fear,
As you, my Lord, or any Scot that this day lives.
Let it be seen to morrow in the Battle,
Which of us fears.

Dowg. Yea, or to night.

Vern. Content.

Hotsp. To night, say I.

Vern. Come, come, it may not be.
I wonder much, being Men of such great Leading as you are,
That you foresee not what Impediments
Drag back our Expedition: certain Horse
Of my Cousin Vernon's are not yet come up,
Your Uncle Worcester's Horse came but to day,
And now their pride and mettle is asleep,
Their Courage with hard labor tame and dull,
That not a Horse is half the half of himself.

Hotsp. So are the Horse of the Enemy
In general, journey-bated, and brought low:
The better part of Ours are full of rest.

Worc. The number of the Kings exceeds ours:
For Gods sake, Cousin, stay till all come in.

The Trumpet sounds a Parley. Enter Sir Walter Blunt. Blunt. I come with
gracious offers from the King,
If you vouchsafe me hearing, and respect.

Hotsp Welcome, Sir Walter Blunt:
And would to God you were of our determination.
Some of us love you well: and even those some
Envy your great Deservings, and good Name,
Because you are not of our Quality,
But stand against us like an Enemy.

Blunt. And Heaven defend, but still I should stand so,
So long as out of Limit, and true Rule,
You stand against Anointed Majesty.
But to my Charge.
The King has sent to know
The Nature of your Griefs, and whereupon
You conjure from the breast of Civil peace,
Such bold Hostility, teaching his dutious Land
Audacious Cruelty. If that the King
Have any way your good Deserts forgot,
Which he confesses to be manifold,
He bids you name your Griefs; and with all speed
You shall have your desires, with interest:
And Pardon absolute for your self, and these,
Herein misled by your suggestion.

Hot. The King is kind:
And well we know, the King
Knows at what time to Promise, when to Pay.
My Father, my Uncle, and my self,
Did give him that same Royalty he wears:
And when he was not six and twenty strong,
Sick in the Worlds regard, wretched and low,
A poor unminded Outlaw, sneaking home,
My Father gave him welcome to the shore:
And when he heard him swear, and vow to God,
He came to be but Duke of Lancaster,
To sue out his Livery, and beg his Peace,
With tears of Innocence, and terms of zeal:
My Father, in kind heart and pity moved,
Swore him assistance, and performed it too.
Now, when the Lords and Barons of the Realm
Perceived Northumberland did lean to him,
They more and less came in with Cap and Knee,
Met him in-Boroughs, Cities, Villages,
Attended him on Bridges, stood in Lanes,
Laid Gifts before him, proffered him their Oaths,
Gave him their Heirs, as Pages, followed him,
Even at the Heels, in golden multitudes.
He presently, as greatness knows it self,
Steps me a little higher than his Vow
Made to my Father, while his Blood was poor,
Upon the naked shore at Ravenspurg:
And now (forsooth) takes on him to reform
Some certain Edicts, and some strait Decrees,
That lay too heavy on the Commonwealth;
Cries out upon Abuses, seems to weep
Over his Countries Wrongs: and by his Face,
This seeming Brow of Justice, did he win
The Hearts of all that he did angle for.
Proceeded further, cut me off the Heads
Of all the Favorites, that the absent King
In deputation left behind him here.
When he was personal in the Irish War.

Blunt. Tut, I came not to hear this.

Hot. Then to the point.
In short time after, he deposed the King,
Soon after that, deprived him of his Life:
And in the neck of that, task't the whole State.
To make that worse, suffered his Kinsman March,
Who is, if every Owner were right placed,
Indeed his King, to be engaged in Wales,
There, without Ransom, to lie forfeited:
Disgraced me in my happy Victories,
Sought to entrap me by intelligence,
Rated my Uncle from the Council Board,
In rage dismissed my Father from the Court,
Broke Oath, committing Wrong on Wrong,
And in conclusion, drove us to seek out
This Head of safety; and withal, to pry
Into his Title: the which we find
Too indirect, for long continuance.

Blunt. Shall I return this answer to the King?

Hotsp. Not so, Sir Walter.
We'll withdraw a while:
Go to the King, and let there be impawn'd
Some surety for a safe return again,
And in the morning early shall my Uncle
Bring him our purpose: and so farewell.

Blunt. I would you would accept of Grace and Love.

Hotsp. And't may be, so we shall.

Blunt. Pray Heaven you do.

Exeunt. ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter the King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl of West morland,
Sir Walter Blunt, and Falstaff. King. HOw bloudily the Sun begins to peer
Above you busky hill: the Day looks pale
At his Distemperature

The Trumpet sounds. Enter Worcester. King. How now, my Lord of Worster? It Is
not well
That you and I should meet upon such terms,
As now we meet. You have deceived our Trust,
And made us doff our easy Robe of Peace,
To crush our old Limbs in ungentle Steel;
This is not well, my Lord, this is not well.
What say you to it? Will you again unknit
This churlish Knot of all-abhorred War?
And move in that Obedient Orb again,
Where you did give a fair and natural light,
And be no more an exhaled Meteor,
A Prodigy of Fear, and a Portent
Of broached Mischief, to the unborn Time?

Mor. Hear me, my Liege:
For mine own part, I could be well content
To entertain the Lag-end of my life
With quiet hours: For I do protest,
I have not sought the day of this dislike.

King. You have not sought it: how come it then?

Falst. Rebellion lay in his way, and he found it.

Prin. Peace, Chewet, peace.

Worcester. It pleased your Majesty, to turn your looks
Of Favor, from my Self, and all our House;
And yet I must remember you, my Lord,
We were the first, and dearest of your Friends:
For you, my Staff of Office did I break
In Richard's time, and posted day and night
To meet you on the way, and kiss your hand,
When yet you were in place, and in account
Nothing so strong and fortunate, as I;
It was my self, my Brother, and his Son,
That brought you home, and boldly did out-dare
The danger of the time. You swore to us,
And you did swear that Oath to Doncaster,
That you did nothing of purpose against the State,
Nor claim no further; then your new-faln right,
The Seat of Gaunt, Dukedom of Lancaster.
To this, we swear our aid: But in short space
It rained down Fortune showring on your head,
And such a flood of Greatness fell on you.
And being fed by us, you used us so,
As that ungentle gull the Cuckows Bird
Uses the Sparrow, did oppress our Nest,
Grew by our Feeding, to so great a Bulk,
That even our Love durst not come near your sight
For fear of swallowing: But with nimble wing
We were enforced for safety's sake to fly
Out of your sight, and raise this present Head,
Whereby we stand opposed by such means
As you your self have forged against your self,
By unkind Usage, dangerous Countenance,
And violation of all Faith and Troth
Sworn to us in your younger Enterprise.

King. These things indeed you have articulated,
Proclaimed at Market Crosses, read in Churches,
To face the Garment of Rebellion:
And never yet did Insurrection want
Such Watercolors, to impaint his Cause:
Nor moody Beggars, starving for a time
Of Pell-mell Havoc, and Confusion.

Prin. In both our Armies, there is many a Soul
Shall pay full dearly for this Encounter,
If once they join in Trial. Tell your Nephew,
The Prince of Wales does join with all the World
In praise of Henry Percy: By my Hopes,
This present Enterprise set off his head,
I do not think a braver Gentleman,
More Active, Valiant, or more valiant young,
More daring, or more bold, is now alive,
To grace this latter Age with Noble Deeds.
For my part, I may speak it to my shame,
I have a Truant been to Chivalry,
And so I hear he does account me too:
Yet this before my Fathers Majesty,
I am content that he shall take the odds
Of his great Name and Estimation,
And will, to save the Blood on either side,
Try Fortune with him, in a Single Fight.

King. And, Prince of Wales, so dare we venture thee,
Albeit, Considerations infinite
Do make against it: No, good Worster, no,
We love our People well; even those we love
That are misled upon your Cousins part:
And will they take the offer of our Grace:
Both he, and they, and you, yea, every Man
Shall be my Friend again, and I Will be his.
So tell your Cousin, and bring me Word,
What he will do. But if he will not yield,
Rebuke and dread Correction wait on us,
And they shall do their Office. So be gone,
We will not now be troubled with reply,
We offer fair, take it advisedly.

Exit Worcester. Prin. It will not be accepted, on my Life,
The Douglas and the Hotspur both together,
Are confident against the World in Arms.

King. Hence therefore, every Leader to his Charge,
For on their Answer will we set on them;
And God befriend us, as our Cause is just.
Exeunt. Manet Prince and Falstaff.
Fall. Hal, if thou see me down in the Battle,
And bestride me, so; it is a point of Friendship.

Prin. Nothing but a Colossus can do thee that Friendship:
Say thy Prayers, and farewell.

Falst. I would it were Bedtime, Hal, and all well.

Prin. Why, thou owe Heaven a death.

Fall. It Is not due yet: I would be loath to pay him before his day. What need I
be so forward with him that call's not on me? Well, it is no matter, Honor
pricks me on? But now if Honor prick me off when I come on? How then; Can
Honor set to a leg? No: or an arm? No: Or take away the grief of a Wound? No:
Honor has no skill in Surgery then? No. What is Honor? a Word. What is that
Word Honor? Air: A trim Reckoning. Who has it? He that died a Wednesday. Does
he feel it? No. Does he hear it? No. Is it insensible then? yea, to the Dead.
But will it not live with the living? No. Why? Detraction will not suffer it,
therefore I Will none of it. Honor is a mere Scutcheon, and so ends my Catechism.


Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Worcester, and Sir Richard Vernon. Worcester. O no, my Nephew must not know,
Sir Richard,
The liberal kind Offer of the King.

Ver. 'Twere best he did.

Worcester. Then we are all undone.
It is not possible, it cannot be,
The King would keep his Word in loving us,
He will suspect us still, and find a time
To Punish this Offense in other Faults:
Supposition, all our lives shall be stuck full of Eyes;
And we shall feed like Oxen at a Stall,
The better cherished, still the nearer death.
My Nephews trespass may be well forgot,
It has the excuse of Youth, and heat of Blood,
And an adopted Name of Privilege,
A hare-brain'd Hotspur, governed by a Spleen:
All his Offenses live upon my Head,
And on his Fathers. We did train him on,
And his Corruption being taken from us,
We as the Spring of all, shall pay for all:
Therefore, good Cousin, let not Harry know
In any Case, the Offer of the King.

Ver. Deliver what you will, I Will say it is so.
Here comes your Cousin.

Enter Hotspur. Hot. My Uncle is returned:
Deliver up my Lord of Westmerland.
Uncle, what News?

Worcester. The King will bid you Battle presently.

Dow. Defy him by the Lord of Westmerland,

Hot. Lord Douglas: Go you and tell him so.

Dow. Marry and shall, and very willingly.

Exit Douglas. Worcester. There is no seeming mercy in the King.

Hot. Did you beg any? God forbid.

Worcester. I told him gently of our Grievances.
Of his Oath breaking: which he mended thus,
By now forswearing that he is forsworn,
He calls us Rebels, Traitors, and will scourge
With haughty Arms, this hateful Name in us.

Enter Douglas. Dow. Arm, Gentlemen, to Arms, for I have thrown
A brave defiance in King Henry's teeth:
And Westmerland that was engaged did bear it,
Which cannot choose but bring him quickly on.

Worcester. The Prince of Wales stepped forth before the King,
And, Nephew, challenged you to single fight.

Hot. O, would the Quarrel lay upon our Heads,
And that no Man might draw short breath to day,
But I and Harry Monmouth. Tell me, tell me,
How showed his Talking? Seemed it in contempt?

Ver. No, by my Soul: I never in my life
Did hear a Challenge urged more modestly,
Unless a Brother should a Brother dare
To gentle Exercise and proof of Arms.
He gave you all the Duties of a Man,
Trimmed up your Praises, with a Princely Tongue,
Spoke your Deservings like a Chronicle,
Making you ever better than his Praise,
By still dispraising Praise, valued with you:
And which became him like a Prince indeed,
He made a blushing cital of himself,
And chide his Trewant Youth so with a Grace,
As if he mastered there a double Spirit
Of teaching and of learning instantly:
There did he pause. But let me tell the World,
If he out live the Envy of this day,
England did never owe so sweet a hope,
So much misconstrued in his Wantonness.

Hot. Cousin, I think thou art enamoured
On his follies: never did I here
Of any Prince so wild at Liberty.
But be he as he will, yet once e're night,
I will embrace him with a Soldiers Arm,
That he shall shrink under my courtesy.
Arm, arm with speed.

Enter Messenger. Mes. My Lord, here are Letters for you.

Hot. I cannot read them now.
O Gentlemen, the time of life is short;
To spend that shortness basely; were too long.
If life did ride upon a Dials point,
Still ending at the arrival of an hour,
And if we live, we live to tread on Kings:
If dye; brave death, when Princes dye with us.
Now for our Consciences, the Arms is fair,
When the intent for bearing them is just.

Enter another Messenger. Mes. My Lord, prepare, the King comes on apace.

Hot. I thank him, that he cuts me off from my tale:
For I profess not talking: Only this,
Let each man do his best. And here I draw my Sword,
Whose worthy temper I intend to stain
With the best blood that I can meet withal,
In the Adventure of this perilous day.
Now Esperance Percy, and set on:
Sound all the lofty Instruments of War,
And by that Music, let us all embrace:
For Heaven to Earth, some of us never shall,
A second time do such a courtesy.

They embrace, the Trumpets sound, the King enters with his Power, alarm unto
the Battle. Then enter Douglas and Sir Walter Blunt. Blu. What is thy Name,
that in Battle thus thou crossest me?
What Honor do thou seek upon my Head?

Dow. Know then my name is Douglas,
And do haunt thee in the Battle thus,
Because some tell me, that thou art a King.

Blunt. They tell thee true.

Dow. The Lord of Stafford here to day has bought
Thy likeness: for instead of thee, King Harry,
This Sword has ended him, so shall it thee,
Unless thou yield thee as a Prisoner.

Blu. I was not born to yield, thou haughty Scot,
And thou shall find a King that will revenge
Lord Stafford's death.

Fight, Blunt is slain, then enters Hotspur. Hot. O Douglas, had thou sought
at Holmedon thus,
I never had triumphed over a Scot.

Dow. All Is done, all is won, here breathless lies the King.

Hot. Where?

Dow. Here.

Hot. This, Douglas? No, I know this face full well,
A gallant Knight he was, his name was Blunt,
Semblably furnished like the King himself.

Dow. Ah fool: go with thy Soul whither it goes.
A borrowed Title have thou bought too dear,
Why did thou tell me, that thou were a King?

Hot. The King has many marching in his Coats.

Dow. Now by my Sword, I will kill all his Coats,
I Will murder all his Wardrobe piece by piece,
Until I meet the King.

Hot. Up and away.
Our Soldiers stand full fairly for the day.

Exeunt. Alarm, and enter Falstaff solus. Fall. Though I could escape shot-free
at London, I fear the shot here: here is no scoring, but upon the pate. Soft,
who art thou? Sir Walter Blunt, there is Honor for you: here is no Vanity, I am
as hot as moulten Lead, and as heavy too; Heaven keep Lead out of me, I need no
more weight than mine own Bowels. I have led my Rag of Muffians where they are
peppered: There Is not three of 150 left alive, and they for the Towns end, to
beg during Life. But who comes here?


Enter Prince. Prin. What stand'st thou idle here? lend me thy Sword,
Many a Noble Man lies stark and stiff
Under the hooves of vaunting Enemies,
Whose deaths are unrevenged. Prithee lend me thy Sword.

Fall. O Hal, I prithee give me leave to breathe a while. Turk Gregory never did
such deeds in Arms as I have done this day, I have paid Percy, I have made him
sure.


Prin. He is indeed, and living to kill thee;
I prithee lend me thy Sword.

Falst. Nay, Hal, if Percy be alive, thou get'st not my Sword, but take my
Pistol if thou will.


Prin. Give it me: What, is it in the Case?


Fall. I Hal, it is hot: There Is that will Sack a City.
The Prince draws out a Bottle of Sack.
Prin. What, is it a time to jest and dally now?

Exit. Throws it at him. Falst. If Percy be alive, I Will pierce him: if he do
come in my way, so: If he do not, if I come in his (willingly) let him make a
Carbonado of me, I like not such grinning Honor as Sir Walter has: Give me
life, which if I can save, so: if not, Honor comes unlooked for, and there is
an end.


Exit. SCENE III.
Enter Hotspur. Hot. If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.


Prin. Thou speak as if I would deny my Name.


Hot. My Name is Harry Percy.


Prin. Why then I see a very valiant Rebel of that Name.
I am the Prince of Wales, and think not Percy,
To share with me in glory any more:
Two Stars keep not their motion in one Sphere,
Nor can one England brook a double Reign,
Of Harry Percy, and the Prince of Wales.

Hot. Nor shall it, Harry, for the Hour is come
To end the one of us; and would to Heaven,
Thy Name in Arms, were now as great as mine.

Prin. I Will make it greater, e're I part from thee,
And all the budding Honors on thy Crest,
I Will crop, to make a Garland for my Head.

Hot. I can no longer brook thy Vanities.

Fight. Enter Falstaff. Fall. Well said, Hal, to it Hal. Nay, you shall find no
Boys play here, I can tell you.


Enter Douglas, he fights with Falstaff, who falls down as if he is dead. The
Prince kills Percy. Hot. Oh Harry thou have robbed me of my Youth:
I better brook the loss of bitter Life,
Than those proud Titles thou have won of me,
They wound my Thoughts worse, than the Sword my Flesh:
But thought's the slave of Life, and Life Time's Fool;
And Time, that takes survey of all the World,
Must have a stop. O, I could Prophecy,
But that the Earth, and the cold hand of death,
Lies on my Tongue: No, Percy, thou art dust
And food for --

Prin. For Worms, brave Percy. Farewell great Heart:
Ill-weav'd Ambition, how much art thou shrunk?
When that this Body did contain a Spirit,
A Kingdom for it was too small a bound:
But now two paces of the vilest Earth
Is room enough. This Earth that bears thee dead,
Bears not alive so stout a Gentleman.
Adieu, and take thy Praise with thee to Heaven,
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the Grave,
But not remembered in thy Epitaph.
What? Old Acquaintance? Could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell:
I could have better spared a better Man.
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with Vanity.
Death has not stuck so fat a Dear to day,
Though many dearer in this bloody Fray:
Imbowell'd will I see thee by and by,
Till then, in blood by Noble Percy lie.

Exit. Falstaff rises up. Falst. Imbowelled! if thou imbowel me to day, I Will
give you leave to powder me, and eat me too to morrow. 'Twas time to
counterfeit, or that hot Termagant Scot had paid me Scot and Lot too.
Counterfeit! I am no Counterfeit; to dye is to be a Counterfeit, for he is but
the Counterfeit of a Man, who has not the Life of a Man: But to counterfeit
dying, when a Man thereby lives, is to be no Counterfeit, but the true and
perfect Image of Life indeed. The better part of Valor, is Discretion; in the
which better part, I have saved my Life. I am afraid of this Gunpowder Percy,
though he be dead. How if he should counterfeit too, and rise, I am afraid he
would prove the better Counterfeit. Therefore I Will make him sure, yea, and I Will
swear I have killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I? Nothing confutes me
but Eyes, and no body sees me. Therefore, Sirrah, with a new Wound in your
thigh come you along with me.


Takes Hotspur on his back. Enter Prince and John of Lancaster. Prin. Come
Brother John, full bravely have thou fleshed thy Maiden Sword.


John. But soft, who have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat Man was dead?

Prin. I did, I saw him dead,
Breathless, and bleeding on the ground: Art thou alive,
Or is it Fantasy that plays upon our Eyesight?
I prithee speak, we will not trust our Eyes
Without our Ears. Thou art not what thou seem.

Falst. No, that is certain: I am not a Double Man: but if I am not Jack
Falstaff, then am I a Jack: There is Percy, if your Father will do me any
Honor, so; if not, let him kill the next Percy himself. I look either to be
Earl or Duke, I can assure you.


Prin. Why, Percy I killed my self, and saw thee dead.


Fall. Did thou? Lord, Lord, how the world is given to Lying? I grant you I
was down, and out of Breath, and so was he, but we rose both at an instant, and
fought a long hour by Shrewsbury Clock if I may be believed, so: if not, let
them that should reward Valor bear the sin upon their own heads. I Will take it
on my death I gave him this wound in the Thigh: if the man were alive, and
would deny it, I would make him eat a piece of my Sword.


John. This is the strangest tale that e're I heard.


Prin. This is the strangest Fellow, Brother John.
Come bring your luggage nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
I Will gild it with the happiest terms I have.
A Rereat is sounded. The Trumpets sound Retreat, the day is ours:
Come Brother, let us to the highest of the Field,
To see what Friends are living, who are dead.

Exeunt. Fall. I Will follow as they say, for Reward. He that rewards me, Heaven
reward him. If I do grow great again, I Will grow less? for I Will purge, and leave
Sack, and live cleanly, as a Noble man should do.


Exit. SCENE IV.
The Trumpets Sound. Enter King, Prince of Wales, Lord John of Lancaster, Earl
of Westmerland, with Worcester and Vernon Prisoners. King. Thus ever did
Rebellion find Rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester, did we not send Grace,
Pardon, and terms of Love to all of you?
And would thou turn our Offers contrary?

Worcester. What I have done, my safety urged me to,
And I embrace this Fortune patiently,
Since, not to be avoided, it falls on me.

King. Bear Worcester to death, and Vernon too.
Other Offenders we will pause upon.

Exit Worcester and Vernon. King. Then this remains: that we divide our Power.
You Son John, and my Cousin Westmerland
Toward York shall bend, you with your dearest speed
To meet Northumherland, and the Prelate Scroop.
Who (as we here) are busily in Arms.
My self, and Son Harry will toward Wales,
To fight with Glendower, and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this Land shall lose his way,
Meeting the Check of such another day;
And since this business so far is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.

Exeunt. FINIS.

