FIFTEEN SERMONS Preached on Several Occasions.

The Last of which was never before Printed.

BY The Most Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Archbishop of York, Primate of
England, and Metropolitan.

LONDON, Printed by Will. Bowyer, for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1700.

royal blazon or coat of arms MVNIFICENTIA REGIA. 1715.

GEORGIUS D.G. MAG. BR. FR. ET HIB REX F.D.



THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. Page 1.
THE Things that make for Peace: Or, The Obligation of Christians to
Church Communion, and mutual Charity.

Romans xiv. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for Peace.
Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc. 1674.

SERMON II. Page 41.
The Profitableness of Godliness: Or, The Advantages of Piety for the promoting
all a Man's Interests in this World.

1 Timothy iv. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having a Promise of the
Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Preached before the Lord Mayor, 1675.

SERMON III. Page 88.
Of doing Good in our Lives; showing, that it is every one's great Concernment,
and is in every one's Power.

Eccles. iii. 10. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
rejoice and to do good in his Life.

Preached at the Yorkshire Feast, 1680.

SERMON IV. Page 127.
The Rich-Man's Duty, and the Encouragement he has to Practice it.

1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be
not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal Life.

Preached at the Spittal, 1680.

SERMON V. Page 169.
A Description of the Upright Man, and his Security in evil Times.

Psalm. cxij. 4. To the upright there arises Light in the Darkness.

Preached at the Election of the Lord Mayor, 1680.

SERMON VI. Page 205.
A standing Revelation of more force to persuade Men, than one rising from the
Dead. With the Evidence we have at this day for the Truth of the Christian
Religion.

Luke xvj. 31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

Preached at White Hall, 1684.

SERMON VII. Page 243.
Rules for the Conduct of our selves, where we are at a loss to distinguish the
Bounds of Duty and Sin; Lawful and Unlawful in any Action.

Galat. v. 13. Use not Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh.

Preached before the Queen, 1690.

SERMON VIII. Page 173.
Virtue and Religion the only means to make a Nation prosperous.

Deuteronomy. v. 29. O that there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever.

Preached before the House of Commons, 1690.

SERMON IX. Page 209.
General Directions for a Holy Life.

Phil. iv. 8. Finally Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.

A Farewel-Sermon, preached at St. Giles 's, 1691.

SERMON X. Page 241.
Zeal for Religion how to be governed.

Rox. x. 2. For I bear them Record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.

Preached before the House of Lords, November. 5. 1691.

SERMON XI. Page 369.
Of our Savior's Appearance.

Heb. ix. 26. Now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away sin
by the Sacrifice of himself.

Preached before the King and Queen on Christmass-day, 1691.

SERMON XII. Page 401.
The Power of Christ's Resurrection.

Philip. iij. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection.

Preached before the Queen on Easterday, 1692.

SERMON XIII. Page 429.
God's Government of the World matter of Rejoicing to Mankind.

Psalm. xcvij. 1. The Lord is King, the Earth may be glad thereof; yea, the
multitude of the Isles may be glad thereof.

Preached before the King and Queen on the Day of Thanksgiving, 1693.

SERMON XIV. Page 459.
Of the Government of the Thoughts.

Prove. iv. 23. Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of Life.

Preached before the King and Queen, 1693.

SERMON XV. Page 487.
A Persuasive to Prayer.

Luke xviii. 1. And he spoke a Parable unto them, to this end, That Men ought
always to Pray, and not to faint.

Preached before the King, 1697.

Note, That by Mistake, the Eighth Sermon, which begins Page 173, has on the
Top of the Page the Title of the Ninth Sermon throughout. As also the Ninth
Sermon, which begins Page 209. has for several Pages together, the Title of the
Tenth Sermon.

SERMON I.
PREACHED AT GVILD-HALL CHAPEL, On the 23d of August, 1674.
Romans xiv. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for Peace.


WHOSOEVER understands any thing of the State of Christianity, as it has now
been for some Ages in the World, will be easily convinced, that there is no one
Point of our Religion more necessary to be daily Preached, to be earnestly
pressed and insisted on, than that of Peace, and Love, and Unity, here
recommended by the Apostle.

It has fared (as the Learned Mr. Hales observed) with the Christian Religion
in this matter, as it did with the Jewish of old. The great and principal
Commandment which God gave the Jews, and which (as they themselves teach) was
the Foundation of all their Law, was, to worship the God of Israel, and Him
only to serve: yet such was the Perverseness of that People, that This was the
Commandment, that of all others, they could never be brought to Keep; but they
were continually running into Idolatry, notwithstanding all the Methods that
God made use of to reclaim them from that Sin. What the Worship of one God was
to the Jews; that Peace, and Love, and Unity, is to the Christians, even the
Great distinguishing Law and Character of their Profession. And yet, to the
shame of Christians it may be spoken, there is no one Commandment in all
Christ's Religion, that has been so generally and so scandalously violated
among his Followers, as this. Witness the many bitter Fewds and Contentions
that have so long Embroiled Christendom; and the numerous Sects, and Parties,
and Communions, into which at this day it stands divided.

And God knows, this is a thing that cannot be sufficiently lamented among our
selves: For though in many Respects we are the Happiest Nation in the World;
and particularly in this, that we have the Advantage of all others, both as to
the Constitution of our Church, and the Purity of Christ's Doctrine, professed
therein: Yet in this point of Schisms, and Divisions, and Religious Quarrels,
we are as unhappy, if not more, than any.

Whether ever we shall see that blessed Day, when these our Breaches will be
healed; and that an End being put to our unaccountable Separations, and the
Unchristian Animosities they are the Occasion of, we shall all join together in
one Communion, and with one mind, and one mouth, glorify God, (as the Apostle
expresses it) God only knows. But sure I am, it is the Duty of every one of us,
heartily to Pray for it; and not only so, but in our Place and Station to
contribute all we can toward it. It was this Consideration that put me upon
the Choice of these Words of St. Paul, for my Argument at this time. Let us
therefore follow after the things that make for Peace.

In treating of which, I shall endeavor Two things. First, To Explain the Duty
here recommended, by reducing it to its Particular Rules and Instances.
Secondly, To set before you the great Obligations that lie upon us to the
Practice of it.

As to the first of these things, viz. what is contained or implied in this
Duty of Following after the things that make for Peace; you may be pleased to
take notice, That this Duty has a twofold Object, according to the two
different Relations and Capacities in which we are to be considered; namely,
the Church our Common Mother, and Particular Christians our Brethren. In the
first Relation, we are considered as Subjects, in the other as Fellow
Christians. Now with respect to the former, the Peace we are to pursue implies
Obedience, and the Preservation of Communion, in opposition to Schism and
Separation. With respect to the latter, it implies mutual Love and Charity, in
opposition to Quarrels and Contentions. So that you see, my Business upon this
first Head must be, to show what are the Particulars of our Duty, or what are
the Things that make for Peace, in both these Respects.

I begin with what is due from us to the Church in order to Peace, as Peace
stands in Contradistinction to Schism. And this Point I shall beg leave to
discuss, very plainly and particularly; because I fear many of us have wrong
Notions about it: And yet it is a matter of such Consequence, that the right
understanding of it would go a great way to the Cure of the sad Divisions that
are among us.

What I have to say upon this Point, I shall comprize in the four following
Propositions; taking my Rise from the first Principle of Church-Society.

The first Proposition I lay down is this, That every Christian is, by virtue
of his Christianity, a Member of the Church of Christ, and is bound to join in
External Communion with it, where it can be had.

For the clearing of this, let it be taken notice of, That the Method which our
Savior set on foot for our Salvation, does not so much consider us as single
Persons, as joined together in one common Society. It was his Design, to gather
to Himself a Church out of Mankind, to erect and form a Body Politic, of which
Himself should be the Head, and Particular Christians the Members; and in this
Method through Obedience to his Laws and Government, to bring Men to Salvation.

This is variously set forth to us in the New Testament. Joh. 15.1.
Sometimes Christ and Christians are represented under the Notion of a Vine; of
which He is the Root, and They are the Branches. 1 Cor. 12.
Sometimes under the Notion of a Natural Body, of which Christ is the Head, and
all Believers the Members. And accordingly what ever Christ is said to have
done, or suffered for Mankind, he is said to have done or suffered for them,
not as Scattered Individuals, but as Incorporated into a Church. Ephesians. 5.25.
Thus Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it. Acts 20.28.
Christ redeemed the Church with his own Blood. Christ is the Savior of his
Body, Ephesians. 5.23.
that is to say the Church; with many passages of the like Importance The plain
Consequence from hence is, that every Person, so far as he is a Christian, so
far he is a Member of the Church. And agreeably hereto, it is very plain that
Baptism which is by all acknowledged, to be the Rite of Initiating us into
Christianity is in Scripture declared to be the Rite whereby we are entered and
admitted into the Church. 1 Cor. 12.13.
Thus St. Paul expressly tells us, that by one Spirit we are all Baptized into
one Body.

Now then it being thus evident, that every Christian as a Christian, is a
Member of that Body of Christ which we call the Church; there will be little
need of taking pains to prove, that every such person is obliged to join in
External Communion with the Church where he can do so: for the very nature of
this Church Membership does imply it. Without this, neither the Ends of
Church-Society, nor the Benefits accruing to us there from, can be attained.

First, not the Ends of it: The Ends of Church-Society are the more Solemn
Worship of God, and the public Profession of our Religion, and the mutual
Edification one of another: Now, how these can be in any measure attained,
without associating together in public Assemblies and mutual Offices, and
other Acts of External Communion with one another, cannot any ways be imagined.

And as little in the Second place, can it be conceived how without this we can
be made partakers of the Benefits and Privileges that Christ has made over to
the Members of his Church. For we are to consider that God has so ordered the
matter, and without doubt for this very reason, to unite us the more firmly in
Society, that the Privileges of the Gospel, such as Pardon of Sin, and the
Grace of the Holy Spirit, are not ordinarily conveyed to us so immediately by
God, but that there must intervene the Ministry of Men. God's holy Word and
Sacraments are the Channels in which they are derived to us; and those to whom
he has committed the Ministry of Reconciliation, and the Power of the Keys,
are the Hands that must dispense them. We have no promise of Spiritual Graces,
but by these means: so that in order to the partaking of them, there is an
absolute necessity laid upon us of joining and communicating with the Church.

It is true indeed, God does not so tie himself up to these means, but that he
can, and will in some cases, confer the Benefits of them without them: as in
case of a General Apostasy of the Church; or of Persecution for Religion; or
of an unjust Excommunication, or any other case where Communion with a true
visible Church is denied to us. But though God does act extraordinarily in
extraordinary cases, where these means cannot be had; yet this does not at all
diminish, much less take away the necessity of making use of them when they can
be had.

From what has been discoursed on this first Proposition, we may by the way,
gather these two things: I only name them.

1. How untrue their Position is that maintain, that all our Obligation to
Church Communion does arise from a voluntary admission of our selves into some
particular Congregation, and an explicit Promise or Engagement to join with it
in Church-Ordinances. 2. How wildly and extravagantly they discourse that talk
of a Christianity at large, without relation to a Church, or Communion with any
Society of Christians.
The second Proposition is, That every one is bound to join in Communion with
the established National Church to which he belongs, supposing there be nothing
in the Terms of its Communion that renders it unlawful for him so to do.

For if we are bound to maintain Communion with the Catholic Church, as I have
before proved, it is plain, that we are bound to maintain Communion with that
Part of it, within whose Verge the Divine Providence has cast us. For we cannot
communicate with the Catholic Church, but by communicating with some Part of
it^ and there is no communicating with any Part of it, but that under which we
live, or where we have our Residence.

Well, but it may be said, that there may be several Distinct Churches in the
place where we live. There may be the fixed Regular Assemblies of the National
Church; and there may be separate Congregations; both which are, or pretend to
be Parts of the Catholic Church; so that it may be all one as to our
communicating with that, which of these we join with, supposing we join but
with one of them; and consequently there is no necessity from that Principle,
that we should hold Communion with the Public Assemblies of the National
Church.

But as to this, I desire it may be considered, that That, which lays an
Obligation upon us to join in Communion with the Church (to wit our being
Members of that one Body of Christ) does also lay an Obligation upon us, as
much as in us lies, to preserve the Unity of that Body, (for this both the
Fundamental Laws of Society, and the express Precepts of Christianity do
require of every Member:) But now to make a Rent in, or separate from any Part
of the Body of Christ, with which we may lawfully communicate (and such we now
suppose the established Assemblies of the Nation to be) is directly contrary to
the preserving the Unity of that Body: And therefore certainly such a Rent or
Separation must be unlawful. And if so, then it must be unlawful also to join
with any Congregation of Men among us that have made such a Rent or Separation.

So that let our pretenses be what they will, so long as the fixed Regular
Assemblies of the Nation wherein we live, do truly belong to the Catholic
Church, and we can lawfully join with them, it is certain, we are bound so to
do, and not to join with those Congregations that have withdrawn themselves
from them; for to do this, would be to join in Society with Separatists, would
be a partaking of their Sin, and a breach of the Apostle's Precept of avoiding
those that cause Divisions. Romans 16.17.

The third Poposition is, That the being a Member of any Church, does oblige a
Man to submit to all the Laws and Constitutions of that Church.

This Proposition is in the general so unquestionable, that no sober Man will
deny it. And indeed, it is the Basis upon which all Societies are founded, and
by which they do subsist. For to suppose a Society, and yet to suppose the
Members of it not under an Obligation to obey its Laws and Government, is to
make Ropes of Sand, to suppose a Body without Sinews and Ligaments to hold its
parts together.

So that all the Question here, is concerning the nature and extent of the
Church's Power over her Members, how far and in what instances she has
Authority to oblige them. Which is a Question not difficult to be answered, if
Men would come to it without Passion and Prejudice.

For it must be acknowledged in the first place, that the Church must, as all
other Societies, be entrusted with, at least so much power over her Subjects,
as is necessary for the securing her own Welfare and Preservation: For to think
otherwise, is to suppose God to have founded a Church, and intended the
Well-being and Continuance of it; which are things that every one must grant;
and yet to suppose that he has denied her the use of the Means without which
that Well-being and Continuance cannot be attained; which is monstrous and
contradictious.

Farthermore it must be granted, that the Welfare and Preservation of the
Church cannot be secured but upon these two Suppositions. First, That Provision
be made for the due and orderly performance of the Worship of God. Secondly,
That there be means of maintaining Peace and Unity among its Members. This
latter is necessary to the Welfare and Preservation of a Church as a Society,
the former is necessary to it as a Religious Society.

Now then this being admitted, it follows in the general, that whatever Power
over her Subjects is necessary in order to either of these things, all That at
least must be supposed to be lodged in the Church, that is to say, in Those
that have the Govenment of it.

So that from hence it is plain, in the first place, that the Church has power
so far to restrain the exercise of her Subjects Liberty, as to oblige them to
all such Laws, Rules, Orders, and Ceremonies as she shall establish for the
more Solemn, Regular, Decent, and Convenient Administration of Religious
Affairs. And if it be questioned whether her Appointments do indeed conduce to
that end, of That She her self is to be the Judge; Her Members being no farther
concerned therein than only, before they obey her Impositions, to see that they
be not repugnant to the known Laws of God. This Power the Church must be
supposed to have, otherwise She will not be enabled to make Provision for the
first thing whereon her Welfare does depend, viz. the Performance of God's
Worship and Service in a due and orderly manner.

Secondly, From hence also it is plain that the Church must be furnished with a
Power to end and determine Controversies of Religion that arise among its
Members: that is to say, to give such an Authoritative decision of them, as
that all Parties are bound to acquiesce in it: for without this she would be
defective in the second thing required to her Welfare and Preservation, viz.
maintaining her self in Peace and Unity.

But here it may be taken notice, that this Power of ending Controversies,
which we ascribe to the Church, does not imply any Anthority over our
Judgments; or that in virtue thereof she can oblige us to give an inward assent
to her Determinations, any farther than she gives us evidence for the Truth of
them: (which is that extravagant Power the Church of Rome does challenge to her
self) but only an Authority over our Practices, that she can oblige us to
submit so far to her Definitions, as not to act any thing contrary to them. A
Power in the former sense is not necessary to the Church's Peace, and the
reason is, because our Judgments and Opinions, so long as we keep them to our
selves, cannot possibly cause any disturbance in, or do any injury to Society.
But a Power in the latter sense is absolutely necessary; for if Men may be
allowed to vent and publish whatever fancies come into their head, and the
Church have no Authority to impose silence upon them, it cannot be avoided but
she will be overrun with Heresies, and embroiled in insinite Quarrels and
Controversies, to the destruction of her public Peace.

The fourth Proposition is, That we can have no just cause of withdrawing our
Communion from the Church whereof we are Members, but when we cannot
communicate with it without the Commission of a Sin.

For if we are bound to Communicate with the Church when we can lawfully do so,
as has been before proved; it is plain we are bound so long to continue our
Communion with the Church, till it be unlawful to continue in it any longer:
But it cannot be unlawful to continue in her Communion, till she require
something as a Condition of her Communion that is a Sin.

So that there are but Two cases, wherein it can be lawful to withdraw our
Communion from a Church, because there are but two cases wherein Communion with
her can be sinful. One is, when the Church requires of us, as a Condition of
her Communion, an Acknowledgment and Profession of that for a Truth, which is
an Error. The other is, when the Church requires of us, as a Condition of her
Communion, the joining with her in some practices which are against the Laws of
God. In these two Cases to withdraw our Obedience to the Church is so far from
being a Sin, that it is a necessary Duty; because we have an obligation to the
Laws of God antecedent to that we have to those of the Church; and we are bound
to obey these no farther than they are consonant or agreeable to those.

But now from this discourse it will appear how insufficient those Causes, how
unwarrantable those Grounds are, upon which many among us have proceeded to
Separation from our Church.

For, first, If what I have laid down be true, it cannot be true that
Unscriptural Impositions are a warrantable cause of Separation from a Church;
supposing that by Unscriptural be meant no more than only what is neither
Commanded nor Forbid in the Scriptures. For the Actions required by these
Unscriptural Impositions, are either in themselves lawful to be done, or not
lawful to be done. If they be in themselves unlawful to be done, then they do
not fall under that notion of Unscriptural we here speak of; they are downright
Sins, and so either particularly or in the general, forbid in the Scripture. If
they be in themselves lawful to be done, then it cannot be imagined how their
being commanded can make them unlawful: So that in this case, there is no Sin
in yielding obedience to the Church, and consequently no cause of withdrawing
our Communion from it.

Neither secondly can it be true, that Errors in a Church as to matter of
Doctrines or Corruptions as to matter of Practice, so long as those Errors and
Corruptions are only suffered, but not imposed, can be a sufficient cause of
Separation; the reason is, because these things are not Sins in us, so long as
we do not join with the Church in them. So that so long as we can Communicate
with a Church, without either professing her Errors, or partaking in her
sinful Practices, as in the present case it is supposed we may do; so long we
are bound upon the Principle before laid down not to separate from her.

Neither in the third and last place is the enjoying a more profitable
Ministry, or living under a more pure Discipline in a separate Congregation a
just Cause of forsaking the Communion of the Church of which we are Members.
And the reason is, because we are not to commit a Sin for the promoting a good
end. Now (as we have said) it is a Sin to forsake the Communion of the Church,
whereof we are Members, so long as her Communion is not sinful: But the
enjoyment of a less profitable Ministry, or a less pure Discipline, does not
make her Communion sinful; therefore the enjoyment of a more profitable
Ministry or a more pure Discipline, cannot make a Separation from her lawful.

Thus have I, as briefly as I could, represented to you the Particulars of that
Duty we owe to our common Mother, in the preservation of her Unity and
Communion. And I hope I have not been so zealous for Peace, as to have been at
all injurious to Truth.

I am confident I have said nothing but what is very agreeable to Scripture and
Reason, and the Sense of the Best and Antientest Christians: And I am certain I
have not entrenched upon any of those Grounds upon which our Ancestors
proceeded, to the Reformation of Religion among us. And for most of the things
here delivered, we have also the Suffrage of several, and those the most
learned and moderate of our dissenting Brethren.

And now, if after this, any one be offended, as indeed these kind of
Discourses are seldom very acceptable; all I can say, is this, That the Truths
here delivered, are really of so great importance to Religion and the public
Peace, that they ought not to be dissembled or suppressed, for any bad
Reception they may meet with from some Men: But as for the manner of delivering
them, I have taken all the care I could, not to give offense to any.

I now pass on to the second part of my Task upon this Head; which is to
consider the Duty recommended in the Text, with relation to particular
Christians, our Brethren.

And here my Business is, to direct you to the Pursuit of those things that
make for Peace; as Peace signifies mutual Love and Charity, in opposition to
Strife and Bitterness and Contentions.

The things that make for Peace, in this sense, are more especially these that
follow, which I shall deliver by way of Rules and Advices.

The first Rule is, to distinguish carefully between matters of Faith, and
matters of Opinion; and as to these latter, to be willing that every one should
enjoy the liberty of judging for himself.

This is one thing that would help very much to the extinguishing of those
unnatural Heats and Animosities, which have long been the Reproach of
Christians. If Men would set no greater value upon their Notions and Opinions,
than they do deserve; if they would make a difference between necessary Points,
and those that are not so; and in those things that are not necessary, would
not rigorously tie up others to their measures, but would allow every Man to
abound in his own sense, so long as the Church's Peace is not hereby injured,
we should not have so many bitter Quarrels and Heart-burnings among us. But,
alas! whilst every one will frame a System of Divinity of his own head, and
every puny Notion of that System must be Christened by the name of an Article
of Faith; and every Man that does not believe just as he does, must straight be
a Heretic for not doing so: How can it be expected but we must wrangle
eternally?

It were heartily to be wished, that Christians would consider that the
Articles of Faith, those things that God has made necessary by every one to be
believed in order to his Salvation, are but very few; and they are all of them
so plainly and clearly set down in the Scripture, that it is impossible for any
sincere honest-minded Man to miss of the true sense of them. And they have
farther this Badge to distinguish them from all other Truths, that they have an
immediate influence upon Men's Lives, a direct Tendency to make Men Better;
whereas most of those things that make the matter of our Controversies, and
about which we make such a noise and clamor, and for which we so bitterly
censure and Anathematize one another, are quite of another nature: They are
neither so clearly revealed or propounded in the Scripture, but that even good
Men, through the great difference of their Parts, Learning and Education, may,
after their best Endeavors, vary in their Sentiments about them. Nor do they
at all concern a Christian Life, but are matters of pure Notion and
Speculation. So that it cannot with any reason be pretended that they are
Points upon which Men's Salvation does depend. It cannot be thought that God
will be offended with any Man for his Ignorance or Mistakes concerning them.
And, if not, if a Man may be a good Christian, and go to Heaven, whether he
holds the right or the wrong side in these matters, for God's sake, why should
we be angry with any one for having other Opinions about them than we have? Why
should we not rather permit Men to use their Understandings as well as they
can; and where they fail of the Truth, to bear with them, as God himself
without question will; than by stickling for every unnecessary Truth, destroy
that Peace, and Love, and Amity that ought to be among Christians.

The second thing I would recommend, is a great Simplicity and Purity of
Intention in the pursuit of Truth; and at no hand to let Passion or Interest,
or any Self-end be ingredient into our Religion.

The practice of this would not more conduce to the discovery of Truth, than it
would to the promoting of Peace: For it is easy to observe, that it is not
always a pure Concernment for the Truth, in the Points in Controversy, that
makes us so zealous, so fierce, and so obstinate in our Disputes for or against
them; but something, of which that is only the Mask and Pretense, some By-ends
that must be served, some Secular Interest that we have espoused, which must be
carried on.

We have either engaged our selves to some Party, and so its Interests, right
or wrong, must be promoted: Or we have taken up an Opinion inconsiderately at
the first, and appeared in the favor of it, and afterward our own Credit does
oblige us to defend it: Or we have received some Slight or Disappointment from
the Men of one Way, and so in pure pet and revenge we pass over to their
Adversaries: Or it is for our gain and advantage, that the Differences among us
be still kept on foot: Or we desire to get our selves a Name by some great
Achievements in the Noble Science of Controversies: Or we are possessed with
the Spirit of Contradiction: Or we delight in Novelties: Or we love to be
singular.

These are the things that too often both give birth to our Controversies, and
also nourish and foment them.

If we would but cast these Beams out of our eyes, we should both see more
clearly, and certainly live more peaceably, But whilst we pursue base and
sordid Ends under the pretense of maintaining Truth, we shall always be in
Error, and always in Contention.

Let us therefore quit our selves of all our prepossessions; let us mortify
all our Pride and Vainglory, our Passion and Emulation, our Covetuousness and
Revenge; and bring nothing in the World to our Debates about Religion, but only
the pure Love of Truth; and then our Controversies will not be so long, and
they will be more calmly and peaceably managed, and they will redound to the
greater good of all Parties.

And this I dare say farther, to encourage you to labor after this Temper of
Mind, That he that comes thus qualified to the Study of Religion, though he may
not have the luck always to light on the Truth, yet with all his Errors, be
they what they will, he is more acceptable to God, than the Man that has Truth
on his side, yet takes it up or maintains it to serve a turn. He that believes
a Falsehood after he has used his sincere endeavors to find the Truth, is not
half so much a Heretic as he that professes a Truth out of evil Principles,
and prostituteth it to unworthy Ends.

The third Rule is, Never to quarrel about Words and Phrases; but so long as
other Men mean much-what the same that we do, let us be content, though they
have not the luck to express themselves so well.

I do not know how it comes to pass, whether through too much heat and
eagerness of disputing, that we do not mind one another's Sense, or whether
through too much love to our own manner of Thinking or Speaking, that we will
not endure any thing but what is conveyed to us in our own Methods: But,
really, it often happens that most bitter Quarrels do commence, not so much
from the different Sense of the contending Parties concerning the things they
contend about, as from the different Terms they use to express the same Sense,
and the different Grounds they proceed upon, or Arguments they make use of for
the proof of it.

For my part, I verily believe that this is the Case of several of those
Disputes, in which we Protestants do often engage at this day. I do not think,
in many Points, our Differences are near so wide as they are sometimes
represented, but that they might easily be made up with a little allowance to
Men's Words and Phrases, and the different Methods of deducing their Notions.

It would be, perhaps, no hard matter to make this appear in those
Controversies that are so much agitated among us concerning Faith and
Justification, and the necessity of good Works to Salvation; and Imputed
Righteousness, and the difference between Virtue and Grace; with some others,
if this were a fit place for it. The Difference that is among us as to these
Points, is, possibly, not much greater than this, That some Men, in these
Matters, speak more clearly and fully; others, more imperfectly and obscurely.
Some Men convey their sense in plain and proper words; others delight in
Metaphors, and do perhaps too far extend the Figurative Expressions of
Scripture: Some reason more closely, and upon more certain Principles; others
possibly may proceed upon weaker Grounds, and misapply Texts of Scripture, and
discourse more loosly. But both Parties (especially the more moderate of both)
seem to drive at much-what the same thing, though by different ways; as appears
from this, That being interrogated concerning the Consequences of their several
Opinions, they generally agree in admitting or rejecting the same.

But Fourthly, Another thing that would make for Peace, is this; Never to
charge upon Men the Consequences of their Opinions, when they expressly disown
them.

This is another thing that does hugely tend to widen our Differences, and to
exasperate Men's Spirits one against another; when having examined some
Opipinion of a Man, or Party of Men, and finding very great Absurdities and
evil Consequences necessarily to flow from it, we presently throw all those
into the Dish of them that hold the Opinion; as if they could not own the one,
but they must necessarily own the other: Whereas, indeed, the Men we thus
charge, may be so innocent in this matter, that they do not in the least dream
of such Consequences; or if they did, they would be so far from owning them,
that they would abhor the Opinion for their sakes.

To give you an Instance or two in this matter: It is a Doctrine maintained by
some, That God's Will is the Rule of Justice; or, That every thing is therefore
just or good, because God wills it. Those that are concerned to oppose this
Doctrine, do contend that if this Doctrine be true, it will necessarily follow,
that no Man can have any Certainty of the Truth of any one Proposition that God
has revealed in Scripture; because, say they, his Eternal Faithfulness and
Veracity are by this Doctrine made Arbitrary Things. Granting now that this can
by just consequence be made out, yet I dare say, those that hold the aforesaid
Doctrine would be very angry, and had good reason so to be, if they were told
that they did not, no, nor could not, upon their Principles, certainly believe
the Scripture.

Some Men think that they can with demonstrative Evidence make out, that the
Doctrine of God's Irrespective Decrees does, in its Consequences, overthrow the
whole Gospel; that it does destroy the nature of Rewards and Punishments, cuts
the very Sinews of Men's Endeavors after Virtue, makes all Laws, Promises,
Exhortations, perfectly idle and insignificant things, and renders God the most
unlovely Being in the World. Now supposing all this to be true, yet it would be
a most unjust and uncharitable thing to affirm of any that believe that
Doctrine, (many of whom are certainly pious and good Men,) that they do
maintain any such impious and blasphemous Opinions as those that are now
mentioned.

The Sum of all is, that a Man may believe a Proposition, and not believe all
that follows from it: Not but that all the Deductions from a Proposition are
equally true, and equally credible with the Proposition from whence they are
deduced: But a Man may not so clearly see through the Proposition, as to
discern that such Consequences are really deducible from it: So that we are at
no hand to charge them upon him, unless he do explicitly own them.

If this Rule was observed, our Differences would not make so great a noise,
nor would the Errors and Heterodoxes maintained among us appear so monstrous
and extravagant; and we should spare a great many hard words, and odious
appellations, which we now too prodigally bestow upon those that differ from us.

The Fifth Rule is, To abstract Men's Persons from their Opinions; and in
examining or opposing these, never to make any reflections upon those.

This is a thing so highly reasonable, that methinks no Pretender to Ingenuity
should ever need to be called upon to observe it: For it seems very absurd and
ridiculous in any Argument, to meddle with that that nothing concerns the
Question. But what do Personal Reflections concern the Cause of Religion?
Whatever it may be to the Reputation of an Opinion, I am sure it is nothing to
the Truth of it, that such or such a Man holds it.

And truly, if Men would leave this Impertinence, we might hope for a better
Issue of our Religious Debates: But whilst Men will forsake the Merits of the
Cause, and unmanly fall to railing, and disparaging Men's Persons, and scraping
together all the ill that can be said of them, they blow the Coals of
Contention, they so imbitter and envenom the Dispute, that it rankles into
incurable Distastes and Heartburnings.

Christians would do well to consider, that these mean Arts of exposing Men's
Persons to discredit their Opinions, are very much unworthy the Dignity of
their Profession, and most of all mis-becoming the Sacredness and Venerableness
of the Truth they contend for. And besides, no Cause stands in need of them,
but such an one as is extremely bassled and desperate; and even then they are
the worst Arguments in the World to support it, for quick-sighted Men will
easily see through the Dust we endeavor to raise; and those that are duller
will be apt to suspect from our being so angry and so waspish, that we have but
a bad Matter to manage.

We should consider that Men's Persons are sacred things; that whatever power
we have to judge of their Opinions, we have no Authority to judge or censure
Them: That to bring Them upon the Stage, and there throw Dirt on them, is
highly rude and uncivil, and an Affront to Humane Society, and the most
contrary thing in the World to Christian Charity, which is so far from enduring
Reproaches and Evil-speaking, that it obliges us to cover as much as we can all
the Faults, and even the very Indiscretions of others.

The Sixth and last thing I shall recommend to you as an Expedient of Peace,
is, a vigorous Pursuit of Holiness.

Do but seriously set your selves to be good, do but get your Hearts deeply
affected with Religion as well as your Heads, and then there is no fear but you
will be all the Sons of Peace.

We may talk what we will, but really it is our not practicing our Religion
that makes us so Contentious and Disputatious about it: It is our Emptiness of
the Divine Life, that makes us so full of Speculation and Controversy: Was but
That once firmly rooted in us, these Weeds and Excrescencies of Religion would
presently dry up and wither; we should loath any longer to feed upon such
Husks, after we once came to have a Relish of that Bread.

Ah! How little Satisfaction can all our pretty Notions and fine-spun
Controversies yield to a Soul that truly hungers and thirsts after
Righteousness? How pitifully, flatly and insipidly will they taste, in
comparison of the Divine Entertainments of the Spiritual Life.

Were we but seriously taken up with the Substantials of our Religion, we
should not have leisure for the Talking, Disputing Divinity; we should have
greater matters to take up our Thoughts, and more profitable Arguments to
furnish out our Discourses. So long as we could busy our selves in working out
our Salvation, and furthering the Salvation of others, we should think it but a
mean Employment to spend our time in spinning fine Nets for the catching of
Flies.

Besides, this Divine Life, if it once took place in us, would strangely dilate
and enlarge our hearts in Charity toward our Brethren; it would make us open
our arms wide to the whole Creation; it would perfectly work out of us all that
Peevishness and Sowrness, and Penuriousness of Spirit, which we do too often
contract by being addicted to a Sect; and would make us Sweet and Benign, and
Obliging, and ready to receive and embrace all Conditions of Men. In a Word, It
would quite swallow up all Distinctions of Parties; and whatever did but bear
upon it the Image of God, and the Superscription of the Holy Jesus, would need
no other Commendatories to our Affection, but would upon that alone account be
infinitely dear and precious to us.

Let us all therefore earnestly contend after this Divine Principle of
Holiness; let us bring down Religion from our Heads to our Hearts, from
Speculation to Practice: Let us make it our business heartily to love God, and
do his Will, and then we may hope to see Peace in our days.

This, this is that that will restore to the World the Golden Age of Primitive
Christianity, when the Love and Unity of the Disciples of Jesus was so
conspicuous and remarkable, that it became into a Proverb, See how the
Christians love one another. This, this is that that will bring in the
Accomplishment of all those glorious Promises of Peace and Tranquillity that
Christ has made to his Church: Then shall the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and
the Leopard lie down with the Kid: Then shall not Ephraim envy Judah, nor Judah
vex Ephraim; but we shall turn our Swords into Plough-shares, and our Spears
into Pruning Hooks; and there will be no more consuming or devouring in all
God's Holy Mountain.

I should now proceed to the Second general Point in my proposed Method of
handling this Text, viz. To set before you the very great Engagements and
Obligations we have upon us to follow after the Things that make for Peace; and
that,

1. From the Nature and Contrivance of our Religion. 2. From the great Weight
the Scripture lays upon this Duty. 3. From the great Unreasonableness of our
Religious Differences. 4. From the very evil Consequences that attend them: As,
1. In that they are great Hindrances of a good Life. 2. They are very
pernicious to the Civil Peace of the State. 3. They are highly opprobrious to
Christianity in general. And 4. and Lastly, Very dangerous to the Protestant
Religion, as giving too many advantages, and too much encouragement to the
Factors of the Papacy.
But I have, I fear, already exceeded the Limits of a Sermon, and therefore
shall add no more.

God open our Eyes, that we may in this our day understand the Things that
belong to Peace, before they be hid from our Eyes.

SERMON II.
PREACHED AT BOW-CHURCH, On the 30th of January, 1675.
1 Timothy iv. 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having a promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come.


THese words are the enforcement of an Exhortation which St. Paul had made to
Timothy in the Verse beforegoing, which was that he should Avoid profane and
Old-wives Fables; meaning those impious and superstitious Doctrines, and the
carnal and unchristian Observances that were grounded upon them (some of which
he had mentioned in the beginning of this Chapter) which some at that time did
endeavor to introduce into Christianity: and instead of applying his mind to
these, that he should rather Exercise himself unto true Godliness.

This was the Exhortation. The Arguments wherewith he enforces it are Two:
First, The Unprofitableness of these Carnal and Superstitious Doctrines and
Practices. Bodily exercise (says he) profits little. Secondly, The real
usefulness of solid Virtue and Godliness to all the Purposes of life. Godliness
is profitable to all things, having a promise of this Life, as well as of that
which is to come.

I shall not here meddle at all with the former part of the Apostle's
Exhortation or the Argument that has relation to it; but shall apply my self
wholly to the latter, craving leave most plainly and affectionately to press
upon you the Exercise of Godliness, upon those Grounds and Considerations on
which the Apostle here recommendeth it.

Indeed to a Man that considers well, it will appear the most unaccountable
thing in the World, that among all those several Exercises that Mankind busy
themselves about, this of Godliness should be in so great a measure neglected;
that Men should be so diligent, so industrious, so unwearied, some in getting
Estates, others in purveying for Pleasures, others in learning Arts and Trades,
All in some thing or other relating to this sensible World; and so few should
study to acquaint themselves with God, and the Concernments of their Souls, to
learn the Arts of Virtue and Religious Conversation.

Certain it is, this Piece of Skill is not more above our reach than many of
those other things we so industriously pursue; nay I am apt to think it is more
within our power than most of them. For in our other Labors we cannot always
promise to our selves certain success. A thousand things may intervene which we
know not of, that may defeat all our plots and designs though never so
carefully laid; but no Man ever seriously undertook the Business of Religion
but he accomplished it.

Nay farther, As we can with greater certainty, so can we with less pains and
difficulty promise to our selves success in this affair, than we can hope to
compass most of our worldly designs which so much take up our thoughts. I doubt
not in the least but that less labor, less trouble, less solicitude will serve
to make a Man a good Christian, than to get an Estate, or to attain a competent
skill in Humane Arts and Sciences.

And then for other Motives to oblige us to the study of Religion, we have
incomparably more and greater than we can have for the pursuit of any other
thing. It is certainly the greatest Concernment we have in the World. It is the
very thing God sent us into the World about. It is the very thing that his Son
came down from Heaven to instruct us in. It is the very thing by which we shall
be concluded everlastingly happy, or everlastingly miserable, after this life
is ended.

These things well considered, we may justly (I say) stand amazed, that Men
should be so prodigiously supine and negligent in an Affair of this nature and
importance, as we see they generally are.

If there can any account be given of this matter, I suppose it must be some
such as this, That the things of this World, upon which we bestow our Care, our
Time, our Courtship, are present to us. We see them every day before our Eyes;
we taste, we feel the sweetness of them; we are sensible that their enjoyment
is absolutely necessary to our present well-being: But as for spiritual matters
they lie under a great disadvantage. They appear to us as at a great distance.
We do not apprehend any present need we have of them: Nor do we fancy any
sweetness or relish in them. Nay, on the contrary, we form the most frightful
and dismal Images of them than can be. We look upon them not only as flat, and
unsavory; but as things which if we trouble our heads too much about will
certainly ruin all our designs in this World. We think Religion good for
nothing but to spoil good company; to make us melancholy and mopish; to
distract us in our Business and Employments; and to put so many restraints upon
us, that we can neither with that freedom nor success pursue our Temporal
Concernments, which we think necessary to our happiness in this World.

But let us suppose things to be thus with Religion as we have fancied, yet
cannot this be any reasonable Excuse for our carelessness about it. What though
there were no visible Benefit by a religious life in this World? What though
the rewards of our pains about it were only in reversion? Yet since a time will
come when it will be our greatest Interest to have been heartily Religious, is
it not a madness now to neglect it? What though Religion be a course of life
difficult and unpleasant; a way strewed with Briers and Thorns; a way which if
we follow, we are certainly lost, as to our hopes of any thing here? Yet since
a Time will certainly come when we shall wish that we had been good Christians,
though we had lost our right eyes and our right hands upon the condition; when
we shall wish that we had purchased Virtue, though at the rate of the loss of the
whole World: For God's sake why should we not be of the same mind now? Who but
Fools and Children but will look upon that which shall certainly and
unavoidably be, with the same regard as if it was now present?

But indeed, this is not the Case of Religion; This Business of Piety is not so
formidable as we often represent it. It is no such Enemy to our temporal
designs. It is a very innocent thing, and will do us no harm; though we look no
farther than this present World. It will hinder none of our delights or
pleasures, but will allow us to gratify every Appetite that God and Nature
has put into us. And if any Man doubt this, let him name that natural desire,
which the Christian Religion does forbid, or any way hinder the innocent
satisfaction of: I am consident he shall be able to name none. Since this is
the Case then, how much more Childish than Children shall we appear if we make
so little reckoning of it? How inexcusably Foolish shall we be, if we will not
be at some pains to possess our selves of that which will be no manner of
Hinderance to us in our affairs in this World, and will infallibly make us
everlastingly happy in that which is to come?

But farther; What if it be certain, that a Life of strict Virtue is not only
no Hinderance to our Temporal designs, but a great Furtherance of them? What if
it can be proved, that besides the influence it has on our Happiness in the
next Life, it is also the best thing in the World to serve our turns in this?
And that nothing can so much contribute to the bringing about our. Worldly
Aims; no such ready way to attain to what our very Flesh and Blood most
desires, most delights in, as to be sincerely Pious. What imaginable pretense
can we then have for our contempt of God and Virtue? If this can be made to
appear, sure all our Objections will be fully answered; all our scruples
satisfied; all our prejudices against Religion wholly removed; and every one
that is not abandoned of his Fortune and his Senses, as well as his Reason,
must think himself concerned to become a Votary to it; since he can have no
Temptation or Motive to Vice which will not more powerfully draw him to Virtue;
and all the ends that the one can pretend to serve, will much more effectually
be served by the other; and he escapes an Eternity of Misery, and gets
everlasting Life into the Bargain.

I think it therefore worth the while to spend the time now allotted me in
making good this Point, and discovering something at least of that universal
Profitableness of Godliness to the purposes of Human Life, that St. Paul in my
Text assures us of.

But because the Studies of Men are so infinitely various, and the Ends of Life
to be served, so many, that it will be impossible to speak particularly of
them; it will be needful to pitch upon some general Heads, such as, if they do
not comprehend all, may yet take in most of those things, to which the Labors
and Endeavors of Men are directed, and in the acquisition of which they have
compassed their Designs; and to show the serviceableness of Religion above all
other means for the attaining of them. And I think I cannot pitch better than
upon those three noted Idols of the World, Wealth and Honor and Pleasure;
these being the Goods which have always been accounted to divide Mankind among
them; and into the service of some one or all of which, All that set up for a
happy life in this World do list themselves, how different and disagreeing
soever they be from one another as to their particular Employments and ways of
Living. I shall therefore make it appear, that Godliness and Religion is a very
great furtherance to the acquisition of all these; and that no Man can take a
more ready way, either to improve his Fortune, or to purchase a Name and
Reputation among men, or to live comfortably and pleasantly in this World, than
heartily to serve God, and to live in the practice of every Virtue.

And in the First place, I begin with the Conduciveness of Religion and
Godliness to improve our outward Fortunes; the Advantages of it for the getting
or increasing an Estate: For this is the thing to which our Thoughts are
commonly first directed, as looking upon it as the Foundation of a happy Life
in this World.

But here I desire not to be mistaken: I would not be thought to deal with you,
as one of our ordinary Empiricks, that promises many brave feats in his Bill,
which are indeed beyond the power of his Art: I do not pretend that Wealth and
Opulency is necessarily entailed upon Religion; so that whoever is good shall
presently be enabled to make Purchases, and to leave Lands and Livings to his
Children. Riches are one of those things that are not so perfectly in our
power, that all Men may hope for an equal share of them. The having more or
less depends oftentimes not so much upon our selves, as upon that condition and
quality in which we were born, the way and course of Life into which our
Friends put us; and a hundred accidental circumstances to which our selves
contribute nothing. But this I say, supposing the virtuous Man in equal
circumstances with others; supposing him to stand upon the same level, and to
enjoy the same fortuitous hits and external concurrences that they do, and he
shall by many odds have the advantage (...) for thriving and improving in ^he
World in any condition of life whatsoever.

So that, so far as the getting of Riches depends upon Humane endeavors; so
far as it is an Art, and falls under Precepts and Directions; no Man alive can
propose a better expedient in order thereto than a serious practice of Religion.

To make this good, let it be considered, that as to the means that do in a
more direct and immediate manner influence upon the getting or improving an
Estate (I speak of general means, such as are of use in all conditions of life;
for to meddle with the Mysteries of any Particular Art or Trade, is not my
purpose, as indeed it is beyond my skill:) as to such means as these, I say,
none can prescribe more effectual than these four.

1. Prudence, in administering our Affairs. 2. Diligence, in that Vocation
wherein God has placed us. 3. Thrift and good Husbandry. 4. Keeping a good
Correspondence with those in whose power it is to hinder or promote our
Affairs.
If now it do appear that Godliness does highly improve a Man in all these four
respects; if it can be showed that all these Fruits naturally grow and thrive
better in a Religious Soil than any other, it will evidently follow; that
supposing these above named means do indeed contribute to the making of a
Fortune, (and if they do not, no Man knows what does; and we strangely abuse
our Friends and our Children, when upon that account we recommend them to them)
it follows, I say, that a life of Godliness is a mighty advantage to a Man for
the purposes I am speaking of.

And first of all, it will be easy to show that Godliness does above all
things tend to make a man wise and prudent, skilful and dexterous in the
management of his Affairs of what nature soever: For it does very much clear
and improve a Man's understanding, not only by a certain natural efficacy it
has (as I shall show hereafter) to purify the Blood and Spirits, upon which
the perfection of our Intellectual Operations does exceedingly much depend; but
also by dispelling those adventitious clouds that arise in the discerning
faculty from the noisome Fumes of Lust and Passion.

All Vice in the very nature of it, depraves and distorts a man's judgment,
fills our minds with Prejudices, and false Apprehensions of things; and, no Man
that is under the dominion of it, can possibly have such a free use of his
Reason as otherwise he might; for he will commonly see things, not as they are
in themselves, but in those disguises and false colors which his Passion puts
upon them: Upon which account he cannot avoid but he will be often imposed
upon, and commit a thousand errors in the management of his Affairs, which the
virtuous Man, whose Reason is pure and untinctur'd, is secured from. It cannot
be imagined that either he should foresee events so clearly, or spy
opportunities so sagaciously, or weigh things so impartially, or deliberate so
calmly, or transact so cautiously, as the Man that is free from those manifold
prepossessions which his mind is fraught with.

We see this every day verified in Men of all Ranks and Conditions, of all
Callings and Employments. What a multitude of inconveniences, as to matter of
dealing between Man and Man does an intemperate Appetite betray Men to? How
silly and foolish is the most shrewd Man, when Wine has gotten into his head?
There is none so simple in his Company, but supposing him to be sober, and to
have designs upon him, he shall be able to overreach him. What a World of
Advantages does the Angry Man give to him he deals with, by the hastiness and
impatience of his Spirit? How often does a Man do that in the fury and
expectancies of a Lust, for which when his Ardours are over, he is ready to
bite his Nails for very vexation?

It is thus more or less with all kind of Vices, they craze a Man's head, and
cast a mist before his Eyes, and make him often lose himself in those very ways
wherein he pretends to be most skilful: So that it cannot be denied, that
Virtue is of a singular use in all matters wherein we have occasion to make use
of our Reason, and does secure us from a multitude of indiscretions, which
without it we should unavoidably commit.

But secondly, Godliness is also an excellent means to secure a man's diligence
in the discharge of his Calling and Employment, which is also a matter of very
great consequence in order to our thriving in the World: for it is the diligent
hand that makes rich, and the man that is diligent in his business, that shall
stand before Kings; as Solomon tells us.

Now the Obligations that Religion lays upon us to be careful in this point,
are far stronger than what can arise from any other respect or consideration
soever; for it obliges us to mind our Business, not only for our own but for
God's sake: It charge the matter upon our Consciences, and represents it to
us as a part of that service we owe to our Creator; and upon the due
performance of which, no loss than the everlasting welfare of our Souls does
depend: for it assures us, that he that will call us to account for every idle
Word, will much more do so for the idle expense of our Time, and the abuse and
not improvement of those Talents that he has entrusted us with. So that though
we had no worldly inducement to make us diligent in our Callings, though we
were sure we should suffer no prejudice in our Temporal Affairs by Idleness,
and the neglect of our Business, (the fear of which yet is the only principle
that puts Worldly Men upon action) nevertheless we were infinitely concerned
not to be slack or negligent in this matter, in regard it is a point that will
be so severely exacted of us in the other World.

I know but one Objection that can be made against this Discourse, and it is
this, that what engagements soever Religion lays upon us to the careful
spending of our time, yet its own Exercises, Prayer and Reading, and
Meditation, take up so great a portion of it, which might be spent in the works
of our ordinary Employment, that in effect it rather hinders our attendance on
our Business than promotes it. But to this it is easily answered, that there is
no Man so engaged in the World, but may if he please, make both his Business
and his Devotions consist together without prejudicing of either.

They have very false Apprehensions of Religion, that think it obliges us to be
always upon our Knees, or always poring upon some good Book: No, we do as truly
serve God, and perform acts of Religion, when we labor honestly in our
Vocation, as when we go to Church, or say our Prayers.

It is true indeed, we ought to have our hearts in Heaven as much as is
possible, and to that end we ought to pray continually; but what hinders but we
may do this in the midst of our Business? There is no employment does so
entirely engross a Man's mind; but he may find leisure, if he please, many
times a day, to entertain good thoughts, to quicken and reinforce his purposes,
to cast up a short Prayer or a wish to God Almighty. And this I dare say for
your encouragement, that such a devout frame of heart, such frequent and sudden
dartings of your Souls to God, while you are at your Business, will be so far
from hindering or distracting you in it, that they will make you go about it
with much more vigor and alacrity.

But farther, I would ask any Man that makes the foresaid Objection, supposing
Religion ten times more expensive of our time than really it is, yet whether
Vice and Sin be not much more so, than it would be. What a multitude of idle
avocations from, and interruptions in our Business does that daily occasion
unto Men? What a number of impertinent Discourses, unprofitable Visits,
needless points of Gallantry, long diversions by Drink, and Play, and Company;
not to mention a great many other Debauches, does it frequently engage Men in?
and yet these we count no hindrances to our Business; these we complain not of;
but to spend a quarter of that time in some devout Exercise, this is
intolerable, it wastes too much of our time, our occasions will not permit it.
Such partial and unjust estimators of things are we. But I proceed.

In the third place then, as for Frugality and good Husbandry, which is another
necessary requisite for the getting of Wealth. Religion is unquestionably the
best Mistress of it in the World; for it retrencheth all the exorbitances and
wantonesses of our Desires, which are the things that pick the money out of our
Purses, and teaches us to live after the measures of Nature, which every body
knows are little, and cheap. It perfectly cuts off all those idle expenses with
which the Estates of other Men stand almost continually charged. The Modesty of
it Clothes us at a small rate; and its Temperance spreads for us, though a
neat, yet a frugal Table. The attendance it requires on our Business will not
allow us to embezel our money in Drinking or Gaming: nor will that Purity which
is inseparable from it, ever let us know what the vast and sinking expenses of
lewdness and uncleanness are. In a word, it is Vice only that is the chargeable
thing; it is only Shame and Repentance that Men buy at such costly rates.
Godliness is saving, and full of good Husbandry; nor has it any known or
unknown ways of spending, except it be those of Charity which indeed, in proper
speaking, are not so much expense, as Usury; for money so laid out, does always
even in this life return to us with Advantage.

The fourth and last means I mentioned of Thriving in the World, was the
keeping a good Correspondence with all those in whose power it is to hinder or
promote our Affairs. This every body knows to be a prime point in Policy; and
indeed it is of a large extent, and of continual use. No Man can be supposed so
independent on others, but that as he is some way beholden to them for all that
he has, so he stands in need of their help and concurrence for all that he
hopes for. men do not make their fortunes of themselves, nor grow rich by
having Treasures dropped in their Laps; but they do it by the benefit of Humane
Society, by the mutual Assistances and good Offices that one Man performs for
another. So that whoever intends to thrive in the World, it above all things
imports him so to carry himself toward all that he has any Commerce with, so
far to secure their favor and good will, that they may be obliged not to deny
him any of those Assistances which the Exigency of his Affairs calls for at
their hands. But now, how this should be done any otherwise than by being truly
Just and Honest, by abstaining from Violence and Injury, by being True to our
Trust, and Faithful in performing our Contracts; and, in a word, by doing all
those good Offices to others, which we expect they should do unto us; which, as
our Savior tells us is the Sum of Religion, is a very hard thing to conceive.

The Usefulness, or rather the Necessity of such a Behavior as this, in order
to the gaining the good Opinion of others, and so serving our own Ends by them,
is so universally acknowledged, that even those that make no real Conscience of
these things, are yet nevertheless, in all their Dealings, forced to pretend to
them. Open and Barefaced Knavery rarely serves a Man's turn in this World; but
it is under the Mask of Virtue and Honesty, that it usually performs those
Feats it does; which is no less than a Demonstration of the Conduciveness of
those things to promote our Temporal Interests: For if the mere Pretense to
them be a great advantage to us for this purpose, it cannot be imagined but
that the Reality of them will be a greater. Certainly the Power of Godliness
will be able to do more than the Form alone; and that if it was upon no other
account than this, that no Man that is but a mere Pretender to Honesty can long
hope to keep his Credit among Men. It is impossible to act a Part for any long
time; let him carry it never so cunningly, his Vizor will some time or other be
thrown off, and he will appear in his true Colors; and to what a World of
Mischiefs and Inconveniences he will then be exposed, every one that knows how
hated, how detested, how abandoned by every one a Knave and a Villain is, may
easily determine. I hope I need say no more to convince you that Religion is
the best Policy; and that the more hearty and conscientious any Man is in the
practice of it, the more likely he is to Thrive and Improve in the World.

So that I may now proceed to the Second general Point to be spoken to, which
is, The Profitableness of Religion for the attaining a good Name and
Reputation. How very much it conduces to this purpose, will appear from these
two Considerations.

First, It lays the surest Grounds and Foundations for a Good Name and
Reputation.

Secondly, Men are generally so just to it, that it rarely misses of a good
Name and Reputation: The first is an Argument from Reason; the second, from
Experience.

First of all, Godliness lays the truest Foundation for a fair Reputation in
the World. There are but two things that can give a Man a Title to the good
Opinion and Respects of Men; the inward Worth and Dignity of his Person, and
his Usefulness and Serviceableness to others. The first of these challenges
Men's Esteem, the other their Love. Now both these Qualities Religion and
Virtue do eminently possess us of.

For, First, The Religious Man is certainly the most Worthy and Excellent
Person; for he, of all others, lives most up to the great End for which he was
designed, which is the natural measure of the Goodness and Worth of Things.

Whatever External Advantages a Man may have, yet if he be not endowed with
Virtuous Qualities, he is far from having any true Worth or Excellence, and
consequently cannot be a fit Object of our Praise and Esteem; because he wants
that which should make him Perfect and Good in his Kind. For it is not a comely
Personage, or a long Race of Famous Ancestors, or a large Revenue, or a
multitude of Servants, or many swelling Titles, or any other thing without a
Man, that speaks him a Complete Man, or makes him to be what he should be: But
the right use of his Reason, the employing his Liberty and Choice to the best
purposes, the exercising his Powers and Faculties about the fittest Objects,
and in the most due Measures; these are the Things that make him Excellent. Now
none can be said to do this, but only he that is Virtuous.

Secondly, Religion also is that which makes a Man most Useful and Profitable
to others; for it effectually secures his performance of all those Duties
whereby both the Security and Welfare of the Public, and also the Good and
Advantage of particular Persons, is most attained.

It makes Men Lovers of their Country, Loyal to their Prince, Obedient to Laws:
It is the surest Bond and Preservative of Society in the World: It obliges us
to live peaceably, and to submit our selves to our Rulers, not only for Wrath,
but also for Conscience sake: It renders us modest and governable in
Prosperity, and resolute and courageous to suffer bravely in a good Cause, in
the worst of Times: It teaches us to endeavor as much as in us lies to
promote the Good of every particular Member of the Community, to be inflexibly
upright, to do hurt to none, but good Offices to all; to be charitable to the
Bodies and Souls of Men, to do all manner of Kindnesses that lie within our
power: It takes off the Sowrness and Moroseness of our Spirits, and makes us
Affable and Courteous, Gentle and Obliging, and willing to embrace with open
Arms, and an hearty Love, all Sorts and Conditions of Men.

In every Relation wherein we can stand to one another, it influenceth upon us,
in order to the making us more useful: It makes Parents kind and indulgent, and
careful of the Education of their Children; and Children loving and obedient to
their Parents: It makes Servants diligent to please their Masters, and to do
their Work in Singleness of Heart, not with Eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but
as unto God; and it makes Masters gentle and forbearing, and careful to make
provision for their Family, as those that know they have a Master in Heaven,
that is no Respecter of Persons. In a word, There is no Condition or Capacity,
in which Religion will not be signally an Instrument of making us more
serviceable to others, and of doing more good in the World. And if such be the
Spirit and Temper of it, how is it possible but it must needs acquire a great
deal of Respect and Love from all sorts of Men? If Obligingness and doing good
in one's Generation do not endear a Man to those that know him, do not entitle
him to their Love and Affections, what thing in the World is there that is
likely to do it?

But Secondly, True and unaffected Goodness seldom misses of a good Reputation
in the World. How unjust to Virtue soever Men are in other respects, yet in
this they generally give it its due; wherever it appears, it generally meets
with Esteem and Approbation; nay, it has the good Word of many that otherwise
are not over-fond of Religion: Though they have not the Grace to be Good
themselves, yet they rarely have the Confidence not to commend Goodness in
others.

Add to this, that no Man ever raised to himself a Good Name in the World, but
it was upon the score of his Virtues, either Real or Pretended. Vice has
sometimes got Riches, and advanced it self into Preferments; but it never was
accounted Honorable in any Nation.

It must be acknowledged indeed, that it may and does sometimes happen that
Vicious Men may be had in Esteem; but then it is to be considered, that it is
not for their Vices that they are esteemed, but for some good Quality or other
they are eminent in. And there is no doubt, if those Men were without those
Vices, their Reputation would be so far from being thereby diminished, that it
would become much more Considerable.

It must also be acknowledged on the other hand, that even Virtuous and Good
Men may sometimes fail of that Esteem and Respect that their Virtue seems to
merit; nay, in that degree as to be slighted and despised, and to have many
Odious Terms and Nicknames put upon them: But when we consider the Cases in
which this happens, it will appear to be of no force at all for the disproving
what has been now delivered. For, First, It ought to be considered what kind of
Persons those are that treat Virtue and Virtuous Men thus Contemptuously; we
shall always find them to be the Worst and the Vilest of Mankind; such who have
debauched the natural Principles of their Minds, have lost all the Notions and
Distinctions of Good and Evil, are fallen below the Dignity of Humane Nature,
and have nothing to bear up themselves with but Boldness and Confidence,
Drollery and Scurrility, and turning into Ridicule every thing that is grave
and serious. But it is with these as it is with the Monsters and Extravagances
of Nature, they are but very Few: Few in comparison of the rest of Mankind, who
have wiser and truer Sentiments of Things: But if they were more numerous, no
Man of Understanding would value what such Men said of him. It looks like a
Crime to be commended by such Persons; and may justly occasion a Man to reflect
upon his own Actions, and to cry out to himself, as He did of old, What have I
done, that these Men speak well of me?

But Secondly, It cannot be denied but that some Persons who are otherwise
Virtuous and Religious, may be guilty of such Indiscretions as thereby to give
others occasion to slight and despise them. But then it is to be considered,
that this is not to be charged upon Virtue and Religion, but is the particular
Fault of the Persons. Every one that is Religious, is not Prudent; the Meanness
of a Man's Understanding, or his rash and intemperate Zeal, or the Moroseness
of his Temper, or his too great Scrupulosity about little things, may sometimes
make his Behavior Uncouth and Fantastic, and betray him to do many Actions
which he may think his Religion obliges him to, that other People will be apt
to fancy Silly and Ridiculous. But this does not at all reflect upon Religion;
nor does it follow, that because the Imprudence of this or the other particular
Man exposes him to the Mirth and the Pleasantness of others, that therefore all
Religious Persons must fall under the same Fate: Most certainly Religion,
wherever it is governed by Knowledge and Sound Principles, wherever it is
managed with Prudence and Discretion, is a thing so Noble, so Amiable, that it
attracts Love, and commands Respect from all that are acquainted with it,
unless they be such profligately wicked Persons as I just now spoke of.

There is one Objection made from the Scripture, against this and the former
Point I have been speaking to, which I desire to remove before I proceed to the
Third General Head of my Discourse. It is this; That the Scripture is so far
from representing Godliness as a means to improve our Fortunes, or attain a
Reputation in the World, that it seems directly to affirm the contrary; for it
assures us, that All those that will live godly in Christ, must suffer
Persecution: That the Disciples of Christ shall be hated of all Men, for His
Name's sake: That the World shall revile and persecute them, and speak all
manner of Evil of them: And that through many Tribulations we must enter into
the Kingdom of God.

But to this it is easily answered, that these and other such like Passages of
Scripture do not speak the General and Common Fate that attends Godliness in
all Times and Places of the World, according to the Ordinary Course of God's
Providence; but only refer to that particular Time, when Christianity was to be
planted in the World; then, indeed, Persecution and Disgrace, Loss of Goods,
and even of Life it self, was to be the common Portion of those that professed
it. Nor could it otherwise be expected; for, when a new Religion is to be set
up, and such a Religion as is perfectly destructive of all those others that
have been by long Custom received, and are by Laws established in the World, it
cannot be imagined but that it will meet with a great deal of Contradiction and
Opposition from all sorts of Persons. But this was a peculiar and extraordinary
Case, and could but last for a certain Time: Now that Christianity has
obtained in the World, and is adopted into the Laws of Kingdoms, as, God be
thanked, it is among us at this day; so far need we be from fearing that the
Practice of it will draw upon us any Persecution, or such other Inconveniences
as are mentioned in the forecited places, that there is no doubt but that we
may rationally expect from it all those External Benefits and Advantages,
which, as we have seen, it is in its own nature apt to produce, and which God
has indeed made over to it by Promise, in several Passages of the Scripture,
especially of the Old Testament.

For that I may mention this by the By, I do not conceive that those Promises
of Long Life, Good Days, and all manner of Worldly Prosperity, with which the
Practice of Godliness is so frequently enforced in the Old Testament, were so
appropriated to the Jewish Religion, as to be antiquated or disannualled by the
Introduction of the Christian; but rather that they are still in force to all
the Purposes they were then; for that the Coming of Christ into the World did
add many great Blessings and Privileges to the People of God, which before they
had not, we are certain of: But that it took away from them any that before
they had, this we no where read; nor, indeed, is it probable.

But I hasten to the Third and last General Head I am to speak to, which is,
The excellent Ministeries of Religion, above all other things, to the Pleasures
of Humane Life. Which Point, if it be clearly made out, I do not see what can
be farther wanting to recommend it unto us, as the most effectual Instrument
for the serving all our turns in this World. Now that Godliness does indeed
make the most excellent Provisions for all sorts of Pleasures, will appear by
these four Considerations.

First, That it eminently ministers to Health, which is a necessary Foundation
for all Pleasures. Secondly, It does much increase the Relish and Sweetness of
all our other Pleasures. Thirdly, It secures us from all those Inquietudes and
Disturbances which are apt to embitter our Pleasures, and make our Lives
uncomfortable. Fourthly, It adds to Humane Life a World of Pleasures of its
own, which those that are not possessed of it, are utterly unacquainted with.
First of all, Godliness does very much conduce to Health: Which is so
necessary to our Enjoyment of any sensible Good, that without it, neither
Riches, nor Honors, nor any thing that we esteem most gratifying to our
Senses, will signify any thing at all to us. Now that a Sound and Healthful
Constitution does exceedingly much depend upon a discreet Government and
Moderation of our Appetites and Passions, upon a sober and temperate Use of all
God's Creatures, which is an Essential Part of True Religion, is a thing so
evident, that I need make no words about it. What are most of our Diseases and
Infirmities, that make us miserable and unpitied while we live, and cut us off
in the midst of our days, and transmit Weakness and Rottenness to our
Posterity, but the Effects of our Excesses and Debauches, our Wantonness and
Luxury? Certainly, if we would observe those Measures in our Diet and in our
Labors, in our Passions and in our Pleasures, which Religion has bound us up
to, we might to such a degree Preserve our Bodies, as to render the greatest
part of Physic perfectly superfluous. But these things are too well known, to
need to be insisted on: I therefore pass on to the next thing.

Secondly, A Life of Religion does very much increase the Relish and Sweetness
of all our sensible Enjoyments. So far is it from abridging us of any of our
Earthly Delights, (as its Enemies slanderously represent it,) that it
abundantly heightens them. It does not only indulge to us the free Use of all
those good Creatures of God which he has made for the Support and Comfort of
Mankind, while they are in these Earthly Bodies; but also makes them more
exquisitely quisitely gratifying and delightful, than without it they could
possibly be. And this it does in part by the means of that never sufficiently
commended Temperance and Moderation I before spoke of; for hereby it comes to
pass that our Senses, which are the Instruments of our Pleasures, are always
preserved in that due Purity and Quickness that is absolutely necessary for the
right performing of their Offices, and the rendering our Perceptions of any
thing grateful and agreeable: Whereas the Sensual and Voluptuous Man defeats
his own Designs, and whilst he thinks to enjoy a greater share of Pleasures
than other Men, really enjoys a less; for his Dissoluteness, and giving up the
Reins to his Appetites, only serves to dull and stupifie them. Nor does he reap
any other Benefit from his continual hankering after Bodily Pleasures, but that
his Sensations of them are hereby made altogether flat and unaffecting. Neither
is his Meat half so savoury, nor his Recreations so diverting, nor his Sleep so
sweet, nor the Company he keeps so agreeable as Theirs are, that by following
the Measures of Nature and Reason, come to them with truer and more unforced
Appetites.

But besides this, there is a certain Lightsomness and Cheerfulness of mind,
which is in a manner peculiar to the truly Religious Soul, that above all
things sets off our Pleasures, and makes all the Actions and Perceptions of
Humane Life Sweet and Delightful. True Piety is the best Cure of Melancholy in
the World; nothing comparable to it for dispelling that Lumpishness and
Inactivity, that renders the Soul of a Man incapable of enjoying either it self
or any thing else. It fills the Soul with perpetual Light and Vigor, infuseth
a strange kind of Alacrity and Gaiety of Humor into us. And this it does not
only by removing those things that Hinder our Mirth, and make us languish in
the midst of our Festivities, (such as are the Pangs of an Evil Conscience, and
the storms of unmortified Passions, of which I shall speak in the following
particular) but even by a more Physical Efficiency. It has really a mighty
Power to Correct and Exalt a Man's Natural Temper. Those Ardent Breathings and
Workings wherewith the Pious Soul is continually carried out after God and
Virtue, are to the Body like so much Fresh Air and Wolsom Exercise, they Fan
the Blood, and keep it from Settling; they Clanifie the Spirits, and purge them
from those grosser Feculencies which would otherwise Cloud our Understandings,
and make us dull and listless. And to these effects of Religion does Solomon
seem to allude, when he tells us, that Wisdom makes a man's face to shine,
Eccl. 8.1.

Where he seems to intimate, that that Purity and Exaltation into which the
Blood and Spirits of a Man are wrought by the Exercise of Virtue and Devotion,
does diffuse it self even to his Outward Visage, making the Countenance clear
and serene, and filling the Eyes with an unusual kind of Splendour and Vivacity.
But whether this be a true Comment on his words or no, certain it is, that
Piety disposes a Man to Mirth and Lightness of Heart above all things in the
World: and how admirable a Relish this does give to all our other Pleasures and
Enjoyments there is none but can easily discern.

Thirdly let it be farther considered, that Godliness is a most Effectual
Antidote against all those Inquietudes, and Evil Accidents, that do either
wholly destroy, or very much embitter the Pleasures of this Life.

For whilst it teaches us to place all our Happiness in God Almighty and our
selves only, whilst we have learned to bring all our Affections and Passions,
our Desires and Aversions, our Hopes and Fears under the command of our Reason,
and endeavor not so much to suit Things to our Wills, as our Wills to Things;
being Indifferent to all Events that can happen, save only that we always judge
those Best which God in his Providence sends us. Being, I say thus disposed (as
certainly Religion, if it be suffered to have its perfect work upon us, will
thus dispose us,) what is it that shall be able to disturb or interrupt our
Pleasures, or create any trouble or Vexation to us? Our Present Enjoyments will
not be embittered with the fear of losing them, or lessened by our Impatient
Longing after Greater. Our Brains will not be upon the Rack for Compassing
things that are perhaps Impossible, nor our Bodies under the Scourge of Rage
and Anger for every Disappointment. We shall not look pale with Envy that our
Neighbors have that which we have not, nor pine away with Grief if we should
happen to lose that which we have.

But the Vicious Man is exposed to all these Miseries, and a thousand more; he
carries that within him, which will perpetually fret and torment him, for he is
a Slave to his Passions; and the least of them, when it is let loose upon him,
is the Worst of Tyrants. He is like the Troubled Sea, restless and ever
working, ruffled and discomposed with every thing. He is not capable of being
rendered so much as Tolerably Happy by the best condition this World affords:
For having such a World of Impetuous Desires and Appetites which must be all
satisfied, or else he is miserable; and there being such an infinite number of
Circumstances that must concur to the giving them that Satisfaction: And all
these depending upon Things without him, which are perfectly out of his Power,
it cannot be avoided but he will continually find matter to disquiet him, and
render his condition troublesome and uneasy: a thousand unforeseen Accidents
will ever be crossing his Designs. Nor will there be wanting some little Thing
or other, almost hourly to put him out of Humor.

And if this be the Case of the Vicious Man, in the Best Circumstances of this
World, (where the causes of Vexation are in a manner undiscernable) in what a
miserable Condition must he needs be under those more Real Afflictions unto
which Humane Life is obnoxious? what is there that shall be able to support his
Spirit under the Tediousness of a Lingering Sickness, or the Anguish of an
Acute Pain? What is become of all his Mirth and Jollity, if there should happen
a Turn in His Fortune, if he should fall into Disgrace, or his Friends forsake
him, or the Means of maintaining his Pleasures fail him, and the miserable Man
become Poor and Despised? Not to mention a great many more Evils, which will
make him incapable of any Consolation, eat into the Heart of his best
Enjoyments, and become Gall and Wormwood to his Choicest Delicacies.

And has he not now, think you, made admirable Provisions for his Pleasures?
Has he not done himself a wonderful Piece of Service, by freeing himself from
the Drudgery as he calls it, of Virtue and Religion? Alas, Poor Man! this is
the only Thing that would now have secured him from all these sad Accidents and
Displeasures. The Good Man sits above the Reach of Fortune, and in spite of all
the Vicissitudes and Uncertainties of this Lower World, with which other Men
are continually Alarmed, enjoys a Constant and Undisturbed Peace. Those Evils
that may be Avoided, (and really a great many which afflict mortal Men, are
such) he by his Prudent Conduct and Government of himself wholly prevents. And
those that are Unavoidable, he takes by such a Handle, that they have no power
to do him any Harm: For he is indeed possessed of that which the Alchymists in
vain seek for: Such a Sovereign Art he has, that he can turn the Basest Metals
into Gold, make such an use of the worst Accidents that can befall him, that
they shall not be accounted his Miseries, but his Enjoyments. So that however
the varieties of his Condition may occasion a change in his Pleasures, yet can
they never cause any Loss or Destruction of them.

And this security he enjoys, not as some of the Stoics of old pretended to
do, by an Imaginary Insensibility, or by changing the names of Things, calling
that no Evil which Really is one: but by an absolute Resignation of himself to
the Will of God, and an Hearty acquiescing in his wise Providence. He is
certain there is a God that governs the World, and that nothing happens to him,
but by his Order and Appointment. And he is certain also that this God has a
real Kindness for him, and would not dispense any Event unto him, but what is
really for his Good and Advantage. And these thoughts so support his Spirit,
that he not only bears patiently, but thanks God for whatever happens to him.
And instead of Fretting and Complaining that things succeed otherwise than he
expected, he resolves with himself that that Condition, whatever it be, in
which he actually is, is indeed best for him; and that which he himself, were
he to be the Carver of his Fortunes, supposing him but truly to understand his
own Concernments, would choose for himself above all others.

But farther, besides this security from Outward Disturbances which our Virtue
obtains for us, there is another Evil which it also delivers us from, with
which the wicked Man is almost perpetually haunted, and which seldom suffers
him to enjoy any sincere, unmingled Pleasure. That which I mean is the Pangs of
an Evil Conscience, the Fears, the Restlesness, the Confusion, the Amazements
that arise in his Soul from the sense of his Crimes, and the just Apprehensions
of the Shame and Vengeance that does await them, possibly in this Life, but
most certainly in the Life to come.

How Happy, how Prosperous soever the Sinner be as to his other Affairs, yet
these Furies he shall be sure to be plagued with: no pompousness of Condition,
no costly Entertainments, no noise of Company will be able to drive them away.
Every Man that is wicked cannot but know that he is so, and that very Knowledge
is a Principle of perpetual Anguish and Disquietude. Be his Crimes never so
secret, yet he cannot be confident they will always continue so: and the very
Apprehension of this makes him feel all the Shame and Amazement of a present
Discovery. But put the case he has had the good luck to sin so closely, or in
such a nature that he need fear nothing from Men; yet he knows there is an
Offended God to whom he has a sad and a fearful Reckoning to make; a God too
Just to be Bribed, too Mighty to be Overawed, too Wise to be Imposed upon. And
is not the Man, think you, under such Reflections as these likely to live a
very Comfortable life? Ah, none knows the Bitterness of them but himself that
feels them. To the Judgment of others he perhaps appears a very happy Man, he
has the World at his beck, all things seem to conspire to make him a great
Example of Prosperity; we admire, we appland his Condition. But ah, we know not
how sad a heart he often carries under this fair Outside: we know not with
what sudden Damps his Spirit is often struck, even in the height of his
Revellings. We know not how unquiet, how broken his sleeps are, how often he
starts and looks pale; when the Wife that lies by his side understands not what
the matter is with him.

He does indeed endeavor all he can to stifle his Cares, and to stop the mouth
of his Conscience. He thinks to divert it with Business, or to flatter it with
little Sophistries, or to drown it with Rivers of Wine, or to calm it with soft
and gentle Airs. And he is indeed sometimes so successful in these Arts as for
a while to lay it asleep. But alas! this is no lasting Peace, the least thing
awakens it, even the sound of a Passing Bell, or a clap of Thunder; nay, a
Frightful Dream, or a Melancholy Story has the power to do it, and then the
poor Man returns to his Torment.

And now judge you whether the Honest and Virtuous Man that is free from all
these Agonies, that is at Peace with God, and at Peace with his own Conscience;
that apprehends nothing terrible from the one, nor feels any thing troublesome
from the other, but is safe from Himself and from all the world in his own
Innocence: Judge, I say whether such a one has not laid to himself better and
surer Foundations for Pleasures and a happy Life, than the Man that by
indulging his Lusts and Vices, only breeds up a Snake in his Bosom, which will
not cease to Sting and Gall him beyond what a Tongue is able to express, or a
witty Cruelty to invent.

Fourthly and lastly, Besides the benefits of Religion for removing the
hindrances of our Pleasures; it also adds to Humane Life a world of Pleasures
of its own, which vicious men are utterly unacquainted with.

And these are of so excellent a kind, so delicious, so enravishing, that the
highest gratifications of sense, are not comparable to them. Never till we come
to be heartily Religious do we understand what true Pleasure is. That which
arises from the grateful motions that are made in our outward senses, is but a
faint shadow, a mere dream of it. Then do we begin to enjoy true Pleasures
indeed when our Highest and Divinest Faculties, which were wholly laid asleep
while we lived the Life of Sense, begin to be awakened, and to exercise
themselves upon their proper objects; when we become acquainted with God, and
the Infinite Abyss of Good that is in him; when our hearts are made sensible of
the great Love and Good Will he bears us; and in that Sense are powerfully
carried out in Joy and Love, and Desire after him: When we feel the Divine
Nature daily more and more displayed in our Souls, showing forth it self in the
blessed Fruits of Charity, and Peaceableness, and Meekness, and Humility, and
Purity, and Devotion, and all the other Graces of the Holy Spirit. It is not
possible but that such a Life as this must needs be a Fountain of inexpressible
Joy to him that leads it, and fill the Soul with transcendently greater Content
than any thing upon Earth can possibly do: For this is the Life of God, this is
the Life of the Blessed Angels above, this is the Life that is most of all
agreeable to our own Natures. While we live thus, things are with us as they
should be; our Souls are in their natural Posture, in that state they were
framed and designed to live in: whereas the Life of Sin is a state of Disorder
and Confusion; a perpetual violence and force upon our Natures. While we live
thus, we enjoy the Pleasures of Men, whereas before when we were governed by
Sense, we could pretend to no other satisfactions but what the Brutes have as
well as we. In this state of Life we gratify our Highest and Noblest Powers,
the intellectual Appetites of our Souls; which as they are infinitely
capacious, so have they an infinite good to fill them: whereas in the sensual
Life, the meanest, the dullest, and the most contracted Faculties of our Souls
were only provided for.

But what need I carry you out into these Speculations, when your own sense and
experience will ascertain you in this matter above a thousand Arguments. Do but
seriously set your selves to serve God, if you have yet never done it, do but
once try what it is to live up to the Precepts of Reason, and Veriue, and
Religion; and I dare confidently pronounce that you will in one mouth find more
Joy, more Peace, more Content, to arise in your spirits, from the sense that
you have resisted the Temptations of Evil, and done what was your duty to do,
than in many years spent in Vanity and a Licentious course of living. I doubt
not in the least, but that after you have once seen and tasted how gracious the
Lord is, how good all his ways are, but you will proclaim to all the World,
that One day spent in his Courts is better than a thousand: Nay, you will be
ready to cry out with the Roman Orator (if it be lawful to quote the Testimony
of a Heathen, after that of the Divine Psalmist) that One day lived according
to the Precepts of Virtue is to be preferred before an Immortality of Sin.

You will then alter all your sentiments of things, and wonder that you should
have been so strangely abused by false representations of Virtue and Vice. You
will then see that Religion is quite another thing than it appeared to you
before you became acquainted with it. Instead of that grim, sour, unpleasant
Countenance in which you heretofore painted her to your self, you will then
discover nothing in her but what is infinitely Lovely and Charming. Those very
Actions of Religion which you now cannot think upon with Patience, they seem so
harsh and unpleasant, you will then find to be accompanied with a wonderful
Delight. You will not then complain of the narrowness of the Bounds, or the
scantiness of the Measures that it has confined your desires to; for you will
then find, that you have hereby gained an entrance into a far greater and more
perfect Liberty. How ungentilely, how much against the grain of Nature soever
it now looks to forgive an Injury, or an Affront; you will then find it to be
as far more easy, so far more sweet than to revenge one. You will no longer
think works of Charity burdensome or expensive; or that to do good Offices to
every one is an employment too mean for you; for you will then experience that
there is no sensuality like that of doing Good, and that it is a greater
pleasure to do a kindness than to riceive one. How will you chide your self for
having been so averse to Prayer and other devout Exercises, accounting them as
tiresome unsavory things; when you begin to feel the delicious Relishes they
leave upon your Spirit? You will then confess that no Conversation is half so
agreeable as that which we enjoy with God Almighty in Prayer; no Cordial so
reviving as heartily to pour out our Souls unto him. And then to be affected
with his Mercies, to praise and give thanks to him for his Benefits, what is it
but a very Heaven upon Earth, an anticipation of the Joys of Eternity? Nay, you
will not be without your pleasures even in the very entrance of Religion, then
when you exercise acts of Repentance, when you mourn and afflict your self for
your sins, which seems the frightfullest thing in all Religion. For such is the
nature of that holy sorrow, that you would not for all the World be without it,
and you will find far greater Contentment and Satisfaction in grieving for your
Offenses, than ever you did receive from the Committing them.

But, O the ineffable Pleasures that do continually spring up in the heart of a
good Man, from the snse of God's Love, and the hope of his Favor, and the fair
prospect he has of the Joy and Happiness of the other World! How pleasing, how
transporting will the thought of these things be to you! To think that you are
one of those happy Souls that are of an Enemy become the Friend of God, that
your ways please him, and that you are not only Pardoned, but Accepted and
Beloved by him? to think that you a poor Creature, who were of your self
nothing, and by your sins had made your self far worse than nothing, are yet by
the goodness of your Savior become so considerable a Being, as to be able to
give delight to the King of the World, and to cause joy in Heaven among the
Blessed Angels by your Repentance: to think that God charges his Providence
with you, takes care of all your Concerns, hears all your Prayers, provides all
things needful for you, and that he will in his good time take you up unto
himself, to live everlastingly in his Presence, to be partaker of his Glories,
to be ravished with his Love, to be acquainted with his Counsels, to know and
be known by Angels, Archangels, and Seraphims; to enjoy a Conversation with
Prophets Apostles, and Martyrs, and all the Raised and Glorified Spirits of
Brave Men; and with all these to spend a happy and a rapturous Eternity, in
Adoring, in Loving, in Praising God for the Infiniteness of his Wisdom, and the
Miracles of his Mercy and Goodness to all his Creatures. Can there be any
Pleasure like this? Can any thing in the World put you into such an Ecstasie of
Joy as the very thought of these things? With what a mighty scorn and contempt
will you in the sense of them look down upon all the little Gauderies and
sickly Satisfactions that the Men of this World keep such a stir about? How
empty and evanid, how flat and unsavory will the best Pleasures on Earth
appear to you in comparison of these Divine Contentments? You will perpetually
rejoice, you will sing Praises to your Savior, you will bless they day that
ever you became acquainted with him; you will confess him to be the only master
of Pleasure in the World, and that you never knew what it was to be an Epicure
indeed, till you became a Christian.

Thus have I gone through all those Heads which I at first proposed to insist
on. What now remains but that I resume the Apostle's Exhortation with which I
began this Discourse, that since as you have seen, Godliness is so exceedingly
profitable to all the purposes of this Life as well as the other: since as you
have seen, Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and
honor; and all her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace:
you would also be persuaded seriously to Apply your selves to the exercise of
it. Which that you may do, God of his, etc.

SERMON III.
PREACHED AT BOW-CHURCH, On the 17th of February, 1680.
Eccles. iij. 10. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
rejoice and to do good in his Life.


THIS Book of Ecclesiastes gives us an Account of the several Experiments that
Solomon had made, in order to the finding out wherein the Happiness of Man in
this World does consist: And these Words are one of the Conclusions he drew
from those Experiments.

No Man had ever greater Opportunities of Trying all the Ways wherein Men
generally seek for Contentment, than he had; and no Man did ever more
industriously apply himself to, or took a greater Liberty in enjoying those
Good Things that are commonly most admired, than he did: And yet, after all his
Labor, and all his Enjoyments, he found nothing but Emptiness and
Dissatisfaction.

He thought to become Happy by Philosophy; giving his Heart, as he tells us,
Eccl. 1.13.
to seek and search out all the things that come to pass under the Sun: Yet,
upon Trial, he found all this to be Vanity, and Vexation of Spirit.

He applied his Mind to Political Wisdom, and other sorts of Knowledge; and his
Seize in that kind were greater than of any that were before him: Yet he
experienced at last, Ver. 18.
that in Wisdom was much Grief; and he that increases Knowledge, increases
Sorrow.

He proved his Heart (as he tells us) with Mirth and Wine, Chap. 2. Ver. 1, 3.
and all sorts of Sensual Pleasures, to find if these were good for the Sons of
Men: And yet so far was he from his desired Satisfaction in these things, that
he was forced to say of Laughter, Ver. 2.
that it was mad; and of Mirth, What Good does it?

He turned himself to Works of Pomp and Magnificence: He built him stately
Houses, and made him Gardens, and Vineyards, Ver. 4.
and Orchards, and Fountains. He increased his Possessions, Ver. 8.
and gathered Silver and Gold, and the precious Treasures of Kings, and of the
Provinces. He got him a vast Retinue, and kept the most splendid Court that
ever any Prince of that Country did: Yet (as he tells us) when he came to look
upon all the Works that his hands had wrought, Ver. 11.
and on the Labor that he had labored to do, behold all was Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit, and there was no Profit under the Sun.

But wherein then is there any Profit, if not in these things? What is that
Good that the Sons of Men are to apply themselves to, in order to their living
as comfortably as the state of things here will allow? This Question (after an
Intimation of the Uncertainty and Perplexedness of all Humane Events; but
withal, of the Exactness of the Providence of God, who has made every thing
beautiful in its Season) he thus resolves in the Words of the Text, I know
(says he) that there is no good in them, but for a Man to rejoice and do good
in his Life. That is to say,

I have found by long Experience, that all the Happiness that is to be had in
the Good Things of this Life does arise from these two Things, Rejoicing in the
Enjoyment of them, and Doing Good to others with them while we live. Take away
these two Uses, and there is no good in them.

Or, if you please, we may interpret the first part of his Proposition, not of
Things, but of Men, thus; I know there is no good in them; i. e. I am convinced
that there is nothing so good for the Sons of Men; or, nothing that more
contributes to their Happiness in this World, than that every Man should
rejoice and do good in his Life. And to this purpose the Words are rendered by
several Interpreters: But it is no matter which of the Senses we pitch upon,
since in effect they come both to one thing.

Two Things then Solomon here recommends to every one that would live
comfortably in this World; Rejoicing, and Doing Good: And I do not know what
can be more proper and seasonable to be recommended and insisted on to you at
this time, and on this occasion, than these two things; for the putting them in
practice makes up the whole Design of this Meeting.

We are here so many Brethren met together to Rejoice, and to do Good: To
Rejoice together in the Sense and Acknowledgment of God's Mercies and Blessings
to us, and in the Enjoyment of Society one with another: And to do Good, not
only by increasing our Friendship and mutual Correspondence, but by joining
together in a cheerful Contribution to those our Countrymen that need our
Charity. To entertain you therefore upon these two Points seems to be my proper
Business.

But in treating of them, I shall make bold to invert the Order in which they
are put in the Text, and shall first speak of doing Good, though it be last
named; and shall afterward treat of Rejoicing. The truth is, Doing Good in the
Order of Nature goes before Rejoicing, for it is the Foundation of it. There
can be no true Joy in the Possession or Use of any Worldly Blessings, unless we
can satisfy our selves we have done some Good with them. It is the doing Good
that sanctifies our other Enjoyments, and makes them Matter of Rejoicing.

Now in treating of this Argument, I shall briefly endeavor these Three Things.

First, I shall earnestly recommend to you the Practice of doing Good, upon
several Considerations. Secondly, I shall represent the Practicableness of it,
by showing the several Ways which every Person (though in the meanest
Circumstances) is capable of doing Good. Thirdly, I shall make two or three
Inferences, by way of Application.
I begin with the First Thing, Seriously to recommend the Practice of doing
Good.

But where shall I begin to speak, either of the Obligations that lie upon us,
or of the Benefits and Advantages that do accrue to us by doing Good in our
Lives? Or having begun, where shall I make an end? The Subject is so copious,
that the Study of a whole Life cannot exhaust it. The more we consider it,
still the more and the weightier Arguments will present themselves to us to
engage us in the practice of it; and the more we practice it, still the more
shall we desire so to do, and the more happy and blessed shall we find our
selves to be.

For, to do Good is nothing else but to act according to the Frame and Make of
our Beings. It is to gratify those Inclinations and Appetites that are most
strongly rooted in our Natures; such as Love and Natural Affection, Pity and
Compassion, a Desire of Friends, and a Propensity to knot our selves into
Companies and Societies. What are all these but so many Stimuli, so many
powerful Incitements of Nature to put us upon doing good Offices one to another?

To do Good is the End of all those Acquisitions, of all those Talents, of all
those Favors and Advantages that God has blessed us with; it is the proper Use
we are to put them to. If we do not employ them this way, we are so far from
being better for them, that we are much worse. What will signify our Wit and
good Humor, our Strength of Reason and Memory, our Wisdom and Knowledge, our
Skill in Arts, and Dexterity in managing Business, our Wealth and Greatness,
our Reputation and Interest in the World; I say, what will all these signify,
if they do not render us more Useful and Beneficial to others? That which sets
the price and value upon every worldly blessing, is the Opportunity it affords
us of doing Good.

To do Good seems to be the foundation of all the Laws of Nature, the supreme
Universal Law; it is that by which the World is supported, and take that away,
all would presently fall into confusion. And perhaps if it were particularly
examined, it would be found that all the other Natural Laws may be reduced to
this, and are ultimately to be resolved into it. It is a question whether there
be any natural Standard whereby we can measure the Virtue or the Viciousuess of
any Action, but the Influence that it has to promote or hinder the doing of
Good. This is that that seems to stamp Virtue and Vice.

To do Good is the great Work for the sake of which we were sent into the
World, and no Man lives farther to any purpose than as he is an Instrument of
doing Good. Be our Lives otherwise never so busy and full of action, yet if
others receive no benefit by them, we cannot give our selves any tolerable
account of our time, we have in effect lived idly and done nothing.

To do Good is that which of all other services is most acceptable to God, it
is that which he has laid the greatest stress upon in the Scripture, it is
that which he has with the most earnest and affectionate persuasives, with the
strongest arguments, with the greatest promises, and with the most dreadful
threatenings enforced upon us. It is that which he has chosen before all
Sacrifices and all Relious worship, strictly so called, to be served with. It
is that which he has appoint-for the great Expression both of our Thankfulness
for his Benefits, and of our Love and Devotion to him. Lastly, it is that which
Moses and the Prophets make the Sum of the Old Law, and Christ and his Apostles
the Sum of the New.

And very great Reason there is for it; for to do Good is to become most like
to God. It is that which of all other Qualities gives us the greatest
resemblance of his Nature and Perfections, 1 Job. 4.2.
for perfect Love and Goodness is the very Nature of God, and the Root of all
his other Attributes; and there was never any Action done, any work wrought by
him throughout the vast tracts of infinite space, from the Beginning of time to
this Moment, but was an Expression of his Love, and an instance of doing Good,
(nay I doubt not to say, the most severe acts of his Justice and Vengeance have
all been such) And therefore with great reason has our blessed Lord told us,
Mat. 5.44, 45.
that the way to become the Children of our Heavenly Father is to do Good to
all, with the same Freedom and Unreservedness that God makes his Sun to shine
upon the World.

And of this our Blessed Savior himself was the most illustrious Example that
ever appeared in the World, so that to do Good is that which does most truly
and perfectly render us the Disciples and Followers of Jesus, makes us really
be what we pretend we are. His whole Life (as the Gospel tells us) was but a
continual going about doing Good. The great Design of his Coming from Heaven,
and of all that he spoke, and of all that he did, and of all that he suffered
upon Earth, was the benefiting of others. And he has left it as the great
distinguishing Badge and Character whereby his Disciples should be known from
other Men, that they should love one another even as he had loved them, Joh.
13.34, 35.
that is (as his Apostle expounds him) they should love and do Good to that
degree as to lay down their lives for their brethren. 1 John 3.16.


But to do Good is not only our greatest Duty but our greatest Interest and
Advantage, which is that that Solomon chiefly refers to in the Text. It is
certain that no Man can take a more Effectual way to render his Being in the
world Happy and Comfortable to him (according to the ordinary course and event
of things) in what Condition or Circumstances soever he is placed, than to do
all the Good he can in his life; so that though a man that lays out himself in
this way, seems only to respect the good of other people, yet in true reckoning
he most consults his own profit.

For to do Good is the natural way to raise us Friends, who shall be obliged to
contribute their Endeavors to the furthering our honest designs; to the
upholding and securing us in our Prosperity, and to the succouring and
relieving us when we are in any evil Circumstances. Such is the Contrivance and
the Constitution of this World, that no man can subsist of himself, but stands
in continual need of others, both for their comfortable Society and their
necessary Assistance in his Affairs. Now of all men living the Good man who
makes it his Business to oblige all about him is most likely to be the best
befriended.

To do Good is the truest way to procure to a man's self a Good name and
Reputation in the World, which as it is a thing desirable upon many accounts,
so it is a singular Advantage to a man for the carrying on his secular designs.
Nay to do good is to Embalm a man's name and to transmit it with a grateful
Odor to Posterity. The memory of a good man shall be blessed. Prove. 1^.7.
And the sense of Mankind has always been, that too much honor could not be
given to the name of those that have done good in their generation.

But which is a great deal more than all this, to do Good is the most certain
effectual means to procure the blessing of God upon our endeavors, and to
entitle our selves to his more especial Care and Providence and Protection: So
that let what will come; in all circumstances and conditions the good man has
the greatest assurance that all things shall at least be tolerably well with
him, and that he shall never be miserable. Trust in the Lord (says David) and
be doing good, Psalm. 37. verse 3.
so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed.

Nay farther, to do Good is to entail a blessing upon our Children after us.
(...) ^.25.
I have been young and now am old (says the same Psalmist) yet saw I never the
Righteous (that is the merciful and good man, for that is the Notion of the
word in that place, and in most others) such an one saw I never forsaken, nor
his seed begging their bread.

Lastly, to conclude this point, To do Good (besides all these advantages that
attend it) is most to consult our own Peace, and to make the best provision
possible for our pleasure and delight. Charity (as Dr. Hammond used to say) is
really a piece of Sensuality. And Epicurus himself the great Master of
Voluptuousness would confess that it was not only more Brave but more Pleasant
to do Kindnesses than to receive them. And certainly every good man will find
it so, for as the exercise of Charity and Beneficence is as truly a
gratification of our Natural Inclinations and Appetites as any other action or
thing that causes pleasure to us: So is it also a gratification of those
Appetites which are the highest and the noblest we have. Now by how much the
appetite that is gratified is more noble and divine; by so much must the
delight that arises from that gratification be more exquisite. So that it was
no very great Hyperbole of our Divine Poet when he said that

-- All joys go less
Than that one joy of doing kindnesses
And which is farther to be considered, it is not with this pleasure as it is
with most others that vanish with the enjoyment, nay often leave bitterness and
melancholy upon the Mind after they are gone off. For to do Good is a permanent
pleasure, a pleasure that will last as long as our lives. The memory of our
good actions will always be accompanied with Delight and Satisfaction; when all
our other past Enjoyments prove matters of anguish and torment to us upon our
reflections on them, these will be a refreshment; and the nearer we approach to
death, still the more comfort we shall find in them. Would we therefore
treasure up to our selves a stock of lasting peace and joy to support us in all
conditions of our life, and and so make our passage easy at our death, let us
do all the good we can.

I think I have said enough to convince any one of the truth of Solomon's
Proposition, that there is nothing better for a man, nothing that more concerns
him either in point of duty or happiness than to do good in his life. Much more
might be said, and what has been said might have been said with more
advantage, and greater evidence, if it had been fit to insist upon every
particular: but I will pursue this Argument no farther, but proceed to the
second general point I proposed, which is to set before you the practicabieness
of this great duty, by showing the several ways which every person though in
the meanest Circumstances is capable of doing Good.

A great many there are that are as strongly convinced as may be that it is both
their Interest and duty to be doing Good in their lives, but they complain that
it is not in their power, they have not any Means or Opportunities for it, and
they bemoan themselves sadly upon this account, as thinking their lives
useless, because they have not those visible Capacities of being serviceable to
the world that others have.

To such as these let me say this in the general: There is no condition in the
world so mean and despicable, but yields us Opportunities of doing Good. There
is neither Old nor Young, Man nor Woman, Rich nor Poor, High nor Low, Learned
nor Unlearned, but in their Sphere, by a good husbandry of those Talents that
God has entrusted to their care and management they may be very useful to
others, and prove instruments of much good in their generations.

This truth St. Paul most elegantly sets forth in 1 Cor. 12. where he compares
the Society of Christians to a Natural body. There he shows that as in the
Natural body there are many members, and all those members have not the same
dignity and honor, nor the same use or office: and yet every member (even the
meanest) has its particular use by which it does real service to the body; nay
so useful it is that the body cannot be without it: so it is with the Church of
Christ, and with every Body Politic. There is a necessity both in the Church
and in the State, that there should be variety of functions and callings, and
degrees and conditions. There must be some to govern, and some to be governed;
there must be some more conspicuous, some more obscure; some whose gifts and
endowments lie this way, and some whose Talents lie in another way; and yet
there is not one of these but in his degree and station, either is or may be as
useful as any that belong to the Society. So that the eye cannot say to the
hand (as our Apostle there expresses it) I have no need of thee. Nor again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you, nay more, those members of the body
(as he continues) that seem to be most feeble are yet very necessary.

To reduce the Apostle's notion to its particulars, or to show in how many
respects every individual person that is a Member of a Society is necessary to
the public, and either does or may serve the Weal of it, and so do Good in his
life, is a task too great for me to undertake at this time, let it suffice at
the present to propose to you these general heads.

First of all, None can want opportunities of doing Good that is in a capacity
of performing any acts of Mercy or Charity, stristly so called, whether that
Charity be showed to the Bodies or Souls of men. Now the instances and
expressions of this way of doing good are infinite, as infinite as are the
wants and necessities of mankind.

To the Bodies of men we do good whenever we contribute to the relieving and
easing them of the outward pressures and wants, and necessities they lie under:
Such as Sickness, Pain, Poverty, Hunger, Nakedness, Debts, Imprisonment, or any
other outward affliction that falls upon them; whether that ease and relief be
effected by our purse, or by our counsel and advice, or by our labor and pains.

And sure some one of these three things there is none so mean or
inconsiderable in the World, but it is in his power to benefit his poor
Neighbor with.

To the Souls of men we do good, whenever by our discourses or other endeavors
we make men better or wiser; when we instruct the ignorant, when we satisfy
the doubtful, when we reduce those that are misled by error, when we establish
the weak, when we reprove those that do amiss; in a word, all our attempts and
endeavors in what way soever to reclaim men from vice, and to bring them to
wisdom and sobriety is a Charity to their Souls; and whether our designs
succeed or not, we shall be rewarded as those that have done good in the world.

Secondly, All the acts of Beneficence and kindness, nay even of Civility and
good Nature, are to be accounted among the instances of doing good. A man does
Good not only by acts of Charity properly so called, but by every courtesy
that he does to another; He does good by showing his respect and good will to
all about him, by reconciling differences among neighbors, and promoting
peace, friendship and society as much as he can; by being Generous and Liberal
and Hospitable according to his ability; by forgiving injuries, and if it be
possible making friends of those that did them; by being easy of access, and
sweet and obliging in his carriage; by complying with the infirmities of those
he converseth with, and in a word, by contributing any way to make the lives of
others more easy and comfortable to them.

Thirdly, A man also does good when he makes use of that acquaintance or
friendship or interest, that he has with others to stir them up to the doing
of that good which he by the narrowness of his condition, or for want of
Opportunity cannot do himself. This is a very considerable instance of doing
good how slight soever it may seem; the man that exercises himself this way is
doubly a benefactor; for he is not only an instrument of good to the person or
persons for whom he begged the kindness or the charity; but he does also a real
kindness to the man himself whom he puts upon the benefaction, for God will not
less reward his Good Will for being excited by another.

Fourthly, Another way to do good is to be careful and diligent, and
conscientious in the discharge of all those Public Offices which we are called
upon to excecute in the place where we live. How burdensome soever these be,
and how much soever of our time they rob us of, yet God by calling us to them,
has put a prize into our hands, (as the Wise man speaks) to do much good, if
we have hearts to make use thereof.

Fifthly, We do good when being in a private Capacity we so carry our selves in
all the Relations in which we stand as the nature of the Relation requires. As
for instance, when being Subjects we conscientiously obey the Laws of the
Kingdom, and submit to our Governors, and promote what we can the public
Peace both of Church and State. When being Masters of Families we take care of
those under our Charge, making sufficient provision both for their Souls and
Bodies. When being Husbands or Wives we discharge faithfully all the Conjugal
duties: When being Parents we love our Children, and bring them up in the fear
and nurture of the Lord. When being Children we obey our Parents in all things.
When being Servants we do our work in singleness of heart, not as men-pleasers
but as those that account they have a Master in Heaven. When having contracted
friendships we are secret and faithful, and prudent in the maintaining and
preserving of them; and so proportionably in all the other relations that we
stand in. All these things though they appear little, yet are they in their
degree a real good and benefit to Mankind, and so necessary that there is no
living tolerably without them.

Sixthly, We also do good by an honest and a diligent pursuit of our calling
and employment There is no Art or Trade that we are bred to, but if it be a
lawful one, it may be of great use to the public, and by well minding it, and
fairly managing it we may render our selves very profitable members of the
Commonwealth.

Seventhly and Lastly, We may do a great deal of good by our good Examples, by
being to others Patterns of Piety and Prudence, of Diligence and Industry, of
Peaceableness and Loyalty, of Humility and Meekness and Temperance. In a word,
every man that will make himself Eminent in any Virtue will be a Light to the
World, his life will be a constant Sermon, and he will often prove as effectual
a Benefactor to those about him by his Example as others are by their Counsels
and Exhortations.

And now all these things considered, who is there among us in such deplorable
Circumstances that he can reasonably pretend to want ability or opportunity to
do good in his life? Sure I am he must live in a desert and have no
Communication with mankind that cannot some or other of these ways be useful
and beneficial to them. And thus much of our Second Head of Discourse.

I now come, in the Third and Last place, to make some Application of what has
been spoken.

And First, Since every man is so highly concerned as we have seen, to do Good
in his life, let us all be persuaded seriously and heartily to apply our Minds
hereunto. Let us look upon it, not as a by-work, a thing to be done now and
then, as there is occasion, after our own turns are served: But let us lay out
our selves upon it, let us propose it to our selves as the great Business of
our lives. Let us take all opportunities for it, let us contrive and manage all
our affairs so that they may some way or other be subservient to the carrying
on this great work.

Let this be the end of our gathering riches, and the measure of our expending
them. To heap up riches that we may be rich, or to throw them away upon our
lusts are both equally intolerable, it is the doing good with them that
sanctifies both the getting and the spending them.

Let this be the compass to steer and direct us in our pursuit after knowledge,
in our learning Arts and Sciences, in the managery of our Trades and
employments; in a word, in the choice and in the prosecution of every design
that is proposed to us. In all these things, the great enquiry is to be, what
Good will they tend to? How shall we be rendered more useful to the world, if
our designs and endavours as to these matters do take effect?

Let this be the great rule by which we proceed in the Education of our
Children and Relations, and the provisions we make for them in the world. Let
it be our first care to possess them with a deep sense of the duty they owe to
the Public, and to furnish them with such qualities as will render them
profitable Members of it, and to put them into such professions and employments
as may afford them fair scope for the exercise of those qualities. If we thus
provide for them, though we otherwise leave them never so small an Estate, yet
with the Blessing of God they have a good Portion.

Lastly, let this design of doing good influence our very Offices of Religion.
When we make our applications to the Throne of Grace, let us be sure to have
the Public always in mind; and even when we pray for our selves, let it be
with this design and resolution, that as God in mercy bestows upon us the
Blessings and the Grace we pray for, we will employ them for the good of others.

O that we would thus seriously concern our selves in doing good! O that we
would once lay aside all our little selfish designs, and that narrowness and
penuriousness of Spirit with which most of us are bound up; and with ardent
Love and Charity set our selves not to seek his own but every man another's
good, as the Apostle exhorts. 1 Cor. 10.24.


Secondly, if the doing good be so necessary a duty as has been represented,
what must we say of those Men that frame to themselves Models of Christianity
without putting this duty into its notion? There is a sort of Christianity
which has obtained in the world, that is made up of Faith and knowledge of the
Gospel Mysteries, without any respect to Charity and good works. Nay have we
not heard of a sort of Christianity, the very perfection of which seems to
consist in the disparaging this duty of doing Good as much as is possible;
crying it down as a heathen Virtue; a poor blind piece of Morality, a thing
that will no way further our salvation; nay so far from that, that it often
proves a hindrance to it, by taking us off from that full relyance and
recumbency that we ought to have on the Righteousness of Jesus Christ only, in
order to our Salvation.

But O how contrary are these Doctrines to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles! How widely different a thing do they make Christianity to be from
what it will appear if we take our notions of it from their Sermons and
Practices! Is it possible that he that went about doing Good himself; made it
his meat and drink, the business and employment of his life, should set so
light by it in us that are his followers?

Is it possible that they that so often call upon us to do Good, 1 Timothy 6.18. 1
Pet. 4.8. 1 Cor. 13.2.13.
to be rich in good works, above all things to have fervent charity among our
selves, telling us that all faith is nothing, all knowledge of mysteries is
nothing, all gifts of Prophecy and Miracles are nothing, but that Charity is
all in all, I say, is it possible that they should think doing Good so
insignificant, so unprofitable, nay so dangerous a thing as these I spoke of do
represent it?

But I need not farther reprove these Opinions, because I hope they find but
few Patrons; but this seriously ought to be reproved among us, viz. that we do
not generally lay that stress upon this duty we are speaking of that we ought
to do.

Many are ready enough to acknowledge their Obligations to do Good, and count
it a very commendable thing, and a work that God will bless them the better
for, yet they are loath to make it an essential ingredient of their Religion,
they think they may be Religious and serve God without it. If they be but sober
in their lives, and just in their dealings, and come to Church at the usual
times, they have Religion enough to carry them to Heaven, though in the mean
time they continue covetous, and hard, and uncharitable, without bowels of pity
and compassion, and make no use of their wealth, or their power and interest,
or their parts and industry, or their other Talents committed to them, for the
doing good in the World.

Far be it from any Man to pretend to determine what Virtues or degrees of them
are precisely necessary to Salvation, and what Virtues or degrees of them a man
may safely be without: But this is certain, that Charity and doing Good are
none of those that can be spared. The Scripture has every where declared these
qualities to be as necessary in order to our Salvation as any condition of the
Gospel. Nay if we will consult St. Matthew. 25. where the Process of the General
Judgment is described, we shall find these to be the great points that at the
last day Men shall be examined upon, and upon which the whole case of their
eternal state will turn. So that if we take the Scripture for our Guide, these
Men at last will be found to be much mistaken, and to have made a very false
judgment both of Religion and of their own condition.

Thirdly, From what has been said about doing Good, we may gather wherein that
Perfection of Christianity which we are to aspire after does consist. It has
been much disputed which is the most perfect life, to live in the World as
other Men do, and to serve God in following our employments, and taking care of
our families, and doing Good offices to our neighbors, and discharging all
other Duties that our relation to the public requires of us; or to retire from
the World, and to quit all our secular concernments, and wholly to give up our
selves to Prayer and Meditation, and those other exercises of Religion properly
so called.

This latter kind of life is so magnified by the Romanists in comparison of the
other, that it has engrossed to it self the name of Religious. None among them
are thought worthy to be styled Religious persons but those that Cloister up
themselves in a Monastery. But whatever excellence may be pretended in this
course of life, it certainly falls much short of that which is led in a public
way. He serves God best that is most serviceable to his Generation. And no
Prayers or Fasts or Mortifications are near so acceptable a Sacrifice to our
Heavenly Father as to do Good in our lives.

It is true, to keep within doors and to attend our devotions (though those
that are in appearance most abstracted from the world, are not always the most
devout persons) I say this kind of life is the most easy and the safer. A man
is not then exposed so much to temptations; he may with less difficulty
preserve his innocence; but where is the praise of such a Virtue; Virtue is
then most glorious and shall be most rewarded, when it meets with most trials
and oppositions.

And as for the bravery of contemning the world and all the Pomps of it, which
they so magnify in this kind of life, alas it is rather an effect of
pusillanimity and love of our ease, and a desire to be free from cares and
burdens, than of any true nobleness of mind. If we would live to excellent
purpose indeed; if we would show true bravery of Spirit and true piety toward
God, let us live as our blessed Lord and his Apostles did. Let us not fly
Temptations but overcome them; let us not sit at home amusing our selves with
our pleasing contemplations, when we may be useful and beneficial abroad. Let
us so order our devotions toward God, that they may be a means of promoting
our worldly business and affairs, and doing Good among men. Let us take our fit
times of retirement and abstraction, that we may the more freely converse with
God and pour out our souls before him; but let this be only to the end that we
may appear abroad again more brisk and lively in vanquishing the Temptations
that come in our way, and more prompt and readily disposed to every good work:
This is to imitate our Lord Jesus, to walk as we have him for an example. This
is a life more suitable to the contrivance and the genius of his Religion,
which is more accommodated to Cities and public Societies, than to Cloisters
and Deserts. And lastly, Mat. 5.16.
this is to walk in a conformity to his command who has bid us make our light
so to shine before men that they may see our good works and glorify our Father
which is in Heaven.

But Fourthly and lastly, If it be a thing so necessary that every man should
do Good in his life as has been represented, then how much to be reproved are
they that do no Good till their death? That live scrapingly and uncharitably
and uselesly to the world all their lives long, and then when they come to die,
think to Atone for their sins and neglects of this kind, by showing some
extraordinary Bounty to the poor, or devoting some part of their Estates to
public or pious uses.

I must confess this kind of proceeding does to me seem just like the business
of putting off a man's repentance to his deathbed. It is absolutely necessary
that a Man should repent though it be never so late; and so it is that he
should do good: if he have done little Good in his life, he is bound as he
loves his soul to show some extraordinary uncommon instances of Charity and a
Public Spirit when he comes to die. But then it is here as it is with the long
delaying of Repentance, the deferring it so long has robbed the man of the
greatest part of the praise and the comfort he might have expected from it. His
Rewards in Heaven will be much less though his good deeds should be accepted,
but he is infinitely uncertain whether they will or no. It must be a very great
act of Generosity and Charity that can obtain a pardon for a whole life of
uncharitableness.

Let us all therefore labor and study to do Good in our lives, let us be daily
giving evidences to the World of our kind and charitable disposition, and let
not that be the first which is discovered in our last Will and Testament. If
God has blessed us with worldly goods, let us distribute them as we see
occasion in our life time, when every one may see we do it voluntarily; and not
stay till we must be forced to part with them whether we will or no, for that
will blast the credit of our good deeds both with God and man.

I have said enough concerning the first point recommended in the Text, viz.
doing Good. I now come briefly to Treat of the other, that is, Rejoicing, which
is equally a part of the business of this day.

There is no Good (says Solomon) in any earthly thing; or there is nothing
better for any Man than to rejoice and to do Good.

The Rejoicing her recommended, is capable of two senses, the first more
general and more concerning us as Christians, the other more particular and
which more immediately concerns us as we are here met upon this occasion.

In the first place by Rejoicing we may take to be meant, a constant habit of
joy and cheerfulness, so that we are always contented and well pleased, always
free from those anxieties and disquiets and uncomfortable reflections that make
the lives of mankind miserable. This now is the Perfection of Rejoicing, and it
is the utmost degree of Happiness that we are here capable of. It must be
granted indeed that not many do arrive to this state, but yet I doubt not but
that it is a state that may be attained at least in a great measure in this
world. Otherwise the Holy Men in Scripture, and particularly the Apostles of
our Lord would never have recommended it to us so often as they have done.
Rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 9 16. Phil. 4.4.
says S. Paul to the Thessalonians. And to the Philipians, Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice.

The way to attain to this happy condition does consist chiefly in these three
things: First a great innocence and virtue, a behaving our selves so in the
world that our Consciences shall not reproach us. This St. Paul lays as the
Foundation of Rejoicing, This (says he) is our rejoicing, 2 Cor. 1.12,
the Testimony of our Conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity I have
had my conversation in this world. It is in vain to think of any true solid Joy
or Peace or Contentment without a hearty Practice of all the duties of our
Religion, so that we can satisfy our selves of our own sincerity before God.

And then secondly, To make us capable of this constant Rejoicing besides the
innocence of our lives there must go a firm and hearty persuasion of God's
particular Providence; a belief that he not only dispenses all events that
come to pass in the World, even the most inconsiderable; but that the measure
of the Dispensations of his Providence is infinite Wisdom and Goodness and
nothing else: so that nothing does or ever can happen to us in particular, or
to the world in general but what is for the best. Now when we firmly believe
this and frequently attend to it, how can we be either solicitous for the
future or discontented at the present events of things, let them fall out never
so cross to our desires and expectations? This is the best Antidote in the
world (and an effectual one it is) against all trouble and vexation and
uneasiness that can happen to us upon any occasion whatsoever, to wit, the
consideration that all things are managed by an infinitely wise and good God,
and will at last prove for the best, how unaccountable soever they appear to us
at present. And this is that which the wise man insinuates in the verse before
the Text, when he says that God has made every thing beautiful in his season.

Thirdly, Another requisite both for the procuring and preserving this
continual cheerfulness and rejoicing, is a frequent and fixed attention to the
great rewards of the other world, which God has promised to all that truly
love him and endeavor to please him. This consideration will extremely add to
our comfort, and contribute to our Rejoicing under all the miseries and
afflictions that we can possibly fall into, namely, that whatsoever condition
we are in here we shall certainly in a little time be in a most happy and
glorious one, and the worse our circumstances are in this life, the greater (if
we be good) shall be our happiness in the next, 2. Cor. 4.17.
for these light afflictions (as S. Pual tells us) which endure but for a
moment, do work for us a far more exceeding weight of glory.

This then is the joy that we are to endeavor after in the first place, to be
constantly well pleased and contented with our present condition, whatever it
be, and these are the ways to attain to it.

But Secondly, There is another more particular Notion of Rejoicing, and which
I conceive Solomon does chiefly intend in the words of the Text, and that is
the free and comfortable enjoyment of the good things of this life that God
has blessed us with, in opposition to a pinching and penurious way of living.
This I say seems to be the notion of Rejoicing that the Text speaks of, as
appears by the following verse. Solomon having told us in the Text, that there
is nothing better for a man than to rejoice and do Good, he adds by way of
explication of what he meant by rejoicing, these words, that every Man should
eat and drink and enjoy the good of all his labors, for it is the gift of God.
And frequently in this Book of Ecclesiastes does he persuade to this kind of
rejoicing. Thus in Chap. 2. ver. 24. there is nothing better for a man, than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy Good in
his labor, this also I saw it was from the hand of God. And in Chap. 5. ver.
18. Behold that which I have seen, it is good and comely for one to eat and
drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labors that he takes under the sun
all the days of his life which God gives him, for it is his portion. And in
Chap. 6. ver. 1, 2. he represents it as a great evil that he has seen under
the sun, and yet such an evil as is common among men, that a man to whom God
has given riches, and wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his
soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but
a stranger eats it, this (says he) is vanity and an evil disease.

And there is certainly great reason in what he says. For to have a plentiful
portion of the good things of this life and not to have the heart to make use
of them for the enjoyment of our selves and friends; for the refreshing us
under the toil that this life does expose us to; for the promoting Acquaintance
and Society, and the rendering our condition as easy as may be; is as
unaccountable a folly as we can be guilty of, and makes us really as poor and
necessitous as those that want bread, but only not so pityable.

Taking now this to be the sense of rejoicing in the Text, (as I believe it is)
we have from hence a good warrant for this day's Meeting, for we come together
to rejoice in Solomon's sense, that is, to eat and drink and to enjoy the good
of our labors, it being the gift of God so to do.

And this practice of ours is not only reasonable in it self, but is commended
to us by the example of God's people both under the Law and the Gospel. The
Jews by the appointment of God himself were to meet every year three times at
Jerusalem, the Capital City of the Nation, See Deuteronomy. 16.
to feast and to rejoice before the Lord, as we have it in the express words of
Moses. And the Christians for near 200 years after our Saviors had their
Agapae, their Feasts of charity, wherein they met together both poor and rich
to enjoy and make merry one with another. It is true these Feasts were at
length left off by common consent, because there grew abuses in them; they
became occasions of Luxury and excess; and so matters of scandal to our
Religion. But this was not an ill reflection upon the thing it self, which was
innocent and commendable, but upon the abuse of the thing. A good and laudable
institution was perverted to evil purposes. However this very consideration
ought to make us very careful of our carriage and behavior in these our
Meetings, lest we fall under the same inconveniences; which that we may
prevent, Two things are especially needful to be taken care of by us.

First, That we do not exceed the bounds of rejoicing prescribed to Christians,
that is, that we avoid all excess, and use the Creatures of God, soberly and
temperately, so as to give offense to none, nor to make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

And Secondly, That we take care to perform and make good the ends and designs
of these Feasts of rejoicing; which ends, if we will take our measures from
those Laws that God gave to his own People in the Old Testament, and which the
modern Jews themselves in their Commentaries take notice of; and which are so
reasonable in themselves that without any Authority they do recommend
themselves to us, are these four following.

First, That we Rejoice before the Lord, that is, that we make our humble
acknowledgments and return our due praises and thanks to him for all the good
things he has blessed us with in our lives, confessing that all we have is
from his free bounty and goodness, and that our Meeting together is to praise
his name upon that account. And this was the thing that was meant by those
solemn Sacrifices that the Jews were bound to offer at Jerusalem at their
Annual Feasts.

The second end of these Feasts is to take occasion from hence to learn our
duty, to be instructed in all the branches of that obedience we owe unto God.
For as Maimonides observes, that was one of the principal reasons of God's
calling together all the people of the Jews to appear at the Feast of
Tabernacles, to wit, that they might hear the Law read unto them; and this
design is I suppose pursued by us in our choosing this Place to Assemble in.

A third end of these Feasts (as the same Maimonides tells us) and is manifest
from Scripture is to promote acquaintance and Friendship, and brotherly love
one with another. And this is a very noble end, and serves many excellent
purposes, and nothing can be beyond it except,

The fourth and last end of these Meetings, which is to do Good; to exercise
our Charity toward our poor indigent Brethren. No man at the Solemn Feasts of
the Jews was to appear before the Lord empty; Exodus 23.15.
He was to bring his offering not only to God by way of recognition and
acknowledgement to him: but for the poor also that they might rejoice as well
as he. This is well observed by Maimonides from Deuteronomy. 16.14. where it is thus
said, Thou shall rejoice in thy feast, thou and thy son, and thy daughter, thy
manservant and thy maidservant, the Levite and the stranger, the fatherless
and the widow that are within thy gates.

This then is the great end of our Assembly, that not only we, but the
Fatherless and the widow; all of our Country, that need our Charity, may
rejoice with us and for us. And this is that which Solomon joins with rejoicing
in the Text, There is no good in them but for a man to rejoice and do Good: and
what that Man who by the sentence of God was declared the wisest of all men
has thus joined together, let none of us presume to put asunder. These are the
Rules, and these are the ends that we are to observe in this our Feast; and let
us all for the Honor of Christ's Religion, and for the credit of our
particular Country, Charge the observation of them upon our selves: which if we
can all resolve to do, I can safely apply to every one of you, that saying of
Solomon in the ninth Chapter of this Book of Ecclesiastes, and the seventh
Verse, with which I shall conclude: Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and
drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy work.

SERMON IV.
PREACHED AT The SPITTLE. On the 14th of April, 1680.
1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be
not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.


GROTIVS his Note upon this Text is this, that St. Paul now having finished
this his Epistle to Timothy, it comes into his Mind that there was need of some
more particular application to be made, and admonition to be given to those
Wealthy Merchants, with which the City of Ephesus (where Timothy resided) did
then abound; and upon this consideration he inserts those words I have now
read, charge them that are rich in this World, etc.

How famous soever the City of Ephesus was at that time for Wealth or Trade,
there is little doubt to be made that this City of ours (praised be God for it)
does in those respects, at this day, equal if not much exceed it. And therefore
that which St. Paul thought of so great importance as to give especial orders
to Timothy, to press upon the Ephesian Citizens, will always be very sit to be
seriously recomended to you in this place; and more especially at this time,
since it is the proper work of the day. Waving therefore wholly the argument of
our Savior's Resurrection, upon which you have before been entertained; I
apply my self without farther Preface to conclude this Easter Solemnity with
that, with which St. Paul concludes his Epistle, viz. with a short discourse of
the Rich Man's great duty and concernment, which is in these words plainly set
forth to us.

In them we may take notice of these three Generals, which I shall make the
heads of my following discourse.

First, The duty it self incumbent upon those that are Rich in this World,
expressed in several particulars.

Secondly, The great Obligation that lies upon them to the performance of it,
which we may gather from the Vehemence and the Authority with which St. Paul
orders Timothy to press it, charge them (says he) that are Rich that they be
not, etc.

Thirdly, The mighty encouragement they have to observe this charge, for hereby
they lay up to themselves in store a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life.

First, I begin with the Rich Man's Duty, which is here expressed in four
points, two of them Negative, teaching what things he ought to avoid; the other
two Positive, teaching what he ought to practice. They are these.

I. That he should not be high minded. II. That he should not trust in
uncertain riches. III. That he should trust in the living God. IV. That he
should do good, he rich in good works, etc.
The first thing that is given in charge to all those that are rich in this
World, is that they be not high minded, (...), that they do not think too well
of themselves for being rich, and take occasion from thence to despise others
that are in meaner circumstances than they. They are not to value themselves a
jot the more, or to think worse of others upon account of that outward fortune
they are possessed of, but are in all their conversation to express the same
moderation, and humanity, and easiness, and obligingness of temper to those
they have to do with, even the meanest and the poorest, as if they stood with
them upon the same level.

And with very great reason has St. Paul given this caution to rich Men. For
by the experience of the World it has been always found, that Wealth is apt to
puff up, to make Men look big, and to breed in them a contempt of others; but
what little ground there is for this, is easily seen by any that will give
themselves leave to consider.

For what does any of these worldly goods (which make us keep at distance)
really add to a Man in point of true worth and value? do they either recommend
him more to God or to wise Men, or even to himself, if he have a grain of sense
in him, than if he was without them? Certainly they do not. For that for which
either God approves us, or wise Men esteem us, or we can speak peace and
content to our selves, is not any thing without us, any thing that fortune has
given to us; but something that we may more truly call our own, something that
we were neither born with, nor could any body hinder us of, nor can be taken
from us, that is to say, the Riches of our Minds, our virtuous and commendable
qualites.

A Man is no more a fit object of esteem, merely for being rich, than the Beast
he rides on (if I may use the old comparison) is of commendation for the costly
Trappings he wears.

Secondly, Another caution given to those that are rich in this World, is, that
they should not trust in uncertain riches. This likewise is a temptation to
which they are exposed, and our Savior has very lively set it forth to us in
the Parable of the Rich man in the Gospel, who having got mighty Possessions,
and filled his Barns, thought of nothing farther; but presently says to
himself, Luke 12.16, etc.
Soul take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for
many Years: But the conclusion of that Parable does sufficiently show the
vanity and ridiculousness of this trusting in our riches; for a message comes
to him from God, Thou fool, this night shall thy Soul be required of thee, and
then whose shall all these things be that thou have provided? It is the
greatest madness in the World to please, or speak Peace to our selves upon
account of that, which we are not sure to enjoy a day, but we may for any thing
we know be snatched away the next moment into another World, and so must leave
the Joy and Pride of our Hearts to we know not whom.

But supposing we had some certainty of our lives, and could promise our selves
that we should not leave our Wealth for some competent time, yet we have no
certainty that our Wealth will not leave us. How prosperous soever our present
circumstances be, yet we cannot ensure the continuance of them; there are a
thousand accidents may happen every day which may strip us as naked as when we
came into the World; and we may be reduced to the extremities of those who are
now the greatest objects of our Compassion and Charity; and this is that which
St. Paul in the Text insinuates when he calls them uncertain riches. But what
are we then to trust in, if not in these things? this St. Paul shows in the
words following, which make,

The third instance of the Rich Man's Duty, Let them (says he) trust in the
living God, who gives to all Men richly to enjoy. The sense of it is this: Let
them from the bottom of their Hearts acknowledge God to be the Author and giver
of all that they possess: How much soever their Heads projected, or their Hands
labored, or their Parents and Friends were kind to them, yet it is the
Providence of the Almighty to which they owe all. The same divine foresight and
contrivance that feeds the Fowls of the Air, and clothes the Flowers of the
Field, does also give them richly all things to enjoy; and therefore upon that
Providence are they entirely to depend, as much excercising Faith in God, and
reposing confidence in him, as if they had no visible provisions made for them:
And as heartily returning thanks to their great Benefactor for every Blessing
they have (seem it never so much their own already,) as a hungry Man that knows
not where to get a meal, would to him that should give him a plentiful
entertainment. In a word, those that have all things in this World must as
devoutly look up to God, both in gratefully ascribing to him every enjoyment
either past or present, and in a full trust and relyance upon him for what is
to come, as those that live from hand to mouth; since it is the same Divine
Providence that feeds and maintains both the Poor and the Rich, and of his
infinite goodness gives to all that fear him, even to the Poor as well as the
Rich, all things to enjoy; and though to the one more plentifully, yet to the
other perhaps with as much content though not in so great abundance.

The Fourth and last part of the Rich Man's Duty here mentioned concerns the
right use of that Wealth that God has given him. Now the right use of Riches
according to the Text does consist in these things. That those that have them
do Good with them, that they be rich in good works, that they be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate.

If we suppose every one of these distinct phrases in the Text, to denote a
distinct thing, then we are to give this account of the passage, That St. Paul
here uses a gradation in his speech, begins with the lowest and most general
expressions of Charity, and so goes on to higher degrees of it; in each
following phrase intending to say something more great or particular than what
he had said in the former, which is a most usual and elegant scheme of
Rhetoric. According to this account (as the words are very capable of it)
there are four things here prescribed to the Rich Man in the use of his Riches.

1. That he do good with them, that is the most general point, that is, that he
employ them some way or other for the benefit of others. He must not live to
himself alone, he must design greater things than the getting an Estate, or the
raising a Family; if others be not advantaged by him, he is Rich to no purpose.
And therefore it will concern him to do Kindnesses and good Offices where he
can, to be liberal and hospitable, to oblige his Friends and Relations all ways
possible, to assist all about him with his counsel, to encourage them by his
example; in a word, to make use of that Interest and Reputaton that his Fortune
has given him above others to do kindnesses to them.

2. He must not think it sufficient to do this good now and then, upon
particular and more rare occasions; but he must abound in acts of goodness.
That is the meaning of the Apostle's second expression of being rich in good
works. He must so study and improve in the Art of doing good, that his good
Deeds do equal his Riches; nay the words import that his true Riches are only
placed in, and to be measured by his good Deeds. He is not to think himself
farther rich than he is rich in good works. The more plentifully God has
Blessed him with worldly Wealth, the more diligent and industrious and
solicitous he must be to do good with it, otherwise he is poorer than those
that perhaps he now and then out of Charity relieves.

And 3ly, Lest this doing good, and being rich in good works should only be
interpreted of doing such kindnesses and good deeds that cost us nothing but
the expense of our time, or the employment of our pains, or the use of our
interest with others; the Apostle adds this farther thing, that the rich Man
must be ready to distribute; that is, very free to part with his Money
according to the proportion God has blessed him with, upon every occation of
real and useful Charity; whether that Charity be of a more public nature, as
for instance, when it is expressed for the advancing Religion and the service
of God, or for the making standing provision for the Poor, or lastly, any way
for the serving the necessities, or increasing the conveniences of the place
where we live, by any public useful Benefaction: Or 2ly, whether this Charity
be of a more private nature, extending no farther than to particular Persons
that come in our way, whom we are convinced to be real objects of it; to these
likewise we must be ready to distribute; every poor necessitous Person has a
right to part of what we have, if we can really satisfy our selves, that our
Alms will do him a real good, and will not be any great prejudice to us.

But 4thly and lastly, The Apostle adds another thing to all this, and that is,
that the rich Man must be willing to communicate. If the sense of this phrase
be different from the former, it will seem to import yet a higher degree of
Liberality. It will import that rich Men should be of such public Spirits, and
so little esteem their Wealth their own, that it should in a manner be made a
common thing, wherein all should share as there was occasion. This is the
notion of (...) or communicating, as it was used in the beginning of
Christianity. S. Luke in Acts 2. having told us that the first Christians
continued in the Apostles Doctrine, and in communicating, presently explains
what he meant by that communion. All (says he v. 44.) that believed were
together and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all Men as every Man had need.

God be thanked the Church of Christ is not now in such circumstances that it
is either needful or reasonable precisely to observe the practice of those
times as to this matter. We are not only not obliged to part with the propriety
of our Estate, and to live in common as the first persecuted Chrstians did, but
we should be highly indiscreet not to say injurious both to our selves and the
public if we did. But this notwithstanding, their practice and the charge here
laid upon us to be communicative, will thus far oblige us, viz. that we
Christians should always retain that public generous Spirit that they in the
first times were acted with. We should sit so loose from the World, and so
unconcerned in the distinction of meum and tuum, that we should make it our
business to do good with what we have, thinking our Wealth best employed when
it is put to that use. And when the cause of God, and the common interest of
our Christian Brethren does require it, we should then as freely part with all
we have as our Predecessors in Christianity did; following herein the Precept
of our Lord to the young Man who came to enquire of him what he should do that
he might inherit Eternal Life, and who was thus answered by our Savior, that
though he had kept the Commandments, yet he wanted one thing to make him
perfect (that is to make him a true Christian) and that was, to sell all that
he had and give to the poor and come and follow him, and then he should have
treasure in Heaven, Mat. 19.21.

Thus have I given you a brief account of each particular of the rich Man's
Duty as it is summed up in the Text; and some perhaps will think it is severe
enough; whether it be so or no I now dispute not, but I am sure it is severely
required of them. This we may gather from St. Paul's way of urging it, charge
them (says he) that are rich in this World that they be not high minded, etc.
He does not say, recommend this to them as a thing that is very reasonable in
it self, and will highly become them; he does not say, put them in mind of it
as a thing by which they may gain a great deal of Honor and Reputation to
their Religion; he does not say, exhort and persuade them to it, as a thing
that will at last conduce to their own advantage: But he says, charge it upon
them, intimating that there was a necessity they should thus practice, it was a
duty indispensably incumbent upon all of them; and this is the Second General
Point I am to insist on.

And certainly this Order of St. Paul to Timothy is a standing warrant, a
perpetual commission to all Ministers of the Gospel, to charge the same thing
upon all rich Men in all places and times. But in the pressing and enforcing
this charge I shall not so much have regard to the three former Duties as to
the last, which concerns the doing good with our Wealth, the exercising acts of
Bounty and Charity as we have opportunity. Charge them that are rich in this
World, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Now in Four respects especially, rich Men are thus to be charged, and a
necessity lies upon them to practice accordingly, viz.

In point of Gratitude, Justice, Religion, Self-preservation.


If all these put together do not make the obligation indispensable I know not
what will. I will speak briefly of each particular.

First, if rich Men do not thus employ their Wealth, they are guilty of great
Ingratitude. That is the least evil imputation they fall under, and yet to any
ingenuous Man it is heavy enough, for to call a Man Unthankful is as great a
reproach as you can cast upon him.

Whoever acknowledges the Being of God, and owns his Providence in the World,
must necessarily believe that all that portion of good things which he enjoys
in this Life does proceed from that God as the Author and Fountain, though they
be immediately conveyed to him by the Ministry of second Causes; and his
Reason and Humanity will suggest to him, that there are some returns of
Gratitude to be made to Him that of his free bounty has thus obliged him; but
what returns can he make to God for his Blessings, other than in communicating
those Blessings among his fellow Creatures? To think that a verbal
acknowledgment of God's favors is a suitable return, is against the common
sense of Mankind, who know that there goes more to a Man's being truly grateful
than the entertaining the Person that obliged him with fair speeches and
professions of his Obligations: And on the other side, to think of requiting
God in a proper sense, by returning real kindnesses to him for those he has
done to us, is equally absurd; for all the services we can pay to him, cannot
add any thing to his infinite Blessedness. How then must we express our
thankfulness for the Wealth that he has bestowed upon us? Why he himself has
prescribed the way to us. He has devolved his right to our kindness upon our
Brethren. He has deputed them to receive the real testimonies of our gratitude
to him, and whatsoever obligations we put upon them, he takes them as an
expression of our Love and Thankfulness to him.

This our Savior himself has told us in express words, in the 25 of S. Matt.
Inasmuch (says he) as ye have done it, i. e. done acts of kindness and charity
to one of the least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. And the
charitable contributions of the Hebrew Christians to their indigent Brethren,
is by S. Paul styled a work and labor of Love showed to God himself, Heb. 6.
If therefore rich Men would not be unkind and ungrateful to him that gave them
all they have, there is a necessity they should do good, etc.

Secondly, The Practice of this must likewise be charged upon them in point of
Justice as well as Gratitude, it is a piece of dishonesty not to do good with
the wealth that God has given us, for it is a falsifying our trust, it is an
embezling our Master's Goods, and putting them to quite other uses than those
he gave us them for. We are not to think that God ever made a Man rich for his
own sake alone, for the serving his own turns, and the satisfaction of his own
private desires with-without respect to the community. No at the best we are
but the Stewards of God's Blessings. A stock of Talents he has committed to
all of us, to some in greater and to others in smaller proportions, and out of
this stock he has given us leave to make a provision for the necessities and
conveniences of our selves and our families, but we must not think all our own
that accrues to us, so that it is at our liberty whether we will hoard it up or
spend it profusely. No, we must have regard to the rest of our Master's
Servants. After we have served our own needs we must dispense the surplusage
among the Family of God, otherwise we are false and wicked Stewards, we abuse
and misemploy our Master's Talents, and a severe account we shall one day
render for so doing.

Thirdly, Men's Religion and Christianity are also deeply concerned in this
point. Works of Charity are so essential to all Religion, and more especially
to that which we call Christian that without them it is but an empty name in
whosoever professes it. Let Men pretend what they will, let them be never so
Orthodox in their belief, or regular in their conversation, or strict in the
performance of those Duties that relate to the worship of God, yet if they be
hard hearted and uncharitable, if God has given them Wealth, and they have not
Hearts to do good with it, they have no true piety toward God. They may have a
name to live, but they are really dead. An unmerciful Christian, or a Religious
covetous Man, are terms that imply a contradiction. For the satisfying you of
this, I shall but need to put these following questions.

Can that Man be accounted Religious that neither loves God nor his Neighbor?
Sure he cannot, for these two things are the whole of Religion, as the Holy
Scripture often assures us; but now the Covetous Man neither does the one nor
the other. His Neighbors he does not love, that is certain; for if he did they
would find some fruits of it; unless this be to be accounted Love, James 2.14,
etc.
to give them good words, to say to a Brother or a Sister that is naked and
destitute of daily food, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, when
notwithstanding they give them not those things that be needful for the Body.
But this kind of Love S. James has long ago declared not to be worth any
thing. And as for the Love of God, another Apostle has put it out of doubt,
that the uncharitable Man has no such thing in him. 1 John 3.17.
Whosoever (says S. John) has this World's good and sees his Brother have need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? cap. 4.20.
For he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen?

Can he be thought a Religious Man or a true Christian, that wants the two main
qualifications that go to the making up a Disciple of Christ, that is to say,
Faith and Repentance? yet this does he that is rich in this World, but is not
rich in good works. Good works are the very soul of Faith, and it is no more
alive without them than the Body is without the Spirit, as S. James has
expressly told us. Jam. 2.26.
If we mean that our Faith should avail us any thing it must work (or be made
perfect) by Charity, Gal. 5.6.
says S. Paul, for though a Man have all faith so that he could remove
mountains, i. e. though he be so heartily persuaded of the truth of Christ's
Religion as in the strength of his belief to be able to work Miracles, as was
usual in the first times of Christianity, yet if he have not charity his Faith
is nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2.
If it be said that the Charity that S. Paul makes so necessary to effectual
Faith, is not giving Alms but quite another thing, for according to him a Man
may give all his goods to feed the poor, and yet want the Charity that he
speaks of: I answer, it is true a Man may give Alms, and very largely, and yet
want that Charity that S. Paul here so much recommends; but then on the other
side, none can have that Charity that he speaks of, but they will certainly
express it in Alms and Bounty as they have ability and opportunity: So that for
all this suggestion Alms and Bounty are absolutely necessary to the Efficacy of
Faith if there be opportunity of doing them: The plain account of this matter
is this, S. Paul speaks of Charity with respect to its inward principle in the
heart, which consists in an universal kindness and good will to the whole
Creation of God; and we speak of it with respect to the outward fruits of it in
the Life and Conversation, which are all sorts of good works, especially works
of Mercy and Bounty: But both these come to the same thing as to our purpose,
for the one always follows the other, wherever there is Charity in the heart
it must of necessity show it self in these kind of actions as there is
occasion, otherwise the Charity is not true but only pretended, for as S. John
has told us, He that loves ((...)) in truth, must love (...) in work and in
deed.

And then as for Repentance; Charity and Almsgiving is a necessary ingredient
into that also. Luke 3.10, 11.
When S. John Baptist came preaching Repentance unto Israel, the people asked
him saying what shall we do? meaning in what manner they should express their
Repentance: his answer was this, He that has two Coats let him impart to him
that has none, and he that has meat, let him do so likewise; and suitable to
this was the Prophet's advice to the King of Babylon, when he exhorts him to
Repentance, Dan. 4.27.
break off thy sins (says he) by righteousness, and thy iniquity by showing
mercy to the poor; that is, evidence thy Repentance by thy Almsgiving and
Charity.

Furthermore, can he be either a good Man or a good Christian, that lives in
the habitual neglect of that, which of all other Virtues God in Scripture seems
to set the greatest value upon; and contrariwise practices that which God has
most particularly declared his hatred and aversion to? Yet thus does he that is
not charitable with what he has. So highly acceptable to God are works of
Mercy and Charity, that they are declared to be the sacrifices with which he is
well pleased, Heb, 13.8. the things in which he does delight, Jerem. 9.24. and
blessed and happy are they pronounced that do them, Pro. 22.9. cap. 14.21. for
hereby Men become the children of God, Luke 6.35. and entitled to his more
especial care and protection, Ps. 41.1. etc. nay so dear do they render a Man
to his Maker, that the wise Son of Sirach scrupled not to recommend the
practice of them in these terms, Be thou (says he) a Father to the Fatherless,
Ecclus. 4.10.
and instead of a Husband unto their Mother; so shall thou be as the Son of the
Most High, and he shall love thee more than thy own Mother does.

On the other side, if we will believe the Scripture, there is nothing more
odious to God than the contrary qualities and practices. The love of money,
which is the foundation of all uncharitableness, 1 Timothy 6.10.
is in Scripture called the root of all evil; as certainly the greatest evils
and mischeifs in the World do often take their beginning from thence. Those
that are covetous are styled by the name of Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5.
than which no more hateful appellation can be given to a Man in the Sacred
Language. It is said of the covetous that God abhors them; Psalm. 10.3.
which implies the utmost aversion that the Divine nature is capable of, to any
sort of Men or things. The uncharitable and hard hearted Men God has declared
he will have no mercy on; Jam. 2.13.
but they shall have judgment without mercy that have showed no mercy.

Fourthly and lastly, a necessity there is, that those that are rich in this
World, should do good and be rich in good works, etc. upon their own account.
Though there were no other tie upon them, yet self-love and self-preservation
would oblige them to it. I meddle not here, how far in point of worldly
interest they are concerned to be charitable, though even the motives drawn
from hence are very considerable. For certainly, Charity is a means not only to
preserve and secure to them what they have, and to make them enjoy it more
comfortably, but also to increase their store. No Man is ever poorer for what
he gives away in useful Charity, but on the contrary he thrives better for it.
God seldom fails, in this World amply to repay what is thus lent to him,
besides the other Blessings that accompany his store, and go along with it to
hs Children after him. This I am sure is solemnly promised, and in the ordinary
dispensations of Providence we see it generally made good: whereas to the
greedy and penurious Man, all things fall out quite contrary; he may have
Wealth, but he has little comfort in it; for a curse generally attends it, of
which he feels the sad effects in a variously miserable and vexatious life, and
often in either having none, or an unfortunate Posterity.

But this is not the thing that I mean to insist on. This World lasts but for a
while, and it is no great matter how we fare in it; but we have Souls that must
live for ever. If therefore Men have any kindness for them, if they mean not to
be undone to all eternity, it is absolutely necessary they should do good with
what they have. O that uncharitable rich Men would think upon that woe that our
Savior pronounces against them. Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. O that they
would seriously consider and often remember those words of Abraham to the rich
Man in Hell, Luke 16.25.
Son (says he) remember that thou in thy life receivedst thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and thou art tormented. Not that
it is a crime to be rich, or to have good things in our life, no, it is the
inordinate love of their Wealth (to which those that have it are too frequently
prone) and their not employing it to those purposes of doing good for which it
was given; it is these things that bring these curses upon them, and really
make it easier, without an Hyporbole, for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18.25.
Certain it is, there is no one sin that can be named, does more fatally exclude
from Salvation than this we are speaking of. We never find the Prophets, or the
Apostles giving a list of those black crimes that will involve all that are
guilty of them in inevitable destruction, but we are sure to meet with
Covetousness, and all the attendants of it among them; as many instances might
be given. Nay so great is this sin of Uncharitableness, and not doing good with
our Wealth, that God in the final sentence that he shall pass upon wicked Men,
to their condemnation at the last day, seems to take no notice of the other
sins and crimes of their life, but only to censure them for this. Matthew. 25.31,
etc.
Thus we find that when the King having gathared all Nations before him, comes
to pronounce the sentence upon those on his left hand, who are those that are
doomed to everlasting fire; there is no mention made of their criminal actions;
they are not condemned for fraud and oppression, for unbelief and irreligion,
for lewdness and debauchery, though any of these be enough to damn a Man: but
merely for their not doing good, for their not relieving the necessitous, and
excercising other acts of Charity when it was in their power.

Since now from these Considerations it does appear how necessary how
indispensable a Duty it is to do good with what we have, to be rich in good
works, to be ready to distribute, and willing to communicate; let me at this
time charge all of you that are rich in this world, as you would not be
unthankful to your great Benefactor, nor unjust to your Neighbors; as you have
any piety toward God, or any care of your own Souls, that you put it in
practice. And two instances of this great Duty the present occasion, and the
exigence of things does oblige me more particularly to recommend to you.

The first is the business of the Hospitals; the encouraging and promoting that
Charity which the piety of our Ancestors begun, and whose examples their
Successors have hitherto worthily followed, and of which we see excellent
effects at this day; for this we need no better proof than the Report given in
of the great number of poor Children, and other poor people maintained in the
several Hospitals, under the pious care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens of London the year last past.

For these so great instances of Charity what have we to do, but with all
Gratitude to commemorate those noble and public Spirits that first began them;
and with all devotion to put up our prayers to God for all those now alive that
have been promoters and encouragers of such good works; and lastly, with all
cheerfulness and diligence to follow these Patterns by liberally contributing
to their Maintenance and Advancement. These are th Public Banks and Treasuries
in which we may safely lodge that Money which we lend out to God, and may from
him expect the Interest. O what comfort will it be to us when we come to die,
to be able to say to our selves, That portion of goods that God has in his
Providence dispensed to me, I have neither kept unprofitably in a Napkin, nor
squandered it away upon my lusts, but part of it I have put out toward the
restoring my miserable Brethren to to the right use of their reason and
understanding; part of it to the amending Men's manners, and from idle and
dissolute persons redeeming them to virtue and sobriety, and making them some
way profitable to the Public; part of it for the healing the sick, and curing
the wounded, and relieving the miserable and necessitous; and lastly, another
part of it toward the Educating poor helpless Children in useful Arts for
their Bodies, and in the Principles of True Religion for their Souls, that so
both in their Bodies and Spirits they may be in a capacity to glorify God, and
to serve their Country. These are all great things, and in which way soever of
them we lay out our selves, we serve excellent ends of Charity.

But there is another point of useful public Charity, which though the
occasion of this meeting has nothing to do with it, yet the present necessity
of the thing does oblige me seriously to recommend to you. There are few I
believe in this City either ignorant, or insensible of the extreme numerousness
of Beggars in our Streets, and unless care be taken, their number is likely to
increase, for this seems to be a growing evil. I dare not lay the fault of this
upon the defectiveness of our Laws, nor dare I say, that the provisions made
for the Poor, are incompetent or disproportionable to the number of them; for
perhaps the usual public Taxes, and private Free Will Offerings discreetly
managed, would go a great way toward the curing this evil; supposing the
richer Parishes to contribute to the maintaining the poorer. But here is the
misery, we do not sufficiently distinguish between our poor; nor take care to
make provisions for them, according to their respective necessities. There are
some that by reason either of old age, or evil accidents, are perfectly unable
to earn a livelihood for themselves; or to be any way useful to the public,
except by their Prayers and their good examples; and to see such go a begging
is a shame to our Christianity, and a reproach to our Government. There are
others that are fit to labor, and might prove useful Members of the
Commonwealth many ways, if they were rightly managed: now the True Charity to
these is not to relieve them, to the encouragement of their idleness; but to
employ them, to put them into such a way that they may both maintain themselves
and help toward the maintaining of others; and if they refuse this, let them
suffer for their folly; for there is no reason that those should eat that will
not work if they be able. A necessity therefore there is, if ever this
scandalous public nuisance of common begging be redressed, that these four
things be taken care of. 1. That those that cannot work be maintained without
begging. 2. That those that can work and are willing, have such public
provisions made that they may be employed in one way or other, according as
they are capable, and every one receive fruits of his labor proportionable to
his industry. 3. That those that can work and will not, be prosecuted according
to the Laws, as Rogues and Vagrants and Pests of the Kingdom. And lastly, after
such public provisions are made for the maintaining both sorts of Poor that
are objects of Charity; that is, the helpless, and those that endeavor to help
themselves; that all persons be exhorted and directed to put their private
Charity in the right Channel, wholly withdrawing it from the lazy and the lusty
Beggars, lest they be thereby encouraged in their infamous course of life, and
giving it to those who by public order shall be recommended to them.

These things I hope I may without offense recommend to the Wisdom and Care of
the Government of this Honorable City, since there are both Heads enough to
contrive the particular ways of curing these evils, and Hands enough that will
be open to contribute what is needful to so useful a work. Certain it is the
thing is practicable, since it has been, and is practiced in some Towns of
this Nation, and in several beyond the Seas. And that it is needful, there is
none that has any true sense of Charity (which consists as much in taking care
to prevent the miseries and necessities of Mankind, as in relieving them;)
there is none that has any regard to the Reputation of our Religion, or the
Honor and good Government of this City, or Kingdom, but must needs acknowledge.

It is one of the great Glories of this City, that as they have been always
faithful and prudent in the management of those Public Charities that they
have been entrusted with, so have they been very ready to increase and to add
to them. And God without doubt has blessed them the more for this very thing;
as indeed the best atonement that any people can make for the many sins that
the place is guilty of, is the Sacrifice of Alms and Charity. And I hope that
which condemned Sodom, to wit, that there were not ten righteous men found in
it (that is, Men that were of a Public Spirit, that were truly Liberal, and
Bountiful, and Charitable, for that is an usual Notion of Righteousness in the
Old Testament, and there are some passages in this History which make it
probable that it may be the notion of it here) I say, that very thing it is to
be hoped, has and will preserve this City of ours; because, as far as we can
gather, there are in it many times ten such Righteous persons. In truth if
there were not several good Men among us, that by the exemplarity of their
lives, and their Charity, do stand in the gap between the reigning sins of the
times, and the Judgments of God that threaten us for them; it would be a
melancholy thing to think what would become of us. But so long as God is
pleased to continue to us a succession of those that fear God, and hate
covetousness; that make it their business to do good and to serve their
generation, there is hopes that he will yet continue to bless us. And so
gracious has God been to our City and Kingdom in this respect, that (to the
glory of his name be it spoken) whatever boasts they of the Church of Rome are
wont to make of the Charitableness of their Religion, in opposition to the
penuriousness of ours; and reproach us with the bounty and munificence of our
Popish Ancestors, and the barrenness of their Protestant Successors: yet we may
safely affirm that there have been more public works of Charity done in this
City and Kingdom since the Reformation, than can be proved to have been done in
the same compass of years during all the time that Popery prevailed among us.

O therefore let us go on to do this Honor to our Religion, let us go on by
our good works to adorn the doctrine of God that we profess. Let us not only
equal but labor to exceed the Piety and the Publick-spiritedness of our
Forefathers. Let every one both Magistrates and People in their several
capacities, be zealous and vigorous both in consulting, in contriving, and in
acting for the public good as much as is possible.

And for your greater encouragement thus to do, let it be remembered, in the
last place, that besides the outward advantages both public and private that
we reap by being charitable; this is the best course we can take to secure our
everlasting Happiness in the World to come. For to do good with our Wealth, to
be rich in good works, to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, is
(as the Apostle in the Text tells us) the way to lay up to our selves in store
a good Foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal
life. And this is the Third thing I am to insist on from the Text.

I mean not here to trouble you with the Criticisms about the word (...) in the
Text, by disputing whether it should be rendered Foundation as it is in our
Translation; though to lay up a Foundation seems an unusual way of speaking; we
do not lay up Foundations but build upon them: or whether the word should be
taken to signify the Bond or the Evidence that God has given us for the
performance of his part of the Covenant; as it is used by this Apostle
elsewhere, where he tells us that the Foundation of God stands sure having
this seal, that is to say, 2 Timothy 2.19.
that Covenant or Indenture, that God has made with Mankind, stands sure,
and has this Seal put to it; for Men do not put Seals to Foundations but to
Covenants: Or lastly, whether the word should be rendered a Treasure, so as to
read the Text thus, laying up to themselves a good Treasure against the time to
come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Vid. Dr. Hammond in loc.
The original word (say the Learned) is capable or being translated all these
ways, and the last seems as natural as any; for to lay up Treasure to our
selves against the time to come, is a proper way of speaking, and that which
our Savior frequently uses in that very thing we are here treating of. But it
matters not much which of them we pitch upon, for they all come to one sense;
and that is this, That to be very charitable in this World is a good means to
secure to our selves a title to eternal happiness in the next.

But to prevent all misunderstanding, that may happen of this point, I desire
before I speak directly to it, to premise these two things.

First, Though we do maintain with the Ancient Church, the efficacy of Charity
and good works for the furthering a Man's Salvation, yet we utterly reject
those Doctrines which the Modern Romanists have advanced in this matter. The
Popish doctrines about good works are these three following, that good works
are meritorious; do deserve the Favor and the Rewards of God Almighty. Again,
that the surplusage of a Man's good works, that is to say, the merits of so
many of his good deeds, as are over and above what is sufficient to save his
own soul, may by the Church be dispensed out to the benefit of others, they
being part of the Church's treasure; and upon this foundation they ground their
Indulgences. And lastly, that good works, i. e. the Alms of dying persons, that
are given to the Church or Clergy, will by the means of the Masses and Diriges
that they purchase to be said for them, be effectual for the freeing their
Souls out of the Torments of Purgatory. These are the Popish Doctrines
concerning good works, which we all justly reject, as having no foundation in
Scripture, or good Antiquity; and being apparently contrived for the promoting
their secular gain and advantage. But then as for the necessity, or the
conduciveness of good works to a Man's Salvation, which is all we here plead
for, I know no good Protestant but does as earnestly contend for it as any of
that Communion.

Secondly, Whatever efficacy we attribute to works of Charity as a means for
the obtaining eternal life; we would not be understood hereby to exclude the
necessary concurrence of other Virtues and Graces to that end. It does not from
hence follow, that it is an indifferent matter what Religion a Man is of, or
what kind of life he leads, if he be but mighty bountiful to the Poor, and do a
great deal of good in his life. No, how acceptable to God soever the Sacrifice
of Alms and Charity be, yet we are not to expect it shall be available to our
Salvation, unless it proceed from a pure Heart, and be offered with a lively
Faith in Jesus Christ, and accompanied with a sincere endeavor to obey all
God's Commandments. Eternal Happiness is not proposed in the Gospel as a reward
of any one single Virtue, no not of the greatest, but of all of them together;
if indeed there can be any true Virtue where there is not a conjunction of all;
I say, if there can be, for St. James seems to affirm that there cannot.
Whosoever (says he) shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
Jam. 2.10.
he is guilty of all.

But now having said this by way of caution, to prevent all occasion that any
may take from our so earnestly pressing Charity, to undervalue and neglect
other Duties: It cannot be denied on the other side, that very great effects
are by our Savior and his Apostles, ascribed to this virtue with respect to
Men's Salvation in the other World. Luke 6.30, 35.


In the 6. of St. Luke, our Lord thus advises, Love (says he) your enemies,
give to him that asks, do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, so shall
your reward be great, and ye shall be the children of the most highest. Now
sure to be entitled to great rewards, and to be the children of the most high,
does look farther than this present World. Our Savior without doubt means the
same thing here, that he expresses upon the same occasion in another place,
viz. they (those that you do good to) cannot recompense you, Luke 14.14.
but you shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the just.

Again, Luke 16.
the Parable of the unjust Steward, that provided so well for himself against a
bad time out of his Master's Goods, is wholly designed to this purpose; and
that the Application of it sufficiently shows, for our Savior having said that
the Lord of this Steward commended him for his providence and care of himself,
he thus applies it to all his Disciples. verse 9.
Wherefore I say unto you, make you friends to your selves of the Mammon of
unrighteousness ( i. e. of these false deceitful riches) that when you fail you
may be received into everlasting habitations; plainly declaring, that the best
provision that rich Men can make for themselves against the time of their
death, in order to their reception into the other World, must be the charitable
actions they do with their Wealth while they live here.

Lastly, Luke 12.33.
In another place our Savior says the very same thing in effect that is said
in the Text; for this is his counsel to all that mean to be happy in the next
life, viz. that they sell that they have (that is, when the times are such that
it is reasonable so to do) that they give alms; for thereby they provide to
themselves bags which wax not old, a Treasure in the Heavens where no thief
approaches, nor moth corrupts.

To these three Texts of our Savior's, I shall add three others of three of
his Apostles, which speak just to the same effect, and with them I shall
conclude. The first is that of St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews; where
having spoken most severe things, and denounced no less than Hell fire against
the false Brethren among them, yet thus he comforts the Church to whom he
writes. Heb. 6.9.
But beloved (says he) we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
do accompany Salvation, though we thus speak. And what I pray is the reason he
is thus persuaded? Verily this, ver. 11.
for God (says he) is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love,
which you have showed to his name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and
yet do minister. It was purely their Charity to the Brethren, that made him
have these good hopes of them, that they were in a state of Salvation. Though
that Church as to other things was in a very degenerate condition, yet
considering they had been laborious and diligent in the exercise of Charity,
and still continued so to be, God would not forget them, nay he was not so
unrighteous as to forget them. And then, that which follows in the next verse
is very observable; verse 11.
And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence (to wit, in the
practice of Charity) to the full assurance of hope unto the end. If they would
have their hopes of a future life assured to them, the way to do it was to
persevere in their diligent attendence to works of Mercy, and Kindness, and
Charity.

The second passage is that of St. John. Hereby (says he) perceive we the love
of God toward us, 1 John 3. 16. etc.
because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for
the Brethren. But whosoever has this World's good, and sees his Brother has
need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love
of God in him? My little Children, let us not love in word; neither in tongue,
but indeed and in truth, and hereby we know that we are of the truth and shall
assure our hearts before him, I pray mind that; by our charitable disposition
and doing good to our Brethren; by this we know we are true Disciples of Jesus
Christ, and this is that, that will assure our hearts, will give us confidence
to appear before God at the last day when he comes to judge the World. And this
is a point that the Apostle thinks so considerable, that he goes over with it
again in the next verse, Beloved if our hearts condemn us not ( i. e. condemn
us not as to this point of Love and Charity) then have we confidence toward
God, and whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of him, because we do those things
that are pleasing in his sight.

The last Text to this purpose that I defire may be taken notice of, is that of
St. Peter, Above all things, my Brethren, 1 Pet. 4.8.
have fervent Charity among your selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude
of sins. O how comfortable are these words! there is none of us, even the best,
but has a multitude of sins to answer for, by what means now must we obtain,
that these sins shall be covered? that is, shall be forgiven; Psalm. 33.1.
for covering of sins is the forgiveness of them in the Scripture Language.
Why, the Apostle has directed us to the method, above all things put on
Charity, for it is Charity that shall cover the multitude of sins. Charity is
of that power with God, that it alone is able to overcome the malignity of many
of our sins and frailties, that would otherwise do us mischief: If any thing
can make atonement for the carelessness and the many failings of our lives, and
prevent the punishment that is due to them, it is to be very charitable, and to
do much good: Charity covers a multitude of sins in this life. A great many
temporal judgments, that would otherwise have fallen upon us for our sins, are
hereby prevented, and that not only private ones but public too: And I think
it no Popery to affirm that Charity will cover a multitude of sins in the other
life also. That is, whoever is of a truly charitable disposition, and does a
great deal of good in his generation, though he may have a great many
infirmities and miscarriages to answer for; yet if he be sincerely virtuous in
the main, and so capable of the rewards of the other world; his other failings
will be overlooked, they will be buried in his good deeds, and the Man shall be
rewarded notwithstanding. Or if he be a vicious person, and so must of
necessity fall short of the glory that shall be revealed; yet still in
proportion, the good he has done in his life will cover the multitude of sins.
Though it will not be available for the making him happy, because he is not
capable of being so; yet it will be for the lessening his punishment. He shall
be in a much more supportable condition among the miserable, than those that
have been unmerciful, or cruel, or uncharitable in their lives. O therefore
what remains, but that considering all these things we should be steadfast, 1
Cor. 25.18.
unmovable, always abounding in these works of the Lord, for as much as we
know that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord? 2 Pet. 1.5. etc.
Giving all diligence to add to Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue, Knowledge; and to
Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to patience, Godliness;
and to Godliness, Brotherly Kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity. verse
1^.
By our good works making our calling and election sure, (so some Copies have
the 10th verse of 1 Pet. 1.) that doing these things we may never fall; but an
entrance may be ministered to us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

SERMON V.
PREACHED AT BOW-CHURCH, On the 29th of September, 1680.
Psalm cxij. 4. To the Upright there arises Light in the Darkness: --


GOdliness, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4.8.
has the promise of this life, as well as of that which is to come. Of this
Proposition of his, the Psalm we have now before us, may seem to be an
Explication or Paraphrase.

For in this Psalm Two things are designed, a description of the Pious Man; and
a description of his Blessedness in this Life: each of which is done in five
instances or particulars.

The terms wherein the Pious Man is here discrib'd, are these following.

First, He is one that Fears God and greatly delights in his Commandments,
v. 1.

Secondly, He is one that is Righteous and Upright in his Conversation, ver. 4.
and 6.

Thirdly, He is one that is Prudent and Discreet in the managing of his
Affairs, verse 5. He guides his affairs with discretion.

Fourthly, He it one whose Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, v. 7.

Lastly, He is one that is extremely Charitable. He is gracious and full of
Compassion, ver. 4. He shows favor and lends, ver. 5. He has dispersed,
he has given to the poor, ver. 9.

Now the Blessedness of such a Man as this, as to this Life, is described in
the five instances following.

The first of which is, A great and happy Posterity; thus, ver. 2. His seed
shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the Upright shall be blessed.

The second is, A Plentiful and an Ample Fortune; thus in the third verse,
Riches and Plenteousness shall be in his house.

The third is, A lasting Fame and Reputation; thus again in the third verse,
His Righteousness remains for ever; and likewise in the sixth verse, He shall
be had in everlasting remembrance.

The fourth is, Honor and Power and Dignity, even such as shall excite the
Envy of the Wicked; thus in the ninth verse, His horn shall be exalted with
honor, the wicked shall see it and shall be grieved, etc.

The fifth is, Great Safety and Peace in the midst of Dangerous and Troublesome
times: thus in the Text, To the Upright there arises Light in the Darkness. i.
e. Light in the greatest Straits and Difficulties; for that is the meaning of
Darkness in this place. Times of Darkness in the Scripture Language are Evil
and Difficult and Dangerous times. Now upon account of this Light that arises
to the Upright Man in Evil times, it comes to pass as it follows, v. 6, 7, 8.
that such a one shall not be moved for ever, neither shall he be afraid of evil
tidings, for his heart is established, and he shall not shrink until he see his
desire upon his Enemies. Or as the Chaldee perhaps better renders it, until he
see redemption in distress.

This is the just Analysis of the whole Psalm. Now of these several Characters
whereby the Pious Man is described, I have pitched upon that of his Vprightness
to give an account of, and to recommend to you at this time. And of the several
Instances of the Blessedness of such a Man, I have pitched upon that of Safety
and Peace in the midst of Perilous and Troublesome times. These two points I
have chosen to entertain you upon, as judging them most suitable to the present
occasion, and to our present circumstances. And we find them both joined
together in the words of the Text, To the Upright there arises Light in the
Darkness.

Here then we have Two things to consider, First, The Person to whom the
Promise here made, or the Blessedness here mentioned does belong, It is the
Upright Man. Secondly, The Promise, or the Blessedness it self, It is Light in
times of Darkness.

I begin with the Character of the Person to whom this Promise is made, He is
the Upright Man, or as in our more common Language we express him, the Honest
Man, the Man of Integrity. We all know so well what is meant by these words,
that it would render the thing more difficult to offer Critically to give Light
to them. As all those General Terms, whereby a Man's whole Duty is expressed in
Scripture, have their several respects and considerations which difference them
one from the other, though they be all equally Comprehensive: So has this term
of Vprightness. That which it immediately and particularly respects, is the
Goodness of a Man's Principles, and the suitableness of his Actions to them. Or
thus, The Conformity of a Man's Mind to the Eternal Rules of Righteousness, and
the Conformity of his Actions to the Principles of his Mind. This is that upon
account of which any person is denominated Upright, and contrary to this is all
Hypocritical and Partial dealings in matters of our Duty. So that if we would
give the definition of an Upright Man, it should be in such terms as these, He
is a Man that in all things follows the Dictates of his Conscience. Or, he is
One, that makes his Duty the Rule of his Actions. Or, he is One, that always
proposes to himself Righteous Ends, and pursues those Ends in Righteous Ways.

This is the general description of the Upright Man: But for the more lively
display of him, and the rendering him, as more Amiable so more Imitable, it will
be fit that we represent him a little more particularly under those several
Respects and Capacities in which his Uprightness is principally seen and
expressed.

And here we must consider him with respect to God, and with respect to Men.
Under the former Consideration we are to view his Religion, under the latter
his Civil Conversation.

And none ought to be surpised that in the Character of an Upright Man we take
notice of his Religious Carriage toward God. For in truth that is a point
which is Essentially necessary to Uprightness. He (says Solomon) that walks
in Vprightness fears the Lord. Prove. 14.2.
Indeed, take away Religion and the Fear of God, and the Foundation of
Vprightness is destroyed. For all the Principles of Conscience, and all the
Obligation to live up to those Principles, is thereby taken away. He that has
no sense of God and Religion, can never think himself bound to observe any
Rules in his Actions and Behavior, but what are subservient to the carrying on
his private sensual worldly Interest: And consequently, whatever is
Inconsistent with that, be it never so base and vile and injurious, he cannot
take himself in point of Duty obliged to stick at it, when he has the least
temptation to it. The result of which is, That he may commit all the villainies
in the World, and yet think himself as Innocent, and his Actions as
Commendable, as if he had been never so Honest and Virtuous.

He therefore that is an Upright Man, has a serious and hearty sense of God
and Religion upon his Spirit, and is above all things careful to preserve and
increase that sense. But then his conduct in this affair is much different from
that of ordinary pretenders to Religion.

For he is a Man that does not content himself with a mere speculative belief,
or an outward profession of the Truths of Religion; but does so far impress
them on his Heart, that they influence his whole Life and Conversation. He does
not think it sufficient to be Orthodox in his Opinions; or to be a Member of a
True Church; or to be zealous in maintaining and promoting the right way: But
he takes care to live as he believes; to practice suitably to the prefession he
makes. As he holds fast the Form of Godliness; so he never fails to express the
power of it, in an Innocent and a Virtuous Life.

He is a Man, that in the whole Conduct of his Religious affairs, minds
Conscience more than any selfish consideration. He takes not up his Principles
either out of Humor, or Passion; to advance his Interest, or to please a
Party: But he believes a thing because it is True, and Professes it because it
is his Duty. In matters of Religion he has the indifference of a Traveller,
whose great concernment is to arrive at his Journeys end; but for the way that
leads thither, be it high or low, all is one to him, so long as he is but
certain that it is the Right Way.

And as he does not choose his Religion out of worldly considerations: So
neither does he quit it upon such. But is resolute and constant in bearing
witness to the Truth, against all opposition whatsoever. As he does not make
show of his Religion the more when it is in fashion, and when it may prove
advantageous to him: So neither does he practice it the less when it may prove
Ignominious or Dangerous. He is obstinately tenacious of his Principles when he
knows them to be good; and prepared to endure the utmost extremities rather
than violate the Laws and Dictates of his Conscience.

He is a Man that thinks Religion too Sacred a thing to be prostituted to mean
purposes; and therefore he never uses it as an Instrument for the serving a
turn; never makes it a Cloak for the covering a private end, though he were
sure he could compass his designs by it. He knows that the greatest Impostures
have laid hid under this mask, and by such Artifices God has been often made a
Patron of the most horrid villainies.

He is a Man that does not place his Religion in outward forms and services; or
in little cheap Duties that cost him nothing. He has a nobler sense of God
than to think that such things can alone recommend us to him: And therefore his
principal concernment is about the great Indispensable Duties of Christianity.
Matt. 23.23.
The weightier matters of the Law, Justice and Mercy and Faith. He has the
everlasting Notions and differences of Good and Evil deeply engraven in his
Heart, and in the practicing or the avoiding them, he chiefly lays out himself.

He is a Man, that does not pick and choose out of God's Commandments, which to
observe to the neglect of the rest: but endeavors Uprightly and Sincerely to
observe them all. He calls no sin little, because his temper inclines him to
it, or the course of his Life leads him more frequently into the Temptations of
it. But he has an hearty uniform Aversion to every thing that is Evil. He
holds no secret friendship or correspondence with any Enemy of God; but fights
as resolutely against his most agreeable and most gainful sins, as those that
he has less Temptation to upon those accounts.

He is a hearty Enemy to all Factions in Religion, as knowing the Life and Soul
of Christianity is often eaten out by them. All dividing Principles he abhors;
and as much as he loves Truth, he is not less concerned for Peace. And he is
better pleased with one Instance of his Charity in Composing, or his Zeal in
Suppressing Religious Differences, than with twenty of his Skill and Abilities
in disputing them. For he knows that LOVE is more acceptable to God than a
right Opinion; and to be a Martyr rather than divide and rend the Church,
Dionys. Alex. in Euleb.
is not less Glorious than to be a Martyr for refusing to offer Sacrifice to
Idols.

Lastly, He is a Man, Religious without Noise; and uses no little Arts to make
his Piety taken notice of in the World. For he seeks not the praise of Men in
any thing he does, but studies to approve himself to God only. And therefore he
is as careful of his Thoughts, as of his Actions; and has the same fear of
God, and regard of his Duty, when no Man sees him; as when he is in the most
public places.

These are the great strokes of Vprightness as to Religion. And whoever makes
good these Characters, may unquestionably conclude of himself, that he is an
Honest Man to Godward, a true Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.

Come we now, in the second place, To take a view of the Vpright-Man in his
civil Conversation: To give some account of him with reference to his Carriage
and Demeanor amongst Men. And here again we must consider him under two
capacities, as a Private Person, and as a Magistrate.

And First, As a Private Person, The general Rule by which he frames and models
his whole Conversation, is such a prudent and diligent care of himself, and his
own good, as is not only consistent with, but does effectually tend to promote
the Good and Happiness of all others that he deals with. This is the
Fundamental Principle which he lays down to observe in all his commerce with
Mankind. For he considers that every Man in the World has a right to be happy
as well as himself: And he considers, that, as things are so contrived, that he
cannot be happy without the assistance of others: So it is infinitely
reasonable that he in like manner should contribute his endeavors to the
making them happy also. These now being the main Principles of his Mind, he
takes care in his whole Conversation that his Actions and Carriage be suitable
to them, and bear some proportion with them.

And therefore, we may be sure that he is a Man exactly Just in all his
dealings, and would not knowingly do the least wrong or injury to any, though
he could gain never so much by it; and were he never so secure that he could do
it without discovery.

He is a Man, that where he is trusted, is faithful to the uttermost. Never
making advantages of Men's credulity, nor abusing the considence they repose in
him.

He is one, that in point of fair dealing between Man and Man, is severe even
to Scrupulosity; and he would rather sit down with loss, than serve his own
ends by any practice that has but a bad report, that has but even the
appearance or suspicion of evil in it; though in the mean time he knows that
what is got by such practices is by some Men accounted lawful gain.

He is a Man of great candor, and sweetness, and obligingness in his
Behavior: But withal, as on one hand he is careful not to run himself into
Inconveniences by his good nature: So on the other hand, the kindness and
good will he professes to all about him, is more than a compliment, or a
semblance of his countenance. For his fair speeches are always attended with
honest dealings; and what he once promises, he is punctual in making it good,
though it be to his own prejudice.

He is a Man that loves a good Name and Reputation, as well as any one, and is
extremely tender of it; but yet he scorns to make use of any evil Arts, either
for the procuring, or preserving it.

And consequently, he is a Man that hates all mean and servile compliance, and
will neither speak nor do any thing against the sense of his Mind for the
humouring any. Flattery and Dissimulation he abhors, and he dares speak his
Mind, when he judges it fit and reasonable; even though he knows the doing it
will give offense.

And as he is perfectly averse to all Fawning and Flattery: So he is above Envy
and Detraction. He never lessens another Man to make himself greater; nor looks
upon the prosperity of his Neighbor with an evil Eye; backbiting, and carrying
about idle stories is not the thing he lives by. He puts a fair construction
upon other Men's Words and Actions, and will rather conceal a real fault, than
make it worse in the reporting it. He hopes and thinks the best of all Men; and
rejoices in the happiness of those about him. He does as much good as he can;
and that good that is done by others, he is so far from envying, that he thanks
God for it as if he had done it himself.

He is a Man of great Plainness and Simplicity; apert and open, and free in all
his Carriage. You may always know where to have him, for his Words and his
Thoughts always go together. And though he is careful not to be lavish of his
Speech, nor at all times to discover all his Mind: Yet he is as careful, that
what he does speak shall be agreeable to Truth; and he so speaks it that those
that hear him may take measures of his Mind from it.

He is a Man, who though he be very watchful of opportunities to do himself
good, and very sagacious in spying dangers, and avoiding them: Yet he never
uses any indirect means, either for the benefiting or securing himself. He
scorns to make advantages of any Man's necessities: Nor will he undermine
another for the effecting of his own designs. Deceit and Collusion are
strangers to all his dealings. Above all things he hates a Trick; and in his
account to be a Man of Intrigues, a cunning or a shrewd Fellow, is but a more
gentile term for a Knave.

In a word, the designs he proposes to himself are all Honest and Just, and
such as tend to the good of the Community as well as his Own, but to no Man's
loss or hindrance. And the means he uses for accomplishing these designs, are
all fair and regular; and so free is both his Heart and his Actions from all
Imposture, that he cares not if all the World were privy to them.

This is the Man that is Upright in his Conversation toward Men. The Man that
with the Wisdom of the Serpent joins the Innocence and Simplicity of the Dove.

But thus much of the Upright Man as a Private Person; Let us now view him a
little under a more conspicuous character. Let us consider him as a Magistrate
entrusted with the management of public affairs. (Which is the Second
particular we are to insist on under this head) and here the Upright Man is
still the same, acted by the same Principles, pursuing still the same designs
we have hitherto mentioned. Only his Virtues have another Sphere and another
Object, and therefore require another consideration.

The great thing he proposes to himself in taking any Office upon him, is the
glory of God, and the public good. The Honor and Dignity of the place, and
the other worldly advantages that may attend it, are but secondary
considerations with him. The first is his main design, which he steadily and
constantly pursues throughout the whole Administration of his Office; the other
is never thought on but with subordination to the former.

And therefore acting from such Principles as these, we may easily conclude him
to be a Man whose Counsels and Actions are not steered by the wind of popular
Applause, but by the sense of his Duty. He studies not to ingratiate himself
with Men, but to discharge a good Conscience. He is more careful to be a Good
Magistrate than to be a Loved one; though (so happily are things contrived,
that) in being the former he rarely fails of the latter.

The consequence of which is, that he is a Man of great Courage and Boldness,
and Resolution. He dares to do whatsoever is fit, and just, and conducive to
the public good, what discouragements soever he meet with. Neither the menaces
of the Mighty, nor the murmurings of the Multitude, can fright him from his
Duty. For he dreads none but God; nor fears to do any thing but what is
misbecoming him.

But then he is a Man that does not resolve things hastily, and upon the
consideration of a few particulars, but takes good advice, and uses mature
deliberation before he determines himself. He does nothing precipitately: But
weighs all things represented to him, as impartially as he can. His Ears are
open to all Parties, and he debates what is said, without Passion or Prejudice
or Prepossession; and he always considers more what is spoken, than who it is
that speaks it.

He is a Man whom you cannot so much disoblige as by attempting to corrupt him.
Neither the regard of his profit, nor his kindness to his Friends, can in
Matters of Right, tempt him to act against his inward sense. As to these things
he is as blind as Justice herself, and you may as soon draw the Sun from his
line, as him from the steady and strict paths of Righteousness.

He is a Man that looks upon his Office rather as a burden, than a preferment.
And therefore he is wonderfully solicitous about the well discharging it. His
care and study is chiefly employed upon the Public, and he rather suffers the
miscarriage of his own affairs than that the Community by his negligence should
receive any prejudice. While others are doing their own business, he is
watching for the common good; for he always remembers that he is a public
person, and that the time and strength that God affords him are not his, but
theirs, by and for whom he is entrusted.

He is a Man that imploys all his power and interest, as much as is possible,
for the maintenance of the worship and service of God, and the defense and
encouragement of the true Religion. For he considers God, as the first and
principal person to be respected in all Governments and Societies, as being not
only the Author but the Head of them. And he remembers that Religion does so
much influence the Civil State, that the happiness and ruin of Cities and
Kingdoms are linked with the well or ill management of it.

And in pursuance of this his Zeal for God and Religion, he takes care, as much
as in him lies, to encourage those Persons that are Virtuous and Good, and to
suppress and bring out of credit all Vice and Debauchery, all Impiety and
Irreligion, all Faction and Disorder; together with the Maintainers and
Abettors of them.

He is a Man, that effectually makes good Job's Character of himself, who was
also a Magistrate: Job 29.14, etc.
He puts on Righteousness and it clothes him, his Judgment is a Robe and a
Diadem: He is Eyes to the Blind, and Feet he is to the Lame: He is a Father to
the Poor, and the cause which he knows not he searches out: He breaks the
Jaws of the Wicked, and plucketh the Spoil out of his Teeth.

He is a Man that looks upon himself to have a Trust both with reference to
to those above him, and those under him: And therefore he is careful to carry
himself with an even steady hand, with respect to both; studiously
endeavoring, both to preserve his Allegiance to his Prince, and his Fidelity
to the Public: Neither invading the Rights of the one, nor injuring the
Liberties of the other.

He is one, that, next to the Honor of God, studies the Peace and Quiet of the
Place where he is concerned. And therefore, as on one hand he is watchful in
spying out Dangers, and quick in applying such Remedies to them as are proper
in the Place and Station he holds: So on the other side he neither takes nor
gives the Alarm upon every slight Surmise, or popular Apprehension. He makes
the best of all things that happen; and by his Prudence and Moderation
endeavors to extinguish growing Flames rather than add Fuel to them; to calm
and allay Men's Jealousies and Animosities, rather than to excite and increase
them.

Lastly, To conclude; He is a Man, that fears God, that honors the King; that
is observant of the Laws; that is true to the Government; and that meddles not
with them that are given to change.

Having thus given you an account of the Upright Man, under the several
principal relations in which he stands; I come now in the second place, for the
comfort of all that are such, and for the encouragement of all others to
endeavor to be such; to set forth the advantages and privileges, that such a
Man enjoys in evil and dangerous times. To the Upright there arises Light in
the Darkness.

Darkness, as I told you before, is a word by which the Scripture expresses
any kind of Straits, or Difficulties, or Adversities. Thus Job 15.21. Darkness
is there opposed to Prosperity; thus Lam. 3.2. I am the man, (says the
Prophet) that have seen Affliction, by the rod of his wrath he has led me and
brought me into Darkness. And thus likewise, to name no more Texts, Joel 2.2.
The day of God's Visitation upon Jerusalem, is called a Day of Gloominess and
Darkness; a Day of Clouds and thick Darkness.

This now being the Notion of Darkness: when it is said in the Text, To the
Upright Man there arises Light in the Darkness; By Light we may understand any
one of these three things, that is to say,

By Light, we may understand Light for his Guidance and Direction; and then the
sense is, That in critical and perilous times the Upright Man of all others,
will be best enabled to order and manage his Affairs.

Or secondly, By Light we may understand Safety and Defense, as the word is
sometimes taken in Scripture; and then the sense is, That in evil times the
Upright Man walks most free from danger; He of all others may expect security
and protection in a common Calamity.

Or thirdly, By Light we may understand Peace and Joy (as that likewise is
another usual sense of the word,) and then the meaning is, That in evil times,
let things happen as they will, though it should be the fortune of the Upright
Man to be oppressed in the Crowd; yet this happiness he will always have, that
his Mind will be at perfect ease and peace. Nothing shall ever discompose him,
but in the midst of his Sufferings his Heart shall be replenished with
perpetual Comfort.

In any one of these senses the Text may be taken, and in all the Three it
fails not to be made good to the Upright Man.

First, To the Upright Man there arises Light in the Darkness, taking Light
for Guidance and Direction. Be the times never so dark, he has this happiness,
that he is rarely at a loss how to steer his course. He finds his way easily,
when other Men are quite bewildred; and he readily expedites himself out of
such difficulties as those that act by other principles find themselves
grievously entangled with. This is a thing that should mightily recommend the
practice of Uprightness, especially in evil times; and that it is really
attended with this advantage, must needs be acknowledged upon these two
accounts.

First, To an Upright Man his way lies plainer, and is more easily seen and
discovered.

And Secondly, He has a greater Light to see it by, than those that take other
measures in the management of their designs.

First, The Upright Man of all others most easily sees his way, for it lies
plain and even, and strait before him. Whereas the ways of Vice and Wickedness
are extremely crooked, full of windings and turnings.

Whoever pursues evil Designs, and is a Slave to base Affections, must
necessarily entangle himself in infinite Labyrinths, through the course of his
Life. For having several ends to pursue, and those many times inconsistent one
with another: it cannot be avoided but that in many circumstances he lights
into, he will be extremely at a loss how to behave himself. If he go this way,
then will something come to Light, which he studiously endeavors to conceal;
if he go that way, then he disobliges some Man or some Party whose interest is
necessary to support him; If he go a third way, he destroys that which is his
main design. At what a loss now in such a case as this must a Man needs be in
the determining himself? Upon what a rack is his understanding put, to get
fairly rid of these Difficulties? And yet such Dilemmas as these is every one
that walks not Uprightly, ever and anon crampt with in his Counsels and
Deliberations.

But suppose he get well over the present Difficulty, yet he is but where he
was; For upon the next emergency of Affairs, he is as much puzzled and nonplust
as before. The same method will not serve him twice for the carrying on his
designs. As often as new occasions arise, so often must he alter his Counsels,
and take new measures: so that he is always unsteady, often inconsistent with
himself; utterly unresolved what Man he shall be, or what part he shall act, in
the next Scene that offers it self.

These Difficulties and Perplexities the Man of Intrigues is always hampered
with; and they necessarily arise from the various flexures and turnings of the
way that leads to his ends: But the contrary of all this is the Lot of the
Upright Man. For his way neither lies on this side, nor on that side, but
always strait forward. He has but one great end to pursue, and that is to
discharge a good Conscience: all his other concernments are wholly regulated by
that. The consequence of which is, That he has no clashing of interests to
perplex his deliberations; no little turns that must be served, to divert him
to the right hand or to the left, but he always looks straight before him: so
that all his resolutions are easily made; most of those Difficulties that
entangle other Men are quite cut off and avoided; his Counsels and his Methods
are always the same; and he is seldom at a loss how to behave himself upon a
new emergency. In a word, his way is commonly so plain that he stands in need
of little advice or instruction for the finding it. And this is that which
Solomon has told us, The Integrity of the Upright shall guide him. For, Prove.
11.3. cap. 4.18.
the path of the just is a shining light.

But 2dly, If it be his Lot to fall into such circumstances, where his way is
not so plain, but that there is need of great advice and deliberation what
course to steer; as it often happens, especially in such times as the Text
speaks of: Yet here the Upright Man has the advantage of all those that walk
by different principles; for (all other things equal) he has more Light to
direct him in the finding of his way than they have.

There is this difference, between a Man that walks Uprightly in all his
conversation, and a Man that has sinister ends of his own to pursue: The
former has always the free use of his Intellectual Powers, and can exert his
Reason in its highest perfection, and to the best advantage: Whereas the latter
is horribly clouded in his discerning Faculties. He has constantly a mist
before his Eyes, which hinders him from rightly distinguishing the objects he
looks upon; and consequently occasions many blunders and mistakes in the choice
of his way.

My meaning is this, Whoever frames his Life by other Measures than those of
Honesty and Conscience; whoever intemperately pursues his private ends or is a
slave to inordinate Passions let them be of what kind they will: These things
do clap such a Byas upon his Soul, as renders him utterly incapable of making a
right judgment of things before him, and consequently must unavoidably expose
him to a great many dangerous errors in the management of his affairs; and
this oftentimes in Matters that have no great difficulty in them.

Take any one of the Passions that usually govern the Man that has no
principles of Conscience; let it be either Fear, or Envy, or Revenge, or
Vainglory, or Avarice, or Ambition; it is a wonderful thing to see how
monstrously they distort his Reason, and what odd extravagant courses they put
him upon; and this even in plain easy cases; Nay, though the Man, in other
things, where his affections have no influence, be a very wise Man. One could
scarce imagine the power that these things have over a Man's Judgment; but that
we every day see such strange instances of it.

But now the Upright Man is not in the least obnoxious to any of these
inconveniences: For having no turns to serve but those that are honest and
good; having no private Affections or Passions to be gratified; he looks upon
things in a pure and simple Light, and not through a colored Glass. And
consequently, his conceptions of them as far as humane endeavors can secure,
are according to their Nature; and his determinations and resolutions are
suitable to his conceptions; that is to say, are reasonable and fit, and such
as become the occasion. As his main design is to do in all instances that which
is best; so that design preserves him from mistaking in his Notions of what is
best. His Reason and Understanding are free and at liberty; and if there do
arise any knot or difficulty, he of all others is likely to untie it with the
greatest ease. And this is that which the Psalmist has told us, The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good Understanding have all they that
do thereafter. Psalm. 111.^^.


But Secondly, If we take Light for Safety and Security, for Defense and
Protection, as it is sometimes used in the Holy Scripture: In this sense also
Light arises to the Upright in times of Darkness. For such a Man may in the
worst of times, above all other Men, promise these things to himself. And this
is that which Solomon tells us, He that walks Uprightly walks surely. Prove.
10.9.
And indeed this seems to be the thing principally intended in the Text; The
Light which is here said to arise to the Upright in Darkness, seems chiefly
to respect his Security from Danger in the times of a Common Calamity; as
appears by what immediately follows; viz. He shall not be moved for ever; he
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart shall not shrink until he see
his desire upon his Enemies.

Now this Security in times of Danger the Upright Man may expect upon these two
accounts. First, his Uprightness in its own Nature (as things are contrived and
carried on in the World) does above all other things conduce to it. And
Secondly, He is upon account thereof entitled to God's more particular
Protection.

First, The Paths of Uprightness are in themselves such as naturally tend to
secure a Man in Evil and Dangerous times.

For first, They do really contribute to the Good and Happiness of the Public,
in the which every Man's private safety is in a manner bound up. Prove. 11.11.
As by wickedness (they are the words of Solomon) a City is overthrown: so by
the blessing of the Upright it is exalted. Every Upright Man is really a
benefactor to the Public: For by him and such as he, Cities and Kingdoms are
supported which would otherwise fall into confusion. The whole Body Politic
owes its preservation to the virtuous Care, and honest endeavors of Upright
Men. And every such Man in particular reaps the benefit of such his Endeavors;
for he shares in his own Person that protection and security he procures to the
Community. And if he had not been Upright, as the Public would have fared
something the worse for it: So it is certain he in his private Capacity, would
in the same proportion, have fared the worse also.

But this consideration of the conduciveness of Honesty and Uprightness to the
Good of the Public, I direct chiefly to those that are in Office and
Authority; for really their carriage and conduct has a more than ordinary
stroke in the good or bad success of the common affairs. And therefore it
concerns them especially to look to themselves, that they be Men of Integrity,
and keep a Good Conscience in the discharge of their Trust. Upon their Upright
walking, the safety and preservation of the Public does more depend, than upon
the Endeavors of a thousand private Men. Though they are but particular
Persons, yet being vested with Authority, their Conduct and Management has as
great an influence upon the common Good or the common Ruin, as if they were a
Multitude; and single as they are, they do in a great Measure carry the Balance
of the public Fortune in their Hands.

But Secondly, The conduciveness of every Man's Uprightness, to the public
good is not the only consideration, upon which it is recommendable, as a means
for obtaining safety and security in evil times. For let the Public go as it
will: In the worst of times, if any Man can in probability be thought able to
shift for himself; if any Man can in reason hope to escape the Violence and
Iniquity of the times, the Upright Man, the Man of Honesty and Integrity is
likelyest to be the Man: I say in reason he is likelyest, and as things
commonly go.

For he of all others takes the surest course to preserve himself; and is least
obnoxious either to the malice or the envy, the undermining or the rapine, of
open Enemies or pretended Friends.

All Knavery and dishonest Dealings set a Man up for a Mark to be shot at; but
Uprightness and Integrity is a Shield and a Protection.

The Upright Man does so order the course of his Life, that he usually avoids
all those Rocks that other Men split upon, and which usually prove their ruin.
The undoing of most Men even in evil times, lies commonly at their own door,
and they may thank themselves for it. If they had been sufficiently careful of
themselves, the malignity of the times would scarce have touched them. It is
generally either very great carelessness and gross neglect of their own affairs;
or the lavishness or intemperance of their Tongues; or an ill gotten Estate; or
private Injuries they have done, and private Grudges they have contracted; or
pragmaticalness in other Men's Matters; or factious adherence to a Party; or
breach of Trust; or treachery to the Public, or the like: I say, it is these
things that do most commonly draw Mischief upon Men's Heads, and lay the
Foundations of all those straits and difficulties in which they are entangled
even in the worst of times. But now the Upright Man does in a great Mesure
avoid all these occasions; for his principles do oblige him to walk in a way
that is diametrically opposite to the things I have mentioned.

The Upright Man treads upon such sure Foundations, and his Ways are so
universally approved by Mankind; that, as things usually go, no Man will easily
offer him injury, but it will be to his own detriment.

The Rule he walks by is such, as does effectually procure him the most Friends
and the fewest Enemies, for he takes the course to oblige all sorts of Men; and
consequently he cannot easily fail of finding those who will use their utmost
endeavor to assist and rescue him, when he lights into any difficult
circumstances.

His righteous conversation is so unexceptionable; and so prudent he is in the
management of his affairs; that those that love him not, will not easily find
an occasion to do him much mischief.

Even those that have no acquaintance with him, yet have so much concernment
for Honesty and Uprightness in general, that they will study to give him what
assistance and defense they can, out of a natural sense that it is fit a good
Man should be protected; and that, for any thing they know, his Case and
Circumstances may come to be theirs.

And those that have lost all sense of good and evil, yet out of care to
preserve their credit amongst Men (amongst the generality of whom, to be an
honest Man will always signify a great deal; for when all is done, it is
impossible to extirpate the notions of Virtue and Honesty out of the Minds of
the Multitude:) I say, in point of their own credit and interest they are
concerned to be careful how they oppress such a Man.

But whatever become of these things; how ineffectual soever all humane means
may be for the securing and preserving an Upright Man in evil times: Yet in the
second place, he has another Auchor to stay himself upon, which is more firm
and stable, and which will not fail him: and that is the protection of God
Almighty: The care of his particular Providence to which he is entitled.

Men may plot and design; may model and contrive; may order and manage things
as they please: But when all is done it is God that governs the World; and
either blasts their most fair and hopeful Projects; or if he suffers them to
succeed, turns them to what use and purposes he pleases: Now this God that
Rules and disposes all things (even the most particular; For not a sparrow
does fall to the ground without his will; and by him the very hairs of our head
are numbered) This God has engaged himself, to take care in an especial manner,
of those that fear him, and walk Uprightly before him.

He has passed his Promise over and over again, Psalm. 37. v. 6, 19, 24, 4^, 41.
that he will make their Righteousness as clear as the Light, and their just
dealing as the noon day. They shall not be confounded in the perilous time, and
in the days of dearth they shall have enough. Though they fall they shall not
be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth them with his hand. In a word, that he
will be their strength in the time of Trouble; he will stand by them and save
them, he will deliver them from the ungodly; he will save them because they put
their trust in him.

It would be endless to quote all the passages in the Book of God that speak to
this purpose. And therefore I shall dismiss this point with that remarkable one
which we find in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Cap. 15. v. 10.
wherein we may see, both the Upright Man, and his Security in evil times,
described in very lively colors. He that walks Righteously and speaks
Uprightly; He that despises the gain of oppressions; that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes; that stops his ears from hearing of blood; and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil: He shall dwell on high; his place of
defense shall be the munitions of Rocks; his bread shall be given him, his
water shall be sure. The sense of which in short is this, That whoever walks
Uprightly, and makes a Conscience of his ways: such a Man shall be always under
the watchful care and protection of the Divine Providence. And never will God
suffer him to fall into any grievous distress; but he shall always have such a
portion of the good things of this World afforded to him, as will be sufficient
not only to make his life supportable, but easy.

And in truth, the experience of the World generally makes this good: Honest
and Upright Men for the most part, in the most public Calamities fare well; at
least much better than those that are not so. In their greatest extremities,
when they have no prospect of deliverance from any humane means, strange
extraordinary unexpected succor and relief does arrive to them. In a word,
that care of the special Providence of God attends them, that they are never
miserable, however they may be now and then cut short in their outward Fortunes.

But it must be acknowledged, that though Piety and Uprightness has the
promise of security in this Life; and that promise for the most part, and in
general speaking is made good: Yet there are a great many exempt cases. God may
see it fit now and then to suffer an Upright Man to be oppressed, and to perish
in a common ruin; and this without any violation of his promises of this kind,
which do indeed respect no more than the ordinary common events and successes
of things. But yet even in this case, still there will To the Upright arise
Light in the Darkness; that is, Light in the third sense we have given of the
word, viz. taking Light for Peace and Joy and Comfort. And this is that which
the Psalmist tells us in another place, Light is sown for the Righteous, and
Gladness for the Upright in heart. Psalm. 97.11.


Whatever Afflictions come upon the Upright Man, yet he has this advantage of
other Men, that he bears them infinitely more lightly than they do; They are
really no great disturbance to him, for he enjoys the same calmness and
serenity of Mind; the same peace and quiet and contentment that ever he did.

His present sufferings are rather matter of rejoicing and triumph to him, than
of discontent and repining; for he knows that they come upon him, by the
Counsel and Disposal of the great Governor of the World: And he knows that he
has so sincerely approved himself to God, and is so well beloved by him; that
he should not have been ordered into these Circumstances, had it not been
really for his good. And this Consideration does so effectually support him
under all the Difficulties that he has to conflict with, that he not only sits
down casily and quietly, but is very well pleased with the dispensations of the
Divine Providence toward him; how ungrateful soever they may be to Flesh and
Blood.

Let what will happen to him, he is full of Peace and Joy. For he has met with
no disappointment of his designs. His great aim was to please God; and his
Conscience from God's word assures him that he has done it; and he has nothing
to do farther but to wait for the happy time, when the secrets of all Hearts
shall be revealed, and every Man's Counsels and Actions shall be made manifest,
and then he doubts not to receive approbation and praise, and a great Reward in
that Day of the Lord Jesus. And so much the rather, 2 Cor. 4.17.
because this light affliction, wherewith he is now exercised, he is assured,
will work for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

To conclude, Whatever his sufferings be; he will live and die in a profound
Peace; perfectly satisfied with all God's dealings toward him: And his Life
and Death will verify to all that know him that advice and observation of the
Psalmist; Psalm. 37.37.
Mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that Man is Peace.

SERMON VI.
PREACHED AT WHITE HALL, On the 20th of March, 1684/5.
Luke xvi. 31. -- If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rose from the dead.


THE Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus in the Gospel is so well known, that
it is needless to relate the Particulars of it. These Words are the Conclusion
of that Parable, and they are made the Words of Abraham, who being in Paradise,
is brought in as speaking them to the Rich Man in Hell.

The Occasion was this. This now Poor Man not being able to obtain the least
Comfort or Refreshment for himself under that unsupportable anguish he endured;
bethinks himself of his Friends and Relations in the World, and casts about how
to prevent their coming to that sad condition. And for this purpose, he begs of
Abraham that he would be pleased to send the happy Lazarus into the World
again, to testify to his Brethren what he knew and had seen concerning the
State of the other Life; and to exhort them to a timely Repentance, lest they
should come into that place of Torment in which he was.

To this Request, Abraham thus answers. They had Moses and the Prophets, which
did plainly enough testify against their Sins, and offered sufficient Motives
to them to repent; and therefore there was no need of such extraordinary Means
as he desired.

But this Answer did not satisfy the miserable Man. Still he pursues his
former Request. Nay, Father Abraham, (says he) but if one went unto them from
the dead, they will repent. There was no resisting such an Argument as that. If
Lazarus whom they all had known living, and now knew to be dead, should rise
again, and personally come to them, and tell them in what a sad condition he
had seen their Friend, and that they must all expect to run the same Fortune,
if they did not change their Course of Living: This would come close to them,
and be more convincing than a hundred Arguments drawn from the Books of Moses
and the Prophets, which were written many Ages before their time, and so
consequently could not be presumed to have so great a force as an Argument
drawn from their own Sense and Experience.

To this Reply of the Rich Man, Abraham peremptorily rejoyns in the Words of
the Text. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

To omit lesser Matters that may be observed from these Words; the Point which
primarily, and most naturally seems to be offered to our Consideration from
them, is this. That those who give no credit to a setted standing Revelation of
God once well attested, or are not thereby prevailed upon to reform their Evil
manners; neither in all probability would they be prevailed upon, though a
particular Miracle was wrought by God in order to their Conversion; as, for
instance, though one should rise from the dead and appear to them.

Now to satisfy every one of the Truth of this Proposition, it will be
abundantly sufficient to make out these two things.

First, That there is really more force and weight in a Public standing
Revelation of God, such as that was by Moses and the Prophets here mentioned,
to convince Men, or to reclaim them; than there can be in a Private Miracle,
though I see it with my Eyes.

And Secondly, Though God should be pleased to work a Miracle, or to send an
Apparition for the Conviction of an obstinate Unbeliever, or vicious Person;
yet such a one would as easily find out shifts and ways to evade the force of
such an Argument, and to hinder the Effect it ought have upon him, as he
formerly did to put off the ordinary standing Motives and Arguments of
Religion: And consequently, there is little probability, that he who is not
gained by the former, will be wrought upon by the latter.

I begin with the first of these things. That there is really more force and
weight in a Public standing Revelation of God, to convince Men, or to reclaim
them; than there can be supposed to be in a Private single Miracle, though a
Man sees it with his Eyes: Or, than there can be in an Apparition from the
dead, if God should think fit to vouchsafe such a thing.

In speaking to this, I mean not to concern my self or you with the Revelation
of Moses and the Prophets, though that be the Revelation which the Text here
speaks of. I think it will be more suitable and useful to us to consider the
Proposition with relation to Christianity, or the Revelation of our Savior and
his Apostles: That being the Dispensation we are now under, and in which we are
more immediately concerned.

Understanding therefore our Proposition of that Especial Revelation which we
call the Gospel, two things there are to be offered, which will undeniably make
it out.

First, Those Persons that lived in the Times of our Savior, when this Public
Revelation of the Gospel was made and attested, had greater Evidences and
Motives to bring them over to the Belief and Practice of his Religion; than if
any particular Miracle had been wrought in order to their Conversion.

Secondly, We at this day, all things considered, have as strong Arguments to
convince us, as powerful Motives to persuade us, as those that lived in the
Times of our Savior, and were Witnesses of what he did and taught.

The unavoidable Consequences of which two Points are these. That those who
lived in the time of our Savior, and were not persuaded by his Gospel, would
not have been persuaded though one had been sent to them from the dead. And
those they are now alive, and are not persuaded by the Evidences and Motives of
Christianity which we now have among us, would not have been persuaded if they
had lived in the Times of our Savior. So that in all Ages of Christianity the
Proposition will hold true, That those who give no credit to the standing
Revelation of the Gospel, or are not thereby induced to lead their Lives
according to it; would not be prevailed upon though a particular Miracle was
wrought for their Conversion.

First then, Our Savior's Gospel at the first publishing of it was a more
effectual Means for the Conversion of any Man then living, than the sending to
him one from the dead.

Let us suppose the Parable we are now upon, to be a true History, and that
this Rich Man had five Brethren living at Jerusalem at the time when our
Savior spoke it; and they were all Wicked, Lewd, Atheistical Persons; and God
Almighty, in pity to their Souls, is pleased to grant that Request which the
Rich Man here makes to Abraham on their behalf; and accordingly sends Lazarus
from the dead to preach Repentance to them: We cannot doubt but such a Sermon,
from such a Man, and in such Circumstances, would mightily awaken them, and put
them upon a more serious Consideration of the folly of their Ways, and the
danger they exposed them to, than ever they entered into before; and this
Consideration it is likely might work them to serious Resolutions of quitting
their present Courses, and entering upon a stricter Life. Certainly such an
Apparition as this, in reason should work such Effects; and, without doubt,
upon many it would. But this we say. Whether did not our Savior perform a
great deal more than all this comes to, in order to the Conviction and
Conversion of all about him? And whether had not these five Brethren, supposing
them to live when he preached his Gospel, and to be Witnesses of his Actions,
much more reason to be persuaded by what he did, and taught; than by the
aforesaid Vision?

Our Savior did by all the Signs and Tokens in the World evidence himself to
be an Express Messenger sent from God, which they could not be certain that the
Vision was.

The Prophetic Records of their own Country did all testify of him; and they
themselves by comparing his Life and them together, might see they were
fulfilled in him.

To omit the Circumstances of his Birth, which were such as never any besides
himself was born with; After he came to enter upon his Public Employment, God
did more than once by a Voice from Heaven testify, that he had sent him, and
that all People were to hearken to him.

And the Truth of this he himself confirmed, not only by his Life, which was
the most Innocent, and Virtuous, and God-like that ever was: Nor only by his
Sermons and Doctrines, which were the most Perfect and Unexceptionable, and
every way the most worthy of God, that ever were taught among Men: But also and
most chiefly by his extraordinary Works, which were such as none but God, or
one acted by a Divine Power, could possibly perform.

He did the greatest things that ever were seen by Men. He showed by his
Actions, and those most publicly done, and frequently repeated, that he had an
absolute Sovereign Power over the course of Nature: over the invisible Agents
of this World, as well Angels as Devils: And likewise over both the Bodies and
the Souls of Men.

And particularly to make it appear that his Testimony was more authentic, his
Authority more to be relied on, than that of any Ghost, any Lazarus whatsoever
that should rise from the Dead: It was very usual with him to send again to the
Living these that were once dead. And one Lazarus he really brought again from
the Bosom of Abraham, after he had been four days Dead, to testify to the
World that Jesus was the Great Ambassador that God had sent, and that all
Mankind were to receive and obey him.

And lest all this should not be convincing enough; lest it should be said
still, One that should rise from the dead, and come and preach to us, would
leave the greater Impressions upon us: Jesus himself did rise from the dead,
and did come and preach to the World, and that in a far more convincing manner
than the Ghost of Lazarus would have done, if the Rich Man had had his own
Wish. For Jesus told his own Death beforehand, and foretold also his
Resurrection; And if God meant not to lay an invincible Temptation before
Mankind to believe a Falsehood, it had concerned his Providence to have hindered
this Resurrection, if Jesus had been any thing else than what he pretended to
be: But he did rise after three days, according to his Prediction, and
conversed upon Earth with his Followers for forty days together; showing
himself not only to a few particular Disciples, but to great Crowds of them,
Five hundred at a time. And after this, in the sight of his Friends he took his
leave of the World, and ascended up into Heaven. And for a Testimony how God
approved him there, he sent down the Holy Spirit upon his Disciples, who for
many years together enabled them to do our Savior's Miracles over again, in
confirmation of his Doctrine.

If now, to come to our Argument; if these five Brethren of the Rich Man be
supposed to be alive when all these things came to pass; If they had the
Opportunity of being present at many of these Passages, and of satisfying
themselves of the rest, (as certainly, supposing the Matter of Fact to be true,
none that lived at that time, and in that Country, but had this Opportunity;)
If they heard this Jesus that was sent from God at the first, and that was sent
from God the second time, after he was dead, testifying against their Sins,
forewarning them of the Judgment to come, and assuring them of Eternal Rewards
if they would repent: I say, If they were Witnesses of these things, I will
appeal to all the World, whether they had not greater Means of Conviction
offered to them, than if any Ghost had appeared to them from the Dead; or any
particular Miracle had been vouchsafed them for the bringing them over to
Virtue and Sobriety.

But I believe no Body will much doubt of this; for indeed the matter will not
bear a dispute. But here is the Question; Whether we that live at this distance
from our Savior, have the same Means of Conviction? and, Whether one now
appearing from the dead to us, would not be of greater force to persuade us,
than the standing Revelation of the Gospel, as we have it now conveyed to us?

This therefore leads me to my second Proposition upon this Head, which if it
can be made out, will wholly take away all Controversy in this Matter. And it
is this:

That we at this day have as great Arguments to convince us of the Truth of
Christ's Revelation, and consequently as great Motives from thence to persuade
us to reform our Evil Lives, as those that Lived in the Times of our Savior.

It is true indeed, we want the Evidence of Sense in these Matters, which they
had; and upon that account, it must be acknowledged, that they have the
Advantage of us. But this we say, notwithstanding, that if we take all things
together, and weigh them Impartially, we shall find that that Want is
abundantly supplied to us in other respects.

For first of all, Our Savior's Gospel, and all the Evidences of it I have
been now speaking of, were timely and faithfully recorded, and are as
faithfully transmitted down to us. So that though we did not see or hear those
things, yet we have a certain and exact Account of them; and such an Account as
was never yet questioned by any Adversaries that lived in those Times, when
such a Question was most reasonably to be made; and such an Account as appears
by all the Evidences that a thing of that Nature is capable of, to have been
written by Eyewitnesses and such Witnesses as were honest undesigning Men; and
not only so, but they sealed with their Blood the Truth of what they reported.
And this same Account was religiously received by all Christians, in all
Places, without Contradiction in those very Times, and was shortly after
translated into a Multitude of Languages, so that it is scarce possible it
should in any Considerable Matter be corrupted. And from that Time to this, in
a continual Succession, there have been Men that have suffered Martyrdom for
the Attestation of it; and in the first Ages after Christ, when they had the
best Opportunities of Examining the Truth of these things, many thousands did
so.

Now I say, Though acccording to the Ordinary Proverb, Seeing be Believing: Yet
next to Seeing, an universal, well-grounded Tradition, which has visible
Effects attending it, has the most force to gain belief. Nay, I do not know
whether there be so much Difference between the Evidence of the one and the
other, as one would think at first. Sure I am, there are many Cases in which we
do as firmly believe Matters of Fact upon the Credit of Tradition, and the
permanent Effects that do accompany it, as if we our selves had been present,
and seen them with our Eyes. Which of us, for Instance, does make any more
doubt of the Story of William the Conqueror his subduing this Kingdom, or of
Henry the Eighth his casting off the Pope's Supremacy; than he does of the
Revolutions that have happned in his own time? And yet these Matters of Fact
are no better attested than the History of our Savior, and his Miracles and
Doctrines,

But Secondly, Though those that lived in our Savior's time had Evidence of
Sense for the Truth of what they believed concerning him and his Doctrine,
which we have not: Yet this is to be considered; that they labored under far
greater Prejudices against his Religion, than we now do, And consequently, all
that sensible Proof which they had of the Truth of it, would not be more
effectual for the convincing of them; than that Proof we now have, though it be
less, ought in reason to be for the convincing of us.

They that were the Hearers and Spectators of what our Savior said and did,
had mighty and inveterate Prepossessions to struggle with. They were educated
in a quite Different Religion, and so must be supposed to have entertained
several Notions and Principles which would very difficultly be rooted out; and
indeed, for the effecting of it there needed little less than an Almighty
Power. But it is not so with us; we by our Education are already disposed and
prepared for the receiving Christianity. We have no praevious Engagements to
alienate our Minds from it; nay, it is our Interest to be of that Religion,
rather than any other. So that certainly a less Evidence for the Truth of it,
will be as convincing to us, as a much greater would have been to those to whom
our Savior first Preached. Nay, I am very confident that this thing being
duly considered, it will appear, that our Arguments for Christianity drawn
from Tradition, will be more convincing to thinking Men among us, than those
Arguments they had from Sense and Experience could be to them.

But Thirdly, If to what has been said we add the several Arguments for the
Credibility of the Christian Religion which we now have at this distance, that
they had not nor could have, that were our Savior's Immediate Disciples; we
shall be satisfied that in point of Evidence we have indeed much the advantage
of them. We have now several standing proofs of our Religion which they could
not have; and which are so strong and conclusive, that they do more than
compensate for the want of that Evidence of Sense which they had, and we have
not. I briefly Instance in these three following.

First, The strange Propagation and Success of our Religion throughout the
World and the Means by which it was Effected. That a poor despised crucified
Person should in a few Years draw all the Roman Empire after him; and that
without any visible Means, except the Goodness of his Cause, and the
Reasonableness of his Doctrine, and the Sincerity and Constancy of his
Disciples, not in fighting for their Master, but in laying down their Lives for
him: And this against all the Power, and all the Arts and Stratagems that the
Devil or the Princes of this World could invent to stifle and suppress his
Name: This is so strong an Argument that this Cause was the Cause of God, and
that his Providence was particularly concerned in the promoting of it, that he
must seem little to be sensible either of God or Providence, that is not
convinced by it.

If Christianity had been of the same strain that the Religion of Mahomet is,
had been as well calculated for Men's Lusts and Worldly Interests as that is;
had allowed as many sensual Liberties to its Disciples as that does; and
lastly, had been carried on in the World by the same ways and means that that
has been, that is by the Force of Arms and Dint of the Sword; it would have
been no great wonder that it should have prevailed, as we see it has done. But
that a Religion which had no Worldly Advantages to promise to its Followers;
Nay on the contrary, was so contrived, that none could own it, but he must at
the same time deny all his Temporal Interests, quit his Friends, his
Reputation, and all his Fortunes in this World, and live in hourly expectation
of a Martyrdom; that such a Religion as this should not only not die with the
first Broachers of it, but daily grow and spread; and the more it was
persecuted, the more increase; till at last it so weathered out all Opposition,
that it got Possession of the Thrones of Princes, and Kings became Nursing
Fathers to it: I say, Whoever is not convinced that the Finger of God was in
this, would scarce have been convinced that the Finger of God was in our
Savior's Miracles, had he been alive and present when they were done. But this
Effect of Christianity both the Prophets and our Lord long ago foretold, and
this we now see was verified long ago, and is still verified in our days:
Though those that lived with our Savior had no experience hereof, nor perhaps
would several of them have been forward to believe it though it had been told
them. So that in this respect we have a most Considerable Argument for our
Religion, which they had not.

Secondly, This is not all. Those that undertook the Religion of our Savior
upon his Preaching, had no Experience of it: They were to be the first
Experimenters themselves. They ran a great Risque, and ventured the Sale of all
that they had, and yet knew not so certainly what kind of Treasure they should
Purchase. But we have the Experience and Suffrage of Sixteen Ages, which will
all vouch, that what we lay out in this way will prove valuable Treasure, will
Reward all the Pains and all the Expense we are at for the Purchasing of it. We
have never in the compass of our own knowledge, nor in all History, met with
any who seriously laid out themselves in the Service of Jesus Christ, and lived
up to his Religion, that ever grudged the Pains they took about it, or repented
themselves that they believed or practiced as they did. The more any Man has
been a Christian, still the more he has thanked God for it; still the more
Quiet of Mind and Peace of Conscience he has possessed; the more he has
enjoyed him self, and the less he has feared Death and all other outward
Calamities. If ever any Christian has repented of any thing, it is, that he
has not been Christian enough, that he has not so heartily believed in our
Savior, and obeyed his Precepts as he should have done. This we all know, and
must be sensible of; and it is a mighty Evidence of the Truth and Goodness of
the Religion we profess. We now can try our Religion, and give our Approbation
of it, by the same Standard and Measures, by which we try and approve of our
Customs and Common Laws. After long experience we find the Usefulness and the
Convenience of it; and to put another in its place, would involve us in
horrible Mischiefs, and Dangers, and Perplexities. But this Argument for
Christianity, those that were the first Converts to it could not have, and
therefore in this respect also we have the advantage of them.

Thirdly and Lastly, There is another very Considerable standing Argument for
the Truth of the Christian Revelation, which those in our Savior's Time were
incapable of; and that is, the Events which he by the Spirit of Prophecy
foretold should after his Death come to pass in the World; most of which have
punctually happened as he predicted them, and the rest in due time we doubt not
will be accomplished. I have not leisure to prosecute this Argument
particularly; only two things I cannot pass by without mention, in both of
which our Lord showed himself as wonderful, and as true a Prophet as ever
appeared in the World.

The one is, the Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, which he foretold
with all the Circumstances imaginable, both as to Time and Manner. Now all that
he said concerning that Destruction, was punctually verified, even according to
the Accounts that the Jewish Historian gives us of that Matter, And when
afterward Julian the Emperor, with a design to blast the Credit of our
Savior's Prophecy, resolved to re-edifie that Temple, and set Men on work for
that purpose; he was soon forced to desist from his Enterprise, by Earthquakes,
and Globes of Fire issuing from out of the Foundations: As the Writers of that
time, both Christian and Pagan, do assure us.

The other Instance I mention is, our Savior's Prophecy of the Rejection of
the Jews, and that they should be carried Captive into all Nations till the
Times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. Now this we see has been accomplished
for many Ages, and still continues to be so in our days. That Nation of the
Jews who were once the Peculiar People of God, settled in the Land of Canaan by
his own immediate Hand, are now dispersed all the World over, but no where
incorporated into a Nation. Yet, which indeed is wonderful, they continue Jews
still; a People that mingle not with the rest of the World, and that are still
as zealous for the Scriptures, from whence we fetch the Grounds of our
Christianity, as ever they were. So that they are a standing Monument of God's
Vengeance upon a People for rejecting the Gospel, and a standing Testimony of
the Truth of our Savior's Prophecies.

These things now, with others that I might name, are very considerable
Evidences of the Truth of our Religion, which those that were Contemporary with
our Savior could not have. So that putting all these things together, I think
we may safely draw our Conclusion, viz. That we now have as great or greater
Arguments to convince us of the Truth of Christ's Revelation, as, or than they
had who were Witnesses of what he did and taught. And consequently, those that
are not persuaded now by the Evidence of it, would not have been persuaded
though they had seen with their Eyes, or heard with their Ears, the Publication
of the Gospel: Which is in effect to say, They would not have been persuaded
though one had risen from the dead.

But notwithstanding all this that I have said, it is to be feared the thing
will not easily go down with many of us; but still, with the Rich Man in the
Parable, after all that Abraham had said concerning Moses and the Prophets, we
will insist on our former Notion. Nay, but if one came to us from the Dead, we
should repent. The Motives that are offered to us in the Gospel are old and
stale to us, we find by long experience, that they make no great impressions
upon us: But if we were visited in such an extraordinary way as the Rich Man
here desired for his Brethren, we should then undoubtedly be prevailed upon.
Thus I believe several of us think: But that we have little ground for such a
fancy; nay, indeed, if we were tried in this way, that it is ten to one, we
should find our selves mistaken; this may farther convince us, viz.

If God should indeed vouchsafe to work a Miracle, or to send an Apparition for
the Conviction of an Obstinate Unbeliever, or vicious Person: Yet such a one
would as easily find out shifts and ways to evade the force of such an
Argument, and to hinder the effects it ought to have upon him, as he formerly
did to put off the standing Motives and Arguments of Religion. And
consequently, there is little probability that he who is deaf to Moses and the
Prophets, will be persuaded by one from the dead.

This is the second Point I laid down for the proof of our Savior's
Proposition, and I come now to speak to it.

I deny not indeed, but if an Apparition should be made to a wicked Person
among us: If, for instance, One of our Companions should, after he is dead, in
a terrible manner come to any of us, and in a doleful tone and language tell
us, how it goes with him in the other World; tell us, that there is indeed a
God that judges the Earth, that there is a Heaven, that there is a Hell, (all
which things he as well as we made it our business to banish out of our Minds
as much as we could;) and acquaint us what an infinite unspeakable Happiness he
has lost by living loosely and carelessly, as we now do; and that he is damned,
irrecoverably and for ever damned for that Infidelity, and those lewd courses
we shared with him in the guilt of, and do still continue to pursue; that all
those Revels we had together, all those Pranks and Debauches we were joint
Actors in, do now, as to him, end in unsupportable anguish and pains, in the
gnawings of a Worm that never dies, and in a life of everlasting Burnings; and
that this shall certainly be our portion, as well as his, unless we do prevent
it by a speedy reformation of our Lives:

I say, If one of our Friends should come from the Dead, and tell us all this,
there is no doubt but it would strike us with infinite horror and amazement.
It would be the most confounding Scene that ever our Eyes beheld, the most
awakening Lecture that ever our Ears heard, and such impressions it would, in
all likelihood, make upon us, as would not suddenly be worn out.

But here is the point, Whether all this would be effectual for the working a
perfect Change of Life, a lasting Reformation, upon a Man that has long
resisted the ordinary means of Conversion, and by long custom of sinning has
made a course of Vice almost natural to him? We say, in all probability it
would not be effectual for the reforming such a Man; because it would be so
easy after the first Heats which the Vision occasioned were over, to find out
colorable excuses, and evasions why he should not pursue a Reformation, which
his Soul so much hated, and which his present Interests and Appetites were so
much against.

For, first of all, Though he was never so sensibly smit at the first; yet
after a little time, the infinite love he bears to that course of life which
this Vision came to testify against, would put him upon Inventions for the
rendering the credit of his very Senses doubtful and suspected. Many Reasons
would be suggested to him from his bribed Understanding, why he should not in
this case believe his own Eyes. For why might not all this be a mere delusion,
the effects of a Melancholy distempered Fancy, a Business wholly transacted on
the Stage of his Imagination.

That he had such an Apparition, and that he was horribly frighted with it, he
cannot doubt: But whether this Apparition was really presented to his outward
Senses, and was not only the Fiction of his own heated and disturbed Brain, he
thinks he has reason to doubt.

For he remembers, that even in Dreams things have been as livelily represented
to him, and made as great Impressions on him, as the same things could have
been or done if he had been awake. And he knows very well, that Fancy has a
strange power over a Man's Judgment, even when his Eyes are wide open;
especially if the circumstances of being alone, of Melancholy and Pensiveness,
and some particular Accidents do concur to the raising of it.

How many People meet with Goblins in their Night-walks, and see Armies
fighting in the Air, and assuredly persuade themselves and others that they do
so? When as in truth the one is nothing else but Trees; and the other, but
Clouds formed into such shapes by the power of their Imagination. How many
Persons in Feverish Distempers see plainly Fiends and Devils standing at their
Beds-feet, ready to take them away, and hear dreadful Noises? But yet none is
so simple as to believe these to be Realties, but only the Effects of their
present Frenzy. And why may not this Bugbear of a Vision, that did at first so
fright the Man, be a thing of the same kind, a mere Creature of his own
disordered Fancy?

It is certainly not impossible for a Man, whose concernment it is not to
believe any thing of this nature, at last to bring himself to such an Opinion.

Especially when he is helped forward by the concurrent Votes of all his jolly
Companions, whom he tells the thing to; who, to be sure, will not fail to laugh
heartily, and make very merry with his Story; and, if it be possible, to droll
it out of his Head, by persuading him, that the whole Matter was but the Result
of Melancholy and a crazed Brain; and that if he still continues to believe it,
he is sitter for Bedlam than their Company.

But secondly, Supposing he cannot thus easily baffle the Credit of his Senses;
but is forced to believe, that what he saw and heard was more than a Fancy or
Imagination: Yet that inveterate Principle of Vice within him will put him upon
other ways and contrivances for the hindering that Effect which the Vision ought
in reason to have upon him. Though he cannot question the Truth of the Matter
of Fact; yet it is likely he may question the Force of the Argument drawn from
thence for his Conviction.

Here is one pretends to come to him from the Dead; but how shall he be certain
that he did really come from thence? For any thing he knows, it may be some
Trick put upon him. Some knavish Fellow had a mind to fright him, or some
bigoted Religionist, assuming the Person or a Ghost, thought by this pious
Fraud to convert him to his Persuasion; as he has read in Story, such Pranks
have been played to serve a Turn, or promote a good Cause. And whereas his
Reason might tell him, that this could not be so, seeing the Person that
appeared to him had both the Countenance and the Voice of his Friend, yet that
he would get over; the Imposture was cunningly carried on, and the Surprise and
Fright it put him into, did so disorder his Judgment that he was not able to
distinguish between the True and the Counterfeit.

But supposing he be convinced, that here was no Juggle in the matter, but what
appeared was a true Spirit or a Ghost, if there be any such: Yet how shall he
know that it was the Ghost of his Friend? If he was sure it was he, he would
give credit to what he reported, because of the former experience he had had of
his integrity: But this he cannot any way be certain of. For any thing he knows
to the contrary, it may be one of those ill-natured Inhabitants of the Air,
that are so much talked of, that make it their Business to disturb the Rest and
Quiet of Mankind; and take a pleasure in filling their Heads with Fears and
Scruples, and drawing them to all kind of Superstition.

He has heard and read of such: And there is no Man of any Persuasion or
Religion, Jew, Turk, or Heathen; nay, all the several sorts of Heathens at this
day, which are to be found either in the East or the Western Indies; and
Christians too of all Communions: There is none of these but have Stories to
tell of Apparitions and Visions, for the confirmation of their several
Doctrines and Tenants. Now that all these Apparitions are to have Credit given
to them, is absurd; because they contradict one another in their Discoveries.
How therefore can he tell whether this particular Apparition that is made to
him, ought to be credited or no, as to what it declares concerning Religion,
and the State of the other World? In plain English, rather than such a Man as
we are speaking of, will be prevailed upon to quit his dearly-beloved Lusts and
Vices, he will find Excuses and Reasons a great many, why he ought not to
believe any thing that is conveyed to him in such a manner as we now suppose.

Especially, if we consider, in the Third place, What Advantages he will make
for his purpose from that very Way that we now think would be most effectual to
convert him; that is, One coming from the Dead. Here is an Apparition pretends
to be sent upon a particular Message to him from the other World, to persuade
him to embrace such a Religion, and to change his way of Living; and threatens
him with horrible Punishments of he does not: The very unusualness of the thing
will put some Apprehensions into him, (especially considering his concernment
to find out all the ways that can be, to elude the Force of the Argument) that
it is not so convincing, does not carry in it so great Evidence as at first
sight there seemed to appear. For what Imaginable Reason can be given why he
should be dealt with in a way so different from that that the rest of Mankind
are? The Particularity of the Miracle will give occasion to him to suspect the
Truth of what it discovers. If his Neighbors and Friends were thus haunted, he
might think he had reason to be alarmed, and to apprehend some danger in that
Course of Life he is so much disuaded from: But since none in the place where
he lives, is thus exercised besides himself; he cannot satisfy his Reason, as
to this way of proceeding with him. If this Means of Conviction was rational
and strong, without doubt others would have it afforded to them, and be
convinced by it as well as he. But since no such thing appears, as the
Apparition it self is unaccountable, so are the Arguments and Motives it
offers, unaccountable also. And till he be convinced in the same way, and by
the same Reasons that other Men are, he will continue as he is.

I represent these things, not to show the weakness or invalidity of such an
Argument as we are speaking of, but to show how easily those that have espoused
Interests inconsistent with Religion and Christianity may find out Expedients
for the avoiding the Force of it.

But Fourthly, and Lastly, Let all this go for nothing. Let us suppose the Man
to be very well satisfied in his own Mind, both concerning the matter of Fact,
and the cogency of the Argument he has from thence, to live after another rate
than he has hitherto done; Nay, as often as he thinks of this Vision, or is
asked concerning it, he has the same Sense, and makes the same Judgment of it
that he did at first; though it be many Years after: I say, supposing all this,
yet does it from hence follow, That such a Man will be effectually brought over
to Virtue and Religion, after he has long pursued a course of sin, and
resisted the Arguments of the Gospel? Alas it is very unlikely. How much
alarmed soever he was at first, yet it is a hundred to one (if he be such a
Person as we speak of) but in time, and by degrees the Impressions will wear
off, and Nature return to its first Course. It was the newness and
surprizingness of the thing, that first wrought upon him; but that will not
last always. After he has once got over the first Transports, and is come
again to his usual temper, and to his Business, and to his Company; the
Argument, though it have the same Force that it had at first, yet it grows flat
and unaffecting, and will have no more effect upon him than the standing
Motives of Christianity formerly had. Notwithstanding all his first
Convictions, he will live as tamely under the Bondage and Tyranny of his old
reigning Lusts (though perhaps not without some checks of Conscience now and
then,) as those that never had such kind of means vouchsafed them for their
Conversion.

And it must needs be thus; for when all is done, Arguments will still be but
Arguments. They can persuade, but they cannot compel. The efficacy of them does
in a great Measure depend upon our Will and Choice, especially where they are
to combat with strong Passions and Prepossessions.

Are there not a thousand Persons in our days, that are as fully convinced of
the Truth of the Christian Revelation, and the Necessity of a Holy Religious
Life in order to the going to Heaven, or avoiding the Pains of Hell, as they
would be if one should come to them from the Dead? Nay, more fully, perhaps,
than they would have been by the Testimony of such an Apparition had they
wanted the Scriptures. And have not the Consciences of these Persons at several
times by several means been severely awakened? And have they not at these
seasons in the most serious manner imaginable made Vows and Resolutions to live
a Holy Christian Life? And yet we see they continue still unreformed, still
they are the same sensual, careless, unchristian Livers that ever they were. I
appeal to the Consciences of Men, whether this be not true; and why should we
think it would fare otherwise with us, if God should send one from the Dead to
reclaim us? That very Miracle would not convince our Understandings more then
they have been convinced already; and therefore why should we think it would
work more upon our Wills?

The Sum of all this Discourse is this. That how prevaling soever we may
imagine such an experiment, as the Rich Man here offers to Abraham for the
Conversion of his Brethren, would be upon us, yet a sensual Man, that was
unwilling to give up himself to the Conduct of Religion, might easily find out
ways to avoid the Force that it ought to have upon his Mind; Nay, more easily
perhaps than he has hitherto resisted the Motives of the Gospel. And therefore
we may certainly conclude with Abraham in the Text, that they that hear not
Moses and the Prophets, or to put it into our own Language, they that hear not
Christ and his Apostles, neither, in all probability, would they be persuaded
though one rose from the Dead.

Nothing now remains, but that I draw two or three Inferences from what has
been said, and so conclude.

In the first place, From what I have discoursed upon this Argument, we may
discover the Infinite Wisdom of God, in the pitching upon that Method he has
done, for the bringing Men to Virtue and Happiness; namely, by the standing
Revelations of Moses and the Prophets, and of Christ and his Apostles. For we
may perceive this Method is every way more accommodated for that End, than if
God should be every day working Miracles for the reclaiming particular Persons.

As it is more suitable to the other Methods of God's Providence; to the way
that he has chosen for the Government of the World, (which is by the settled
standing Laws of Motion, leaving Natural Causes to produce their Natural
Effects, and not interposing his Omnipotency, but upon especial extraordinary
Occasions:) So also as we have seen, is it much more effectual for the
covincing, Men's Understandings, and the working upon their Wills, than the
other Method of Private Miracles and Revelations would be.

We have seen how many ways the Force of an Argument drawn from ones appearance
from the Dead may be evaded: But now none of these Pretenses can be made
against the Evidence of a Public Revelation, so attested, and confirmed, and
conveyed down to us, as that of Christianity is. And besides, there are many
Arguments to be drawn from such a Revelation, to show the Credebility of it,
which are altogether wanting to such a Private Miracle as we speak of.

Secondly, We may learn from hence, what little need there is of any new modern
Miracles for the confirming to us any Doctrine of Christianity, which was long
ago, in all the Articles of it, so well attested by the Illustrious Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles.

And more especially we may learn from hence what little Credit is to be given
to those Miracles that are wrought, or pretended to be wrought, for the proof
of such Doctrines as are really contrary to that Revelation of our Lord, as it
is delivered in the Holy Scriptures.

We are sure that Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, taught
nothing but the Truth of God, he having so publicly and so convincingly set
his Seal to all their Doctrines. And we are sure likewise that the Scripture
contains nothing in it but what was taught by them, and consequently must be
the Truth of God also. And therefore, if any Doctrine or Article of Religion be
at any time recommended to our Belief, that does not agree with these Holy
Writings, or does contradict them either directly or by plain unavoidable
consequence; we may be equally sure that that Doctrine cannot be true, nor is
to be received by us, though we are told of never so many private Miracles that
have been wrought for the confirmation of it.

Our Rule in these Cases is, To the Law and to the Testimony; To the Public
and undoubted Oracles of God, in the Old and New Testament. Whatever Doctrine
can be proved out of them, we are bound to embrace it without a new Miracle. On
the other side, Whatever Doctrine is inconsistent with them, we must reject it,
though an Angel from Heaven, or one from the Dead should come and Preach it to
us.

Thirdly, From hence we see the Vanity and Unreasonableness of those Men, that
not content with the Ordinary Means of Grace, are always wishing for
Extraordinaries. There are a great many of us that will be saved by Methods of
our own choosing, otherwise we will not be saved at all. As it was in St. Paul's
time, the Jews they required a Sign; the Greeks, they were for Wisdom and
Philosophy; and perhaps a third sort of Men were for another kind of means of
Conviction: So it is among us.

Here is one Man would have a particular Miracle wrought for his Conversion. If
he could see a Spirit or a Ghost, he would believe there was another World. If
God would send an Angel from Heaven to preach to him, he thinks he should
become a New Man.

Here is another would believe the Gospel, if every Point of it could be
demonstrated by Reason, and a clear and plain account be given of all the
Mysteries of it: but till that be done, he is of the Religion of the
Philosophers.

Here is another Man waits for Immediate Impulses and Inspirations. The
ordinary Assistances of the Spirit that acccompany the Word and Sacraments will
not do his business.

But let us not deceive our selves. All these Imaginations are vain and
foolish. If God should grant us our several desires; and give one of us a Sign,
another of us a Demonstration, another of us a powerful Conviction upon our
Minds, from his Holy Spirit, and that in an extraordinary way: Yet it is still
very doubtful, whether, for all this, the Business of our Conversion would be
effected.

None was more confident than the Rich Man in the Parable, that if to the
Testimony of Moses and the Prophets, was superadded a new Miracle, his Brethren
would certainly be persuaded: But yet you see, our Savior affirms the direct
contrary.

Oh let us all close with the standing Public Methods which God has
established in the Church, for the bringing us to Virtue and eternal Happiness,
and not be hankering after new and fanciful ways of our own choosing, Most
certainly, the Ordinary Means of Grace are sufficient for the Salvation of all
our Souls, and will be effectual to that End, if we be not wanting to our
selves. And if any Extraordinaries be at any time needful, God without doubt
will supply us with them also.

Fourthly, and lastly, From what has been said, we see the horrible Guilt and
the utter Inexcusableness of those Men, that notwithstanding the Gospel means
of Salvation, that have been so long afforded them, do still continue Infidels
in their Judgment, or Immoral in their Lives.

What will these Men be able to say for themselves, when they come to appear
before the Judge of the World, at the great Day of Accounts? Will they pretend
there was not force enough in the Gospel-evidence to convince them, or weight
enough in its Motives to reclaim them? Ah their own Hearts will give them the
Lie. They can no longer be able to deceive themselves. There will be no
Unbelievers, no seared Consciences, in the other State. They will then be
clearly convinced, that God for his part did all that was necessary, nay all
that was fit to be done, in order to their Salvation: but they were resolved to
shut their Eyes, and harden their Hearts against the gracious Means that were
tendered them.

Oh, how will the Rich Man and his five Brethren in Hell rise up in Judgment
against these Men? For they only refused to hear Moses and the Prophets: But
these, besides them, have obstinately refused to hear Christ and his Apostles,
who brought abundantly greater Light into the World than the former did.

Much more, How will the poor ignorant Heathens rise up in Judgment against
them? Who were destitute both of Moses and Christ; and yet, to the shame of
Christians it may be spoken, have several of them lived better Lives than many
of us do.

May not we justly and sadly apply that Woe which our Savior pronounced of
Chorazin and Bethsaida, to Thousands among us? Woe unto you Unbelievers; Woe
unto you, O obstinate and irreclaimable Sinners; for if the mighty Means of
Grace, the mighty Evidence of Truth, had been afforded to Tire and Sidon, to
Sodom and Gomorrha, to Mahometans and Pagans, that have been afforded unto you,
they would long ago have repented in Sackcloth and Ashes. But I say unto you,
it shall be more tolerable for all these in the day of Judgment, than for you.

God Almighty give us all Grace seriously to consider these things, that we may
by a timely and hearty closing with his Methods and Designs for our Salvation,
prevent the dismal Consequences of Infidelity and a Vicious Life; that so it
may not be our Condemnation at the last day, That Light is come into the World,
and we have loved Darkness rather than Light.

SERMON VII.
PREACHED AT WHITE HALL, On the 11th of April, 1690.
Gal. v. 13. Use not Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh.


ANY one that uses to make reflections upon his own Actions, cannot but
observe, That one of the great occasions of the sins he is guilty of in the
course of his Life, is the too free use of his lawful Liberty.

I do not say, that any Man does commit sin by using his lawful Liberty (for
that would be a kind of contradiction): But I say, the using our Liberty to the
utmost pitch and extent of that which we call lawful, is the occasion of a
great many sins that would otherwise not have been committed.

If one should offer to tempt a Man that has any Sense of Virtue or Religion,
to do a thing, that at the first sight appears sinful or wicked; it would
certainly be rejected. Every one that has any regard to God or Goodness, would
start at such a Proposal. But here is our infelicity. A Temptation comes on by
degrees. And at the first we are engaged in nothing but what is lawful and
honest; and accordingly we use that Liberty which Nature and Religion allows
us; and so we proceed on insensibly in the use of that Liberty, till at last we
become uncertain whether we have not exceeded the bounds of what is lawful: And
by this means we are often caught. Nay, indeed nothing but this could betray
well-meaning Persons, and such as are virtuously disposed, into sin. Licitis
perimus oumes, said a devout Man: It is by lawful things that we commonly
miscarry.

With great reason therefore does St. Paul give this advice in the Text:
Brethren (says he) ye have been called unto Liberty, only use not Liberty for
an occasion to to the Flesh.

There is no doubt but the Apostle writ these words upon occasion of, and with
reference to, the great Controversy that was then on foot among Christians,
touching the Obligation of the Jewish Law.

Some then thought themselves bound in Conscience to observe all the Precepts
of Moses his Law. Other Christians thought they were freed by the coming of
Christ from all legal Observances. The Apostle determines the Case in Favor of
these latter, and declares, that by the Gospel they were called unto Liberty,
and were free from all the Mosaical Impositions. But yet nevertheless he tells
them they ought to be careful in the exercise of that Liberty, that they do not
use it for an occasion to the Flesh.

That is to say, that this Liberty to which they were called, should not
Minister to any sin. That they should not so use it, as to be a snare, either
to themselves or others. To themselves by running into licentiousness, and
taking unlawful Liberties. To others, either by affrighting the unbelieving
Jews from the embracing Christianity, or discouraging those that already
believed the Gospel, in the profession of it.

This is the strict Sense of the Apostle's words, as they come in here in the
Text, and as they do relate to that occasion upon which he writ them. But that
sense, with reference to that occasion, is now out of doors among us. Though
the general Advice that is here given, will eternally be good and useful; Nay,
and always needful to be insisted on in all Ages of the World.

We have none now that use their Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh, as to
the point of the Judaical Ceremonies. But we have abundance that do use it so
as to other Matters. Nay, as I said before, this too free use of our Liberty in
lawful things, is one of the great Sources and Fountains from whence most of
our irregularities do proceed. And therefore I do not know how I can entertain
you more usefully upon this Text, than by endeavoring to give you the best
Rules I can, for the reducing the Apostle's Exhortation into practice, as it
does concern us at this day.

But that you may see plainly what I drive at, I will yet state the Matter a
little more particularly.

Our Case in this World is this. The Laws of Virtue and Religion, do allow Men
all reasonable Liberties in the gratification of their natural Passions and
Appetites, and in the use and enjoyment of all the good things of this Life.
But all unreasonable gratifications, all excesses and immoderate Liberties are
forbidden by Religion, and therefore are sinful and criminal.

If now in all Cases a Man could readily and certainly fix the precise bounds
and landmarks of what is reasonable and moderate, and what is unreasonable and
excessive in the use of his Liberty; so as that upon all occasions, and in all
emergencies, he could say within his own Mind, Thus far I may lawfully and
innocently go in the gratification of such an appetite, or in the enjoyment of
such a pleasure, or the like; but if I proceed a step farther, I become a
Transgressor: I say, if this was the case of a Man in the use of his Liberty,
it would be no hard matter for any well-disposed Person to take all that
Liberty that was moderate and lawful, and to forbear all that which is
excessive and unlawful.

But now this is not always an easy matter to be done. For many Cases happen in
which a Man cannot precisely determine where it is that his lawful Liberty
ends, and where it is that it begins to be extravagant and excessive. So that
while a Man is only designing to gratify his desires in lawful instances, he
is often carried beyond his bounds, and proceeds to excess.

This now, I say, is one great occasion of sin to Mankind; and yet there is no
avoiding of it, because it is such a one as does necessarily arise from the
nature of things.

Thus for instance: It is certainly very lawful for a Man to drink Wine and
strong Drink, not only for his Health's sake, when his Constitution does
require it; but also for Cheerfulness, and the Enjoyment of his Friends. But on
the other side, Drunkenness and Intemperance, are grievous Crimes, and utterly
forbid by our Religion. Whilst now a Man on one hand has a desire to take that
Liberty that is allowed him, and to gratify his natural inclination to mirth
and pleasantness, or to show Civility, as he terms it, to his Company: And on
the other hand, he has no certain unalterable measures to proceed by, for the
stinting himself in this Case; (as surely it is a very hard matter to prescribe
or define, either to a Man's self or others, the exact pitch or limits where
Temperance ends, and Intemperance begins:) by this means, I say, he is often
betrayed into sin. Thinking with himself, that there is a great latitude and
compass in the exercise of Temperance and Sobriety (as indeed there is,) and
that therefore he may go on some time longer with the Company; the Wine by this
means steals upon him, and he is, before he was aware, fallen into the sin of
Intemperance and Excess.

And thus it is, not only as to the use of our Liberty in things allowed, but
as to the performance of our Duty in things commanded.

Every Man is sensible, that it is a principal Law of our Religion to be
Charitable, and to give Alms out of our Substance. But now it is not so easy a
matter for any Man to define, and set cut the quantum, or the precise
proportion of Alms, which every one is bound to give; so as to be able to
pronounce, that if a Man give so much, he performs his Duty, and is a
Charitable Man, for one in his Circumstances; but if he gives less than that,
he is Covetous and Uncharitable. Now, I say, because this Duty of Charity is
thus indefinitely left, and there is such an affinity and undistinguishableness
between the least measures of Charity, and the sin of being uncharitable; Men
do from hence often take occasion to fall short in the performance of it. And
as in the former instance I gave about drinking, they are apt to take more
Liberty than is allowed them; so in this they are apt to do less than is
commanded them. For if they do but give something to the poor out of their
yearly Income, they think they give enough to satisfy the Command of Charity;
and so they make no Conscience of saving and hoarding without end or without
measure.

There are a hundred more instances besides these two that I have named,
wherein there is such a latitude left to our practices, and the difference
between lawful and unlawful, Duty and Sin, lies in so small a compass, that it
is hard to separate and distinguish them, unless a Man be both very wise and
very honest.

We have not any Law of God which defines how often we are to pray; Or when it
is our Duty to fast; Or to what degree we may be angry; Or how we are to govern
our selves as to the quantity or kinds of our meat and drink; Or how far we may
comply with the Customs of the World; Or how splendid we may be in our Apparel
and Equipage; Or what Games and Recreations may be used, and how often; Or what
Rules we are to go by in buying and selling, and our other dealings with Men;
Or how far we may seek our own, when our right cannot be obtained without
prejudice to our Neighbor.

In these, I say, and abundance of other Cases, we have no express particular
Laws of God to steer and measure our Actions by; nor indeed is it possible we
should have: Because what is fit and reasonable to be done in these Cases,
admits of so great a difference from the infinite variety of the circumstances
of particular Men.

What now must we do in these Cases? How must we order our selves, that we may
perform our Duty, and keep out of sin?

Why in answer to this I say, We have only general Rules to direct us in these
matters; and those Rules we are to apply to our own particular cases.

In this latitude that things are left in, we are to use our Liberty as
carefully and as prudently as is possible; taking our measures from the
Principles of Reason, and the general Rules of the Gospel. Now what those
general Rules and measures are, it is my business at this time to treat of.

And three things I have here to propose for the use of our Liberty, which
will, I think, be a sufficient Direction to us in all cases of this nature; and
which if we do carefully observe, we shall never use our Liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh; but we shall both come up to what is our Duty, and shall
likewise avoid all those sins which Mankind are so frequently betrayed into,
through the too great affinity that there is between Virtue and Vice, and the
indiscreet exercise of their Liberty upon occasion thereof.

And the first thing I would possess you all with, and which indeed, as it is
the most general, so it is the best advice that can be given in this matter, is
this: That we would endeavor to be heartily honest and serious in the business
of Religion: That we would sincerely devote our selves to the service of God:
That we would purify our Minds as much as may be from all sensual and selfish
Principles; and in all our Actions and Pursuits have more respect to the doing
our Duty, and the approving our selves to our great Lord and Master, than to
any other consideration.

This is that which St. Paul so often exhorts us to. Whether (says he) you eat
or drink, or whatever ye do, do all to the glory of God. And again, Whatever ye
do, do it heartily, as unto the Lord, knowing that of the Lord you shall
receive the reward of the inheritance.

If we could once get our selves possessed of this Probity, this Purity of Mind
and Heart, it would better instruct us in the use of our Liberty, and teach us
to distinguish between good and evil; what is sit to be done, and what ought
not to be done, in all cases and emergencies we are concerned in; than all the
dry Rules of Casuistical Learning, be they never so carefully and accurately
laid down.

When a Man is once arrived to that holy temper of Mind, that he heartily loves
God and his Neighbor, and has such a lively sense of the truth and the
excellency of Christ's Religion; that he is resolved, that that shall influence
and govern the whole course of his Life, and that he will do all his Actions,
as much as he can, for the honor of our Lord, and the advancement of his
service in the World: There can hardly any particular case occur to such a Man
in which he will not have rules and measures ready at hand to steer and direct
him in his proceedings.

Nay this general Principle alone of doing all his actions to the glory of God,
that is to say, to the honor of his Religion, and the edification of his
Neighbor: I say this alone will afford him sufficient light and direction for
the government of his Actions in all Contingencies. Because there is no Action
he can be engaged in, but it is at the first sight discernable, whether the
doing of it, or the not doing of it, does more tend to the honor of his
Religion, or the good of others.

That which makes the conduct of a Man's self in this World, so nice and
difficult a matter, and has given occasion to the discussion of so many Cases
of Concience about the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Actions, is this; That Men
are not thoroughly honest, but halt between God and the World. They have a great
mind to serve their pleasure and their ambition, and their secular ends, and
yet to serve God too; and this puts them upon tampering and trying to reconcile
these interests together.

Whence it comes to pass, that the usual Questions that arise about their
Actions, are not, what is best to be done, or what is most agreeable to their
Duty in this or the other ease? But, how far they may go in the gratification
of such an Appetite or Passion, without trangressing the Laws of God? How far
they may satisfy their covetuous desires, without being unjust? Whether they
may use such arts or tricks, in getting or saving, without being knavish; How
far they may drink, and not be drunk? How far they may gratify their humor of
decking and adorning themselves, and yet do no unlawful thing? How far they may
indulge wantonness, and yet be chaste?

Now as I said before, such Questions as these are not easy to be resolved (nor
indeed is the Gospel of Christ so contrived, as if it had taken much care
whether they were resolved or no.) But they are really Cases and Problems that
require both Judgment and Learning, and likewise the consideration of abundance
of particular circumstances, to have a good account given of them.

But now the Man that does entirely give up himself to the conduct of the
Spirit, and proposes nothing to himself in all his Actions but the pure glory
of God: Such a Man having none of these Worldly sensual designs to serve in his
Actions, can rarely be supposed to have any of these Questions to put to
himself. And consequently he can never be at a loss or uncertainty, how he is
to act for want of a resolution of them, much less can he be in danger of
transgressing the bounds that God has fixed to his Actions.

All the point that such a one has to consider in any Action is, whether will
his doing or not doing such an Action better serve the ends of Religion? Which
will tend most to his own spiritual benefit, and the profit of his Neighbor,
to pursue this design, or to let it alone? Whether will be more conducive to
the Honor of his Lord, to gratify such an Appetite, or to deny it
satisfaction?

This, I say, is the only Question that such a Man has to put to himself, and
there is no difficulty in giving an Answer to it. For there is scarce any case
to be put concerning an Action, but it is very obvious, without an Instructor,
to find out which side of the case, if it be chosen, will most minister to the
ends of Virtue and Religion and Charity. Or if it be not obvious, then it is
very certain, the Man needs not much deliberate about it, but may choose either
side indifferently.

It is a very hard matter oftentimes to determine concerning the Necessity and
Obligation of Actions; that is, whether a Man be bound to do them or no. It is
likewise often a hard matter to determine concerning the lawfulness of Actions,
whether a Man may do them or no. But it is a very easy matter in most cases to
determine concerning the expedience of Actions; that is to say, whether it be
best and fittest for a Man to do them or no. Now this last, I say, is the point
that a thoroughly good Man will consider and steer himself by in all his Actions.

Thus for Instance, It may perhaps bear a dispute, Whether a Man be precisely
bound by God's Law, to pray solemnly twice a day, so as that he sins if he do
not: But it will bear no dispute, that it is much better and more acceptable to
God, and beneficial to our selves, to pray at least thus often, than to pray
seldomer. And therefore such a Person as I am speaking of, will upon this
consideration put it in practice (nay and pray oftener too as he has occasion)
without concerning himself whether he be strictly bound so to do or no.

It may bear a dispute among some Persons, whether painting the Face be not
allowable to Christian Women. But it can bear no dispute among any, that it is
more agreeable to the Sobriety, and Modesty, and Chastity of a Disciple of
Jesus Christ, and better serves the ends of Religion, to forbear all such
suspicious Ornaments. (There being rarely any good end to be served by them,
but abundance of evil often arising from them.) Now this consideration alone is
enough to set the Heart of every serious Christian against those practices, and
to make them wholly to refrain them.

Thus again, it is argued both ways about Play or Gaming, whether it be lawful
or no: (especially when sums of Money are played for; and the thing becomes
rather an avaritious Contention, than a Recreation and Divertisement) some
believing that it is innocent; others that it is a grievous sin. But there is
no Man, even of those that use it most, but will readily acknowledge, that it
exposes a Man to great and Dangerous Temptations of sundry kinds; that it is
the occasion of abundance of Sin, and abundance of Mischief, and that it seldom
fails to produce intolerable consequences, both as to Men's Souls, and Estates,
and Families. Now to a Man that loves God, and has a tender sense of his Duty,
this is enough in all Conscience to deter him for ever from the practice of
Gaming, though it be not made to appear to him, that it is expressly and
explicitly forbid by any Law of Jesus Christ.

So that you see, that in those points where there are disputes on both sides,
when the Consideration is concerning the Obligation, or the lawfulness of an
Action; there is no difficulty, no dispute at all, when the Consideration is
only concerning what is best and most fitting to be done; concerning what is
most agreeable to our Duty, and most conducive to the Honor of God and
Religion as to that Action. That is evident enough in all Cases; nor is any Man
at a loss for finding it out. And that is the Principle which I say every
sincere lover of God governs himself by; and which I would have us all to
propose to our selves for the Rule of our Actions, in order to the securing us
from those snares and stumbling blocks, to which the affinity between Virtue
and Vice, Lawful and Unlawful, will otherwise expose us.

Let us not stand upon points with God Almighty, as if so much was his, and so
much was our own; as if we were to share our selves between his Service and our
own Pleasures and Profits, and the like; and were resolved not to pay him any
more respect or love, than what some express Letter of his Law does exact at
our Hands. But let us so entirely devote our selves to his Service, as to do
not only all those things which we are strictly bound to do, or else we are
Transgressors; but all those things that are acceptable to him, all those
things that are praise worthy, and tend to the Perfection of our Nature, and
the Reputation of Christ's Religion.

Let us make it the end of our Actions, not to seek our selves but his Glory;
every day to grow better and better, and in every Occurrence to consider, not
what may lawfully be done, but what is Most becoming a Disciple of Jesus Christ
to do. In a word, what ever is best in any Action; what ever most serves the
end of piety; what ever tends most to the credit of our Religion, and the
benefit of others, let us consider that, and act accordingly.

And thus I am sure to design and act, is most suitable to the Nature and
Genius of our Christian Religion; nay, indeed, it is the Principal Law and
Commandment of it.

The design of Christianity is not to adjust the precise bounds of Virtue and
Vice, Lawful and Unlawful, which is that that a great many among us so greedily
hanker after. For the best that could have come from such a design, had been
only this, that Men by this means might have been fairly instructed, how they
might have avoided the being bad; though they never became very good. But the
design of Christianity; is to make Men as good as they can possibly be; as
devout, as humble, as charitable, as temperate, as contented, as
heavenly-minded, as their Natures will allow of in this World. And for the
producing this effect, the exact distinguishing the limits of the several
Virtues, and their opposite Vices, signifies very little.

The Laws of our great Master are not like the Civil Municipal Laws of
Kingdoms, which are therefore wonderfully nice and critical, and particular in
setting bounds to the practices of Men, because they only look at overt
Actions; so that if a Man do but keep his Actions within the compass of the
Letter of the Law, he may be accounted a good Subject, and is no way obnoxious
to the Penalties which the Law threatens.

If our Religion had been of this strain, we should without doubt have had a
World of particular Laws and Precepts, and directions about our Actions, in all
emergent Cases more than we now have: And we might as easily have known from
the Bible what was forbidden unlawful Anger, what was excessive drinking, what
was pride and luxury in Apparel, and the like; as we now know by the
Statute-Book, what is Burglary or Murder, or Treason. But there was no need of
these particularities in the institution of Christ Jesus. His Religion was to
be a Spiritual thing. And the design of it was not to make us chaste, or
temperate, or humble, or charitable, in such a degree; but to make us as chaste
and temperate, as humble and charitable, as pure and holy in all our
Conversation, as we possibly can be.

This I say was the design of Christ's Religion. It was to be the Highest
Philosophy that was ever taught to Mankind. It was to make us the most
excellent and perfect Creatures, as to purity of Mind and Heart, that Humane
Nature is capable of. And therefore it has not been so accurate and particular
in prescribing bounds to our outward Actions, because it was abundantly enough
for the securing them, to oblige us to the highest degree of inward purity

And this it has done above all the Laws and Religions in the World. It
teaches us to abhor every thing that is evil or impure in all the kinds of it,
in all the degrees of it, and in all the tendencies toward it; And to lay out
our selves in the pursuit of every thing that is honest, that is lovely, that
is praiseworthy, and of good report among Men.

If this now be the design of our Religion, and these be the Laws of it, I
leave it to you to judge of these two things. First, Whether it does not highly
concern all of us that profess this holy Religion, to endeavor, in all our
Conversation, to be as holy and as virtuous as we can, and to do as much good
as we can; and not to content our selves with such a degree of honesty and
virtue, as is just sufficient to the rendering us not vicious. And then
secondly, Whether, if we do thus endeavor, we can easily be at a loss in
distinguishing between Good and Evil, Duty and Sin, in any instance; And
consequently, Whether we can be much in danger of ill using our Liberty, and so
transgressing upon that account.

I have been longer upon this first Head than I intended, but I shall make
amends for it by dispatching the two following, in so much the fewer words. And
indeed after so large an account as I have given of the general Rule, there is
less need of dwelling upon particular ones.

II. In the second place, In order to the right use of our Liberty, and so
securing our serves from falling into sin, through mistaking the measures of
Good and Evil; This will be a good Rule to propose to our selves, namely, That
in matters of Duty, we should rather do too much than too little: But in
matters of Indifferency, we should rather take too little of our Liberty than
too much.

First, As to matters of Duty my meaning is this: That where the Laws of God
have generally and indefinitely commanded a thing, but have not set down Rules
about the particular measures and proportions of it; in that case it is
advisable rather to do more than we are perhaps precisely bound to do, that so
we may be sure we have performed our Duty; than by being scanty in our
obedience, to run the hazard of falling short of our Duty.

Thus for instance, Our Lord in the New Testament, has often and solemnly
commanded us to pray. But neither he nor his Apostles, have any where told us
how often we are to pray; only they have bid us pray frequently. In this Case
now a Man that makes a Conscience of performing his Duty, will take all
occasions and opportunities of listing up holy hands, and devout affections to
his heavenly Father: However, he will not fail, at least once every time he
rises, and once every time he goes to rest, to offer up a solemn Sacrifice of
Prayer and Praise. Less than this, I say, he must not do, for fear he break the
Commandment of praying frequently, praying continually. But more than this it
will become him to do, in order to the giving himself satisfaction, that he
has fully performed it.

Thus again, To give Alms to the poor, is an indispensable Duty of our
Religion. But what proportion of our substance we are to give away in Alms and
Charity, is no where set down; but is wholly left to our discretion. Now in
this case, it is certainly much more advisable to give liberally, and largely,
and plentifully; even as much as our condition in this World, and the
necessities of our Families can allow: though by so doing, we shall prove to
have given in greater abundance than we were strictly obliged to: Than by
giving stingily and pinchingly, now and then a little pocket money or so, to
run the hazard of being Trangressors of the Commandment, and having our Portion
among the covetous and unmerciful.

There is no damage comes to a Man by doing the former; but on the contrary, a
great deal of good. For God never fails bounteously to reward the bountiful
hand. But there is both damage and infinite danger in the latter. And thus we
are to practice in all other Duties.

Only this caution we must take along with us: That we are always so to
proportion the measures of every single Duty, as to render it consistent with
the performance of the other Duties of our lives.

As for instance, we must not spend so much time in Prayer, as to hinder the
pursuit of our Callings, and necessary business. We must so give Alms, as yet
to leave our selves enough to pay every one their own, and to make a competent
provision for our Families. But let us but take care to secure this, and then
we cannot easily exceed in the measures of any Duty. The more we pray and the
more we give alms, still the better. And so in all other instances of Duty.

But now in the second place, the quite contrary to this are we to practice in
matters of Liberty. There the rule is, rather to take less than is allowed us,
than to take all. Rather to abridge our selves of our lawful Liberties, than by
doing all that we may lawfully do, endanger our falling into sin.

There is no harm at all in departing from our Rights and Privileges which God
has indulged us: But there is a great harm in extending them beyond their
bounds. There is no evil in not gratifying our desires and appetites in all the
things they crave, which are allowable, and which we are permitted to gratify
them in: But there is an infinite evil in gratifying them in unlawful forbidden
instances. And therefore every wise and good Man will be sure to keep on the
safe side; and to prevent the danger of doing more than he should do, he will
not always do all that he may do.

The truth is, that Man that makes no scruple of using his Liberty to the
utmost stretch and extent of it upon all occasions, and regards nothing more in
his Actions, than just that he do not fall into some direct sin: That Man
cannot always be innocent, but will be drawn into a hundred irregularities and
miscarriages.

Thus for Example, he that uses himself to eat or to drink to the utmost pitch
that can be said to be within the limits of Temperance, it is impossible but
such a one will now and then be unavoidably overtaken in the sin of Gluttony or
Drunkenness.

He that will use all the liberties that the Law allows him, for the making
advantages to himself in his Trade, or his Dealings with other Men: Such a one
will not be able to avoid the just imputation of being in many instances an
Oppressor or a hard Conscienced Man.

The safest way therefore, if we mean to preserve our Virtue amidst the
multitude of Snares and Temptations that we meet with in the World, is to set
bounds even to our Lawful Liberties; to keep our actions within such a compass,
as not to come even near the Confines of Vice and Sin.

Though it is but a point, and that often an undiscernable one, that
distinguishes between what is lawful, and what is unlawful. Yet there is a
great latitude in what is lawful. That is, if I gratify my Appetites but a
little, I do that which is lawful; and if I gratify them more, I may do that
which is lawful likewise. But he shows the most Honest and Virtuous Mind, that
in his actions takes but a little of this latitude, and by that means keeps
himself at a good distance from that which is vicious and criminal.

III. But thirdly and lastly, To what degree soever we may think fit to make
use of our liberty; yet at all times, As soon as we begin to doubt or fear we
have gone as far as we lawfully can go; it is then high time to break off, and
to proceed no farther. This is the last Rule I have to offer upon this
occasion. And thus also, wherever we have a just ground of suspicion or doubt,
whether a thing be lawful or no; this doubt or suspicion, is of it self reason
enough to make us forbear that thing. Unless indeed there be a Necessity, or a
great Charity to be served by the doing of it, which may in reason over-balance
the suspicion of its lawfulness.

Thus in matters of Recreation. If we have the least doubt, whether this or the
other Pleasure or Divertisement be innocent and lawful; why that is Argument
enough without more ado, to make us forbear it; though perhaps we see others
use it without scruple.

Thus in matters of Temperance, when we first begin to suspect that we have
drunk as much as is convenient for us: Let us by all means leave off, and break
from the Company.

Thus in matters of Sobriety, when we have reason to doubt, that we are come up
to the full bounds of the Christian gravity and modesty; and that any degree
more of pomp or bravery in our garb, or in our attendance, or in our equipage,
will relish of Pride, or Vanity, or Affectation: It is high time rather to
abate something of our sumptuousness in these things, than to proceed any
farther.

And thus lastly in matters of Equity and Justice, when we first begin to have
a suspicion, that such a practice is an indirect or knavish trick, or that we
are too severe and hard upon a Man, upon whom we have got an advantage: Why,
this suspicion alone is enough in reason to check us in our cariere, and to put
us upon more fair and moderate courses.

This is a Rule that will for ever be fit for us to practice, for it is
grounded upon Eternal Reason. Indeed it is as old as Morality. Quod dubitas ne
feceris. Do nothing that you doubt of, is a maxim that obtained among the
Heathens as well as among us Christians.

I dare not indeed say, that this Rule holds universally in all Cases. For
Cases do sometimes happen, wherein it will be advisable for a Man to act even
against his doubts. But in such Matters as I am now speaking of, Matters
wherein a Man is at perfect Liberty to act or not to act: In all such Cases, it
will always, without exception, be a true, and a safe, and a wise Rule. And I
am sure if Men would seriously charge themselves with the practice of it, they
would hereby prevent a Multitude of Sins and Transgressions, with which they
usually inflame their Accounts against the day of Judgment.

And thus much of the Rules I had to propose, as to the use of our Liberty, in
such Cases where a Man is at a loss in finding out the Measures and bounds of
Duty and Sin, and upon that account is in danger of Transgressing. I have only
two things more to add upon this Argument, by way of Application, and I have
done. The one as a Caution to prevent the misapplying these Rules; the other as
an encouragement to put them in practice.

That which I have to say by way of Caution is this: That what I have been now
recommending, especially under the two last Heads, is not intended to be a Rule
or direction to any Hypochondriack, or Melancholy Persons, or such as are apt
to be over-scrupulous about their Actions: For indeed to such Persons it is the
worst advice that can be given.

For they are apt to doubt and boggle at every thing, be it never so innocent
and free from blame. They dare not eat a hearty Meal for fear of being
Intemperate. And for fear of not being devout enough they exhaust their
Spirits, and spoil their Health, through the continual intention of their Minds
to serious things.

Now Persons that are of this temper, are rather to be encouraged to take more
Liberties than they do, than to abate any that they make use of.

But their Case is of another Consideration, and foreign to my present purpose;
and therefore I here say no more about it. It being sufficient to have given
this intimation to such People, that they do not make an ill use of any thing
that I have now represented; for assuredly, what has been now said, does not
much concern them.

2. The other thing I have to say, and that by way of Encouragement, is this: I
doubt not but some will be apt to think, that the Rules I have now given about
the Exercise of our Liberty, are much too strict and severe; and that if they
must be tied up to such Measures, then farewell all the joy and pleasure, and
comfort of their lives. But to such People I would crave leave to say, that
they have very wrong notions of this Matter.

The using of their Liberty in such a manner as I have been recommending, would
not rob them of one true pleasure or comfort that this World affords. So far
from that, that I am very sure, whoever frames his Life according to these
Measures, shall live a hundred times a happier Life, and shall enjoy the World
and all the pleasures and advantages of it, much more to his own content and
satisfaction; than if he put no check to the craving of his Appetites, but
always indulged and gratified them in every thing, and as much as they desired.

Assure your selves Virtue and Religion will never hinder you from enjoying any
pleasure or satisfaction that is natural. On the contrary there is great Reason
to believe, that the practice thereof will extremely heighten and advance the
satisfactions you can receive from your Worldly Enjoyments. I doubt not in the
least, but to a sincerely pious and Virtuous Man, and that has a Regard to God
in all his Actions, even the very pleasures and comforts of this Life are more
gratifying and affecting, than to any sensual or wicked Man. For such a one, as
he is more capable of enjoying them, so do they come to him likewise without
the mixtures of those uneasy, troublesome, bitter Reflections, that other Men
feel in the very best of their Enjoyments.

Let no Man therefore apprehend any loss of his pleasures by entirely devoting
himself to God's Service, and using his liberty in that careful way I have been
recommending. Let him not think that he shall hereby be too much straightened and
confined. For certainly this is the true means, not only to keep him for ever
from being a Slave to any thing, but also mightily to improve and increase his
Liberty.

For by thus exercising himself, all the Powers of his Soul will be vastly
enlarged, and he will hereby attain both leisure and will to employ all his
rational Faculties about the best and the noblest objects in the World, which
will yield him the greatest pleasure that is to be had on this side Heaven.
Whereas if he had given up himself to be governed by any of his sensual
Appetites, he had been a poor narrow confined Creature indeed, not capable of
any greater satisfactions or pleasures, than what the Brutes do enjoy as well
as himself, but with less uneasiness, and fewer disturbances.

It is true indeed, a sensual Man has no notion of this kind of pleasures, no
more than a Beast has of the pleasures of a Man. And therefore it is no wonder
that such Men entertain all talk about them as little better than mere Cant and
Jargon. But I seriously appeal to all Men that have ever made any trials in the
way of Religion and Virtue, whether the Contentments and Satisfactions they
have received from the rational use of their Liberty, and the thoughts and
reflections that hereby they do approve themselves to God, and live in hopes of
his Favor, and have a fair prospect of a glorious Immortal Sat in another
world: I say, Whether they do not find the pleasures and contentments that
arise from hence, to be infinitely more solid, and substantial, and durable,
than any of those that they receive from the gratification of their sensual
Appetites in a vicious unreasonable Manner.

Oh therefore, Let none of us make any scruple of devoting our selves entirely
and without reserve to God Almighty's Service. Let none of us be afraid to put
reasonable restraints upon our Passions and Appetites. Assuredly the thus using
our Liberty, is the certain way to preserve and increase it, and with it, the
pleasure and comfort of our Lives; and not only so, but to render us
Everlastingly Happy and Blessed in the other World. Which that we may all be,
God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON IX.
Preached before the House of Commons, AT St. Margaret's Westminster, On the
21st of May, 1690.
Deuteronomy. v. 29. O that there were such an Heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep all my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their Children for ever.


THese are the words of God to Moses concerning the Children of Israel. And two
things may be gathered from them.

I. His serious desire of their Happiness.

II. The means whereby that Happiness is to be attained.

The first of these is imported in that solemn wish into which the Text is
framed: O that there were such an Heart in them, etc. that it might be well
with them, and with their Children for ever.

The second is imported in the way of connecting the former part of the wish
with that which follows: O that there were such an heart in them, what then?
That they would fear me, and keep all my Commandments always, and why so? It
follows, That it might be well with them, and with their Children for ever.
Which plainly implies, That the way to have things well with them, and with
their Children, is to fear God, and keep all his Commandments always.

I have but one thing more to observe concerning the Text, and that is this:
That the wish or desire that God here expresses of Israel's Virtue and
Happiness, does not so much relate to the Israelites, considered singly, and as
particular Persons, (though it cannot be denied, but it does extend to them,
even under that notion) but it chiefly relates to the Children of Israel
considered collectively, that is to say, under the notion of a People or
Nation. God here expresses his care of the whole Nation, and seriously wishes
they may be a happy People, they and their Children after them.

Two points then we have from this Text very proper to be insisted on, upon
this Occaasion, which therefore I shall make the Heads of my following
Discourse.

First, That God is seriously concerned for the good and happiness of Nations
and Kingdoms, as well as that of particular Persons; and more especially of
those Nations that profess his true Religion.

Secondly, That the Happiness and Prosperity of Nations is to be attained the
same way that any particular Man's happiness is, that is to say, by fearing
God, and keeping his Commandments.

I. I begin with the first, That God is seriously concerned for the good and
happiness of Nations and Kingdoms, as well as that of particular Persons; and
more especially of those Nations that Profess his true Religion.

I do not think this is much doubted of by any Christian, and therefore I need
not insist on a laborious proof of it.

That God who does not overlook the meanest and the most inconsiderable
Creatures that he has made; but so far concerns himself in taking care of
them, and providing for them, that not so much as a Sparrow (if we may believe
our Savior) does fall to the ground without his will: Can it be imagined, that
he is not more concerned for the happiness and well-being of the noblest part
of the visible Creation, Mankind, who bear his own Image, and whom he looks
upon as his own Children? Certainly he is.

And that God whose Care and Providence does so particularly extend to every
individual Man, that (as the same our Lord Jesus speaks) the very Hairs of our
Head are numbered by him. Can it be imagined, that he does not still take more
care of the greater Bodies and Combinations of Men, such as Nations and
Kingdoms, which are so many ways more considerable than single Men, and in
whose Fortunes the good or ill of particular Persons is so wholly bound up?
Certainly he does.

And lastly, That God who is the Author, the Preserver, the Protector of all
public Societies, by whom Kings Reign, and Magistrates decree Justice: Can it
be imagined that he has not still a more particular regard to those Nations
that he has been pleased to call by his own Name, and has chosen for his own
People (such as were the Israelites in my Text, of old; and such are all those
Peoples and Nations now that do profess his true Religion)? Certainly he has.

Thus natural reason will teach us to argue. And that it is a right way of
arguing, Matt. 6.26, 30. 1 Cor. 9.9.
is confirmed to us by our Savior and St. Paul, both of which we find
reasoning after this manner.

To quote to you all that the Scripture says upon this Argument, would be
endless. One of the great designs of God's word, is to possess us with a hearty
Belief, that God, as he is the Creator, so he is also the Governor of the
World. And that his Providence extends to all the things and Persons in it. And
that the constant Rule and Measure of that Providence, is no other than the
good of the World, and the good of every Person in it, so far as his private
good is consistent with the public. And that therefore as God designs all good
to every particular Man, so does he more especially design the good of Nations
and Kingdoms in all his dispensations of Providence to them. Nor is there any
thing happens in any Nation or Kingdom but with his approbation. Even the
severest visitations that come upon Mankind are from him. There is no evil
happens to a City, Amo^ 3.6. Isa. 28.2^. Mi^. 7.18. Latin 3.3^.
but the Lord has done it. Though yet Judgment is his strange work. And Mercy
and Loving kindness is the thing wherein he delights. He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. But sometimes it is necessary that
Nations should be scourged; yet even that is for the greater good of Mankind.
Isa. 26.^.
That thus when God's Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World
may learn righteousness.

But then as for his own People, those upon whom his name is called, those that
are in Covenant with him, and profess his true Religion; for them upon all
occasions he declares so great a tenderness and concernment; that there is
hardly any figure of Speech that the most sensible Man can make use of, for the
expressing his most passionate love to his dearest Friend or Relation, though
it be his Wife or his Children, but the very same figures are made use of by
the Holy inspired Writers to set out to us the kindness and concernment that
God has for his own People. He is their God, their King, their Shepherd, their
Father, their Husband. They are his chosen ones. His Delight, his peculiar
Treasure. He rejoiceth over them to do them good. His bowels earn, his heart is
turned within him, his repentings are kindled together, when through their
miscarriages he is forced to pass any severe Sentence upon them. All this is
the language of God in Scripture, when he speaks of his People, and therefore
we cannot doubt of his sincere affection to them, and particular care of them.

All the doubt is, whether these expressions ought to be applied to any other
people than the Jews, with respect to whom the Scripture uses them. But we
that believe the Gospel, need not make much doubt of it. For it is certain, the
reason of all these expressions of kindness to the Jews more than to other
Nations, was founded in this; That they were the People whom God had chosen to
plant his Church among. They were the People where his Religion was owned. But
now it is evident to all Christians, that after our Savior came into the
World, and Preached his Gospel to all Nations, the Jews, as a Nation, ceased to
be God's Church, or peculiar People; and from that time all those Nations that
embraced Christ's Religion, came into their place, and were from thence forward
to be as dear to God, and as much his Care and his Treasure, as ever the Jews
were. And, upon that account, we of this Nation, may, with as much reason,
apply the expressions of Scripture to our selves, which declare God's kindness
and concernment for his People, as ever the Jews did.

Especially considering that God has owned us of this Nation for his People, in
as remarkable a manner as any Nation in Christendom. As appears not only from
that glorious light of the Gospel, which he has for many years blessed us with,
above any other people perhaps in the Christian World: But also from the
wonderful Providence, by which he has from time to time preserved our Church,
and with it the true Religion among us, notwithstanding the various attempts of
our Enemies to subvert it. O may these Mercies of God to our Nation never be
forgotten, and may we always remember them with that due thankfulness they call
for at our hands.

And thus much of our first Head. I beg leave to draw a practical Inference or
two from what has been said, before I proceed to the other.

First, Since it appears, that God sits at the Helm, and steers and manages all
the affairs of Mankind; and that public Societies are more especially the
objects of his Care and Providence: Methinks this Consideration should be a
good Antidote against all those troublesome Fears and Solicitude, we are apt
to disturb our selves with, about the success of public Matters.

If indeed all things went in the World by Chance or Fate, and there was no God
that did superintend human Affairs; I should think it very Natural for Men to
be extremely concerned at every piece of ill News they heard. It might be
allowed them to break their sleep in the night, and to complain dismally in the
day, of the sad times that were coming upon us. But since we are certain, as
much as we are certain there is a God, and as much as we are certain that the
Scripture is true; that all our Affairs, our public as well as our private
Affairs; the Affairs both in Church and State, are entirely in God Almighty's
disposal, and that He does really manage and order all things among us; and
likewise so manageth them, that all shall at last turn to the good of his
People, and to the good of every honest Man: I say, since we are, or may be
satisfied, that our Business is in so good hands, I must confess I do not see
what reason People have, to give themselves so much trouble and uneasiness,
about things that may, or may not come.

Thus far indeed, it is fit that every one should be concerned; nay it is fit
that every one should charge his Conscience with it: Namely, to do his Duty to
the public in his place and station; to contribute all that is in his power
toward the procuring and promoting the common Happiness; and to endeavor all
that in him lies, toward the avertting those Judgments we have reason to fear.
But when a Man has done this, to what purpose is it for him to trouble himself
any further? I should think he had better follow our Savior's advice, which,
when all things be considered, will be found Eternally Prudent and Reasonable:
Matt. 6.34.
Take no thought for to morrow; let the morrow take care for the things of it
self: Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Secondly, This Doctrine ought to teach us this farther Lesson; to depend
altogether upon God Almighty, and upon him only, for the good success of our
Affairs, either in Church or State, whenever they are in a doubtful or
dangerous condition. Prove. 19.21.
For though many are the devices in the hearts of men; nevertheless the counsel
of the Lord, that shall stand. It is in vain to trust humane means: For be our
strength never so great; or be those that manage for us never so industrious;
or be our hearts never so much united: Yet it is an easy matter for God to
blast all our designs, and to disappoint all our Counsels in a Moment.

He has often done so, where Men have been confident in their own strength. 2
Kings 19.34.
In one night's time he made that prodigious Army of Assyrians, that came up
against Jerusalem, and thought themselves sure of taking it; to decamp and fly
back into their own Country, leaving a hundred and fourfcore thousand of their
number Dead upon the place.

There is in truth no trusting to an Arm of Flesh. For the successes of War
depend upon a thousand Contingencies, which it is not in the power of mortal
Men, either to foresee, or remedy. Eccles. 9.11. Psalm. 33.16.
So that the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong; nor
can a King be saved by the multitude of an Host, nor any mighty Man be
delivered by his much strength. But the God of Heaven that rules in the
Kingdoms of Men; it is He that preserves or destroys; that gives Victory, or
sends a Defeat, as it pleases him. And therefore he is, by way of eminence,
styled, The Lord of Hosts, the God of Battles.

On the other hand, If our Affairs at any time be in so very bad a posture,
that we cannot not avoid the having a melancholy dismal prospect of things; yet
let us not be discouraged, let us still trust in God; let us do what belongs to
us to do for the obtaining his Mercy and Favor, and then refer the Event to
him. God has certainly a kindness for his People, and if we do our parts
toward the preserving his Affection to us, we may still hope he will continue
to be our Savior and Deliverer.

Is is as easy to God to save by few as by many; the Walls of Jericho, at his
Command, Josh. 6.20.
fell down flat, only at the sound of Rams-Horns. 2 Kings 7. chapter
And when the City of Samaria was Besieged, and brought into the greatest
extremity that was possible, so that Women even are their own Children: yet in
one night, God by an unaccountable terror, which he struck into the hearts of
the Enemies, raised the Siege. And such plenty was left in their Camp, that
every one of the Besieged had wherewith, not only to satisfy his hunger, but to
enrich himself. Only that Nobleman that would not believe this when it was
foretold by the Prophet, did not live to taste of the Fruits of God Almighty's
Victory, being trodden to Death in the Crowd.

II. But it is time to come to the second general point I observed from this
Text; viz. That the Happiness and Prosperity of Nations, is to be attained the
same way that any particular Man's happiness is; that is to say, by being
sincerely virtuous and religious; or, as my Text expresses it, by fearing God,
and keeping all his Commandments always.

This is a true Proposition, both with respect to particular Persons and to
Nations too; but with this difference, That if we take Happiness and Prosperity
for that which the World accounts so, that is to say, the possession of a great
many outward Blessings, and the freedom from temporal evils and
inconveniences; the Proposition is not so universally true with reference to
particular Persons, as it is with reference to Nations and Kingdoms. For every
Man that fears God is not always blessed with happy outward Circumstances. On
the contrary, some good Men are exposed to many and great Afflictions, and
Misfortunes, and Sicknesses, and Crosses, all their lives long. But it is
certainly true of all Nations and Peoples whatsoever. Every Nation or Society
shall fare better or worse in this World, exactly, according as they fear God,
or despise and affront him; exactly, according to the degree they keep God's
Commandments, or break them. Though it is not certain, that every particular
Man shall always do so. And there is great reason that it should be thus. For

First, We know that all God's ways are just and equal. Now as to particular
Persons, there is a great room left for the dispensing this Justice and Equity
to them. For they being in their natures made to live for ever, it is enough
for the vindicating God's Justice, that they be at any time hereafter, either
rewarded for their Piety and Virtue, or punished for their Wickedness and abuse
of God's Mercies. So that wicked Men may be happy and prosperous here, and good
Men may suffer many afflictions and tribulations, without any the least
reflection on the Justice or Goodness of the great Governor of the World:
Because there is a farther day reserved for the adjusting all Men's Rewards
according to their Works.

But now the consideration of public Societies and Nations, is quite
different. Nations are not made to be Immortal, but end with this World. No
Society, as a Society, shall be called to a future account. But all the Rewards
and Punishments, they are capable of as Societies, must be adjudged and
distributed to them in this present Life. And therefore if we suppose God to be
the Judge and Governor of the World, and of all the Nations in it; as well as
he is the Judge and Governor of particular Persons: We must likewise suppose,
that he administers all affairs so, that Righteous and Religious Nations have
in this World the reward of their Virtue in the blessings of Peace and Plenty,
and all manner of temporal Prosperity: And on the other side, impious and
incorrigible Nations are likewise punished in this World for their wickedness,
either by severe Judgments, or by a total destruction; as God in his infinite
Wisdom sees cause.

This now that I have offered is I think so reasonable, that if there was no
more to be said, it ought to go a great way toward the making of the point I
have in hand highly credible. But in the second place there is a great deal
more to be said. The word of God does all along bear testimony to the truth of
this. A multitude of Texts of Scripture there are, that do most plainly give
this account of God's dealing with Nations and Peoples, that I have now
mentioned.

There is no Judgment threatened to any Nation in the holy Scripture (and
abundance of Nations are there threatened) but it is upon account of the sins
and wickedness they were guilty of. Which Sins, if they repented of, so
repented as to forsake them, they might find mercy.

And accordingly we find in fact, that God always dealt with Peoples and
Nations according to these measures. God had solemnly denounced destruction to
the City of Nineveh, by his Prophet, and that within forty Days. But upon the
Repentance of the Ninevites, and turning to God with all their hearts, he
reversed his Sentence (though to the great discontent of the Prophet) and gave
them a further time.

On the other side he waited long for the Repentance of the Canaanites, but
would not destroy them; because their sins, though very heinous, admitted a
place for Repentance. But when their iniquities were filled up to the measures,
according to which God proceeds in his destruction of Nations; He then sent the
Israelites to root them out, and to take possession of their Land.

And thus was Nebuchadnezzar raised up by God to be a scourge to all the
Nations about him, for the punishment of their sins. Nebuchadnezzar had indeed
other things in his Head. That which he designed was, the gratifying his own
Ambition, and enlarging his Dominions. But these were not the ends which God
had to serve by him. God made use of him as his Instrument, as his Servant,
(and so he calls him) for the rendering to the Nations that just recompense of
vengeance which their sins called for.

I mention these things the rather, because they are instances of God's dealing
with Heathen Nations, who were under no particular Covenant with God.

And I might have recourse likewise to the Histories of all Nations, to show
the truth of this. Name any Nation that was ever remarkable for Justice; for
Temperance, and severity of Manners; for Piety and Religion (though it was in a
wrong way); that did not always thrive and grow great in the World; and that
did not always enjoy a plentiful portion of all those things which are
accounted to make a Nation happy and flourishing. And on the other side, when
that Nation has declined from its former Virtue, and grown impious or dissolute
in manners, we appeal to Experience, whether it has not likewise always
proportionably sunk in its Success and good Fortunes. I am sure any one that
will be at the pains to read either the Greek, or the Roman, or even the
Turkish History, will meet with matter enough there to satisfy him of the
truth of this observation.

But I confine my self to the Scripture, and in that the History of the Jews is
the most remarkable, for indeed it makes up a great part of the Old Testament.
Now in that History it is worth our taking notice of; That every degree of
public Vice, and departure from God's Laws, was always punished with public
Judgments. And on the other side, every degree of public Repentance and
Reformation, was always rewarded with public Happiness and Prosperity. So that
any one that could make a right estimate of the Morals of that Nation, and how
it stood as to Virtue and Vice; might constantly make a judgment likewise how
it would fare with them, as to their outward temporal affairs.

I must confess that generally speaking, there is little force in those
Arguments that are drawn from Examples; But in the case I am now upon, I think
there is a great weight in them. For though we cannot argue from God's dealing
with one Person, that he will just deal in the same manner with another: Yet as
to Nations and Kingdoms, the case is otherwise, as I before said. For God's
Dispensations and Providence to them, seem all to proceed upon one immutable
Foundation (which will be the same in all Ages and Countries) namely the
expression and vindication of his Justice and Goodness in this World.

And for my part, I have always been of this mind, That there is no other
difference between the History of God's dealings with his own People the Jews,
and that of other Nations, but this: That in other Nations the public Events
that happened, whether good or bad, though they were taken notice of, yet they
passed without any reflection on the true causes from whence they proceeded.
The Historians did indeed often lay their Fingers rightly upon the immediate,
visible, outward occasions, or means, or instruments, from whence their good or
bad Fortune was derived to them. But they searched no further. They considered
only second Causes, and took no great notice of the first and principal Cause
of all things, God Almighty, and his influencing humane affairs. They left God
in a great measure out of their Hypothesis, and out of their History. But now
that the World might be awakened to a more hearty belief and sense of his
Providence, God took care to single out the Nation of the Jews; and in them to
give us a true Pattern or Platform of his dealings with all the Nations of the
World. And for that purpose he ordered, that all the great strokes, both of
their departure from God, and of their return to him; and likewise both of the
good or bad Fortune, that did at any time befall that Nation, should be
faithfully Registered, and the true Causes of them faithfully assigned; That all
Mankind might from thence receive Instruction how they ought to behave
themselves toward God; and what according to their different behaviors they
were to expect.

To conclude this point: By all that has been said it appears, That the State,
and Condition, and Fortune of all Kingdoms and Nations, is the very same with
that of the Jews, as it is represented by Achior the Ammonite, in the advice he
gave to Holofernes, when he came up with an Army against that People. You have
the passage in Judith 5.17. Whilst (says he) these People sinned not before
their God, they prospered; because the God that hates iniquity was with them.
But when they departed from the way that he appointed them, they were destroyed
in many Battles, after a nonderful sort, and were led Captive into a land that
was not theirs. But now they are turned to their God, and are come up from
their Captivity, and have again possessed Jerusalem. Now therefore my Lord and
Governor, if there be any fault in this People, so that they have sinned
against their God, let us consider that this shall be their ruin, and let us go
up that we may overcome them. But if there be no iniquity in this People, let
my Lord pass by, lest their Lord defend them, and their God be for them, and we
become a reproach before all the World.

Thus it is, and will be always with all States and Nations, if they
notoriously sin against their God, this will be their ruin. But if there be not
found iniquity in them, it is in vain for any Enemy to set upon them; for God
will be for them, and their Lord will defend them.

If this which I have said be not sufficient to satisfy any one about the
truth of this point, I might bring other Proofs for it. I might for instance,
in the third place, insist upon this, That Virtue and Piety do, in their own
nature tend to promote the welfare and happiness of Peoples and Nations. As, on
the other hand, all Vice and Irreligion, is destructive of humane Society. And
this without respect to any appointment or Decree of God, that things should be
managed in this way; but purely in the very nature of the thing.

It is obvious, That Virtue and Religion lay the surest Foundation for all
those Blessings wherein the happiness of a Nation does consist that is
possible; both by making Magistrates to govern well, and by rendering the People
easy to be governed. And likewise by furnishing both the Governors and the
governed, with such kind of Principles and Habits as cannot fail with the
Blessing of God to produce both Peace, and Plenty, and Victory, and all other
sorts of Prosperity in a Nation.

As on the other hand, all Vice, and Wickedness, and Profaneness, and Impiety,
do sow the worst Seeds in the World for the dissolving and breaking in pieces
all Societies; or at least, for the so enfeebling them, that they shall either
be in a very low wretched condition among themselves, if they have no Enemies;
or if they have any, become an easy prey to the next Invader.

But I will not enter upon this Argument, because I think the matter needs no
further proof, And I would spend the rest of my time, in making some
Application of what has been said upon this point, to the business of our
present meeting on this Day.

WE are here met together for the solemn Humiliation of our selves with Fasting
and Prayer, before Almighty God: In order to the Supplicating his Divine
Majesty for the Pardon of our Sins, and the Sins of our Nation; And the
imploring his Blessing and Protection to the King and Kingdom, by continuing
those Mercies to us we do enjoy; by averting those Judgments from us we have
reason to fear, and more particularly by giving a Happy Issue to that dangerous
War in which his Majesty, with the Kingdom, is now engaged.

And very great reason there is, that you the Representatives of the People of
England, should most seriously, and solemnly join in this Religious Office;
since the Fortunes of the Nation you represent, did never more lie at stake,
than at this present.

You have hitherto been acting and endeavoring for the Happiness and Security
of your Nation by Humane Methods, and we all put up our daily Prayers, that
what you have done, and what you shall do, may be for the Glory of God, and the
good of his Church; and the Safety, Honor, and Welfare of their Majesty's and
their Kingdoms. And we hope all will so come to pass.

But now on this Day, both You and We, are to think of other Methods, for the
procuring Success to our Affairs. Namely, by having recourse to God Almighty;
who, when we have done all that we can, is the Governor of the World, and will
do what he pleases. But yet will always do that which is best for Mankind, and
that too which is best for our Nation, if we be capable Objects of his Favor.
And to make our selves such, if it be possible, is our business on this Day.

This is indeed a seasonable Business at all times; but at this time it seems
absolutely necessary. Since we have reason to apprehend the Crisis of our
Nation, as to Happiness or Ruin, to be upon the point of approaching.

The Judgments of God are now abroad in the World. We have not only Rumors of
Wars sounding in our Ears, but all Europs is now in an actual War, and a
terrible one. And what the Consequences will be, we know not.

Some very great thing God certainly designs to bring to pass in these parts of
the World, and that very suddenly. A Cup he has mingled for all the Nations to
drink of. Which to some undoubtedly will prove a bitter Potion, a Cup of God's
Wrath and Fury; to others probably a Cup of Salvation. But how it will prove to
us, is yet entirely in the Will of God. However this is certain, that we of
this Nation shall have as much our share in it, be it good or bad, as any other
in Christendom.

And now after the mention of this, Can there be any need to call upon any one
to weeping and fasting, and mourning, and crying mightily to the Lord, that he
would have mercy upon us, and spare us, and our Nation, and not give his
Heritage over to Confusion? Why methinks the Circumstances we are in, should
put us upon so doing, without any other Monitors. Indeed we have no Humanity,
no Compassion for our selves or our Country, if we do not.

We should all be of this mind, if we did seriously consider how things stand
with us.

We are not that Innocent, Virtuous, Pious People, that may certainly reckon
upon God's Favor, and think our selves in all Cases sure of his Protection.
For if the Doctrine I have now been insisting on to you, be true Doctrine; then
we of this Nation can but entertain very small hopes of being Happy and
Prosperous. Nay, we cannot but apprehend Misery and Ruin, and Desolation to our
selves; unless God be abundantly more merciful to us than we deserve. And there
can be no way to prevail with him to be so, but an universal Humiliation and
Repentance. And this is the Application I desire to make of the Point I have
been now treating of.

If the measure of God's dealing with Nations be always according to the Moral
State of them. If their good Fortunes be dealt out to them according to their
Virtues; and Judgments be inflicted upon them, according to their provoking God
by their Sins; as we have said: Good Lord! What a lamentable Prospect have we
of this Kingdom of what may come upon us? And what infinite reason have we
thereupon, immediately to try all the ways that are possible of making our
Peace with God, that so Iniquity may not be our ruin.

I beg leave to dwell a little upon this Point, because it is the proper
Argument of the day.

I do not say, nor do I think, that we of this Nation are worse than our
Neighbors. But this I say, considering how long God has spared us, and how
long we have enjoyed the Blessings of Peace and Plenty, and all sorts of
Prosperity (though perhaps with many Fears and just Apprehensions of danger);
whilst most of our Neighbors have been harassed with Wars, and exposed to all
the Cruelties and Miseries of Persecutions and Devastations: And considering
the great Privileges and Advantages we have for many years enjoyed, of all the
outward means of Grace, that could be desired for the Eternal Salvation of our
Souls, and that above any other Nation under Heaven; And withal, how
unprofitable we have been under these means, how unthankful to God for them,
and what little Effect they have had upon us for the bettering our Manners. And
lastly, Considering how very wicked we generally are, what a World of open
gross Sins and Impieties do reign among us, and what a lewd, Profane,
Hypocritical, Atheistical Spirit seems to have gone out into the Nation, and to
prevail upon it. I say, these things considered, we cannot make any very
comfortable Reflections on our own Condition. So far from that, that if (as I
said) the measure of God's dealings with Nations be taken from their Behaviors
and moral Qualities, and be suited to their merits and deserts; we have as
little to hope for, as most Nations under Heaven.

I take no delight in saying these things; on the contrary it is very grievous:
But if ever one may be allowed to run out into a Declamation against the Vices
of the Times, it is upon such an occasion as this, and before such an Audience
as this, that the liberty may be challenged.

For God's sake let us not deceive our selves nor think that we are Favorites
of Heaven, merely because we profess the Best Religion, and are Members of the
Best Church in the World.

For as good as our Church and Religion is, and as zealous as we seem to be for
them; yet never did Vice and Iniquity of all sorts, and indeed every thing that
is contrary to our holy Religion, more abound in this Nation than at this day.

Give me leave to speak out upon this occasion, and to tell you of some of the
Crying Sins that reign among us, and that deserve Your Care to put a stop to;
and which, if if they be continued in, will certainly bring down the Vengeance
of God upon us.

Where was there ever more Atheism and Insidelity to be seen in a Country that
professed the Religion of Jesus Christ, than is among us at this day?

We do not perhaps meet with very many that do openly affirm, There is no God:
For as bad as we are, God be thanked we are not yet arrived to such Impudence.
That is such an affront to the Laws and good Manners, that it is not to be born
with. But we may meet with several, every day, that do affirm the same thing by
consequence; asserting such Principles from whence it may be necessarily
concluded.

For my part, I account it much the same thing, as to the ill effects of the
Opinion, to deny the Being of God; as to deny the Being of Angels, and Spirits,
and Immaterial Souls, to deny the Being of particular Providence; to deny the
natural difference between good and evil; to deny another Life after this,
wherein good Men shall be rewarded, and wicked Men punished; to deny the
liberty of Humane Actions, and to say, that all things which we do, we do by a
fatal necessity, and we cannot do otherwise: And yet we may every day meet with
Men of these Principles, nay, and that laugh at all those that maintain the
contrary.

But then, as for the business of Jesus Christ, and that which we call the
Christian Religion, what a very little do a great many among us make of that?
To talk of Christ's being sent for the Savior of the World, and that he died
to procure the Pardon of our Sins, and that we must believe all the
Scripture-Doctrines concerning him, and worship him as a God; why what stuff is
this to a great many of the resined Spirits of our Age? It is very well if they
can so far prevail with themselves, as to own the Being of God, and to
acknowledge their obligation to the Duties of moral Honesty and Justice, which
natural Religion teaches: But as for Jesus Christ and the Trinity, and the
Sacraments, and all revealed Religion; they beg your Pardon for these things,
they are too nice and subtle for them to meddle with. Not but that they are
good Christians all the while. For they can come to our Churches, and to our
Sacraments too, if there be occasion. Because indeed they will always be of the
Religion of the Country where they live. But at the same time they do this;
they do no more really believe, or expect any Spiritual Benefit in our
Religion, nor look for any more Salvation from Christ Jesus, than they would
expect from Mahomet, if they should live in Turkey.

But this is not all. Even among those that do believe in Jesus Christ, and own
his Religion; yet what little regard have they, generally speaking, to his
Worship and Service.

It is very well if they now and then afford their presence on Sundays at the
public Religious Assemblies. I will not examine with what designs, and for
what ends they come thither, nor how devoutly and religiously their hearts are
affected during the time they are there. I say it is very well that they are
there at all.

But even of those that do come thither, and do once a Week seem to have a
sense of public Religion, I say how few are there of them that take any care
of worshipping God, either in their Families, or in their Closets?

Why, if a Man was truly Religious, he could not pass a day without solemn
Addresses to his Maker, and to his Redeemer. He would pray in his Closet
constantly; and if he had a Family, he would Pray with them constantly. And if
he had no Family, he would constantly resort to those places where he might pay
his Tribute of public Prayer and Praises to God, unless he had urgent business
to hinder him.

But, is there any thing of this to be seen among us, except in some few
Persons here and there? Are there not twenty Families for one that live without
so much as the show of any Devotion? Without any sort of Prayer or Worship of
God in their Houses? Nay, and I am afraid, I may say, there are twenty for one,
even of Private Persons, that live without Devotion in their Closets; that
never call upon God, never renew their Vows to their Savior, never pay him any
Homage, except perhaps once a Week in a formal way, when the Custom of the
Country obliges them to resort to the Church.

The truth is, so little sense have most of us of Religion and Devotion; so
little regard of our Duty to God, and our depenance upon him, and expressing
that dependence, either in Private, or in our Families: That were it not for
that Happy Institution of the Lord's day, on the which we are obliged, by the
Laws of God and Man, to meet together for the Worship of God; we should hardly
see any Face of Religon among us, and in a little time should scarce be
distinguished from Heathens.

But yet this is not the worst of our Case. Our gross Immoralities; that Horrid
Lewdness and Debauchery that is every where to be observed in our days, does
still increase our Guilt, and cry to Heaven for Judgment upon our Nation.

It would make a Man's heart ache, that has any sense of God or Religion, to
think of the Riots, the Drunkenness, the continued course of spending our Time,
and our Parts, and our Substance, in Revelling and Gaming, and all manner of
such excesses that is daily practiced among us. And yet at the same time, the
Men that thus live, think themselves very honest Men all the while.

It would really amaze a Man, and put him upon admiring God's Patience, that he
does not presently confound the World, if he did seriously reflect on the many
filthy, lewd Speeches and Actions, the numerous wicked intrigues of Lust, the
Infamous Whoredoms and Adulteries that are, without any sense of shame, daily
carried on and acted among us, and that by Persons too that have the Face to
show themselves at our Holy Assemblies.

Especially, if to these be added, the infinite Lies, and Cheats, and Perjuries
which our Land groans under. The Blasphemous Oaths and Imprecations, the Damn
me's and Sink me's; the Horrid Profanations of the Name of God, and all things
Sacred, that are in every place, in every street where we pass, belched out, in
contempt of the Almighty and his Laws; by all sorts of Persons, of all sorts of
Qualities; from the Beggar in the street to the Man of Honor, and that for no
other reason in the World, but because it is their Humor or their Custom,

And lastly, to fill up the measure of our iniquities; to our other reigning
Vices, we have added that of Hypocrisy too; which one would think should not
often be found among so much Profaneness.

How many of us make a mighty noise with Religion, and are zealous even to
Bigottry, in the defense of it, and yet have not one grain of inward sense of
what it obliges them to. Nay so far from that, that if Religion be but in
their Mouths: If they do but appear Zealous enough for the Protestant Cause: If
they can but cry love enough, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord,
as the Jews did in the Prophet; They matter not how coutradictory their Actions
are to the Precepts of that Religion they do Profess. Their Zeal for so good a
Cause, will sanctify all the other Actions, be they never so wicked and unjust.

But if this be not Hypocrisy, there is no such thing in the World. Sure I am,
it was this sort of Carriage, that God so often reproves the Jews for, by his
Prophets; and upon account of which they are so often reproached as a
Generation of Hypocrites, and for which he threatens them with utter
destruction.

O my Brethren, what have we to say to these things? If the Case be thus with
us, as I am afraid it is; What plea have we to put in for our selves? If God
should let loose our Enemies upon us, the Enemies of our Nation, and of our
Religion, and should give us over as a Prey unto them, what have we to reply?
Truly nothing that I know of, except that of the Psalmist, Righteous art thou,
O Lord, and Just are thy Judgments.

But we trust God's Lenity and Forbearance, and Mercy is as great to Public
Societies and Kingdoms, as it is to Private Persons; And, that we may apply
those expressions to our Nation which David uttered with reference to himself:
O Lord if thou should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who may
abide it? But there is Mercy with thee, that thou may be feared.

When the Iniquities of a People are at the full, God will not fail to punish
them. But whether ours be so or no, He only knows. We hope, though they be very
grievous and crying, they have not yet exceeded the measure of God's Patience;
and that there is yet left a place for Repentance. This is indeed the only
Plank we have to trust to, that can save us from Shipwreck; and therefore we
ought to lay hold upon it.

Let us therefore this day, every one of us; if we have any kindness for our
Native Country: If we have any respect to that dear Place, where we and our
Ancestors, and all our Relations and Kindred for many Generations have lived so
happily:

If we have any Zeal for, or regard to that excellent Church, and that Holy
Religion, that God did in so extraordinary a manner plant among us; and for the
preserving of which in our Land, His Care and Providence has so often and so
wonderfully appeared:

If we have any Concernment for many thousands of innocent Souls, who without
their own fault may deeply suffer for the Nations Sins:

Lastly, If we have any Bowels of Compassion to those dear Children of ours,
that God has given us, that we may transmit to them and their Children after
them, that Birthright, and those Privileges, and that excellent Religion we
received from our Fathers:

I say, if we have any sense of these things, let every one of us this day,
most sincerely apply our selves to the Service of God, in all the ways of a
serious Virtue and Piety. Or if we have been careless of this matter
heretofore; or which is worse, have been lewd or wicked in our lives; yet let
us now at last heartily repent of it. And with Prayers and Tears, and the most
solemn Resolutions of Amendment, prostrate our selves before the Throne of
Grace; imploring and beseeching God's Pardon and Forgiveness, and, if it be
possible, a lengthning of our Tranquillity.

O let us not refuse this opportunity of doing the greatest Kindness, and the
best service to our Country, that we possibly can. And therefore let us not
only heartily bewail our own Sins, but the reigning Impieties and Wickedness,
that our Nation stands accountable for.

Now is the time, if ever, that we are all concerned to be importunate with God
for our selves and our Country.

And a fitter Prayer for this purpose cannot be composed for us, than that
which Daniel put up to God for his Nation, and that at such a solemn time as
this, when, as he tells us, he had set himself to seek God for his People, by
Prayer and Supplication, with Fasting, and Sackcloth and Ashes.

The Prayer is in the 9th Chapter of his Prophecy; and I shall conclude with
it, and I earnestly beg of you all to join with me in it.

O Lord, the great and dreadful God, that keep the Covenant, and show
mercy to them that love thee, and to them that keep thy Commandments.

We have sinned and done wickedly, and have committed Iniquity, and have
rebelled; even by departing from thy Precepts, and from thy Judgments.

O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee; but unto us confusion of face as at
this Day; to the Men of Judah, and to the Inhabitant, of Jerusalem, because we
have s^^^red against thee.

But unto the Lord our God belongs Mercy and Forgiveness, though we have
rebelled against him; ^^ither have we (...) of the Lord our God, to walk in his
Laws which he set before us.

O Lord, according to all thy Right^^^sness, we beseech thee, let thy anger and
thy fury be turned away from thy City Jerusalem, thy holy Mountain. Because for
our sins, and the iniquities of our Fathers, Jerusalem and thy People are
become a reproach to all that are about us.

Now therefore, O God, hear the Prayer of thy Servants, and cause thy Face to
shine upon thy Sanctuary.

O God, incline thine ear and hear: Open thine Eyes, and behold the City which
is called by thy Name.

O Lord, hear. O Lord, forgive. O Lord, hearken and do. Defer not for thy own
sake, O our God. For thy City, and thy People, are called by thy Name.

And whilst Daniel was thus praying and confessing his sins, and the sins of
his People unto the Lord, and supplicating for his City Jerusalem: Behold the
Angel Gabriel was sent unto him from the Lord, with the glad tidings that God
had heard his Prayer for Jerusalem, and that it should be built, and the Lord
would dwell in it.

O may we all thus Fast and Pray, as Daniel did, and may God Almighty give us
such a return of our Prayers, Amen, O God for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom,
etc.

SERMON X.
PREACHED AT St. GILES in the Fields. On the 28th of June, 1691.
Philip. iv. 8. Finally, Brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be
any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things.


I Have the two last Lord's Days made it my business to treat of this Text, in
a way that I thought did most tend to the informing your Judgments: And to that
purpose I have raised several Observations, and drawn several inferences from
it.

I mean now to treat of it in another way, and apply my self wholly to the
pressing you to the practice of it.

And indeed the Nature of the Sermon I am to make, does call for this from me.
For I am now to take my leave of you; this being the last time, in all
probability, that I shall Preach among you as your Minister: And therefore I
suppose good Advice and Exhortation will more become me at this time, than a
close Discourse upon a Text.

And yet, my Text does afford matter enough, without straining it, for such a
purpose: Nor indeed do I know a Text in the Bible, that I could more willingly
pitch upon to leave with you, as the last Advice I would give you, and as the
Sum and Conclusion of my Preaching among you; than these Words of St. Paul I
have now read to you.

Let me therefore at this time address my self to you all, as the Apostle here
did at the conclusion of his Epistle to the Philippians, Finally, Brethren,
whatsoever things are true, etc.

Here are a great many things recommended by the Apostle to our thoughts and
pursuit. If we would make a distribution of them, I believe they will all
naturally enough full under these Four Heads. For the things here recommended
are not so many as the words by which they are expressed, there being several
Words used in this Enumeration, that are of the same importance, and seem to
express much the same thing.

The Four Heads I would reduce them to are these,

I. A constant Adherence to the true Religion. II. Honesty and Justice in our
Dealings. III. A Life of Strict Purity, in opposition to Sensuality and
Lewdness. IV. The adorning the Doctrine of God we do profess, by the constant
Practice of every other thing that is Virtuous or Commendable, or well thought
of by Mankind.
This, as I take it, is a fair account of the Parts of this Text: and these I
shall make the Heads of my following Exhortation.

I begin with the first. Finally, my Brethren, whatsoever things are true,
think on those things.

The Truths that St. Paul here exhorts them to think on are undoubtedly the
Truths of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, which he had delivered to them. These he
would have them to think upon, and persist in, and never to be prevailed upon
by any Temptation to depart from them.

Let me now apply this Advice of his to you. It is the particular Blessing of
God to this Kingdom, and an inestimable Blessing it is, that he has not only
vouchsafed us the Light of his Gospel for many years, but he has also taken
Care that the Truths of it should be delivered to us with greater Purity and
Sincerity, and freer from the mixtures of Error than to most, I was going to
say than to any other People in the World.

If it lay in your way to make observations concerning the State of Religion in
other Countries; nay, or but to read the Accounts that are given of it: I am
sure you would be convinced how exceedingly happy we of this Church are, above
all the Churches in Christendom.

O therefore let us all firmly adhere to the Truths we have been taught; to the
Truths we have hitherto made Profession of. And let us firmly adhere to that
Church which has held forth these Truths to us, and taught us this Profession.

We do not pretend that any Church is Infallible, and therefore not ours: But
this we dare say, and we can justify; that if we take our measures concerning
the Truths of Religion from the Rules of the Holy Scriptures, and the Platform
of the Primitive Churches, the Church of England is undoubtedly, both as to
Doctrine and Worship, the Purest Church that is at this day in the World; the
most Orthodox in Faith, and the ^^^est on the one hand from Idolatry and
Superstition, and on the other hand from Freakishness and Enthusiasm, of any
now extant.

Nay I do farther say with great seriousness, and as one that expects to be
called to account at the dreadful Tribunal of God for what I now say, if I do
not speak in sincerity: That I do in my Conscience believe, that if the
Religion of Jesus Christ, as it is delivered in the New Testament, be the true
Religion (as I am certain it is:) Then the Communion of the Church of England
is a safe way to Salvation, and the safest of any I know in the World.

And therefore I do exhort you all in the Name of God, steadfastly to hold and
to persevere in this Communion.

Here you have the Things that are true. Think of them and embrace them
heartily; and Live and Die in the Profession of them. This is the Doctrine I
have always Taught you, and by the Grace of God I mean to Practice accordingly.

II. The next thing I have to recommend to you from these words of the Apostle,
is Universal Honesty and Justice and Righteousness in your Conversation.
Whatsoever things (says he) are true, whatsoever things are honest; whatsoever
things are just; think on these things.

You see I join these two words Honest and Just together, as importing the same
thing. Though yet I am aware that the word we here render Honest is often used
in another signification, that is to say, for Grave or Venerable: But since
that other signification falls in most properly under my last Head, I wave it
here, and take the word as our Translation renders it.

Indeed it is in vain to expect any advantage from our profession of the Truth,
if we be not sincerely Just and Honest in our Actions.

Whosoever can allow himself in the practice of any dishonest, knavish indirect
Dealing, let that Man be never so Orthodox in his Belief and Opinions; yet I am
sure he is no true Christian.

O therefore let me exhort you all, whatever Interests you have to serve;
whatever Dealing; you are to engage in, to be always strictly Just and Upright
in your Conversation. Use no Tricks, practice no ill Arts for the serving your
ends, but in all your transactions with Men, deal with that Simplicity and
Integrity and good Conscience, that becomes those who would be accounted the
Disciples of Him who was the most Innocent, the most Sincere, and the least
Intrigueing Person in the World.

Assure your selves no dishonesty can prosper long. Whatever turns you may
serve by it at present, yet you will bitterly repent of it sometime or other.
But Righteousness and Justice does establish a Man's ways. And the upright Man,
though he is not always the richest, yet always walks most surely. And as for
the final event of things; Remember this that God Almighty has pronounced, that
no Unrighteous men, no Covetous, no Liars, no Extortioners, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. But to go on.

III. The next thing I have to exhort you to from the words of my Text is the
Practice of Purity. For after the Apostle has recommended the pursuit of
things that are true, and the things that are honest and just, he next adds the
things that are pure. Meaning hereby that we should study to be pure, and
chaste, and temperate both in our Hearts and Lives; avoiding all Excesses, and
Lewdness, and Sensuality.

And if he thought it convenient in that Age of strictness and severity and
devotion, to put the Christians in mind of this: I am sure it is not only
convenient but necessary to do it, in this Age of ours, when Luxury and
Debauchery, when Whoredom and Drunkenness, and all sorts of Vice; that are
contrary to Purity, are grown to that height among us, that we seem to defy
God Almighty by our impudent Practice of them, and provoke Him to give us up to
Destruction,

I pray God make the whole Nation deeply sensible of the Folly and Wickedness,
as well as of the Danger and dreadful Cousequences of these Practices. And as
for you who are here present, let me bespeak you in the Words of the Apostle;
Dearly Beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, to abstain from
fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul. I beseech you, as you have any
Honor for your Lord and Master, as you have any regard to the preservation of
a sense of Religion in your Minds, as you have any concern for your Health, for
your Estates, for your Families; as you have any respect to the Public, that
Effeminacy and Sottishness and Diseases may not be entailed upon our Posterity;
Lastly as you love your own Souls, and hope ever to see the face of God in
Heaven, learn to live Soberly, learn to live Chastely, learn to practice Purity,
and Temperance in all your Conversation. Avoid Whoredom and Drunkenness as you
would the Plague, for certainly they are the worst of Plagues to them that use
them: For other Plagues do only put our Bodies in danger, but these do endanger
both our Souls and Bodies. Nay, as to the one (I mean our Souls) they will
prove certain inevitable Destruction without Repentance and Reformation.

I know these things are made slight Matters of by a great many among us. But
assure your selves God will not account them so; it is certain he will not, if
we may believe his Word; for it is there told us expressly, that Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge. And withal, that neither Adulterers, nor
Fornicators, nor unclean Persons, nor Drunkards shall ever inherit the Kingdom
of God, or of Christ.

IV. I proceed to the last Head of Advice that is given in my Text. The Apostle
having instanced in Three things necessary to be daily thought upon and pursued
by all Christians, viz. Truth, and Honesty, and Purity, leaves off to meddle
any farther with particulars, and sums up the rest of his Advice in generals.
And that sum comes to this, That as we are Christians we should not only take
care of the three forementioned things, but should make it our business to
improve our selves in every other sort of Virtue; nay in every other sort of
thing that is Praiseworthy, or that is well esteemed of among Mankind. So that
really it should be the endeavor of our Lives, to render our selves as
excellent and as exemplary for all sorts of amiable Qualities as it is possible
for Men to be in this World.

This I take to be the full meaning of those four expressions that follow in my
Text, Whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these things.

And now, Brethren, see from hence what your obligations are. You that have
such a glorious Light vouchsafed you; such unvaluable Promises, such mighty
Assistances made over to you by the Gospel of Christ: You must in reason
imagine that in return of these great Advantages, great things are expected
from you.

It will not satisfy your Engagements, that you do believe and profess the
Gospel, that you do no wrong to your Neighbors, that you are neither given to
Lewdness nor Drunkenness, (though yet even these, as the World goes, are very
great things, and could all Men that profess Christianity truly say this of
themselves, we should soon see Heaven upon Earth.) But your Christianity
obliges you to aspire after greater things; you must get your selves possessed
of the whole Circle of Virtues; you must be Kind and Charitable, as well as
Just and Honest; you must be Modest and Meek, and Humble, as well as Temperate
and Chaste.

Nay, not only so, but you are to labor after all these several Virtues in the
full Latitude and Extent of them, even to that degree that every thing which
has but the appearance of Evil is to be avoided by you. You are not only to
abstain from Acts of Injustice, but even from doing a hard thing to any one;
you are not only to keep your selves within the known Limits of Temperance and
Chastity, but to avoid all those things that border upon the Vices opposite
thereunto, and so as to all other instances; if any thing be of ill Report, and
looks infamously to the sober part of Mankind, why that very Consideration is
enough to deter you from the practice of it; For you are to recommend your
Religion to all the Men in the World, by all the ways that are possible.

In a Word, you are to endeavor to be as free from blame in your whole
Conversation as you possibly can, and not only so, but to be as good, and to do
as much good as your Circumstances will allow you.

This now is to be a Christian indeed; by thus endeavoring you truly walk
worthy of that high and heavenly Calling wherewith you are called, and you do
(as the Apostle advises) adorn the Doctrine of God in all things; and happy,
extremely happy are they that do thus, for great is their Reward: Great even in
this World, in the solid Peace and Assurance of God's Favor which they here
enjoy, and which indeed far exceeds all the Blessings that the Earth can
afford; but exceedingly great in the Life to come, when Jesus Christ shall come
with all the Powers of Heaven to do Honor to those that have thus here
honored him.

Thus have I gone through all the Parts of my Text, but I do not think that I
ought so to leave it. I have given you an account of the things that St. Paul
has here directed us to, to be the main pursuit of our Lives. But I think
likewise it will be proper to speak something of the Methods of that pursuit,
or the means which we are to observe, if we would practice this Text; and here
I am to begin anew with my Advices. Several things I have to represent upon
this Occasion, and to exhort you to. I am not much sollicitous, whether they
strictly belong to my Argument or no. But I desire to leave them with you, as
things that I judge to be very useful, and which I wish may be ever remembered
by you.

And the First thing I would exhort you to is this, That you would endeavor to
possess your Minds with a hearty Sense of God Almighty, and the absolute
Necessity of being seriously Religious.

I do not mention this, as if I thought there was any need to caution you
against Atheism or Infidelity, for I hope not many among us are inclined that
way. Mankind are naturally disposed to believe a God and Religion, and since
through God's Blessing it is Christianity that is the Religion of our Country,
and in which we have been all Educated: I look upon an Atheist or an Infidel
among us, to be a sort of Prodigy, a strange unusual Creature, vastly different
from those of his own Kind.

But here is the thing. Though most of us profess Religion, and the true
Religion, yet many of us have no lively or hearty Sense of it. We use Religion
as we do our Clothes. They are very convenient, nay perhaps necessary, and
therefore we wear them, and for the particular form or mode of them, we follow,
as to that, the Custom of the Country where we live. Yet as the Clothes we wear
do not alter the Complexion or Features of our Body, so neither does the
Religion we Profess any more affect the Temper of our Souls. We serve our
selves in both Cases of the outward Conveniences that are to be had by them,
but we are still the same Persons both as to our outward and inward Lineaments.

But alas, this is a very sorry way of being Religious, and will do us no great
kindness. We may perhaps reap some secular advantages by it, but yet even the
very trouble and pains it puts us to, do equal the Conveniences we have from
it. The Men that live thus, are just served like those that work in rich Mines.
They are daily employed about Gold and Silver, or Gems, and they work hard, and
they have their days wages for their Labor, but they are not a whit the richer
for the Treasures that come into their hands.

Your Religion will never serve you to any extraordinary purposes, till your
hearts be affected with it as well as your understandings. Let me therefore
advise you, as you love either your Happiness in this World, or in the next,
make it your principal care to get a lively and vigorous Sense of God impressed
upon your Minds. And look upon it as the greatest Interest you have to carry
on, the greatest Business you have to do in this World (as it really is) to
approve your selves to this God by a sincere endeavor in all your
Conversation, to walk as his Son Jesus Christ has taught you. If you do this,
you will certainly find the Sweet and Comfort of it both here and hereafter.

When all is said, it is a vain thing for any Man to expect a tolerable easy
passage through this World, unless he have the Hopes of God's Favor to support
him under the Multitude of evil Accidents which the State of Humane Life will
necessarily expose him to. And as for the other World, without these Hopes he
is perfectly lost: And to be able to entertain any rational Hopes of God's
Blessing and Favor, is a very vain thing likewise, unless we make it our
business with our whole Hearts and Souls to serve and please and obey Him.

There are a great many Rules and Maxims that we use to give to our Friends or
our Children for the making their Fortunes, and I cannot deny but they are
exceeding good ones. Thus for instance, we advise them to get a true
understanding of their Business, and to pursue it diligently; to keep out of
ill Company, to avoid Drinking or Gaming and Lewdness, and to study the Tempers
and Humors of Mankind, and to learn to apply themselves dexterously to those
they have occasion to converse with; why these and such others are excellent
Rules, and most worthy of all Men to be studied and practiced. But still there
is one Rule above all these, and without which all the other will signify very
little to the making a Man's Life easy and comfortable; and that is to
preserve a lively sense of God upon our Spirits, to have his fear always before
our Eyes, to love him above all things, to value his Favor more than Life, and
to dread his Displeasure as the worst of Evils. If we can but once get our
Souls into this frame, we have done our Business both for this World and for
Eternity; All the other particular Rules and Advices will be in a great measure
superfluous; for he that is possessed of this good Principle, will of course
naturally fall into the practice of them. And besides this Fear and Love of God
in our Hearts, as it is the most effectual means, according to the usual
Disposition of the Divine Providence, to put us into good Circumstances of
Living; so it is the only means of making our Circumstances happy to us, if
they be good; or of making them easy and supportable, if they be bad.

I do therefore most earnestly recommend it to you, as you desire that either
you or yours may prosper, nay, as you would not be very miserable; be not
contented with a superficial outside Religion, but affect your minds as deeply
as is possible with a sense of God, and what you owe to him; and endeavor to
impress the same sense upon your Friends and Children, and all that are about
you. The truth of it is, so much does our present happiness, as well as our
suture, depend upon this belief of God, and love to him, and hopes of his
favor; that were it not for this, the present World with all the imaginary
Pleasures and Glories of it would appear to all wise and good Men, not only an
empty dull unsatisfactory place, but a dismal melancholy Prison. If it was
supposed that all things here were the effects of blind Chance, or fatal
Necessity, and that there were no Wisdom and Goodness that did preside over the
World, or took care of Mankind; no considering Man could desire to live here.

The Second thing I would leave with you, is this, That after you have got into
your minds a hearty sense of God and his Providence, and his Presence and
Goodness; so as that you mean to make it the business of your lives to
recommend your selves to him: you would in the next place, take care to keep up
that sense by a a constam and daily Worship of him.

For God's sake, and for your own Souls sake, do not neglect your Prayers. You
must never think that God will bless you, if you do not make a Conscience of
daily paying him your tribute of Honor and Worship.

Be sure therefore, you be constant in your private Devotions. As you every day
receive the renewed pledges of God's Love and Goodness toward you in a
thousand instances: So let every day your Affection and Gratitude be expressed
to him, by hearty Prayer and Thanksgiving. This is absolutely necessary to be
done, as I have often told you, if you mean to preserve any hearty sense of
Religion in your minds.

But besides this I have another thing to recommend to all those that have
Families. They are Heads and Governors of a Society. For indeed the first
notion of Society is that of a Family. Every Family is a little Kingdom, and
every Kingdom is or ought to be a great Family. Now is it natural, is it
decent, that there should be any Society upon Earth wherein God should not be
owned and worshipped? And yet woe be to us, how many thousands of Families are
there in this Kingdom, nay, I am afraid, even i^ about this City, wherein God
is not so much as named in public, unless perhaps by the way of affront, by
the way of Cursing or Swearing.

We deservedly complain of the great Looseness and Profaneness and Irreligion
that has overspread the face of this Nation. O! I doubt a great deal of the
blame of it lies upon the Householders, the Masters of Families among us. If
they would take better care of their Children and Servants, and let them know
what it is to worship God, things would not be so bad among us. But how can we
expect better, when there is no Religion either taught or practiced in our
Houses. We give our Domestics opportunities enough, of learning all our bad
qualities; but we give them none of learning our good ones, if we have any.

They see us offending God by many rash words and finful actions; but they do
not see us repenting and asking God's Pardon by our solemn Prayers and
Applications to the Throne of Grace. Let us therefore seriously lay this point
to heart. I am sure we have just cause to do it. Let us bring Religion into our
Families, and not be contented that once a Week some of our People in their
turns should hear something of it. Let us every day call our Family together,
and pay our Common Tribute of Prayer and Praise for the Mercies we do daily
receive in common.

Methinks our Savior seemed to have a respect to this very Duty, and to charge
it mightily upon us, when he made us that gracious promise, that even, where
two or three were gathered together in his Name, there would he be in the midst
of them. Sure, his words have most naturally a respect to the Worship of God
that is performed in Families. As has likewise the very contrivance of the
Lord's Prayer: All the Petitions thereof being so framed, as to be most proper
to be said by more than one, and yet too when we have shut our Doors for that
purpose. But,

Thirdly, As you ought to take care about the Worship of God in your Closets
and in your Families; let me add, that it equally concerns you to frequent the
more public Worship of God in his own House. It is a bad sign of some very ill
principle or other, for any Man to be much a stranger there. Even to have the
liberty and opportunity of worshipping God in public, is one of the greatest
Blessings and Privileges that we can have in this World; and has by good Men
always been so accounted. Now sure, if we have this Notion of it, we shall
think our selves mightily concerned to take all opportunities that come in our
way, not only on Sundays, but on other days, of resortting to the Public
Assemblies, and joining with them in the solemn Sacrifice of Prayer and
Thanksgiving; and thinking it a good day to us, wherein we have thus employed
our selves.

The Sacrifices of this kind that we offer to God with an honest and devout
mind, we cannot doubt will always find acceptance, and produce their effects;
nay, perhaps when our Closet-prayers will not. For there are certainly more
promises to public Prayers than to private ones. Though yet both are very
good, nay both are absolutely necessary. But to proceed,

Fourthly, Being upon this Argument of the Means and Instruments of Religion,
you may be sure I cannot omit the mentioning of another thing, as one of those
points that I would most seriously recommend to you, and that is the solemn
observation of the Lord's Day.

I am not for laying stress upon the keeping of this day, or any other, more
than the nature of the thing requires. I am sensible that the Doctrine about
the observation of the Sabbath, as it is delivered by some Men, is
superstitious enough, and oftentimes, where it is believed, proves rather a
snare to Men's Consciences, than of use to make them more Religious. Far
therefore am I from desiring you to be nice and scrupulous about the
Punctilio's of the Lord's-Day-service. The Laws both of God and Men have in
that matter left a great deal to your own discretion, and the circumstances you
are in. But however thus much is necessary, that every Man who professes
himself a Christian, should bear a constant Religious regard to the Lord's Day,
by devoting it to spiritual uses, more especially the public Worship of God.

I do not much doubt of the truth of the observation which some good Men have
made, viz. That a Man shall prosper much better both in his Spiritual and
Temporal Affairs, all the Week after, for his careful observance of the Lord's
Day. And I am likewise of opinion that those Men have little or no sense of
Religion, that make no Conscience of sanctifying that Day, or that put no
difference between it and other Days. Sure I am, were there nothing of a Divine
Command for the setting a part this Day to Religious uses (which yet I believe
there is); yet it is one of the most prudent and useful Constitutions that ever
was made. So that even upon that account, all Men that have any Honor for God,
or Zeal for the Public Good, should think themselves obliged to observe it.

The benefits of it are indeed unspeakable. Not to mention the Civil or
Temporal conveniences of it; in truth to the keeping up the Religion of this
day we owe in a great measure that the very Face of Christianity has hitherto
been preserved among us. And were it not for this, for any thing I know, most
of us in a very few years would become little better than Heathens and
Barbarians. And so great an influence toward the making Men better, or at
least keeping them from growing worse, has this practice always had; that you
may observe the most profligate Men among us, who for their wickedness come to
an untimely end, do generally impute their falling into those sins which caused
their Death, to their breaking the Sabbath, as they commonly express it. But,

Fifthly, Let me upon this occasion put you in mind of another thing, which by
many of us is too much neglected. And that is, the taking all opportunities of
coming to the holy Sacrament.

I have often spoken to you abbout this matter, and I now desire to remind you
of it. There are little hopes you will ever make any great progress in Virtue
and Holiness, till you can bring your selves to a frequent and constant
participation in this Holy Mystery. Because indeed this is the solemn Ordinance
that Christ has appointed for the conveying his Grace to us, and enabling us
to overcome our sins, and grow daily in Virtue and Goodness,

I know we have generally many and inveterate prejudices as to this matter. But
assure your selves they are mere prejudices and no good reasons. Every Man that
means or designs honestly, and endeavors to lead his life as a Christian ought
to do, may certainly with as little scruple come every Month to the Communion,
as he may come every Week to say his Prayers, or hear a Sermon. Nay, and I say
further, if a Man do not so lead his life, that he may approach to the
Sacrament every Month, nay every Week, nay every Day, if there be occasion; I
am afraid that he does not live so, as to be fit for it, though he comes but
once in a Year, or once in seven Years. For the dueness of your Preparation
does not depend upon your setting aside so many extraordinary days for the
forcing your selves into a Religious posture of mind, but upon the plain
natural frame and temper of your Souls, as they constantly stand inclined to
Virtue and Goodness. A Man that seriously endeavors to live honestly and
religiously, may come to the Sacrament at an hour's warning, and be a Worthy
Receiver. On the other side, a Man that lives a careless or a sensual Life, may
set apart a whole Week or a whole Month for the exercising Repentance, and
preparing himself for the Communion, and yet not be so worthy a Receiver as the
other. And yet he may be a worthy Receiver too, provided he be really honest
and sincere in the matter he goes about; and provided that he remember his Vows
afterward, and do not sink again into his former state of carelessness and
sensuality.

But to return to my point. I do verily think that most of the doubts and fears
and scruples that are commonly entertained among us about receiving the
Sacrament, are without ground or reason; and that every well disposed Person
that has no other design in that action but to do his Duty to God, and to
express his belief and hopes in Jesus Christ, and his thankfulness to God for
him, may as safely at any time come to the Lord's Table, as he may come to
Church to say his Prayers. And if the case be so (as I believe it is) then of
what a mighty privilege and benefit do they deprive themselves, who when they
have so many opportunities, do so seldom join in that solemn Institution of our
Lord, which (as, I said) was designed for no other purpose, but to be the means
of our growing in Grace and Virtue, in Love to God and to all the Word?

O therefore, my Brethren, let me beg of you not to be strangers at the Lord's
Table. But I need not beg it of you, for I am sure you will not, whenever it
shall please God to put it into your hearts seriously to mind the concernments
of your Souls; and to be heartily sensible of the need you stand in of the
Grace of Christ for the leading a holy and pure Life.

I have but one thing more in the Sixth place, to leave with you, and I have
done. It is not indeed of the nature of those things I have last recommended to
you, that is, a means or instrument of growing more Virtuous: But it is a
principal Virtue it self. And I do therefore recommend it to you, because it is
at all times useful, at all times seasonable, but more especially it seems to
be so now: And that is, That you would walk in Love, and study Peace and Unity,
and live in all dutiful subjection to those whom God has set over you, and
endeavor in your public stations to promote the public Happiness and
Tranquillity as much as is possible: But by no means upon any pretense
whatsoever to disturb the public Peace, or to be any way concerned with them
that do; by no means ever to engage in any Party o^ Faction, and least of all
any Faction in Religion, which is grounded upon a Statepoint.

I am sorry the posture of things among us gives me occasion to mention this
matter; but it is too visible to what a height our animosities and discontents
are grown; and what the consequences of them may be, unless there be a timely
stop put to them, I tremble to think.

With Men's differences as to their notions about the Politics I am not
concerned; let Men frame what Hypotheses they please about Government, though I
do not like them, yet I do not think my self bound to Preach against them. But
when these differences are come to that pass, that they threaten both the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Peace; there I think no Minister should be silent.

Church-Divisions God knows we have, and have always had too many, but it is
very grievous that those who have always declared themselves the Friends of our
Church, and Enemies to Schism, should at this time of Day set a helping hand to
promote a Separation.

And yet it seems to this height are our differences come. Some People among us
that formerly were very zealous for the Established Worship of the Church, are
now all of a sudden so distasted with it, that they make a scruple of being
present at our Service. Nay, some have proceeded so far as to declare, I know
not upon what grounds, open War against us, and set up Separate Congregations
in opposition to the Public.

What is the meaning of this? Has Schism and Separation from the established
Worship, which heretofore was branded as so heinous a sin (and deservedly too,)
so changed its nature all of a sudden, that it is become not only innocent but
a Duty?

Have we not the same Government both in Church and State that we formerly had?
Have we not the same Articles and Doctrines of Religion publicly owned and
professed and taught, without the least alteration? Have we not the same
Liturgy, the same Offices and Prayers used every day that have always been?
What is there then to ground a Separation upon?

Yes, But the names in the Prayers are changed, and we cannot Pray for those
that are now in Authority, as we could for those that were heretofore,

But how unreasoanble is this, when St. Paul has bid us to put up Prayers and
Supplications and Intercessions for all Men, especially for Kings and all that
are in Authority. Does he make any restriction, any distinction what Kings, or
what persons in Authority we are to pray for, and what not? Does he not
expressly say, we must pray for all Men, and for all that are in Authority? And
does not the the reason of his exhortation imply as much, if his words did not?
Namely, that we may lead quiet and peaceable Lives, in all Godliness and
Honesty.

But I pray consider what this Doctrine leads to. If this Principle be admitted
to be good Divinity, then farewell all the Obligations to Ecclesiastical
Communion among Christians. For what Government is there in the World that will
not meet with such Subjects as are not satisfied with it? And if that
dissatisfaction be a just reason to break Communion with the Established
Church, what Ligaments have we to tie Christians together? What will become of
holding the Unity of the Spirit, in the Bond of Peace? What is the consequence
of this, but endless Schisms and Separations?

But further, I wish these Persons would consider what an unaccountable humor
it is to make a Rent and Schism in the Church, upon a mere point of State.

Great Revolutions have happened in all Ages and in all Countries, and we have
frequent instances of them in story. But I believe it will not be easily found
that ever any Christians separated from the Church upon account of them. Still
they kept unanimously to their Doctrine and their Worship, and never concerned
themselves farther in the Turns of State (how great soever they were) than
peaceably to submit to the Powers in being, and heartily to pray to God so to
prosper their Government, and direct all their Affairs, that all their Subjects
might lead quiet and peaceable lives under them in all Godliness and Honesty.
But when in a Revolution, a Prince was advanced to the Throne, that they looked
upon to be a good Man, and an Encourager of the True Religion; in that case
they did not only readily submit to him, but acknowledged it as the great
Blessing of God to them, that he had raised up such a Man to rule over them.
This was the Notion, and this was the Practice of the Primitive Christians as
to this matter, I may indeed say of the Christians in all Ages. And whatever
you may have heard to the contrary, I doubt not to say that this is the very
Doctrine of the Church of England.

Let me therefore exhort all of you to be followers of Peace: to premote
public Unity and Concord as much as is possible; to study to be quiet, and
mind your own business; to be more concerned for your Country and Nation than
the Interest of any single Man in it; heartily to submit to the Government; and
not only so, but to thank God for the Blessings you enjoy under it, and most
earnestly to pray for the Continuance of them: Lastly, Never to espouse any
Party or Faction against the Government, nor ever to be driven away from the
Communion of the Church, of which you have always professed your selves
Members, by any of the pretenses which some warm Men may suggest to you. This I
dare venture to say, how uneasy soever some of you now may be in joining with
our Prayers, you will at last be ten times more uneasy in separating from us.
For Faction has no bounds, and God knows whither it will lead a Man at last.
Were there nothing else but the Heat and Turbulency, the Passion and
Peevishness, the bitter Zeal and Uncharitableness that the being of a Party
does naturally engage Men in: I say, were there nothing else but this, No Man
that consults the peace of his own mind, would for any consideration leave the
public Communion, and espouse the cause of a separate Interest. But there are
worse Consequences than these, and I pray God we may never feel them.

And now I have done with my Exhortation. And I have spoke my thoughts very
freely to you. And I hope you will receive what I have said with the same
kindness that I meant it. And truly I have no reason to doubt of it, after so
long an experience as I have had of your Civility and Candor. Indeed during all
the time I have been among you (which has been now near sixteen Years) I have
been so kindly treated by you, and have received so many Testimonies of your
Good Will, that I cannot but take this Opportunity of publicly acknowledging
my Obligations to you, and returning you my Solemn Thanks for Them.

I cannot indeed say that I have done my Duty as I ought, and I heartily beg of
God to forgive all my Defects. But I have this satisfaction, that I have
sincerely endeavored in all my Preaching, to instruct you in the true Doctrine
of the Gospel, and to teach you the right way that leads to Salvation. And I am
so certain, that I have not been mistaken my self, nor misled you in that
matter; that I dare with Confidence address my self to you in some of the words
of the Apostle, which do immediately follow after my Text: Viz. Those things
which you have learned and received and heard from me, do; and the God of Peace
shall be with you.

I shall ever bless God for that Providence of his which placed me among you;
and as I shall always and do earnestly desire all your Prayers for me; so I
shall always heartily pray for you; that God would guide and prosper you, that
his good Providence would always watch over you for good; that he would bestow
upon you and your Children after you all sorts of Blessings needful and
convenient for you; and especially that he would deliver you from every evil
work, and preserve you to his Heavenly Kingdom. This God of his infinite Mercy
grant, etc.

SERMON X.
Preached before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal IN THE Abbey-Church at
Westminster, On the 5th of November, 1691.
Romans x. 2. For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge.


THese are St. Paul's words, and he spoke them of the Jews, those unbelieving
Jews that were so tenacious of the Traditions of their Fathers, and so utterly
averse to any Reformation of Religion: That though it appeared by undeniable
evidence that Christ Jesus was by God sent into to the World for that purpose;
yet, did they to the last stand out in their opposition of him and his Gospel,
even to the final rejection of their Nation.

To these People does St. Paul in this Chapter express a great Compassion,
heartily wishing and praying for their Conversion. Brethren (says he in the
first verse) my hearty desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they may be
saved. That is, that they may come to the knowledge of the Truth in Christ
Jesus, and by that means obtain everlasting Salvation. And one reason why he
was thus concerned for them, he gives in the words following, which are the
words I have read unto you. For I bear them Record (says he) that they have a
zeal of God, but not according to knowledge. It was a great motive to him to be
concerned for their happiness, that they were Zealous, for Religion; though he
knew at the same time, that the Religion they were then so Zealous of, was not
the right Religion; nor did the Zeal they showed for it, proceed from right
Principles.

According to the account I have now given of this Passage, Three things we may
take notice of from it, viz.

I. The Apostles approving and tacitly commending that Zeal which his
Countrymen expressed for Religion. II. His meek and charitable behavior
toward them, even when their Zeal for Religion was very faulty and blameable.
III. His discovery of the faultiness of their Zeal, which lay in this, that it
was not according to knowledge.
These Three things I shall take for the Heads of my following Discourse upon
this Text, and shall afterward make such Application of it, as the Business of
this Day calls for.

I. First, I desire it may be observed, That Zeal of God in general, that is, a
hearty and passionate concernment for Religion, The Apostle here finds no fault
with: On the contrary, he approves it as a commendable thing. For you see he
represents it, as a piece of virtue in his Countrymen, and speaks it to their
commendation, that they had a zeal of God, I bear them record (says he) that
they have a zeal of God. As much as to say, that he owned, they had that good
quality, and they were to be commended for it; and for that reason he both
wishes them well, and affectionately prays for them.

That which I would from hence take occasion to put you in mind of is this:
That Indifference and Vnconcernedness for Religion is not to have a place among
any ones Virtues and good Qualities; it is rather a very great fault; howsoever
it may sometimes pass for an instance of Wisdom and Prudence.

If indeed Men had no Passions, or had so mortified their Passions, that they
were rarely earnest or zealous about any thing; their unconcernedness for
Religion and the things of God might be the less reproveable. But when Zeal and
Passion is more or less wrought into every Man's temper, and the calmest Men
may be observed on sundry occasions not to be without it; it is an inexcusable
fault to have no Passion, no Zeal for God and his Cause.

How can a Man answer it to his own Conscience, to be heartily angry when an
affront in word or deed is done to himself; and yet to be altogether
insensible, when God is affronted in his Prefence? To make a mighty bustle,
when his own Right and Property is at stake, though in never so small a matter;
and yet to show no concernment for the Rights and the Honor of that God who
made him, and by whose savor alone it is that he can call any thing his own
that he has.

O! What a World of Good might we all do, if we had a true Zeal of God? How
many Occasions and Opportunities are there put into our Hands every Day (in
what condition or circumstances soever we are) which if we were acted by this
principle, would render us great Benefactors to Mankind, by discouraging Vice
and Impiety, and promoting Virtue and Goodness in the World?

But perhaps I have set this business of Zeal for God too high: Because none
are capable of being thus Zealous, but those that have attained to a great
degree of Virtue and Piety, which we cannot suppose of all, nor the most. But
however, it will be a shame to all of us, if we do not come up to that pitch of
Zeal which the unbelieving Jews are here commended for. I bear them record,
says St. Paul, that they have a zeal of God. What was this Zeal of theirs?
Why, as I told you, (and as it plainly appears from the whole Chapter) it was
an earnest and passionate concernment for the Religion of their Country. Sure
all Men among us both good and bad may come up to this degree of Zeal for God,
and it is a reproach to us if we do not. Especially confidering that their
Religion at that time, was not God's Religion, but Ours is.

Indeed the Public profession of Religion in the right way, is as much every
Man's Interest, and ought to be as much every Man's Care, as any the dearest
thing he has in this World. Nay, to all Men that believe they have Souls to
fave, it is more valuable than any other Worldly privilege. It concerns us all
therefore to be Zealous in that matter. The Duty we owe to God, to our Country,
and to our Selves, does require it. In vain it is to be busy about other
things, and to neglect this. A Man will have but small comfort when he comes to
die, to reflect that he has been Zealous of the Privileges and Property, and
Rights of his Countrymen; but it was indifferent to him, how the Service of
God and the Affairs of Religion were managed.

II. The Second thing we observe from this Passage, is, The Apostle's carriage
to the Unbelieving Israelites, who though they were zealous for God, yet were
in a great mistake as to their Notions of the true Religion. He does not
bitterly censure them. He is not fierce nor furious against them. He does not
excite any person to use force or violence to them. But he rather pities them.
He makes their Zeal that they had of God, an Inducement the more heartily to
pray for them, that God would direct them in the right way that leads to
Salvation. Though he is far from approving their blind Zeal, in so obstinately
opposing the Righteousness of God, that is, that Method which God had
prescribed, for the attaining of Righteousness, by the Faith of Jesus Christ;
and setting up a Righteousness of their own, which consisted chiefly in
observing the Ceremonials of Moses his Law and the Traditions of their Fathers,
as it follows in the next Verse after my Text: Yet he thinks them the more
pitiable and the more excusable, in that this their Opposition proceeded from
their Zeal of God, though it was a misinformed irregular Zeal.

This practice and carriage of the Apostle toward these Ignorant Zealots,
ought to be a Rule for us to walk by in the like Cases. If Men be of a
different way from us, as to Religion; if they hold other Opinions, or though
they be of another Communion from us; and though too we are sure they are
mistaken: Nay, and dangerously mistaken too; yet if they have a Zeal of God, if
they be serious and sincere in their way; if their Errors in Religion be the
pure results of a misinformed Conscience: Let us, as the Apostle here did,
take occasion from hence to pity them, and to put up hearty Prayers to God for
them; and to endeavor all we can by gentle methods, to reduce them to the
right way: But by no means to express contempt or hatred of them, or to treat
them with Violence and Outrage. So far as their Zeal is for God, let us so far
show Tenderness and Compassion to them; and if their Zeal be in such instances,
as are really commendable, let us in such instances not only bear with them,
but propose them for our Examples. This, I say, was the Apostle's practice, and
I think it is so agreeable to the Spirit and Temper of our great Lord and
Master Christ, that it will become us in like cases to act accordingly.

But then after I have said this, These two things are always to be remembered.

First, That our Tenderness to mistaken Zealots, must always be so managed, as
that the true Religion, or the Public Peace suffer no damage thereby. And
therefore how kindly and compassionately soever, we, as private Christians, are
to treat those that differ from us, and pursue a wrong way out of Conscience:
Yet this does not hinder, but that both wholesome Laws may be made for the
restraining the exorbitances of mistaken Zeal; and when those Laws are made,
that they may be put in execution.

The Consideration of Lawgivers and Magistrates, is different from that of
private Christians. Their business is to see, Nequid detrimenti respublica
capiat, that the Government be secured, that the common peace be kept, that the
Laws of God be observed, that God's Religion as it is delivered by Jesus Christ
be preserved sincere and undefiled, and that the solemn Worship of God be
purely and decently performed. And therefore there is no doubt, but that in all
these matters the Government may make Fences and Securities against the Insults
of intemperate Zealots, and when these Fences are made, it should be at their
Peril if they transgressed them, supposing Magistrates did their Duty. And all
this we say is very consistent with that Tenderness and Charity that all
Christians, and even Magistrates themselves in their private Capacity, do owe
to mis-perswaded erroneous Consciciences.

And then Secondly, it is to be remembered that that Kindness and Tenderness to
mistaken Zealots, which we are speaking of from the Text, is not to be
expressed to all alike; but to some more, to some less, to some perhaps in no
degree at all; according as the nature and quality of their Errors are, and
according as the Men that are guilty of them, may more, or less, or not at all,
be thought to have a real Zeal of God, and to act out of Principles of
Conscience. Thus for instance;

In the First place, Those that set up for Patrons of Atheism or Epicurism;
that make it their business in their Conversation to expose all Religion, and
to bring it into contempt; that ridicule the Professors of it as a company of
easy credulous Men; that make no Conscience of blaspheming God and all things
Sacred, as occasion is given them: Why, these Men may have Zeal enough for
their Opinions, and we find that they often have a great deal too much: But are
such to be treated with that sort of Tenderness and Compassion that we are now
speaking of? No, by no means; For they are quite out of the bounds of my Text,
They have a Zeal indeed, but it is not a Zeal for God, but for the Devil and
the Interests of his Kingdom. And if one were to measure the greatness of
Crimes by the mischief they do to humane Society; I should think that this sort
of People were not to expect so much favor and respect from Mankind, as some
other Malefactors that yet by our Laws are to pay for their offenses at no less
a rate than their Lives.

Again, Secondly, If there be any Men that under a pretense of Religion do
teach or encourage or promote any sort of Vice or Immorality; or whose
Principles do necessarily lead to debauch Men's Manners in the plain matters of
Sobriety, Chastity, Truth, or Justice, and the like; such kind of People are by
no means Objects of that Tenderness and Compassion that we are now speaking of:
For the Laws of Nature as to moral Virtue and Vice are so plainly writ in every
Man's heart, that he must be supposed to be an Ill Man that can easily
entertain any Principle (let it come never so much recommended under the Name
of Religion) that contradicts them. And whatever allowance may in charity be
made for a Man's mistakes, there is no reason that much should be made for his
Wickedness.

Again, Thirdly, If there be any Men that whilst they express a great Zeal for
the Purity of Religion, and exclaim against the Corruptions of it (as they term
them) which are introduced into the Public Establishment, and turn every stone
to have all things settled in another Method; yet all this while God and their
own Hearts know that all this Concernment and Zeal of theirs for Religion,
though it make a great show, is only pretended; and that there is another thing
that lies at the bottom, that is to say, Worldly Interest, and Dominion and
Power, which they hope to compass by such a Regulation of Matters as they
desire: I say, if there be any such Men, they are likewise no way concerned in
that Compassion my Text speaks of. For though they may be very Zealous, yet it
is a Zeal for their own secular advantages that acts them, and not a Zeal of
God. If such Men could be known; instead of being kindly and charitably thought
of for their Zeal in Religion; the Virtuous part of Mankind would look upon
them as the worst of Hypocrites. But since God only knows the Hearts of Men;
all such pretenders to Zeal for Religion, must, till we know them also, be
treated according to the Merits of the cause they pretend to be Zealous for.

But then Fourthly and Lastly, All that I have now said is with respect to
those that are out of the limits of my Text, such as have no Zeal of God,
though some of them may pretend it: But then, as for those that really act out
of Principles of Conscience, and have a real Zeal of God, though in a wrong
way; These are true Objects of our Tenderness and Compassion, though yet in
different degrees. For according as their Principles and Practices do more or
less injure our common Christianity, or are more or less dangerous to our
Government and Constitution; in the same proportion, the greater or less
Tenderness and Indulgence is to be expressed toward them. But most of what
concerns this matter being already settled by Law, I will not be so bold as to
meddle in it, and therefore I proceed to the Third Head of my Discourse.

III. The Third thing I told you we might observe from this Text was this, The
Apostle's tacit Reprehension of the Jewish Zeal upon this account, that it was
not according to Knowledge.

The Use I make of this is, that from hence we may be able to gather to our
selves a true Rule for the governing our Zeal in matters of Religion, and
likewise for the judging in others what Zeal is commendable, and what is not.

For be our Zeal of God never so great, yet if it be not a zeal according to
knowledge, it is not the right Christian Zeal. And though we see others never
so fervent and vehement in pursuing a Religious Cause, and that too out of
Conscience; yet if this Zeal of theirs be not according to knowledge, it is a
Zeal that justly deserves to be reproved. And though both we and they may for
our sincerity in Gods Cause, expect some Allowances, both from God and Man, yet
neither they nor we can justify it, either to God or Man, that we are thus
foolishly and ignorantly Zealous.

I wish this mark of right Zeal, that it ought to be according to knowledge,
were more considered. For it seems not often to be thought on by those that are
most zealous in their way, of what persuasion soever they be. This same
business of Knowledge, is a thing that is most commonly forgot to be taken in
as an ingredient or Companion of Zeal, in most sort of Professors. For as the
World goes, those Men are generally found to be the greatest Zealots, who are
most notoriously Ignorant. Whereas true Zeal should not only proceed from true
Knowledge, but should also be always accompanied with it, and governed by it.

But what is it to have a Zeal according to Knowledge? What does this Character
of justifiable right Zeal contain in it? I answer, it must at least contain in
it these five following things.

First, To have a Zeal according to Knowledge, does import, that we be not
mistaken, as to the matter of our Zeal; that it be a good Cause, that we are
zealous about. And since it is Zeal for God that we are here speaking of, it
must be something wherein our Duty is concerned, that must be the object of our
Zeal.

So that a right Zeal of God implies, that we do so well inform our selves of
the Nature of our Religion, as not to pretend a Religious Zeal for any thing
that is not a part of our Religion. If our Zeal for God be as it should be, it
must certainly express it self in matters that are good; about such objects as
God has made to be our Duty. It is good (says St. Paul) to be always
zealously affected in a good matter. But if we mistake in our Cause, if we take
that for good which is evil, or that for evil which is good, here our Zeal is
not according to Knowledge.

Secondly, as the object of our Zeal must be according to Knowledge, so also
the Principle from whence our Zeal proceeds, must be according to Knowledge
also. That is to say, We must have solid and rational grounds to proceed upon
in our concernment for any thing; such as will not only satisfy our selves,
but all others that are unbyassed: In a word, such as we can justify to all
the World.

If it be every Man's Duty (as St. Peter tells us it is) to be ready to give an
Answer to every one that asks him a reason of the Hope that is in him: Then I
am sure, it is much more every Man's Duty to be able to give a reason of the
Zeal that is in him. Because this business of a Man's Zeal does more affect the
Public, and is of greater Concernment to it, than what a Man's private Faith
or Hope is.

But yet how little is this considered by many zealous Men among us? Some are
zealous for a point to serve an Interest or a Faction. But this is not to be
owned as the ground and reason of Zeal; for indeed if it should, it would not
be allowed of. Others are zealous for no other reason but because they find
their Teachers, or those they most converse with, are so. They follow the
common Cry, and examine no more of the matter. Others indeed have a Principle
of Zeal beyond all this. For they are ^^ved from within, to stand up for this
or the other Cause; they have Impulses upon their minds which they cannot
resist: But that in truth is no more a justifiable ground of any Man's Zeal,
than either of the former. For if these Motions and Impulses that they speak of
be from God; there will certainly be conveyed along with them, such Reasons and
Arguments for the thing that they are to be zealous about, as will, if they be
declared, satisfy and convince all other reasonable Men, as well as
themselves. For it is a ridiculous thing to imagine, that God at this day does
move or impel Men in any other way than what is agreeable to the Reason of
Mankind, and the Rule of his holy Word. And if the Man's Zeal can be justified
by either of these, there is no need of vouching Inspirations for it.

Thirdly, As the Zeal which is according to knowledge has a good matter for
its object, and proceeds from a right Principle: So it is also regular as to
the Measures of it. He that has it is careful that it do not exceed its due
Bounds, as the Ignorant Zeal often does; but he distinguishes between the
several objects he is zealous for, and allows every one of them, just so great
a Concernment as the thing is worth, and no more. If the thing be but a small
matter, he is but in a small measure concerned for it. If it be of greater
moment, he believes he may be allowed to be the more earnest about it. But he
looks upon it as a rash and foolish thing, and an effect of great ignorance or
weakness, to be hot and eager for all things alike. We should account him not
many degrees removed from a Child or an Idiot, that upon the cut of a Finger
should as passionately complain and cry out for help, as if he had broken a
Limb. Why just the same Folly and Childishness it is, to make a mighty bustle
about small matters which are of no consequence, in which neither Religion nor
the Public Peace, are much concerned; as if indeed our Lives and Souls were in
danger. It therefore becomes all prudent and sober Men to take care, that their
Zeal do not spend it self in little things; that they be not too passionate and
earnest, and vehement for things that are not worth much contending for. If we
lay a greater weight upon a Cause than it will bear, and show as much warmth
and passion for small matters, as if the Fundamentals of our Faith were at
stake, we are zealous indeed, but not according to Knowledge.

Fourthly, The Zeal that is according to knowledge, is always attended with
hearty Charity. It is not that bitter Zeal which the Apostle speaks of, which
is accompanied with Hatred and Envy, and perverse Disputings: But it is kind,
and sociable, and meek, even to Gainsayers. It is that Wisdom which is from
above, that is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated. It
is a Zeal that loves God and his Truth heartily, and would do all that is
possible to bring Honor and Advancement to them: But at the same time it
loves all Men. And therefore in all things where it expresses it self, it
purely consults the Merits of the Cause before it, but lets the Persons of Men
alone. It is a certain Argument of an Ignorant and ungoverned Zeal, when a Man
leaves his Cause and his Concernment for God's Glory, and turns his Heat upon
those that he has to deal with; when he is peevish and angry with Men that
differ from him: When he is not contented to oppose Arguments to Arguments, and
to endeavor to gain his point by calm Reasoning; but he flies out into Rage
and Fury; and when he is once transported herewith, he cares not what undecent
bitter Reflections he makes upon all those that have the Fortune to be of a
different side. But in these Cases Men would do well to remember, that the
Wrath of Man works not the Righteousness of God, as the Apostle expresses it.
All this kind of behavior favors of the Wisdom of this World, which is
Earthly, and Sensual, and Devilish.

Fifthly, and lastly, Another inseparable Property of Zeal according to
Knowledge is, That it must pursue lawful Ends by lawful Means; must never do an
Ill thing for the carrying the best Cause. This St. Paul has laid down, as a
Rule, to be eternally observed among Christians, when in the third of the
Romans, he declares, that their damnation is just, who say, Let us do evil that
good may come, Be therefore our Point never so good or never so weighty, yet if
we use any dishonest, unlawful Arts, for the gaining of it; that is to say, If
we do any thing which is either in it self Evil, and appears to be so by the
natural Notices of Mankind, or which the Laws of our Holy Religion do forbid: I
say in all such Instances we are Transgressors. And though our Cause be very
good and our Ends very allowable; yet since the Means by which we would
accomplish those Ends are unwarrantable, the whole Action, though proceeding
from never so much Zeal for God, is very Bad, For true Zeal as it always
supposes a right Information of Judgment, as to the matter of it, so likewise
it supposes, that a Man should act in honest ways, and endeavor to attain his
ends by lawful means.

And thus have I laid before you the Properties and Characters of that Zeal
which is according to knowledge, which was the third and last thing I proposed
upon this Text; and I pray God we may always remember them whenever we have
occasion to express a Zeal for any thing, especially in matters of Religion.
All that remains now is, to make some brief Application of my Text, with
reference to the business of the Day.

These words, as I told you, were spoke of the Jews. But the Character here
given of them does so well fit a sort of Men, whose fiery Zeal for God and
their Religion, gave occasion to the Solemnity of this Day; that it looks as if
it were made for them. It is the Bigots of the Church of Rome that I mean; to
whom we must do the same right that St. Paul here did his Countrymen, We must
bear them Record, that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge.

Zealous they are sufficiently, as the Jews were, no body doubts of it. But as
for their Zeals being according to knowledge, there is great reason to doubt,
they are as faulty in that point, as St. Paul's Countrymen were. Indeed if you
were to draw the comparison between the Jewish and Popish Zealots, as to all
the several particulars that our Savior and St. Paul take notice of as
Instances of blind Zeal in the former: You would find in all those particulars
both their Zeals to be much of a piece, not only as to the Fervor, but as the
Blindness of them.

Was it an instance of Ignorant Zeal in the Jews that they set up their
Traditions to the disparagement of the Law of God? I pray, who are those that
disparage the Holy Scriptures, by setting their Traditions upon an equal foot
with them?

Were the Jews to be blamed for that they were so zealous for their old
Religion, as to oppose that Reformation of it, which our Lord Jesus endeavored
to introduce among them, because they thought it was an Innovation. I pray who
are those, who upon that very ground oppose all Reformation at this Day, though
yet the wisest and best Men among themselves are sufficiently sensible, that
there are great Corruptions, both in their Doctrine and Worship?

Was it a fault in the Jewish Zeal that it placed Religion too much in
Ceremonies and Formalities, in washing Cups and Platters, in tithing Mint and
Cummin, and the like to the neglect of the weightier matters of the Law,
Justice, and Mercy, and Faith? I pray, wherein is Image Worship, Invocation of
Saints, Penances, Pilgrimages, the use of Relics, Holy Water, etc. I say
wherein are these things better than those? And yet we know who they are that
lay so great a stress upon these and such other things, that it may be truly
said, a great part of their Religion is made up of them.

It would not be difficult to run the parallel between the Zeals of the two
Religions, through several more Instances; But it is an unpleasant Argument,
and therefore I will pursue it no farther.

Only one instance more of the Jewish Zeal I must not pass by, because it comes
up so fully to the business of this Day.

So zealous were they for their Religion, that they did not care what sort of
means they made use of for the promoting of it, were they never so wicked and
unnatural. Our Savior they hunted to Death with false Witnesses; Stephen they
stoned out of pure zeal in a popular tumult. Forty of them solemnly bound
themselves under a Curse, that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed St. Paul. But all this, and a great deal more our Savior had foretold
they would do, when he told his Apostles, that the time would come, when
whosoever killed them should think that he did God good service. A Blessed way
of doing God service this is, to act such wicked inhumane things as these! But
such inhumane things as these does a Blind Zeal for Religion sometimes put Men
upon. And that it does so, we cannot have a greater proof (except what I have
already mentioned) than the practices of the zealous Men of the Church of Rome.

How many unlawful Arts have they used to subject all the Christian World to
their Lord and Master? How many Forgeries for this purpose have they been the
Authors of, and maintained them afterward? How many disturbances have they
given to the Peace of Christendom, in the most unjust and unnatural ways for
the Advancement of the Papal Cause? It was out of Zeal for Gods Service and the
Interest of Holy Church, that so many Princes have been Excommunicated and
Deposed; that so many Tumults and Rebellions have been raised; that so many
Crusados, for the extirpating Heretics, have been sent out. By which, and such
like means, it may justly be computed, that as much Christian Blood has been
shed for the establishing Popery, as it now stands, nay, and a great deal more,
than ever was during all the times of the Heathen Persecutions for the
supporting of Paganism,

But if there were no other instance extant in the World to show what is to be
expected from a blind Zeal, especially a blind Popish Zeal for Religion, that
instance which the deliverance of this Day does give us occasion to mention,
would be alone sufficient to inform us. When for no other end, but for the
Advancement of Popery, and the rooting out that Pestilent Heresy of the
Reformation, which infested these Northern Climates, a Company of Popish
Zealots entered upon the most Barbarous and Inhumane Project that ever was
undertaken by Men; even neither better nor worse, than the destroying the King
and Parliament at one blow; and had put all things in such a readiness in order
thereunto, that they certainly had effected it, as on this Day, had not their
Conspiracy been detected in a wonderful manner.

But thanks be to God, their designs then and ever since, have been defeated,
and some of them even miraculously; and we trust in the Mercies of God that
they will ever be so.

God has been wonderfully Gracious to us in the Preservation of our Church and
Religion from Popish attempts to destroy it, ever since it was settled among us.

How many Plots and Conspiracies were laid in the time of the Glorious Q.
Elizabeth, to put an end to her Life, and with it, to our reformed
establishment?

What a dreadful one was this of the Gunpowder Treason, in the Reign of her
Successor?

How many Dangers have threatened us since that time from that quarter?

What a horrible storm but of late did we apprehend, and justly enough too, was
impending over us?

And yet blessed be God (who has never sailed to raise up Deliverers to his
People in the day of their Distress) that storm is blown over. And we are here
not only in Peace and Quietness, in the full possession of our Native Rights
and Liberties, and in the Enjoyment of the Free Exercise of our Religion (which
is one of the most desirable things in the World). But such is the deliverance
that God has wrought for us, that we also seem to have a fair prospect of the
Continuance of these Blessings among us; and according to Humane Estimate, to
be in a good measure out of the danger of our old Inveterate Enemy, Popery I
mean, which one would think had now made its last effort among us.

Is not this now a great Blessing? And must not all sincere Protestants (of
what persuasions soever they be in other respects) necessarily believe so?
Certainly they must, if they think it a Blessing to be delivered out of the
hands of our Enemies, and to be in a Condition to serve God without fear.

Let us all therefore own it as such to God Almighty; let us thankfully
remember all his past Deliverances from Popery, and especially, let us never
forget those of this Day; neither the former, nor this late one.

We have reason to believe, that God has a tender Care of his Church and
Religion in these Kingdoms, not only because he has so many times so signally
and wonderfully appeared for the preservation it: But more especially, because
we know, and are convinced, that our Religion is according to his Mind and
Will; being no other than that which his Son Jesus Christ taught unto the
World; that is to say, no other than that which is in the Bible, which is our
only Rule of Faith.

It infinitely concerns us all therefore so to behave our selves, as to show,
that we are neither unthankful for Gods past Mercies, nor unqualified for his
future Protection.

And in order to that, I know no other way but this, that we all firmly adhere
to to the Principles of our Religion; and that in our Practices we conform our
selves to those Principles. That is to say,

In the first place, That we sincerely love and fear God, and have a hearty
sense of his Presence, and Goodness, and Providence, continually abiding in our
Minds. That we trust in him, depend upon him, and acknowledge him in all our
ways: That we be careful of his Worship and Service, paying him the constant
Tribute of our Prayers, and Praises and Thanksgiving, both in Public and
Private.

And then secondly, that we be pure and unblameable in our Lives; avoiding the
Pollutions that are in the World through Lust; and exercising Chastity, and
Modesty, Meekness and Humility, Temperance and Sobriety, amidst the sundry
Temptations we have to conflict with.

And thirdly, that we have always a fervent Charity to one another, that we
Love as Brethren; endeavoring to do all the good we can, but doing harm to
none. Using Truth and Justice, and a good Conscience in all our dealings with
Mankind. Living peaceably, if it be possible, with all Men. And not only so,
but in our several Places and Stations, promoting Peace, and Unity and Concord
among Christians, and contributing what we can to the healing the sad Breaches
and Divisions of our Nation.

And then lastly, that we pay all Submission and Duty and Obedience to the King
and Queen whom God has set over us; endeavoring in all the ways that are in
our Power, to render their Government both as easy to themselves, and as
acceptable to their Subjects, and as formidable to their Enemies as is possible.

If all of us that call our selves Protestants would charge our selves with the
Practice of these things, how assured might we re^ that God would bless us;
that he would continue his Protection of our Nation, our Church, our Religion,
against all Enemies whatsoever, and that we might see our Jerusalem still more
and more to flourish, and Peace to be in all her Borders.

May God Almighty pour upon us all, the Spirit of his Grace, and work all these
great things in us, and for us: And in order hereunto, may he send down his
Blessings upon the King and Queen, and so influence and direct all their
Councils, both Public and Private, that all their Subjects may be happy in
their Government, and (...) peaceably and quiet lives under them in all
Godiness and and Honesty. And after such a Happy and Peaceable Life here, may
we all at last arrive to God's Eternal Kingdom and Glory, through the Merits of
his dear Son, To whom, etc.

SERMON XI.
Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL, On CHRISTMAS DAY, 1691.
Heb. ix. 26. Now once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin
by the Sacrifice of himself.


THis Text does naturally suggest Five things to be insisted on, most of them
proper for our Meditations on this Day; which therefore I shall make the Heads
of my following Discourse.

I. In general the Appearance of our Lord. Now has he appeared. II. The Time
of that Appearance. In the end of the World. III. The End and Design for which
he appeared. To put away Sin. IV. The Means by which he accomplished that End.
By the Sacrifice of himself. V. The Difference of His Sacrifice from the Jewish
ones. His was but once performed; Theirs were every day repeated. If his
Sacrifice had been like theirs; then (as you have it in the former part of the
verse) must he often have suffered since the Foundation of the World; But now
once in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice
of himself. This is the just Resolution of the Text into its several
particulars, of each of which I shall discourse as briefly and practically as I
can.
I. I begin with the first, The Appearance of our Lord in general. Now has he
appeared,

Let us here consider, first, Who it was that appeared: And then, How he did
appear.

The Person appearing we will consider both as to his Nature, and as to his
Office.

He that appeared, as to his Nature was God and Man; both these Natures were
united in him and made one Person. He was God with us. So the Angel styles him
in the first of St. Matthew.

He was the Word that was with God, and was God, and by whom all things were
made. He was, I say, that, Word made Flesh and dwelling among us. So St. John
styles him in the first of his Gospel.

Lastly, He was God manifest in the Flesh, so St. Paul styles him in the first
Epistle to Timothy.

This was the Person that the Text says, Now appeared, that is, the Son of God
in Humane Nature. God of the substance of his Father begotten before all
Worlds, and Man of the substance of his Mother born in the World. Perfect God,
and Perfect Man and yet but one Person. For as the Reasonable Soul and the Body
make one Man; so here God and Man make one Christ. As our Creed expresses it.

And this leads me to his Office. This Divine Person God-Man, that the Text
here says appeared, was, by his Office, the Christ, the Messiah, that is, that
great Minister of God, that Anointed King and Priest and Prophet, which from
the beginning of the World he promised to send down upon Earth for the
salvation of Mankind. Who was believed in by the Patriarchs; Typified by the
Law; Foretold by all the Prophets; Shadowed out in all the Economy of the
Jewish Nation; Expected by all the Israelites; And wished for by the best of
the Heathen World.

This Person invested with this Office at last appeared; and in what manner,
you all know from his Story in the Gospel.

He was by the Holy Spirit of God conceived in the Womb of a Virgin, as was
foretold of him by the Prophets; of which an Angel of the highest order in
Heaven first brought the happy Tidings to the Virgin her self.

This Virgin, by as strange a Providence, when the time of her Delivery drew
near, was brought from her own City and Habitation in Galilee, to Bethlehem a
City of Judah, where she brought forth this Illustrious Babe; And thereby
fulfilled another Prophecy concerning him, namely, That he should be born in
Bethlehem, which also the Scribes at that time acknowledged.

The circumstances indeed of his Birth were far from any outward Pomp and
Magnificence. The Virgin his Mother was poor and a stranger; and so ill
befriended, that in the Confluence of People with which the City was then
crowded, she was able to procure no better a lodging than the Stable of an Inn:
So that a Manger was the place that first received the Lord of Glory. This
Slur, this Affront God then thought fit to put upon all that external Splendor
and Grandeur, which usually does so much dazzle the Eyes of Mortal Men.

But God failed not to make abundant amends for the meanness of his Birth, by
giving sundry other demonstrable Evidences of the Dignity of the Person that
was then born.

For the Magi from the East ( Princes shall I call them, or Philosophers?)
being conducted by a new Star, came and paid their Homage, and brought their
Offerings to this King of the World in a Manger. And the Shepherds, that were
watching their Flocks in the Fields by night, were surprised with the Glory of
the Lord shining round about them, and an Angel that thus spoke to them; Fear
not, for behold I bring you Tidings of great Joy which shall be to all People,
for unto you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior which is Christ
the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the Babe wrapped in
swaddling Cloths lying in a Manger. And suddenly there was with the Angel a
Multitude of the Heavenly Host, praising God, and saying; Glory to God in the
Highest, on Earth Peace, Good Will toward Men.

After this manner was the Appearance of our Savior, and much after the same
manner was his following Life. It was a life of much Poverty and Meanness as to
outward circumstances; but it was a life in every Period of it fraught with
Wonders. Whether we consider the admirable Goodness and Charmingness of his
Temper; or the exemplary Virtue and Piety that did shine out in all his
Conversation; Or the Divinity of his Sermons and Doctrines; Or his prodigious
inimitable Miracles; Or the Attestations which were given to him from Heaven;
Or the usage he received from Men; Or the Events which followed upon all these
things in the World.

But it is his first Appearance in the Flesh that we are this day met together
to Commemorate. And never had Mankind so Noble an Argument given them, to
exercise their Thoughts and Meditations upon.

If we consider the Quality of the Person appearing, that he was no other than
the Eternal Son of God: How ought we to be wrapped with Wonder and Astonishment
at the Infiniteness of the Divine Condescension? How ought we to be affected
with Love and Thankfulness at such a never-to-be-parallelled instance of God's
kindness to us, that he should so love us as to send his only begotten Son into
the World, that we might live through him.

If we consider that this Son of God resolving to appear in the World, of all
other ways chose to do it in our Flesh, and so united both the Deity and
Humanity in one Person: O what a sense ought this to impress upon us of the
Honor that is here done to our Nature, and the Dignity it is advanced to? And
how ought that sense, either to fright us, or to shame us from prostituting
this our Nature to any vile unworthy Mixtures and Communications, which God did
not disdain to take into so near a Relation to himself.

If we consider that this God, in humane Flesh, came as the Messiah, the
Savior of the World, so long before promised, and so long expected: How ought
this to fill our hearts with Joy and Thankfulness? How should it move us to
pour out our Souls in Benedictions to God for having thus Visited and Redeemed
his People? And putting us into that dispensation which so many Holy Men, for
so many Ages, wished to see, but did not see it; nay, and which the Angels
themselves desired to look into; and which the Jews for rejecting, at the time
it was published, are to this day a standing Monument of God's Displeasure and
Vengeance?

If we consider the many Evidences, that this our Savior gave at his
Appearance, of his being the true Christ; How exactly in all the Circumstances
of his Nativity, and all the Passages of his Life, he fulfilled the Prophecies
which went before of him; and how convincing the Testimonies were, which God
gave to the Truth of his Mission: How ought this Consideration to strengthen
our Faith in this Christ? To make us constant to the death in owning him for
our Savior, our Messiah, in Opposition to all the Pretenses of the Jews, and
Infidels, and Atheists, and Scepticks to the contrary.

Lastly, If we consider the mean Circumstances that this our Christ chose to
appear in; so far below the Dignity of so great a Prince, that there is not the
poorest Beggar's Child among us, but generally finds better Accommodation when
it comes into the World: O what a Check, what a Rebuke ought this to be to that
Spirit of Ambition, and Pride, and Vainglory that too often possesses us poor
Mortals? How ought it to take off our admiration, and lessen the too great
esteem we are apt to have of all outward Pomp and Greatness? Nay, and to make
us despise all the glittering Shows and and Bravery of the World: Since God has
given us so visible a demonstration, by the sending his own Son into it, how
little a Value he sets upon these Things. But,

II. I proceed to the Second Point, which my Text leads me to speak to, and
that is the Time of our Savior's Appearance here mentioned, Once has he
Appeared in the end of the World.

You see here that the time of his Appearance is said to be the end of the
World. But how is that to be understood? If we take the expression in the
literal sense, and as we commonly use it; the thing is not true. For there have
already passed near seventeen Hundred Years since our Savior's Appearance; and
yet the end of the World is not come, nor do we know when it will.

But there will be no difficulty in this matter, if we carefully attend to the
Phrase the Apostle here uses, and interpret it according to the Propriety of
the Language in which it is delivered. The word in my Text is (...), which
every body, that is versed in the style of the New Testament, knows may be
better and more naturally rendered the Consummation or Conclusion of the Ages,
than the End of the World.

Fot the understanding this Phrase, we must have recourse to the known Idiom of
the Jews, who used to speak of the several Oeconomies and Dispensations, under
which the World successively had been, or was to be, as of so many (...) or
Ages. The last of which Ages, and the Accomplishment and Completion of all of
them, they held to be the Age of the Messiah; beyond which they knew there was
to be no other Age or Economy. With reference to this way of speaking, the
times of the Gospel Dispensation are frequently called in Scripture the Last
Times, the Last Days, the Fullness of the Times, and in the Text, the
Consummation or Shutting up of the Ages. The meaning of all which Phrases is no
more than this. That the Times of the Gospel, that is, the Appearance and
Revelation of our Savior; though God intended them from the beginning, yet
should they be the last of all Times. There should be several Dispensations set
on foot in the World before they came; and when those times were fulfilled,
when the Ends of those Dispensations were accomplished, then should our Savior
appear, and begin his Kingdom which should never be succeeded by any other.

This is the true meaning of Christ's appearing (...), as the Text expresses
it, that is, not (as we translate it) in the end of the World, but in the last
of the Ages, or at the time when the Ages were fulfilled and accomplished.

Now what use are we to make of this Consideration, the Apostle himself does
fairly intimate to us in the beginning of this Epistle: God, says he, who at
sundry times and in diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made
heir of all things, and by whom he made the Worlds. And so he goes on to set
forth the incomparable Dignity and Pre-eminence of this last Messenger of God,
above that of either Angels or Men, by whom he had spoken to Mankind before.
But what is the inference he draws from all this? Why, That you may see in the
beginning of the second Chapter. We ought therefore (says he) to give the more
earnest heed to the things we have heard (that is to say, the Doctrine of the
Gospel) lest at any time we let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense
of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation as was spoken
to us by the Lord Jesus?

The Apostle's Argument here proceeds on this manner. God's Revelation of his
Will to Mankind, and the discovery of his Grace and Goodness was not all at
once, but gradual and by parts.

He first spoke to Mankind by the Patriarchs who were burning and shining
Lights in their Generations.

He afterward singles out the Nation of the Jews to be his peculiar People,
and to them he gives a written Law which was delivered to them by Angels in the
hand of Moses their Mediator (as the Apostle speaks in the third of the
Galatians) which Law was a shadow or dark representation of the Good things
which were afterward to be revealed.

After this he sends Prophets in a continual Succession for several Ages, who
do more clearly discover God's will to them; who call upon them to Holiness and
Virtue; and who speak in very plain Terms of that Great Salvation which God
should one day manifest to the World.

And last of all, as the Lord of the Vineyard in the Parable dealt with his
Husbandmen, who after he had sent Servants one after another, of different
Qualities and Degrees, at last sent his own Son: So at last, I say, did the
great Lord of the World, when the fullness of the time was come, send his own
Son to be his Ambassador to Mankind, his own Son who was the Brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

If now, as the Apostle here argues: If under the former Dispensations, when
God only declared his Will by Angels or by Prophets, he was yet so severe that
no Transgression or Disobedience escaped without a just recompense of
Vengeance; How can we escape if we neglect so great a Salvation, as that was,
which in these last days was preached by Jesus Christ? How can we escape, if
these last and greatest Methods of God for our good, and in which all the
Treasures of his Goodness are displayed; I say, if these have no effect upon us
in order to the making us both Holy and Happy.

What Teachers, what Instructers can we further expect? What new Lights or
Assistances do we yet wait for? Can any one think that God should set on foot
some other new Dispensation for the bringing off those wretched People upon
whom this last could prevail nothing? Do we dream of another Covenant, or
another Mediator between God and Man, besides Christ Jesus? Do we fancy that
God will send some other Ambassador or Savior into the World after he has
sent his own Son? Or that the Son of God will come a second time in Humane
Flesh, and again be crucified for us?

No certainly, God has afforded the last and greatest means for Man's
Salvation, and no other is ever to be expected. Christ has once appeared in
the end of the World to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and to those
that believe in him and love him, and obey him, will he appear the second time
to their alvation. But never will he appear again to make a new Reconciliation
for those Men, that are not reconciled to God by his first Appearance. To such
(as our Apostle speaks in the Tenth Chapter) There remains no more Sacrifice
for Sin, but a fearful expectation of Judgment and fiery Indignation to consume
the Adversaries.

III. The Third General Point I am to insist on from the Text is the End of our
Savior's Appearance; and that is here said to be the putting away of Sin. Once
in the end of the World has he appeared to put away Sin.

This is that which the Scripture every where assigns as the Business and
Design of Christ's coming. To run over all the particular Texts would be
tedious in so plain a Case. I shall therefore only name one or two.

This is the Account that St. John gives of his Appearance, 1 Ep. Chapter 3. Ye
know, says he, that he was manifested to take away our Sins.

And again, this is the account that the Angel gives to Joseph a little before
his Birth, Mat. 1.20. Fear not, says he, to take unto thee Mary thy Wife, for
that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth
a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his People from
their sins. He was called Jesus because he was designed by God to be our
Savior; for so much that word imports. And he is therefore our Savior,
because he saves his People from their Sins, which is in the words of the Text,
to put them away.

But what is it to be saved from our Sins, or to have our Sins put away? Since
the Salvation we have by Christ does consist in this, it is fit we should a
little more particularly insist on it. In Answer therefore to this Question, we
say that two things are employed in Christ 's putting away Sin.

First, His saving or delivering us from the Guilt of our Sins, and the
Punishment due to them.

Secondly, His saving or delivering us from the Power and Dominion of them.

In these two things consists the Salvation obtained for us by Jesus Christ;
and if either of them was wanting, or was not effected, he would not be a
complete Savior.

First, Christ appeared to put away Sin, by delivering us from the Guilt and
Punishment of it; that is to say, by procuring for us the Pardon and Remission
of it.

This is the Salvation which Zachary in his Hymn foretells John Baptist should
publish to the World, Luke 1. To give knowledge of salvation to his people for
the Remission of their sins.

And this is that Redemption of Christ which St. Paul speaks of, 1 Coloss. 14.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

And lastly, St. Paul's Sermon to the Gentiles is, Be it known unto you, Men
and Brethren, that through this Man Jesus Christ is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are justified from all things
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts. 13. And
therefore much less certainly by the Law of Nature.

The effect of these Texts is, That all Mankind are Sinners, are concluded
under Sin, are become Guilty before God, as the Apostle speaks. The most
innocent Person is not excepted. All without exception have by their Sins
fallen short of the Glory of God. Means now for the freeing themselves from the
Guilt of these Sins they have none, nor is it possible they should have, for
that wholly depends upon the pleasure of Him to whom they have rendered
themselves obnoxious; and that is God, the Governor of the World. Here
therefore appears the infinite Mercy of God, and the Kindness of our Savior.
The Eternal Word interposeth and offers himself to become Man, and in that
Person to make satisfaction for the Sins of the World. And God accepts the
Terms. And hereupon a Covenant is made between God and Mankind; wherein God for
his part upon account of this Mediation of Christ, promises Forgiveness of all
Sins, to all true Penitents all the World over.

O joyful Tidings these! What ease is here to wounded Consciences? What comfort
to despairing Sinners? What encouragement to all Men every where to repent?

If we consider Mankind in their pure Naturals, and as without Christ Jesus,
this plainly was their Case. They did believe a Supreme God; and their Reason
it is likely would tell them that God was Good and Merciful. But yet this
Reason could discover no more than God's general Goodness to them that all
along endeavored to please and approve themselves to Him. But as for his
Willingness to pardon and forgive Sinners, especially those that had offended
him by very grievous Crimes, or lived in a long habitual course of Wickedness;
this they could not conclude from their Reason. Nay, if they did reason as they
justly might, they might rather be inclined to believe that he would not pardon
such Criminals. For as their Reason told them, that God was Good: So the same
Reason told them that he was Just, and had an infinite Regard to the Honor and
Reputation of his Laws. Which Laws, their own Consciences told them, they had
heinously transgressed; nor had they any thing wherewith to compensate or make
satisfaction for the Transgression of them: And therefore what could they
expect from so Just a God, but to undergo the punishment they had deserved?

This was a very uncomfortable Reasoning. And yet such a one it was, as there
was no answer to be given to, in the State of Nature; and therefore in what a
melancholy Condition were Mankind all the while? What encouragement had they
seriously to set upon the Amendment of their wicked Lives? Or, if they did,
what Fruit, what Comfort could they promise to themselves by such an amendment?

But Blessed be God that has removed us out of these uncertainties; Blessed be
God that has given us the greatest assurance that is possible, of his Love and
Kindness to the greatest of Sinners; and consequently laid the greatest
Obligation upon all Mankind to turn from their evil Ways.

He has sent his Son, his only Son into the World, on purpose to assure us of
his good Will to us; to give a demonstration of the unfeigned Love and Kindness
that He bears to every Soul of the Sons of Adam; that he would not have any of
them perish, but that they should all come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
be saved. This Son of His does most Solemnly in the Name of his Father,
proclaim Pardon and Remission of Sins to every one that should believe in Him.
There is no Sinner excepted, even the Oldest, the Greatest, the most Enormous
of Sinners, if they will come in, and submit to the Yoke of Jesus Christ, have
his certain Promise that they shall be received.

And least any one should fear the Divine Justice, upon account that there is
no satisfaction made to it for his Sins: Our Lord has taken care to remove
that Objection. For he by the unvaluable Merits of his Person, and the free
unconstrained Offering up of Himself to an ignominious Death upon the Cross, on
the behalf of Mankind, has made a full, complete and entire Satisfaction to
God's Justice for all the Sins of the World, from the beginning to the end
thereof.

So that now every one has free Access to God, and a Right to his Favor
through the Blood of Jesus Christ. And though we have been never so bad, never
so unworthy; yet if we have but the Hearts to forsake our Sins, and come to
Jesus Christ, we shall as certainly obtain the Acceptance and the Love of our
Heavenly Father, as if we had been Innocent and never sinned at all.

Nay, God is not only willing to receive us, but he earnestly begs and
sollicits us to take his Mercy. And so pleased he is at the Return of a Sinner,
that our Savior has told us there is joy in Heaven over such a one. Nay, more
joy among the Angels over a sinner that repents; than over ninety nine just
persons that need no Repentance.

O how welcome ought this News to be to us! How transported should we be at the
infinite Kindness of God manifested to us by our Savior! O! praised be God for
his astonishing Love. For ever adored be our Lord Jesus, that has made a
Propitiation for us by his Blood. O let us for ever kiss and hug the precious
unvaluable Scriptures of the New Testament, if there was nothing else in them
but that faithful Saying, that Saying, worthy of all Men to be received, That
Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners; to save you, and me, and all
Sinners, even the greatest of Sinners.

O! who is there that is in his Wits, would choose to be out of the Christian
Dispensation; or be left to the Methods of Nature and Philosophy for the
attaining their Happiness, as some loose People among us do sometimes talk.
Were the natural Talents of Mankind exalted far above what they either are, or
ever have been; yet I would value that one Saying, That Jesus Christ came into
the World to save Sinners, more than all the Notions and Speculations of Reason
and Philosophy. I would desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. I would, with the Apostle, count all things as loss, nay, as Dung,
in comparison of the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my Savior;
and that I may be found in him, not having my own Righteousness, which is by
Nature, but that Righteousness which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for me. And thus much of Christ's appearing to put away Sin, in the
first Notion of that Expression.

But Secondly, Christ appeared to put away Sin in another sense: That is to
say, To destroy the Power and Dominion of it from among Men; to abolish it, so
as that it should not henceforth reign in our mortal Bodies. To free us from
Sin, as the Apostle speaks, that is, to enable us to lead holy and virtuous
Lives. So that whereas Mankind heretofore yielded their Members Servants to
uncleanness, and to iniquity unto iniquity; so they should now yield their
Members Servants to righteousness unto holiness.

Thus to put away Sin was as principal an End of Christ's coming as the other
before mentioned; nay, perhaps more principal: For the other, in true
reasoning, may be said to be wholly in order to this. Certain it is, unless
this End be attained, the other will signify nothing to us: For we are not
capable of any Benefit from that Remission of Sin which was purchased for us by
Christ, until our Sins be put away by Repentance, and and we become holy
Persons by the change and renewal of our Natures.

Never therefore let us deceive our selves. Though Christ has actually put
away all the Sins of the World in the former sense by his satisfaction; that is
to say, has procured the Pardon of them; has taken away the Sting of them, so
as that they shall not be deadly to any: Yet all this is upon supposition that
the Strength of them be taken away in us; that they have no Dominion over us;
that we mortify them in all our Members; that we daily die to them, and live a
Life of Righteousness. All that Christ merited or purchased for the World, will
not do us the least good, unless we be made conformable to him in his Death and
Resurrection, by our dying to Sin and living to Righteousness.

And in truth, if we will mind it, the putting away Sin in this sense of it,
has as great weight laid upon it in Scripture, and is as often assigned for
the great End and Business of Christ's appearance as the other.

St. John tells us plainly, that for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil.

And St. Paul likewise tells us, that he therefore gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people
zealous of good works.

And lastly, St. Peter gives the same account of his coming, Acts 3.26. where
he tells us, that therefore God raised up his Son Jesus, that is, sent him into
the World (for his raising up there spoken of, as any one will see that looks
into the Context, was not his being raised from the dead, but his being
manifested to Mankind. For here the Apostle's business is to apply that Promise
or Prophecy of Moses unto our Savior, viz. That God would in due time raise
up to his People a Prophet like unto him, whom they should all be obliged to
hearken to.) I say therefore God raised up his Son Jesus, i. e. sent him into
the World, that he might bless his People, in turning every one of them from
their Iniquities. This turning every one from their Iniquities was the great
End for which our Lord Jesus Christ was manifested unto Mankind.

And indeed Reason will teach us all this, as well as Revelation. For in the
nature of the thing, none can be truly Happy but those that are truly Pious.
And in the same degree and proportion that any one is wicked, or is under the
power of his Lusts, in the same degree he must needs be miserable. So that if
Christ came to be our Savior, and in that, meant either to make us happy, or
to keep us from being miserable; there was an absolute necessity that his first
and principal Design must be to root out of our Nature all Sin and Wickedness;
and to restore the Image of God in our Minds, which consists in unchangeable
Purity and Holiness and Goodness.

Away therefore with all those Hypotheses that give such an account of Christ's
coming into the World, as to make the ultimate End of it, to be the freeing us
from Hell and Damnation, and purchasing Heaven and Eternal Life for us, but
without any respect had to the renewing our Natures, or the making us sincerely
Holy and Virtuous. All such accounts of Christ's Undertaking, are monstrously
unreasonable and absurd.

For not to insist upon the manifest Affront they put upon God's Justice and
Holiness, in making Him the great Patron of Sin, whilst they assert Him to be
the Justifier of wicked Men even whilst they continue wicked.

You cannot, as I said, but see (in the first place) how very much such
Doctrines do disparage the Love of our Savior and lessen his Undertaking. For
whilst he is here supposed to have Redeemed us only from his Fathers Wrath, and
the Punishment consequent thereupon; leaving us in the mean time to the
wickedness and impurity of our own Nature, which alone without the accession of
any other external Evil, is a misery great enough: He is hereby rendered but
half a Savior; One that freed us indeed froman External Evil, but left us
irremediably exposed to an Internal one, as grievous as the other. One that
delivered us from the apprehensions of a Gibbet, or an Executioner; but could
not, or would not cure us of the inward Sicknesses and Maladies, under which we
languished.

But this is not all. In the second place, it ought to be taken notice of, what
an absurd inconsistent Notion this kind of Doctrine gives us of the Happiness
of Mankind. For whilst they suppose that a Man under the Power and Dominion of
Sin, is capable of that Happiness which Christ purchased for us in the other
World (which Happiness as both Scripture and Reason testify, does chiefly
consist in the enjoyment of God, and of his Excellencies and Perfections): They
must at the same time suppose, that a Man may berendred happy by the enjoyment
of that of which he has no Sense, no Perception; or rather, to speak properly,
that he is the happiest Creature alive in the enjoyment of an Object to which
he has the greatest aversion and antipathy in the World. Which, if it be not an
absurdity, I know not what is. When Light can have Communion with Darkness,
when God can have Fellowship with Belial; Then, and not till then, can a wicked
Man, a Man that lives in Sin, and loves it, be capable of that Happiness which
Jesus Christ has purchased for us.

IV. The Fourth thing I should speak to from this Text, is the Means by which
our Savior brought to pass the great End of his Appearance, viz. The putting
away of sin, Which means are said to be the Sacrifice of himself. Now once in
the end of the World, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself.

Two things should be done in order to a just Discourse upon this point.

First. To give an account, how the Death of Christ was a Means for the putting
away of sin in the first Sense I gave, that is, the procuring the Pardon of it.

Secondly, How it was a Means of putting it away in the other Sense, that is,
the destroying or mortifying it in us.

But these things being Foreign to our present Business, and more proper for
the Argument of a Good Friday Sermon. I shall say no more of them, but proceed
to my last point.

V. The Fifth and last thing observable from the Text, is the difference of
Christ's sacrifice, whereby he put away sin, from the Mosaical ones. Which
difference, so far as it is here taken notice of, consists in this. That the
Legal Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sin were daily offered; But Christ
offered the Sacrifice of himself but once, Once in the end of the World, etc.

The Apostle in this Chapter is discoursing of the Difference between the Law
and the Gospel. And as to that Point, he insists much on the Difference of
their Sacrifices. The Christians that owned the Gospel had but one Sacrifice,
the Sacrifice of Christ once offered; whereas those that were under the Law
were forced to have many. Nay, even the most solemn Sacrifice that God had
appointed for the Expiation of their Sins was repeated once a Year, as the
Apostle tells us in the Verse before my Text. But now the Sacrifice of Christ,
which he puts by way of opposition to theirs, That was but once offered, and
was never to be repeated. This is the point with which he concludes this
Chapter; two Verses after my Text, Christ, says he, was once offered to bear
the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second
time unto salvation.

This is the Apostle's Doctrine, and I insist on it now, because all those that
design on this day to receive the Holy Sacrament are concerned in it.

Let us from hence take notice, that in this Service of the Holy Communion, we
are not to pretend to offer Christ as a Sacrifice to his Father: His Sacrifice
was but once to be offered, and that was done 1600 Years ago; and in the Virtue
of that Sacrifice once offered, all faithful Christians and sincere Penitents
shall receive Remission of Sins, and all other Benefits of his Passion. But for
us to think of offering Christ again as a Sacrifice, is in effect to put our
selves into the same rank and condition with the unbelieving Jews, that is, to
need the repetition of the same Sacrifices every Year, nay every Day, which is
the very reason for which the Apostle denis the Efficacy of them.

We do not indeed deny, but that every time we approach to the Lord's Table for
the receiving of the Holy Communion, we offer Sacrifices to God: For we offer
our Alms, which we beg of God to accept as our Oblations; and these in the
Language of Scripture, are Sacrifices with which God is well pleased.

We likewise offer our Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving to God for the
Death of our Savior. And all our Prayers and Supplications we put up in his
Name, and in the Virtue, and for the Merits of that Sacrifice he offered to God
in our behalf: And in so doing we commemorate that Sacrifice both to God, and
before Men. And this is all, we are confident, that the Ancient Church meant by
the great Christian Sacrifice or the Sacrifice of the Altar.

But if we go further, if we will in the Communion pretend to offer up the Body
and Blood of Christ in Sacrifice to God, that was once sacrificed upon the
Cross: It is intolerable. It is a thing that was never dreamed of in the first
Ages of the Church: It is directly contradictory to the Foundation of all the
Apostle's Argument and Discourse here in the Text; and the very supposal of it
brings along with it many grievous Absurdities in the Theory, and something
that looks like impious in the Practice.

And yet this is the constant and avowed Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Rome, in every Sacrament they have, and that is in every Mass that is said
among them. The main business of that Mystery they make to consist in the
Priest's offering up to God the very Body and Blood of Christ, the same Body
and Blood that was once offered up at Jerusalem; this they pretend to offer up
as a Sacrifice every day: And they attribute to this their Offering the same
Virtue and Efficacy that the Apostles and all Christians have always attributed
to the one Sacrisice of Christ upon the Cross; that is, that it is a true
propitiatory Sacrifice for the Living and for the Dead: And none among them
dare deny this, under pain of an Anathema. as the Council of Trent has ordered
the matter.

Good God! whither will Interest and Faction and Zeal for a Party transport
Men? But it is not my business to expose them, but to put you in mind of what
concerns our selves, namely, as I said, that when we come to the Lord's Table,
we do not approach thither with a belief that our Lord Jesus is there again
offered, but only with a design to commemorate his Sacrifice that was once
offered. We come not thither to sacrifice Christ, but to be Partakers of his
Sacrifice. We are not to feast God; but God there feasts us, and that with the
best Food in the World: such Food as will nourish us to Eternal Life, if we be
worthy Guests: Only we must not appear before God empty at this Solemnity: We
must offer to him of our Substance: We must offer our Prayers and
Supplications, not only for our selves, but for all the World; but more
especially for all that are called by the Name of Christ; and among those, most
particularly for our own Church and Kingdom, and all Orders and Degrees of Men
therein. We must offer likewise our selves, our Souls and Bodies a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is our reasonable service. And
lastly, to conclude, we must offer our most hearty and affectionate Thanks to
God Almighty, for that incomprehensible Instance of his Love in sending Christ
Jesus to us to be our Savior; for his wonderful Birth, for his holy Life, for
his precious Death, for his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, and for his
Intercession for us at the right hand of God.

And O thou Blessed Savior that have done all this for us, give us such a
lively Sense of thy marvelous Love in leaving thy Glory, and taking Humane
Flesh upon thee, that thou might dwell among us, and instruct us in our
Duty, and assist us in the performance of it, and encourage us thereto by the
glorious Hopes of a never dying Life, and at last make thy self an Offering for
our Sins! O let these things sink so deeply in our Minds, and so wholly possess
our Hearts, that we may entirely give up our selves to thee! That we may with
our whole Souls embrace all thy Doctrines and Revelations: That we may
endeavor in all our Actions to conform our selves to thy Example; and make it
the Business of our Lives to be obedient to thy Precepts, to submit to thy
Will, and to be contented to be disposed of by thee in all the Circumstances of
our Lives. O let nothing in thy Religion ever be an Offense to us! But enable
us to hold the Profession of our Faith in thee without wavering, in all the
Trials and Difficulties thou shall think fit to expose us to; that so in Faith
and Obedience, in Patience and Perseverance, we may ever wait for, and at last
obtain that Crown of Righteousness which thou have laid up for all that love
thee, and expect thy second and more glorious Appearance.

To thee, O eternal Son of God, thou great Lover of Mankind; to Thee, who
tookest upon thee to deliver Man, and did not abhor the Virgins womb; to
thee, who overcamest the sharpness of death, and did open the Kingdom of
Heaven to all believers: To thee, O most dear, O most beloved, O most adorable
Jesus, be for ever given by us, and by all the Souls whom thou have redeemed,
and by all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, all Honor, and Glory, and
Praise, all Service and Love and Obedience, henceforth and for evermore.

SERMON XII.
Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On EASTER DAY, 1692.
Philip. iii. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection.


WE shall easily see the Design of these Words, and what use we are to make of
them, if we look at their Connection with the Discourse that goes before. St.
Paul in this Chapter, sets himself to show the Excellency, and the great
Advantages of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and how inconsiderable, how
unworthy to be named in comparison therewith, all those things were, that the
Jews his Countrymen so much gloried in. His Discourse upon this occasion is so
very remarkable, that it will he worth our while to run over the particulars of
it.

I also (says he in the 4th. verse) might have considence in the flesh. If any
other man thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the Flesh, I more. As
if he had said, Think not, O Philippians, that I therefore speak lightly of
those Privileges and Advantages which the Jews among you so much boast of,
upon this account, because I have none of them my self: No, on the contrary, if
I would value my self upon such outward carnal things, I have as much reason as
any. Nay, there is not a Jew among you that perhaps can say so much on his own
behalf in this respect, as I can.

For (as he goes on in the 5th. and 6th. verses.) I was circumcised the eighth
day, of the Stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Penjamin, an Hebrew of the
Hebrews: as touching the Law, a Pharisee: concerning Zeal, persecuting the
Church: touching the Righteousness, which is by the Law, blameless.

That is to say, I have not only the Character of a Son of Abraham upon me,
being circumcised; but I am also of the Race of (...) which all the circumcised
Children of Abraham are not.

Nay surther, I am an Israel^^ of the Tribe of Benjamin; that Benjamin which
our Father Israel so dearly loved, and of that Tribe which, together with
Judah, kept him to the house of David, and the true Religion, when the other
ten Tribes revolted.

Nay more, I am an Hebrew of the Hebrews, Not sprung from Proselytes, as many
among you are, but all my Ancestors, both by Father and Mother, being natural
born Jews.

And then as to my Profession in Religion, it was the strictest among the Jews,
for I was a Pharisee. And you all know That Sector all others to be the most
eminent for the Reputation of Preciseness and Sanctity.

Neither did I in my Zeal for the (...) Moses come short of the strictest (...)
is among you; for who was more (...) eager, more violent in persecuting ^nity
than I was?

And lastly, To sum up all, As to the Righteousness which is by the Law, I am
bl^^dless. So punctual have I always been in observing the Precepts of Moses
his Law, that (...) reprove me in the^ point; but I may truly, in the Jewish
notion of Righteousness, be accounted a Righteous Person.

But now, am I much the better for all these things? Have I any great reason to
glory upon the account of them? No, verily, (as he goes on in the 7th. verse)
but what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. All these
outward Advantages, my Birth, my Profession, my Sect, my Reputation, my strict
way of living, which might have proved very beneficial to me in all worldly
respects; when I once came to the knowledge of the Christian Religion, I
despised them all: For in truth I found that they were so far from being real
Advantages to me, that they were rather hindrances in the way of Virtue and
Piety.

Yea doubtless (as he goes on in the 8th. verse) I account all things but loss
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have
suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ. That is to say, Not only the abovenamed privileges, but all other
things whatsoever, Wealth, Greatness, Fame, Friends, and Life it self, I
account them all very pitiful things if they be compared with the inestimable
advantages of being a Christian. As I have once, so I will again readily
forsake all, part with all things that the World holds most dear and valuable,
nay, I will trample them under my feet like dirt and dung; provided I may
obtain the Favor of Christ.

And (as he goes on in the 9th. verse) that I might be found in him, not having
my own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is by the Faith of
Jesus Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. This passage has
been frequently misunderstood, and interpreted to a sense that I believe St.
Paul did not think of. St. Paul does not here oppose an inherent Righteousness
to an imputed one; but an outward, natural, legal Righteousness to that which
is inward and spiritual, and wrought in a Man by the Spirit of God. The
Righteousness which the Apostle here desires to be found in, is not the
Righteousness of Christ made his, or imputed to him; but a real Righteousness
produced in his Soul by the Faith of Jesus Christ.

The plain Sense of the Verse seems to be this. That which above all things I
desire is to be found in Christ, i. e. to be found a Disciple of his; ingrafted
into him by being a Member of his Church, not having my own Righteousness which
is of the Law, i. e. not being content with those outward Privileges, and that
outward Obedience which by my own natural Strength, I am able to yield to the
Precepts of the Law, which is that Righteousness in which the Jews place their
Confidence, and by which they expect to be justified before God; But that which
is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith; i.
e. that Righteousness which I desire, and in which only I shall have the
Confidence to appear before God, is an inward Principle of Holiness; that
Spiritual renewed Obedience to God's I aws which he does require as the
condition of his Favor and Acceptance, and which I can never attain to, but by
the Faith of Christ; by becoming a Christian. This is none of my own
Righteousness but God's, it being wrought in me by his Spirit, accompanying the
preaching of the Gospel; and as it is his Gift, so he will own it, and reward
it at the last ^ay.

This is the full importance of that Verse, and then it follows by way of
Explication of what he now said, That I may know him and (...) Resurrection,
etc. This is the (...), that I aspire after, that I may know Christ, nor only
by a n^^ional belief of his Doctrines, (...) of his Religion, but by a
spiritu^^ experimental Knowledge of him, such a Knowledge as ^^ansform^^^
Spirit and Temper; and that (...) the power of his (...), i. e. then (...)
experience in my self all the good (...) that his Resurrection (...) a power to
work in me; that I may see the Virtue and Efficacy of it in my daily dying to
Sin, and rising again to a (...), holy, and heavenly Life. This is that
Righteousness I long for and in comparison of which, I account all things in
the World but as less, and as du^^.

Thus have I given you a full account of the Text, and all the Apostle's
Discourse that it depends upon, I now come to treat more particularly of it
with reserence to the solemnity of this Day.

We all here present do profess to believe the Article of our Savior's
Resurrection, and our business at this time is to celebrate the memory of it.
But we must not rest here. We are not to look upon our Lord's Resurrection
merely as a thing to be believed, or professed, or commemorated; or as a matter
of Fact that only concerned himself: But there is a great deal in it which does
nearly concern us. The Apostle tells us, there is a great Power in it; even a
Power of raising us from Sin to a Holy and Virtuous Life. It is so ordered, as
to be capable of being, and it ought to be, a Principle of now Life in us, as
it was the beginning of a now Life in our Savior. Now this Virtue, this Power,
this Efficacy of it, as it is that, which with the Apostle we ought all most
earnestly to endeavor the experiencing in our selves; so it is that which will
be fittest for us at this time to apply our Meditations to.

My Work therefore at this time shall be to give some Account of the Power of
Christ's Resurrection in order to the making Men good, which the Apostle here
speaks of; to show how, or in what respects it does instuence upon the Lives of
Christians.

Now if we look into the Holy Scriptures, we shall find that there is a
fourfold Power attributed to it, or that it has an insluence upon our Lives
in these four respects. That is to say,

I. As it lays an Obligation upon Christians to Holiness and Virtue. II. As it
is the Principal Evidence of the Truth of our Religion, the Design of which is
to make Men Holy and Virtuous. III. As it is the great Support of our future
Hopes, or our Hopes of another Life; which indeed is the main Encouragement we
have to apply our selves seriously to the business of Holiness and Virtue. IV.
And Fourthly, as to it we do principally owe all that supernatural Grace and
Strength, by which we are enabled to live Holily and Virtuously. Of these four
Points I shall Discourse very briesly.
I. And First of all, our Savior's Resurrection has an influence upon our
Practice, as it lays an Obligation upon Christians to lead Holy and Virtuous
Lives. As it is in it self an incitement to Piety, and heavenly-Mindedness.

This is indeed the lowest instance of its Power; but yet we ought not to pass
it by, because the Writers of the New Testament do frequently insist on it. For
thus they argue. If Christ was crucified for our Sins; then ought we to
crucify them in our members. And if Christ rose again the third day; then are
we engaged in conformity to him to rise again to newness of Life, to lead a
Spiritual, Divine, Heavenly Life, such a lise as he now lives with God.

And this in the ancient times was taught every Christian in, and by his
Baptism. Whenever a person was baptized, he was not only to profess his faith
in Christ's Death and Resurrection, but he was also to look upon himself as
obliged in correspondence therewith, to mortify his former carnal affections,
and to enter upon a new state of Life. And the very Form of Baptism did lively
represent this Obligation to them. For what did their being plunged under water
signify, but their Undertaking in Imitation of Christ's Death and Burial, to
forsake all their former evil courses: As their ascending out of the water did
their Engagement to lead a holy, spiritual Life? This our Apostle does more
than once declare to us.

Thus, Romans vi. 4. We are buried (says he) with Christ by Baptism unto death,
that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the Glory of the Father,
even so we also should walk in newness of Life. Thus again in the 10th and 11th
verses of that Chapter, In that Christ died, he died unto sin once, but in that
he lives, he lives unto God: likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed
unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. That is to say,
After the example of Christ's Death and Resurrection, account ye your selves
obliged to die to sin, and to live to Righteousness.

Lastly, To name no more Texts, the same use does the Apostle make of Christ's
Resurrection in Coloss. iii. 1, 2. If ye then (says he) be risen with Christ,
seek those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of
God. i. e. You by entering into the Christian Covenant are incorporated into
Christ; He is your Head, you are his Members; and therefore since he no longer
leads a life of this World, it will by no means become you to live like
Worldlings or Epicures, but being risen with him (as the Members ought to do
with the Head) to mind those things that are above where he is, to set your
affections (as he goes on) on the things above, and not on the things of the
Earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

These things plainly show that the Apostles delivered the Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection, as a Practical Doctrine; as a point, which, if Christians
believed as they should do, it would engage them to mortify their lusts, to
die to the World, to place their affections on Spiritual things, to have their
conversations in Heaven, where Christ our Head, our Life, now sits at the right
hand of God.

II. Great will the insluence and Power of Christ's Resurrection upon our lives
appear to be, when we consider that it is indeed the principal Evidence that we
have for the Truth of our Religion, the very design of which is to make us
Virtuous and Holy.

If any thing in the World can make a man good, it must be a hearty belief of
the Gospel. And if any thing in the World can make a man heartily to believe
the Gospel, it must be the Resurrection of our Savior from the dead. All that
Power therefore, that the Gospel of Christ has to make men good; all that
force and efficacy that its Arguments, its Promises, its Precepts, its
Encouragements, its. Threatenings, have upon the Understandings and Wills of men
in order to bring them to Virtue and Holiness; I say, all this may in a great
measure uitimately be resolved into the Article of Christ's Resurrection. For
this Resurrection of his was the thing that did from the beginning, and does
now, and ever will ascertain mankind of the Truth of Christ's Religion. This
was, and will be for ever, the convincing Evidence, that what Jesus taught was
true Doctrine, that what he commanded was of perpetual obligation, that what he
promised or threatened he was able to make good.

If Christ had not risen from the dead, but had for ever been detained in the
Grave, notwithstanding all that might be urged from the Goodness of his
Doctrine, and the Inuncency of his Life, and the multitude of his Miracles, for
the Proof of the Truth of Christianity (though yet very strong and concluding
Proofs these are) I doubt it would hardly have met with that ready
Entertainment in the World, that we find it did. But a great many, both then
and now, would have made the same Objection against Jesus Christ and his
Gospel, that the Pharisees did of old; that is to say, That all his great Works
and Miracles were done by Sorcery and Magic. And that as for the Innocence of
his Life, and the great Virtue and Strictness that he expressed in his
Conversation; that was only used as a Trick and an Artifice the more easily to
impose upon the World. But now, when it appears that Jesus, who taught this
holy Religion, who did those Miracles, who lived that virtuous Life; did, after
he was put to a cruel death, rise again to Life, and conversed upon earth for
forty days together, and after that, in the presence of many Spectators did
ascend into Heaven: I say, when this appears (as God be thanked it is evident
beyond all contradiction) here is no room left for any suspicion of this
nature; but all pretenses of Imposture do perfectly vanish. It is impossible
for any considering man to believe Christ's Resurrection, and at the same time
to doubt of the truth of his Religion.

For thus let us reason. Christ over and over again told his Apostles that he
should be put to death, but after that, he would within three days rise again.
Matthew. xvi. 21. xvii. 22. John. xvi. 16.

Nay, he told this not only to the Apostles, but to all the People; nay, more
than that, he gave this as a Token, as an Evidence to them whereby they should
know, and be convinced that he was, what he gave himself out to be, the Son of
God and the great Prophet and Savior that was to come. John ii. 19.

Nay, in the last place, he not only refers the Jews to his Resurrection as an
Evidence of his being the Christ, but as the last and greatest Evidence that he
had to give. And such as if they were not convinced by, they must expect no
other. Matthew. xii. 39, 40.

Our Savior now laying such a mighty stress upon this point of his
Resurrection, putting his whole cause (as I may speak) upon this Issue: I ask,
How is it possible to imagine, that God Almighty should make these predictions
of our Savior, good; if he was not really what he pretended to be?

If Christ had been an Impostor, it had been the easiest matter in the World to
have stifled all his pretenses for ever. It had but been to have let him
mouldered to dust in his Grave, as all other men do, and as He, without the
help of Omnipotency, would have done; and then all the World would have seen
that he was a Deceiver. But now, when in stead of perishing in the Grave, he
was after three days restored to life again, as he had foretold the People;
nay, to a gloririous, immortal Life; What are we to conclude from hence?

Did not God in this, appear with a witness as a Voucher and Approver of his
cause? Was not this a demonstration to all the World, that Christ Jesus was no
Deceiver, but that he came from God; and that whatever he delivered was the
Truth of God, and to be received as the Oracles of God? Certainly it was.

For that a man should be raised from the Dead by any other Power, than the
very Power of God; all the World knows to be impossible. The Devil, though he
can do very strange Feats in the natural World: Yet I rever heard or read, that
either he or any of his Agents or Ministers, so much as pretended to raise the
dead to life again. And certainly if he could have done it, he would have done
it often before this, (as in the case of Apollonius Tyanaeus, Mahomet, and
others) if it had been for no other reason than to baffle thereby the Evidence
of our Savior's Resurrection, and render it unconcluding.

Ir must therefore certainly be the Power of God that raised up Jesus from the
dead. But then to suppose that God should employ this Tower for the giving
Testimony to a Falsehood, that he should set his own Seal to attest an Untruth,
as he must be supposed to have done, if Jesus was not his Son: What an
unaccountable thing is this? No man that believes that God is faithful and just
and true, and that he governs the World, can possibly imagine such a thing. For
this had been to have contradicted all his own Attributes, and to have laid an
invincible temptation and snare before all mankind to believe an Impious Lie.
You see then what an unexceptionable Proof, (nay Demonstration I may call it)
the Resurrection of Christ does afford us of the Truth of his Religion; which
is the second Instance of the Power that is in it to bring men over to Holiness
and Virtue.

III. But, Thirdly, the Power of Christ's Resurrection for the making us holy
and virtuous will further appear in this respect. Namely, as it is in
particular, the great support of our Future Hopes; the great Pledge and
Assurance of our own Resurrection and Immortality.

For if Christ be risen, then may we also be certain that we shall at last be
raised by him. Because Christ is not risen for himself only, but as the
first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. xv. Good reason therefore had S. Paul
to argue as he does in that place, If Christ be preached that he is risen from
the dead; how say some among you, that there is no Resurrection? On the
contrary (as he urges) If we believe that Jesus Christ died and rose again:
Even so them also that sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. 1 Thessalonians. iv. 14.

For how can we desire to be better assured that our Bodies shall not for ever
sleep in the Grave, but shall at last be reunited to our Souls, and both Soul
and Body live eternally in unspeakable bliss and happiness; I say, How can we
have greater assurance of this, than by what was on this day brought to pass in
our Savior?

We have hereby a clear demonstration that the Resurrection is possible. For
Christ who was once dead is alive again, and lives in unexpressible Glory, at
the right hand of God. And at the same time that he rose, he raised up other
Bodies also of Holy Men to accompany him in his Triumph over Death.

But that is not all. He that raised up himself and them, has given us his
solemn Word and Promise, in as express terms as is possible, that he will by
the same Power raise up us also; and exalt us to the same Glory that he is
possessed of. He has told us, That he is the Resurrection and the Life: And
that whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life;
and he will raise him up at the last day. There cannot be a stronger Proof of
any thing; than our Savior's Resurrection is of the happiness of good Men in
another State.

Which being so; How powerful a means must we needs conclude it to be, for the
Reforming the manners of Mankind, and making them truly Holy and Virtuous?

Since we have thereby such a Demonstration given us of a glorious Immortality
to be expected by us; what is it that can be able to hinder or divert us from a
serious pursuit of those things that lead to it? What could God do more by way
of Motive and Argument, toward the Proselyting the World to Religion and
Righteousness, than he has done, by thus Ascertaining our future Happiness by
the Resurrection of his Son Jesus?

To be certain, that if we seriously apply our selves to a life of Piety here,
we shall be crowned with everlasting Felicity hereafter! To be certain, that if
we follow the steps of our Blessed Savior, we shall for ever shine in the same
Glory and Luster that he now does at the right hand of his Father! To be able
positively to say, I know that my Redeemer lives, and I know that if I live as
he did, I shall for ever live with him; and though it does not yet appear what I
shall be, yet this I know, that when he shall appear I shall be like him! O
what noble Thoughts, what brave Resolutions is this able to inspire us with?
What Difficulties shall we be afraid of? What Labors shall we not willingly
undertake? What Temptations shall we not easily vanquish in the Prospect of
such an eternal Crown of Glory, as awaits us, and is secured to us by our Lord
Jesus?

O happy we Christians! that have so clear a Revelation of those things, which
God has prepared for them that love him, those things which eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither did they enter into the heart of man! Blessed, for ever
blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, that has begotten us again to this lively
hope by his Rosurrection from the dead.

O! what mighty Encouragements have we to set our selves against our Sins, and
to labor after the Perfection of Virtue, in comparison of what those have who
are ignorant of our Savior's Resurrection, and who know nothing of the other
World but by the uncertain conjectures of their natural Reason?

If we had no other assurance of the Immortality of the Soul, and the rewards
and punishments of another life, but what is afforded us by the light of
Nature, and the deductions of Philosophy; I doubt we could never expect to see
any great Reformation in our manners.

Some of the Philosophers have indeed to their immortal Fame, asserted the
truth of these things: But then others of them have as much made it their
business to run them down. And as for those of them that spoke the best
concerning the other World, yet God knows, their Discourses upon this Argument
(as will appear to any that reads them) are generally very uncertain, and
altogether conjectural.

But admitting their Reasons to be strong and conclusive (as I am far from
denying, that the Souls Immortality is demonstrable by the light of Nature) yet
there are generally these two Inconveniences in the Arguments they make use of
for the Proof of this matter, which render them in a great measure ineffectual
for the reforming men's lives.

First, They are generally of so great Subtilty, so Nice, so Metaphysical, so
much above the reach of ordinary Capacities, that they are useless to the
greatest part of Mankind, who have not understandings fitted for them.

And Secondly, They have this inconvenience likewise, that a Man does not see
the Evidence of them, without actual attention to a long Train of Propositions;
which attention, it may be, when a Man most stands in need of their Support, he
shall neither have the leisure nor the humor to give.

But now the Christian Method of proving another Life, is quite of another
strain, and wholly free from these inconveniences. That Demonstration which
Christ has given us of a glorious Immortality by his Resurrection from the
dead, as it is infinitely certain and conclusive; so it is plain and easy,
short and compendious, powerful and operative. No Man that believes the matter
of Fact, can deny the Cogency of it: Men of the meanest Capacities may
apprehend it. Persons in a crowd of business and in the midst of temptations
may attend to it. And it has this Virtue besides, that it leaves a lasting
impression upon the Spirits of those that do believe and consider it.

Thanks therefore to our Lord Jesus Christ for this excellent Instrument of
Piety, that he has given us by his Resurrection. Everlasting Praises to his
name, that he has thus brought Life and Immortality to light by his Gospel.
This very thing alone, was there nothing else to be said for the Christian
Revelation, would sufficiently justify both the Gospel it self, and our Lord
Jesus the Author of it, to all Mankind; nay, and effectually recommend his
Religion, above all others that ever were taught, to all Persons in all Nations
of the World.

IV. Fourthly and Lastly, There is still a further Blessing coming to us by our
Savior's Resurrection from the dead; and in which indeed is chiefly seen and
expressed the great Power of it for the making us Holy and Virtuous. That is to
say, Unto it we do principally owe all that supernatural Grace and Assistance
by which we are enabled to vanquish our Corruptions, and to live up to the
Precepts of our Religion.

As Christ by his Resurrection did oblige us to lead new lives: As Christ by
his Resurrection did demonstrate the truth of the Christian Religion, which is
wholly in order to our leading new lives: As by his Resurrection he cleared up
to us the certainty of our future State, and thereby gave us the greatest
Motive and Encouragement to lead new lives: So in the last place, by the same
Resurrection he acquired a Power of conferring Grace and Strength and Influence
upon us, by the Virtue of which we are in fact enabled to lead new lives.

Though Christ by his death reconciled us to God, and procured a Pardon of Sin
for us; yet the actual benefit of this Reconciliation, the actual application
of this Pardon, did depend upon our performance of certain Conditions. Which
conditions were, that we should mortify all our evil affections, and frame our
Lives suitable to the Laws of the Gospel. But now the Grace and Power by which
we are enabled to do this, was not the effect of Christ's Death, but of his
Resurrection.

It was when he ascended up on high, and led Captivity Captive, that is, when
he had vanquished Death, which had vanquished all the World before: It was
then, (as the Scripture assures us) and not till then, that he was in a
capacity of giving gifts unto men. It was not till he was glorified, as St.
John observes, that the holy spirit was given.

Hence it is, that we every where find the Apostles attributing the business of
Man's Justification and Salvation, as much, or more to Christ's Resurrection,
than to his Passion. If Christ be not risen (says St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv.) your
Faith is in vain, ye are yet in your Sins. Indeed, if Christ had perished in
the Grave, we had still had all the load of our sins upon us; because we had no
assurance that God had accepted the Atonement and Propitiation which he had
made for them. And much less could we have promised to our selves, that we
should have been assisted by any Divine Power for the subduing of them.

Again, the same St. Paul tells us, Romans iv. that Christ was delivered for our
sins, and raised again for our justification. Christ's Death was the Sacrifice,
the Satisfaction for our Sins. But it was by the means of his Resurrection,
that that Sacrifice and Satisfaction is applied to us and we for the merits of
it become justified before God.

Lastly, To name no more Texts, Who (says the same Apostle, Romans viii.) shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifyeth: Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.

Here then is the great Power of our Savior's Resurrection to make us good.
Christ being risen from the dead, has all Power given him both in Heaven and
in Earth. God, as St. Paul expresses it, has put all things under his feet,
and has given him to be head over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. Now in
the fullness of that Power that he is invested with; as he does on one hand,
with never-failing efficacy make continual Intercession for his Church and
every Member of it: So he does on the other hand, out of the fullness of that
Power, derive and communicate so much Strength and Grace and Assistance of the
Divine Spirit to all Christians; that if they make a good use of it, they shall
not fail to perform all those Conditions of Faith and Repentance and a Holy
Life, that are required of them, in order to their being made actual partakers
of all those unspeakable Benefits, which he purchased for Mankind by his Death
and Sufferings.

Christ by his Resurrection is become both our High Priest and our King; both
our Advocate and our Lord. By that Power which he then obtained, as our Priest
and Advocate he does with Authority recommend us and all our concernments to
his Father. As our King and Lord, he rules and governs us; he takes care of us;
he provides for us; he represses the insults of his and our Enemies, and
defeats all their attempts against us; And, lastly, he supplies us from time to
time with such a measure of Grace and Strength, and influence of his Divine
Spirit, as he sees is needful or proper for our Condition.

If all this now, that I have said, be the effect of our Savior's
Resurrection, as it certainly is: Must we not needs own that there is a mighty
Power in it for the making us good? What can any man among us, that professes
to believe that Jesus was raised from the dead, say for himself, if he leads a
wicked Life? What Apology can he make for the continuance in his sins? Will he
say that the Temptations to sin are too strong for him; that he wants Grace,
and Strength to overcome his evil Habits; and that through the corruption of
his Nature he must of necessity remain a slave all his days to his Passions and
Appetites whether he will or no? Why, in saying this, he forgets that Christ is
risen from the dead. For if he did remember that, he would remember also, that
there is a Virtue and Power, above that of corrupt Nature, which he, as a
Christian, may easily come by, if he seriously seek after it: Namely, The Grace
and Strength of the Holy Spirit of God, which I have been speaking of, which
Christ upon his Resurrection obtained the disposal of; and which he never fails
to send down upon every Soul that heartily prays for it; and when ever he gives
it, he gives it in such measures, that a man must certainly, by the influence
thereof, overcome all his evil and corrupt Affections; or if he do not, it
shall be entirely his own fault.

O, what a mighty Comfort and Encouragement ought this to be to all those that
heartily desire and endeavor to be good! All such may with boldness approach
to the Throne of Grace, and confidently open their wants, not doubting of such
Relief as is most convenient for them. Our Savior is risen, and sits at the
Right hand of God. He that loved us so dearly as to die for us, is now entered
into his Kingdom, and is able to grant us whatsoever we ask.

Do we find our selves burdened with our sins? Do we want strength to resist
Temptations, and to master our strong Corruptions? Our Savior is risen, and
now ever lives to make intercession for us. Let us fly to him for succor, let
us beg a portion of that Grace and Holy Spirit he has purchased for us. We may
rest satisfied he will hear our Prayers, and derive such vigor and influence
upon our Souls, that we shall in due time, by the means thereof, vanquish and
triumph over every thing that opposes us.

We cannot in any wise doubt of his Power, for God by raising him from the dead
has made him both King and Priest, has exalted him to the highest Authority
and Dignity both in Heaven and Earth. We cannot doubt of his good will, for he
that underwent so many Difficulties and Agonies for us in the days of his
Flesh, cannot forget those whom he has ransomed with so great a price, nor
suffer that Power which God has given him, to lie by him unimployed.

To conclude, Let us not faint; Let not our hearts be troubled; Let us not
despair of any thing. Our Savior is risen. Our High Priest is entered within
the vail, has taken possession of the highest Heaven, where he continually
makes intercession for us. Such a High Priest as is kind and compassionate, and
tenderhearted; that knows our frame, and remembers that we are but dust;
that pities our weaknesses, and is sensible of the difficulties we have to
conflict with, as having himself had sufficient experience of them. And withal,
such a High Priest as is able to save to the uttermost all those that come unto
God through him.

Thus have I given some account of the Virtue of our Savior's Resurrection, in
order to the making us sincerely Good. What remains? But that, as we should
heartily thank God for these Benefits of it; so we should especially endeavor
to be partakers of them; not contenting our selves with a notional, ineffectual
Faith, but laboring with St. Paul experimentally to know Christ Jesus, and the
Power of his Resurrection.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant;
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

SERMON XIII.
Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL,
PSALM, xcvii. 1. The Lord is King, the Earth may be glad thereof: yea, the
multitude of the isles may be glad thereof.


THat is to say, it ought to be Matter of exceeding Joy to all the Inhabitants
of the World, that amidst all the uncertainties, and Hazards, and Variety of
Fortunes, which they here find themselves exposed to, there is One Above that
governs all.

GOD that made the World is the King of it. All the Beings of the Universe,
Angels, Men, and Devils, with all the other Animate or Inanimate things in
Heaven and Earth, as they are His Creatures, so are they truly and properly His
Subjects, and act entirely in subordination to Him, as Ministers and
Instruments do under the Guidance of the Principal Agent.

GOD does as truly Reign in the World, as any King does in his Kingdom: He does
as truly order the Affairs of it, as any Master does those of his own Family.
Nay, a Man's own Thoughts and Actions are not by a thousand times so much
attended by himself, are not so much his Care, as the Affairs of the Universe
are attended by, and are the Care of God Almighty.

This is the notion of the Lord's being King; and, Do you not think it ought to
be matter of Rejoicing to all Reasonable Creatures?

O Lord! what a gloomy dismal Scene of things do they present us with, that
give other Accounts of these matters?

To banish God's Providence and Government out of the World, is to banish all
Joy, all Peace, all Hope, all Comfort for ever, from all those that have the
power of Thinking.

A Brute indeed is not much concerned how Matters are ordered: An Ox may grow
fat in his Stall, and a Colt frisk in his Pasture, let the Hypothesis of the
Government of the World be what it will. But to one that is made with a Faculty
of Reasoning, that has Hopes and Fears, and can reflect on what is past, and
has a prospect of what is future; what black and melancholy Apprehensions must
it cause in such a one, to suppose that no care is taken of Human Affairs; but
that we sail in the tempestuous Ocean of this World, every minute in danger of
Rocks and Quicksands, without any Pilot to steer us?

Take what Hypothesis you will; either, That there is no God, but that all
things comes to pass by Chance, or inevitable Necessity; Or, That there is a
God, but that God having once put things into this Frame, never meant to
trouble himself more about them, but left them to shift for themselves, Natural
Events falling out from necessary Causes, and Civil Assairs being left to
Mankind, who are to shuffle and divide the World among themselves as well as
they can: I say, proceed which way you will, if you exclude God Almighty's
Government, you make this World so dark and miserable a place, that no serious,
considering man can tolerably enjoy himself in it.

For here, upon the former supposition, you are left without Counsel or Advice.
You have nothing to propose, nothing to design in the course of your Lives. It
is all one how you behave your selves, whether honestly or wickedly; whether
you mind your Business, or mind it not, for the Even will be the same. You are
obliged to no body for any Benefits; you can complain of no body for any ill
usage. If you be in ill circumstances, you have none to apply to for Remedy;
and if you be in good ones, you may be stripped of them without Remedy the next
moment: for all things are carried on by a whirl of Fate.

And you are not much bettered by the latter Hypothesis, That God has trusted
the Government of the World with Mankind, who are endowed with Reason and
Understanding.

For, if we consider how Mankind do sometimes use their Reasons, it is as good,
if not better, to be exposed to the Hazards of Chance or Necessity, as to be
subject to their Wills.

The truth of it is, if this Systeme of the World be well considered, it will
appear a more uncomfortable one than the other; for it does not remove from us
the Iron Bands of Fate, we are still under that Yoke as much as we were before.
Yet besides these, it puts upon us another Yoke, the arbitrary Pleasures of
those of our own kind, which, if they be not governed by Reason, are ten times
more unsupportable than the other.

We are by this Hypothesis as much exposed to Natural Evils as we were before,
and there is no help for them; but over and above, we must bear the Indignities
and Insolences, the Ravages and Cruelty of every one that is stronger than our
selves, and has the will to oppress us.

O hard Lot of Mankind, if this was their Constitution! better by far were it
for them to be Brutes, and think of nothing; than to be Men, upon such Terms as
these.

Happy therefore are the Inhabitants of the Earth, happy are the remotest Isles
thereof, that there is a King that reigns both over Fate and Men. Happy are we,
that there is a wise and intelligent Being, that superintends all our Affairs,
and so governs both the Powers of Nature, and the Powers of Mankind; that
nothing can be done by either of them, but what is designed by, and pursuant to
his Counsels.

Upon this Supposition we may live like Men, and enjoy our selves with some
Comfort in this World. We may propose Ends and Designs to our selves, and hope
that with our diligence and good management they may take effect.

Upon this Supposition we may and ought to look upon all our good Successes, as
the Blessings of God to us, and particularly that which we are this day met
together to thank Him for; I mean, the wonderful Preservation of His Majesty
from all the Dangers to which he has so often been exposed, and his safe
Return to us.

Upon this Supposition we may hope, that though all things have not succeeded
according to our Wishes, yet in due time they may, since the King of the World
has, by the frequent and unexpected Deliverances he has wrought for us, and
the strange unusual Providence that have attended our King, given us some
Encouragement to believe (provided we do our parts toward it) that He has
reserved Us for better Times, and Him for the executing those Glorious Designs,
which Good Men hope will at last be accomplished in the World.

Lastly, Upon this Supposition, every Honest Man will find reason enough both
to bear contentedly whatever uneasy Circumstances he lies under, and to trust
in God's Mercy for the removal of them; and in the mean time to possess his own
Soul in a cheerful dependence on God's Providence, and a hearty Thankfulness
for all the innumerable Blessings he has received, and does daily receive from
his Hands. And therefore, since the Lord is King let the earth be glad: yea,
let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof.

Now, That the Lord is really thus the King of the World, there are all the
Arguments to persuade us that can be desired:

It is the Voice of Reason: It is the Voice of all Mankind: It is the Voice of
GOD himself, both in His Works, and in His Word.

Give me leave to give you a Specimen in all these ways of Arguing, and but a
Specimen, because it would be rather the Work of a Book than of a Sermon to
dilate upon these matters.

First, I say, Reason tells us it must be thus. For admitting that the World
did not make it self, but was made by God; it will follow, that the same God
that made it must still govern it: For, the same Ends, and Designs, and Motives
(whatever they were) that induced God to make the World at first, will oblige
Him for ever to take care of it and look after it. Unless we suppose God to
contrive an act as uncertainly and unstedily, and with the same inconstancy and
levity of Mind that some of us Mortals here upon Earth do.

Secondly, It is the Voice of all Mankind. For, otherwise how comes it to pass,
that among all Nations, and in all Ages, there has been some Religion or other
practiced.

I pray, what is the meaning of worshipping God, of putting up Prayers and
Supplications to Him for the things we need; of returning Thanks for the
Benefits we have received; of appointing Religious Rites and Methods for the
expiation of Guilt, or the averting of impendent Calamities (all which things
have been practiced in all Nations, from the beginning of the World to this
day)? I say, what is the meaning of all this, unless it was hereby meant to be
signified, That there is a God which does concern himself in the Affairs of
Mankind, and who does dispense, Good or Evil, to them, as they well, or ill,
behave themselves toward him?

The Truth is, To say, that God does not govern the World, is to say, that all
Religion is a Cheat; and, that all Mankind, except a few debauched Wits in the
more polite Countries, and a few Brutes in the very barbarous ones, (who are of
no Religion at all) have been, and are a company of credulous Fools. For this
is certain, whatever Argument either Jew, or Turk, or Pagan, or Christian, can
suggest to himself for the convincing him, that it is his Concernment, or his
Duty, to worship God, or to be of any Religion at all, nay, or to make any
conscience of any Action he does; I say, all these Arguments do not only prove,
but suppose, that God both knows and orders the Affairs of the World.

Thirdly, It may likewise be as strongly proved from Effects; from the tracks
and footsteps of a Divine overruling Providence, which are to be seen in the
Events that happen in the World, which is what I call the Voice of God in his
Works.

These are indeed so many and so visible, that whosoever has either read
History, or has made Observations, must needs have taken notice of them.

If ever there were any extraordinary Deliverances vouchsafed to Kingdoms, or
Cities, or particular Persons; or ever any remarkable Judgments inflicted upon
any of these, which so carried the Marks and Signatures of God's Hand in them,
that the One could not in reason but be attributed to the Care that he had,
that Religion or Innocence should not be oppressed; and the Other must in
reason be interpreted as a Divine Vengeance, that pursued the Guilty for their
Crimes:

If ever there were any Prophecies that did punctually foretell a Particular
Event that came not to pass till many Years after, and such an Event as was
perfectly contingent, and depended upon the Wills of Men:

If ever there were any Notices given of Approaching Calamities, by Voices from
Heaven, by strange Appearances in the Air, and such other like Presages, not
naturally to be accounted for:

If ever there were any Apparitions, any Witchcraft, any effects of a
Diabolical Power, by which it may appear, that there are a sort of Invisible
Beings in the World, which do bear ill will to Mankind, but yet are so curbed,
that they cannot do all the Mischief they would:

If ever there were any Miracles wrought either by Moses and the Prophets, or
by Jesus Christ and his Apostles, for the confirmation of the Jewish or the
Christian Religion:

Lastly, If ever any Good Man did ever receive any Blessing, or avoid any
Misfortune, which he might rationally look upon as an Answer to the Fervent
Prayers that he had put up to God, or others had put up for him:

I say, If any of these things that I have now named be true (as all Histories
give us a World of Instances of the truth of all of them, and as for some of
them, I do not doubt but they fall within the compass of our own Observation
and Experience.) I say, if any of these things be true, then have we a
convincing Proof, that there is a Power that does interpose in the Affairs of
the World, superior both to that of Nature, and to that of Mankind, and which
moderates all things, according as it seems good unto him.

But in truth, we need not go to supernatural Events, or to particular
Providence for the Truth of this: For, in my Opinion, the daily effects that
every one of us sees and feels; the very Subsistence of the World for so many
Ages, in that regular frame that it was at first; and the fair Treatment and
Encouragement (how unequally soever things seem to be distributed) which
virtuous and religious men have always found in it, and do yet find,
notwithstanding that far the greatest number of men are of another stamp: I
say, these very things seem an Argument beyond exception, That there is a God
that presides over us, and takes care of us.

But, Fourthly and lastly, God has yet given us a further Proof of this, by his
own many Authentic Declarations in the Holy Scriptures (which we call his
Word.)

One of the main businesses of which is, Dan. 4.17.
to assure us, That He rules in the kingdoms of men, and disposes of all their
Affairs.

There He is set forth as the Author of all Events, Amos. 3.6.
both good and bad; so that no evil happens in a City, but the Lord does it.

There He is represented as the searcher of all hearts, the Judge of all men's
Designs and Actions, the Avenger of all Evil Practices, and the Refuge of all
Good Men.

There we are told, that He is the God of of Battles, Psalm. 33.16.
and that no King is saved by the multitude of his Armies, nor any mighty Man
delivered by his own strength: but Salvation is from the Lord. And so are
Disappointments also.

There we are assured, Psalm. 33.^4.
that He from his Habitation looks down upon all that dwell on the earth. He
fashioneth the hearts of them; he understands all their ways. Pror. 19.21.
And though many are the devices that are in their Hearts, yet it is his
counsel only that shall stand.

In a word, Ephesians. 1.^^.
it is God (as the Apostle tells us) that works all things, and he works
them all according to the counsel of his own will. So that nothing comes by
chance, nothing is done in vain; but all Events are in pursuance of a Design.

Nay, not so much as the Event of casting a Lot (which seems the most
fortuitous contingent thing in the whole World) is left at random: For even in
that Case the disposal of the Lot (as Solomon tells us, Prove. 16.33.) is from
the Lord.

All this is not only the Doctrine, but in a great measure the very Language
and Expression of those Holy Books. And, what can we desire more? Or, what
words can we invent that shall declare more fully the thing we are speaking of?

None can that I know of, except perhaps those of our Savior, with which I
shall shut up this point. Matt. 10.29.
Fear not, (says he to his Disciples) Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing? yet not one of them falls to the ground without the will of your
Father. Nay, I say unto you, the very hairs of your head are all numbered. O
wonderful this! what! God Almighty number the very Hairs of our Heads! Lord,
what is man, that thou should have such respect unto him, and do that for him
which even the nicest and most delicate of Men never yet did for themselves?
But thus art thou pleased to express thy particular regard to the Sons of Men.
Thus art thou pleased to let us see, that none of us are so inconsiderable, but
that we are within the Verge of thy Providence, and Objects of thy Care. And
therefore much more are Cities, and States, and Kingdoms so, wherein the
Fortunes of so many Individuals are wrapped up.

O, blessed be God for his Love to Mankind! O, for ever adored be his Name for
thus humbling himself to take notice of us and our Affairs, and likewise for
giving us such abundant Assurance that he does so! Since therefore we have such
mighty Evidence of all sorts, that the Lord is King, let the Earth be glad:
yea, let the multitudes of the isles be glad thereof.

And we shall still see greater reason thus to be glad, if we consider a little
more particularly the Rules and Measures by which God administers the Affairs
of his Kingdom: Which are not, as too often happens in Human Governments,
Arbitrary Will or Humor, but perfect Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness.

Though it be true what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 135.6.
That Whatsoever the Lord pleases, that does he in Heaven and in Earth, and in
the Sea and all deep places: Yet it is as true, that the Lord will never be
pleased to do any thing, either in Heaven or in Earth, but what is suggested by
infinite Goodness, and in such ways as are the Result of Infinite Wisdom. For
as the same Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 33.5
He loves righteousness and judgment; the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord. He is holy in all his ways, Psalm. 145.17, 9.
and righteous in all his doings: and his tender mercies are over all his works.

To say, That God deals arbitrarily with any of his Creatures; or, that He
dispenses Good or Evil to them merely because He will, without any other
Reason, is in truth to disparage His Nature, and gives us such a notion of Him,
as we have perhaps of some of the Great Monarchs of the World, but whom we are
far from esteeming the Best Men.

No certainly, if we Mankind find in our selves, that the wiser and better we
grow, the less are we led by Humor and Will, and the more do we shake off our
Indifferency to Good and Evil, and the more steadily do we cleave to the
eternal Laws of Reason and Righteousness in all our Actions: We may be sure
that God, who is Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness it self, can never in any of
his Actions or Dealings with his Creatures, depart from these Principles.

The true Scheme of God Almighty's Government is plainly this.

His Infinite Mind clearly understood all the Possibilities of things long
before they were in actual being. He knew what things were possible to be; and
how they would act if they were put into being; and what the Events of all
their Actings would be.

His Infinite Goodness moved him to put into actual being every thing that he
saw was Good to Be; and to give them all those powers of Action that they have;
and withal, to look after them so, as that both they and all their Motions and
Actions should at last be to the Praise and Glory of the same Goodness, that
first inclined him to create them.

His Infinite Wisdom contrived the Methods in which all this should be brought
to pass, and so laid the Scheme and Platform of things, that nothing could
happen in the whole Creation, from the beginning of the World to the end
thereof, (though it was in it self never so bad, never so mischievous) but what
both might and should be so ordered, as to be subservient to that end.

And lastly, The Scheme of Things being thus laid, His Infinite Power first
produced All things, and still upholds All things, and from time to time, in
their several seasons, actually brings to pass every thing, according to the
Determinations of his eternal Wisdom. And though it does it in ways secret to us,
yet it does it certainly and surely, and withal, most easily and gently, with
the least violence to the established Laws of Nature, and without any force at
all upon the Free Wills of Intelligent Beings.

This I say, is the Account that both Reason and Scripture give us of God's
Making and Governing the World. Infinite Knowledge is the Foundation of All.
Infinite Goodness is the Author and Mover of All. Infinite Wisdom is the
Contriver and Director of All. And Infinite Power executes All.

Admit now these Principles, and see what will follow from them.

It will follow from hence, in the first place, that every Event that happens
in the World, is beautiful in its season; as Solomon expresses it. That is to
say, How unaccountable soever it may appear to us, yet there is a good Reason
to be given, both why it happens at all, and likewise why it happens at that
time, and with those circumstances that it does. It helps to adorn the Great
Drama and Contrivance of God's Providence, and ministers to excellent Ends,
though we poor Creatures do little apprehend how it makes for them. As indeed it
is impossible we should, unless we had the whole Comprehension of Things in our
Minds, and saw the entire Scheme of God's Government, from the beginning to the
end. This must needs be so, if we be Governed by Infinite Wisdom.

Secondly, It follows from hence, that both Good and Evil are measured to
Mankind according to their respective Capacities. If we be fit for Good, Good
will come. If we deserve Punishment, we must expect that likewise. For, All
God's ways are equal, though Ours be unequal.

And therefore it is the most unreasonable thing in the World to impute our
Successes, whether they be Good or Bad, so wholly to the immediate Hands that
managed our Affairs, as not in the first place to take notice of the Hand of
God in them.

There is a Divine Power that governs all these matters. And though it be true,
that no Misfortune, no ill Success ever happens, but there is a Human Reason to
be given for it; and it may be found out upon what occasion, or by what
neglect, or through what ill management that Misfortune happened: Yet it is as
true, that if those that managed for us had the Wisdom, and the Conduct, and
the Strength of the very Angels of God, yet their Endeavors would not be
effectual, for the making us happy, unless we our selves were in a Capacity of
being so, by being proper Objects of God's Mercy and Favor. This must likewise
be true, if perfect Justice govern the World.

Thirdly, It follows from hence, that even the severer Dispensations of God's
Providence toward us; the things we complain of, and are uneasy under; our
very Calamities, and Misfortunes, and Disappointments; even these are the
effects of God's Kindness, though at the same time they may be likewise Instances
of His Justice. That is to say, they are meant really for our Good, and will
prove so, if we make that use of them we should do.

The very Nature of God is to do all Good, at all Times, to all his Creatures.
For, He had no other End in making them, nor has he any other End in looking
after them. But God cannot do good to All in the same way. Correction, and
Chastisement, and Punishment is in some cases more expedient for the bringing
People to Rights, and promoting their true Interests, than the giving them all
that their own Hearts can wish. In such cases therefore God must deal with his
Creatures as every wise Parent deals with his Children. And though these
Chastisements (as the Apostle tells us) are not joyous, but grievous, yet are
they designed for the bringing forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness in
all them that are exercised thereby.

The truth is, we do not know what is good for our selves. We often wish for
things, that perhaps, if our wishes were granted, would undo us. But our
Happiness is, that God knows all, and so tempers all, that all Events, even
those that we are apt to look upon as the greatest Judgments, shall at last
appear more visibly to have been the wisest methods that could possibly have
been contrived for the doing the Greatest Good to us. And if they do not
succeed accordingly, it will be our own fault.

This must likewise needs be true, if perfect Goodness govern All: For even
Justice it self is but a different way of expressing Goodness. And all that,
which we call Judgment and Vengeance, is unaccountable, unless it serve for the
doing Good to the World.

Fourthly, and Lastly; From hence it follows, that all Events whatsoever, that
ever did, or do, or shall happen in the World, either with respect to Nations,
and Kingdoms, or with respect to particular Persons, are really the Best that
could, or can happen. And if things were ordered otherwise, it would not be so
well.

A strange Paradox you will say this is; that not only the Mischiefs and
Calamities that fall upon Mankind, but even their Faults and Mismanagements,
nay, their very Sins and Wickednesses, should be for the best. But really so it
is, and so it must be, if both infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, and Power govern
the World.

Not, but that a particular man's Sins may be the occasion of his Ruin, nay,
and certainly will be so, if he persist in them.

And likewise the Faults of a People may, and will have such an ill influence
upon the Community, as if they be not amended, the Desolation of the Nation may
at last ensue thereupon.

But still, though every thing that happens do not prove for the Good of that
particular Person, or that particular People, that is immediately concerned in
the Event; yet it will certainly prove for the General Universal Good.

So that, take all the whole Series of Events together, that have, or shall
come to pass all the World over, we may undoubtedly affirm, that All things
have been as well managed, as it is possible they could be, and will be so to
the end of the World. And this we our selves shall be satisfied of, when we
come to be in a condition of making a just estimate of things.

For indeed, to suppose otherwise, is to say, either that Infinite Wisdom does
not act so wisely as it might do; or, that Perfect Goodness might do more Good
than it does do; or, lastly, that Omnipotent Power cannot do every thing that
is possible. All which Suppositions are plainly absurd and contradictious.

And now, if all these things be true (as they certainly are) how natural is
the conclusion of my Text? Since God is the King of all the World, and such a
King likewise, that the Measures of his Government are exact Goodness, and
Wisdom, and Righteousness; what have all Mankind to do, especially Good Men,
but to Rejoice and be glad?

This is the Psalmist's Inference from this Doctrine. And this is the present
Business of the Day: And therefore let us all practice accordingly. That is the
only Application I desire to make of what has been said.

And Two ways we ought to express our Rejoicing.

First, In a hearty sense of all God's past and present Mercies to us, and an
actual giving Him our Thanks for the same.

Secondly, In a cheerful dependence upon Him for his Future Blessings. Give me
leave to speak a little to these two Points, and I have done.

First, Let us be heartily sensible of All God's Kindness to us, both past and
present, and unfeignedly thank Him for the same.

It is very remarkable, that not only David, but the Prophets likewise, when
they are treating of God's Kingdom, call upon the Isles in a particular manner
to take notice of it; [See Isa. xxiv. 15. xlii. 4, 10, etc.] as here in my
Text, Let the multitudes of the Isles be glad thereof: As if the Isles in a
more particular manner were to have a share in the Blessings of his Government.
And, no doubt, it was so intended, and accordingly it has so come to pass.
For, it is the Isles of the Gentiles, by which Name the Scripture expresses
those Countries that were at the greatest distance from the Continent of Judea;
I say, it is these Isles, which now at this day (God's ancient People the Jews
being for their Infidelity long ago rejected) are the principal Seat of his
Church and Kingdom, and to which He vouchsafes the Light of his Gospel, and
the Means of Salvation; so true is God to all his Promises.

But now, of all the Isles of the Gentiles, if any one above the rest has felt
the benign and gracious Influences of the LORD's being our King, certainly Ours
is that Island.

How wonderfully bountiful has God been to us in a continued succession of
Public Blessings, even from the first beginning of Time, that we have had any
Memorials of Events among us?

We had the Happiness to be early made a Province of the Roman Empire, and by
that means were trained up to Civility, and Arts, and Good Manners.

That made way for the greatest Blessing that Heaven could bestow upon us, even
the receiving Christianity: And that Blessing we had with the most early, being
the first among the Nations that embraced it.

When through the just Judgment of God, Barbarism and Ignorance overspread the
face of Europe, and by the occasion thereof Superstition and Idolatry made its
way, and all the Western Kingdoms gave up their Power to a Foreign Usurper;
even then this Island made the longest stand; nay, and was never so perfectly
subdued, but that Popery was here a different thing, from what it was in the
Southern Climates.

When the happy time came, that God thought fit to set on foot the Reformation,
(having first made way for it, by the restoring of Learning) such was His
particular Care of us, that this was one of the first Kingdoms that was brought
over to it.

And we have this Advantage above all other Reformed Churches, that as our
Reformation was regularly made, and by just Authority, so it was made most
agreeably to the Pattern of the Primitive Churches of Christ.

And, God be thanked, according to the goodness of it, such has been its
Success ever since; for we have all-along, from that time to this, (except the
interruption of a few Years in the late Times) served God in Peace and
Happiness, under the same Establishment. And we trust we shall do so to the end
of the World.

Many indeed have been the Oppositions and Disturbances, that have been given
us by our Adversaries, both at home and abroad; but as manifold likewise have
been our Deliverances, and that in a most wonderful manner.

I need not mention them, for they are known to us all.

How many Secret Conspiracies against our Protestant Kings and Queens, has God
Almighty's Mercy detected and defeated?

How many Open Attempts against our Laws, and against our Religion, has He by
strange Providence brought to naught?

More than once has He by wonderful methods preserved us, when we gave up our
Church and our Liberties in a manner as lost, and that in so easy and quiet a
way, that there was no concussion of the Nation followed thereupon.

Are not these Extraordinary Instances of God's Kindness to a People? And,
ought not we, who have received, and do yet enjoy the Benefit and the Comfort
of them, to remember them with Thankfulness all the Days of our Life?

But some of us, perhaps, are not now in a Humor to think of these things; our
present Circumstances fill our Minds, and Those are difficult enough. Let our
past Deliverances have been what they will, yet we are sure we are now in a
Hazardous Condition, notwithstanding all the Prayers we have put up for better
Successes.

That is too true: And I pray God make us all sensible of it; and especially
make us sensible of the things that have caused it, namely, our Ingratitude for
God's former Mercies; our Lewdness and Debauchery; the Spirit of Atheism and
Profaneness, and Irreligion, that still reigns among us as much as ever; and
above all, our unaccountable dividing our selves into Parties, and pursuing
particular Piques and Quarrels, not only to the neglect, but to the plain ruin
of our common Interests.

These are the things that have hindered our Successes, and provoked God's
Displeasure against us; and till these things be amended, I am afraid, we shall
never be a happy Nation.

But yet, notwithstanding our high Provocations, yet so gently has God
corrected us, and even in his Judgments so much has He remembered Mercy, that
we have all reason to rejoice at the Benignity and Kindness of His
Dispensations toward us; nay, and to render Him our most hearty and solemn
Thanks, for the Mercies that He has bestowed upon us, even with respect to the
Matters we complain of.

For God has really so far heard our Prayers this Year, that He has given us
the most important Successes, though not the Successes we desired.

He has kept the War at a distance from us; and we have, under the Happy
Government of Her Majesty, lived free from all Disturbance at home; every man
sitting under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree, (as the Prophet speaks)
enjoying his Religion and Rights in perfect Peace; and with a bountiful
Provision likewise, from God's Hand, of all the Things that were either needful
or convenient.

And as for our Successes abroad, though it is not proper for me to talk of those
matters, yet I believe thus much I may decently and truly say, That though the
King had not the Victory, being overpowered by Numbers; yet he gained more
Honor, and sustained less Loss than those that boasted of the Victory.

And which is yet more, God has not only Preserved his Person, amidst the
infinite Hazards he was continually exposed to, and Returned him safe to us,
but returned him likewise with such Reputation for his Courage, and Vigilance,
and Conduct in the Difficulties he had to struggle with, as has gained him the
highest Esteem among his Enemies, and therefore ought much more to endear him
to his own Subjects.

And now, let all this be considered, and then let any man say, that really
loves the Interest of his Country, whether we have not reason to look upon
these things as Great Blessings; and as such, to return our Solemn Thanks to
God for them.

And then in the Second place, as to our Future Successes, let us all
cheerfully depend upon God's Providence, and trust in his Mercy for them.

This is all the Rejoicing we can express as to Future things; and this is that
which the Apostle calls Rejoicing in Hope.

And surely great Reason have we thus to do, when we consider who it is that
orders our Affairs; One, whose Kindness we have no reason to doubt of, having
had so many Experiences of it, even beyond our hopes and Expectations: And one
likewise upon whose Power we may securely depend, since His Arm is not
shortened, nor ever can be, how much soever our Arm of Flesh may.

God Almighty is our King, and He both certainly knows, and will certainly do,
that which is best for us, provided we take care to do that which becomes us.

Away therefore with all Fear, and Distrust, and Despondency; it is an Argument
of Infidelity and Irreligion, as well as Cowardice, to despair of the
Commonwealth.

We are in as good Hands as it is possible for us to be: Nay, we our selves
cannot wish to be in any other.

Let but us do our Parts, by qualifying our selves for God's Mercies; and that
is to be done by contributing our best Endeavors, every man in his Place and
Station, to the Service of the Public; and then we may safely cast all our
care upon him who cares for us, and we may be sure we shall not be
disappointed.

This Method, as it is much more easy, so we shall find it much more conducing
toward the obtaining the Successes we desire, than Complaining, and
Fretfulness, and a tormenting Anxiety about our Affairs.

We may indeed, by our Peevish and Querulous Humor, disquiet our selves, and
put others into a Ferment, nay, and at last, perhaps, may contribute a great
deal to the Glory of hindering and defeating the most wise Counsels that are
proposed for our Safety; but that is the greatest Point we gain.

God Almighty will not alter his Methods for any of our foolish Passions; but
there is a way to prevail upon God himself, to do for us all that our own
Hearts can desire, provided that which we desire be good for us; and that way
is, to own Him and his Government; to love him, and to serve him; to be
thankful for his Mercies; to be easy and cheerful under all his Dispensations
to us; and lastly to referr our selves entirely to his Wise Counsels, and to
trust in his Mercy for all that is to come.

Great indeed, and wonderful, are the Promises that are made to those that put
their Trust in God. Jer. 17.5.
Cursed (says the Prophet) be the Man that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh
his Arm: But, Blessed is he that trusts in the Lord, Psalm. 32.10.
and whose hope the Lord is. Many sorrows (says the Psalmist) shall be to the
wicked: But whosoever trusts in the Lord, mercy shall embrace him on every side.
Psalm. 34.3.
And again, O taste and see, how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the Man that
trusts in him.

If now we believe these things, (and if we be Christians, we do and must
believe them) consider I beseech you, the Use we are to make of them.

What have we all to do? Let our late Disappointments have put us into never so
bad a Humor; let our present Circumstances be entangled with never so many
Difficulties; yet what have we all to do, but to Rejoice in GOD, and to Trust
in his Mercy?

All is well, and All will be well for ever to them that Love God, and put
their Trust in Him.

Sing we therefore unto the Lord a New Song: Let the Congregation of Saints
praise him. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: And let the Children of
Sion be joyful in their King. God is the King of all the Earth, let us sing
praises with understanding. The Lord has pleasure in his People: He will for
ever help the meek hearted: For his delight is in them that fear him, and that
put their trust in his mercy. He is our help and Strength, a very present help
in Trouble: therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be moved, and though
the hills be carried into the midst of the Sea: Though the Waters thereof rage
and swell, and the Mountains shake at the tempest of the same. Even, in that
case, the Rivers of the flood thereof shall make glad the City of God. All the
Blusterings and Storms that threaten God's People, shall turn to their
Advantage, and shall really at length prove matter of rejoicing to them, how
terrible and dreadful soever they appeared at first: For, as it there follows,
God is in the midst of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God will help
her, and that right early. God will be with his Church, and will deliver his
People whenever it is proper and seasonable so to do.

Nay, let the Worst come; though we were reduced even to the utmost Extremities;
which yet, God be thanked, we neither are, nor. I hope, ever shall be; yet
even, in that Case, the Consideration that God is our King, ought not only to
support us, but to fill us with Joy. Even in that Case, every Good Man should
bear his part in the Song of the Prophet Habakkuk, (3. 17.) with which I
conclude.

Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine:
Although the labor of the olive shall fail; and the fields shall yield no
meat: Although the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd
in the stalls; yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
salvation.

SERMON XIV.
Preached before the King and Queen AT WHITE HALL.
PROVE. iv. 23. Keep thy Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues
of Life.


THE Argument with which this Audience was entertained the last Lord's Day,
being the Government of the Tongue; I cannot think it improper or unseasonable
for me, who have the Honor to come next, to treat about the Government of the
Thoughts: There being a near relation between these two, and a necessary
dependence of the one upon the other.

Our Words indeed are more easily governed than our Thoughts, because they are
more in our Power. But it will be impossible either to govern our Words or our
Actions, as we should, unless we first bring our Thoughts in some measure under
Government.

I must confess this Argument of the Government of the Thoughts, though it be a
very useful, yet it seems also a very nice and difficult one, through the great
variety of Cases, arising from Men's different Tempers, which will not come
under the same Rules, and yet ought to be provided for. But however, this shall
not discourage me from undertaking this Argument; it shall only make me more
careful as to what I say about it. That is, to have respect, as much as I can,
to all sorts of Tempers, and to deliver what I have to say with so much
Plainness, that every body may go along with me.

The Words, upon which I ground my discourse, are those of Solomon, which I
have read unto you, and which contain one of those Precepts that he lays down
for the Religious Conduct of our Lives. Keep (says he) thy Heart with all
diligence for out of it are the issues of Life.

Not to trouble you with what others have said upon this Text, I take the true
Meaning of it to be this.

By the [Heart] here, which we are exhorted to keep, we are to understand the
Inward Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Souls or Spirits; all which
in the inspired Writings are constantly said to be seated in the Heart. This
undoubtedly is the Scripture-Notion of the Heart.

And when we are here bid to keep our Hearts with all diligence, I think there
is no question to be made, the Meaning is, That we should diligently attend to
the Thoughts and Motions, and Affections of our Minds; that we should watch
them narrowly, lest at any time we should give our Consent to something we
ought not. This is the meaning of keeping our Hearts with all diligence.

And then a Reason is added, why it concerns us thus to keep them. And that is
this. Because out of the heart are the issues of Life. What is the Meaning of
that Phrase? Plainly this. The Issues, the Fruits, the Effects that are shown
in our Lives and Conversation, do certainly proceed from the Heart, and
therefore, accordingly as that is well, or ill guarded or kept, so will our
Lives and Conversations be. The Goodness or Badness of our Lives does
altogether depend upon the attending or not attending to the Thoughts, and
Motions, and Inclinations of our Minds. As our Caution and Watchfulness in this
Point is greater or less, so will our Course of Life be better or worse. And
therefore it concerns us all, that mean to live well, to be infinitely careful
in this matter.

This is a plain Account of the Advice that is here given us. So that you see,
if I mean to discourse pertinently to my Text, my Argument must be (what I
said) the Care, and Management, and Government of our Thoughts, as they fall
under a Religious Consideration.

In treating of this Argument there seem to me Two Things needful to be done:

First, To give an Account what Power a Man has over his own Thoughts.
Secondly, To show wherein the Art of Governing of them does consist.
It is indeed this second thing which my Text naturally leads me to speak to:
But I cannot speak to that to any purpose, till I have made way for it by
clearing the first. It is in vain to give Rules about the Government of our
Thoughts, till we know how far we have Power over them; how far they fall, or
do not fall, under our Conduct and Management.

And I must needs say, that most of those I have met with, that have discoursed
about the Government of Thoughts, by not inquiring into, and settling this
Point, have been so far from benefiting all their Hearers, that desired to
receive benefit by their good advices, that to several of them they have done
harm: Because as to them their advices have been perfectly unpracticable. Now
those that by their own Experience found them to be so, instead of considering
that that Teacher might be in a mistake, or that He did not sufficiently weigh
and examine the Case of all Persons he gave his advice to, have peremptorily
concluded that they themselves were in the fault, and therefore they were in an
evil condition, because they found themselves not able to live up to what was
advised them.

The first Question then is, How far a Man has power over his own Thoughts.
There is not indeed any single Answer to be given to this Question, that will
fit all Men. For that is impossible. It would be as unreasonable to demand it,
as it would be to require of a Workman to make a Garment, that should fit all
sorts and sizes of Men.

Some Men by the very Principles of their Make and Constitution, are much
better able to govern their Thoughts than others. Some that are naturally
weaker, have by long use and many trials obtained a greater power over their
Thoughts than others. Again, the same Persons that at some times have a greater
power over the motions of their Minds, may at other times have a less Command
over them; and this according as their Health, or their Business, or a hundred
Contingencies of outward things do affect them. So that all that can be done,
as to this matter, is to lay down some general Propositions, which every Body
is to apply to himself as there is Occasion. And Five of this kind I have to
offer, and which, I think, will take in all, or the greatest part of what
belongs to this Argument.

The first Proposition I lay down is this, That the first Motions of our Minds
are very little, if at all, in our power.

By the first motions of our Minds, I mean those sudden Thoughts, or
Apprehensions, or Passions, or Desires, which are excited in our Minds by any
Object that is at that time presented to our Imagination, As to these, I say,
we are not so much Masters of our selves as to be able to stop them; nay, though
perhaps they be very irregular. And the Reason is, because they are produced so
quick, that there is not time enough given for Reason to interpose.

There is no necessity indeed that a Man should give Consent to these Motions;
but as for their coming into his Mind, he can no more help it, than he can help
his present Temper, or the present Circumstances he is engaged in.

Thus for Instance. Do you think it possible for a Man that is of a Fiery
Passionate Temper, to avoid the feeling a sudden Resentment of Anger arising in
his Mind, if he meets with any unexpected Affront or other great Provocation?
Or for a Man that desires to be well thought of, not to entertain some Vanity
of Imagination, when he hears himself commended or flattered? Or for a Man that
is addicted to Pleasures, not to feel some irregular Inclinations in himself
toward the gratifying his Appetites in those things, when he has all the
Temptations before him? And thus in all other Cases.

I grant indeed that a Man by long Consideration, and a serious exercising
himself in the ways of Virtue and Piety, may bring himself to that Temper, that
he shall not have so many irregular, undecent Motions in his own Mind, upon any
occasion whatsoever, as he was wont to have; and that those that were formerly
Temptations to him, will at last be none: But still I say, the first Motions
and Workings of his Mind however they be occasioned, are in a great measure out
of his power; he cannot stop them; and therefore the Art of governing his
Thoughts does not lie there.

The second Proposition I lay down is this, When a Man's Mind is vigorously
affected and possessed, either with the outward Objects of sense, or with
inward Passions of any kind, in that Case he has little or no Command of his
Thoughts. His Mind at that time will be in a manner wholly taken up with that
it is then full of: Nor will he be able, till those Impressions be worn off, to
think freely of what he pleases.

Thus for Instance, When a Man is under a sharp, tormenting Pain; as he cannot
avoid the feeling of that Pain, so neither can he avoid the thinking of it.
When one is full of Grief for the loss of a dear Relation; or transported with
Passion for some unworthy usage he has met with: It is in vain to say, Pray
think not of these Matters; for these things must and will in a great measure
employ his Thoughts, till his Passions do cool, and the Impressions that caused
them be vanished.

Thus, for a Man to come from some Business in which he is more than ordinarily
concerned; or from the hearing some very good or very bad News; I say, to come
fresh from this to the saying his Prayers: I do not, I cannot wonder, that in
this case his Mind will be much upon his Business, or his News, notwithstanding
all his endeavors to the contrary.

For the Nature of Man is such, that he cannot so of a sudden turn his mind
from one Business to another; but that if he did closely and vigorously apply
himself to the first Business, his Thoughts will for some time run upon it,
even after he has applied his Mind to the other.

I do not deny, but that a Man may often so order his Affairs, as to be able to
keep his Mind clear and free from such Prepossessions as I am now speaking of,
so as that when he comes to apply himself to any Business he has a mind to, he
may intend it with his whole Might. But this I say, If our Minds be once
engaged with warm Thoughts about any thing; it is very hard, if not impossible,
to get them disengaged on a sudden. So that the Art of Governing our Thoughts
does not much lie in that neither.

Thirdly, There are some Cases likewise, where a Man's Thoughts are in a manner
forced upon him, from the present Temper and Indisposition of his Body. So that
though he be in no Passion, though there be no unusual Objects of Sense that
excite those Thoughts in him; nay, though he never so much resolve not to think
upon those things; yet so long as that Habit of Body lasts, he cannot avoid
those kind of thoughts: So that in this Case also, there is little room left
for the Government of Thoughts.

That which I now say, happens frequently, not only in all sorts of Distempers
where the Brain is visibly disturbed, as in Fevers, and the like; which often
cause a thousand delirous Fancies, and sometimes downright Madness and
Distraction: But also in other Cases where there seems to be no Fever, or
other visible Distemper; nor does the Brain, as to other matters, seem to be at
all disordered; but the persons, in all appearance are sound both in Body and
Mind.

And this is the Case of some deeply Hypochondriac Persons; many of which will
be haunted with a Set of Thoughts and Fancies, that they can by no means get
rid of though they desire it never so earnestly.

Sometimes they cannot get it out of their Heads, but that they are Atheists
and Infidels; they neither believe in God nor in Jesus Christ, nor have any
sense at all of Religion.

Sometimes they are tormented with Blasphemous Thoughts, and they cannot set
themselves to the Performance of any Office of Devotion but a thousand impious
Fancies will come in and spoil all.

Sometimes they fancy they are guilty of several grievous Crimes, which it is
to be hoped, it was hardly possible they should be guilty of: nay, you cannot
convince them but that they do every day commit some of these Crimes, because
they imagine they give consent to them.

And whilst these sorts of Thoughts fill their Imaginations, there is not a
Passage in the Bible that they read, nor a Sermon that they hear, but they find
something in it, which they do so perversely apply to their own Case, as thereby
to increase their trouble, but not to get any relief.

I have known several well-disposed Persons, and some of them sincerely Pious,
that have been in this Condition.

What now is to be said to this? Why, it is very certain that all these
Thoughts and Fancies are thrust upon them, and are not the free, natural,
voluntary Operations of their own Minds; but the effects of Vapors or
Hypochondriac Melancholy. Nor can the Persons themselves any more help their
thus Thinking, or Fancying, than they can help the Disturbances of their Dreams
when they have a mind to sleep quietly. Indeed we may properly enough call
these Fancies of theirs, their waking Dreams; as their Dreams are their
sleeping Fancies.

Well, but now of all Persons whatsoever, these People are most desirous to
have Rules given them for the Government of their Thoughts. And I cannot blame
them, because their Thoughts are certainly very Troublesome. But truly, if we
should speak pertinently to their Case, instead of giving them Advices for the
regulating their Thoughts, they should rather be advised to look after their
Bodies, and by the help of good Prescriptions to get rid of those Fumes and
Vapors which occasion these Fancies. When the Cause is removed, the effect
will soon cease. I do not in the least doubt, whatever these People may think
of their own Case, but that this is as properly a Bodily Disease as a Fever,
or Fits of the Falling Sickness.

In the mean time, while they are in this Condition, whatever Rules are proper
to be given to other Persons for the Government of the Thoughts, of all People
living those Rules do the least concern them. For those Thoughts which they
complain of, do not at all fall under Regulation or Government; because they
are suggested to their Minds whether they will or no. And for my part, I think
it a great deal more advisable (if it could be) to neglect and despise them;
than to be perpetually struggling and disputing with them, and vexing themselves
about them.

But, you will say, If Men be such Slaves to their Thoughts, and are thus
necessarily passive under them, where is the Freedom of Thought? To this I
answer,

In the fourth place, out of these three Cases I before mentioned, we have
Liberty of Thinking, and may choose our own Thoughts. And that Liberty and
Freedom we have in Thinking, does, to my apprehension, mainly consist in this,
viz. That all of us (who are not in the Circumstances I have been hitherto
speaking of) can, if we please, apply our Minds more vigorously to one sort of
thing than to another; and accordingly as we do thus apply our Minds, so will
the most of our Thoughts be.

It is in our power among the multitude of Objects which present themselves to
our Mind, (as for Instance, God, Virtue, Holiness, Heaven, Wealth, Power,
Greatness, Preferments, Fine Clothes, Splendid Equipage, Sensual Pleasures,
Recreations, Divertisements, Knowledge, Learning, Arts, and the like:) I say,
that among all this multitude of Objects that present themselves to our Minds)
it is in our power to determine our selves, which of them we will dwell upon,
and make a Business of. And accordingly, when at any time we have pitched upon
any of them, as a Business, it is in our power to mind that Business either
more or less diligently. And if it be such a one, as that we mean in good
earnest to concern our selves about it, it will then so fill our Minds, as that
by attending to that, we shall either prevent in a great measure other Thoughts
from coming into our Heads; or if they do come in, they will not long stay
there, but will very speedily give place to that which is our main Business at
that time.

And the Reason of this is plain; Because our Natures are of that Make, that
two things at once cannot well possess our Minds; and therefore if we be intent
about one thing, we cannot have much room or leisure for Thoughts of another
Nature.

But then Fifthly and lastly, Though this that I have said be the true Nature
of that power we have over our Thoughts, as to the directing them to a
particular Object: Yet there is another power we have over them that ought here
more especially to be considered; because in it are laid the very Foundations
of Virtue and Vice, and upon account of it, all our thoughts become either
morally good or evil.

That which I mean is this. Though we cannot in many Cases, think always of
what we would; nay, though we cannot hinder abundance of Thoughts from coming
into our Minds against our will: Yet it is always in our power to assent to our
Thoughts, or to deny our Consent to them. And here it is that the Morality of
our Thoughts begins. According as we Assent or Dissent to the Motions that are
made in our Minds; so will our Thoughts have the Notion of Virtuous or Sinful
Thoughts.

When any Temptations are presented to us from without, we cannot perhaps (as I
said before) avoid the feeling an irregular Passion, or Motion, or Inclination
stirring within us upon occasion thereof: But yet at that very time it is in
our power, whether we will comply with those Passions and Inclinations, or not;
whether we will consent to them, or not; whether we will pursue them further,
or not. Now if we do not consent to them, but endeavor to stop, and stifle,
and resist them as soon as we are aware of them; there is yet no harm done. Our
Thoughts, how undecent or irregular soever they were, are rather to be
accounted the Infirmities of our Corrupt Nature, than our Sins properly so
called.

And thus it is likewise as to our Wandering Thoughts in our Prayers. If we
strive against them, and endeavor to keep our Minds in a Devout Composed
Temper, and attend as well as we can to the Duty we are about: I say, if we do
this, I hope those Distractions and Wanderings will never rise up in Judgment
against us.

And as for the frightful Blasphemous Fancies, which, as I told you, some, even
Pious Persons are tormented with: As to them, I say, they, of all other
irregular Thoughts, have the least danger of Sin in them, though they be not so
solemnly and formally disputed with, and contested against. Because indeed they
are so terrible in their own Nature, that no Man in his Wits, and that has any
sense of God or Goodness, can be supposed to consent to them. They are indeed
great Infelicities, but by no means any Sin, any farther than we approve of
them; and to approve of them, for any tolerable good Man is impossible.

But then on the other side, If we consent to any wicked Motion or Inclination
that we feel in our selves; let it come in how it will, never so suddenly,
never so unexpectedly; if we close with any Thought that prompts us to Evil, so
as to be pleased with it, to delight in it, to think of pursuing it, till it be
brought into Action: In that case we are no longer to plead our Original
Corruption; for in that very Instant we become Actual Sinners, Actual
Transgressors of the Law of God, the Obligation of which reaches to our very
Hearts and Thoughts as well as our Actions. Though yet we are not so great
Transgressors, so long as our Sin is only in Thought, or Desire, or Purpose; as
if it had proceeded to outward Action.

All this is taught us for true Divinity, by no less an Author than St. James,
in the first Chapter of his Epistle, v. 13, 14, 15, Let no man say when he is
tempted, I am tempted of of God; for God tempts no man. But every man is
tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust, and enticed. Then when lust has
conceived, it brings forth sin, and sin, when it is finished, brings forth
Death.

Which passage of the Apostle does plainly contain these three Propositions.

First, That no man is drawn to commit Sin by any State or Condition that God
has put him into; no, nor by any Temptation, either outward or inward, that is
presented to him. It is not a Sin to be tempted; no, nor to seel that we are
tempted by some disorderly Inclination that arises in our Minds thereupon.

But, secondly, then our Sin begins, when we yield to the Temptation, when we
are drawn away by our own Lusts, and enticed, when they get the Victory over
us, and we do consent to them. Then Lust has conceived, and brings forth Sin.

But, Thirdly, Though the very consent of our Wills to a Temptation, be a Sin
in us; yet that Sin is not so great as it will be afterward, if it be brought
to Action. Sin in the desire or purpose, is but an Embryo; it is but the first
Rudiments of Sin, but when it comes to be acted, it is then a Sin in its full
dimensions; and the Consequences of it may be Fatal without Repentance. Sin
when it is finished brings forth Death.

Having thus given some Account, how far our Hearts or Thoughts do fall under
Government; I now come to my Second Point, that is, to treat of the Art of
Governing them, or to lay down the necessary Rules and Directions which are to
observed in order thereunto.

And we shall not need to go far for these Rules, for they will all naturally
flow from the Principles I have already laid down. And I think, they may
conveniently enough be reduced likewise to these Five following.

First, From what has been said, it appears, that the First and great Point to
be done by us, if we would keep our Hearts in a good Frame, and order our
Thoughts to good purposes, is, that we rightly pitch our main Designs; that we
choose that for the great business of our Lives, that really ought to be so.

Now what that is, can bear no dispute with any Man that will fairly use his
Reason. For certainly, that which is our greatest Concernment in the World,
ought to be our greatest Business and Design in the World.

And it is evident to every one, that believes he has a Soul to save, that his
greatest Concernment of all, is, to approve himself to that God who made him,
and disposes of all his affairs; and who accordingly as we sincerely endeavor,
or not endeavor to serve him, will make us either very Happy, or very
Miserable, both in this Life and the other. So that there can, as I said, be no
Dispute about what ought to be the great Business and Design of our whole
Lives, and to which all other Businesses must yield.

Now if we be so wise, as really to propose this as our main End, and resolve
to mind it, and follow it as such; I say, if we be so wise as to do this; we
have made a very great step toward the obtaining a security to our selves,
that the greatest part of our Thoughts and Desires, and Affections, will be
such as they should be; such as will be acceptable to God, and satisfactory to
our selves.

For as I told you before, whatever is our main Business, be it what it will,
it will, in a great measure, draw all our Thoughts to it. Our Natures are so
contrived that we must always be thinking of something or other. But then they
are so contrived likewise, that we think most of that, which is most in our
Eye, most in our Esteem, most in our Pursuit. And this is that which our
Savior tells us; Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Whatever it be that you place your Happiness in, upon that will your Thoughts
run; upon that will your Desires, your Inclinations, your Affections, be fixed.

We have a World of instances of the truth of this every day before our Eyes.
If a Man has set his heart on Money, and proposes it to himself, as the
Business of his Life, to be Rich: Why, I dare say, such an one will own to you,
that most of his Thoughts are upon that Project; and that he finds it so far
from being difficult to keep his Mind close and steady to his Main Interest, as
he calls it; that it is rather difficult to him to think of any other Matters.

If a Man be given up to Pleasure, and thinks nothing worthy his living for,
but Wine and Women, and good Eating and good Company; Is it not natural to such
an one to bend all his Thoughts that way? Or does he put any force or violence
upon himself, in thinking and contriving all the day long, how to bring to pass
the Gratification of his Lusts or his Appetites.

Why, my Brethren, if we did all of us in good earnest make the Service of God,
and the purchasing Heaven and Happiness to our selves, as much our Business,
our End, our Design, as these Men make Wealth or Pleasure to be theirs, we
should certainly be thus affected. The common Course of our Thoughts, would
naturally and easily, without the least constraint, run upon those Objects: And
we should take as great delight in Thinking of our Treasure, and Contriving for
the obtaining of it; as they do in Thinking and Projecting for theirs.

I say, Thus it would be with us. For I cannot for my Life apprehend, what
Charms there can be in Worldly or Sensual Things, to attract a Man's Mind; what
Fetters there can be in them, to bind his Thoughts, and tie them to themselves:
But that there are the same, or greater, in Virtue and Goodness; in the Love
and Favor of God; in a Pure Conscience here, and Eternal Glory hereafter:
Always provided, that they are as much made the Objects of our Choice and
Pursuit, as the other.

And therefore I cannot but suspect, where we see Men so very cold and backward
to Spiritual Things; and so apt to spend all their Thoughts upon trifling,
vain, or worldly Matters, that it is with a great deal of Pains and Reluctance,
that they can bring themselves to think of their Everlasting Concernments: I
say, I cannot but suspect that these Persons have not yet laid up their
Treasure in Heaven, as our Savior expresses it; they have not yet so wholly
devoted themselves to the Service of God, as to make it their Main Business.
When once they have done that, I dare assure them, they will find it so far
from being a force upon them, to think of good things, that it will be very
natural to them; and they will find the greatest Pleasure in the World in so
doing.

Secondly, Whoever would keep his Heart always in a good Frame, and be able to
give a good Account of his Thoughts to God, must have an especial care to avoid
two things, viz. Idleness, and loose Company. For both of these do strangely
unhinge a Man's Mind; and disarm it of that Severity, which is its best guard
and defense against Evil Thoughts; and make it become an easy prey to every
Temptation that will attack it.

A wise Man should never be at such a pass, as to say, I have nothing to do, I
do not know how to spend my next Hour: But should so order the Course of his
Life, that all the Portions of his Time, as much as is possible, may be filled
with some useful, or at least come innocent Employment.

It is Idleness, and having nothing to do, that is the Mother of most of those
vain, and unprofitable, and sinful Fancies, in which some Men spend their days.
And whereas Temptations do now and then come in the way of other Men; the Idle
Man is forced to seek out Temptations for the shipwreck of his Virtue. And
therefore no wonder if he that seeks them, finds abundance of them.

And truly, Loose and Impertinent Conversation, which was the other thing I
named, though its looks something with a better Grace yet is not much better
than Idleness. For wherever it is much used, it will so emasculate a Man's
Mind, and take off the edge and vigor of it, as to serious things, that he
cannot easily get it into a good Frame again. Evil Communication (says St.
Paul) does corrupt good Manners. And therefore those people, a great part of
whose Life is taken up in gadding up and down; in Play; in merry Meetings; in
telling or hearing idle Stories, and the like: It is impossible but their
Thoughts and Inclinations, and the whole Frame of their Hearts will be
suitable; that is to say, very frothy; very light and foolish; not to say,
profane, and wicked, and Atheistical too, if the Company they much converse
with, be of that strain.

Thirdly, Another thing of great moment, for the keeping our Hearts, is, to be
as attentive as is possible to the first Motions of our Minds; and whenever we
find that they tend toward something that is forbidden, to stop them as soon as
we can.

We cannot, as I told you before, often prevent irregular Desires, or Passions,
or Inclinations, from arising in our Minds, upon sundry occasions. But this we
can do: As soon as we are aware of them, we can refuse our Consent to them;
(and in that case I hope they will not be imputed to us as Sins;) Nay, not only
so, but we can refuse their breaking out, or showing themselves in our Words,
or our Actions. For the Motions of our outward Members are all at our Command,
though the first Motions of our Minds be not.

Here therefore will ly a main Point in the Art of well governing our Minds and
Thoughts. You cannot perhaps, for instance, prevent a sudden Passion of Anger
from rising in your Minds upon twenty Accidents; But as soon as you feel this
Passion, you can thus far stifle it; you can seal up your Mouth, so that the
Passion shall not vent it self in unseemly Words; And if you will withdraw that
Fuel from the new-kindled Fire, it will soon be extinguished, and die. Whereas
if you suffer it to break out in bitter Speeches and Expressions, it will flame
beyond measure.

Thus again if any undecent, impure Fancies or Desires should be excited in you
upon any occasion: It was not perhaps in your power to keep them from coming
into your Minds: But it is in your power to withdraw from the Temptation that
caused them; and to endeavor to direct your Thoughts to some other Object; at
least not to proceed one step in any outward Action toward the accomplishing
of those Desires. If you take this Course, the Disturbance of your Mind will
soon cease, and you will return presently to your ordinary Temper.

And let me tell you this further; That by your being thus careful to resist
and smother the first beginnings of Sin; you will not only preserve, in a great
measure, the Innocence of your Minds under the present Temptation; but you will
also have this farther advantage, that by this means, you increase your Power
over your Thoughts, against the next time that the Temptation returns. Every
check you give to the first motions of Sin, makes the next assault of them the
less furious. And if you do constantly use your selves, thus to Guard and Watch
over your Hearts; you will in time obtain such a Command over them, that you
will not be troubled with a quarter of those irregular desires, and passions,
which heretofore upon several Occasions used to be kindled in you. By this
Method you will strengthen your Faculties, and enlarge your Powers; and by
degrees bring your selves to that happy Temper of Soul, that there will be no
great War between the Law of your Members, and the Law of your Minds: But the
World and the Flesh will be Crucified to you, as you are to them; that I may
use St. Paul's Expressions.

But then Fourthly, That you may be able not only to keep bad Thoughts out of
your Minds; but also to have a constant spring of good ones; there are some
particular Exercises very proper for this purpose to be recommended. Such I
mean as these, Converse with discreet and pious Persons; Reading good Books,
especially the Holy Scriptures; taking times of Meditation and Recollection;
and above all, Fervent and Constant Prayer to God.

It is not to be told how every one of these things does help to inspire us
with good Thoughts and Purposes.

A little passage now and then, though but occasionally dropped in Conversation,
that is to the business of Virtue and Goodness, will supply us some times with
matter for good Thoughts for a considerable while after. What lasting
Impressions then, do you think, would be left upon our Minds, if we made it our
constant Exercise every day, to read or hear something out of the Bible, or
some other good Book, with a design to grow Better thereby?

But above all things, we must take care to be diligent and serious in our
Applications to the Throne of Grace: it is Hearty Prayer and Devotion, that,
when all is done, will prove the most Effectual Means, for the keeping our
Hearts steady to that which is Good, and securing them from the pollutions of
the sensible Earthly Objects that do surround us.

O therefore let us be constant in our Religious Offices. Nay, let us take
every opportunity that our Affairs will allow us, of raising our Minds to God,
and thanking him for his Infinite Love and Goodness to us; and imploring the
continual Influences of his Grace and Holy Spirit, and re-inforcing our Vows
and Purposes of persevering in his Service.

By this means we shall come to lead Spiritual Lives indeed. Our Souls will be
a perpetual Fountain of good Thoughts. And while we live here, our Conversation
will be in Heaven. For God and Christ, and the things above will have our
Hearts, though the World has our Bodies.

But then, in the Fifth and last place, Notwithstanding what I have hitherto
said, concerning the Diligence with which we are to keep our Hearts; yet this
is always to be remembered, That with our Diligence we must be careful to join
Discretion.

My Meaning is this, We must have a care not to intend our Thoughts
immoderately, and more than our Tempers will bear, even to the best things: But
we must so keep our Hearts, as at the same time to preserve our Healths, and
keep up the Vigor of our Minds.

And the way to do that, is, Not to put them too much, or too long, upon the
stretch at any one time: But to relax them when there is occasion, and to let
them run out, and entertain themselves upon any thing that comes next to hand,
so long as it is Innocent.

It is a vain thing to imagine, that we can always be thinking of our great
Business; or that we can always be a Praying, or Reading, or Meditating; or,
that, as our Condition is in this World, even the greater part of our Thoughts
should be such as we call Devout and Religious Thoughts.

God has provided a great deal of other Business for us to apply our Minds to,
so long as we live in this World. And by minding that diligently and
conscientiously, we do serve God as acceptably, as if we were Reading or
Praying.

Nay even then, when we have no urgent Business upon our hands to take up our
Minds, it is not necessary that we should be always thinking of Religion. Nor
would I call every Thought, a vain, or an idle, or a sinful Thought, that has
not God, or our Spiritual Concernments for its Object. Even the most
Spiritually minded among us, must oftentimes be content to be entertained with
such Thoughts as our Company, or our Temper, or the present Circumstances we
are in, do suggest to us. And provided those Thoughts be innocent, and do not
entrench upon the Laws of Piety and Purity, and Charity; be they otherwise very
trifling and impertinent: I say, I would not look upon them as ill Thoughts,
nor have any one angry at himself upon account of them.

The truth of it is, so long as we consist of Bodies and Souls, we cannot
always be thinking of serious things. They indeed are the Wisest that think of
them most, but it is even dangerous to attempt to think of them always. For, as
most Men's Constitutions are, that is the ready way to spoil the Habit of our
Bodies, and by that means to render our Minds perfectly unfit for Thinking at
all, to any good Purposes.

Thus have I laid before you the Main Things wherein, as I do believe, the
right Governing our Thoughts does consist. And I doubt not they are so safe,
and so effectual, that whosoever will sincerely practice them, as far as he
can, will so keep his Heart, that the Issues from thence in his Life and
Conversation will be Happy and Prosperous. I conclude all with the Collect of
this Day.

Almighty God, who see that we have no power of our selves to help our
selves; Keep us both outwardly in our Bodies, and inwardly in our Souls; that
we may be defended from all Adversities which may happen to the Body, and from
all EVIL THOVGHTS which may assault and hurt the Soul, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

SERMON XV.
Preached before the KING, AT St. JAMES'S, March 13. 1697/8.
LUKE xviii. 1. And he spoke a Parable unto them, to this end, That men ought
always to pray, and not to faint.


THE Parable which our Savior spoke unto them to this end was this; There was
in a City a Judge, who feared not God nor regarded Men, and there was a Widow
in that City, and she came to him saying, Avenge me of my Adversary. And he
would not for a while: But afterward he said within himself, Though I fear not
God, nor regard Man; Yet because this Widow troubles me, I will avenge her,
lest by her continual coming she weary me.

The Application of this Parable is easy and natural. If a Man that neither
fears God, nor regards Men; has neither Sense of Religion nor Humanity; may be
supposed to be so far prevailed upon by the earnest Prayer of a miserable
necessitous Person, as to grant the Request made to him, and to administer
Relief to the Supplicant, merely upon account of the Continuance, and
Importunity of the Petitions that are put up: Then how much more ought we to
think that God, who is Infinite Goodness it self; who is always kind and
bountiful to his Creatures; who delights to do good to them, even without their
seeking and desiring it; and who is so far from being at any Pains or Trouble
for the supplying their Wants, that it is altogether as easy to him to do,
what is requested of him, as not to do it: I say, How much more ought we to
think that this God, upon our earnest and hearty Prayer to him for any thing we
stand in need of, will return us a kind Answer, and grant us such Supplies as
are proper for us. But then we are to remember, that we Pray always, and faint
not. We must be diligent, and importunate, and persevering in our Devotions,
otherwise we are not to expect any more favorable return of them, than the
Judge in the Parable made to the Widow upon her once or twice putting up her
Petitions to him.

This is the Effect of the Parable. I mean not now farther to insist on it, but
to stick to that point for the sake of which our Savior framed it. Jesus spoke
a Parable unto them to this end, That men ought always to pray, and not to
faint.

But what is meant by praying always, and not fainting which our Lord here
obliges us to? Is it to be always on our knees, and to mind no other business
but Devotion? So indeed (they say) some of ancient times expounded it; but we
meet with them no where, but in the Catalogues of the Heretics. No certainly,
to pray always, and not to faint, does imply a quite different thing, of which
I shall give an account in the following partiticulars.

First, These words import, that we should be always in a praying Temper, in
such a Disposition of mind, that we always carry about us, and have within us
the necessary Requisites of hearty Prayer; that is to say, a firm Belief of God
and his Providence, a lively Sense of our own Sinfullness, and Weakness, and
manifold Necessities; and an entire, humble, constant Dependence upon the
Divine Goodness for the Supply of them. In such a Frame of Soul as this, I
take, That Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, mentioned in the Scriptures, to
consist.

Secondly, To pray always, likewise imports, that upon every solemn Occasion we
should actually address our selves to God: seeking help from him in all the
straits and difficulties we happen into; rendering our acknowledgments for every
Good that arrives to us in our lives; and imploring his Protection, his
Guidance, his Blessing upon us, in every Work of Moment that we go about.

Thirdly, It imports farther that we should at least twice every day, either in
public, or in private, offer up the Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise in a solemn
manner unto God. Less than this (I think) this Phrase of Praying always, as
likewise that other Expression of St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. v. 17.
that we should pray without ceasing: less than this, I say, they cannot
signify; but how much more I now enquire not. It is indeed very probable, as
Interpreters have noted, that these Expressions are borrowed from, and have
respect to the daily Sacrifices among the Jews. Every day twice (that is to
say, in the Morning, and in the Evening) by the Appointment of God, was offered
up a Sacrifice in the Temple; to which the Devout People resorted: Which
Sacrifice is in Scripture called by the Name of the continual Sacrifice, the
daily Sacrifice; the neverceasing Sacrifice; and this in Contra-distinction to
the occasional Sacrifices which pious Persons used to bring thither. If now
this be a true account of these Expressions, we cannot be said to pray always,
to pray without ceasing, to pray continually, unless we do at least twice every
day, in the Morning, and in the Evening offer up our solemn Sacrifice of Prayer
to God.

But Fourthly, To pray always, and not to faint, Implies great Earnestness and
Importunity in our Prayers. It imports that we should not faintly Address to
God, but with Affection and Fervor; with a deep Sense of our Sins, and of our
Wants; and a serious and fixed Attention to what we are about; and with very
ardent desires, and hungring and thirsting after that Grace, or that Pardon, or
that Blessing that we pray for. And this is that kind of Prayer which St. James
Styles the effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous man, which, Chapter v. 16.
he says, avails much.

Lastly, To pray always, and not to faint, imports Continuance and Perseverance
in our Prayers. That we do not pray by Fits and Starts, and then intermit our
Devotion; but constantly keep up the Fervor of our Minds toward God: Not
giving over our Prayers, Romans 12.12.
though we have not a Return of them so soon as we expect; But continuing instant
in Prayer, as the Apostle speaks, and watching thereunto with all perseverance.
Ephesians. 6.18.


These are the chief things which are comprised in this Command of our Savior.
Now to recommend the Practice hereof to you, and to offer some Arguments to
persuade every one thus to pray always, and not to faint, is that which I
design in the remaining part of this Discourse.

I do not know how it comes to pass, that Men have generally so great an
Aversion to this Duty of Prayer. They are very hardly got to it. They are glad
of any Pretense in the World to be excused from it. And when they do come to
perform their Devotions, (which among many is not oftener than the Laws or
Customs of the Country oblige them to) how soon are they weary of them! How
little do they attend to the siness they are about! As if indeed Prayer was one
of the greatest Burdens that God could lay upon Human Nature. Whereas in truth,
if our Lusts and Passions were out of the way, and Men could be brought to give
themselves the Liberty of considering things equally; we should be convinced
that there is no Work that a Man can apply himself to; no Action that he can
perform, to which there are greater Invitations, greater Motives; nay, I was
going to say, greater Temptations of all sorts, than to this of Prayer.

Suppose one would set himself to persuade any of us to the Practice of some
particular thing which he has a Mind to recommend to us; what more effectual
Method could he take for the carrying of his Point, than to lay before us the
common Heads of Arguments, by which all Mankind are prevailed upon to undertake
any Business or Action? And then to convince us, that the thing he would
persuade us to, is recommendable upon all these accounts. As for instance, That
it is a thing fit, and decent, and reasonable to be done. Nay, it is a thing we
are obliged in duty to do, even so far obliged, that we act against our
Natures, if we do it not. Nor have we any just Exception against it. It is the
most easy thing in the World. It will put us to no manner of Trouble, or
Pains, or Self-Denial. So far from that, that it is very pleasant and
delightful. And not only so, but also highly creditable and honorable. And,
which is the Top of all, the Benefits and Advantages we shall receive from it
are extremely great in all respects. If now, I say, a Man can make all these
things good of the Point he would persuade us to; sure all the World must
account us out of our Wits, if we do not follow his Advice.

Yet all these things, it may be evidently made to appear, are true of Prayer,
and that too in a higher degree than of most things in the World. What
therefore can be desired in this Exercise to recommend the Practice thereof to
us that it has not? And what must be concluded of us, if, notwithstanding all
this, we continue obstinate in our Neglects of it? Give me leave to speak a
little to these several Particulars.

First of all; Does it recommend any thing to our Practice that it is fit, and
decent, and reasonable to be done? Then certainly we must needs think our
selves obliged to the constant Practice of this Point we are speaking of. For
there is nothing that does more become us; nor is any thing more undecent, or
more unreasonable than the Neglect of it.

Is it not fit that the Sovereign Lord of us, and of the World should be
acknowledged by us? That we who, do continually depend upon him, should ever
and anon be looking up to him, and expressing that Dependence? Is it not fit
that we, who every moment experience a thousand Instances of his Kindness,
partake of a thousand Mercies and Favors of his, and must perish the next
Minute unless they be continued to us; Is it not highly fit and reasonable (I
say) that we should take notice at least of these things to this our Benefactor?

We should think it very ill Manners to pass by our Prince, or even any of our
Betters, without saluting them, or some way or other testifying our Respect to
them, though they had no way particularly obliged us: But if we were beholding to
them for our daily Bread; to come into their Presence without taking notice of
them, or their Bounty to us, would be intolerable. How much more intolerable
therefore must it be, to pass by God Almighty day after day; nay, to be in his
Presence continually, (as indeed we always are) and yet neither to pay any
Homage or Reverence to him, as He is our Supreme Lord, nor to make any
Acknowledgments, as He is our daily Preserver and Benefactor.

If we had any sense of Ingenuity, we should blush to think of passing a Day
without several times lifting up our Minds, and doing our Respects to Almighty
God, though there was no other ill in the Neglect, than only the horrible
Rudeness and ill Manners that it discovers in us.

But, Secondly; The constant Exercise of Prayer is not only recommended to us
under the notion of a very decent and reasonable thing, but as an indispensable
Duty. God Almighty has most strictly charged it upon us, and we are
Transgressors of his Laws if we do not practice it.

Nature it self speaks sufficiently plain in this matter. And wherever God
has to the Law of Nature super-added any Revelation of his Will, this Duty we
are speaking of fails not to make up a considerable part of it. It would be
endless to mention all that is said upon this Head by our Lord and his Apostles
in the new Testament. I have told you already that they oblige us to no less
than Praying always, Praying without ceasing. They use likewise abundance of
other Expressions to the like purpose. They bid us, every where to lift up holy
hands. In every thing to make our Supplications known unto God. To pray in the
Spirit with all Prayer and Supplication, and and to watch thereunto with all
perseverance.

If it be said there is no such express command for Prayer in that Revelation
which was made to the Jews; I answer, It is a great Mistake. The Prophets do
over and over again injoin it as the Principal Part of the Worship of God. And
those that live without Praying are by those Inspired Writers ranked among the
Atheists. Psalm. 53.1.4.
And as for the Law of Moses it self, it is obvious to observe, that the
greatest part of it is concerning Sacrifices. Now Sacrifices, if we will
understand them right, were nothing else but that Form or Method of putting up
Prayers to God, that was in those times used in the World. So that, in truth,
so far was Prayer from being left as a Matter of Indifferency to the Jews, that
most of their Religion consisted in it.

And accordingly all the Devout Men of that Church spent much of their Time in
this Exercise. David's manner was to pray seven times a Day. And Daniel took
himself to be so much obliged to the frequent Practice of this Duty; that
rather than break his Custom of performing his Solemn Devotions three times a
day, he would expose himself to the Den of Lions.

Nay, Thirdly; So great is our obligation to frequent Prayer, that he acts
against his Nature whosoever does not practice it. For, in truth, Prayer is the
proper and peculiar Duty of Man, as he is a Man.

That which constitutes the nature of Man, and does formally difference, and
distinguish him from all other Animals, is, not so much the power of Reason, as
the capacity of being Religious. There are some Footsteps of an obscure Reason
to be observed in many Creatures besides Man; But in none, except Him, is there
found any sense of a Deity, or Disposition toward Religion, or any thing that
looks like it. That seems to be the Prerogative of Mankind. God endowed them,
and them only with Spirits capable of Reflecting upon the Author of their
Beings, and of making acknowledgments and performing Religious Worship to him.

So that to Worship God, to converse with him in the exercise of Devotion, to
Pray, and give Thanks for his Benefits, may be truly said to be the proper
Office of a Man as Man; The natural exercise of those Faculties that
distinguish him from brute Creatures. And consequently, those that live in a
continual neglect of this, what must be said of them, but that they act
unsuitably to their Natures, and are degenerated into a sort of Brutishness?

It appears then, that our Obligations to this Duty are many and great, and
such as there is no possibility of evading. But here is our unhappiness, that
those Duties which we are most strictly obliged to, are not those that we are
always most inclined to practice. There may be something in the most
indispensable Duties so harsh and unpleasant; so disagreeing with our other
Appetites or Interests; They may be so hard to be performed; so Laborious, or
so Expensive, or upon some other account so ungrateful, that we shall
naturally put our selves upon the finding out Excuses for the ridding our hands
of them, and easily satisfy our minds for so doing.

But now, which I desire in the Fourth place to be considered, There are none
of these pretenses to be made against this Duty of Prayer; none of these
Inconveniences do attend it. But it is so naturally, so easily performed; and
so inoffensively to all our other Appetites and Interests; That one would
think, nothing but mere laziness, or stupidity, could hinder a Man from the
daily Exercise of it.

It requires no great Parts, or Learning, or Study for the discharging it. The
meanest Capacity, the most un-improved Understanding, if there be but an honest
Heart, may perform it as well as the learnedest Man in the World.

It requires no Labor or Toil. The feeblest and most dis-spirited Body that
can but lift up eyes to Heaven, and direct wishes thither, does it as
effectually, as the most vigorous Constitution.

It does not go against the grain of any natural Inclination; nor put the body
to any pain or hardship. Nor does it contradict any appetite or affection that
Nature has implanted in us. No Humor, but either the Sottish or the
Malicious; the Brutish or the Devilish is distasted by it.

It puts us to no Charge or Expense in the World, save that of our Thoughts;
yet that is the noblest way of spending them: And if they be not employed thus,
it is ten to one but they will be employed much worse.

It is not at all consumptive of our Time. For we may attend this work, when we
are a doing other business; and there is no man so full of business, but he
has abundance of vacant spaces, which he will not know how to fill up to any
good purpose, unless he has learned this Art of saving Time.

In a word, there is no Objection against it, it is one of the Easiest,
Naturalest, Inoffensivest Duties in the World; Nay, so easy it is, that the
most Selfish Man, if he was to make his own Terms with God Almighty, could not
desire to obtain the Blessings he stands in need of, upon easier. If all the
Mercies and Benefits we do daily and hourly need, and consequently must expect
and wish for; I say, if they be not worth asking at the Hands of God, or
returning thanks for them after he has bestowed them; they are worth nothing.

But besides the unexceptionableness and easiness of this Duty, it is also, in
the Fifth place, the most pleasant and delightful Exercise in the World. It is
true, vicious Men will not easily think so, but look upon it as a dry insipid
Employment; but so would the very Beatifical Vision of God, and all the
Exercises of Glorified Souls in Heaven appear to such Men. But they are not
competent Judges of Matters of this Nature, having neither Experience of them,
nor Disposition toward them. Those only can form right Notions of these
spiritual Exercises, who have a good sense and relish of God upon their Minds,
and have used and accustomed themselves to Devotion. Now to all such I appeal,
whether the Delights, and Satisfaction, and Consolation that they receive from
conversing with God, and a hearty pouring out their Souls unto him, be not
inexpressible? whether they do not find more Joy, and Peace, and Comfort in
their attendance upon Gods service, either in public, or private, than ever
they did from the Pleasures and Gratifications of any of their outward senses.

So much as the Soul is more pure and excellent than the Body; so much are the
Pleasures and Gratifications of that, more exquisitely delicious than those
that arise from Corporeal Objects. But of all the Pleasures of the Soul, those
that it receives from the Communications of God to it, in the Exercise of
Devotion, are incomparably the highest, and most affecting. We may talk of
Pleasures and Enjoyments, but no man ever truly found them, till he became
acquainted with God, and was made sensible of his Love, and partaker of his
Spiritual Favors, and lived in an entire Friendship and Communion with him;
which Friendship and Communion is chiefly, if not only, both expressed, and
maintained, by Prayer and other Exercises of Devotion.

Add to this in the Sixth place, that Prayer is not only the most delightful
Employment, but the most Creditable and Honorable that our Natures are capable
of. We account it, and very justly, a mighty Privilege and Dignity to be known
to Princes and great Men; To have their Ear, and to enjoy the Liberty of access
to them at all times: But what is this to the Honor and Dignity we receive, in
having leave given us at all times, to approach into the Presence of the King
of the World?

That we, poor sinful dust and ashes, should be permitted to speak to so
transcendent a Majesty! Nay, should have free Liberty given us to converse with
him as with a Friend! To open all our wants, to acquaint him with all our
concernments, to make known every thought of our Hearts, and every affair of
our Lives to him! Nay, and to be assured that he will be so far from taking
amiss this boldness in us, that he will savourably accept all our Applications,
and make as kind returns as we our selves can wish or desire! What greater
Honor are we capable of than this? O therefore, how far are they sunk below
all the Ambition of humane Nature, that will not take all opportunities of thus
Honoring and doing Credit to themselves by the Exercise of Devotion!

But so selfish are the Spirits and Tempers of many of us, that nothing will
work upon them, but the consideration of Gain, and Profit, and Advantage: Let
us see therefore what of this kind we may promise to our selves from Prayer,
which is my Seventh and last consideration.

And let the point be put upon this Issue. Let all that has hitherto been said
for the recommending of Prayer go for nothing. If it do not appear, that it is
as profitable and gainful an exercise, as it is reasonable and due; as it is
easy and pleasant, and honorable: Let no Man trouble himself about it, but
throw off all thoughts of it for ever.

But in this respect also the Motives to Prayer are infinite. No Man can number
the Benefits and Advantages that do accrue to us from it. I can here but only
touch upon a few of the many.

Prayer is the most proper means to ennoble, and refine, and spiritualize our
Natures. Were it not for this, it would be impossible to preserve our Souls
aloft, in the midst of such a heap of earthly Rubbish with which they are
overwhelmed. Our daily converse with material objects would make us wholly
sensual, and the Spirit would, in a manner, be lost in the Flesh. And so it
does really fare with all those that live without Devotion toward God. However
they may retain so much worldly prudence, as to enable them to govern their
Temporal Affairs to their Advantage; yet their Souls do perfectly grovel upon
the Earth. They are utterly devoid of the Spiritual Life. They have no more
sense of the Noblest and best things, which it is the perfection of their
Faculties to be employed about; than a blind Man has of Colors. Into this
dull state shall we all sink, if we do not take care to maintain a constant
Devotion toward God; for it is by That, that the sense of Goodness is kept
alive in us. It is That that raises us above this World, and preserves our
Minds from the Defilements of the Earth, which, by their continual mingling
with material things, they would otherwise necessarily contract.

But further, Prayer does not only tend to the bettering the Constitution of
our Minds; But the Benefits and good Influences of it do extend also to all the
affairs and actions of our Lives. No body can tell, but he that has tried, how
much devout and affectionate Prayer does dispose a Man to go about his business
in the World. So far is this Exercise from hindering our Employments, as is
commonly pretended, that in truth it is a great furtherance to them.

Besides; It is the best Antidote in the World against all disappointments and
vexations that we can meet with; Against every ungrateful and displeasing
Accident that comes upon us in the course of our Lives. He that converseth much
with God, and uses to make all his concernments known to him, is prepared to
bear all things patiently, and evenly, whatsoever happen, nor can he light into
any circumstances of Life, which will not be, not only supportable to him, but
easy also.

Add to this in the last place, that it is Prayer that secures the Blessing of
God, both upon our Persons and upon our Labors; Upon our Basket and Store;
Upon our Families; Upon our Employments; And upon all that we have, or do. So
great is the Virtue of Prayer, that it turns all the Actions of our natural or
civil Life, however indifferent they be, into Actions of Religion. And every
thing that we have, or comes to us, is thereby made a Blessing of God, which
without it perhaps might have been a Cross and an Affliction. It is Prayer by
which every Thing, and every Action is sanctified to Believers.

I might name several other Benefits and Advantages to be reaped from the
conscientious Practice of this Duty; But those that I have mentioned, may (I
think) if they be considered, be sufficient to recommend it to any Man
whatsoever, that has the least Kindness for himself: And therefore I will not
burden your Memories with heaping up more Motives. Only one thing I desire
leave to press a little more earnestly, and particularly, than I have yet done,
and that is, The Absolute Necessity of Constant Prayer, in order to a Holy and
Virtuous Life.

Do any of you here present in good earnest mean to live as you should do? Do
you really intend or desire to endeavor after such a Pitch of Virtue and
Holiness, as will be available for the saving your Souls everlastingly? If you
do not, it is in vain to attempt the persuading you to any thing of this Nature.
If you do; then give me leave to tell you, that it is absolutely necessary that
you should live in the constant Exercise of Prayer, otherwise you will never do
your Business. And on the other side, I dare assure you, if you do thus
practice, you will not fail of attaining the End you aim at.

These three things I dare lay down for Truth in this Matter:

First, It is impossible for any Man to be good, that lives without constant
Praying.

Secondly, Whoever is good at the present, yet if he disuse himself in this
Point, he will not continue good long.

And Lastly, Whoever makes a Conscience of Praying frequently and heartily, and
continues so to do, though he cannot at present be said to be a good Man, yet it
is impossible for him long to continue bad; he will certainly at last get the
Victory over his Lusts and evil Habits. So that Prayer is both the Means
without which Virtue cannot be attained; And the Means that never fails of
attaining it; And the Security of it when it is attained. Of these three things
very briefly, and I have done.

First, I say, No Man can be a virtuous Man that lives without Praying. I do
not deny, that some who make no great Conscience of this Duty, but live in an
habitual Neglect of it, may so far retain the Notions of good and evil, and
those Notions may to far influence their Actions, as that they shall not be
notoriously and scandalously vicious. It may be they will not lie, nor cheat,
nor oppress any one. It may be they do not live in a Course of Lewdness and
Debauchery; nor will be engaged in any Design or Action that is apparently base
or dishonorable. But all this while, these Men are far from being virtuous in
the Sense we now speak of. For we speak of such a Virtue as recommends us to
God; such a Virtue as will be effectual for our Salvation in the other World.
Now to such a Virtue as this, there goes nothing less than an Universal Care
over all our Actions; a Serious Endeavor to frame all our Conversation
suitably and conformably to the Laws of our Savior. But how can any Man think
he takes Care of this, that knowingly, and willingly, lives in a constant
Contradiction to one of the principal Duties of our Savior's Religion?

Our whole Duty is made up but of Three Things; That a Man live soberly with
respect to himself, righteously with respect to his Neighbor, and piously with
respect to God. Supposing now, that a Man take care of the two former, that is,
of doing his Duty to himself and his Neighbor, (which yet I believe never any
Man did, that made no Conscience of neglecting his Prayers:) But suppose a Man
could satisfy himself as to these two Points of his Duty; yet if he make no
Conscience of the third, that is, of Piety toward God, (as no Man can make
Conscience of that, who makes it no matter of Conscience whether he says his
Prayers or no) in what Sense or Notion can this Man be said to have done his
Duty, or to lead a virtuous Life? Certainly in no Sense at all. For as to one
third part of his Duty, (which is indeed as considerable at least, if not more,
than either of the other) he is a notorious Transgressour. And though he be not
unjust, though he be not debauched, yet wanting Piety toward God, he is Impious;
And that will as certainly damn him, as either of the other. Either therefore
one of these two things must be made appear, that is to say, that there may be
Virtue, such Virtue as will recommend us to God without Piety: Or that there
may be Piety without ever Praying, or worshipping God, (neither of which I
believe will be easily affirmed;) Or it will follow, That where there is no
Praying, there is no Virtue, and consequently no Salvation.

But besides; We all know there is no Possibility of Living a Holy and Virtuous
Life, (such a Life as our Religion requires of us, and which alone will stand
us in stead in the Day of Judgment) without the Grace of God, and the
Assistances of his Holy Spirit. And we all know likewise that these are no way
to be come by, but by earnest, and affectionate, and constant Prayer. How
therefore is it possible, that any Man, who is not very serious and frequent in
the Exercise of Devotion, should ever be able to live a Holy Life? He may
indeed, by his own Study, and for his own Interest, possess himself of such
good Qualities, as may make a fair Show in the World, and recommend him to all
about him: But the inward Principle of Goodness and Holiness he cannot have.
Because he does not practice the Means of obtaining the Grace and Spirit of
God, by which alone that Principle is to be wrought in him.

But, Secondly, Let a Man at present be in a good State of Soul; yet it is
impossible to preserve himself in that State, without the constant Exercise of
Devotion. If a Man once begin to neglect his Prayers, or to grow more dull and
remiss in them, or more averse to them, it is a certain Argument that he is in
a declining Condition as to Virtue and Goodness. And as that Neglect, or that
Dullness, or that Aversion increases, in the same Degree does the Goodness of
his Condition abate also. And when once it is come to that pass with him, that
the Flame of Devotion is quite extinguished in his Heart; so that he can live,
and enjoy himself without any Converse or Intercourse with God in Prayer; He
may from that Period date the Loss of his Spiritual Life. He is reduced to the
State of a sensual, natural Man; Alive to the World, and to his Lusts, but
perfectly dead to God.

The plain English is, Prayer and Devotion is as necessary a Means to preserve
the Union between the Soul and God, in which our Spiritual Life consists, as
Meat and Drink is, to preserve the Union between our Souls and Bodies, in which
our natural Life consists. And we may every whit as reasonably expect to keep
our Bodies alive without the constant and daily use of Eating and Drinking: As
we can expect to keep our Souls alive to God without the constant and daily
Exercise of Devotion.

This may to some appear strange Doctrine; But I do believe I may appeal to
experience for the Truth of it. Nay, I dare put the Question to any one, that
ever took any serious Care of his Soul, and sincerely endeavored to live
virtuously, and to please God, whether he has not found the Matter to be so as
I have represented.

Have not such always found, that so long as they kept up the Fervor and
Vigor of their Devotion, so long as they were constant and diligent in their
Prayers, and other Holy Exercises: So long nothing could hurt them. So long
they have always maintained their Post, and rather grown better than worse. And
though they have sometimes been foully overtaken by some Sin that they resolved
against, yet that Relapse has done them no Mischief. Their Continuance in
their Prayers has been an Antidote against the Malignity of the Sin; And they
have presently weathered it out, and suffered no ill Consequence by it; But it
has rather made them more watchful over themselves, and more careful of their
Actions afterward.

But, on the other side, have they not always found, that when once they began
to abate of the Fervor of their Devotions; when once they began to pray
seldomer, or with more Coldness and Indifference; They then began to live more
loosely and carelessly; to be more dull and sluggish toward every good Work?
Till perhaps by degrees the true Sense of God and Religion has been in a great
measure worn off from their Spirits, and they in a manner have returned to a
Worldly and Sensual Life. Nay, have they not often found, that when it has been
their Misfortune to break loose from their Duty, and sink for some time into a
State of Carelessness and Forgetfulness of God, and of their own Vows and
Resolutions, (as it has sometimes happened to very good Men:) I say, Have they
not often found that this their going backwards in Goodness was occasioned
purely and solely by the Intermission of their Devotions? That there was no
visible Reason, or Account to be given of this their Fall, but only that
through Sluggishness, or some other Cause, they have neglected to pray to God
so earnestly and so frequently as they used to do? I am confident a great many
can say this out of their own Experience. So that it concerns every Man that is
at present in a good Disposition of Mind, and has good Hopes toward God; It
concerns him as he loves his Soul; As he would not lose all the Fruits of his
past Labors and Endeavors in the Service of God; By all means possible to
keep his Heart in a devout Frame: And whatever comes of it not to grow cold or
languid in his Prayers; Or to omit or disuse them, either in public or
private, upon any pretense whatsoever.

But, Thirdly and Lastly, to conclude all, there is this farther to be said for
the Encouragement of all sorts of Persons, to persevere in the Practice of this
Duty, namely; That whoever makes Conscience of Saying his Prayers frequently
and heartily, and continues so to do, though he be not good at the present, yet
it is impossible for him long to continue bad. He will at last certainly get
the Victory over all his Lusts and evil Habits, and attain to the Favor of
God, and the Salvation of his own Soul. This necessarily follows from what has
been said. A Course of Prayer and a Course of Sin cannot consist together; One
will necessarily destroy the other. Praying will either make a Man leave
Sinning, (as a pious Man of our own used to say,) or Sinning will make a Man
leave Praying. But this is to be understood of Prayer that is put up to God
with great Seriousness, and Heartiness, and out of a Sense of Duty and
Conscience. For as for those formal Prayers that are made out of Custom, or
upon the account of Education, or for the serving some Worldly Ends of
Interest, or Reputation, or the like; God respects them no more than the
impertinent Tattle of Fools.

All those of us therefore that mean and design to be good, though we are not
so already; Let us above all things take care to mind our Prayers. Let us pray
to God in Private. Let us pray to God with our Families. And let us join as often
as we can with the Prayers of the Public Assemblies. This I am sure is the
best Method we can take for the reforming our Lives, and for the gowing in all
Virtue and Goodness. And the more we practice it, the better we shall like it.
And if we persevere therein we shall find the Comfort of it both in the Grace
and Assistance we shall receive from the Holy Spirit, for the vanquishing all
our Lusts and Corruptions; And in the Blessings we shall procure from God both
to our Selves and our Families, and all our Affairs and Concernments; And,
lastly, in the Everlasting Salvation of our Souls in the Day of the Lord Jesus.
To whom, etc.

FINIS.

