EIKON ASILIK: OR The Princes Royal: Being the Sum of a SERMON Preached in the
Minster at York on the Lord's Day morning (in the Assize week) March 24. 1650.
before the Right Honorable Francis Thorp and Alexander Rigby, Esquires, Barons
of the public Exchequer, and Justices of the Assize for the Northern Circuit;
the Honorable the Lord Major of York, the Right Worshipful Sir John Savil
Knight, High Sheriff of Yorkshire, the Right Worshipful Justices of Peace,
Gentry and others of the City and County of York.

By JOHN SHAVVE, M. A. Sometimes of Christ-Colledg in Cambridge, and now
Preacher of Gods Word at Kingston upon Hull.

DAN. 7. 27. And the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the Greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the People of the Saints of the most
High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve
and obey him. LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Nathaniel Brooks, and are to
be sold at his shop at the Angel in Cornhil, 1650.

To the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the PARLIAMENT of the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
VEry ancient Historians call this our Nation Primogenitam Ecclesiarum, the
first begotten of all the Churches, and tell us that though Christ was preached
in some other Nations before this, yet that this was the first wherein the
Christian Faith was publicly entertained by Prince and State, Omnium
Provinciarum prima Britannia publicitus Christi nomen recepit: and they add,
that Lucius King of Britain was the first Christian King in the world, and did,
in the year after Christ, 169. send two learned men, Elvanus and Medvinus, to
Eleutherius (then Bishop of Rome) to receive further instruction in the
Christian Faith, and for the better Government of this Land; Eleutherius
returned Answer by two learned men, Faganus and Others call them Fugatius and
Dimanus.
Damianus, in these words; You require of us the Roman Laws and the Emperors to
be sent over to you, the Roman Laws and the Emperors we may ever reprove, but
the Law of God we cannot; you have received by Gods Mercy in the Realm of
Britain the Law and Faith of Christ; you have with you within the Realm both
the parts of the Scriptures, the Old and New Testament: Out of the same by Gods
grace, with the counsel of your Realm, take you a Law, and by that Law, through
Gods sufferance, rule you your Kingdom of Britain; for a King has his name of
ruling, and not of having a Realm: you shall be a King while you rule well, but
if you do otherwise, the name of a King shall not remain with you, and you
shall lose it, which God forbid, etc. And though the Gospel was preached here
before then, yet not till then were the Temples of Idolatry, the twenty eight
Flamines, and three Arch-Flamines removed, and a mavelous great change made
throughout Lucius his Dominions, Romanorum inaccessa loca, Christo fuere
subdita: After, when Gregory sent Augustine the Monk hither, (who brought over
some Truth and much Superstition) in the Saxons reign here, anno 596. he found
the wife of Ethelbert King of Kent (viz. Queen Berta) and her Chaplain Bishop
Luidhard and many others, zealous Christians, especially in Wales, yet some
light broke out then, and much more in the reign of a child (King Edward 6.)
and more by a woman (Queen Elizab.) that God alone might have all the glory:
and surely God is carrying on the same work still, in purging and reforming of
his Church, shaking Nations, that Christ may the more come in: And I verily
believe that no ten Hagg. 2. 7.
years since Lucius his time can speak of so great wonders (if not miracles)
wrought for England, and wherein the Lord has more appeared for the good of
his People here, then since Your Honor has sat in the Chair of that Honorable
Assembly of Englands Parliament. God grant that our murmuring (which never
makes any thing better, but provokes a father, and brings more rods and lashes
on the child, and which God calls Rebellion, Numb. 16. 41, 46. with c. 17.
10.) do not either quite overturn us, or at least protract eleven days journey
into forty years travel, as the Israelites murmuring did, Numb. 14. 26, 30.
and cause that many of us shall fall in the Wilderness, and never see the good
Land: Far be from me such thoughts, such praise Adulator and Laudator have both
the same letters.
, or rather flattery, as to think or say, that the Grand Assembly (whereof You
have so long, and with such indefatigable pains, been the faithful Speaker)
has had no faults and errors (though I desire rather to weep over them to God,
then blaze them to men) remembering often that story of Gilbert Foliot, Bishop
of London, in H: 2. reign, Anno Christi 1161. who says of himself, that when
he first entered into the Monastery, he zealously cried out against the
sluggishness of his Governors; afterward, being chosen Governor, he inveighed
against his superiors; being chosen Prior, he cried out against the Abbots;
afterward, being chosen Abbot, he excused them, and deeply charged the
Bishops; but being chosen Bishop, I began (says he) to see how much easier it
is to find faults, then (when it is our own case) to mend them. I cannot say
of your Honorable Senate, what that learned and holy Who was, as Nazian, said
of Basil, (...).
Beza (who lived 86. years) said of himself, that his Head never once aked; but
truly I think a bad Stomach may make a good Head to ache, and our sins and
murmurings may much further that which we so much complain against: Israel
sinned, and God left David to number the People, 2 Samuel 34. 1. and I verily
believe that our good and wise God (that can bring light out of darkness, good
out of evil, and extract medicines out of poisons, 2 Cor. 4. 6.) has sometimes
brought much good to this Land, even out of Your Errors and our Enemies; and
has many times (a Mercy that Luther much noted, and often blessed God for) not
taken advantage of your and our failings to our destruction, but hereby made us
more zealous, wary, and active afterward. O the wisdom and mercy of our
gracious God! Of all the Saints in Scripture, I find no one that vented more
impatience then Job, as Cap. 3. cursing, (though not God, as Satan promised,
Job 1. 11. and 2. 5. yet cursing,) Job 6. 8, 9. and 7. 14, 15. and 10. 18, 19.
Yet the Holy Ghost, Jam. 5. 11. highly commends Jobs patience, and lays it down
for a pattern, never naming one word of his impatience. Abraham showed much
unbelief, twice thereby denying his wife, yet is chronicled for the Father of
the Romans 4. 11, 18, 19, 20.
faithful, and one strong in Faith. Jehoshaphat joined friendship with Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 18. 3. went with him to battle against Ramoth Gilead, Verse. 27, 28. and
after that he had been reproved for it by Jehu, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2. yet he again
makes friendship with Ahaziah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 25. and marries his son to Ahabs
daughter, 2 Chro. 21. 6. and yet the Lord says of him, 1 King. 22. 43. that he
turned not aside from doing that which was right in the eyes of the Lord. How
should this melting patience cause you to bless and act for this gracious God,
and to chronicle his mercies to posterity! How often have I wished, that Your
Honor, who have had, during almost these ten years, so perfect information of
all the wonders of our God to and for his People in this Nation, had Psalm. 107.
43.
kept a perfect Diary thereof! or if You have so done, that You would
communicate the same to the world, which would be one of the rarest pieces of
humane stories. How wonderful and various have been the goings of our God in
this Nation, these ten years, and still are, like His dealing with His People
of the Jews, after their return from Babylon! Zech. 14. 6, 7. It was for a long
time neither day nor night, clear nor dark, (a man could not guess what a day
it would be by the eye of sense, but presently after a Sunshine, a Cloud;) and
all this to shake off such as live by sense, and not by Faith, and serve
themselves of God and the Public (as Jehu and Judas did;) and to let the
Saints see, that things are carried on not by might, nor by power, but by the
Lord of hoasts his own Spirit, Zech. 4. 6. nevertheless in the evening time it
shall be light. And I am (in the midst of a cloudy day) the more encouraged,
when I consider, 1. That the work is in the hand of a good and wise
Master Builder, who ever the instruments be; In all these turnings there is a
Spirit in the Wheels, and the Wheels are full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. Secondly, God
sees and aims further then the best Agents and Instruments that are used in the
work: The Apostles did not see, in the work themselves were employed in, so far
as Christ meant, but he lets them see more and more by steps and degrees what
he would have done, Mark 4. 28. So Ezekiel. 47. 3, 4. and God has led us along
with a Cloud and Fire, and owned us in the Mount, and midst of straits.
Thirdly, The light of the Truth (I mean, not Satan's delusions, and men's
phansies, but true Light) much spreads in America, New England, in Wales, in
the North, etc. Poor Creatures flock like Doves to the windows, and the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence: And if it be said, so do Profaneness and Heresies
spread; I answer, it was always so in times of Reformation, till things could
be settled, Satan more struggles; and when God is giving physic, the disease
more breaks forth, Hos. 7. 1. When did cursed Doctrines and Practices more
break forth in the Old Testament, then in Malachi's time, when the Jews were
returned from Babylon to reform Church and State in Canaan? Mal. 3. 14, 15. See
Israel through the Wilderness. Fourthly, Compare former times impartially with
these, we shall find, thirteen, fourteen, or twenty years ago, traps of
several kinds laid for conscientious Ministers and Christians; men durst not
meet together to seek Gods face, humble their Souls; Sermons on Lords days in
the afternoon, weekly Exercises, etc. restrained, the very face of piety
discountenanced, and they that wrought wickedness, and most zealous against
Puritans, were exalted: dumb dogs, non-residents, sports on Lords day, etc.
favored: But how are godly men and godliness countenanced in good measure?
what happy alteration in our Universities for advance of piety, (though still
more is to be wished?) And though too many Errors in some Members of our
Armies, yet see heretofore every Town generally sent such out to be Soldiers,
who were of the basest sort for drunkenness and villainy, that knew nothing;
compare our Army now with those here formerly, and then judge without
prejudice. Fifthly, Though men's ^ims were but little and strait at first, as
Luther said, that when he first began, he meant no more, but to withstand
Popish Occasion ^^^dinatio^^s indulgentiarum pretio numerato Lutherus initio
fuit permotus ad hoc quod suscepit Reformationis opus, etc.
Pardons and selling of Indulgences; yet neither would God nor his Enemies let
him alone, till he resolved with Moses not to leave a hoof, neither root nor
branch of Popery: So God and our Enemies heighten Your spirits. Sixthly, We
hear what God is still working, in bringing in many poor Natives in America,
(whether they be the Posterity of the Jewish ten Tribes, as Peter Martyr of
old, and Mr Thorowgood.
others of late give very probable conjectures, and if so, Mr Brightman and
others may well be owned for Prophets, who above forty years ago foretold the
Calling of the Jews to begin about the year 1650. or whether they be Gentiles)
to embrace the Gospel with tears, prayers, marvelous zeal and Reformation: And
how have we seen the finger of God all along, restraining the rage of men,
letting the Enemy vent only so much fury as might conduce to Gods praise!
Psalm. 76. 10. He that stills the noise of the Seas, stills the tumules of the
People, Psalm. 65. 7. The great God swaddles the mighty raging Ocean like a
little Infant, (yea, more easily then any Midwise can do the least child) in
swaddling bands, Job 38. 9. and the Original word (...) of (...), Fraenum
Capistrum.
used Mark 4. 39. for Christ's stilling the winds and Sea, signifies his putting
a bridle in the mouth of the winds and Sea, whereby he turns them about (when
most blustering and raging) more easily then any man can do the nimblest horse:
He gathers the winds in his fist, Pro. 30. 4. nods (...)
men to death, Psalm. 80. 16. with a blast, Job 4. 9. And how may all these
experiments stir You up to trust God for the future, and be sincerely active
for God against Your own and the Nations sins and distempers! as Henricus
Auceps when he fought against the Hungarians made this Vow to God, that if the
Lord would give him a victory over his Enemies, he would purge his Country from
Commonly so called, else buying livings was not Simons sin, Act. 8. 18, to 20.
though usually called Simony.
Simony, which then much reigned therein. And I beseech you return the praise
and glory of all not to Your selves, or Armies, but to the free mercy and
goodness of God alone. Pope Hadrian having built K. W. Rufus when two Monks
came to him to buy an Abbots place, each outvying other in great sums of money
for it, the K. asked a third Monk that stood by, what he would give, who
answered, never a penny, for that its against my Conscience (said he) to give
any thing; then said the King, of all the three thou best deservest it, and so
bestowed it upon him.
a sumptuous College at Lovain, caused this inscription to be engraven upon it,
Utrecht (where he was born) planted me, Lovain (where he had his education)
watered me, and Caesar (who promoted him to the Popedom) gave the increase,
under which a witty Passenger subscribed, Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did
nothing. Nay, much rather say as Dan: Cramerus, Nil scio, nil possum, nil sum
quoque quod tamen esse, seire and posse aliquid dicor id omne Dei est.

Or as holy Cruciger, Omnia praetereunt praeter amare Deum.

And now, Honorable Sir, give me leave to acquaint you with the Reasons which
moved me to presume to present this plain Discourse to Your Honor.

1. To give a poor, yet humble and hearty acknowledgment to the world, of the
many favors and great undeserved respect which I have received freely from you,
and the kind offers which you long since made to me, upon your first taking
notice of me, as far above my deserts as desires, the embracing whereof my
other Obligations would not permit. And secondly, That seeing the love of this
Commonwealth is deeply rooted in your heart, (deeper then the loss of Callice
in Queen Mary's, or the love of his Country in A. Fulvius Non Catilinae te
genui sed patriae, said Aulus Fulvius, when he slew his own son with his own
hands for Treason against the Commonwealth.
) which public frame of spirit is a thing most highly commendable, though it
be not true which Tully says, Omnes qui patriam conserverunt, adjuverunt,
auxerunt, certum est esse in Coelo,) and that God has called Your Honor to a
very high place and work, (for such work, and so long a time, as you have no
president before you) let me hear (I beseech you) take occasion to become a
humble Petitioner to your Honor, and by You to the Commonwealths
Representative, in a few partiticulars: It has been my lot for some time to be
constantly at York Assizes, (not as having any suit at all, but in attendance
to some worthy friends,) where my heart even bled within me, to see such
rashness and carelessness in swearing, too many offering to swear that (but
that the Judges were more careful and honest) which after some discourse they
were convinced to be untrue. Oh that there could be found some other way then
swearing of every man at the Assizes, whether to punish false witnesses by
pecuniary or corporal mulct (as the new-converted Natives of America do punish
the sin of lying, for the first lie 5 s. for the second 10 s. for the third 20
s.) or what other way shall seem to Your Wisdoms most convenient; which perhaps
would more restrain such careless and conscienceless persons from unjust
witness-bearing, then any their Oaths; so might the Land be much freed from the
burden of Oaths under which it groans, Jerem. 23. 10. and from that flying
roll, Zech. 5. 23. It is observable that the word in the Hebrew, which the
Scripture uses for swearing, is always used in the passive (...) juratus fuit.
voice, to note (say some) that a man should not swear but when an Oath is laid
upon him, and he driven to it: the word also has the signification of seven
(...) and (...)
, as having reference, say some, to the seven Spirits of God before the Throne,
before whom we swear, and therefore should swear in truth, righteousness, and
judgment, Jerem. 4. 2. Rev. 1. 4. and 5. 6. and not rashly, Eccles. 5. 2. How
scrupulous and tender was good Eliezer, and how clear would he be ere he would
swear? Genesis 34. 4, 5, 6. Such a man's word is worth more then many men's Oaths.
When Lewis the French King was taken Prisoner by the Turks, and after they
agreed upon Articles, for confirming whereof the Sultan offered to swear, that
if he broke any of the Articles, he would renounce his Mahomet, requiring K.
Lewis to swear likewise, that if he broke any of his Articles, he would deny
his Christ to be God; which Oath Lewis detesting, and offering rather to dye
then to take it, the Sultan wondering at his tenderness and constancy, took his
word without any Oath at all, and so published the League: I complain not
against swearing as unlawful in it self, nor yet against the manner used
therein, in touching or kissing the book, (though that godly sufferer William
Thorp, and some other eminent Worthies in England, did mightily oppose this,
and suffered much for their Opinion herein above 240 years ago, in the reign of
our King Henry 4.) only I could wish, if it were possible, this common and
rash swearing and for, wearing might be prevented.

2. I beseech you further what in you lies, the suppressing of cursed Heresies
and Fandamental Errors, which are no small See the Epistle of the Walachtian
Churches sent to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, Quomodo omne geaus
Haeresium in ultum permitti possit in illa Civitate quae tam expresso juramento
sese devinxit ad omnia Scismata cy^^^enda.
blemish to our endeavored Reformation: It Is more then three years ago since a
foreign Pen wrote to our disgrace in a Book published at Dantzick, Anglia his
quatuor annis facta est colluvies and lerna omnia Errorum and Sectarum, nulla a
condito orb Provincia, tam parvo spatio tot monstrosas Haereses protulit,
atque haec; Epise porum tempora intra sexaginta annos non nisi quatuor sectas
protulerunt, and eas plerunque in obscuro latentes, etc. I pray you help us
really to confute his testimony: I know when the Jews returned from Babylon to
reform the Church and State, they set up first the Altar, then the Temple, then
the walls of the City, (as if we would say, first Worship, then Doctrine, then
Discipline,) but yet up the walls did go also at last: The Lord help you and us
against this dangerous flood of the Dragon, which so hurts both broachers and
receivers. Austin says of Arrius the Heretic, that his pains are increased in
Hell, as often as any one, through his Heresy, is seduced from the Faith; and we
find it true, that the itch of Error, if not prevented, oft-times breaks forth
into the scab of Atheism. We have publicly humbled our selves in this Nation
more then once for our Heresies; I beseech you act what you justly may against
them: We hear what Laws our Brethren in New England have made Mr Thorow-good.
about three years ago against Anabaptists and others (not for their
Conscience, which they may keep to themselves, but) for infecting and seducing
others. And we read M. Weld rise, growth, etc.
that about thirteen years ago, anno 1637. they convented at New-Town in
New England some of the principal Ringleaders, and not only publicly
admonished and excommunicated, but also imprisoned, and after banished them.
Luther foretold above one hundred years ago, that the Familistical Errors,
which he then in their bud opposed, would hereafter rise up, with more subtilty
and danger, in the days of more light of the Gospel, and sure now Satan is
busy in sowing Tares.

3. I beseech you encourage and further (as, blessed be God, you have begun a
glorious work that way) a godly orthodox painful Ministry in England, Ireland,
Wales, etc. that God, that has always paid so well for nursing his children,
and counted that done to him which is done to them, will not forget Matthew. 25.
Acts 9. Mat. 10. 40, 41 42. Zech. 2. 8,
any pains and care for his faithful Ministers, and propagating his Gospel,
advancing piety and learning with all due and needful encouragements thereto:
Satan every way opposes them, and Gods work by them: Elijah was called the
Troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18. 17. Amos charged for conspiracy, Amos 7. 10.
Paul counted a (...).
pestilent fellow, (a very post) a mover of Sedition, and Ringleader of a
Sect, Acts 24. 5. and Christ himself a Teacher of New Doctrines, Mark 1. 27. as
well as Paul, Acts 17. 9. Jeremy was laid by the heels for a Traitor to the
State, Luther called a trumpet of rebellion, and Beza a seedsman of sedition.
Unicum crimen eorum qui crimine vacabant, as Lipsius out of Tacitus.
Therefore they stand in more need of your further encouragement; so shall you
be not titulary, but real defenders of the Faith. The Pope sent over to James
the fourth King of Scotland a Sword with this Title, Protector of the Faith:
and presently after another Sword to our King Henry the eighth with this Title,
Defender of the Faith; but the meaning was, to protect the Popish Faith, and
not Christ's pure Gospel; and accordingly both those Kings afterward caused
several godly men to be burned for the Truth in their Dominions, and great
ignorance followed, men wholly studying Popish fancies, and neglecting Gods
Word, so as George Creichton Bishop of Dunkel confessed that he had lived
Bishop many years, yet never knew any thing of the Old and New Testament.

4. I beseech you, while you sit in that Honorable Senate, forget not poor
Prisoners in the Gaol, but let there be in every County some provision made for
their Souls, so that they may not be made in their Prisons ten times more the
children of Hell, then before, and most unfit to dye, when most unable to live.
How much good did that learned and holy Mr Perkins that way in his time! One
Malefactor (amongst others) crying out upon the Ladder to Mr Perkins, that he
feared Non metuo mori, sed damnari.
not Death, but a worse thing, was even melted into tears at Mr Perkins his
Prayer, and dyed joyfully. What a blessed work would this be, to provide some
able man (and means for him) to preach to, and catechize these poor Souls, that
so they may not be in bondage to Satan, but Christ's free men, that when the
Justice of the Law will not suffer them to live, the Mercy in the Gospel may
fit them for death. A reverend Minister of this Nation (now with God) said that
one shilling a quarter of every parish (one with another) in the County of
Somerset (which is no burden to any man) would encourage some godly man to
this work; so might we perhaps, through Gods mercy, see more penitent thieves.

5. Contribute (I beseech you) your best skill and help for the joynting of
godly and faithful men, who agree in the same Fundamentals of Doctrine, and
truth of practice toward God and the State, and shall agree in the same Heaven
at night: Tragediae Lutheranae mihi ipsi etiam calculo sunt molestiores, (said
Erasmus;) The Differences among godly men more troubled Erasmus then the stone:
It Is a thousand pities to see what strangeness in Opinion, Affection, and
Conversation a few years of peace have bred in too many, who agreed, mourned,
and wept together in times of Trouble, (like sheep run of a heap in a storm,
but spread up and down the mountain in a Sunshine.) How do the Philistines
hereupon triumph, publish it in Gath, and raise up their hopes! And I fear
there are some cursed spirits that do purposely heighten our Divisions, to
ruin us both. I have often sadly thought of that passage of Oecolampadius to
the Lutherans, when the fire of contention grew hot 'twixt the Zuinglians and
them (as they were called,) and the subtle Jesuits and Papists joined
themselves with the Lutherans in the Sacramentary quarrel, and stroked them on
the head (eos laudabant, and in pretio habebant, etc.) purposely to make the
breach wider and irreconcilable, to ruin both; Error condonari potest (says
Oecolamp.) discordiam neque si sanguinem fundamus expiabimus: and as our
Divisions bring scandal, so danger (as Machiavils rule was) by being divided in
minutula frustula. Cambden observes that the low Countries suspecting the
friendship of the English (anno 1587.) stamped money with two Earthen Pitchers
swimming on the Sea, with this Motto, Si collidimur, frangimur; If we dash one
against another, we are both broken. I wish that England and Holland, England
and Scotland, England and England, would timely consider this, whom to cement
and glue firmly, was worth the study and labor of another Constantine the
great, nay, of an English Parliament; but lies only in the Power of the
Almighty. In the Reign of Henry the eight (anno 1536.) forty thousand
Yorkshire men rose up in Arms, to uphold the Popes authority, their old
Traditions, Latin Service, (though alas whether it was cursing or praying
they knew not,) their Beads, Crosses, and other Church-ornaments (as they
called them,) which they thought Cromwell would then have pulled down: This
Rising they called the Holy Pilgrimage, on their Colors they had the five
wounds of Christ, with the letters JESUS in the midst: The King sent down a
great Army against them, both Armies drew near to one another, the place, day,
and hour of battle was set, but that night, before the battle should be, fell a
small rain, which so raised a little brook that was betwixt the Armies, that
neither Army could come at the other all the next day, the neighboring
Inhabitants having never seen that brook swell near that height, (which the day
before a man might have gone over dry-shod,) though they had often seen far
greater rain: both Armies looked at it as Gods miraculous hand, forbidding
their fighting, and so treated, agreed, and departed quietly: How happily was
the effusion of blood prevented? Alas, how do we see sincere godly men ready
(through different apprehensions and remnant of corruption) like Abraham and
Lot, Paul and Barnabas, to fall out! In Queen Mary's days of persecution, some
godly men (after Martyrs) thought that they might not with a safe conscience
fly away, though they had fair warning and opportunity, as Latimer, Tailor,
B^adford, etc. but were bound to tarry and witness the truth of God: Others
(though very godly) thought they might not with a good Conscience stay, but
should be wilfully acc^ssary to their own death, as Fox, Juel, Knox, etc. and
when those godly men that fled did return, some approved Church Government by
Bishops, others could not: some conformed to the Ceremonies established, others
durst not; yet many of both Opinions agreed in Grace and Glory: Yea, even
Bishop Andrews could say in his Epistle to P. Moulin concerning those Churches
that had not Bishops, nor owned that Government, Ferreus sit qui salutem eis
neget, nos non ^^mus ill^ ferrei: and yet alas in matters of smaller moment
S^ud^um partium is magna pars studiorum: You may (through Gods blessing) much
conduce to a happy union, however God will reward you (...) and not (...): What
a journey took Polycarp (anno Christi 157.) to reconcile that frivolous brabble
'twixt Romans and Asians about keeping Easter? Where strife and contention is,
there is confusion and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16. But where godly amity and
unity amongst brethren, there the Lord commands his blessing, and life for
evermore, Psalm. 133. Let me call to mind one remarkable victory to this
purpose; About ninety years ago, when Mary Queen of Scots (Widow to James the
fifth King of Scotland, and Grandmother to King James of Great Britain) would
have forcibly established Popery in Scotland, and had secretly received diverse
French into Leith for that end, and garrisoned that place with them, she was
opposed by the Protestants in Scotland, who being too weak, prevailed with
Queen Elizabeth to aid them; she sent over the Duke of Norfolk with an Army to
assist the Scots, the English with the Scottish Protestants laid siege to
Leith, from whence the French and the Queens Popish party of Scots sallied out,
and slew diverse both English and Scotch, and laid their dead bodies naked upon
the top of their Works in the hot month of June (anno 1560.) against the Sun:
The Queen of Scots looked out of her window upon the Dead Bodies, and said,
Yonder is the goodliest Tapestry that ever my eyes beheld, I would the whole
fields hereabouts were strawed with the same stuff: After which words she
shortly fell sick and dyed; and the Popish party besieged in Leith were forced
to yield and depart; Scotland was quieted, and the Truth of Religion hereby
there established: but ere our Army returned home, it was desired that there
might be a solemn Day of Thanksgiving to God kept at Giles's Church in
Edinburgh in July, 1560. where one prayer was then solemnly put up to Heaven,
and recorded in Scotland, in perpetuam ^ei memoriam; part whereof was in these
words: O Lord whereas thou have made our Confederates of England instruments to
set us at this liberty, and to whom in thy Name we have promised mutual faith
again, let us never fall into that unkindness O Lord, that either we declare
our selves unthankful to them, or Profaners of thy holy Name, but confound O
Lord the counsels of those that go about to break that most godly League
contracted in thy name, and retain thou us so firmly together by thy holy
Spirit, that Satan never have any power to set us again at variance or discord.
I add no more, but fiat, Amen and Amen, etc.

6. As I heartily beg of God for you and us, that never any iniquity may be
established by a Law, so would I beg that our Laws may be so framed according
to Gods holy Word (suitable whereto something is begun I leave it to Your Honors
to judge whether one Post in a week which needs not travel on the Lords day at
all (when no Case of necessity, or extraordinary,) was not better, then two,
who travel every Lords day, all the day constantly.
for Lord's Day, and against Adultery, Incest, Swearing, etc.) as might cause
our Lawyers and others more to read and study the Scriptures, therein to know
more fully and clearly the Law of our Land, as Eleutherius long since wrote to
K. Lucius: but herein I submit (as is meet) to Your and the honorable Senates
grave and wise Judgments, humbly craving your pardon for this tediousness and
bold Dedication. I shall not fail, right honorable Sir, to bow my knees unto
the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you, and the Heads of our
Tribes, that our only wise and good God would give you a true sight of, and
repentance for what is amiss, (for I know you are far from Bishop of Lichfield
and Coventry.
Bishop Overton his mind, who accused a faithful Minister Mr Hugh Clark Vicar
of Woolston in Warwickshire.
within his Diocese of Treason, and committed him to Warwick Gaol for praying
before his Sermon for Queen Elizabeth, That God would forgive her her sins. You
are not such strangers to your own hearts and actions, as Cardinal Bellarmine,
who could not find any sin to confess, save one or two in his youth.) I shall
lap you round about in my poor prayers, that God would more and more discover
unto you his mind and work, make you all spiritual Princes to Jesus Christ,
guide, bless, and carry you through in Gods work, and for the Public, in such
a manner, as you may not only do his work, but have a share and comfort in it.
I add no more but Doctor Hollands Farewell, which he used when he took his leave
of the Fellows of Exeter College in Oxford, where he was Principal, Commendo te
dilectioni Dei, and odio Papatus omnisque superstitionis, and humbly and
heartily subscribe my self

Your Honors most obliged and faithful Servant in the Service of God and the
Public, JOHN SHAWE.

The Princes Royal: OR A Sermon preached at the Minster in YORK on the
Lord's Day morning in the Assize week, March 24. 1650. Upon that Text,
PSALM 45. Verse. 16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou
may make Princes in all the Earth.
FOr the matter of this Psalm, it is (...) a Song of Loves; for the end of it,
it is (...) to instruct, says the title of this Psalm: Some think Psalmorum
liber, quaecunque utilia sunt ex omnibus continet, said Basil, and so Augustine,
The Book of the Psalms is a storehouse of all holy Truths in other books
severally dispersed.
the word (...) which signifies lillies, points out the matter of the Psalm,
viz. the love 'twixt Christ and his Church, who both are compared to lillies,
Cant. 2. 1, 2.

At marriages (especially of great persons) they used to have Epithalamial
songs sung, the principal matter whereof was the commendation of the Bridegroom
and the Bride: suitable hereto the Holy Ghost endites (whosoever was the
penman) a divine Epithalamial Psalm, relating to, and setting forth, nextly
and immediately in the letter and shadow, the praises of Solomon and his wife
(the daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt;) for though Solomon had seven hundred
wives, and three hundred Concubines, 1 King. 11. 3. yet did he especially
affect Pharaohs daughter, 1 King. 3. 1. The Jewish Rabbis say, that one of the
Articles in the agreement of marriage 'twixt Solomon and Pharaohs daughter was,
that she should forsake her Idolatry and blind Superstition of Egypt, and
embrace the Worship and Service of the true God; which Article seems to be
alluded to here, Verse. 10. 11. but under the similitude of Solomon's marriage
with Pharaohs daughter is ultimately, principally and mystically set out the
Lord Christ his marriage with the Church (as it is also in the Book of
Canticles;) and even some of the learneder Jews are forced to confess, that
many things in this Psalm cannot be meant of Solomon and his Spouse, but of the
Messiah and his Church, as verse. 1. he speaks of the things touching the King
but that King is God, whose throne endures for ever, Verse. 6. So Verse. 11. 18.
and for the Spouse, she is such a one whose chief glory lies within, Verse. 13.
And for their Children, though Solomon had a thousand Wives and Concubines, yet
we read but of one son (whereas others who had but one wife, had many sons;)
and though Solomon was the wisest of all mere mortals since the Fall, yet his
son Rehoboam very foolish; so that my Text cannot in the letter be meant of
Solomon, who had not children whom he might make Princes in all Lands; nay, the
Kingdom ever went less, after Solomon's time: But to put all out of question,
the Holy Ghost applies this Psalm to Christ and the Church, Heb. 1. 8, 9, etc.
So that this Psalm is a continued Allegory (if not Type,) setting out, under
the similitude of Solomon's marriage, the near and happy union and dear
affection 'twixt Christ's and all Believers, and those precious children and
choice posterity that Christ begets in his Church by his Spirit and Word: And
here is, First, the commendation of the Bridegroom, from Verse. 1. to 10. for
his beauty, eloquence, and art, in soul-winning, justice and meekness, the
glory of his garments, and palace, etc. And then the commendation of the Bride,
Verse. 10. to 15. and of the children converted and born again to Christ in the
Church, Verse. 16. Who shall be Princes in all Lands. Here then we have 1.
implied, A spiritual marriage 'twixt Christ and the Church. 2. Their spiritual
children and posterity. 3. The royal dignity of these children that are
converted and born to Christ in the Church: they are Princes.] 4. The extent,
in all Countries, places of the Earth, where ever they dwell, though in poor
Cottages, wandering in sheep skins and goat skins, siting down with poor fare,
yet are they Princes in all the Earth. 5. See the great honor that redounds to
the Church hereby, Domus mea a me incipiet, tua vero in te desinet, said Tully
to the braging and prod^gal Roman.
whereas usually men brag and glory of their ancient pedigree, moth-eaten
antiquity, (though the Heathen Poet could say, where that goes alone, it is a
poor commendation, Et quae non fecimus ipsi, vix ea nostra voco;) yet men glory
of their Ancestors and Families, that they are sprung ab atavis regibus: The
Holy Ghost says, that this is a far greater honor, to have precious Converts
daily born to God, then all temporal pedigrees. [In stead of thy Fathers shall
be thy children, etc.

The first Point (which is couched in the Text, and runs through the whole
Psalm, I shall only point at in transitu, and so pass to the next) is this,
That there is a spiritual, glorious and happy marriage 'twixt Christ and his
Church: This is clear in all the Book of Canticles, Ephesians. 5. Isai. 54. 5. Rev.
19. 7. and 21. 9.

Qu. Wherein does this spiritual mystical marriage consist?

Ans. 1. Ex part Sponsi, on the Bridegrooms part; who, 1. makes his choice,
and sets his heart on whom he will: Amongst men we say, that before marriage a
man should suit his choice to his mind (viz. rightly regulated,) but after,
his mind to his choice, if ever he meant to have content or comfort in it: And
(...) madness, and life tedious, without Christ: Nihil mihi sapit, in quo non
sapit Jesus Christ: A poor Soul loves to speak to him, to hear him, and hear
from him, loves his Word, ways, people, all that savors of Christ; loves
nothing further then as it comes from, or tends to, or suits with, Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

4. She desires never to part: No; the Soul does not marry Christ till death
them depart, or till God shall separate them by death, but takes him for life,
death, ever: The Soul never repents of this match, save only that he was
married no sooner, and counts all his time lost till then; as one born out of
due time, 1 Cor. 15. 8.

5. The Spouse goes to Christ the Husband for every thing: she depends upon
him; upon, 1. His Judgment, for counsel and direction what to do in all cases.
2. Upon His Eye (and not men's eyes) for approbation of all we do to God or men.
3. Upon his Purse, for maintenance and daily supply in every grace and duty,
etc. The Wife loses her own name, and is called after her Husband; So it is no
more I (says Paul) but Christ in me, Gal. 2. 20.

But I promised brevity herein, and therefore I shall only give a short touch
by way of Application: And first, here is a

1. Against sin (the worst of evils;) Christ the Husband must pay the debt:
Vxori lis non intenditur, says the Civil Law; If a poor woman marry a Prince
to whom she owed 10000 l. he may pay himself.

2. Fear not final falling away: Christ repents not of the match; he fore-knew,
ere he married us, what we were, and would be: If any fall would now break it,
it would have prevented it: A true Believer may fail and fall; but, 1. It Is but
a particular guilt; he is guilty as to that fact: That thing that David did
di^pleased the Lord, but not a general guilt; his estate is good, and approved
of God; his general course and frame of heart is holy. 2. It Is but the guilt of
a Child, not an Enemy; we may provoke a Fathers displeasure, Exodus 4. 14.
Psalm. 106. 32. but it is not the wrath of a Judge to a Malefactor, Romans 8. 1. so
as to cast him out for ever, Joh. 8. 35.

3. We may go boldly to Christ our Husband at all times, both in Life, for
counsel, direction, supply; and in Death Death in it self is the King of
terrors, Job 18. 14 Sigismund the Emperor, and Lewis the 11. king of France
charged all their servants about them, that all the time of their sickness they
should not dare to name in their Hearing that terrible word Death, How did the
fear of Death keep the^e great men in a continual bondage? but fear not to go
down to the grave, Genesis 46. 3 for thy Husband has gone and sweetened the way.
, because death cannot break this match; and after death, at Judgment, because
when the world is on flaming fire, our Husband is our Judge: at death we go but
to our Husband, to his Father, and our Father, Joh. 20. 17, Isai. 54. 5.
Tollitur mors non ne sit, sed ne obsit.

4. This is a great honor to the Saints, Psalm. 149. 9. to be a Kings Spouse:
Vxor fulget radiis mariti; If a woman marry with a Knight, she is a Lady; if
with an Earl, she is a Countess; if with a King, she is a Queen. If poor Ruth
marry Boaz, she is Lady of Bhthlehem-Judah: If Esther with Ahashuerus, she is a
Queen of vast dominions.

5. Comfort to us against many Cross^s and Afflictions here: A wife that has
many crosses, yet this bears up her heart, I thank God I have a loving and
kind Husband: Or if she has but a bad Husband on Earth, yet, I have a kind,
tender, rich Husband in Heaven. It Is said of Rubenius Celer when he was dying,
being asked what Motto he would have on his Gravestone, he answered, only
this, That I have lived with my Wife forty three years and eight months, and
to this hour we never once fell out. Mr Fox in the Book of Martyrs tells of a
godly man who lived at Clarkennel in the days of Queen Mary, who was marvelous
tender over, and loving and kind to his wife, yet she accused him to the
Popish Priests, whereupon he was apprehended, for speaking against Popery in
his Family; and after he was through Gods mercy deliver^d, she did a second
time accuse him, that he would not go to the Mass, and that he spoke against
the Pope and their Idolatry, whereupon he was again apprehended, imprisoned,
This Assizes was a man condemned for poisoning a loving wife.
in the Stocks in Lollards Tower, cruelly used, first one arm and leg in the
Stocks, and then another, and his child whipped to death, and after the woman
went mad; but Christ is a marvelous kind and tender Husband.

6. Fear not want, if married to Christ, the Heir of all, Hebr. 1. 3. Psalm. 23.
1. for with him came all things else, Romans 8. 32. -- Deus meus and omnia.

The second Use of Exhortation.

1. Entertain no Suitors now thou art married, no adulterous Therefore the
Husband called the covering of her eyes, Genesis 20. 16. Isai. 30. 22.
married she now entertains no more Suitors, but quiets her heart in her
Husband: So say we to all these cursed tempting lusts, I am now married, away,
begone; Ego non sum ego.

2. Long for Christ, if absent: How do Wives long for their Husbands return,
though poor sinful men? so you, breathe after Christ in Heaven; see the Church,
Cant. 5. How welcome is he that brings news to a Mariners Wife? We espy your
Husband coming yonder, etc.

3. Obey Christ, not as a Slave, but as a Wife, from a principle of love: It Is
true in Gods eyes, quod cor non facit, non fit, If no love, no life: But obey
Christ as a Wife; 1. In one place as well as another. 2. From and with the
heart, Romans 6. 17. 3. For Conscience sake to Gods Ordinance; Say to Satan, I am
not mine own, I will ask my Husband. 4. Submit thy mind and will to Christ's
Judgment and Will: Thou think this or that best, but he is only wise, take
his advice.

4. If Christ suffer in any of his servants, pity and help them: When King
Edward was shot with an envenomed Dart, his Queen sucked out the poison with
her mouth, when no other way was found to cure him.

5. Bless Christ, and thank him, that would vouchsafe to 1 Samuel 25. 41. See
Abigails deep complement.
sue to, or match with thee, whom he might have made a firebrand, who had
said him nay often.

6. Forsake all for him: Rebecca will leave Father, Mother, all, to go to
Isaac, and Rachel, for Jacob leaves Laban, and her Country, etc. Genesis 2. 24.

The 3. Use is for trial; art thou married to Christ? ^ Do thou know him
with a tasting experimental knowledge? Phil. 3. 9. she is but a light huswife
who will cast her self on any whom she knows not. 2. Do thou love his
person, and not his portion only? Do thou love him for himself? 3. Do
thou love him above all others? long for him when absent? 4. Art thou sorry
that thou did put him off long? say him nay, so often? 5. As Christ bought
and paid for thee more then thou art worth, so he changes thee when married;
Moses married an Ethiopian, and she continued her hue when married; David
bought Saul's daughter, and paid more then she was worth, she continued surly,
but Christ changes those whom he marries, new hearts, new lives, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
Holy Mr. Dod being asked, why he (preaching to some Gentlewomen that used naked
Tertullian would have called these, Pudor ostentatitiae Virginitatis: How may
the Americans shame us, for there the native Indians in New England since the
Gospel came to them, have made a Law, that every one that goes with naked
breasts shall pay five shillings.
breasts, ^ain dress, etc.) did no^ sharply reprove them for it, and persuade
them to leave them? he answered, I will first labor to get Christ into their
hearts, and then they will easily and quickly leave these of themselves. 6. If
married thou have lost thy own name, so do Virgins when marry, and are called
after their husband; so Paul, not I, but Christ in me, Gal. 2. 20. I go not out
in my name, in my strength, for my ends; but as the ancient Martyr said, my
name, ends, hopes, ways, are all called Christian.

All those those who are borne again of Christ, they 2. Observe.
are Princes, whether they dwell in all the earth, in any County, City Town or
Village, so many godly men there, so many Princes there, Rev. 1. 6. He has
made us Kings and Priests to God and his Father, etc. Rev. 5. 10. And has made
us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on the earth. 1 Pet. 2.
9. But ye are a chosen generation, (...), a Kingdom of Priests, Exo. 19. 6. The
righteous are Kings, many righteous men, says Matthew, c. 13. 17. many Kings
have desired, etc. says Luke c. 10. 24.

There are two things, which I would do, ere I can clearly apply it: 1. Show
you what kind of Princes all the people of God are. 2. Wherein their Princeship
(or Kingship) consists.

1. Godly men (as such) are not temporal, but spiritual Princes; as Christ's,
so their Kingdom is not of this world, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 8. True it is, that godly
men, as David, etc. may be temporal Princes, but not Quatenus godly men and
Christ's seed: And we had need to clear this, for great temporal Monarchs are
very fearful of any claim to their Kingdoms, or meddling with their Titles.
Our Chronicles mention one Burdet, a Merchant of London, dwelling at the sign
of the Crown in Cheapside in the days of our King Edward the fourth, Anno,
1483. who jestingly said to his Son, that he would leave him heir to the
Crown, meaning the sign of the Crown where he lived, for which he was
apprehended, and within four hours hanged, drawn, and quartered for so saying:
Kings love not that men should Pulcheria the virtuous and discreet sister of
Theodosius the second, seeing her brother the Emperor to sign many writings
without reading them, caused a writing drawn and tendered, wherein he consigned
into her hands his wife Eudoxia, (formerly before Baptism called Athenais a
poor woman, daughter of Leontig, who seeking at the Court for Justice in a
private cause, took the Emperors affections, was baptized and married him)
Eudoxia said, it was too great a game to jest and play upon Diadems, though the
good Emperor much reformed by it.
jest with their Crowns; how fearfully startled was Herod, when he heard tell
of some Wisemen asking for one that was borne King of the Jews! Mat. 2. 1, 2,
3, indeed worse afraid then hurt: the Saints are not by virtue of their birth
from Christ temporal, but spiritual Kings, though carnal men men's slander is
very common, that Gods people rebel and aim only to be temporal Kings,
Nehem. 6. 6, 7. But know, that it is far better to be a spiritual Prince with
God, then merely a temporal Prince over men: Which will appear, 1. Because the
greatest Kings on earth have usually more crosses on earth, then external
comforts; there is a great vanity in the chiefest person and places on earth,
Psalm. 62. 9. The world has now stood above 5000. years, and the greater half
of this time was spent ere the Jews had any settled King; at last about the
year of the world, 3761, God gave them a King, Saul by name, and there were but
three Kings that governed and ruled over all the twelve Tribes, viz. Saul,
David, and Solomon, and one of these (viz. Saul) came to a violent death, slew
himself, though perhaps the Amalekite helped to dispatch him If so, then Saul
who had been cruel to David, (...) cruel to him self, and he that spared the
Amalekites, and never prospered after, is at last slain by an Amalckite. 1 Samuel
15. 14 23. See Lightf^^^ on that place (...) is only used it. 2 Samuel 1. 9. and
signifies both (...), and tremor vel argustre.
when his coat of male somewhat hidered his own spear from making that speedy
end which he desired, as the words in the Hebrew may be read, 2 Samuel 1. 9.
(...) After these three Kings deaths, the twelve Tribes were divided into two
Kingdoms, two Tribes clave to Rehoboam Solomon's Son and H^^^, and made up the
Kingdom of Judah; and ten Tribes to J^^oboam. Solomon's Servant, and made up the
Kingdom of Israel: Now after this division (which began about the year of the
world, 2969.) until the captivity of Babylon, and destruction of Jerusalem by
Ne^ucha^^^zzar, there were but twenty Kings of Judah, and of there eight
suffered a violent death, and of Israel before their lasting captivity, 2 King.
17. 6.) there were but nineteen Kings, whereof not one feared God among them
all, and of these nine died a violent death, besides others imprisoned, cruelly
used, etc. In England since the coming in of the Norman William (which is
usually styled the Conquest) there has been five and twenty Princes, of whom
nine came to a violent death: and many more of those 109. Kings of Scotland. I
say it for this ^ad, to show what crosses and calamities do often times attend
great persons and places, which cause their troubles to exceed their comforts,
which made Solomon complain of the vanity of vanities in all conditions, Eccl.
1. and before him his Father David say, that he had seen an end of all
perfection, Psalm 19. 96. Nay, see how sometimes Gods heavy hand goes out
against a whole great Family, or ^ine; thus we find Ahab and Jezabel guilty of
blood, of godly Nabathe blood, see what became of all that race and line, Ahab
was shot to death by a man that shot at ^venture, and timed not at him more
then any other, 1 King. 22. 34. as he went up against Ramoth-Gilcad, but it was
purposely levelled, foretold, and directed by God against Ahab, 1 King. 21.
19. as Elijah had told the King ere he went up thither; so also Micaiah, 1
King. 22. 28. and Jezabel, who was wife, mother, and daughter to a King, even
she was slain, 2 King. 29. 33. King Ahaziah son to Ahab, never recovered of h^s
fall through the Lettice, 2 King. 1. 2, 16, 17. then Ahabs other son Jehoram
was King of Israel, 2 King 3. 1. he goes against Ramoth-Gilead, and takes it,
which his father Ahab could not do, and having received some wounds in that
service, he leaves Jehu one of his Captains, Commander in chief over his Army
^t Ramoth-Gilead, and goes himself to be cured at Jezreel, presently Jehu (by
Gods appointment, 2 King. 9. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8. etc.) draws all the Army against
King Jehoram, (his King, his Master, and his Master Ahabs son) and slew him, 2
King. 9. 24, 25. and that the blood of Naboth which Ahab had a hand in was a
maine cause of all this, appears because it is expressed, that in the same place
where Naboths blood was shed, both Ahabs and Iehorams blood was spilt, 1 King.
21. 19. and 2 King. 9. 25, 26. and so of Iezabel, 2 King. 9. 36, 37. Athaliab
the daughter of Ahab was married to Jehoram King of Judah, 2 King. 8. 16. 17,
18. she was slain, 2 King. 11. 16. her husbands bowels fell out, 2 Chronicles. 21,
18, 19. none prospered that meddled with that Line, their elder sons were slain,
or carried captive by the Philistines and Arabians, 2 Chronicles. 21. 17. and 22. 1.
Ahaziah King Ahabs grandchild, and some think he married again into that
stock, 2 Kings 8. 27. he joined with Jehoram in that war, and after to visit
him, 2 King. 8. 28, 29. he was slain 2 King. 9. 27. and 42. of Ahaziahs
brethren, or kindred of Ahabs stock were slain, 2 King. 10. 14. and seventy
more of Ahabs sons and grandchildren by several wives were slain, 2 King.
10. 1, 7. so as none remained of that line and family, 1 King. 21. 21. see the
like of Baasha, another King of Israel, his line, 1 King. 16. 11.

Who has not read the continued succession of calamities that attended Mary
Queen of Scotland, mother to the late King James (...) her cradle to her grave?
Her father King James the fifth, died about the time of her birth, when she was
about six years old, she was sent to France in great danger by winds and
English ships, there was an agreement 'twixt England and Scotland for a match
'twixt our King Edward the sixth, and her, which breaking on their part,
occasioned the Lord Protectors march with an English Army to Muscleborough
field, where much blood was shed, and a Scotch Lord being taken prisoner, and
asked how he liked our wedding with Scotland? said, he liked the match well,
but not the woing, to fetch a wife with fire and sword: In France she was
married young to Francis the Dolphin of France, who died shortly after of a
pain in his ear, then was she Omnia fai and nihil mihi profuit, said Scverus
the Emperor, when he was dying; and almost all the Roman Emperors until
Constantine, and very many Popes after him, got nothing by all their great
advancement, for the getting whereof they adventured life and limb, and a
better thing; sed ut citius in tersicerentur, as A^ban a wedge to cleave him,
and garments throw him.
in great dangers by Sea in her return back to Scotland, where also she found
the Scots in Arms, she was there married to Henry Lord Darnley, (son to
Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox) by whom she had King James, her husband was
murdered soon after King James's birth, she was apprehended by the States of
Scotland, charged with the murder, and imprisoned, after she escaped out of
prison, fled to England where she was prisoner, first in one place, and then
another, above sixteen years, and then beheaded at Fotheringay-Castle in
Northamptonshire: she desired to be buried in France, but was buried at
Peterburgh, aged six and forty years, and yet could not rest in a grave, her
body was taken up again by King James, and buried at Westminster: Every Crown
of Gold is lined with a Crown of Thorns, who almost would take up Crowns upon
these terms? but spiritual Princes their comforts in life, death, after
death, exceed their crosses, they have that joy that no man can take from them,
that will support them at the stake, in the Dungeon, etc.

2. There is no Nation where all the Subjects are temporal Princes, but all
Christ's true Subjects, in whose hearts (...) their own Spirit which is one of
the greatest conquests, Prove. 16. 32. and over afflictions, Romans 8. 37.

9. Temporal Princes be not all of one Line no not in the same Kingdom, as in
England, sometimes the Romans ruled here, sometimes the Britains, then Saxons,
then Dane^, then Normans, and since the Norman William, sometimes his own Race
ruled here, then the Plantagenets, then the Tudors, then the Stuarts, and of
the four and twenty Kings since William the Conquerors death, not above seven
in England that could pretend legally to succeed their next Predecessors either
by lineall or collateral Title; but the Saints are all of one blood, borne of
the blood of God, Ioh. 1. 13. of the same spirit, Joh. 3. 5, 6, 8.

10. Some other Princes were anointed with external oil, though it is
generally observed, that all the Kings of Israel and Judah were not anointed
with oil, though Saul, David, Solomon, and some others were, nor were the Kings
of Judah anointed with the holy oil where with the High Priests were anointed,
and which God commanded to be made, Exodus 30. 23. -- 33. but with common oil,
though laid up in the Sanctuary: The Scotch Historians say that external
anointing of their Kings never began with them ti^ Popery got footing there,
(from which they say, their Nation was free many years after Christ, and kept
much purity in Religion) and that King Edgar was the first so anointed there.
Anno 1098. The French Historians tell much of the holy oil kept at Reims, yet
generally acknowledge that the first King of France that was anointed was
Pepin, and that none of the Merovignion Line were anointed.
(and yet their former Kings were as much, and as truly Gods anointed as the
later) but all the Saints are Gods Anointed, Psalm. 105. 14, 15. with a
supernatural and heavenly Oil of Grace, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The Apostle tells us,
Hebr. 1. 9. That Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, which notes two things. 1. That all the Saints are Chri^^s fellows,
fellow-heirs, fellow sufferers, fellow-conquerors etc. 2. That they are
anointed with the divine graces that Christ is, only in their measure, (for of
Christ's fullness they receive grace for grace, Ioh. 1. 16.) Psalm. 133. ^.

The next thing is to show you, wherein they are Princes, (for, as Zebah and
Zalmunna said to Gideon concerning his brethren, Judge. 8. 18. they each one
resemble the children of a King;) and of this briefly.

1. They are Princes by birth, by the new and second birth, born of the royal
blood of Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 12, 13.

2. They have the vast possessions of Princes Abraham had little, yet he was
heir of the whole world; Romans 4, 13
(as before is proved;) Luther said, that all the vast dominions of the Turk
was but a scrap cast to a dog; but the Saints dominions are higher, larger, etc.

3. They have the power of Princes; As a Prince have thou power with God, said
Christ to Jacob, Genesis 32. 28. Paul can do all things through Christ, Phil. 4.
13. All things are possible to him that believes, Mark 9. 23. They have power
Hic homo potuit apud deum quod voluit, was said of Luther; Saints are the
blessings of and to a place; Isaiah 19, 24
with God, so as to stop Lions mouths, quench fire, bind 2 King. 2. 8, 14
up the Sea, nay bind the hands of God, Exodus 32. 10. And the Queen of Scots
(before mentioned) said, that she more feared the prayers of Mr John Knox, then
an Army of 20000 men: So said Leolin Prince of Wales of another; and the
Elector of Saxony of the Archbishop of Magdenburgh, etc.

4. They conquer as mighty Princes; Death, 1 Cor. 15. 55. and Hell, Romans 8. 1.
and afflictions, Romans 8. 37, 38. Prince of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. their lusts, 2
Cor. 10. 4. their hearts, Prove. 16. 32. Jam. 4. 7. Rev. 2. 26, 27. a greater
conquest then David's over Goliath.

5. They are clothed as Princes: The Queen in the Psalm was clothed with gold
of Ophir, yet her best clothing was within, Psalm. 45. 9, 13. They have robes
that none wear but Princes, the perfect merits of Christ upon them; They are
clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12. 1. Christ's long white robe, Revel. 19. 8. and
with the sincere garment of grace within them, Ezekiel. 16. 8. to 14. The
Scripture calls Christ's merits the best robe, Luke 15. 22. none but Princes
wear it.

6. Fed as Princes; not scraps, but Childrens bread, Angels food, fed at the
Kings own Table (as Mephibosheth;) They have meat that the world knows not of,
as Christ said, Joh. 4. 32.

7. Served as Princes; Christ serves them, Joh. 13. 4, 5, 6. Luke 22. 27.
Angels of Heaven serve them, Hebr. 1. ult. Devils and wicked men are scullions
to them, to scour them, as Luthers phrase was.

8. Their work is Princes work; not drudgery, but servire Deo est regnare:
Wicked men do the Devils work, some without door, as profane men; some within
doors, as Hypocries: The Saints do Gods.

9. They shall judge the world ere long, as great Princes, 1 Cor. 6. 3. How many
men are converted to God, so many Judges are born into the world, and therefore
no wonder that they are so hated by wicked men: Ere long, Felix shall be
Prisoner, and Paul the Judge; Herod the Prisoner, and John Baptist the Judge;
Pharaoh the Prisoner, and Moses Judge: Mat. 19. 28. Pareus observes, that
Christians used to bring their causes to be tried by the Bishops, as supposed
godliest and just; after they claimed it as a right, and so would be both
Bishops and Princes: Saints shall judge without sin.

10. They shall ere long be crowned in glory as Princes: Indeed the Saints in
this life are in their nonage. It Is chronicled as a great happiness of a Family
in Ireland (the Barons of Hoath,) that the heirs thereof for 400 years together
were always at age before their fathers death: but here the Saints are not at
full age till their own death; and then crowned in glory: Only take heed that
we be not children of the Kingdom in profession only, but in truth, else we
shall be cast out, Mat. 8. 12.

Qu. If you ask, how such poor sinful creatures come to be such great Princes?

Ans. I answer, 1. By birth, as before, Joh. 1. 13. 2. By Acts 20. 28 Ephesians 1.
14 (...), People of Gods purchase 1 Pet 2 9 1 Cor. 6, 20
marriage, they marry unto the royal line, Isai. 54. 5. 3. By Purchase, Christ
bought it for them, and them for it. 4 By deed of gift, Luke 12. 32. Edward the
sixth could not give his Kingdom away, if he could, it had not come, as it did,
to Queen Mary: but our Father can, and will, both that of grace and glory,
Psalm. 84. 11.

Favor me, right honorable and well-beloved, with a little more of your
patience and attention, and I shall apply this briefly, and dispatch the rest
in few words. And,

1. It shows the happiness and honor of all the Saints; such Psalm. 149. 9. They
are no base or vile persons, Psalm. 15. 4. but mighty Princes. There is not the
poorest godly man alive would change estates with the greatest wicked man in
the world; for would great Princes change Estates with Beggars, every wicked
man (though swelled as big as Nimrod or Pharaoh) are Beggars, and live upon the
Alms of the Parish (as I may say,) They are spared alive out of Hell awhile,
for the Saints sake: God spares the Tares for the Wheats sake; and Sodom for
the Right^ous sake, (if it be spared,) Job 22. 10. Nay, wicked men are
condemned already; They are reprieved, not from Assizes till the next Assizes,
but from moment to moment: but the Saints, though they walk on foot, as Solomon
observed, Eccles. 10. 7. are Princes; They have much in present possession, and
much in reversion, happy they; no wonder they would not change, not Moses with
Pharaoh, not John Baptist with Herod, not Paul with Felix, etc. Time is coming,
when Haman would be glad to be Mordecai's Lacky, as old World would have been
glad to have been in the place of Noah's Dog, when flood came: The righteous is
now more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12. 26. and wicked men's Consciences
convince them now, but much more at the great Day. Theodosius used more to
glory that he was servant of Christ, then that he was Emperor of the East: So
King David glories that he was Gods servant, twice in one Ver^e, Psalm. 116. 16.
Moses, though dead, not only was, but is, so: Josh. 1. 2.

2. The next shows how joyful a day the day of our conversion Object. But I
cannot tell the day of my Conversion. Ans. But thou can tell the day that
thou wast unconverted, and God has wrought a change in thee: A man knows he
was born into this world, though he cannot remember the day when; and a woman
knows that she was married, though she cannot tell just the day and hour when
it was.

3. Bless God that would look on such poor creatures, and Psa. 113. 7, 8. Oh
that Christ would make those Princes, in whom Satan once reigned, and bound,
more then eighteen years, Luke 13. 16. and 11. 21, 22.

4. Then let us be exhorted to carry and behave our selves

1. Cry not for toys and trifles: Was it not a great shame for a great Prince
to weep and mourn for the loss of two or Monstrosares est seeds prima vita ima.
Bern.
three pins, points, or sarthings? Jerome tells of one Dydimus, a godly learned
Preacher, who was blind, Alexander, a godly man, comes to him, and asks him,
Are you not sore troubled and afflicted for want of your sight? Oh, yes, said
Dydimus, it is a great affliction and grief to me: Then Alexander chid him,
saying, Has God given you that which is the excellency of an Angel, of an
Apostle, and are you troubled for that which Rats, and Mice, and brute beasts
have? So, has God made us Kings and Princes to God, and shall we mourn or
murmur for these outward trifles? etc.

2. Are you Princes? Away then with all base employments: Is it no ashame to
see Princes rake the channels, turn Scavengers, shovel the dirt? etc. The
Heathen Romans did conceit that there was a filthy Hag or Witch, called Lulla,
that strangled their children in the Cradle, so that when the Nurses rocked the
children to sleep, they cried Lulla abi, Lulla abi, Lulla begone, avoid; whence
to this day Nurses use at such times to sing Lullabie: Let all spiritual
Princes Isai. 30. 22
say to all cursed lusts, Begone, get thee hence: Shall they swear, be drunk,
worldly? No, remember thou art a heavenly Prince.

3. Envy not wicked men: Shall great Princes envy the happiness of poor
condemned and reprieved Beggars? I have read of a Soldier, that (upon a strict
command of the General, that no Soldier should break into the Vineyards as they
marched, nor take any thing from that place upon pain of death,) he broke into
the Vineyards, and took only one bunch of Grapes, for which he was condemned;
and as he went to execution, was eating of that bunch of Grapes, his
Fellow Soldiers chid him, saying, He ought then to mind somewhat else; To whom
he said, I beseech you Sirs do not envy me my Grapes, they will cost me dear;
you would be loath to have them at my rate: So do not you envy nor murmur at
wicked men; alas when the reckoning comes, you would be loath to have their
sweet bits at their rate.

4. Carry noble minds of Princes: Though Kings are served by the plough, yet
their minds are taken up with higher Eccles. 5; 5
matters of State. It is written of our King Edward, that he had a burning
desire to go to the holy Land, Zechar. 2. 12. (for so they called the Land of
Canaan, though now I think there is no Land more unholy) but being prevented by
death, he charged his Son to carry his heart thither: So, though we be below,
and trade, and meddle in things here below, yet let our hearts and affections
be above: Though we have our Commoration on Earth, let us have our Conversation
in Heaven, Phil. 3. 20. which is a sure evidence that we are risen again
already, Col. 3. 1, 2.

5. Let us keep company with Princes, even godly men: Would it not be a great
shame to see the honorable Judges of Assize go off the Bench, leave the Society
of the Justices and Gentry of the Country, and only keep company with the
Prisoners at the Bar? Sheep and Wolves, Princes and base Peasants, have small
converse together: Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 11.

6. If you are Princes, contend not for every toy; Regium est male audire quum
been feceris. Jesus Christ is Prince of Life, Acts 23. 15. Prince of Peace,
Isai. 9. 6. Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Dan. 8. 25. Rev. 1. 5. and he
has made us great Princes, and shall we contend for every quarrel, 1 Cor. 6.
1. to 7. It Is reported of Judge Dyer, that when any petty Controversies came
before him, especially of poor men, he used to say, That either the parties
were wilful, or their neighbors uncharitable.

7. In the cause and way of God go on undauntedly, and with princely courage,
yea, both in doing and suffering for Christ: And here give me leave to apply it
more particularly; and, 1. To you my Lords, whom God has been pleased to call
to these public places; and that you may go on undauntedly for God and your
Country, Look, 1. That your principles be sound and upright, else however you
judge men now, yet poor men will judge you another day, when all the Saints shall
judge the world. 2. Look you be upright in your ways; uprightness has boldness:
do not steer your course according to friends, or foes, or men's corrupt humors.
It Is said of Baldwin the French Lawyer, that he had Religionem Ephemeram, every
day a new Religion, but constant to none; Beza.
and therefore says Beza, he became Deo hominibusque quos toties fefellerat,
invisus. Some of you have read of a very great Courtier of this Land, who was a
great Favorite to King Henry the eighth a Papist, to King Edward the sixth a
Protestant, to Queen Mary a Papist, to Queen Elizabeth a Protestant, and kept
both great favor and places; being asked how he could do so, he answered, I
always imitated L. Pawlet.
the Willow, and not the Oak, was ready to bow and bend to the lusts of great
men, and humors of the Times, as one not tied to John Baptists Conscience, but
giving elbow-room to Jeroboams policy, etc. I can tell you of a Judge (God ever
deliver you from his steps) that raised a most strange conclusion from honest
Premises, I mean, Pilate, Luke 23. 14, 15, 16. who says concerning Christ, I
have examined him, and found no fault in this man, therefore I will chastise
him: Unjust Judge! nay therefore chastise him not: Or, as it is related by John,
cap. 19. 6. I find no fault in him, therefore take ye him, and crucify him:
nay rather ought he to rescue and deliver him. Epaminondas, a Heathen man,
being poor, and tempted with great presents, used to say, if the cause was
good, he would do it without a bribe, because it was good; if bad, not for a
world.

3. Look your ends be right; the Devil knows that that is a prevailing
temptation wherewith he thought to have undone Job, when all other shafts
failed, does Job serve God for naught? Job. 1. 9.
as if he had some by-ends in it: This undid Jehu, who executed judgment
severely on the house of Ahab, which God commanded, and yet God revenged all
that very blood upon Jehu's house, Hos. 1. 4. because of Jehu's by-end in the
work.

Secondly, A word to you Right worshipful and worthy 2. Take heed lest any of
you favor drunken Alehouses to uphold your Rents and price of Corn, or Your
Clerks fee^. Holy Mr Fenner says that he heard a Clerk of the Assizes say,
that he was glad there were so many rogues, because he got more money.
Justices of peace; I pray you pull out the beams out of your own eyes first:
be not you guilty of those vices, which you ought to punish in others, so shall
you go on with courage. You see at these Assizes diverse devouring Wolves
arraigned, would you pursue them to their den, you should find most of this to
spring from, and be hatched at, debuched Alehouses: I pray you know neither
friend or so; Justice is pictured blind as to men's persons, but quick-sighted
in causes: Shall I punish my friend, for whom such a one speaks, an old servant
to my Father, to my Wife, Son? etc. No, nor your foe neither: With all my heart
spare your friend, but punish the Malefactor; Teach men in your Ridings and
Sessions that Norman distinction that William the first taught an Odo, brother
to K. William, Earl of Kent, and Bishop of Bayeux in Normandy.
Earl of Kent, whom the King would punish for his foul misdemeanors; the Earl
being also Bishop of Bayeux in France, pleaded he did not do the fault as he
was Earl, but as he was Bishop, (and so then not under the temporal
Jurisdiction;) To whom the King replied, neither do I punish you as a Bishop,
but as an Earl; however the party was punished: spare your friend, yea and your
foe also, if you will, but punish the Malefactor.

3. To you Gentlemen of the long robe, (to whom I spoke freely, 3. Britania
rediviva.
yet truly here, the last Assizes; and therefore no more now but this,) plead
now, as you may, with courage, stand up at last, and have Christ plead your
cause: I do not say, when or while causes are dark and doubtful, but when it
clearly and plainly appears that the cause is untrue and unjust; Do not do your
best or worst to color it over, and to cause unjustice to be done (or else it
shall not want your furtherance;) Think not that this is enough to say, Am I
for the Plaintiff, or Defendant, (no matter which,) and when you see the cause
naught, (...) body, more distempers still do appear, Hos. 7. 1. Thus in Christ's
Time, Scribes, Pharisees, Herodians; in Apostles days, in Primitive Times,
Ebion, Cerinthus, Arrius his Heresy was condemned by the Council of Nice, Anno
D. 330. Macedonius by the Council of Constantinople, Anno D. 383 Athanasius
rose up mightily against Arrius in Constantines days; and Basil against Maced.
in Theodosius days. Nestorius was condemned by the Council of Ephesus, an. 490
and Eutiches by the Council of Calcedo^ Anno 456 When Austin mightily spread the
Gospel, Pelagius (alias Morgan) spread His Errors, (both of them were born on
one day, Austin in Africa, and Pelagius in Wales.) In our flight from Rome,
says Mr Bailey, some heretofore stopped too soon, as the Lutherans; and after
them Cranmer, Ridley, etc. who lest too much Popery; And others ran too far
(says he) as Anabaptists; and after them Bolton, Brown, Barrow etc. and the
Brownists; Sure I am if the late Bishops stopped too soon, many now adays run as
much too far. Mos iste in Ecclesia semper viguit, ut quo quisque fo et
religiosior co promptius novellis adinventionibus contrairet; says Vincent.
Lirinens.
Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutyches, Pelagius; in Luthers days many Sects,
Anabaptism, Antinomianism; in Calvin's, Servetus: but) this is sad, that what
was owned by all to be profainness twelve years ago, (as to swear commonly, not
to pray, nor confess sin, nor sanctify Sabbath, nor frequent Gods Ordinances,
to deny the Scriptures, etc.) if a man now do the same things, and say he holds
an Opinion, or it is his Opinion that he may do thus, then it should be
accounted no profaneness, but Religion? Cursed Errors draw the best spirits
(says holy and learned Mr Hooker of New England) from the heart to the head,
turn Religion into a Dispute, and make it only a matter of questions and
words, and eat out, in very many, the very heart of godliness. It was the great
grief of holy Mr Buroughs, not long before his death, that he could not see
that practical power of godliness in the professors of these days, which he saw
in those that dyed immediately before these Times began; but that we seem (said
he) to have more light, but less life. Oh this does not beseem spiritual
Princes of Jesus Christ. A foreign Writer, three years ago, to our shame,
published, Anglia his quatuor annis facta est colluvies and lerna omnium
Errorum ac Sectarum, nulla a condito orb Provincia tam parvo spatio tot
monstrosas Haereses protulit, atque haec, etc.

5. Let this be a Caveat to all persons, to take heed they offer Princes: You
know how dangerous Scandalum magnatum and Crimen laesae Majestatis were
accounted to be; Take heed how you rail against or affront a godly man for
godliness sake, truly you kick against the pricks, Christ will own it, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. These are Gods anointed, touch them not
at your peril, Psalm. 105. 14. They are the dearly beloved of Gods Soul, Jerem.
12. 7. Gods Hephzibah, Isai. 62. 4. Gods delight is in them; These are the
Spouse of Christ, and Christ will say, Will you force the Queen before me, as
Ahashuerus said of Haman, Esth. 7. 8. These are the Lords portion, take heed
what you do to these men, etc.

The sixth Use is for Comfort to all the Saints, because they Princes: 1. Kings
and Princes are not usually tried at an ordinary Court, but some special Court
for them: Truly godly men shall not be tried, 1. At man's Bar, not stand to man's
day 1 Cor. 4. 3 (...). When Woodroof the sheriff called Mr Rogers (our
Protomartyr) Heretic, that shall be known said Rogers, at the day of Judgment.
, who usually rail against them, and mock them: 3. Nor at the Bar of strict
Justice, but at the Chancery of free mercy, their debts being paid, persons
covered in Christ, and their Husband their Judge. Secondly, These Princes have
two of the best Kingdoms that we ever heard of, the one of Grace, the other of
Glory; that whiles others glory of Corn, Wine, Oil, Psalm. 4. 7. and petty
Manors, the Saints may say as the King of France commanded his Herald to cry
still, King of France, King of France; so they, Heirs of Grace and Glory.
Thirdly, Princes are an honor to the place where they are born and bred: So
Psalm. 87. 5, 6. Of Sion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her: So
many godly men in a Town, so many Princes in a Town. It is an honor to Boston
in Lincolnshire that learned and holy Mr Fox (that wrote the Book of Martyrs)
was born there; to Manchester, that heavenly Mr Bradford the Martyr was born
there; to Dean and Leigh in Lancashire, that George Marsh the godly Martyr was
born in the first, and Jeffrey Hurst in the latter; and Mr Robert Bolton at
Blackborn in the same County; Mr William Perkins at Marston in Warwickshire;
Holy Mr Latimer at Thirkesson in Leicestershire; Martyr Cranmer at Arselacton
in Nottinghamshire; Doctor Willet at Ely in Cambridg-shire; Mr Whateley at
Bambury in Oxfordshire, Many worthy men born in Lancashire, Dr Whitaker, Mr
Nouel, Mr Bentley, Mr R. Balton, Mr Bradford, George Ma^sh, Jesfrey Hurst, etc.
In Devonsh re Bishop Juel, Dr Reynolds. In Northumberland Bishop Ridley Martyr.
Cumberland Archbishop Grindal. Westmoreland Mr Gilpin. Buckinghamshire Dr
Humphred. Shropshire Dr Holland. Hampshire Mr Philpot. Kent Mr Ed. Deering.
Nottinghamshire Archbishop Cranmer; both Mr Chapels, etc.
etc.

7. In all these hurryings and clatterings of the Times, while State, let us
cry to God, that we may be, and content our selves to be, spiritual Princes to
Christ, to reign over our lusts, and to have the Government of Christ in our
hearts: Let this be our greatest contention and strife; and beg direction from
God for them, in whose hands is the power of settling external Governors and
Government. Take heed we be not of those that say in our hearts, We will not
have Christ to reign over us, Luke 19. 37. Content not our selves that we are
related to godly men, heavenly Princes: John of Valoys was Son, Uncle, Brother,
Father to a King, yet himself was never King; so here --

8. Labor what we can the advance and propagation of the Princes to God in
every town and place where it comes: Follow it to Ireland, Wales, the Northern
Counties, etc. with your prayers; yea, into the dark corners of the world, that
Christ may have Princes in all the Earth: This is the means whereby thou may
come to have thy Son a crowned King, and thy Daughter a crowned Queen in glory.
Follow the Gospel with thy prayers into America; How do the fields there begin
to look white to the Harvest? how does the Kingdom of Heaven begin there by the
native Indians to suffer violence? God grant the event may never be the taking
the Gospel from us (where too many seem weary of the Scripture, Ordinances,
Duties, etc. and loath the Manna) to give it to them. How does the Gospels
success there rejoice us, especially if they be posterity of the Jews, as many
affirm that they are!

9. The next Use is for Trial: It Is dangerous laying claim to Kingdoms when men
have no good Title. Our Chronicles Straw, Cade, Tiler etc. Kings are afraid of
times; Herod the great put to death 14000 infants, as Josephus writes, with
intent to have killed the King of the Jews, and did slay His three sons,
Alexander Aristobul^^s, Antipato^, His virtuous wife Maria^^ne for fear of
losing His Kingdom. Zec. 14. 20
afford many instances hereof, and what it cost them in the end; and is it
nothing to claim a Kingdom of Heaven without title?

1. Art thou spiritually anointed? (as we have said,) Psalm. 105. 15. 1 John 2.
27. Oil, 1. Softens, 2. Heals, 3. That Oil wherewith Kings were anointed, had a
sweet perfume, etc. So, 1. Is thy heart softened? does grace sink as oil (Psa.
109. 18.) into thy heart, or have thou only swimming notions in thy head, or
some outside reformation only? The Soul was first in sinning, in converting,
in resurrection; does grace pierce thither? is thy heart sincere in what thou
do? A godly man has an imbred, gradual, partial, unwilling bemoaned hardness
of heart, which he complains of, groans under, Isa. 63. 17. but not a total,
wilful, unsensible hardness, which ruins, Zec. 7. 12. 2. Art thou healed in
some measure from the reigning and damning power of sin? Romans 7. ult. 3. Is thy
life more sweet and savory? thy speeches, practices? Is Holiness written upon
them?

2. Is thy mind princely, set upon things above, Col. 3 1. like Daniels
windows toward Jerusalem? It is not for you (said Cleopatra to M. Antony) to
fish for gudgeons, but for Castles and Kingdoms; Are our minds altogether set
on, and drowned in the Earth? are we terrigenae f^atres, inhabitants of the
Earth, Rev. 12. 12. (opposed to the dwellers in Heaven) whose names are written
in the Earth, Jer. 17. 13 and like Domitian follow catching of Flies? Sure then
we yet are not spiritual Princes; for if such, our minds would run upon our
Father, Mother, Country, House, and Brethren above.

3. Have thou got a princely conquest over thy lusts, so that they reign not
over thee? and that as well over that inside and spiritual wickedness (which is
perhaps minoris infamiae, but majoris reatus) as well as visible and shameful
transgressions, which fear or shame may restrain, though the root of the matter
be still within as unmortified as before; A godly man is like Brutus his staff,
Cujus intus solidum aurum corneo valebatur cortice, gold within and horn
without; or like the Ark* gold within, goats hair without, etc. I should have
given you more evidences of spiritual Princes, and of Gods hidden ones, Psalm:
83. 3. their title to a Kingdom; as also more Uses; and a third Doctrine yet
remains behind; But the glass has overrun me; and I have learned from Luther,
Cum vides attentissime audire populum, conclude etc. When thou see thine
Hearers (says he) most attentive, then conclude; eo alacriores redibunt, so
they will return more cheerfully the next time; I add no more therefore, but
only conclude as Cyril does his preface to his Catechism, Meum est docere,
vestrum auscultare, Dei proficere; Paul may plant, and Apollos water, and now
the great God give the increase.

FINIS.

