THE POVRTRAICTVRE OF THE PRIMITIVE SAINTS in their Actings and Sufferings,
According to Saint Paul's Canon and Catalogue, Heb. 11.

Psalm. 119.52. I remembered thy Judgments of old, O Lord, and have comforted my
self. Minut. Faelix. page 126. Non habitu sapientiam, sod mente praferimus,
non eloquimur magna, sed vivimus. Lud. Vives, lib. 5. de Doctr. Christ. page
352. Theologia quanta pars est narratio gestorum Populi Israelitici, Christi,
Apostolorum, Martyrum; denique sanctorum omnium, and totius Ecclesiae? qua nos
and docent, and valedissime, ad been agendum inflammant. Cypr. Sermon ter. de
bono Patientiae, page 200. Invenimus and Patriarchas, and Prophetas, and justos
omnes qui figuram Christi imagine prae^unte portabant, nihil magis in laud
virtutum suarum custodisse, quam quod patientiam forte and stabili
aequanimitate tenuerunt. By J. S. Presb. Angl.

Newcastle, Printed by S. B. 1652.

ABELS SACRIFICE.
Heb. 11.4. By Faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice then
Cain, by which he obtained, etc.
OUr Savior Christ's negative ab initio non fuit sic, Mat. 19.8. was a full
confutation of the Pharisees mistake in the case of Divorcement; and the
affirmative, ab initio fuit sic, is here the Apostles confirmation of his
former theses, and conclusions; the one Cap. 10.38. the other in this Chapter
verse the first, which though it be not expressed, is virtually employed; the
whole Fabric of his discourse bears on that foundation; and all the
subsequent examples, are but so many Moral evidences and demonstrations of
those holy truths: And that they were so from the beginning, he fetches his
proofs from the beginning of Piety; all your forefathers lived by Faith, Faith
was to them the subsistence of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen; and therefore if you be Believers, your Faith will give you life, also
will be to you the substance, etc. From the beginning of the World till this
present Century, you may be furnished with fair Presidents to verify these
truths for your satisfaction, and to exemplify them to you for your
observation: those primitive spirits (if your spirits be teachable and pliant)
will learn you the doctrines and obedience of Faith, will leave on your Souls
a persuasion of the truth of those truths, and also work on your spirits an
habitual attendance on God, and resignation of your selves to God, and a
conformity to his holy will: In brief, Their Piety will instruct you what and
how to believe; begin with the World, and fetch your proofs downwards, and
you shall find the Ancients to believe the Propositions, both in thesi and
hypothesi; they embraced them for truths, and applied them to their several
uses, both by active and passive obedience, even before men began to call upon
God, Genesis 4.26. that is, in solemn Assemblies, and Public manner to worship
God; you have this exemplified in Abel, the first Pattern of patience, and
practioner of Piety; the first Martyr and Canonized Saint, whose Faith engaged
him to Sacrifice, to present this Sacrifice to God; and because an Oblation to
God, therefore a great excellent Sacrifice it was; and for this Act he was
approved by God, and is famous with men; both God and Man to this day speaks of
him with honorable Titles. Abel the Just, Abel the Righteous, By Faith
offered, etc.

The Method I shall observe in this and the following Discourses, will be one
and the same, and so throughout I shall endeavor,

1. To explain, and deliver the sense of the Text, with reference to the
History from whence the Words of the Text are taken. 2. To propose such
Doctrinall inferences, and practical deductions, as I shall observe and
conclude from the Text. 3. To provoke your Devotion with a Prayer and
Meditation, upon the chiefest observable in the Text, or that which was
principally intended by the holy Apostle.
For the first,

By Faith: The Offering was the prescript and injunction of Faith, not actus
elicitus fidei, for the proper and immediate Act of Faith* is belief; but
actus imperatus, an Act which issued from belief and was commanded by it; Thus
visiting the Fatherless and Widow, Jaw. 1.27. as an ingredient in the
Apostles description of pure Religion; not as this were an Act of Religion, in
the most strict restrained sense, as Religion, is the duty of adoration, not as
it signifies, the performance of the direct and proper offices of his honor
and worship, admiring his perfections, magnifying him in his Attributes; or
having familiar intercourse with him; but in a more large extended sense, as it
is an inseparable adjunct, or convincing argument of Religion, without which,
no man can justly pretend to Religion, or be denominated Religious.

He offered to God a Sacrifice; This Law of Sacrificing was ab initio, of long
standing in the Church of God; the first man, without doubt, and the first holy
men practiced it, long before the Mosaicall Ordinances, sacrificiary was an
institution of Piety; It Is true, we Read not of Adams Sacrificing, perhaps
because no such notable occurrent happened therein, as in the Oblations of his
Sons; yet that he practiced and taught his sons this duty, may with much
probability be asserted; Nature, undoubtedly, taught him this Law, in as much,
as the most generous Heathenish spirits, with an unanimous consent, have Voted
it an Honor due to God, and did precisely observe it, as is sufficiently
proved.

But Abel not only offered a Sacrifice; but its noted, for an excellent
Sacrifice, a more excellent Sacrifice then Cains; a difference there was
betwixt their Sacrifices, and a great one too; there was excellency, greatness
in the one, obtulit majorem hostiam, so Beza, Plurimam, so the old Translation
Reads it; (...); so the Original: there was no excellency, nor greatness in
the other, for it was rejected.

Interpreters have traveled long to enquire wherein the excellency of Abels
Sacrifice consisted, and to discover the difference of the Oblations, and to
find a reason, why God accepted Abels, disapproved Cains Sacrifice.

I shall acquaint you with some of their discoveries, and will not presume to
determine, which are real, which imaginary; perhaps they are all imperfect;
neither dare I prescribe to others, but desires of them a Travelers
indifferency, to choose what they find safest: only I shall enterpose this
consideration, That God is no respector of Persons, his judgments are in the
deep, and his ways past finding out; and though his judgments are many times
secret, yet they always proceed upon the infallible rules of justice and
equity; and where our reason cannot find out an unquestionable reason of his
procedures, yet it is all the reason in the World, to believe and acknowledge
God to be most wise, most just, most holy. But this in general, though it will
not silence a proud cavilling disputant, will yet satisfy a sober modest
Christian; That Cains profaneness, or hypocrisy, or preconceived hatred of
his Brother, spoiled the Religion of his Sacrifice, and deprived him of the
reward of his service; and that Abels innocence, sincerity, and devotion, was
as incense to his sacrifice, as Fire from Heaven to hallow it, to give it a
sweet smelling savor; and in this resolution there can be no danger: I am sure
it is according to the plain rule of Scripture; peruse these following Texts,
and apply them,

Genesis 4.7. 1 Samuel 15.21.22. Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. Isap 66.3. Am. 5.21.

But to return, The Jews derive the excellency of Abels Oblation from it self,
the matter offered, or subject of the offering; which (say they) was according
to the rule and estimate of things prisable, of more value then Cains: and the
Crime which they charge on Cain, was Covetousness: the Virtue they ascribe to
Abel, was Liberality. It Is true, God loves a giver like himself, liberal and
bountiful; the Covetous (whose alms, if he give any, is in Senica's Phrase,
Panis lapidos^e, and whose expenses for Gods service, or Temple, are Sesses,
not Free Will Offerings) God abhors: yet it also as true, which the Heathen
has observed, God regards not how full hands we bring him, but how pure: he
values not our Offerings, because they are either many, or rich; but because
they be holy: reasonable services of him, (...), as Arist. l. 4. Aeth. c 1. But
yet this comes not home, is no full discovery; for though it be most certain,
That covetousness is an abomination, a filthiness able to pollute any
sacrifice, or holy duty; and that Liberality is highly prized and rewarded by
the Almighty: yet 'its evident from the Text, That their Offerings were of the
different returns with which God had blessed their labors, in their
respective civil Callings and conditions of life: and therefore, in respect of
this difference, the reason lies not of their different respect with God.

Others from that Clause, Genesis 4.3. [In process of time] conceive Cains Crime,
was slacknesse, or dullness, in the performance of his duty: and indeed, we
ought not to be remiss, or negligent to pay our vows; God loves
cheerfulness and alacrity of spirit in his service: But in the Scripture, we
find not Cain criminal on this score, for by the context it appears they both
offered in the same order, and at the same time; and that phrase imployes not
any slownesse, but only indefinitely, notes a determinate time.

Others fetch the difference from the yet undiscovered paths of God; eternal
decree: Abel was an Elect, Cain a Reprobate: Abel a justified Person. Cain not;
and therefore Abels sacrifice was sanctified Cains not. But (under correction*
and with submission to abler judgments) I conceive the former part no
Discovery; 'its an unknown passage to us, and God has not admitted us unto his
secret resolves, but his Revealed Counsel^ are for us and for our Children; and
that his Decree infuseth no goodness or badnesse into the actions of men: an
action is called good, from its conformity to the rule, that I am sure it Gods
revealed will; and bad from its obliquity, or deviation from it and its
goodness, or badnesse, depends on the rectitude, or crookedness of man's will:
And for the other part of the supposition, with the premised reference, I
conceive no man justified, but he is sanctified also; yet no man justified*
before sanctified: For faith which is required as the condition of our being
justified, must necessarily in order of nature be before justification; this
presupposes Faith, which certainly includes repentance, and conversion to God;
yea it self is an act of sanctification: and the promises of mercy are, as to
Believers, so to sincere Penitents; He that forsakes his sins, shall find
mercy, Prove. 28 13. so that neither of these surmizes states the case, nor
gives a clear resolution to the Quaere.

Others, because Genesis 4.4. it is emphatically said of Abel, he brought his
Firstlings, and his fat: but of Cains verse 3. without any further expression,
or addition* nakedly, He brought, etc. have conjectured these expressions the
clearest notes of discrimination: for (say they) the Scripture never adds such
circumstantials, but for distinction, or for an addition of honor, or an
elogie: and however faith made the highest difference, yet the effects of Abels
faith were great, and holy* warming his spirit with much devotion, and
persuading him to such a choice, as might at once both express what great
blessings he had ^eceived from the good hand of God on his labors; and also
testify what reverend and holy thoughts of Gods Sovereign Majesty, had taken
his spirit; and Cains infidelity, made his Sacrifice a Sacrifice of flesh,
without devotion, without any respective consideration of the holiness of the
employment and therefore, he took, he offered what was next at hand, without
any more to do.

This interpretation is pious, proper, and pertinent, and were I resolved to be
affirmative, I would thus resolve the Point; For in our adresses and offering
to God, we should compose out minds to serious thoughts of his greatness,
wisdom, power goodness, and elevate them to the highest pitch, raise them to
the highest note, and thus prepare our selves to the offices o^ his worship and
service. But this supposes somewhat, which should be proved more clearly then
a supposition will bear but whether the excellency of Abels oblation above
Cains arose from the Persons of the offerers, or their intentions in offering,
from the substance and subject matter of the Sacrifices or from the qualities,
and adjunct thereof; this we are sure of, God delivered his Judgment, and gave
Abels the excellency; for he witnessed that he was righteous; he testified of
his gifts, and whether from his faith, or from his oblation he was pronounced
righteous, it is all one, seeing his oblation was an obedientiall act of faith;
his faith engaged and obliged him to present his oblation to God, and his
oblation evidenced, and proved his faith before God and Men; Faith sanctified
his Offering, and his Offering showed his Faith, and Gods testimonial approved
both. Abel stands upon Record in the Rolls of Heaven, and Earth, known and
dignified with the Titles of, Abel the Just, Abel the Righteous.

But now, if it be here enquired, by what signal evidence God testified of his
gifts, or how God declared that he was Righteous, I shall propose the several
guesses of Commentaries, and leave the Reader to the former indifferency I
granted him: Some conceive, God manifested his approbation by the descent by
Fire from Heaven upon his Sacrifice, in such manner as we Read Lev. 9.24. and
its not altogether improbable; for as Cains Sacrifice was a Meat Offering, Lev.
2. so Abels was a Peace Offering, Lev. 3. such as that of Moses and Aaron, Lev.
9. So also the 2 Chronicles. 7.1. Others by his Word, in a Vocal expression, God
then communicating his will to his servants in that method. Others, That God
expressed his acceptance of Abels Sacrifice by an after benediction on his
stock and labors, making them to thrive and prosper more abundantly then was
ordinary: but however it was, very likely it is, God declared his approbation
by some visible sign, then at the time of his offering and since by his
servant Moses, who has Regi^^red it to all Posterity, for his Honor, and
their example; he had not only Gods testimonial, but now has man's; now he
is, and ever fince he has been of happy memory* and high repute in the Church:
for it follows, he yet speaks.

Which expression is also capable of different interpretations.

1. The examples of the godly departed, and their worthy Acts speak loud in the
ears of Posterity, and call upon them for imitation; they were Written, they
are still Read for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1
Cor. 10.11 their language powerful in Rhetoric; they teach both what to
decline, what to follow; those dead examples serves as echoes, redoubling and
sounding the actions of their holy lives; and it was the Piety of the first
times to enjoyne, and of after ages to retain in the Church the memorialls of
the first Founders of the Christian faith, not so much to honor them, as to
glorify God in and for them* and to gain the following Generations, to follow
their holy lives and faith. 2. This may seem to allude to Gen 4.10, as this
same Apostle does, Heb. 12.24. and if so, then it instructs us, That God is
concerned and engaged in the sufferings and deaths of his Abels, who dye in the
Lord, or suffer for his holy truths; their blood cries loud in his ears for
revenge, and one day or other, he will hearken to the voice of their cry, and
recompense the ungodly after their deservings, as it happened to the
Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15.2.3. 3. The world (...), has a Passive signification,
and imports, to be famous renowned, celebrated, or spoken of; and so its
rendered, Mat. 26.13. be told or spoken of; his oblation, his faith, and Gods
testimonial of both, shall be had in everlasting remembrance; such honor have
all his Saints, to have their memories, their actings, and sufferings,
preserved and magnified in the Church of God from Generation to Generation; we
have the blessed Virgin Mary enforming us of her renown to all Ages, Luke
1.48.49. Death removes their bodies, not their virtues; takes away their lives,
not their precious memories; they after speak to us to imitate them, and in a
pious and grateful commemoration to speak of them, and praise God for them;
this is their happiness, they live time out of mind in Heaven, by the
beatificall Vi^^on; in Earth by a continued celebration of their eminent
graces, and holy performances: An^ thus you see I have unaware^ fallen on my
second Proposal, ^ collection of the Doctrines which are observable in the
words and they are many: I shall acquaint you only with a few.
1. The Apostle begins his induction with Abel, and bring^ it down to that
century wherein he lived the same to conti^ue unto all Ages; it was the self
same faith which was delivered to the Saints in the first and latter times;
that is in Scripture sense, before Christ's coming in the Flesh, and after: it is
true, the circumstantialls and externalls of Gods service, have much varied in
the several periods of the Church; but from the beginning there was one
foundation of Religion, the same essence of piety, Jesus Christ, the same
yesterday, etc. Heb. 13 8. an^ Christ is the same way conveied into the bearts
of Believers, the same Word, the same Faith the same Catholic Church, only
in Saint Aug language Tract 45. in ea. Ioh. tempora variate sunt, eadem fides,
sonus mutatus est idem verbum: one common head Christ, all members united to
him by one principal, Faith, and this comes from the same Fountain, the
Spirit, and the Word. 2. We are informed who are to be esteemed Elders in the
Church such only as received their approbation from God; the Primitive ancient
Fathers, and what esteem is to be allotted them; not to be accounted Founders
of our Faith, but Builders^ or rather (unless we admit the first Master
Builders Prophet^ and Apostles) repairers of Breaches* whenever the Orthodor
Faith is assaulted by Heretics, who either batter the Building* or undermine
the Foundation; neither are they to be worshipped as the objects of adoration;
but respected as patterns of imitation, not absolutely and universally, but
with restriction; we are to follow them, wherein they follow their Leader, who
alone is the way, the truth, and life; Gods testimonial makes their Writings
authenticke, and their examples imitable.
But more particularly, something we shall observe from Abels Person, his
Oblation; and Gods acceptance of both.

1. From the Person, we observe these following considerables.

1. The piety of Beleevert* privileges them not from humane fatalities and
contingencies, during the time of their residence here on earth; omnis Adam,
omnis Abel, Psalm. 39.5.12. Every man at his best, his most seemingly seence and
settled estate, is nothing but Vanity; or rather, Vanity, and nothing less then
Vanity and nothing, Es. 40.17. Quemcunque hominem video, miserum scio, (says
Seneca) and, Quemcunque miserum video, hominem scio, Man, and misery, are
paralells; Man at once lost his integrity and felicity; and ever since he is
the subject of folly and misery: neither does godliness exempt them from the
common fate of men, Death; they live and dye as others, though, as their life,
so their death is different from others: the disease is not removed, but the
plague and mortality of it; Death is not taken away, (for they also are taken
away by Death) but the sting; Death delivers them up to the Grave, and the
Grave takes possession of them, as it does of any Mortal, Psalm. 49.10. Ez
21.4. and many times the best dye soonest, Es 57.1. Certainly this should be a
great encouragement against the storms, and difficulties, the dangers, and
casualties of this life; and against the terrors and affrightments of Death
This one Consideration will yield us solid comfort, That all must dye, all are
Humane and Mortal; for why should we fear to pass that strait, which all men
must Sail through; or endeavor basely, and many times, unchristianly, to
decrine* what none can avoid? All men, all holy men, Abel the first righteous
man; Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; David, Gods favorite a man after
Gods own heart, his darling; all wise men, the Prophets, and Patriarchs; all
great men, Kings and Judges, have gone before us, or must come after us; and
shall we think that strange, which is universally common? or startle at the
appraches of what is so infallibly certain? Had wicked men only passed this
way, the Rode would have been suspicious; but seeing all our Progenitors, even
the godliest, have gone this way; and the first that beat the Path, was a Just
man, Justitia Princops, cui Christus justitia primatum tribuit, as Aug.
speaks; we need not feate, we may boldly venture, and follow; hac itur ad
superos.

But more comfort yet, This just man dyed a violent Death; its Chrysostomes
Observation, in Genesis 21. (...), etc. he first saw Death, and his Death was
sudden and violent: the first that dyed, was murdered, and that by his
Brother. Be not troubled, nor discontented with the sadness of thy affliction.
If thy Brethren, thy spiritual or natural kindred, imprison, persecute, kill
thee; if thou lose thy head, thy life, yet if thou keep thy Religion, thy
faithfulness; it is thy gain, thy advantage. Abel fell by the hand of his
Brother, and forthwith received a Crown of Martyrdom.

But yet more comfort; Abel is fallen, but he is fallen only asleep, he shall
anon awake into immortal glory; mean time, his Monument stands, and shall not
fall, till those Scripture Records perish: Dead Abel is not Dead, he yet
breaths, he speaks; Qui per virtutem perierat, haud is interit, says the
Comedian; and is Chrysostomes observation in Philip. him. 3. (...), wicked men
are living dead men, 1 Timothy 5.6. the Righteous when dead, are yet, Dead Living
Men, Luke 20.38. the life is transitus ad mortem, a posting to Death: the Death
of the other, is reditus ad vitam; a return to life, Ambr. de hon. mort. For,
non est vita, etc. that is not life, but death, which separates a living man
from Christ; neither is that death, but life, Quae morieutem Christo sociat*
which brings a dying man to Christ who is the life, id de Abel l. 2. c. 9.

2. We are not to measure Gods favor by his temporal dispensations, nor pass
sentence of his love or hatred, by the events or accidents of this life. Holy
devout Abel is murdered in his young tender years; accursed Cain, lives long,
begot a numerous Issue, builded magnificent Cities: God distributeth his
temporal blessings promiscuously, gives many times more liberal Portions to
the wicked, then to his Children; and commonly he dispenceth his temporal
felicities and advantages in a due proportion and equality to all, both good
and bad: sure I am, wealth may abound, where grace does not; and many times,
wicked men enjoy the World most. Which made the Psalm. 7 4. account the full men
of the World, full to superfluity, to overflowing, wicked men: which certainly
implies, that wicked men are many times full men, but their fullness is a far
more sad condition then the beggars emptiness and want; they have a judgment
and that is they have their Portion in this life, which though it be not a
Child's Portion, yet is often as liberal; but its a sad consideration to have
enough here, and too much for a moment; and have nothing (but what I fear to
name) for Eternity.

3. Abel the first man who dyed, and he dyed a Martyr; The Cross and the
Church were at once consecrated; righteousness was persecuted in the Cradle,
in the Insancie of time; afflictions entered early into the Church, and no
sooner Religion peeped but cruelty and pers^cution, like the Canicular stars,
appeared, and maligned it: the first man who was eminent^y just, was
exemplarily a sufferer for it; and this reaches us both patience to persevere,
and to endure, that we faint not; be not weary of well-doing, though we be sure
to smart for it; its a fe^icity to dye for doing good; Blessed are ye when ye
suffer for Righteousness sake, says our Savior: Sacrifice we must, though we
know we shall be made a Sacrifice for it; and if our Sacrifice be an excellent
Sacrifice, though men vilify us, God will testify for us, we should not be
ashamed, but rather rejoice; and hence we Read of glorifying in tribulation,
Romans 5.3. of counting it all joy Jam. 1.2. of counting it an honor, (...).
Act. 5.41. and its our calling to suffer, as well as to believe. Chil. 1.20.
was to suffer, because we believe; so Sulp. Sever. l. 2. hist. tells us, that
Dicclesiane saviente cortatim in gloriosa certamina ruchatur, multoque avidius
martyria gloriosis mortibus quarobatur, quam nunc Episcopatus pravis
ambitionibus appetnntur.

4. Abels Sacrifice was well counted of by God, because he kept his heart
upright with God, therefore was his Oblation accepted, because he was just; and
Gaius was rejected, because he harbored malicious thoughts in his heart
against his Brother; Its the just man's Sacrifice, which is as Incence, the
Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination; its Sacrilege, and grosle
hypocrisy for an ungodly man to call on God, Ps. 50.16. and a very Heathen
could tell us, animadverto etiam ipsos Deos, non tam accuratis adorantium
precibus, quam innocentia and sanctitate latari, Plin. Pan. ad Traj. Saint Paul
is express, 1 Timothy 2.8. Lift up holy and clean hands, without wrath, without
doubting: nothing of infidelity toward God, no malicious design in our hearts
against our neighbor, when we approach into Gods presence. The Psalmist, Psalm.
99.7. tells, Moses and Samuels Prayers were heard; and tells the reason, For
they kept his testimonies, etc. and again is positive, If I incline unto, etc.
Psalm. 66 18. and therefore, I will wash my hands in innocence, and so I will
go to thine Altar, Psalm. 26.6. God requires obedience rather then sacrifice,
for, He that turns away his ears, etc. Prove. 28.9. Alas then, to what purpose
do we offer to God our bodies; when we retain our affections or why do we
pray unto him, and sin against him; ask grace of him, and never endeavor to
resist one temptation, to mortify one lust, to cast off one carnality; to what
end are our Prayers loud, and our Voices strained for a blessing when our sins
cry louder for vengeance? why do we bow our knee, and prostrate our bodies,
yet our minds are insolent, and haughty, a stiff necked and stubborn
Generation? why do we lift up our hands and eyes to God, when we are devising
contriving and projecting for the World? what are all the postures of devotion,
the moving of the lips, the articulation of the tongue, the incurvation of the
knees, the erection of the eyes and hands, but complement, formality, and the
arts of hypocrisy, unless they be ushered in, and attended with purity of
heart, with innocence of actions, and sincerity of affections? When the Jews
offered their Sacrifices, Isay 1.11. God protested against them,
notwithstanding they were the Ordinances of his own lips, and solemnly voweth,
he will not take notice of their multiplied, their numerous, their long
Prayers; why? Their hands were full of blood, Isay. 1.15. (...) Is. Pel. l, 4.
Ep. 24. God respects not the work, but the heart; not our language, but our
life; not our petitions, but our practices: for, Qui innocentiam colit, Deo
supplicat, Min. Fael. he Prays well, who lives well; but he that devises
evil against his neighbor, in any respect, by fraud, or force to alienate his
right, this man's Religion is in vain, his oblations are in vain, it is but
dalliance and mockery of God, to express devotion in their overtures, when the
design is interest, and passion; to wear Gods Livery, yet do the Devils
Service; to follow Gods Colors, and fight the Devils Battles: but be not
deceived, God is not mocked. etc. O then cleanse your hands, ye sinners, and
purify your hearts ye double minded, and so draw nigh to God, and he will draw
nigh to you; look that there be no root of bittornesse in you, entertain no
distrustful misprisions of Gods wisdom, power, or mercy; harbor no
invenomed malicious thought of hatred or revenge against thy Brother, or
neighbor: sue for Grace, at the Throne of Grace and by your actions and
conversations, give testimony of the reality of your expressions of the
sincerity of your hearts, and desires; and so God will witness, and testify,
that you are faithful, and righteous, as Abel; then he will accept your burnt
offerings, and grant all your desires; then he will declare, and pronounce*
your Prayers and Oblations excellent Sacrifices, as he did to Abels; and will
reward you with the return of grace and glory among them who are Sanctified by
Faith.

5. I shall add one more Observation only in this Point, which I borrow from
Saint Aug. l. 15. de Civ Dei, c. 1. Cain and Abel divided the World, and still
the devision holds betwixt the wicked and godly; those who are of the City of
God* cry and Pray, Lord show unto us the light of thy countenance; and those of
the City of the World, who mind Earthly things; the increase of their Corn
and Wine. Abel, the Founder of the holy City: Cain the Master Builder of the
profane; the way of Cain a dangerous destructive way, and the Kainites were
those who approved, Scelestissimos Sodomitas, seditiosum Core, Judam
proditorem, Epiph. haer. 38. But Aug there drives further the Observation, Cain
prior, etc. Cain the first borne; Abel follows; to Note the succession of
Nature and Grace; by Nature we are first Cains; by Grace we are after renewed
into Abels.

2. From the Sacrifice, and the first Observation is the same Father, Epist. 49.

1. Quam sit res antiqua sacrificium, quod non nisi uni De^, etc. non quod illo
egout Deus, but to tutor and discipline us The first holy man was a Sacrificer;
and wicked Cain was not so Sacrilegious, as to deny God his own; God will be
worshipped, not only with inward sincerity, but by external rites, and bodily
performances. The case is the same now, it was in the beginning; God then was a
Spirit, and would be wo^shipped in Spirit and Truth: and if external services
had prejudiced the spiritual God who was a Spirit, and required spiritual
worship, would have wholly rejected and condemned them: Abels Sacrifice would
have proved criminal as well as Cain^; for though chiefly he requires the
heart, (My Son give me thy heart) yet not exclusively; he who made both Soul
and Body, exacts a tribute of obedience and worship from both. God hears
without Ears can interpret our Prayers without our Tongues, and yet for all
that, it is necessary some times, and most times advantageous, never sinful or
superstitious, to make use of the Tongue and Lips in our devotion; its
hypocrise, when the Lips labor, but the Spirit is flat and dull; when the body
is present, and the soul roving and wandering; but when body and soul are
conjoined in the performances of holy duties, then we present a reasonable
service to God. The difference here, was not betwixt him that Sacrificed, and
him that Sacrificed not, Eccl. 9.2. for both were Sacrificers: but between a
sincere Sacrificer, and him that offered the Sacrifice o^ Fools, Eccl. 5 1. So
in the Parable in the Gospel, Mat. 25. Virgins, and no Virgins, was not the
terms of opposition; but Wise and Foolish Virgins, Professors, and Believers;
Formalists, and Live Members of the body of Christ; such as seek themselves in
their addresses, and such as aim at Gods glory; such as make use of God, and
the forms of godliness for their own ends, and such as observe them in
obedience to Gods will, and their intention and design to Gods glory, which
sanctifies all their Oblations, gives distinction to them, and procures
acceptance of them. Aug. l. 15. de Civ. Dei. c. 7. makes this difference
betwixt a godly, and a wicked man, Boni ad hoc utuntur mundo, ut fruantur Deo,
mali, ut fruantur mundo, uti volunt Deo. That then which distinguished Abels
Sacrifice, was the purity and Piety of his intentions, without which, the
bodily exercise (though that required also) could not profit, O then, when we
come into Gods Presence, enter into his Courts, let not your bodies and souls
be strangers, the one in the Temple, the other at home, or abroad in the World,
but glorify God both in your souls, and in your bodies, for they are Gods;
give him a bended knee, and a broken Spirit; let both hands and heart be
advanced, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

2. Reason, and Religion, taught Abel, it was Gods blessing upon his endeavor,
made them prosperous, (and indeed, so it is, Psalm. 127.2) and therefore, to
offer to God some part of that, which he had blessed him withal in his Civil
Calling. And this enstructs us to implore Gods assistance in all our
enterprises, his blessing upon all our labors, his concurrence in all our
actions. Plin. in his Pan. to Traj. observes it, Nihil rito, nihil prvidenter,
etc. nothing could be prosperously undertaken, without Prayer and Supplications
to their fantastic gods. And Cain here upon the same account, and persuasion,
offered his Sacrifice: He that is called a Christian, and neglects, and omits
this duty, is short of Cain, of a Heathen, in Religion. O then, whatsoever ye
do, or whatsoever ye are about to do, commend the success thereof, and
commit your selves to Gods wise disposal, and gracious providence, Phil. 4.6.

3. This Sacrifice was Majoris pretii, so Beza. Plurima hostia. so the Vulgar.
Our contributions to Piety, and charitable benevolences ought not to be
extorted* or squeazed; are not to be sparing or pinching; but are to be
dispensed cheerfully, and liberally. To part with the worst, and keep the fat,
and the best, for a sacrifice to our own lusts, is not an acceptable Sacrifice
to God. Alms is a Christian Sacrifice, at well as Prayer; but it is when they
are done in Mercy and Charity, with an affection to do good, and a readiness
to communicate, Heb. 13, 16. to bestow some part of our temporal estate on the
outward service of God for we are to honor God with our substance) is not
only gratitude, but Religion; to choose and stick to that way of Gods service,
which will occasion least expenses, which is most cheap and easy, and will
cost us nothing; is not to give unto God, the things that are Gods; is not
only baseness, and covetousness, but also profanity and irreligion: and to
detain^ alienate, what God has proportioned for public Ministry, Sacrilege,
Mal. 3.8.

4. It was not only of the Fat, but of the Firstlings of (...) Flock, the
first fruits of our life, the prime years of our ag^ while vigor and strength
is full, are to be Consecrated to, a^^ employed in Gods service. We are to sow
our Seed in the Morning: To remember our Creator in the days of our You^^ to
bear his yoke from our Childhood, to go into his Vin^yard at the first
hour, and continue till the twelfth; to se^^ him early, in the height and
excellency of our days; not (...) our declining, dawning dotage: the services
of old age, a^^ deathbed resolutions and performances, are lame, sick
Sacrifices, Mal. 1.8, God will not be thus served.

3. From Gods Acceptance.

1. Abel Offered to God of his own gifts, and for this he (...) famous to all
generations. God honors them who hono^^^ him, though the World deride and
malign them, yet he w^^^ procure them a name and memory in his Church, though
the^^ be for a while overclouded with a storm, yet their righteou^nesse shall
appear as the Sun at Midday. 2. It is not the applause, or admiration of men,
but Go^^ testimony and approbation, which will yield solid comfort an^ content;
the good word of men is as uncertain as themselves its Hosanna to day, Crucify
to morrow: But he who receive honor from God, holds it for eternity; his
testimonial, h^ Letter Patents* are never out of date: vainly and ambitiously
(...) covet the praise of men, is Pharisaicall hypocrisy, Ioh. 5.4^ a touch of
infidelity, which (when the secrets of all counsel^ shall be discovered) will
bring with it shame and confusion (...) face before God and his Angels: but
that praise which is of God is a tended with honor, glory, immortality,
eternal life^ Observe Saint Paul's Exhortation, Phil. 4.8. and obey it, and you
shall obtain Abels reward and honor, Gods testimony. For certainly, if we by
patient continuance in well-doing* seek for glory, we shall find it; If as
Abel we Sacrifice and suffer for it; do well, and are persecuted for it, the
blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things then the blood of Abel, will
consecrate and sanctify all our Sacrifices, services, and sufferings, and make
them accepted for that Sacrifice, which Jesus Christ, the first borne of every
Creature, offered to God the Father on the Cross, for the Salvation of Men.
Neque enem in sacrificiis, quae Abel and Cain primi obtulerunt, munera eorum
Deus, sed corda iutuebatur: Abel pacificus and justus, dum Deo sacrificat
innocenter, docuit and cateres quando ad Altar munus offerunt, s^^ venire cum
timore Dei, cum simplici cord, cum lege justitia, cum concerdiae pace, Cypr.
Sermon. sext. de Orat. Domin.

3d. Part, which contains a Prayer, or Meditation.

O Eternal Lord God, who dwell in the highest Heavens, in hat light which
is inaccessible, yet admits thy sinful creatures he e on earth to have access
unto thy Throne of Grace, by humble Prayers and Supplycations. O thou Infinite
all perfection, and all sufficiency, who art clothed with Majesty and Honor,
yet gracio^sly accepts the Oblations and devoirs f t^y faithful servants,
though accompanied with many imperfections and weaknesses: pardon and remit
(we beseech thee) the infirmities and defects of our holy things, and let the
Words of our Mouths, and the Meditations of our hearts be always acceptable
in thy sight, O Lord our strength and our redeemer. Compose our minds, and
frame our hearts into such a temper of spirit, that with devotion of spirit,
with submission and reverence of affections, with holy and heavenly resolutions
of obedience, we may serve and worship thee, that our Sacrifices be living, our
services reasonable, such as may advance thy glory, and express our sincere
repentance, and holy Faith. We renounce all sufficiency in our selves, all
merit in our works, and have recourse to thy mercy* and thy Sons merits, for
the acceptance of both. We humbly confess our persons are burdened with an
infinite guilt, which our wounded spirits cannot of themselves sustain. O holy
Jesus who was wounded for our transgressions* and bore all our iniquities,
disburden and clear us from the weight of our sins, take us into the arms of
thy mercy, bear our griefs, carry our sorrows, that we sincke not into
perdition. Master save us, else we perish; Son of God, Lan^s of God; then
that take away the sins of the World, take away our sins: protect us from thy
Fathers wrath, and reconcile us into his favor. Our Natures are deeply
infected with an over-spreading Leprosy; o thou the great Physician of our
Souls, wash and cleanse the plague of our hearts with thy blood, and by the
virtue of that precious application, cure all our distempers, heal all our
infirmities: our sins are in number and quality above measure sinful; O holy
Redeemer, absolve us from them by the Oblation of thy Soul offered for sin:
expiate them with thy satisfaction, kill them by thy death, and let thy
righteousness be unto us for a garment of salvation. Our Services, Prayers,
and Religious duties, are defective and blemished; O all-sufficient Savior, by
thy Incense and Intercession, supply all their defects, sanctify all their
adherent corruptions, and present them as acceptable Sacrifices to thy Father.
Suffer us not, O omnipotently gracious, and graciously omnipotent Lord God,
when we are called, as Abel was, to suffer for thee, and for righteousness
sake, to fall away from the steadfastnesse of our Faith: strengthen us with all
might, by thy glorious power, unto all patience, and long suffering with
joyfulnesse. Let thy holy Spirit be our instructor, and comforter, that we
never Sacrifice to any strange Gods, that we never swerve from the rules of
Piety and Justice, always obeying thy will, always submitting to thy will.
The Lord hear us in the day of trouble, the name of the God of Jacob defend
us; fend us help from his Sanctuary, and strengthen us out of Sion. Remember
all our Offerings, and accept our Sacrifices; O let us always offer, and do
thou graciously accept; and, when thou please, let us chearefully suffer, and
do thou gloriously reward. Whatsoever thy dispensations shall be, let them be
in love and mercy to us; and let our demeanor under them, be as becomes the
Gospel of Christ Jesus; if they share out unto adversity, let us take up our
cross and follow thee, resign our selves, offer up our wills and affections
to thy infinite wife and good providence: If thou portion out unto us
prosperity, let us not dare to Sacrifice unto our own nets, ascribe it to our
own wit or industry, or carnally glory in our own wealth or power; but to offer
and return to thee all we have and enjoy, in a grateful acknowledgement;
receiving all from thee, depending for all on thee, enjoying all in thee,
referring all unto thee: And for all, we offer unto thy divine Majesty our
souls and bodies, our thoughts and words, our resolutions and actions, our
passions and affections, to be regulated by thy word, sanctified by thy spirit,
guided by thy counsel, blessed by thy goodness; all that we are, all that we
have, we offer as a Sacrifice to thee, and to thy service, humbly beseeching
thee to approve and accept all for the value of that Sacrifice, which thy holy
Son Jesus offered on the Cross for the redemption of mankind: For which
great and unexpressable mercy, we offer up unto thee the Calves of our lips.
Blessing, Glory, Honor, and Power, be unto him that sits on the Throne, to
the Lamb, and to the holy Spirit, for ever and ever, Amen.

ENOCHS Translation.
Heb. 11.5. By Faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death, and
was not found, etc.
ABel the first example of piety, was the first man that died; Enoch, the
second godly man in the Catologue, the first that died not: Abels departure,
assures us, That though we now live, we must dye; Enochs translation,
ascertains us, That though our life be changed, we shall live: Abel was
snatched away by unnatural violence Enoch was removed by a supernatural
mercy: Abel by the hand of his Brother was sent into Heaven, Enoch was by God
immediately assumed thither: Abel was cast up in a storm Enoch carried thither
in a calm; he to receive his Crown of Martyrdom, this the reward of his
uprightness and sincerity in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation,
both admitted to the fruition of an unmixt, unalterable felicity. Further yet,
in Abel we see the sad and disconsolate condition of Believers in this life; in
Enoch, their glorious and happy estate after their change: in the one, the
implacable fury, hostility, and malice of the World against them: in the other,
the incomprehensible love and mercy of God toward them: the first enstructs us
to serve God constantly, in despite of all opposition, terrors or
discouragements; the latter, ascertaine us, that if we please God, God will
reward our services with glory and eternity; For, By Faith Enoch, etc.

According to my premised Method, the words of the Canon are to be first
explained.

1. part.

This Enoch was the same that is mentioned by Saint Jude, verse 14. to
difference him from Enos the son of Cain, called the seventh from Adam; not
as if there had been but five men betwixt Adam and him, (for there was a
numerous people betwixt them) but because he lived in the seventh generation or
age from Adam, five generations intervening that of Seth, Enos, Kena^,
Mahalaleel, Jared, who begot Enoch in the seventh age, anno mundi, 622.

The Apostles Encomium of this Enoch is taken from the historical relation,
Genesis 5.24. and there is no jar at all betwixt Moses his history, and Saint
Paul's testimony of him.

Indeed Aben-ezra, and generally the Jews, charge the Apostle with forgery and
prevarication, and hotly urge Moses against him to prove that Enoch did die, in
a direct oppoition to his, that he should not see death, and their plea they
take from the words of the Text, which (say they) necessarily proves their
affirmation. For thus they reason, all the days of Enoch were 365 years, but
if he were then, or be yet living, then Moses his calculation of Enochs days
were false, his days were extended to the Apostles age, and so more then 365
years, and therefore Moses his report, he was taken away, is not truly
translated by Saint Paul, [he did not see death] and so by consequent, Saint
Paul does not interpret, but imposes on Moses what he never intended, does not
translate Moses his words, but corrupt and offer violence to them in this
particular, concerning Enochs translation.

But in all this heat, the Jews show themselves Jews, maliciously charging
that on the Apostle, which the accusers are deeply guilty of, which will easily
be discovered by these following manifestoes.

1. Those words, all the days etc. relates only to the days of his flesh,
but determines nothing concerning either his death, or not death: the sense is,
howsoever he was removed hence, whether he passed the ordinary gate of death,
or was extraordnarily conveyed away; it is certain, before this removal, he
lived 365 years, which is all that can be concluded from that expression, and
is to their purpose a mere impertinency: for it follows not, all the days of
Enoch were 365 years, therefore Enoch died, that is, his soul was separated
from his body; this will only follow, his body was taken from the eye of men,
and his person, from conversation with men of that age; neither can that
Phrase, God took him, bear their gloss. For 2. The Apostles translation of
the phrase is warranted by Onkelus, who thus reads it, Neque enim occidit eum
Deus, he was not taken away by a sudden violent death, as they fancy; God took
not life from him as Jonas wished in the impatiency of spirit, Jonah 4.3. but
took him, the whole compositum consisting of body and soul: and further yet,
from Siracides, Eccles. 44.16. who interprets it of his translation into
Heaven, (...), but most principally and clearly from the Text it self; For
1. Death is the wages of sin, not the reward of piety; and his taking away, in
the Text, is subsequent to his walking with God, as an extraordinary
remuneration thereof, and a signal testimony of his love and favor.

2. No such phrase is used concerning the departure of any of the rest of the
Patriarchs; of all of them it is said in express formal terms, that they
dyed, of him only, that God took him, in an extraordinary favor, by an
extraordinary way; neither is this to be presumed a nullity, or appeal of that
eternal Decree of the Sovereign Lawgiver, Statutum est omnibus mori, but a
dispensation of that Law, which he subjected his creatures unto, himself still
remaining most free to privilege and exempt whom he pleases from the bondage
of death, and sentence of the Law; neither does Death in that Statute signify
only the divorce or separated estate of the soul from the body, but also it
expresses the exchange of a mortal bodily condition, into an immortal and
spiritual: and unless this signification be admitted, that Statute reaches
not, holds not, in that residue which shall be found at the last day, who
shall not die that is their persons shall not be dissolved, but shall die, they
shall be changed; they shall not die in the former, they shall die in the
latter sense 1 These. 4.17,

3. That expression [he was not, or he was not seen] non comparuit, as Onkelos,
imports so much For if God had only assumed his soul, as of other dying
Saints, he might have been seen on earth, his body had remained among them as
the dead bodies of Abel, Seth, etc. did; which because it was not to be found,
we may with good consequence infer, God took it with his soul, not his soul,
and left it.

If it be objected That it is also said of Moses his body that it was not to be
found; the answer is obvious, that the case (...) different: For of Moses its
recorded in plain termet, that he died they are the very words of the Text, no
such thing so much as hinted concerning Enoch: And although none had made a
discovery where Moses Sepulcher was, the proper ubi of it, yet in general we
know, God enterred him in a valley of Moab, Deuteronomy. 34.6.

4. God is a God of the living; what he is said to take, it is to show mercy
and love, it is not to worse, but perfect the condition: if he take the soul,
it is to enlarge it from the burden and bondage of the body, and to complete
that effence which it had in its house of Clay: if he take the body, it is to
confer on it a more excellent and certain condition, to free it from
contingencies, infirmities, yea corruption it self, and restore it to a life
proportionable to that dignity and glory it is assumed and advanced unto.

Others there are, who though they grant, he died not, yet by no means will
allow him a place in Heaven, but confine him to some subterrestriall or aeriall
lodge, or which is most received, to Paradise, as (say they) afterward Elias
was, there to be reserved to the revelation of Antichrist, at, or near, the end
of the World, under whom they shall suffer Martyrdom, yet at last shall
prevail against him, and so be admitted into Heaven.

But this fancy is easily consuted by the series of the history of Genesis, for
either Enoch was one of the eight persons saved in the Deluge, as most certain
it is he was not; or if he were at the time of the Deluge in any terra
incognita, he had certainly perished in it. If it be replied, That Paradise was
a privileged place, by an extraordinary dispensation, from the general
Inundation. First this is to beg the question, and to suppose that which is to
be proved. Secondly, this is to pretend a miracle without warranty. Thirdly, if
it were so, then Noah might have saved himself a labor to build an Arc, and
saved himself and children in Paradise, and have had no tedious march thither.
And fourthly, if Enochs body were there, it might have been found, and seen,
for it was a known place in Mesopotamia; and Peter, the Jesuit is of this
opinion, and dissents from Bell, and others of his society in this particular.

Others make Heaven the term of his translation, but yet conceive he was
advanced to the highest pitch of felicity, he should after participate, Sed
substitisse in sinu Abrama usque ad Christi adventum, these are the words, and
this the conjecture of Peter Martyr; but this (I conceive) though it be
disputable, yets its most probable, its no absurdity in relation, its not error
in Faith to hold, That God compleats not the felicity of his Saints at their
entrance into Heaven, simul and semul, altogether and at once, but by several
degrees and Classes advances them, as shall more fully appear in the
explanation of the last verse of this Chapter.

But whether God changed Enoch in a moment as the living at the last day shall
be, 1 Cor. 15.51.52. I will not declare affirmanter, positively, though to me
it seems most probable, he was not so changed; for flesh and blood, (that's the
relics of corruption) cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: necessarily,
the body must be previously disposed and qualified with such perfections and
excellencies, as in some measure are answerable to Gods Majesty and presence,
before it be admitted into Heaven, or partake glory; even the most innocent
imperfections to which our bodies are subject, as hungring, thirsting, and such
like, must be deposited, and other dispositions substituted; our bodies must be
spiritualized, not in substance, but in qualities, and in their exemption from
those infirmities which were in this mortal estate connaturall to them; and
this is Aug thought l. 1. de piece mer. and remiss cont. Pel. Non cred^ Enoch
and Elias in illam spiritualem qualitatem corporis comm^tates, qualis in
resurrectione promittitur; and so I leave the first praposall, and descend to
the Doctrinall part.

1. Enochs wa^king with God, was antocedent to his pleasing of God, to his
translation by God; if we will please him be glorified by him we must fear and
honor him first; h^^ that thus hops will purify himself, he that lo^keth
for now Heavens, and new Earth, will be diligent to be found, etc. 2 Pet.
3.13.14. and this diligence is the well pleasing service this is the (...), in
the Text for this w^rd signifies no^ only actually to please, but to endeavor
to make it their study, business, and delight to please; and so i^ is (...)
(...) Tit. 2.9 It Is most certain, if we do sincerely endeavor, w^ shall
please, if we please, we shall be approved, shall be recompensed; this is the
salary of righteousness, at the end i^ shall be well with the doers thereof,
Isay 3 10. but if we walk after the world, the humors fancies, and misprisions
of men, the fashionable thriving, and applauded sins of the times, if we comply
with the interests and passions of others for our own worldly ends to the
dishonor of Religion, prejudice and disadvantage of our neighbors, we
endeavor to please men, not God, we are not in all things willing, that is,
resolving and endeavoring to live honestly, which in the Apostles account, is
the great evidence of a good conscience, Heb. 13.18. we walk after the flesh,
and we know Saint Paul's judgment is authenticke, Gal. 5.21. whereas if we live
in the fear of God, walk after the spirit, there is no condemnation, Romans
8.1. If we will walk (...), exactly, Ephesians. 5.15. we must walk by rule, Phil.
3.16. then all shall be blessed here, and hereafter: ambula, walk before me
(says God) Genesis 17.1. and be thou perfect; sincere here, and happy hereafter;
godly here, glorious hereafter. 2. Enochs integrity, and exact conversation,
and that in an Age when sin was predominant, and the whole world lay in
wickedness, verifies the Apostles assertions, The just shall live by Faith;
Faith is the substance, for what but his Faith kept him unspotted from the
World, moved him to walk in a diametricall opposition to the ways of the
World? what but his Faith taught him to contemn the World, and all the gaudy
fantastic vanities of it, all the carnal pleasures and enjoyments of it?
what but his Faith provoked and persuaded him to walk wisely in the midst of
a crooked and perverse generation? what but his Faith, which overcame the
world, mastered his affections, sequesited his thoughts from the honors,
profits pleasures thereof, and set him on heaven and heavenly things? his Faith
told and enstructed him, that the World is but a Scheame, that passes away, 1
Epist. of John 2.17. 1 Cor. 7.31. all its honors end in shame and dishonor,
all its profits in want and misery, all its pleasures in bitterness and
anxiety; and this enformation restrained him from a greedy restless pursuit
after the World; his Faith ascertained him, that to be carnally minded, is
death; to walk after the spirit, is life; that the ways of the wicked are
destructive, pernicious ways, 2 Pet. 2.2. a woe attending them, Jude 11. that
the walk of the many (though many of them walk like the pestilence in
darkness) is enmity to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. the path that
leads to the chambers of death; and therefore he declined their paths, would
not follow a multitude to do evil; well he knew, that great is the reward of
righteousness; he that believes, shall not be ashamed, shall not be
confounded; his patient expectation shall not be frustrated, God will preserve
him, and save him, and glorify him to all eternity: and upon this
consideration, he ordered his conversation aright, he walked with God while he
lived here, and now rests from his labors, and lives with God in peace and
happiness to all eternity, illi terrena sapiant, etc. says Cyprian, let those
dote on the World who either know not, or look not for Heaven; those who seek
for eternity, slight the World, leave all, and follow Christ, Matthew. 4.22.
Col. 3.1. you have a most weighty exhortation, to holy and heavenly
mindedness, which may well take up your thoughts and meditations. 3. Enoch
Faith obtained more then it aimed at, not only a liberate from the bondage of
mortality, and the soon after ensuing destruction; but also an unexpected
conveyance into Heaven: God does abundantly to the Believers, over and above
what his Faith can think or ask. It Is true, our Faith expects not the same way,
looks not at the same pass into Heaven; yet it will procure that happiness to
us which will be infinitely satisfactory; the soul of the Believer is
immediately after its separation translated into Heaven: and his body (though
for the present flumbering in the Grave) shall awake into a glorious
resurrection, Ioh. 6.40. and be united unto the soul and so both shall be
indefeasably seized of eternal felicities the sight and fruition of God. Thus
Augustine lib. 15. de Civ. Dei, cap. 19. Enoch translatio nostrae dedicationis
est prasigurati dilatio; quae quidem jam facta est in Christo capite nostro,
qu^ sie resurrexit, ut non moriatun ulterius, sed etiam ipse translatu^ est,
restat altera dedicatio universa domus; quando erit omnium resurrectio, non
mortuorum amplius. 4. Enoch was taken away, when he had lived but a moiety of
that age, which the rest of his contemporaries had indulged to them; it is many
times a great mercy to be taken away from present and future evils. Indeed,
old age, and long life, are the blessings of God, yet such only as are common,
and are not simply desirable of themselves, but in reference and order to
other ends and uses; and certainly. Death it self, (if we reflect on the
advantanges, we gain by it, whether deliverance from the contagious
wickednesses, or sad distempers of the calamitous time we pass below, or the
immediate possession and enjoyment of the succeeding selicities in Heaven)
cannot be surmized a loss, but an exchange or trassique; not an effect of Gods
severity and wrath, but a privilege of grace and mercy: else Saint Paul's,
Cupio dissolvi. etc. Phil. 1.23. would be a rash, if not desperate wish,
concupiscontia carnis, which was indeed most pious and rational; for what so
high complement of love, as to desire to be with Christ? what more reasonable
suite, then to Petition an exchange of Earth, for Heaven; cortainty, for
uncertainty; misery, for endless felicity? to leave the society of men, wicked
men, tyrants, and persecutors; absurd unreasonable men, as the Apostle styles
them, and be admitted into the company of innumerable Angels and Saints, of
Christ, his holy Apostles, Confessors, and Martyrs. O then let us not fear our
own, let us not grieve at the death of others, as if we were without hope; but
let us resolve, that Death is the end of our Pilgrimage, the finishing our
course, the bringing us to our fathers house; and Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord. 5. Enochs Faith, was an operative, obedientiall Faith, it
taught and directed him to please God; Vt transferretur causa fuit, quod
placuit Deo, ut placerat Deo, ambulavit cum Deo obediens ejus voluntati, ut
ambularet cum Deo, causa fuit ejus fides, Haym. in lo. his Faith set him on
obedience to God; his obedience pleased him; and because he pleased him,
therefore he also translated him: No matter then whether we please men, or no,
lets study and endeavor to please God, to serve him (...); with reverence and
godly fear, in the Apostles expression, Heb. 12.28. and we shall be sure, all
things, the worst of things, tribulation, distress, persecution. famine,
nakedness, sword, and death it self, shall work together for good to us,
Romans 8.28. If men scorn and forsake us, the Heavenly Quire will entertain and
welcome us; If the World deride, hate, and persecute us, Angels will delight
and rejoice in us, God will bestow a name and an inheritance which shall not be
taken from us, he will favor and preserve us. Build, O build up your selves in
your most holy Faith, and in the end, you shall receive the end of your hopes,
the reward of your labors and sufferings, Eternal Life. For the obtaining of
which, let us in the last place Pray.
Per Abelem mortis sententiam demonstravit Deus esse certam; Per Enoch autem
indicavit temporariam eam sententiam, nec in sempeternum duraturam, caetorum
abolendam olim mortem; Proinde, quod vivens translatus est, and quod vivit,
scimus: Vbi autem, and quomode, incertam, Scriptura hoc non patefaciente,
Theoph. in loc.

3d. Part. The Prayer, or Meditation.

O Most glorious Lord God, who art infinitely holy, mereifull, and good, who
delightest in mercy, and with whom mercy rejoices against judgment; from
whose goodness every good and perfect gift is derived, and with whom there is
no variable nesse, nor shadow of change; who infinitely rewardest the sincer^
endeavors of thy servants with Eternity, and do abundantly for them above
what they can ask or think. Enoch, his confidence, kept himself unspotted of
the World; when it lay in wickedness, he separated himself from all
confederacy and association with it; when the ungodly walked on every side, he
followed the ways of Righteousness; where and when sin abounded, grace in
him did superabound; he walked before thee O God of Righteousness, and thou
were pleased by a Miracle of mercy to remove him from the world and sin, and
assume him into Heaven that way none had passed before, and possess him of thy
glory and fullness. O thou the God of all Power strengthen us by the assistance
of the same grace, to follow his holy example, that so also we may follow him
in the place of holiness, the Throne of Gods Glory and Majesty Restrain and
prevent us by thy Grace, that we walk not in the ways of the wicked, we fond
not upon earthly vanities and possessions, we have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness. Assist us by thy Grace, that we walk as the
Children of Light, our treasure being Heaven, the reward of holy living, we may
not have our portion in this World; that having made our acquaintance with
thee, and living and dying in the unity of the holy Catholic Church, and in
the Communion of Saints, we may have remission of our sins: And when thou
shall be pleased to remove us hence, we may live with thee eternally, and be
partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, we may be admitted into
the society of the holy Angels, of Enoch and of the rest of the glorified
Saints: Deliver us (O Lord) from the power of darkinesse, and so translate us
into the Kingdom of thy dear Son; that then with the holy Angels and
blessed Saints, we may spend a whole Eternity in singing Praises to thy great
and glorious name, who live for ever and ever; and blessed be the holy and
undivided Tranity, now and for evermore, Amen.

NOAH'S Arc.
Heb. 11.7. By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved
with fear, prepared an Arc to the saving of his house, by the which he
condemned the World, and became heir of the righteousness which is by Faith.
THe third Canonized Saint in Saint Paul's Catalogue is Noah, one perfect in his
Generation, not only coram ho^inibus, before men, sed pra hominibus coram Deo,
more then ^en, before God, Genesis 7.1. this is Gods testimony of him, Genesis 6.9. a
Preacher of Righteousness, both by words and life; this Saint Peter's Elogie of
him, 2 Pet. 2.5. the Heir of Righteousness, in this Apostles expression in
this place; whose holy Faith procured him a salvation different from the
mercies which were bestowed on Abel and Enoch; the same Faith but noted here
and diversified by discriminating acts and objects. Abels Faith sanctified his
Oblation, and furnished him with spiritual graces, perseverance in well-doing,
and the patience of hope, (as the Apostle Phraseth, 1 These. 1.3.) for well
doing; and after, this work of Faith, acquired him him an inheritance among
those who are sanctified by Faith. Enochs Faith wrought righteousness, and
immediately advanced him into Heaven, and preferred him to a transcendent
dignity, and by an extraordinary way of mercy, possessed him of eternity. Noah's
Faith procured him temporal advantages, preserved him and his family from
outward ruin, when the ungodly World, yea, a World of ungodly men perished by
the Deluge. Abels Faith armed him with patience against the assaults of his
Brothers cruelty. Enochs Faith defended him against the overflowings of
ungodliness and senced him with innocence, Noah's Faith taught him providence,
to prepare an Arc against a storm, and preserved hi^ from the overflowings of
the great deeps: It Is true, the direct and primary object of Faith, is eternity;
yet even temporal deliverances are subordinately and secondarily considered;
it is a^ act of Faith to overcome the World, but the highest operation is the
purchase and acquisition of Heaven: Godliness has the promises of this life,
that now is, and of that which is to com^ 1 Timothy 4, 8. even temporal
enjoyments, are objects of our desires, and of our hopes, so long as the
preservation of health a^^ life shall be a mercy and blessing to us; and Faith
not only bin^ us to the duties of Religion, but to a diligent provision for
o^^selves and relatives, 1 Timothy 5.8, The direct then, and proper a^ of Abels
Faith, was patience; the reward, blessedness, Mat. ^ 10. The act of Enochs
Faith, was holiness of life; the reward Vision of God, Mat. 5.8. The act of
Noah's Faith, providence the reward, Preservation. For by Faith Noah, etc.

1. Part. The Exposition of the Words.

Being warned of God, and it was no sudden, no sho^^ warning; the prediction
bears date before the event 120 year^ The warning was given ( Genesis 6.3.) in
the 480 year current ^^ Noah's life, Lamech his Father being 662, and
Methuselah h^^ Grandfather 849 years old; and the Deluge happened not t^^ the
600 year current of Noah, Genesis 7.6.

Of things not as yet seen, and so not foreseen by humane wisdom, or
discoverable by any rules of art, the foretold event was beyond the reach of
the deepest Politian, and the skill of the most exact Artist. Indeed, an
observing man might have seen the sins of that Age, and that place where he
lived, to be rip^ for judgment, and cry loud for vengeance; but he could no^
see, that all Flesh had corrupted it self, nor reasonably presum^ it; and
therefore neither could he foresee that all Flesh should be destroyed by Water
at such a period of time; nor reasonably presume, that God would execute the
severity of his wrath i^ that height and rigor. The Artist possibly might by
the conjunction of the Celestial bodies presage great Floods and Inundations
to happen at or near about that determinate time; but he could not so much as
guess or divine, that so violent an irruption of the springs and heads of
Waters should follow as would drain them, and the Water which was bound in the
Clouds, Job 26.8. should descend in cataracts for forty natural days, and
cover the most mountainous parts of the earth; that the Waters above and
beneath within the Earth, and the Clouds, should conspire ^he destruction of
the World; or that the Air would melt and ^issolve it self into Water, or
that this Deluge would be so universal, happen at once in all parts and places
of the World; ^hese, nor none of these, could the chiefest Magitian, either
^ncy, or Prognosticke, no ordinary or natural influences or ^owers (though
these might have their helping and furthering ^asualty) brought this long
derided judgment; but the extraordinary hand of the great God of Heaven and
Earth, he only before whose Eyes all things past, present, and to come are
^aked) in his infinite wisdom foresaw it, he in his infinite ^oodnesse to
mankind foretold it, and in his most just judgment, for the sin of man,
sent it, Genesis 6.17. For if this sad ^^ent could have been foreknown, this would
have much added ^o the Worlds condemnation, but much detracted from the
excellency of Noah's Faith; it would have been a slender commendation of Noah's
Faith, and this instance a weak proof of the Apostles suppositum, verse 1.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen, if Noah had, or might have had a
Mathematical demonstration of this warning of God. But Noah had Gods
declaration for it and he took it on Gods word, which the unbe^eeving World
derided, and while they jeered and mocked at the brediction (perhaps because
the Stars could not reveal this secret) he feared and expected the event,
depending on Gods ^eracity and power, he believed the revelation (for it was a
warning from God) therefore feared the denunciation, Indubi^atum habuit
eventum, quod Deus eventurum praedixerat, quod homines securi ut fabulam
ridebant, and Noah, eo quod metuit, ut Insanum irridebant, Erasm. Paraphr.

(...), being circumspect and cautious thereupon, or pi^ously and religiously
observing the divine vaticiny; or, as we read it, moved with fear; or
downright with the Vulgar, fearing; it is all one: for fear strikes men into
religious thoughts of God; Primus in orb Deos fecit timor, and makes men wary
and wise in all their undertakings, and most sedulous a^ careful to avoid
imminent and approaching dangers: and so follows, fearing he prepared, etc.
his Faith moved him to fea^^ and his fear moved him to undertake the Fabric.
Some ^^ deed place a Comma after fearing, and thut read the words, (...) quae
nondum videbantur veritas, or metuens, taking the foregoing clause into the
sense of this word, feared the thing not seen; b^ I take the ordinary reading
to be fuller and clearer, he believe the things not seen, and thereupon feared,
and fearing, he prepred, etc. his preparation proceeded from his fear and his
fe^^^ from his Faith. But what? does Faith work fear; is not report of
Conscience, in the sense of Gods love, the chiefest product on of Faith? and
does not this exclude fear?

The resolution is easy, and at hand, That though the principal effect of
Faith be love, and complacency in the love of God yet even this does presuppose
the full and adaequate object of Faith which is every revelation and
proposition of God, the histori^^ precepts, promises, and threatenings of God,
Faith makes use (...) any, or all of these, according to the exigency and
condition of t^^ subject. The Believer relies on the Promises, for his hope a^^
confidence; applies the menaces and judgments to fear a^ decline them;
observes the histories for belief, and the precept for obedience; he yields a
full assent to all Gods affirmations, cheerful dependence on all his
Promises, an uniforme obedience to all his Precepts, and an humbled awe to all
his threa^nings: For Faith in his full latitude and extent, respects all a^^
every one of these; and therefore Faith does not exclude fear but beget and
nourish it. And thus Noah believed all that God proposed, and particularly,
having denounced wrath to com^ therefore necessarily he must fear; and his
fear comply^^ with all the other specified considerations; for as he fear the
threatened Deluge, so he believed Gods prediction concerning it; and accordingly
as God commanded, he prepared a Arc, and he was confident, that as God had
promised, so b^ that means he would most assuredly preserve him and his family
it was not then the fear of a melancholy man which so distract and disturbes
his mind, that he cannot bethink himself (...) any case or remedy, but
always suspects, and is jealous of tho^ remedies which are at hand, as
experience testifies, when a well-^rovided Army betrayeth it self by a Panick
fear, nor the fear ^f a drowning man, whose reason is so suddenly, and wholly
surprised, that it is altogether useless to him; Neither was it a fear of
despair, or distrust, like that of damned Spirits, for this ^ highly injurious
to God, even a denial, or doubting of his ^^ve and goodness; but it was a
fear of Providence and circumspection for himself and family; of reverence
and affection ^^ God; and certainly, this affection, if right set, have its
true ^^bject, and wisely moderated, have its just temper, has very much ^f
Religion in it, and is a maine instrument in the conversion ^f the soul to
God, and afterward settling and confirming it: that which Faith first workth
by, is the terrors of the Law; and that which keeps our Faith in obedience,
is the fear of wrath; ^his is one principle and foundation of this work of our
conver^^on, for it makes men desirous to prevent, quo ad posse, the wills they
dread, and lays a restraint upon their Spirits; and though Faith stands not
here, but advances higher, stirring up ^n the soul apprehensions of love and
mercy; yet here it usu^^ly begins, as appears from the demeanor of Saint
Peter's ^onverts, Acts 2.37. and Saint Paul's, Acts 19.17.18.19. ^hus the first
motive of the Ninivites repentance, was a Ser^on of fear; the next and most
immediate, an axiom of love; ^he can tell, if God will, etc. Jonah 3.9. But I
digress, and will return to Noah's fear, to show wherein it consisted.

1. It was a preapprehension of those evils which God had ^^reatned, and this
however a natural affection to fear those wills, which we expect, yet is not
sinful, but commendable, and profitable, leading us ( ut seta trahit post se
filum, in Saint Augustines expression) to serious thoughts of Gods Power,
Truth, Justice; and so disposes us to seek and enquire for his ^^ercy and
goodness: It expels carnal security, idleness, and ^ensuality, the
putting far away the evil day, Amos 6.3. and ^ngageth to provide against a
storm. Hence it is said, It is a ^arefull thing to fall into the hands of the
living Lord, Hebr. p. 31. The best, sin, and so deserve wrath, and so need of
this ^^ssion, to fear, and to fly from wrath to come: and because (...) has
denounced woe, woes against all disobedience, therefore they cannot but fear,
Amos 3.8. which is also exemp^^ fied in David, Psalm. 119 120. My Flesh
trembles for fea^^ of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.

2. It was a fear of care and caution, by repentance a^^ holiness of life, to
prevent the feared evils, not to touch t^^ accursed thing, not to cover the
Babilonish garment, or wedge (...) gold, not to require meat for our lust; to
decline and seperat^ from all wicked associations and confederates, not to put
th^^ hand to those wickednesses for which the wrath of God comes on the
Children of disobedience: nay further yet not (...) act, consent, or counsel,
to any design which to us may see^ repugnant to our Profession, or we may
suspect to be prejudicial to the service or worship of God, or injurious to
o^^ neighbors, and wheresoever any doubt or feruple shall arise which way to
follow, what to adhere unto, always to choose t^^ safer part, and the less
suspicious, to avoid that course whe^^ possibly we may offend, though
necessarily we shall not, and follow that, wherein certainly we shall not
offend, though m^^^ contrariant to our own desires, humors, and carnal
interes^ and advantages: this is rightly to serve God in fear, Psalm. 2.1^. To
work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.13. The walking
circumspectly, the duty of every prudent, wa^^ Christian, Ephesians. 5.15. and that
we fall not (for it is possible for the best to fall) we must fear, Let him
that think he stands take heed, etc. 1 Cor. 10.12. and the Apostle proposes
the caveat, to the Christian Churches, from the exclusion of the Jewish, Romans
11.20.

3. It was a fear of respect and reverence, both in respect of Gods Majesty,
at whose presence the Angels cover their faces, Es. 6. and also in
consideration of Gods past goodnesse^ and mercies toward them, and expectation
of future deliverances: Hence that expression, Psalm. 130.4. There is mercy with
thee, that thou may be feared: well he knew, that he that believes in him,
shall not be ashamed; well he knew, that his mercy was nigh them that fear
him; that nothing more endeares and obliges God to us, then an unwillingnesse
to displease him; nothing more restraines us from offending God then the
contemplation of Gods Sovereign Majesty, and remembrance and expectation of
his mercies; nothing more demonstrates and expresses our love to God, then our
fear to offend him, res est soliciti, etc. 1 Pet. 1.17. Mal. 1.6. Well he knew
there was a vast difference betwixt him that fears, and him that fears not;
that ruin and destruction attends the latter, that mercy and deliverance is
provided for the former; and therefore Noah not only feared, but that he might
be capable of the mercies which are prepared for those that sear him, he
prepared an Arc: which was an act of hope and confidence, that God would
preserve, and is the second described effect of Noah's Faith.

He prepared an Arc, he provided the materials; God ordered the form, God
prescribed and lined the model; Noah raised the structure: the Platform was
Gods, the workmanship Noah's, which was a most clear signal proof of his
Faith; whether we respect the act it self, or the many difficulties, and
discouragements which accompanied it, and he was to encounter, and struggle
withal, in the composure of this Fabric; For

1. The very subject it self required a great portion of Faith; for well might
Noah thus argue with himself; Does the good and gracious God delight in the
ruin of his creatures? Made he the World to destroy it? or can nothing
satisfy his wrath and justice, but an universal destruction and
extermination? Will he actuate his threatenings to the height, and execute his
Judgments with the greatest severity and rigor? Are all the passages of his
goodness and tender mercies obstructed? No means to be used to mitigate and
qualify the hardness of the sentence, or is the Decree irreversible? Will he
deface the World, the impresse of his glory? Will he destroy man, his own
Image, curam divini ingenii, as Tertullian, his Masterpiece? These and many
more quaeries might Noah have cogitated, to distrust the prediction, or
dispured it, and to retard him in his design, that he should not fall to his
work, or slackly follow it. But against all these carnal disputings, he
proposes to himself Gods veracity and faithfulness; God has thus declared
his pleasure, has prescribed and ordered me to frame this Building, there is
no more dispute, no foreslowing of time, no neglect in the observance of the
Order, God has spoken, I must belee^^^ 2. The difficulties which he would meet
withal in the performance of his duty, might have staggered his Faith, and
sto^^ his work: For this also might he here have reasoned; Must I (...)
necessity build an Arc, and this of so great a capacity and largeness? or
what need the expense of so much money, labor, a^^ time, as will be required
to this work? How can I make (...) Arc of that stowage and bulk, as will
contain the several sp^cies of all creatures? or granting, I might make room
enough^ yet what safety for me and my family, from the cruelty a^^ fierceness
of ravenous beasts? what agreement or peace ca^ be expected among them? How
will it be possible to endur^ the variety of the hideous shrikes, roaring, and
wildnesses of the sentitives of all sorts, or the filthiness of their stinch
and excrements? But granting these also; yet further, how shall (...) summons,
or what authority will my summons have among^ these untamed bruits? Will they
be decoyed into the Arc a^ my call? or supposing this to be feasible; yet
where shall Provision be had (as the Disciples to Christ, where shall we have
Bread for this multitude) where shall Victuals be found to furnish a Magazine?
or where a Magazine, to contain sufficient sto^^ for the sustentation of all
these? or how shall that variety o^ Provision be brought in, as will serve for
the nutriment of these strange different natures? Or how was it possible for
eight Persons to fodder and serve them all every day, and give them every one
their allowance? But allowing these also to be possible; yet how shall so great
a bulk, of that burden and capacity escape the rage of the madness of the
Waters and Winds; or splitting and foundering on some rocks or mountains? or
escaping the rocks, how shall I manage this hitherto unknown Engine? or what
judgment can I have in this undiscovered Art? But waving all these thoughts
too, how shall this design go on, which is so ridiculous and absurd to all
the world? which i^ so odious and ungrateful to all men, that none will yield
any asistance; all of them, either jeere and deride the work, or hinder and
stop it.
These, and such like thoughts and disputes as these, might have shaken his
resolution, and puzzled, if not non-plussed his Faith; and either broke the
design, and quashed the attempt, or made it go on slowly or slackly.

But Noah is constant and faithful to his Master, and his service; he knew
whom he trusted, whom he served, and therefore ^eighted all these pretended
difficulties, and seeming impossibilities, the scorns and derisions of carnal
men, and follow his business closely and cheerfully: Well he knew, that God
is infinite in Power and Wisdom, and whatsoever he wills, ^e does in Heaven
and in Earth; that he is true and just in all his Decrees and Promises; that he
could by his word, and for his words sake, would strengthen and animate his
spirit to go through with his work, enable him to perform all those duties
imposed on him, endure all those hardships, remove all those obstacles and
impossibilities which flesh and blood could object against him, and that God
would carry on this work by him, in despite of all opposition, difficulties,
and discouragements; for he was faithful that Promised, and therefore upon the
performance of the command of God, he obtained the reward, Preservation of
himself and family, which is not so much an effect, as a consequent recompense
of his Faith. For so it follows,

To the saving of his House, eight Souls, in Saint Peter's expression, 1 Pet.
3.10. that is, eight individualls, or Persons, and no more of his family, or
his house, were saved. And who these eight were, we have Recorded, Genesis 6.18.
himself, his Wife, his three Sons, Sem. Ham, and Japheth, and their
respective Wives, none of his servants, none of his Parents, though the
Posterity of Enoch, were taken in; these followed the garb of the world,
contemned, and mocked Noah's fear and design, which condemned the world, and
them with it: For that's the next clause which is to be explained;

By which he condemned the World, (...), he condemned, and adjudged them to the
Deluge: And here, as it was said of Athanasius, Totus mundus contra Athanasian,
Athanasius contra totum mundum: The world condemned him as foolish, and his
Arc as frivolous; he condemns the world by the Arc of impiety and
irreligion, and to destruction and ruin: this an effect contrary to the
former: the Arc saved him and his, but condemned the world in two respects.

1. The Structure of the Ark, which if the world had bee^ teachable, had been
an Instruction and Exhortation to Repentance and Reformation, that while there
was time, it might prevent the sad judgment denounced against it, for its
exorbitancies, and prodigious impieties: And probably it is, that No^ during
the time of the building of the Arc, was sedulous an^ frequent in his
Exhortation to amendment of life; for, from this, it seems, he is called, a
Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.^ and the world for not harkning to his
admonitions, and not o^ serving Gods long-suffering, while the Arc was
preparing, (...) called, the disobedient World, 1 Pet. 3.20.

2. The event it self shows us how the Arc condemned the world; before the
Deluge came, they mocked it; but afte^ it approached, they sought to it for
sanctuary, but could not b^ admitted; when they saw the danger was unavoidable,
then, and never till then, did they believe it, did they seek to avoid it^
Certainly, when they perceived they must Drown, their vai^^ hopes and
presumptions had deceived them, and that the Ark^ floated above the Waters in
security; this sight, and apprehension, would confound and amaze them, and
force from them (...) sentence of condemnation on themselves, and a confession,
that they justly deserved, what befell them; just as it is described by the
Author of the Book of Wisdom, c. 5. v. 1. ad 10. Thi^ then was their
condemnation, they had time to repent before the Deluge; after they shall have
no more time, they all shall perish; but Noah by the Arc is saved, and by his
Faith in preparing it, is entitled and made Heir of that Righteousness which
is by Faith.

Became Heir, he succeeded Abel and Enoch in the honor, and reward of
Righteousness, and of that Righteousness which is by Faith, an Evangelicall,
not Legal Righteousness; an Heir not by birth, but by Adoption; not by
works of the Law, but Faith; which Righteousness of Faith is twofold. One
imputed, which Faith embraces and apprehends. The other inhaerent, which
Faith produces and actuateth. The first is perfect, because it is Christ's
Righteousness, accepted as ours, and is nothing else, but the remission of our
sins, and the acceptance of our persons in and for Christ. The second is
imperfect, because of sin dwelling in our members, yet requi^ed of us, it
being the Character and Seal of Gods Spirit within ^s, or assurance of our
Heireship, and fruit of our Adoption, and in plain terms, it is the
mortification of sins and lusts, and a sincere purpose and endeavor of a new
life in righteousness and holiness; which Noah in some degrees performing,
thereby obtained the power and right to become the son of God, heir of that
other righteousness which is by faith, that ^s this, as to Noah, so to us,
conveyes, estates, seals, and ra^ifies our Adoption, and after, possession of
Heaven, which faith ^erives and communicates to us, for, and by the mercies of
God, ^n the merits of Jesus Christ; for in the Gospel-sense, Son and Heir, are
termini aequipollentes; as every Heir is a Son, so every ^on is an Heir too;
for if a Son then an Heir, Gal. 4.7. If Children, (and Children we are by
faith in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.^6.) then Heirs, Heirs of God, and coheires
with Christ, the only begotten, the well-beloved Son, Romans 8.17. by, and from
whom, we receive the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we try Abba Father; which is
also, in the Apostles expression, the being Heir of the World, Romans 4.13. not
of this sublunary, transient, cheating world; but the new world, the world to
come, Heb. 2.5. the promised and expected new Heavens, and new Earth, 2 Pet.
3.13. Thus it is declared, The meek shall inherit the Earth, Mat. 5.5. not
this Earth, full of fraud, violence and injustice, but that wherein
righteousness dwells; for they are, were, and so counted themselves, verse
13.14. of this Chapter, Strangers and Pilgrims here on Earth: their hopes,
their inheritance, their country is in that new Jerusalem which is above,
eternal in the Heavens. Come Inherit, etc. says our Savior, Mat. 25.24. Adam
had no further grant, no larger conscession then a Legal Possession, an
Earthly Paradise; and his estate was contingent, subject to mutation and
change: Moses his assurances and demises to the Jews, were confined to the Land
of Canaan; more he could not grant, or secure: but the supernatural heavenly
possession, incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away, is reserved for,
and made over to the heirs of that righteousness which is by faith; which
that we may obtain and enjoy to all Eternity, let us follow after, and
pracrise holiness and righteousness, according to these following is
structions from the words thus cleared.

The Second Part.

1. This warning of God unto Noah, confirms the Apostle description of faith;
Faith is the substance, etc. If God threate^ any judgment, or promise any
mercy, the judgment is as certain as if it were executed, and the mercy as
sure, as if possessed; though they have no actual being in themselves, ye^
Gods word gives them a certain subsistence, and our belief o^ his word, give
us a certain assurance of the truth and issue Gods power and veracity, makes
all his threats and promises unavoidable and infallible, and our faith makes
them evident an^ secure to us; and we thereby depending on Gods truth and
faithfulness, gather both confidence and assurance. For thus th^^ Apostle
argues, Let us believe, without wavering, for he (...) faithful that promised,
Heb. 10.33. and thus he positively concludes, Faith depends on the Word of God,
Romans 10.17. Indee^ the Word of God is not declared to us in the latter Age, as
i^ was to Noah, (for he had this warning either by immediate Revelation from
God himself or by the Embassy of one, or more Angels; but to us, Gods
warnings and oracles are transmitted, and signified by the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles) yet the obligations of our faith are equal and alike;
for whenever God issues forth his Revelations and Declarations to men^ he
therewith gives them assurances, they have like expresses of his will, besides
the certitudinem objecti, the certainty of the Revelations themselves, which
are infallably true, because the Decree is of the Spirit of Truth, who cannot
lie; he will superadde (such is his goodness and mercy) certitudinem subjecti;
we shall be ascertained that they are his Revelations, if with humbled hearts,
devout Prayers, and sincere holy obedience, we endeavor to know his will, God
will discover his will, Psalm. 25.9.10. and 14. Ioh. 8.31.32. Ioh. 7.17. give
unto us the Spirit of obsignation and knowledge, a certainty of adherence, as
well as of evidence, making us not only to believe, but even to know, and be
as fully assured, that it is the Word of Christ, as those which have heard it
with their ears, and which saw it with their eyes: For as Noah was secure,
that this warning was no Satanicall suggestion, or illusion, no private fancy,
or delusion of his own brain, but a divine revelation; so God has given unto
the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, such splendour and sufficiency of
light, and appointed us such mediums, clear ways and means for the discovery
and comprehension of that light, as may make them appear to all, not wilfully,
or maliciously blind, that they are his word, and contain in them a full
declaration of his will, he confirms and seals in the hearts of all
Believers, the truth of their Writings, 1 Ioh. 5.10. He engraves them, in the
Prophet Jeremies expression, Ier. 31.33. In those days I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: he sets such impressions, and
leaves such characters of divine truth in the spirits of his people, that they
cannot but acknowledge the Scriptures for the Oracles and Dictates of the holy
Spirit: We have a more sure word of Prophecy: God in their Writings has
declared what is sin and transgression, and the severity of his wrath against
sin; he has expressed what godliness is, and the great rewards and
happinesses he has awarded to them that lead a godly life. O then let the
heaviness of his threatenings, deter us from sin; let his gracious Promises
invite and incite us to Repentance; let his judgments keep us in his fear;
^et his invitations and offers of mercy, keep us in obedience; let us seriously
consider, that he has revealed wrath against every soul that does evil, that
holds the truth in unrighteousness, except ye repent, ye shall all perish; and
let us always remember, that he has proposed mercy to all humbled penitents,
sincere converts; he that confessieth, and forsakes his sins, shall find
mercy; mercy in his life, and the whole course thereof, at the hour of his
death, and in the day of judgment. God has done his part to preserve us from
wrath, and reserve us for mercy, and mercy for us; if we slight his
judgments, undervalue his mercies, we have no color, no pretense of plea, we
are altogether inexcusable, our destruction is of our selves, because like
Jerusalem, we would not be warned: Observe but Gods method, how he cleares
himself from the ruin of his people, how he charge it wholly upon
themselves; First he proposes to every private man's Conscience his dealing
with them, and refers it to their judgment, Deuteronomy. 30.15. See, I ha^ set before
thee this day, life and good, and death and evil: He cal^ upon them to
observe, and to acquit him when they are judged he tells them plainly, that
they cannot pretend ignorance; (...) thou deest well, shall thou not be
accepted? thou shall be accepted; If thou do evil, sin lies at the
door, and Dea^^ the wages of sin; but if thou will not see, nor observe,
th^^ he recites his proposals again, offering Life to thee if thou w^^
hearken, verse 16. denouncing Death, if thou refusest to hea^^ verse 17.18. and
if none of these will serve the turn, then (...) acquits and justifies
himself, by open Proclamation, before (...) the World, verse 19. I call Heaven
and Earth to Record the day against you, that I have set, etc. And the more
clearly (...) sets it before thee, if thou observe not, thy contempt is t^^
greater, thy punishment shall be greater: Thou, O Christian have, or may have,
a most plentiful Revelation, the way of li^^ and death is more distinctly set
before thee, then before t^^ former Age of the World; if thou decline the way
of life, a^^ tread in the paths of death, thy sin is so much the mo^^
heightened, thy judgments shall be more intended and multiplied. It is the
Apostles affirmation upon the same reason Heb. 10, 26. If we sin, etc. the
consequent is sad and di^mall, verse 27. and the reason is a fortiori, verse
28.29. an^ it is the same Apostles Exhortation, grounded on the same reason,
Heb. 2.1. Therefore we ought to give, etc. that is his Exhortation; and the
Reason is, verse 2.3.4. For if the Wor^ spoken by Angels (as perhaps this to
Noah was) was steadfast, are every transgression and disobedience, received, etc.

2. This warning of so long date, is a pregnant proof, and remarkable example
of Gods patience and long suffering toward malicious, incorrigible sinners;
For first, he does not a^ the first punish, but premonisheth them of their
sins, and the demerits thereof, sollicites and invites their repentance. An^
secondly, he allows them a long time for repentance, punishes them not, when
in justice he might take vengeance, and execute his wrath; not as if God, were
not naturally and immutably just; but because he is a most free disposer of hi^
judgments, and pays them, when, and in what manner seems good to him in his
infinite wisdom; and forbeares ^he punishment of impieties always upon
weighty and important reasons. The first is to show his propensity to the acts
of grace and mercy, his unwillingnesse, and indisposition to our in force the
acts of his tevenging justice; so he solemnly protests, As I live, says the
Lord, I delight not in the death ^f a sinner, etc. Ezech. 33.11. which the
Apostle seconds, 2 Pet. ^.9. The Lord is long-suffering to usward, not willing
that, etc. in his mercy he is (...), Genesis 18.32. meek, not irritable, not
easily provoked, (...), gentle, easily entreated, 2 Cor. 10.1. (...),
overseeing, looking beyond our sins, passes by them, dissimulat peccata
propter poenitentiam, in his mercy, there is (...), Romans 2.4. when he cannot
but see, he forbeares, (...), Neh. 9.30.31. suffers long, many times, many
years, (...), Hos. 11.8 9. when he is about to punish, he is at a stand,
asking, How shall I, etc. and then resolves into conditions of mercy, I will
not execute, etc. he stays, expectat ut misereatur, Es. 30.18. And when he
executes wrath, he does alienum opus, that which his nature declines; he does
it with regret, and reluctance, For he does not afflict willingly, not from the
heart, Lam. 3.33. He forgives, destroys not, Psalm. 78.38. and when he
punishes, he is weary, Isay 40.2. The second reason is, That, God moderating
his judgments with such meekness and mercifulness, not suffering his whole
displeasure to arise, and so long suspending the execution of his sentence, he
might bar the incorrigible, refractory malignant of all excuses, and
shiftings; both which reasons are declared by the Apostle, Romans 2.4.5. the
judgment is unavoidable, and the judged inexcusable, for that the Judgment
was passed through their own default, and for their contempt after process and
issue. O then let not us slight or trifle with Judgments, but seriously
observe and apply them, considering that his premonitions and warnings are
given out, to bring us to repentance; and let not us by our security, or
contempt, frustrate our selves of those happinesses, and advantages, which God
has graciously consigned them to us for our good: he threatens before he
punishes, that his menaces of ruin might be a means of our reformation,
occasions of, and provocations to repentance; let us then comply with him in
his design, be moved and affected with his threat^^ not to suffer our eyes to
sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber, neither the temples of our head to take any
rest, until we make u^^ of all these means, take hold of all these
opportunities of mer^^ which he has endulged to us, until we be at peace with
him^ and he reconciled to us, and remove all impediments which man prevent the
true and sanctified use of his Judgments: I sha^^ but briefly nominate three.
The first is neglect, when we forget his past Judgments, as old news, or
obligations grown o^^ of date, as Pharaoh did, Exodus the 7.8.9.10. Chap. and
the frequent crime of the Israelites, as we find it inventoried, Psalm. 78. The
second is, when we scorn and contemn his premonition of future Judgments,
which the Psalmist has noted out to u^ and fully expressed, Psalm. 10.4.5.6.
The third, which is mo^^ usual, is the mis-interpretation of his Judgments,
as if w^ were not the men he aimed at, they concerned not us: hence in the
Prophet Ieremies expression, we settle on our lees, sooth our selves in our
sins, turn the stream another way, and shift off the application of them
from our selves; and hence also many times his Judgments overtake us, and come
upon us before we are aware; hence when we cry, Peace, Peace, behold
destruction and sudden calamity, as of a Woman in travel: Judge our selves
then, that we be not Judged.

3. Noah was warned, and warned he was of God, not only in a Public general
way, but by a private missive, a particular express from Heaven: not only of
the wrath which was to come, but further advertised of means to avoid it; God
declared unto him the whole pleasure of his will in that concernment; so true
is that of the Prophet, Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord will do nothing but he
reveals his secrets unto his servants; even as a Prince imparts his designs
to his favorites and confidents: Thus he honored Abraham, Genesis 18.17. and
thus still he continues his respects to such as sear him in the great
concernments of their souls; he discovers to them (that is his friends and
savourites) the great mystery of salvation by Jesus Christ; for so we are
assured, John 15.15. Henceforth I call you not servants, that's a too low and
vulgar salutation and respect, for the servant knows not, etc. The Psalmists
assertion still holds, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and
his co^^nant to make them know it, Psalm, 25.14.

4. Noah was warred, and the warning moved him to fear, which occasioned
contempt and scorn in others: Noah took ^^e warning, the World derided it; The
consequents of this ^^arning were different, according to the diversity of the
subjects on which it wrought: It Is a maxim in Philosophy, ^^icquid recipitur,
recipitur ad modum recipientis; the same ^^quivocall cause, produces several
effects, according to the ^^spositions of the subjects which derive virtue from
it; the same ^^nne at once melts Butter, and hardens Clay; the same
^^bstance of meat, affords good nourishment to a vigorous body, ^^d becomes
hurtful to a diseased; and it holds in Religion: ^^e same mercy from God
finds different interpretations, and ^^es, by different men: the malicious
Jews blaspemed, when ^^mbled converts believed Christ's Miracles; they follow
him, (...) Crucify him, those follow him, to obey him; they to rebel against
him, these to submit to him: If God bless a wicked ^^an with temporal
prosperity, he turns this blessing into a ^urse, abusing it to the
satisfaction of some immoderate lust; ^f a goly man receive the same portion,
he makes a sanctified ^se of it, employing it for his Lords honor, and his own
pre^ent, and after advantages; the one grows wanton, proud, in^olent,
intemperant, and what not; this other makes it a pro^ocation and inducement to
thankfulness, and obedience; so ^n adversity the difference is easily
discernable; a wicked man ^ormes, frets and troubles himself with impatiency,
and others with the turbulency of his spirit; a righteous man submits with
^almenesse and meekness of spirit, possesses his soul in patience, he
neither disquiets, nor injures any other; and, as Gods dispensations find such
different entertainment, so his acts of grace, so the Judgments of his mouth:
Tell an obstinately perverse sinner of pardon of his sins, if he will
timously and sincerely repent, this message will be welcomed with the same
respect from him, that a proclaimed act of oblivion shall receive from him who
is resolved to abase and bafle Majesty; denounce sentence of woe against him
for his impenitency and contempt, he esteems no more of these, then Luther did
of the Popes Bulls, to be bruta fulmiua, mere scarcrowes, or a few idle wor^^
to abuse the well-meaning simplicity of Fools and Children (...) let the same
Proposition of Peace be tendered to a righteous soul, who by the prevalency of
some lust has fallen from (...) obedience, he with joy and thankfulness
accepts, renewes (...) vows, and re-obligeth himself to an inviolable
observance (...) all Gods decrees and edicts: Declare to him wrath against
eve^^ soul that sins, this dissolveth him into humiliation and co^trition
of spirit, makes him cautious and timorous at any ti^^ after to offend Gods
glorious Majesty. O then let us make^^ sanctified use of all Gods
dispensations, of all his promises, a^^ his threats, this will distinguish us
from the World, and disco^^ unto our selves the fincerity of our hearts; no
safer, no su^^ way of trial of our own hearts, then to observe what are (...)
productions of Gods dealings upon our spirits, what effects t^^ terrors of his
Law, the proposals of his Gospel, and the expresses of his love, has wrought
in us; if they have pulled down in us the strong holds of sin, if they have
captivated eve^ rebellious thought to the obedience of Christ, if they have
red^ced and reformed us, that we fear to offend, that we desire a^^ delight to
please him; then happy are the People which be in su^^ a case, then blessed are
these People which have the Lord f^^ their God, it is an infallible sign we are
in Christ, we have tr^^ Faith, as Noah had, who obeyed Gods order, believed his
pr^mises, feared his warning; for these were the results of Noah Faith, which
first moved him to fear, and afterward to obey (...) and this leads me on to
a further Observation.

5. Noah feared; a most genuine, and direct act of Faith^ for that he feared
the Deluge at that distance, proceeds from his Belief of the warning; the rest
of the World beleeve^ it not, took not the warning, held it a superstition, or
a weakness or a madness to believe it, and therefore they feared it not
Infidelity is the root of all sin, Faith the original of all Piety and
certainly Noah had a large measure of Faith, which could work this motion of
spirit in him, in opposition to all the World, and in despite of his natural
infirmities; that har^^ threat, [I will Destroy] might perhaps at the first,
strike him in^ to a Passion; but then, the protraction of the sentence, aft^^
the prediction, might easily have seduced and betrayed him into ^^relesnesse
and forgetfulness, as naturally we have experimented, ^^ough we all know we
must dye, yet all of us almost, think and ^^nceit with our selves, not yet, not
yet, when there is yet day^^ occasion of the fear, of the approaches of Death;
For Tarde, quae credita laedunt, ^edimus; and then we are most apt to forget,
what pleases not ^^sh and blood, besides the disadvantage of time, which eats
^^t the memory of such predictions: But Noah's Faith, Time ^^uld not devour,
would not suffer him to forget, or be secure; ^^t like a faithful
remembrancer, puts him in mind of the ^^arning, keeps him in fear and
expectation of the event, and ^^akes him both wise and active: Doubtless, true
Faith, and ^^ue Fear, are compatible in the same subject; Noah believed,
^^erefore he feared; and so all they who do believe, do fear; ^^nd none
truly fears, but they also believe; not as the Devils ^^eleeve and tremble,
for they hate what they beeleeve and ^^emble at: but as Gods children, who love
and affect what they ^^eleeve and fear, and is always in conjunction with
bold^esse and confidence. That Son which is natural and inge^uous, the more
hopes and assurances he has of his Fathers ^^vour, (which are the supports of
boldness) the more reve^ently will he demean himself toward his father, the
more cau^^ous and timorous to displease him; and it is knownly ex^^erimented,
that where men's chiefest hopes and dependancies ^^es, there they reserve their
respects and endeavors to please, which are the proper issues of fear; from
whom we expect nothing, them we value not, their displeasure we fear not; ^ut
on whom we depend, we fear to lose their favor, and ^his makes us both
ingenuous, and diligent to preserve it: The Master of the Sentences, and with
him, generally all the Schoolmen, out of Austine, demonstrates this, by the
similitude of a tender Wife, who both loves and fears her Husband; ^eares his
absence, fears his displeasure, fears the loss of his company, respects and
honors his presence, and is sollicitous to please him in every respect; and
so, omnis pius, solicit ^ius; for when I fear, I fear him not, as I fear a
wild beast, hate him, and fly from him; but I honor him as my na^^ rall
superior, (...), Clem. Alexand. l. (...) Strem. for this fear is not a
natural effect, but a supernatur^ habit, a gift of the holy Ghost, Is. 11.2.
opposite to hardne^^ of heart, Prove. 28.14. and is the great stay and
strength^^ Religion that men neither irreverently and rudely rush i^^ Gods
presence in the offices of his service, as the horse rush^^ into the battle,
Eccles. 5.1.2. nor carelessly neglect, or ne^genly perform the work of the
Lord; for by fear we are (...) structed (as the same Clemens expresses)
(...), to man our addresses to God with reverence, humility, submission^
affection or devotion of spirit; then we truly worship and se^^ God, when we
fear him, insomuch, that his worship and (...) fear are the same, Es. 29.13.
Mat. 15.9. If God had not (...) his fear into the hearts of the Sons of men,
they would h^^ had no heart to seek God; and they that fear him not, p^^
forms to him, if any, none but dull and flat services: He^^ David's resolution,
Psalm. 5.7. and our Savior himself, (th^^ whom (I presume) none can be more
bold with God the Fath^^ presented his Prayers, and was heard, (...), Heb. 5.^.
for his piety, or that he was affected with fear; and its the observation of
learned Camerarius, on these words, Certe qui (...) metuunt, neque precantur,
neque inter precandum, exclaman^^ and Lectantius is full to the same purpose,
lib. de ira Dei, cap^^ Quomodo (says he) ipsa religio sine metu teneri aut
custediae pote^^ Quod enim non metuitur, contemnitur, quod contemnitur, utiq^^
non colitur. And the Apostle resolves us, if our latria worsh^^ of God be
acceptable, it must be done with reverence, a^^ (...), again, godly fear, and
the reason is subjoyned, P^^ our God, etc. Heb. 12.28.29. O then let not us
provo^^ him to jealousy, not slubber over his service, nor throng in^^ his
holy assemblies rudely and undecently, nor behave our selv^^ irreverently; but
let us sadly remember, that this God wh^^ we serve, he, and he only, is to be
feared; and therefore th^^ we offer no service, present no suite, tender no
duty, but wi^^ bowed hearts, broken spirits, and humbled souls; this o^^ fear
has a special influence, not only in our services of Go^ but in the whole
course of our life, Genesis 20.11. it preserves (...) from Apostasy, from Schism,
and uncharitableness; which we ^^ay safely conclude from that remarkable
passage, Ier. 32.39.40. I will put, etc. and it is thus Interpreted by Aug. de
bona perse. ^ap. 2. Talis and tantus erit, timor meus, quem dabo in cor eorum,
^t perseveranter and mihi adhaereant. Hence Saint Cyprian l. 2. Ep 2. calls it,
fidelis innocentiae custos; And the Psalmist intimates thus much, Psalm. 36.1.2.
The wickedness of the wicked ^ith, that there is no fear of God before his
eyes. Hence the Schools resolve, In tantum timemus, in quantum amamus; as our
love is perfected, so is our fear; and as our love shall last when our Faith
shall cease, so our fear shall endure; which they gather from Psalm. 19.9 here
we live by love and hope, and because we love, therefore we respect; because we
hope for good from God, therefore we fear him, lest by neglect of him, we ^^se
that good we expect from him, and hereafter our fear of him shall accompany
our love, and be completed with it, even ^he holy Angels, all his Saints which
are, or shall be, shall fear him to all Eternity; Non quidem secundum eum
actum, quo me^uitur vel offensa Dei, vel separatio a Deo; sed secundum actum
quendam reverentiae ortae ex consideratione ejus majestatis, Estius l. 3. sent.
did. 34. But not only his presence and majesty, but also his threats and
judgments are to be feared, a Believer without any contradiction to his
confidence or assurance of Gods favor, when his judgments are abroad his
wrath burns like fire, as Noah was so he may, and ought to be moved with
fear; even Gods Power, his Justice, and Wrath ought to be feared, and he to be
feared for his wrath. An evident proof hereof we have in our Saviors warning
to his Disciples, Luke 12.4.5. And I say unto you my friends, even to you,
under this capacity and consideration, as my friends, be not afraid, etc. And
hereupon Aug. tr. 41. in Ioh. exhorts, Si non potes amare justitiam, time vel
poenam, ut pervenias ad amandum justitiam; and Clemen Alexand. l. 2. Strom.
gives a reason, When we will fly ^ut (and the best and most faithful are
sometimes too extravagant) and neither reason nor advice reduce us, (...),
fear will tame and subdue, even as Fire melts Wax, and makes it apt to
receive any shape, or impression; so fear mollifies our spirits, softeneth our
hardened hearts, and so makes them capable of the image and impresses of Gods
spirit; and her me thinks Solomon's character of a wise man, and a fool, i^
very observable, Prove. 14.16. A wise man fears, and departed from evil; but
the fool rages, and is confident; so much difference is there betwixt him
that fears, and him that fearet^ not, as there is betwixt a confident fool
(that has a strong sancy he believes, and upon that account rages and
vaporeth but has no ground for his confidence and belief) and a so be
discreet man, who walks circumspectly, takes a care and make a conscience of
his ways, and dare not touch an accursed thing And hereupon in Scripture, we
read of trembling at Gods word Isay 66.2. of being afraid of his judgments,
Psalm. 110.120 and that expression Ier. 26.19. Did he not fear the Lord, a^^
besought him: they are best prepared to seek, who fear him And that other
connaxion, Zeph. 3.7. Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction:
Fear removes precipitancy an^ inadvertency, cuts off carelessness and
security, it is the beginning. that is, the excellency of Wisdom, the
introduction to Wisdom, (...), the first nurcery of Wisdom, as Clemens
Alexand. styles it; (...), as Aristotle, it makes men serious and considering,
ingenuous to invent, and diligent to use all means of enstruction; and
therefore Paen directed his speech, delivered his enstructions to them that
feared God, Acts 13.16. Ye that fear God, give audience proud, cerelesse.
fearelesse hearers, will be but unprofitable livers, This word of salvation
which he Preached, was sent to such Act 13.26. and so Clemens styles it, (...),
a previous disposition to grace. But most full to this purpose is that Habb.
3.16. When I heard, my belly trembled. my lips qut^ered at the voice and I
trembled, etc. Let Heathenish Stoics fancy and tell us that a wife man is not
subject to passions: let a Christian Stoicke copceit, and Preach, a Believer is
beyond fear, he is not to eye Gods. Judgments or Justice: let me tell him
Habbakkuk did, and David did so too, 2 Samuel 6.9. and after he had murdered his
faithful servant Vriah, he feared lest the sentence of wrath, denounced
against Caire, for his murder, or of Saul, for his disobedience, should fall
upon him, as some of the ancients have conceited, and not without some
probability of reason from his serious petitions, Psalm. 51. The 18. Psalm is a
Prayer or deliverance from death and destruction. The 75. Psalm a Prayer
against the terrors of the day of Judgment. And Psalm 76. a Prayer, that we
may fear Gods judgments, and not to be moved with the terror of men; and
therefore also are we warned to remember Lots Wife, Luke 17.32. But that which
cleares all, and makes the Observation undeniable, is the example of the whole
Church, upon whom an example of Gods Justice so wrought, that it cast them into
a panick fear, for so runs the Record, Great fear came upon all the Church,
and upon, etc. Acts 5.11. O then let not us dare to offend God in a presumption
of his mercy; let us fear to offend, in the consideration of his Justice; Soli
filii irae, iram non sentiunt, says Hierome, none but the Sons of wrath, are
insensible of wrath; let us not dally with Gods Judgments, or in a vain
fancy, persuade our selves, surely the bitterness is past; but let us seriously
remember and observe them, whether expressed in his word or declared in his
works of Providence; and if it shall please him to punish us, and show his
displeasure by Public calamities and distractions, and by personal
sufferings, O then let us humble our selves under the mighty hand of God, and
religiously fear him, and then none of those evils shall move or disquiet us.
To fear Poverty, Banishment, Imprisonment, or Death it self, Imbecilis est
animi, qui vero Deum metuit, illa universa non metuit, Lact. l. 6. c. 15.17. no
sorrow or sadness shall perplex us, no contingencies nor temporal
infelicities distract or disturb us, no humane policies or powers affright, or
dismay us; but this fear of God will strengthen us, relieve us against all
humane, worldly, carnal fears, and either expel them, or moderate them, Is.
8.12.13. Psalm. 46.1.2.3 4. It will make us wise to prevent dangers, to provide
means of safety, before destruction comes. O then let not us be like the
World in Noah's time, drowned in security, before the Deluge overwhelmed them;
nor like Lots Sons, Genesis 19 14. or like those in Zeph. 1.12. or Gedalia, not
believe or fear, till we find and feel the woeful effects of our dis-beliefe
and security, the heavy wrath of God, and his eternal vengeance seizing on,
and surprising us, Ier. 40.14.14. but let us, as Noah, observe Gods warnings,
and threats; let us believe then and ponder them in our hearts, and by unfeigned
repentance and sincere resolutions of obedience, fly from eternal wrath
provide for eternal happiness, and then our Faith and Fear shall be
recompensed, as Noah was, when the world of ungodly impenitents shall be
destroyed, we being in the Arc of Christ Church shall be saved. This was Noaks
policy, he feared, and therefore sought a way for deliverance and preservation,
and therefore prepared an Arc, which was a consequent of his feare^ and
another effect of his Faith.

6. God warned Noah to build, and Noah prepared an Arke^ to preserve him and
his, God is not so austere, or rigorous in his judgments, but that his
goodness may be signally noted; in his greatest judgments, he declares his
mercy, and his mercy rejoices against Judgment; For here

1. To his threats of destruction, he immediately subjoyne^ a promise for
salvation. Genesis 7.8. and 13.14. thus it happened to our first Parents, that
sentence of Death, Morti morieris, was pronounced against them; but with the
same breath, a Promise of mercy; and salvation was Proclaimed, The Seed of the
Woman shall, etc. In the same times, Jerusalems Captivity, and its restoration
is Prophesied, It shall be carried into Babylon; but it shall be freed too.
David's Children, If they offend they shall be chastised with Rods of men; but
his loving lindnesse shall not totally depart from them.

2. In the largest extent and generallity of Gods Judgments, there is still a
reservation, some exception; In this Universal Deluge, Noah, and his Sons, and
their respective Wives, are Privileged, and exempted Persons. In the
devastation of Sodom and Gomorrah, Let is within the qualification of mercy,
and Zohar escaped. Rahab was not destroyed with Ievicho. Jeremy and some others
with him, were not led into Captivity with the Jews; and though ever since the
Jews rejected Christ, God has rejected them; yet there is a residue, a
reserve, according to the Election of Grace, Romans 11.5. still a remnant is
preserved for the manifestation of his mercy, and goodness.

3. Many times the godly are not mixed, and confounded with the wicked; it is
true, sometimes they are; but it is as cervine that many times they are not:
The lofty admired Edifices, ^^tely Palaces, strong Castles of the Earth, could
not withstand (...) fury of the Deluge, nor protect their proud Possessors: But
^^ah shall be saved in an Arc, a contemned and jeered bun^^ of Wood; no
Storms or Tempests shall Drown it. God ^^ll feed Jacobs Family, when the
Inhabitants of the Earth ^^re dried up with Famine. When the destroying Angel
kil^^ the first Borne of Egypt, the Houses signed with the Blood (...) the
Lamb, were preserved, Ezech. 9.4. Psalm. 11.6.7. At (...) general
conflagration of the World, 2 Pet. 3.7.10. the ^^eevers shall escape, and be
saved, though by Fire. O happy ^^y, when Gods Judgments appear, shall be found
of him in ^ee, without spot, and blameless, they shall not be confounded in
the perilous times, and in the days of Dearth they all have enough; the
Waters shall not Drown them, nor (...) Fire consume them; the Waters shall
bear them up, and (...) Fire save them; these wild impetuous Elements (of
which usually say, they are the best servants, and worst masters) shall serve
the orders and decrees of Heaven; and when God is ^^ased to make a distinction,
he will give them a spirit of ^^cerning, to difference betwixt them that fear
him, and them ^^t fear him not; its his promise to his Church, and he will
^^ke it good, Is. 43.1.2.3.

7. Noah prepared an Arc; God promised to save him, but was on this score,
that he would make an Arc; its not Faith, (...) over-daring presumption which
neglects or contemnes ^^nest and just ways and means; to depend on God for our
^^dily sustentation, or for our everlasting salvation, and not to (...) our
labor and industry in those practices his Word pre^^bes unto us, is not to
believe in God, but tempt him; he ^t in good earnest entends to come to Heaven,
must use all ^e and diligence to perform the conditions of the promises; must
work out his salvation with fear and trembling, strive ^^h all diligence to
make his calling and election sure. O then us not deceive our selves, presume
without warranty, that we (...) in the Faith; let me tell you, true Faith
believes the con^ons, as well as the promise; it believes the Article of
Remission of sins, but upon this condition, that we repent, a bring forth the
fruit of a holy life; our duty must answer grace, and then his grace will
assist us in our duty: God will no longer our God then we are his People; and
we are so l^^ his People, as we submit to his Laws, and do whatsoever
commands: And as it is in the concernments of the soul in the relations of
the body, we are not only to beloeve, a trust, that is, look for a fortune or
event, without the use of means to attain it; but we must believe, and provide
th^^ henest in the sight of all men; use the means, and trust and pend on God
for a blessing, as Paul said, Acts 27.30.31. (...) cept these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved: So it is in (...) those above specified
considerations; Except ye repent, ye all likewise perish: If any would not
work, neither should ^eate: He has promised Heaven, yet it is, If thou
repent: has promised to feed thee, yet it is, If thou bestirre thy self thy
Calling, labor with thy hands; in vain thou expe^^ either, if thou slight the
conditions. Further yet, when Church of God is distressed and persecuted: God
has promi^^ deliverance, but it is upon these terms, That the members the of
seek to God by Prayer, and reformation of lise, and endeav^^ by all lawful and
warrantable means to promote and adva^^ her interest, put to thy helping hand,
and then, semper libs p^^ dote hamus; But if thou sit still, value thine own
ease more t^^ the Churches prosperity and peace, and be content to refer
business to God, if he will save it, let him do it; know th^^ that Mordecays
reply to Ester, when she scrupled to interc^^ for the People the Jews, to the
King, in their extremity. is m^^ properly applycable to thee, Ester 4.14. If
thou altogether hold thy peace, etc. Certainly no greater argument of a sp^^
espoused to the World, bespotted with sensuality, devoide of fear of God,
then, when Religion is at stake, the daily Sa^^ fice invaded, and all Piety at
a loss, to project, and plot for (...) World, and make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts of A very Heathen will tell us, Non nobis solum
nati sumus; (...) those generous spirits among them, who have expended th^^
lives and fortunes, with much prodigality for their native Co^^trey, will, in
the day of Judgment, condemn the base covetousness, and wasting luxuries of
such carnal Professors, whose ^^res and lusts are alike insatiable, heap and
hord up, without ^^e or conscience, and spend without fear or wit, and never
^^nk of the afflictions of Joseph, to relieve the distressed, to re^^h the
bowels of the hungry, nor contribute any thing, but by ^^sse, to the worship or
service of God. But yet, alas, how lit^^ are all humane contributions, either
to preserve the body to ^^e the soul, or to secure, or settle the Church? How
defici^^ and imperfect is all our labors and industry to these pur^es? Noah was
at vast Charges, took great pains to build an ^^ke, but what was all this to
his preservation? What had he defend it against the storms of winds, and
violence of the ^^ather, which hurried down the highest and most senced Cities
(...) Turrets? How could the Arc endure those assaults and tem^^ts, which the
great places of strength could not resist? Or ^^w could Noah conduct, and guide
it over the tops of Hills, and ^^idst the Mountains? But true obedience
disputes not Gods ^^mmands, and if he enjoynes things improper, and impertinent
humane reason; as Go and wash in Jordan, etc. Or, Let seven ^^iests bear
seven trumpets of Rams-hornes, etc. yet obey we ^^ust, our Faith requires our
observance, and performance. And us it holds in the institution of the holy
Sacraments, which ^^ve no foundation in reason; yet because they are the Acts
of ^^ods wisdom, and he commands their use; we are not to Judge canvas them,
but to observe and reverence them. And as these ^^rrow their success from
their Institution, so all our labors ^^d endeavors, their blessing, from his
gracious providence: ^^xcept the Lord keep the City, etc. Psalm. 127.1.2.3.
nothing (...) project or enterprise, but becomes either prejudicial, or
un^ofitable, unless God give the blessing: which we find experimentally true
in some kind, famine, when plenty enough of ^^orne for the quantity, but
extreme want, in respect of the ^^ourishment, when God in his Just Judgment
(as the Pro^net spea^eth) breaks the Staff of Bread, gives it not a
nourishing faculty. but it rather occasions faintness, and decay of ^^irits.
But that which makes this Observation more home and ^^vident, is yet further to
observe, That this Vessel which he ^^repared, was not a Ship, made to all
advantages of Sailing; but an Arc, close above, without Sails, Oars, or any
or Engines which man has invented and employed for the co^^ modious passing of
Vessels upon the Seas; It had no Helme^ steer her with, no Master or Governor
to command handing of Helm or Sails; God reserved to himself glory of Noah's
Preservation, he himself was the only Pi^^ to guide it upon the Waters, and
afterward to Harbor it; Providence, the Sailts and Oars, to steer and move
it. (...) is many times pleased clearly to demonstrate his Wisedo^ Power, and
goodness, by using the weaknesses of our inter^tions, and employing such mean
instruments, as have nothing power or wisdom in themselves. Give me leave
thus to ap^^ it; If we see the Arc of Christ's Church floating like the Is^^
Lemnos, having no place of settlement; If we see her mo^^ upon troubled waters,
tossed to and fro with the waves of c^tention; If we see her without a
Governor, having nothing humane; policy or power to direct or protect her; if
with Sails, having no favor nor respect from the world; with Oars, any
humane assistances or aids; God will supply to the want of all these, if she
turn to God sincerely, beg his m^cy, and with a penitent heart, purified by
Faith, crave his P^tection: All these deficiencies of secondary causes, and
want^ humane assistances, will prove demonstrations of Gods por^^ and wisdom,
when he shall be pleased to deliver her by hand, without any ways or means
discernable, or possible be imagined by humane ingenuity: In ordinary ways of
(...) liverance, there is a concurrent abundance and confluence experimented
means, the concurrence and aid of second cau^^ the full force and strength of
the arm of flesh; but in spec^^ and extraordinary deliverances, when God will
show himself more signally and clearly, he effects his designs by weak
improper. insufficient, and defective means

8. Noah's Arc condemned the World, because the world wo^^ not reform,
notwithstanding Gods warnings, premonitions, a^^ exhortations. O then while the
Arc is in building, wh^^ grace is offered, whilst we are summoned to come to
hi^^ while this opportunity of repentance lasts, turn you fro^^ your evil
ways, nothing can hinder, or retard your conversion but either your own
insensible duinesse and inadvertency (which yet is a crime of your wills) or
your malicious perverseness: If the Arc be finished, God deprives you of the
opportunities of mercy, the advantages of grace; the deluge of Gods wrath is
ready to fall down upon you, there remains nothing but a fearful looking for
of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaties; wanton
not, play not with his word; seek the Lord while he may be found, for a time
there is when he will not be found, because we cannot find a way, or place of
repentance, though with Esan we seek it carefully with tears; and be assured,
that if the Ministry of his Word (which answers to the preparing of the
Arc) bath not converted thee, it will condemn; if it quicken not it will kill;
if this two-edged sword with one edge, has not cut off the evils of your
hearts; with the other it will pierce us through with eternal pains, and
never dying deaths: If it be not the savor of life unto life, it will be of
death unto death.

9. The World; though many regard not Gods warning its not multitude or numbers
will save us in the day of wrath. O then follow not a multitude to do evil,
lest thou perish with them for company; choose the society of the few, the
little Frock, and strive to get into the Arc with them; it is better to be
saved alone, then perish with the World. And here again let me resume my
former exhortation; Whilst thou have the light, walk in the light; take heed
thou be not misled and deceived with the fashions and interests of the World,
or the examples of worldly men, (who pretend to be and transform themselves
into Angels of light) lest thou perish with the World: Follow the orders and
discipline, of Jesus Christ, his holy example, in him is no darkness; he is
that light which enlightneth every man in the World; if we shut our eyes
against this light, if we hate it, or hate to follow it, we are already
condemned; It is Saint John's sentence, John 3.19.20. This is the condemnation,
that light is come into the World and men loved darkness rather then light,
etc. But

10. Here is one Observable more; The Deluge took not the World on a sudden: As
they were forewarned long before, so God in his goodness so ordered, that it
should rain also forty days and forty nights, that seeing they could n^
escape with their temporal lives, they might in these interva^^ and interims,
take occasion to provide for eternity. O the infinite goodness of God, who
allowed these perishing soul^ time and leisure to implore mercy; these dying
men had a further opportunity of repentance, and they might though dead (...)
the flesh, yet live in the spirit. I have long dwelt upon Noa^ Building, and
have walked up and down, too and fro his Ar^^ yet not come to an end. What he
prepared, was for our e^fication, to build us up in our most holy Faith, It was
a gre^^ preparation, contained much in it upon the waters, and y^^ affords
plentiful matter both for Doctrine and Instruction I shall therefore descend
into a more particular applycation and touch a little of the mystical, and
this in three considerations. In respect of Noah's Person, his Arc, and the
Deluge

1. In respect of Noah: All the great Personages of the o^^ Testament, related
to Christ; and all their services, were representations of his acts or
sufferings. Adam the first, a Type (...) Christ, the second Adam, from whom we
derive our second bir^^ and regeneration. Abel, flain by his Brother for his
innocence a Figure of Christ's innocence, and his death, whereunto he w^^
delivered by the Jews, his brethren after the Flesh. Enoc^ Translation, an
example of Christ's Ascension into Heaven. A^ what was Typified by Noah and his
Arc, we have expressed 1 Pet. 3.20.21. The like Figure, etc. the word (...),
sigu^fies more, and more properly, an opposite, contrary figure, copy like, or
contrary to the Pattern, and was certainly use by the Apostle, to denote the
Analogy of eternal life, where^^ Baptism is a Sacrament, with temporal
preservation from the Deluge; and the resemblance betwixt Christ the Institutor
this Sacrament, and Noah the Architector of the Arc: and holds in several
likenesses. For 1. Noah was the chief of the second World, that wor^^ which
succeeded the Deluge; Christ the Head of a new Wor^ too, and of the World also
founded upon the ruins of a former for as the first world in Noah's time
perished, so necessarily, what soever issued from Adam, was to be annihilated,
that all might b^ repaired by Christ. 2. Noah signifies literally, rest, or
repose; Christ is our Noah, our Savior, who has endured for us the storms of
Gods fierce wrath, will harbor us, after we have passed the waves of this
troublesome world, in security and peace; and will Pilot his Church through the
storms of Persecution, mauger the violences and attempts of Devils and men,
into the place of his ^est, his heavenly Kingdom, Psael. 93.4.5. 3. Noah
exhorted sinners to repentance, and was therefore styled, A Preacher of
Righteousness: In which respect he is a proper Type of Christ, whose errand
and business it was to all sinners to Repentance, and who yet by his Writings
and Ministers discharges that Office. 4. Noah saved his Family, his near
Relatives; so Christ delivers his People from his Fathers wrath, his spiritual
kindred, his flesh and his bone, Ephesians. 5.20. 5. Noah prepared an Ark; Christ
builds up a Church to himself, Mat. 16.18. 6. Noah after builded an Altar,
offered a burnt Offering, and so removed a curse, and procured a blessing, Genesis
8.20.21.22. Christ offered himself a Sacrifice for us to deliver us from his
Fathers wrath, the curse of the Law, and to reconcile us into his favor, and
make us partakers of the Promises and blessings of the Gospel; the Parallel we
find in full terms set down to our hands, Ephesians. 5.2. The purchases of Christ's
Sacrifice, are spiritual renovation, and eternal happinesses, with an annexed
Promise, That he will never punish us in his sore displeasure; he will never
suffer his whole wrath to arise; the highest expressions thereof shall prove
but fatherly corrections, friendly admonitions; not punishments properly, not
fruits of his revenging justice, because declared in mercy, for our
reformation, not destruction.
2. In respect of the Ark, which was a Type of the Church, the assembly of the
first born, Heb. 12.23. for as all comprehended in the Arc, were saved, so
shall all within the enclosure of the Church; they are the body of Christ, and
he is the Savior of his body, Ephesians. 5.23. And so that rule, Extra Ecelesiam non
est salus, holds good. And that of Cyprian, He has not God for his Father, who
has not the Church for his Mother. So he in other places, Sermon. de Sp. Sancto,
and in Ep. (...) Novat. haeret. and the allegory, or argument, drawn from the
proportion, runs thus; Noah's Ark was one, and all out of (...) perished for
their contempt; so the Church is one, and all o^ of the Church shall perish for
their disobedience; this is the Church, against which the gates of Hell shall
not prevail, n^^ther the depth of waters, nor the height of the rocks, co^^^
damnifie this Arc; not the powers of darkness, nor spiritu^^ wickednesses in
high places, shall hurt the Church, the one ho^ Catholic Church, the
aggregate of Believers; not extern^^ professors, not a particular Church of any
one denomination made up of Pastors and their Flocks: for in it are many
hypocrites, and wicked persons; which brings in Augustines o^servation, lib.
12. contra Faust. Man. cap. 15. In the Arc the was unclean, as well as
clean, living things, Sic in Eccles^^^ Sacraementis, and boni, and mali
versantur, good and bad a^^ mixed in the Church here, where, he that will take
pains, man find many more allusions applied by that Father. But here is
observable, That the Cement of the Ark, in the Hebrew wor^ comes from another
word which signifies, propitiation, reconcilemen, or pardon; and from it the
Propitiatory, which covered the Arc, borrowed his name; it is from Christ's
satisfaction and propitiation, that we are not consumed, that our peace is made
and we accepted; it is by the wood of the Cross, that we an^ delivered; and
the word in Hebrew used for the Arc, is derived from a word which signifies to
return, to be converted; the Chuch is a society, or body of sinners converted
to God Christ died for us, that we should turn to God, Acts 3.26 Titus 2.14.
3. In respect of the Deluge, 1 Peter 3.20. which hold thus; The same waters
which drowned and destroyed the world bore up and supported the Arc; even as
the Red Sea which sucked in, and enclosed the Egyptians, was a Rode, and
D^fence for the Israelites. So Baptism, the Water of Regeneration, on the one
part crucifies sin, the flesh and its lusts; o^ the other sides gives a new
life and being; the holy partake thereof become new creatures. And hence it is
that Saint Pet^^ immediately adds, after the washing of our Consciences by
Baptism, the mention of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the ^^ad, to
perfect the parallel; For as the Deluge descending upon ^^e Arc, was a Figure
of Death; and its escape in safety, a ^^gure of life and resurrection. So in
Baptism, the plonging to the Water, is a sign of Death; the rising out again,
of ^^fe and Resurrection: to denote to us, That all we which are ^^ptized
should die unto sin, and rise into newness of life, ^m. 6.3.4.5.
And as after the Deluge, the Dove brought an Olive Branch; (...) the holy
Spirit, which appeared at the Baptism of Christ in ^^e shape of a Dove, is
sent into our hearts, to assure us that ^^e wrath of God the Father is
over-past, and we are his beloved Children, Romans 8.16.

Again, the Deluge the more it increased and over-topped ^^e Palaces of the
Earth, the higher it elevated the Arc, and ^^vanced it nearer Heaven; so the
same afflictions which ruins and confounds the men of this World, raises the
Believers ^^om Earth to Heaven, extols and exalts them to God and eternity.

Lastly, as the Arc, after the Deluge, was found on the mountains of Ararat;
so after the waves and tossings of this passing world shall cease, and be
passed over; the Church shall be found (...) the Mountain of Sion. that which
is Heavenly, and above, (...) glorify God for ever. And, as Noah, after his
deliverance, (...) offer to him the Sacrifices of Praises and Thansgivings to
all ^^ternity.

2. The Moral affords these Instructions following.

1. The reiterated and renewed griefs and afflictions which many times the
best of men do suffer, are as the great Deluge, ^he deep waters, that they
prevail not against to drown or sink them in security and despair; they in
these exigents must have timely recourse to God by Prayer and Supplication with
(...) penitent heart, which is the best course to stay them, and have the
People that are in adversity, Psalm. 32.6.7. But then

2. It is Gods mercy that they are not consumed, a special work of his
providence and power, that the deep waters of the ^roud go not over their
souls; it requires the same strength (...) settle a madded enraged tumult, as
to still the waves of a troubled Sea, Psalm. 65.7. which forced the Prophet so
panately to Pray, Psalm. 144.7. and Save me O God, Psalm. 65.14.15.16. verses.
And Psalm. 77.15.16.17. David attrib the Israelites deliverance from the Red
Sea, to Gods immed power: And therefore Psalm. 22. He speaking of storms
tempests, thunders and floods, concludes, The Lord sits the Flood, verse
10. That Providence and supreme Power wisent the waters of the Deluge, and
preserved Noah in them the same which disposes of all things in Nature, or the
(...) verse.

3. To beware of forgetfulness of God, of Pride of He security of Spirit; and
for this purpose, peruse and apply your selves (as is very obvious, if you
will) upon many o^ sions, and in several circumstances that passage of the God
Mat. 24.36 usque ad 40. Know and believe, that as there an Universal Deluge,
so there will be a more Universal Co^gration. Once all but eight Persons were
drowned in the Waters; and again all shall (nothing accepted) be dissolved w^
Fire, at the great and terrible day of the Lord, 2 Peter 3.7.12. But this is
not all, there is another Fire to devour condemned world, for the perdition of
the ungodly, prep^ for the Devil and his Angels, which shall never be
extinguish O fear these Fires, that thou may fly from them. Noah warned of
God concerning the Deluge; thou art warned God also, of his coming again to
judge the world by Fire, Noah did, believe and fear; fear, and obey Gods
Voice; day, even whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be harder though
the deceitfulness of sin; (...); T^ is our Faith, that we look to that day;
this our Fear, that haste to it; our Obedience, that we will endeavor to
appro our selves Gods faithful servants, by our holy conversation, and against
that day; for if we Believe, we cannot but Fear and if we Fear, we cannot but
look for, and hasten to this day and as Noah feared, and thereupon prepared an
Arc, etc. so we do fear, we will be diligent, to be found of him in Pea^ 2
Peter 3.14. Fly to Christ's holy Church for sanctuary, and the being admitted,
and received into this foundation, let us bui^ our selves up in our most holy
Faith, strive with all care and diligence, that we be not led away with the
error of the wicked. ^t we fall not from our own fledfastnesse, that we grow in
^ace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, ^fecting holiness in
the fear of the Lord, that we may be a ^ilding fitly framed together, grown
into an holy temple of (...) Lord, an habitation of God, through the Spirit,
Ephesians. 2.21.22. ^t our Faith be founded on the word of God, and the rock of first
Jesus, and then our Faith shall not fail; then we neither ^ed to fear the
descent of the rain, the irruptions of the ^ods, nor the tempests of winds; our
Building, our Arc will we us: But if we prepare and provide for the world,
spend ^r time, and labor for it; we, and our works, and all the ^orks of the
world, and the world it self, shall parish. O then ^ild for eternity, labor
for Heaven, the building of God, an ^use not made with hands, 2 Cor. 5.1. God
will prepare for a City, Heb. 11.16. if we thus prepare our selves, by holy
^edience, to meet him at his coming. If we look for the ^orid, haste to be
rich, make our business, and study to gather, (...) add to an estate, to fill
our Coffers, to raise up houses, and all them by our names; this in a sober
man's experience and ^dgement, is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Vanity in the
sign and project; Vexation of Spirit in the prosecution and ^anaging of it;
Vanity, for they labor for that which profits at; Vexation of Spirit, for
they fall into temptations and snares, ^d many foolish and hurtful lusts;
brings upon them a Deluge (...) cares, and miseries; drownes men first in
troubles and di^ractions, and after, in destruction and perdition, 2 Timothy 6.9.
^anity, in that the plotters and contrivers are wavering and unable in all
their ways; apt they are to be off and on, they ^e easily seduced from their
Faith and Honesty; and Vexation (...) Spirit, in that they pierce them through
with many sorrows; ^anity, in that they promise themselves a name, and
perpetuity, ^ut they are deluded; their names shall rot, and they shall not
^joy them, Deuteronomy. 28.30. Vexation of Spirit, in that they eat he bread of
sorrow, to acquire an estate; are perplexed how to ^eep it, how to dispose of
it, and what will become of it. Vanity, for they are vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish ^earts are darkened, their inward thoughts are
folly, Ps. 49 11.12.13. Vexation of Spirit, to think they must leave it, like
sheep must be laid in the Grave, verse 14. etc. they cannot help t^ selves, or
others with it; they cannot ransom their souls, ca^ recover the health of
their bodies, nor purcha e a cure for Gout. But then they are much more vain,
shall be (...) more tormented in Spirit, who build Sion in Blood and Jer^lem in
iniquity. Micah 3 0. they that by deceit and inju^ extortion and oppression,
sacrilege and perjury, think to themselves, though upon the ruins of others;
they cert^ prepare not for the preservation of their houses, but for houses
fall, and their own confusion; these properly are said sicare ad genennam: a
flying roll, a swift destruction pu^ them both. Zach. 5 2.3.4. Even a man and
his posterity 33.1. Isay 5.8.9. the more riches they creasure up for t^ selves
and theirs, the more they treasure up wrath; but if w^ provide well for our
selves and our generations, raise up a (...) and memory which shall not be
taken away, purchase an I^ rita^ce that fades not; be rich in Faith, and
abound in (...) works; believe in God, and sear him, and you shall not want in
this world (which is the great pretense of world (...) why they are so active
and stirring in the world, so tenaciou^ illiberall that they gripe and catch at
all; give, or lend not^ to those that truly want; ^estow nothing, or if any
thing small forced token on Gods service, Ministers or Members) t^ wilt, as
Noah did, provide for another world; spare neither nor pains for the
re-edi^ying of the Arc of Christ's Chur^ thou will by justice, mercifulness,
and alms make friend the unrighteous Mammon, etc. Luke 16.9. Lay up in sto^
good foundation against the time to come, etc. 1 Timothy 6. thou by thy religious
practices shall condemn the world, and shall not be condemned with it. O then
shake off careless and security, Zeph. 2.15. give over your covering and cour^
of the world, your cager desires and restless pursuites o^ with much anxiety
and suspension of mind; enquire and after the ways of life and salvation,
with humility and since^ and pursue and follow them with care and conscience;
then the rightly beleevest, truly fear God, and wisely provides for saving
of thy self, and others; thou may be confident assured of Gods protection,
favor, and everlasting mercy: God will Pilot thee through all the storms and
tempests of this World, by all the spouts and cataracts of tribulation and
perseation, and conduct thee to the Harbor of life and salvation. ^oubtiesse
the end of all Gods judgments threatened or in^icted, are to deter us from
sin, to keep us from sin and ^nisery, and to hold us in obedience, to make
us more considering, and better; times of distraction, and destruction, are
con^dering times, Isay 57.1. and certainly, if ever, we may justly ^omplain
with David, Psalm. 74.3. Usque ad 11. nothing but de^lation and rain in every
quarter; the Church is desolate and in confusion, Jerusalem an heap of stones,
the sword rages and is drunk with blood: and that which heightens these
judgments, The Lord has set every man's sword against his fellow, ^ven
thoughout all the Land; as he did thoughout all the Midia^tish Host And yet
(which is yet also a greater judgment) no man considers it, or lays it to
heart; never more covetousness, ^uxury, profanation, wickedness, and all
Heathenish impieties; there is a general consumption of Religion, and
Humanity, of Piety and Honesty; and it is much to be feared that as Aetas
pa^entum pejor annit, tulit nos nequiores, mox daturos progentem ^itiotiorem;
the World shall be drowned in Barbarism, A theisme and Infidelity; so God in
his justice will east us away from ^is presence, deprive us of the light of his
countenance, his Truth and Gospel; take away our pound, remove our
Candlestick, let out his Vineyard to other Husbandmen, and make us (...)
^ssing, a reproach, and a Proverb among the Nations; give the Philistines
possession of our Arc; and we shall wander too and from, from Sea to Sea, and
from the North, even to the East shall we run to seek the Word of the Lord
and shall not find it, Amos 8.12. Perhaps we may have fullness and plenty, to
^at and drink, (and the want of this is only feared, and the getting of it,
only sought) marry, and give in marriage; live pleasantly, and (according to
the now usual expression) comfortably, after our own hearts desire; when as
immediately, we not considering, are overtaken with wrath and vengeance, and
have no Arc to save us; not a Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, to instruct
us; there is no more Vision, no Prophets more in the Land; the daily Sacrifice
is taken away, and the abomination of desolation set up. When I read the
sins an judgments of Jerusalem, Ez. 22. per totum, and reflect upon these
present times and conditions thereof; I see so much their sins in use and
practice, that I cannot but foresee the the plagues and punishments thereof
will follow us, unless we return, repent, and reform. And O that yet we
would repent that the Lord might have compassion on us, heal our Land, st^ the
tumults of the People; take away all Schism, profanation and heresy, which
pesters the Church; all confusion and disorders which obscures it, and we
reduced into a settled Christian Peace, attended with justice and mercy, that
all our hearts a^ affections may be united in the bands of Religion; that o^
Arc may be brought back again, that glory may dwell in o^ Land: and when we
shall be removed hence, we may be received into the Land of glory.

One great expression of our Faith in God, and fear of him is Invocation of
his holy Name; an excellent preparative an^ sure means to preserve us in the
unity of the Arc of Christ Church, and save it from the condemnation of the
World; (...) to Petition the Rock of our Salvation, the Author and Finished of
our Faith, the Founder and Benefactor of his Church: And therefore for a
Conclusion of this work, Let us Pray.

The third Part. The Prayer.

O Most great and glorious Lord God, who art wonderful i^ justice, terrible in
judgment, irresistible in power; be thou our fear and dread, in the perilous
time; our shield and desence, a very present help in the needful time of
trouble: Be thou our hope and confidence in the days of wickedness, and when
the wickedness of our heels composse us about: thou who have prepared mercy
and truth for these that seck thee, prepare us for thy mercy and truth. Let all
the Earth flare the Lords stand in awe of him all ye that dwell in the World,
for his salvation is nigh them that fear him. O fix thy fear in our hearts,
that we never turn again to folly: Let us see thy mar^^llous loving kindness,
and partake of thy plentiful goodness, which thou have laid up for them that
fear thee, even before be Sounes of Men. O let not us dally with thy warnings;
let ^s not be settled on our lees, living in security and sensuality: ^t not the
sentence of guil^inesse preceed against us; let all thy evelations of wrath
upon every soul that d th evil; all the de^arations of thy righteous
judgment upon all sinners and against ^ll sin, work in us repentance to
salvation, not to be repented ^f: Let it work an holy indignation,
displeasure, and revenge ^on our selves, that we have displeased thee;
carfulness and ^are, that we displease thee not again: a zeal, and vehemeus
^esire, to do those things that please thee, that we may be sin^re, and
without offense, till the day of Christ: Let not us have ^ur portion in this
condemned World; but that it may be, with ^e heirs of righteousness which is
by Faith: Let thy Word ^ake deep impressions on our spirits, take place in our
affections. And because we are forewarned, to fly from the wrath to come;
^ssist us by thy grace, that we may bring forth fruits meet for ^pentance. Give
to us great and dreadful apprehensions of thy ^lory and immensity, thy majesty
and thy power; that we may ^dore thee, and fear thee as our God: and
whenever we make ^ur addresses to thee, let us fall low on our knees before
thy foot^oole with such humbled spirits, and devout postures, as may best
express our conceits of thy greatness; our reverence to thy presence, and our
own unworthiness to appear before thee. Move ^s to serve thee in fear, and
plant the reverence of thy Name and Laws in our hearts, that we may walk in
all thy ways with much diligence, great observation, and gedly jealousy, over
all our actions. Let the dread and reverence of thee, thy justice, and thy
power; thy thrcats and judgments deelared from Heaven, and many times on
Earth, executed upon disobedient condemners of thy words, make us to tremble at
the recognition of our sins, and in consideration of our guilt, and demerits:
and then, O Lord, let the contemplation and meditation ^f thy sure mercies, and
gracious promises, keep us in a uniforme constant course of obedience: let us
thus pass from Faith to Fear, from Fear to Love, from the apprehensions of
of thy wrath, to the sense and comforts of thy mercies. Let thy ^eare take such
full possession of our Spirits, that we Fear nothing but thee; we fear not
poverty, shame, the power and malice men, nor any outward disadvantages and
discomforts; that (...) shall not fear, though the Earth be moved, and the
Hills be carried into the midst of the Sea; though the waters thereof ra^ and
swell, and the mountains shake at the tempest of the same for his salvation is
nigh them that fear. he has an Arc, b^ holy Church, to preser^e and keep
them alive. O holy Jes^ preserve and keep this Church, which thou have founded
on t^ self: save and deliver this Arc of thy strength from the str^ vings of
the people, and the insurrections of evil doers: defen^ her in peace, adorn
her with holiness, build her up in unity maintain her in safety in all
stormes-and against all temptation and enemies, that she be not pestered with
Heresy, Schism (...) Scandal. O deliver her from private interpretations,
innovations of holy things, doting about questions, and making endless strifes,
strange Doctrines, and the Doctrine of the unlearne^ and unstable. O think
upon the Congregation which thou ha^ purchased and redeemed of old; unite all
her members in the bands of Faith, Hope, and Charity; and when thou think
first of external communion. Let the daily Sacrifice of Prayer and
Sacramental Thanksgiving, never cease: let the Order of thy Ministers which
serve at thy Altar stand in Power; and sen^ thou forth Laborers into thy
Harvest such as have Calling, a^ Aaron and Noah: make them farthfully to
declare thy Will to the People; rightly to dispense thy Sacraments, and
acceptably to entercede with thee for thy People: Preserve thou those whom thou
have placed in the Highest Order of thy Church, that they lay Hands suddenly on
no Man, but on such whose Lips may preserve knowledge, and whose Lives adorn
the Gospel of Jesus and grave, blessed Lord, that though the Floods of
Persecution and worldly interest, have lift their Waves to overwhelme thy Arc,
yet do thou Coast her in security over these Seas, and Pilot her in safety
into the place of thy rest. O preserve thou (...) in the union and communion of
this Church; let us have Noah's, Preachers of Righteousresse, orderly called,
and fitly qualified for the Function; let us still enjoy the freedom of thy
Gospel, the Food of thy Word, the sweetness and refreshings of thy Sacraments,
holy discipline, public Communion in thy Church, and the benefits of the
society of the Saints. O let not our sins cause (...) to remove the Candlepick
from us, to give away thy Arc, to ^at thy Vineyard to other H^shandmen, lest
we be condemned, and ^sh with the unbeleeving World, but do thou preserve us
in times ^^blike-calamities, that we may pass over the Waves of this
trou^^some World, and be harbored in rest. O support us with thy ^d, that when
the foundations of the Earth be out of course, ^n the Nations of the Earth are
divided and moved, so that the ^rts of men shake at the tempests thereof, our
hearts may be settled thee and thy sure mercies, and never-failing compassions:
thy Spirit move upon these Waters, that the Streams go not ^r our souls the
overflowing of ungodliness make us not afraid, (...) the great Waters of
persecution, or any other affliction, drown not. O thou whom even the Winds
and the Sea obey, now when Ship of thy Church is tossed with tempests, covered
with Waves; ^se, and rebuke these Winds and these Seas, and let there be a at
calm, a blessed and universal Peace throughout the Christian ^rld, that we
may delight and rejoice in the promised blessings of Gospel, our Swords may be
converted into Plowshares, and our ^ares into Pruninghooks. And that we may be
prepared for these ^rcies, frame our hearts to an holy obedience to thy whole
will, make Hears of righteousness which is by Faith, and as be^ommeth use who
look for that inheritance. Teach us by thy grace to dense the World, and
worldly things, to lay up our treasure in Heaven, ^charity and actions of
Religion, that when thou shall call on us deposit these honses of clay, our
earthly tabernacles which we now try about us, we being Heirs of
Righteousness, may dye in the a^tu^^ Communion of thy one holy Catholic
Church; and after death, ^ter into our Masters joy, and at the Resurrection of
the just, be ^ly possessed of that Kingdom, which thou have prepared for all
at love and feere thee, and wait for thy coming. Grant this, (...) Heavenly
Father, for thy mercies sake, and for his sake, whom ^ou have appointed Heir
of all things, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who has given unto us his Spirit,
the earnest of our Inhe^^ance, who make h intercession for us, and by whom we
cry (...) Father. To this Blessed, Holy, and undivided Trinity, be Praise,
Glory, Worship, and Thanksgiving, now and ever, Amen.

ABRAHAM'S Exile.
Heb. 11.8.9. By Faith Abraham when he was called to go into a pl^^ which he
should after receive for an inheritance, obey and he went out, not knowing
whether he went, etc.
ABraham succeeds Noah in the Catalogue of Believe but in the instances and
expresses of his Faith, he was fore him, and all his Progenitors upwards to
Adam, a^^ all that succeeded him, till our Lords Incarnation. him it is
remarkable, That through those many darkenesses, a^^ at such a distance, he saw
his Lords Day, and he rejoiced. him, for the transcendency of his Faith, did
that Title of Hon^ belong, The Father of the Faithful; he only of all of the
first tim^ merited that style, and to him it is attributed indefinitely Father
he was to all his believing forefathers and all his a^ their following
Posterity; and consequently upon the same ^^ count, to him the highest
blessing, which mortality was capa^^^^ of, was assigned, and assured; and that
by a thrice repea^^ grant and confirmation; In thee shall all the Nations of
(...) Earth be blessed which consignment, though literally made (...) and
verified in the Person of Christ, yet was symbolically a^ typically demised to
Abraham; this blessing was to be derive^ from him, who was derived from
Abraham; and therefore Chr^^^ is said (which is yet an higher Honor, an
exaltation of Abraham above Men and Angels) to take the Seed of Abraham, He^^^
2.16. And this blessing promised, is expressed to be Abraham bosom, which yet
is no less then the beatificall Vision, everl^sting rest and security, the
sitting down with Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of Heaven.

But then, as Abraham was the Father of many Nations; so (...) Faith the Parent
of a numerous Issue of Religious Acts and ^^^ties: out of his loins great
Nations had their being and ^^ginning; and his Faith gave sanctity and
holiness, to many ^^^obled glorious virtues; his Faith hallowed and
consecrated (...) his natural and morrall excellencies and perfections; and
en^uled them, holy and religious. Let Philosophers talk of the ^catenation and
connection of the Cardinal Virtues, in gradu ^perantiae: most certain it is,
that in all true Believers, all ^rtues, both Moral, and Theological, are
closely concentred; ^^d most signally and evidently they were so in Abraham.
The ^ralists tells us. That Prudence is the copula of their Virtues; (...)
Divines, That Faith gives being, growth, and persection to holy duties, and
then it cease; as these say, where prudence there are all Virtues, nullum
numen abest, etc. and no act (...) he denominated good, without Prudence, this
mi^at velut ^er igues, Inna minores; so in Religion: where Faith is, there in
aslotiation and conjunction of all holy graces; if we do ^eeve, we cannot but
serve God; we cannot but live soberly, ^^ly, and godly; and no act can
challenge the appellative of ^^igion, which proceeds not from Faith: The proof
of the ^^mer, is Titus 2.11.12.13. and of the latter, Titus 1.15. ^hout it,
they cannot think a holy thought; for, animalis (...); the natural (and the
unbeleeving man is he) receives, (...). 1 Cor. 2.15. and where Faith is, (as
the Sun, attended ^^h a numberless number of Stars, which she gives light
and ^^er too; though with this difference, That when she shines ^^^st, they
appear least; and her setting, is their rising) so is always attended and
waited on with a glorious train of ^^eparable servants, holy graces, which
also are her proper issue (...) offspring, as well as retinue: all which,
besides the former loses are evidently conspicuous in this illust^ious example,
(...) noble precedent. Abraham believed, and therefore he knew (...) discerned
the call, My Sheep (says Christ) know my Voice, follow me: so he harkned also
to this Divine Call, and ob^ed it: For it follows he obeyed the call: But yet
observe discretion of his faith he went not of his own head he ex^^^ not
himself, he waited till he was called; he was first called, and then he went:
And yet his obedience is further not^^ was an absolute, and if ever (under
correction be it spo^^ blind obedience his Master said, go and he goes: but
th^^ not all, he went he knew not whither; this was highly i^^ in verba
Magistri, and yet so strongly was he persuaded of (...) goodness and truth
that go he would, and assured he wa^^ the place whether he went to would be in
after inheritance, it was not enough to believe for a while, and in the time
temptation to faint and flag: No, after he arrived by ^p^^ providence in that
^e^ra incognita, his Faith still taught hi^ tendance on Gods leisure; even in
the Land of Promise he mitted to the divine disposition, to be a sojourner; and
th^^ the country were his own, in the divine designation which eye of his
Faith also perceived; yet he would not enter in upon that account, he would
live there as a stranger, till would give him Livery and Seizin; he would not
take it a^^ own hand, but wait, till that Power which gave it him, (...)
possess him of it: and after all this, here follows an Act of (...) nation.
Abraham was contented with the mean^esse of his ^^dition; and though a mighty
warlike Prince, and the Father many Nations, submitted to dwell in Tabernacles
with and Jacob, etc so that you have these remarkable honor acts of his holy
Faith:

1. The Prudence of his Faith he went not before h^^ called; and therefore it
is signally said, when he was called ^enter dictam. 2. The obedience of his
Faith, as soon as called, he w^^ he disputed not the order, he delayed not his
observance; w^^ he was called to go, he obeyed, and went: and by this
racteristicke note, the Centurian proved his own author^^^ and his soldiers
and servants obedience. Mat. 8.9. 3. The dependence of his Faith; he went he
knew not wh^^ and yet was assured God would bring him to his demised Instance,
and hereon depends and follows. 4. The confidence of his Faith, notwithstanding
all those jections which flesh and blood could pretend against his F^^^ to
invalidate it, and make him stagger; yet he is resolve^ go, and was confident
to find an Inheritance: and the next 5. The perseverance and patience of his
Faith, He sojourned in the Land of Promise, etc. And from hence we find, 6.
The humility and modesty of his Faith; he was satis^^ed with his allowance, and
submitted to his fortune; He ^^welled in Tabernacles, etc. And last we have, 7.
The wisdom and considerations of Faith; his Faith ^^elyed not on a broken
Staff, an Egyptian King; but was ^unded on a Rock: he obeyed, upon rational
motives and ^onsiderations; on solid Arguments, and certain infallible
in^erences, verse 10. For he looked for a City, etc.
And here, upon these circumstances, I might enlarge; but that I am engaged to
observe my premised Method. Only ^y the way, take notice how pertinently, and
powerfully the ^postle Argues, from this proposed Method, to discourse his
^ebrews into obedience and patience.

The Hebrews were all of them in a persecuted and afflicted condition, some one
way, some another, for their Profession; many of them driven into the
Wilderness, forced to fly from, and desert their native Possessions, and
habitations: But yet their condition was not harder then this of Abraham; their
^evelations of Heaven and Eternity, were clearer, and therefore their Faith
ought not to be less then that of Abraham, ^o varieties of accidents should
discompose them, no distractions or difficulties of times, should dispossess
them of their hope, or out them of their estate in reversion, their heavenly
inheritance: they have but little Faith, and less patience, who think much to
suffer a little while, a little inconsiderable worldly ^osse, especially if
they be Christians; before whose eyes, the ^reat things which are laid up for
them that are faithful unto ^he death, are most clearly presented: they
pretend only to ^aith, that dare not trust God, unless they have all their
desires in hand, and will not suffer the severest tyranny; much loss, ^ome few
blows, for all they can hope for: They are none of Abraham's Issue, they have
nothing of his Faith, and so cannot ^easonably expect any portion of his
blessing; any blessing in his bosom. And thus I fall into my proposed way. And
first for an Explication of the Words:

The first Part.

The Words are so plain in the terms, that they need (...) Exposition; Only
a difficulty or two is to be explained. An^ the First is, How Abraham received
this Call: and to this shall but say little, because the Scriptures has
expressly sai^ nothing concerning it: Only in general, it relates, That h^^
was Called, but determines not how; so Abraham had an explicit Faith, of the
general grant of an Inheritance; but as implicit Belief, only of the
particular place: so we may boldly resolve he was Called; but we know not how,
or in wh^^ manner God signified his Call to Abraham; and therefore neither can
we without temerity, or presumption define, or conclude positively what Method
or Solemnity, God used in this Call. Most probable indeed it is, That God
declared his Wi^^ to Abraham and the Pa^riarkes, Viva Voce. Neither will
dispute whether this Call aimed only at a temporal end, or ha^ also a
spiritual purpose; though to me it seems evident from Joshua 24.2.3. that at
once Abraham forsook his Fathers hou^^ and Idolatry; and he was called from the
one and the other And so also from Genesis 11.31. we may conjecture, that Genesis
delivered his Commandment to Abraham, he imparted to Ter^ his Father, and Lo^
his Cousin; and so they all resolved to qui^^ Chaldee, and to take part with
Abraham, though they failed i^ the design; for Terah being Old, stayed by the
way in Charran; after whose Death, Abraham took journey into Canaan Acts
7.2.3.4.

The second Quaere is, When Abraham had this Call; this is a circumstance of
time, and I shall not be inquisitive, or tedious in the discovery. Only,
briefly this account I shall give Abraham, after the Death of his Father Terah
in Charran went into Canaan, and was then seventy and five years old, Genesis
12.4. which thus appears also from the con-text of the History: Terah lived two
hundred and five years, Genesis 11.32. and at that Age he died in Haran, ibid.
Abraham immediately went thence into Canaan, Genesis 12.4. Acts 7.4. and was then
seventy and five years old: and so also Abraham, Terahs youngest son was
borne to him anno atat. 130. And thus much shall serve for this enquiry. The
Doctrinall Part will be more large and now in order follows,

The second Part.

1. Had Abraham gone upon a sullen humor of discontent, or a doting fancy of
change, or a pure pang of over-growne Zeal, the Enterprise had been folly,
superstition, and impiety, and which is more, infidelity: had he gone without
permission, or competent authority, it had been temerity and presumption, if
not worse, sedition. Had he gone upon the score of a new discovery, and
pretense of a foreign Plantation, this had been credulity and design; or had
he gone upon a report or narrative of the fertility of the Land of Canaan, this
at the best, would be interpreted, but an innocent undertaking; it were far
from being an act of Divine Faith. But Abraham had no design, but that which
every one should have in his Religion, and that is, to serve God, and restifie
his obedience and duty to him: It was not a precipitate indiscreet Zeal which
hurried him on to this change of soil, but a sober and sound Knowledge; not
upon a whisper of his own spirit, but upon a Call from Heaven: and indeed,
unless we have Warrant and Commission from God, we have no Power to Exile our
selves, to impoverish our Families, to sell our Estates: pretended necessities
will not serve the turn, they must be real, and not of our own making, for
even these are species of self homicide, and felony de se. He is a Disciple of
Christ, who takes up his Cross; not he that either deserves it, (it is a sin,
a misery and curse to suffer as a Murderer, as a Thief, etc. 1 Pet. 4.15. it
is a Glory, and Crown, to suffer as a Christian) nor he which pulls a cross
upon his head, courts a Martyrdom, when without any prejudice to his Religion,
he might avoid it; that runs himself into a mischief, which he ought to
decline: Cruces nec colimus, nec optamus, Min. Falix. page 97. but if it be for
well-doing, and if the Will of God be so; if those sufferings be of his
appointment, if thereunto we be called, then committing our souls to God, as
unto a faithful Creator, is matter and ground of present comfort and
rejoicing; and after, happiness and glory: and then are we called, when we are
tempted to a denial of any part of our Christian Faith, to the omission of any
holy duty, to believe, or practice any thing contrary to express Scripture, or
dictates of a rightly informed Conscience in any instan^^ whatsoever; For to
profess, what we do not believe, is damnable hypocrisy; and to practice what
is unlawful, is horrible impiety: If then we be required to profess, or
practi^^ contrary to our belief and persuasion; in this case we are called to
suffer, and not to profess or practice what we b^leeve not: much we may do
for the preservation of o^ selves, dependants and interests; but nothing is
tolerated (...) to do, to the dishonor of our holy Religion, or the loss
(...) a good Conscience. When God and Man, Religion and Interest, Conscience
and Worldly Relations are in competition then it holds, He that loves Father
or Mother, more, and Matthew. 10.37.38. Then, whosoever will save his life, and
Mat. 16.25. as for example, If I am enjoined the Profession of the belief of
Purgatory (which opinion I am satisfied ha^ no ground, either in Reason or
Religion) that I should subscribe to, or avow its truth and Religion; in this
case, thoug^ perhaps the opinion be not a specie of it self haereticall, no^
has any annexed impiety to it; yet my subscription to, o^ affirmation of its
truth, would be unsafe, if not damnable (...) me; and by consequent, I am
called rather to suffer, then t^^ hazard my Conscience, and Salvation, by my
Profession of Lie; for so it is to me. Thus also if I be threatened with
Plunder, Imprisonment, etc. for not joining with interested Persons in an
unlawful Covenant, or for not subscribing t^^ any unjust Engagement, contrary
to Duty, Laws, or Religion in this case, because Conscience ascertains me the
practice are wicked and sinful, I am not to comply with, adhere unto, or
promote the Interest of a Party, but either to suffer, o^^ be silent, to live
peaceably and innocently; and if that wi^^ not serve the turn then to suffer
patiently and contendedly for hereunto I am called: I am neither to be awed
into h^ refie or impiety; I may neither assent to haereticall opinion
destructive of an Article of Faith, nor consent to sinful actions, repugnant
to the precepts of Faith: And if upon this account I suffer, I am a Martye
caeteris paribus in both, if no^ equally: only I must be sure that my refusal
or denial b^ upon good grounds, strong convictions of Conscience from the
writings of holy Scriptures, and not upon mere probabili^s or jealousies, or
far-fetched conjectures and fancies; that is refusal, be not an humor or
design, a sullenness or stiffnesse Spirit; but the motion of a sanctified
heart upon Scripture ^evelations. 2. This Call of Abraham we have Registered,
Genesis 12.1. ^^d it put his Faith to the trial and proof; for it runs in high
^^rmes, Get thee out of thy Courtrey etc. A strange and un^^uth order and
injunction, to relinpuish and desert his Inhe^ance and Patrimony, and to
travail and find out a new ^yle, and new acquaintance, and to stand to the
courtesy of ^angers. It were needless to discourse of the fancy and con^nt a
man takes to his Native Country, (nescio qua natale ^um, etc.) of the
affection and piety he owes to his Parents, (...) the delight and satisfaction
he finds in his Inheritance and ^^tient Family, especially if he be a man of
Honor and Qua^y, for these concerments being the highest objects of natural
^^sires; to leave these, seems all one, as to cast off Nature ^^d Humanity it
self. But yet this is the condition of a ^^hristian, God many times puts them
upon trials, calls them to ^^fferings, to sorsake all indearements, and adhere
only to ^^m; to love him for himself, and above, and before all others; ^^d
to love others only in and for him; and so Christ pro^^ed not to his
followers, the fulness of the Creature, abun^nce of wealth, dignities, and
thrones, outward successes and ^osperities, carnal delights and pleasures,
confluence of all ^rthly enjoyments; but harsh and unpleasant conditons, (such
(...) would make the most affectionate servant forsake his Master, ^e most
faithful Subject leave his Prince, and compound in me) Persecution and
Tribulation, Poverty and Ignominy; no ^^ther Arguments of Invitation, to submit
to his di cipline, did ^^e or his Apostles use, but such as were drawn from
sufferings, and the rewards thereof; neither indeed could they properly have
used any other; For Christ was the Prince of sufferings, a ^^an of sorrows; and
the Apostles were banished, imprisoned, ^rmented; not one of them but Saint
John (and he escaped ^eath by a Miracle, when he was put into a Cauldron of
^alding Lead and Oil) died a natural death; and so not only by Precept
taught, but by example (...) they who will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer Persecu^^ Saint Paul found it so; no sooner was he Converted, Ananias
was sent to Baptize him, with this Declaration will show thee how great things
thou must suffer, Acts 9.^^ and ever after, he was a Commission-Officer under
Christ His Motto was Quotidie Morior, I dye daily; and the C^^^ was both his
delight, and his study. No sooner was D^^^^ Anointed and Concecrated to the
Kingly Office by the Prop^^ Samuel, but he was subjected to troubles and
miseries; when are once admitted into the Communion of the chosen Gen^tion, the
Royal Priesthood, the holy Nation; we ever a^^ are obnoxious to temptations,
persecutions and afflictions; (...) the very Blessings which we enjoy, are with
Persecuti^ Mark 10.30. Of the eight beatitudes mentioned Matthew. five of them
them have either meannesse, or misery for the subject; Blessed are the Poor,
the Hungry and Thirsty, ^^ that Mourn, the Humble, the Persecuted; and as it
fared w^ Christ, he was immediately assaulted by the tempter, upon solemn
designation and separation to the Office of Medi^ by Baptism, Mat. 3.16.17.
and Mat. 4.1. So it happens every follower of Christ; as soon as they list
themselves ^^der his command, subscribe to his service, they are sure to m^^
with difficulties, sadnesses, and conflicts; the Devil, his Co^plices, and
Agents pursue them with implacable fury, with (...) wearied malice, and rage;
the sentence is peremptory, In (...) World you shall have tribulation, John
16.33. See but in w^^ harsh Language God declared his Will to Abraham, the Wo^^
and Expressions were able to torment the Bowels, disorder t^ affections,
disturb the soul, and distract the spirit of a^^ one not altogether (...),
who had any spark of good nature in him; he faith not to him in a sweet or
smooth style, Ta^^^ Journey out of Chaldee, and travel thence into Canaan;
(...) in severe and high Phrase, Get thee out of thy Country, and fr^^ thy
Kindred, and from thy Fathers House: God will not dissemble with his servants,
he tells them plainly the terms an condition of their servitude, what they
must expect and loo^ for; neither would he have them to flatter or delude them
selves with vain hopes of I know not what imaginary felici^^es, not to build
Castles in the Air, frame Ideas and plea^^nt fancies of Empires, Crowns,
Riches, and Honorable At^^ndance; but wisely to consider with themselves
aforehand, ^hether they like the terms, will observe the conditions, leave
(...), if that be required, to follow him, left forsaking their pre^^nded and
acknowledged Master, he take vengeance on them ^^r their Apostasy, and they
become a taunt and scorn to others, Luke 14.28.29.30. Look to it then, O
Christian, what God ^^quires of thee, consider aforehand, what God has called
^^ee too; its temerity and folly to take in hand so great an interprise,
unless thou intend to go through with it; it is sin ^^d shame too, to forsake
it, after thou have undertaken it; He ^^at puts his hand to the Plough, and
looks, etc. Luke 9.62. ^^e whom money or preferment can seduce, or fear
bafle out (...) his undertaking, to side or betray his trust to the adverse
par^^, is too base and vulgar a spirit to be employed in any honorable
service: Let none pretend to Christ, who either do^^gly loves, and fancies the
World, or slavishly and cowardly ^^ares it, who drives at nothing but interest,
and is affected with nothing but loss or death, or the pre-apprehensions of
either; (...) whom fair promises can seduce, or threats or hard usage ^^gbeare
and stave out of his Religion, let him never take the ^^me of Christian.
Remember Lots Wife, who regretting ^^e loss of her Country, and some gaudy
Vanities she had ^^ere, was turned into a Pillar of Salt. Know then, and
consider, O Christian, that all those trials and sufferings, are thy por^^on in
this life, that through many tribulations thou must en^^r into the Kingdom of
Heaven; If Called, thou must for^^ke all, and follow thy Master; here, in
bearing thy Cross; ^ereafter, in receiving a Crown, Per varios casus, per tot
dis^imina rerum, tendimus in Latinus. God will have it so, for ^any reasons
best known to himself; yet some we have re^ived from his fullness, which his
Word as a suppletory, has ^^nished us withal. As 1. These sufferings and
hardnesses tend much to his glory; for by this means God is worshipped, served,
and obeyed (...) himself, and not upon a pretense, a design or interest; this
plainly demonstrates the ingenuity and sincerity of (...) Addresses and
Attendance on God, when we lay aside all o^^ respects, and have no ends or
stratagem in our service, but serve him, to glorify him, and to be glorified
with him; wh^^ no ingredient in our service, but love, and hope; when wi^^ out
secular ends, and not for secular advantages, we prose^^ the cause of God; when
we make not use of Religion, to dr^^ on a design, to satisfy a passion and
lust; when we prese^^ Gods Honor and service, before our own interests; when
quit for him all those endearements and relations, wh^^ most naturally and
orderly do take up our affections; no ^^ger or clearer testimonies of great
love can be shown: (...) good reason we have to do so; God had no motive to
love but his good pleasure; no end in settling his love upon us, to save and
glorify us; and its but justice that we love (...) for himself, that without
any self ends we strive to please (...) and conform to his will, who wills
nothing but our sa^^^ fication and salvation; and no greater argument of love,
(...) if God Calls us to it to suffer, to dye for God: he that (...) part with
his God, to keep his Coin; he that will desert station, and neglect his duty,
because he shall find troub^^ and hardships, and miseries in the engagement
and servi^^ turns Renegadoe and Apostate, and speaks plainly by his section,
that the satisfaction of his lusts and interests, were chief aim of his
desires and object he sought for; God (...) not at all in his thoughts, his
intentions were base and unw^^thy, servile and mercenary; he wore Gods livery,
not for section, but gain; he pretended to him, not for duty, loya^ or honor,
but for pay, pillage or promotion. The D^^ thought Job an hypocrite, and
therefore he thus Argued D^^ Job serve God for wought etc. Job 1.9.10.11. Well
he kno^^ salse-hearted, double-minded men, would not, for they are ^^stable in
all their ways, off and on, as they spy advantage the reason of their service
and pretenses, is their successen prevalencies; if otherwise it happen, they
curse, murmr, fret with impatiency; are apt to think God has forsa^^ them,
has no mercy for them, they despair, and in this sperate humor, speak evil
of Dignities. But the Devil (...) deceived in Job, he was an upright man,
there was truth in his ^nward parts: By his patlence, and constancy in his
sufferings, ^e declared his own sincerity, and confuted the Devils fancy; ^e
evidenced strongly his love to God, and effectually baffled ^he malice of
Satan; that he Preached the Devil was a Liar, and a Murderer; Job a sincere
true man, who had not been so ^mously known, had he not suffered. This cleares
his sinceri^y, and teaches us this duty, That God is to be served, whether ^e
be pleased to reward our services with Prosperity, or try them ^y Adversity;
thus we glorify God. And 2. We advantage our selves. Nothing more conduces to
^he advantage and honor of a Christian, then to suffer for his Profession, to
obey Gods Call; for these advers^ies, detect and ^iscover their concealed
Graces and Habits, and makes them ^minently conspicuous, and notorious: Many
wise and good ^^en, had dyed under the Notion of weak men, Idiots, harmeesse,
well-natured, easy Spirits, unless while they had lived, they had been p^t to
the trial: many affronts indignities, corns and dishonours, have been cast on
them; but indeed they gained reputation by them, whilst their Deportment were
so ^eroicke, so Christian, under their Afflictions, that as the tram^ing of
dirty feet gives brightness to the Brass, so all those ontumelious
aspersions, and dishonorable useages, made them ^ore glorious, beloved,
admired; As the fire cleanses the Gold, ^o affliction manifests Religion, 1
Pet. 1.7. it is, that we may ^e found to the praise and honor etc. These
exercise many Graces, which otherwise are not so useful: Faith, Hope,
Pati^nce, Self-denial, and makes us exemplarily appear, (which otherwise we
should not) to be humble, meek, charitable, constant Believers; such Stars as
these cast not forth their light, ^^t in such Nights of temptation, trouble,
and adversity. But ^s an addition, and complement of honor. God stamps upon
them by their sufferings, the Character and Image of his Booved, their Head; he
conformes them to the Image of his Son, ^om. 8.29. and bestows on them the
distinguishing note of (...) Children. He deals with them as with Sons, Heb.
12 6.^.8. and after rewards them with an eternal weight of Glory, ^ow.
8.17.18. 2 Cor. 4 17.18. That man knows little of the Gospel, who is offended
at the sufferings of Gods deare^ Servants, or deelines the Honor and Mercy of
sufferings for Righteousness sake. The more generous Spirits of the Heathen
had the same thoughts of their suffering fellow Citizens, and of their
sufferings. Cicero says, Qui nunquam certavit cu^^ fortuna, nullum nomen
meretur. And Fler. lib. 2. cap. 2. account the Romans greatness, from their
sufferings, in the cause (...) their Country, Magnitudo Populi Romani
comprobatur cal^^ mita^i^us. And it was a true Observation which Minutius
Fali^^ hinted at to Cacilius, Adeo omnes vostri viri, ques in exom plum
praedicatis, aerumnis suis in^lyti floruorunt. All the Rom^ Presidents of
Virtue and Valor, were notorious sufferers; a^^ the most calamitous Persons
for their Countries sake, were the most renowned. And this their Philosophers
determined, concluding the Passive part of Fortitude, to be most Heroi^^^ and
Honorable. But now, if we consider, that our prese^^ sufferings, gains us not
only Honor, but brings (...) Profit; that they are Advantages, as well as
Glories; Th^^ thought, would almost persuade the most engaged Earthworm^ to
parr with his clay god, and wedge of confidence, for Christ sake, and for
Heaven: And the Apostle tells us in plain term they are so; All things, even
the worst of things, work together, contrary to their nature and intentions,
by a secret overruling Power, are engaged to plot and act for the best, the
advantages of them that love God: and no greater lovers (...) him, then the
resigned sufferers for him, Romans 8.28. A strange way of exchange, to gain by
the worst, to purchase by loss to conquer by suffering; and yet so it is, Romans
8.37. 2 Cor. 4.17. Heb. 12.10. and we experimentally find it so. No^ have so
great a share of the consolation of the Spirit, are (...) much renewed in the
inner man, have such serenety of Spririt, and contentation of mind, as they who
possess their souls in patience; that is, who suffering according to God
will, commit their souls to him in well doing as unto a faith full Creator;
and this is a reason why we should submit, so al^^ so why God uses this
Method: He brought Light out of Darkness, all things out of nothing: and this
is as great a demon^ration of his power and goodness, as the former; by (...)
nominy, to raise to Glory; by Death, to restore to Life; from Poison, to draw a
Preservative; to bring the best out of the worst. And it is Saint Aaugustines
Observation, Deus ^deo bonus est; God is so good, that we would never suffer
evil to be, unless he were so powerful also, that he could ^ring the
greatest good, out of the most desperate evil. Titus sackes Jerusalem: This
the Divine Providence ordered for a punishment of the Jews malice and
wickedness. Well, Ierusa^em is an heap of stones, the jews are disperced;
and this was used by God, as a fairer way, and more effectual means, for the
dissemination of the Gospel. This very order which God sent to Abraham, has in
it much concealed goodness and mercy; and though at first it seems harsh and
rigorous, yet propius in^uenti, it is full of grace and truth, as we may
perceive by the following circumstances. Abraham (and so we need not wander for
an example) is commanded to quit his Country; the Design was, he should quit
Idolatry; and this former a proper means to bring about the latter; for to
abide in his own Country, had been a perpetual obstacle to his then intended
course of godliness, (for what agreement has the Temple of God with ^dols?
what communion has Light with Darkness?) and Idolatry was the Epidemicall
sin of that Nation: But if his abode there altered not his course, yet
undoubtedly it had been very dangerous (and no Man is to venture his Religion
upon a hazard, nor subject it to a temptation) in respect of his many natural
obligations and relations of Country, Parents, and Kindred; whereas by
quitting his Country, and sojourning in Canaan, he became disengaged from
those ties of Nature and Native soil, and fitly disposed to venture on
Religion, and to make progress in the ways of godliness: For its most
certain, what the Roman Historian Observed, Falicitate corrumpimur, nothing
more destructive of Religion, then too much worldly prosperity; it makes men
apt to forget, to extinguish and obliterate all notions of God and godliness;
to pervert the principles of holy life, and set the will and affections upon
the pursuit of phantasticke, unprofitable, deceiving apparitions of pleasure
and profit, pride, luxury, etc. is almost the inseparable companion of a full
and high estate; and it is a great mercy in God to afflict, that we may be
humble sober, wise, religion devout: Out of very truth and faithfulnesle, God
causes hi^ People to be troubled: And therefore David resolved, It ^^ good for
me that I have been afflicted: that I may learn the Statutes, Psalm. 119.71.
Afflictions makes us tractable and teach able, apt to receive Instruction and
to be kept to it; but before his afflictions, he was as Jeremy said of
himself, an u^^med Cal^e. I went wrong, verse 67. he despised all counsel and
would have no correction; and probably, had wandered a^ the days of his life,
after the lusts of his own heart, had h^^ not been restrained and re-called by
Gods afflicting Hand (...) Voice. 3. Religion is not a light perfunctory
employment, but (...) sad, serious, and laborious employment, Res severa est
veru^ gandium, Senica Epist. 49. It requires great austerity of Spirit strict
performances, humility, selfe-denyall, mortification, (...) effectual
dereliction of sin; abrenunciation of the World called, 1 These. 1.3. The
work of Faith: which as Pisc. in lo^ expounds, it is (...), or (...), an
active, working Faith, to kill and crucify the old Man, and all his lusts, to
mortify a beloved darling sin, to bring our bodies in subjection to be at
enmity with the World, to refuse worldly pleasure^ when temptations, beyond
duty or safety; to take pains in the cause of God, which is expressed by the
following Phrase, the lobour of love, which is (...), a laboring love, such as
sets us to enquire after the Law, to buy the Truth, search the Scriptures, to
endeavor for a right understanding in the ways of truth and godliness,
according to our respective opportunities and capacities: to put on the armor
of Righteousness on the right hand and on the left: If we be not called to
suffer and dye for Christ, yet we must dye unto sin, and live unto
righteousness; If not to forsake our houses yet our lusts; if not to go out
of the World, yet to use the World a^ if we used it not, that is, cut off all
our portion in this life excepting so much of it, as is necessary for our
present subsistence, to secure our Inheritance in the World to come; and this
is our patience of hope also, as well as in the downright suffering part, Heb.
10.36. the burden of the Lord, a doing the work of the Lord in voluntary
severities and abstinences, (...) a separation from the World, 2 Cor. 6.17.
expressed by those summons, Depart, depart ye, go ont from Babel, flee out
^om the Chaldeans, touth no unclean thing, Esaias 48.20. and 52. 1. have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, no ^ommerce, that is, no
compliance or confederacy with the workers of wickedness, Rev. 18.4. This is
that which Christ ^eakes of plucking out the right Eye, cutting off the right
and; to relinquish whatsoever is dear or near unto us, if it is an
impediment, or a diversion from the paths of holiness, ^r an occasion or
inducement to sin and impiety: all which was represented to the Church of
God, under the name of the pouse, in that charge, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken, O
Daughter, and ^usider, and incline thine ear: forget also thine own people,
and ^^y fathers house. So shall the King greatly desire thy beauty etc. 4. God
tempers the rigor of his precept, with the sweetness of a Promise. If the
first part, the Summons, be dis-relli^ing and unpleasant: The second part, the
sub-joyned Premi^s, are comfortable and refreshing. God sends always a graous
rain upon his Inheritance, to refresh it, when it is dry; (...) gives sharp
Physic in a Sugared recipe; after a Seed time (...) Tears, an Harvest of Joy.
God leaves not Abraham de^itute, but promises a great reward; for his
Country, Canaan better Land; for his Kindred, a great Nation; for his Fathers
^use, he shall be a Father of many Nations. God in our ^fferings, would have us
to contemplate on the excellencies, ^^d depend on the truth, and rejoice in the
goodness of his ^romises, which far exceed both the number and greatness
(...) our hardnesses. And thus, after an order of sadness, he adds ^ven
blessings of comfort; which I shall briefly describe in ^der. 1. I will make
thee a great Nation. Great, both in number and multitude. Populous Nations
deseended from Abra^m by Keturah and Hagar, Genesis 25. And great also in re^wne
and virtue, men famous in their Generations, who were after. builders in the
house of Israel, issued from them, as Kings and Prophets. 2. I will bless
thee: Make thee Prosperous, and Religions. 3. I will make thy Name great: Not
only to be the ^ther of the Faithful by a perpetual Decree; but to be
con^^sed among the Nations, and reverenced among the Heathen Josephus lib. 1.
Antiq. 4. Thou shall be a blessing: Thou shall surely be blesse^ And not only
so, but in abstracto, thou shall be a blessing self; and also because, that
expression, the Lord bless the^ Abraham, was the usual form of blessing
among the Hebr^^. 5. I will bless them that bless thee: Others shall be ble^
for thy sake. 6. I will curse them that curse thee: All thine Ene^ shall perish
and be scattered. 7. All the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in thee.
(...) both Jews and Gentiles, who are imitators of Abraham's ^^ty, and followers
of his Faith. And immediately hereupon confirmation of all, God appeared to
Abraham; which also a further comfort to him in his affliction. Thus, Dol^
voluptas invicem cedunt; Heaviness may endure for a Ni^^^^ but Joy comes in
the Morning. Christ deals thus (...) his Disciples, he forewarnes them, what
they shall suffer; ever annexes to his predictions of affliction, succeeding
a^^rances of mercy and comfort: In the World you shall (...) tribulation: but
be of good comfort. I have overcome the Wo^^ John 16.33. After we are required
to leave Father and ^^ther etc. A Promise is made for the receipt of an hundred
(...) here, and hereafter a life of blessedness to all eternity. T^^ are much
mistaken, and the authors of their own miseri^^ who sits down under a cross
in pensiveness and anxiety Spirit, and never looks to that future glory which
is prepa^^^ for them; whereas if they did consider the after rewards, the would
not count their present sufferings, etc. Romans 8.18. e^^ because they look not
at the things which are seen, but the things which are not seen: Temporal
afflictions and ^^rituall consolations, are not incompatible, 1 These. 1.6. b^
always meet in those, who abound in hope and confident of an infinite
advantage, when the day of restitution comes. But if we have nothing but
natural dependence no expectation or security of Heaven, the fear of Dea^
wounds us to Death; we lose our Souls, to save our Persons ^^d Estates; our
hearts faint and fail us at every shake, whereas we reflect upon that
recompense which is laid up for Be^evers; this would allay all our secular
sorrows, allienate and ^se the pressures we lie under, rejoicing in hope, Romans
12.12. ^^e shall not decline to go any whither we are called to, to ^^e any
thing is commanded, to endure any thing shall be flicted upon us; we will run
with patience the Race that set before us, looking on, and for Jesus, the
author and fisher of our Faith.
5. The former Observation is strengthened by that which ^lowes, He went, not
knowing whether. Know he did, That ^ethersoever he went, God was his exceeding
great reward, Curtius said, Vbicunque vir fortis sedem elegerit, Patria est; he
was certain, that what place soever the Divine Prodence should guide him to,
that should be his Inheritance; (...) what that place was, he neither knew by
name, or scitua^n, or description in a Map; yet this exigent was he put to,
remove from a known certain Inheritance, whereof had seizine and actual
Possession, for a strange and unowne Land, which he had only in expectation; a
settled bitation, for an ambulatory wavering Pilgrimage; God quires of us to
forsake our temporal present pleasures, which we taste, feel, and see, for
that Estate in Reversion, ^ose excellencies, Eye cannot see, Ear cannot hear,
nei^er can they enter into the Heart of Man; only we have me rude and unformed
Idaea's and glimpses thereof, enough make them amiable, and defireable. Flesh
apprehends noing, but what may be demonstrated by sense; and carnal ^en move
and act upon such advantages, as their Intelligence all conduct them; and
thinks folly and madness to lose an ^ouse, an Estate here, for a Mansion, and
an Inheritance in ^version. Faith moves not by the direction of sense, but upon
the dictates of Conscience: Acts not with reference to (...) present
conveniences, but according to the suggestions of eligion, and expresses of the
Holy Spirit; is makes the Be^ever follow the Heavenly Call, with an
indifferency of Spirit, (...) neglect of the present emergencies, not
respecting whether he goes, what he suffers for Christ's sake; for he know^
and is satisfied, that he who has promised is faithful; that (...) will not
tempt him above his ability, but will give an Issue and yet what a Believer
does in this case is no more, but w^ a wise provident, carnal man does for his
temporal Inter^ The Merchant and Mariner leaves their Families and Postession
Sail into remote, and sometimes unknown Countries, (...) all the hazards of
Wind and Weather, depends on (...) firmness of a three inch Planke, and many
times upon (...) strength and working of a Cable; and all this he under takes
upon this score, in hopes that his Voyage may (...) (and, Spes est rei incertae
nomen) advantagions, or honorable to himself, an improvement to his Estate, an
enrich^^ his Posterity, though he knows not which way the Wi^ shall drive
him, or into whose hands he shall fall: and thi^ the condition of all such who
seek their fortunes, they le^ the present modicum, in expectation of a greater
proportion if it fall well, they are made; if not, they are undone. (...) now a
Believer has an advantage, and therefore more rea^ to follow his designs; for
though he leave his pittance (...) yet assured he is he shall fall into the
hands of his Heaven Father; all things shall go well with him, and so his
desi^^ is both more Religious and prudentiall. This was the co^^tion of the
Hebrews the Apostle wrote unto, to be Plunder expelled their Houses, Exiled
from their Native Soil; to (...) vagrants and wanderers, without any settled
place of residence but he confirms them by this consideration, this very Est^
was long since praefigured, and as it were consecrated in Abraham. If then our
case be, as this of Abraham, or these Hebrew or as the Primitive Christians,
whose Motto was, Quos fugiamus, habemus, quo fugiamus, non habemus. Yet let the
sa^ considerations of Faith and Religion, and Reason, stablish (...) settle our
minds and hearts in a patient submission to G^^ good pleasure and will; let
them who have not hope, or (...) have their Portions and their hopes here
only, fret, murma^ and repine; but for us. (Christian and beloved Brethren)
let (...) be steadfast and unmovable, abounding always in the wor^ of the
Lord, forasmuch as you know, that your labor is not vain in the Lord. It was
the Panegyricke which Chrysostom, ^^de of his Antiochians; (...), (...). No
contingency, disaster, fear danger, difficulty, or hardness could abate or
cool their Zeal; nay, says he, it did not ^^ely not extinguish, (...), but
did the more in^^me and kindle, Hom. 4. ad Pop. Antioch. Which brings in the
(...) 6. The perseverance of Abraham's Faith by which he abode, (...). There are
some, who begin in the Spirit, but end in the ^^esh: their Religion is fierce
and violent at the first declaration, but after cooles and shakes; like those
Galls mentioned in ^^or. lib. 2. Hist. cap. 6. Quorum primus impetus est major
quam ^^rorum, sequens winor quam foeminarum; their first charge is ^^ore hot
then that of men, the very next fainter then the as^^^lts of Women; Like the
Children of Ephraim, who being ^^rnessed and carrying Bows, turned themselves
back in the ^^y of battle. They are all Religion at the first overture;
No^^ing but come see my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts; but the de^^ne is
discovered the hypocrite raised, and it was the heat of ^dust, or the fury of
a passion; their pretenses, like untimely ^^it, never comes to maturity: Of the
two and thirty thousand ^hch Gideou levied to fight with the Mideanites, two
and twenty thousand poor spirited cowards, (who probably would va^^ur highly
of their valor at the first) deserted the service: and upon a second assey of
their resolution, nine thousand seven hundred fell off. Those who by their
Baptism are listed in^^ the number of Christ's Soldiers: and when they are
called (...) the service, are distracted with base unworthy fears and
^^alousies, and like white livered dastards, either Apostate, or ^ine would; or
are fo foftned and settled with ease and sensual ^elights, that they cannot, or
would not endure the burden and ^eate of the day, are no Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, no ^embers of the Army of Martyrs, the company of Saints, no ^hildren
of Abraham, not respecting his temporal conveniences or relations, conversed
in a far distant Country, and ^^ved there as a Stranger, never longing, or
in his thoughts relearning homeward; which is a new and more heightened trial
^f his Faith, then the former: For now in this exigent, his ^^pectations seems
to be totally frustrated, and his confidences deluded, in as much, as after he
arrived in Canaan, which depended o^ for a Possession, he obtained nothing
perman or fixed which he could own or challenge, but a Sepulch^ and this also
he purchased seventy years after his arrival. Enterre his beloved Sarah. his
Companion both in his Tra^ and Hopes. Neither did his Posterity Inherit any
part or (...) ^ell there, till some years after his life determined; and the
fore, it is significantly expressed here, He lived in Tents, no^ Villages or
Mansion Houses, which are fixed Places of reside^^ bu^ in Tabernacles, which
were portable and moveable lo^^ings. He was necessitated to shift Quarters from
Place to P^^^ sometimes to the Mountains, sometimes to the Champian; (...) this
he was put to with Isaac and Jacob; with Isaac sev^^ and five years, and
fifteen with Jacob. The more Abra^^ endeavored the advancement and settlement
of his Poster^ the less reason he had to expect it; all his labors proved
cesselesse, and his hopes vain: For while he promised him^ a Country, he and
his Wife lived and died there in the c^^^ city of Strangers only; and his
Posterity had no other (...) come for many years after them. And yet it had
been so^ content and satisfaction, if he could have continued there; (...) a
devouring deadly Famine drives him thence into Egypt for supply of Food: And
even here also he was necessitated as a (...) grim to sojourne and wander.
Flesh and Blood would had have digested these difficulties and contrarieties;
but tho^ all failed, yet his Spirit rested contented and quiet, and he p^^
severes unto the end, because his Faith was argumentative a rational For thus
did he discourse himself into Contenta^^ and Perseverance: What? though at
once I be dispossessed my inheritance and hopes; though I have nothing to live
^ but bare dependencies; yet I trust in God All-sufficient, Truth self,
Wisdom it self, Goodness it self; I will not que^^ on his veracity,
prescribe to his Wisdom, suspect his goodn^^ this I know and am assured of,
that he can, and in his go^^ time will, accomplish his engagement to my
Posterity: A^^ as for me, he will confer on me in lieu of all these
tem^^alties, what is infinitely better, his Heavenly Kingdom; comparison
whereof, the material Heavens and the glory the^ the Earth and the fullness
thereof, are but meet emptinesses (...) vanities; for so it is further
expressed. he looked high, far ^^ve the Earth, at a City having a Foundation,
verse 10. of this ^apter. This very reason concludes his Faith not to be
Enthustick nor fantastic, but as I said, discursive and rational;

Faith was sustained by proper and effectual mediums. and ^refore constant and
perseverant, durable and unalterable, like foundation, and in a subordination
like to that Foundation (...) Founder his Faith relied on. From all which
Premises, these (...) general Doctrines are deducible.

1. When God makes over to us any Promise, we are wholly (...) refer the Time
and Manner of its accomplishment, to his ^^e good pleasure and wise
disposition; it belongs not to us to ^scribe or determine any thing, in respect
of either the way, or ^ne of the execution of his just decrees, or performance
of (...) gracious Promises; for this is not to submit to, but chal^ge God; and
which is more impudently daring, to impose (...) God; Its in Scripture
expression To tempt God, Provoke (...) Grieve him, Psalm. 78.40.41. They
limited, they had the ^^dnesse to appoint God, when, and how he should save
them; ^d this was, to provoke him etc. 2. God accomplisheth his Promises in
far choycer bles^gs many times, then in his Grant are awarded or expres^d.
And yet this does not break his Charter, but commends (...) Liberality; For as
the lesser is always contained in the ^^uter, so he that gives the greater
does also give the lesser; (...) that promises the loan or gift of a Penny,
and in lieu there^^ sende^^ a Pound, or in stead of a Pound, gives a Diamond
(...) the value of some hundreds, violates not his Promise, but ^untifully
performs it; and by his bounty and munificence, (...) fordeth a new
Obligation, and occasion of gratitude and ob^^rvance. And thus, because Earthly
Inheritances are service^^le only for our present accommodation, God was
better then is word, in Abraham's construction, when he bestowed on him ^eaven
and Life Eternal. That Promise made to the Obedi^^t, in the fifth
Commandment; or (if that be the meaning of (...) Words) The ^^eek shall
Inherit the Earth, Matthew. 5. are both (...) satisfied; when God calls his
servants, the Obedient and Meck out of this World, in their Youth and fullness
of ^^row, and Estates them in Heaven; because he gives the m^^ Mat. 25 21. the
body for the shadow, the substance for (...) Image, the Truth for the Type; and
so that Promise, M^^ 10.30. is made good, if performed here or hereafter; if
rec^^^penced with restitution of the same in specie, though that every respect
may not be presumed, or the reward commu^^ into Eternity. And this holds in
many dispensations of (...) goodness, without a removal to Heaven, if God
exalts (...) understanding and spirits to strong and serious apprehens^^ and
contemplations of his excellencies and perfections, wh^ we are here in an
otherwise sad and tragical Estate: as fo^^ stance; If he permits us to be
indigent, and sharply nece^^ous, yet gives freely of the treasures of his
Wisdom in Sp^^^uall Understanding; to make us rich in Faith, and abound good
Works; If he suffer us to be persecuted and afflicted, a^ yet affords peace of
Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost^ in these interims, the love of God be
shed abroad in our hea^ and we be rooted and grounded in our hopes: If in
ignom^^ and dishonor, and yet the Spirit of God and Glory rest (...) us; If in
maladies and bodily infirmities, yet the distemp^ and diseases of our Soul be
removed and cured, and spirit^^ health and life substituted; If dispossessed of
our Inheritan^^ and yet we possess our Souls in patience, this is not to
^^ceive hard measure at the hands of God, but good meas^pressed down, shaken
together, and running over: God (...) these dealings is not hard or austere,
but good and gracious^ us. And O that we had the spirits to discern, and the
lig^^ to distinguish, and hearts to come, taste, and see how graci^^ the Lord
is. Lastly, Abraham's Heavenly mindedness is considerable ^ several instances.
In Canaan he sojourned in Tents, Amb^^tory and uncertain Lodging; In Heaven he
expected a City ^ Mansion firm and immutable, of perfect and lasting repose.
(...) Canaan he lived in the open Air, separated from the so^^ty of the
Natives; In Heaven, he should find a foundat^^ where are resident the
innumerable company of Angels, (...) sanctifying Spirits, the general Assembly
and Church of the ^^rst borne; the Tabernacles he moved in, were the Works ^f
Men's hands, of their composition and fashioning: the Ci^y of the living God was
his own Fabric, God the Ar^^itect and Builder, 2 Cor 5.1. So this City was
not a ter^ene Habitation, subject to mutations and casualties, by se^erall
contingencies and modes of Government, but an hea^enly, whose Foundations
cannot be removed or shaken. Here ^elow, Cities are many times broken with
divisions, factions, and Interests; where we may not abide, unless we be a
par^y (and there is hazard) or newters; and then we are liable (...) be hated
of all, and to be abused by every prevailing facti^n. This City of God, is
furnished with the peace of God, ^^aintained in a perfect and indissoluble
unity of the holy ^aints and Angels. O let the same mind be in us, that was ^n
Abraham; despise the World, because we think of Heaven; not to be entangled
with the lusts of the World, because ^ere we are Strangers: in vain do we
look for a Mansion ^^ere, unless here, as Strangers and Pilgrims, we abstain
^^om fleshly lusts, 1 Peter 2.11. Unless by Obedience and ^atience in
well-doing, we go out of Babylon, into the place which we shall after receive
for an Inheritance: Unless we ^voyd and flee from the occasions of sin;
unless we deny ^ur selves, and become Humble, Patient, Chaste, Liberal,
Merciful, and Obedient; Invitamur ergo a Deo Patre, ut fa^ice and beata
commutatione, Patr^m Diabolum relinquamus; If ^^e come not, or be not
entertained when we come, Perditi^ ^ua ex te, our destruction is of our selves.
The whole I shall ^hut (...) with Saint Augustines words, lib. Sermon. de temp.
Sermon. 68 Novum hoe probationis ge^^^, habenti propria, exi^ia iudicere
peregrina, ingerere laborem itineris quiescenti, im^erare penuriam possidenti;
and tantarum facultatem Domiu^, n^^issi^atem imponere peregrinandi. Libenter
tamen fides accepit, quicquid arduam videbatur incredulis, and sententiam Dci
tan^uam qui optare videretur, accepit fidelis, And thus I pass to the third
Part.
The third Part. The Prayer.

O Incomprehensible, Immutable, and All-sufficient Lord G^^ whose ways are in
the great Deeps, and whose Foot-s^^ are not known; who by secret methods of
mercy, orders (...) saddest contingencies, to the advantages of thy Servants,
and (...) thy Wisdom and Power brings good out of evil: We glor^ thy
Wisdom, celebrate thy Power, magnify thy Mercy (...) thy Goodness, adm^re
thy Providence, and do most humbly (...) plore thy Grace and assistance, that
we with great attention, (...) devotion, and much humility, may hearken to thy
Heavenly (...) the expresses of thy Will, and the motions of thy Spirit, and
(...) as ready to Obey as Hear, that at all times we may express (...)
obedience by an effectual dereliction of our sins, and more^^tion of our
lasts; and when thou please, we may with a q^^ and week Spirit, be contented,
and resigned in all changes of P^^son and condition; and when thou call,
reddily forsake all (...) natural Interests, Relations and Conver^ences. Let
(...) our l^^ to our Worldly endearements, or the fear, or loss of our E^^^
thy Possessions, be ever able to dispossess (...) of our hopes of H^^ven. Let
us never practice any indirect or unwarrantable ^onses, either to procure, or
preserve an Estate; that we being ^^grims and Strangers here, in affection as
well as condition, (...) long after, and labor for a continuing City,
demeaning our se^^ as Strangers in all modesty and sobric^y: acting as
Strangers moving homewards to our Country, the Heavenly Jerusale^^
over-looking the presect, and e^^ing the future, the Heaven Ma^sions not made
with hands, the Inheritance incorruptible, (...) defiled, that f^deth not away,
eternal in the Heavens, Abraham b^som^ the place of ^ost to the Sons of
Abraham, to live for ever with the God of Abraham. To which God, Father, So^^^
and Holy Ghost, be all Glory, Honor, and Im^^tality, (...) and to all
Eternity, Amen.

SARAHS Seed.
Heb. 11.11.12. Through Faith also Sarah her self received strength to
conceive Seed, and was delivered of a Child when she was past Age, because she
judged him faithful who had ^ramised, etc.
SArah was formerly Abraham's consort in his Exile; she is now his Partner, in
the Promised Seed; they were conjoined by God in holy Wedlock, they are not
separated or divided in their holy Faith; and so, as near as might be. ^he
Apostle joins them in his discourse, for honored Exam^les of Faith and
Magnanimity. Abraham followed the Voice and Call of his Lord and God: Sarah
follows the example of ^er Lord and Master (for so she acknowledged him, 1
Pet. 3.6.) and is therefore the immediately following Example here; and ^ndeed
for the Honor of her Sex, is put into the Gatalogue; even that Sex, though the
weakest, may for all that be strong in ^aith; and therefore it is emphatically
expressed, (...), and also for the encouragement of the Hebrew Women, that they
would submit to any conditions with their Yoke-fellows, and not through
softness, delecacy, or wantonness, decline ^opartnership with their Husbands
in their sufferings; nor through incredulity, or tenderness, endeavor to
dissuade them from their steadfastness, and prous undertaking. For the Hebrew
Men were ambitious to be called the Sons of Abra^am; and the Women, the
Daughters of Sarah; and as they took themselves obliged to the imitation of
Abraham's Piety; so these, to follow the Faith of Sarah; whom Saint Peter in the
above cited Place, commends, for her Obedience to her Husband: And our Apostle
here, for her Faith in God. Through Faith also Sarah her self received
strength to conceive Seed, etc.

The first Part.

The enquiry will here be, whether any extraodinary abil^ties were de novo,
conferred on Abraham and Sarah, to stre^ then them for Procreation? And to this
I answer, That though they were not simply unapt for Generation; yet to humane
apprehension it was altogether improbable, that Abraham and Sarah after so long
co-habitation without Issue, should (...) length in their Old Age have
Children; for if in his young years he received no Children by Sarah; much
less hopes (...) there when he was an hundred years Old, and Sarah ninety and
so if we respect Sarah's former-sterility, and present i^^ becility, that she
was both Old ( For it ceased to be with S^^rah after the manner of Women) and
Barren, the Work see^ miraculous. For though Abraham received no new
Generati^^ faculty from God to beget Isaac; yet certainly, in as much (...)
Sarah both in her youth (and then the custom of Women continued with her) was
Barren: of necessity she must be m^^ more, when she was both Old, and that use
discontinued; a^^ so we may safely determine, God gave her strength to Concei^
which formerly she had not. It Is true, Adam begot a Chil^^ at the Age of 130.
years: and Methuselah at 187. Genesis 5. and 25. but these lived eight or nine
hundred years, and so (...) marvel. But after the Deluge, the life of Man
shranke up, a^^ shortened; and in the period between Abraham and Moses, (...)
lived not two hundred years; for Abraham lived but 17 years, and Sarah 127.
who yet are noted for old People. B^^ in Moses time, they were reduced to
seventy or eighty year^^ Psalm. 90. And so in that period wherein Abraham lived,
p^^^bably there was more required then the ordinary strength (...) Nature at an
hundred years; (and though after Sarah's dea^^ he had many Children by
Keturah. yet this was from the co^^^tinuance of that supernatural Power, which
he received from the Begetting of Isaac) and as for Sarah to Conceive at nine^^
years, was certainly miraculous, seeing she in the prime and co^^ceived
pregnancy of her Age, was Barren.

But her another difficulty is to be cleared; for Genesis 18. (...) Sarah is
reported to laugh at the news, that she should conceive, and was sharply
rebuked for her incredulity; how then can it be verified, That through Faith
she received, etc. or that she ju^ged him faithful who had Promised? To this
Quere, it is answered, That probably this was not a laughter of joy or
admiration, but contempt and scorn, conceiving the subject matter of the
relation impossible, and so r di^alous: neither can she be excused, for that
she knew not whether God himself, or an Angel delivered the Words though as
soon as she knew, she acquiesced in the revelation: For that positive
assertion, I will return as a set time, etc. does evidently argue, that the
affirmer was either God himself, or an Angel; and Sarahs denying her self to
laugh, is evidence enough, that she was convinced in Conscience, that he was
God, or an Angel; neither could any one have rebuked her for incredulity, but
God, who is the alone searcher of hearts; And so Augustine resolve, it, To^. 4.
qu^st. sup. Genesis cap. 36. Dominus non redarguit Abraham cum riserit, quia
^llius risus admirationis and latitiae fait; Saram v^re redarguit, quia fait
risus dubit^tionis, and ab i^e dijudicari potuit, qui corda hominum nevit: Yet
he thinks it a womanly modesty at first to deny it, though she was so
ingenious, that after the reprehension, she neither defended it, nor replied,
but Believed. Sarahs Faith then was mixed with incredulity, or weakness, like
his Mark 9.24. and though at the first conceit she seemed to dis-beleeve the
revelation; yet a second consideration, mastered and suppressed this carnality;
and so she received strength to Believe, and to conceive; he^ spirit prevailed
against the suggestions of her flesh, and her Faith prevailed over her natural
imbicility and sterility.

The second Part.

Let us next coasider what strength our Faith may receive from the Premises,
and what issue this fruitful President affords.

1. Abraham and Sarah before they received the Promised Seed, were almost out
of hopes; they against and above hope. heleeved in and under hope; their Faith
must be frequently exercised: And this is the condition of the Sons of
Abraham, and Daughters of Sarah. The Children of Israel are promised
Deliverance, yet after this, their Taskemasters are more rigorous, their
Bondage more intolerable, and their yoke heavier: and after they return out
of Egypt, they meet with nothing but the representations of Death and seeming
impossibilities of escape; the Red Sea before them, an Army of Egyptians
behind; and they were at a loss in themselves, till Go^ by a miracle forced a
way of Deliverance. Joseph is promised high advancement, and superiority over
his Brethren; but for a long time he finds nothing but hatred from them; and
servitu^^ and slavery from the Merchants; and after all, he is sentence^ to
close imprisonment; and in this condition he lived, till God by an
undiscernable way of mercy, preferred, and exalted him above his Brethren.
David had a Crown assigned him, an^ was actually and solemnly Enthroned,
though not possessed ^ but before that he obtained it, he was chased like a
Partridge o^ the Mountains; he was banished, and forced to hide himself in
holes and eaves; all he gained by it, was to be a miserable sugitive and
vagrant; till God moved the hearts of the ^^fractory Israelites to accept him.
2. That Attribute of God, which Sarah most considered was his fidelity or
faithfulness; She judged him faithful: The Word signifies, truth, sincerity,
to keep touch: In Scripture sense it imports power, and sufficiency to performs
an engagement^ Thus impotent and deficient subjects are said to be false and
liars; A Horse is a lie, Psalm. 33.17. that is, unable to deliver: great men are
lies, they promise, but perform not, Ps^^ 62.9. but God is faithful, full of
goodness and power, o^ willingness and ability, Heb. 10.23. Psalm. 36.5. and
57.^^ 2 Timothy 1.12. 3. God pardoned Sarahs infirmity, upon her after repentance,
and belief: he charges not his Children with those errata's they strive
against, and are to them invincible; neither does he esteem of, or censure
them according to that p^i^^ciple which they oppose and deny; but according to
that which i^ praedominant, and the denomination is from the better or
prevailing party. Peter, notwithstanding his doubting, is in the account of
Believers; Why doubtest thou? O thou of little Faith. God will not quench the
smoking flax, nor bruise the broken reed; Faith, even to the pittance and
proportion of a grain of mustard seed, shall be accepted with him, whose
property is to be east entreated; And hereupon he entitles himself, The good
Shepherd, because he takes the weak Sheep in his arms; and the weak
Believer is received, though not for his weakness, yet even for that a
Believer Romans 14.3. God has received him; he is Gods servant, verse 4. Sarahs
infirmities are covered, her Faith commended her virtues extoled, her
defailings not mentioned. Gods goodness and long-suffering colored and
concealed Jobs impatience; and though ^e murmured, yet it is said expressly,
He sinned not, because of his sincerity and faithfulness. Indeed the Law
requires perfect unsinning obedience, and approves no Act, but what in ^^^bus
numeris, in every circumstance good, without the least ^esect or imperfection,
bonum est ex integra causa; but the Gospel offers more grace, accepts the
weak if sincere, enleavours of Bele^vers, Psalm. 103.13.14. Mal. 3 17. O then
happy we, if we but faithful servants, if our workings be bu^ ^ordiall and
upright; no evil adhering circumstance shall be ever able to condemn us: O
that we would imitate this goodness of God; its the fashion of the world to
extenuate or con^eale our neighbors virtues, to proclaim their bad; which
^roceeds from a spirit of Pride, Se fe-love, Envy, Detraction, or Malice: The
Character of our Heavenly Father, is the Lord good and gracious,
long-suffering, and of great goodness, pardoning iniquities, transgressions
and sins, not imputing covering them: O that we were like him in Charity; if
we were, then our Charity would cover a multitude of faults. 4. Sarah and many
Propheresses, the Virgin Mother, and many other holy Women, recorded for
followers of Christ, have sufficiently honored that Sex for their Piety; and
there has been from Age to Age such of them as have remonstrated their
magnanimity and sincerity. Saint Basil relates, That ^an Honorable Matron^
immediately before her Death, used this Exhortation to those of her Sex; who
were Spectators of her sufferings; Remember (says she) it was not only the
flesh of Man, was taken to make in Women; but his bone also; so we being bone
of his bone, have received strength, spirit, and conrage with and from him,
which we also should employ in the ^^^^r^ises of our holy Faith. 5. Sarah
received strength; What is it that thou have, which thou have not received? It
is God which raises Families, an^ gives Children, Psalm. 127.3. and if God give
them, it is (...) just and congruous we return them to him, consecrate the^^
to God, train them up in his discipline; and if he reman^ them, and call for
them (as many times he does) freely (...) surrender and resign them. 6. God
afforded not this happiness to Abraham and Sarah till their Old Age: God many
times communicates (...) his Grace to us, till our strength fail us; not that
we sh^^^ presume that God will do so, because he may, and someti^^ does; but
that we should not at any time diffide his mer^^ or driven into despair: Some
he calls at the eleveth ho^^ and one Theife upon the Cross: But we must
beware, (...) there is danger in all delays; and no estate more dangero^^ then
to defer Repentance, till Old Age, or the Deathbed ma^^ us unserviceable for
the World, and unable for the prosecu^^^^ of its lusts: For though it be
certain, that true Repentance^ never too late: yet it is also most true, that
late repentance ^ seldom or never (...). 7. Sarahs Womb receiving life and
strength to Concei^^ represents unto us the manner of our conversion to God.
The Soul naturally is dead in sin, till by Faith in Christ Jesus, (...)
receives life and strength to bring forth fruits of Righteousness there is a
plastic fermative virtue in the Immortal Se^^ 1 Peter 1.23. which begets
in us the new Man, which ^^ter God is Created in Righteousness and true
Holiness; An^ as Isaac had not his being from his Parents, by their natural
generative faculty, but by a supernatural assistance; and therefore he is said
to be, not the Son aft^^ the Flesh, but after the Spirit, and of Promise Gal
4.23. So it is not by Natur^^ but by a Power from Heaven, that Christ is formed
in (...) and he dwells in our hearts by Faith; John 1.13. Who (...) borne not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will Man, but of God.
The third Part. The Prayer.

O Omnipotent Lord, the God of all consolations, and Father of all mercies, who
gave new strength and abilities to the de^ayed bones and impaired members of
Abraham, even as dead; ev^ve our dead spirits, give a spirit^all being to our
natures ^ead in sin: Create clean hearis, and renew right spirits with^^ us;
that we may dye unto finne, and live unto righteousness. Thou who gave power
to Sarah to conceive, and bring forth a ^^ly Seed, raise us by thy mighty power
from the corruption of ^ur natures, to the renovation of our mind, that through
the ^^mortall Seed, planted and watered in our hearts by the blessed spirit, we
may receive strength and ability of spirit to conceiv^ and f^rm^ Christ within
us; to resist sinue, and adhere to godliness; and notwithstanding the
barrenness and weakness of our ^^ture to be enabled in the inner, to
perform all holy daties, to ^ho^nd and be fruitful in all good Works. We
beseech thee, most gracious God) to extend thy goodness to thy whole Cathe^^ne
Church; deliver her from those oppressors that seek to de^oure her; comfort
all her desolations; make her Desert, like Eden, and her Wilderness like the
Garden of the Lord, to bring ^orth holy Plants i^ flonrish in the House of God,
and to Worship ^iu^ in the beauty of holiness: let joy and gladness be found
^^erein, praise, and the voy^e of singing. Raise up unto her nuring Fathers and
nursing Mothers; and strengthen her to Con^^e^ve, and bring up as many as the
Stars of the Ski^ in mul^itude and as the Sand of the S^a^sh^re, which is
innumer^ble, ^o offer^up unto thee the daily sacrifice of praise and
thansgiving, and after to sing uncessantly, holy, holy, holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come. Blessing ^^onour and glory
be unto him that fitteth on the Thr^^e, and to the Lamb, and to the holy
Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.

ABRAHAM'S Offering.
Heb. 11.17.18.19. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isa^^ and be
that had received the Promises, offered up (...) only begotten Son, etc.
THis is the tenth and last trial of Faithful Abraham Para^^ has Observed
from the Hebrews; but of others the most grievous, dangerous, and uncourteous,
the ^^lusion and complement of them all; and though each of the was
sufficiently sad and dismal, and required great abilitie^ Faith to oppose
them; yet all of them were short of this, (...) in time, and seeming tyranny;
it would have put any M^^ Faith but Abraham's to a stand or a loss. It was a
hard ^^ence to be Exiled; to fly into Egypt for maintenance; to (...) his Sarah
with the hazard of his life; to engage in a W^ against four Kings, upon Lets
score; to Marry his Mayde^ cause of the Barrenness of his Wife; to part with
her w^^ great with Child; to be Circumcised in his old Age; to (...) Sarah,
and receive an order (...) the ejection and reprobation^ Ishmael. But all these
seem to be humane and moderate, (...) comparison of this which exacts such
rigorous, inhumane, (...) prodigious undertakings; yet his Faith informed him,
the (erudelitas hac est summum pieta^^^ genus) God has enjoy^^ and required
this Offering from him, and consequently prev^^led with him to enter upon the
Enterprise: For, By Eaith, wh^ Abraham was tried, be Offered, etc.

The first Part.

The Record is famously known, you will find it filed, G^^ 22.1. the Words
are plain and clear, without any ambiguity, guilty, unless we semple at the
Word, (tried; when he was try^^^) (...), which signifies, tempted; and is so
used by Saint ^^mes 1.13. and a direct contradiction seems to be bewixt this,
when he was tempted of God, and this other enunation, God tempts none. But to
avoid the repugnancy, and fear the ambiguity of the word: We must observe,
there is a ^^o-fold trial or temptation, according to Saint Augustine Act. 43.
in Evang. Ioh. Vna qua decipit, altera, qua probat; (...) the first
confideration, the Devil only is the tempter; our ^^ne flesh is a traitor or
conspirator under this tyrant, to de^er us up into his temptations, or persuade
us to embrace ^^em. God is said to tempt only in the second sense; he will ^^e
our parts and sufficiencies examined and proved, so Lyra ^^d Aquinas And these
is a vast difference betwixt these con^distinguished temptations, as in many
respects, so principally these: For an evil temptation, is actus or motus
quidem natus cleuare ad ^llicetum; Its a solicitation and seduction into sin,
(...) the subversion of our Faith: The other is only actus proba^^us; an
experiment, probation, or discovery of what strength ^^e have, to resist the
temptations and motions of sin and ^^tan; what sufficiency we have acquired
in our Christian profession; Deuteronomy. 13.3. Exodus 16.4. and its a great deal ^^re
noble to master a temptation, then to be freed of it; (...) overcome it, then
not to be subject unto it; so Lombard. (...) 2. did. 23. Gloriosius, est non
consentire quam tentari non ^^se: and so the Devil tempts us, to destroy and
ruin us, John (...) 10.12. 1 These 3.5. God suffers us to be tempted, and its
us to the test, for our good, that in the evil day we may be ^^e to stand,
Rev. 3.10. sometimes for our humiliation, either a praise him for what we have
received, or to beg of him that we lack, or to burn out the dross, till it
be pure, and to ^^ke away all tin. Isay 1.25. sometimes for our exaltation,
to waken us from a swoun, by a box on the Ear, and glory in (...) grace which
is sufficient for us: sometimes for the advantages of others, for their
imitation, if we hold out and stand (...) in the Faith; for their caution (if
we fall or faint) and compassion. Gal. 6.1. and sometimes to stop the Devils
mouth, and ^^ found him in his wisdom and projects, Job. 1.9. But the same
Augustine in the fore mentioned place, opens this po^^ more fully yet: Sed
quomodo tentet, ut sciat, quem latere (...) potest, untequam tentet, ut sciat
(hoc est) ut scire not faciat, (...) latebat se, sed non Deum; admesit, vero
te^tatorem, and s^^ enm sui cognitorem; and so he expounds it, lib. 4. de Genesis
lit. cap. 9. and lib. Sermon. de Temp. Sermon. 72. his trials are (...) to gain
himself knowledge, or experience of our present (...) or after purposes (he
knows our thoughts after off, even (...) before they be thought; all the
recesses, the windings and dolings of our deceitful hearts, are open to his
eyes, he fore^^ all our desires, depths, and drifts, and can, if he please,
disco^^ them, before they be contrived) but for a discovery and ^dence to us,
that we may know what is within us, whether (...) be sincere Peniterts, or
handsome Hypocrites; whether (...) hearts be sound, or rotten and false. And
though God said, (...) 22.12. Now I know that thou fear God, etc. yet this
i^ (...) to be understood, as if God had not before known what (...) would
prove to; but it is, humanitus dictum, as if he sh^^ have said, Now by this Act
of singular Faith and Obedie^^^ thou have given so evident an evidence of thy
Faith, that (...) I been ignorant thereof. now I should have known it, th^^
needs no further disquisition nor other discovery, or experim^^^ but this, thou
at my command, Offered Isaac.

But what, Does the Eternal Lawgiver give orders for (...) breach of his own
Eternal Decrees? Does he command (...) there, contrary to his own Commandment,
to Kill his Son (...) become a Parricide; or how can this Precept be reconci^^^
either with Gods goodness, or Abraham's inhocency?

Certainly this fact of Abrahaus, was not directly against^^ positive or
natural Law of God; for howsoever not to Kill, (...) a Morrall Institution;
yet in as much as God has an absol^^^ unlimited, (and I may further add) an
Arbitrary Power, or (...) the Lives and Estates of his Creatures, whatsoever he
ordere^^ concerning them, is most holy, and just, because his Will is (...)
adaequate Rule of all Justice. It is true, God does not alway^^ make use of his
Prerogative, as in the event he did not (...) Abraham; but do it he may, if he
will, and we must not d^^ to murmr or repine, but conform and will what he
will^^ (...) Augustine Epist. 65. Necesse est, ut volumus, quod ille vult,
^ujus voluntatis nec exce^ent^^^ fas est recusare; nec omnipo^entiam licet
evitare. God is above all Law, and doth-hinde or ^^ose the hands of Men at his
pleasure; and to do what God commands cannot be against nature ^^eing he is
the God of nature, and Author of it: neither is it a fact against his
Commandment; because in this case, Man is but the Executioner and Officer of
his Law; and so it is not in strictness Man's Act, but Gods; and therefore most
just. Thus God has ^rohibited Murder, and so strictly ties us to its
observance, that unless we have competent and lawful authority or calling
thereunto, or express commandment from God for it, we are unnatural
violators of this Law of God: But if we have a Precept or Authority from him,
we transgress not, for he has jus vitae, and necis: he may dispose of our
lives and fortunes, as he pleases. And so the Levites Exodus 32.27.18 had no
Legal Power over the Persons of their Brethren: but being designed by special
order from God himself for this work, they had full Commission for what they
did: and so, if the Israelites of their own heads, or score, had spoiled the
Egyptians, they had been Felons; but because they had a lawful Authority
commanding them, they are quit by all Law, both from Usurpation and Felony And
the reason of this is, because that howsoever the Law be Eternal in the
sanction, yet it is variable in the instances thereof, and particular
determinations; as to Murder is against the Law: but when a Man is to be
accounted a Murderer, the Law expresses not Abraham then having Authority to
do this Fact, does not trans^resse the Law; which if he should attempt, or but
project the like, or far less in the same kind without the same, or
sufficient order, we are notorious Delinquents and Malesactors. The general,
ordinary, and perpetual obligations of the Law, is the rule of our actions and
obedience: The extraordinary, particular, and personal temporary instances,
are not to be drawn into consequences, nor imitation. Abraham's Faith was then
reselved into these Principles.

1. We are absolutely and indispensably without all demur or counterplea,
without all haesitation or tergiversation to obey God in all things. 2. Gods
Will and Sovereign Authority, is the most exac^ and proper rule of Justice. 3.
God is most good, and most wise, and therefore commands nothing irreconcilable
and inconsistent with his goodness and wisdom. 4. To Kill a Son without
express warrant, is contrary t^ duty; but to offer him to God, when God Calls,
is both Obedience and Sacrifice: and with such Obedientiall Sacrifices Go^ is
well pleased. Add to all this, God commanded not the Act for it self, (that
is) he did not command it to be do^^ with an intention and purpose that it
should be done; but only to prove Abraham, whether he would do it or no, upon
Go^ order: And therefore we Read. That though it was not do^^ yet God takes
his Order to be fully satisfied, and exactly obeye^ and counts it as done, (for
Gods design took place, and the ^^timate end of it was perfected) for that he
Obeyed his Voy^ Genesis 22.16.18. And though Isaac was never hitherto an
Holocaust; yet in the Text, he is said expressly to be Offered: (...) Offered
Isaac; His attempt is valued from an acceptable Sacrifice
But further you may demand, How comes Isaac to be Abraham's only Son? Was
not he a Father to Ishmael?

Yet his only Son he was, (though before him he had Ishmael. and after
diverse Children by Keturah) for these respect.

1. In reference to the expulsion of Ishmael, the Son (...) the Bondwoman,
who was outed of his Family by a Decre^^ from Heaven. 2. In reference to his
Wife Sarah; she only had Isaac, an^ because she had no more, he only is
accounted the Legal He^^ to Abraham: and this makes an only Son. 3. In
reference to his affection, and tenderness over him^ his delight and his only
hope, who was a long time expected and desired; and, at last, got by a Miracle,
in his Fathers and Mothers old age. And so further to 4. In reference to the
Promise, whereof Isaac was the Subject: as is expressed here in the Text. And
5. In reference to the Line and Posterity of Abraham: For in Isaac shall thy
Seed be Called. And thus much for the ^learing of the Words: now follows the
Second Part

1. When he was tried. Many times he had been tried before, but God will have
him further sisted: he puts his Children upon several trials, as in a
troubled Seasone billow falls ^n the neck of another: So in this enraged World
of wickedness, one affliction follows close at the heels of another; and we
are no sooner freed from Egypt but Pharaoh parsues us. Our life is of few days
but those full of trouble, Job 14.1. ^very day has his trouble, his evil,
Sufficient unto the Day is ^he evil thereof, Mat 6 34 Our life is a warfare a
restless employment, a time of conflict: after one skirmish is over, we must
prepare for another. David out of the Mouth of the ^ion, and the Paw of the
Bear, falls into the hands of Goliath; and after, under Saul's rage and tyranny;
and at last a Rebellion was hatched against him by his own Son and his
Counselor, Absalom and Achitophell. But why, after so many and great
assurances of fidelity and loyalty, should God yet require further Evidence?
Certainly, where God has bestowed eminent Graces, he will have them eminently
conspicuous; where he conferreth great assistances of habets, he exacts
proportionable ^^yalls thereof. Job, upright above all Men in the East, and
therefore that his Faith may be more glorious, he must of all others ^^e most
put at. God gave Moses an exceeding great Spirit, and ^^e therefore is to
sustain the barden of Israel. God will not ^ave his Graces idle in us, but
according to our abilities and strength exercised and employed.

But here is more in these Words, When he was tried, as if ^^e had never been
tried heretofore: It Is true, he had undergone several trials, and those
sharp ones too; but yet, none of them ^n respect of this, could merit the
name; the Holy Spirit (as it ^ll the others were nothing) bestows the
denomination on this. Ordinarily, every man in the progress of his life, meets
with some one remarkable accident, danger, or affliction, which above all
others he may call his trial: Every day a man lives, (...) an evil day; Few
and evil have the days of the years of my life been, etc. Genesis 47.9. yet a
Man shall light one more notable, an evil day indeed, which for its malignity
far surpasses all others, and is therefore called Ephesians. 6.13. (...), the
Evil Day. A professed Soldier, in his experience, may tell you several
conflicts and skirmishes; but no^ above two or three set battles in full
bodies in his life time.

2. Abraham was tried; so was Job, an upright man. David, a man after Gods own
heart. Judgment begins at the house of God; the fiery trial can be no strange
thing to God. Children, when as his own shall be sure to pass and endure it;
strangers are only excepted: Let none pretend to an exemption or protection
from the usual contingencies, which i^ all ages have attended Gods separated
servants, Calamities an^ temporal Troubles, Afflictions and trials; for its
necessary their should happen, that those which are approved, might be made
manifest; as the Apostle in another, though not altogether unlike case, 1 Cor.
11.19. that our Faith may appear precious like gold, and be found to the
praise etc. 1 Peter 1.7.

3. Abraham was tried: Probably Sarah knew nothing of i^ and so no mention of
her trial or faith in this instance; Gr^^ who knows our frame, remembers
the d^st, considers (...) gold; he dispenses his afflictions, according to
the abilities (...) his people; he spares Sarah for her weakness, lest the
severing of the trial may bafle her Faith; he lays the whole burden (...)
Abraham, because strong in Faith, able to bear it; he know^^ every vessels
bearing, and will not oppress, or overloade them lest they sink or founder,
before they be harbored; what he will not lay on some. he charge home on
others: This is m^^^ undoubted, he will not suffer any to be tempted above what
they are able, 1 Cor. 10.13. and that he disposes of all things most wisely,
for the advancement of his glory, and the eternal advantages of his creature.

4. Abraham Offered: Thus it is said, though he did but enterprise and attempt
it; he did Offer what was commanded intentionally, though not in the execution
and event; God accepted it as done, because he seriously resolved to do it,
an^ ofttimes rewards the will for the deed. He who will not allow of a good
intention in a bad action, both condemns a^ evil thought, (Adultery in the
Heart, a Lust, and desire of sin) and approves a good motion, a sincere
intention, and purpose of mind, without any subsequent act, we are good enough,
if our obedience be but sincere. In magnis and voinisse sat est: For God is so
good, that if there be a willing mind, it is accepted as the Apostle in another
case; but it holds, and is the same in all, 2 Cor. 8.12.

5. Abraham Offered; that is, as its expressed Genesis 22.16.18. If obedience be
not in all cases, certainly in the most, it is better then Sacrifice; for
Sacrificing separated from Obedience, is the Sacrifice of Fools, of
Hypocrites; but Obedience is always a good and acceptable Sacrifice: Qui
innocentiam celit, Deo supplicat, Minut. Faelix. He has showed thee, O Man,
what is good, etc. Micah 6 8. And this is the direct, proper emanation, the
highest and plainest evidence of Faith; and therefore is called, The Obedience
of Faith, Romans 1.5. and 16.26. And in Saint John Baptists Divinity, the
Believer, and the Disobedient are the two terms of opposition and distinction,
(...), and (...), John 3.36. The best way to try our Faith then, is to enquire
and look after our Obedience; if we do the Commandments, adorn our Faith
with an answerable conversation; if our respects to Gods Call be entire,
regular and constant.

6. Abraham Offered, because God commanded; we are also to surrender our
Children to God that gave them, when he sends his Apparator, Death, to Summon
them; and that by way of Offering, freely and ch^arefully: So Origin Hom. 8.
Exhorts, Laetus ^ffer Falium Deo, esto Sacerdos animae ejus. Abraham did more,
he himsefe bound his Son and bent his Sword to slay him. But now the
affections of Parents are so cemented to Clay, that rather then they will
Offer, they will persuade their Sons to offer to s^r^nge gods, strange
inventions, if they be but new; but if Children are to be Offered, then they
are to blame who strive to reserve them, when called for; and they are called
for, when we have used all lawful means for their preservation, but the event
followed not. Then to blame are they, who only endeavor for a great Estate
for their Sons, but never Offer them to God, respect not what Religion,
rather what fancy, humor, design, wickedness they follow and adhere to.

7. He Offered Isaac, the Promised Seed, his only begotten Son, of whom it
was said, that in Isaac, etc. Faith enjoynes Sacrificing; and the obligations
of Nature, directs us to offer to God; but both Nature and Religion, prohibites
the offering of a Son; much more, to make an Holocaust of him that was, first
to Kill him and then to turn him into Ashes (...) and especially, if an only
beloved Son, a Son in whom a^ found all endearements, tendernesses, and
sweetnesses. The Apostle reduces all to these two pleas and restraints, Of
Nature, and Religion. Of Nature, That he was his only Son, an^ therefore it
was a great condiscention of Faith, to submit to the order, therefore it was a
point of extreme difficulty to captiva^^ his reason to the obedience of Faith.
Of Religion, He was the Promised Seed, and therefore it was a most execrable
Act an^ wretchedness to destroy him, by whom Salvation should co^^ into the
World. But against this, he opposes Gods Omnipotency, Truth, Goodness,
Wisdom; and his Faith taught him to Prophecy, God will provide, etc. Genesis 22
8.

1. Then let us hear the pretenses of Nature. It were almost needless to
discourse of the strong affections of Parent toward their Issue; they are
better known then expressed, an^ seance to be known by any, but him who is a
Parent. Eve^ Brutes have an instinct to nourish, provide for, and protect their
young ones; we have heard but of few (and those few are signa^^ are branded
with marks of dishonor to all Posterity, as Her^^ and Antiochus) who yet has
forfeited their natural affection, though some there are, as the Apostle
notes. Romans 1.31. 2 Timothy 3.3. who are (...) but these are unnatural Monsters:
For the propensions of Nature, as to desire, so to love their Posterity, are
ordinarily strong and violent; no man never yet hated his own flesh, and
Children are parts parentis, Flesh of their Flesh (...) and very often are
intensive, with greater degrees of affection beloved by them, then themselves,
though they be no dutiful Children; witness the repeated expressions of love
in David for Absalom, O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God
I had dyed for thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Senne, 2 Samuel 18.33. And that sad
complaint of Jacob, If ye take this also from me, and mischief befall him,
etc. Genesis 44.29. And there are reasons in nature, as well as experience, to
confirm this; for there is an impresse and desire of nature in every man to
perpetuate, and out-li^e himself in his Issue; and for this Reason
Philosophers tells us, that love rather descends then ascends: Children love
not their Parents so hotly, as Parents do their Children, because the Patents
survive in their Children, and their Children (downward; still) in their
Children: And which is yet more, Children are reflections and perspectives of
their Parents, they are the Parents themselves, but more visibly, and therefore
more lovely and amiably. And this was Abraham's case, he was a tender Father, he
beheld much loveliness in Isaac, and his only hope of surviving after his
Funerals, was in him. Yet this was not all, he was not only his beloved, but
was also his only Son; an only Son hedgeth ^n and encloseth all his Patents
Bowels; where there are many, there is a distribution of them, and each takes
his share and Portion; even as that Fountain, which sends its Streams into
different Rivelers, never increases into a great River, being spent in
narrower receptacles; and the loss of an only Son, is ^he loss of our life
and hopes, which hardly admits of any suggestions or persuasions of comfort.
Rachel Weeping for her Children, would not be comforted, etc. Jer. 31.15. And
the holy Spirit, when he would express the violence and distemperature of this
Passion of Grief, and the bitterness of the Grieved, Phtaseth it, a Mourning
for an only Son; Make thee Mourning as for an only Son, most bitter
lamentation, Jer. 6.26. which expression is also used, Amos 8.10. And yet there
is another incentive of his affection; In Isaac all the degrees of love were
not only united and concentred, but were strongly rooted and unalterably
settled by his long conversation with him. For now if we believe Ioseplias,
Isaac was five and twenty years old; and its usually observed, that as
Children grow in accomplishments and years, so our loves are fixed and
radicated: And Abraham had reason to be so, for Isaac was a rarely accomplished
Person, with all the ornaments of Nature and Grace: so that his Faith and
Obedience, has by some been parallelled, and by others preferred to Abraham's:
And it is by many disputed whether Abraham's Obedience, or Isaacs Patience
deserved (...) higher repute. Add unto all these that the Death of an one^^
Son, whether by diseases or violence is a tragic^ll thought (...) the Parent;
but then for the Father to Kill him and he wh^ gave him life, to be his
E^eentioner, seems to be not only against reason, and the affections of
natures; but also direct^^ against the Precepts of Religion, and dietates of
Piety: And therefore

2. Let us observe what Arguments, Religion might fra^^ to prejudice the
design, what Apology Abraham might dra^^ from Divine Oracles, to deny the
Fact. For in him, Abraham did not only destroy an only. Son, but all
Mankind; for (...) his hopes of a Posterity, so the hope of the Gentiles, and
(...) glory of the People Israel were sounded in the Person of Is^^^ For In
eius persina perire videbatur, tota mu^do salus, as C^^vin: It seemed at once
to frustrate all the Promises, and (...) anticipate the Salvation of the World;
nay further, it seem^^^ contradict not only Gods goodness, but his will; For
he w^^leth not the Death of a sinner; neither does he so much as p^^mit or
allow one man to take the life of another: he that (...) is a Murderer, a
transgressor of the Divine Will revealed (...) Scripture, and a most
proportionable just Punishment, is th^^^ned and commanded: He that sheddith
Man's Blood by M^^ shall his Blood he shed: Much less does he approve of Human
Sacrifices. The Devil indeed is a Liar, and a Murderer (...) the Beginning,
he delights in Blood; and those are his best (...) wants, and fittest agents,
whose feet are swift to shed Blood (...) it is his delight to have our Sons
and Daughters offered to his and so at once it seems directly to thwart and
oppose all former Laws, and to null and void all the Promises; to depri^^
Abraham of a Son and the World of Salvation; to cut (...) and c^shiere his
hope of Posterity, and the World of restoration, by the Promised Seed, the
Messiah, who was to be deriv^^ from Isaac.

These, and many more such Objections, would a carnal hea^^ have framed from
these premised Apologies of Nature and Religion; but Faith confutes all these,
and whatsoever can be pr^^tended by the definitive sentence of two universal
and insallibly true Propositions. God is True. God is Just; and both Nature,
(that is in this sense) right reason, and all Religion, will subscribe to the
truth and evidence of both; for as it is the minimum quod sic of natural
Religion, to assent to this truth (that God is) which is so Universally
acknowledged by all people, of all sorts; so, right reason will undeniably
conclude, from that first principle of Nature and Religion; That whatsoever
God, (that all being) shall reveal, is most true; and whatsoever he shall
command, is most just; and as therefore I cannot err, while I believe nothing
but what he has asserted; so neither can I sin, while I do nothing but what
he has commanded. So that his Faith waved all the so mer exceptions, and
relied only on these two firm and rooted Principles, Gods Fidelity, and
Justice. Where these two considerables are presented unto us.

1. The close adherence of Faith to its Object, and its acquiescence and
complacency in that adherence; none of all those suggestions of carnality, nor
any humane reasonings could remove his Faith from its hold, nor shake its
resolutions; no violences could beat it from its rock, (whatsoever flesh and
blood can pretend to the contrary, his confidence and assurance is still the
same) its fortress and refuge; for to this was he driven, and this he will
keep and stand to; that God has promised, and that he will effectuate what he
has promised; and whatsoever seeming impossibilities are opposed, he can
effect what he pleases; he can raise Children to Abraham out of stones, and by
death bring them to life, Psalm. 46.1. etc. This was the substance of the three
Childrens answer to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.16.17. and the ground of Jobs
resolution, Job 13.15.

2. The method which Faith uses to resist such temptations: it grants all
the premised considerations, but superaddes more weighty and considerable to be
thought upon; it rejects no proposal of nature, no overture of reason; but
by an overruling Power, makes nature to resolve contrary to its own
propensions and reason; to reconcile what of it self it could not; advancing,
but indeed bending, it to Divine Mysteries, and so does not destroy Nature, but
perfect it; does not over thro^^ reason, but exalts it, and regulates both; for
supposing the excuses of nature good and binding, yet Faith sores high, an^
views that which nature cannot see, and embraces what she cannot comprehend,
that though death deprive Isaac of a present being, yet that God who gave Power
to dead Abraham t^ beget, and dead Sarah to conceive him, has as much power t^
raise him from death, and return him again. No question h^ grieved as for his
only Son, in the bitterness of his Spirit and so nature had his work, (for
he was no Stoicall antipassionist) yet Faith (which indeed is its proper work)
comfort him, and assures him that God, according to his immutability and
infallibility of his Promise, would not take him away forever, and so again
admitting the reasons enforced from Religious premises, Faith resolves upon
higher principles, Gods Sovereign authority, his omnipotency, his Attributes
of Power Wisdom, Justice, etc. as has been declared; and forbidden us,
either to dispute his commands, or distrust his attribute^^ Let Flesh and Blood
Argue, If Isaac be sacrificed, the Promise are frustrated; Faith denies the
consequence, and is affirmative^ God is not tied to this or that way for the
performance of hi^ Promise; that his ways are above our ways, his thoughts
abov^ our thoughts, as the Heaven is higher then the Earth: And thus Abraham
believed, for he considered (his Faith was (...) rash praesumptuous fancy, but
a sober and advised meditation^ that God was able, etc. It is the wise man's
advice and counsel^ In time of prosperity rejoice, in time of adversity
consider, Eccle^ 7.16. consider Gods Almighty greatness, infinite wisedome^
absolute power, inexpressable goodness and undisputable truth^ and thou shall
never fall; thou may be tossed; but shall no^ sink; thou may be shaken,
but not removed; thou may be afflicted yet not in distress. Persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.8.9. this was the
confidence and relief of Saint Paul's sadnesses and afflictions, Eve^ to trust
in God, which raises the dead, who delivered us, etc. 2 Cor. 1.9.10. this was
his persuasion, That neither life, nor death, nor Angels, etc. Romans 8.38.39. O
that we were wise to consider these excellencies, these resolutions, and
understand the loving kindness of the Lord; that we would consider and
remember that he brought light out of darkness, order out of confusion; all
being from nothing, and he is the same God still in Power, in Wisdom, in
Goodness; his Ear is not heavy, nor his hands shortened, unless our sins
cause him to hide his face from us, that he will not hear. And lastly,
consider Abraham to be like this your Father, in the resolutions and endeavors
of obedience both Active and Passive, Isay 51.1.2. Consider Abraham your
Father, etc. and remember that God blessed and increased him; he considered God
was able, etc. and so he received, etc. which affords another Observation.

8. He received him. It is Gods mercies that we are not consumed, Lamt. 3.22.
God gave him unto Abraham the second time; he will always have his Church to
remain; and though for a time she be over-clouded with Heresies, Persecutions
and Interests, yet Magna est Veritas, etc. the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against her, she will be most Christian in her most persecuted and afflicted
condition; and many times God delivers her from her Persecutors, making her
darkness to be ^ight, and bringing again the Captivity of Sion as in a
Dream. And as it fares with the Church, so with its several Members, they are
many times brought out of the deep Waters, and the stiff mire, light springing
up to them that are true of heart; as it is said, Light came to the Jews,
Ester 8.16. upon the discovery and disappointment of Hamans cruelty.

9. Abraham offered his Son, and saved him; he received with an addition, a
Lamb; and with a blessing, and assurance of blessing, In thy Seed, etc. to
give to God what he demands, is a great act of justice, because he demands;
we give him nothing but what is first his; and its the best policy, the surest
way, both to preserve and improve his gift: we never offer any thing to God,
but we are gainers by it, we receive either an hundredth sold for the present,
or Eternal Life: Give our Persons, our Souls and Bodies to him, to serve and
worship him in fear; and though upon that score the Soul be separated, and
the Body crucified, we shall receive both again with inexpressible advantages:
give your substance and goods to the necessitated members of Christ's body, and
though we spend much this way, we shall save much more; decima and divet este,
we shall gain^ and raise an estate: He has distributed, and given to the poor
his righteousness remains, etc. that one was of improvement his horn shall
be exalted with honor: that is a second way, both certain, Psalm. 112.9. and so
this kind of distribution, is a way of provision for the future, and therefore
called, a laying up a stake of a good foundation, 1 Timothy 6.19. a Treasury, a
Magazine

10. He received him in a figure, (...), though Faith received not the expected
reward and effect which it apprehends, as being inexpedient, either for the
present, or future condition of the Believer; yet it receives what God awards,
the hope of the righteous shall not perish; and they that put their trust in
him shall not be confounded: but many times before belief comes, we are at the
last experience; the Altar is prepared, Isaac bound, and is laid upon it, and
Abraham takes the knife in hand, ready to give the fatal stroke; but then, and
^^till then, not before, did the Angel step in for a rescue, an^ dilivered
Isaac from death, and so Abraham received him by^ resemblance of the
Resurrection: and thus Christ delivers hi^ Church, when overwhelmed with
oppressors, reviveth her when she is in the dust, when she is but a company of
dead men, appointed as sheep to be slain, and numbered for destruction; when
she is dry bones, and her hopes clean off, he will put breat^ and life into
them. These, and such like, are the similitude^ o^ parables which the holy
Spirit uses to express the affliction and deliverance of his Church, Isay
26.19. Ezekiel. 37.5.6.7. etc.

And having gone thus far, I might a while stay on the mystical and
parabolicall signification of those Texts; for so some Interprets these words
[he received him in a figure] that is in reference to Christ, whose Death and
Resurrection were here pr^^ figured. And Augustine tells us, That this action
of Abraham's was both factum, and prophetia. an History and a Prophecy; but I
intend not to vary much from my resolved Method: and (...) for a conclusion,
shall only observe the two commendatory (...) of Abraham's Faith, which is
noted to be 1. Obedientiall, working, acting Faith, be offered; and this was
the working of the Faith, James 2.21. The former propo^^ salls and calls of God
to Abraham, were for the trials of his ^aith in that particular and instance,
of believing his Promises: ^ut this was a new trial of his Faith in another
expression and determination, even that of obedience to his commands. God
sometimes tries our Faith by Promises of incredible things, whether then we
will depend on him: sometimes by commands ^f harsh unpleasant services or
duties, whether we will submit to him, and obey him: now when God puts us to it
to evidence our Faith, either by patience, or obedience; if we do not, we are
not the sons of Abraham, not the friends of God. For true Faith will still
approve it self so by faithful actions, no temptations of the world, or the
Devil, to the contrary, shall make us suspect or disbeleeve what he has
promised; no invitations of sin, or lust, shall lay us off from the practice of
what ^e commands: where fire is, there is heat and light; where ^aith, there
holiness and obedience. 2. Rational, it was not a rash precipitate, or
temerarious de^gne, but a wise, sober, deliberate proceeding of his
understanding, will, and affection; for all his spiritual faculties were
employed in this consideration of Faith, (...), he pondered and weighed with
himself, secum perpendens in one Translation, ^atiocinatus, in another; his
understanding considered Gods Truth, Power, etc. and upon this concluded, That
he could, and would perform his Promises; his will followed the dictates of
his understanding, and resolved, it was good and just to be^eeve in God, and
obey him; and then all his affections follow, with cheerfulness and
readiness, to act what the understanding proposed and proved, and the will
adhered to as good: we finne and fall from one uncleanness to another; we
distrust God, and waste our selves with impatience and fretfulnesse of spirit;
and all, because we are not wise, considering men, we advise not with, or
hearken not to reason, but are wilfully deceived and seduced by interest and
passion, pride or prejudice, or some raging just in our wills and affections;
that seeing we do not see, and hearing, etc. It remains as a duty of Faith, to
be considering, and serious, and sober in our obedience to God. Which that we
may be, one act more of Faith and Obedience is yet behind, and that is Prayer.


The third Part. The Prayer.

O Holy Father, the Father of the Spirits of all flesh, who requires of thy
servants reasonable services; renew us in on^ minds, that we prove what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God, that we may present our bodies a
living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God. Let no suggestions of Satan,
(...) seducements of the world be ever able to shake us, or make (...) falter
in our belief of thy Promises. Let no allurements of pleasure, profit, or
vainglory, make us to disobey thy Command^ O thou the God of Abraham, who
dignified him with those Titles of, Father of the Faithful, and Friend of God,
bestow (...) such measure of grace, make our Faith so holy and obedientia^ that
we may show and evidence our selves the Children of Abraham, doing the works
of Abraham, that so we may be accounted also, the Friends of God. O let us
sincerely and hearti^ surrender our selves to Christ; firmly rely on all his
promises especially those which concerns the eternal salvation of our
immortal souls; faithfully obey whatsoever he has commanded us and do, act
and move (whenever he is pleased to try us) according to the Principles of
our Faith, the Fundamentals of (...) Religion, Gods truth and justice, that we
never dis-beleeve the formen, or dis-obey the latter; and that we constantly
resolve, t^ believe whatsoever he has revealed, because he cannot lie; and to
practice whatsoever he shall, or has commanded: because h^^ is most just. To
which only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now
and for ever, Amen.

ISAACKS Prophecy.
Heb. 11.20. By Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come.
ISaac follows his Father in the Catalogue, Sequiturque patrem non passibus
aquis, his Elogies are not so high, nor so numerous, as the reports were of his
Fathers faith; yet what is recited of him is truly Patriarchall, and belongs
to him, both as the Successor of the Promise, and as the next immediate Heir
both of his Fathers Possessions and Honors: he was the first in the entaile,
and what was settled on him, he transmits and passes over to Jacob and Esun: to
Jacob (as his next successor in the federall blessing, In thy Seed shall all
the Nations of the Earth be blessed) he bequeathes the prerogative of
prime-geniture, being Heir of the Promise, Genesis 27.27.28.29. And to Esan, he
consignes an estate or portion of temporalties, because he had forfeited his
Birthright, and his Title to it, Genesis 27.39.40. and both these he passed over
to them by the Spirit of Prophecy, and the eye of Faith: For, by Faith Isaac,
etc.

The first Part.

In this Discourse I shall discuss these following Quaries, wherein if I shall
mistake, I shall leave every one to his indifferency of judgment.

1. How this benediction of Isaac could be an act or emanation of Faith, which
was procured by fraud and subtilty, and was granted besides and contrary to the
intention of the demisor.

The Solution of this Quaere may be thus given, Isaac by faith apprehended the
certainty and truth of this prediction, (for he was firmly persuaded, that the
contents of his Prophecy should (...) fulfilled) only he mistook in one
single circumstance of (...) Person concerning which it should be verified; and
so thou^^ he knew not Jacob was the subject of the blessing (and so d^signed by
God the chief donor) or at least (which in effect (...) all one) did not
remember or observe it; yet assured he was, th^^ that blessing so conferred,
could not fail but should stand again all opposition, and hold firm and
legal to all intents and pu^poses; and therefore he was positive and
peremptory. I (...) blessed him, yea and he shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. and
the very affirmation is to me a ground of conjecture, that Is^^^ now saw the
error of his first thoughts and was satisfied th^^ thus it was to be, and thus
it should, or ought to be, as (...) now he had stated it; and that Isaac was
now taught by a sp^ciall instinct from God, which Divines conclude from these
circumstances; 1. Isaac for his over-affection to Esau is correct^^ by
blindness and so prepared to see and correct his error. 2 (...) longed for
Venison, and would not pass it till he had the Ve^^son, which he might have
done without any such delatory condition. 3. That notwithstanding his frequent
use of Veniso^ he was deceived with Kids flesh. 4. That though he perceiv^^ him
to be Jacob by his Voice, yet he blessed him. 5. That Es^^ all the time the
business was transacted at home, was sent abro^^ And lastly, that after all
this, though he complained of the fra^^ yet he confirmed and ratified the
promised blessing to l^^^ But if it be further demanded, how Isaac could
mistake or ignorant of the Person to be blessed, inasmuch as from Hea^^ he was
ascertained that Rebekah had two great Nations in (...) womb, but the greater
should serve the lesser; the answer m^^ be, 1. That that Prophecy was not so
clear, as that he could ^^derstand it without the assistance of a further
Revelation. 2. (...) strong affection to Esau did possibly obliterate it, which
cou^^ not admit of any jealousy against him; for usually the fir^^ borne, as
they have the start and advantage to gain our (...) and therefore most ardent
affections, so they retain and ho^ what by this Privilege is indulged them:
and the reason (...) this may be, because that natural, propension generare
(...) simile, in some sort is satisfied at the Nativity of the Fir^^ borne, who
are the first representations of our selves.

Now for the other member of the Quaere, the procurement of the blessing by
fraud and forgery; this may much reflect upon Rebekahs credit, who by this fact
seems to oppose a Divine Ordinance, to abuse her Husbands simplicity, and her
Sons tenderness; and not a little touches her favorite and confederate,
Jacobs ingenuity and honesty; for though his former purchase from his Brother,
gave him a Right and Title to the Inheritance, yet this way to get the
Possession of it, was altogether unwarrantable and sinful: but it does not at
all concern Isaacks faith, who was a mere Passive in the whole transaction;
and therefore I shall not enter any further consideration of that Circumstance,
but pass to the

2. Quaere, What kind of Blessing this was which Isaac Prophesied of?

The answer is, This Blessing was not merely Paternall; for even the Blessings
of our Parents, having on them the impresses of Divine Authority, are of great
importance: neither was in simply Sacerdotall, or Pastoral, as Melchisedek
blessed Abraham, Genesis 14.19 as the Priests the People, Numb 6.23.24.25. as
Christ his Apostles, Luke 24.50. but it was Prophetical too, God discovered
these future contingencies to Isaac, and put these words in his mouth as
infallible Oracles.

3. What are the advantages, privileges and praeeminencies of Primogeniture?
or wherein did this blessing consist?

The answer is, The right of Primogeniture conserred, 1. Government and Empire
over the whole Family. Next, a double Portion. And lastly, the honor of
Priesthood.

4 When did Jacob attain to these advantages?

For the first, It Is most certain Esau had the commanding power over Jacob for a
long time; witness his frequent submissions and supplications unto him, Genesis
33. and 34. but it was fulfilled in David's time, who totally subdued and
subjected the Idumeans to the Crown of Iud^h, 2 Samuel 8.13.14.

For the second the double Portion, though Idumea was fertile, in comparison of
many places; yet it was but a waste in respect of the Land of Canaan, Mal. 1.3.

For the third, The Honor of Priesthood was proper and peculiar to Jacobs
Posterity, even down to Christ, confirmed (...) us, Luke 1.32.33.

The second Part.

1. The best of men, are but men, full of spiritual weaknesses and
infirmities. Isaac was so passionately affectionate^ toward Esau, that he
could not observe, either his profanene^^ toward God, his disobedience to his
Parents, his dissasection to his Brother, nor his roughness, cruelties, and
incivilities to all men; his affection overswayed his reason, and what he had
on^^ fancied, he still holds to. And thus it happens with the peevish^^
passionate Heretics of all ages, men of perverse minds, weak superstitious
Schismatics, who have the unhappiness still to be of the worst side, and they
are the weakest defendants; the take up their errors upon fears, or fancies,
Magis opinione qua^ re laborant, and then they begin to believe them, and after
maintain them with resolution and confidence, upon the first no ground^ or
reasons; They think so, because they think so; Believe so, because they
believe; and are resolved, because they are resolved these are in the list of
those unreasonable men mentioned, 2 The^^ 3.2. on whom God has sent (...),
strong delusion^ 2 These. 2.11. But Isaac's doting affection of Esau, was a
misprison to Jacob; Esau is still liked, notwithstanding his insolences and
violences: Jacob is slighted for all his meekness o^ spirit, and sweetness of
nature; Esaus Venison shall better please his Father, then the sober and solid
perfections of Jacob Many times Children are valued by their Parents, not for
their deserts, but humors: and their virtues are not esteemed, but their
activity and passions; so conceited are men, even in the expresses of nature,
so vain and phantasticke are the motives of our elections and endearements:
and yet not only Isaac, but Rebekah also was faulty in this kind; for
howsoever Jacob's goodness and mildness of spirit was a good gound for the
intention of her love, yet there was no reason she should endeavor the
dis-inheriting of her Elder Son, contrary to the Law of God and Nature. For, I
suppose, Rebekah as little minded the Divine Oracle, as her Husband; inasmuch
as the Scripture makes this the reason of her affection, that Jacob was a
plain man, and lived in Tents, was a comrade to her, and frequently conversed
with her, (and conversation is the last concoction of love) which Esau did not,
being always abroad; and so this affection of her, was an effect of the same
infirmity; it proceeded not from any rational solid cause, but from a
conceited sensitive endearement: Yet her affection stays not here, Daw uno
absurd, sequuntur mill, it carries her on to a design which would comply
with and gratify her passion; and now the plot is to advance her beloved Son,
and out Esau of his Fathers blessing. And for this purpose, she contrives an
artificial lie, but notorious fallacy, Jacob must go to his Father, now
blind, and therefore more apt to be deceived and pretend himself to be his
Firstborn Esau; that he had been a hunting for this delightful Venison,
which now he presented to him; and upon this account, he must demand the
blessing of Primogeniture. When once passion rules us, and interest persuades
us, how violent and restless are we to satisfy our passions, and pursue our
interests, without any respect to either humane or divine constitutions; Laws
then have no obligingness in them, and so strongly do these carnalities carry
us, that we stop not, till either we carry all before us, like a violent
torrent; or run our selves into mischieses as wild beasts into a snare in
the pursuance of their prey. But above all, this most plainly appears, in this
plain man Jacob, who for all his seeming simplicity, has one trick of
Legerdemaine, he will act that part, which his Mother had given him to conne
though he knew his part was none of the best, and her counsel stark naught:
for that he supposed that this artifice deserved rather a curse, then a
blessing, we may guess from his own words, Genesis 27.12. but, qua data porta
ruunt: Ahab is never quiet till he purchase Naboths Vineyard, though the
possession of it be death. And Jacob is easily persuaded by his Mother to
follow the plot, because he liked it, and it made for him; and now her motions
are most chearefully entertained and accepted, and observed. How often does
self-love betray us, and our temporal interests stifle and extinguish the
proposals of Reason and Religion! How frequently do carnal men play fast and
loose with God and their own Consciences, when even good men are sometimes
cheated and seduced into error and folly, by passion and interest! How slight,
unreasonable, and unjust suggestions will satisfy us, when once we give way to
the flesh, and endeavor to satisfy it! O then, how observant and circumspect
should we be, that no carnality or lust, blend or mix with our designs, that
our undertakings be not policies for secular advantages, (there is always
somewhat of the (...) in them) but acts of Christian prudence, simplicity, and
ingenuity. How constant and diligent should we be to search and try our ways,
to examine our hearts, our deceitful hearts: and because these are sins in
the best, Quotidianae incursionis, as Tertullian, of all sins of infirmity,
therefore we have need earnestly, every day to solicit God in his Sons
Words, And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from ^^ evil, Amen. 2.
Here was a difference in judgment and choice, between these two, who were
joined together in Conjugall society, and professed and followed the same rode
to Heaven; Isace preferred Esau; Rebekah, Jacob; yet such was their wisdom
and moderation, that they permitted each to other the liberty of their
judgments: neither did this difference any way hinder or prejudice their
offices of Piety, or mutual obligations, or reciprocal duties of love: a fit
Pattern for Parents, not to quarrel for trifles, not to separate upon minute
considerations; a proper President for all Christians, that they hold the unity
of the spirit in the bond of peace; when differences of opinion arise (as
indeed when are there not?) concerning some lesser Truths of Religion, that is,
if the opinions be in materia non revelata, or non necessaria; if the point be
not revealed, or at least, not so clearly revealed, as to satisfy an honest
teachable heart; if it be not in fundamentals, but in superstructures, these
different persuasions being no way impious, and we being united in the maine,
all the prime and vital parts of Christianity, which relates to Faith and holy
living, we are to communicate one with another, to be affectionately kind one
to another, and mutually endeare our selves in all Christian offices and
duties; nothing, should debar us from a joint performance of all Religious or
Civil duties, but what does meritoriously and actually divorce and separate us
from Christ, and as it were unchristian us, or render (...) Christian, either
in our profession, or conversation. 3. Isaac in his Prophetic Rapture,
perceived the blessing was by God consigned for Jacob, and so accordingly
devolved ^he right on him, and acquiesced in Gods good pleasure, though
contrary to his own propension and desire: we ought to suspend and silence our
private and particular phancies, when God has revealed the contrary; we are to
renounce and deny our most ^ardent and praevalent affections, when God has
otherwise declared the good pleasure of his will; I was dumb (says David,
Psalm. 39.9. and opened not my mouth, because thou did it. 4. Though Isaac was
endued with a Prophetique Spirit, yet ^he knew not the time of his death; in
general only he apprehended, that his dissolution was approaching: God
conceales ^he determinate time of death, even from the Prophets themselves;
that no man may presume of long life: he would have as always provided for
Death, Ideo latet ultimus dies, ut observetur omnis dies; therefore is the last
day unknown, that we may be in readiness every day. 5. Isaac, that he might
not be prevented by Death, foreflowes no time, delays not to perform his last
fatherly Office, joblesse his Children; He blessed Jacob and Esau, this will
serve for a seasonable Instruction for Parents, that whilst they live, they
provide for, and bless their Children; not to leave them to the disposal of a
Feoffee in trust, or a deceitful Guardian; and it concerns us all, even to
do good while we have opportunity, not to procrastinate our repentance, not to
wave the duties of our Christian Calling, putting off the evil day; while we
have ^ight let us walk as the Children of light, for the night cemmeth wherein
no man can work, which is most excellently set forth by the Wife Man, Eccl.
12.1. to the 8. 6. Isaac blessed both Jacob and Esau: Paternall Benedictions
are of no small efficacy and importance; Its the Childrens duty to require
them, its the Fathers to give them; For the Major domo, the Father of a Family,
is the representative of God, the Father of the Spirits of all flesh. God
ratifies, what ^he does in his name, and for that authority which he deriveth
unto him. What the spiritual Fathers are in reserence to their ^ure an
pastoral charge, Ambassadors for Christ etc. 2 Cor 5.^0. that Fathers are in
their respective Families; and though they have not special watranty as Isaac
had for the distribution of their blessings, yet have they grounds enough to
render them effectual; for they have this general assurance from the Almighty
Father, that he will be their God, and the God of their Seed, and are therefore
sufficiently Commissioned for this (...) and purpose. 7. The Apostle places
not these two blessed Persons according to their production, but according to
Gods blessing or them; names not Esau before Jacob, though borne before him but
Jacob before Esau, because he had translated the Birthright to him. God is the
Sovereign and free dispenser of his blessings; he disposes of them in such
order. degree and measure, as he thinks most suitable, and consequently to
murmur and repine against Gods proceedings and dispensations, is both impiety
and folly; if thy Brother, or Neighbor have a large portion then thou, know
that God gave it him; and if tho^ envyest or hate him for it, thou art a
Malignant indeed i^ the most genuine and proper importance of the Word; thi^^
eye is evil, because God is good; and more then so, thou art a Fool too; for
tell me, is it not reasonable and fitting for thee, in thine own judgment, to
dispose of thine own as thou will, and is it not then unreasonable folly in
thee to murmr and repine at God, because he uses his own liberty in the same
kind: It were far more Christian and prudentiall for thee ^^ praise God for
what thou art or hasie; and though thou ha^^ not so much as others, yet what
thou have, thou have received. Every good and perfect gift, etc. James 1.17. If
thou have no^ Isaacs blessing, Dominion, Majesty, fullness of Bread, and
abundance of Wine; yet if thou have Esans Portion, the Dew of Heaven, and the
fatness of the Earth: or at the worst, if thy condition be to live by thy
sword; take that thine is, be contented and thankful. David had more hearty
joy in his dime^sum, then they who had more abundance. Psalm. 4.6.7. 8. Isaac
employed all his skill and industry (for he felt Jacobs Hands, and
distinguished his Tongue) that he should no^ be mistaken in the collation of
his blessing: yet all shall no^ prevail against Gods decree, The counsel of
the Lord that shall stand, Prove. 16.1.2. 9. Jacob is preferred before Esau, the
lesser is exalted above the greater; the time will be, when that worldly men,
which exercised Lordship, Arbitrary Tyrannical Power, over the Believers,
shall themselves be brought under subjection, and the righteous shall have
Domination, when their beauty shall consume away, Psalm. 49.14. Apoc. 2.26.27.
the Birthright, with all its Privileges, jurisdictions, and preheminences,
shall be transmitted to them; they shall sit upon Thrones, judging the twelve
Tribes, receive their double Portion in the Heavenly Canaan, and offer up
spiritual sacrifices to that God who is their Portion and Inheritance unto all
eternity. 10. Isaac saw these two great Nations meant by Jacob and Esau,
flourishing in wealth and honor, not with his bodily eyes, for these were
darkened, but by his spiritual eye; he foretold the future conditions of both
these People, not from their Stars, but Revelation. By Faith Isaac blessed,
etc. and so not by the positure and Scheame of the Heavens, but by a
remonstrance from Heaven; the former was impossible, for both these, though
most different both in dispositions and condition of life, ^ad the same
horoscope at their Birth; and because the Heavens are in a perpetual motion,
and there is some stay at all Births, a will be matter of extreme difficulty,
if not impossibility to determine the certain position of the Heavens at those
Births; ^o that this praediction was not from any Constellation, appea^earing
at their Nativities; but from a Divine Oracle, declared before they were borne.
And indeed, what reason is there in Philosophy, why every year, every day
should not have as ^^rong influences as their Birthday upon Men? or which way
imaginable can these Astrologians prove the Heavenly Bodies ^o exercise their
Powers and Virtues? He that will be better satisfied in this particular, let
him read Augustine, lib. 5. De Civit. Dei, cap. 3.4.5. Lastly, By Faith, etc.
The eye of Faith does, if not with as much clearenesse, yet as much certainty,
apprehend future contingents, as the bodily eyes do their sensible objects;
not that ^require a demonstrative knowledge of the articles of Faith, for his
is an Appendix of the Manichean Heresy, which taught, ^ihil amplius esse
eredendum, quam quod evidenti ratione possit demonstrari, as Augustine observes
lib. 1. de util. ered. but the our assent be rational, and built upon Moral
certainties, (...) course and argument, a constant uninterupted tradition, tr^^
of miracles, word of Prophecy, the excellency sublimity a^ reasonableness of
its Doctrine, the fullness, satisfactorinesse, a^^ riches of its promises, the
concordance and usefulness of ^ its articles; not that I conceive either, that
every Believer ha^ this certainty and assurance of the Articles of his Faith,
or the promises of Grace; for although it be most certain, that both the
premised instances are certain, and more sure then an^ thing we touch or see,
certitudine objecti, yet they are not (...) to us, certitudine subjecti; Its an
error to suppose, that every Believer (or else he is no Believer) must be
advanced to such (...) degree of Faith, such a measure of assurance, such a
strength o^^ adherence, as is found in the objects and habits of sen^ an^
science; even a little Faith, is true Faith, is saving Faith; (...) I entend
this to be understood of strong Christians who by devout humble Prayer, and
sincere obedience, have impet^^^^ the spirit of obsignation, and are confirmed
in their mosst bo^ Faith, by the blessed Spirit of God as a reward of their
holy living, (...), etc. Colos. 22. and are brought (...), Heb. 6.1. by the
spirit of wisdom and revelation Ephesians 1.17. which is usually called a
plerophory, or fullness of persuasion; and even in weaker vulgar Believers,
Faith whatsoever it be, though but like a grain of Mustard Seed, in s^genere,
does afford such a measure of assurance of future felcities, as that it both
engages obedience, and expects rewards upon that stock; it is always not
only a subsistence, giving a present being to future objects, giving them a
being i^ esse objectivo, Biel in 3. did. 24. art. 2. but a demonstration (...)
it renders the speranda, the objects of credibility, visibly and conspicuously
subsistent; whatsoever object Faith apprehends whether past, present, or to
come, it brings along with it not only a bare subsistence, but according to
the measure and degree a more or less evidence; Its the Prerogative of Faith,
(...), as Chrysostom in Hom. 9.^ Romans to look upon an assignement, as a
position, upon an assurance, as an actual enjoyment, to give those things a
being which yet in nature has none, and so by consequence a certainly to the
apprehensions of the soul; here our Savior is positive, He that drinks my
blood has Eternal life, John 6.54. though its most certain, he has it not
in full fruition, but only in primitiis, the earnest of the Inheritance; and
thus also he proves a present condition of happiness, by a future medium,
Happy are ye, etc. Luke 6 22.32. Why? for great is your reward; which way of
argumentation were impertinent and fallacious, unless that Faith produced a
praesubsistency of the objects believed, brought remote and distant promises
near at hand, within our reach and embracement; Habet fides oculos ^^ibus
quodammodo videt verum esse, quod nondum videt, August. Epist. 222. Blind
Isaac eying the promises saw two great States and Commonwealths founded in the
Persons of Jacob and Esau, and foresaw their wars, successes and the
respective contingencies, which should happen unto them for many hundreds of
years after his eyes were closed. The Israelites discovered a passage through
the Red Sea and Wilderness into Canaan. Ioh ^aw a Redcemer from a dunghill.
David out of the deep mire; a Protector. Abraham saw that day, which others
desired to see; ^ut could not, even before it was existent it was visible. And
Saint Steven upon the Earth, among a crowde of miscreants, ^aw the Heavens
open, and the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God; and
these fore-sights and discoveries, made them confident, and patient, and their
expectations of mercy assured and resigned; they were ascertained their hopes
should not fail them, and therefore they waited, and were con^ented; For he
that Believes shall not make haste, Isay 28.16. he is quiet, and silent, and
possesses his soul with patience, till the times of refreshing come; and
certain it is, That he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; the
Phrase denotes security, and contentation: he that Believes, is safe, and
because he is safe, he is satisfied; For a confident man is contented to wait
for that good, which his confidence expects and promises; which is
sufficiently proved by David's answer to Abishai, 1 Samuel 26.9.10.11. but a
suspicious man, whose mind is taken up with fears or jealousies, like a
drowning man, is ready to catch ^^ every probaility, and use every occasion
that happens, or he fancies, will further his desires; a serupulons man, whose
reason of his considence are either vain in themselves, or indiscu^^^ in
himself, will be wavering and inconstant, though for the present he eagarly
pursues what he enelines too. This may be ex^^ exemplified by two competitors,
for one and the same office an^ preserment; I suppose the one to have good
grounds of his hope^ the promise of the Patron or donor, or the prevalency of
some active friend with him, and he is confident of the fidelity of the one, or
the activity of the other, and thereupon takes time and leisure in his journey,
toils not his body, distracts not his mind in the pursuit thereof; but the
other has only some slight acquaintance with him, some pretenses only to his
favor and bounty or has only this hope, that if he come first, possibly he
may provaile; neither has he any friend, on which he dare rely, to negotiate
and meditate for him; therefore he Posts Night and Day storms and frets at
every obstacle, quarrels and fights with every shadow of opposition, and
allows himself no refreshment (...) ease, because his suspicion and jealousy
chafeth and chaseth hi^ In this ease we may certainly resolve, he who made
most ha^^ had the lesser hopes; and his haste was less, whose hopes (...)
greater and surer: for he that has a promise from a man ^^ Power and
faithfulness, whereof also he has an undoub^^ assurance, is not too eager or
over-vehement for the performance, but is willing to stay the time and pleasure
of his friend neither is there amongst men any thing which makes them ^^
forward for security or payment in contracts, but distrust a^^ dishonesty. And
yet this Phrase is varied by the Apostle 1 P^^ 2.6. shall not be ashamed; he
will not only not make haste, ^^ if the merey be delayed, he will not be
ashamed; his Faith been him out against all inward serupulosities, and outward
igno^^nies: if his own heart shall dictate, God is slack, or if his enemies
jeere and deride his confidence, yet he is still the same no reproaches shall
haste or deject him, no carnalities seduct o^ alter him; to be disappointed on
his relyance and hopes, th^^ shames a man; but to be rooted in hope, is to
gather considence and comfort; which David observed of himself, Psalm.
27.1^.14. I should have sainted except I had believed to see the goodness of
the Lord, etc. In three things, says Bernard do I pla^^^ any confidence, and
they are such, as will not suffer us to be ashamed; In charitate adoptionis,
veritate promissionis, potestate redditunis, for Gods goodness, truth, and
power cannot fail them that trust in him, and wait for the appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
The third Part. The Prayer.

MOst merciful and gracious Father, most glorious and eternal Lord, the God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; bless us thy Children by Adoption, with the Dew
of Heaven, and Fat of the Earth, bless and prosper unto us the works of our
hands, and satisfy us early with thy mereies, that we may rejoice and be glad
in thy salvation; give us such a proportion of temporalties, as are most
suitable to our dispositions and abilities, but they be no temptations and
provocations to sin; and let the blessings of thy right hand descend
plentifully upon us, thy heavenly and spiritual graces, that we may grow up
and flourish in the house of the Lord. Be pleased to regulate and direct all
our actions to thy glory, and our salvation; restrain all our passions and
inordinate affections, and bring them under the dominion of grace. Bless and
sanctify all thy blessings upon us, that we may improve them to thy Honor,
and our own everlasting advantage, that we press forward to the mark. For the
price of the high calling of God in Jesus Christ: let thy promises of grace be
the objects of our Faith, and let our Faith rest in them, that we be not
confounded in the perilous time, and we may wait with patience till the Sun
of Righteousness appear with healing in his wings: Raise up our thoughts from
the consideration of the present pressures and threatened calamities which may
happen us, to a contemplation of the love of God in Jesus Christ Adopting us,
and promising good things to us, the truth, power, and faithfulness of God in
performing the expressions of his love to us, and to a settled meditation of
that Eternal Rest, those sure mercies and honorable felicities, which the
Father has made over to us in his beloved Son, and which he has assured
unto us by the Revelation of his Spirit: To which holy, blessed, and undivided
Trinity be ascribed, all Honor, Blessing, Praise, and Worship, now and for
ever. Amen.

JACOBS Piety.
Heb. 11.21. By Faith Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the Sons of
Joseph, and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff.
OMne bonum est sui diffusivum, Goodness is communicative of it self. And a
very Heathen can resolve us. That Nullius boni sine socio jucunda est
possessio, there i^ no content in the possession of any goodness, unless we
have a Partner with us; and every good man is of that temper and disposition,
that he freely communicates what he has received; if God bless him, he is
willing others should have some part or profit with him, and what he freely
received, he freely gives; as for example, If God has bestowed a Talent of
Knowledge, Learning; Wealth and Authority, on any good Man, he will employ it,
teach others with his Learning, enflruct with Knowledge, supply with his
Wealth, relieve and protect by his Authority; or if he do not, he cease to
be a good Man, and these advantages cease to be good things and blessings to
him. Abraham received a blessing from God, he bequeathes this to Isanc; Isaac
leaves it to Jacob; and Jacob imparts it to the twelve Tribes; All these holy
Patriarchs succeeded one another in the blessings, here was Personal
Succession, both in the Place and the Faith; they Lineally descended and
succeeded one another both in the Chair, as formerly the Elder Father still
blessing the following; and in the donative of the blessing, and in the Worship
and Service of God; Religion, it seems, then was heredetary, and these
Patriarchs came to the blessing by descent, and the Legitimate Children, were
the Heirs of the Promise, and therefore as by Faith Isaac blessed Jacob and
Esan, so by Faith Jacob blessed both the Sons of Joseph, By Faith Jacob when
he was a dying, etc.

The first Part.

This benediction was the same which Isaac before imparted to Jacob, it was
Paternall, Sacerdotall, and Prophetical: the subjects of it were the Sons of
Joseph, but with this difference, the whole blessing was enstated on Jacob by
Isaac; whereas Jacob divided it to Judah, Lovy, and the Sons of Joseph; Reuben
indeed was his eldest Son, the beginning of his strength, the excellency of
dignity, and power, and so in an ordinary course it belonged to him; but he
forfeited his Birthright by desiling his Fathers Bed; and so his dignity was
gone, Genesis 49.3.4. and so the jus Regni, the Kingly Dominion and Sovereignty
over his Brethren, was settled on Judah; the Honor and Office of Priesthood
was collated on Levis and the double Portion was allotted to the Sons of
Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh; and the blessing on them was, That his Name
should be named on them, and the Name of his Fathers. Abraham and Isaac, Genesis
48.16. that is, they should be reputed for his Children, for the Grandchildren
of Isaac, and great Grandchildren of Abraham, and so the Heirs of the
Covenant of Promise; and they were adopted into the place of Reuben, 1 Chronicles.
5.1.2. or Levi. who was not to have any share into the Land of Canaan; and then
there is another blessing annexed, That they may grow as Fish, into a
multitude, into the midst of the Earth: and indeed, accordingly they
multiplied in Egypt, into vast numbers. For at the departure of the Israelites
out of Egypt, there were of Manasseh. forty two thousand seven hundred: Of
Ephraim, thirty two thousand five hundred; but all these, men of War, perished
in the Wilderness; yet at their entering into Canaan, there was found after a
perfect Muster of Ephraim, forty thousand and five hundred; and of Manasseh,
thirty two thousand and two hundred, Numb. 1.33.34.35. so that in the space of
two hundred and fifteen years, there Issued from Joseph seventy five thousand,
or very near that account: and so Ephraim was after so powerful and
considerable a Tribe, that oft-times the Scripture speaking of the defection of
the ten Tribes from the house of David to Jeroboam, the whole t^^ are
indefinitely called Ephraim; this Tribe being the principal contriver and
abettor of that Rebellion, as Isay 7.2. Hos. 5.3.

But we have another Passage in these words, which deserve Vindication; they
are taken out of Genesis 47.31. He worshippe^ toward the Beds head; or as the
last Translation, he bowe^ himself upon the Beds head; and so Junius reads
it, Incurva^^^ se ad cervical lecti sui; and so others, incurvavit se ad cap^^
lectuli: but our Apostle follows the Septuagint, He worshipp^^ upon the top of
his staff, because that Translation was then (...) great authority in the
Church; and the difference is not m^teriall, nor of consequence; for whether
way soever it be re^dred, the sense is not much altered; and the Septuagint
themselves Translated the Word here used in the Hebrew, a Bed, Genesis 48.2. so
that they made not so great account of it. The dir^ genuine sense of the words
then will amount to this, That Iac^^ reared himself upon his pillow at his
beds head, leaning also (...) his staff, and so prayed unto, and praised God.
Indeed, the vu^gar Latin, contrary to this sense and the words themselves
reads it, Adoravit fastigium virgae ejus, which yet by some (...) approved,
though upon a design to maintain religious adora^^on to be due to the
creatures; but that this is a corruption, appears from the words themselves,
for it leaves out the Proposition (...), which in the Accusative Case signifies
super upon, all observed by Grammarians. And this is sufficient to invalida^^
the authenticalnesse of that Translation, and to discover the weakness of
their Argument, and in part the falsenesse o^ their Tenet, who would from this
place conclude, The adoration of creatures, relics, or images; and which is
yet more, i^ destroys the pretended infallibility of the Church of Rom^ which
in the Council of Trent has declared the vulgar Latin to be the authentic
Text and Rule of Faith; for if defacto she has erred in this determiniation,
then de jure, possibly she may; and it is apparent she has erred, in
approving this Translation, which we have proved erroneous, and might further
manifest from the Hebrew and Septuagint, but that the Bibles of the Doctors of
Lovaine, themselves Romanists, has saved us the labor, who read it otherwise
then (...) vulgar Latin, which (as I said) the Tridentine Council Sess. 2.
Can. 2. has allowed for the authentic Interpretation.

The second Part.

1 Jacob, dying Jacob, took care before his death to bless his Children, and
took pains to worship God in as reverent and descent a posture, as his
infirmity would allow. Gods Children all their life time, find him a Father of
mercy, and God of all consolations, they receive many blessings and assistances
from him; but at their death, he has a most tender care and particular respect
over them, that their Faith fail not, that the last enemy prevail not against
them, that dying they may be Conquerors; he perfects his strength in their
weakness, and he acts most powerfully and vigorously in them, when their
infirmities are strong upon them, their Faith conquers death, and the fear
thereof, and him that has the power of death the Devil, the outward man that
is the living and animal saculties of Man, his vegetation and (...) are
weakened and impaired by the usual harbingers of death bodily infirmities, and
maladies; yet the inward man breathing and moving by spiritual principles,
renewed with spiritual faculties of faith and sanctified reason, is perfected
and completed by them; ordinarily, blind Men have the most apprehensive,
tenacious, and faithful memories, because they have not so many diversions to
several objects as seeing Men have; and so dying Believers have their souls
fixed on God, sequestered from the world, and are altogether taken up with the
contemplation of heavenly joy, and with holy exercises of Devotion and Piety
and with earnest fervent Zeal and vehement desires to glorify God, and to be
glorified with him; to bless God, and to be blessed by and with him eternally:
but this comfort redounds not to all, it is only peculiar to Christian
Believers, whose conversation has been heavenly; not to presumptuous daring
sinners, who walk after the flesh, and never seek to God, till they have not
strength to serve sin and Satan, who never begin to live well, till they be a
dying, and puts all off to a death bed Repentance, which is the most sad and
miserable condition of all others; for it will be a work of extreme
difficulty, if not impossibility, for an habituated sinner, in that scantling
and strait, heartily and sincerely to perform the duties and offices of Faith
and Repentance, or seriously the settle himself unto them: for Omnis peccator
peceat in su^aterno, Every such sinner, if he should live for ever, would
sinner for ever; but the comfort and happiness is for them, who in the
preceding years of their life, in the days of their health and strength of
their discourse and understanding, have followed the ways of godliness, the
footsteps of Abraham; and when sid^ or a dying, has nothing to do, but to
exercise those grace which they formerly acquired, and perfect that Repentance
which they early begun.

2. Both the Sons of Joseph; not nominating them unto us, but only making
them known to us by their relation to Josoph. Certainly the Apostles design
of the concealment o^ their names, and expression of them by their Parentage,
was for to put those Hebrews in mind both of the design Joseph's Brethren had
to sell him for a slave in Egypt, which was purposely to cut him off from
Jacobs house, and deprive him of a blessing and his portion; and also of Gods
Decree to the contrary, ^h^^ though they devised mischief craftily against
him, and drive their plot far, and did bring it in their sancies to their
desired issne and period; yet he that sits in Heaven shall laugh them to
scorn, and his determination shall stand in despite of their confederacies
association, malice and policy, Joseph shall receive a Fathers blessing, and in
his necrest relatives a share in the firsts borne Praerogative, a double
portion: and thus the Apostle gains by this insinuation upon these Hebrews his
purpose, which was to persuade them to contentation and resignation of spirits:
assuring them, that though for the present they were in a sad slavish
condition, yet let them wait patiently on the Lord, and they shall see his
salvation; they (though for the (...) this interim plundered of their estates,
driven from all their houses, subjects to Tyrants) shall receive the blessing
of the Lord, a double portion in the real advantages and bequeathments of
fullness, glory, and joy, whish no man shall take from them, John 16.22. the
expression is 'a tacit implication, That the Plundered, shall receive an
Inheritance; the Banished, a Mansion; the Imprisoned, an Enlargement, and be
set at Liberty; the Captivated, shall Reign; the Mourners, shall Rejoice; the
Contemned and Despised, shall be Glorified; the Perhented, shall be blessed.
But this is not all, the Apostle had a further drist, even to inform and
confirm them in that most certain, and most frequently experimented truth;
Perdam sapientiam, sapientum, God takes the crafty in the devices that he
imagines; he breaks their snares, and turns all the worldlings wisdom into
foolishness; he, by his good Providence, blaffs all their designs, frustrates
their policies, confounds their counselt, dissolves their covenants, dissipates
their confederacies, ruins their endeavors, befooles their enterprises and
discovers their hypocrisies; they, as they labored for the wind, so they
shall reap the whirlewinde; he brings the devices of the ungodly to nothing;
nothing takes, neither what they project for themselves, nor plot against
others. God disappoints them, and the counsel of his will shall only take
effect; and in that order and method he has praeordained, as may be further
seen in these Sons of Joseph. Jacob and Joseph intended the pre-eminence, the
chief blessing, for Manasseh, God preferred Ephraim, and so directs and guides
old Jacobs hands in this first Observance of that Ceremony of Imposition of
hands, for a solemnity of Benediction, that Ephraim has the blessing of the
right hand, the first blessing, and best Portion. But

2. The expression affords another observation, not indefinitely, or barely the
Sons of Joseph; but more particularly and distinctly, both, or rather each of
them (...), though God beslow more and larger blessings of one then another,
yet he is pleased that every one should have a share and part in them, all have
not alike, every one has his allowance, his dimensum, his Portion; a strong
body requires more full dict, then weaker constitutions; so that if the weaker
have less, it has enough; and some Men's spirits are more vigorous, and able
to coneoct a plentiful Estate, and convert it to good nourishment; men of
weaker parts have less warmth to nourish, and a fullness to these is apt to
make them surfeit and diseased; and therefore, if these have as much as will
keep them in temper, and preserve them in health, they have sufficient. If thy
lot be not an Elder Brothers Inheritance, Ephraims blessing, thou have enough,
if thou can be contented with a younger Brothers annuity, thou art more then
a dependent in thy Fathers house, and have Manasse^ blessing, though less then
the others yet great enough for thee. Are all Prophets? are all Apostles? can
all be Patriarchs, chiefe^ of Families, Lords of Inheritances, Rulers over
People? Know this, that if thou have not Power and Authority to guide and judge
others, thou yet have a competency, a subsistence, a Privilege in the Israel
of God, a Part and Portion in Canaan; If thou be not as an Eye or hand in
the mystical body of Christ, yet thou his Flesh and his Blood; if not a
glorious Pillar. or beautiful Perch in the Temple, yet a Living Stone; if thou
art not Honorable, nor Rich, yet thou art healthful, strong, pleasant; and
perhaps if none of these, yet thou art satisfied; and that is the most valuable,
and most to be desired blessing.

4. By Faith, etc. Notwithstanding Jacob possessed nothing in Canaan, but his
Fathets Sepulchers; yet he divides and distributes it into Lots, as if it were
in his power and absolute disposal; Faith assured him his division should
stand good, and his Legacies in force, his last Will and Testament should be
proved, and what he had respectively bequeathed to each Tribe, they should
actually Possess and Enjoy. Thus the Apostles assertion is still proved, Faith
is the subsistence, etc. the evidence, etc. verse the first of this Chapter.

5. Jacob having now blessed the Sons of Joseph, his Faith moves and mounts
higher, he is now setting himself in a posture to bless God; he leaves the
thoughts of Canaan, and turns to God; He worshipped, etc. The Apostle tells us
there is a coercive irresistible Power in love, The love of Christ constrameth
us, 2 Cor 5 14. and such a holy violence and compulsion there was in Jacobs
Faith, his Faith constrained him to rear up his diseased infirm body, and
leaning upon the end of his Staff, to Worship that God who was both his fear
and confidence; so strong were the actings of Faith on his spirit. That his
souse must magnify his Lord, and his spirit rejoice in his Savior, and his
body must attend, accompany the soul, and join with it in the worship of God,
the propension and forwardness of his spirit, raised up his dying body; such
is the divine virtue of Faith that it erects, what is ready to fall;
strengthens, what is like to fail; quickens, what is near to dye. The ancient
wiser sort of the Heathens (observing the high expressions, ^^^ssene disco^^^^^
writings and reasonings of dying men, when gross and palpable infirmities had
seized on the body, and deprived the Organs and Instruments thereof of any
activity or serviceableness^^ for those perfections) have hereupon concluded,
the spiritualnesse, and immateriality of the soul of Man, and by consequence,
its immortality; for, Modus operands sequiter modena effendi; these operations
of the soul are altogether independent of the matter, it contributes nothing
to these actions, and so is its essence also; for if the soul were material,
then the operations of the soul. Discourse and Reasoning, should depend
immediately upon the material Organs, it could not act without them; and also,
if the Organs be enfeebled and the instrument decayed and weakened, those
operations should be imperfect, weak, and, like the body, crasie; but this
contradicts their own observation and experience, who had found more rare
emanations of the soul in dying men, then when they were living, and a weakened
body cannot move so strongly, or quickly, as when it was in its marrow and
vigor. Hereupon Philosophers distinguish the actions of the soul into two
orders; the former sort of actions it offects qua forma, in the capacity of a
form to a material and sensitive body; and in this respect the soul can
neither subsist, nor act without the matter, for here its supposed as forma
informans, and its no longer a form, then it does inform, and so long all its
operations follow the disposition of the Organs, and qualifications of the
bodily senses: The other kind of actions it produces qua talis, or qua anima,
considered abstractive and absolute, in a separated state from the body, as its
an intellectual substance; and in this notion, as its independent of the
matter, deriving nothing from any power in it, so it can subsist without it,
and perform its functions and offices, notwithstanding the imbicilities,
indispositions, or distempered crazinesses of the body: But then, if the soul
be illuminated, and guided by Faith, (which is an heavenly divine, and merely
spiritual principle) then the discourses and ratiocinations, the emanations
and operations of the soul, are transcendently excellent, though the body be
dying, because of that supernatural virtue, and spiritual life, which it
receives from its (...) and efficient; this grows by the thines of^^ the
Organs, and rises by their setting; it gains strength by the weaknesses of
the body; perfection, by the infirmities of the flesh; virtue, by its decay;
and more life by its death (...) and here (me thinks) as Philosophers esteemed
most honorably of those Persons, who dying, discoursed most rationally; so we
should judge, at least, charitably of those, who whatsoever formerly they have
been, do yet breathe out their last in pious ejaculations, raptures, or
motions, or spend their dying minutes in addresses to God, or in unexpected
expressions of repentance, devotion, and heavenly mindedness, though I
conceive, they proceed from the spirit of grace, and principle of Faith. But I
digress, and return to the maine Observation: The motions of a sanctified
believing soul, are so strong and powerful, that as the first mover foreeth a
regular motion from the inseriour heavens; so the soul enclines, and carries
the body along with it in the performance of holy duties. The believes thinks
it no^ enough to worship God in spirit, with an elevated mind and devout
soul; but he eonjoynes reveront and descent geflure of body: Even this dying
Person, in a reverentiall habitude to Gods presence and Majesty, as far as his
bodily infirmities would permit, used the worshipping posture. And it was the
demeanor of the Saints of God in all ages, in their Addresses to Almighty God,
to adore, that is to bow, or prostrate their bodies. These Patriarchs, if they
stood upright, fell down upon the ground, before they worshipped; if lying, as
Jacob, they listed themselves up, and bowed: And in this Posture we find David
at and immediately before his Thanksgiving, 1 Kings 1.47.48. And our Savior
Christ himself was so civil, that he would not neglect his bodily service; so
before he Prayed, he kneeled, Luke 22.41. or, he sell on his Face, Mat. 26.39.
or, he lift up his Eyes, John 11.4. by some gesture of decency, reverence and
submission, he evidenced his devotion and humility: and the received rendering
of the word, is promiscuously, either adorare, or inclinare so, or inourvare;
to adore, to fall down, or to bow: and confermable hereunto, was the practice
of the Primitive Christians, among the first address and application to God a^
their entrance into the Church, as a Prologve to their after devotions was
this: Aute omnia adoremus Dominum qui faci^ upon come let u^ Worship, and fall
down, and kneel before the lord our maker: And so David's connection holds, Come
into ^n Coures; and then, O We ship him in the beauty of helinesse, Psalm.
96.8.9. for then we come before the presence of the Lord, the presence of the
Lord of the whole Earth. So that adoration is ^n exhibition of reverence and
honor, testified by some bodily gesture, as Bowing, Prostration, Kissing,
Saluting or Uncovering, according to the custom of the Nation; which we may
further prove from these following parallel Places of Scripture, where the
expressions are Synonymae's, all importing the same sense; for Mat. 8.2. its
(...), he worshipped him. Mark 1.40. its (...), he kneeled down to him, Luke
5.12. (...), he fell on his Face: and the like you shall find, if you compare,
Mat. 15.25. with Mark 7.25. Its true indeed that God has not strictly tied us
to any certain Posture or set demeanor and form of bodily worship; but in
^hes^, in the general he requires, that they be decent, (let all things be
done decently) not rude, or rustic; and decency is regulated by Custom, and
those Customs which are Catholic, the Customs of the Church of God in all,
or the confessed pu^er ages, are best; because as they are most conformable,
and less under suspicion of Schism; so they most and best express our
reverentiall fear of Gods sacred Majesty: and because they best evidence and
help our inward Devotions, when they cooperate with them: for as we know the
goodness of Springs by their ebullition; so where there is faith and fervor
within there will be expressions of humility without. Our Bodies are Gods, the
Created and Redeemed them as well as our Sou^es, and glorify him therefore in
both: therefore God exacts a tribute of homage and service due from both; and
as in Nature, the separation the one from the other is death, so in Grace it is
sin: and as the union is life; so it is Religion: for bodily worship, when
set on the right Object, and attended with the sincerity and fervor of the
soul, is one way of worshipping God in Spirit and Truth: for in this case the
Body is but the Instrument animated and acting by the soul; and the action is
no whit less spiritual, because the body is yoked with the soul in the
employment: but the antithesis, or opposition in the (...) Commandment, seems
directly to prove this Observation, (...) according to the usual
Interpretation of the Commandem^^ domonstrates it; for if the negative part be
(as certainly (...)) Thou shall not worship, nor bow down to Idol false gods;
the by the Rules of opposition, and the verdict of the received position, the
affirmative will be, Thou shall worship and down to the Lord our God; or as
some Interpret by bo^^ down, thou shall worship; and if this be concluding, and
the be any obligingness in Law, we are bound to this service, (...) tute
praecepti, by an express positive Law. And further yet, Family Duties, and
Private Devotions, a bodily gesture of Reverence and Comeliness be admitted,
approved, and practice why not rather at Public Congregations? or why then
shou^^ they be only omitted, neglected, disallowed? unless that the vulgar
conceit has taken men, that either little or no revere^^ is good enough for
the house of God, and that place of all other ought to be slighted: neither
will that Text John 4.23. (...) make any thing against this Observation. God
(true it is) will worshipped in Spirit and Truth, that is, even to take the m^^
restrained Interpretation, he is a spiritual nature. and requ^^ spiritual
service; but who denies this? but yet, even this in^^ pretation, is to be
understood fundamentally, not exclusively for the context will not endure any
other sense, because (...) was a spirit from all eternity, and ever since the
Creation, required spiritual worship, even before that present hour spoken
verse 23. and as spiritual worship was not then exclusive bodily worship, so
neither are they incompatible, and incon^^ stent, since that hour came; or at
this present hour now it, (...) man ever yet presumed that bodily worship was
a duty, unless offered with a true heart; if it stood alone it was a mere
mockery, a perfect piece of hypocrisy; and therefore those words (...) not set
in opposition to bodily worship, but (as to any obse^^ is evident from the
context) to the appropriating of it to f^^^ fingalar place, Jerusalem, or that
Mountain: now the time (...) that every City is, a Jerusalem; every Oratory, a
Temple; eve^ separated Place, a Mount Sion; and every Land, a lewry: (...)
therefore he wills, as afterward the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.8. (...) ^en pray every
where, lifting up pure handt: and this is a bodily exercise or posture (which
the Genevah note thus glosseth) as ^estimonies of a pure heart and conscience:
The natural then. (...) single meaning of these words is this, God is to be
worship^ed in spirit, that is, heartily and devoutly, and it excludes
hypocrisy and indifferency: in truth, that is, elearely and solely, not by
lying vanities, fantastic representations, false guises, such as the
sacrificing in man's blood, and offering festival lust^ and uncleanness in
the solemn offices of Religion: to the former, the extreme is to worship God
carelessly, and negligently, and so not in spirit. To the second, it is to mix
impieties in Gods worship, to worship him with a lie, and so not in truth; this
no way proves that when we adore, that is bow, we worship ^^t in spirit and
truth; for even bodily worship is in this sense spiritual, if it arise from,
accompany, and follow the devotion of the heart this is to glorify God both in
bodies and spirits, ^or they are Gods: And so let us Pray.

The third Part.

O Most holy Father, God of infinite wercies, of tender and never failing
conpassions, of great and unspeakeable goodness: We bless, magnify, and
glo^fie thee; and blessed be God, even ^he Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has blessed us with all ^irituall blessings in high places in Christ; for that
unwaluable ^lessing in giving thy well-beloved Son to take our nature upon
^im etc in and through him adopting us to be thy Sent, Heeres ^f the blessing
of an happy Eternity O bless us with thy saving ^aces, that we may by a
regular, constant course of holy living at^aine to that most blessed end; and
sanctisie all thy blessings unto (...) that we be comented with thy allowances
and blessings, that (...) never murmr at, or envy thy blessings upon others,
but that (...) patience we expect our portion in Heaven: and so blessed Lord,
(...) our hearts with the sense of the glories and perfections, and (...)
fading nothingnesse and emptiness^ of the creatures, that with ^^^cere and
ardent affections of obedience and love, we may obey (...) serve and worship
thee with reverence and godly fear. O let (...) in our addresses and
approaches to thy glorious Majesty, seriously ineditate on thy presence,
glories, and soveraigutly; on (...) merciet and goodness, and not dare rudely
and undecently, to (...) into the presence of the Lord of the whole Earth. Then
art (...) Lord both of our souls and bodies, to thee we offer both; (...) dies
expect a portion and share in the rewards and blessing (...) Religion with our
souls: O let them be yoked and joined (...) there in the exercises and offices
of Religion; let us here live (...) the unity of thy Catholic Church, in the
commantem of Sa^^ worshipping thee in spirit and truth, with an holy service in
(...) beauty of holiness, glorifying thee both in our bodies and soul^^ that
when both shall be glorified with thee, we may to all Eternity with the
Heavenly Quire of Angels and blessed Spirits, (...) that Psame of blessing,
Glory, Praise, Honor and Power, (...) unto him that sits on the Throne, and
to the Lamb, (...) ever and ever, Amen.

JOSEPH'S Memorandum's.
Heb. 11.22. By Faith Joseph when he dyed, made mention of (...) departing of
the Children of Israel, and gave commandment concerning his bones.
Joseph closes up the Catalogue of the Patriarchs, he is the last mentioned of
them; and the History of him conclude the first and choicest Monument of
Antiquity, the Book (...) Genesis, the prime and principal Record of ancient
Church story. This Joseph was famous and honorable for many excellent and
eminent virtues, as we read at large in that Book the most principal are
those some summed up by Ambr^^^ lib. 1. Off cap. 17. Humilis fuit usque ad
servitutens, verecundus usque ad fugam, patiens usque ad carcerem, remissor
injuriae usque ad remunerationem: his Humility, Chastity, Patience, and
Charity; to which we may add, his singular Piety toward God, Fidelity to his
Prince, though one that knew not God; his Clemency toward his Brethren: His
Chastity was so rare, and is so famously known, that all that know that History
must acknowledge, that never any escaped so great temptations, with so much
Innocence; For his Piety, it was sufficiently proved in every circustance of
his life, he depending on God for all, receiving all from him, referring all
unto him, and in all, magnifying and celebrating his name, as Genesis 39.9. Genesis
40.8.41.16. and 50 51.42.18.45.7. And for his Clemency, pity, and goodness to
his Brethren, no example can match him; and which was the crown and complement
of all he was faithful to the end; as he begun, so he continued, so he ended:
Qualis vita, as he lived, so he dyed, living he exercised his Faith in the
works of Natural and Moral Religion; and at his dying, he manifested it by
his foreknowledge of the Israelites departure out of Egypt, and his Precept to
bury his bones in Canaan, For. By Faith Joseph, etc.

The first Part.

1. How was this memorial an act of Faith? Did not Joseph take it upon trust,
from his Fathers relation? or was his Faith in this instance any better then an
implicit Faith, or founded on a humane testimony? for that Jacob foretold his
Children, what Joseph here mentions, and brings to their remembrance, is plain
from express Scripture, Genesis 48.21. But to this the answer is obvious; that
though Jacob did deliver this prediction before Joseph and his Brethren; yet
the same Spirit which dictated that revelation to Jacob might still reside with
Joseph, and perhaps did discover more to him then to his Father; for in this
particular, Joseph's Prophecy seems more clear and full; inasmuch as Jacob
Genesis 48 21. foretells not the hardships and servitudes they were to endure in
Egypt, and that after they should most mercifully and miraculously be delivered
thence as Joseph does presage, Genesis 50 24. b^t only tells them, that now they
were in Egypt; and fore-tels them, they should be brought again into the Land
of their Fathers; no mention of a visitando Deus vos visitabit; God will visit
you, in the for^mentioned place: Besides, Joseph could not know that thi^
Prophecy of his Fathers would be true, and so not re-assumes i^ for a positive
Doctrinall Truth, but by Faith; his Faith told him that his Father Jacob had
this revealed to him by the Spirit (...) God, and therefore he ought to believe
as firmly, as if the Spirit had immediately declared it to himself, (for its
no matte^ whether the Proposition be mediately or immediately revealed it is
all one to the Believer) and because he believed, he might speak, because his
Brethren perhaps through forgetsulnesse or inadvertency minded it not. And it
was (...) further act of Faith, That he endeavored to promote and exercise
their Faith, by patience and toleration in their afflicted condition; and hope
and expectancy of future deliverance for this is the meaning of those words,
Visitande visitabit, God will surely and sharply visit, suffer you to be sore
oppressed^ and therefore prepare, that ye may be able to stand in the e^^ day:
and then, Ascendere vos faciet, he will promete and ^^vance you: and therefore
assure your selves of a future prosperous condition; though this happened not
till one hund^^ fifty five years after. 2. Why did he command them to carry
his bones thither? (...) one place better then another? or were his bones to be
(...) served and worshipped by them? The answer to the former Interrogation may
be this, That Joseph did not command his bone^ to be removed to Canaan, as
though there had been some inhaerent holiness in that place, more then others;
but because he would signify thereby his desire to be an Heir of the
promised, and of the Heavenly Country which it typified. To the second, take
this solution; That Joseph intended not his bone should be reserved to be
carried about a several set times, either for pomp, or ostentation, or
veneration: but that hi^ bones might be honorably enterred amongst his
ancestors, (...) demonstrate his hope and confidence in the blessings of the
Covenant, that he desired to be joint shater and copartner with them in those
happinesses; and they were to be kept, that the Egyptians remembering Joseph, by
this Monument left among them, should use his People and Kindred more
respectively and courteously, the time of their abode among them. In summ^^ it
was to declare, That he lived and died in the unity of that Church, in the
Communion of those Saints, (this union of their bodies, being a symbol of that
other union of their spirits, in one Lord, one Faith, one Covenant; for in
Jesus Christ all Believers are one body, and Members of one another) and that
by hope he waited for a glorious Resurrection. For if the Bones of Joseph had
been reserved for veneration, certainly in some place we should have found that
the Israelites did exhibit this honor to them; but no mention of any such
practice in these places where mention is made of the burial of his Bones; not
in Exo. 13.19. where the departure of Israel out of Egypt is Registered: not in
Josh. 24 32. where their Possession of Canaan is specified; and then, if ever,
(for this was the most likely time of all other) they would have worshipped
them. The Israelites did only what they were commanded, they carried his Bones
away with them, Exodus 13.19. and afterward buried them in Sichem, Josh. 24 32.
indeed that place he nominated not, they should be buried in, but left that
particular to their discretion, who were to bury them; though that place they
chose, both because they had given him a grant of it, and also because it fell
out to be the Inheritance of his Sons; and thus also they buried Joshua in
Mount Ephraim, Josh. 24.30.
The second Part.

1. By Faith Joseph; and it was a most high and noble act of Faith in Joseph,
to overlooke all the seducements of Egypt, to slight all the tempations of
Pharaohs Court, and fix his eyes and thoughts upon Canaan, and the future
conditions of his Brethren, his Kinsmen according to the flesh, the Israelites;
it seems much to surpass the Faith of Jacob, for he had no Possessions in
Egypt; but Joseph was, Casars secundus. next to Pharaoh in State, Power, and
Dignity, and had acquired a great vast estate of Treasure and Honor; and
therefore had not that temptation to look for another Country for the
establishment and promotion of his Children, as Jacob had; a carnal mind
could not fancy how he should think of the departure of his Posterity out of
Egypt, but with regret and reluctance, with sorrow and pensiveness of mind;
inasmuch as there they were honorably and richly seated and settled; so that
this praeapprehension of their future departure, was both a notable effect of
Faith, and pregnant proof of the first description of Faith, (that is the
subsistence, etc.) that he should neglect and disesteeme his present ample
revenues and high preferments, for an estate in reversion, a share in Canaan so
many years after: it was a good motive to persuade the rich men of the
Hebrews, now in their persecuted condition, to undervalue and contemn their
worldly. Possession, and to intend and aim at the acquisition of a future,
Inheritance in Heaven; and with David, Psalm. 17.14.15. to overlook worldly
prosperity, and behold the Face of God in Righteousness; and will also serve
for a good admonition to all, who pretend to godliness and Religion that they
be not seduced with sinful pleasures, or corrupted with worldly Profits or
Preferments, to the dishonor and scandal of their Profession, the frustration
of their hope, and destruction of themselves. What a miserable object it is, to
see a good cause managed, and through this, bafled and marred by an evil man;
the precious holy Faith prosessed, by men of vile execrable lives: the truth
prejudiced, by the wickedness of its abettors; and Religion it self wronged*
by the sensualities, filthinesses, idolatrous covetousnesses, and love of the
world, which is daily discovered in the greatest seeming sticklers for it. O
let us never when we make for Canaan, look back to Egypt; let not the
delicacies and enjoyments of Pharaohs Court lay off our affections from the
pursuit of the Promised Land, the Heavenly Jerusalem; Non est consentanoum,
qui metu non frangitur, eum frang^ eupids a^e; nec qui invictum se a labor
praest^^eret, vi^ci a voluptate, said Tulli de Offl. lib. 1 page 31. and if it
be a shame for a magnanimous spirit to be addicted to immoderate Pleasure and
Profit; certainly its a dishonor, and a misery too, for the pretenders to
Faith, to be employed in designs and undertakings for the satisfaction of
their irregular, extravagant, and disordered lusts and appetites. 2. His Faith
appeared in this, That though the time of the accomplishment of the Promises
was above a century; yet dying be looked upon it at hand, he would not have
them to think of departing Egypt* till that the time of restitution come; and
so until then the order was, his Bones should stay in Egypt among them:
Doubtless it was to admonish them again, that they should not set their
hearts on Egypt but think on the Land of their Inheritance, and not to
anticipate or dispute the time, but ^o wait patiently till God should be
pleased to deliver them, and satisfy their hopes and desires: Faith is so
zealous and charitable that where it resides, it makes the subject to abound,
not only to have a stake or treasure for himself, but to communicate to
others; it makes him industrious and sollicirous to promote Gods glory* and the
edisication of his Church; not one^y for the rer^ e of their life natural, but
even that also after death, these Memorandums or Breviates, may remain among
them* be helps and assistances to their Faith and Memories. This was Saint
Pe^ers care and endeavor, as he reports of himself, 2 Peter 1.14 13. I know
my time etc. I will endeavor therefore etc and this was Joseph's thought and
labor by the reservation of his Coffin, to teach his Posterity to slight the
delights and advantages of Ph^raohs Court, and to unite themselves to the
People of God. Thus we see Joseph himself, notwithstanding the many
pro^ocations and engagements to Egypt, still by Faith keeps himself uns^o^ted
of the world* he walks not only wisely, but also piously in the midst of a
crooked profane Generation; he retained the old principles and instructions he
had received in his Fathers house; and after the fruition of all the
contentments Egypt could afford, yet to acknowledge them not the true
desireables* but imaginary perishing vanities; and therefore persuades his
Children never to think of them, but in their expectations and resolutions to
quitt them* and to strive and purchase that Inheritance which they had in
reversion, they should after so long time actually possess, which no man could
take from them. And O that we would* like Joseph, emply our precious time, and
happy opportunities for the honor and repute of our Christian Profession, and
for the advantages and benefit of all Christian People; that as Joseph did, we
may live well and so dye well: live unto the Lord and dye in the Lord and so
rest from our labors N^w as Joseph had a word of Prophecy, so have we a sure
word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19 even this, That though now for a season (if
^^be) we are in heavenesse through manifold temptations, etc. temptation on the
right hand, the promises, persuasions, slatteri^ and complyances of the world;
on the left, frowns, persec^^ on^, scornings, and tribulations: yet these are
for the trial (...) our Faith, being much more precious, etc. the spirit of
Christ tes^^fying beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and of these after
a^flictions of Christ which we are to suffer in our flesh, for (...) bodies
sake the Church, Col. 1 14. and the glory which should follow; therefore we
should gird up the loins of our minds (...) sober, and hope to the end, (and
he that has this hope purifie^ himself) for the grace that is brought unto us
at the revelatio^ of Jesus Christ; therefore we should take heed, lest there be
(...) any of us an evil heart of unbeleife, in departing from t^^ living God,
(and no more sad symptom of this, then that (...) are loath to depart out of
Egypt, unwilling to forsake our (...) loved darling bosom sins, our
pleasures and profits; we thi^^ not on the afflictions of Joseph, we desire no
fellowship with (...) Israel of God we travel not for our Calestiall Canaan)
but (...) Joseph did to his Children, so we should exhort one another day^
whiles it is called to day, etc. and once more we ought to g^^ the more earnest
heed to the things we have heard, lest at any t^^ we should let them flip, Heb.
2.1.2.3. and Heb 3.12.13. 3. Joseph in the tendernsse of his affection
premonish^^ and remembers the Israelites of their hard servitude, and (...)
their deliverance. Christ also in greatness of his love to us, had forewarned
us what we shall expect from the world, and wh^^ we may receive from him, if we
do adhere to him, even mu^^ to the same purpose; In the world ^^ shall have
tribulation, (l^^ no godly man fancy the contrary) but be of good cheer, I
ha^^ over come the world, John 16.33. and he overcame it not ^o^ himself, but
for us, that when all the world lies in wickedness, in him we might have
peace. And we know what the Poet resolved, Sperat adversis metuit secundis
alteram sort^^ been praparatum pectus; if we do not yield to, nor compl^ with
any temptation, but resist and oppose it, no adversity shall ^^fle our hopes,
no prosperity shall corrupt our fear, loyalty and ^^edience to our Sovereign
Lord and Maker; and still (...) sends his Prophets unto us, admonishing and
charging us in sea^on and out of season, not to trust in uncertain riches, not
in more uncertain pleasures and honors, but to trust in the living God, who
gives us all things richly to enjoy, and at whose right hand there is honor
and pleasure for evermore, and in whose presence is the fullness of joy. 4.
Joseph gave commandment concerning the burial of his Bones; Burial in a
decent solmne manner, is an honor due to the bodies of our deceased Friends
and Kinsfolks; and if occasion be) of any Christian neighbor. The Earth is a
common field (wherein every man may challenge his share and part when ^he falls)
for the bodies of dead Persons to be sowed in, where also they are to rest in
peace, without trouble or molestation, till they appear, and spring forth again
at the general Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 5. What Joseph commanded, they
observed; The commands of Superiors are to be obeyed, not only for fear, but
for Conscience sake. If they constitute or decree an Act or Statute, for the
regulation of disorders, or the advantages of humane society, or the Public
Interest, or wherein they do not oppose or contradict Gods Laws, they are to
be religiously kept and observed; much more should we obey the Commandments of
the Supreme Law giver in Heaven and Earth, our Lord and Creator; for to bring
this home, read and peruse the whole five and thirty Chapter of Jeremy. But
these Children of Joseph did more then he commanded expressly; of their own
heads they buried him in Sichem, where God leaves his orders in general, but
determines not the particulars or instances; in those things, the Fathers of
the Church have liberty to determine, and their orders therein are to be
observed; what is of Divine Institution in any Ordinance, is not alterable, is
not capable of addition or diminution; but many circumstantialls for the decent
and orderly performance of the Institution, are to be ordered by the guides and
governors of the Church, according to the rules of Christian prudence, and the
general rules of the Word of God. In foam ca^es therefore to demand a
particular warrant from Heaven, is presumption and folly, so long as the
general order will supply that supposed defect; and even (...) every Christian,
some circumstantialls are left to his dis^r^^tion and prudence; as in private
Prayer, whether it be do^^ sitting, standing, etc. is matter of counsel; only
we are t^^ observe the general rule, to glorify God in our bodies, as we^^ as
spirits; and we use that posture which does experimentalls most elevate our
affections, and heighten our spirits.
The third Part.

GIve Ear, O thou Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph lik' a sheep,
show thy brightness, thou that sit between the Cherubims: Before all
People stir up thy strength, a^^ come to help us. Turn us O God again, and
cause thy face (...) shine, that we may be saved. We hate wandered in desorts*
fal^ ways, and still follow our own inventions: We are lost sheep, (...)
astray, and wander to and fro as Sheep having no Shepherds. (...) thou the
great Bishop and Shepherd of our souls, turn thee to (...) again; return us
unto thee, and do thou restore unto us (...) Shepherds and Pastors, that we
may be gathered into one f^ll^^ Les not us want spiritual guides, which may
make us rest it^ green Pastures, and may lead us by the still wa^ers, which
m^^ restore our souls, and lead us in the paths of right^ousnesse; let thy
Rod and thy Staff comfort us. Be not angry O Lord about measure, neither
remember iniquity for ev^r; see we bese^ch thu^ behold we are all thy People,
we are all thy People, and the Sheep of thy Pasture. Return we beseech thee (O
Lo^d) look down from Heaven, and behold and visit this Vine, and the Vineyard
th^^ thy right hand has Planted; so we that are thy People, shall sing of thy
praises, and declare thy salvation from Generation to G^neration. And forasmuch
as thou have given us a sure Word of Prophecy to guide our feet in the ways
of peace, let us take the more earnest heed that this Word slip not from us:
Let us always remember what thou have ordered and commanded, and what tho^
have ^romised, that us prosperity corrupt us, and make us forget our duty; no
adversity tempt us, that we relinquish our hopes: And continue unto us the
Houses of thy Prophets and of thy Prophets Children. S^^d forth Laborers into
thy Harvest, Mo^^^^ of thy own making, and have their Mission from thee; and
let not us despise the Word of Prophecy, lest we quench the Spirit; and of thy
goodness bring us out of this Egypt first in our Affections, and then in our
Persons, that we may rece^ve our Inheritance in the Calestiall Canaan, with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven. Grant us this, and what
else is necessary for the scattered Flock, thy Catholic Church, or for our
selves, for the Merits and Mediation of our Great High Priest, Jesus Christ the
Righteous; to whom with the Eternal Father and blessed Spirit, be all Honor
and Glory, now and over, Amen.

FINIS.

