Certain plain and easy DEMONSTRATIONS Of diverse Easy ways and means for
the Improving of any manner of barren Land, although the same be not worth
xij.d. the Acre. And showing how to make the same become worth XX.s. XXX.s. or
XL.s. the Acre yearly. Published for the Increasing of the Wealth and
Prosperity of the Nation, and the benefit of the Poor, and of all those as
are Owners of any barren Land.

LONDON, Printed by T. F. and are to be sold by William Ley, at his Shop at
Paul's Chain near Paul's Churchyard, 1657.

Brief Demonstrations of Certain, Plain and Easy ways, and means for the
Improving of any manner of Barren-Land, although not worth xij.d. the Acre, and
showing how to make the same become worth xx.s. xxx.s. or xl.s. the Acre
yearly.
Published for the benefit of the Nation, and for the Increasing of the wealth
and Prosperity of all Nations, that shall in time Practice the same.
By J. S. One that it defirous of the Public good.
TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, having many things to make public for the good of the Nation,
I shall only at the present briefly Demonstrate some few things that may make
much for the Public good and the Prosperity thereof; In this small and
ensuing Treatise, it is intended for the good of the Poor as well as of the
rich; and therefore, I shall in brief publish no more at one time then what
the poor man may be able to purchase and attain to, as well as the rich, and
so shall proceed in the succeeding times; Every one is bound in duty to employ
and improve those Talents that God has endowed them with to his glory and the
public good, and I hope no man can be offended thereat: if any such there be,
they ought to know their Error is great, and their judgment will be great at
the great judgment day of the Lord: I shall Conclude only desiring the Lord to
bless and prosper all honest and lawful Endeavors, and rest always desirous
of the Public good,

J: SHA:

CHAP. I. Concerning the use of the Manuring. Rowler.
OF all Inventions for the easy and speedy Manuring of all sorts of Ground,
there is none better or more useful then the Manuring Rowler, being rightly
and seasonably used: The best season for using thereof is in the Autumn and
Winter, when the ground is wet and not dry or hard frozen: Also, when the Snow
begins to melt and the frost to thaw, the manner how to use it, is to fill
it with Dung and other soil, or with good and fertile Earth, and then to draw
it up and down in your field from one end to the other, until all the manure
be vented out of the same, and then again to fill it, and use it after the
same manner, until you have used and spent all your dung, hereby one load of
Dung will do more good and improve your Land more then 3, or 4. Load laid on
the ground, and spread after the accustomed manner: Also, ground that is not
worth xij.d. the Acre, may in few years be made to become worth xx.s. or
xxx.s. the Acre.

These manuring Rowlers may be made of what bigness you please; for they may be
made no bigger then for a man to drive or thrust before him, and also they may
be made so big as they may require one or two Horses to draw the same.

Now if the later end of the Autumn or Winter season prove dry, and the ground
be too dry to Manure and improve the same then you may moysten and water the
same, as is declared in the Chapter, Showing how to water Ground in dry seasons
where water is plentiful: And in moistening, or watering the same, be sure to
moisten and water no more then you shall at that present manure well with your
manuring Rowler, and water that well, and thoroughly that you would Manure.

Also, if you would Improve any barren Land speedily then you must bring in the
best mould you can get, and spread the same all over so much of your barren
Land as you desire to Improve, and after you have spread the same, then to fill
your manuring Rowlers with Dung or other good soil, and manure the same when
the ground is Wet as is before prescribed.

Also, it is very expedient to Plow up your barren ground, if you have not
plenty of good Earth to lay upon it and to manure it withal, and as soon as it
is Plowed up, then to manure it with your manuring Rowler; And what you Plow up
one day, you should Manure the day following.

CHAP. II. How to improve Barren Land not worth yearly xij.d. the Acre, and io
make it become worth yearly xx.s. or xxx.s. the Acre.
ONe of the best and surest ways to Improve any manner of barren Land both
speedily and effectually is by making long Furrows, or Trenches, either with
the Plow or Spade 12. or 18. Inches deep, and 12. or 18. Inches wide: these
furrows and trenches should be made along from the South to the North, and
distant some 14, 15, or 16. foot each furrow or trench from the other: these
furrows being thus made should be filled up with the best, and richest Earth
or soil that may be got near to the said barren land; and after they are thus
filled, then at the season of the year for Planting, then to plant Quicksets,
and all other small Plants of diverse kinds all along in the said Trenches and
furrows; or otherwise to set or sow Acornes, Nuts, Hawes, and the seeds of
other Trees in the said Trenches and furrows that it may grow up to a
Hedge-row or hedge, and so to preserve them and let them grow.

Now in the Spaces between the said furrows you may practice several points
of Husbandry in manner following; as in one or 2, or 3. of the said Spaces
between the said trenches or furrows, if you would have Meadow ground or
Pasture; then when the ground is wet either with Rain or with Snow, you must
manure the same with the manuring Barrow, or manuring Rowler, they being filled
with the richest or fattest Earth you can get until the said Spaces become all
mire and dirt; and after that bring the best green Turffe you can get in
Lanes, or along by Hedge-sides, from whence the fame may be best spared into
your said Barren ground, and spread the same all over the said spaces between
the trenches covering the said barren ground therewith, that you would have to
be good Meadow or Pasture ground; and after that fill your manuring Rowler with
good mellow Dung and manure the said spaces therewith; In the Winter seasons
and a little before the Spring, and so every Winter season when the said ground
is moist, and it will become good Meadow or Pasture ground worth xx.s. or xxx.s.
the Acre or more, and continue so for ever.

Also, you should have a great care that no Cattle that will Crop come into the
said ground before your Quicksets and Hedge-rowes be grown out of danger; and
therefore you must preserve the grass for Hay, and in the Autumn, and Winter
you may put in your Lambs, Calves, and Colts, and any other cattle that will
not Crop, and it will breed them up very well and yield you profit enough.

Now in the other Spaces you may use and practice other points or kinds of
Husbandry at your pleasure, that are or hereafter shall be published; for in
some of them you may set and sow Beans, and Pease after the same manner as is
declared in the following Chapters. And in the other Spaces you may plant and
set young Trees; In other spaces you may sow Roots, as Turnips, Carrets and
such like, having manured, prepared and fitted the said ground and spaces for
the said purposes.

And in other of the said Lands and spaces having moveable Folds made for the
purpose to fold your Cattle in, you may fodder any Cattle you have in the said
Lands, and improve it very much, and also improve your Cattle, by defending
them from wind and weather in Cold seasons.

These moveable Folds are to be made of the lightest wood and boards as is to
be obtained, as of Elm, Maple, Sallow, Willow and such like; also, those that
shall desire to see the same, or only the Model of them, or to have them
made, if they shall refort to such places, whereto they shall be directed in
this Book; they may there see the same or be furnished with them if they
please.

CHAP. III. How to Improve any Barren Land not worth xij.d. the Acre.
ANother way to Improve any manner of barren Land both easily and speedily; Is
first to make long Furrows from the South to the North and fill them up with
good rich and fertile Earth, as is declared in the former Chapter, and then to
set Beans or Pease in their season all along in the said furrows; and then
all along in the Space between the said furrows to make Holes either with a
good round Stake or crow of Jron about 10, or 12. Inches deep, the wider the
holes are the better; then fill up the said holes with the best Earth or mixed
mould as is before declared for the Furrows; and set Beans or Pease in the
said Holes.

Now after you have gathered your Beans and Pease, you may let the Stalks and
hames remain and rot upon the ground, and then in the next wet Seasons
ensuing, manure the said ground with the manuring Rowlers filled with Dung, or
other good Earth, or fertile mould, that may most easily be had.

If your Barren ground be somewhat dry that you would manure, then it will be
worth your labor to nail or fasten all the course old Linen or woollen Rags
doubled or twisted together you have or can have, round about on the outside
of your manuring Rowlers, and then power water upon them when you manure your
ground therewith, and also you must moysten either the Dung or the fertile
Earth very much with water, when that you put it into the manuring Rowler to
manure your Land therewith; and so when the Rags shall grow any thing dry to wet
them well again with water, by pouring it upon them.

Also, it will be worth labor and very good to Manure your ground early in the
Morning when the ground is very full of Dew, with the manuring Rowler.

The several Benefits that will arise to all in the Nation will be many
through the exercise of these points of Husbandry some whereof I will name; As
first, all or most of the Poor in the Nation may be set on work in one kind
or other thorow-out the Nation, to the great profit of the Owners of the barren
Lands in the Nation; some being employed in making Trenches, Pits and holes,
others in filling them up with earth, and others in Planting, Sowing, and
setting Plants, or Seeds, or other things as is prescribed.

Secondly, The maintenance of the Ministers and Gentry will be amended and
increased.

Thirdly, The Merchants, Tradesmen, and Handicrafts-men, will gain hereby; for
all Trading will be increased.

Fourthly, the Customs, and other revenues due to the State will be increased.

CHAP. IV. Another way whereby Barren-fields may be improved.
FIrst, you may plow Furrows from one end or side of your Field unto the
other, and fill up the same with good fertile mould of Earth, if you desire to
improve your Land by sowing or setting Beans, Pease or any other kind of
grain in Furrows, and not by planting of Wood.

Also, you may Plow the said fields very well and so Harrow them, and then
manure them with the manuring Rowler, and after plant and set Corn in the
same; making holes with a Setting-stick made for that purpose, and putting in
with your Seed fine small light mould that is fifted into the said holes,
filling them up therewith.

And after when you have gathered your Crop, then in wet Seasons if the ground
be wet manure the said Fields with your manuring Rowlers well filled with Dung,
or other good soil, and your said fields will be extraordinarily Improved, and
made fertile.

CHAP. V. Another way to improve Barren Land not worth xij.d. the Acre.
ANother way to Improve any manner of barren Land, is by Digging many holes or
small Pits one foot and a half deep, and two foot square, and then to fill up
the said Pits or holes with the best Earth or mould that is to be got near
unto the said barren Land, and then at the Season of the year that is best for
Setting and Planting to set or plant such small Trees or Plants, as will agree
best with the nature of the soil there laid, and not too much different from
the nature of the soil of the said Climate, and indeed it will be very
necessary to observe what Earth, or soil will improve best the said Barren
earth; For as Oak will grow and prosper best in Clay grounds, so Elmes will
grow and prosper best in rich Sandy grounds and other Dry moulds, and other
sorts of wood; In other sorts of ground, as Willowes in wet grounds, and Ash,
Maple, Beech; and indeed most sorts of Wood will grow in mixed moles and Loamy
grounds.

Now then it is expedient that such Persons as will use those or the like ways
in Improving of these Barren grounds, do Observe the natures of such barren
ground as they desire to improve, as to observe whether it be wet Moorish
grounds, or dry Sandy barren ground, or Chalkie, Gravelly, or Clay, or Loamie
ground; for as there be rich Sandy grounds, so there are barren sandy grounds,
and as there be rich Loamie, gravelly and Clay grounds, so there be barren
loamy, gravelly and Clay grounds. Now if you make your Trenches or little Pits
in dry barren Sandy ground, then to fill the said Pits and trenches with the
richest Clay or loamy Earth you can get, and also to manure the said ground
with the same, and if you make your said trenches and pits in wet or Moorish
grounds, then to fill both the trenches and pits with the fattest Sand, or
dryest rich mould well Chaulked, or you may put some Chalk into the said
trenches or pits before the said Sand or Rich dry earth be laid in the same,
and to manure the said wet ground with the like, spreading much Chalk or sand
upon the said Moorish, o^ wet grounds. Now by this kind of Husbandry great
profit will arise to the Owners of the said barren Land, and also to the
Commonwealth and Nation; for hereby all sorts of Timber will become plentiful
for all uses.

These holes and Pits may be made as near together as the Planters shall
please, for as the said Trees grow up and spread some may be Cut down and
taken away to the owners profit and others left to grow and spread, and always
when they shall want space to spread and grow then to fell and take away some
more, leaving others to continue growing until they shall be come to their
full growth; Thus may barren ground that is not worth xij.d. the Acre, be made
to bring in great profit, and be Improved from generation to generation, and in
the end when all or most of the Trees be felled or taken away it will become
and continue good Arable or Pasture ground for ever, if it (...) yearly Manured
in its season as it ought, and may easily be done.

FINIS.
AT the House of (...) There you may see the Exact model and manner of the
improving Inventions, and receive further Instructions for the Improving (...)
any manner of Barren Land if you please, and also be directed (...) such
Persons, as will either buy or farm any Barren Lands that you shall be
desirous to Sell or Let.

HOW TO ORDER ANY LAND, SO as it may reteyne all the moisture that falls
thereon: And to Improve it thereby.
FOr as much as the fatness of the soil is washed away, when in the winter
season the ground is so wet, that every shower is not received, and drunk in
by the earth where upon it falls, but passes away, and carries with it the
Fatness, and Richness of the soil that should remain upon the superficies
of the earth, whereby barrenness does ensue daily, although daily the
Husbandman do manure and dung the same. Therefore every one that would reteyne
the Fatness and Richness of their own soil for their own Land, must use
means to retain that, that would and does carry away the Richness and Fatnes
of their soil from the same. And that every man may reserve the Fatness of
his own soil for his own Land, it is accessory to use and practice these
points of Husbandry hereafter declared. As first to mound his Land with banks
in every place where the water may have vent, and Current from of the same;
secondly, to turn the vent and Current of all Land-waters into his own
ground, out from the high ways, wast-grounds, and Commons belonging to or
lying near his own Land, and if these two shall not be found Remedies
sufficient, I shall hereafter declare some other. I know the latter is
practiced a little by some, but it is so little that it is to little purpose;
For what avails it for a man to let the water in at one place, and to let it
go out at a thousand, but every man reteyning all the water that falls upon
his own ground, shall in short time find it very availeable, for if this
kind of husbandry only were but used half the time that it has been
neglected, men should find their Lands to be greatly Improoved by the same,
the which every one may easily do, and that to their own great profit and
advantage and to the profit and advantage also of their far Remote neighbors.

For if every one do but consider how diverse grounds has been much Improoved
by watering, and overflowing the same near unto Rivers, that in former times
have been but little worth, then they cannot deny, but that they also in high
grounds may improove their Land by watering and overflowing the same, and that
they may overflow it by stopping the vents and Currents of the water that shall
fall upon the same, or when they shall bring the land-water upon the same from
their own Corre Feilds, highwayes, and other wast grounds and Commons.

Also, then will not their far Remote neighbors, that use to be annoyed with
floods, and others that live in Fenne Countries, be so much annoyed with water
as commonly they are, nay; if every one did but truly, and duly observe and
practice this kind of Husbandry, they would not be annoyed at all: and
therefore it must needs be advantageous and profitable for those that live in
Fenny Countries, and others in the vale Countries that are annoyed with Floods,
as well as for those that live upon hills and high grounds.

Now how easily it may be effected, may any one soon understand, that can but
understand how easily mischeifes may be prevented, when they are prevented at
the first arising and beginning before they come to a head, and how easily an
Inconvenience may be helped when every man shall put to their helping hands
any one may judge. We know that the many sparks of fire in Town and City,
so long as they are kept within bounds are service able, and there is no
damage or danger sustained by them; but if by misfortune or negligence they
get out of their bounds what disasters do they cause. Even so the many drops
that do fall in a Country if they should be kept within bounds in the
several Closes and Lordships wherein they fall, they would be serviceable, and
advantageous, which other ways destroy whole Feilds of Corn, break down
Bridges, drown Cattle, and sometime overturne houses, and work much other
mischeifes also, for we may all very well know, it is never well with England
when the Corn in the golden vales of England is destroyed through floods; now
as the Husbandman may easily reteyne all the water that falls upon his own
ground for his own profit, and advantage, in his several enclosures, so may
he as easily open a vent for his water at any time if there be cause and let it
out from one Close, wherein there is no need, or where it may be harmeful, and
bring it into another wherein it may do good, and where there may be great
need thereof: now if there be any that cannot conceive how or which way this
point of husbandry may be effected with great facility and ease: let them but
repair unto the Author, or unto his Assigns; and they will after taking view
of their land show how easily it may be done.

How to prepare barraine Land that yields no profit, for the Improoving of
it, and how to make it Fertile.
THe first thing to be done when you would improove your barrain dry ground, is
where it is level, or where it can be easily brought to a level, to mound it
about in square plots and Closes, or other ways, as it shall be found most
convenient with banks. In such manner as that you may reteyac, and keep all
the water or moisture within the bounds thereof that shall fall upon it, or
that may arise from Snow, or that may otherwise be brought upon the same.

Thus when it is well bounded, and mounded with banks may you dung it well, or
manure it in what sort you like best, and you shall be sure not to loose any
part of your dung or manure through hasty and sudden showers, that tommonly
does wash away a great part thereof.

But when it is dunged well, and well soked with moisture, or when it is in a
manner overflowen; then to manure it with dung or other Fat carth in the
Manuring barrow will mightily Improove it, for the drawing of the manuring
barrow up and down, and the trampling of the ground when it is so moist, or
overflowen, will increase your manure, and dung exceedingly: For no man can be
Ignorant, how trampling, Carting, and such like actions in wet weather, and
when the ground is wet does increase mire and dirt exceedingly in any place:
Yet some may object, why then are not Foot-pathes, and Highways more Fertile
then other places, being they are more frequently trampled, and travailed upon
then other places are. Unto whom I answer, if highwayes and Footpathes were
crampled, and travailed on only in wet weather, and when they are wet, they
would be far more Richer in soil and more fertile then they are; for as
trampling and travailing in wet weather increases soil and Dirt, so in dry
weather trampling and travailing wareth and wastes away both the Dirt and
soil, and causes Barrenness and yet how many ways and paths also if they
should not be yearly supplied with gravel, and such other batten, durable
materials would grow Impassable through mire and soil. Also although trampling
and trauayling is good to improove ground, yet continual trampling, and
travailing is hurtful to ground, because it hinders the growth of the
grass, and yet in Heathes, and Commons, where are paths, and tracts that are
but seldom trampled, is no heath, yet is there grass, and more would there
be if they were not overlayd with sheep, and Cattle, and trampled more in dry
weather, then in wet that keeps it under, and hinders the growth thereof.

Again, to manure ground that is dunged when it is wet, with the Manuring
barrow trimmed also with dung, or other Fat earth, or soil, will increase
other manner of soil and Dirt, then bare trampling or travailing will, and
also it will improove it more. If there be any that think drowning and
overflowing of ground will not improoue it, because in some places they are
feign to cut Furrows and trenches to draine the same, let them inquire of
those who have used the overflowing of ground that lies by Rivers, and have
improoved the same, and use it yearly. Indeed arrable ground when it is sown
should have Furrows, and trenches to draine the same, because too much
moisture is hurtful to most kind of grain; and therefore they should make
their Furrows so, as that the Rain that falls upon their Cornefields, may
have vent and Current into their pasture ground and lay Feilds, and then they
may there environ it so with a bank, as that it may not any ways break forth
of the same. Thus therefore, if it be one, two, three, four, or five Acres, or
more that you would improoue, thus you may order and prepare it, and improove
it, and unto any who wills or desires to learn more, I will yet show him
diverse more excellent ways.

The sewer all benefits that will arise from Mounding of ground with banks and
stopping of Currents of Land waters.
IT will mittigate the great Floods, If it caueth them not to cease altogether,
that so annoyeth the Fennie Countries and other places. It will improove high
grounds, and cause plenty, and prevent dearth and scarcity:

It will Increase the old Springs, and make new springs to break forth, and
arise in diverse places, and that especially, If having more Land-water in any
place then can be retained upon the same, they make deep pits or wells for the
same to Run into; or if they turn the Current of their water unto their dry
and thirsty Lands, that will receive and drink in all.

Hereby also, they may store themselves with water in the dry and upland
Countries against the summer times and dry seasons, where they have any
gravelly, or Clay Ground.

Arguments showing whither this point of Husbandry be possible and profitable
or no.
BEcause a man cannot speak of any new ways or points in Husbandry, but
diverse well experienced men, do presetly judge the same to be Impossible, or
else unprofitable. I will here briefly discuss these two Questions: that so
every one that will, may conceive how possible and profitable they may be:
First, to show the possibility thereof, let any one place a leaking vessel in
the rain, where no spoutes may run into the same, and see if it will ever be
filled with the rain that shall descend therein; For all sorts of ground will
not hold water, and may be compared to leeking vessels, except only the
gravelly, and the Clay ground; so that if men do but bank their ground a
little to keep the water that falls thereon upon the same, It will not long
abide, if it should desce^d never so fast unless it be in gravelly and Clay
grounds. And here I know many will say they (...) not practice this point of
husbandry without da^^^ifying themselves, because of necessity where there is
no dry thirsty Land near, and abundance of Clay or gravelly ground, altogether
in one place must drowno some of their own ground if they should stop the
vent and Current of the water, and reteyne all the water that falls there on
upon the same, unto which I answer, although men in some places should drown
3 or four Acres in an hundred Acres, yet they cannot be damnified thereby,
because those who know what a pond of an Acre, or more is worth, cannot be
ignorant that 3, or 4, Acres of Land thus drowned in some places, may yield
more commodity then ten Acres of dry Land that is worth 30. shillings the Acre.

Again for the general, better is it to have some hundreds of Acres drowned,
and made Fish-pooles, then to have many thousands of Acres lie barraine, and
unfruitful.

And that such places will be as storehowses for water against the summer times
and dry seasons, no man can deny, for whereas I have spoken of watering of
ground in dry seasons where water is to be had, and some have asked how they
should provide water, here is one way, whereby they may provide water in hilly
Countries, and high grounds far off from Rivers; And although it may be
impossible for any one man to reteyne the water within his own ground that
falls in many men's Lands; yet is it possible for every one to reteyne the
water that shall fall within his own ground. And therefore not Impossible.

A breife Answer unto what may be objected: or has been objected.
I Know many there be, that will say they know many more excellent points of
his bandry, then yet has been discovered by me, and I must confess, I know
many particular Husbandmen that do conceive, and understand those secrets in
husbandry, that generally is not conceived, nor understood by many that use
husbandry, the which I have forborne to treat of, because I would not seem to
discover, what I know to be understood, and practiced by any one already,
although I am not ignorant of the same; and that diverse husbandmen and others,
do know diverse more excellent points then has been discovered, I will
believe. For I my self know many more excellent poytits then I have yet
discovered, and yet I know and believe that diverse that shalfucceed unto this
generation shall know, and understand, and discover more, then shall be
understood, and discovered by any one in this generation. Now to avoid further
Controversies; If there be any that shall think, or object, that any one point
herein discovered, is impossible, unprofitable, or not worth the practizing,
let them but help the Author unto any barraine Land and they shall soon see
the contrary prooved, for their satisfaction.

And whereas some I know will be apt to object, That the water lying upon the
ground in the winter season, will breed Rushes, and Sedges; I answer, the
Manuring barrow (if it be trimmed and used as it may be) will keep the ground
from bearing of Rushes and Sedges; and also it will kill both Rushes and Sedges
in any ground that is naturally inclined thereunto.

AN EASY AND PROFITABLE ORDER IN TILling of Ground to improve it, and make it
Fertile.
BEcause all things in this World are subject to casualtie, and Husbandry and
Tillage although it be a principal stay, and supporter both in the Church and
Commonwealth, yet does it not always hit according to the Husbandmans
expectation, but oftentimes does fail, unto his great loss, and the miseries
of others: I shall here discover some certain points in Husbandry, whereby
the Husbandman may easily succor his Corn after it is sown, and use such
means and ways that he may preserve and foster it, if need so require.

Now the most certain way in Tillage, not to loose both your seed and labor
(as many often have done in dry seasons, and are still like to do, if they
hold on in their accustomed Tillage) when the season is like to be dry, is to
Till your Ground by Lands, leaving always a space untilled between every
Land, that so you may have places whereby you may come to moysten, and succor
your Seed until it be well come forth and grown, if the season be dry, and
you perceive it does not come forth kindly as you would have it, this is a
point of Husbandry, that will be extraordinary useful where any Barraine
ground lies near unto any Rivers, where water may plentifully be had, and it
will not be unusefull where good ground is, although there be not such plenty
of water: but some Husbandmen it may be will be apt to think, that so much
ground that year is lost that is left untilled in a Field that is tilled; but
it is easily answered, that better a little ground be lost, then a greater
quantity of ground, and your cost and Seed also be lost, as it may be said
well to be, if it does not bring forth a crop propertionable unto the place and
charge bestowed thereon, but to speak the truth, the ground is not lost that
is left untilled, because of it self it will bring forth some benefit:
although it be not sown, and that, that is not sown the one year does gather
heart, and will be improved against the next year, for if you diligently
succor your seed-plots with water, and some such other means as you shall see
needful, the Invention that you may water your tilled ground with, will also
at the same time water your untilled spaces, so as that, what with the
watering, and with the trampling, your untilled spaces will be well improved
thereby. For watering, and trampling of ground when it is moist, will improve
any ground, without any other means, neither may any Husbandman sow one jot
the less, for what quantity of ground he leaves unsownein one Field, he may
sow for it the same quantity in another place, and in the same manner, if he
think well, and in thus ordering, and sowing of his ground he shall find more
certain profit then any other way.

The breadth of the Lands that in this manner are to be tilled, may be 6, 7, or
8 foot in breadth, and the space between each land that you are to leave
untilled, may be a foot and a half, or more in breadth if you see cause: thus
may you without doing harm to your Corn at any time as you see cause, both
nourish and cherish it up, from the first sowing thereof until it be past all
danger that may befall it through drought, for when it is sprung up to some
pretty growth, the blades will defend the roots thereof so from the heat of
the Sun in dry seasons, that it will not take any extraordinary harm
thereby:

Also this is to be noted, that those spaces that you leave unplowed one year,
if you sow the same Field the next year, you are to plow up, and leave now
some part of the lands (that the last year were tilled and sown) for to be the
spaces between the Lands that you mean now to till and sow: and so every year
you may rest some part of your Field, although every year you sow the greater
part, and reap good crops of Corn from the same.

Now to give you some taste whether this point of Husbandry will be
advantageous or no, let every Husbandman first cast what an Acre of Corn is
worth standing upon the Ground, and then how many Acres thereof may be watered
in a day; unto the first question I can answer, I have known an Acre of Wheat
to have been worth ten pounds upon the ground, when Corn has been at an high
price, but I will suppose it to be worth now but 40 shillings, or 3 pound the
Acre: Unto the second I will answer, where water may easily be had, a couple
of men may well and easily water about some 30 Acres a day, when the days be
long, and if it be watered well but every other day, and the ground be any
thing good, or well manured, it will come forward; and by this account, two men
may cherish 60 Acres and bring it forward, watering the one half well one day,
and the other half another day; and 60 Acres according unto the lowest rate
amounts unto 120 pound, and at 3 pound the Acre, it will amount unto 180
pound: and how much soever an Acre of any Corn can be worth, an Acre of Corn
well tilled and thus caerished, will come to be worth much more then that which
is but slightly tilled, and that never after is helped or cherished any ways.
Now if a Couple with two or three Months labor (for I suppose in two or three
Months the Corn will be indifferently able to desend it self against the
heat of the Sun, and will be come so forward that it will not need any
further watering) can thus bring such profit out from the earth, I suppose it
will recompense their labor, and be an encouragement unto any to proceed with
pleasure and delight in a labor so advantageous for themselves, and so much
concerning the public good, neither will this labor fall upon the Husbandman
at an unseasonable time. For always after Seedtime has the Husbandman most
leisure, and after Seed-time then i^ the most seasonable time thus to cherish
your Corn, and it is not to be doubted, but that oftentimes there will fall
some showers also, that will both help and ease the labor of the Waterers, in
the driest time and season of the year: For I for my part am persuaded that in
men's honest and good endeavors there is a silent Rethorick to persuade with
GOD, and yet I would not have any man to be silent in a time of necessity; but
I leave that for Divines to teach and persuade, and stir up men unto.

Now such Husbandmen that have not a manuring Plow o^ Seed-barrow ready, may
till their Land in this order after the old accustomed manner, if the Land be
not extraordinary barren. For if it be extraordinary barren, then they must
use the Manuring-Plow, or Manuring-Wagen in Tilling and Sowing the same, or
else perhaps they may loose much of their Crop, or a least never improove it so
orderly by sowing the same: Neither is there a better, nor more easy and
speedy way to improve any arable ground, or to make any barren Land to become
good arable Land then by thus ordering, and sowing of the same, (...) any one
may quickly find that shall but once make trial o^ some little parcel of
barren-ground in any place.

Now if there be any that can help the Author unto; and reasonable quantity
of barren ground, he will further discover unto them how they shall improve
both easily and speedily and barren ground, and make it to become good Meadow
ground, and be worth so much yearly, as any Meadow ground is, or can be any
place near adjacent thereunto.

How to shroud your Grass.
IT were one excellent point in Husbandry to set and plant, both Oaks and
Elmes, all along in a row by the hedges on your Field sides, excepting those
sides that join upon some common Roads and Highwayes, that require the Wind
and Sun to dry them, and make them passable, for hereby might you shelter
the grass a great part of the long Summer ^ayes, from the scortching heat of
the Sun, and in the Winter ^^om the nipping blasts of the cold freezing
Wind, and also ^rovide fuel for your fire and other uses, and food for your
wine, besides many other commodities that would arise from (...) same, for
every Spring your grass would be much more ^^rwarder than it is, and the
leaves of the Trees would also help (...) fatten your ground; and it were to be
wished that there were me Act or Statute to force this point of Husbandry,
that so ^^e Walls of the Kingdom, and the Bridges whereby such ^oopes of our
Forefathers were wont to pass over the Seas (...) chastise their insolent and
daring enemies; might be effectually maintained; and that we might thereby
become feared of ^^ose enemies, that now think themselves out of our danger.
Surely the reason why this Husbandry is not used, is because ^^e profit
thereof would not presently arise to our selves; but ^^ery one ought to know
that no man is born only for himself, ^^d that Fathers are to provide for their
Children; therefore we would leave our Country to our Children, and have our
childrens Children enjoy the same, let us then providently ^^east, to provide
such materials for our Grandchildren, that ^^y may have wherewithal to
encounter with their enemies ^^^oad, rather then to suffer them to be forced to
combat with (...) here at home; surely if any enemy of ours, had any kind of
Timber so tough and durable as our English Oak, they wou^^ not neglect so
great a benefit: O then unless we would h^^^ our Enemies to succeed us in our
inheritances let us make use (...) the benefits and privileges that our good
God has bestow upon us above other Nations.

How to gather Wheat, Rye and Barley in late Harvests, and Wet Seasons.
IN Harvest-time when the Corn is full ripe and like to she and the season so
wet that it cannot be housed so dry as should be, ought this point of
Husbandry to be practiced, rather than that the Corn should be spoiled or
lost; first therefore such seasons may the Husbandman reap or cut down his
C^^^^ according to the Country custom wherein he lives, and th^^ afterward
whenever it holds up; or sooner if there be cau^^ let his Harvest people
(having implements accordingly) app^^ themselves to the cropping, clipping, or
cutting off the Ears the Corn by handfuls at a time, little Children may
gather (...) Corn into handfuls, and give them to the Harvest-man, when he
cuts them off, should put them into Sackes, and then sho^^^ they be carried
home, and spread upon floores in Lofts, and all other places where they may lie
and dry, and being dry t^^^ should they be removed and other brought and should
be spr^^ in their places, otherwise whenever the Weather hol^^ little fair,
there may one be assigned to follow every Rea^^ that may clip off the ears as
fast as they shall reap it, into the flaskets, and so sack them up, and carry
them home as fa^^ it is reaped. Thus may men soon gather in their Wheat, the
Rye, and their Barley, although there should be much grass, weeds among the
straw, that does require much time to wit^ and dry before it can be got in. Now
when they have go^^ the ears of their Corn, they may let the straw lie and
d^^ while without sustaining any great hurt, and after they may there it in and
stack it up at leisure, when the season is more d^^

FINIS.

