THE Sham PRINCE Exposed. In a Dialogue between the Popes Nuncio and
Bricklayers Wife. Nurse to the Supposed PRINCE of WALES.
Nurse AH! Father Nuncio, what woeful times are these we live in; and how
different from those, when every day laid the Foundation of a Chapel and
almost all Professions both in Church and State, employed in Converting either
Houses or Persons to the Service of Mother Church?


Nuncio. Why, truly Daughter, the Alterations are not much greater than we have
heard or seen in former times. And as we have still found the Mother of God
ready to help us at a dead lift, so I don't doubt but this will make one Saints
set her on her Son, to demand Restitution.


Nurse. Well, You may flatter your selves with Restitution etc. but your
satisfaction is likely to be no greater than a Hungry Man's Dream of a plentiful
Supper: Your late short Scene of Glory was like the last Blaze of a Candle,
spent in the Socket; and the unmannerly Whigs think it has left as bad a stink
behind it too.


Nun. Come, come, Child, we have a reserve yet left, what, do you think a
Council of Jesuits can be outwitted by a Dutch man. I can but laugh to think
what a thorn in their Sides our young Prince Pretty-man will prove.


Nurse. O Lord Sir, Now the whole Kingdom laughs at the Sham; and there is neyer
a Joyner in Town but has a Pattern of the Bed-stead: Nay, next Bartholomew-Fair
they intend to have a Droll, called, The Tragedy of Perkin Warbeck; you have
read the Story of that Perkin, Sir, have not you?


Nun. And what of all this? Do you think ten years Consultation in the
Conclave, a French Army, and his Holiness's Blessing, cannnot sufficiently
enable us to bring about a far Design of greater difficulty than this? But What
do the People say of it?


Nurse. Why they say the Queen lay under such Circumstances at the time of the
report of her Conception, that not all the Stallions in Europe could have got
her with Child; nay, they say neither the Irish Champion, nor the Italian
Count, no nor the strongest Backs in Covent Garden could have done it.


Nun. Nay to speak the Truth between you and I, we chose a bad time, but we
thought the very Notion of a Prince of Wales, would make such a noise, as Would
drown all Probability and Reason; besides, who thought People would have been
so uncivil, to peep as it were under the Queens Clothes or Question the Word of
a King.


Nurse. It Is true, these Church of England Whigs are so Inquisitive (forsooth)
that the Queen never went to Piss, but they would be casting of her Water. Well I
am sure to have lost a good Bargain of it: Oh! I shall never hear such sweet
Music again, as the rattling of Guinea's every now and then in my hand; Beside,
the Honorable Title of the Prince of Wale's Nurse.


Nun By our lady, you're in the right of it, nothing troubles me so much as the
loss of my Pension; for tho it is our Business to look Grave and Demure; yet by
our Bulk you may guess we take no delight in Starving.


Nurse. But Sir, is there no way to get another Prince of Wales; for so I might
be Nurse, I did not care if there was a new One every Year. It passes for
Current, that the Queen's big again of a Duke of York: When do you think she will
be brought to Bed?


Nun. O Lord, do you think she would be mad to lie in these troublesome times;
besides the very noise of the Dutch Soldiers would spoil her Milk, as Thunder
does Ale; for She Is resolved to Suckle the next herself, to prevent Suspicion;
and you know (as the Ladies deposed) She has abundance of Milk always, after
being with Child of a Son.


Nurse. Well Sir, I wish I could see it, but all the Protestant Astrologers
foretell she will mis-carry: And O my Conscience, I believe they are a sort of
Conjurers, for they Calculate every thing to a Hairs breadth.


Nun. Nay, nay, now you talk of Conjurers I can fit you: I am sure I and my
Brethren foretold things so miraculous, that few or none could believe them,
till they saw them.


Nurse. Nor then neither, may be.


Nun. Did not our Roman Almanacks speak of the Queens being to be with Child,
at least half a Year before 'twas said she was conceived? Did we not declare it
must be a Prince of Wales? nay we could have told you the very time and place
too, but that we feared the Chamber would have been crowded with Heretics, and
that would have troubled her worse than her Labor: For we had Prognosticated
before, that the Presence of a Protestant Bishop, etc. would be very Obnoxious
and Hurtful to the Birth of a Prince of Wales.


Nurse. It Is very true Sir, you and your Society vented many Prophecies: But the
design and meaning of them were so plain and obvious to every Understanding,
that it detracted much from the reverence of them: I have been told, your
Ancient Oracles were delivered like Riddles, and consequently not liable to
every mean interpretation; and though we all acknowledge'd the News of the
Queens being certainly with Child of a Prince of Wales, as a sort of a Mystery,
yet by comparing a few Cases, we easily unravelled the whole Business.


Nun. Well, well, we shall play you another Game ere long: But tell me how do
the People think of the King in this matter?


Nurse. Why they that are Moderate amongst them, think he was so fond of the
very Notion of having a Son in his Old Age, that in a little time he might have
been (good man) deluded into the belief of it; as some have used themselves to
tell a Lie so often, that at last they have been persuaded that it was true:
Others think the Queen wore the Breeches so long, that His Majesty durst not
venture to unbutton them, or try the truth of the Matter: But the more general,
and more probable Opinion, is, that being led by a Zeal, inflamed chiefly by
you and your Worshipful Society, he thought the merry of the Act, in relation
to his Church, would balance the Stain which the dismal Consequences thereof
would certainly imprint on his Memory and Reputation. And the thoughts of this,
if you had any Grain of Conscience, Religion; or Honesty (which is very much
dispair'd of in men of your Profession) should touch your Hearts, with either
Shame of Repentance, for so black a design of Suppressing the Church, ruining
State, and murdering more honest and conscientious men, than all your boasted
Universality can show.


Printed in the Year, 1688.


