The Duty and Happiness of doing good. TWO SERMONS: The Former, Preached at the
YORKSHIRE FEAST, In Bow-Church, Feb. 17. 1679. The Other, Before the Lord
MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF LONDON, At the SPITTLE, Apr. 14. 1680.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

A SERMON Preached at the Second GENERAL MEETING OF THE GENTLEMEN, and others
in and near LONDON, Who were Born within the COUNTY of YORK, In the Church of
St. Mary-le-Bow, February 17. 1679/80.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

To my Honored FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN, Mr. William Petyt Mr. Richard Graham
Mr. John Cook Mr. Mich. Wrightson Mr. Tob. Humphrys Mr. Anth. Lawson Mr. John
Short Mr. Francis Boynton Mr. Peter Short Mr. Gab. Wettenhall Mr. Arthur
Sedgwick Mr. Thomas Watson
Stewards of the last Yorkshire Feast.
GENTLEMEN,
I Now at length Present you with that Sermon which at your desire I Preached
at the Second Anniversary Meeting of our Contrymen, and which you were
pleased so far to Approve as to Request the Publication of it. That I have not
performed your Request so soon as might be expected, I hope you will pardon me,
since I had not till this time a convenient leisure to Transcribe my Papers for
the Press. If this plain Discourse, now that it is public, do any way conduce
to promote Doing Good which is the Argument of it, I shall thank God for the
Success, and You for putting me upon the Attempt.

Gentlemen, I am Your Affectionate Countryman, Friend and Servant, JOHN
SHARP.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Second general Meeting of the Gentlemen and others in
and near London, who were Born within the County of York.
ECCLES. iii. 10. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
rejoice and to do good in his life.
THis Book of Ecclesiastes gives us an account of the several Experiments that
Solomon had made in order to the finding out wherein the Happiness of Man in
this World does consist; and these Words are one of the conclusions he drew
from those Experiments.

No man had ever greater Opportunities of Trying all the ways wherein men
generally seek for Contentment than he had; and no man did ever more
industriously apply himself to, or took a greater liberty in enjoying those
good things that are commonly most admired than he did: And yet after all his
Labor and all his Enjoyments he found nothing but Emptiness and Dissatisfaction.

He thought to become Happy by Philosophy, giving his heart, Eccles. 1.13.
as he tells us, to seek and search out all the things that come to pass under
the Sun: Yet upon Trial, he found all this to be Vanity and vexation of Spirit.

He applied his mind to Political Wisdom and other sorts of Knowledge, and his
Seize in that kind were greater than of any that were before him; ver. 18.
yet he experienced at last that in Wisdom was much grief, and he that
increases Knowledge increases Sorrow.

Cap. 2. ver. 1, 3.
He proved his heart (as he tells us) with Mirth and Wine and all sorts of
Sensual Pleasures to find if these were good for the Sons of men: and yet so
far was he from his desired satisfaction in these things, that he was forced to
say of Laughter that it was mad, ver. 2.
and of Mirth what good does it.

He turned himself to works of Pomp and Magnificence, he built him stately
Houses, and made him Gardens, ver. 4.
and Vineyards, and Orchards, and Fountains. He increased his Possessions, and
gathered Silver and Gold and the precious Treasures of Kings and of the
Provinces. ver. 8.
He got him a vast Retinue, and kept the most splendid Court that ever any
Prince of that Country did: yet (as he tells us) when he came to look upon all
the works that his hands had wrought, ver. 11.
and on the labor that he had labored to do, behold all was vanity and
vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun.

But wherein then is there any Profit if not in these things? What is that good
that the sons of men are to apply themselves to in order to their living as
comfortably as the state of things here will allow? This question (after an
intimation of the uncertainty and perplexedness of all humane events, but
withal of the exactness of the Providence of God who has made every thing
beautiful in its season, He thus resolves in the words of the Text, I know
(says he) that there is no good in them but for a man to rejoice and do good
in his life, that is to say,

I have found by long experience that all the Happiness that is to be had in
the good things of this life does arise from these two things, Rejoicing in the
enjoyment of them, and doing Good to others with them while we live. Take away
these two uses and there is no good in them.

Or if you please we may Interpret the first part of his Proposition not of
things but of men thus: I I know there is no good in them, i. e. I am convinced
that there is nothing so good for the sons of men; or, nothing that move
contributes to their happiness in this world, than that every man should
rejoice and do good in his life. And to this purpose the words are rendered by
several Interpreters, but it is no matter which of the senses we pitch upon,
since in effect they come both to one thing.

Two things then, Solomon here recommends to every one that would live
comfortably in this world; Rejoicing and doing Good: and I do not know what can
be more proper and seasonable to be recommended and insisted on to you at this
time and on this occasion, than these two things; for the putting them in
practice makes up the whole design of this Meeting.

We are here so many Brethren met together to Rejoice and to do Good. To
Rejoice together in the sense and acknowledgment of Gods mercies and Blessings
to us, and in the enjoyment of Society one with another: And to do Good not
only by increasing our Friendship and Mutual Correspondence, but by joining
together in a cheerful Contribution to those our Countrymen that need our
Charity. To entertain you therefore upon these Two Points seems to be my Proper
Business.

But in treating of them I shall make bold to invert the order in which they
are put in the Text, and shall first speak of doing Good though it be last
named, and shall afterward treat of Rejoicing. The truth is, doing good in the
order of nature goes before Rejoicing, for it is the Foundation of it. There
can be no true joy in the Possession or use of any worldly blessings, unless we
can satisfy our selves we have done some good with them. It is the doing good
that sanctifies our other enjoyments and makes them matter of Rejoicing.

Now in treating of this Argument I shall briefly endeavor these Three things.

First, I shall earnestly recommend to you the Practice of doing good upon
several Considerations.

Secondly, I shall represent the Practicableness of it, by showing the several
ways which every person (though in the meanest Circumstances) is capable of
doing good.

Thirdly, I shall make two or three Inferences by way of Application.

I begin with the First thing, seriously to recommend the practice of doing
good.

But where shall I begin to speak, either of the Obligations that lie upon us,
or of the Benefits and Advantages that do accrue to us by doing good in our
lives? or having begun, where shall I make an end? the subject is so copious
that the study of a whole life cannot exhaust it. The more we consider it;
still the more and the weightier Arguments will present themselves to us to
engage us in the practice of it: and the more we practice it, still the more
shall we desire so to do, and the more happy and Blessed shall we find our
selves to be.

For, to do good is nothing else but to act according to the frame and make of
our Beings. It is to gratify those Inclinations and Appetites that are most
strongly rooted in our Natures; such as Love and Natural Affection, Pity and
Compassion, a Desire of Friends and a Propensity to knot our selves into
Companies and Societies: what are all these but so many stimuli, so many
powerful incitements of nature to put us upon doing good offices one to another?

To do good is the end of all those Acquisitions, of all those Talents, of all
those Favors and Advantages that God has blessed us with, it is the proper use
we are to put them to. If we do not employ them this way, we are so far from
being better for them that we are much worse. What will signify our Wit and
good Humor, our Strength of Reason and Memory, our Wisdom and Knowledge, our
Skill in Arts, and Dexterity in managing Business, our Wealth and Greatness,
our Reputation and Interest in the world, I say what will all these signify if
they do not render us more Useful and Beneficial to others? That which sets the
price and value upon every worldly blessing, is the Opportunity it affords us
of doing good.

To do good seems to be the foundation of all the Laws of Nature, the supreme
Universal Law; it is that by which the World is supported, and take that away,
all would presently fall into confusion, And perhaps if it were particularly
examined, it would be found that all the other Natural Laws may be reduced to
this and are ultimately to be resolved into it. It is a question whether there
be any natural Standard whereby we can measure the Virtue or the Viciousness of
any Action, but the Influence that it has to promote or hinder the doing of
good. This is that that seems to stamp Virtue and Vice.

To do good is the great Work for the sake of which we were sent into the
world, and no man lives farther to any purpose than as he is an Instrument of
doing good. Be our lives otherwise never so busy and full of action, yet if
others receive no benefit by them, we cannot give our selves any tolerable
account of our time, we have in effect lived idly and done nothing.

To do good is that which of all other services is most acceptable to God, it
is that which he has laid the greatest stress upon in the Scripture, it is
that which he has with the most earnest and affectionate perswasives, with the
strongest Arguments, with the greatest promises and with the most dreadful
threatenings enforced upon us. It is that which he has chosen before all
Sacrifices and all Religious worship strictly so called to be served with. It
is that which he has appointed for the great Expression both of our
Thankfulness for his Benefits, and of our Love and Devotion to him. Lastly it
that which Moses and the Prophets make the Sum of the Old Law, and Christ and
his Apostles the Sum of the New.

And very great Reason there is for it; for to do good is to become most like
to God. It is that which of all other Qualities gives us the greatest
resemblance of his Nature and Perfections, 1 Job. 4.8.
for perfect Love and Goodness is the very Nature of God, and the Root of all
his other Attributes; and there was never any Action done, any work wrought by
him throughout the vast Tracts of infinite space, from the Beginning of time to
this Moment, but was an Expression of his Love, and an instance of doing good,
(nay I doubt not to say, the most severe acts of his Justice and Vengeance have
all been such) And therefore with great reason has our blessed Lord told us,
Mat. 5. 44, 45.
that the way to become the Children of our Heavenly Father is to do good to
all, with the same Freedom and Unreservedness that God makes his Sun to shine
upon the World.

And of this our Blessed Savior himself was the most illustrious Example that
ever appeared in the world, so that to do good is that which does most truly
and perfectly render us the Disciples and Followers of Jesus, makes us really
be what we pretend we are. His whole life (as the Gospel tells us) was but a
continual going about doing good. The great Design of his Coming from Heaven,
and of all that he spoke, and of all that he did, and of all that he suffered
upon Earth, was the benefiting of others. And he has left it as the great
distinguishing Badge and Character, whereby his Disciples should be known from
other men, that they should love one another even as he had loved them, Job.
13.34, 35.
that is (as his Apostle expounds him) they should love and do good to that
degree as to lay down their lives for the brethren. 1 Job. 3.16


But to do good is not only our greatest Duty but our greatest Interest and
Advantage, which is that that Solomon chiefly refers to in the Text. It is
certain that no man can take a more Effectual way to render his Being in the
world Happy and Comfortable to him (according to the ordinary course and event
of things) in what Condition or Circumstances soever he is placed, than to do
all the good he can in his life; so that though a man that lays out himself in
this way, seems only to respect the good of other people, yet in true reckoning
he most consults his own profit.

For to do good in the natural way to raise us friends, who shall be obliged to
contribute their Endeavors to the furthering our honest designs; to the
upholding and securing us in our Prosperity, and to the succouring and
relieving us when we are in any evil Circumstances, such is the Contrivance and
the Constitution of this World, that no man can subsist of himself, but stands
in continual need of others both for their comfortable Society and their
necessary Assistance in his Affairs. Now of all men living the Good man who
makes it his Business to oblige all about him, is most likely to be the best
befriended.

To do good is the truest way to procure to a man's self a Good name and
Reputation in the World, which as it is a thing desirable upon many accounts,
so it is a singular Advantage to a man for the carrying on his secular designs.
Nay to do good is to Embalm a man's name and to transmit it with a grateful
Odor to posterity. Prove. 10.7
The memory of a good man shall be blessed. And the sense of mankind has always
been, that too much honor could not be given to the name of those that have
done good in their generation.

But which is a great deal more than all this, to do good is the most certain
effectual means to procure the blessing of God upon our endeavors, and to
entitle our selves to his more especial care and providence and Protection: So
that let what will come; in all circumstances and conditions the good man has
the greatest assurance that all things shall at least be tolerably well with
him, and that he shall never be miserable. Psalm. 37. ver. 3.
Trust in the Lord (says David) and be doing good, so shall thou dwell in the
Land, and verily thou shall be fed.

Nay further, to do good is to entail a blessing upon our Children after us. I
have been young and now am old (says the same Psalmist) yet saw I never the
Righteous (that is the merciful and good man, Ibid. v. 2^
for that is the Notion of the word in that place and in most others) such an
one saw I never forsaken nor his seed begging their bread.

Lastly to conclude this point, To do good (besides all these advantages that
attend it) is most to consult our own peace, and to make the best provision
possible for our pleasure and delight. Charity (as Dr. Hammond used to say) is
really a piece of Sensuality. And Epicurus himself the great Master of
Voluptuousness would confess that it was not only more Brave but more Pleasant
to do kindnesses than to receive them. And certainly every good man will find
it so, for as the exercise of Charity and Beneficence is as truly a
gratification of our Natural Inclinations and Appetites as any other action or
thing that causes pleasure to us: So is it also a gratification of those
Appetites which are the highest and the noblest we have. Now by how much the
appetite that is gratified is more noble and divine; by so much must the
delight that arises from that gratification be more exquisite. So that it was
no very great Hyperbole of our Divine Poet when he said that -- All joys go less
Than that one joy of doing kindnesses.


And which is further to be considered, it is not with this pleasure as it is
with most others that vanish with the enjoyment, nay often leave bitterness and
melancholy upon the mind after they are gone off. For to do good is a permanent
pleasure, a pleasure that will last as long as our lives. The memory of our
good actions will always be accompanied with Delight and Satisfaction; when all
our other passed Enjoyments prove matters of anguish and torment to us upon our
reflections on them, these will be a refreshment; and the nearer we approach to
death, still the more comfort we shall find in them. Would we therefore
treasure up to our selves a stock of lasting peace and joy to support us in all
conditions of our life and so make our passage easy at our death, let us do
all the good we can.

I think I have said enough to convince any one of the truth of Solomon's
Proposition that there is nothing better for a man, nothing that more concerns
him either in point of duty or happiness than to do good in his life. Much more
might be said, and what has been said might have been said with more
advantage, and greater evidence if it had been fit to insist upon every
particular: but I will pursue this argument no further, but proceed to the
second general point I proposed which is to set before you the practicableness
of this great duty, by showing the several ways which every person though in
the meanest Circumstance, is capable of doing good.

A great many there are that are as strongly convinced as may be that it is both
their Interest and duty to be doing good in their lives, but they complain that
it is not in their power, they have not any Means or Opportunities for it, and
they bemoan themselves sadly upon this account, as thinking their lives useless
because they have not those visible Capacities of being serviceable to the
world that others have.

To such as these let me say this in the general: There is no condition in the
world so mean and despicable, but yields us Opportunities of doing good. There
is neither Old nor Young, Man nor Woman, Rich nor Poor, High nor Low, Learned
nor Unlearned, but in their Sphere, by a good husbandry of those Talents that
God has entrusted to their care and management they may be very useful to
others, and prove instruments of much good to their generations.

This truth St. Paul most elegantly sets forth in 1 Cor. 12. where he compares
the Society of Christians to a Natural body. There he shows that as in the
Natural body there are many members, and all those members have not the same
dignity and honor, nor the same use or office: and yet every member (even the
meanest) has its particular use by which it does real service to the body; nay
so useful it is that the body cannot be without it: so it is with the Church of
Christ and with every body politic. There is a necessity both in the Church
and in the State, that there should be variety of functions and callings, and
degrees, and conditions. There must be some to govern and some to be governed;
there must be some more conspicuous, some more obscure; some whose gifts and
endowments lay this way, and some whose Talents lay in another way; and yet
there is not one of these but in his degree and station, either is or may be as
useful as any that belong to the Society. So that the eye cannot say to the
hand (as our Apostle there expresses it) I have no need of thee. Nor again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you, nay more, those members of the body
(as he continues) that seem to be most feeble are yet very necessary.

To reduce the Apostles notion to its particulars, or to show in how many
respects every individual person that is a Member of a Society is necessary to
the public, and either does or may serve the Weal of it, and so do good in his
life, is a task too great for me to undertake at this time, let it suffice at
the present to propose to you these general heads.

First of all none can want opportunities of doing good that is in a capacity
of performing any acts of mercy or charity strictly so called whether that
charity be showed to the bodies or souls of men. Now the instances and
expressions of this way of doing good are infinite, as infinite as are the
wants and necessities of mankind.

To the bodies of men we do good when ever we contribute to the relieving and
easing them of the outward pressures and wants, and necessities they lie under:
Such as Sickness, Pain, Poverty, Hunger, Nakedness, Debts, Imprisonment, or any
other outward affliction that falls upon them; whether that ease and relief be
effected by our purse, or by our counsel and advice, or by our labor and pains.

And sure some one of these three things there is none so mean or
inconsiderable in the world, but it is in his power to benefit his poor
Neighbor with.

To the Souls of men we do good, whenever by our discourses or other endeavors
we make men better or wiser; when we instruct the ignorant, when we satisfy
the doubtful, when we reduce those that are misled by error, when we establish
the weak, when we reprove those that do amiss, in a word, all our attempts and
endeavors in what way soever to reclaim men from vice, and to bring them to
wisdom and sobriety is a Charity to their Souls; and whether our designs
succeed or not we shall be rewarded as those that have done good in the world.

Secondly, All the acts of Beneficence and kindness, nay even of Civility and
good Nature, are to be accounted among the instances of doing good. A man does
good not only by acts of Charity properly so called, but by every courtesy
that he does to another; He does good by showing his respect and good will to
all about him, by reconciling differences among neighbors, and promoting
peace, friendship and society as much as he can; by being Generous and Liberal
and Hospitable according to his ability; by forgiving injuries, and if it be
possible making friends of those that did them; by being easy of access, and
sweet and obliging in his carriage; by complying with the infirmities of those
he converseth with, and in a word, by contributing any way to make the lives of
others more easy and comfortable to them.

Thirdly, A man also does good when he makes use of that acquaintance or
friendship or interest, that he has with others to stir them up to the doing
of that good which he by reason of the narrowness of his condition, or for want
of Opportunity cannot do himself. This is a very considerable instance of doing
good how slight soever it may seem; the man that exercises himself this way is
doubly a benefactor; for he is not only an instrument of good to the person or
persons for whom he begged the kindness or the charity; but he does also a real
kindness to the man himself whom he puts upon the benefaction, for God will not
less reward his good will for being excited by another.

Fourthly, Another way to do good is to be careful and diligent, and
conscientious in the discharge of all those Public Offices which we are called
upon to execute in the place where we live. How burdensome soever these be,
and how much soever of our time they rob us of, yet God by calling us to them,
has put a prize into our hands, (as the Wise man speaks) to do much good if we
have hearts to make use thereof.

Fifthly, We do good when being in a private Capacity we so carry our selves in
all the Relations in which we stand as the nature of the Relation requires. As
for instance, when being Subjects we conscientiously obey the Laws of the
Kingdom and submit to our Governors, and promote what we can the public Peace
both of Church and State. When being Masters of Families we take care of those
under our Charge, making sufficient provision both for their Souls and bodies:
When being Husbands or Wives we discharge faithfully all the Conjugal duties:
When being Parents we love our children, and bring them up in the fear and
nurture of the Lord. When being children we obey our Parents in all things.
When being servants we do our work in singleness of heart, not as men-pleasers
but as those that account they have a Master in Heaven. When having contracted
friendships we are secret and faithful, and prudent in the maintaining and
preserving of them; and so proportionably in all the other relations, that we
stand in. All these things though they appear little, yet are they in their
degree a real good and benefit to mankind, and so necessary that there is no
living tolerably without them.

Sixthly, We also do good by an honest and a diligent pursuit of our calling
and employment. There is no Art or Trade that we are bred to, but if it be a
lawful one, it may be of great use to the public, and by well minding it, and
fairly manageing it we may render our selves very profitable members of the
Commonwealth.

Seventhly and Lastly, We may do a great deal of good by our good Examples, by
being to others Patterns of Piety and Prudence, of Diligence and Industry, of
Peaceableness and Loyalty, of Humility and Meekness and Temperance. In a word,
every man that will make himself Eminent in any Virtue will be a Light to the
world, his life will be a constant Sermon, and he will often prove as effectual
a Benefactor to those about him by his example as others are by their Counsels
and Exhortations.

And now all these things considered, who is there among us in such deplorable
Circumstances that he can reasonably pretend to want ability or opportunity to
do good in his life? Sure I am he must live in a desert, and have no
Communication with mankind that cannot some or other of these ways be useful
and beneficial to them. And thus much of our Second Head of Discourse.

I now come in the Third and last place to make some Application of what has
been spoken.

And First, Since every man is so highly concerned as we have seen, to do good
in his life, let us all be persuaded seriously and heartily to apply our minds
hereunto. Let us look upon it, not as a by-work, a thing to be done now and
then as there is occasion after our own turns are served: But let us lay out
our selves upon it, let us propose it to our selves as the great Business of
our lives. Let us take all opportunities for it, let us contrive and manage all
our affairs so that they may some way or other be subservient to the carrying
on this great work.

Let this be the end of our gathering riches, and the measure of our expending
them. To heap up riches that we may be rich, or to throw them away upon our
lusts are both equally intolerable, it is the doing good with them that
sanctifies both the getting and the spending them.

Let this be the compass to steer and direct us in our pursuit after knowledge,
in our learning Arts and Sciences, in the managery of our Trades and
employments; in a word, in the choice and in the prosecution of every design
that is proposed to us. In all these things, the great enquiry is to be, what
good will they tend to? How shall we be rendered more useful to the world, if
our designs and endeavors as to these matters do take effect?

Let this be the great rule by which we proceed in the Education of our
Children and Relations, and the provisions we make for them in the world. Let
it be our first care to possess them with a deep sense of the duty they owe to
the Public, and to furnish them with such qualities as will render them
profitable members of it, and to put them into such professions and employments
as may afford them fair scope for the exercise of those qualities. If we thus
provide for them, though we otherwise leave them never so small an Estate, yet
with the Blessing of God they have a good Portion.

Lastly, let this design of doing good influence our very Offices of Religion.
When we make our applications to the Throne of Grace, let us be sure to have
the Public always in mind; and even when we pray for our selves let it be with
this design and resolution, that as God in mercy bestows upon us the Blessings
and the Grace we pray for, we will employ them for the good of others.

O that we would thus seriously concern our selves in doing good! O that we
would once lay aside all our little selfish designs, and that narrowness and
penuriousness of Spirit with which most of us are bound up; and with ardent
Love and Charity set our selves not to seek his own but every man another
good, 1 Cor. 10.24.
as the Apostle exhorts.

Secondly, if the doing good be so necessary a duty as has been represented,
what must we say of those men that frame to themselves Models of Christianity
without putting this duty into its notion? There is a sort of Christianity
which has obtained in the world, that is made up of Faith and knowledge of the
Gospel Mysteries, without any respect to Charity and good works. Nay have we
not heard of a sort of Christianity, the very perfection of which seems to
consist in the disparaging this duty of doing good as much as is possible;
crying it down as a heathen virtue, a poor blind piece of Morality, a thing
that will no way further our salvation; nay, so far from that, that it often
proves a hindrance to it, by taking us off from that full relyance and
recumbency that we ought to have on the Righteousness of Jesus Christ only, in
order to our Salvation.

But O how contrary are these Doctrines to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles! How widely different a thing do they make Christianity to be from
what it will appear if we take our notions of it from their Sermons and
Practices! Is it possible that he that went about doing good himself; made it
his meat and drink, the business and employment of his life, should set so
light by it in us that are his followers?

Is it possible that they that so often call upon us to do good, 3. Tim. 6.18.
1 Pet. 4.8. 1 Cor. 13.2.13.
to be rich in good works, above all things to have fervent charity among our
selves, telling us that all faith is nothing, all knowledge of Mysteries is
nothing, all gifts of Prophecy and Miracles are nothing, but that Charity is
all in all, I say is it possible that they should think doing good so
insignificant, so unprofitable, nay so dangerous a thing as these I spoke of do
represent it?

But I need not further reprove these Opinions because I hope they find but few
Patrons; but this seriously ought to be reproved among us, viz. that we do not
generally lay that stress upon this duty we are speaking of that we ought to do.

Many are ready enough to acknowledge their Obligations to do good, and count
it a very commendable thing, and a work that God will bless them the better
for, yet they are loath to make it an essential ingredient of their Religion,
they think they may be Religious and serve God without it. If they be but sober
in their lives, and just in their dealings and come to Church at the usual
times, they have Religion enough to carry them to Heaven, though in the mean
time they continue covetous and hard and uncharitable, without bowels of pity
and compassion, and make no use of their wealth, or their power and interest,
or their Parts and industry, or their other Talents committed to them, for the
doing good in the world.

Far be it from any man to pretend to determine what virtues or degrees of them
are precisely necessary to Salvation, and what Virtues or degrees of them a man
may safely be without: But this is certain, that charity and doing good are
none of those that can be spared. The Scripture has every where declared these
qualities to be as necessary in order to our Salvation as any condition of the
Gospel. Nay if we will consult St. Matthew. 25. where the Process of the General
Judgment is described, we shall find these to be the great points that at the
last day men shall be examined upon, and upon which the whole case of their
eternal state will turn. So that if we take the Scripture for our Guide, these
men at last will be found to be much mistaken, and to have made a very false
judgment both of Religion and of their own condition.

Thirdly, From what has been said about doing good, we may gather wherein that
Perfection of Christianity which we are to aspire after, does consist. It has
been much disputed which is the most Perfect life, to live in the world as
other men do, and to serve God in following our employments, and taking care of
our families, and doing good offices to our neighbors, and discharging all
other duties that our relation to the public requires of us; or to retire from
the world, and to quit all our secular concernments, and wholly to give up our
selves to Prayer and Meditation, and those other exercises of Religion properly
so called.

This latter kind of life is so magnified by the Romanists in comparison of the
other, that it has engrossed to it self the name of Religious. None among them
are thought worthy to be styled Religious persons but those that Cloister up
themselves in a Monastery. But whatever excellence may be pretended in this
course of life, it certainly falls much short of that which is led in a public
way. He serves God best that is most serviceable to his Generation. And no
Prayers or Fasts or Mortifications are near so acceptable a Sacrifice to our
Heavenly Father as to do good in our lives.

It is true, to keep within doors and to attend our devotions (though those
that are in appearance most abstracted from the world, are not always the most
devout persons) I say this kind of life is the most easy and the safer. A man
is not then exposed so much to temptations; he may with less difficulty
preserve his innocence; but where is the praise of such a virtue? Virtue is
then most glorious and shall be most rewarded, when it meets with most trials
and oppositions.

And as for the bravery of contemning the world and all the Pomps of it, which
they so magnify in this kind of life, alas it is rather an effect of
pusillanimity and love of our ease, and a desire to be free from cares and
burdens, than of any true nobleness of mind. If we would live to excellent
purpose indeed; if we would show true bravery of spirit and true piety toward
God, let us live as our blessed Lord and his Apostles did. Let us not fly
Temptations but overcome them; let us not sit at home amusing our selves with
our pleasing contemplations, when we may be useful and beneficial abroad. Let
us so order our devotions toward God, that they may be a means of promoting
our worldly business and affairs, and doing good among men. Let us take our fit
times of retirement and abstraction that we may the more freely converse with
God and pour out our souls before him; but let this be only to the end that we
may appear abroad again more brisk and lively in vanquishing the Temptations
that come in our way, and more prompt and readily disposed to every good work:
This is to imitate our Lord Jesus, to walk as we have him for an example. This
is a life most suitable to the contrivance and the genius of his Religion, which
is more accommodated to Cities and public Societies, than to Cloisters and
Deserts. And lastly this is to walk in a conformity to his command who has bid
us make our light so to shine before men that they may see our good works and
glorify our Father which is in Heaven Mat. 5.16.
.

But Fourthly and lastly, If it be a thing so necessary that every man should
do good in his life as has been represented, then how much to be Reproved are
they that do no good till their death! That live scrapingly and uncharitably
and uselesly to the world all their lives long, and then when they come to dye,
think to Atone for their sins and neglects of this kind, by showing some
extraordinary Bounty to the poor, or devoting some part of their estates to
public or pious uses.

I must confess this kind of proceeding does to me seem just like the business
of putting off a man's repentance to his deathbed. It is absolutely necessary
that a man should repent though it be never so late; and so it is that he
should do good: if he have done little good in his life, he is bound as he
loves his soul to show some extraordinary uncommon instances of Charity and a
Public spirit, when he comes to die. But then it is here as it is with the
long delaying of Repentance, the deferring it so long has robbed the man of the
greatest part of the praise and the comfort he might have expected from it. His
Rewards in heaven will be much less though his good deeds should be accepted,
but he is infinitely uncertain whether they will or no. It must be a very great
act of Generosity and Charity that can obtain a pardon for a whole life of
uncharitableness.

Let us all therefore labor and study to do good in our lives, let us be daily
giving evidences to the world of our kind and charitable disposition, and let
not that be the first which is discovered in our last Will and testament. If
God has blessed us with worldly goods, let us distribute them as we see
occasion in our life time, when every one may see we do it voluntarily; and not
stay till we must be forced to part with them whether we will or no, for that
will blast the credit of our good deeds both with God and man.

I have said enough concerning the first point recommended in the Text, viz.
doing Good. I now come briefly to Treat of the other, that is, Rejoicing, which
is equally a part of the business of this day.

There is no good (says Solomon) in any earthly thing; or there is nothing
better for any man than to rejoice and to do good.

The Rejoicing here recommended, is capable of two senses, the first more
general and more concerning us as Christians, the other more particular and
which more immediately concerns us as we are here met upon this occasion.

In the first place by Rejoicing we may take to be meant, a constant habit of
joy and cheerfulness, so that we are always contented and well pleased, always
free from those anxieties and disquiets and uncomfortable reflections that make
the lives of mankind miserable. This now is the Perfection of Rejoicing and it
is the utmost degree of Happiness that we are here capable of. It must be
granted indeed that not many do arrive to this state, but yet I doubt not but
that it is a state that may be attained at least in a great measure in this
world. Otherwise the Holy men in Scripture, and particularly the Apostles of
our Lord would never have recommended it to us so often as they have done.
Rejoice ever more, 1 Thessalonians. 5.16.
says S. Paul to the Thessalonians, and to the Philippians, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.

The way to attain to this happy condition does consist chiefly in these three
things: First a great innocence and virtue, a behaving our selves so in the
world that our Consciences shall not reproach us. This St. Paul lays as the
Foundation of Rejoicing, This (says he) is our rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1.12.
the Testimony of our Conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity I have
had my conversation in this world. It is in vain to think of any true solid Joy
or Peace or Contentment without a hearty practice of all the duties of our
Religion, so that we can satisfy our selves of our own sincerity before God.

And then secondly to make us capable of this constant Rejoicing besides the
innocence of our lives there must go a firm and hearty persuasion of Gods
particular Providence; a belief that he not only dispenses all events that
come to pass in the world, even the most inconsiderable; but that the measure
of the Dispensations of his Providence is infinite Wisdom and Goodness and
nothing else: so that nothing does or ever can happen to us in particular, or
to the world in general but what is for the best. Now when we firmly believe
this and frequently attend to it, how can we be either solicitous for the
future or discontented at the present events of things, let them fall out never
so cross to our desires and expectations? This is the best Antidote in the
world (and an effectual one it is) against all trouble and vexation and
uneasiness that can happen to us upon any occasion whatsoever, to wit, the
consideration that all things are managed by an infinitely Wise and good God,
and will at last prove for the best, how unaccountable soever they appear to us
at present. And this is that which the wise man insinuates in the verse before
the Text when he says that God has made every thing beautiful in his season.

Thirdly, Another requisite both for the procuring and preserving this
continual cheerfulness and rejoicing, is a frequent and fixed attention to the
great rewards of the other world, which God has promised to all that truly
love him and endeavor to please him. This consideration will extremely add to
our comfort and contribute to our Rejoicing under all the miseries and
afflictions that we can possibly fall into, namely, that whatsoever condition
we are in here we shall certainly in a little time be in a most happy and
glorious one, and the worse our circumstances are in this life, the greater (if
we be good) shall be our happiness in the next, 2 Cor. 4.17.
for these light afflictions (as S. Paul tells us) which endure but for a
moment, do work for us a far more exceeding weight of glory.

This then is the joy that we are to endeavor after in the first place, to be
constantly well pleased and contented with our present condition, whatever it
be, and these are the ways to attain to it.

But secondly, there is another more particular Notion of Rejoicing, and which
I conceive Solomon does chiefly intend in the words of the Text, and that is
the free and comfortable enjoyment of the good things of this life that God
has blessed us with, in opposition to a pinching and penurious way of living.
This I say seems to be the notion of Rejoicing that the Text speaks of, as
appears by the following verse. Solomon having told us in the text, that there
is nothing better for a man than to rejoice and do good, he adds by way of
explication of what he meant by rejoicing, these words, that every man should
eat and drink and enjoy the good of all his labors, for it is the gift of God.
And frequently in this Book of Ecclesiastes does he persuade to this kind of
rejoicing. Thus in Chap. 2. ver. 24. there is nothing better for a man, than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in
his labor, this also I saw it was from the hand of God. And in Chap. 5. v. 18.
Behold that which I have seen, it is good and comely for one to eat and drink,
and to enjoy the good of all his labors that he takes under the sun all the
days of his life which God gives him, for it is his portion. And in Chap. 6.
v. 1, 2. he represents it as a great evil that he has seen under the sun, and
yet such an evil as is common among men, that a man to whom God has given
riches, and wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all
that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eats it, this (says he) is vanity and an evil disease.

And there is certainly great reason in what he says. For to have a plentiful
portion of the good things of this life and not to have the heart to make use
of them for the enjoyment of our selves and friends; for the refreshing us
under the toil that this life does expose us to; for the promoting Acquaintance
and Society, and the rendering our condition as easy as may be, is as
unaccountable a folly as we can be guilty of, and makes us really as poor and
necessitous as those that want bread, but only not so pitiable.

Taking now this to be the sense of rejoicing in the Text, (as I believe it is)
we have from hence a good warrant for this days Meeting, for we come together
to rejoice in Solomon's sense, that is, to eat and drink and to enjoy the good
of our labors, it being the gift of God so to do.

And this practice of ours is not only reasonable in it self, but is commended
to us by the example of Gods people both under the Law and the Gospel. The Jews
by the appointment of God himself were to meet every year three times at
Jerusalem, the Capital City of the Nation to feast and to rejoice before the
Lord, See Deuteronomy. 16.
as we have it in the express words of Moses. And the Christians for near two
hundred years after our Savior had their Agapa, their Feasts of charity
wherein they met together both poor and rich to enjoy and make merry one with
another. It is true these Feasts were at length left off by common consent,
because there grew abuses in them; they became occasions of Luxury and excess,
and so matters of scandal to our Religion. But this was not an ill reflection
upon the thing it self, which was innocent and commendable, but upon the abuse
of the thing. A good and laudable institution was perverted to evil purposes.
However this very consideration ought to make us very careful of our carriage
and behavior in these our Meetings, lest we fall under the same
inconveniences, which that we may prevent, Two things are especially needful
to be taken care of by us.

First, That we do not exceed the bounds of rejoicing prescribed to Christians,
that is, that we avoid all excess, and use the Creatures of God, soberly and
temperately, so as to give offense to none, nor to make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

And secondly, That we take care to perform and make good the ends and designs
of these Feasts of rejoicing; which ends, if we will take our measures from
those Laws that God gave to his own People in the Old Testament, and which the
modern Jews themselves in their Commentaries take notice of; and which are so
reasonable in themselves that without any Authority they do recommend
themselves to us, are these four following.

First, That we Rejoice before the Lord, that is, that we make our humble
acknowledgments and return our due praises and thanks to him for all the good
things he has blessed us with in our lives, confessing that all we have is
from his free bounty and goodness, and that our Meeting together is to praise
his name upon that account. And this was the thing that was meant by those
solemn Sacrifices that the Jews were bound to offer at Jerusalem at their
Annual Feasts.

The second end of these Feasts is to take occasion from hence to learn our
duty, to be instructed in all the branches of that obedience we owe unto God.
For as Maimonides observes, that was one of the principal reasons of Gods
calling together all the people of the Jews to appear at the Feast of
Tabernacles, to wit, that they might hear the Law read unto them; and this
design is I suppose pursued by us in our choosing this Place to Assemble in.

A third end of these Feasts (as the same Maimonides tells us) and is manifest
from Scripture is to promote acquaintance and Friendship, and brotherly love
one with another. And this is a very noble end, and serves many excellent
purposes, and nothing can be beyond it except

The fourth and last end of these Meetings, which is to do good; to exercise
our Charity toward our poor indigent Brethren. No man at the Solemn Feasts of
the Jews, Exodus 23.15.
was to appear before the Lord empty. He was to bring his offering not only to
God by way of recognition and acknowledgment to him: but for the poor also that
they might rejoice as well as he. This is well observed by Maimonides from
Deuteronomy. 16.14. where it is thus said, Thou shall rejoice in thy feast, thou and
thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant and thy maidservant, the Levite and
the stranger, the fatherless and the widow that are within thy gates.

This then is the great end of our Assembly, that not only we, but the
Fatherless and the widow; all of our Country, that need our Charity, may
rejoice with us and for us. And this is that which Solomon joins with rejoicing
in the Text, There is no good in them but for a man to rejoice and do good: and
what that man who by the sentence of God was declared the wisest of all men
has thus joined together, let none of us presume to put asunder. These are the
Rules, and these are the ends that we are to observe in this our Feast; and let
us all for the Honor of Christ's Religion, and for the credit of our particular
Country, charge the observation of them upon our selves: which if we can all
resolve to do, I can safely apply to every one of you, that saying of Solomon
in the 9 th Chapter of this book of Ecclesiastes, and the 7 th verse, with
which I shall conclude: Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine
with a merry-heart, for-God now accepts thy work. (...)


ERRATA.
PAge 8.1.6. it that, r. it is that. p. 9 1 penult. for in r. is. p. 13.1.10.
r. proposed. p. 14.1.23, 24. for lay, r. ly.

FINIS.
A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE Lord MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF
LONDON At the SPITTLE, April 14. 1680.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT CLAYTON, Lord MAYOR OF LONDON And to His
LADY.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Make bold to prefix both Your Names tot his Sermon, though it was at Your
Request, Madam, that I published it, not only because I have received many
Obligations from You both, which I take this Opportunity to acknowledge and
thank You for: But also because You are both known to be Eminent Examples of
that Virtue which is in the following Discourse Recommended. May all in Your
Circumstances imitate You herein; and may You always be in a condition to be
Patterns to others. Thus prays,

Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, I. SHARP.

A SERMON PREACHED At the SPITTLE.
1 Timothy vi. 17, 18, 19. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be
not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God, who
gives us richly all things to enjoy.

That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come
that they may lay hold on eternal life.


GROTIUS his Note upon this Text is this, that St. Paul now having finished
this his Epistle to Timothy, it comes into his mind that there was need of some
more particular application to be made, and admonition to be given to those
Wealthy Merchants, with which the City of Ephesus (where Timothy resided) did
then abound; and upon this consideration he inserts those words I have now
read, charge them that are rich in this world, etc.

How famous soever the City of Ephesus was at that time for Wealth or Trade;
there is little doubt to be made, that this City of ours (praised be God for
it) does in those respects, at this day, equal, if not much exceed it. And
therefore that which S. Paul thought of so great importance as to give especial
orders to Timothy, to press upon the Ephesian Citizens, will always be very fit
to be seriously recommended to you in this place; and more especially at this
time, since it is the proper work of the day. Waving therefore wholly the
argument of our Saviors Resurrection, upon which you have before been
entertained; I apply my self without farther preface to conclude this Easter.
Solemnity with that, with which St. Paul concludes his Epistle, viz. with a
short discourse of the Rich man's great duty and concernment, which is in these
words plainly set forth to us.

In them we may take notice of these three Generals, which I shall make the
heads of my following discourse.

First, The duty it self incumbent upon those that are rich in this world,
expressed in several particulars.

Secondly, the great Obligation that lies upon them to the performance of it,
which we may gather from the vehemence and the Authority with which St. Paul
orders Timothy to press it, charge them (says he) that are rich, that they be
not, etc.

Thirdly, the mighty encouragement they have to observe this charge, for
hereby, they lay up to themselves in store a good foundation against the time
to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

First, I begin with the Rich man's duty, which is here expressed in Four
points, two of them Negative, teaching what things he ought to avoid; the other
two positive, teaching what he ought to practice. They are these,

I. That he should not be high minded. II. That he should not trust in
uncertain riches. III. That he should trust in the living God. IV. That he
should do good, be rich in good works, etc.
The First thing that is given in charge to all those that are rich in this
world, is that they be not high minded, (...), that they do not think too well
of themselves for being rich, and take occasion from thence to despise others
that are in meaner circumstances than they. They are not to value themselves a
jot the more, or to think worse of others upon account of that outward fortune
they are possessed of, but are in all their conversation to express the same
moderation and humanity and easiness and obligingness of temper to those they
have to do with, even the meanest and the poorest, as if they stood with them
upon the same level.

And with very great reason has St. Paul given this caution to rich men. For
by the experience of the world it has been always found, that wealth is apt to
puff up, to make men look big, and to breed in them a contempt of others; but
what little ground there is for this, is easily seen by any that will give
themselves leave to consider.

For what does any of these worldly goods (which make us keep at distance)
really add to a man in point of true worth and value? do they either recommend
him more to God or to wise men or even to himself, if he have a grain of sense
in him, than if he was without them? certainly they do not. For that for which
either God approves us, or wise men esteem us, or we can speak peace and
content to our selves, is not any thing without us, any thing that fortune has
given to us; but something that we may more truly call our own, something that
we were neither born with, nor could any body hinder us of, nor can be taken
from us, that is to say, the Riches of our minds, our Virtuous and commendable
qualities.

A man is no more a fit object of esteem, merely for being rich, than the beast
he rides on (if I may use the old comparison) is of commendation for the costly
Trappings he wears.

Secondly, Another caution given to those that are rich in this world, is, that
they should not trust in uncertain riches. This likewise is a temptation to
which they are exposed, and our Savior has very lively set it forth to us in
the Parable of the Rich man in the Gospel, who having got mighty possessions,
and filled his barns, thought of nothing further; but presently says to
himself, Luke 12.16, etc.
soul take thy ease, eat, drink and be merry, for thou have goods laid up for
many years: But the conclusion of that parable does sufficiently show the
vanity and ridiculousness of this trusting in our riches, for a message comes
to him from God, Thou fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee, and
then whose shall all these things be that thou have provided? It is the
greatest madness in the world to please, or speak peace to our selves upon
account of that, which we are not sure to enjoy a day, but we may for any thing
we know be snatched away the next moment into another world, and so must leave
the joy and pride of our hearts to we know not whom.

But supposing we had some certainty of our lives, and could promise our selves
that we should not leave our wealth for some competent time, yet we have no
certainty that our wealth will not leave us. How prosperous soever our present
circumstances be, yet we cannot ensure the continuance of them; there are a
thousand accidents may happen every day which may strip us as naked as when we
came into the world; and we may be reduced to the extremities of those who are
now the greatest objects of our compassion and charity; and this is that which
St. Paul in the Text insinuates when he calls them uncertain riches. But what
are we then to trust in, if not in these things? this St. Paul shows in the
words following which make

The Third instance of the Rich man's duty, Let them (says he) trust in the
living God, who gives to all men richly to enjoy. The sense of it is this: Let
them from the bottom of their hearts acknowledge God to be the Author and giver
of all that they possess: How much soever their Heads projected, or their Hands
labored, or their Parents and Friends were kind to them; yet it is the
Providence of the Almighty to which they owe all. The same divine foresight and
contrivance that feeds the Fowls of the air, and clothes the Flowers of the
field, does also give them richly all things to enjoy; and therefore upon that
Providence are they entirely to depend, as much exercising Faith in God, and
reposing confidence in him, as if they had no visible provisions made for them:
And as heartily returning thanks to their great Benefactor for every blessing
they have (seem it never so much their own already,) as a hungry man that knows
not where to get a meal, would to him that should give him a plentiful
entertainment. In a word, those that have all things in this world must as
devoutly look up to God, both in gratefully ascribing to him every enjoyment
either past or present, and in a full trust and relyance upon him for what is
to come, as those that live from hand to mouth; since it is the same divine
Providence that seeds and maintains both the Poor and the Rich, and of his
infinite goodness gives to all that fear him, even to the poor as well as the
rich, all things to enjoy; and though to the one more plentifully, yet to the
other perhaps with as much content though not in so great abundance.

The Fourth and last part of the Rich man's duty here mentioned concerns the
right use of that wealth that God has given him. Now the right use of Riches
according to the Text does consist in these things. That those that have them
do good with them, that they be rich in good works, that they be ready to
distribute, willing to communicate.

If we suppose every one of these distinct phrases in the Text, to denote a
distinct thing, then we are to give this account of the passage, That S. Paul
here uses a gradation in his speech, begins with the lowest and most general
expressions of Charity, and so goes on to higher degrees of it; in each
following phrase intending to say something more great or particular than what
he had said in the former, which is a most usual and elegant scheme of
Rhetoric. According to this account (as the words are very capable of it)
there are four things here prescribed to the rich man in the use of his riches.

1. That he do good with them, that is the most general point, that is, that he
employ them some way or other for the benefit of others. He must not live to
himself alone, he must design greater things than the getting an estate, or the
raising a family; if others be not advantaged by him, he is rich to no purpose.
And therefore it will concern him to do kindnesses and good offices where he
can, to be liberal and Hospitable, to oblige his Friends and Relations all ways
possible, to assist all about him with his counsel, to encourage them by his
example; in a word, to make use of that Interest and Reputation that his
fortune has given him above others, to do kindnesses to them.

2. He must not think it sufficient to do this good now and then, upon
particular and more rare occasions; but he must abound in acts of goodness.
That is the meaning of the Apostles second expression of being rich in good
works. He must so study and improve in the Art of doing good, that his good
deeds do equal his riches, nay the words import that his true riches are only
placed in, and to be measured by his good deeds. He is not to think himself
farther rich than he is rich in good works. The more plentifully God has
blessed him with worldly wealth, the more diligent and industrious and
solicitous he must be to do good with it, otherwise he is poorer than those
that perhaps he now and then out of charity relieves.

And 3 ly, Lest this doing good, and being rich in good works should only be
interpreted of doing such kindnesses and good deeds that cost us nothing but
the expense of our time or the employment of our pains, or the use of our
interest with others; the Apostle adds this further thing, that the Rich man
must be ready to distribute; that is, very free to part with his money
according to the proportion God has blessed him with, upon every occasion of
real and useful charity; whether that charity be of a more public nature, as
for instance, when it is expressed for the advancing Religion and the service
of God, or for the making standing provisions for the poor, or lastly, any way
for the serving the necessities, or increasing the conveniences of the place
where we live, by any public useful benefaction: Or 2 ly, whether this charity
be of a more private nature, extending no farther than to particular persons
that come in our way, whom we are convinced to be real objects of it; to these
likewise we must be ready to distribute; every poor necessitous person has a
right to part of what we have, if we can really satisfy our selves, that our
alms will do him a real good, and will not be any great prejudice to us.

But 4 thly and lastly, the Apostle adds another thing to all this, and that
is, that the Rich man must be willing to communicate. If the sense of this
phrase be different from the former it will seem to import yet a higher degree
of Liberality. It will import that Rich men should be of such public spirits,
and so little esteem their wealth their own, that it should in a manner be made
a common thing, wherein all should share as there was occasion. This is the
notion of (...) or communicating, as it was used in the beginning of
Christianity. S. Luke in Acts 2. having told us that the first Christians
continued in the Apostles doctrine, and in communicating, presently explains
what he meant by that communion. All (says he v. 44.) that believed were
together and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods, and
parted them to all men as every man had need.

God be thanked the Church of Christ is not now in such circumstances that it
is either needful or reasonable precisely to observe the practice of those
times as to this matter. We are not only not obliged to part with the propriety
of our estate, and to live in common as the first persecuted Christians did,
but we should be highly indiscreet, not to say injurious, both to our selves
and the public, if we did. But this notwithstanding, their practice and the
charge here laid upon us to be communicative will thus far oblige us, viz. that
we Christians should always retain that public generous spirit that they in
the first times were acted with. We should sit so loose from the world, and so
unconcerned in the distinction of meum and tuum, that we should make it our
business to do good with what we have, thinking our wealth best employed when
it is put to that use. And when the cause of God, and the common interest of
our Christian Brethren does require it, we should then as freely part with all
we have as our Predecessors in Christianity did. Following herein the Precept
of our Lord to the young man who came to enquire of him what he should do that
he might inherit eternal life, and who was thus answered by our Savior, that
though he had kept the Commandments, yet he wanted one thing to make him
perfect (that is to make him a True Christian) and that was, to sell all that
he had and give to the poor and come and follow him, and then he should have
treasure in Heaven, Mat. 19.21.

Thus have I given you a brief account of each particular of the Rich man's duty
as it is summed up in the Text; and some perhaps will think it is severe
enough; whether it be so or no, I now dispute not, but I am sure it is severely
required of them. This we may gather from S. Paul's way of urging it, charge
them (says he) that are rich in this world that they be not high minded, etc.
He does not say, recommend this to them as a thing that is very reasonable in
it self, and will highly become them; he does not say, put them in mind of it
as a thing by which they may gain a great deal of Honor and reputation to
their Religion; he does not say, exhort and persuade them to it, as a thing
that will at last conduce to their own advantage: But he says, charge it upon
them, intimating that there was a necessity they should thus practice, it was a
duty indispensably incumbent upon all of them; and this is the Second General
Point I am to insist on.

And certainly this order of S. Paul to Timothy is a standing warrant, a
perpetual commission to all Ministers of the Gospel to charge the same thing
upon all Rich men in all places and times. But in the pressing and enforcing
this charge I shall not so much have regard to the three former duties as to
the last, which concerns the doing good with our wealth, the exercising acts of
Bounty and Charity as we have opportunity. Charge them that are rich in this
world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute,
willing to communicate.

Now in Four respects especially, Rich men are thus to be charged, and a
necessity lies upon them to practice accordingly, viz.

In point of Gratitude, Justice, Religion, Self-preservation.


If all these put together do not make the obligation indispensable I know not
what will. I will speak briefly of each particular,

First, if Rich men do not thus employ their wealth, they are guilty of great
Ingratitude. That is the least evil imputation they fall under, and yet to any
ingenuous man it is heavy enough, for to call a man Unthankful is as great a
reproach as you can cast upon him.

Whoever acknowledges the Being of God, and owns his Providence in the world,
must necessarily believe that all that portion of good things which he enjoys
in this life does proceed from that God as the Author and Fountain, though they
be immediately conveyed to him by the Ministry of second Causes; and his
Reason and Humanity will suggest to him, that there are some returns of
Gratitude to be made to Him that of his free bounty has thus obliged him; but
what returns can he make to God for his blessings, other than in communicating
those blessings among his fellow creatures? To think that a verbal
acknowledgment of God's favors is a suitable return, is against the common
sense of mankind, who know that there goes more to a man's being truly grateful
than the entertaining the person that obliged him with fair speeches and
professions of his Obligations: And on the other side, to think of requiting
God in a proper sense, by returning real kindnesses to him, for those he has
done to us, is equally absurd; for all the services we can pay to him, cannot
add any thing to his infinite Blessedness. How then must we express our
thankfulness for the wealth that he has bestowed upon us? why he himself has
prescribed the way to us. He has devolved his right to our kindness upon our
Brethren. He has deputed them to receive the real testimonies of our gratitude
to him, and whatsoever obligations we put upon them, he takes them as an
expression of our Love and thankfulness to him.

This our Savior himself has told us in express words, in the 25 of S. Matt.
In as much (says he) as ye have done it, i. e. done acts of kindness and
charity to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. And
the charitable contributions of the Hebrew Christians to their indigent
brethren, is by S. Paul styled a work and labor of love showed to God himself,
Heb. 6. If therefore Rich men would not be unkind and ungrateful to him that
gave them all they have; there is a necessity they should do good, etc.

Secondly, The Practice of this must likewise be charged upon them in point of
Justice as well as Gratitude, it is a piece of dishonesty not to do good with
the wealth that God has given us, for it is a falsifying our trust, it is an
embezling our Masters goods, and putting them to quite other uses than those he
gave us them for. We are not to think that God ever made a man rich for his own
sake alone, for the serving his own turns, and the satisfaction of his own
private desires without respect to the community. No at the best we are but the
Stewards of Gods blessings. A stock of Talents he has committed to all of us,
to some in greater and to others in smaller proportions, and out of this stock
he has given us leave to make provision for the necessities and conveniences
of our selves and our families; but we must not think all our own that accrues
to us, so that it is at our liberty whether we will hoard it up or spend it
profusely. No, we must have regard to the rest of our Masters servants. After
we have served our own needs we must dispense the surplusage among the family
of God, otherwise we are false and wicked Stewards, we abuse and misemploy our
Masters Talents, and a severe account we shall one day render for so doing.

Thirdly, Men's Religion and Christianity are also deeply concerned in this
point. Works of Charity are so essential to all Religion, and more especially
to that which we call Christian, that without them it is but an empty name in
whosoever professes it. Let men pretend what they will, let them be never so
Orthodox in their belief, or regular in their conversation, or strict in the
performance of those duties that relate to the worship of God, yet if they be
hard hearted and uncharitable, if God has given them wealth, and they have not
hearts to do good with it, they have no true piety toward God. They may have a
name to live, but they are really dead. An unmerciful Christian, or a Religious
covetous man, are terms that imply a contradiction. For the satisfying you of
this, I shall but need to put these following questions.

Can that man be accounted Religious that neither loves God nor his neighbor?
sure he cannot, for these two things are the whole of Religion as the Holy
Scripture often assures us; but now the Covetous man neither does the one nor
the other. His neighbors he does not love, that is certain; for if he did they
would find some fruits of it; unless this be to be accounted love to give them
good words, to say to a brother or a sister that is naked and destitute of
daily food, James 2.14. etc.
depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, when notwithstanding they give them
not those things that be needful for the body. But this kind of love S. James
has long ago declared not to be worth any thing. And as for the love of God
another Apostle has put it out of doubt, that the uncharitable man has no
such thing in him. 1 John 3.17.
Whosoever (says S. John) has this worlds good and sees his brother have need,
and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love of God
in him? cap. 4.20.
For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen?

Can he be thought a Religious man or a true Christian, that wants the two main
qualifications that go to the making up a Disciple of Christ, that is to say,
Faith and Repentance? yet this does he that is rich in this world, but is not
rich in good works. Good works are the very soul of Faith, and it is no more
alive without them than the Body is without the Spirit, James 2.26.
as S. James has expressly told us. If we mean that our Faith should avail us
any thing, it must work (or be made perfect) by Charity, Gal. 5.6.
says S. Paul, for though a man have all faith so that he could remove
mountains, i. e. though he be so heartily persuaded of the truth of Christ's
Religion as in the strength of his belief to be able to work miracles, as was
usual in the first times of Christianity, yet if he have not charity his Faith
is nothing. 1 Cor. 13.2.
If it be said that the charity that S. Paul makes so necessary to effectual
Faith, is not giving alms but quite another thing, ver. 3.
for according to him a man may give all his goods to feed the poor, and yet
want the Charity that he speaks of: I answer, it is true a man may give alms,
and very largely, and yet want that Charity that S. Paul here so much
recommends; but then on the other side, none can have that Charity that he
speaks of, but they will certainly express it in alms and bounty as they have
ability and opportunity: so that for all this suggestion Alms and bounty are
absolutely necessary to the efficacy of Faith if there be opportunity of doing
them: The plain account of this matter is this, S. Paul speaks of Charity with
respect to its inward principle in the heart, which consists in an universal
kindness and good will to the whole Creation of God; and we speak of it with
respect to the outward fruits of it in the life and conversation, which are all
sorts of good works, especially works of mercy and bounty: but both these come
to the same thing as to our purpose, for the one always follows the other;
wherever there is charity in the heart it must of necessity show it self in
these kind of actions as there is occasion, otherwise the charity is not true
but only pretended, for as S. John has told us, He that loves ((...)) in
truth, must love (...) in work and in deed.

And then as for Repentance; Charity and Almsgiving is a necessary ingredient
into that also. When S. John Baptist came preaching Repentance unto Israel,
Luke 3.10, 11.
the people asked him saying what shall we do? meaning in what manner they
should express their Repentance: his answer was this, He that has two coats
let him impart to him that has none, and he that has meat let him do so
likewise; and suitable to this was the Prophets advice to the King of Babylon,
when he exhorts him to Repentance, break off thy sins (says he) by
righteousness, Dan. 4.27.
and thy iniquity by showing mercy to the poor, that is, evidence thy
Repentance by thy Almsgiving and Charity.

Furthermore, can he be either a good man or a good Christian, that lives in
the habitual neglect of that, which of all other virtues God in Scripture seems
to set the greatest value upon; and contrariwise practices that which God has
most particularly declared his hatred and aversion to? yet thus does he that is
not charitable with what he has. So highly acceptable to God are works of
mercy and charity, that they are declared to be the sacrifices with which he is
well pleased, Heb. 13.8. the things in which he does delight, Ierem. 9.24. and
blessed and happy are they pronounced that do them, Prove. 22.9. cap. 14.21. for
hereby men become the children of God, Luke 6.35. and entitled to his more
especial care and protection, Ps. 41.1, etc. nay so dear do they render a man
to his Maker, that the wise son of Sirach scrupled not to recommend the
practice of them in these terms, Eccles. 4.10.
Be thou (says he) a Father to the fatherless and instead of a husband unto
their mother, so shall thou be as the Son of the most high, and he shall love
thee more than thy own mother does.

On the other side, if we will believe the Scripture, there is nothing more
odious to God than the contrary qualities and practices. 1 Timothy 6.10.
The love of money, which is the foundation of all uncharitableness, is in
Scripture called the root of all evil; as certainly the greatest evils and
mischiefs in the world do often take their beginning from thence. Those that
are covetous are styled by the name of Idolaters, Ephesians. 5.5.
than which no more hateful appellation can be given to a man in the Sacred
language. Ps. 10.3.
It is said of the covetous that God abhors them; which implies the utmost
aversion that the Divine nature is capable of, to any sort of men or things.
The uncharitable and hard-hearted men God has declared he will have no mercy
on; Iam. 2.13.
but they shall have judgment without mercy that have showed no mercy.

Fourthly and lastly, a necessity there is, that those that are rich in this
world, should do good and be rich in good works, etc. upon their own account.
Though there were no other tie upon them, yet self-love and self-preservation
would oblige them to it. I meddle not here, how far in point of worldly
interest they are concerned to be charitable; though even the motives drawn
from hence are very considerable. For certainly, charity is a means not only to
preserve and secure to them what they have, and to make them enjoy it more
comfortably, but also to increase their store. No man is ever poorer for what
he gives away in useful charity, but on the contrary he thrives better for it.
God seldom fails, in this world amply to repay what is thus lent to him,
besides the other blessings that accompany his store, and go along with it to
his children after him. This I am sure is solemnly promised, and in the
ordinary dispensations of Providence we see it generally made good: whereas to
the greedy and penurious man, all things fall out quite contrary; he may have
wealth, but he has little comfort in it; for a curse generally attends it, of
which he feels the sad effects in a variously miserable and vexatious life, and
often in either having none, or an unfortunate posterity.

But this is not the thing that I mean to insist on. This world lasts but for a
while, and it is no great matter how we fare in it; but we have souls that must
live for ever. If therefore men have any kindness for them, if they mean not to
be undone. to all eternity, it is absolutely necessary they should do good with
what they have. O that uncharitable Rich men would think upon that woe that our
Savior pronounces against them. Luke 6.24.
Woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your consolation. O that they
would seriously consider and often remember those words of Abraham to the Rich
man in Hell, Luke 16.25.
Son (says he) remember that thou in thy life receivedst thy good things, and
Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and thou art tormented. Not that
it is a crime to be rich, or to have good things in our life; no, it is the
inordinate love of their wealth (to which those that have it are too frequently
prone) and their not employing it to those purposes of doing good for which it
was given; it is these things that bring these curses upon them, and really
make it easier, without an Hyperbole, for a Camel to go through the eye of a
needle than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18.25.
Certain it is there is no one sin that can be named, does more fatally exclude
from Salvation than this we are speaking of. We never find the Prophets, or the
Apostles giving a list of those black crimes that will involve all that are
guilty of them in inevitable destruction, but we are sure to meet with
covetousness, and all the attendants of it among them; as many instances might
be given. Nay so great is this sin of uncharitableness, and not doing good with
our wealth, that God in the final sentence that he shall pass upon wicked men,
to their condemnation at the last day, seems to take no notice of the other
sins and crimes of their life, but only to censure them for this. Matthew. 25.31,
etc.
Thus we find that when the King, having gathered all nations before him, comes
to pronounce the sentence upon those on his left hand; who are those that are
doomed to everlasting fire; there is no mention made of their criminal actions;
they are not condemned for fraud and oppression, for unbelief and irreligion,
for lewdness and debauchery, though any of these be enough to damn a man: but
merely for their not doing good, for their not relieving the necessitous, and
exercising other acts of Charity when it was in their power.

Since now from these Considerations it does appear how necessary, how
indispensable a duty it is to do good with what we have, to be rich in good
works, to be ready to distribute, and willing to communicate; let me at this
time charge all of you that are rich in this world, as you would not be
unthankful to your great Benefactor, nor unjust to your neighbors; as you have
any piety toward God, or any care of your own souls, that you put it in
practice. And two instances of this great duty the present occasion, and the
exigence of things does oblige me more particularly to recommend to you.

The first is the business of the Hospitals; the encouraging and promoting that
Charity which the piety of our Ancestors begun, and whose examples their
Successors have hitherto worthily followed, and of which we see excellent
effects at this day; for this we need no better proof than the Report given in
of the great number of poor Children, and other poor people maintained in the
several Hospitals, under the pious care of the Lord Mayor, Commonalty, and
Citizens of London the year last past.

For these so great instances of Charity what have we to do, but with all
Gratitude to commemorate those noble and public spirits that first began them;
and with all devotion to put up our prayers to God for all those now alive that
have been promoters and encouragers of such good works; and lastly, with all
cheerfulness and diligence to follow these Patterns by liberally contributing
to their Maintenance and advancement. These are the Public Banks and
Treasuries in which we may safely lodge that money which we lend out to God,
and may from him expect the Interest. O what comfort will it be to us when we
come to dye, to be able to say to our selves, That portion of goods that God
has in his Providence dispensed to me, I have neither kept unprofitably in a
Napkin, nor squandered it away upon my lusts, but part of it I have put out
toward the restoring my miserable Brethren to the right use of their reason
and understanding; part of it to the amending men's manners, and from idle and
dissolute persons, redeeming them to virtue and sobriety, and making them
someway profitable to the Public; part of it for the healing the sick, and
curing the wounded, and relieving the miserable and necessitous; and lastly,
another part of it toward the Educating poor helpless Children in useful arts
for their bodies, and in the Principles of True Religion for their Souls, that
so both in their Bodies and Spirits they may be in a capacity to Glorify God,
and to serve their Country. These are all great things, and in which way
soever of them we lay out our selves, we serve excellent ends of Charity.

But there is another point of useful public Charity, which though the
occasion of this meeting has nothing to do with it, yet the present necessity
of the thing does oblige me seriously to recommend to you. There are few I
believe in this City either ignorant, or insensible of the extreme numerousness
of Beggars in our Streets, and unless care be taken, their number is likely to
increase for this seems to be a growing evil. I dare not lay the fault of this
upon the defectiveness of our Laws, nor dare I say, that the provisions made
for the poor, are incompetent or disproportionable to the number of them, for
perhaps the usual public Taxes, and private Free Will offerings discretely
managed, would go a great way toward the curing this evil; supposing the
richer Parishes to contribute to the maintaining the poorer. But here is the
misery, we do not sufficiently distinguish between our poor; nor take care to
make provisions for them, according to their respective necessities. There are
some that by reason either of old age, or evil accidents, are perfectly unable
to earn a livelihood for themselves; or to be any way useful to the public,
except by their Prayers and their good examples; and to see such go a begging
is a shame to our Christianity, and a reproach to our Government. There are
others that are fit to labor, and might prove useful members of the
Commonwealth many ways, if they were rightly managed: now the True Charity to
these is not to relieve them, to the encouragement of their idleness; but to
employ them, to put them into such a way that they may both maintain themselves
and help toward the maintaining of others; and if they refuse this, let them
suffer for their folly; for there is no reason that those should eat that will
not work if they be able. A necessity therefore there is if ever this
scandalous public nuisance of common begging be redressed, that these four
things be taken care of. 1. That those that cannot work be maintained without
begging. 2. That those that can work and are willing, have such public
provisions made that they may be employed in one way or other, according as
they are capable, and every one receive fruits of his labor proportionable to
his industry. 3. That those that can work and will not, be prosecuted according
to the Laws, as Rogues and Vagrants and pests of the Kingdom. And lastly, after
such public provisions are made for the maintaining both sorts of Poor that
are objects of Charity; that is, the helpless, and those that endeavor to help
themselves; that all persons be exhorted and directed to put their private
Charity in the right Channel, wholly withdrawing it from the lazy and the lusty
Beggars, lest they be thereby encouraged in their infamous course of life, and
giving it to those who by public order shall be recommended to them.

These things I hope I may without offense recommend to the Wisdom and Care of
the Government of this Honorable City, since there are both Heads enough to
contrive the particular ways of curing these evils, and Hands enough that will
be open to contribute what is needful to so useful a work. Certain it is the
thing is practicable, since it has been, and is practiced in some Towns of
this Nation, and in several beyond the Seas. And that it is needful, there is
none that has any true sense of Charity (which consists as much in taking care
to prevent the miseries and necessities of mankind, as in relieving them;)
there is none that has any regard to the Reputation of our Religion, or the
Honor and good Government of this City or Kingdom, but must needs acknowledge.

It is one of the great Glories of this City, that as they have been always
faithful and prudent in the management of those Public Charities that they
have been entrusted with, so have they been very ready to increase and to add
to them. And God without doubt has blessed them the more for this very thing;
as indeed the best atonement that any people can make for the many sins that
the place is guilty of, is the Sacrifice of Alms and Charity. And I hope that
which condemned Sodom; to wit, that there were not ten righteous men found in
it (that is, men that were of a Public spirit, that were truly Liberal, and
Bountiful, and Charitable, for that is an usual Notion of Righteousness in the
Old Testament, and there are some passages in this History which make it
probable that it may be the notion of it here) I say that very thing it is to
be hoped, has, and will preserve this City of ours; because, as far as we can
gather, there are in it many times ten such Righteous persons. In truth if
there were not several good men among us, that by the exemplarity of their
lives, and their Charity, do stand in the gap between the reigning sins of the
times, and the Judgments of God that threaten us for them; it would be a
melancholy thing to think what would become of us. But so long as God is
pleased to continue to us a succession of those that fear God, and hate
covetousness; that make it their business to do good and to serve their
generation, there is hopes that he will yet continue to bless us. And so
gracious has God been to our City and Kingdom in this respect, that (to the
glory of his name be it spoken) whatever boasts they of the Church of Rome are
wont to make of the Charitableness of their Religion, in opposition to the
penuriousness of ours; and reproach us with the bounty and munificence of our
Popish Ancestors, and the barrenness of their Protestant Successors: yet we may
safely affirm that there have been more public works of Charity done in this
City and Kingdom since the Reformation, than can be proved to have been done in
the same compass of years during all the time that Popery prevailed among us.

O therefore let us go on to do this Honor to our Religion, let us go on by
our good works to adorn the doctrine of God that we prosess. Let us not only
equal but labor to exceed the Piety and the Publick-spiritedness of our
Forefathers. Let every one both Magistrates and People in their several
capacities, be zealous and vigorous both in consulting, in contriving, and in
acting for the public good as much as is possible.

And for your greater encouragement thus to do, let it be remembered, in the
last place, that besides the outward advantages both public and private that
we reap by being charitable; this is the best course we can take to secure our
everlasting Happiness in the world to come. For to do good with our wealth, to
be rich in good works, to be ready to distribute, willing to communicate, is
(as the Apostle in the Text tells us) the way to lay up to our selves in store
a good Foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on eternal
life. And this is the Third thing I am to insist on from the Text.

I mean not here to trouble you with the Criticisms about the word (...) in the
Text, by disputing whether it should be rendered Foundation as it is in our
Translation; though to lay up a foundation seems an unusual way of speaking; we
do not lay up Foundations but build upon them: or whether the word should be
taken to signify the Bond or the Evidence that God has given us for the
performance of his part of the Covenant; as it is used by this Apostle
elsewhere, where he tells us that the Foundation of God stands sure having
this seal, 2 Timothy 2.19.
that is to say, that Covenant or Indenture, that God has made with mankind,
stands sure, and has this seal put to it; for men do not put seals to
foundations but to Covenants: Or lastly, whether the word should be rendered a
Treasure, so as to read the Text thus, laying up to themselves a good Treasure
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life] The original
word (say the Learned) is capable of being Translated all these ways, Vid. Dr.
Hammond in loc.
and the last seems as natural as any; for to lay up Treasure to our selves
against the time to come, is a proper way of speaking, and that which our
Savior frequently uses in that very thing we are here treating of. But it
matters not much which of them we pitch upon, for they all come to one sense;
and that is this, That to be very charitable in this world is a good means to
secure to our selves a title to eternal happiness in the next.

But to prevent all misunderstanding, that may happen of this point, I desire
before I speak directly to it, to premise these two things.

First, Though we do maintain with the Ancient Church, the efficacy of Charity
and good works for the furthering a man's Salvation, yet we utterly reject those
doctrines which the Modern Romanists have advanced in this matter. The Popish
doctrines about good works are these three following, That good works are
meritorious; do deserve the Favor and the Rewards of God Almighty. Again, that
the surplusage of a man's good works, that is to say, the merits of so many of
his good deeds, as are over and above what is sufficient to save his own soul,
may by the Church be dispensed out to the benefit of others, they being part of
the Churches treasure; and upon this foundation they ground their Indulgences.
And lastly, that good works, i. e. the Alms of dying persons, that are given to
the Church or Clergy, will by the means of the Masses and Diriges that they
purchase to be said for them, be effectual for the freeing their souls out of
the Torments of Purgatory. These are the Popish doctrines concerning good
works, which we all justly reject, as having no foundation in Scripture, or
good Antiquity; and being apparently contrived for the promoting their secular
gain and advantage. But then as for the necessity, or the conduciveness of good
works to a man's Salvation, which is all we here plead for, I know no good
Protestant but does as earnestly contend for it as any of that Communion.

Secondly, Whatever efficacy we attribute to works of Charity as a means for
the obtaining eternal life; we would not be understood hereby to exclude the
necessary concurrence of other virtues and graces to that end. It does not from
hence follow, that it is an indifferent matter, what Religion a man is of, or
what kind of life he leads, if he be but mighty bountiful to the poor, and do a
great deal of good in his life. No, how acceptable to God soever the Sacrifice
of Alms and Charity be, yet we are not to expect, it shall be available to our
Salvation, unless it proceed from a pure heart, and be offered with a lively
Faith in Jesus Christ, and accompanied with a sincere endeavor to obey all
Gods Commandments. Eternal Happiness is not proposed in the Gospel, as a reward
of any one single virtue, no not of the greatest, but of all of them together;
if indeed there can be any true virtue where there is not a conjunction of all;
I say if there can be, for S. James seems to affirm that there cannot. Iam.
2.10.
Whosoever (says he) shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he
is guilty of all.

But now having said this by way of caution to prevent all occasion that any
may take from our so earnestly pressing Charity, to undervalue and neglect
other duties: It cannot be denied on the other side, that very great effects
are by our Savior and his Apostles, ascribed to this virtue with respect to
men's Salvation in the other world.

In the 6 th of S. Luke, Luke 6.30, 35.
our Lord thus advises, Love (says he) your enemies, give to him that asks,
do good, and lend, hoping for nothing again, so shall your reward be great, and
ye shall be the children of the most highest. Now sure to be entitled to great
rewards, and to be the children of the most high does look farther than this
present world. Our Savior without doubt means the same thing here, that he
expresses upon the same occasion in another place, Luke 14.14.
viz. They (those that you do good to) cannot recompense you, but you shall be
recompensed at the Resurrection of the just.

Luke 16.
Again the Parable of the unjust Steward, that provided so well for himself,
against a bad time, out of his Masters goods; is wholly designed to this
purpose; and that the Application of it sufficiently shows, for our Savior
having said that the Lord of this Steward commended him for his providence and
care of himself, he thus applies it to all his Disciples. ver. 9.
Wherefore I say unto you, make you friends to your selves of the Mammon of
unrighteousness ( i. e. of these false deceitful riches) that when you fail you
may be received into everlasting habitations, plainly declaring, that the best
provision that rich men can make for themselves, against the time of their
death, in order to their reception into the other world, must be the charitable
actions they do with their wealth while they live here.

Lastly, Luk 12.33.
In another place our Savior says the very same thing in effect, that is said
in the Text; for this is his counsel to all that mean to be happy in the next
life, viz. that they sell that they have (that is when the times are such that
it is reasonable so to do) that they give alms; for thereby they provide to
themselves bags which wax not old, a Treasure in the Heavens where no thief
approaches nor moth corrupts.

To these three Texts of our Savior, I shall add three others of three of his
Apostles which speak just to the same effect, and with them I shall conclude.
The first is that of S. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews; where having spoken
most severe things, and denounced no less than Hell fire against the false
brethren among them, yet thus he comforts the Church to whom he writes. Heb.
6.9.
But beloved (says he) we are persuaded better things of you, and things that
do accompany salvation, though we thus speak. And what I pray is the reason he
is thus persuaded? Verily this, For God (says he) is not unrighteous, ver. 10.
to forget your work and labor of love, which you have showed to his name, in
that ye have ministered to the Saints, and yet do minister. It was purely their
Charity to the brethren, that made him have these good hopes of them, that they
were in a state of Salvation. Though that Church as to other things was in a
very degenerate condition, yet considering they had been laborious and diligent
in the exercise of Charity, and still continued so to be, God would not forget
them, nay he was not so unrighteous as to forget them. And then, that which
follows in the next verse, ver. 11.
is very observable; And we desire that every one of you do show the same
diligence (to wit, in the practice of charity) to the full assurance of hope
unto the end. If they would have their hopes of a future life assured to them,
the way to do it was to persevere in their diligent attendance to works of
mercy and kindness and charity.

1 John 3.16, etc.
The second passage is that of S. John. Hereby (faith he) perceive we the love
of God toward us, because he laid down his life for us; and we ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good, and sees his
brother has need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwells the love of God in him? My little children, let us not love in word
neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth; and hereby we know that we are of
the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, I pray mind that. By our
charitable disposition and doing good to our brethren, by this we know we are
true disciples of Jesus Christ, and this is that, that will assure our hearts,
will give us confidence to appear before God at the last day when he comes to
judge the world. And this is a point that the Apostle thinks so considerable,
that he goes over with it again in the next verse, Beloved if our hearts
condemn us not ( i. e. condemn us not as to this point of love and charity)
then have we confidence toward God; and whatsoever we ask, we shall receive of
him, because we do those things that are pleasing in his sight.

The last Text to this purpose that I desire may be taken notice of, 1 Pet. 4.8.
is that of S. Peter, Above all things my brethren have fervent charity among
your selves, for charity shall cover the multitude of sins. O how comfortable
are these words! there is none of us, even the best, but has a multitude of
sins to answer for; by what means now must we obtain, that these sins shall be
covered? Ps. 33.1.
that is, shall be forgiven; for covering of sins is the forgiveness of them in
the Scripture Language. Why, the Apostle has directed us to the method, above
all things put on charity, for it is charity that shall cover the multitude of
sins. Charity is of that power with God, that it alone, is able to overcome the
malignity of many of our sins and frailties, that would otherwise do us
mischief. If any thing can make atonement for the carelessness and the many
failings of our lives; and prevent the punishment that is due to them; it is to
be very charitable, and to do much good: Charity covers a multitude of sins in
this life. A great many temporal judgments, that would otherwise have fallen
upon us for our sins are hereby prevented, and that not only private ones but
public too: And I think it no Popery to affirm that Charity will cover a
multitude of sins in the other life also. That is, whoever is of a truly
charitable disposition, and does a great deal of good in his generation, though
he may have a great many infirmities and miscarriages to answer for; yet if he
be sincerely virtuous in the main, and so capable of the rewards of the other
world; his other failings will be overlooked, they will be buried in his good
deeds, and the man shall be rewarded not withstanding. Or if he be a vicious
person, and so must of necessity fall short of the glory that shall be
revealed; yet still in proportion, the good he has done in his life will cover
the multitude of sins. Though it will not be available for the making him
happy, because he is not capable of being so; yet it will be for the lessening
his punishment. He shall be in a much more supportable condition among the
miserable, than those that have been unmerciful, or cruel or uncharitable in
their lives. O therefore what remains, but that considering all these things, 1
Cor. 15.58.
we should be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in these works of the
Lord, for as much as we know that our labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
2 Pet. 1.5, etc.
Giving all diligence to add to Faith, Virtue; and to virtue, Knowledge; and to
knowledge, Temperance; and to temperance, Patience; and to patience, Godliness;
and to godliness Brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, Charity. By our
good works making our calling and election sure, (so some Copies have the 10 th
ver. of 1 Pet. 1.) that doing these things we may never fall; ver. 10.
but an entrance may be ministered to us abundantly into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

THE END.

