A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN, In
Bow-Church; on the feast of St. Michael, 1680. At the Election of The LORD
MAYOR for the Year ensuing.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

Clayton Mayor.
Jovis XXX. die Septembris 1680. Annoque Regni Regis Caroli Secundi Angliae,
etc. tricesimo secundo.
THis Court does desire Dr. Sharp to Print his Sermon preached yesterday at
Bow-Church, before the Election of the Lord Mayor.

Wagstaffe.

PSALM. cxij. 4. To the Upright there arises Light in the Darkness: --
GOdliness, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
has the promise of this life, as well as of that which is to come. Of this
Proposition of his, the Psalm we have now before us, may seem to be an
Explication or Paraphrase.

For in this Psalm Two things are designed, A description of the Pious Man; and
a description of his Blessedness in this Life: each of which is done in five
instances or particulars.

The terms wherein the Pious man is here described, are these following.

First, He is one that Fears God and greatly delights in his Commandments,
v. 1.

Secondly, He is one that is Righteous and Upright in his Conversation, v. 4.
and 6.

Thirdly, He is one that is Prudent and Discreet in the managing of his
Affairs, v. 5. He guides his affairs with discretion.

Fourthly, He is one whose Heart is fixed trusting in the Lord, v. 7.

Lastly, He is one that is extremely Charitable. He is gracious and full of
Compassion, v. 4. He shows favor and lends, v. 5. He has dispersed, he
has given to the poor, v. 9.

Now the Blessedness of such a man as this, as to this Life, is described in
the five instances following.

The first of which is, A great and Happy posterity, thus, v. 2. His seed shall
be mighty upon earth, the generation of the Upright shall be blessed.

The second is, A Plentiful and an Ample Fortune, thus in the 3d. v. Riches
and Plenteousness shall be in his house.

The third is, A lasting Fame and Reputation, thus again in the 3d. v. his
Righteousness remains for ever, and likewise in the 6th. v. He shall be had
in everlasting remembrance.

The fourth is, Honor and Power and Dignity, even such as shall excite the
Envy of the Wicked, thus in the 9th v. His horn shall be exalted with honor,
the wicked shall see it and shall be grieved, etc.

The fifth is, Great Safety and Peace in the midst of Dangerous and Troublesome
times, thus in the Text, To the Upright there arises Light in the Darkness. i.
e. Light in the greatest Straits and Difficulties; for that is the meaning of
Darkness in this place. Times of Darkness in the Scripture Language are Evil
and Difficult and Dangerous times. Now upon account of this Light that arises
to the Upright man in Evil times, it comes to pass as it follows, v. 6, 7, 8.
that such a one shall not be moved for ever, neither shall he be afraid of evil
tidings, for his heart is established, and he shall not shrink until he see
his desire upon his Enemies. Or as the Chaldee perhaps better renders it,
until he see redemption in distress.

This is the just Analysis of the whole Psalm. Now of these several Characters
whereby the Pious man is described, I have pitched upon that of his Vprightness
to give an account of and to recommend to you at this time. And of the several
Instances of the Blessedness of such a man I have pitched upon that of Safety
and Peace in the midst of Perilous and Troublesome times. These two points I
have chosen to entertain you upon, as judging them most suitable to the present
occasion, and to our present circumstances. And we find them both joined
together in the words of the Text, To the Upright there arises Light in the
Darkness.

Here then we have Two things to consider, First, The Person to whom the
Promise here made, or the Blessedness here mentioned does belong, It is the
Upright man. Secondly, The Promise, or the Blessedness it self, It is Light in
times of Darkness.

I begin with the Character of the Person to whom this Promise is made, He is
the Upright man, or as in our more common Language we express him, the Honest
man, the man of Integrity. We all know so well what is meant by these words,
that it would render the thing more difficult to offer Critically to give Light
to them. As all those General Terms, whereby a man's whole Duty is expressed in
Scripture, have their several respects and considerations which difference them
one from the other, though they be all equally Comprehensive: So has this term
of Vprightness. That which it immediately and particularly respects, is the
Goodness of a man's Principles, and the sutableness of his Actions to them. Or
thus, The Conformity of a man's mind to the Eternal Rules of Righteousness, and
the Conformity of his Actions to the Principles of his mind. This is that upon
account of which any person is denominated Upright, and contrary to this is all
Hypocritical and Partial dealings in matters of our Duty. So that if we would
give the definition of an Upright man, it should be in such terms as these, He
is a man that in all things follows the Dictates of his Conscience. Or, he is
One, that makes his Duty the Rule of his Actions. Or, he is One, that always
proposes to himself Righteous ends, and pursues those Ends in Righteous ways.

This is the general description of the Upright man: But for the more lively
display of him; and the rendering him, as more Amiable, so more Imitable, it
will be fit that we represent him a little more particularly under those
several Respects and Capacities in which his Uprightness is principally seen
and expressed.

And here we must consider him with respect to God, and with respect to Men.
Under the former Consideration we are to view his Religion, Under the latter
his Civil Conversation.

And none ought to be surpised that in the Character of an Upright man we take
notice of his Religious Carriage toward God. For in truth that is a point
which is Essentially necessary to Uprightness. Prove. 14. ^.
He (says Solomon) that walks in Vprightness fears the Lord. Indeed take
away Religion and the Fear of God, and the Foundation of Vprightness is
destroyed. For all the Principles of Conscience, and all the Obligation to live
up to those Principles, is thereby taken away. He that has no sense ^^^^od and
Religion, can never think himself bound to observe any Rules in his Actions and
behavior, but what are subservient to the carrying on his private sensual
worldly Interest: And consequently whatever is Inconsistent with that, be it
never so base and vile and injurious, he cannot take himself in point of Duty,
obliged to stick at it, when he has the least temptation to it. The result of
which is, That he may commit all the villainies in the world, and yet think
himself as Innocent, and his Actions as Commendable, as if he had been never so
Honest and Virtuous.

He therefore that is an Upright man, has a serious and hearty sense of God
and Religion upon his Spirit, and is above all things careful to preserve and
increase that sense. But then his conduct in this affair is much different from
that of ordinary pretenders to Religion.

For he is a man that does not content himself with a mere speculative belief,
or an outward Profession of the Truths of Religion; but does so far impress
them on his heart, that they influence his whole Life and Conversation. He does
not think it sufficient to be Orthodox in his Opinions; or to be a Member of a
True Church; or to be zealous in maintaining and promoting the Right way: But
he takes care to live as he believes; to practice sutably to the profession he
makes. As he holds fast the Form of Godliness; so he never fails to express the
power of it, in an Innocent and a Virtuous Life.

He is a man, that in the whole Conduct of his Religious affairs, minds
Conscience more than any selfish consideration. He takes not up his Principles
either out of Humor, or Passion; To advance his Interest, or to please a
Party: But he believes a thing because it is True, and Professes it because it
is his Duty. In matters of Religion he has the indifference of a Traveller,
whose great concernment is to arrive at his Journeys end; but for the way that
leads thither, be it high, or low, all is one to him, so long as he is but
certain that it is the Right way.

And as he does not choose his Religion out of worldly considerations: so
neither does he quit it upon such. But is resolute and constant in bearing
witness to the Truth against all opposition whatsoever. As he does not make
show of his Religion the more when it is in fashion, and when it may prove
advantageous to him: so neither does he practice it the less, when it may prove
Ignominious or Dangerous. He is obstinately Tenacious of his Principles when he
knows them to be good; and prepared to endure the utmost extremities rather
than violate the Laws and Dictates of his Conscience.

He is a man that thinks Religion too Sacred a thing to be prostituted to mean
purposes; and therefore he never uses it as an Instrument for the serving a
turn; never makes it a Cloak for the covering a private end, though he were
sure he could compass his designs by it. He knows that the greatest Impostures
have laid hid under this mask, and by such Artifices God has been often made a
Patron of the most horrid villainies.

He is a man, that does not place his Religion in outward forms and services;
or in little cheap duties that cost him nothing. He has a nobler sense of God
than to think that such things can alone recommend us to him: And therefore his
principal concernment is, about the great Indispensable Duties of Christianity.
The weightier matters of the Law, Matt. 23. 23.
Justice and Mercy and Faith. He has the everlasting Notions and differences
of Good and Evil, deeply engraven in his heart, and in the practicing or the
avoiding them, he chiefly lays out himself.

He is a man, that does not pick and choose out of Gods Commandments, which to
observe to the neglect of the rest: but endeavors Uprightly and Sincerely to
observe them all. He calls no sin little, because his temper inclines him to
it, or the course of his Life leads him more frequently into the Temptations of
it. But he has an hearty Uniform Aversion to every thing that is Evil. He
holds no secret friendship or correspondence with any Enemy of God; but fights
as resolutely, against his most agreeable and most gainful sins, as those that
he has less Temptation to upon those accounts.

He is a hearty enemy to all Factions in Religion, as knowing the life and soul
of Christianity is often eaten out by them. All dividing Principles he Abhors;
and as much as he loves Truth, he is not less concerned for Peace. And he is
better pleased with one Instance of his Charity in Composing, or his Zeal in
Suppressing Religious differences, than with twenty of his Skill and Abilities
in disputing them. For he knows that LOVE is more acceptable to God, than a
right Opinion; and to be a Martyr rather than divide and rend the Church,
Dionys. Alex. in Eusebius.
is not less Glorious than to be a Martyr for refusing to offer Sacrifice to
Idols.

Lastly, He is a man, Religious without noise; and uses no little Arts to make
his Piety taken notice of in the World. For he seeks not the praise of Men in
any thing he does, but studies to approve himself to God only. And therefore
he is as careful of his thoughts, as of his actions; and has the fame fear of
God, and regard of his duty, when no man sees him; as when he is in the most
public places.

These are the great strokes of Vprightness as to Religion. And whoever makes
good these Characters, may unquestionably conclude of himself, that he is an
Honest man to Godward, A true Israelite indeed in whom there is no guile.

Come we now, in the second place, To take a view of the Upright man in his
civil conversation: To give some account of him with reference to his carriage
and demeanor amongst men. And here again we must consider him under two
capacities, as a Private person, and as a Magistrate.

And First, As a Private person, The general Rule by which he frames and
modells his whole conversation, is such a prudent and diligent care of himself,
and his own good, as is not only consistent with, but does effectually tend to
promote the Good and Happiness of all others that he deals with. This is the
fundamental Principle which he lays down to observe in all his commerce with
Mankind. For he considers that every man in the world has a right to be happy
as well as himself: And he considers, that, as things are so contrived, that he
cannot be Happy without the assistance of others: So it is infinitely
reasonable that he in like manner should contribute his endeavors to the
making them Happy also. These now being the main principles of his mind, he
takes care in his whole conversation that his Actions and Carriage be suitable
to them, and bear some proportion with them.

And therefore, we may be sure, that he is a man exactly Just in all his
dealings, and would not knowingly do the least wrong or injury to any, though
he could gain never so much by it; and were he never so secure that he could do
it without discovery.

He is a man, that where he is trusted, is faithful to the uttermost. Never
making advantages of men's credulity, nor abusing the confidence they repose in
him.

He is one, that in point of fair dealing between man and man, is severe even
to Scrupulosity; and he would rather sit down with loss, than serve his own
ends by any practice that has but a bad report, that has but even the
appearance or suspicion of evil in it; though in the mean time he knows that
what is got by such practices is by some men accounted lawful gain.

He is a man of great Candor, and sweetness, and obligingness in his
behavior: But withal, as on one hand, he is careful not to run himself into
Inconveniences by his good nature: So on the other hand, the kindness and
good will he professes to all about him, is more than a compliment, or a
semblance of his countenance. For his fair speeches are always attended with
honest dealings; And what he once promises, he is punctual in making it good,
though it be to his own prejudice.

He is a man that loves a good Name and Reputation, as well as any one, and is
extremely tender of it; But yet he scorns to make use of any evil Arts, either
for the procuring, or preserving it.

And consequently he is a man, that hates all mean and servile compliance; and
will neither speak nor do any thing against the sense of his mind for the
humouring any. Flattery and dissimulation he abhors, and he dares speak his
mind, when he judges it fit and reasonable; even though he knows the doing it
will give offense.

And as he is perfectly averse to all Fawning and Flattery: so he is above Envy
and Detraction. He never lessens another man to make himself greater; nor looks
upon the prosperity of his neighbor with an evil eye; backbiting, and carrying
about idle stories is not the thing he lives by. He puts a fair construction
upon other men's words and actions, and will rather conceal a real fault, than
make it worse in the reporting it. He hopes and thinks the best of all men; and
rejoices in the happiness of those about him. He does as much good as he can;
and that good that is done by others, he is so far from envying, that he thanks
God for it as if he had done it himself.

He is a man of great Plainness and Simplicity; Apert and open, and free in all
his carriage. You may always know where to have him, for his words and his
thoughts always go together. And though he is careful not to be lavish of his
speech, nor at all times to discover all his mind: yet he is as careful, that
what he does speak shall be agreeable to truth; and he so speaks it that those
that hear him, may take measures of his mind from it.

He is a man, who though he be very watchful of opportunities to do himself
good, and very sagacious in spying dangers, and avoiding them: yet he never
uses any indirect means, either for the benefiting or securing himself. He
scorns to make advantages of any man's necessities: Nor will he undermine
another, for the effecting of his own designs. Deceit and Collusion are
strangers to all his dealings. Above all things he hates a Trick; and in his
account to be a man of Intrigues, a cunning or a shrewd fellow, is but a more
gentile term for a knave.

In a word, The designs he proposes to himself, are all Honest and Just, and
such as tend to the good of the Community as well as his Own, but to no man's
loss or hindrance. And the means he uses for accomplishing these designs, are
all fair and Regular; and so free is both his Heart and his Actions from all
Imposture, that he cares not if all the world were privy to them.

This is the man that is Upright in his Conversation toward Men. The Man that
with the wisdom of the Serpent joins the Innocence and simplicity of the Dove.

But thus much of the Upright man as a Private Person; Let us now view him a
little under a more conspicuous character. Let us consider him as a Magistrate
entrusted with the management of public affairs. (Which is the Second
particular we are to insist on under this head) And here the Upright man is
still the same, acted by the same Principles, pursuing still the same designs
we have hitherto mentioned. Only his Virtues have another Sphere and another
Object, and therefore require another consideration.

The great thing he proposes to himself, in taking any Office upon him, is the
glory of God, and the public good. The Honor and Dignity of the place, and
the other worldly advantages that may attend it, are but secondary
considerations with him. The first is his main design which he steadily and
constantly pursues throughout the whole Administration of his Office; The other
is never thought on but with subordination to the former.

And therefore acting from such Principles as these, we may easily conclude him
to be a man whose Counsels and actions are not steered by the wind of popular
applause, but by the sense of his duty. He studies not to ingratiate himself
with men, but to discharge a good Conscience. He is more careful to be a
Good-Magistrate than to be a Loved one; though (so happily are things
contrived, that) in being the former, he rarely fails of the latter.

The consequence of which is, That he is a man of great Courage and Boldness,
and Resolution, He dares to do whatsoever is fit, and just, and conducive to
the public good, what discouragements soever he meet with. Neither the menaces
of the mighty, nor the murmurings of the multitude, can fright him from his
Duty. For he dreads none but God; nor fears to do any thing but what is
misbecoming him.

But then he is a man that does not resolve things hastily, and upon the
consideration of a few particulars, but takes good advice, and uses mature
deliberation before he determines himself. He does nothing precipitately: But
weighs all things, represented to him, as impartially as he can. His ears are
open to all parties, and he debates what is said, without passion or prejudice
or prepossession; And he always considers more what is spoken, than who it is
that speaks it.

He is a man whom you cannot so much disoblige as by attempting to corrupt him.
Neither the regard of his profit, nor his kindness to his friends, can in
matters of Right, tempt him to act against his inward sense. As to these things
he is as blind as Justice herself, and you may as soon draw the Sun from his
line, as him from the steady and strict paths of Righteousness.

He is a man that looks upon his Office rather as a burden, than a preferment.
And therefore he is wonderfully solicitous about the well discharging it. His
care and study is chiefly employed upon the public, and he rather suffers the
miscarriage of his own affairs than that the community by his negligence should
receive any prejudice. While others are doing their own business, he is
watching for the common good; for he always remembers that he is a public
person, and that the time and strength that God affords him are not his, but
theirs, by and for whom he is entrusted.

He is a man, that imploys all his power and interest, as much as is possible,
for the maintenance of the worship and service of God, and the defense and
encouragement of the true Religion. For he considers God, as the first and
principal person to be respected in all Governments and Societies, as being
not only the Author but the Head of them. And he remembers that Religion does
so much influence the Civil State, that the happiness and ruin of Cities and
Kingdoms are linked with the well or ill management of it.

And in pursuance of this his Zeal for God and Religion he takes care, as much
as in him lies, to encourage those Persons that are Virtuous and Good, and to
suppress and bring out of credit all Vice and Debauchery, all Impiety and
Irreligion, all Faction and Disorder; together with the Maintainers and
Abettors of them.

He is a Man, that effectually makes good Job 's Character of himself, Job 29.
14, etc.
who was also a Magistrate: He puts on Righteousness and it clothes him, his
Judgment is a Robe and a Diadem: He is Eyes to the blind, and Feet he is to the
lame: He is a Father to the Poor, and the Cause which he knows not he
searches out: He breaks the Iaws of the Wicked, and plucketh the Spoil out
of his teeth.

He is a Man, that looks upon himself to have a Trust, both with reference to
those above him, and those under him: And therefore he is careful to carry
himself with an even steady hand, with respect to both; studiously
endeavoring, both to preserve his Allegiance to his Prince, and his Fidelity
to the Public: Neither invading the Rights of the one, nor injuring the
Liberties of the other.

He is one, that, next to the Honor of God, studies the Peace and Quiet of the
Place where he is concerned. And therefore, as on one hand he is watchful in
spying out Dangers, and quick in applying such Remedies to them as are proper
in the Place and Station he holds: So on the other side he neither takes nor
gives the Alarm upon every slight Surmize, or popular Apprehension. He makes
the best of all things that happen; and by his Prudence and Moderation
endeavors to extinguish growing Flames, rather than add Fuel to them; To
calm and allay men's Jealousies and Animosities, rather than to excite and
increase them.

Lastly, to conclude; He is a Man, that fears God; that honors the King; that
is observant of the Laws; that is true to the Government; and that meddles not
with them that are given to change.

Having thus given you an account of the Upright man, under the several
principal relations in which he stands; I come now in the second place, for the
comfort of all that are such, and for the encouragement of all others to
endeavor to be such; to set forth the advantages and privileges, that such a
man enjoys in evil and dangerous times. To the Upright there arises Light in
the Darkness.

Darkness, as I told you before, is a word by which the Scripture expresses
any kind of straits, or difficulties, or adversities. Thus Job 15. 21. Darkness
is there opposed to Prosperity; thus Lam. 3. 2. I am the man, (says the
Prophet) that have seen Affliction, by the rod of his wrath he has led me and
brought me into Darkness. And thus likewise, to name no more Texts, Joel 2. 2.
The day of Gods Visitation upon Jerusalem is called a Day of Gloominess and
Darkness; a day of Clouds and thick Darkness.

This now being the Notion of Darkness: when it is said in the Text, To the
Upright man there arises Light in the Darkness; By Light we may understand any
one of these three things, that is to say,

By Light, we may understand Light for his Guidance and Direction; and then the
sense is, That in critical and perilous times, the Upright man of all others,
will be best enabled to order and manage his affairs.

Or secondly, By Light we may understand Safety and Defense, as the word is
sometimes taken in Scripture; and then the sense is, That in Evil times the
Upright man walks most free from danger; He of all others may expect security
and protection in a common Calamity.

Or thirdly, By Light we may understand Peace and Joy (as that likewise is
another usual sense of the word,) and then the meaning is, That in evil times,
let things happen as they will, though it should be the fortune of the Upright
man to be oppressed in the crowd; Yet this happiness he will always have, that
his mind will be at perfect ease and peace. Nothing shall ever discompose him,
but in the midst of his sufferings his heart shall be replenished with
perpetual Comfort.

In any one of these senses the Text may be taken, and in all the Three it
fails not to be made good to the Upright man.

First, To the Upright man there arises Light in the Darkness, taking Light
for Guidance and Direction. Be the times never so dark, he has this happiness,
that he is rarely at a loss how to steer his course. He finds his way easily
when other men are quite bewildred; and he readily expedites himself out of
such difficulties as those that act by other principles find themselves
grievously entangled with. This is a thing that should mightily recommend the
practice of Uprightness, especially in evil times; and that it is really
attended with this advantage, must needs be acknowledged upon these two
accounts.

First, To an Upright man his way lies plainer and is more easily seen and
discovered.

And secondly, He has a greater Light to see it by, than those that take other
measures in the management of their designs.

First, The Upright man of all others most easily sees his way, for it lies
plain and even, and straight before him. Whereas the ways of vice and
wickedness are extremely crooked, full of windings and turnings.

Whoever pursues evil designs, and is a slave to base affections, must
necessarily entangle himself in infinite Labyrinths, through the course of his
life. For having several ends to pursue, and those many times inconsistent one
with another: it cannot be avoided but that in many circumstances he lights
into, he will be extremely at a loss how to behave himself. If he go this way,
then will something come to Light, which he studiously endeavors to conceal;
If he go that way, then he disobliges some man or some party whose interest is
necessary to support him; If he go a third way, he destroys that which is his
main design. At what a loss now in such a case as this must a man needs be in
the determining himself? Upon what a rack is his understanding put, to get
fairly rid of these difficulties? And yet such Dilemmas, as these, is every one
that walks not Uprightly, ever and anon crampt with in his Counsels and
Deliberations.

But suppose he get well over the present difficulty, yet he is but where he
was: For upon the next emergency of affairs he is as much puzzled and nonplust
as before. The same method will not serve him twice for the carrying on his
designs. As often as new occasions arise, so often must he alter his Counsels,
and take new measures: so that he is always unsteady; often inconsistent with
himself; utterly unresolved what man he shall be, or what part he shall act, in
the next scene that offers itself.

These difficulties and perplexities the man of Intrigues is always hampered
with; and they necessarily arise from the various flexures and turnings of the
way that leads to his ends: But the contrary of all this, is the Lot of the
Upright man. For his way neither lies on this side, nor on that side, but
always straight forward. He has but one great end to pursue, and that is to
discharge a good conscience: all his other concernments are wholly regulated by
that. The consequence of which is, That he has no clashing of interests to
perplex his deliberations; No little turns that must be served, to divert him
to the right hand or to the left, but he always looks straight before him: so
that all his resolutions are easily made; most of those difficulties that
entangle other men are quite cut off and avoided; his Counsels and his Methods
are always the same; and he is seldom at a loss how to behave himself upon a
new emergency. In a word, his way is commonly so plain that he stands in need
of little advice or instruction for the finding it. And this is that which
Solomon has told us, The Integrity of the Upright shall guide him. Prove. 11.
3. cap. 4. 18.
For, the path of the just is a shining light.

But secondly, If it be his Lot to fall into such circumstances, where his way
is not so plain; but that there is need of great advice and deliberation what
course to steer; as it often happens, especially in such times as the Text
speaks of: Yet here the Upright man has the advantage of all those that walk
by different principles; For (all other things equal) he has more Light to
direct him in the finding of his way than they have.

There is this difference, between a man that walks Uprightly in all his
conversation, and a man that has sinister ends of his own to pursue: The
former has always the free use of his Intellectual Powers, and can exert his
reason in its highest perfection, and to the best advantage: Whereas the latter
is horribly clouded in his discerning faculties. He has constantly a mist
before his eyes, which hinders him from rightly distinguishing the objects he
looks upon; and consequently occasions many blunders and mistakes in the choice
of his way.

My meaning is this, Whoever frames his life by other Measures than those of
Honesty and Conscience; whoever intemperately pursues his private ends, or is
a slave to inordinate passions, let them be of what kind they will: these
things do clap such a Byas upon his Soul, as renders him utterly incapable of
making a right judgment of things before him, and consequently must unavoidably
expose him to a great many dangerous errors in the management of his affairs;
and this oftentimes in matters that have no great difficulty in them.

Take any one of the passions that usually govern the man that has no
principles of Conscience, Let it be either Fear, or Envy, or Revenge, or
Vainglory, or Avarice, or Ambition; it is a wonderful thing to see, how
monstrously they distort his Reason, and what odd extravagant courses they put
him upon; and this even in plain easy cases; Nay, though the man, in other
things, where his affections have no influence, be a very wise man. One could
scarce imagine the power that these things have over a man's Judgment; but that
we every day see such strange instances of it.

But now the Upright man is not in the least obnoxious to any of these
inconveniences: For having no turns to serve but those that are honest and
good; having no private Affections or Passions to be gratified; he looks upon
things in a pure and simple Light, and not through a colored glass. And
consequently his conceptions of them, as far as humane endeavors can secure,
are according to their nature; and his determinations and resolutions are
suitable to his conceptions; that is to say, are reasonable, and fit, and such
as become the occasion. As his main design is to do in all instances that
which is best; so that design preserves him from mistaking in: his Notions of
what is best. His Reason and Understanding are free and at liberty; and if
there do arise any knot or difficulty, he of all others is likely to untie it
with the greatest ease. And this is that which the Psalmist has told us, Psalm.
111. 10.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, a good Understanding have
all they that do thereafter.

But secondly, If we take Light, for Safety and Security, for Defense and
Protection, as it is sometimes used in the holy Scripture: In this sense also
Light arises to the Upright in times of Darkness. For such a man may in the
worst of times, above all other men promise these things to himself. And this
is that which Solomon tells us, Prove. 10. 9.
He that walks Uprightly walks surely. And indeed this seems to be the
thing principally intended in the Text; The Light which is here said to arise
to the Upright in Darkness, seems chiefly to respect his Security from Danger
in the times of a common Calamity; as appears by what immediately follows;
viz. He shall not be moved for ever; he shall not be afraid of evil tidings;
his heart shall not shrink until he see his desire upon his Enemies.

Now this Security in times of Danger the Upright man may expect upon these two
accounts. First, His Uprightness in its own nature (as things are contrived and
carried on in the world) does above all other things conduce to it. And
secondly, He is upon account thereof of entitled to Gods more particular
protection.

First, The Paths of Uprightness are in themselves such as naturally tend to
secure a man in Evil and Dangerous times.

For first, They do really contribute to the Good and Happiness of the Public,
in the which every man's private safety is in a manner bound up. As by
wickedness (they are the words of Solomon) a City is overthrown: Prove. 11. 11.
so by the blessing of the Upright it is exalted. Every Upright man, is really
a benefactor to the Public: For by him and such as he, Cities and Kingdoms are
supported which would otherwise fall into confusion. The whole Body politic
owes its preservation to the Virtuous Care, and Honest Endeavors of Upright
men. And every such man in particular reaps the benefit of such his Endeavors;
For he shares in his own person that protection and security he procures to the
Community. And if he had not been Upright, as the public would have fared
something the worse for it: So it is certain he in his private Capacity, would
in the same proportion, have fared the worse also.

But this consideration of the conduciveness of Honesty and Uprightness to the
good of the Public, I direct chiefly to those that are in Office and
Authority; for really their carriage and conduct has a more than ordinary
stroke in the good or bad success of the common affairs. And therefore it
concerns them especially to look to themselves that they be Men of Integrity,
and keep a good Conscience in the discharge of their trust. Upon their Upright
walking, the safety and preservation of the Public does more depend than upon
the Endeavors of a thousand private men. Though they are but particular
persons, yet being vested with Authority; their Conduct and Management has as
great an influence upon the common good or the common ruin, as if they were a
Multitude; and single as they are, they do in a great measure carry the
balance of the public Fortune in their hands.

But secondly, The conduciveness of every man's Uprightness, to the public good
is not the only consideration, upon which it is recommendable, as a means for
obtaining safety and security in evil times. For let the public go as it will:
In the worst of times; if any man can in probability be thought able to shift
for himself; if any man can in reason hope to escape the Violence and Iniquity
of the times; the Upright man, the man of Honesty and Integrity is likelyest to
be the man: I say in reason he is likelyest and as things commonly go.

For he of all others takes the surest course to preserve himself; and is least
obnoxious either to the malice or the envy, the undermining or the rapine, of
open Enemies or pretended Friends.

All knavery and dishonest dealings set a man up for a mark to be shot at; but
Uprightness and Integrity is a shield and a protection.

The Upright man does so order the course of his life, that he usually avoids
all those rocks that other men split upon, and which usually prove their ruin.
The undoing of most men even in evil times, lies commonly at their own door,
and they may thank themselves for it. If they had been sufficiently careful of
themselves, the malignity of the times would scarce have touched them. It is
generally either very great carelessness and gross neglect of their own affairs;
or the lavishness or intemperance of their Tongues; or an ill gotten Estate; or
private Injuries they have done, and private grudges they have contracted; or
pragmaticalness in other men's matters; or factious adherence to a party; or
breach of trust; or treachery to the public, or the like: I say, it is these
things that do most commonly draw mischief upon men's heads, and lay the
foundations of all those straits and difficulties in which they are entangled
even in the worst of times. But now the Upright man does in a great measure
avoid all these occasions; for his principles do oblige him to walk in a way
that is diametrically opposite to the things I have mentioned.

The Upright man treads upon such sure foundations, and his ways are so
universally approved by mankind; that, as things usually go, no man will easily
offer him injury but it will be to his own detriment.

The Rule he walks by is such, as does effectually procure him the most friends
and the fewest enemies, for he takes the course to oblige all sorts of men; and
consequently he cannot easily fail, of finding those who will use their utmost
endeavor to assist and rescue him when he lights into any difficult
circumstances.

His righteous conversation is so unexceptionable; and so prudent he is in the
management of his affairs; that those that love him not, will not easily find
an occasion to do him much mischief.

Even those that have no acquaintance with him, yet have so much concernment
for Honesty and Uprightness in general, that they will study to give him what
assistance and defense they can, out of a natural sense that it is fit a good
man should be protected; and that, for any thing they know, his case and
circumstances may come to be theirs.

And those that have lost all sense of good and evil, yet out of care to
preserve their credit amongst men (amongst the generality of whom, to be an
honest man will always signify a great deal; for when all is done, it is
impossible to extirpate the notions of Virtue and Honesty out of the minds of
the multitude:) I say, in point of their own credit and interest they are
concerned to be careful how they oppress such a man.

But whatever become of these things; how ineffectual soever all humane means
may be, for the securing and preserving an Upright man in evil times: Yet in
the second place, he has another Anchor to stay himself upon, which is more
firm and stable, and which will not fail him: and that is the protection of God
Allmighty: The care of his particular providence to which he is entitled.

Men may plot and design; may model and contrive; may order and manage things
as they please: But when all is done, it is God that governs the world; and
either blasts their most fair and hopeful projects; or if he suffers them to
succeed, turns them to what use and purposes he pleases: Now this God that
Rules and disposes all things (even the most particular; For not a sparrow
does fall to the ground without his will; and by him the very hairs of our head
are numbered) This God has engaged himself, to take care in an especial manner,
of those that fear him, and walk Uprightly before him.

He has passed his Promise over and over again, Psalm. 37. v. 6, 19, 24, 40, 41.
that he will make their Righteousness as clear as the Light, and their just
dealing as the noon day. They shall not be confounded in the perilous time, and
in the days of dearth they shall have enough. Though they fall they shall not
be cast down, for the Lord upholdeth them with his hand. In a word, that he
will be their strength in the time of trouble; he will stand by them and save
them, he will deliver them from the ungodly; he will save them because they put
their trust in him.

It would be endless to quote all the passages in the book of God that speak to
this purpose. And therefore I shall dismiss this point with that remarkable one
which we find in the Prophecy of Isaiah, Cap. 15. v. 16.
wherein we may see, both the Upright man, and his security in evil times,
described in very lively colors. He that walks Righteously and speaks
Uprightly; He that despises the gain of oppressions; that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes; that stops his ears from hearing of blood; and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil: He shall dwell on high; his place of
defense shall be the munitions of Rocks; his bread shall be given him; his
water shall be sure. The sense of which in short is this, That whoever walks
Uprightly and makes a conscience of his ways: such a man shall be always under
the watchful care and protection of the Divine Providence. And never will God
suffer him to fall into any grievous distress; but he shall always have such a
portion of the good things of this world afforded to him, as will be sufficient
not only to make his life supportable, but easy.

And in truth, The experience of the world generally makes this good: Honest
and Upright men for the most part, in the most public calamities fare well; at
least much better than those that are not so. In their greatest extremities
when they have no prospect of deliverance from any humane means, strange
extraordinary unexpected succor and relief does arrive to them. In a word,
that care of the special Providence of God attends them that they are never
miserable, however they may be now and then cut short in their outward fortunes.

But it must be acknowledged, that though Piety and Uprightness has the
promise of security in this Life; and that promise for the most part, and in
general speaking is made good: Yet there are a great many exempt cases. God may
see it fit now and then to suffer an Upright man to be oppressed, and to perish
in a common ruin; and this without any violation of his Promises of this kind,
which do indeed respect no more than the ordinary common events and successes
of things. But yet even in this case still there will To the Upright arise
Light in the Darkness; that is, Light in the third sense we have given of the
word, viz. taking Light for Peace and Joy and Comfort. And this is that which
the Psalmist tells us in another place, Light is sown for the Righteous, Psalm.
97. 11.
and Gladness for the Upright in heart.

Whatever Afflictions come upon the Upright man, yet he has this advantage of
other men, that he bears them infinitely more lightly than they do; They are
really no great disturbance to him, for he injoys the same calmness and
serenity of mind; the same peace and quiet, and contentment that ever he did.

His present sufferings are rather matter of rejoicing and triumph to him, than
of discontent and repining; for he knows that they come upon him, by the
Counsel and Disposal of the great Governor of the World: And he knows that he
has so sincerely approved himself to God, and is so well beloved by him; that
he should not have been ordered into these circumstances, had it not been
really for his good. And this consideration does so effectually support him
under all the difficulties that he has to conflict with, that he not only
sits down easily and quietly, but is very well pleased with the dispensations
of the Divine Providence toward him; how ungrateful soever they may be to
flesh and blood.

Let what will happen to him, he is full of Peace and Joy. For he has met with
no disappointment of his designs. His great aim was to please God; and his
Conscience from Gods word assures him that he has done it; and he has nothing
to do farther but to wait for the happy time, when the secrets of all hearts
shall be revealed, and every man's Counsels and Actions shall be made manifest,
and then he doubts not to receive approbation and praise, and a great Reward in
that. Day of the Lord Jesus. And so much the rather, because this light
affliction, wherewith he is now exercised, he is assured, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
will work for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory.

To conclude, Whatever his sufferings be; he will live and die in a profound
peace; perfectly satisfied with all Gods dealings toward him: And his Life and
Death will verify to all that know him that advice and observation of the
Psalmist; Psalm. 37. 37.
Mark the Perfect man, and behold the Upright, for the end of that man is Peace.

THE END.

