A SERMON Preached at the Second GENERAL MEETING OF THE GENTLEMEN, and others
in and near LONDON,

Who were Born within the COUNTY of YORK, In the Church of St. Mary-le-Bow,
February 17. 1679/80.

By JOHN SHARP, D. D. Rector of St. Giles in the Fields, and Chaplain to the
Right Honorable the Lord High Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head, in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

To my Honored FRIENDS and COUNTRYMEN, Mr. William Petyt Mr. Richard Graham
Mr. John Cook Mr. Mich. Wrightson Mr. Tob. Humphrys Mr. Anth. Lawson Mr. John
Short Mr. Francis Boynton Mr. Peter Short Mr. Gab. Wettenhall Mr. Arthur
Sedgwick Mr. Thomas Watson
Stewards of the last Yorkshire Feast.
GENTLEMEN,
I Now at length Present you with that Sermon which at your desire I Preached
at the Second Anniversary Meeting of our Contrymen, and which you were
pleased so far to Approve as to Request the Publication of it. That I have not
performed your Request so soon as might be expected, I hope you will pardon me,
since I had not till this time a convenient leisure to Transcribe my Papers for
the Press. If this plain Discourse, now that it is public, do any way conduce
to promote Doing Good which is the Argument of it, I shall thank God for the
Success, and You for putting me upon the Attempt.

Gentlemen, I am Your Affectionate Countryman, Friend and Servant, JOHN
SHARP.

A SERMON PREACHED At the Second general Meeting of the Gentlemen and others in
and near London, who were Born within the County of York.
ECCLES. iii. 10. I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to
rejoice and to do good in his life.
THis Book of Ecclesiastes gives us an account of the several Experiments that
Solomon had made in order to the finding out wherein the Happiness of Man in
this World does consist; and these Words are one of the conclusions he drew
from those Experiments.

No man had ever greater Opportunities of Trying all the ways wherein men
generally seek for Contentment than he had; and no man did ever more
industriously apply himself to, or took a greater liberty in enjoying those
good things that are commonly most admired than he did: And yet after all his
Labor and all his Enjoyments he found nothing but Emptiness and Dissatisfaction.

He thought to become Happy by Philosophy, giving his heart, as he tells us, to
seek and search out Eccles. 1. 13.
all the things that come to pass under the Sun: Yet upon Trial, he found all
this to be Vanity and vexation of Spirit.

He applied his mind to Political Wisdom and other sorts of Knowledge, and his
Seize in that kind were greater than of any that were before him; yet he
experienced at last that in Wisdom ver. 18.
was much grief, and he that increases Knowledge increases Sorrow.

He proved his heart (as he tells us) with Mirth and Cap. 2. ver. 1, 3.
Wine and all sorts of Sensual Pleasures to find if these were good for the
Sons of men: and yet so far was he from his desired satisfaction in these
things, that he was forced to say of Laughter that it was mad, and of Mirth
what good does it. ver. 2.


He turned himself to works of Pomp and Magnificence, he built him stately
Houses, and made him Gardens, and Vineyards, and Orchards, and ver 4.
Fountains. He increased his Possessions, and gathered Silver and Gold and the
precious Treasures of Kings and ver. 8.
of the Provinces. He got him a vast Retinue, and kept the most splendid Court
that ever any Prince of that Country did: yet (as he tells us) when he came to
look upon all the works that his hands had ver. 11.
wrought, and on the labor that he had labored to do, behold all was vanity
and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun.

But wherein then is there any Profit if not in these things? What is that good
that the sons of men are to apply themselves to in order to their living as
comfortably as the state of things here will allow? This question (after an
intimation of the uncertainty and perplexedness of all humane events, but
withal of the exactness of the Providence of God who has made every thing
beautiful in its season, He thus resolves in the words of the Text, I know
(says he) that there is no good in them but for a man to rejoice and do good
in his life, that is to say,

I have found by long experience that all the Happiness that is to be had in
the good things of this life does arise from these two things, Rejoicing in the
enjoyment of them, and doing Good to others with them while we live. Take away
these two Uses and there is no good in them.

Or if you please we may Interpret the first part of his Proposition not of
things but of men thus: I I know there is no good in them, i. e. I am convinced
that there is nothing so good for the sons of men; or, nothing that more
contributes to their happiness in this world, than that every man should
rejoice and do good in his life. And to this purpose the words are rendered by
several Interpreters, but it is no matter which of the senses we pitch upon,
since in effect they come both to one thing.

Two things then, Solomon here recommends to every one that would live
comfortably in this world, Rejoicing and doing Good: and I do not know what can
be more proper and seasonable to be recommended and insisted on to you at this
time and on this occasion, than these two things; for the putting them in
practice makes up the whole design of this Meeting.

We are here so many Brethren met together to Rejoice and to do Good. To
Rejoice together in the sense and acknowledgment of Gods mercies and Blessings
to us, and in the enjoyment of Society one with another: And to do Good not
only by increasing our Friendship and Mutual Correspondence, but by joining
together in a cheerful Contribution to those our Countrymen that need our
Charity. To entertain you therefore upon these Two Points seems to be my Proper
Business.

But in treating of them I shall make bold to invert the order in which they
are put in the Text, and shall first speak of doing Good though it be last
named, and shall afterward treat of Rejoicing. The truth is* doing good in the
order of nature goes before Rejoicing, for it is the Foundation of it. There
can be no true joy in the Possession or use of any worldly blessings, unless we
can satisfy our selves we have done some good with them. It is the doing good
that sanctifies our other enjoyments and makes them matter of Rejoicing.

Now in treating of this Argument I shall briefly endeavor these Three things.

First, I shall earnestly recommend to you the Practice of doing good upon
several Considerations. Secondly, I shall represent the Practicableness of it,
by showing the several ways which every person (though in the meanest
Circumstances) is capable of doing good. Thirdly, I shall make two or three
Inferences by way of Application.
I begin with the First thing, seriously to recommend the practice of doing
good.

But where shall I begin to speak, either of the Obligations that lie upon us,
or of the Benefits and Advantages that do accrue to us by doing good in our
lives? or having begun, where shall I make an end? the subject is so copious
that the study of a whole life cannot exhaust it. The more we consider it,
still the more and the weightier Arguments will present themselves to us to
engage us in the practice of it: and the more we practice it, still the more
shall we desire so to do, and the more happy and Blessed shall we find our
selves to be.

For, to do good is nothing else but to act according to the frame and make of
our Beings. It is to gratify those Inclinations and Appetites that are most
strongly rooted in our Natures; such as Love and Natural Affection, Pity and
Compassion, a Desire of Friends and a Propensity to knot our selves into
Companies and Societies: what are all these but so many stimuli, so many
powerful incitements of nature to put us upon doing good offices one to another?

To do good is the end of all those Acquisitions, of all those Talents, of all
those Favors and Advantages that God has blessed us with, it is the proper use
we are to put them to. If we do not employ them this way, we are so far from
being better for them that we are much worse. What will signify our Wit and
good Humor, our Strength of Reason and Memory, our Wisdom and Knowledge, our
Skill in Arts, and Dexterity in managing Business, our Wealth and Greatness,
our Reputation and Interest in the world, I say what will all these signify if
they do not render us more Useful and Beneficial to others? That which sets the
price and value upon every worldly blessing, is the Opportunity it affords us
of doing good.

To do good seems to be the foundation of all the Laws of Nature, the supreme
Universal Law; it is that by which the World is supported, and take that away,
all* would presently fall into confusion, And perhaps if it were particularly
examined, it would be found that all the other Natural Laws may be reduced to
this and are ultimately to be resolved into it. It is a question whether there
be any natural Standard whereby we can measure the Virtue or the Viciousness of
any Action, but the Influence that it has to promote or hinder the doing of
good. This is that that seems to stamp Virtue and Vice.

To do good is the great Work for the sake of which we were sent into the
world, and no man lives farther to any purpose than as he is an Instrument of
doing good. Be our lives otherwise never so busy and full of action, yet if
others receive no benefit by them, we cannot give our selves any tolerable
account of our time, we have in effect lived idly and done nothing.

To do good is that which of all other services is most acceptable to God, it
is that which he has laid the greatest stress upon in the Scripture, it is
that which he has with the most earnest and affectionate perswasives, with the
strongest Arguments, with the greatest promises and with the most dreadful
threatenings enforced upon us. It is that which he has chosen before all
Sacrifices and all Religious worship strictly so called to be served with. It
is that which he has appointed for the great Expression both of our
Thankfulness for his Benefits, and of our Love and Devotion to him. Lastly it
that which Moses and the Prophets make the Sum of the Old Law, and Christ and
his Apostles the Sum of the New.

And very great Reason there is for it; for to do good is to become most like
to God. It is that which of all other Qualities gives us the greatest
resemblance of his Nature and Perfections, for perfect 1 John 4. 8.
Love and Goodness is the very Nature of God, and the Root of all his other
Attributes; and there was never any Action done, any work wrought by him
throughout the vast Tracts of infinite space, from the Beginning of time to
this Moment, but was an Expression of his Love, and an instance of doing good,
(nay I doubt not to say, the most severe acts of his Justice and Vengeance have
all been such) And therefore with great reason has our blessed Lord Mat. 5.
44, 45.
told us, that the way to become the Children of our Heavenly Father is to do
good to all, with the same Freedom and Unreservedness that God makes his Sun to
shine upon the World.

And of this our Blessed Savior himself was the most illustrious Example that
ever appeared in the world, so that to do good is that which does most truly
and perfectly render us the Disciples and Followers of Jesus, makes us really
be what we pretend we are. His whole life (as the Gospel tells us) was but a
continual going about doing good. The great Design of his Coming from Heaven,
and of all that he spoke, and of all that he did, and of all that he suffered
upon Earth, was the benefiting of others. And he has left it as the great
distinguishing Badge and Character, whereby his Disciples should be known from
other men, that they should love one another even as he had loved them, Joh.
13. 34, 35.
that is (as his Apostle expounds him) they should love and do good to that
degree as to lay down 1 John 3. 16.
their lives for the brethren.

But to do good is not only our greatest Duty but our greatest Interest and
Advantage, which is that that Solomon chiefly refers to in the Text. It is
certain that no man can take a more Effectual way to render his Being in the
world Happy and Comfortable to him (according to the ordinary course and event
of things) in what Condition or Circumstances soever he is placed, than to do
all the good he can in his life; so that though a man that lays out himself in
this way, seems only to respect the good of other people, yet in true reckoning
he most consults his own profit.

For to do good in the natural way to raise us friends, who shall be obliged to
contribute their Endeavors to the furthering our honest designs; to the
upholding and securing us in our Prosperity, and to the succouring and
relieving us when we are in any evil Circumstances, such is the Contrivance and
the Constitution of this World, that no man can subsist of himself, but stands
in continual need of others both for their comfortable Society and their
necessary Assistance in his Affairs. Now of all men living the Good man who
makes it his Business to oblige all about him, is most likely to be the best
befriended.

To do good is the truest way to procure to a man's self a Good name and
Reputation in the World, which as it is a thing desirable upon many accounts,
so it is a singular Advantage to a man for the carrying on his secular designs.
Nay to do good is to Embalm a man's name and to transmit it with a grateful
Odor to posterity. The memory of a good Prove. 10. 7
man shall be blessed. And the sense of mankind has always been, that too much
honor could not be given to the name of those that have done good in their
generation.

But which is a great deal more than all this, to do good is the most certain
effectual means to procure the blessing of God upon our endeavors, and to
entitle our selves to his more especial care and providence and Protection: So
that let what will come; in all circumstances and conditions the good man has
the greatest assurance that all things shall at least be tolerably well with
him, and that he shall never be miserable. Trust in the Psalm. 37. ver. 3.
Lord (says David) and be doing good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and
verily thou shall be fed.

Nay further, to do good is to entail a blessing upon our Children after us. I
have been young and Ibid. v. 25.
now am old (says the same Psalmist) yet saw I never the Righteous (that is
the merciful and good man, for that is the Notion of the word in that place and
in most others) such an one saw I never forsaken nor his seed begging their
bread.

Lastly to conclude this point, To do good (besides all these advantages that
attend it) is most to consult our own peace, and to make the best provision
possible for our pleasure and delight. Charity (as Dr. Hammond used to say) is
really a piece of Sensuality. And Epicurus himself the great Master of
Voluptuousness would confess that it was not only more Brave but more Pleasant
to do kindnesses than to receive them. And certainly every good man will find
it so, for as the exercise of Charity and Beneficence is as truly a
gratification of our Natural Inclinations and Appetites as any other action or
thing that causes pleasure to us: So is it also a gratification of those
Appetites which are the highest and the noblest we have. Now by how much the
appetite that is gratified is more noble and divine; by so much must the
delight that arises from that gratification be more exquisite. So that it was
no very great Hyperbole of our Divine Poet when he said that

-- -- -- -- -- All joys go less
Than that one joy of doing kindnesses.
And which is further to be considered, it is not with this pleasure as it is
with most others that vanish with the enjoyment, nay often leave bitterness and
melancholy upon the mind after they are gone off. For to do good is a permanent
pleasure, a pleasure that will last as long as our lives. The memory of our
good actions will always be accompanied with Delight and Satisfaction; when all
our other passed Enjoyments prove matters of anguish and torment to us upon our
reflections on them, these will be a refreshment; and the nearer we approach to
death* still the more comfort we shall find in them. Would we therefore
treasure up to our selves a stock of lasting peace and joy to support us in all
conditions of our life and so make our passage easy at our death, let us do
all the good we can.

I think I have said enough to convince any one of the truth of Solomon's
Proposition that there is nothing better for a man, nothing that more concerns
him either in point of duty or happiness than to do good in his life. Much more
might be said, and what has been said might have been said with more
advantage, and greater evidence if it had been fit to insist upon every
particular: but I will pursue this argument no further, but proceed to the
second general point I proposed, which is to set before you the practicableness
of this great duty, by showing the several ways which every person though in
the meanest Circumstances is capable of doing good.

A great many there are that are as strongly convinced as may be that it is both
their Interest and duty to be doing good in their lives, but they complain that
it is not in their power, they have not any Means or Opportunities for it, and
they bemoan themselves sadly upon this account, as thinking their lives useless
because they have not those visible Capacities of being serviceable to the
world that others have.

To such as these let me say this in the general: There is no condition in the
world so mean and despicable, but yields us Opportunities of doing good. There
is neither Old nor Young, Man nor Woman, Rich nor Poor, High nor Low, Learned
nor Unlearned, but in their Sphere, by a good husbandry of those Talents that
God has entrusted to their care and management they may be very useful to
others, and prove instruments of much good to their generations.

This truth St. Paul most elegantly sets forth in 1 Cor. 12. where he compares
the Society of Christians to a Natural body. There he shows that as in the
Natural body there are many members, and all those members have not the same
dignity and honor, nor the same use or office: and yet every member (even the
meanest) has its particular use by which it does real service to the body; nay
so useful it is that the body cannot be without it: so it is with the Church of
Christ and with every body politic. There is a necessity both in the Church
and in the State, that there should be variety of functions and callings, and
degrees, and conditions. There must be some to govern and some to be governed;
there must be some more conspicuous, some more obscure; some whose gifts and
endowments lay this way, and some whose Talents lay in another way; and yet
there is not one of these but in his degree and station, either is or may be as
useful as any that belong to the Society. So that the eye cannot say to the
hand (as our Apostle there expresses it) I have no need of thee. Nor again the
head to the feet, I have no need of you, nay more, those members of the body
(as he continues) that seem to be most feeble are yet very necessary.

To reduce the Apostles notion to its particulars, or to show in how many
respects every individual person that is a Member of a Society is necessary to
the public, and either does or may serve the Weal of it, and so do good in his
life, is a task too great for me to undertake at this time, let it suffice at
the present to propose to you these general heads.

First of all none can want opportunities of doing good that is in a capacity
of performing any acts of mercy or charity strictly so called whether that
charity be showed to the bodies or souls of men. Now the instances and
expressions of this way of doing good are infinite, as infinite as are the
wants and necessities of mankind.

To the bodies of men we do good when ever we contribute to the relieving and
easing them of the outward pressures and wants, and necessities they lie under:
Such as Sickness, Pain, Poverty, Hunger, Nakedness, Debts, Imprisonment, or any
other outward affliction that falls upon them; whether that ease and relief be
effected by our purse, or by our counsel and advice, or by our labor and pains.

And sure some one of these three things there is none so mean or
inconsiderable in the world, but it is in his power to benefit his poor
Neighbor with.

To the Souls of men we do good, whenever by our discourses or other endeavors
we make men better or wiser; when we instruct the ignorant, when we satisfy
the doubtful, when we reduce those that are misled by error, when we establish
the weak, when we reprove those that do amiss, in a word, all our attempts and
endeavors in what way soever to reclaim men from vice, and to bring them to
wisdom and sobriety is a Charity to their Souls; and whether our designs
succeed or not we shall be rewarded as those that have done good in the world.

Secondly, All the acts of Beneficence and kindness, nay even of Civility and
good Nature, are to be accounted among the instances of doing good. A man does
good not only by acts of Charity properly so called, but by every courtesy
that he does to another; He does good by showing his respect and good will to
all about him, by reconciling differences among neighbors, and promoting
peace, friendship and society as much as he can; by being Generous and Liberal
and Hospitable according to his ability; by forgiving injuries, and if it be
possible making friends of those that did them; by being easy of access, and
sweet and obliging in his carriage; by complying with the infirmities of those
he converseth with, and in a word, by contributing any way to make the lives of
others more easy and comfortable to them.

Thirdly, A man also does good when he makes use of that acquaintance or
friendship or interest, that he has with others to stir them up to the doing
of that good which he by reason of the narrowness of his condition, or for want
of Opportunity cannot do himself. This is a very considerable instance of doing
good how slight soever it may seem; the man that exercises himself this way is
doubly a benefactor; for he is not only an instrument of good to the person or
persons for whom he begged the kindness or the charity; but he does also a real
kindness to the man himself whom he puts upon the benefaction, for God will not
less reward his good will for being excited by another.

Fourthly, Another way to do good is to be careful and diligent, and
conscientious in the discharge of all those Public Offices which we are called
upon to execute in the place where we live. How burdensome soever these be,
and how much soever of our time they rob us of, yet God by calling us to them,
has put a prize into our hands, (as the Wise man speaks) to do much good if we
have hearts to make use thereof.

Fifthly, We do good when being in a private Capacity we so carry our selves in
all the Relations in which we stand as the nature of the Relation requires. As
for instance, when being Subjects we conscientiously obey the Laws of the
Kingdom and submit to our Governors, and promote what we can the public Peace
both of Church and State. When being Masters of Families we take care of those
under our Charge, making sufficient provision both for their Souls and bodies:
When being Husbands or Wives we discharge faithfully all the Conjugal duties:
When being Parents we love our children, and bring them up in the fear and
nurture of the Lord. When being children we obey our Parents in all things.
When being servants we do our work in singleness of heart, not as men-pleasers
but as those that account they have a Master in Heaven. When having contracted
friendships we are secret and faithful, and prudent in the maintaining and
preserving of them; and so proportionably in all the other relations that we
stand in. All these things though they appear little, yet are they in their
degree a real good and benefit to mankind, and so necessary that there is no
living tolerably without them.

Sixthly, We also do good by an honest and a diligent pursuit of our calling
and employment. There is no Art or Trade that we are bred to, but if it be a
lawful one, it may be of great use to the public, and by well minding it, and
fairly manageing it we may render our selves very profitable members of the
Commonwealth.

Seventhly and Lastly, We may do a great deal of good by our good Examples, by
being to others Patterns of Piety and Prudence, of Diligence and Industry, of
Peaceableness and Loyalty, of Humility and Meekness and Temperance. In a word,
every man that will make himself Eminent in any Virtue will be a Light to the
world, his life will be a constant Sermon, and he will often prove as effectual
a Benefactor to those about him by his example as others are by their Counsels
and Exhortations.

And now all these things considered, who is there among us in such deplorable
Circumstances that he can reasonably pretend to want ability or opportunity to
do good in his life? Sure I am he must live in a desert, and have no
Communication with mankind that cannot some or other of these ways be useful
and beneficial to them. And thus much of our Second Head of Discourse.

I now come in the Third and last place to make some Application of what has
been spoken.

And First, Since every man is so highly concerned as we have seen, to do good
in his life, let us all be persuaded seriously and heartily to apply our minds
hereunto. Let us look upon it, not as a bywork, a thing to be done now and then
as there is occasion after our own turns are served: But let us lay out our
selves upon it, let us propose it to our selves as the great Business of our
lives. Let us take all opportunities for it, let us contrive and manage all our
affairs so that they may some way or other be subservient to the carrying on
this great work.

Let this be the end of our gathering riches, and the measure of our expending
them. To heap up riches that we may be rich, or to throw them away upon our
lusts are both equally intolerable, it is the doing good with them that
sanctifies both the getting and the spending them.

Let this be the compass to steer and direct us in our pursuit after knowledge*
in our learning Arts and Sciences, in the managery of our Trades and
employments; in a word, in the choice and in the prosecution of every design
that is proposed to us. In all these things, the great enquiry is to be, what
good will they tend to? How shall we be rendered more useful to the world, if
our designs and endeavors as to these matters do take effect?

Let this be the great rule by which we proceed in the Education of our
Children and Relations, and the provisions we make for them in the world. Let
it be our first care to possess them with a deep sense of the duty they owe to
the Public, and to furnish them with such qualities as will render them
profitable members of it* and to put them into such professions and employments
as may afford them fair scope for the exercise of those qualities. If we thus
provide for them, though we otherwise leave them never so small an Estate, yet
with the Blessing of God they have a good Portion.

Lastly, let this design of doing good influence our very Offices of Religion.
When we make our applications to the Throne of Grace, let us be sure to have
the Public always in mind; and even when we pray for our selves let it be with
this design and resolution, that as God in mercy bestows upon us the Blessings
and the Grace we pray for, we will employ them for the good of others.

O that we would thus seriously concern our selves in doing good! O that we
would once lay a side all our little selfish designs, and that narrowness and
penuriousness of Spirit with which most of us are bound up; and with ardent
Love and Charity set our selves not to seek his own but every man another 1
Cor. 10. 24.
good, as the Apostle exhorts.

Secondly* if the doing good be so necessary a duty as has been represented,
what must we say of those men that frame to themselves Models of Christianity
without putting this duty into its notion? There is a sort of Christianity
which has obtained in the world, that is made up of Faith and knowledge of the
Gospel Mysteries* without any respect to Charity and good works. Nay have we
not heard of a sort of Christianity, the very perfection of which seems to
consist in the disparaging this duty of doing good as much as is possible;
crying it down as a heathen virtue, a poor blind piece of Morality, a thing
that will no way further our salvation; nay, so far from that, that it often
proves a hindrance to it, by taking us off from that full relyance and
recumbency that we ought to have on the Righteousness of Jesus Christ only, in
order to our Salvation.

But O how contrary are these Doctrines to the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles! How widely different a thing do they make Christianity to be from
what it will appear if we take our notions of it from their Sermons and
Practices! Is it possible that he that went about doing good himself; made it
his meat and drink, the business and employment of his life, should set so
light by it in us that are his followers?

Is it possible that they that so often call upon us to do good, to be rich in
good works, above all things to have 1 Timothy 6. 18. ^ Pet* 4. 8. ^ Cor. 13. 2.
13.
servant charity among our selves, telling us that all faith is nothing, all
knowledge of Mysteries is nothing, all gifts of Prophecy and Miracles are
nothing, but that Charity is all in all, I say is it possible that they should
think doing good so insignificant, so unprofitable, nay so dangerous a thing as
these I spoke of do represent it?

But I need not further reprove these Opinions because I hope they find but few
Patrons; but this seriously ought to be reproved among us, viz. that we do not
generally lay that stress upon this duty we are speaking of that we ought to do.

Many are ready enough to acknowledge their Obligations to do good, and count
it a very commendable thing, and a work that God will bless them the better
for, yet they are loath to make it an essential ingredient of their Religion,
they think they may be Religious and serve God without it. If they be but sober
in their lives, and just in their dealings and come to Church at the usual
times, they have Religion enough to carry them to Heaven, though in the mean
time they continue covetous and hard and uncharitable, without bowels of pity
and compassion* and make no use of their wealth* or their power and interest,
or their Parts and industry, or their other Talents committed to them, for the
doing good in the world.

Far be it from any man to pretend to determine what virtues or degrees of them
are precisely necessary to Salvation, and what Virtues or degrees of them a man
may safely be without: But this is certain, that charity and doing good are
none of those that can be spared. The Scripture has every where declared these
qualities to be as necessary in order to our Salvation as any condition of the
Gospel. Nay if we will consult St. Matthew. 25. where the Process of the General
Judgment is described, we shall find these to be the great points that at the
last day men shall be examined upon, and upon which the whole case of their
eternal state will turn. So that if we take the Scripture for our Guide, these
men at last will be found to be much mistaken, and to have made a very false
judgment both of Religion and of their own condition.

Thirdly, From what has been said about doing good, we may gather wherein that
Perfection of Christianity which we are to aspire after, does consist. It has
been much disputed which is the most Perfect life* to live in the world as
other men do, and to serve God in following our employments, and taking care of
our families and doing good offices to our neighbors, and discharging all other
duties that our relation to the public requires of us; or to retire from the
world, and to quit all our secular concernments* and wholly to give up our
selves to Prayer and Meditation, and those other exercises of Religion properly
so called*

This latter kind of life is so magnified by the Romanists in comparison of the
other, that it has engrossed to it self the name of Religious. None among them
are thought worthy to be styled Religious persons but those that Cloister up
themselves in a Monastery. But whatever excellence may be pretended in this
course of life* it certainly falls much short of that which is led in a public
way. He serves God best that is most serviceable to his Generation. And no
Prayers or Fasts or Mortifications are near so acceptable a Sacrifice to our
Heavenly Father as to do good in our lives.

It is true, to keep within doors and to attend our devotions (though those
that are in appearance most abstracted from the world, are not always the most
devout persons) I say this kind of life is the most easy and the safer. A man
is not then exposed so much to temptations; he may with less difficulty
preserve his innocence; but where is the praise of such a virtue* Virtue is
then most glorious and shall be most rewarded, when it meets with most trials
and oppositions.

And as for the bravery of contemning the world and all the Pomps of it, which
they so magnify in this kind of life, alas it is rather an effect of
pusillanimity and love of our ease, and a desire to be free from cares and
burdens, than of any true nobleness of mind. If we would live to excellent
purpose indeed; if we would show true bravery of spirit and true piety toward
God, let us live as our blessed Lord and his Apostles did. Let us not fly
Temptations but overcome them; let us not sit at home amusing our selves with
our pleasing contemplations, when we may be useful and beneficial abroad. Let
us so order our devotions toward God* that they may be a means of promoting
our worldly business and affairs, and doing good among men* Let us take our fit
times of retirement and abstraction* that we may the more freely converse with
God and pour out our souls before him; but let this be only to the end that we
may appear abroad again more brisk and lively in vanquishing the Temptations
that come in our way, and more prompt and readily disposed to every good work:
This is to imitate our Lord Jesus, to walk as we have him for an example. This
is a life most suitable to the contrivance and the genius of his Religion, which
is more accommodated to Cities and public Societies, than to Cloisters and
Deserts. And lastly this is to walk in a conformity to his command who has bid
us make our light so to shine before Mat. 5. 16.
men that they may see our good works and glorify our Father which is in
Heaven.

But Fourthly and lastly, If it be a thing so necessary that every man should
do good in his life as has been represented, then how much to be Reproved are
they that do no good till their death! That live scrapingly and uncharitably
and uselesly to the world all their lives long* and then when they come to dye,
think to Atone for their sins and neglects of this kind, by showing some
extraordinary Bounty to the poor, or devoting some part of their estates to
public or pious uses.

I must confess this kind of proceeding does to me seem just like the business
of putting off a man's repentance to* his deathbed. It is absolutely necessary
that a man should repent though it be never so late; and so it is that he
should do good: if he have done little good in his life, he is bound as he
loves his soul to show some extraordinary uncommon instances of Charity and a
Public spirit, when he comes to die. But then it is here as it is with the
long delaying of Repentance, the deferring it so long has robbed the man of the
greatest part of the praise and the comfort he might have expected from it. His
Rewards in heaven will be much less though his good deeds should be accepted,
but he is infinitely uncertain whether they will or no. It must be a very great
act of Generosity and Charity that can obtain a pardon for a whole life of
uncharitableness.

Let us all therefore labor and study to do good in our lives, let us be daily
giving evidences to the world of our kind and charitable disposition, and let
not that be the first which is discovered in our last Will and testament. If
God has blessed us with worldly goods* let us distribute them as we see
occasion in our life time, when every one may see we do it voluntarily; and not
stay till we must be forced to part with them whether we will or no, for that
will blast the credit of our good deeds both with God and man.

I have said enough concerning the first point recommended in the Text, viz.
doing Good. I now come briefly to Treat of the other, that is, Rejoicing, which
is equally a part of the business of this day.

There is no good (says Solomon) in any earthly thing; or there is nothing
better for any man than to rejoice and to do good.

The Rejoicing here recommended, is capable of two senses, the first more
general and more concerning us as Christians, the other more particular and
which more immediately concerns us as we are here met upon this occasion.

In the first place by Rejoicing we may take to be meant, a constant habit of
joy and cheerfulness, so that we are always contented and well pleased, always
free from those anxieties and disquiets and uncomfortable reflections that make
the lives of mankind miserable. This now is the Perfection of Rejoicing and it
is the utmost degree of Happiness that we are here capable of. It must be
granted indeed that not many do arrive to this state, but yet I doubt not but
that it is a state that may be attained at least in a great measure in this
world. Otherwise the Holy men in Scripture, and particularly the Apostles of
our Lord would never have recommended it to us so often as they have done.
Rejoice ever more, says S. Paul to the Thessalonians, and to the 1 Thessalonians. 5.
16. Phil. 4. 4.
Philippians, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice.

The way to attain to this happy condition does consist chiefly in these three
things: First a great innocence and virtue, a behaving our selves so in the
world that our Consciences shall not reproach us. This St. Paul lays as the
Foundation of Rejoicing, This 2 Cor. 1. 12.
(says he) is our rejoicing* the Testimony of our Conscience that in
simplicity and godly sincerity I have had my conversation in this world. It is
in vain to think of any true solid Joy or Peace or Contentment without a hearty
practice of all the duties of our Religion, so that we can satisfy our selves
of our own sincerity before God.

And then secondly to make us capable of this constant Rejoicing besides the
innocence of our lives there must go a firm and hearty persuasion of Gods
particular Providence; a belief that he not only dispenses all events that
come to pass in the world, even the most inconsiderable; but that the measure
of the Dispensations of his Providence is infinite Wisdom and Goodness and
nothing else: so that nothing does or ever can happen to us in particular, or
to the world in general but what is for the best. Now when we firmly believe
this and frequently attend to it, how can we be either solicitous for the
future or discontented at the present events of things, let them fall out never
so cross to our desires and expectations? This is the best Antidote in the
world (and an effectual one it is) against all trouble and vexation and
uneasiness that can happen to us upon any occasion whatsoever, to wit, the
consideration that all things are managed by an infinitely Wise and good God,
and will at last prove for the best, how unaccountable soever they appear to us
at present. And this is that which the wise man insinuates in the verse before
the Text when he says that God has made every thing beautiful in his season.

Thirdly, Another requisite both for the procuring and preserving this
continual cheerfulness and rejoicing, is a frequent and fixed attention to the
great rewards of the other world, which God has promised to all that truly
love him and endeavor to please him. This consideration will extremely add to
our comfort and contribute to our Rejoicing under all the miseries and
afflictions that we can possibly fall into, namely, that whatsoever condition
we are in here we shall certainly in a little time be in a most happy and
glorious one, and the worse our circumstances are in this life, the greater (if
we be good) shall be our happiness in the next, for these light afflictions (as
S. Paul tells 2 Cor. 4. 17.
us) which endure but for a moment, do work for us a far more exceeding weight
of glory.

This then is the joy that we are to endeavor after in the first place, to be
constantly well pleased and contented with our present condition, whatever it
be, and these are the ways to attain to it.

But secondly, there is another more particular Notion of Rejoicing, and which
I conceive Solomon does chiefly intend in the words of the Text* and that is
the free and comfortable enjoyment of the good things of this life that God
has blessed us with, in opposition to a pinching and penurious way of living.
This I say seems to be the notion of Rejoicing that the Text speaks of, as
appears by the following verse. Solomon having told us in the text, that there
is nothing better for a man than to rejoice and do good, he adds by way of
explication of what he meant by rejoicing, these words, that every man should
eat and drink and enjoy the good of all his labors, for it is the gift of God.
And frequently in this Book of Ecclesiastes does he persuade to this kind of
rejoicing. Thus in Chap. 2. ver. 24. there is nothing better for a man, than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in
his labor, this also I saw it was from the hand of God. And in Chap. 5. v. 18.
Behold that which I have seen, it is good and comely for one to eat and drink,
and to enjoy the good of all his labors that he takes under the sun all the
days of his life which God gives him, for it is his portion. And in Chap. 6.
v. 1, 2. he represents it as a great evil that he has seen under the sun, and
yet such an evil as is common among men, that a man to whom God has given
riches, and wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all
that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eats it, this (says he) is vanity and an evil disease.

And there is certainly great reason in what he says. For to have a plentiful
portion of the good things of this life, and not to have the heart to make use
of them for the enjoyment of our selves and friends; for the refreshing us
under the toil that this life does expose us to; for the promoting Acquaintance
and Society* and the rendering our condition as easy as may be, is as
unaccountable a folly as we can be guilty of, and makes us really as poor and
necessitous as those that want bread, but only not so pitiable.

Taking now this to be the sense of rejoicing in the Text, (as I believe it is)
we have from hence a good warrant for this days Meeting, for we come together
to rejoice in Solomon's sense, that is, to eat and drink and to enjoy the good
of our labors, it being the gift of God so to do.

And this practice of ours is not only reasonable in it self, but is commended
to us by the example of Gods people both under the Law and the Gospel. The Jews
by the appointment of God himself were to meet every year three times at
Jerusalem* the Capital City of the Nation to feast and to rejoice before the
Lord, as See Deuteronomy. 16.
we have it in the express words of Moses. And the Christians for near two
hundred years after our Savior had their Agapae, their Feasts of charity
wherein they met together both poor and rich to enjoy and make merry one with
another. It is true these Feasts were at length left off by common consent,
because there grew abuses in them; they became occasions of Luxury and excess,
and so matters of scandal to our Religion. But this was not an ill reflection
upon the thing itself, which was innocent and commendable, but upon the abuse
of the thing. A good and laudable institution was perverted to evil purposes.
However this very consideration ought to make us very careful of our carriage
and behavior in these our Meetings, lest we fall under the same
inconveniences, which that we may prevent, Two things are especially needful
to be taken care of by us.

First, That we do not exceed the bounds of rejoicing prescribed to Christians,
that is, that we avoid all excess, and use the Creatures of God, soberly and
temperately, so as to give offense to none, nor to make provision for the flesh
to fulfill the lusts thereof.

And secondly, That we take care to perform and make good the ends and designs
of these Feasts of rejoicing; which ends, if we will take our measures from
those Laws that God gave to his own People in the Old Testament, and which the
modern Jews themselves in their Commentaries take notice of; and which are so
reasonable in themselves that without any Authority they do recommend
themselves to us, are these four following.

First, That we Rejoice before the Lord, that is, that we make our humble
acknowledgments and return our due praises and thanks to him for all the good
things he has blessed us with in our lives, confessing that all we have is
from his free bounty and goodness, and that our Meeting together is to praise
his name upon that account. And this was the thing that was meant by those
solemn Sacrifices that the Jews were bound to offer at Jerusalem at their
Annual Feasts.

The second end of these Feasts is to take occasion from hence to learn our
duty, to be instructed in all the branches of that obedience we owe unto God.
For as Maimonides observes, that was one of the principal reasons of Gods
calling together all the people of the Jews to appear at the Feast of
Tabernacles, to wit, that they might hear the Law read unto them; and this
design is I suppose pursued by us in our choosing this Place to Assemble in.

A third end of these Feasts (as the same Maimonides tells us) and is manifest
from Scripture is to promote acquaintance and Friendship, and brotherly love
one with another. And this is a very noble end, and serves many excellent
purposes, and nothing can be beyond it except

The fourth and last end of these Meetings, which is to do good; to exercise
our Charity toward our poor indigent Brethren. No man at the Solemn Feasts of
the Jews, was to appear before the Lord empty. He was to bring Exodus 23. 15.
his offering not only to God by way of recognition and acknowledgment to him:
but for the poor also that they might rejoice as well as he. This is well
observed by Maimonides from Deuteronomy. 16. 14. where it is thus said, Thou shall
rejoice in thy feast, thou and thy son, and thy daughter, thy manservant and
thy maidservant, the Levite and the stranger, the fatherless and the widow
that are within thy gates.

This then is the great end of our Assembly, that not only we, but the
Fatherless and the widow; all of our Country, that need our Charity, may
rejoice with us and for us. And this is that which Solomon joins with rejoicing
in the Text, There is no good in them but for a man to rejoice and do good: and
what that man who by the sentence of God was declared the wisest of all men
has thus joined together, let none of us presume to put asunder. These are the
Rules, and these are the ends that we are to observe in this our Feast; and let
us all for the Honor of Christ's Religion, and for the credit of our particular
Country, charge the observation of them upon our selves: which if we can all
resolve to do, I can safely apply to every one of you, that saying of Solomon
in the 9th Chapter of this book of Ecclesiastes, and the 7th verse, with which
I shall conclude: Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart, for God now accepts thy work.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 6. it that, r. it is that. p. 9 I penult. for in r. is. p. 13. l.
10. r. proposcd. p. 14. l. 23, 24. for lay, r. ly.

FINIS.

