DE FINIBUS Virtutis Christianae.

The Ends of Christian Religion, WHICH ARE To Avoid Enjoy
eternal Wrath Happiness
from God, Justified in several Discourses.

By R. S. LL. D.

VVisdome is justified of her children.

OXFORD.

Printed by HEN: HALL Printer to the University, for RIC: DAVIS. Anno Domini.
1673.

Imprimatur

PETER MEWS Vice-Can.
March 18. 1672.
FAcit Lucius noster prudenter, qui audire de Summo Bono potissimum velit. Hoc
enim constituto in Philosophia, constituta sunt omnia; caeteris in rebus sive
praetermissum, five ignoratum est quippiam, non plus incommodi est, quam quanti
quaeque earum rerum est, in quibus neglectum est aliquid; summum autem Bonum si
ignoretur, Vivendi quoque Rationem ignorari necesse est. Ex quo tantus Error
consequitur, ut quem in portum se recipiant scire non possint: Cognitis autem
rerum Finibus, cum intelligitur quid sit Bonorum extremum and Malorum, inventa
vitae via est, conformatioque omnium Officiorum.

Ita Piso apud Ciceronem lib. 5. De Finibus. TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in
God, GEORGE, By divine Providence Lord Bishop of Winchester, etc.
My ever Honored Lord,
IT is one of the Happinesses of us pretenders to learning, that we are
commonly the subjects of great Men's favors. But in this we are not so singular
as we are in there, that sometimes we are thought to pay our Debts to them by
growing in New ones; Of which this my present Dedication may be some instance
to your Lordship. For I must ever own with all humble and thankful
Resentments, that what Dignity and Place I have in the Church of England I
received from your Noble Bounty, and hold under your sole Patronage. And now I
further take confidence, considering your Lordships great ability in Learning
and Judgment, for that purpose to invoke your Lordship, as a most proper
Arbiter, Judge and Patron of the Discourses that I have now committed to the
Press. And, in truth, I could do no otherwise. For seeing the Receiving this
Countenance and Favor is by the kind interpretation of the World a fashionable
Way of Thankfulness, I, who have so much Reason to make use of all means of
Gratitude, should be highly Culpable, if I should not gratify my self by laying
hold of this, which is most expedient also for me in my present Occasion, and
much for the Reputation and Ornament of what I publish.

And, my Lord, as your Protection is very necessary for me, so I conceive it
now very honorable for your Lordship, in that great and eminent Office which
you bear in Gods Church. For what can be more suitable for a Bishop, than to
countenance the defense of those Truths, which are the fundamental Basis of
all Relion and Virtue.

What I present now extends but to the Title de Finibus: Which, if we handle
Divinity in the Analytique Way (the Way that expedites our learning and
accommodates it to practice) is first in Order. But your Lordship has seen my
whole Method, and if they shall be judged useful may command my Endeavors
upon the other Titles also. And though here (as in the holy Waters described
Ezech. XLVII.) the further we go, the deeper we shall wade into the Body of
Divinity, yet I think we may avoid all those depths, that are unfathomable or
Dangerous, if we contain our selves within the Compass of what is Practical.
In the mean time I could not forbear to contribute my Mite toward the fixing
in the first Place of these Initiall Rudiments, that are naturally first in
Order, now first openly called in Question and allwaies, as I before intimated,
of prime influence to ground us in Morality and Religion.

It is the Observation of Plato in his tenth Book de Legibus, that whosoever
beleiveth that there is a God, and a Providence and that God will not be
corrupted to Partiality or Injustice by any Complement in Worship (...), He
will neither willingly do an Ungodly Act, nor speak an unruly Word: I need not
to your Lordship expatiate in commending the judgment of that Philosopher who
determines it necessary for the well Government of a Common weal, (...). apud
Poit. x. de leg. ad Fine^.
that it be thus ruled in the fundamental Laws of it. That in case Atheism of
any kind should appear in any Man, every one should be obliged to oppose it as
a public Pest, and to defend Religion, and to delate to the Magistrate such,
who by dissettling the common Principles, which affirm a Providence, would
corrupt the manners of the Unlearned: and that then the Magistrates should
punish all Atheists so delated most severely, as being persons of very
pernicious influence to the state. For it is not only to the contempy of the
Sovereign Deity, but to the Ruin of any Temporal Kingdom, that Atheists, or
at least that Professors of Atheism, and teachers of profanesse, should be
sufferd to go Unpunished. These Heclorings against Heaven being justly reckoned
among those things that are (...), the very Banes of Empire and Government, as
taking away that which is the great and common Awe of Men of all degrees, the
Reverence I mean of that supreme and Dernier Resort in the highest and
unavoidable judgment of the great Creator. It is much to be wished and prayed
for, that we, as we all worship the same same God, so we might once be so Happy
as to agree in the same worship of Him. Such an Union would certainly render us
more dear to Him and more considerable to Men. But if some Difference in
Worship, for the darkness of Men's Understandings and the hardness and
untowardnesse of their Hearts, must be tolerated; yet methinks we should have
so much Zeal for Religion, and Loyalty to the supreme Creator and Governor of
the World, as to discommon those from all our Societies, who lay foundations to
eradicate all manner of worship, who laugh at all the Reverentiall Hopes and
Fears in Religion and behave themselves as (...), Men who desire to live in the
World that God has made; and yet despise to worship Him that made it.

That God would pardon our past provocations and continue to bresse us, and his
immediate Vicegerent our King, and make Him glorious in the Extirpation of
Atheism and Profanesse and in the punishment of those who have been or shall
be hereafter Ministers of Evil, in scattering the poisonous seeds of
Irreligion and Wickedness among us: And that He would give your Lordships the
Bishops, and all other inferior Magistrates, Honor in your contributing
severally to this great and necessary Effect, is, and by his Grace, ever shall
be, the Prayer of

My most honored Lord, Your Lordships most obliged and ever observant Chaplain
ROBERT SHARROCK.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Freindly Reader.
IN the ensuing Discourse, that I might commend unto you the Gift of Fear, and
the Christian Virtue Hope, I have given you a just Character of the objects
that we have Reason to fear and hope. Which if we apprehend as they are, we
cannot naturally but fear and avoid the One, and hope and desire the other: It
is like to be an ill world, when the Existence of God and his Providence, the
eternal punishment of the wicked in Hell, the Immortality of the Soul, and the
Resurrection of the Body are called in Question. I remember that Dr Arrowsmith
speaking of the Existence of the three divine persons compared them to the
three Wells mentioned Genesis 26. The Divinity of God the Son to the Well Ezech,
signifying contention, because the Orthodox have been long forced to contend
for it against the Arians of several Ages, the Deity of the Spirit to the Well
Sitnah that signifies Hatred, because the holy Ghosts Divinity has been the
Object of the Socinians Contradiction and Hatred. But he compared the Existence
and Divinity of God the Father to the well Rehoboth, about which there was no
strife, However his Comparison agreed then with the Times, yet as lately as he
dyed; had he lived until now, I am sure it had been out of doors, For such is
our Unhappiness that it concerns us to contend even for the Existence of God
the Creator, and for his Providence and Government of the World; such is our
Calamity that we have some now, as ready to deny the God that made them, as
there were any in the last Age to deny the Lord that bought them. This is their
Absurdity, they are more willing to suppose those infinite, or at least
innumerable lesser, Beings, of which the World is made to be infinite in
Duration, than to comply with the common Faith in beleiving One infinite
Creator of them all. And in every other particular that Opinion is proposed as
probable by the new Modes in Philosophy that complieth most with the loose way
of living now designed. Sometimes it is a part of their War with Heaven to
endeavor to extinguish Hell, sometimes to dispute against the Immateriality and
Immortality of the Soul, sometimes against the Resurrection of the Body, by
these stratagems they cut off those hopes that are the Encouragements to
Virtue, and those, fears that are, or in Reason should be, the Bars of all
Profanesse.

Aetas posterior, pejor Avis tulit
Nos nequiores -- I will not add
Mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
For I wish there were not Opinions and Practices so bad, that we are out of
danger of having worse, or of being worse otherwise than by the further
spreading of that Poison that is already cast among us.

My design now is, (upon the Title de Finibus; which is now no unseasonable
Argument,) to lay down and explain, even where I find no Opposition, the
doctrine of Christianity in that Method which I think most easy and natural,
and to confirm it, as it ought to be confirmed especially, from the Word of
God, though generally where the matter is agreeable I have taken in the Reason
of the best of the old Philosophers also. In controverted points, besides my
Explication of the common doctrine, I present you with such of the old
Arguments from Divines or Philosophers, as after my survey of our modern
Hypotheses, I think stand yet unanswered, and which will, si secuta fuerit as
old Brutus spoke in another case quae debet fortuna, eternally triumph in the
power of their own Truth.

Great part of these Discourses were, as you see, Sermons, and what was not
preached as being not accommodable to my present Auditories, yet I have put in
the same Method and joined them in their Stations, that my discourses might be
complete and adequate to their Title. And though these extend but to the first
Title in Christian Morality yet I hope through Gods assistance to add the rest
in due time, or to suppress what remains as I shall be commanded or advised by
those who are to judge of their Expediency and Usefulness.

In the mean time, let us pray together that God would give us Sobriety of Mind
in this distempered Age, and establish us all in such a Fear and love of Him,
whose fruit may be to holiness and Peace and Charity in this world, and
whose End may be everlasting life in the world to come.

THE CONTENTS
SECT: 1.
SERMON: I. Of the Fear of God.
Atheism increased in England. page 1, 2 Unbelief of the principles of Religion
is the cause of exorbitant Lives. p. 2, 3 The contrary designs of Happiness
in Religious and Atheistical persons. p. 3, 4 Modern Atheists either
Epicureans or Aristoteleans. p. 4, 5 The Vanity of the Epicurean Atheist. p. 6,
7, 8, 9, 10 The Vanity of the Aristotelean Atheist. p. 11, 12, 13 The Vanity of
Atheists in general. p. 13, 14 Psalm 14 Paraphrased. p. 14 The Fears and
self-contradictions of Atheists. p. 14, 15 No argument against the Existence of
a Deity. p. 16 The common faith of Mankind asserts a Deity. ib. The Christian
Faith assures us of a Deity and the Creation. p. 16, 17 Pride of Curious
learning the Cause of Error in Aristotle and Epicurus and other Grecians Wits.
p. 17, 18 Acts 17, 21. explained. p. 17 Cautions against practical Atheism.
p. 18, 19 Moral Obedience the best part of Gods Service. p. 20
SERMON: II. Of the fear of God.
By this Phrase, the Fear of the Lord, various habits of the mind are
signified. p. 21, 22 St Basil explains the Text: Psalm: 34.11. of servile fear
p. 22, 23 Servile Fear commended. p. 23 The judgment of God and Hell Torments
were received by ancient Tradition as the great Objects of human Fear. p. 24
That Tradition corrupted by Poets. ib. Hell Torments Confirmed by Scripture. p.
25 Hell Torments perpetual and continued. p. 26 The Infidelity of the present
Age. p. 27 Modern followers of Plato and Origin extenuate Hell Torments. p. 27,
28 Hobbists and Socinians do the same. p. 28, 29 Torments of Individuals in
Hell proved to be eternal. p. 29 Objections answered. How eternal Torments
curative. p. 30 Equality of Pleasure in sin and Torment in punishment not
necessary. p. 31. No Argument can be drawn against the Eternity of Helltorments
from the Mercy of God. p. 32 Epicurus false in his Rule, si gravis, brevis. ib.
The manner how the Damned shall be enabled to endure Hell Torments
unconceivable. p. 32, 33 Eternal Torments called a Second Death. p. 34. The
firing of Sodom how a Type of Hell fire. ib. The use of these terrible truths.
p. 35.
SERMON: III. Of the Fear of God.
Severe Truths generally displease. p. 36 The Primitive fathers in this case
the best Interpreters of dubious Scriptures. p. 37 St Augustines arguments for
the Eternity of Hell Torments. p. 38, 39 St Basils arguments and Advice. p. 40
St Ambrose concerning their Extention and Perpetuity. p. 41, 42 Rabbinicall
conceits of the pains of the damned. p. 41, 42 Lactantius how the greatness of
those Torments hinder not their eternity. p. 42, 43 Tertullian Vindicated. p.
43, 44 Justin Martyr vindicated. p. 45 St Gregory, Photius, Cyprian,
Prudentius, Athanasius and St Hierom considered. p. 45, 46, 47 Justinians
letter to Archbishop Menna and the decree of the sixth council of
Constantinople referred to. p. 47, 48 Whether Hell Torments formally such as
described? if not such, greater: St Greg. Nyssenes Opinion. p. 49 Hell Torments
not now understood. p. 49, 50 God himself is in Hell a consuming fire. p. 50,
51 Fear of God and his judgment commended. p. 51, 52 This fear a principal
Bar against Vice. p. 52, 53 Vicious men not to be Envied. p. 54 There is a
Reward in the End for the Religious.
SECT. II.
SERMON: I. Of the Rewards of Religion.
Man Naturally desires Happiness. p. 5 The Greater Happiness is more
desirable then the less. p. 58 Heathens were sensible of a Reward for Virtue
and a punishment impendent upon Vice. p. 59 The fears and suspicions of an ill
Conscience immovable. p. 60 The joy and content of the Heathens in the
practice of Virtue and how this joy was reasonable. p. 60, 61 The Laws of
Nature and sense of God a Rewarder in all Men. p. 61, 62 Christians have
greater Reasons of their satisfaction and content in the exercise of Christian
Virtue. p. 62, 63 The contemplation of the joys of Heaven necessary for our
encouragement to Virtue. p. 63 Psalm. 16. v. ult. commended. p. 64 Happiness in
Heaven the greatest possible. ib. The parts of the greatest Happiness
explained. p. 65 Security from Grief a necessary prerequisite to Happiness. p.
66 Heavenly Happiness free from pain and Grief. p. 67 Man's condition
considered in respect of pain. p. 68 The use of Cares and Pains in this World.
p. 69 No Use of Pains or Cares in Heaven. p. 70 The particular Occasions and
Causes of our Bodily pains and cares inconsistent with the state of Glory. p.
71, 72 Of Pains purely Mental. p. 73 The state of Glory free from mental
Pains. p. 74 Of Hell Torment. p. 75 The state of Glory free from these
Torments. p. 75, 76 The vision of Heavenly joy shall increase the Torment of
the damned. p. 76 The vision of Hell Torments shall increase the blessedness
of the blessed. p. 77 Recapitulation and Conclusion. p. 78
SERMON: II. Of the Rewards of Religion.
His Apology may be pardoned who is put to describe Heaven. p. 79 It is Gods
mercy that Heaven is described by Metaphors. p. 80 Voluptas in Motu, active
joys in Heaven. p. 81 And in the highest degrees and greatest quantities. ib.
Scenes of Spiritual joys in corporal shapes and figures given us in
compassion to our Infirmities. p. 82 Heavenly joys compared to the pleasures
of feasting. ib. To the joys of marriage. p. 83 To the joys of Honor. p. 84
To the Glories of a Victor in games of Honor. ib. To the Gl ries of a King. p.
85 The stateliness of the Court of Heaven descibed. p. 85, 86 The Eternal
duration of these joys and Glories in Heaven. p. 86, 87, 88 Metaphors express
the Grandeur not the Nature of that Joy. p. 88 Glorified Bodies Spiritual like
Christ's Body. p. 89 Ben Maimons discourse of the Reasonableness of Gods
proposing Heaaven to us under such Metaphors. p. 89, 90 The Doctrine of
Socrates and Plato de Finibus compared with that of Christianity. p. 91, 92
Material senses continued in Heaven for Ornament rather then for Use. p. 93
The Conclusion. p. 94
SERMON: III. Of the Rewards of Religion.
Why men prefer Worldly Enjoyments before those of Heaven. p. 96 The same
Attributes given to God and Heaven. ib. The happiness of Both described by
Negatives. p. 96, 97 The Enjoyment in Nature great, the Enjoyments in conceit
and fancy greater then those in Nature. p. 98, 99 The Enjoyments in Heaven
greater then both. p. 99 1 Cor. 2.9. and Isaiah 64. vv. 1, 2, 3, 4. compared
and explained. p. 100, 101 The Conflagration of this world in order to the
purgation of its Matter for the New Heavens and New Earth and New Jerusalem
incomprehensibly glorious. ib. Rabbis affirm that from the state of the
Messiah we must take the image of our future Glory. p. 101, 102 The
Resurrection of Christ the Image of ours. p. 102 How the Glories of Heaven are
revealed to Christians by the Spirit. p. 103 Advice. Stand no more gazing in
Heaven. p. 104 Christian Faith and Hope commended. Christian Practice
commended.
SERMON: IV. Of the Rewards of Religion.
The Hope of the Resurrection of the Body and life everlasting the greatest
Encouragements to Virtue. p. 109 The Existence of the Law of Nature argues
Rewards and punishments in another life because they are not equally
Distributed in this. p. 110 The immortality of the Soul anciently believed. p.
111 Mr Hobbes's his Opinion considered. ib. The Doctrine of the Souls
Immortality sprang not from the Daemonology of the Greeks. p. 112 The ancient
arguments for the Immortality of the Soul from Cicero and other Philosophers.
p. 113, 115, 116 The Explication of those who make Souls corporeal imperfect.
p. 114 Mr Hobbes misinterprets Scripture which determines the Soul to be
independent from the Body. p. 117, 118 Reasons why Christians first believed
the Gospel of Christ concerning the Resurrection of the Body. p. 118, 119
Christ's other pred ctions already miraculously fullfill'd were received as
Arguments that his Doctrine concerning the Resurrection shall be fullfilled
also. p. 119, 120 Miraculous instances of his power in raising the Dead. p.
120, 121 Jairus his daughter and the Widows son raised. p. 121, 122 Lazarus
raised and the Resurrection preached. p. 122, 123 Christ's own Resurrection a
powerful argument of ours. p. p. 123, 124 Objections Obviated. p. 125, 126 How
the Doctrine of the Resurrection was received among the Jews. p. 127 Our
Saviors Argument against the Sadduces explained. p. 127, 128 How farve the
Doctrine of the Philosophers was consistent with the Christian Doctrine of the
Resurrection. p. 129, 130 Application. Hope of this Resurection to be cherisht.
p. 131 This Virtue Hope commended from its Vsefullnesse. p. 132 The Antinomians
Error who rejects this Virtue deduced from its Originals described and
confuted. p. (...), 134 The Exercise of Hope commended from the (...) to it. p.
134 The Exercise of Thanksgiving and Worship commended. p. 135
SECT: III.
SERMON: I. Of the chiefest good.
Christian Doctrine opposed by Epicureans and Stoics. p. 146 141, 142 St Paul's
Triumph over his learned opponents. p. 143 Philosophers very good and very bad.
p. 144, 145, 146 Errors about summum Bonum. p. 147, 148 No sect could obtain
Happiness in this life. p. 149, 150, 151 Their happiness designd in this life
inconsiderable. p. 152, 153 Some philosophers prizd virtuous actions to be
summum bonum. p. 154 Others esteemed pleasure to be it. p. 155 And aimd at that
only in this life. p. 156 Christians aim at everlasting pleasures. p. 157
SERMON: II. Of the chiefest Good.
St Augustine under temptation of pleasure. p. 160 Difference of lusts. p. 161
Religion opposes the reign of lusts. p. 162 No true happiness in the
enjoyment of honor. p. 163 No true happiness in the enjoyment of pleasures.
p. 164 Proved by the example of King Solomon. p. 165 No true happiness in the
enjoyment of riches. p. 166 Pleasures of Intemperance mischeivous to the mind.
p. 167 Pleasures of Intemperance hurtful to the Body. p. 168 Ruinous to the
estate. p. 169 They are sins against society. p. 170, 171 Dishounourable to Man
as Man. p. 172 Inconsistant with religion. p. 173 Most dishonorable to a
Christian. p. 174 The Christians Body consecrated to holiness. p. 175 The
modern triumph of Vice over Christianity deplorable. p. 176 The application. p.
177, 178
SERMON: III. Of the chiefest Good.
All men desire the chiefest good. p. 182 Most seek It where it is not to be
found. p. 183, 184 Gods rightousnesse the way. p. 185, 186 Christ's yoke is
easy. p. 187 Reveiw of heaven. p. 188 Infidelity of those that seek it not. p.
189 Inconsideration of those that seek it not. p. 190, 191 Our future state
more Considerable then our present. p. 192, 193 The belief and life of the
Atheist exposed. p. 194, 195, 196, 197 Their different Ends. p. 198
ERRATA.
Page ^. ^o. 24 (...) with God p. 13. l. 24. (...) p. 14. l. 27. dares not trust
p. 24. l 10. that great (...) the L^ve p. 2 (...). 13 shall after s^^e periods
of ^im ib. l. n^^. prepared for temporal ^u^ishment (...) and the (...) ^ 3 l.
2. ^t John says p. 38. l. 6. Matter of l. 10 Ancients l 11. dele^^^ p. 39. l.
3 (...) p. 40. l. 31. shall suffer p. 47. l. 10. qui dix^^unt in cord Non est
Deu^ p. 52. l. 19. of true and proper p. 62 l. ^l^ as the Gentiles p. 63. l. 1.
so their Virtue ib. l. 23. raises a Christians p. 70. l. 16. ad^^o^ish u^ p.
74 l. 1. C^yes p. 82. l. 22 fatness of p. 83. l. 9. fountain of light p. 89.
l. 16. Behemenisme p. 94 l. 9. pious reverence. p. 98. l. 5. and with learned
and good Natured p. 106. l. 20. not only with the Righteousness of Christ
imputed but also with the Righteousness, ib. l. 25. without the assistance p.
114. l. 4. con^ects notions l. 28 which we have not yet p. 125. l 19. or it may
p. 132. l. 13. cardinal Christian p. 134. l. ^. as to set a difference between
Gods Glory and our Happiness, why should we not have an Eye to both or why
should we sever p. 135. l. 12. to bless God p. 145. l. 5. and agrees ib. l.
penust the vanity of p. 148. l. 25 dele and p 152. l. 4. consesse i^ reasonable
p. 171. l. 7. son of her Vomes p. 177. l. 23. smites and wrongeth l. 24. the
day of p. 1^2. l. 3. Hence is all p 186. l. 31. Whosoever have p. 188. l. 17.
Counselors p. 196. l. 8 But yon.

IN MARGIN.
Page 5 l. 26 lege ^^^^itate l. 42. architectum p. 7. l. 4 cum tota p. ^0. l.
14. (...) l. 18. Augustines p. 15. l. on^ium mortalium p. 22 l. 12 (...) p 29.
l. 6. Salutem l. 7. hoc est p. 40 l. 7. ad Meanam p. 49 l. penult inter
proleg^mena^ p. 55. l. 12. ordinata p. 87. l. 15 sola ergo lb. l. 25 fieri
co^um p. 9^. l. 22 non est dubitandum p 1^9. l. 17. hac carn^ p. 152. l. 14.
quae istorum ib. l. 16. inger^nt mortem l. 17, 18. gaudendum: ubi Virtutes
ips^e quibus l. 19. peric^lorum, laborum, dolorum ta^^o fideliora lestimon^a
miseriarum p. 153. l. 13. quid esset ib. S^e l. 14. quaesiverunt p. 168. l. 7.
coena delectavatur.

SECTION I.

THE FEAR OF GOD, in Opposition TO The Atheism of this present Age commended,
AND The Pains of Hell represented as the Greatest Evil.

In three Sermons preached in the Cathedral Church at Winchester.

By R. S. Prebendary there: Pietas timore inchoatur, Caritate perficitur.

PSALM. 34.11. Come ye children, and hearken unto me, and I will teach You the
fear of the Lord.


I will make no apology, my Christian Auditors, for calling You children: No
man is too good for this compellation, but he that is too good to go to
Heaven. For our Savior has affirmed with an Oath, that Whosoever does not
receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, Mar. 10.15.
he shall in no wise enter therein. And therefore I shall not alter the
Exhortation of the Psalmist, either as to the matter, or as to the phrase. The
Matter is profitable, and the phrase pathetick, Come Ye children, and hearken
unto me, and I will teach You the fear of the Lord.

A good confident Demagogue says, the Atheist: What! must we be children? and
must we hearken so diligently? and must we be taught? and must we be taught by
Him? And lastly, which is worst of all, must we be taught to fear, and to fear
Spirits, things that we never saw? Must this fear be the fear of a God?

I observe, that in sermons made to our Ancestors, the Preachers seldom
proposed any argument to prove the existence of God, or the need we have to
worship and fear him, without some such apology as this, that though no man was
so unreasonable, or Ungodly, as to deny the Being of a God; yet that such
discourses were sometimes useful to Countermine secret and privy suggestions
to Atheism, and Irreligion; which by our Natural Corruption, and the Devils
malice we may receive some damnage by. But now the scene is altered; we need no
such Apology. The Devil has improved his Empire. Instead of denying
Ungodliness, we are ready to profess Atheism, and instead of subduing our
lusts, we are ready to pamper and cherish them. The Enemy has made his inrode,
and shall not the Watchman give Notice, that every man's blood, that prepares
him not to his own defense, may be upon his own head.

It is noted by a Judicious divine, Presto^ in his Sermon. of the sensible
Demonsiration of a Deity.
that all that Unevenesse, and all those exorbitances, that are found in the
lives of Men, do generally proceed from the weakness of the spring, because
the principles of Religion are not thoroughly and firmly believed. Men for the
generallity (I speak not now of profess't Atheists) will not neglect Religion
altogether, nor will they make their hearts perfect which God in althings. The
Reason is; because the principles of Religion are in part believed, in part not
believed, They say in their hearts, It may be there is a God, a Creator, a
Rewarder, a Judgment to come; and yet they have so much of David's fool in
them, that sometimes they are ready to say in their hearts, It may be there is
no God. Now here is a defect in the root and principle. A Watch may as well go
without a spring, as Man live well in any degree, that does not believe that
there is a God, and that he is a Rewarder.

It is time now for Us to sound an Alarm, and to set up our Standard, When the
poison of Atheism is not like the Pestilence that walks in darkness, but
when it appears, and challenges Religion, and sets up its Standard also for a
Token, and is like the destruction that wastes at noon day.

The Heralds or messengers of God from Heaven have not been wanting to acquaint
the world with these most important Truths. That the fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom, That there is no beginning to be wise without it; So
Solomon Prove. 1.7. That the fear of the Lord is Wisdom, and that to depart
from Evil is understanding, So Job 28. ult. That they are all fools that say
in their hearts, There is no God. That the workers of Iniquity have no
knowledge, that oppress and eat up Gods people, as if they would eat bread,
and call not upon the Lord, So my Psalmist, Psalm 14 1, 4. But the Heralds of
Hell have opened their poisonous lips also, They call that folly that we think
our chiefest VVisdome; They profess to soar high far above all our Aims. For
they design themselves a happiness that they will not depend upon, nor thank
God for. And the security of that happiness of theirs consists chiefly in this,
That God shall not be in all their thoughts: and their greatest accomplishment
is this, that they have in a good measure untaught themselves the fear of the
Lord. They endeavor not to avoid the Judgment of God, but the fear of his
judgment; like the silly fish mentioned by Aelian, that hides his head in the
bank, and, because he sees not the fisher, thinks himself secure, and that the
fisher sees not him.

If you would know why they endeavor thus to hide themselves from the fear of
God, they tell you that the great hinderance to men's comfort in this life is,
Lucret. lib. 1.
Eternas quoniam paenas in morte timendum: because they are apt to be troubled
with suspicions and fears of an Eternal punishment after Death. They would be
happy, but the fear of a God and a judgment spoils their Mirth. However their
resolve is not to lose any present pleasure. S. Paul tells you their word, Let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we die. while we live (say they) let us live
voluptuously, and that we may no more be troubled for the future, let us
contrive some way how our Enemy may not find us, that is (to use their own
language) how we may Relligionibus atque minis obsistere divom --

let us be rid of this Religious timorousness at any rate, and let us throw off
this fear of God, that is ready continually to afflict us. And seeing this Fear
arises from a consideration, that the world cannot be made or preserved
without a God: Let not us (say they) be carried along with that commun Opinion;
and thus they persuade themselves to be guilty of the folly, noted by the
Psalmist, of saying in their hearts, There is no God. This is the Genealogy of
their wicked thoughts. This the Aim of their Philosophy and study, as you may
see it delineated by themselves in the first book of Lucretius.

Pardon me, My children, while I show you the Vanity of these pretended
wisemen, and the foolishness of their Wisdom, when it exalts it self against
the wisdom, and would destroy the fear of the Lord. Seneca thought he had no
hard task upon him, when he was to defend the cause of God, and I hope by his
assistance it will be easy for me to show openly the folly of these Men; who,
to deliver themselves from the fear of Gods judgment, have ventured to deny
his being and existence. These men have ranged themselves into two sorts. 1.
The first are the Epicurean Atheists who, to rid themselves of the fear of God,
have been forced to maintain this Hypothesis, That the World was made by
chance, and is governed by chance; and so by Consequence, that God is not to be
feared as the creator and Governor of the world.

2. The second sort are the Aristotelean Atheists, who, to be rid of the same
fear of God from their Master Aristotle (if indeed it was his Opinion) assert
the world never to have been made at all, but to have been perpetuated, as it
is, For it is not altogether out of question, Whether Aristotle did indeed deny
the Creation of the world. For some there are, as the learned Scaliger, who
reckon Aristotle among those Philosophers, who though they asserted the
Eternity of the World; yet have owned the Creation also, supposing God the
Eternal Cause of an Eternal World, and so from God the Eternal Creator an
Eternal succession of Generations and corruptions; and consequently that God
was before the world in Nature, but not in Time or Duration of any Kind; but as
the sun was before its own light. But against this Opinion are the Writings of
Aristotle lib. 8. Phys. lib. 1. De caelo; and in the later part. lib. 2. de
genesis and corrupt. and lib. 12. Meta^h. Vid. and Pereri. lib. 15. de Mo^u and
Eternitate mundi. However it is supposed, that before his death he altered his
Opinion, and writ in Contradicton to his former arguments V. Gassend. de Phys..
1. l. 4 c. 5. and loca apud eum citata; quibus add. l. 2. de Genesis and cor..
3.10. De Anima, etc.

Manilius concerning the order and exact motion of the Stars. l. 1. Astron.

Nec quicquam in tanta magis est Mirabile Mole,
Quam ratio and certis quod l^gibus omnia parent.
Nusquam turba nocet, Nihil ullis partibus errat,
Laxius aut levius mutatove ordine fertur.
Quid tam confusum sp^cie ^quid tam vice certum?
Ac mihi tam praesens ratio non ulla videtur,
Qua pateat Mundum divino Numine verti,
Atque ipsum esse Deum, nec sort coisse Magistra,
Ut voluit credi, qui primus maenia Mundi
Seminibus struxit minimis inque illa resolvit.
And a little after --

Nunquam transversus solemn decurrere ad Arctos,
Nec mutare vi as, and in Ortum vertere Cursus,
Auro^amque novis nasc^nte oftendere terris.
Nec lunam certos excedere luminiais Orbs;
Sed servare modum, quo cresc at quove recedat.
Nec cadere in terram pendentia sidera Caelo:
Sed dimensa suis consumere tempora signis,
Non casus opus est, Magni sed Numinis Ordo.
See Cicero lib. 2. de. not. Deorum n. 88, 89, 90. and sequentib. Philosophi,
si fo^te eos primus respectus Mu^ di conturbaverat, ^ostea cum vidissent motus
ejus finitos and aequabiles, omniaque tantis ordinibus moderata, immutab^lique
constantia intelligere debuerunt inesse aliquem non solum habitatorem in hac.
coelesti and divind d^mo. sed etiam rectorem and moderato^^m, and tanquam
architect^um ta^ti Operis, etc. ib. Principio terra Universa cernatur locata in
medio mundi, sede solida, and undique ipsa in sese nutibus suis congloba. ta,
vestita floribus, arboribus, srugibus, quorum omnium incredibilis multitudo
insatiabili varietate distinguitur. Add huc fontium gelidas perennitates, etc.
ib. n. 98.


from all Eternity by infinite successions of Generations and corruptions, and
that without the Creation or Providence of God.

To make way therefore for the establishing the worship and fear of God in your
hearts, We will consider the Vanity of these our greatest modern opposers
(first of our Epicurean, then of our Aristotelean, Atheists) who for want of
Invention in themselves, have raked their Atheism out of the errors of the old
Philosophers.

He then that adopts the Epicurean Hypothesis, and believes, that the whole
world and all the parts of it come together by chance, and is so preserved
without the work or providence of God, Let him but cast his Eyes up to Heaven,
and there take a just view of the compass of those vast Bodies. Let him see the
Glory of the Sun, the light and beauty of the Moon, the number, order and the
exact Motion of the Stars, continued now for near six thousand years without
Error or Interruption.

Then let him look down upon the Earth, and wonder to see how it is fastened
without prop or pillar, and made to stand immovable in the midde of the Air,
how it is compassed and intervein'd with waters, how it is covered with Grass
and herbs, beautified with flowers, and enrich't with all manner of fruits (all
which are conveniences most necessary for the use of Man) Will he then think
that all these came by chance? Will he not rather (with old Hermes the
Trismegist) call God Father, and own him to be the Wise and powerful Creator
and preserver of all these things. The Heavens, says David, Psalm. 19. declare
the Glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work. Day unto day
utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge. There is no Speech nor
Language where their Voice is not heard.

Nay, this Hypothesis of the Epicureans is abundantly confuted even by Cicero,
and other considering Men among the Heathen. If a man (say they) should come
into a fair house well built both for state and convenience, provided with all
useful, and adorned with all Curious, furniture, could he think the house had
no founder that built, no Master that owned and furnished it. So he that
beholds the goodly frame and structure of the World, and the variety of all
those Curious and useful parts contained in it, may justly be censured for
wanting the commun Reason of Mankind, if he does not conclude, that it had an
author and a former, and has a Lord and an Owner, Which is no other but that
God; the fear of whose power and providence these Epicures desire to lay aside.

If there be no providence, how came that admirable correspondence in parts so
different, as those are, whereof the world is made? Is it by Chance that things
in their Natures most contrary, as hot and cold, moist and dry, fluid and
firm, all conspire to the advantage of the Creature, as to their commun End?
Is it by Chance that the Springs do feed the Rivers, and the Rivers the Sea,
and the Sea the Clouds, and the Clouds the Earth, and the Earth Beasts, and
Beasts Men? No surely, God has done all this for Man, and he expects from Man
this return only, Namely, that he will give him the honor of his own Work.

If there be no providence, how came it, that throughout the whole Universe,
there are for particular and extraordinary cases such particular and
extraordinary provisions. Egypt and some other Countries have no Rain: But
then, instead of Rain, Magnae etiam Opportunitates ad cultum hominum alque
abundantiam aliam al^s i^ locis reperiuntur, Aegyptum Nilus irrigat, and tota
aestate obrutam oppletamque tenucrit, tum recedit, mollitosque and oblinatos
agros ad se^ rendum relinquit. Mesopotamiam fertilem efficit Euphrates, in quam
quotannis quasi notos agros invehit. Jndus v^ro, qui omnium est Fluminum
maximus, non aqua solum agros laetisicat and mitigat, sed cos etiam conserit.
Magnam enim Vim frumenti sea cum and similium dicitur deportare, etc. lib. 2.
de Not. Deor. n, 1 ^ 1.
they have great Rivers, such as Nilus and Niger in the otherwise barren parts
of Africa, which at certain times of the year overflow their banks, and at
other periods sink and draw themselves in again, which make these countries as
fruitful as if they had all the seasonable showers of the former and the latter
Rain. Great and unsufferable were the beat under the torrid Zone by the
necessary reflection of the Sun, unless otherwise qualified. And think You,
that it comes by chance, that in those places they abound with fresh Winds,
Springs and Showers constantly to mitigate the extremity of that Heat? Near the
Poles the cold is so excessive, that without great assistances for warmth, Men
could not live. There therefore grows abundance of Wood, and there are the
beasts with all the deep furs proper for the use of those inhabitants. We in
these Countries have hot stomachs, and we have plenty of flesh and other solid
meat at hand. In hot countries, where there can be little provision of flesh;
there they have lesser stomachs, and find fruit and herbs with a little bread
and wine to be food convenient for them.

All these things, my Brethren, came not by Chance. Let Atheists blaspheme as
they please, There is the hand of providence in it. For as in a family where
all are under one Lord, and all are served by one Steward, every one has his
portion and allowance according to the Office he bears, and the work he is
approved to do: So did God the Father in his first Creation appoint for all the
Nations of the world a fit Diett according to the Temperature of their Bodies,
and the condition of the Climate they live under. Neither has he made this
provision for Men only, but also for beasts, and for the fouls of the Air, and
for every creeping thing; according to that of the Psalmist The Eyes of all
things, look unto thee, O Lord, and thou give them their Meat in due season.

The Epicurean Atheists undertook indeed to show, how the world and all its
parts were made without a God. But what have they performed in that great
Essay? Of those ten thousand Myriads of appearances in the world, can they
perform it in any one? Can they make one hair white or black? Let them make
the Leaf of a tree, or the wing of a fly; how else shall we think them able to
answer their great Undertakings, and to show what they promise -- Unde queat
res quaeque creari,
Et quo quaeque modo fiant Opera sine divom?


that is, how althings in the world may be created and made without the work of
God.

For, that Chance, the blindest thing in the world, should perfect all the
parts of this stately fabric, and place them in this excellent Order, is the
most incredible supposition that could be made. It is well observed by Cicero,
that by the casual shuffling of many thousand single leters the Annals of
Ennius might more possibly be composed, than that a Chaos of undigested Atoms
should form so excellent a world consisting of so many and so useful and
beautiful parts without the least contrivance. Hic ergo non mirer esse
quenquam, qui sibi persuadeat, corpora quaedam solida atque individua vi and
gravitate serri, mundumque effici ornatissimum, and pulcherrimum ex eorum
corporum concursione fortuita? Hoc qui existimat fieri potuisse; non intelligo
cur non idem putet, si innum^rabiles unius and viginti li^erarum sormae vel
aureae vel quales libet, aliquo conjiciantur, posse ex his in terram excussis
Annals Ennii, ut deinceps legi possint, effici? etc. Quod si mundum efficere
potest concursus Atomorum, cur porticum, cur templum, cur domum, cur U^bem non
potest? De not. lib. 2.


But before I leave the Epicurean Atheist, let me form one argument against
him out of his own Philosophy. It is this, That which is received by the commun
Prolepsis or Notion of Mankind, that is Certainly true. Vidit Epicurus esse
Deos, quod in omnium animis eorum Notionem impressisset Natura. Quae enim Gens
est, aut quod geaus hominum, quod non habeat sine doctrina anticipationem
quandam Deorum, quam appellat Prolepsin Epicurus? So Velleius in Cicero 1. De
Not. Deorum. A little after, Cum non instituto aliquo, aut more, aut lege, sit
Opinio constituta, maneatque ad Unum firma omnium Consensio, intelligi Necesse
est esse Deos; quoniam insitas little, vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus.
De quo autem omnium Natura consentit, id. verum esse necesse est. ib. ex
sententia Epicuri.
This major proposition is Epicurus's own, and stongly contended for, as you
may see in the first book of Cicero de Not. Deorum. The Minor out of his own
Philosophy also shall be this: But the Being of a God is received by the commun
Prolepsis or Notion of Mankind. Whence the Conclusion follows, That it is
certainly true, there is a God. The Epicureans, not being able to deny any part
of the Premises, admit the Conclusion also: but then affirm, that this God
did not create, nor does Govern, the World. To which the Reply is easy; It
being granted by them, that what is received by the commun Notion of mankind is
true, and that the Being of God was so received: Let any Epicurean unravell
what was generally meant by the word God, and he will find, That men in their
commun Notions, when they asserted the being of a God, had no other conceit of
Him, than of the great Creator and provident disposer of all things. And
therefore from the Commun Notion Eupicurus ought to have concluded, if the
Existence of God, then his existence also according to that Notion. Now it
neither is, nor ever was, the Notion of Mankind, That God is an Idle Fairy or
Spirit, as he imagined, but that he was, (...). So Sophocles.

There is in Truth, there is one God, and he made Heaven, the large Earth and
Azute sea. (...). Epictet. Aelianus dicit. Barbarorum neminem delapsum ad
(...), sed ab omnibus affirmari and esse numen, and nostri curam gerere. lib.
11. c. 31. Plutarchi est illud, (...). Plut. lib. de com. Notitiis. Populares
Deos multos naturalem unum esse summae Totius Artificem. Artisthenus ut ciratur
a Lactantio lib. 1. c. 5. (...). Varro, Deum Animam esse Motu ac Ratione mundum
gubernantem. v. August. de Civ. Dei lib. 4. c. 31.


(...), Father and Maker, Principle and Cause of all things, as I could prove
unto you out of almost infinite Testimonies. It is well however that we have
the Testimony even of those Opposers of Gods providence upon Record, that in
the Time of Epicurus, the being of a God was by them and others generally
received as the commun Notion of all Mankind. And so much against those, who
out of the Epicurean principles have endeavored to cast off all Religion, and
the fear of a God. Only for an Epiphomena before we make our Transition, let us
join in Chorus with the Prophet Jeremy c. 10.6, 7. and say, Forasmuch as there
is none like thee, O Lord, thou art great, and thy Name great in might, Who
would not fear before the O King of Nations, for to thee does it appertain? or
else with the 24 Elders Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory
and honor and power. For thou haft created all things, and for thy pleasure
they are and they were created. And now I have done with Epicurus and his
Company: methinks I may take a peble and a sling, and like little David against
Goliath venture one stroke with the great Aristotle also. First sling a smooth
stone at Him, and then kill him with his own sword.

And what stone shall I take, shall I oppose him with the commun Tradition,
Notion or belief of Mankind? It is confesst that before the rise of Philosophy,
all did universally believe the Being of a God. Nay Pythagoras, Socrates,
Plato, and all the most ancient of the Philosophers ownd this Truth, That the
world was created. Aristotle himself acknowledges this Notion and belief,
(...) Aristot. 1. de Caelo c. 10.
All men, says he, affirm the world to have been created. The Cartesians, who
have tried as many tricks with themselves as other Men, have endeavored (and
confess it) to cast off all superinduced Principles and received Notions; and
among those this also of a God. But with all their endeavors they confess they
could never do it, but that the Notion of a God and a Creator will still abide
in their Minds, as a Testimony of his Existence. I will not therefore say with
Tertullian, Tertull. praescri^. adv. Haereticos.
Quod apud multos unum invenitur, non est erratum, sed traditum, That which in
many persons is found one and the same, is not an Error, but a Tradition. But
thus, That, which in all Men is found one and the same, is neither Error nor
Tradition, but a Notion given us by God together with our Natures. And though
some men have endeavored to stifle this Notion: Yet I shall show, that it
rises upon them, and casts them even into that very fear of God, which they
would avoid, in spite of all their endeavors. This Notion therefore and belief
of a Deity, that is so Universal and so immovable, must have a fixed Principle
in our Natures. (...). Hesiod.
Hesiod says, that There is allwaies somewhat of Truth in a commun Fame. But
this being not only Commun, but Universal, must have a stronger ground. For
what says Aristotle himself, (...), That which appears to all, that we affirm
to be true. Ethie. ad Nicomach. l. 10. c. 11.
And he that goes about to make null such a general belief, shall not have
any way of argument more credible.

Besides, the supposition, that those Aristotelean Atheists have raised, is
satisfactory to no Man's understanding. No man living can apprehend how it is
possible, that there should be infinite successions of generations and
corruptions, without a first Cause. Nay this Hypothesis (as the Masters of the
Mathematickes observe) contradicts the certain Principles of Reason. For it
makes such a duration whereof a part shall be equal to the Whole. For the part
of the supposed Duration of the world, that is past, must be infinite, because
supposed to have no beginning, and the part to come must be infinite, because
supposed to have no End, and both parts together could be but infinite, for
nothing can be larger than infinite; so that each part will be equal to the
whole. Now to admit any part equal to the whole is contrary to every Man's
Reason, that is able to consider. Secondly, this Hypothesis makes one infinite
longer than another. For the part of this supposed duration of the world, that
was past as yesterday, must be infinite, and the part of the same duration,
that reaches till to day, must needs be a day longer than that which ended
yesterday; and so one of these Infinites must be longer than the other. Which
is reckoned absurd also among the Learned, who account it demonstrable, that
all infinites are equal. But I shall remit to the learned Mathematick
Demonstrators these arguments and many others of the like kind, that are fitter
for the Schools than Pulpit. And lastly, as I promised, shall deal one blow
with Aristotle at his own weapon.

1. First, if he believed his arguments were demonstrative, that he used to
prove the Eternity of the world, Why does he (in the first book of his Topics
and ninth chapter) reckon the question concerning the Eternity of the world
amongst his Dialecticall problemes, such as he accounts not capable of any
demonstration? But alas! when he considered the case, he would not think his
own arguments so much as probable. For he confesses, that there could be no
satisfactory Hypothesis made, that did not allow of a first Cause. In one place
he tells us, That it is of Necessity, (...). lib. 8. Physic. c 5.
that there be a first mover, that was not moved of any other. In another, that
this first mover must be supposed to be eternal. And in a third that if there
be no first Cause, (...). ib. c. 6.
there cannot be any other cause nor any Causation at all. Nay he concludes in
terms directly against that which is said to be his own Hypothesis, and
tells us, That it is impossible to proceed in infinitum, or that the whole
series of Beings, should depend one upon another infinitely without a first
cause. (...). Metaph. lib. 2. c. 6.
Which first cause can be no other than that great God, whom to fear and honor
we propose in opposition to all Atheists, as the only way to full content here,
and perfect happiness hereafter. (...). Physic l. 8. c. 12.


You see here how if Aristotle held in other places a supposition, that
maintained an infinite succession of causes, without God or first cause, how
great his Vanity appears. For then he is not only contradicted by the commun
Principles of Reason; but unanswerably confuted by himself also. And thus, if
he will be a Philistine, this great champion like another Goliath, must fall by
his own sword.

And it is most certain Truth, and worth our observing, That the notion of a
Deity has still risen up in the hearts of all its opposers, and made them
guilty of like contradictions. Vide Acostam l. 7. Hist. and. c. 2. and 3.
I speak not this of such beasts as the Chichimesans, mentioned by Acosta, or
some other barbarous people, that seem to be somewhat worse than men, Thomam
Herbert Angl. de Souldaniae Incolis.
but of all pretended Atheists, that are able to consider. And though some of
them are more cautious than Aristotle, and will not contradict their own errors
in categoricall propositions; yet there are some sudden passions, some strange
fears of death or somewhat else peeps out of them against their wills, that
shows that they are not able utterly to stifle the Notion of a God. Sueton in
Caligula.
Sueton reports of Caesar Caligula, that he was a profess't Atheist, At qui
tantopere Deos contempsit, ad minima tonitrua caput obvolvere, ad vero majora
proripere se e strato sub lectumque condere solebat, He that shamelessly
despised a Deity, would hide himself as shamelessly under his bed at the noise
of a great thunder.

Methinks the 14th Psalm contains a lively character of those men. They are
fools, verse. 1. That say in their heart, there is no God; or at least that wish
it, if they dare not say it openly. Secondly, they are corrupt and abominable
in their doings; that is, vile, lewd and filthy in their ways of living. For
that is the very Epithete the Psalmist gives them. Thirdly, they are
oppressors, eaters and devourers of the people; the phrase is considerable,
They eat them up as they would eat bread, they eat and devour them, as if they
were made to eat; and the people were made to be their bread, to be eaten and
devoured by them. Then fourthly, they slight all acts of Religion and worship,
even prayer it self, which is a principal part of worship and most universally
received. For so the the text says, They call not upon the Lord. But in the
fifth verse is the distinction between the Atheists, and the men that are
Religious most excellently set down, They fear a fear, So it is in the Hebrew,
and in the Margin of your English Bibles. But God is in the generation of the
Righteous. The Righteous or Religious man, he fears God, owns him, and hopes to
be directed, pardoned and saved by him, and is so happy that fearing God
always, he need fear nothing else. But the foolish Atheist, he is so wise that
he will not allow himself to fear God, because he does not trust Him. But the
Text says that he fears notwithstanding. He fears a fear, he is uncertain of
the Event, and so is continually terrified with an uncertain fear of that God
and that Judgment, that his heart is not willing to admit, and yet as it
follows in the sixth verse, he does what he can to outvapor the poor godly man,
and to shame the council and design of his life, because he takes God to be
his Refuge.

And truly, my Brethren, I think this day is this Scripture fullfilled in your
Ears. It is to be lamented, that there are men among us that profess
Atheism, and for want of Wit, as I said before, to invent new ones, are
willing to broach again those old Hypotheses against Religion; and in their
Caballs do slight the commun faith concerning the Being of a God, and his being
a Rewarder in the world to Come, and do gallant it over the Religious man, and
accuse his life of folly and superstition. Yet see the power of Conscience and
the just hand of God upon them: They fear a fear. None are so incredibly
fearful of death, and the consequences of Death, as they. Mr Hobbes is the
modern Reviver of that Hypothesis of Aristotle, that I but now opposed; Sic ab
eo dicta, sic acta passim testantur. v. praefationem ad Dialogum Physicum de
Not. Aeris. in Epist. ad Sam. Sorberium quod idem de Epicuro notat Cicero, cum,
scil. quas res gloriabatur se contemnere Numen and Mortem, eat animum mortalium
maxim formidatum.
proud and insolent in his assertions. And yet he fears; nay he professes
Fear, as much as he professes Atheism; even the fear of Death. Which fear can
be reasonable on no other account, than that of a God and a judgment to come.
For if there be no punishment of their evil deeds afterward, Death can be no
worse estate than that of a perpetual sleep: And so to sleep without fear of
Vengeance or judgment to come is certainly a more desirable estate than life,
when accompanied with pain or grief or with the terrors of Death only. This is
the condition of these Men, while in their idle and foolish speeches they
vainly deny God, in their spontaneous actions they show such tokens of
Suspicions and fears, as do more strongly assert, that they are yet afflicted
with the Notion of his Existence. While, in the mean time, God is in the
generation of the righteous, they are professed worshippers of God, and fearing
him all ways they fear not death at all, nor the consequences of it at all;
but can sing out Triumphantly over that dreadful Nothing, O Death where is thy
Sting! O Grave where is thy Victory?

I have one Observation more concerning the Atheists of our Time who broach
again those old Hypotheses against Religion That they are ready enough to call
to us for demonstrations; yet they themselves could never (though they have
been challenged to show their skill in that particular) I say it, and I say it
again, they could never yet form one tolerable argument to assert the
certainty of their own Hypotheses, or to destroy our Faith concerning the Being
of a God. And therefore if they will yet Continue to blaspheme, let them after
all our demands either give us one argument to prove There is no God, or that
the world is eternal, or that it was made by Chance, without the work of God;
or let them confess that they have taken up their strange suppositions without
Reason, and maintain them against Reason, and all that with Reluctance of Mind
and with fears and suspicions that the commun judgment is the more true.

I conclude therefore with Job and Solomon, That the fear of the Lord is
Wisdom, and that to depart from evil is understanding: and with my Psalmist,
That the Wisdom of these Atheists is folly, and their strengh weakness, not
able to dissettle the Universal anticipation and catholic Faith of the whole
world. Which Catholic Faith of the whole world is this, as it is mentioned by
the author to the Hebrews, c. 11. v. 6. That there is a God, and that he is the
Rewarder of all those that diligently seek Him.

But besides this catholic commun Notion, we have a special Faith settled by
Miraculous testimonies from Heaven. We have the books of Moses, and the
Prophets; Yea, and of the Apostles also, and so as the author to the Hebrews
observes, By Faith we know that the world was framed of old by the word of God,
Heb. 11.12. and therefore We, at least that know it by Faith, are sure that we
have reason to fear and worship God. And as for others, it is a saying of St
Paul, that in this time of Unbelief cannot be unseasonable, If the Gospel be
hid, it is hid to those that are lost. And so I say, if the Notion of a Deity
(which is the first Article of the Christian, as well as of the commun Faith)
be hid, It is hid to those that are lost. But I hope safer and better things of
you (my Christian Auditors) and have only used this Discourse to arm you
against the Spirit of Atheism, that is now gone abroad in the world.

And now, My Brethren, give me leave to draw some advices for You from the
consideration of the premises. And the first is, to those that are learned and
best educated among Us, Dicit Cicero, Epicurum non Graeciam modo, sed and
Asiam; in^o totum terrarum orbem novitate doctrinae concussisse. De Fin.
That we avoid pride and the ambition of broaching New and Curious learning. It
was this pride surely that betrayed both Aristotle and Epicurus to their
Errors. Et Lucretius, hinc Epicurum celebrat, quod primus exticit Religioms
Oppugnator. lib. 1.

Humana ante oculos faede cum vita jaceret
In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione,
Quae caput a cocli regionibus ostendebat:
Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans.
Primum Grajus homo mortales tollere contra
Est ausus, etc. ib.

For it was in their time looked upon as an excellence of wit, and a great piece
of Mastery to be able to maintein a contradiction in any science against the
commun and vulgarly received Opinions. It is recorded by St Luke, Omnis enim
Numinis Religio colentibus vitio vertebatur, presertim ab Epicureis, ceu
inutilis and superstitiosa nimis (...), etc.
that the Athenians and strangers that lived at Athens spent their time in
Nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some New thing. Act. 17. v. 21. By
which New thing he means not that which we call News; not the Relation of any
New Occurrences in affairs of State, but some New curiosity in point of
learning, some New Invention, or New argument, or method of Reasoning in
matters Philosophical. And the desire of some such applause was surely the
cause of their broaching these dangerous Hypotheses against God. It was then,
as it is now. He who holds the newest and strangest Opinions in Philosophy or
Divinity has allwaies most disciples, and is most looked after. Nonconforming
Scholemasters and Tutors are generally preferred by the Unwise, who are many
times the major part, before those that are lawful and orthodox. For it is
true as Seneca observes, Nemo admiratur lunam nisi laborantem, The Moon is more
admired, when she is in an Eclipse, than when she shines out fully and
perfectly. But, my Brethren, We must endeavor to correct this Vicious
disposition of our Minds, For truth is not the worse either for being commun,
or for having Age on its head. And seeing these Truths concerning the Creation
and Providence of God, and the Reason we have to fear and worship Him, are
strongly confirmed to Us, let it not be any prejudice against them, which ought
to be their commendation, that they are ancient all, and all intimate to our
Natures.

Lastly, let me advise you, if you think your selves not in danger of
speculative, to beware of practical Atheism: For we may be guilty of this
Sin, not only by Wishing or saying There is no God, but also by living without
his fear, For that is to live, as if there was no God. For he denies God, that
does not always fear the effects of his power, his Justice and his Truth. He
denies God, that denies to honor him in all his Attributes. And surely he has
no conceit of the Truth and justice of God, or no conceit of his Power, who
does not fear to dissobey Him. For what says God by the Prophet Jeremy, Will
you Steal, and Kill, and commit Adultery, and Swear falsely, and burn incense
unto Baal, and yet profess to fear and Worship me. Jer. 7.9.

You had as good profess to deny Me, as to Worship me, and not to Obey me.
So in the fiftieth Psalm, God tells the wicked Man that it is a part of
great profaneness to pretend to Gods covenant and yet to hate to be reformed,
v. 16, 17. to venture to dissobey God and break his commandments, and yet to
profess to worship Him, to be guilty of Theivery and Adultery and Calumny, and
to hope that God will connive at all this. It were as honorable to God, for us
to think there was no such Being, as to think him such a God, as would take
upon him to judge the world, and yet suffer himself to be flattered so with
hypocritical Worship, as to be wrought upon to pass by the breach of his own
Laws and to be made inconstant to the observance of those Moral Rules, by
which he governs the world: as good deny Him, as to suppose him a blind-Guide
or an unjust and partial Judge. Take therefore the advice of the Psalmist in
the 22d verse of that 50th Psalm, and Consider this, Ye that forget God (that
is, ye that have owned Him, and yet now fear Him not) least he tear you in
pieces. Those who have profess't Religion, if they forget their Duty to God,
which they have profess't, and live profanely, They shall most certainly
undergo the punishment of their profaneness. The sentence is, God shall tear
them: that is, God shall distract and cross such persons in this life, and
punish them eternally in the life to come. One will make have to be Rich, and
it may be, not having the fear of God before his Eyes, will design to attain
his End by manifest theivery. So the Psalmist, when thou saw a theif thou
consentedst with Him. another man, or the same Man another Time, for want of
the same fear, will be companion to an Adulterer, v. 18. Some give their Mouth
to Evil, v. 19. and their Tongue frames deceit, it may be, to circumvent
their Neighbors in buying or selling or matters of Trade. Some abuse their
tongue another way, they sit and speak evil against their Brother, and slander
their Mothers Son, v. 20. Now because God refers the punishment of these
Offenses to future judgment, and does not take them off immediately in the
very Act, they harden themselves yet more against God and fear him less and
less, So verse. 21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence, and thou
thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self, (that is) apt to be
flattered and corrupted as thou art, and therefore thou addest worship to thy
Wickedness. But I will reprove thee and set them in Order before thine Eyes. I
will make thee know the Order and difference of Duties, and so I shall set
before thine Eyes, the many disorders of thy practice. For in Vain in words you
profess to defy Atheism, and in Vain you own and worship God with your lips,
When in the mean time you rob Him of his better and nobler Services. When you
do not give him real Fear and Honor in your hearts, and when you deny him
Obedience in your lives. And he fears not God, that dares to dissobey Him. For
Worshipping and offering of Praise is good, but living Obediently is better,
and more accepted with Him. So the Psalmist Concludes, and so do I, He that
Offers praise Honoreth God, but to him that orders his conversation aright
shall be showed the Salvation of our God.

Gloria Trinuni Deo.
SERMON. II.
PSALM. 34.11. Come ye children, and hearken unto me, and I will teach You the
fear of the Lord.


IT is observed that this phrase, The fear of the Lord, denotes in Scripture
several distinct habits or dispositions of the Mind. Sometimes it signifies
Religion, or the worship of God in general, So Job. 1.9. (...), Job. 1.9.
Where Satan asks, Does Job fear God for naught? the LXX render it, does Job
worship God for naught? and so that which in the phrase of Moses is, V. apud
LXX. Prove. 1.7. Esaiae 33.6. Genesis 20.11. Job. 28.28. and in voce complexa Job
1.15 8. and 2.3. Vid. and. Deuteronomy. 10.12. and Jonae 1.9.
Thou shall fear the Lord thy God (Deuteronomy. 10.20.) is rendered by the
interpretation of our Savior (Math. 4.10.) Thou shall worship the Lord thy God.
And it is ordinary to render the Hebrew word (...) that signifies to fear, by
the Greek word (...), that signifies to worship. And in all languages Religion
and the fear of the Lord sometimes pass under the same significations. And in
this sense I understood this phrase the last time, when in Opposition to our
Aristotelean and Epicurean Atheists, I affirmed the existence of the Eternal
God, and advised you to fear and worship Him.

Sometimes the fear of the Lord is taken in a stricter sense, for the Dread of
God, as the author of all punishments; and especially of eternal punishment in
Hell. And there are other sorts of affections that have this Name also. There
is the fear of a Slave and the fear of a Son, There is the fear of an Atheist
and the fear of an Hypocrite, the fear of a doubting Christian and the fear of
a Christian that douts not, but is carried on with a full assurance of Faith.
For he dreads God as a child reverenceth his Father, that is, He fears to
offend Him. There is great variety in these fears, They take several Men
several Ways. The lowest kind is communly the beginning of Wisdom, That
frights from Sin for fear of punishment. But the highest kind, namely filial
fear, is the End and perfection of it. It is the Disposition of an adeptus of
one that has already attained to the greatest Wisdom.

St Basil in his exposition of this 34th Psalm undertaketh to tell us, (...).
Basil. in Psalm. 33. al. 34.
which of all these fears it is that the Psalmist desired to teach his
children: and he declares in plain terms that the spiritual Scholemaster
meant it of the fear of Gods wrath and punishment in Hell. He meant it even of
that which the Scholemen call Slavish fear, He would have his Scholars, when
they were tempted to any Sin, to have recourse to this fear as to an Antidote.
He would have them fear the last and terrible judgment. He would have them
fear the tormenting Devils, executioners of the Wrath of the Almighty Judge.
(...), He would have them fear that lowermost Hell, that labyrinth of
Darkness, out of which there was no passage, that burning allwaies but never
shining fire. And he proposes that not only young beginners and Novices in
Christianity, but that grown and well instructed Christians should use this
fear to restrain their sinful lusts. Their Great proficient David would by no
means be without his part of this Religious Discipline. The same Father tells
us, that this was his prayer, Psalm. 119.120. (...), that is, Nayl down Lord and
crucify my flesh through thy fear. We read that Text otherwise, but suppose
that St Basil, St Augustine, St Ambrose, Theodotion, and the LXX. had some
reason for it, else they had not rendered it so.

The Schools and their great Master Aquinas, Aquin. 22. q. 19. art. 4. and Art
6, 7. and Doctores in S. Tho. ibid.
though they have nicely distinguished the fear of God, into servile and
filial, initiall and perfect; yet give very good Characters of that fear, which
they call initiall and slavish, concluding, that it is good, that it is
consistent which the love of God, that it is a principle disposing us to
Wisdom, that it is a gift of the holy Ghost and a Remedy against Sin.
Parisiensis observes, Cum diligentiorem considerationem de timore seceris,
in^enies eum evidenter supra omnia alia dona deprimintem cor humanum, and
subiicientem ei quem timet. Parisiensis. 1. Part de Universo p. 3. c. 4.

Magna est vis Conscientiae, quod poenas semper ante oculos versari putent qui
peccaverint. Cicero Orat. pro Milone.

Qui opibus hominum sibi contra conscientiam septi and muniti esse videntur,
Deos tamen horrent, etc. apud Cic. de Fin. 1.


that this fear does soften and humble the heart of man and subjects him to the
Obedience of God, more than any other gift. It is this fear that in Natural
Conscience is powerful to restrain Men from sinning. Great (says Cicero) is
the power of Conscience, because they that Sin have the Idea of Punishment
allwaies before their Eyes. And though (as he says in another place) some men
by their power and popularity may seem to have a fence against their
Consciences; Yet no wicked Man was ever so mighty, Luke. 12.5.
as to be able to deliver himself from the dread of the Wrath of God. And
therefore it was not without Reason that our Savior himself advises to this
fear also, even to fear God, who, after he has killed, has power to cast both
Soul and Body into Hellfire.

And truly the last Judgment of God, and that eternal punishment, which he
has prepared for Wicked men, deservedly entertains the apprehensions and
fears of the wisest and soberest Man that lives. This was an ancient fear
among both Jews and Gentiles; though there were some, to use St Paul's phrase,
both of the Circumcision and of the Uncircumcision, that were of the Sadducean
principles. Epicurus, it seems, and his followers were grieved at the
communesse of this fear, Lucret. lib.
and therefore complain by their Poet Lucretius, that Nothing could prevail
against Religion, Aeternas quoniam poenas in morte timendum. Because Men were
so apt to be carried away, V. S. Paulinum page 5^0.
with the fear of eternal punishment after Death. The thing that ruined the
power of that Tradition of Hell among the Gentiles was the fabulous
interposition of the Poets, and their corrupting the Truth of God, by adding
stories of Styx and Acharon, Cerberus and the Furies, which looked indeed but
like Poetical Bugbears: of these it is that Cicero speaks, Quis tam excors, ut
ista moveant? Who so void of reason as to be moved by them? But I shall show
you that our Religion does not advise us to fear that, which is only an empty
Shadow. For as in my last discourse I declared unto you against the Atheists,
that there is a God; So now (against our Socinians and Atheists in divines
clothing) I shall make it as evident that there is a Hell or a state of great
and of eternal punishment, prepared for the Devils and wicked Men.

First this was an old Testament Truth. For the proof of it, I shall now
produce but what I find in the single Prophet Esaias. He affirms c. 30. 33. That
there is a Tophet prepared of old, for the King, I add and for the Subjects
too, For the Priests and for the people a place of howling and torment is
prepared. God has made it deep and large, the pyle thereof is fire and much
wood, and the Spirit or breath of the Lord like a stream of Brimstone does
kindle it. A dreadful fire, and horrid shall be the punishment by it, when the
Revenging breath or Spirit of God kindles and continues that fire. Then for the
eternal continuation of that torment he testifies in the End of his Prophesy,
That such as obey not God shall be an abhorring to all flesh, and shall be
tormented with that worm that dies not, and with the fire that never shall be
quenched, Isaiah. 66. ult. For the Testimonies of the New Testament we shall
produce but what we find in St Matthew, He, in his 13th chapter v. 41. and
sequ. reports it from our Saviors own mouth, that in the End of the word the
Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and shall gather all them that do
iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire where there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. These expressions signify the greatness of
their punishment. And for their Eternity, he reports in another place from our
Savior, Math. 25. v. ult.
that the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment and the righteous into
life everlasting. Which the Fathers thus expound, that the life of Glory in
Heaven shall not be more everlasting than the punishment of the wicked in Hell
shall be. Nay Grotius, who of all Interpreters is most narrow and scanty in
the Exposition of those phrases wherein the torments of Hell are thought to be
signified, yet allows that these Texts are truly meant of the pains of Hell,
and that our Savior finding no proper Ressemblance for those pains, among the
punishments used in the Jewish commun wealth (for to be stoned or crucified,
which I think were the severest Judgments among them, were no way fit to
represent the pains of Hell) he therefore sought abroad for a comparison, and
so likeneth the Torments of Hell, to the Cruelties practiced in the valley of
Gehenna or Gehinnom; where the Phaenicians burning their children alive unto
Devils, the horror was such, that the beating of Drums and the sounding of
all other the lowdest Music was applied in vain to drown the noise, and
hideous outcry of their howlings. Whence the valley of Hinnom got another Name
and was called also Tophet, that is, the place of Drumming.

But this its Type, Gehenna or Tophet, gives us not so lively a description of
the miserable condition of that place, as the Master of the Apocalypse does,
Rev. 14.10, 11. where he declares it was revealed to Him, that those who
worship the beast shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, that is poured
out without mixture into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall be tormented
with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence
of the Lamb. And which are considerable Circumstances, the smoke of their
torment shall ascend up for ever and ever, and they shall have no rest day nor
night. First, the smoke of their torment shall ascend up for ever and ever,
that is, there shall be no end of their torment. It shall not be a single
vivicomburium, like the punishment of fire and faggot in this world. The flames
for all their fierceness shall not wast themselves nor consume the Subjects
they burn. But as the Activity of the fire, so the passive faculties of the
Devils and wicked Men shall be infinitely enlarged in their torment. Then
secondly, the other circumstance is, they shall have no rest day nor night.
Which intimates that as the torments shall be eternal, so they shall be
without intermission. So it was said before, They shall drink of the Wine of
the wrath of God without mixture, that is, they shall feel nothing but wrath,
no Interpolations, none of Zeno's Intervalls of delight or pleasure, Nulla
refrigeria, nothing of refreshment either day or night. Dives, as it is in the
Parable, during all the vast duration of Eternity, shall not be able to procure
one drop of Water to cool his tongue.

Where are the fears, my Brethren, where are the apprehensions that ought to be
of so dreadful a place, of so dreadful a condition, as this? This is an Age
when men will not submit to their own Remedies, when they fly from the
consideration of Hell and everlasting torments, and can only abide the
Impressions wherewith their vile natures are more delighted of unlawful lusts
and pleasures. Nay some are come to that Impudence as to boast their
profanesse, and to glory in their shame and Ruin, as that they have fixed
their sails for Hell, and are not afraid to encourage one another with such
discourses as these, that they will rifle and ravish every thing that is
delightful, and fill themselves with pleasure in their way thither, and when
they come to their End, whatsoever the condition of the place be, they shall
be sure to find such company there as will best suit with their Inclinations.
This, my Brethren, is the language of those whom God has judicially given up
to a reprobated sense: of whom I may say, that if they continue in their
Impenitence, neque ipsa salus eos servare poterit, The very Gospel it self of
our Lord Jesus can never save them. And yet they have a great party ready to
Hector it on their sides. The Atheists whom we met with in our last discourse
have now taken the habit of divines. For as the Spirits of darkness can
imitate the angels of light, so these professors of Atheism can appear to be
divines, with an intent to corrupt Divinity and destroy Religion. We find Gebal
and Ammon and Amalek come up among us. The conceited Platonist, the
Atheistical Hobbist, the Heretical Socinian, are now turned Chaplains, Guides
and Confessors, and they have made the Way of Vice so easy, that the voluptuous
Brave goes smooth to Hell. He has neither Wit within, nor fear from without
powerful enough to keep him back.

The Platonist tells his Virtuoso out of Origin, that Divines are mistaken in
their Notion of Hell, for that indeed there shall be no other Hell, but only at
last (when the world is grown old and languid) the Earth and all things thereon
shall perish by a general conflagration, That the Elements shall then Melt
with a fervent heat, that then the Place of the Atmosphere or Air must needs be
filled with a suffocating smoke, which the Earth shall send up from her
enflamed entrals. This is all the Hell he admits, and into this he is willing
to allow that the Devils and obstinately wicked men shall be thrown: asserting
further that this conflagration shall end in time, and that by it the Earth in
all its parts shall be much purified, and that those poor Souls that were
suffocated in the conflagration shall awake again to activity and life, and
inhabit the Earth again, and again be extinguish't and revive again, and all
this by infinite vicissitudes of like changes. Mr Hobbes and the Socinians
allow this to be a pretty conceit; and a probable Opinion it should pass for,
if all their suffrages and perverted Reason could make it so, or bow down the
sense of the holy Scripture to it. But to make it more teneble, they think fit
first in the place of an old one that had been battered too much by the
Fathers, when Origin defended it, to raise and fortify a new Sconse or two.
Origin placed a conflagration that should endure only for a time. This they
slight, and as if zealous for true Divinity, they come nearer to the Text, and
yet they give it but a Judas Kiss, when they place instead of that
conflagration an Eternal fire. For be not afraid, my Brave, says the new
conductor, our Eternal fire shall do you no more harm then Origens temporal
Conflagration did. To tell you in short, they are the words of Crellius
concerning the damned, Cruciabuntur igne aterno, says he, atque ita
delebuntur, The Devils and worst of Men, shall be destroyed in that Eternal
fire wherein they are tormented.

And if it seems a Paradox that there should be an eternal fire produced for
a temporal Punishment, Leviathan p. 4. c. 44.
Mr Hobbes tells you, and the Socinians tell you, that the Reason of this is,
because the wicked are not at once but successively to be cast into this
eternal fire, absurdly enough: as if many finite times would make up an
infinite Eternity.

But to pass by such mistakes; The same power of Scripture that battered
Origens, shall break down these new fortifications also. Does not our Savior
tell us, that not only the fire, but every Man's punishment in Hell, shall be
everlasting punishment, even equally everlasting with the life of Glory? Mat.
25.46. And it is not only said by our Savior, Mark. 9.48. that in Hell the
worm dies not, but (...), their worm, the vultur at their liver, the pain in
relation to the patients shall have no End. If the Scripture had thus expressed
it, That the worm of Conscience and fire of Hell should abide for ever, the
subtlety of the same serpent might have suggested to them, as anciently it did
to the followers of Origin, that the word for ever did sometimes signify a
limited Duration, but the Text in St Mark is (...), Mark. 9.48.
Their worm shall not shall never dye, their fire shall not be quenched. How
will they answer these Negatives? will they determine the time when that shall
cease, that our Savior says shall not at all, shall never cease? Or will they,
can they engage to suffer the Remainder of that Torment, which they, whom they
thus beguile, must abide even after this their phancied and appointed period?

Nor is this subtlety that the fire, but not the burning of particular sinners,
shall be eternal a newly devised subtlety; but ancient enough to be opposed
by St Augustine, who asserteth, Neque illud hic dici poterit, in quo nonnulli
seipsos seducunt, ignem aeternum dicentes non ipsam combustionem aeternam, per
ignem quippe, qui eternus erit, transituros arbitrantur eos quibus propter
fidem mortuam per ignem promittunt salute, ut videlicet ipse Ignis aeternus
fit, combustio vero eorum, hos est, Operatio ignis in eos non sit aeterna, etc.
lib. de Fide and Operibus. c. 15.
that those deceive themselves who affirm the fire to be eternal, but not
the burning of the several individual persons cast thereinto. This Opinion
and the confutation of it those who desire to see may read in the 15th chapter
of his excellent Treatise De Fide and Operibus.

Give me leave to speak a few words in answer to their Arguments, and I shall
Conclude.

One great argument, that they allege for their Opinion, is this. All well
appointed punishments, say they, are Curative in their design, that is, they
intend some reformation. But no eternal punishment can be Curative. Therefore
the punishment appointed by God cannot be eternal.

Now whatsoever fault besides there may be in this argument; it is certain the
Minor is false. For even the eternal punishments of Hell have a Curative
design. Not to the damned themselves. But a Curative design and a Curative
effect also to all us that believe this damnation to come. How many sinful
wretches, being first awakened and affrighted with the thoughts of an eternal
punishment hereafter, have been straitway converted to the service of that God,
who is as well able to save, as he is to cast Body and Soul into Hell fire?

But might not these torments, say they, be more Curative, if they were not
eternal, but so that after a while Men might be released from those chains
and sent up into the world above to declare the horridness of those Hellish
torments.

To this our Savior gives them an answer by the mouth of Abraham, in that
Parable Luke 16. wherein when Dives proposed thus, Nay father Abraham, but if
one went to them from the Dead they will repent. Abraham said unto Him, If they
hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be converted though one rose
from the Dead.

Another argument of theirs against the Eternity of Hell torments is, That
there should allwaies be an Equallity between the Sin and the Punishment, And
that the pain or smart ought not to be eternally great and long, when the
pleasure reapt by the transgression has been but short and transitory. But
here the very argument is to be denied, I am sure the Fathers anciently denied
it. Joannes Episc. Constantinop. in Epistola ad Theodorum Monachum.
We find John Bishop of Constantinople, affirming just the contrary, Namely,
that it was Reason the obstinately wicked should suffer eternal pains, though
the Pleasure of their wickedness had been but as dreams and shadows, and that
the punishment of sins should never End, though the Pleasure of those sins
ended before the sinful Acts themselves were perfectly completed.

Nay they confute this argument themselves by what is laid down in their
former. For if all punishment must be curative, then must the pain of it be not
only equal to, but greater than there is pleasure in the Offense. For if there
be present pleasure in Sin, who would loose that present pleasure, for fear of
the future pains of Hell, if those pains were not to be greater than this
pleasure? And it may be questioned, Whether less than an eternal pain would
prove at all curative to the world. For if even eternal punishment does now
scarce suffice for this effect, then less than an eternal punishment would
prove too little. There is no proportion or Equallity in the value between a
Man's life, and a man's goods. Yet by our Law, the Man that robs you of your
goods forfeits his own life, And there was a necessity of this Law, because
some men are so addicted to Robbery and stealing, that a less punishment would
be no terror to them. And so we may reply, that it is reasonable upon that
account as well as diverse others, that the punishment of Hell should be
eternal; because a less punishment would Scarce suffice to affright wicked
men from their sinful course of life.

Another Argument they draw from the goodness of God and his fatherly
affections to his creatures. But this argument is like that of Cotta in Cicero,
Cicero 3. de Not. Deorum. ad finem.
who urges, that because God can do all things and that without labor, he out
of his Majesty and mercy should not have suffered the two Eyes of the sea,
(...). Basii. tract de vera Fide, Tom. 2. page 588.
Carthage and Corinth, to be put out. But Gods Actions are to be regulated by
his own pleasure, not by our Phansies. St Basil tells us, that even by
asscribing all fatherly affections to God, we may be guilty of great
Ungodliness. We are to attribute to him infinite Amplitude and liberty, as
well as infinite Mercy. And at last he can say to that infinite Mercy, as he
does to the sea, Hitherto shall thou go, and no further. What says Zophar to
Job: If God cut off, or shut up, or conclude together, who shall hinder him.
Besides so Zophar proceeds, and I do not find any Body can answer him. God
knows vain Man, and has seen Wickedness in Him, should he not consider it?
should he not animadvert and punish for it? Job. 11.7. 2 Esdras. 4.
Surely his Justice and severity ought as well to be magnified in his
Animadversions upon obstinate Offenders, as his Mercy in showing kindness to
the humble penitent.

Another objection they flourish from that Axiom of Epicu^us, Si gravis,
brevis, If, say they, the punishment be very great, it cannot be very durable.
Because it is inconceivable how the Soul should suffer great pains and not be
disunited from the Body by reason of them.

But, my Brethren, we must be so modest as to allow many things to be true,
which yet are not conceivable by us. I speak a bold word, All the Philosophy in
the world, old and new, can never declare the manner how our Souls, that are
immateriall, can be pained by the diseases of our Material Bodies. But yet we
find they are so. How then should it be thought, that we should be able to
explain the manner how the Souls of wicked men shall be enabled to endure the
great and eternal pains of Hell, when we cannot explain the manner how we
become sensible of any thing we now feel. We believe also that the
Constitutions both of the damned and of the blessed shall be altered. For as St
Paul says, we know not what we shall be, and we dare affirm as little
concerning the Nature of the damned as of the blessed. Secondly, neither do we
know the Nature of the Infernal fire. I am sure it was anciently believed to
be so far from destroying the Body of the tormented, as to give a kind of
Incorruptibility unto it, and if you will be contented with the doctrine of the
primitive Church, I may, God willing, show you hereafter that it was the
Opinion of the Fathers in General, that such shall be the fire of Hell, and
such the constitutions of the damned, that they shall be capable of pains
eternal, and yet very great; some difference in their greatness there may be
(some beaten with more and some with fewer stripes) but none in their duration.

The Soul shall suffer pain it self by the immediate hand of God, and shall be
tortured also by the harsh and discordant Motions of the tormented Body,
whereunto it shall be most firmly, and therefore in that time and place most
unhappily, united. It shall feel its tenement uneasy, noisome, tempestuous, but
shall find no divorce, no way of separation. Nor shall those pains be slight
that shall immediately be inflicted on it by an Allmighty power, Zealous in the
pursuance of his just Revenge. It is true those pains would quickly extinguish
the life of the tormented were their constitutions then not to differ from ours
now. But the ancient catholic Faith is otherwise, Namely that the passive
faculties of the Devils and Wicked Men shall be sustained eternally or
eternally repaired, to make these patients eternally miserable.

Mr Hobbes indeed supplies them with an argument against this Doctrine from
that text in the Revelation, Leviathan, part 4. Cap. 44.
where the punishment of the Wicked in Hell is called a second Death; Whence he
argues, that the Wicked shall die or be annihilated under that punishment. But
I hope Mr Hobbes will allow St John to be a fit interpreter of his own words.
Surely he calls the eternal torment of the wicked in Hell by the name of the
second Death. For if you compare Rev. 14.10. and Rev. 21.8. you will find, that
there is a Lake of Fire and Brimstone prepared, that the Unbelieving and
abominable shall be cast into it, that the smoke of their torment shall ascend
up for ever and ever, and in conclusion that this is the second Death.

We affirm further to conclude the Objections, that whereas the fireing of
Sodom and Gomorrha is made by St Jude a Type of the fire of Hell, that there is
no necessity, that the Type should agree in every particular with the thing
typified, but that St Jude is so to be understood, that what the Inhabitants of
Sodom and Gomorrha suffered for their lusts in one day, that in Hell they, and
such as follow their lewd Ways, must undoubtedly suffer to all Eternity.

I must conclude: and the conclusion of my present Discourse shall be this,
That we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.11.
and there accordingly as our works have been in the flesh, be sentenced either
to everlasting blessedness or to this everlasting Misery. Knowing therefore
the terror of the Lord as St Paul speaks, we persuade Men that they would live
as men and not as beasts: that they would deny Ungodliness and worldly lusts.
Knowing the terror of the Lord, we are Ambassadors for Christ as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's steed, be ye reconciled unto God.
Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we entreat Men, that they would not live unto
themselves, but unto him that dyed for them and rose again. What, says St
Paul, 1 Cor. 16.11.
shall we provoke the Lord to Jealousy? are we stronger than He? The Judge of
Heaven and Earth is a mighty and terrible Judge. He spared not his own Son when
he found him under the sins of others, and will he spare those rebels of his
whom he shall surprise, Glorying in their sin and shame? Are our Muscles Iron,
or our Membranes brass? Can we break the rod of God, or conquer him by
suffering all his wrath? Can we fly from it? or have we, my Brethren, any Fence
against it? Whether shall we go from his Spirit? or whether shall we flee from
his presence? If we climb up to Heaven, He is there, and if we make our Bed in
Hell, he is there also: He is even in Hell to be a consuming fire to the
wicked. If we say the darkness shall cover us, the darkness hides not from
him: Psalm 139.7, 8. What then? Can we, as the three children did, walk in the
fiery furnace and be untoucht? Can we dwell with devouring fire, or lie
everlastingly in beds of flaming Sulphur, and be contented with that condition?
If we Can neither endure the Wrath of God, nor have any defense against it, nor
can fly from the effects of it, there remains only that We use such Caution,
and live so in these few days of our try all here, that we may escape that
place of torment, whereas our Savior has declared, the Worm shall Never dye
and the fire Never shall be quenched. Oh that there were such a heart in Us,
that we might fear God and keep his commandments allwaies, for then it should
be well with us for ever!

I should now have showed you that what I have spoken concerning the greatness
and Eternity of hell torments was the Constant sense of the ancient Catholic
Church, and comes not from my private interpretation of the holy Scripture. But
I must leave that argument and the conclusion of this whole discourse until
some other Opportunity.

Gloria Trinuni Deo.
SERMON. III.
PSALM. 34.11. Come ye children, and hearken unto me, and I will teach You the
fear of the Lord.


IN my last discourse from this Text, I affirmed two things of the pains of
Hell, that they shall be great, and that they shall be eternal (a good
argument I thought to move us to fear Him, who has power to cast us thither,
and an immutable will or decree to give every man reward or punishment according
to the merit of his life) I then also gave an answer to the Objections of our
modern Platonists, to Mr Hobbes also, and the Socinians who deny the pains of
Hell to be eternal.

Wicked Ahab confess't, 1 Kings c. ult ^ v. 8.
that he hated Micaiah, because He did not prophesy good concerning Him, John
8.40.
but evil; and our Savior found that he procured himself a mortal hatred
among the Jews, because he told them the truth. Some truths are so ungrateful
to the Ear, that they cannot be insinuated without great danger of procuring an
aversation to the relator. Felix did not love to hear of Judgment to come,
Acts. 24, 25.
more unhappy He, more unlike to justify his name. And I fear that some do so
ill like the severe and necessary Truths concerning that last judgment and the
consequences of it, that I as your spiritual Scholemaster have proposed from
this text, that they will be censured by them as the dictates of a tetricall
Orbilius, of a sharp and cruel Master. Memini quae plagosus mihi parvo
Orbilius dictaret. Horat.
I affirm therefore to countenance them yet further, and to plant them upon
their right foundation, that they are not mine, but the resolutions of the
ancient Catholic Church. It is true this Doctrine has its considerable
opposers: and so have all other doctrines of the Christian Faith: But since
this text looks upon you, my Auditors, and all true professors of Religion, as
children, the phrase is, come Ye children and hearken unto me. Be so humble as
to own the Discipline you are under; Submit your selves to the paedagogick
Rules of your Schole. For he cannot be Christ's Scholar, that is too proud to
admit them. One good Rule for the resolving all such difficulties and sopiting
all such differences is this, That if there be a controversy concerning the
sense of a Scripture, and the Fathers of the primitive Church, that lived next
after Christ, and his Apostles, have unanimously determined the sense of that
Scripture, and have made that determination professedly and not by the by,
Every one of Christ's Scholars must have humility enough to submit unto it: For
they, being nearer the fountain, were more like to have the truth brought
incorruptly to them than we, that are so far removed, to us.

And having told you this for a Rule so equitable that I think it will merit
not to be contradicted, I shall tell you further, that the primitive Fathers
did maturely debate and consider this controversy, and the Texts alleged on
both sides concerning it; both in their public councills and in their private
studies; and have declared for the greatness and Eternity of Hell torments,
against that which was anciently Origens Opinion, and is now renewed by some
modern Socinians and Atheists.

Seeing therefore the Eternity of these Torments has been anciently matters of
contradiction, and continues so to be unto this day, I think it reasonable for
me to give you a further confirmation of their Eternity from the Testimonies,
arguments and reasons of these Reverent ancients and Primitive Fathers in our
Religion.

As St Augustine (whom for the reputation of his authority I first produce) in
his exposition on those words of our Savior, August. ad Oros. contra Priscill.
and Origin. cap. 6.
Math. 25.46. The wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, and the righteous
into life everlasting, observes, that the same word (...) is there put to
express the duration of the punishment of the wicked in Hell, and the eternal
life of the glorified in Heaven. And having laid that for a ground, he argues
thus, if the consideration of the mercy of God provokes us to believe that the
punishment of the wicked in Hell shall have an end, what must we consequently
believe concerning the reward of the righteous, when on both sides in the same
text, and with the same word they are alike pronounced to be eternal. This
argument is frequently used by other Fathers, August. De Civit. Dei. c. 23.
and by St Augustine himself in other places. So, in his book de Civitate Dei,
he tells those who oppose the Eternity of Hell Torments, that if they will
have a temporary punishment in Hell, they must likewise have a temporary reward
in Heaven; our Saviors epithete being the same to both. The Translators of the
Bible were surely guilty of a little oversight, when they varied the Epithete
in that Text: which is the same without variation in the Original. There are
texts wherein the variation of a word or phrase may be useful by Way of
Paraphrase to let in light to the sense, but here in respect to this
Controversy,

-- Verbum verbo curasset reddere fi^^us
Interpres --
The Interpreter should have been strict and have rendered the Text word for
word. For it is the Identity of the Epithete, applied equally to both, that
makes St Augustines argument unanswerable. And St Augustine building upon that
Identity of Duration mentioned there urges the absurdity. Can you (says he)
think such exposition true in the later part? Can you think it credible that
the Righteous may relapse from that excellent and glorious purity, they enjoy
in Heaven, and fall thence into the filth of sin again, and into its wages,
Death? and then he asserts, that if it be absurd and false to affirm an End of
glory and purity in Heaven, it must be equally absurd and false to affirm an
End of pains in Hell: because the same Adjective in the same verse is applied
to both.

Another argument He draws out of the prophesy of Esaias, What, says he,
August. ad Oros. contra Priscill. and Origin, c. 6.
shall we answer to the words of that Prophet, Their Worm shall not dye and
their fire shall not be quenched? Whatsoever kind of punishment is understood,
by their worm and their fire, if it shall neither dye, nor be extinguished, it
is declared to be eternal: and I told you in my last discourse that he
opposes also that subtle and slender defense, August. de Fide and Operib.
that some did then and do now make, who allow the Fire to be eternal, but not
the burning of the Individual persons cast into it.

This, my Brethren, is St Augustines doctrine; and I am sure his advice is as
safe as his doctrine is true, namely, Augustine de Civit. Dei lib. 21. c. 23.
that those who would be free from this eternal punishment, should rather
spend their time in doing Gods will, than in framing arguments and
distinctions against his word. Next I produce St Basil, as a principal
Authority among the Greek Fathers. Basil. ad Virgin. lapsam, tom. 3. page 18.
He tells us, that the Torments of Hell are infinite and intolerable, that
the fire is unquenchable, and the worm punishes immortally, that the place is
dark and horrible, V. Basil. citat in Epistola Justiniani Imper. ad Menciam
Archiep. Constantinop. apud Binium council. Tom. 4. council. Constantinop. 60.
the wailings bitter and unpleasant, and that these complicated miseries shall
have no end. In another place in answer to that Text where it is said, that
some shall be beaten with few stripes. He tells us that those who suffer
fewest, must suffer at least an eternal punishment, they must endure the
everlasting biteings of the worm that dies not, and the everlasting burnings
of the fire that never shall be quenched. [Elsewhere he tells us, that it is
the craft of the Devil that persuadeth men the contrary, when our Saviors
speech is plain, That the wicked shall go into everlasting punishment, Basil.
in libro Regularum.
and the Righteous into life everlasting: and that men may as well say, that
everlasting life in Heaven shall have an End, as that there shall be an end to
the punishment in Hell, seeing they are both by our Savior equally said to be
everlasting.] This is St Basils Doctrine and his advice is as safe and good,
That while we have Opportunity we would secure our future condition and fly
from that eternal punishment whereinto if we are once plunged by Gods
dreadful sentence, we shall never afterward be able to escape. To day
therefore if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts: Strive to enter in
at the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate and broad is the way that leads to
destruction, and as Solomon spoke in another case: None that go in thither
return again nor take they hold of the paths of life.

St Ambrose declares as well the greatness and extension, as the perpetuity of
the pains of Hell, Ambros. De fide resurrectionis.
that as both body and Soul sinned; So Body and Soul should suffer, what the
Soul imagined and contrived, the Body put into Act, the law of the flesh
wrought upon the law of the mind; and therefore it was reason that no part
should have any rest, but that as all parts and faculties sinned, so all should
suffer together. This is answerable to what is spoken by our modern Divines,
and by some Jewish Rabbis also; That the Wages of sin in Hell should be
commensurable to the Body of sin on Earth. We know it is the nature of Evil to
spread like Venom over every part and faculty of Man, when once it has gotten
an Empire or Dominion in him, And so it is the will of God that Punishment in
the time of its Reign, that is in Hell, should spread also, and that every
faculty that has been the seat of sin should be made the seat of torment. Did
Lust enter at the Eye from corporeal Beauties? In Hell Horror shall more
abundantly enter there from Ghastly sights. Did the Ear delight in Vanity and
let in laughter, when Religion was abused or the holy Scriptures jested upon,
and turned into Burlesque? Now let the same profane ear take its farewell of
its ancient pleasures, and content it self if it can with the variety of Noises
that shall be found in the howlings and drummings of Tophet. Was Dives his
tongue curious in tasting its delicate meats, now it shall be parched with a
continued infernal Fever and be denied the cheap refreshment of a drop of
Water from Lazarus his finger. And that gross sense of touching, which is the
bed of the fowlest Sin, shall be laid not to repose, but to be eternally
disquieted in a Bed of flame. After a like manner shall all the internal
senses that have been the servants of sin be entertained in punishment. And
the faculties of the soul that have been debauched to wickedness shall be
distracted with greater torments than all these. Some Jewish Doctors are of
Opinion, that the Souls of the damned shall be violently raped upwards and
downwards by most painful and contrariant Motions, that they shall endeavor
upwards in order to associate themselves to the purer Spirits, Vide Pocockii
notas Miscell. in Portam Mosis Maim. c. 6.
but having no principles nor skill to attain that purity, nor use in it shall
by the power of their old use and custom with ineffable torments be hurried
downwards. They shall be continually toss't from one desire to another, and yet
shall have no ways or means to attain either the new spiritual delights, or
the old earthy pleasures. And these they affirm are greater than any torments
of fire or Ice, of Knives or Swords, of Serpents or Scorpions, and that their
Minds shall be so distracted by these Opposite desires, that their pain shall
be thence as great, as if two Angels stood one on the north Pole, and another
of the South, and did thence continually from several slings, Vide Pocock. and
autores ib. p. 170.
sling these miserably tormented Souls from one End of the world unto the
other, without giving them any intermediate Quiet.

And for the continuance of this Torment St Ambrose affirms also, Ambros.
lib. De Fide Resurrect.
that the sinner in Hell shall be preserved for punishment, as the just is
perpetuated for Glory, and that there shall be no more decay in the worm of
the wicked, than in the glorified Bodies of the Just, Ambros. in 1. Cor. c. 3.
tom. 5.
and he expresses the perpetuity of that Torment in another place to the full,
when he tells us that the wicked and perfidious or Apostate Christians igne
aeterno in perpetuum torquebuntur, they shall be tormented for ever in an
eternal fire. So that it is not the fire only, as our Patrons of Vice would
have it, but the torment in that fire that shall be eternal also

Lactantius asserts the extension of the pains of Hell not only over the Soul
but over their Bodies also; Lactantius de divino praemio. lib. 7. c. 21.
which says he, shall be indissoluble and eternally permanent that they may
hold out against the torments of everlasting fire. That the Fire shall be pure
and fluid, rather like that of melted metals and minerals, and consistent with
that blackness of darkness mentioned by St Jude, than like our Culinary fire,
or any other luminous flame. That it shall endure of it self and preserve it
self without aliment; And not only so, but that it shall even restore what it
consumes. Idem divinus ignis, says he, una eademque potentia and cremabit
impios and recreabit, The same fire of God shall by the same faculty and power
burn the wicked and recruit them. Et quantum a corporibus abjumit tantum
reponet, and sibiipsi eternum pabulum subministrabit, It shall restore so much
of the Body as it consumes, and so furnish it self with an eternal fuel. He
does not only say that the passive faculties of the damned shall be strengthened
and made hard as an Anvil to endure that punishment, but that even the fire it
self shall have a restorative faculty also and give strength in the midst of
Torment. And if this either Tradition or Supposition of the Fathers concerning
the restorative faculty of the fire of Hell or the then strength of the passive
faculties be admitted, it is very easy to conceive how the pains of Hell may be
great, and yet their greatness may not hinder their Eternity.

Tertullian and Justin Martyr are misreported by a learned Writer, as favorers
of some contrary Opinions, Bishop Tailor Ser. 3. of Christ's Advent.
and as sometimes disallowing the perpetuity and sometimes the continuity of
those Torments. But great and learned divines are not allwaies without their
naevi. And, I think, it may be reckoned for one of his failings, that he has
given countenance to our modern encouragers of Vice, by writing so doubtfully,
and in general misreporting the Opinions of the Fathers in this particular.

For Tertullian in the first place is so far from favoring Origens Opinion,
that he every where opposes it. In that very Text cited and misconstrued by
the Bishop, Epicurus omnem cruciatum and do. lorem depreciat, modicum
contemplibilem pronunciando, Mag. number vero non diuturnum, etc. Tertull. c. 45.
adversus Gentes page 74.
Tertullian directly opposes one of the greatest arguments that was ever made
in the defense of the Heresy of Origin. The argument (indeed taken from the
principles of Epicurus) was this, That no pain which is great can be lasting.
Tertullian industriously and directly denies that principle, and affirms in
particular, that the pains of Hell are great, and yet not only lasting but
everlasting, Dolores non diuturni, verum sempiterni, His sense is, that to say
those pains are lasting, is to abate of the Truth, and to speak too little of
them, and therefore he pronounces the pains of Hell to be great and
everlasting, and that this was then the Christian Faith. The Reverend Prelate
above mentioned would have the words non diuturnus to signify not the pains of
every day, and so he does at least take off the continuity of the pains of Hell
in the Opinion of that Father. Bellum diaturnum, pax diuturna, morbus
diuturnus, fimulatio diuturna, alio semper sensu. apud. Cic.
I will not bring a Grammatical controversy into the Pulpit, else it is easily
defensible, that He has fixed a new and a wrong sense to the word Diuturnus,
and a new and a wrong Etymology, when he deriveth it from dies not from diu:
Besides he takes off the Opposition intended by Tertullian against that
principle of Epicurus, and makes him speak that which is most contrary to his
own doctrine in other places. Deus producto aevo isto judicaturus est suos
cultores in vitae aeteraae retributionem, profanos in ignem aeque perpetem and
jogem, suscitatis omnibus ab initio defunctis, and reformatis and recensitis ad
utriusque meriti dispunction^m. Tert. adv Gentes c. 18.
For in the 18th chapter of his Treatise adversus Gentes, he writes that God,
at the End of this life, shall raise up the dead from the beginning of the
world, and call them to an account of their merit and demerit, and shall
sentence the wicked into a Fire that shall be both everlasting and continued,
and elsewhere, that the profane shall live in the torment of a perpetual fire,
which shall be so far from destroying them, that it shall give an
incorruptibility to the tormented Bodies. What can be spoken more expressly
against the annihilation contended for; than this doctrine, that makes Hell
fire so far from corrupting them, as to give incorruptibility to the tormented.
Or what more against Origens Opinion for the restoration of the damned, and
vicissitude of Resurrections, than what he affirms in the same place, Dei
quidem cultores apud Deum semper; pro^ni vero in paena aeque jugis ignis,
habentis ex natura ejus divinam subministrationem incorruptibilitatis. Tert.
cap. 48. Adv Genter. Et S. ibidem Restituetur omne human um genus ad
expungendum quod in isto avo boni vel mali meruit, and exinde pendendum
immensam aeternitatis perpetuitatem. Ideo nec mors jam, nec rursus ac rursus
resurrectio, sed erimus iidem qui nunc, nec alii post.
That there shall not be now a death and then a Resurrection, and then another
death, and after that another resurrection; but that we shall rise the same
that we are now, and that afterward there shall be no change? I pronounce
therefore that Tertullian has had wrong done Him in this Point, and that
neither St Augustine among the Latin, nor St Basil among the Greek Fathers are
more orthodox than He, nor more opposite to the ancient and modern Heretics
in this point concerning the greatness and eternity of Hell Torments:

And the like may be said of Justin Martyr, he affirms I am sure, that every
one shall go to everlasting punishment or to everlasting Salvation according to
the merit of their life. That the Devil and such as follow him, that is, V.
Justin. Martyr. in Apol. pro Christianis ad senatum Romans and in 2. Apol. ad
Antoninum Pium page 45. Where it is not only called (...), but (...) v. and
page 50. and 52. ib. and in 68th page speaking of the ad coming of Christ he
affirms, that then, (...).
the wicked debauched and Impenitent shall be eternally punished in an eternal
fire. And he does not mean that they shall be annihilated, as Mr Hobbes will
have it, and revive no more, but that they shall continue to suffer (...), in
an eternal sense of that Torment; [That they shall have sorrow enough in Hell,
but that in Hell their Sorrow and Repentance shall not profit them at all.]

St Gregory tells us, that the Devil begat this Persuasion, Greg. Moral. 34.
c. 11.
that the punishment of sin in Hell should have an End, that Men here on Earth
might not take care to put and End to their sins.

And Photius that great Patriarch of Constantinople in his Letter to Michael
Prince of Bulgaria reckons this Opinion so dangerous, that he calls it (...),
an Exhortation to all possible sin and to all possible damnation. And surely
those who would now persuade us, than the pains of Hell shall be but short and
transitory, will, when they may have hope to prevail, tempt us with that same
Original Lie by which the Serpent first deceived Eve: As then the Serpent said
to the woman, Ye shall not surely dye, though God had said, you shall surely
dye, So these will say, Be sanguine now, that is, eat and drink, whore and
Hector, debauch and oppress, For we have found out a new and comfortable
Opinion, that there is no such thing as any second Death.

But I shall proceed to show you, that whatsoever new Opinions there are now,
the primitive Faith was otherwise. St Cyprian, or whoever was author of that
Homily de Ascentione Christi, that we find among his writings, declares to
this purpose, That the wicked shall be appointed to dwell in infinite torments,
That there shall be streams of Tears for ever, but for ever to no purpose.
The flames there shall be utterly inextinguishable, and the punished Souls shall
dwell immortally in those infernal furnaces, and the most killing part of
their torment shall be this, that they shall all ways live in a despair of
ever being redeemed thence. God will no more have mercy then, Then confession
and Repentance shall be too late; For Christ descended into Hell but once and
shall return thither no more to work any new Victory or make any new
Redemption. Prudentius adds his suffrage against the Heresy of Origin in
those verses, Vermibus and flammis and discruciatibus aevum
Immortale dedit, Senio ne paena periret
Non pereunte anima --
His meaning is, That both the Soul of the sinners and their torment also,
their flame and their worm by the appointment of God, shall be eternal.

Athanasius concludes his creed thus, Those that have done well shall go into
everlasting life, and those that have done evil into everlasting fire, and he
affirms the same in diverse other of his writings.

St Hierom, as he was a passionate Lover and admirer of Origens learning and
Wit, Felicibus ingeniis mirum dictu quantopere faverit, adeo ut haereticos
etiam laudibus ornaret, libenter si licuisset fidei vitium eruditioni
condonaturus. Cum primis autem Origenis, quem suum adpellat, etc. Erasmus in
vita Hieronymi, ubi narrat etiam ut Origenistae in suae sactionis consortium
Hieronymum pertrabere nitebantur.
so possibly he might take his fancy of a Purgatory fire from Him, and yet as
well as he loved him, he would not follow him in his heresy, Diaboli (says he)
and omnium negatorum and impiorum dixerunt in cord non est Deus, Deus,
credimus aeterna tormenta. We believe that the Devils and Atheists and such as
deny God in their hearts shall suffer eternal pains. Hieron. in c. ult. Esaiae.
And let our Atheists take heed they do not one day find St Hieroms creed truer
than their own.

It were endless to give you all the private Judgments of the Fathers,
dispersed up and down among their writings, You may have a good Collection of
the arguments anciently used against Origens Opinion in Justinians letter to
Menna then Archbishop of Constantinople; which letter is yet extant in the
third Tome of Binius his Councels: I shall therefore conclude the Authorities
that affirm the pains of the damned in Hell to be everlasting, with that
peremptory decree of the sixth council of Constantinople, intended to condemn
that very Opinion of Origin maliciously (to the Ruin of all good manners) now
again renewed by the Atheists and Socinians of this loose and naughty Age. And
let me tell our Lawyers (who as they say begin too much to favor Mr Hobbes's
errors) that this decree which I shall now repeat was thought of so much use by
the ancient Lawyers, Vide Baisamon in Photii Nomo. canon. Tit. de Fide c. 2. l.
5. Basilic^^ Tit. 1. c. 1. resp. 1.
that they caused it to be embodied with the Imperial Laws, and esteemed the
authority of it to be the universal concern of the Empire. The words of the
decree are these, (...), in English thus, V. Binius Council. loco citato.
If any one does say or hold, that the punishment of the Devils and Wicked men
shall be but temporary, and that after a season it shall come to an End, or
that there shall be a restoration of the wicked Angels and Wicked men to their
former estates and Dignities, Let him be accursed. I am unwilling so severe a
Censure of the Church should come against any man through my mouth. Instead
therefore of that, Let him be accursed, I shall say let Mr Hobbes live and let
him be reclaimed, and let him not be ashamed to repent of and to disclaim his
Errors (as I have reason to believe Origin did his before his death.) And let
the Socinians be indeed as Zealous encouragers of Virtue, and Opposers of Vice
as some of them pretend to be, and then I am sure they will leave off this
their daubing with untemper'd Mortar, See the lamentation of Origin, Heu mihi
doctori, nec discipuli locum teneo, volens alios illuminare mcipsum obscuravi.
Plangite me quia aeternis paenis condemnotus sum; ve eor diem judicii, qua in
aeterna poena damnatus sum; Timeo paenam, quia aeterna est, etc. Ita Origenes
in threnois a B. Hieronymo latin redditis.
this which I may properly call (in the phrase of Ezechiel) their sowing
pillows under every Armehole.

To conclude, this then is the uniforme sense of the Catholic Church. That the
pains of Hell are great, The Greatness of them is intimated in this, that they
are represented as the Torments of fire which is the worst sort of Torments, by
the Torments of a black and dark fire, which is the worst sort of tormenting
fires; Other Circumstances that make this torment formidable, are the
perpetuity and continuity of it, both affirmed by all orthodox writers
primitive and Modern.

And yet whether these Flames are visible and luminous, or the Burnings are
intensely great and dark, as those of melted metals and Minerals; and whether
they are palpable or Immateriall; are questions, which with many others of like
Nature are easier to be disputed, than certainly decided. For as the Joys of
Heaven are set forth unto us by visible and Material Emblemes and
Representations of the greatest Happinesses that we can conceive, and yet we
believe them much greater and better, though not properly such as those shadows
represent; So on the other side, if we judge the expressions concerning the
pains of Hell to be metaphorical, and do not believe that they are formally
such as they are described to be when they are represented to our present
Capacities (which was, I think, the utmost of St Gregory Nyssenes Opinion) yet
then we must by the same Analogy believe, that they are greater and higher
miseries, than those metaphorical Expressions can really decipher. Surely if
there had been a greater kind of torment conceivable than that Torment of fire
joined with that blackness of darkness mentioned by St Jude, the holy Ghost
would have chosen to have made use of those for representations. Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, Someanciently, and some of late, as
Casaubon particularly, have spoken of Greg. Nyssene, as if he had been a
Sectary of Origens heresy. The chief place they note is the conclusion of his
catechetick Oration. But the sum of his discourse there is no more than this;
That as the Joies of Heaven are such as cannot be described in words, seeing
they are such as Eye has not seen non Ear heard; so neither shall the pains in
the lise to come be like those that we now feel, The fire shall not be like our
fire; for ours may be extinguish't, that cannot: Nor shall that worm be of the
kind of our earthy Vermin. For they dye, but that dies not. And truly I never
heard that it was censured as Heresy, I am sure it was not the Heresy of
Origin, to assert the Seripturall expressions concerning the pains of Hell
Metaphorical. What it was is declared in this discourse, and St German and
Photius two great Patriarchs have anciently written his defense V. Elogia in
Nyssenum in prolegomena ad ejusdem opera ex editione Claudii Morelli, Parisiis
1638.
So neither is it possible that our present flesh and blood should be able
without a change of its Nature, to inherit or endure the kingdom of Satan. And
if there must be a change of this corruptible Nature, before it can be
capacitated to suffer those everlasting Torments, possibly there must also be a
change in our earthy Natures before we shall be able perfectly to understand
them.

We read that upon the delivery of the law of Moses, Exodus 24.17. that the
sight of the Glory of the Lord was like devouring Fire upon the Top of the
mount. And that then the People saw the thundrings, and lightnings and the
noise of the Trumpet and the mountain smoking. And he professed Himself then to
be a consuming Fire, Deuteronomy. 4.23. Believe me, my Brethren, or if ye will not
believe me, believe the Author to the Hebrews who tells us, that even under
the Gospel, our God is also a consuming Fire. And it is, as I formerly noted,
the Observation of the Psalmist, That if we make our Bed in Hell, God is there
also; God is there and he will show himself a consuming fire in the midst of
those Flames. Though Heaven be the Throne and place of Gods presence, yet God
is in Hell as certainly, and as effectually, as he is in Heaven. And the
wicked, together with the good Company they hope for, shall be sure to find Him
there disposing of that good Company so, that they shall not be able to clude
the Vindictive Wrath of God, or any way to alleviate one another punishment.
God I say, who is the luster of a shining Glory in the new Jerusalem, with his
presence does also fill that Tophet that he has prepared: You remember that
the same God that was light and Glory to the children of Israel, was a cloud
and pillar of darkness and trouble to the Egyptians: Exodus 14. and so shall
the same God be light to the Just, and a cause of Horror to the wicked after
the resurrection. How much of the Torment shall be inflicted on the damned
immediately by himself as he is God the consuming fire, He only knows; and
God grant that by his grace we may so live, that, by our own woeful experience,
we may never know it. I am sure it is a good inference that the Apostle makes
from this Consideration. Heb. 12. ult. Let us, says he, have the Grace to
serve God, with Reverence and godly fear, as we read it, or as the ancients
read it, with Reverence and fear of punishment, For our God is a Consuming Fire.

And thus much have I spoken to commend unto you that Initiall fear, that is
the way to Virtue and the beginning of Wisdom. I speak not of this as of the
highest attainment in Religion, I know there is an estate of so great
perfection as to be above fear, and that is the estate of perfect love; For
perfect love casts out fear. 1 John. 4.18.
I wish we were but well settled within the Bordures of Religion: Not is a Man
to be denied his Sonship and Interest in God the Father, if he be really
religious, though he be not arrived so high as that perfect love which casts
out fear. Solomon assures us, that there is a blessedness that belongs to the
man that fears allwaies: Prove. 28, 14. and St Paul advises us to work out
our salvation with Fear and Trembling, Phil. 2.12. And therefore I cannot
altogether approve the Rule of the Schools that says, that Timor filialis non
respicit Deum tanquam Principium inflictivum paenarum, Filial fear looks not
upon God as the cause of Punishment. For the best of us, though Children, must
confess that we have been dissobedient children. Joseph feared especially the
evil of sin when he resisted his lustful Mistress with that Expostulation,
Genesis 29.9. How shall I do this wickedness and sin against God, but it is not
said that He did not fear the Punishment of that sin also. To fear God is to
honor and sanctify Him, so the Prophet Esaias advises, Sanctify the Lord of
Hosts himself. How is that to be done? Why it follows, let him be your fear,
let him be your dread: Esaias 8.13. When we fear him and punishment by Him, we
think honorably of his power and of his justice: And thus, as Solomon observes
Prove. 19.23. The fear of the Lordtendeth to life. And though the perfection of
Holiness implies more, yet as St Paul notes, we do not come to that
perfection, we do not perfect that holiness. but by the fear of the Lord. 2
Cor. 7.11. He that fears God dares do no Evil, and whether he fears sin as
sin, or whether he fears the punishment of God upon his sin, the least and
lowest of these fears causes a man to abstain from evil and is the way to
life, that we are commanded to walk in. And let me give it this further
commendation, that it does not only cause our Obedience in other things: but we
show our Obedience even in this when we fear God. And therefore we are doubly
to blame if we do not cherish this Fear that is in the first place commanded by
God himself and so our Duty, secondly that contains in it such an honor of
God, and such an estimation of his power and justice, as will be a motive to
lead us to holiness here, and consequently to eternal happiness hereafter.

And now I have done, I tell you that I am not at all delighted with this
argument: and I had rather, if there were cause, have been commending unto you
that other fear of God, that filial fear; which indeed, has little of true and
proper fear in it. I mean, that I had rather have been preaching unto you the
joyful Tokens of your assurance, in order to the perfecting your love in God.
But alas I find too much reason to be still upon these Initiall lessons. And,
My Brethren, you must not be angry with the watch for giving you these Alarmes,
until they find you more apprehensive. It is most certainly true that where
there is no fear of God, there is no true, stable and well grounded Virtue.
What a Conclusion was that of Abraham, Genesis 20.11. The fear of God is not in
this place, therefore will they slay me for my wives sake. Abraham knew this,
that where Natural lust has extinguished the fear of God, there is no bar
against Adultery, Murder or any sort of Wickedness. For want of this fear
proud and lustful Men will be ready to poison or make away the husband that
they may enjoy, I mean abuse the Wife, Oh may it not be said of us for these or
the like Reasons, That the fear of the Lord is not in this place! Abimelech in
the day of doom shall appear to be the son of Abraham, and our profession of
Religion shall increase our shame and torment if we dare those wickednesses
that Abimelech durst not. Beauty was Beauty then; The Beauty of Sarah had took
him, and he had took possession of the Beauty: and surely she was as near being
made a Sacrifice of another kind, as her Son Isaak afterward was when he lay
bound upon the Altar. But Abimelech, though a Gentile, when he knew she was
Abraham's wife, he would not rob Abraham, much less would he slay Abraham for
his wives sake. If it be otherwise with us, shall not his Nature judge our
Religion, and his Gentilisme condemn our pretenses of Christianity? Hominum
pessimus malus Christianus, He that is vicious being a Christian, is even the
worse for his profession. Eternally true is that observation of David, Psalm
19. The fear of the Lord is clean, surely the want of this fear, as it is a
National defect, and cause of much National sin, does call for penitential
prayers and tears from every Soul that is a lover of his Nation. Now is the
time that every devout man should be as the Prophet Jeremy, should wish his
head Water and his Eyes fountains, that he might weep day and night for the
sins of the daughter of his people: Surely it is time the Trumpet were now
blown to some solemn penance. Let us at least, that are Priests and Ministers
of the Lord, weep in our several places, Let us stand between the porch and
the altar, and say, Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to
reproach Joel 2.17. Let us all, Men of high degree, and men of low degree join
with that Royal penitent, Psalm. 51. and pray, that God would wash us, even
this whole Nation, thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sin.
Make us clean hearts O God, and renew right Spirits within us. Cast us not away
from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from us. And then let us add
endeavors to our prayers, Let us gird up the loins of our Minds, and encourage
our selves against all Vice. What though ill men sometimes come to be favored
and preferred? What though the fear of God and his judgment with some sorts of
Men is now grown out of fashion. The council of King Solomon will eventually
prove as good as it is now seasonable, Prove. 23.17. Let not thy heart envy
sinners, but be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long, for surely there
is an End and thine Expectation shall not be cut off. The Contempt of Religion
has been an old distemper in the world, and the prosperity of profane Men an
old scandal. There is nothing yet extraordinary has happened to us. There were
stout Hectors in Malachi's time, that said, It was in vain to serve God, and
that there was no profit to have kept his Ordinance, That the proud were happy
and that the workers of wickedness were set up, and those that even tempted
God were delivered. Let us consider therefore what wise and good Men anciently
did in that Case, the Prophet tells you, Mal. 3.16. That then they that feared
the Lord spoke often one to another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it. And a
book of Remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and
thought upon his Name. And they shall be mine says the Lord of Hosts in that
day that I make up my Jewels, I will spare them as a Man spares his Son that
serves Him.

Oh that the great God, whose last appearance shall melt down the Flinty
mountains, would now melt down our flinty hearts, and make them new, and
cleanse and polish them so, that in that day he may own his own workmanship,
and place us, even us, his new Creation, in some dark place at least among
those Jewels!

To that great God who is maker of all things, and Judge and Rewarder of all
men, and to the Lord our Righteousness, whose merits must be our only plea in
that dreadful day of Judgment, and to the Spirit of Holiness, who by
appearing in us and for us can only make us accepted, by giving us a Title to
plead those Merits, to the whole Holy and ever blessed Trinity in Unity be
Glory Honor and Adoration for Evermore.

FINIS.
SECTION II.

CELESTIAL HAPPINESS OR The Rewards of Religion in the future life.

Explained, confirmed and commended as the chiefest Good.

In four Sermons preached in the Cathedral Church at Winchester.

By R. S. LL. D. etc.

He that comes unto God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of
all those who diligently seek him:

Heb. 11.6. IN felicitate aeterna Civitatis Dei, Sabbatoque perpetuo vacabimus
and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, Amabimus and laudabimus. Ecce quid erit
in Fine sine fine. Nam quis alius noster finis est quam pervenire ad Regnum
cujus nullus est Finis?

Augustine: in conclusione lib: ult. de Civitate Dei.
We believe, O Lord, that thou shall come to be our Judge; Make us to be
numbered with thy Saints in Glory everlasting

SERMON. I. Of Happiness in Heaven.
PSALM. 16.11. In thy presence is fulness of Joy, at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.


IT is the commun and uniforme judgment of all mankind, a truth universally
received, without any contradiction, that to live, without grief, in an estate
of Joy and Happiness, is the confessed Interest, and to it is the innate
desire, of every man, as Man.

Now, (which will ease us of a laborious defense of this conclusion,) as the
mind of man can never be so much debauched, as not to propose its own
Happiness and delight, for the end of all its deliberate Actions; so neither
can it be without the sense of this its Aim: but, upon examination, will ever
rest more undoubtedly satisfied of its own passionate affection to happiness,
than of any other thing that it comes to understand, by the sight of the Eye,
the Taste of the Palate, or the perception of any other the most infallible
external sense: And therefore Philosophers, who have made it their buisnesse
to understand human Nature, have thought it enough to intimate, and forbid the
proof of this point; because it is already by every one confess't; No Notion
more commun or more generally anticipated: So that it is agreed by all, Omne
animal simulatque natum est, voluptatem appetere, ea^que gaudere ut summo bono,
dolorem aspernari ut summum malum, and quantum possit a se repellere; Neque
opus est ratione aut disputatione, quamobrem voluptas sit expetenda, aut
fugiendus dolor sit, lentiri autem hoc, ut calere Ignem, Nivem esse albam,
dulce Mel; quorum nihil oportet exquisitis rationibus confirmare, satis est
admonere. Ita Torquatus apud Ciceronem 1. de Finib. Omni Naturae convenit quod
sit determinata ad aliquid, Voluntas est ord^nata a Deo ad certum finem, qui
est Beatitudo, and sic voluntas naturaliter vult Beatitudinem sive been esse,
and non libere; tanquam naturali inclinatione determinante quantum ad actum
primum. Ideo primus actus cujuscunque voluntatis tribuitur Dco; and idco nulla
creatura potest peceare in primo actu, cum ad illum ^t naturalis and a Deo
determinatio. Viguerius Inst. de voluntate Humana. cap. 3.. 3. v. 1.
that his pains would be needless, and even subject to derision who should
endeavor by exquisite arguments to confirm this Truth; That every man desires
to be free from pains and greifs, and to live in an estate of delight and
Happiness.

There is another Universal judgment of all mankind, not denied by any man
that has learning enough to number or measure, It is this: that the greater,
the more full and intense, as also the more extense and durable delight, is to
be chosen before the shorter and the less. For Delight or Happiness being in
all men's Judgments esteemed a thing inoffensively good; Arist. Rhet. lib. 1.
c. 6.
of which there can be no noxious or harmefull excess, (to use Aristotle's
language ((...)) it follows that the more of this excellent condition any man
enjoys, it is so much the better for him, or (to use ordinary speech) so much
the happier he is. We should account that Man an Idiot, a Natural fool, and
fit to be a Ward all the days of his life, who having his choice should choose
one shilling before twenty, one Farm rather than a whole Lordship consisting
of many; one part rather than the whole, wherein that part and diverse others
more considerable are contained. Now if it be thus in matters whereof there
may be bad use made; and which may be converted into the possessors harm, much
more true is it, and most certainly holds in the case of happiness it self.
That full joy is to be preferred before that which is slender, poor and
scanty, and Pleasures for evermore, before pleasures for a season.

Now to prepare you for what I shall speak hereafter concerning the Rewards of
Christian Virtue, I shall tell you, That among all the Pleasures and
Happinesses, that were found out by wise and considering Men among the Heathen,
none are said to be greater than those that did ordinarily spring from the
practice of moral virtue. Nor, Apud Stobaeum cap. 22. Plutarch de Anim. Tra.
Euripides in Oreste. Juvenalis Satyr. 13. ad fine^^ Paena autem vehemens, etc.
if we will believe their histories, were there any greater greifs to be
avoided than those that did arise from the practice of Vice. Pythagoras
compared the pains of an evil Conscience to perpetual whippings: Plutarch to
the anguish of an Ulcer; Orestes in Euripides to a destructive disease; Iuvenal
tells us, that the torments of an evil conscience are so great, that there
can be no greater even in Hell. For an example of that unquietness wherewith
wicked men are haunted, we may look on the Character of the Roman Catiline, as
he is reported by Salust, His impure Soul, says he, could neither be at rest
sleeping nor waking, His conscience did so rake and harrazze his unquiet mind.
His color therefore was pale, his Eyes bleared, his pace sometimes quick,
sometimes slow, Animus impurus neque uigiliis neque quietibus sedari poterat,
ita Conscientia mentem exagitatam vastabat: Igitur color ejus exanguis, faedi
oculi, citus modo, modo tardus incessus prorsusque in facie vultuque Vecordia
inerat. Salust in Catil.
and the Disease of his heart appeared openly in his face and Countenance. And
thus it is more or less with every man of Catilines principles and practice,
Iamblich. Protreptic. c. 19.
insomuch that Iamblichus affirms that even Immortality without virtue, would
be a very great Mischief, Herocl. incarm. Pyth.
as implying and eternal Infelicity: Hierocles confesses also that the least
of evils that can happen to a person of an ill life is, (...), That his Soul
is in perpetual Torture and convulsions and that he ever lives in dread of the
punishment of Hell.

And it is a most true Observation, Plutarch de Any. Tra.
that some of their own learned men have made, namely, that Reason which is
wont to administer help to all other sorts of grief, on the contrary does
enrage and increase this much more. Nay even those who are the greatest Enemies
to virtue, and most profess't defenders of Atheism, cannot free themselves
from a suspicion of divine Revenge impendent upon Vice. For though they raise
every day new and strange Hypotheses; Yet when they have wrackt their brains
to the uttermost, out of all their studies and restlessnesse, they raise but
suppositions or Hypotheses, they pretend not to bring any science to the
contrary, Nay they bring not one argument to prove, that the commun faith is
not the truer.

On the contrary the wise and good man, He, as Seneca observes, is allwaies
full of Joy, He is merry, he is quiet, He is unshaken, Senec. Ep. 59.
He lives so that he keeps an even reckoning with God. I may add, and with
his own conscience which is a domestic Deity unto Him. The Pleasure of Virtue
is equal to that of life, and life were no life without it, says Phaedra in
Euripides. Eurip in Hippol.
I might multiply testimonies on this argument, but the matter is confess't and
needs it not.

If you ask what Reason Vicious men among the Heathen had for these their
fears? what ground had good men among them for these their Joys? I answer,
that even their Reasons were not bad ones, but yet for our Comfort, we that are
Christians have much better.

First they had as we have, a Faith that there is a God, and that this God is a
rewarder of good and evil actions. They found Notices of good and evil
planted in their minds, directions for Virtuous living given them from the
author of their Natures. These notices as they were made, so were they bred up
with them, and became as inseparable from them as the very parts of their own
souls. These are the (...), The commun notions that the Creator has inspired
universally unto all reasonable men as says Hierocles. Hierocl. in Carm. Pyth.
These are the natural and domestic Heralds of Gods will unto us. And it was
by obeying these Notices that the Heathens are said by St Paul, Romans 2.14.
to have done by nature the things that were written in the Law. Plato tells
us that God has diverse sorts of Laws, and among the rest that one is Lex
humana, nostris insculpta mentibus, ad very rectique notitiam and affectum, It
is the Law of human reason wrought and engraven in our minds to form a
knowledge and love of Truth and Right. This being laid down as a ground, they
discoursed further that men ought not to think that these natural notices were
to no purpose imprinted on them by the author of their Natures. But, seeing
they were most proper to direct Virtuous actions, they argued that God had
appointed them for that End; even as he had appointed the Eye to see and the
Ear to hear, which were only proper for those services: and consequently that
wicked men cross the purposes and designs of God and displease him, when they
make no use at all of those Dictates of Conscience, or use them not to the
right End; and that they must expect to suffer the effects of that displeasure.
For it was not without reason presumed that to have these Notices obeyed was
the pleasure of God, who planted them in our Natures; and that those pleased
him most who obeyed him most in doing as they directed: and that either in
this life or in the next they should find the benefit of their Obedience; and
the wicked the Reward of their Dissobedience. tamblic. de vita Pyth. c. 18.
All beings show their kindness where they love (says Pythagoras) and God
consequently. And therefore he and his Schole always concluded that wise Men
will apply themselves to do the things that please God and that in hope of a
Reward. For even the Gentiles believed that there was a God, and that he was a
Rewarder of all those that diligently seek Him. According to the style of the
Apostle Heb. 11.6. If it be asked what do we more than this? what advantage then
has the Christian and what profit is there of the Gospel of Christ? I answer
as St Paul did Romans 3.2. Much every way, chiefly because that to us are
committed the Oracles of God. We grant that their Notices were pretty
explicit, that directed what actions were good and what evil. Yet their
thoughts concerning a Reward (though they believed it in the general) were
very confused, various, doubtful. They saw that in this world good men were
often oppress't, and that worse than they governed, and bare Rule over them.
This made them resolve, that the great and full reward of Virtuous actions was
to be expected in another World. But their conceits concerning that other
world were so uncertain, and their Traditions upon which these conceits were
built became at last so mixed with fables, that they came to be esteemed but
Poetical Phansyes. Heaven was metamorphos'd into the Elysian Fields; and the
Tales of Styx and Acharon confounded the True Notion of Hell: insomuch that
little remained of the old Faith and Tradition uniformly consented to more than
this, That there were Notions in us competently sufficient to direct our
Practice, That there was a God who made us, and planted these Notions in us,
and that this God was a Rewarder.

Here then is our advantage, The Gentiles they had their Altars erected to an
Unknown God, Act. 17.23. So then Virtue aimed at an unknown Reward, What the
best and most considering persons among them conceived confusedly and believed
uncertainly, That the holy Gospel to us Christians proposes distinctly, and
confirms surely. And though the Glory and Happiness which the blessed shall
enjoy in Heaven be so great, that as St Paul observes, Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, nor understanding comprehended it: yet as the same St Paul observes
(1 Cor. 2.10.) God has reveled it to us by his Spirit. He has showed us what
is the condition of that estate, at least so far forth as our earthy natures
were capable to understand it.

And truly it is but necessary for us to be frequent in the contemplation of
that happiness that God has provided for such as serve him. For the Race that
is set before us is to be run, not without our labors and endeavor. And it is
the value of the prize that must encourage us to be temperate and strive in it.
King David (though reported in holy Scripture to have been a Man after Gods own
heart) yet professes of himself, that he had utterly fainted but that he
believed verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living,
Psalm. 27. And St Paul observes that it is only and singly this Hope of Heaven
that eases a Christians life from being of all lives the most miserable, to be
of all lives the most happy, 1. Cor. 15.19. Nor was his consideration of the
Recompense of Reward thought either unlawful or superfluous by Abraham or
Moses or our blessed Savior. Great were the Joys that were set before them,
and great, even the same great Delights are set before Us. The most searching
wit cannot conceive greater, For these are the greatest possible, nay we cannot
conceive these adequately, because they are so great.

Now that I may not wander too much, when I treat of so infinite a Theme, I
shall designedly confine my present discourse to some few Texts, and chiefly to
the last verse of the sixteenth Psalm; Where the Prophet concludes, that in
the Kingdom of Heaven, or which is all one, in the presence of God, there is
fulness of Joy, and at his right hand there are Pleasures for evermore.

This Psalm is entitled by the Septuagint (...). A piece of David's Sculpture
or engraving. As our best Poets choose to have some greater acumen, somewhat
more excellent and strong for wit and sense in the Closure of their Poems: So
in the last line of this Psalm, in the Bottom of this piece of Sculpture,
there is engraved in small, a good lively Image of Heaven, or of that which
makes Heaven to be such, Celestial Happiness. This Urania is a fit piece,
for every divine Lover and courtier to cast both his Eyes upon. And therefore
while I discourse to You on this subject to rectify my meditations, I shall
frequently cast mine Eye upon this very little, but very fine piece of the
Royal Engraver.

I laid down in the beginning these undeniable and confessed Grounds. First
that every man desires to live without grief, in an estate of joy and
happiness.

Secondly that every wise man desires the greater Happiness before the less.
I showed by the by, the Opinions of Heathen Men, that Happiness was no
otherwise attainable but by Virtue and the endeavor of Pleasing God.

But now I assume, which I intend for the Argument of this Discourse, That in
Heaven, in his own presence, God has provided for Virtuous men an estate of
happiness, that is in all respects the greatest that can possibly be imagined
or enjoyed: And to prove this that I assume, I shall only beg you to grant,
what, if you consider, you cannot but grant, namely that the greatest
happiness possible, can have but those parts or properties which in this Text
are either explicitly or implicitly affirmed of the Glory of Heaven.

The first of these is Indolence, that is the absence of Grief and security
from it. This is required as a prerequisite, or principle and foundation of the
other parts, and is implied, because the other mentioned properties cannot be
where this is not.

The second part or property is, that it has Joy in possession; The very
form, essence, or substance of that happiness consists in Joy. Nothing can be
more suitable to our Natures or appetites, than delight, Joy or pleasure: And
this we have an explicit assurance of from this Text. For the Psalmist tells
us expressly; That in the presence of God there is joy, and at his right hand
there are Pleasures.

The third property of the greatest happiness is, that there be fulness of
this Joy. For Fulness implies the highest degree and greatest measure.
Neither man nor Angel nor any other Being can be capable of more than
fulness, and this is also explicitly affirmed of the estate of Glory, viz.
That in the presence of God there is fulness of Joy.

The Fourth and last property of the greatest happiness that can be imagined
is the Perpetuity, or eternal duration of its pleasures: and this the Text
also gives us an explicit assurance of; For it concludes, That in the
presence of God are pleasures for evermore: not for a day or a year or ten
years or ten thousand, But in the presence of God are pleasures for evermore.

Thus the Royal engraver in this very little piece has given us all the
lineaments of the greatest happiness, and has directed us where this Urania
makes her abode, where this Happiness, this perfect and complete happiness is
to be found, not among Glories or riches or Pleasures of this World, but in
the presence of God in Heaven.

O Let the Power of thy Grace O Lord fit us for that presence!

The first property of that happy estate, which the blessed enjoy in the
presence of God is Indolence, or security from Greifs. This is not expressly
mentioned in the description, but certainly implied; For there can be no
Fulness of joy where pains or sorrows are mixed or fill any part of the Soul.
For that Soul cannot be perfectly full of joy that is partly filled with
sorrow, And I therefore place Indolence first, because an Estate of Joy can
stand upon no other Bottom: There can be no foundation for it, where the place
is already possess't with grief. For as the Scholemen use to dispute, that the
privation or absence of cold, is a necessary requisite for the introducing of
Heat, so they affirm also that the absence of grief or sorrow is as necessary
for the production of delight and Pleasure.

Secondly this estate of Indolence, which is the ground or Basis of delight,
though it be only implied in the Psalmists description here, yet in other
Texts of Scripture is expressly asserted to be part of the Portion of the
Blessed in Heaven. We are Christians, we all profess to believe the
Scriptures. In them we hope to have eternal life, and so (if the Son of God be
to be believed before Socinus) did the Jews before us: we have the light of
that Revelation which the Heathens wanted, and would have rejoiced at. This
would have corrected their Traditions and rectified their confused
Expectations. We have as St Peter speaks a more sure word of Prophesy, to
which we shall do well if we take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark
place; until the day dawn and the day star arise in our hearts, that is,
until the day come that we shall be admited into the presence of God, and
shall see him, not in a glass darkely, but face to face. Till that time come,
we must borrow all our light from Scripture, which came not by the will of Man,
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. ult.

St John we know in the time of the Gospel was the great Master of
Revelations, He was the person whom our Savior chose out of all his Disciples
to reveal those things unto that were to come to pass in the End of the world.
And he has given us a sufficient Testimony of our Security from grief at that
time, when we shall enjoy the presence of God in the new Jerusalem. He saw the
Heavens and the Earth fly away from before the face of God, and there was no
place found for them, Rev. 20.11. He saw also a new Heaven and a new Earth and
a new Jerusalem coming down from God, richly adorned as a Bride in Expectation
of her Bridegroom. Rev. 21.1, 2, 3, 4. And I heard, says he, a great voice
out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with
them and be their God, and God shall wipe away all tears from their Eyes, and
there shall be no more Death, neither sorrow nor Crying, neither shall there be
any more pain. Here You see we have a particular Revelation to assure us that
in the resurrection of the just, they shall have the first part of Happiness,
which is Indolence or the security from grief.

Now the manner or solemnity of giving this Revelation deserves to be
considered also. For least this vision should be without an authentic Notary,
He who sat upon the throne said unto John Write, for the words are faithful
and true. This came not like a delphick whisper; For he heard a great Voice,
and that not uttering the mind of God enigmatically, as it were in a riddle,
not in amphibolies or equivocall language and of various construction as the
heathen Oracles did (who sought out dark speech, that the Event might not
overtake them in an evident lie) but in plain univocall and downright terms,
There shall be no more Death nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain. This was a Voice
from Heaven, This is the eternal decree and covenant of God of which he
commanded St John to be the Scrivener, This is the enfeofment of the redeemed,
or in the phrase of the Spirit, the words that are faithful and true and
cannot pass away.

This Text you see is general and full and can be meant of nothing else. But
seeing what is here spoken in general is in other Texts delivered more
particularly, It will not be amiss to follow wheresoever the Scripture
leads, and so to take a more special account, what are the miseries that ill
men are subject to, and that holy and good men by the mercy of God are redeemed
from.

It is most true that Esdras long since observed that Man's condition is not
greatly to be boasted of, seeing it is generally true that he observes 2
Esdras. 7.21. that Men now in this present time live in Heaviness and after
death they look for punishment. Here we are subject to all sorts of pains
bodily and mental; and after the Resurrection as there shall be conditions of
greater joy, so also there shall be conditions of greater sorrow, than are any
of those to which we are here obnoxious.

Man is indeed born to pain naturally as the spark flies upward: And God that
ordained all things ordained these pains and sorrows, and every one must look
to have his share of them. And yet it is piously believed that it is not Gods
delight either in this world or in the next to afflict or greive the children
of Men. It may seem a paradox to some that pains or greifs should be good for
any thing, and yet it is the Opinion of the best Philosophers (and I believe as
true, as it is strange) that the pains which men feel in hunger in thirst and
in all sorts of sicknesses, and also that all those Natural cares that arise
from natural appetites are by God appointed for necessary and excellent Ends.
We learn from divines that the pains and cares of this world were intended to
wean us from it, and to prompt and dispose us to look after a better. But we
learn also from our Philosophers that they serve even in this as useful means
for the conservation of Man in his present estate and Nature. Were it not for
the pains of Hunger and thirst, It is believed that some men would be so
retchlesse as to forget to provide meat; Admirari nosde^ cet eam fuisse
solertiam sapien^issimi Naturae opificis, qui, quia omnis Operatio sutura ex se
laberiosa erat, etiam quae naturalis foret, testante Aristotele, idirco omnem
Operationem blandimento voluptatis condivit: ac tanto vehementiorem voluit esse
voluptatem, quanto ipsa Operatio erat magis necessaria futura, sive ad totius
generis sive ad Animalis cujusque singularis conservationem, Scilicet Animalia
aut non curarent, aut obliviscerentur, neque adverterent, quibus par foret
temporibus seu conjugio operam dare, propagando generi seu comedere, bibereque
producendae vitae Individui, nisi inditi essent stimuli, quibus molestiam
creantibus, instigantibusque admonerentur ejus actionis cujus voluptas, talem
molestiam sedatura, sit comes unde and ad illam eliciendam feruntur. Gassendus
in 10. Diogenis Laertii librum. De morali Phil. Epicuri.
and that were not hunger and thirst greater pains, some would be so lasy as to
account it a pain to eat and drink, and so death would probably evertake them
in their inconsiderateness, before they would mind to replete their exhausted
Bodies.

And in like manner it may be asserted, that there is a necessary use in all
the pains of sickness. For sicknesses are certainly contrary to our Natures
and corruptive of them. And therefore, It is the concern of our lives to find
them out; which we cannot easily do without the sense of pain. The Apoplexy is
a dreadful disease unto us, even upon this very account, because it kills and
gives no warning, and evey other disease would be as suddenly fatal, had it no
pains to forerun or to accompany it. It must therefore be granted, that even
the pains of sickness are here useful to us, they are stimuli necessarii,
they put us in mind that our health and life is concerned. Pains make us
sensible of the morbifick cause and so do direct and provoke us to endeavor the
Cure of the Disease.

And the same thing may be said of the greatest Cares, that are incident to
Man, that they have their great Ends also. We know that the present world
subsists, only by the maintenance of a succession of Generations. And if these
successions must be maintained, Men must (besides the present sustenance of
their families) take care to lay up (let me use the Phrase of the Psalmist)
some remainder of their substance for their Babes.

But (to apply this to our present argument) There can be no more use of these
cares or of these pains when We shall once be well landed into Heaven. For
first in Heaven there shall be no sin, and therefore there shall be no need of
any pains so be the punishment of Sin; Secondly there shall be no death, and
therefore there shall be no need of hunger or thrist or of the pains of
sickness to warn us that we are in danger of Death, or to direct us to do
those things that concern our life. Nor shall there be any use of those
ordinary Cares that are now most Natural and useful to admonish to make
provision for our selves and our families, because God shall there make such
provisions for us that all these worldly Cares shall be for ever useless. Our
lives shall not as in this world depend upon the continual accession of fresh
Nourishment, nor our Immortality upon the establishment of life and estate upon
our Name and issue.

And as there is no final cause nor use of those cares and pains in Heaven; so
is there no possible place for, no material, no efficient cause of them,
(...), There shall be no internal matter there, that may within us be
suscipient or capable of Diseases, nor external Occasion to produce them.

In this world we complain that we are subject to innumerable sicknesses, and
that the immediate causes of them are almost infinite; but all those causes and
occasions are inconsistent with the Revealed state of Glory. First many
diseases there are that arise from a Weakness or defect in some part or Organ,
Thus Palsies, Epilepsies and Apoplexyes are by some Physicians judged to arise
from some Weakness or defect in the Brain and Nerves. If a Man has got the
Jaundice or the dropsy, then the weakness of the liver is accused. And the
Spleen and the Lungs and every other part has its proper weaknesses also,
whence several and distinct diseases commonly arise. But this is the comfort
of the good Christian, that his Body shall be subject to no weakness nor
defect in Heaven. St Paul assures us 1 Cor. 15.43. That our Bodies which are
sown in weakness shall be raised in strength and power.

Secondly besides these of Weakness, there are sorts of Diseases which happen
even to the strongest Men, such are those pestilentiall sicknesses that are
caused by poisonous and corruptive vapors, which corrupt and infect the blood,
though before never so pure and defecate. Against these no strength of our
earthy Natures can be any preservative. But the strength of a glorified body is
above them all. And St Paul in the Text above cited 1 Cor. 15.43. is our
witness in this particular. Our Bodies that are sowed in corruption shall be
raised in incorruption. Our Corruptible must put on Incorruption, and so our
Mortal shall put on Immortality: We shall have our Natures fixed for ever, so
that no malignant, no pestilentiall vapor; nor any new and heterogeneous
ferment shall be able to alter or corrupt our Constitutions. The pestilence
that walks in darkness propagating it self occultly, and the Plague that
destroieth at noon day, shall have no influence nor power over us.

Thirdly though the Body and all its parts be strong, and the Air wherein we
breath be sweet and wholesome, Yet Diseases may arise from other causes. For
example, sometimes there happens to be some dissagreablenesse in the matter of
our Diet: sometimes a mistake in the Quantity; sometimes by some other
accidents Errors are committed in some of our Digestions: which as they happen
in the first second or third Digestion (to use the style of our vulgar
Physiology) they cause the pain in the stomach, the Colic or the Flux, the
Obstruction of the Mesentery the fits of an Ague, or the pains of a putrid
fever and many more as well Chronicall as acute diseases. But all these are
accidents of that Nature that they cannot possibly happen to our glorified
Bodies. St John declares Rev. 7.15.16. That in Heaven Men shall hunger no more,
they shall thirst no more, There shall be none of those stimuli; none of those
pungent pains for want of meat and drink. There shall be no use of Diet nor
possibility of Comitting Errors in Diet on Digestions, and consequently no
surfeit nor putrid fevers nor those other diseases that here arise from errors
committed in diet and digestion. There shall not be any burning fever, No nor
so much as a febris ephemera, not the least Inflammation of the Spirits from
the heat of the Sun. So St John proceeds, The Sun shall not fall hurtfully upon
them, neither shall any burning.

It may be added to complete the difference, That Women, (which is the half of
the rational world) bear children here, and it is notorious that they do not
bear them without pain and sorrow. For to many a disease are they peculiarly
and upon that account obnoxious before they can bring a Man child into the
world. But in Heaven it is Impossible that Women should have any of these
Discomposures, or that the now Natural care for Wives and children should
disturb men there. For our Savior has condescended to tell us, that those who
shall be accounted worthy to attain that world, and the Resurrection from the
Dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, nor can they die any more. They
shall have a perpetuity, but it shall be established in a better way than by
succession of Generations. For it follows Luke 20.35. They are (...), equal
to, or of like immortal Nature with the Angels, and are the sons of God.

Thus you see how that in all things God exalts the honor of his Goodness to
us. He did us a kindness in giving us these pains during our Mortality. In the
resurrection, that day of our Jubilee, when there shall be no further use of
them, He will take from us our Diet of bitter herbs, and do us a more great and
excellent kindness, He will establish us in such a state that it will be
Impossible any such cares or greifs should fall upon us.

I have spoken hitherto principally of our deliverance from greifs that are
corporal and incident to us by reason of our Bodies. But it is too true that
we are subject here to those that are mental also. The Spirit of man may bear
his infirmities. That is such Evils as are incident to his Man's Body may be
born by his Spirit, Prove. 18.14.
but a wounded Spirit who can bear? When our strength is weakness, how great
is that weakness? and when our Releif is Torment, how great is that Torment?
It is for the soreness of these pains of Conscience that they are compared
even by Heathens to perpetual whippings, to destructive diseases, to sore and
incurable Ulcers, nay even to the Torments of Hell it self. And it is most true
that no man in this world can be perfectly secure from the pains and troubles
of Conscience, because no man can here be perfectly just, no man can perfectly
comply with the Dictates of his Conscience, which contains yet a blotted Copy
of Gods first Original Law. Nor can any professor of Christianity perfectly
comply with the book't or later Edition of Gods Royal Law, so as to need no
remorse, so as to be above the Necessity of sorrowing and Repenting for his
sin. Though David was a Man after Gods own heart, yet there was a time when his
heart smote Him. And if his heart smote him for cutting off Saul's skirt, and
for numbering the people; what work think you made his heart with Him in the not
to be named matter of Uriah? How bitter are those crye^ in the 38th Psalms
Thine arrows stick fast in me and thy hand presses me sore. There is no
health in my flesh because of thy Displeasure, neither is there any rest in my
Bones by Reason of my sin. For my wickednesses are gone over my head, and are
like a sore Burden too heavy for me to bear. And how full of concern are those
prayers in the 51. Psalm, penned on that very occasion. Cast me not away from
thy presence, Take not thy holy Spirit from me. Restore me to the Joy of thy
Salvation. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God. And St Peter, that great
Apostle (though his pretended successor pretends he cannot err) yet he erred
more than once, and for his errors wept, (I wish I could read of any Popes that
did the same) for his errors I say he wept, as bitter tears as ere were wept by
Mary Magdalene.

But Heaven is above all these clouds and showers. There is no trouble of
Conscience, there is no broken Spirit there, there is no grief, no sorrow, no
pain. And therefore not the greatest of pains the pain of a troubled mind. As
in the state of Integrity there was neither sin, nor sting of Conscience: So
shall it be in the state of perfect Restoration. The glorified Christians
shall not only be purged from all their sins by the blood of Christ, and be
clothed with his Righteousness, but such Grace shall be given them that they
shall grow up and flourish in an inherent Righteousness of their own. The
great Master of Revelations tells us, that to the Spouse of the Lamb (which is
the glorified Church of Christ) to her it shall be granted that she shall be
arrayed in fine linen, which fine linen as the same St John interprets it,
is the Righteousness of the Saints. Rev. 19.8. They shall be as the confirmed
Angels are, secure from falling into any Action that may cause sin or sorrow,
Their trade shall be to be ever Glorifying God, and this shall add to their
Glory and to their joy, that they shall know that this their glorious
Employment shall neither have any end nor any Intermission.

And Having showed you now that Heaven is free from the pains of this world,
you will easily believe that it is free from the pains of the other world also.
Heaven were not Heaven, if there could be any danger of the second Death, or if
the pains of Hell might interrupt the delights and Gloryes of the Blessed there.

The prophet Esaias tells us indeed, that there is a Tophet prepared of Old,
Esaias 30.33. and our Savior that there is an everlasting fire prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, Math. 25.41. a Torment that as St John speaks shall
neither have End nor Intermission, Rev. 14.11. The smoke of their Torment,
says he, shall ascend up for ever and ever, and they shall have no Rest day
nor night. The Eternity of this Torment is sufficiently asserted and proved by
the Fathers in Opposition to the Heresy of Origin, which same proofs may serve
to convince all Heretics and Men of loose principles that now endeavor to
Renew the same pernicious doctrine. I gave you a particular of them with
Answers to the matters objected in another Discourse, when I commended unto you
the fear and dread of God, even of that God who as our Savior declares is able
to cast both Soul and Body into Hell fire. And I shall not repeat now what I
delivered then.

It then being granted that the condition of the second Death and the pains of
Hell therein are very dreadful, it will be a doctrine worthy of our
acceptance, that those who are accounted worthy to wear the livery of Christ
and to be Citizens of the Heavenly Jerusalem, shall have security from those
pains also. David speaks it as well of Himself as of Christ: Thou shall not
leave my Soul in Hell. For the Souls of the Just are all in the hand of God,
and no Torment shall touch them: Wisd. 3.1. The Plagues of Egypt shall not be
seen in Goshen. Our Savior who knows it best has described unto us the
management of that whole affair, and the different portions of the good and
the bad, Math. 25.30. When (says he) the son of Man shall come in his glory
and all his Angels with Him, All Nations shall be gathered before his Throne,
and He shall separate the good from the bad, as a shepherd separates his sheep
from the Goats. The good he shall bless and receive into his own kingdom,
but unto the wicked shall this sentence be, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels; so these shall go into
everlasting punishment and the Righteous into life everlasting.

Give me leave to add one Observation more, It is this, That though the damned
shall have a sight of Heaven, and of the state of Glory, yet that sight shall
be so far from being any comfort or refreshment to them, that it shall greatly
augment their torment. For that sight shall Cause envy, and we know that Envy
naturally causes grief, There shall be (as our blessed redeemer testifies)
weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when they shall see Abraham and Isaak and Jacob
in the kingdom of God and themselves thrust out. This very Circumstance of
their seeing Abraham and Isaak and Jacob and the whole company of the
professors of Religion (men whom they formerly contemned and despised) in the
possession of that Glorious Happiness, and themselves with all their wisdom
and Policy thrust out and excluded, this uncomfortable Contemplation shall
cause no small accession to their torment.

Secondly though the blessed have seen sorrow for the time past and shall then
see the horror of Hell before their eyes, Yet both the Remembrance of the one,
and the sight of the other shall be so far from causing grief and sadness in
them, that these Contemplations shall greatly augment their Joy. Suave mari
magno, turbantibus aequora Nautis,
E Terra alterius magnum spectare laborem:
Non quia Vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas,
Sed quibus ipse malis careas, quia cernere suave est.
It is a delight, says Lucretius, for one that has escaped to the shore, to
look back upon the Tempest, and to see it break the masts, and tear the Sails,
and create trouble to the mariners, who are yet toss't like a Tennis on the
waves. Not that it is a pleasure for one man to see another toyld, but a joy to
stand in security, and to view so great a danger, that He himself in his own
particular has so nearly escaped. So likewise the Blessed in Heaven, when they
are secured in their own particulars, then shall they with pleasure remember
all the troubles and greifs that they have waded through in the life past; and
with pleasure look upon the pains of Hell which they see other plunged into,
but themselves have, by the Mercy of God, so strangely escaped: and thence even
from this consideration shall they take Occasion to sing praises to Him who
has placed them in a blessed estate, not obnoxious to any of their former
greifs, and has also redeemed them from the dreadful Region of darkness, and
brought them to his own mavelous light.

And now the sum of what I have discoursed is this, That there is nothing
more desirable to mankind in general than joy or Happiness. That the greater
joy is by all wise men to be preferred before the less. That to the greatest
possible joy (besides other requisites) the absence of all grief is required.
That the estate of Glory has this requisite. First it is free from all those
cares and greifs and pains to which we are here obnoxious by reason of our
Bodies. For the proof of which, I showed you in particular, That though the
usual cares and pains, to which we are here obnoxious by reason of our
mortality, are of Use and necessity in this present world, Yet they have no
Use, nor place, nor possibility in the state of Glory. Then I showed you that
there shall be none of those pains in Heaven that are purely mental; and last
of all, That though after this life there is a Tophet of everlasting punishment
prepared, yet that the pains thereof shall not touch the blessed, but that the
contemplation of them shall even augment their Joy.

All this have I done to prove that the first condition, namely Indolence or
security from greifs is one part of the portion of Religious and good men in
Heaven. But this is but the Negative part, but the removing of the Rubbish that
there may be a good foundation laid for the superstructure of Happiness. When
I shall draw the next Curtain, I shall show You, that I may further provoke You
to the practice of a Religious and Virtuous life, The Glory of the Mansion it
self, the joy of Heaven, the fulness of that joy; the pleasures of that
state, even those pleasures that the Psalmist affirms shall last for evermore.
Now let the great God of his infinite mercy pardon our sins, and purify our
hearts, and make us first as desirous of his Rewards in Heaven, as they are
worthy of our Desire, then let Him fit us for them, and bring us to them; even
to those joys that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor have entered into the
heart of Man to be conceived. To the God of Joy and peace who is able to do for
us more abundantly than we can ask or think be Glory Honor and Adoration for
ever.

SERMON. II.
PSALM. 16.11. In thy presence is fulness of Joy, and at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.


FOR Ministers to make Apologyes in the Pulpit, when they are not absolutely
necessary, is generally judged to be uncomely, and below the Gravity of their
place. But there are subjects sometimes to be treated of, in which there is so
just Occasion of some Preface, that to omit it were token enough of a proud and
presuming Nature. And such I take to be the argument which I must consider from
this Text, which leads me to the consideration and Description of that
Estate, which I can neither fully understand nor speak. And if God should give
me the Tongue (as he gave St Paul when he was rapt up into the third Heaven the
Eyes) of an Angel; yet ye would not be able to understand neither the Nature
of heavenly glory, unless the same God should likewise give unto you
Angelical Intellectuals. Such is the grossness of human sense, that when we
desire to give Heaven its due esteem, yet all our thoughts are both besides it
and below it. We are not capable of any true Idea's of it. We cannot bear the
least ray of the starrinesse of its Nature, It is therefore the great Mercy and
Condescension of God, that since we could not arise to the Contemplation of
Heaven in its true and Native luster, he has considered our Natures, and by
the use of familiar Metaphors and allusions made his heaven stoop to us, and
clothed it for our present Comprehension with the Air and livery of this lower
world. And we are further to adore his Bounty, that has made heaven too great,
and too glorious an estate, to be described Philosophically in affirmative
univocall Terms. It will be sufficient, if I can any way express it, though
in phrases Metaphorical and borrowed from subjects below it self, and though
they are, as they must needs be, full of (...), and undervaluations of its
true, and frequently alien from its essential and genuine dignity.

I showed in the foregoing discourse (among other things) that the greatest
Happiness possible can have but these four parts or properties. 1. Indolence
or security from grief, which is required as a prerequisite, and foundation of
the other parts. 2. That, for the essence, nothing can be desired more suitable
to our Natures than Delight, joy or Pleasure. 3. That for the Degree, man is
capable of no more than Fulness. 4. For the Extent, that nothing can be
longer or larger than Perpetuity, or pleasures for evermore.


I went then only through the Negative part, and without figure or Metaphor
proved it from Scripture clearly and distinctly, that the state of Glory shall
be free from pains and greifs, bodily, mental, temporal, eternal. Now I come
to the positive part, and to prove that there is not only in Heaven the state
of Indolence or security from grief, which answers that (...) or Voluptas in
statu, so much valued by some of the ancient Philosophers, but also that
Voluptas in Motu preferred by others, namely all those stirring and pleasant
Airinesses and commotions of the mind which are concomitants of the greatest
mirth. For so, though generally under figures and metaphors, is that estate
represented to us.

If you ask by what Authorities of Scripture we entertain this hope of an
active joy in Heaven (besides that of my Text which affirms joy and fulness
of joy to be had in the presence of God) I shall refer you to what the Psalmist
affirms in the 125 Psalm, viz. That he who in this world goes on his way
weeping and bears good seed, shall doubtless come again with joy: the words
are (...) in the Hebrew, (...) in the Greek; that is, with an Ovation or great
exultancy of active joy. Nay there is so much of this in Heaven that the state
of Glory is simply styled by the name of Joy. For the form of words to be
used by our Savior when he shall admit his Religious and faithful servants
into Heaven is no other but this, Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

But I have yet a further Conclusion to be proved from divine Revelation,
namely, that there is not only a security from grief, and some active joy in
Heaven; But that there are the greatest degrees and quantities of that joy.
There shall be plenty of it; even as much as our refined and exalted Natures
shall then be able to contain. Nothing is capable of more than fulness, and
we have a ready testimony from the Text, that in the presence of God there is
fulness of joy.

Now to comply with our Natures, and to make us esteem the reward that is
proposed to us, and to entice our affections after it, that are generally too
carnal, and to represent the fulness of this joy so as to give it a power
over us that are yet earthy minded, the holy Ghost has chosen to represent the
pure, and in their own Nature incomprehensible joys of Heaven, by sensible
representations of the most eminent earthy delights and pleasures. He saw our
Infirmity that we cannot well Judge of delights that are purely intellectual
and spiritual; and therefore he has so much condescended to our Distempers,
as to distemper Heaven it self for our sakes; and to draw us some scenes of
Heavenly joys in the corporal shapes and figures of our fullest earthy
pleasures; Such are those of feastings, Weddings, the possession of Riches,
Honors and the like, so Luke 22.30. This Heavenly joy is represented by that of
a Royal feast with God, by eating and drinking at the Table of the king of
Heaven.

And our Psalmist has given us the like figure of Celestial Happiness in the
thirty sixth Psalm v. 8. which we read thus, They that trust in thee shall be
abundantly satisfied with the fullness of thy House, and thou shall give them
to drink of the River of thy pleasures, that is, thou shall give them to drink
plentifully of thy pleasures, as out of a River, It follows, For with thee is
the Well (the never ceasing spring) of life. And in thy light shall we see
light. Every particular is very considerable, First Inebriabuntur ubertate
domus tuae, so the vulgar latin, agreeably enough to the Original and best
Translations: In Textum Inebrtabuntur ubertate domus tuae, and torrente
voluptatis tuae potabis eos, dicunt Interpretes, quia suavior in poculentis
voluptas quam in esculentis, ideo per inebriationem summam laetitiam hie
intelligi. v. Euthymium and Nicephorum. ^uin and Philosophi instantiam
voluptatis i^ motu eam potantis post sitim inducunt, inde per (...) Veteres
quidam, ut Orpheus, perpetuam inebriationem Virtutis mercedem dixerunt.
Now by that or the like phrases learned Men have chosen to represent, that
Voluptas in Motu, that active and stirring pleasure in which they placed the
greatest Happiness. Secondly those Phrases, they shall be abundantly
satisfied, and they shall drink as out of a River, signify the greatest plenty
of that pleasure, or (to use the style of the Text) a great fulness of this
Joy. And though these representations for our sakes are Corporeal; yet there
is one in the close more Intellectual, Spiritual, and harder to be
understood, In thy light shall we see light. Let the foundation of light and
life so purify and then exalt our Natures, that we may see that light and live.

It is most certain that the Joys of Heaven are in their own Nature highly
Intellectual and Spiritual, and yet to exhibit a full delight, and shape its
idea to our present affections, It is frequently in Scripture Compared to the
pleasures of a Marriage, and which is a high Honor to Matrimony, to that of a
Bride upon her Wedding day. That we know is the Time of her great joy, and
there is reason it should be so, seeing at that day she is emancipated from the
corrections of childhood and youth, she is freed from the commands of her
Governesses, she is made Mistress of her self, she receives a Blessing and a
portion from her father, smiles and Gratulations of joy from her whole family
and kindred, and which is above all, she takes then a perfect assurance of full
satisfaction to her Natural desires, and makes an everlasting settlement of
her own, and takes an everlasting assurance of her Husbands love. In these
colors therefore does St John typify unto us the estate of the blessed in
Heaven, Revel. 21. Then, says he, that is in the first appearance of the state
of Glory, the triumphant Church shall come prepared as a Bride adorned for her
Husband: as the Bride rather than as the Bridegroom, because (if there be any
difference) her Joy is esteemed generally the greatest. And then, as it is
expressed Rev. 19. the Blessed Angels shall sing for Joy those divine Scripture
Epithalamiums, Let us be glad and rejoice and give honor to the Lord, for the
marriage of the Lamb is come and the Bride has made her ready: and that song
of Loves, Psasm 25. Hearken O princess and consider, incline thine Ear, forget
also thy own Country and thy Fathers house; then shall the King greatly desire
thy Beauty, for he is the Lord thy God, and worship thou him. To which the
Bride shall make Responsals like that penned by Isaiah cap. 61.10. I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has
clothed me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me with a robe of
Righteousness even as a Bride, richly adorned with her Jewels.

But because Glory and honor to some more Intellectual Complexions, is matter
of their greater delight, than those sensual of meat and marriage; to comply
with the Notions of these men also concerning Happiness, Heaven is elsewhere
expressed to be an appearance in Glory, Col. 3.4. and it is in holy scripture
particularly compared to the pleasure that men of great Spirits take in Honors
gotten by noble and excellent Achievements.

Among the triumphant Glorys mentioned in History, V. Natalis Com. lib. 5.
Mythologiae cap. 5. Morere Diagera: Non enim in coelum ascenderes; Lacenis
Gratulatio ad Diagoram duos filios Victores olympiae habentem. Tusc. Quaest. l.
1.
and of use in former times, there were none Causes of greater Joy than those
accustomed upon a victory at the Pythian, Nemaean, Isthmian or Olymphick Games;
where he that got the victory was crowned with an honorable garland, and
carried on the shoulders of the chiefest Citizens not into the Gates, but
through triumphant Pageants or Arches, even over the walls of their Cittyes. In
the chief places of which there were Inscriptions engraven or statues erected
to the honor of the Conqueror, sometimes therefore the estate of Glory is
compared to the transport and Joy of these triumphant victors. So by St Paul (1
Cor. 9.24.25.) to that or a Crown or prize gotten by those who strive for
Mastery at the Race. But that which is above all in point of Honor, and more
universally resented as the most full, ample and greatest attainment that is
possible in this world, is to be the Fountain of Honor, to be a King in
possession of a real Crown or throne: By this therefore the Glory of Heaven
is most frequently exemplifyed, to him that overcomes, says our Savior Rev.
3.21. will I give to sit with me in my throne; and St James tells us, that
the Lord has promised, and the Blessed shall receive a Crown of life, James
1.12. and Math. 24.24. and Rev. 1.6. It is said, that the Blessed shall be
Kings and Priests unto God.

Nor shall they have these honors in an obscure place. For the glory of that
Court (to complete the fullness of our Joy) is expressed to be of a most
unimaginable slateliness, beyond that of any Princes palace in the world.
Socrates in one of Platoes discourses tells us, that all the ordinary herbage
of the Superior world, is as glorious as the brightest part of the most
beautiful flower upon Earth: and that the vast mountains of that world are
entire Rubyes and Diamonds; whereof those gems which we wear and value, are (as
it were) but small scattered Chips and fragments. I will not accuse Socrates
for these Hyperboles, his meaning might be sober, and the words intended only
to express a great glory in the world above. For even the slatelinesse of the
Heavenly Jerusalem is typified in the Revelation [chap. 21.19.] by Ministering
unto our Corporeal phancyes a not unlike representation; For it said, that the
wall of that City, as it was represented to Him, was made of Jasper, the
foundation consisting of diverse other precious stones, that the City it self
was all built of a substance that had the pureness and other qualityes of
perfect gold, and (which is the only quality that can be added to make gold it
self more precious) the clearness and transparency of glass. That the streets
were paved with the same most precious metal; That every Gate was one entire
Pearl, that the presence of God and of the Lamb were a constant light and
Glory, and as it were a temple in the midst of it. Now if this should be
literally true, and in kind, even as it is expressed, what an overflowing
fulness of delight must he be possessed with, that is continually ravished
with these Enjoyments, that is a King or a prince in such a place as this? and
we cannot deny to admit these Comparisons so far as they were intended, namely
to join with the Text in confirming the proposed Truth, That there is delight
in the greatest quantity possible (though not of so gross a kind) that there
is fulness of Joy and Glory in Heaven.

I might instance in other similitudes, as where it is compared to the
possession of a great treasure, which to some men is a most great and sensual
delight, but I shall choose to pass to the last particular, The Measure or
duration of the greatest Happiness. And truly I think the learned Fathers of
the primitive Church were sound Philosophers in this point, with whom it is a
frequent assertion that such a life cannot be most happy, which is not secure
of its own Eternity. If therefore any thing be designed for the full
satisfaction of human Nature, it must be a delight that shall last for ever:
and that is such, that it must needs be satisfactory, seeing no man can wish
for more than eternal Happiness: Eternity has no end at all, neither is
there any duration, nor can be in Nature, no nor can be projected in Human
Fancy, longer than for ever, nay the Imagination cannot extend so far. The
power and goodness of God has provided for us beyond the utmost stretch of
our own Conceits; For he has meted out the duration of our Glory by no other
measure than that infinite Eternity. My text comes home to the proof of this
point also, For it asserts, That in the presence of God there are pleasures
even for evermore. Merito Philosophorum non obscurus Euclides qui fuit conditor
Megaricorum discipl^nae, dissentiens a caeteris, id esse summum bonum dixit,
quod simile sit, and idem semper. Intellexit profecto quae sit natura summi
boni, licet id non explicaverit quid sit; id est autem immortalitas nec aliud
omnino quicquam: quia sola nec imminui, nec augeri nec immutari porest. Senec^
quoque imprudens incidit, ut fateretur, nullum esse aliud virtutis praemium
quam immortalitatem. Laudans enim virtutem, in eo l^bro quem de immatura morte
conscripsit, Una, inquit, res est virtus, quae nos immortalitate donare possit
and pares Diis facere; sed and Stoici, quos fecutus est, negant fine virtute
effici quenquam beatum posse. E^go virtutis praemium beat a vita est, fi virtus
(ut recte dictum est) beatam vitam facit, Non est igitur (ut aiunt) propter
seipsam virtus experenda, sed propter vitam beatam quae virtutem neceslario
sequitur. Quod argumentum docere eos potuit, quod esset summum bonum. Haec
autem vita praesens and corporalis beata esse non potest, quia malis est
subjecta per corpus. Epicurus Deum beatum vocat, quia incorruptus and quia
simpiternus est. Beatitudo enim perfecta esse debet ut nihil sit quod vexare ac
minuere aut immutare possit. Nec aliter quicquam existimari beatum possit, nisi
fuerit incorruptum: Incorruptum autem nihil est nisi quod est immortale.
Solaerga Immortalitas beata est, quia Co^rumpi ac dissolvi non potest. Quod si
cadit in hominem virtus, quod negare nullus potest, cadit and Beati^udo. Non
potest enim fieri ut sit miser, qui est virtute praeditus: si cadit beatitudo
ergo and immortalitas cadit in hominem, quae beata est. Summum igitur bonum
sola immortalitas invenitur, quae nec aliud animal, nec corpus attingit, nec
potest cuiquam sine scientia ac virtute, id est, sine Dei cognitione ac
justitia obvenire; cujus appetitio quam vera, quam recta sit, ipsa vitae
hujusce cupiditas indicat, quae licet sit temporalis, and labor plenissima,
expetitur tamen ab omnibus and optatur; hanc enim tam senes quam pueri, tam
Reges quam Infimi, tam denique sapientes quam stulti cupiunt. Tanti est (ut
Anaxagorae visum est) contemplatio coeli ac lucis ipsius, ut quas^unque
miserias libeat sustinere. Cum igitur laboriosa haec and brevis vita, non
tantum hominum, sed etiam caeterorum Animantium consensu, magnum bonum esle
ducatur; manifestum est eandem summum ac perfectum fueri bonum, si and fine
careat and omni malo. Denique nemo nunquam extitisset, qui hanc ipsam brevem
contemneret aut subiret m rtem, nisi spe vitae longioris, etc. apud Lactantium
de falsa sap. lib. 3. c. XII. ubi etiam concludit, Summum Bonum quod facit
beatos non posse esse nisi in ea Religione ac doctrina, cui spes immortalitatis
adjuncta est. Cui simule est iliud St Augustini, Beatissima Vita effe non
poterit, nisi quae fuerit de aeternitate sua certissima, De Civitate Dei lib.
10. c. 30. Cujus est and illud, Quicquid ad hoc corpus spectat and
immortalitatis est expers vanum sit necesse est.


(...)

Posidippus. And here all our Comparisons are outgone: Our feastings are for an
hour, our Weddings for a day, a Week, or a Month; the enjoyment of Riches,
honors, kingdoms with us in this world are but short and momentarie; but in
heaven there shall be not only a Feast, but an eternal Feast; an Eternal
Appetite, and eternal satisfaction to it. The Iubilation of the Lambs Nuptials
shall not be measured by a day or days, by a Month or Months, but shall be
extended to the vast duration of the eternity of God. There shall be new
Epithalamiums and new songs, the Gayety shall be everlasting; the Lamb and the
Bride shall always marry and shall always be given in marriage.

There shall be glory that shall be always fresh, that shall not grow into
oblivion or disrepute, there are those Crowns and garlands to honor our
Mastery, that are (as St Paul speaks) (...), as fade not away; there only are
those everlasting kingdoms, and those stately palaces which cannot be
removed, but do stand fast for ever. There only are those treasures which are
eternally secure, where neither Moth nor Rust does corrupt, and were Thieves
cannot break through and steal.

And thus much, being led by several texts of scripture, I have adventured to
speak by way of Metaphor concerning that blessedness; and I think I have
evinced that it is an estate not only of security from griefs, but of the most
great, and most full delights and of delights that shall last for evermore.

But here give me leave to interrupt you with an advertisement, Namely, that
those expressions and scripturall Resemblances of heavenly Joy to the delights
of sense are only intended to express the grandeur and compleatnesse, but not
the Nature or kind of the Joy of Heaven; otherwise the Paradise we expect might
be thought as sensual as that of Mahomet is commonly represented. And indeed
it was the great goodness and Wisdom of God to use unto us such familiar
Resemblances, for we are earthy constitutioned men, so, says St Paul, was Adam
our Fore-Father, 1 Cor. 15. And while we live here we must bear (as he there
speaks) the Image of the Earthy. And so are not capable to understand what
Joys will be apt to suit with our Natures after their change into the state of
Incorruption. Only thus much is revealed unto us, That as we have borne the
Image of the Earthy, so we must bear the Image of the heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. That
is, as we have been hitherto like Adam, so also hereafter we shall be in our
glorified bodies, like unto the glorified body of Christ; they are the express
words of St Paul, Phill. 3.21. That the Lord Jesus shall transfigure our vile
bodies and make them like unto his glorious body. It is not, says St John 1
Epist. 3.2. manifest, or Intelligible what we shall be, only thus much is
revealed, and we know it to be true, that when the Lord shall appear we shall
be like him; that is, not only our Souls, but our bodies also shall be purely
spiritual, even as the body of Christ was after his resurrection.

This is not vehemenisme, but a great truth, that there is a spiritual Body.
And however in the Notions of our present Philosophy, Bodies and spirits are
opposite and contradistinct, yet not so but that the body of Christ now is, and
ours hereafter shall, be undoubtedly spiritual, we know but in part, says St
Paul, and truly the Nature of that spiritualty which we shall enjoy in our
bodies after that great change, is a mystery, or that part of science, which
now we do not, cannot, understand. Maimonides has an excellent discourse
given us by the learned publisher of the Porta Mosis to this effect, As, says
he, the blind Eye is not delighted by the most beautiful colors, now the deaf
Ear by the ravishing modulations of the sweetest Music, and as it is
impossible that the fishes of the sea should know how to judge of the pleasures
those creatures take that live in the quick and finest Ether, under the
Concave of the Moon, Sicut nec caecue colores nec Sung dus voces, nec impotens
Veneris voluptatem veneris percipit, ita nec corpora voluptates animi proprias
assequi. Et quemadmodum Piscis Elementum ignis non habet cognitum, ita nec in
mundo hoc corporeo voluptates Mundi spiritualis dignosci. Maimonid. in praefat.
ad Explic. cap. 10 Sanedrim. apud Pocockium de Porta Mosts.
so neither by us in this world can the delights of the spiritual world be
discerned. We have no true taste (says he) of any but corporeal pleasures, and
purely mental delights are so strange unto us, that we cannot without much
Industry and diligence have any taste or Apprehension of them. On the contrary
Angels are not sensible of any corporeal pleasures, their senses are not as
ours, nor made to the same purposes: And we after death shall no more relish or
desire these bodily pleasures, than a wise Monarch would desire to dethrone
himself for ever and lay down all his Regalia, that he might spend his days
at play in the streets, with that company and in those sports which when he was
a child was more suitable to his temper than the exercise of his Royal power.
Such difference is there in the dignity and vileness of the delight of this
corporeal and that spiritual World. And therefore (as that considering Rabbin
well expresses this matter) God has dealt with his people as a prudent and
indulgent Master treats the tender scholar whom he desires to improve, He
provokes him to his lesson with the reward of a fig or a piece of sweetmeates,
Et paulo post, Non est Angelis volu^tas aliqua corporea nec came percipiant, cum
non sint illis ut nobis seasus, quibus ea quae nos percipimus assequantur;
Eodemque modo cum e Nobis quis dignus factus fuerit, qui gradum istum p^st
mortem consequatur, Non amplius voluptates corporeas percepturus est easve
appetiturus, magis quam Rex magni Regni dominus Regno suo exuicuoiat, ut ad
Pili lusum in Plateis redeat, etiamsi tempus faerit quo lusum istum Regno
anteserret. Fingas puerum minorennem ad praeceptorem, deductum quo cum legem
e^oceat; quod magnum ei, ob eam quam inde assequetur perfectionem Bonum est,
licet ipse magnitudinem istius boai prae intellectus imbecillitate non
percipiat. Coget Necessitas Praeceptorem qui ipso perfectior est scholarem sic
provocare, Dicet, Lege ut tibi Juglandem aut ficum aut sacchari portiunculam
demus, ta fiet ut studcat, Non ipsius Lectio^is gratia, Cujus digaitatem nondum
intelligit, sed ut edulium istud accipiat, etc. apud Maimoniden cod. lib. p.
138. and deinceps.
or somewhat that will for the present work upon his fancy, not with a
discourse of nice speculation to evince a future satisfaction to the mind by
the learning of the Law.

And this doubtless is the very reason why the holy Ghost bath had such
frequent reference to corporeal pleasures, in the Notices which he has given
us concerning the Joys of Heaven; because while we are here, our body
generally prevails above our spirit, and we do better resent corporeal than
mental pleasures. Cum horro mortalis de aterna gloria disserit, Caecus de luce
disserit. Gregor. Moral. 27.26.
But notwithstanding for the use of those that are more perfect, and that we
may not conceive to our selves, as I said, any hope of a Mahumetane Paradise,
or reality of gross corporeal pleasures in the life to come, the same Spirit
has made frequent attestations of the Spirituallnesse which we shall enjoy
even in our Bodies then, and of the diversity of our delights there from these
of this present world: and therefore when we shall come to explain the Nature
of Heavenly glory without the use of Metaphors (which can be only done by
Negatives, because we cannot form any direct Idea of it) then all these
pleasures of eating and drinking marrying and giving in marriage and all
corporeal delights are denied of it.

But now since we have made so good a progress in the way we designed, let us
indulge our selves the refreshment a little to look back and see how consistent
and agreeable these principles of Religion are to the Notions of considering
men among the Heathen. And truly it is hard to find any thing more agreeable to
us than the Philosophy of Socrates, as it is represented by Plato in his
Philebus, and elsewhere dispersedly among his writings and was (as I take it)
the ancientest Philosophy of the whole world. Which in short is this, (...).
and afterward, (...). Which testify that the ancients to Plato owned the world
to be governed by the providence of God. He reckons this among the great and
ancient Traditions, inter (...), etc. passim.

V. Platonem in Philebo, and in his tenth book de leg. he appoints severe
punishment for Atheists as for persons that are most destructive to the
commonwealth, of which he makes three kinds, (...), etc.


First that there is a God and a providence that Rules the whole world. That
man is a complext being consisting partly of an Immortal soul, which is
derived from God, (the great spirit that fills and governs all things) and
partly of a corruptible Body made of the Elements and corruptible parts of the
world. And consequently that the pleasures and delights of Man are diverse,
answerable to this Complexion and mixture. Some pleasures are purely
Intellectual, some purely corporeal, some mixed of both. That when any thing
tends to the corruption of this complext and mortal Nature, it causes grief,
And that when any thing tends to the restoration of the same Nature, it
causes joy or pleasure to the Body. That there is a joy or Pleasure that
arises purely from the expectation of the soul alone, and that there is
another mixed kind, For the soul may conceive pleasure in expectation of some
good to happen to the whole compound, And this well agrees with our Divinity.
For we profess that the souls of all good Christians rejoice in the hope of
that Glory of God that shall hereafter be extended both to our Souls and to our
Bodies. And that very well agrees with our Divinity (in this subject de
Finibus) which he affirms, That there is a sort of joy that is far more
excellent than all the rest, and that is a certain fruition and Speculative
pleasure that arises from the knowledge and contemplation of things that
continue eternally the same. For such fruitions in the highest degree are
enjoyed by all glorified spirits by means of the Beatifick vision, (...). ib.
of the most Glorious objects of the world to come; concerning which the
Schools have furnished us with large discourses that are not unpleasant, but
yet have this deficiency, V. Aquin. supplem. Quaest. 92 93. and Doctores passim
de visione beatifi a.
that they have more of Fancy and conjecture in them than certain evidence.

For seeing we neither now understand what our own Natures shall be then when
we shall be exalted into the state of Incorruption, Nor what kind of glorious
Objects shall present themselves, nor to what kind of senses they shall
accurre, (...), Soc. lb.
therefore it is impossible we should have a positive knowledge of the true
Nature of the fruitions of that Estate; Thus much is revealed that we shall not
cat nor drink to restore Nature, nor shall our Constitutions be discomposed by
any disease, and therefore neither shall we have any of those Pleasures that
Plato speaks of, which living creatures enjoy when they are restored to their
own Natures, we shall have none of those concretions and discretions, None of
those replettons and evacuations, none of those increments and decrements,
corruptions and restitutions of Nature, which are according to the Philosophy
of Sorates Causes of grief or Joy in this world. For St Paul has declared that
in the Resurrection Men shall have spiritual Bodies, that shall be immortal
in themselves, and therefore not to be preserved so by eating or drinking, or
the continued addition of new substance: Quaerat fortasse aliquis de virtute
gustabili and virtute tangibili, and etiam odorabili, si quae erit earum
operatio vel usus in futura gloria? Et revera est dubitandum, quod vires illae
non recedent ab Animabus humanis, sed Operatio virtutis gustabilis, qua
Gustatio est, cum non sit necessaria nisi propter nutrimentum and
restaurationem corporis, non eritibi necessaria, ficut nec operatio virtutis
generativae quae generatio est. Liberabuntur tamen istae vires a miseriis in
quibus modo sunt. Tu enim hic vides qualiter affligitur virtus gustabilis fame
and siti, malisque saporibus. De vi etiam generativa notum est quae tormenta
patiatur hic ab ardoribus concupiscentiarum and libidinibus: ab his igitur erit
liberatunc: Et erit Decus ejus and Gloria castitas inviolabilis. Non enim
Sobrietas aut Abstinentia minus virtutes sunt, aut minus Arma animarum
humanarum in pace spirituali quam in b^llo: Et hoc est quoniam non solum
Armasunt, sed etiam ornamenta and pulchritudines animarum mirabiles at
desiderabiles. etc. apud Gul. Parisientem part. 1. de universo. p. 2. c. 33. p.
696.
And yet Bodies they shall be still and in the Opinion of the best scholemen
they shall have the same material senses of Taste and touch and smell, though,
if they do continue, it is agreed that they must continue for Ornament rather
than for those uses, to which they were applied in this world.

Let us conclude by adressing our thanks to God that he has vouchsafed to
reveal so much unto us concerning the Glory of the life to come, which we could
not have understood by Nature. For the Natural Man understands not these
things of God, and if we consider aright we shall find that we have Reason with
all humility and precious Reverence to thank God that we do not comprehend it
all. For it is the infinite Blessedness of that condition, that puts it beyond
the reach of our senses and of our understanding, as we shall declare more
largely when we explain that Text where it is affirmed, that Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, nor have those things entered into the heart of Man, that God
has prepared for those that love Him.

Now to the great God who is maker of all things and judge and Rewarder of all
men, And to the Lord our Righteousness, etc.

SERMON. III.
1 COR. 2.9. It is written, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of Man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love Him.


IF you ask where this is written, the Margin of your Bibles direct you to the
64th of Esaias, where the Church, desirous of his second Advent, addresseth thus
to the desired Messiah, Oh that thou would rend the heavens, that thou
would come down, that the mountains might flow down at they presence! For
from the beginning of the world, (so the fourth verse proceeds) men have not
heard nor perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God, besides thee,
what He has prepared for Him that waits for Him.

There is one thing wherein I find the generallity of Men strangely
inconsistent with themselves: They cry out and declame against the present
world, and undervalue all its Enjoyments, Why men preser earthy enjoyments
before those of heaven.
and yet they are loath to leave it, and in practice prefer it before Heaven
it self. Now this is a dangerous Misprision, and the cause of it is not our
Mistake concerning the Vanity of the things of this world, but our Ignorance or
Infidelity concerning the Things of the next. The whole Nature and all the
Qualities of that Happiness, while we are here, We shall never perfectly know.
But God has given us such a portion of Revelation concerning it, as may
sufficiently commend it to us. And indeed in these and many other Texts very
excellent things are spoken concerning a glorious state to come, a state of
Happiness which Religious and good Men shall enjoy in Heaven. I may speak in
the phrase of the Psalmist, very excellent and glorious things are spoken of
thee, thou City of God. Heaven is a place of so great Glory, that it has
gotten some of the prime attributes of the great and glorious God that dwells
in it: God is infinite and so is the Happiness of Heaven: God is
incomprehensible, and so is the Happiness of Heaven. The excellence of God
Himself Naturally, and the Glory, in that Heaven which he has prepared for his
own Mansion, and for the future Mansion of his servants are too great to be
expressed truly, and without a Metaphor, otherwise than by Negatives. It was
true without a Metaphor, what we declared in the first part, That in Heaven
there shall be no grief, no sorrow, no pain. But how shall we speak the
positive parts of Heavenly glory by way of Negatives? Why! we may speak as the
Church anciently did by the mouth of the Prophet Isaiah: Eye has not seen nor
Ear heard, what (that is, what positive parts of Glory) God has prepared for
those that wait upon Him. And St Paul goes further in the same Way, when he
tells us, that Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, nor (which is somewhat beyond
what is contained in the expression of the Prophet Esaias) have those things
entered into the heart of Man, that God has prepared for those that love Him.

The Eye of a man that is gentile and curious sees much, and the Ear of the
same Man hears much more than his Eye ever saw, and his Fancy conceives
beyond them both: But the heart of a Man, if we take it for his will and
Desires, enlarge themselves infinitely and exceed all. For a man may will and
desire all happiness indefinitely, even that which he never saw, nor perfectly
conceived: But the things that God has prepared for those that love Him are so
great, and contain so much of Happiness and delight, that St Paul affirms,
they have not entered into the Heart, certainly not into the imaginative part,
and it may be not perfectly into the appetitive part of the soul of Man.

But suppose that St Paul spoke only of the understanding, Fancy, or
Imaginative faculties, when He says, that the Glories of Heaven have not
entered upon man's heart. It is surely a very high commendation of that Glory
(which Christ has purchased and prepared for his servants, and which the
spirits of just men made perfect shall enjoy in Heaven) when he tells us,
that it is greater than any that our external or internal senses, greater
than any that our animal or rational faculties can apprehend, more great more
perfectly excellent, than did ever enter into the understanding or Imagination
of Man.

Great surely are the riches and ample is the dominion of Nature; But greater
and more ample that of human Fancy, The enjoyments in Nature great.
there are Beauties of Art and Nature to please the Eye, There are the delicate
Enchantments of Voices and other Music to delight and Ravish the Ear. Nature
for the Taste has afforded us variety of pleasant meats and drinks, and the
studied and Curious Arts of Luxury have found out many more. Every sense has
its entertainments fitted for it; and the world is not so poor, but that there
is somewhat what in it to answer almost every Fancy and every appetite of Man.

In the City there is wealth. In the court there is rich apparel, the
graceful Mien, gallantry and glory. In the University there is learning and
good Natured men, there is that great pleasure of wise and excellent
Conversation. With Counselors there is civil prudence, with Commanders there
is courage and Conduct, with other professions other excellencyes to be
admired. There are in the world Royalties, Primacies, Principallities, Empires,
for such as are ambitious of them. But which are of ten thousand times more
value than all that I have mentioned, There are yet further such precious
seize to be had even here below, as virtue and the inchoate grace of God,
inchoate I say, for in heaven only shall our virtues and our Graces, together
with our glory, be made perfect.

These and many other enjoyments and delights there are which have been
respectively seen by the Eye, or heard of by the Ear, or apprehended by Man.
And though few men have attained to all or the most part of these, Yet a man in
his heart or mind, by the consideration of the parts, may without difficulty
conceive all these great delights to meet in one and the same person.

And further, it is at least conceivable, that all those pleasures may continue
with Him, and with his children and descendents in his sight any finite number
of years, even the greatest that can be counted by Arithmetic, and even what
he cannot conceive or understand with his Mind, he may indefinitely wish for or
desire with his heart as an unknown Happiness.

But if we take up in the narrower Interpretation and confine this word Heart
to the Understanding faculties, It must needs be confess't that it were a
strange portentous state of delight and Glory, if all these known and
conceiveable parts of Happiness should thus accrue to any one in particular;
and indeed it would be so great, that rightly to conceive this Estate, if it
were only as great as any that can enter into the understanding of Man, one had
need of a knowledge not only like that of Solomon, comprehensive of the Nature
and use of all plants, or of any one Species of things, but of the Nature and
advantages of all Objects whatsoever, and so rather like that of the first Man
Adam, who knew all the Excellencies of all the Creatures, and gave them names
accordingly.

But yet St Paul tells us (which is the consideration that I would enforce)
That even such an Estate, it being seen with the Eye, and heard of by the Ear,
and having entered into the heart of Man, is of a much baser and lower Nature,
than is the true Est te of that Grace and Glory, which the Blessed in Heaven
shall be possessed of. Adam himself who knew so much of the Nature of all
things, yet knew not perfectly the Glory of this estate, and St Paul, who, in
his rapture into the third Heaven, saw it, yet confesses that it was
unspeakeable.

And here he does not only tell us from the Prophet Esaias, that Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, but he adds, nor have those things entered into the heart
of Man, that God has prepared for those that love him. They are greater than
his mind can fully comprehend, and it may be greater than ever his heart did
distinctly or perfectly desire.

There is, I confess, some doubt concerning the sense of this Text, 1 Cor.
2.9. explained.
and what writing it is that St Paul does here cite in this place. For he
says, It is written, Eye has not seen, Nor Ear heard. Vide Drusium, Zegerum,
Grotium, etc. in 1 Cor. 2.9.
The critics generally assert from ancient and grave Testimonies that in the
Apocryphal books of the Prophet Eliah, the words here cited by St Paul are
found, and are willing to refer us thither for them. And Grotius affirms,
that the Jewish Rabbis have such a common proverb or sentence as this, which
they do also expound of the future life. This we may be sure of, that if St
Paul here cites the Apocryphal books of Eliah, or any other of the old
Jewish writings, that He commends what he cites, and has given it a
countenance and Authority by that Citation: And why may he not do that to the
Jewish writings, which he has done things well written by the Heathen Poets.
Acts 17 28. Tit. 1.12.


But it seems to me more probable, that the marginall references in our
English Bibles direct us not amiss, when they refer us to the Text read unto
you out of the 64th chapter of Esaias, where it is said v. 1. by way of prayer for
the second Advent or Glorious coming of Christ in Judgment: Oh that thou
would rend the Heavens, that thou would come down, that the Mountains
might flow down at thy presence. As when the melting fire burns, the fire
causes the liquors to boil, etc. We believe that at the end of the world
there shall be a general conslagration of all things, when not the mountains
of the Earth only, but the Elements of Heaven also shall melt with fervent
heat, And it is not improbable that the Prophet may intend that conflagration
when he makes this prayer, and then the sense will be, Oh that the great day of
doom were come, when all the mountains of the Earth shall burn and smoke, at
another rate than Mount Sinai did at the giving of the Law! At that time one or
two Mountains smoked and were ready to flow down before his presence. The
conflagration of the world in order to the purgation of its matter.
But oh when will that time come, when the whole systeme of Nature shall be
melted down and flow together in its own infinite space as in a great melting
Furnace? For this is the Operation that must pass through the mighty hand of
God, that so the feculent Matter of this world may be purged of its dross and
rust, and be made a fit material, for the new Heaven and the new Earth, and
the new Jerusalem, that God shall then prepare for those that love him. He
proceeds then to show the Reason why he desired this dissolution of all things,
namely, that it might make way for a better Resurrection. For, says he (ver.
4.) since the beginning of the world Men have not heard nor perceived by the
Ear, Nor has Eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for those
that wait upon him: So that the sum of the sense is but this, Oh that this
world might be dissolved and melted down, that we might arise into a new and
better world, even into that Glory, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard: For
such a Glory has God provided for those that wait upon Him.

But this text, as it extends not our heavenly Glory, as St Paul does, to be
beyond the comprehension of the heart; So there is a Parenthesis in it not
mentioned by St Paul, For it is said, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, O God
(besides thee) what he has prepared. Rabbis affirm that from the state of
the Messiah they were to learn the image of their future glory.
But this parenthesis (besides thee) was not omitted by St Paul, because
dissagreeable from his doctrine. For even (according to the Rabbinicall
Interpretation) this text together with the Parenthesis, will agree with the
Analogy of St Paul's doctrine, and that of the christian Faith. For this was
hence the Notion of learned Men among the Jews, that in the future life there
was for good men a state of great glory provided, but that they were to take
the Image of their future Glory from what should happen to the person of the
Messiah; so that according to their doctrine we must make this paraphrase of
this 4th v. O God the son, our Savior and Messiah (For to him this whole
prayer seems to be address't) Besides thee, that is, besides the evidence and
pattern of our Resurrection and glory that we have in thee; we, as yet, see
not, nor can we understand what he, that is, what God the Father has prepared
for those that wait upon him. Ben Maimon the most judicious of their Rabbis
tells us, that it was the Intention of the Prophet Esaias here to declare that
the glory of the world to come cannot be comprehended by Corporeal senses;
and that his Brethren, the Hebrew doctors, make this to be the sense of the
Text, that the Prophets only exhibit and declare the state of the Messiah and
his Glory, and that from him must be taken the Image of the glory in the world
to come. So, says he, Seculum futurum sensibus corporeis nequaquam apprehendi
indicat Propheta hocipsius dicto, Oculus non vidit, O Deus, praeter te, quid
faciat expectanti ipsum. Ad quod explicandum dixerunt Magistri, Omnes propherae
universim non prophetarunt nisi de diebus Messiae. At quod ad Mundum futurum,
Oculus non vidit, praeter Te, etc. Maimonides in poria Mosis Pocockiana, p.
154. and in p. 150. Neque voluptas illa in parts distribuitur, neque enarrati
potest, neque reperitur similitudo aliqua quacum comparati possit, verum uti
dixit Propheta, ejus magnitudinem admiratus quam magna est bonitas tua, quam
obscondisti Timentibus Te, etc. ib.
they interpret this text, Eye has not seen, O Lord, besides thee, what God
has prepared for those that wait upon Him, that is in short, Men know no more
of Heavenly glory than what they learn by those things that God has declared
concerning the exaltation of the Messiah.

And we have no reason to contradict this Exposition of the Rabbis, though of
the Jewish Religion and not of ours, seeing it is a Gospel Truth, that the
Image of our Resurection is the Resurrection of Christ, The Image of our Glory
is the Glory of Christ, we have no manifestation of what we shall be, but such
as arises from the consideration of what He is: And so we may truly say in
their sense, Eye has not seen, O Christ, Nor Ear heard, besides thee, what God
has prepared for those that wait upon Him. St John tells us 1 John 3.2. that
it does not yet appear what we shall be, but this we know, that when our Lord
Christ shall appear we shall be like unto Him. He shall change our vile body
and make it like unto his own glorious body according to that mighty working
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself.

There is another doubt also objected from that Parathesis or addition of St
Paul, But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. For how can it be said
that the things that God has prepared for his servants have not entered into
the heart of Man, when Christians are men, and it is added that God has
revealed them to us Christians by his Spirit.

This parathesis therefore must be justly not strictly interpreted, For it is
true, that God has revealed them now much more than formerly; He has revealed
them by his Spirit, but he has not revealed them fully, not so that St Paul
himself could, while he lived here, adequately conceive the Nature of those
heavenly Glories. It is most true that since our Savior preached the doctrine
of the new Testament, and since the gift of the Spirit which has raised Man
above his Nature and since the Transfiguration, resurrection and Ascension of
Christ, which are patterns of what shall happen to all Gods servants, Now the
existence of the future state of Glory is more fully confirmed, and its nature
much better understood, than it was by those who lived in the former Ages; when
they had no light but from the letter of Moses, whose writings were dark in
this point, or from the Prophets, or from the more uncertain Faith and
Tradition of the Gentiles. And yet notwithstanding the great advancement of our
knowledge in this particular, It is not so advanced as to render this text
untrue; it is not so advanced as that we may persectly know them. For his
Rapture into the third Heaven taught St Paul himself, that those Joys are yet
unspeakeable, and that Humane Nature is yet incapable adequately to conceive
them. They are so great, that Eye has not seen them, Ear has not heard them,
nor have they ever so entered into the heart of Man as to be perfectly and
fully conceived by Him.

When our Savior was taken up into Heaven from amidst his disciples in Mount
Olivet, Act. 1.
and a Cloud had received him out of their sight, they continued still
steadfastly looking toward Heaven, but were reproved by the Angels in these
Words, Ye men of Galilee why stand you gazing up into Heaven? Words, my
Brethren, that we may nost properly apply to the present figure of our own
thoughts, we have been looking not toward Heaven only, but upon Heaven it
self, until in the midst of our gazing we have lost it. Only we cannot so
properly say that a Cloud, as that a sunbeame, or at least a very bright Cloud,
has received it out of our sight. For we find that Heaven is so wrapped up in
its own glory, that there is no perfect entrance left to the Eye of our
understanding.

Let us therefore apply to our selves that Angelical advice, and stand no more
gazing into Heaven. It is proper for us in this case to do as the disciples
did, to have away to our upper Rooms, First to our prayers, then to our work;
But for our Encouragement we may cast an Eye upon the great Reward that God
has provided for us, We may consider so much of Heaven as is revealeable to
us, and believe further, and expect beyond all that those incomprehensible
Glories that are to be enjoyed with Christ above. Nay let us believe and give
thanks for it, that there are joys prepared for us that are not now
revealeable, and though we can form no Idea or conceit of them; yet let us
rejoice and give thanks unto God that there are joys prepared for us, and for
all Religious and good Men with us, of which we can form no Idea. Christ has
merited this belief of the world that we should think him able to perform his
promises, to raise us from the dead and to glorify us with that glory, which I
have endeavored to describe, but have been oppress't in my endeavor by the
weight of my undertaking, finding the excellent glory and happiness of that
Estate to be incomprehensible and ineffable. He that raised Jairus his daughter
and the Widows son, and Lazarus and (which is most of all) himself from the
dead, whatsoever Atheists may speak of the Incredibility of that Resurrection,
shall certainly raise us also. I hope by Gods help to give you an account of
the Reasonableness of the Christian faith in that article at some other time.
But we that profess Religion, profess to believe our Resurrection as
certainly as we believe our death. I know that my redeemer lives, says Job,
Job 19.25, 26.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, and though after my
skin worms destroy this Body, yet in my flesh shall I sce God, etc. And I
know, says Martha, that my Brother shall rise again in the Resurrection at the
last day, John 11.24.

I shall now add but one advice more, which is this: that as we have
Evangelicall expectations, so we should take the Evangelicall directions, that
we would endeavor to rise to newness of life here, that we may rise to
eternal Glory hereafter. Let the Doctrine of our Resurrection to eternal life
have its perfect work, so the full belief and actual consideration of this one
Article of eternal life, or eternal misery to come, may by the grace of God,
minister to us Christians in giving obedience to our Lord, that which we
sometimes complain so much for the want of, even a power to do all things
through Christ that strengthens. There is no Duty (says Dr Jackson)
whereunto the belief of this eternal Reward does not enable and bind us. If we
do not live in some measure agreeable to our profession and the hopes of our
profession, we shall be in the End condemned by it: and in the mean time we
betray it openly, that there is now a defect in that principle that should be
within us, or in the exercise of that Principle, that is, we believe not, or
we consider not, For what says St John, every one that has this hope
purifieth Himself even as God is pure, 1 John. 3.3. And therefore he that does
not purify Himself, He is but a pretender to this Hope, He has it not at all
well grounded in Him, or at least he has it not in actual exercise and
Employment. For if there be such a Hope, unless it be very sleepy, if it be a
lively and a quick Hope, it must be the spring of a Christians joy and glory,
in comparison of which He will contemn all the Riches, all the Honors, all the
Pleasures of this world as dross and dung. And there is reason for this
preference, because as St Paul does more than once assert, so great is the
glory that shall be revealed, that to it nothing in this present world is
worthy to be compared. It was the Hope of this Happiness that made the
primitive Christians leap into the Flames and suffer Martyrdom with joy. Now
though we, through the Mercy of God, have no flames of Martyrdom to seap into,
yet we may take this note from the Psalmist (Psalm. 125.) that those who are
said to return with joy had a Time of going on their Way weeping and bearing
good seed; or this from St John, That the Bride must have her wedding Garments
prepared before hand. She must not be like the foolish Virgins, she must not be
to provide her Ornaments when her wedding Hour is come. She must be arrayed in
Fine linen and this Fine linen is the Righteousness of the Saints, Revel.
19. We must know that Christians are to be arrayed not only with the
Righteousness of Saints inherent. We may learn from St Paul 1 Cor. 9. That
those who obtain this Crown of Glory in Heaven are temperate in all things, and
prepare themselves before hand, and then also run and strive that they may
obtain. For it is so ordained that no man shall come to that great glory either
with the assistance and Grace of God, or without his own faithful Endeavor,
Complement alone will never do it: Our Savior has protested, Matthew. 7.25. That
not every One who professes this Religion, Not every one who says unto Him,
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he only who does the
will of his Father which is in Heaven.

Now to the king of Heaven, and to the Lord our Righteousness by whose merits
only we can have Entrance into that kingdom, and to the Spirit of Holiness,
who can only give us title to those merits, etc.

SERMON. IV. Of Happiness in Heaven showing, In Opposition to the Atheist, The
Reasons why we believe Rewards and punishments in another life. The Immortality
of the Soul. The Resurrection of the Body.


I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob: God is
not the God of the dead, but of the living.

Math. 22.23. ACTS 26.8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible, that GOD
should raise the Dead?


AS the Fear of that Punishment, The Hope of the Resurrection of the Body and
life everlasting the greatest Encouragement to Virtue.
that God has prepared for Wicked men, is apt to deter them from the
continual practices of Vice: So the Christians Hope of the Resurrection of the
Body and everlasting life in Heaven is the greatest encouragement to the
Exercise of Religion and virtue. I have already showed you the excellence and
Glory of that Estate which we Hope for: and in the next place I think it may
be seasonable in Opposition to the Atheists of our Time to clear unto you the
foundation of this Hope, namely the Credibility of the Resurrection it self,
which I propose to do in this method.

First to show you that from Natural Reason much has been granted toward our
faith in this particular.

Secondly, that the world had reason to receive, and we have reason still to
continue the belief of the doctrine of our Savior delivered us in this Article.

All this I mean to do as it were historically by giving you the ancient state
of the doctrine delivered in it, and some of the old arguments that continued
this belief against the Atheistical Reasonings of former Ages: And these old
arguments of proof, that have withstood the Batteries of Atheism hitherto I am
not only contented with, but indeed I prefer them before those fine, but
untried ones, of New Invention. The existence of the law of Nature argues
rewards and punishments in another life, because they are not equally
distributed in this.


First this was part of the Natural Man's creed, that there shall be hereafter
in another life, time and place for Bliss and Punishment. This all considering
persons have argued from the Notions of the Law of Nature that men generally
find implanted in them. If a law (say they) then there must be a Reward and
Punishment; else that Law will be to no purpose. But we find a Law written in
our Hearts, and yet virtue has not its Reward, (...), etc. apud Platodem in
Phaed.
nor vice its Punishment allwaies in this life, and therefore it must be looked
for in another. How many vicious livers are there, who have escaped correction
from all Mortal Men? and how many poor virtuous persons have there been, who
for their general practice of virtue and patience in Honesty and upright
dealing have received nothing but Envy, Reprocah, Despite and Oppression in
this life? V. Plutarchum de sera numinis vindicta. Platonem in Gratillo and
Gorgia.
and therefore we argue now, as they did anciently, that there is wanting that
Order and providence in the Government of the Rational world, that is visible
in all things of lesser moment, unless, as we believe, there shall be indeed
another life, wherein according to our merits we may receive Rewards and
punishments. And upon this Expectation Solid and Wise Men still held that the
Practice of Honesty, and the Observance of the Laws of Nature were to be
defended and preferred even before the preservation of their present lives.
Which had been irrational and foolish for them to have done, had they been
without a Reasonable Hope of a just Recompense in another life. Secondly,
another thing that we have received from Arguments of natural and Human Reason
is the doctrine of the Immortality of our Souls. And since the Soul according
to the Platonique and Peripateticall, and all other Philosophy, Detrchere
aliquid alteri, and hominis incommodo suum augere commodum, magis est contra
Naturam quam Mors, quam paupertas, quam dolor, etc. apud Ciceronem de Off. 3.
Ad Carthaginem rediit Regulus, cum neque ignorabat se ad crudelissimum hostem
atque exquisita supplicia prosicisci, quod Fidem servandam putabat. Cicero eod.

Justum and tenacem propositi virum,
Non civium ardor prova jubentium,
Non vultus instantis Tyranni,
Mente qualit solida.
Si fractus illabatur Orbis,
Impavidum ferient ruinae.
Hac art Pollux, and vagus Hercules
Innixus, arces attigit igneas, etc. apud Horatium carm. lib. 3. Ode. 3.

is the great constituent Principle of our Being and Individuation, if that be
granted to be immortal, it must be granted that the greatest and most
considerable part of every Individual Man is immortal, And this will well
conduce to expedite our other doctrine concerning the credibility of the
Resurrection of the same Body.

It is most true, Mr Hobbes's opinion considered.
that the Author of the Leviathan affirms that Men, before the time of our
Savior, were generally possess't of an Opinion, Leviathan. p. 4. p. 340.
that the souls of Men were substances distinct from their Bodies, and
therefore that when the Body is dead, the Soul of every Man whether godly or
wicked must subsist somewhere by virtue of its own Nature: But it is as untrue,
that the same Author in the same place affirms, That this doctrine concerning
the Immortality of the Soul was an error that sprang from the Demonology of the
Greeks. For in truth, these doctrines were so distinct and independent one upon
another, The doctrine of the Souls immortality sprang not from the Demonologie
of the Greekss.
that the greatest deriders of the Greek Demonology were the greatest and most
cordial assertors of the Immortality of the Soul. Such was the famous Socrates
in particular, whose principal Accusation was, That He made himself and his
Scholars sport by deriding the Gods worshipp't in Greece. And this his crime
was publicly presented upon the stage, so as to make Him odious to the People,
by Aristophanes in his Witty comedy that he calls his Clouds. And yet this
Socrates, who laughed at their Demonology so much, had the doctrine of the
Immortality of the Soul so fixed and rivetted in him, that, as all History
concerning Him consents, V. Platonis Phaed. Cicer. 1 Tusc. Quaest, Xenophontem,
etc.
the confidence of it made Him slight his present life and the favor of his
Tyrant judges, and choose to die that he might be possess't of that Immortality.

And that this general doctrine concerning the Immortality of the Soul was
founded not upon their Demonology, but upon good Arguments taken from the
Nature and Operations of the Soul it self, may be seen in Plato's Phaedrus,
and his Phaedo, and in Plotinus, and in Cicero and other Philosophers.

And to put this out of doubt, I shall give you a Taste of their arguments out
of Cicero, The ancient arguments for its immortality out of Cicero.
which (for the Reputation of ancient learning, let me speak it) I think are
strong enough to break the Opposition of our modern Wits, and in particular to
withstand the force of the great Leviathan.

Animorum, Cicero. in Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.
says he, nulla in terris Origo inveniri potest: Nihil enim in animis mixtum
aut ex terra natum atque fixum esse videatur, Flabile aut igneum, male vulgo
leg. stabile aut igneum.
nihil aut humidum aut flabile aut igneum. His Conclusion is this, that the
Soul has not its Original from any of the Elements, nor from the Fire, nor
from the Air, that is flabile and Spirituous, nor from the moist Water, nor
from the fixed Earth, nor from a mixture of all these. His enim Naturis nihil
inest quod Vim Memoriae, mentis, cogitationis habeat, There is nothing in any
of these Elements that is capable of doing those things that are ordinarily
performed by the memory, the understanding and thoughts of Men. We will pursue
the first Instance of his concerning Memory. Let therefore Mr Hobbes, or any
other of our new Wits, show how an Elementary Body or any part of it, that is
in perpetual Flux, should retain the memory of things done long since, it may
be sixty or seventy years ago. A River that is allwaies running may as well
keep an Impression figured upon the surface of the Water by a seal, as the Body
of Man that never continues the same for one day can retain those infinite
impressions, that every Man remembers without alteration or difference; when
this Body and all its Elementary parts (wherein these memoires are supposed to
inhere) is in so perpetual a Flux, that they never are the same entirely for
the least time that is considerable. All our modern Men and virtuoso's grant
this transient Nature of the Elementary parts of the Body, and that what thus
daily and hourly perishes, is daily and hourly supplied with fresh
Nourishment. Seeing therefore the Elementary parts of our Bodies are allwaies
flying of and never continue fixed, our ancient men of learning such as
Pythagoras, Heraclitus, Socrates and Plato and Cicero and the Arabique and
other Philosophers after them, argued, See the arguments of Avicen and
Ibnalcatib in Raymundi Martini Pug. Fidei. p. 1. c. 4.
that not the fluxile part of this transient Body, but an Independent and
Immateriall soul must be the subject of Human Memory. For Memory or any other
Faculty, Action or other Accident cannot be supposed to inhere in a subject
that cease to be, or to endure long, when the parts of the Body supposed to
be its subject are of very short continuance.

And if the Acts of memory which is Tullye's first instance cannot be performed
by Elementary Bodies alone, (...). Vide Plotin. Ennead. 4. l. 7. c. 6.
imointeger lib. (...).
much less can those curious and intricate Acts of Reason and discourse, by
which a man not only remembers single propositions, but corrects Notions, and
deriveth arguments; and therefore Cicero concludes, as the learned did before,
and the learned have done ever since, that there is an extraordinary singular
and divine being within us, somewhat above our commun and Elementary Natures,
that is able to perform these Acts.

And surely all the Industry and Endeavors of our modern Philosophers to
explain or prove the contrary are utterly in vain. The explication of those
that make Souls corporeal impersect.
Great is the power of wit and learning, but weigh their Wit and learning in
the Balance, and in this attempt all their wit and learning will be found
defective. For suppose we grant, (to comply with the latest and best of them)
that there are all those chambers in the Brain, that he there most ingeniously
delineateth. Glaze those chambers with all variety of Dioptrick Glasses that
shall be useful to the Operations designed, Let the Nerves serve as so many
Tubes to carry in the Images of all sensible Objects, Let those images pass
through the Corpus striatum, and let that, whatsoever be objected concerning
its incapacity to that purpose serve instead of an Objective Glass. Finally
through that objective Glass, let all the Images conveied and represented be
laid down upon the Corpus callosum as upon a white Table. Here is, you see, a
great deal supposed, and if we could have any competent evidence all this were
true, yet we were not much the nearer: For the main questions concerning the
manner of sensation, Fancy and memory, do still remain unexplained. For it is
still unresolved how Light or Fire or Air or any Elementary Body, which appear
to us in all other cases to be dead and insensible Beings, can within the Brain
be so much advanced as to be quite other things and execute such high and noble
Offices of sensation, conception and giving judgment concerning those
Representations: And suppose further we grant that the figures represented upon
the Corpus Callosum may by some secret undulations be cast into the folds of
the Brain, and that in these folds Memory and reminiscence is performed. Yet
here the main Questions concerning Memory remain still unexplained, Namely, how
notwithstanding the continued wasting of the parts of the Brain, and the supply
of fresh parts in their Room, and notwithstanding the confluence of all the
vast variety of new Impressions, yet the memory of the same things continues so
many years, if there be nothing but a transient Elementary matter to be the
subject of these Memories.

Secondly, it neither is, nor do I ever expect to see it, explained, how within
those Folds Light or Air or Fire or any Elementary Body should be able to
Remember or Recollect, when neither Fire nor Air nor Light, in any other place
ever appeared to have any Faculties in any particulars like those mentioned.
We believe there is a Soul of Man that goes upward, and the Soul of a beast
that goes downward. But let none of our Materialists in Philosophy boast, that
they have demonstrated how either of these Souls can perform its meanest
Operations, if (to speak in Opposition to the Elements) it be not a
Quintessence, somewhat above these Material Natures. His enim Naturis, I must
repeat Ciceroes words, Nihil inest quod vim Memoriae, Mentis, Cogitationis
habeat.

Another of Cicero's arguments is this, Quod sapit, Other old Arguments for the
souls immortality from its simplicity, causality of its own motions, and
longings after eternity.
divinum est, To be wise implies a high and noble Intellect, and is a faculty
fit not for a corporeal and Elementary but for an excellent pure and simple
essence, and if it be not of an Elementary but of a pure and simple Nature, it
must consequently be eternal. Dubitare non possumus, quin nihil sit animis
admixtum, nihil copulatum, nihil duplex, quod cum ita sit, certe nec secerni,
nec dividi, dec discerpi, nec distrahi potest: Nec interi. re igitur Est enim
Interitus quasi discessus and secretio, and direptio, earu^ partiu^, quae ante
interitum junctione aliqua teneban. tur. Cicero Tusc. Quaefi. lib. 1.
It is not to be doubted says he, that the Soul is an incomplex't Being, such
a one, as is not mixed nor joined nor doubled in its composure. Which being so,
the parts of it can never be divided or severed one from another: and
consequently it can never dye, because Death is but a separation of those parts
that before Death were in conjuncture. Other Arguments he has for the
Immortality of the Soul, as that the Soul is the principle of its own Motion,
and so moves it self, and therefore, seeing nothing can be deserted of it
self, the soul can never dye nor cease to move, as the Body does, which
therefore dies because it is deserted of the Principle of its Motion, which is
the soul. That the soul has native Breathings and longings after Eternity
implanted in it, And that those Breathings and longings are not in vain: since
God and Nature made nothing in vain. Such are the arguments that were anciently
used on this subject. And let no Man here object the Operations of beasts; For
it is demonstrable that they are of a kind vastly inferior to ours, and
therefore we judge their souls to be so too. And truly many considering Men
will rather think the Souls of beasts somewhat above Elementary, which we
understand not, and own with Socrates our imperfect knowledge, than that such
Operations as are performed by the Minds of Men should be the product of
Elementary matter only. For surely our modern Materialists, who are the
Philosophers in Fashion, have been so far from showing how the Operations of
the Souls of Men may be performed by such matter, that they have not given any
sufficient satisfaction, how it is possible that by such matter and local
Motion alone the actions of bruit beasts may be elicited.

But enough has been said to make it evident beyond all contradiction, That
the doctrine of the Souls Immortality was not built upon the Daemonology of the
Greeks, but was received and continued from Reasons drawn from the
consideration of its own Nature, Motions and Operations. And Mr Hobbes should
do well to answer those Reasons and to show the credibility of his own
Hypothesis, seeing He has exceeded the Atheism not only of the ancient
heretics in Philosophy, but of all pretenders to it, in this last and most
Atheistical Age. For he and those of his Clubbe make the human Soul to be
little or Nothing, but a Modus Entis at best, a kind of Motion of some parts of
an Organized Body, somewhat like that Harmony of parts to which some compared
the soul anciently, and stand confuted for their pains by Plato and other
Philosophers. And as if it had been a small matter to corrupt Philosophy, he
has done worse and has showed his endeavor to abuse Divinity also: when he
levells the sense of Scripture to that of his own Philosophy, and when he
tells us that the Soul in our Saviors words does not signify any such
distinct and immortal substance as the erroneous world believes it to be, but
only the life, that is in his sense, the Motion of an organized Body; that the
Body and Soul, when spoken of together, signify the Body alive, that is, the
Body in its Organicall Motions.

But all his Wit and Learning will never be able to draw the holy Scriptures to
favor the impious Hypothesis of his Philosophy. If there be no such thing as
Spirit, Mr Hobbes misinterprets the scripture which speaks of the soul as
independent from the body.
or incorporeall substance, that may inform us if the Soul so much spoken of
be nothing but a Modus Entis, the motion or harmony of the Body, it was neither
safe, nor wise, nor good advise that our Savior gave his Disciples, when he
commanded them thus; Fear not them that kill the Body, but are not able to kill
the Soul, but rather fear Him, who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in
Hell. For if the Soul were only the Motion or Harmony of the Parts of the Body,
he that should kill the Body must needs spoil the Harmony, or motions of it
also, and consequently must be able to destroy the Soul too. As he who breaks
the Lute must needs spoil all its Music for ever after. It is plain therefore
that our Savior speaks of the Soul as of a Being independent from the Body, so
likewise when his Body was upon the cross and lay under the cruelty of his
deadly Enemies, he commended his Soul to God as that which was above their
reach. The like did his first Martyr St Stephen, and all his holy Martyrs, and
all good Christians ever since have at their Deaths commended their souls to
God, as that which is distinct and independent from their perishing Bodies. And
yet this doctrine concerning the Independence, Immateriality and Immortality of
the Soul, was, as I have showed, no peculiar doctrine of Christianity, but was
received generally upon good grounds before; and the Gospel ownes it as true
and well confirmed, and adds to it (that which the Jews believed also,) the
Doctrine concerning the Resurrection of the Body.

This Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body has been spoken against by many
Atheists as a thing incredible. To show you therefore that the Christians were
not fools, who ever have believed it, and that we do nothing unreasonable in
continuing this Belief; V. Greg. Nyssenum de Hominis Opificio. c. 25. etc.
I shall show you the Reasons of the Christian faith in this very particular,
as they were anciently represented by St Gregory Nyssene, and that with very
little alteration of my own.

It has been observed by learned Men among the Heathen, V. scripta de
Phlegonte scriptore Ethnico lib. Annal: citato apud Origin. lib. 2. contra
Celsum sub Initium. (...), etc. ib.
that never any one foretold things so certainly to come, or that were so
punctually and precisely accomplished, as were the predictions and Prophecies
of our Savior; and such were those particularly concerning the Persecution of
the Christians and the Ruin of the Jewish Temple and Nation. For there was in
Reason no probability of either. Judaea was, we know, safe then under the
Roman Government, and the whole world quietly sat down in peace under the same
Empire. The Romans interposed not in matters of Religion as appeared in all St
Paul's Trials before Roman Magistrates. It was therefore a strange unlikely
Prophesy that Jerusalem, achief city in a Roman province, Origenes in illud,
(...).
should shortly be encompassed with Armies, and thereupon fall into utter
Desolation, or that the Calamity should fall so greivously upon childbearing
Women, that this should be taken up as a Proverb, Blessed are the barren that
never bare, and the Paps that never gave Suck. Yet Jerusalem was in the Eyes of
that generation so besieged and reduced to that Calamity by Famine, that, as
we read in Josephus, an honorable Woman was found eating her own child, and
surely then if ever was a time for the daughters of Jerusalem to weep and to
use that saying, Blessed are the barren that never bare. It is also observed by
some that as to the manner of that utter desolation of the Temple our Savior
foretold it even to the most minute Circumstances, as that in the ruin of it,
Origin. lib. 2. contra Celsum v. and Nyssenum loco ^cit. nec non Josephum do
bello Judaico lib. 7. cap. 6, 7, 8, ad 16. Luke 23.28, 29. Act. 18.12, 13, etc.
V. Matthew. 13.2.
there should not one stone be left upon another that should not be thrown down
and plucked asunder, as the Original word signifies. Quis sine admiratione hoc
tremendum Demini dictum legere potest, qui meminerit a Josepho scriptu^, (...),
etc. and illud quod paulo post sequitur, (...): adeo omnia solo adaequata, ut
ne vestigia quidem pristinae ullius habitationis relicta fuerint. Igitur Titus
Alexandria revertens cum complanata omnia videret lach^ymas continere non
potuit, etc. lege 15. caput l. 7. (...) apud Josephum. Nemo ignorant Romanorum
morem fuisse complanato urbium rebellium Solo aratrum inducere. Vere igitur
Mors Jerosolymorum fuit inducto illi aratro. Quod nec vetustissimi Judaei
ignorant, qui non solum aratrum templo impressum fuisse terhibent. sed etiam
nomen ejus, qui aratrum impressit in monimentis suis retinent. Turannum Rufum
vocant, etc. apud Scaligerum Canon Isagog l. 3. ev 11 ad excidium Templi. p.
311.
All which was full-fild to a tittle: for we read that one Turannus Rufus
plowed up the very foundations of that magnificent Temple, and so severed every
stone therein; and yet neither the Emperor Titus, as abundantly appears in
the history of Josephus, had originally any design to Ruin Jerusalem, nor any
other Roman any respect to, but a hatred against Christ and his Gospel, whose
Prophesies notwithstanding by the overruling providence of God they were
wrought to fulfill.

Now (as the Father, V. Nyssenum ubi supra.
whose Discourse I follow, well observes) when all the predictions and many
others of different kinds were strangely fullfill'd in the Eyes of the World.
Christ's predictions miraculously fulfilled are arguments that his doctrine
concerning the Resurrection shall be fulfilled also.
Men of Reason had just cause to think well of all other doctrines that Christ
had delivered; especially of his principal and fundamental ones among which
none was more considerable than this, That an eternal Happiness both of Body
and Soul was to be obtained by Faith and Obedience to the Gospel.

That our Savior was able to raise the dead, and to perform all that he had
promised he proved by his doing many miracles, great and wonderful,
confessedly exceeding all human power. He healed the sick daily: But it is one
thing to heal the sick, and another thing to raise the Dead; and therefore to
evidence his Allmighty power in that particular, It is believed that he delaied
the time of his coming to diverse sick persons, and suffered them to die, that
being dead He might glorify his power, and give some instance of his ability to
work the great and last Resurrection. So when Jairus came to him for his
daughter, Mark 5. He suffered himself to be staid in healing the Woman that had
the Issue of blood, till news was brought that the daughter was dead, and so
now in such a case, that nothing but the Resurrection of the dead could cure
her, and therefore it was advised that he should now desist from troubling the
Master. But in truth our Master staid to good purpose, not only to cure the
poor Woman with the hemme of his Garment, but to cure all us of our Infidelity,
and to have the Opportunity of working a Miracle, that must needs convince
those incredulous persons, of whom he there spoke, that except they saw signs
and wonders they would not believe. Dead therefore though she was, He spoke but
the Word Talitha Cumi, Damsel arise; and the Damsel arose and walked.

In the case of the Widows son, which is reported in the 7th chapter of St
Luke, He delayed a little longer, and as he made the case more difficult, so he
made his power and mercy more conspicuous. There was a Man dead, a young Man of
an untimely death. He was a son, an only son, the only son of a Widow. He was
her joy, all her hopes, all her desires. When he was gone all was gone with her.
She loved him when alive, and when dead (as that Father whom I follow
conjectures,) she embraced and hovered over his Corpse and kept it to mourn over
it as long as it could be kept. But when it could be kept no longer, she
submitted to the misfortune of her condition, and went with the whole company
of her neighbors to see him interred with decency and kindness. He stayed till
his corpse was brought to the very grave, without the Gates of the City, to the
Golgotha or commun place of sepulture there. When the case was thus desperate
and every one was concerned for the irreparable loss of the poor Widow. He
thought it then a fit time to comply with the commun pity, and therefore he
met the Widow in her Tears, he had compassion on her. He said unto her, Weep
not, he touched the Beer and he spoke those powerful Words, (...), young man
arise, and he that was dead sat up, and he delivered him to his Mother. This
was confess't to be the hand of God, to be a great Miracle. It was life from
the dead to the Son, and little less to the but now disconsolate, now
wonderfully rejoiceing Mother. A greater miracle intended also to confirm the
same Truth was that of Lazarus. A work so great that the same Father takes
notice, that our Lord led his Disciples to Galilee on purpose that they might
see it, and by it be instructed in the Mystery of the Resurrection. It is
recorded by St John that when Jesus heard that Lazarus was sick, He abode still
two days in the place where he was: But when he was departed, our Lord spoke
thus to his Disciples, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes, that I
was not there that you may believe; and therefore he, took the Disciples with
Him and went to Bethany, and when he came there he preached the Resurrection. I
am, says he the Resurrection and the life, whosoever believes in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live, etc. And in process to prove his Doctrine,
Jesus, when he was come to the grave, bids them take away the stone: John 11.
Martha opposes it, alleging that certainly now the Corpse lay in stench and
putrefaction, and by reason of that it was not to be endured that Christ
should come near the Tomb: Vide Nyssenum ubi supra.
He had been dead 4 days, and therefore it was not to be doubted that the
Cadaverous ferment had swelled the Body, and that there had been a considerable
progress made in the Putrefaction. But she had but a rebuke for her care, and
our Savior after a prayer to God speaks those powerful words, Lazarus come
forth. And he that was dead came forth bound hand and foot with his grave
clothes, etc. This was a great Demonstration that the power of giving a
Resurrection to our putrified Bodies lay in Him, when he was able to cross
Nature in her Operation and to compel her to restore that to life that was not
only dead, as in the other instances of Jairus and the Widows son, but lying
in the midst of its putrescency, diffluency and stench.

There is but one thing that the most cautious and diffident persons could wish
to be added to make the Demonstration beyond Exception, and this our Savior was
aware of, you will, says he, surely say unto me this Proverb, Physician heal
thy self, Luke 4.23. Thou that raisest others raise thy self also: We will
destroy this Temple of your Body and if, (as you say) you can raise that in
three days, we will desire no further Argument, we will not any longer be
diffident, nor faithless, but we will believe, that you are, as you say, the
Son of God, and that you will raise the Bodies and glorify the Souls of all
that believe, and obey the Gospel that you Preach. There were some unbelieving
Scoffers that tenderd their faith upon a slighter condition, though they
thought even that Impossible. For while he was yet alive they made him this
offer, Let him but now come down from the Cross and we will believe. But he
had a Miracle to do much greater than that, and He must die upon the cross,
that he might be able to perform it. He dyed therefore, and rose again, and by
his Resurrection he gave the last fullest proof of his victory over death, and
his power to perform his promise in raising the dead universally at the last
day. This last Miracle convinced the most incredulous, even cautious and
diffident St Thomas. When he saw with his Eyes, that his Lord was risen indeed,
John 20.25.
the same Lord that he had before seen crucified, dead and buried, when he saw
the print of the nails that had fixed him to the cross, and the hole or Gash in
his side that was given him by the Soldiers spear, there was nothing left to
shelter his diffidence or unbelief.

Let no man therefore after all these Miracles, especially this last and
greatest of Christ's raising up himself, doubt of the power of our Lord or of
his faithfulness in raising of us all. He is both able and faithful that
promised. So St Paul expostulates, if Christ be raised from the dead, how say
some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead? 1 Cor. 15.12.
He spoke to Jairus his daughter but a word or two, Talitha Cumi, and she arose
from the dead; and no more to the said widows Son, but (...), young man arise,
and he arose, and no more to Lazarus, but (...), Lazarus come forth, Neither
the bonds of death, nor the diffluence and putrefaction of his corpse, nor those
other bonds by which in the Grave he was tied hand and foot, could hinder his
obedience to the overruling power of this Command.

Now at the last day the word shall not be to one Damsel, or one young Man,
or to one Lazarus, but to the whole Body of Mankind. The word shall be RISE
ALL, and the manner is thus described. When the number of the Elect shall be
fullfilled, and every man shall be born into the World that God has appointed
to Glorify, and when that time shall be fully come, the knowledge of which God
has reserved to himself, then the Lord Christ shall descend from Heaven with a
shout, and with the voice of an Archangell, and with the Trump of God. That
Trumpet shall sound to the Bottom of the Sea, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
and to the Center of the Earth and shall strike every atome of the whole
universe, and our dissolved Bodies in particular, into those several places
and stations that God has appointed them to fill, in the state of the
Resurrection. And when the command and warning is thus general the Resurrection
shall be so too, even as when his command was particular to Lazarus and the
rest, the Resurrection was particular also. What though our Bodies should be
burnt to ashes, and those ashes scattered into the Rivers or the Sea, as by
persecuting Princes in despite of the Christians God sometimes they have been,
What though they should be devoured by Canniballs, or by the beasts of the
field, or the fouls of the Air, or the fishes of the Sea, and those beasts,
fouls and fishes should again be eaten by other Men; Let the Atheist make what
supposition he will, yet every part of every Body will still be within the
Empire of God. No Canniball, nor beast, nor foul, nor fish ever converted the
whole Body of any Man to his own nourishment, and is it not more easy to raise
Bodies out of those remainders, than out of stones to raise children to
Abraham? And what if the same material fragments are not necessary to make us
the same Men? We have not the same material particles in our Bodies that we
had twenty years ago; and yet our soul which is the great Principle of
Individuation being the same, we judge our selves to be the same Men; and
though most of it may be, all our material parts are vanished and others
supply their places in that time, yet we think we are sure that our Bodies also
are still the same, and all the members of our Bodies continue still the same.

But if those parts or a great number of the same parts be necessary, It is
most true that St Gregory Nyssene observes, that every part of every Body will
still be within the Empire of God. St Greg. Nyss. de Hominis Opificio cap. 26,
27. Tom. 1. page 115. and deinceps. (...), etc. supra and infra.
Fury or Malice cannot so dissipate them nor Ravin so devour them, but that
every part of every Body will still be within the Compass of the World, and
God can as easily dispose those parts to their right owners, as a commun
herdsman, who keeps all the beasts of a Lordship in one herd, can when he
pleases distinguish them and send them to their particular masters and owners.

But seeing the Resurrection of the same Bodies must be wrought by the power of
God, It is fit that we should refer the particular manner, how our Bodies
shall be restored to the secret knowledge of God Himself. The thing we are not
to doubt, For to raise a Body out of some matter is less than to raise it out
of no matter at all. God out of stones can raise children to Abraham, and to
raise children implies, Matt. 3.9.
that He can give Relation as well as substance, and therefore that he cannot
only make bodies, but he can make them our Bodies, He can make them ours it may
be some otherways, but most probably by recollecting all or some of the same
particles, and uniting them and marrying them again in the Bonds of an eternal
wedlock to the same individual Soul and to the same identicall and numericall
faculties of Sensation, Fancy, Memory, Reason and the rest that we now enjoy.
For this is much more easy than to create; nay more easy than out of stones to
raise up children to Abraham, that is, to give substance and Relation where
there was none before.

Upon these grounds we receive the Gospel of our Lord, and having such
promises of God, we believe with St Paul that the committing of our Bodies to
the Grave is but the Solemn preparation for our future Crop and Harvest, 1
Cor. 15.
which God shall raise up unto us in that great day. We are assured that for
one grain of life which we part with here, we shall receive a hundred fold in
the life to come. V. 42.43. etc. ib.
For though the seed we now sow be a mortal and dying seed, yet it shall grow
up into an immortal and eternal life: So says St Paul, the Body is sown in
corruption, It is raised in incorruption, It is sown in Dishonor, It is raised
in Glory, It is sown in Weakness, It is raised in power, It is sown a
natural Body, It is raised a spiritual Body. This is the Catholic Christian
Faith, the truth of which has been confirmed to us by the greatest Miracles,
and which has prevailed in the End against all the Oppositions in all Ages of
the unreasonable unbelieving world.

If you desire to be satisfied how the doctrine of the Resurrection stood in
the Opinions of the Jews and Heathen. How the doctrine of the Resurrection was
received among the Jews.
We find first that among the Jews, the majority and indeed the best and
learnedest sects received it; and so did the Pharisees in particular. For which
they cited Daniell 12.2. and Job. 19.25, 26. but more especially against the
Sadduces (who receive only the books of Moses) they allege that promise to
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob. Exodus 6.4. concerning their Enjoyment of the Land of
Canaan, which because they enjoyed not in their lives past, It was argued that
there must be a Resurrection, that the promise of God may yet be fullfilled
unto them. And against the same Sadduces, who denied the being of Spirits and
the Resurrection, Matthew. 22.31. explained.
our Savior uses a like argument, Matt. 22.31. which because to some it
appears dark, I shall a little open it unto you. The Argument stands thus.
Long after Abraham's decease God has said, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaak
and of Jacob. See Exodus 3.6. And so much the Sadduces granted. To which our
Savior assumes, God is not the God of the dead but of the living, that is, God
is not, cannot in a just sense be said to be God of the dead, who are so dead
that they shall never live again, and therefore if he be the God of Abraham,
Isaak and Jacob; Abraham, Isaak and Jacob shall live again. This is an argument
though possibly not so clear as some others from some other Scriptures, yet as
clear as any that could be deduced from the books of Moses, which was the only
Scripture acknowledged by the Sadduces against whom our Savior there disputed.
Some Hebrew Rabbis, though Enemies to Christ, yet favor both this his
doctrine, and his particular Exposition of this Text. (so Aben Esra) For they
take these words I am the God of Abraham, etc. to contain a promise that
refers to the Resurrection. Grotius observes that these are words by which
God expresses the Covenant of his greatest Grace and kindness, as where he
says, I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. That their Notion of God
there implies that of a Rewarder and great Benefactor; and to be Abraham's God,
implies according to that Notion to be Abraham's great Benefactor, Friend and
Rewarder. Then they assume that the fulfilling of this promise happened not to
Abraham in this life, nor to Isaak or Jacob; For they lived here the lives but
of poor pilgrims, they received nothing excellent or particular from God, for
which God should be styled their God. And Death is a condition wherein they
could not receive this singular favor from Him. God cannot in this sense be a
God to persons that are dead and to continue dead. And therefore, if he will
show to Abraham, Isaak and Jacob any excellent and particular favor (which
seems to be intimated in the phrase of being their God) this must be showed in
another life, and consequently God must raise them up from the dead, Comp. Heb.
11.16. with Exodus 3.6.
that they may be made capable of it. And the Author to the Hebrews
interprets this phrase just as our Savior does that Abraham and the
Patriarchs by virtue of this promise expected a better Country, that is, an
heavenly. And he affirms that God is not ashamed to be called their God upon
this very account, because he has prepared them a City, intimating that his
preparing for his people a City in Heaven, a heavenly Jerusalem, is the very
thing that gives Him a title to be called their God.

Now the soul, as is above affirmed, being always immortal, and this promise
being made concerning the beatifying of their Bodies and rendering them glorious
in Heaven; in both respects, first in respect of what they always enjoy in
their Souls, and secondly in respect of the certainty of Gods promise
concerning the Resurrection of their Bodies, Abraham, Isaak and Jacob are
looked upon as being even now alive. If God be just the soul is immortal. For
Abraham and other good Men have not had their Recompense of Reward in this
life. Nay if God be indeed faithful and just, he will be a God to whole
Abraham, Body and Soul. We see (while it is in conjuncture) the Soul loves the
Body and would not willingly be parted from it; And it is all the Equity in the
world, that since the Bodies of Gods servants suffer much in Obedience to the
Soul and Spirit, they should be partakers of Glory with the Soul and Spirit.
God made the whole Man, and redeemed the whole Man, and every good Christian
gives unto God the whole Man, and therefore we may conclude that it is
agreeable to the goodness of God, to be kind to both parts body, and soul, and
equally to glorify the whole Man.

As to the Opinions of wise and rational Men among the Heathen, we find, as I
showed before, that they perfectly agree with ours concerning the soul of Man,
I cannot say as much in that other point concerning the Resurrection of the
Body, though some possibly among them have believed that also: And the
Principles of others do rather favor than contradict it. For this we have the
Authorities of St Augustine and St Gregory Nyssene. Gregory Nyssene tells us,
(...). Ita Phocylides inter (...), ut Suidas (...) illud poema appellat.
quamvis and sunt qui dubitant, an Gapita illa antiqui sint Phocylidis, qui
Olympiad. 59 aut 60 floruit. Non tamen est cur aut Judaeum aut Christianum ex
stylo reputemus (...), etc. habot his aliena.
that even the Opinion of the Pythagoricall Transmigration has a notion in it
not very different from ours of the Resurrection. Both hold that the same Soul
may after its departure from the Body abide and inform some Elementary Body,
only our Doctrine is, That the Soul shall abide and again inform the same
Elementary Body. St Augustine tells us, that there were a sect of
Philosophers called the Genethliaci, mentioned by Varro, who were of Opinion,
that after certain periods of Time the same Soul and the same Body should be
again reunited: and comparing the Opinions of Plato and Porphyry, he reports
Plato's Opinion to be thus, Animas sine corporibus in aeternum esse non posse,
Greg Nyssen. de Anima and Resurrectione p. 231. (...). ib. and deinceps.
Videatur and Augustinus de Civitate Dei lib. 22. capp. 28, 29. v. and
Forcatulum lib. 1 page 87, 90.
That our Souls will not endure to live eternally in disunion from our Bodies.
He reports Porphyries Opinion to be, That the Soul being in a separate estate
from the Body, and once made pure, will never care to return to those Evils
to which it has been obnoxious in Human Body. But he observes in the
conclusion, that both these Opinions were reconcilable to Christianity. Nay if
they were both united they would make up perfectly the Christian doctrine, and
that if Porphyry had lent his Opinion to Plato, and Plato his to Porphyry, they
both had been united to the Truth of the Gospel in this particular, which is,
that our Souls in the End shall return to such Bodies in which they shall
happily and immortally continue. His words are, Dicat, etc. Dicat cum Platone
Porphyrrius, redibunt ad corpora; dicat Plato cum Porphyrio, non redibuet ad
malo, and ad ea cortora redire consentieat in quibus nulla mala patiantur.
Let Porphyry say with Plato, that our Souls shall return to some Bodies, and
let Plato say with Porphyry, that they shall not return to evil Bodies, and
then the conclusion must be, that our Souls shall return to such Bodies in
which they shall suffer no evils; Which is the very doctrine and faith of
those that profess Christianity.

But, my Brethren, we have diverse reasons to believe both the Immortality of
the Soul and the Resurrection of the Body, which those Philosophers wanted. God
has begotten us to this Hope by great and powerful Arguments. It remains only
that we make some good use of these Doctrines; and the first and most genuine
is this. That as wise Men and good Christians we cherish this Hope: Which we
have great Reason to do; First, upon account of its Usefullnesse here,
secondly, upon account of that Reward which God has reserved for this Virtue
in the life to come.

This Hope is a virtue not only useful but necessary for us while we are in
this militant condition. Our life is sometimes compared to a Warfare, and then
this Hope of salvation is said to be our Helmet, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. which is, as all
know, a most necessary piece of Armor, and the defense of the most Principal
part. Sometimes our life is compared to a Voyage by Sea, and then this lively
Hope is represented as most useful to us upon another account. For if we are
becalmed in the midst of the Ocean of these worldly affairs, Hope is the Wind
that must fill our sails. And this (...), full Gale of this Hope will safely
and in due time bring us to our desired Haven, Heb. 6.11. But if on the
contrary by reason of our own lightness and Vanity we are ready to be tossed
to and fro with every Wave of Temptation, This Hope of Heaven serves us for
another Use. For then, as the Apostle to the Hebrews well observes, we are to
have this Hope as an Anchor of the Soul sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19. In every
profession and calling the Encouragement is from Hope. He that ploweth, ploweth
in Hope, and he that thresheth, thresheth in Hope, 1 Cor. 9.10. And in our
general calling of Christianity no man ever was made perfect without this
Hope. Men as Men desire Happiness. and would avoid misery. But if Christians
were without this Hope and all their Expectations were confined to this life
only, St Paul affirms, that they were of all Men the most miserable, 1 Cor.
15.19. We have indeed a joy that exceeds the joy of the worldly man in his
Corn and Wine and Oil, but our Hope is the foundation of this our joy. We
rejoice, says St Paul, in the Hope of the Glory of God, Romans 5.2. We have
love, that is a great and a cordial Christian Virtue, a Virtue amiable to God
and useful to Men. But Hope is the Principle and ground of Love, Quantum quis
sperat, Bernard. de pass. Dom. c. 43.
says St Bernard, tantum amat, we love our Neighbor because we love God: but
we love God because we expect and hope for all our Happiness from Him. Every
good Christian has a tree of life that springs up within him, the Root of
which is Faith, the Stem Hope, the Branches Love, and the Fruit good Works.
He therefore that goes about to take away Hope goes about to ruin the inner Man
by cutting off the Tree at the very Stem. Hoc ipsum quod Christiani sumus,
Fidei ac spei res est, says St Cyprian, V. Cyprianum de bono Patientiae.
The very being of our Christianity depends upon our Faith and Hope: There is
an Error crept in Christendom in Opposition to the Exercise of this great
Virtue, which I think sprang originally from the unnatural and forced
Rhodomontades of the proud Stoic, who (as I shall show when I compare their
Ends in Philosophy with ours in Religion) vapor'd in a Wisdom that was errant
folly, and boasted of a Virtue he neither had nor meant to have. From the
Stoics it passed into the Contemplatives or perfectionists in the Church of
Rome; and from these down to our Antinomians or Brethren of the Family of Love.
This is the genealogy of their Error; and their Error this: They would have no
Christian act from any Principles either of Hope or Fear. They think it below
them to cast so much as an Eye to Heaven, they would have us to go to Sea
without a Wind, and to war without a Helmet. They would have the poor professor
of Religion go on his way weeping and bearing good seed, without hoping for a
harvest, when he shall return with joy and bring his sheaves with Him. They
would have Moses Choose to suffer affliction with his Brethren, Heb. 11.26.
rather than be accounted the son of Pharaoh's daughter; and that without any
respect to the Recompense of Reward. These Men are certainly more nice in their
speculations than the simplicity of Christian wisdom requires them to be:
Must we needs exceed the example of our Master? It is well surely, if we come
up in any good proportion near unto it. And yet we read that he, for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross. Was this joy set before Him, Heb.
12.2.
and may it not be set before us also? It has been the care and wisdom of God
to draw us to himself by the proposal of great Rewards: These are the
Magnetismes of Gods appointment: and yet they are called by the Prophet Hosea,
the cords of a Man. I drew them, says God, with the cords of a Man, and with
the Bonds of Love, Hos. 11. These are the ways of Attraction fitted by God to
work on Human Nature. These are the Bonds of Gods love and Bounty, whereby he
endeavors to draw his people to Himself, shall we then be so hardy and
venturous, as in favor to our own conceits to break his Bonds in sunder, and
cast his cords from us? We have his warrant and order not to cast away our
Confidence, we have his commad to gird up the loins of our Minds, to be sober
and hope to the End. 1 Pet. 1.13.
And where we have our commands and directions from the Oracles of God, with
what pretense can we scruple whether it be lawful to Obey? Is not his word a
sufficient Warrant for our practice? He is so loving a Father that he will not
offer his children a stone for Bread, nor a Scorpion for an Egg. Why then
should we be so presumptuous as to sever those things by Niceties and
speculative distinctions, which God has conjoined and which the son of God
whilst he lived upon Earth has by his practice and Example commended to us.

Some Antinomians to disparage this virtue have told us, that there shall be
no use of Hope in Heaven. What then? shall we not therefore use that Virtue
which is so necessary for us while we are upon Earth? And how do they know that
there shall be no use of Hope in Heaven? Learned and studied Men are of another
Opinion, namely, that the perfected Saints and Angels ever love God, because
they have an assured Hope that they shall ever be continued in that Station of
serving and praising God in Glory. They cannot infinitely at once enjoy their
eternal Happiness: and what they cannot infinitely at once enjoy, why may
they not hope for in continuance? Surely could they want of this Hope or this
assurance, their love in the same measure would want of its perfection. Thus
you see, though the use of Hope in this life is enough for our purpose, yet
they can never prove that it is altogether unusefull or unnecessary in the
next.

But besides this, The reward of Hope.
from the usefullnesse of it I have another argument which may move you to
continue and cherish your hope, and that is from the Reward that God has
annexed unto it in the world to come. This is the very Motive of the Apostle,
Heb. 10.35. Cast not away your confidence, which has great Recompense of
Reward. God has appointed this lively Hope as an excellent Instrument to
assist us and to conduct us safe to Heaven; and then he rewards us for making
use of this help and assistance, that he has ordained for us and given to us.
For we have it not of our selves. It is (as all other Christian virtues are)
the gift of God. And this is ever the way of Gods infinite goodness, He
appoints those things that are most excellent and useful to our Advantage,
and then for serving our own Interests in that Way that he has appointed, he
heapeth yet more and extraordinary rewards upon us.

Another use, that we must not forget to make, is this, That we in the whole
course of our lives give thanks giveing, worship and Adoration to God, who has
bestowed upon us immortal Souls, and so put a difference between us and the
beasts that perish; and so also in respect of the glorious Resurrection which
he has promised to our Bodies, we ought according to the style of St Peter,
bless God even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us to a
lively Hope of our own Resurrection, as by other means so especially by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead. I shall exhort you therefore in the
very words of our Office in the holy communion, Let us lift up our hearts and
give thanks to our Lord God. For it is meet and right and our bounden duty that
we should in all times and in all places give thanks unto thee, O Lord, holy
father, All mighty and everlasting God. But chiefly are we bound to praise thee
for the glorious Resurrection of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, who by his
death has destroyed death and by his Rising again to life has restored us to
everlasting life. Therefore with the Angels and Archangels and all the company
of Heaven we laud and magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee and
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts; Heaven and Earth are full of thy
Glory. Glory be to thee O Lord most high. Amen.

FINES COMPARATI. THE AIMS of Philosophical Vulgar
Wits.

Compared with the Ends of Religion and Virtue.

That which is Crooked cannot be made strait, and that which is wanting cannot
be numbered,

Eccles. 1.15. 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Where is the Wise? Where is the
scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? Has not God made foolish the
VVisdome of this World.

For after that in the VVisdome of God the world by VVisdome knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after VVisdome: But we
preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness.

But unto them that are called Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and
the wisdom of God.

To which add the 6th and 7th verses of the following chapter. We speak
wisdom among them that are perfect, yet not the Wisdom of this world, or of
the princes of this world that come to naught.

But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which
God ordained before the world to our Glory.


WHen I have been sometimes considering upon what slight grounds diverse
learned Men have undervalued Religion, and the Hopes of Immortality and Glory,
and that many vulgar Wits have done the same; and that neither the learned
Philosophers, nor the carnally-minded and worldly men, Both Philosophical and
vulgar Wits vain in the choice of their ends.
have gotten any thing considerable in exchange, or indeed have any thing in
comparison to boast of, I could not but apply to these two differences, the
high and Philosophical and the low and vulgar Wits, that saying of the
Psalmist, applied by Him to the different states of Men. Psalm. 62.
Surely the Wits of high degree are Vanity, and those of low degree are a lie:
to be laid in a Balance they are both together lighter than Vanity. For I shall
easily make it appear that the Wise man or Philosopher, when he has exalted
himself against God, He has made himself a fool, and that he has no more
Reason to glory of his Wisdom, Jer. 9.23.
than the Rich man has of his Riches or the Voluptuous Man of his pleasure,
and that neither of them have any cause to Glory. He that glories against
Religion holds up his Weapons against God, and he shall prosper accordingly.
Give me therefore your favor and patience and I shall consider them, all the
high and the low, the Wise man and the fool, as they have opposed the most
perfect wisdom, which, however sometimes despised, I shall plainly demonstrate
to be the VVisdome of Religion. The Philosophers have ever been apt to soar
too high and to towr aloft beyond their senses. The vulgar have ever been as
apt to sink too low, so that their senses are communly drowned in the
Enjoyments of this world. We will not disparage Philosophy so much as not to
consider it in the first Place. And therefore I have chosen to present you a
Landscape, where you have our great Apostle represented as taking a Review of
his Opponents at Athens, who were the Philosophers in general, and among them,
if we distinguish particularly, the Epicureans and the Stoics. And upon this
full Review of the Opposition he had on the one side, and of the power,
strength and success of his Gospel on the other, I conceive Him as it were
venting both his Pity and his Indignation in the words of this Text, Where is
the Wise? Where is the the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? has
not God made foolish the Wisdom of this World, etc.

This Epistle was written to the Christians in Achaia. Corinth, as all know,
was the Metropolis in that Province, insomuch that when the Apostle mentions
the readiness of of the Corinthians, his phrase is, that all Achaia was ready
a year ago. Athens was another lesser City in the same province, but renownd
for the Academy that was held there by the Philosophers. And I am of Opinion,
that this Text reflects on somewhat that happened to St Paul at Athens.
Argumentum l. 5. Tuscul. Quaestionum illud est, Virtutem ad beat vivendu^
seipsa esse contentam, ubi sanctum illud augustumque, ut vocat, Platonis fontem
aperit. Cui viro ex se apta sunt omnia quae ad beat vivendu^ ferunt, huic
optime vivendi ratio comparata est. Neque enim laetabitur unquam, aut maerebit
nimis, Quod semper in seipso omnem spem reponet sui. Et inter paradoxa defendit
Cicero (...). Nemo potest non esle beatissimus, inquit, qui est totus aptus ex
se, quique in se uno sua ponit omnia. Contentus sis temet ipso and ex te
nascentibus bonis Sen. Epist. 20. Stoicus putat Deum ad sapienteum sic dicere,
Non egere felicitate felicitas vestra est. Est and quo Deum antecedatis, Ille
extra pat^entiam malorum est, vos supra patientiam. Contemnite mortem, quae vos
aut finit aut transfert. Ante omnia cautum est, ne quis vos teneret invitos.
Nihil facilius quam mori, etc. Sen. de Providentia cap. 6. Solcbat Sextius
dicere, Jovem plus non posse quam Virum bonum. Deus non vincis sapientiam
felicitate, etiamsi vincit aetate. Non est Virtus major quae longior, etc.
Epist. 73. and epist 5.3. Est aliquod, inquit Seneca, quo sapiens antecedat
Deum. Ille naturae beneficio non suo sapiens est. Ecce! res magna, habere
imbecillitatem hominis securitatem Dei. Et epist. 31. Hoc est summum bonum,
quod si occupas, incipis Deorum socius esse non supplex. Vox Stoici non
intercedam apud Deum, ut sapiens plenus gaudio, hilaris, inconcussus sim, ita
Horatius Aequum animum mihi ipse parabo.
For as he disputed against the superstition of that place, and preached the
Christian doctrine, certain Philosophers of the Epicureans and the Stoics
encountered Him, abused Him, called him names, (...), babbler, that is, one that
makes a great noise and spends much speech to little purpose. He preached
Jesus, This was thought Innovation, dangerous to the state: It was condemned as
the preaching of a strange God. And whether they took (...) to be a Goddess or
no, yet this we are sure of, that when he preached the resurrection of the
Dead, he was but mocked and laughed at for his pains; The Philosophers declared
for a Happiness and summum bonum in this life. They had a Wisdom profess't
among them, that undertook to give a virtue which should need no Grace, and
should perfect such a life as should need no pardon; And therefore as they
would not stay for their summum bonum, or chiefest Happiness until the
resurrection, so they cared not for a Jesus, they would need no Savior. They
boasted, that they had a way whereby they could live cum Diis ex pari, they
could live in the perfection of Virtue and felicity, as the Gods themselves
did, and they would not own him to deserve the Name of a Philosopher, that
could not beatify Himself. Their Sapiens must sibi sufficere ad beatam vitam:
Their Wiseman must have a Happiness within Himself, which he may be proud of
as his own, and for which he stands beholden to no other being, These were the
(...), principal Opinions of the Philosophers, and, if we distinguish them
from the rest, particularly of the Epicureans and the Stoics.

These principal Notions of Philosophy being so contrary to those of Christian
Religion, which St Paul was to preach, It is no wonder if he left Athens and
went to Corinth, where on the contrary he found strange success. Of the Rulers
of the Jewish synagogue one was coverted, another publicly buffeted before
the judgment seat for raising a faction against St Paul. And more of his
success we read in that 18th chapter of the Acts.

Now in this Epistle written to his Converts, of which some few were at Athens,
but the greater part at Corinth, he seems to reflect upon the Opposition that
he met with among the professors of Wisdom in Achaia, and particularly those
Epicureans and Stoics, who encountered him at Athens. And contemplating the
success that God had given to the preaching of the Gospel, He is pleased with
the Review, and in opposition to all that pretended wisdom wherewith Himself
had been opposed, He makes this triumphant Speech,

Where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
etc. Where is your (...), your Philosopher, where is your scribe, your
literator, your professor of learning, as Tertullian translates it? your (...),
your writers of curious Dissertations, as Oecumenius. Where is your (...), your
Curious Disquisitor, Disputer of this world? which words of this world possibly
may be Emphaticall to denote one commun Error of all the Philosophers, that
they directed men to look after happiness in this life, and not in the life to
come, whereas the Gospel directs to happiness in the next life and not in
this. So says St Paul in the pursuance of his discourse in the sixth verse of
the next chapter. We speak wisdom among the perfect, yet not the Wisdom of
this world nor of the princes of this world, which perish and soon come to
naught. The Wisdom of the world, as Oecumenius observes, aims at Temporal
things, which continue only with this life and reach not to the life that is to
come. The Christians aim is chiefly at things of the other life, And by the
Princes of this world he tells you that St Paul means the Philosophers and
Literati, (...): Oecumenius in locum.
who were generally Demagogues and imposed on the People, the same that are
called (...) and (...) in the chapter before. Men that gloried in their own
inventions and Reasonings, even these by the Gospel are also convinced of
folly, no less (nay it may be more) than other Men: For the Vulgar and those
that pretended not to so much Wisdom as these learned Philosophers, could see
God by the Creature, and could think it wisdom to endeavor to comply with the
pleasure of their Creator: But these Princes of the world, as St Paul calls
them, had got a New wisdom, and a Philosophy that led from God. In Opposition
to all these, and to resettle his own worship, God raised up Preaching, a weak
means in all appearance, and therefore the Greeks did not more admire the
Wisdom of their own Philosophy than they derided the foolishness of
Preaching. But what says our Apostle in the Context, (...), That of God which
has least of wisdom in it, will eventually prove wiser than the greatest
wisdom of Men. And (...), that of God which has least of strength in it will
eventually prove too strong for the strongest Opposition of Men. Let those
therefore boast that Win, Let the Philosophy of Christianity be foolishness
to the Greek, we know that there is notrue Philosophy besides it. We have
learned from our Savior that VVisdome is justified of her children, and the
Apostle here tells us, that the Philosophy of the Gospel is wisdom to the
perfect, and on the contrary that (...), God has stultified and infatuated the
Learning, Wisdom and Philosophy of this world.

Yet some care must be taken that we do not condemn, nor misconstre St Paul,
so as to think that he condemns all Philosophy or all Philosophers. There is a
Natural Wisdom that St Paul calls the wisdom of God; and the Gentiles, who
as St Paul says, do by Nature the things contained in the Law, do it by their
Natural wisdom, and therefore in the case of Philosophers it is a hard task
to speak any thing universally and justly. For Philosophy is not one uniforme
Learning and Discipline, There is a great difference between Socrates and Plato
on the one side, and Aristippus and Epicurus on the other. Take Philosophy all
together it will appear to be a very Protens. It is like the Clouds in
Aristophanes his Comedy, that have every day new fashions: Or the Philosophers
may be compared to Jeremiahs figs Jer. 24. Some very good figs like those that
were first ripe, and some very naughty figs which could not be eaten they were
so bad, Though there has been for a long time a profession of Philosophy and
this Philosophy has still been the Mistress of the Vertuosi, because it had
the honor to be thought to teach Wisdom and Virtue and every Noble endowment:
yet he that will speak distinctly of its merit must distinguish times and
persons.

At first it was the Wisdom of God as St Paul cais it, 1 Cor. 1.21. that is
true Natural Wisdom, and it taught true Religion and the fear of God.
Afterward in some of its sects it grew not only to be a new, but a quite
contrary learning and Discipline. It was an Angel of light, but it left its
first Estate and degrees in this with Lucifer, and those other high
Intellectual Spirits that it had its fall from Pride. For the professors of it
growing proud in their own conceits and affecting fame by the height and
singularity of their Notions, when they by the Wisdom that they profess't
would not know, that is would not own nor acknowledge God, but left his
providence out of their Philosophy and grew too learned to be humble,
thankful or Religious; Nay when God had, suffered them so long until some of
them made it the buisnesse of their Philosophy on purpose to oppose Religion.
Then it was time for God to appear in defense of his own existence, Providence,
and Worship, and against all their Philosophy, he then sent forth a company of
foolish preachers, as they were esteemed, like Gideons Army against the
Midianites with their trumpets, lamps, and pitchers, but indeed extraordinarily
assisted by his own Spirit and by this means it pleased God through the
foolishness of preaching on the one side to save them that believe, and on the
other to show the Variety of that profession of Wisdom, or in St Paul's phrase
to destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and to bring to naught the understanding of
the prudent.

The case, to speak it distinctly and particularly, was this, before that time
and until the Reign of Philosophy in Greece, It had been the commun
uninterrupted Faith of the whole world that there was a God, and that he was a
Rewarder, that there should be hereafter in another world Time and Place for
bliss and punishment, that then it should be better for the just than the
unjust, for the good than for the bad, These principles encouraged virtue, kept
vicious Men in awe, and made all attend to observe the then acknowledged Laws
of Nature: and these were owned as sound and pious Traditions, and studiously
defended as such by Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato and others of the ancients
among the Philosophers themselves.

But afterward, the more Philosophy flowrish't in repute, and the more it was
courted as an accomplishment, the more the professors of it grew into
Emulation. Then they began to think it no Mastery to tread in those old and
beaten paths, Then nothing was so honorable as a New Hypothesis; And the
Notions they had received were thought too commun for Philosophical Wits to
get credit by: and therefore all these were judiciously cast of as rusty
Traditions of the Vulgar, whom it is no wonder if the Modes in Philosophy
counted barbarous, The learned Men and Curiosi at Athens, who, as St Paul
observed, waited for, and courted those Opinions that were new and singular,
had conceits that should render mankind more lusty and independent. Aristotle
bespeaks himself a great Name by broaching a New Hypothesis, that the world was
eternal and not made by God. Epicurus by another, that there is no providence,
and that God is no Rewarder. The Traditions of Heaven and Hell, which in part,
as then reported indeed, were so, were totally and unjustly without distinction
rejected as poetical and fabulous. Virtue was to be its own Reward, and Men
were to expect no other. And this was looked upon as a great service done, and
a great Improvement of Man's Empire, for by making virtue (which was to be
learned by an Art they taught) self sufficient to happiness, Every man's
felicity was taken out of Gods power and put into his own. V. Plutarch. 1.
(...), virtus ad vivendum b^ate sufficit; perfecta and divina virtus quid ni
sufficiat, imo supersluit. Sen. de vita beata. c. 16.
Thus by turning all the ancient catholic doctrines, and every Truth of God
into a Lie, whatsoever their Intentions were this is most certain, that they
practiced most destructively to the ruin of all goodness by thus undermining
the very foundations of Morallity and Virtue. But by the just judgment of God
they were infatuated and became vain in their imaginations. Virtutum omnium
praemium in ipsis est, non enim excercentur ad praemiu^: recte facti fecisse
merces est. Sen. epist. 81.
For when they had cast off those old and sound traditions before reported,
their new Reasonings were infinitely confounded, as the tongues of the
rebellious world were first at Babell. All their designs were for Happiness
and the chiefest good; But the opinions were all most innumerable into which
they were divided in the search after it. St Augustine out of Varro reckons 188
sects or divisions of them, Insomuch that many, who had a mind for fashion sake
to be Philosophers, Alii voluptate^ finem esse volueruntquorum princeps
Aristippus, qui Socratem audierat, unde Cyrenaici. Post Epicurus, cujus est
disciplina nunc notior: neque tamen cum Cyrenaicis de ipsa voluptate
consentiens. Voluptatem and honestatem fines esse Callipho censuit. Vacare omni
molestia Hieronymus, hoc idem cum honestate Diodorus, ambo hi Peripatetici.
Honest autem vivere fruentem his rebus quas primas homini Natura conciliet,
and vetus Academia censuit, ut indicat scripta Polemonis, quem Antiochus probat
maxim and Aristoteles. Ad vos nunc refero quem sequar, modo ne quis illud tam
inetuditum, absurdumque respondeat, Quemlibet modo aliquem. Cupio sequi
Stoicos, licetne? Omitto per ipsos Aristotelem meo judicio prope singularem,
per ipsum Antiochum qui appellabatur Academicus. Erit igitur res jam in
discrimine. Nam aut Stoicus constituatur sapiens, aut veteris Academiae.
Utrumque non potest. Et enim inter eos non de terminis sed de tota possessione
contentio. Nam omnis ratio vitae definitione summi boni continetur, de qua qui
dissident de omni ratione vitae dissident. Cicero Academ. quaest. lib. 4
yet could not tell whom they might follow. Yet two great Errors and mistakes
there were, that run through all these sects and divisions, One was this, that
they would have their happiness or summum Bonum in this life. Secondly they
would have it so, within themselves, so in their own power, that neither God
nor man should be able to hinder them of it. This was their design, but their
lot from God was otherwise, and Christians triumph over them in these
particulars. First because they never for all their proud boastings could
secure to themselves the happiness which they designed in this life, and so
they must confess before God and men that they have ever miss't of their Aim.
Secondly the Utmost aims, that these Philosophers in their several sects and
divisions were forced to sit down with, are poor and mean in themselves, the
highest Encouragments that they can propose to their great and laborious Virtue
are inconconsiderable if compared to their Ends of that Natural Religion which
they opposed, much more inconsiderable than the End of our true and perfect
Religion, which has been delivered us by the son of God, and which the
foolishness of preaching has in opposition to all their Philosophy again
resetled over all the Christian world.

The first particular that we are to prove is this, that they could never
secure to themselves the happiness they design in this life. And this St
Augustine proves to their heads. I shall give you but a Taste of his Discourse.
First those prima Naturae, those first happinesses of Nature which the
Academicks made prime parts of their felicity, says he, and where and how can
they be so ascertained as not to be subject to various Casualties? What grief
is there though never so contrary to pleasure, what uneasinesse and Disquiet is
there, Prima sic Naturam numerat Cicero Incolumitatem conservationemque omnium
partium, valetudinem, sensus integros, vires, pulchritudinem caeteraque generis
ejuidem v. Ciceron de Finib, lib. 5. p. 144.
though never so contrary to Rest and Indolence, that may not happen to the
Body of their wisest Philosopher? Who can help his being deformed if Nature
made him so; sickness happens to one and he wants health; Weakness and
Lassitude to another and he wants strength, To another a Lasy Heaviness and
torpor and he wants Activity: and which of all these may not happen to the Body
of their Wisest Man? Then as to the Soul, What little assistance from our
senses will remain toward the perception and comprehension of Truth, Ea quae
dicuntur prima Naturae, quando, ubi quomodo, tam been se habere in hac vita
possunt, ut non sub incertis casibus fluctuentur? Quis enim Dolor contrarius
voluptati, Quae inquietudo contraria quieti in corpus cadere sapientis non
potest? Membrorum amputatio vel debilitas hominis expugnat incolumitatem,
deformitas pulchritudinem, Imbecillitas sanitatem, Vires lassitudo, Mobilitatem
Torpor aut tarditas, Ecquid horum est quod nequeat in carnem sapientis irruere?
-- Quid ipsius animi primigenia quae dicuntur bona, ubi duo prima ponunt,
propter comprehensionem perceptionemque veritatis, sensum and intellectum? Sed
qualis quantusque manet sensus, si, ut alia taceam, homo fiat caecus and
surdus? Ratio vero and Intelligentia quo recedit, ubi sopietur, si aliquo morbo
efficiatur insanus? Deinde perceptio veritatis in hac carnum qualis ac quanta
est, quando, sicut legimus in veraci libro sapientiae, Corpus, Corruptibile
aggravat animam, etc.
if a Man should happen to be blind and deaf. And whether goes the Reason and
understanding of this great Philosopher, how will he render it sedale and
tractable, if by the Tumultuary motions of the Spirits in a Disease he once be
rendered Mad? But allthough no such Disease should fall upon him, yet how little
perception of Truth can we possibly arrive to us whilst we are impeded with
this Flesh. Seeing it is true that we read in the book of Wisdom, that the
corruptible Body presses down the Soul, Impetus porro, vel actionis Appetitus,
si hoc modo recte latin appellatur ea quam Graeci vocant (...), quia and ipsam
primis Natuae deputant bonis, Nonne ipse est, quo geruntur etiam insanorum illi
miserabiles motus, and facta quae horremus quando pervertitur sensus ratioque
ropitur? Porro ipsa virtus, quae non est inter prima Naturae, quoniam and eis
postea doctrina introducente supervenit, cum sibi culmen bonorum vindicet
humanorum, Quid hic agit nisi perpetua bella cum vitiis, nec exteriori, bus sed
interioribus, nec alienis sed plane fuis? etc. ib.
and the earthy Tabernacle weighs down the mind, that otherwise would be apt
to meditate on many things. Hardly, says he, do we guess aright at things
that are upon the Earth, and with labor do we find the things that are before
us; Then for the appetitive part which the Greks call (...) and the latins
have scarce any good Name for, though it be esteemed with them one of their
prime parts of happiness, is not this the power by which, when once the sense
is perverted and Reason laid a sleep, all those horrible actions of Mad and
phreneticall Persons are performed? Then as for the Moral virtues, such as
Temperance and Prudence, Justice and fortitude, which exceed the prime
Happinesses of Nature and are introduced by learning and discipline. What great
Matter of Happiness can there be in these, when they confess that their
virtue is allwaies in a perpetual War with Vice, not only with outward Vices,
but also with such as are within us, not only with others Vices, but also with
our own. We who are Christians confess, Neque enim nullum est vitium cum,
sicut dicit Apostous, Caro concupiscit adversus Spiritum, Cui Vitio contraria
Virtus est, cum sicut idem dicit. Spiritus concupiscit adversus carnem. Haec
duo sibi invicem adverfantur, etc. absitergo ut quamdiu in hoc bello intestino
sumus, jam nos beatitudinem, ad quam vincendo volumus pervenire adeptos esse
credamus.
that the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh,
and that these are contrary one to another; so that we cannot do the things
that we would: and therefore we confess also that we are not the adepti, that
we have not yet attained that happiness to which by the conquest of our
carnal appetite we desire to be advanced. Et quis est adeo sapiens ut contra
libidines nullum om nino habeat conflictum.
And where is that Philosopher who by his Wisdom has attained to such a
Mastery as to be beyond this Intestine War and to have no conflict with his
lusts. To pass by those other virtues, it is a full Testimony that they give
us of their want of true happiness whiles they describe unto us the happiness
that they suppose themselves to have in their virtue, Fortitude. The Stoic
has learned the lesson of (...), (...). apud Epictetum in initio Enchiridii.
V. Commentarium Plutarchi, Stoices magis inopinata quam Poetas effari.
Things within our power, and things without our power, so well, that he will
not allow any thing to be evil that it is not in his power to hinder, But for
all that let this Stoic boast of his Immunity from Evils, or the Cyrenaick of
his Pleasure, or the Epicurean of his Indolence, Tantus superbiae stupor est in
his hominibus, hic se habere finem Boni, and a seipsis fieri beatos putantibus,
ut sapiens eorum, hoc est, qualem mirabili vanitate describunt, etiamsi
excaecetur, obsurdescat, obmutescat, membris debilitetur, dolotibus crucietur:
and si quid aliud ralium malorum dici aut cogitari possit, incidat in eum, quo
sibi mortem cogatur infer, hanc in his malis vitam constitutam eos non pudeat
beatam vocare.
when he is blind and deaf and dumb and cripled in his limbs and leprous in his
flesh and tortured with the colic, stone and gout, and in a word is afflicted
which such calamities that they all agree ought to persuade their Sapiens, or
wiseman, fairly to kill himself, that he may avoid those accidents, (I do not
say evils, for fear of offending the tender Ear of a Stoic) and so to make a
Way for himself out of this life. Oh the Happiness of this life, when their
Sapiens is forced fairly to die, O vitam beatam quae ut finiatur mortis quaerit
Auxili um! Si beata est, maneaturin ea: Si vero propter mala ista fugitur ab
ea, quomodo est beata, etc.
that he may be rid on it. If it be so calamitous that their wiseman chooses
Death rather than such a life, how is he then possess't at the same time of the
greatest happiness. Let me interrogate with St Augustine, Did Cato, the great
Example of the Stoics kill himself out of patience or out of Impatience? He
would never have done it, unless he had born the victory of Caesar most
impatiently: Where then was his fortitude, when he run away from that happy
life wherein he boasted. And why may not those things be accounted Evil that
renders a Man's life so miserable as that he must avoid it by his own murder.
And therefore the Peripateticks and ancient Academicks whose Opinion Varro
defends, Utrum, obsecro Cato ille patientia an potius impatientia se peremit?
Non hoc fecisset nisi victoriam Caesaris impatienter tulisset. ubi est
fortitudo? nempe cessit, succubuit, usque adeo superata est, ut ipsam beatam
derelinqueret, desereret, fugeret, etc. Seneca de M. Catone sic, megnis aetatum
intervallis sapiens invenitur. Neque enim magna and exce. dentia solitum and
vulgarem modum crebro gignuntur. Caeterum M. Cato, vereor ne supra nostrum
exemplar sit. lib. Quod in Sapientem non cadit Injuria.
speak more tolerably, when they allow these calamities of life to be Evils,
and the greater Evils the longer they continue. But still they hold the
erroneous conclusion that their Sapiens may be happy in the midst of those
Evils, which that they may no longer continue they confessed reasonable that he
should kill Himself. But let me speak again with St Augustine, Do they
therefore call such a life happy, because by a Voluntary Death they may
withdraw themselves from it? What if by the judgment of God they should be
continued in this life and not permitted to die nor ever suffered to be without
these Evils, in these Circumstances at least they would confess their life to
be miserable. And this we assume that it is not therefore not miserable,
because it may be relinquisht, Because it is a short misery it ought not
therefore to seem none at all, or which is more absurd, because it is a short
misery It ought not therefore to be called Happiness. An ideo beatam vitam
dicis, quia licet tibi ab his malis morte discede. re, Qu^d si ergo in eis
aliquo judicio divino tenereris nec unquam sine illis esse sinereris, nempe tum
saltem miseram talem diceres vitam. Non igitur propterea misera non est, quia
cito relinquitut; quandoquidem si sempiterna sit, etiam abs teipso misera
judicatur. Non igitur propterea quoiam brevis est, nulla miseria debetvideri;
aut quod absurdius, quia brevis miseria est, ideo etiam beatitudo appellari,
Magna vis est in eis malis quae cogunt hominem secundum ipsos etiam sapientem,
sibimet auferre quod homo est; cum dicant and vetum dicant hanc esse naturae
primam quodammodo and maximam vocem, ut homo concilietur sibi, and propterea mo
tem Naturaliter fugiat, etc. Vita igitur quaestorum tam tamque gravium malorum
aut premitur oneribus aut subjacet casibus, nullo modo beata diceretur, si
homines qui hoc dicunt, sicut victi malis ingravescentibus, cum sibi ingerint
mortem, cedunt infelicitati, ita victi certis rationibus cum quaerunt beatam
vitam dignarentur cedere veritati, and non putarent in ista mortalitate fine
summi boni esse gaudendum ubi virtutes ipsae, Cymbus hic certe nihil melius
atque Utilius in homine reperitur. Quanto majora sunt Adjutoria, contra Vim
peticulor, laborum, dolorum tanto fidelioria testimonia Miseriarum spe salvi,
spe beati facti sumus, sicut salutem, ita beatitudinem non jam tenemus
presentem sed expectamus futuram. Talis salus quae in futuro erit saeculo, ipsa
erit etiam finalis beatitude; Quam beatitudinem isti Philosophi quoniam non
videntes nolunt credere, hic sibi conantur falsissimam fabricare, quan. co
superbiore tanto mendaciore virtute. Augustinus De Civitate Dei. lib. xxx. cap.
4.
There must needs be a great power in those Evils that make a Man's valor guilty
of his own Murder, especially seeing that nothing is more Natural then for a
Man to love Himself, to avoid Death and to desire to live in this very
conjunction of Soul and Body. St Augustin's conclusion therefore is, and it is
the Opinion of all good Christians, that in this life which is oppress't with
so many and so great Evils and is subject to so many casualties perfect
happiness is not to be expected, and therefore that if the Philosophers had
been truly wise they would have left off to project to themselves the Enjoyment
of the chiefest Good in this state of Mortality. That the Moral virtues
themselves, then which Nothing is more excellent or profitable in human life,
are greater Testimonies of the miseries we are here subject to than assistances
against them: that they cannot give the happiness designed by them, and
therefore that by how much the more these virtues are proudly boasted of by so
much the more they are vainly belied. But this is not all that may be spoken
against Philosophy, as the Wisdom of it is opposed to and compared with that
of Christianity, that it attaineth not its End nor makes any one happy. But it
may be added that the Happiness by them designed is but poor and Mean. They
win not at their Game, but if they did, Si ergo virtus per seipsam beata non
est, quoniam in perferendis malis tota vis ejus est; si omnia quae pro bonis
concupiscuntur negligit, si summus ejus gradus ad mortem patet, quandoquidem
vitam quae optatur a caeteris saepe respuit, mortemque quam caeteri timent,
fortiter suscipit. si necesse est ut aliquid a se magni boni pariat, quia
suscepti and superati labores ad mortem usque sine praemio esse non debent, si
nullum praemium quod ea dignum sit in terra reperitur, quandoquidem cuncta quae
fragilia sunt and caduca spernit; quid aliud restat nisi ut caeleste aliquid
efficiat quia terrena universa contemnit, and ad altiora nitatur quia humilia
despicit. Id vero nihil aliud esse potest quam Immortalitas. Quod Argumentum
docere Philosophos potuit quid esse summum bonum -- Beata igitur vita, quam
Philosophi quae siverunt semper and quaerunt, nulla est: and ideo ab iis non
potuit reperiri quia summum bonum non in summo quaesiverunt sed in imo, etc.
apud Lactantium lib. 3. de falsa sapientia. cap. xii. Plutarchus aperte de
Stocio sapiente (...). De pugna Stoic. Cicero, Stoici eam sapientiam
interpretantur, quod adhuc nemo mortalis est Consecutus. in Laelio. imo and
seneca rarum dicit sapientem tanquam Phaenicem semel anno quingentesimo. Epist.
42. Quin and ipsi prosessores sapientiam quamquam profitebantur despicatui
habebant, Quare cultius tibi Rus est quam Naturalis usus desiderat? Cur ad
prescriptum tuum non caenas? Cur tibi nitidior supellex, etc. Nunc hoc
respondeo tibi. Non sum sapiens and ut Malevolentiam tuam pascam nec ero.
Senec. de beata vita. c. 17.
it were but trifling: for their game was but childrens play. The Academicks
Prima Naturae, The ten parts of the Felicity of Aristotle, and the
Peripateticks, the Indolence of the Epicureans, the Pleasures of Aristippus and
the Cyrenaicks, the Chimaeras and Airy Castles of the Stoics, if when enjoyed
as much as our Natures are capable of, yet they weigh Nothing, or, if it were
possible, less than Nothing when compared to that Immortality and Glory
proposed to all Christians, let us to prove this, divide and separate these
sects of Philosophers, who are all in the choice of their Ends divided from us,
because they will place their Expectations in this life only. First the Stoics
and Aristotle (as in all public Schools he is now represented, who take their
definitions of felicity from his Ethics, and not from his Rhetoric, where his
Opinion stands as represented by Cicero and the ancients) and the generallity
of Moral Philosophers, all directly affirm, That there is no Reward of virtue
to be looked for but the bare Action. Honesty, say they, is its own price and
must pay it self, nor will they allow us any End of doing well besides our very
doing so. Ask them what End had Epaminondas in the defense of his City with
the loss of his life, what Reward had Hercules (who is their great Example of
Heroic virtue) when he went about doing good, purging the world of Monsters
and gratifying mankind with his twelve renowned Labors. It was the commun
belief that he got his place in Heaven by them. But these Philosophers were of
an Opinion that he had only his Labor for his pains. Operatio sec. virtutem was
all his work, and the same Operatio sec. virtutem was all his Happiness and
Wages; So that these propose no Encouragement that may compare with the Ends of
our Religion or that state of Immortality, which, though we do not
understerstand, yet we believe to be full of a great, a glorious and an
Eternal joy.

Another sect of Philosophers there were of another Opinion, namely, that it
would not agree with the real design of a Wise Man to practice the great, and
hazzardous actions of virtue upon no other account besides than the Action it
self: and therefore considering the troubles that did continually harrasse the
vnlgar sort, though they were not with Aristippus for the Itch of Pleasure, yet
they thought very well of the state of Indolence; they resolved therefore that
it was the chiefest attainable good and ought in prudence to be the End of
every wise Man's actions, to endeavor in this world to be rid of all grief and
trouble: and to this Estate they gave the names of (...) Indolence. To enjoy
which, I say not Joy but, Indolence only for the term of this life was the
Total sum of their utmost design; But to this estate no man in this life
could ever yet attain. No Philosopher was ever so good a Physician of the mind
as to be able to prescribe such a Nepenthes as could remove all grief and
sorrow from the sense. But if Philosophy could give Indolence yet this is but
the first part, this is only the Entrance and beginning of ours: It comes short
of joy most of all short of such joies as we pretend to, which are so great
that nither their Nature nor their duration can be comprehended by us.

It is true that Aristippus and a sect of Voluptuaries there were, who advanced
higher, and condemned this state of Indolence as too low for the greatest Scope
and End of virtue, too small for the highest intention of a Man, being, as they
phrased it, but dormientium felicitas, a sleepy Happiness, a life for Trees
that grow in all storms and continue indolent and insensible though a flash of
Lightning consume them to ashes. And yet it was a state not competent to Man
neither, (...). Laertius in vita Aristippi.
as Epicurus (the admirer of it) must needs have found by his own Experience.
For notwithstanding all his skill in Physics, He was not Physician enough to
defend himself from most violent fits of the Stone, V. apud Plutarchum in
moralibus compendium comentarii, quo ostenditur Stoicos qua poetas absurd^oria
dicere.
with which he was frequently tormented, and in one of which He is reported to
have died. And not to seem sensible, but to profess Indolence in such a Case;
would appear like a Stoicall Rhodomontade or groundless ostentation of a power
beyond what really can be found in the Nature of Man: therefore some of them
affirms, Aristippus I mean and other voluptuaries of that School, that to
enjoy actual delight and joy for the present, to be sure of some pleasure in
this uncertain World is the best and greatest design of a Wiseman. But how much
joy will serve this wisemans turn? how much is his utmost Aim? enough to make
Him as happy in his own judgment as his great Philosophy could make him. No man
can be more punctual in any thing than the Epicurean Zeno, is in this
determination, who gives this to be the true dose or measure of it, That it
must be a continued pleasure for the greater part of this life, That if any
vehement grief intervene, it must be short, or if it be long and Chronicall, It
must have more Intervals of Delight than fits of Pain. The utmost design of the
most Indulgent Philosophers you see is only for some pleasue and that in this
life only, so much as may a little preponderate and outweigh the fits of grief
that shall endeavor to oppress Him, while he is here. Give him but a Quartan
Ague, let him have but two days well for one day ill, two days of joy for one
of sorrow and it suffices Him.

How infinitely then in the Aim of our profession and the End of our virtue
beyond theirs, when the Scripture sets forth before us, not only the bare
Action of virtue for its own reward, which was the Aim of the Stoics anciently
and of the vulgar Philosophy that is now read in all Schools, Nor only
Indolence or security from grief, which was the Aim of some Epicureans: But
such a state as shall contain all these in the first place, and besides all
these an Addition of joy, even of such joy as neitheer Aristippus nor his
followers, nor any other Philosophers could ever hope for, even fulness of
joy without mixture of grief and pleasures, not only during this momentany
life, but pleasures for evermore. And this is another particular of our
Triumph, namely that besides this, That the Philosophers by their Wisdom could
not attain their Ends; their very Ends and Designs were by no means
comparable to those which Christians may obtain in the profession and practice
of their Religion.

O let the great God make us for ever humbly thanckfull for these his Mercies:
Let Him, of his great Mercy, by all those means and methods that He has
sanctified to that purpose, first make us fit for, and then bring us to those
joies and Glories, that are the Ends of Christian faith and virtue, and which
are indeed so infinitely great, that Eye has not seen them nor Ear hard them,
nor have they ever entered into the Heart of Man to be conceived.

Gloria Trinuni Deo.
SERMON II.
ROMANS 13.13 14. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Ryotting and
Drunkenesse, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying.

But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provisions for the flesh to
fulfill the lusts thereof.


HAving done with the little learned world, whose Wisdom I have proved to be
but Vanity, finely diversifyed with singularities of many curious follies; I am
now come into the greater, where I find the bulk of mankind not poisned with
medicines artificially and industriously composed, but overwhelmed in an Ocean
of Ordinary delights, and drowned as it were in the most commun, and duly taken
very useful, Element. Solomon advises us, that having found honey we should
eat so much as is sufficient: But we on the contrary are still ready, like
drones, to suffer our selves to be drowned with the best Enjoyments, and to
surphet with the abundance of good things here below. How many are there in all
conditions and places that are tempted to forsake their chiefest good: their
God, and their Heaven, The ends of the vulgar Riches and Honor, but more
especially pleasure.
in exchange for the Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World. And if we look
upon examples, we shall find that no Temptations have been more powerful than
those from Pleasure. Men who are covetous of Riches or ambitious of Honor,
have no better pretense for their Ambition and covetousness, than the hope of
a continued Enjoyment of their pleasures in the End. V. Augustinum lib. 8.
confess. c. ult.
St Augustine, as he was a man of great wit and Spirit, so was he a man subject
to great Temptations. He confesses that Pleasures were his old Mistresses;
Once they had, and they strove hard to have kept perpetual, possession of him.
What Augustine will thou leave us thus? will thou take a Farewell of all thy
old delights for ever? Succuttebant, says he, vestem meam carneam, they made a
strong concussion upon his carnal part. But it happened by the Mercy or God
that once as he had been in a conflict with such Temptations, he fell into a
deep consideration of his former life, and then as he reports of himself he
heard as is were a voice saying to him, Take up and read. Taking up a book,
(which he had there) of St Paul's writings, he dipped upon this very text, not in
ryotting and drunkenesse, not in chambering and Wantonness, etc. Nec ultra
volui legere, says he, nec opus erat. He found enough in that Text for one
Reading. The word of God (as the Apostle well observes) Heb. 4.12. is quick
and powerful, and sharper than a two edged sword, pierceing even to the
dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit; and is not only (...), Judge of our
thoughts and Intents, but (...), Executioner of our Lusts. So St Augustine
found it, He obeyed the power of this word, and glories in the Grace of God,
that this text was in the hand of God, the instrument of his conversion and
salvation. Oh that the same Spirit of God would so work upon our hearts, that
the same word might now take the same effect in us!

There is a great deal contained in this Text, and yet let me tell you the
profession of Christianity contains a great deal more, we are pressed here to
the performance but of one part, of one branch of our Baptismall vow, namely to
make good that part of our baptismall Renuntiation, wherein we profess to deny
the sinful lusts of the Flesh.

Our commun Philosophy teaches us, that the Aims, desires or Lusts of the
flesh are twofold, some proceed from the Concupiscible Appetite, and these in
St Paul's Phrase go under the names of ryotting and drunkenesse, Chambering and
Wantonness, and are contrary to the duty of keeping our Bodies in Temperance,
soberness and chastity, commended to us in our Catechism. Secondly, there are
some Lusts that proceed from the irascible appetite, and these in St Paul's
Phrase go under the names of strife and Envying, whence battle and murder and
all breaches of the sixth commandment communly ensue. We shall plant our
Batteries now only against the first squadron of our Lusts, that in this late
Age have gotten too great an Empire of Mankind and shall leave the second to
be encountered at some other time.

Lust we have and shall have, This is that Body of Sin, that we carry still
about us. The fixednesse of Lusts to corrupted Nature.
St Paul complains of it as of a deadly dart that stuck fast in his Liver
Haeret lateri Lethalis Arundo-who, says he, shall deliver me from this Body of
death? Even natural men have been still ready to complain of this (...),
(...). Plutarchus ex opinione Pythagorae. Et ex Platone and Aristotele animam
dicit, (...), vid. Plutarchum in comment. (...).
the very body of death that St Paul speaks of. It is (...) (as Plutarch
calls it) an extravagant, passionate, and disorderly appetite. This is that
Canaanite that we must allwaies fight against, but shall never be able utterly
to extirpate.

Some indeed there are (and too great a part of the world) that design
themselves an happiness by the satisfying these Lusts, and to that intent they
make great and ample provisions for them. St Paul tells us, that the
intention of the Gospel is directly contrary; namely to direct us to Glory by
the way of sobriety and virtue, to diswade men from the pleasures of
Intemperance, and to suppress the government of Lust. I think it very
seasonable (now in this loose Age) to show you the Reasonableness of St Paul's
doctrine, which is the doctrine of Christianity; and to that end shall propose
unto you three conclusions; which being well proved, will be sufficient to
diswade any reasonable man, much more any true Christian, from the pursuance of
Happiness by the way of sensual pleasure.

The Conclusions are these. 1. That there is no satisfactory happiness to be
found in the pursuance of our Natural Lusts and desires. 2ly The making
provision for the Lusts of Intemperance, is certainly Mischievous and
Dishonorable to Man as Man. 3ly The pursuance of such sensual pleasures or
Lusts, is most of all Mischievous and Dishonorable to man as Christian.


First, I tell you that God has written vanity and vexation on all the
provision that can be made for Lust. It was the sin of Man that first filled
humane Nature with this concupiscence: And God suffers vain Men to be toyled
with their own passions, and to be vexed with making provision for those Lusts,
which he knows, and we may know, never will be satisfied. For we find by
Experience, that those Men who have let themselves utterly loose to the Biasse
of their Natural Inclinations, and have plunged themselves in all those
material Enjoyments, which they thought would end in the greatest pleasure,
have found in the Top of their Enjoyment nothing but Satiety, Disrelish, and
Repentance.

Solomon has committed his own Experience to History in this point. He was a
wise and a rich King: he lived in great Magnificence and glory; There was in
Him a Confluence of whatsoever this world can pretend to of Riches, Honors, and
pleasures: and he gives us the story (in the second chapter of his
Ecclesiastes) how once like a Vertuose (for experiment sake) he ran the Risque
of trying what good might be found in all sorts of them. He was a voluptuary
(or Epicurean, as we call them,) before ever Epicurus was born. To enable him
to acquire the Enjoyments he proposed, he wanted no worldly means: For first,
He had a great Empire, and vast Treasures left him by his Father, and he had
large Tributes both from his own People, and from the Provinces adjoyzing, and
not only from the remaining Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, 1 Kings
9.21, 22.
and Jebusites, 1 Kings 10. ult.
but he had yearly acknowledgments from those great kingdoms of Egypt and
Syria also: And therefore to satisfy the lust of the Eye, as it became his
Imperial magnificence, he built and he planted sumptuously. Other great princes
were not more famous for their Mausolaea, their Pyramides, Amphitheaters and
Arches, than he was for that Temple which he built for God, and the Palaces
that he built for his own Court, and the courts of his Wives: one of which was
no less a person than the Daughter of Pharaoh King of Egypt. And his
plantations were answerable. He tells you that he planted vineyards and
Orchards, and made Pooles of Water, that is, he had large Gardens, where, 1
Kings. 4.33.34. and Targum in Eccles. c. 2.
if we believe some Authorities, there grew all Plants from the Cedar of
Libanus unto the Hyssope on the Wall. These Gardens were graced with Groves and
Arborets, and those with Grottoes, Pools, Basins and Waterworks, which were
partly for state, and partly for use (as the Text there intimates) to water
therewith the wood that brings forth Trees. To satisfy the Lust of the Ear,
he had Music both Isntrumental and vocal: He had Men singers and
Women-singers and Musical Instruments of all sorts, and in a word all the
delights of the sons of Men, as we read in that 2d of Ecclesiastes, and in the
first book of Kings. He had Honor in abundance, from his neighboring Princes
and from those that were afar off. The Queen of Sheba, and many besides her, 1
Kings. 4. ult.
came from the uttermost parts of the Earth to hear his Wisdom and to see his
Glory. 1 Kings 4.29.
Moreover to the more full Enjoyment of his other Acquirements God gave him
also wisdom and Understanding and largeness of heart even as the sand on the
Seashore. He had a large Heart by the particular gift of God. Eccles. 2.1, 3.
And Solomon indulged his heart a liberty large as it self, Eccles. 2. I said
to my heart (says he,) go to now, I will try thee with Mirth, therefore enjoy
pleasure, and he confesses he gave himself to Wine and to Folly, to the folly
of Women as most interpret his confession, Ecclus. 47.19.30.
yet acquainting his heart with wisdom, so the Text proceeds. This was his
design, he would make a mixture of Wisdom and folly. He had no mind to part
with his reason; but however he would not omit to try also the pleasures of
foolish vain men. He would be mad for an Experiment, and therefore he projected
how he might cum ratione insanire. He would have the pleasure of Madness and
the security of Reason. Eccles. 2.10.
Whatsoever good things his Eyes desired he kept it not from them, he withheld
not his heart from any Joy, and yet he would keep so much Wit in his frolic,
as to be able to weigh his Enjoyments and to see once, for himself and for us
all, what good there might be in such a life for the sons of Men. When he
therefore freely and without disturbance had pursued the satisfaction of his
Natural Lusts, by an Indulgence to all sorts of Pleasures, how much true
content did he find in them? Why he tells us (and we have good reason to
make use of the Experiment) that he found Laughter to be Madness, he found
Mirth to be unprofitable. Eccles. 2.2.
He hated his Eiches and all his great Acquirements, because he found it most
probable that one time or other they would come into the hands of a Fool.
Eccles. 2.18, 19
And this he had reason to think a great absurdity and vanity, that a wise man
should toil and make himself a slave all the days of his life, and that in
the end a fool should be Master of his Acquirements, who will slight the
prudence of his Ancestor, and profusely, and idly wast all that Means of Noble
living provided by him. This consideration among others made Solomon, Eccles.
2.20.
as himself confesses, despair of all his labor. He saw the uncertainty of all
things here below, and when he had made himself great, he despaired of the
continuance of his greatness.

His Kingdom was advanced to the height, V. Matt. 6.19, 20.
but he discovered Principles of decay in it. He saw that no Kingdom but that
of Heave could last for ever, and possibly he might discover the fool in his
son the young Prince Rehoboam, that should loose not only his Tributary
dominions, but ten tribes of Israel also. He had Treasures good store; but he
found Principles of decay in them too; he saw no Treasures on Earth could last
or be secure. He hated the madness and folly of his delights and pleasures,
and he hated the Magnificence of his Works and labors, Nay he hated this
present life also, because every thing in the end was grievous unto him.
Eccles. 2.17.
The vanity of the Creature, after a full Experiment made, led him to this
great conclusion That Happiness was to be obtained not in this but in another
life. It was with him in general as it had been before with his Brother Ammon
in one particular: As when Ammon found what little satisfaction his exorbitant
lust received in the ravishing his sister Thamar, It is said in the Text, that
Ammon hated her exceedingly, Insomuch that the hatred wherewith he hated her,
was greater than the love wherewith before he loved her. 2 Samuel 13.15. Solomon
in like manner, when he was disappointed of that content and satisfaction, that
he hoped to obtain in his Riches, Magnificence, Glory and Pleasures, then he
hated all his glorious Works, nay he hated his present life it self, because he
found that all things under Heaven were vanity and vexation. Surely, my
Brethren, if Happiness or true satisfaction had bin to be found in Glory, or
Riches, or in the pursuance of any sort of pleasures, Eccles. 2.12.
Solomon had found it, For what can he do that comes after the King? that
comes after so great and so wise a King. Why the Text answers Eccles. (...).
De morib. ad Nichomach. lib. 10 cap. 6. Eccles. 12.13.
3.12. he may do even that which is already done. He may try as Solomon did
for satisfaction by them; but he shall find in the Issue, as Solomon did, that
there is no full Content in Glory or Riches, in Laughter or Marth, in Wine or
Women, or any other reputed pleasure; but that all things in this world are in
the end vanity and vexation. Aristotle, who is esteemed the best and wisest
Philosopher, makes this final Resolution of his Ethics, that Happiness did
not consist in voluptuousness, but in the practice of virtue. Solomon was
wiser than he, He tried all things, and after a full Experiment he concludes
more divinely, that Man's happiness consists neither in Riches, nor Honors,
nor Pleasures, but in the fear of God: which indeed makes this life happy by
giving us hope of a better and more glorious life in the World to come.

And let this Experiment of Solomon, unless we think that we can extract more
good from the Creature than Solomon could, satisfy us with the Truth of our
first Conclusion.

My second conclusion was, that the design of the (...), as Aristotle calls
them, of those I mean that aim at Happiness by ways of Luxury, is not only
vain, but huriful also. And that the pursuance of the satisfaction of these
Lusts of Intemperance, is certainly Mischeivous and dishonorable to Man as Man.

Quidam se voluptatibus immergunt, quibus in consuctudinem abductis carere non
possunt; ob hoc miserrimi sunt, quod eo pervenerunt, at illa quae supervacanea
fuerunt, sacta sunt necessaria; serviunt itaque voluptatibus non fruuntur; and
mala sua, quod malorum ultimum est, amant. Seneca.
Philosophers have observed, that it is one Mischief consequent to all Lusts of
Intemperance, that Men's Lusts are not satisfied but increased thereby, and
their Appetite so corrupted; that they cannot live without them. The pleasures
which they use, they are quickly made slaves unto, and they cannot wean
themselves from that which in short time must be their Ruin: This I lay down
for a Rule; that all Lusts of this kind contrary to the Laws of Religion and
virtue are Lusts of Intemperance. And for their Mischief, this we find in
general, that persons Quid quod ne mente quidem recte uti possumus multo cibo
and potione completi? Est praeclara epistola Platonis ad Dionis propinquos, in
qua Scriptum est his fere verbis. Quo cum venissem vita illa beata quae
serebatur plena Italicarum Syracusanarumque mensarum nullo modo mihi placuit,
bis in die saturum fore nec unquam pernoctare solum; caeteraque quae comitantur
huic vitae in qua Saptens nemo efficitur unquam, moderatus vero multo minus.
Cicero in 5. lib. Tusc. Quaest.
riotous, or drunken, or debauched by any of these Intemperances, have first of
all their Minds weakened, and the faculties of their souls enervated thereby.
You shall rarely find in such men any true Wisdom or able Counsel, or
persevering Industry, or any Excellence; and Apud Samnites morum Censores
vinolentos a Senatu amovebant tanquam indignos qui honores and publica munia
gererent; Indignum enim videbatur illos, qui ingenio temulento and marcido
forent, quique libidinum maculis notarentur, ad Remp accedere, aut de publicis
consultare: quod etiam Cretenses, and Lacedemonios and Carthaginenses
factitasse novimus. Alex. ab Alexand. lib. 3. c. 11.
therefore in wise and well governed states, persons given to the least of
these vices, have bin by Law made incapable of any public office or Employment.

Nor are these vices less ruinous to the Body. Who has Woe? Who has Sorrow?
Who has Contention? Who has redness of eyes? Who has wounds without cause?
Even they that tarry long at the Wine, says Solomon. Prove. 23.30. Alexander,
Seneta lib. 12. Epist lib. 12. E. pist. 84. Plutarch. Dialog. 19.
that great and Invincible Conqueror, was, as many write, conquered himself and
killed by Drunkenness.

And for other Ryots, It is an old observation too frequently renewed, Plato
frugali coena, a quo cu^ Timotheus Cono. nis Filius Dux Atheniensium, omissis
coenis Imperatoriis, ad convivium assumptus, and frugali coena exceptus esset,
reversus ad suos dixit, Qui cum Platone^ oenant, etiam postero die been habent.
Aelian l. 2. c. 18. Cicero. Tus. q. lib. 5. A. Gell. l. 15. c. 8.
that as the greatest Health and Pleasures of the Body come by Frugality and
Temperance, virtues that our Religion commends to us, so the greatest
Illness, by excesse^ He that withdrew himself from a great Invitation to eat a
Philosophical Commons with Plato, had this for his Excuse, that those who eat
with Plato are well, in good mind and stomach the next day afterward. And on
the other, side It is a good character of a ryottous feast, that is given us by
Phavorinus in A. Gellius, That all the wit of it consists in two things, In
sumptu and Fastidio, in being costly, and making their Guests sick of the
Entertainment. It is no honest Ambition, my Brethren, for Men to destroy the
Bodies of their Friends by those means that God has appointed for their
Conservation. Press not that upon thy Friend that his Nature requires not,
and may be endammaged by. Know you not, that your superfluities are due unto
the poor? Cram not then the Rich Man with his Portion, else thou imitatest the
worst of Thieves; thou robbest the poor, Gen 18 6, 7, 8. Heb. 13 2. Quaesitotum
terra pelagoque c^borum Ambitiosa fames and lautae gloria Mensae Lucan. l. 4.
de bello civili.
and then, as Thieves usually do, thou misem ployest what thou stealest from
him, Namely to abuse the body of thy richer Neighbor. Abraham is highly
commended for his hospitality in Scripture, yet his way was not the way of
Riot. For when he had got a tender and a good Calf well dressed with a Dish of
Butter; and a Mess of Milk, he thought it an Entertainment fit for Angels. It
is not Natural hunger, but Ambitiosa fames (as a Poet calls it) the pride of
high eating or of sumptuous feasting, that requires more and Dimidium plus
toto, the less is the better for the Body. Diverbium illud, Dimidium plus toto
in laudem temperantiae and frugalitatis natum been explicat celebri disticho
Hesiodus.

(...),
(...).
(...). Cluadian. lib. 1. in Rufinum -- ontentus honesto
Fabritius parvo, spernebat munera Regum,
Sudabatque gravi consul Serranus ar^tro,
Et casa pugnaces Curios angusta tegebat.
Plus habent voluptatis and cruciatuum minus, qui frugaliter vivunt quam qui
genio indulgent, Dictum Socratis. Ipsae voluptates in tormenta vertuntur,
Epulae cruditatem generant, Ebrietas membrorum torporem, ac tremorem; libidines
manuum ac pedum and articulorum depravationem, Denique mortem. Seneca. in
epist. ad Luc. Quis Hostis in quenquam tam contumeliosus fuit, quam in quosdam
voluptates suae? Sufficit enim alicui, si hostem suum excaecat; voluptates
autem non solum excaecant voluptuosos, sed etiam impotentes reddunt, and
contractos and lep^osos, and diversis aliis infirmitatibus confringunt. Idem.
Legimus quosdam aeticulari morbo laborantes, and humoribus podagrae,
proscriptione bonorum ad simplicem Mensam redactos convaluisse; quia Epularum
la^gitate ac voluptatibus caruerunt quae corpus and animam frangunt. Hieronym;
contra Jovin.




Thirdly, all these ways of Intemperance are certainly ruinous to the Estate.
When did the estate of the Roman Common wealth thrive but when frugallity and
Temperance were esteemed virtues, when the Consuls themselves were not ashamed
of their good husbandry. When for a Cook to have showed his art in dressing any
thing but plain meat had been Criminal, a good Occasion for his banishment as
it was by the Spartan Law. When their chief Magistrates took oaths at their
Inauguration, as in the Roman Common wealth once they did, that in their
public feastings, they would use no Wine but that of their own country, and
which grew upon the place (a piece of frugallity, let me tell you, that by the
by, is particularly commended to Christians by some ancient Fathers, by Clemens
Alexandrinus particularly, and which possibly might not ill become the present
necessities of this Nation.) In these days, I say, of their Frugality and
Temperance it was, that the Romans thrived and grew every day more great and
formidable: and when did that great Empire first begin to run to decay and
ruin, even when they had 1000 times the Men, and 1000 times the Money, but the
men were corrupted by Luxury and the money spent upon that Luxury. When an
Aelius verus, a Geta or a Vitellius would spend the Revenue of a province in
one days Riot, and an Heliogabalus the Revenue of two in one nights
chambering. I wish we in all the poverty we complain of were not come near
their Luxury, Crasso inter Romanos pecuniae magnitudo locupletis nomen dedit,
at per Luxum ejusdem tandem bona venierunt. v. val. Max. l. 6. c. 11. Melchior
Jun. in Orat. Luxuriae adjun. ctam dicit inopiam Plautus. in Trin. in prologo.
Parsimonia apud vetere^ Romanos non domestica solum observatione ac d^sciplina;
sed publica etiam animadversione legumque Complurium sanction^ bus custodita
est. Veteri senatus decreto jubentur principes civitatis, qui ludis
Megalensibus antiquo ritu mutitarent (i. e. Mutua inter se convivia agitarent,
jurare apud COSS. verbis conceptis non amplius in singulas caenas sumptus esse
facturos quam centenos vicenosque aeris, praeter olus and far and Vinum, neque
vino alienigeno, sed pattio usuros, etc. apud Gellium lib. 2. cap. 24.

(...), etc. apud Clement. Alexandrin: Paedagog. lib. 2. page 156.


nay, I wish we did not in many things exceed their very excesses. Number the
Ingredients of your Dishes and you will find that there is scarce a great
dinner now in a Tavern; where their Olio's, Bisks and grand-meats do not exceed
the famed pentapharmacum of Aelius verus, or the Tetrapharmacum of the Emperor
Adrianus. And are we not, if not as choice, Coquos esse non permittebantalios,
quam ca^nis duntaxat qui vero quamvis artem cupediariam novis. set, eiiciebatur
Sparta, Aelianas l. 14. de var. Hist. Quin and Marius Consul (si credimus
Eutropio) gloriae sibi duxit, quod solitus erat con. vivium parum site
adornare, quod histrione^ nullum habebat neque pluris pretii Coquum quam
villicum.
yet at least as Immoderate in our Wines. I speak not of the third sort of
Intemperance, I have no pleasure to libell the Age I live in. But give me leave
to remember you of the advice of Bathshebah, she was a wise and a great Queen
Mother: One that could never be suspected of unkindnesse or disloyalty to her
Lemuel, that is, to her Solomon, to the son of her Womb and the son of her
Bones. And yet we find that with great tenderness of expression she advised
him against Intemperance in Wine and Women, as that which had destroyed Kings.
All Intemperances are Apollyons and Abaddons, impartial in their mischief. And
if by Luxury, Empires, and Royal estates are suddenly ruined, much sooner will
our private estates and fortunes by these means be exhausted.

Nor are these sins of Intemperance only private and domestic Annoiances, they
are public Nusances, fit to be presented in a Leet, they are sins against
society and occasions of Injustice also. Prove. 31. Nulla pestis capitalior quam
voluptas corporis, cujus avidae libidines temere and effraenate ad peccandum
incitant. Hinc Patriae Proditiones, rerump. eversiones, Nullum denique sceus,
nullum facinus est, ad quod suscipiendum libido voluptatis non impellat. Dictu^
Architae Tarentini apud Giceronem de senectute expositum.
For who are they that assemble themselves with the Congregations of Robbers,
and use ill Arts of living, but those who by Intemperance have spent their
estates in making provision for their Lusts? But above all others, that
Incontinence, the 3d Species, described by chambering and Wantonness, is the
Mother of great varieties of Injuries. If it runs out into Adultery it causes
the breach of Conjugall faith, which is the foundation of all Domestic Union,
then Spurious heirs are thrust into inheritances not belonging to them, and
instead of Love, that cements Families, they are harraz't with the sad effects
of Hatred and Jealousy; which end commonly in Duels, poisons and such other
Malicious Revenges. But if it run out into Fornication only, It brings in
murder of Infants or their ill Education, the stains of Bastardy and 1000
other Inconveniences.

Lastly, let us consider how dishonorable a thing it is for Man as Man, who is
confess't to have a divine and rational Soul, to be made a slave to such
bestiall filthy lust. There is not a Man among the Heathen but apprehends
himself made for better ends.

Os homini sublime dedit, Coelumque videre -- Jussit -- Says one of their own
Poets. Man was not made to be a sot, Quod si Pupillum tibi Deus commifisset,
nu^ iilum negligeres? Te vero cu^ tibi ipfi commendavit, inquiens, non habeo
aliquem fideliorem cui te committam quam Teipsum Hunc volo ita mihi custodias,
quemadmodum ipsius Natura postulat; scil. pudicum, fidele^ altum, infractu^,
affectibus malis vacuum, moderatum, Sobrium etc. Apud Aria^um in Epictet.
or to intend no more then what all beasts intend and enjoy much more than he.
No, man was made for the Exercise of virtue and contemplation of God and
communion with him and has (even as Heathen Philosophers have observed) a Soul
apt for such Employments. How base therefore and dishonorable a thing were it
for Man to wallow in the dirty puddle of his lusts; which makes him unfit not
only for communion with God, but also for the exercise of Reason and virtue
among Men.

Who then but a fool would wish to live the life of sensual pleasures, when,
as I have proved unto you, there is neither satisfaction, nor content to be had
in the Enjoyment, nor safety either to the mind, Body or estate, to be had in
the pursuance of those pleasures to which we are addicted by our Natural
Lusts; besides that it is dishonorable and unworthy of a Man to be made a
vassal and slave to such Enjoyments, as are commun to him with the beasts that
perish.

All this you will say you could have heard in the Moral Philosophy School;
and it is probable you might. Morality is a great and acceptable part of Gods
service, and our Duty, and he uses his Reason well, who by it establishes
himself in Moral Reformation. St Paul himself presses a Moral Argument
against the use of these Intemperances, as 1 Cor. 6.18. where he tells us,
that he who commits fornication sins against his own body, which is a
Truth commended to us by all Moralists.

It is true, we that are Christians have more high and spiritual Reasons to
move those who value the honor and Interest of their professions. And therefore
my third Conclusion was, That the pursuance of lustful pleasures was most of
all Mischevous and dishonorable to Man as Christian. We cannot serve God and
Lust.

Simul esse possunt, Simul regnare non possunt. Heaven and Hell are not more
contrary in their Rules, designs and Ends than they. For let a man put on the
strongest Resolutions of Piety, let him bind those Resolutions with the
strongest vows, yet a Dalilah in his Bosom, a reigning Lust will quickly
ruin and nullify them all. Seeing therefore we cannot serve God and our
lustful pleasures at the same time, let us own our own Master, his servants we
are to whom we obey, let us take heed we do not come under the Character 1 Timothy
3.4. of being (...), lovers of pleasures more than Lovers of God: For they
which are so, have denied their first profession, which was to keep Gods holy
Will and commandments and to renounce the sin full Lusts of the Flesh.

Secondly, which is the other part of my Conclusion. The pursuance of all
sensual pleasures is highly dishonorable also to Man as Christian. This may
be learned from that Argument of St Paul 1 Cor. 6.19. Know ye not that your
Bodies are Temples of the holy Ghost, that is, as Churches and Temples are
honored above other places by being consecrated to Gods service, so are our
Bodies honored above the bodies of other Men by being consecrated to the
service and Inhabitation of Gods holy Spirit. Sometimes for the like honor done
unto them our Bodies are compared to holy and consecrated vessels, and
therefore the same Apostle tells us that this is the will of God even our
Sanctification, that every one should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4, 3, 4.
not in the lust of Concupiscence. (...) indeed, which we translate vessel,
signifies also any utensill or Instrument, and the body being the Instrument
not only of the rational soul, but also of the holy Spirit, is therefore
properly called (...), Its utensill or vessel, but then (as the Apostle
intimates) the utensils of the soul or Spirit are to be used honorably, holily
and cleanly; and if Philosophy has condemned the pleasures of Intemperance, as
unworthy the Aims of Men, much more will they appear to be below and unworthy
of a Christian. It was the Strict command of God by the Prophet Esaias, Depart,
depart, touch no unclean thing ye that bear the vessels of the Lord. And if it
be so strictly required that those should be clean that bear the vessels, much
more Reason is it that those should be clean that are the vessels of the Lord.
Consider, my Brethren, the filthinesses that are consequent to all manner of
Intemperances, they are so very filthy they are not to be named in a Christian
Assembly. Of what Judgment then shall we be thought worthy, if when we have
consecrated our vessels unto God, we afterward dishonor and pollute them? He
acceps the gifts of our Bodies as well as that of our souls and Spirits, and
has preferred them to be vessels of sanctification, purity and Honor; what a
Judgment fell upon Belshasser when he was taken in the act of profaning the
Material vessels of the Sanctuary in his Luxury and drunkenness, Dan. 5. But
the sin of the loose and debauched professor is worse than this. For he
polluteth the Temple it self, the Sanctuary it self. For such is every
Christians Body unto Christ. The Intemperate man may pretend much, but he
cannot truly boast of any Religion or love to the Church, He has a zeal it may
be against the separatist, but he considers not that even in the same kind
the sacrilegious separatist is less profane then He; The separatist does very
ill when he profanes the material. Temple, but the intemperate Christian does
worse when he profaneh the spiritual. The separatist defaceth the pictures of
the Saints, but the Intemperate Christian defaceth the very Image of God
according to which he was created.

I think I may yet further follow my Apostle and step a little higher in
expressing the honor that is done unto our bodies, against which we sin by
these Intemperances. For our Bodies are not only said to be the vessels,
Temples, and Sanctuaries, unto Christ, but even Members of him also, because of
the same Spirit that cohabiteth both in our Lord and us. St Paul presses this
Argument home against the 3d and worst sort of Intemperance, 1 Cor. 6.15. Know
you not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ, shall I then take the
Members of Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot? Surely he that
desires to be called by the name of a Christian, and would deserve that name,
can never intend so vile an Act, or willingly consent so to dishonor the
Members of his Lord.

The truth is our Religion goes beyond Philosophy, and affords not only the
best Rules of Sobriety, but the best encouragements to it and the best
Dissuasives from the contrary. V Tacit. l. 3. Ann, Alexandiu^ ab Alexan. l. 3.
c. 11.
Yet as Tiberius spoke in Tacitus concerning the Laws anciently made in Rome
against Luxury, Leges contemptu abolitas securiorem Luxum fecisse, that those
Laws being once suffered to be despised made Luxury ride on more triumphantly
and secure. This is our very Case. The Gospel of our Lord has prescribed us
good Medicines, but our Disease is grown so great, as to have the Mastery and
to triumph over all our Medicines, vice is grown so powerful and impudent as
to run down Religion it self from off the stage of this sinful World; when St
John pronounced that dismal sentence in the Conclusion of his Epistle, (...),
The whole world lies down and sinks under the power of its own wickedness He
excepted then the Christians out of that World; 1 John 5.19.
But where is now the power of Christianity it self, where is there now even
among Christians the Man that in St John's sense sins not? where is the Man
that guardeth and keeps himself so, that the Wicked one touches him not?

Is it not an ill and a desperate case, my Brethren, that we can be contented
with the empty name of Christianity and can suffer the Laws and power of
Religion to be contemned? Is not the Word of God as sufficiently able now as
formerly to hamper and toil the Consciences of profane and evil men? Methinks I
have a mind to imitate St James, to make an Apostrophe to them and to call
these wicked Men a little by their own names. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses,
those are the Apostles words, Ye Drunkards and ryottous persons, ye that are a
shame and scandal to your profession, ye that abuse the Members of Christ and
continually dishonor and profane your Bodies, your Bodies said I? Nay they are
not yours, those vessels I mean that your Lord has made and bought; and which
first in your Baptism and since in every Sacrament received by you, ye have
dedicated to God, and he has appointed to Sanctification and holiness; What
will ye not stand to the Covenants ye have made with your God? Is it nothing in
a Matter so sacred to give and to take, to offer and resume, to promise and
prevaricate? Is it not a great profaneness and sacrilege to defile and pollute
the vessels ye have dedicated? And do ye not fear to be overtaken in your
profanesse as Belshazzar was in his? Or if you are not afraid of the
Wickedness that is in it (for some indeed there are that are not afraid of any
Wickedness) yet why are ye not ashamed of your folly, Thus Vetulam praeferre
Immortalitali to prefer the filthy Harlottry of the world and flesh before
the eternal glory of your Bodies and souls? Why do ye pretend to
Christianity, if ye will not practice it? This we know that if you believe the
Gospel you cannot think your selves secure in the pursuance of these
practices. O ye young Men why do ye not consider what Solomon has foretold
you, that when you have rejoiced your fill and walked till you are weary in the
ways of your heart and in the sight of your eyes, you must in the end be
brought to a Reckoning and a Judgment for all the particulars of your lives,
Eccles. 11.9. O ye that are Men of Age, ye that have been now for a long time
professors of Christian Religion, why do you not consider what our savior has
prophesied Mat. 4.36. That as when in the days of Noah Men were eating and
drinking until the flood came and took them all away; so shall the coming of
the son of Man be. It was nothing but his great kindness that made our
Savior give his Scholars that Caution, Luc. 21.34. Take heed to your selves,
least at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness
and the Cares of this World and so that day come upon you unawares; As he is a
faithful and wise servant that makes it his business to do his Masters will,
so he has the character of an unfaithful evil and foolish servant, who puts
off the evil day and says in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and
sins and wrongeth his fellow servants and eats and drinks with the
drunken: For the Days of his particular Judgment shall come sooner than he
thinks for; The Lord of that servant (as himself has foretold) shall come in a
day, when he looks not for him and in an hour that he is not aware of, and
shall appoint his portion with Hypocrites. And let me tell you the portion of
Hypocrites is one of the worst Portions that is paid in Hell. That we may have
a better Portion in a better place I shall conclude by pressing seriously upon
you the very exhortation in my Text, That Exhortation that wrought so happily
upon St Augustine. And if it wrought upon St Augustine why may it not by the
gracious operation of the same Spirit work a like effect upon some of us? Let
us, my Brethren, cast of the works of darkness, and let us put on the Armor
of light, let us walk honestly as in the day, Not in ryotting and drunkenness,
not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in strife and Envying, but let us put on
the Lord Jesus Christ and make no provisions for the flesh to fulfill the
Lusts thereof. Let us know that our Religion ought to extend to every action of
our Lives, even to our eating and drinking and every part of our Conversation.
Let us remember whose we are, who has made us, and who has bought us with a
price. And since he has made both and redeemed both and we have offered and
given both, Let us glorify him with both, Both with our bodies and with our
Spirits, for they are his. Let us hold to that Rule of the Apostle which is or
ought to be the great Rule of every Christians life, whether we eat or drink
or whatsoever we do, let us do all to the Glory of God, so shall we never do
amiss, but the peace of God shall be with us and preserve us for ever.

Gloria Trinuni Deo.
PAPAKLSIS AN Exhortation to the pursuance of the CHIEFEST GOOD, WITH A brief
Review of the Opinions concerning it.

(...)

Romans 12. MATH: VI. 19, 20, 33. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon
Earth, where moth and rust does corrupt, and where theives break through and
steal; but lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven.

to which add, v. 33. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness.


IT is a certain truth, that in every Man there is an innate desire of good;
and it is as true that very few attain to the Good that they desire. For as
Maximus Tyrius in his 19th Discourse has ingeniously expressed it, It
happens to us, in this dark and muddy Region of the lower world, as it does
to those who scramble for gold or silver in a dark night: who while they want a
light to distinguish what they feek after, and only guess at it by deceitful
circumstances fall together by the Ears for they know not what. For he that
has gotten any thing will not part with it, for fear he should have already
gotten the desirable thing, neither will he abstain from further scrambling
for fear it should be yet to seek. Here is all the Tumult and the strife, the
Clamors and the noise, the sighs and the groans, the rapine and the suits, and
all the hurry of the overbusy world. This is the same thing that is intimated
by K. David, in his fourth Psalm, There be many that say, who will show us any
good? Not Many only, but All; even the whole world pretend to be and really are
in the pursuance of this good. But as St Paul observed concerning the Jews that
they obtained not to Righteousness because they sought it where it was not to
be found: So the Mass of Mankind attain not to the Possessron of Happiness
because they seek it where it is not. They search for the living among the
Dead. The Psalmist had observed concerning the Joy of the vulgar that it was
such a delight as did always ebb and flow, according to the increase or
decrease of their Corn and Wine and Oil. For in these lay their Treasures and
upon their Treasures they laid their Hearts, but he had settled his Eye upon the
true Joy, His hope was the hope of Heaven. His expectation was the Expectation
of the beatifick Vision, His desire was to have the face of God eternally
reconciled to Him, The light of Gods countenance was more to Him then was the
Joy of the Worldly man, When his Corn and his Wine and his Oil increased.
Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8.

This was the Happiness of David, the Man after Gods own heart, who had an
understanding whereby He was enabled to call Good Good and Evil Evil, and was
guided by the Spirit of God to have his Will and affections rightly placed;
which the greater part of the world neither had then, nor have to this Day.
Philosophers, Historians, Poets and all observers of human Manners and Nature
have taken notice of a vast variety in human inclinations. All pretend, and all
seek: yet in all this variety of Pretenders and seekers, few have designed, few
have sought the greatest good. Some place their happiness in Luxury and Riot,
others in Parsimony and thrift, The Merchant in his gold, the Drunkard in his
Wine, the effeminate in his Loves, The witty Man in pleasant Conversation; the
Orator in fine and well adorned speech, the Martial man in fights and
triumphs, some sportive men have been so vain as to think there could be no
greater Happiness upon Earth then to be a renowned Victor in the Olympique
Games, and to get a branch of Olive as a Trophee of Mastery in those feats of
Activity. Sardanapalus, I Will watrant you, thought himself a pretty Man, and a
Prince indeed when he was curled and dress't, and richly clothed and shut up
in his Palace among his concubines; but few others have thought that a design
of life well chosen for so great an Emperor. Xerxes thought himself little
less then the God he worshiped, if indeed his pride then allowed him to
worship any; when he (...) his fetters upon the Sea, and joynd Europe and Asia
with a bridge, not considering how short should be the Glory of that Action and
that it should suddenly end in being utterly overthrown; There are no things
done from the great Atcheivments of Alexander and Caesar, to those little Arts
that are not worthy to be named in a pulpit, that are not practiced with some
design of good: But this is the misery of our Condition that in all this
variety, the Ends we design are generally if not Base and Wicked, yet poor and
mean; and yet though poor and mean and eagerly pursued are seldom
notwithstanding sufficiently attained.

But it is more worth our Notice and Admiration that Philosophy it self, the
great Mistress of Curiosity, should profess to correct the Aims of the
Vulgar, and to design so Wisely and yet should fail, as notoriously as any
other profession of doing any thing worthy of all her anxious Disquisitions.
That it should challenge so great a Name, and procure so little Good, that they
should err so widely in their searches after the Summum Bonum, or chiefest
Happiness. For I do not find that they had the good luck to attain to any
thing that might give them just Occasion to cry out (...) I have found it, I
have found it: And those who seem to be the adepti and to have gotten most
considerable seize contented themselves generally with a very mean
Quarry. (...). Maximus Tyrius Dissett 19 ad Finem. Ad vos nunc refero quem
sequar^ etc. Cicero Academ. Q. l. 4.
It has been anciently observed that Pythagoras his Learning ended in a few
Musical Iingles, Thales's Wisdom in some uncertain Astronomicall Phansies,
Heraclitus's Contemplations concluded in solitude and weeping, Socrates his
renowned Philosophy led Him to the practice of unnatural lust. Diogenes his
sharpness of wit, to use his Body to endure all manner of nastinesse and
course labor; E. picurus's Inventions and Discourses, of which he boasts so
proudly, set Him down contented with any kind of Pleasure. We shall do
Aristippus no wrong at all if we join Him with the more renowned Epicurus. And
why may not the Stoics and Peripateticks Clubb also? who are both represented
to make the bare Action or virtue its own Reward. Such are the Ends and so
great is the variety in the Aims of these singularly learned Men? Whom then
shall we follow? or shall we follow none? shall we join issue with Maximus
Tyrius in the Discourse above commended and say what (...). That God has blown
the expectation and desire of Good, as a living spark into the heart of Man but
has hidden from him the Way to find it out. No by no means. This were no
better then blasphemously to cast man's fault upon his maker. God indeed for
Reasons hidden from us, and wrapped up in the abyss of his own secret knowledge,
formerly as St Paul speaks, winked at the Errors and vanity of mankind,
imparting true wisdom and the knowledge and desire of the chiefest Good to
very few. But since Christ the light of the world appeared among us he has
publikly preached these Truths. First that the Enjoyment of the kingdom of
Heaven is the chiefest, and indeed the only considerable good. Secondly that
there is no way to attain this Kingdom of God without first attaining his
Righteousness, and submitting our selves according to our Sacramental
Obligations to the Rules of the Gospel. Now these being laid down first, as
principles of eternal and unalterable Truth; Our savior gives us in the next
place the only safe advice, Namely that abandoning all other foolish and idle
Counsels, we should give our selves to be his Disciples: we should addict our
selves to Christianity, as to a Discipline of true Wisdom, we should design no
less then Heavenly Glory which is no doubt the chiefest Good. Omnis sapientia
hominis in hoc uno est ut Deum cognoscat and colat; Hoc nostrum Dogma, haec
sententia est. Quanta igitur voce possum, testificor, proclamo, denuntio. Hoc
est illud quod Philosophi omnes in tota sua vita quaesierunt, nec unquam tamen
investigare ^ comprehendere, tenere valuerunt: quia Religionem aut pravam
tenuerunt, aut totam penitus sustulerunt. Facessant igitur illi omnes qui
humanam vitam non instruunt sed turbant. Quid enim docent aut quem instruunt
qui seipsos nondum instruxerunt? Quem sanare aegroti, quem regere caeci
possunt? huc ergo nos omnes quibus est curae sapientia, conferamus an
expectabimus donec Socrates aliquid sciat? aut Anaxagoras in tenebris lumen
inveniat? aut Democritus veritatem de puteo extrahat? aut Empedocles dilatet
animi sui semitas? aut Arcesilas and Carneades videant, sentiant, percipiant?
Ecce vox de caelo veritatem docens, and nobis sole ipso clarius lumen
ostendens. Quid nobis iniqui sumus and sapientiam suscipere cunctamur? quam
clari homines contritis in quaerendo aetatibus suis nunquam reperire potuerunt.
Qui vult sapiens ac beatus esse, audiat dei vocem, discat justitiam,
sacramentum Nativitatis suae norit, humana contemnat, divina suscipiat, ut
summum illud bonum ad quod natus est, possit adipisci. Lactantius lib. 3. de
falsa Sap. cap. 30.
We should sell all that we have rather then to mill the buying of this pearl,
And when we have fixed our Eye aright we should then pursue wisely that
Happiness that we have in our Design, we should endeavor after it in that way
by which it is only attainable which is declared to be the way of
Righteousness. Nor is it any Righteousness that will lead us to this
Kingdom. The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees will not do it. Our
Savior has told us in the beginning of his Sermon in the Mount that Except our
Righteousness exceed their Righteousness we shall never enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Original Righteousness we have none at all. We lost it,
God knows, as soon as we were entrusted with it.

Actual Righteousness we have none of out own. We must speak of all our
Righteousness as the Man to the Prophet concerning his Axe, when the head of
it fell into the Water. 2 Kings. 6.5. Alas Master for it was borrowed. We must
have a Righteousness without us called by our Savior Matt. 6.33. Gods
Righteousness, that is a Righteousness given and imputed. And we must have a
Righteousness within us and that is Gods Righteousness also, a Righteousness
given though inherent: A spirit of Righteousness, a new Spirit and a new
heart. This inherent Righteousness gives us an assurance that we have a title
to the other The other, the Righteousness without us, that of our Savior is
indeed only meritorious. In the argument of merit O Christ we will make mention
of thy Righteousness, even of thy Righteousness only, And yet we know that
without holiness, without inherent holiness no man shall see thy face. No man
shall have the benefit of thy Passion or any part of thy Righteousness, that
has not thy Spirit. For whatsoever has not the Spirit of Christ, they are
none of his. It is not the calling of our Savior Lord Lord that will give us
any title to his merits, without our sincere endeavor to do the will of our
father which is in Heaven. This I take to be a sufficiently orthodox and sense
of those words, seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness.

Now if these are the principal of our Masters precepts, surely we have no
reason to think his Yoke uneasy or his Commandments grievous, this is the sum
of the burden that he lays on us. He has provided an Estate of
unconceivable Glory and Happiness for us. And has commanded us to seek it,
And further least we should err and mistake the way that leads to this
Estate, He has declared unto us that it must be sought in the Way of
Righteousness, for the Robe of Glory can no more become an unrighteous man,
then Honor can be seemly for a fool. He has commanded us for our own sakes to
seek this Kingdom of Glory, but to seek it in that just, proper and humble way
and method that Himself has prescribed. And when you recollect and consider
the Nature and Excellence of that Estate you will confess it an Estate beyond
all others infinitely worth your seeking.

Reflect then but with one glance of your Mind upon it as it is described in
the certain Oracles of eternal Truth. David first in the 16th Psalm and the
last verse assures us that in the Kingdom of Heaven, or, which is all one, in
the presence of God, there is fulness of Joy, and that at his right hand
there are pleasures for evermore. Now in these words there is a description of
the greatest happiness that can be or can be imagined: There is nothing for
its nature more desirable then Joy or delight; there is no measure (or
proportion) better then fulness, There is no Duration better then Eternity.
And therefore he that has Joy for the kind, and fulness of that Joy for the
Measure and joys or pleasures which for the duration of them shall last not
for a day, or a year, nor only for ten years, or ten-thousand years, but for
evermore, He surely can have no further Happiness to wish, nor greater
enjoyment to design.

And St Paul from that Text 1 Cor. 2.9. Where it is said that Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it ever entered into the Heart of Man to conceive
the things that God has prepared for them that love Him, intimates thus much,
That if you could gather together all the riches of Nature, and could add to
the heap, whatsoever Human Phansy could further Imagine, For example! Let there
be presented the best and Clearest Beauties for the Eye, The most Ravishing
Musiks for the Ear, the most delicate meats for the palate, let the choicest
entertainment be found out, for every Fancy and every Appetite, that Nature
improved by Human art and study can supply us with; Join and place in one and
the same person, all the wealth of the City, the Grace, the Gallantry, the
Glory of the Court, the learning of the University, the most desirable
conversation of learned and good Natured Men; Add to these the prudence of the
Wisest Councels, the Courage, conduct and success of the most famed
commanders, all the Regalia that Princes and Emperors enjoy in the fulness of
their Majesty and power, and last of all add also which is infinitely of more
worth then all these, the enjoyment of Virtue and the inchoate Grace of God,
Then make all these enjoyments of the greatest imaginable duration, and extend
them to his dearest Issue, and nearest Relations yet all this is still below
the Happiness good Christians shall enjoy in the life of Glory. For all this
may be conceived, But the state of Glory is so Glorious that St Paul (who saw
it) says it cannot be conceived. It connot enter into the Heart of Man.

Do you now, believe all this to be true? Do you receive this Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles nay of Christ Himself? Or do you deny that Article of the
Christian Faith that affirms the being of such a life everlasting after Death?
If you do believe it, can you think such an Estate not worth the seeking after?
Do you think your selves wiser then Abraham and Moses and all the worthies of
the former ages, who quitted their greatest temporal Interests that they might
seek this Inheritance.

Examine your selves my Brethren and first see whether there is not a fault in
the very spring: whether there be not somewhat defective in your very faith.
Suppose now that with St Paul you had been rapt up to the third Heaven and
there had taken a view of those unspeakable Glories, that were then and are now
enjoyd by the Spirits of Just men made perfect. Would you not think that the
obtaining of that Estate and to be made one of those glorified beings, would be
worth, (nay infinitely more worth then) all the pains you could take and all
the labors you could undergo during the Remainder of your short uncertain
lives? you are Christians, and your being so implies that you believe there are
such Joys, your faith (if you have any) gives you a confidence of them and
makes the existence of them evident unto you though you have not seen them as
St Paul did. For faith, as it is defined by the Author to the Ebrewes, is the
confidence of things hoped for and the Evidence of things not seen.

But if it be not from any want of faith but from a certain Carelessenesse or
Retchlessnesse as some call it that you are lazy and neglect the seeking this
your greatest Interests. Consider I pray a little further, that if you will not
concern your self to be thus very happy; you then must take the just contrary
lot and submit your self to be very miserable. If you will not take pains to
attain that Glory that is the crown and reward of the just, you must expect to
fall into Hell even into the Nethermost Hell with the wicked. Do you think the
Rich Luxurious Glutton mentioned in the Gospel, who in his life time cared not
for Heaven nor the concerns of the world to come, who pampered Himself and
suffered Lazarus to starve before his door. Might such a Man as he (I say) have
the liberty granted Him of a second Trial and to live over his life here on
Earth but once again, Would he not rather spend his days neatly and soberly,
in frugality, and Temperance, (which are the Virtues that our Religion
commends to us) and give away the superfluities of his Estate in Charity to
the poor, then be sentenced the second time for his Cruelty and Riot (Vices ill
put together) into that place of Misery and Woe where during the vast duration
of Eternity he may not procure one drop of Water to cool his Tongue: Would you
know what that death is that they incur who are not preferred unto that
Eternal life that Christ has purchased for His? Flames and Brimstone and
Worms, the painful worm of conscience and that Hideous noise of Tophet,
that, is of Continual howling, burning and drumming, These are the parts of
the second Death. Now is it worth no pains to secure your selves from so
endless, so easelesse, so Remedy less a misery and torment? Where is your
sense my Brethren where is your Faith? Your Faith, or at least the
consideration of the Articles of your Faith, is commonly out of the Way when it
should be doing you any good. Let me ubraid it as Eliah ubraided the false God.
1 Kings. 18. Peradventure it is in a journey or else it sleeps. It sleeps
surely and must be awakened. Bestirre your minds and consider, Is not the very
avoiding the Torments of Hell of more consequence then the Enjoyments of all
the present Honors or estates, that we are capable of in this world, of more
consequence then either to avoid the miseries of this life, or even Death it
self. Which though it be a most dreadful thing to flesh and blood, yet (to use
the phrase of the devout Church Poet) it is but a Chair, a ready easy
conveiance into another Estate over which Death it self shall have no power.

But if you are of that Nice and Curious temper that you must be led only by
the silken threads of Example, not stratned by Council nor goaded on by
precept; Read I pray St Paul's writings and consider his Acts, as they are
recorded in the book of the Acts of the Apostles. Was his life like the life of
a Man that had but a little understanding? Do you think your selves wiser then
He was? If not, why do not you, why do not we all imitate Him? Why have we not
all his Zeal and his Resolution? Could Tribulation or Distress or famine or
peril or Sword, Nay could either life or Death, Angel or Devil,
principallities, or powers, things present or things to come, could either
height or depth or any other Creature hinder him from pursuing his well chosen
Aims, from seeking the life of Glory and from fighting against his Spiritual
Enemies that he saw ready to obstruct him and to hinder him in his Race thither.

But you will say what I before intimated, that St Paul had the advantage of
us. For he had been Rapt up into the third Heaven and had seen this Glory. Well
then, if he saw it we have an Eye witness at least that confirms the
existence of it to us: But had Abel, had Enoch, had Noah seen the objects of
their Faith? By Faith Noah being warned of God of things not seen prepared an
Ark to the saving of his house and so became heir of the Righteousness that is
by Faith. Heb. 11.7.
And if we will be heirs of Righteousness we must believe God concerning
things to come which we never saw, we must condemn the world also, and prepare
an Ark even the Righteousness of Christ to convey us to that Kingdom Blessed
are they, says our Savior to St Thomas who have not seen and yet have believed
Consider the whole Army of Martyrs mentioned in the eleventh chapter to the
Hebrews who through Faith subdued Kingdoms wrought Righteousness, Joh. 20.29.
obtained promises stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire,
escaped the Edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant
in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, Women received their dead
raised to life again, others were tortured not accepting of deliverance that
they might obtain a better Resurrection, This better Resurrection, though
unseen by them as yet was the Anchor of their Hope, and the spring of their
Courage, They were stoned, they were sawed asunder, they were tempted, they
were slain with the sword, They went about in sheep skins and goat skins, being
destitute, afflicted and tormented; Of whom the world was not worthy they
wandered in deserts and mountains and hid themselves in the dens and caves of
the Earth. This they did, this they suffered, though they were never rapt up
into the third Heaven, They endured all these hardships through Faith even the
common faith that we profess and it was this Article concerning the better
Resurrection, and the life of abundant Glory, that upheld them.

Where then is our Zeal and our strengh? Do we not in every public service, in
every assembly that we make, like this, profess that we believe the same
resurrection of the Flesh and everlasting life after death, And yet have we no
regard to any thing but what is present? Are things in Reversion of no value
with us. Do not all men among us that have any Reputation for Wisdom take care
to secure their estates in all kinds of secular Tenures that are to commence to
others after their own deaths? And should not Charity begin at home? Is this
our fashion, or, if it be, is it agreeable to the Rules of Wisdom and prudence,
that we should provide so studiously for the welfare of our surviving Friends
and should take no care of our own eternal welfare even after our departure
hence? Is our present estate for so long a term, is it so certain, so
permanent so secure that we need not be concerned, no not for so vast a
futurity? Whosoever thinks himself so perfectly settled, Let him above all other
dread that sentence Luk: 12.20. Thou fool this night even this night shall thy
Soul be required of thee, and then whose shall these things be that thou have
provided. For so is he, thus shall it be with Him, This shall be his lot from
the Lord, who lays up treasures to himself and is not rich toward God: He
shall also suddenly be taken from the wealth wherein he trusted.

Understand ye brutish among the People! O we fools when shall we be wise? Do
we part with the life of Glory, Do we part with the Kingdom of God to seek we
know not what? Or do we think to have Saul's fortune to find a Kingdom while we
are seeking Asses? Why is the heart of the world set upon that which is not? So
short are the continuance of pleasures, honors, life it self that they are
scarcely to be accounted things that are: Every man sees that the pleasures of
this world, are quick and short, and pass away like lightning from us. Honors
are but Feathers which the breath of other men may discompose every Moment:
Riches the more substantial and more general Idol, are good for nothing, if
we well observe it, but to make the Wing the larger, to make a Man soar higher,
and fly with the greater sweep, and thus no sooner are they but they make
themselves wings and fly away. And what is life, the Ordinary life of Nature,
Extend it to its length it is but as a day says Cicero in comparison of
Eternity. Were it not full of Trouble, Sorrow and disease, Were there nothing
otherwise to be excepted against but the shortness and Uncertainty of it, It
were not a possession that for its own sake ought at all to be esteemed. Quae
vero aetas longa? aut quid omnino homini longum nonne modo pueros, modo
adolescentes in cursu a tergo insequens nec opinantes affecuta est senectus!
Sed quia ultra nihil habemus, hoc longum dicimus: Omnia ista perinde ut cuique
data sunt pro part aut longa aut brevia dicuntur, apud Hipanim fluvium qui ab
Europae part in Pontum influit Aristoteles ait bestiolas quasdam nasci quae
unum diem vivant, ex his igitur hora octava quae mortua est, provecta aetate
mortua est, quae vero occidente sole, decrepita, eo magis si etiam folstitiali
die. Confer nostram longissimam aetatem cum aeternitate; in eadem propemodum
brevitate qua illae bestiolae reperiemur. Cicero Tusc: Quaest; lib. 1.
And therefore it is a most reasonable counsel of tke Psalmist in the 146t
Psalm Trust not in Man whose breath is in his Nostrils. Trust not in thy
Patron, in thy Friend, in thy Brother if his breath be in his Nostrils. Trust
not in thy self if thou have no better tenure in thy being then that. Man's
breath cease suddenly by a thousand Occasions; And when that breath's gone,
where is the Man you trusted in, or wherein is he to be accounted of? We may
make a blaze in our life. But this life burns all the while, as uncertainly as
a Taper, There is nothing surer then that this Taper will soon be blown out or
burnt out. Lord teach us so to number our days and the shortness and
Uncertainty of this present life, that we may apply our hearts to the highest,
truest, noblest Wisdom.

There is nothing in natural life considerable but this one thing, that
therein we have an Opportunity to purchase to our selves that life of abundant
Glory, that estate of eternal happiness that I have been now commending to
you. If we apply our selves to this then indeed we apply our selves to the
truest Wisdom, we have a prize set before us and liberty to run a Race: But if
eventually it be found that this price is put into the hand of fools, Our life
will be unto us but Occasion of eternal Misery and it would have been better
for us never to have been born.

Will any Man then whose faith is not asleep or in a journey will any Man I mean
that believes and considers the existence of Heaven and Hell and the other
doctrines of our Faith, venture to commit a sin or to provoke his judge, or to
do any thing that may endanger the damnation of his Soul to eternal Death to
save so poor a thing as this uncertain life, much less to get Riches or Honor
or any other worldly acquirement? Let us not therefore halt between two
Opinions. If the Gospel be Gospel Let it have the power of the Gospel. Fear
its threatenings Entertain its encouragements. Receive its Dictats. If you
receive not these, stay no longer here to be a scandal to the best Religion,
Go rather to the Font where you were initiated and there publicly Renounce and
disclaim your Faith. Turn professedly Julians or Judas's and insted of the
Apostles creed take up the loose discourse of the wicked Atheist or blasphemer,
as it is expressed in the Second chapter of the book of Wisdom and boasted
upon Occasions with a little Variety by our modern pretenders to profane Wit;
we are (as the ungodly wretch in that place most Cursedly expatiates) born at
all adventures: he means by chance, as if Men were not at all designed or
formed by the providence of God, and we shall be hereafter as if we had never
been. For the breath of our Nostrils is as smoke or (which comes very near the
Philosophy of our Modern Atheist) A (...) a little spark in the moving of the
heart. Which being extinguished our Body shall be turned into ashes, and our
Spirit shall vanish into the soft Air, And our name shall be forgotten in Time
and no Man shall have our works in Remembrance. For our time is a very shadow
that passes away, and after our End there is no returning. If you are prepared
now to renounce your Religion and to agnize these Aphorisms of Atheism to be
the articles of your Faith, If you are contented to be reckoned not with the
sheep but with the Goats and to have your portion with these wretches
hereafter, you may from the same place take the Counsel of the wicked
Reasoner, It is a fit Application for such a doctrine, Enjoy the good things
that are present and regard not the world to come. Fill your selves with costly
Wine and Ointments and let none of you go without some part of his
voluptuousness, Contemn the laws of God and Nature. Oppress the poor
righteous man, spare not the Widow and (which is perfect Hobbisme) Let your
strength be the Law of Justice and what is feeble count it little worth. Lay
wait for the Righteous Man (The man of great and just principles and
resolutions he must be rid out of the way) because he is not for your turn, he
will be sure to expose your baseness, to oppose your designs of Villainy and
wickedness, Examine him with Despitefullnesse Try him with Contumely, thus
know his meekness, thus prove his Patience. Do not only make your scoffs at
Virtue, but which are acts worthy a perfect Brave; destroy it and root it out
and then fear not to adventure upon any acts of Impiety or Insolence.

These are the Councels of the confirmed Reprobate in the second of Wisdom,
shame and Woe unto us that this noise should be heard in our streets, that these
Counsels should at this day be put in practice among us. And you, my Brethren,
if you have not come into the Council of these Cains and Nimrods, if these
Theorems of Ranting and Hectoring do yet affright you, if you dare not deny the
truth of the Christian doctrine that is not only countenanced by the Analogy of
other certain Truths but has also been confirmed by Miracles from God and
gifts of the holy Ghost Then as ye expect the light and life of God ye must
live as children of that light, as heirs of that life, ye must profess and
practice just contrary to the belief and practice of these reprobated Men: Ye
must believe that there is an eternal Wages reserved for Temporal
Righteousness, and an everlasting Reward to blameless Souls. And that (for
all the Rallery of these blasphemers) Man was not so wonderfully made by
chance, Nor born at all adventures, but that God created Man to be immortal,
and to be the Image of his own Eternity, as the Author of the book of Wisdom
there declares (in confutation of that wicked Reasoning which according the
Epicurean Hypothesis he had so lively represented) you are of those my
Brethren, that have not as I hope stood in the way much less sat down in the
seat of those insolent Scorners at all Religion and Goodness. You believe that
our Lord Jesus Christ shall one day come to judge the quick and the dead, when
as St Paul writes to his Colossians, those that have done well shall receive
the Reward of an Inheritance, and those that have done wrong shall receive for
the wrong that they have done and there shall be no respect of persons.

Those who have chosen to be patrones and practicers of Atheism and given
themselves over to the suggestions of the Evil Spirit and to the Vanity of
their own hearts, those who have contemned the Gospel, which as St Paul
observes is not hid to any but those that are lost, and slight the
Righteousness that is commended to us, though they are lofty now and full of
their Grandeur, how will their countenance fall when the sun shall become black
as Sackcloth of hair and the moon shall be as blood, and when the stars of
heaven shall fall to the Earth as when a fig tree casts her untimely figs.
With what boon grace will they carry themselves, when they shall see the
Heavens depart, as a scroll that is folded together, and every mountain and
every Island (and this of ours among the rest) shall be visib'y moved quite out
of their places. St John tells us what will be their condition at that time
who are wanting in Religion and good Manners though otherwise exalted in
secular dignity and Estate. Revel. 6.15. The Kings of the Earth and the great
Men, and the Rich men and the chief Captains and the bond and the free Men and
all that whole Gang of wicked Men and Unbeleivers shall hide themselves in the
dens and rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the Mountains and rocks, fall
on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the throne and from the
wrath of the Lamb. He whose first Advent to us was humble and mean and he that
in his passion for us showed the meekness of a Lamb will then appear as the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah: He shall then come no more as a Priest to atone for
us, nor as a Prophet to Preach unto us the way of life, but then only as a
Judge to acquit or condemn us And the man that has made no advantage of the
first advent shall not need to wish the second. There shall be no Place nor
means for Redemption then. But the fearful and Unbeleiving and Abominable and
Whoremongers and Sorcerers and Idolaters and Liars and other such sinful Men
shall have their part in that lake of fire and Brimstone where (whatsoever
Socinus or Mr Hobbes have thought to the contrary) the smoke of their Torment
shall ascend up for ever and ever and they shall have no rest, day nor night.
Those on the Contrary who have believed the Gospel of our Savior and by the
power of their Faith have overcome the Temptations of the world, and so by
reason of their Inherent Grace have a title to plead the merits of Christ and
his Righteousness for the Remission of their sins they shall inherit all
things even all the Glorious unconceivable Happinesses of Heaven.

To which Kingdom of Glory God Allmighty bring us through all those means and
methods that he has sanctified to that purpose Now to the King of Heaven and
to the Lord our Righteousness by whose merits only we have entrance into that
Kingdom, and to the Spirit of holiness who can only give us title to those
Merits and bring us within the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, to the
Whole holy and ever blessed Trinity in Unity be Glory Honor and Adoration for
ever.

FINIS.

