THE RISING SUN: OR THE SUN of RIGHTEOUSNESS, Shining upon the SONS of
UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. A Theological Sun-Dyal, Wherein Is to be seen, the Rising,
Motion, Influence, and manifold Operations of Christ upon the Soul, under that
clear and glorious resemblance of the Sun. As also, The Description of the true
Believer, in whom are to be found but the least measures and sparks of Grace,
which are here discovered and cherished. As also the highest degrees and full
growth in Grace are here delineated and furthered.

By JOHN SHEFFEILD, Preacher of the Gospel at Swithins, London.

Jerem, 33. 15, 16. In those days will I cause the branch of Righteousness to
grow unto David, and he shall execute Judgment and Righteousness in the Land;
in his days Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and this is
the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness.

Isai. 60. 19. The Sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the Moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be to thee an everlasting
light, and thy God thy glory.

London, Printed by Th. Maxey for SA. GELLIBRAND, at the Golden Ball in Paul's
Churchyard, 1654.

Superiori, sed Propiori Soli, Soli Justitiae Soli, Mundi conditori,
Eccleclesiae Redemptori (...) Theophilo, and (...) Philemoni.
(...)
COeli enarrant Domine Jesus, Coeli Coelorum enarrant Gloriam tuam, omnisque
eorum exercitus (...) illa celeberrima Corona, et (...) Tot veluti Aquilae
Solemn spectan^es, tot Parelii Solemn circumstantes, tot denique (...), Vultu
solemn versus ^ixo, ^emplu^ and (...), a tergo relin^uentes, Luna^, Solemque
ipsu^, and (...) sub pe^ibus conculcantes, te Solemn Iustitiae indesi^enter
^anunt, spectant, circumstant, adorant. Inter h^s ^im quasi in Sancto
Sanctorum, (...), non antea inspiciendam jam resera^am, and spectandam posuisti.

Visibiles, insuper and Inferiores hi Coeli, ^lendidumque illud expansum opera
manuum ^arum indicant, Praecipue vero inter ignes ille minores, Sol Coelorum
decus, terrarum gloria, Pecorumque hominumque Lux, Vita, Deliciae, imo Luminis,
Numinisque tui speciosissima Umbella. Hunc enim tibi pro vehiculo deligisti,
quoniam in ipso posuisti Tabernaculum tuum.

Sanctissima vero tam Prophetarum, quam Apostolorum cohors, eorumque (...)
Scripta te solum spirant, te Solemn praedicant, and sicut stella olim illa (...)
Visa Orientis Filios (Gentium Primitias) animi dubios, via nescios ad tua rect
a anteambulans deduxit Limina, ibique quasi ad Solis Domicilium (verum
Bethshemesh) Viatoribus perductis (ut Arcae foederis a Philistaeis Plaustro
Imposit^ divinitus antea evenerat) constitit; ita h^ turbam credentium (te
quaerentem) quas^ manu prehensa perducunt. In hisce enim posuisti lucernam tuam
pedes viatorum in via pacis dirigentem.

Quinetiam celeberrimus ille omnium Theologorum chorus, and Pastorum Grex, tot
in mundo Lumina, in dextra tua stellae lumen suum a tuo solius Lumine acceptum
referentes t^ solum (...) suspiciunt. Hisce etiam Arcam foederis Gestandam,
manibus aliis non contrectandam, (...) concredidisti.

Innumera denique per orbis totius fines credentium sparsa multitudo, tam
Naturae, qua^ Scripturae lumine adducti; Prophetarum, Apostolorumque
defunctorum, nec non pastorum praesentium testimonio inducti, tantaque insuper
Testium nube conducti, te solum insequuntur, quemadmodum sequacior ille populus
praecedentem olim ignis columnam; incessus, accessus, discessus, recessus,
gressusque tuos omnes observant, tecum aut moventes, aut manentes. Te solum
exoptant, te anhelant, in te etiamsi nondum conspectum, fama notum fide certa
nituntur, credentes diligunt, dilectum cordibus excipiunt, excipientes vero
gaudent (...), and suos quisque Thesauros aperientes pro sua cujusque facultate
munera ferentes adorant, tuam tantummodo (...) ad ipsorum beatitudinem omnibus
numeris consummandam praestolantur. Inter hos etiam ignis, nubisque columnam
praesentiae tuae symbolum constituisti.

In horum ego consortio unus, minimus; inter peccatores (eheu!) primus; inter
(...) imus ((...)) inter (...), inter Vere Sanctos nisi Gratia illa gratis
data, gratumque faciens satis superque abundasset, prorsus (...). Gratia tamen
tua sum id quod sum; meque tibi, tuaeque gratiae, quae prius electum, dein
dilectum facit totum debere agnosco. Inter amicos tamen sponsi siquos habet
(habet enim fidissimos, atat paucissimos) unum me asserere ausim, etiamsi inter
pronubos, filiosve Thalami haud sim dignus numerari.

De te, Pulcherrime hominum, de te quem unice diligit anima mea, narratura est
meditatio and scriptio nostra. Te solum scire, and qui te misit Patrem, haec
est vita illa aeterna. Te autem notum facere (te inquam crucifixum) hic vitae
praesentis scopus, hoc Ministerii opus.

Scire meum nihil est, nisi te cognoscere Christ,
Te mihi scire paru^, nisi quem scio te sciat alter.
Oh Utinam alias mihi concederetur lingua eruditorum, lingua instar Calami
scribae peritioris, ubi gregem tuum instruxero* at jam calamus in linguam
converteretur, linguam scribae cujusdam paratioris ad Regnum Coelorum, qui ex
suo omne genus Doctrinae Coelestis refertissimo promptuario, ^am recentiora,
quam vetustiora profert.

Quod potui feci non quod debui, non quod par est; unguentum quod habui
pretiosissimum in caput multo preciosius impendi. Sit nomen tuum sicut
unguentum diffusum, and ubicunque terrarum sese S^l long, lateque visendum
exhibuerit,

Nomen ibi, regnumque tuum tollantur in astra.

Ad me quod attinet, cum Propheta cogor* exclamare, Hei mihi homuncioni labiis
polluto, qui nec sapientiam didici, nec scientiam Sanctorum degustavi. Valde
mihi vereor ne ex turbine mihi respondeas, Quis est iste qui obtenebrat
consilium sermonibus inscit is? and in me just a excandescas iracundia, quod
non de te recte uti aequum est locutus sum.

Ex fulgore dedi fumum, ex fumo dato lucem.

Quis adeo coecus (gemens, tremensque loquor) ut servus tuus? surdus ut nuntius
iste tuus? Te tamen memini Thesaurum tuum testaceis istiusmodi Vasculis
imposuisse, qu^ supereminentia omnis potentiae omnisque efficaci^ ex Deo
prorsus, ex nobis nequaquam provenisse dignoscatur. Adest itaque mihi gloriatio
si quidem in infirmitatibus gloriari concessum; Quoniam in infirmitate humana
perfecta est gratia divina.

Quod superest, te Patremque tuum, Patrem illum luminum flexis genibus exoratum
velim: lucem, ve^itatemque tuam undiquaque splendentem, undique triumphantem
caelitus emittas, adeo ut hostibus omnibus debellatis, haeresibus extinctis,
schismatibus aut resartis, aut rescissis, dissidiis sopitis, tenebris
discussis, Pax, Lux and summa concordia Christianae Reipublicae restituantur.
Ecclesia tua non amplius ut vidua marito orbata, hostium vulneribus saucia,
natorum jurgiis exacerbata, Lachrymis propriis and cruore emacerata, maesta
vultu, maesta vest incedat, sed tandem (ut sponsum decet Altissimi) tuo lumine
quasi nuptiali vest induta, in sponsum dilectissimum familiariter reclinans,
ex eremo egressura cernatur, Pulchra ut Aurora speciosa ut Luna, clara ut Sol,
terribilis ut exercitus cum vexillis. Pro Diademate Coronam duodecem stellarum
Doctrinam duodecem Apostolorum sem: per gerens*

Ministros tuos dextra tua teneas, sinu foveas, Ecclesiam sanguine tuo
redemptam Spiritu and Verbo tuo Regas, Veritatem sartam tectam tueare,
Universis dona distribuas, Pusillum tuum Gregem protegas; tuum sit dilatatum.
Regnum a solis ortu ad occasum usque, ut projectus ille (quondam) lapis in
montem tandem excresens mundum universumimpleat. Tuam tibi Domine (...)
assumas, ut tibi Reges, Regnaque omnia inserviant, fortem illum (...)
Principem, omni sua a tot retro saeculis usurpata tyrannide exuas, ipsumque
catena ligatum in Abyssum detrudas, Antichristum illius (...) illustri tuo
adventu perdas, tua omnia promissa adimpleas, tuamque cum Myriadibus Sanctorum
ad finem impietati imponendum reditum acceleres. Interea vero sis nobis in
Eremo columna ignis, noctu (...), animo lassis, in tenebris incedentibus (...),
in fine* sine fine, (...).

Sic seipsum, libellumque istum, reliquosque assiduos in nomine tuo susceptos
quales, quales conatus tibi tuaeque gratiae, benedictione inde Spirituali
locupletandos dedicans, and devovens humillimis ardentissimisque contendit
precibus.

Servus omnium inutilissimus, qui sua omnia (...) projiciens, hoc solo nomine
gloriatur, Jehovah Tzidkenu.

To the Right Worshipful and other his beloved Friends* Inhabitants of SWITHINS
LONDON.
I Read of a rich silver Globe presented by Ferdinand to Solomon the
Magnificent of admirable Workmanship, expressing, besides the passing of each
hour, the motions of the Sun, changes of the Moon, etc. and giving a
resemblance of the whole frame of the Celestial Orbs, made with much Art by the
direction of the most famous Astronomers then in the world.

I have nothing of that Art and Rarity to present you with, but a plain
Theological (not Astrological) Sun-Dyal, representing not the lower Heavens and
their Motion, but the Empyrean and its Rest; and the Essence, Attributes,
Properties, Effects, Motion, Influence of the Higher Sun, the Sun of
Righteousness.

The Subject handled I cannot wish greater or better, there is none before it;
the manner of handling I could wish much better, especially for the dignity of
the person of whom it treats, as also of your selves, or whoever may peruse it.
But as with him where there is a willing mind, there is acceptance of what
little we have; so I doubt not but you will hold it your Honor, in all things
to be like minded to Jesus Christ.

To many of you I am bound in many bonds of Gratitude, to all in duty;
therefore I could not judge any among those whom I am bound to love and honor
so fit to have this Discourse inscribed and presented to, as your selves, who
are to me above all others whatsoever, nearest in spiritual relations and (...)
in Christian and cordial affecti(...)* To others I owe much, to you my self.
Having then dedicated my self, first to him of whom it treats, (w^o^e I am, and
whom I serve) your Savior, my Lord; who can be thought s^ f^t to be joined
with him as your selves, whose things next to his I desire most to take care
of? The Ministers duty is to divide himself between the Lord and his Church
(not the Lord and the world,) for so did Christ divide his love between his
Father and his Church; to him he gave himself to express the highest love of
pure obedience; for the Church he gave himself, to express the strongest love
of benevolence.

You have had the sum of this Discourse preached among you, and diverse of you
have it written in your Note Books, and repeated in your Families. But I would
desire rather you might have the Doctrinal part of all Sermons written in your
Consciences, and the Use ever repeated in your Conversations.

Now that you may, as you have heard of Jesus Christ be taught by him, and as
you have received him walk in him, attaining to all the riches of the full
Assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the whole Mystery of
Christ, in whom are hid all treasures of wisdom and knowledge; and that your
conversations may be as becomes the Gospel, that you may be ever found among
such as fear his Name, that you may wait for this Sun of Righteousness to rise
upon your souls, to heal all your infirmities, to cloth you with his
Righteousness, that coming behind in no gift, duty diligence, comfort,
experience and growth, you may by him be presented perfect and without spot
before God; which as it will be your (that I may not say mine) Joy, Glory,
Crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus; so it is the prayer of

Your daily Remembrancer, and Servant in the Lord, JOHN SHEFFEILD.

To the READER.
Reader*
HAving much to say to thee within, I shall not let thee stand at the door, but
entreat thee to enter, sit down, and read a while. If thou desire to know
what I have to say, Read on a while and I shall tell thee. If thou must have it
in a few words, either turn to the Table in the end, or to the Title in the
beginning. And if thou must have it in two words: hark then: Thou have here a
Resemblance of Christ, and of thy Self. Of him a dark and dim one, one every
way short, such a one as I could make, not such a one as he is, or ought to
have been made of him. But of thy self, it may be not such a one as thou art,
but what thou ought to be, and if this fall short too, though I shall be the
less happy, yet art thou the more happy.

I have set this Image before thee, that by beholding it with open face, thou
may by viewing him, and reflecting on thy self be changed into the self same
imag^* from Grace to Grace, and so from Glo^^ to Glory, thou being made more
(...) by Christ, that he may be (...) with thine, (rather his own) ima^^
(...); and he being more glorious in the sight, thou may in due time be
satisfied with his Image. Melius est nihil omnino scire, ne quidem unam causam
eorum quae facta sun^, cur factum, and credere Deo and perseverare in ejus
dilectione, quae hominem vivificat, nec aliud inquirere ad scientiam nisi Iesum
Christum Filium Dei qui pro nobis crucifixus est, quam per quaestionum
subtilitates, and multiloquium in Impietatem cadere. Irenaeus.


Reader, This is thy great work, to know and study Christ and thy self. All is
loss and dung to him, and all knowledge is but (...), or (...), a for^ of
knowledge, or false knowledge to this.

To deal plainly with thee, here is no new light which this curious Age gazeth
after, no new earth discovered in the Moon, but a new heaven if thou will in
the Sun; or another Sun rather besides that ordinary one; yet not a Parelius,
but an Hyperelius, a Light exceeding that of the Sun, and yet a Light as old as
the Scripture, or the Sun either, his ancienter Light; yea, a Light elder then
both, as old as the Father of Lights, the ancient of days. His going forth is
from the Mitah 5. 2
days of Eternity, says the Prophet; and he is the same yesterday, to day and
for Hebrews 13, 8
ever, says the Apostle. Who as he is the true Light, God of God, Light of
Light, so has he derived of his own Light into these great Luminaries, the Sun
and Scripture; the one being his Chariot, the other his Lanthorn; from both
which our Discourse is lighted: and though there can be nothing added to the
light of these two yet if I have brought any Oil to keep the light of the
Sanctuary still burning, as Israel was of old commanded, as I account it the
only work of a Minister, so I desire thou may not shut thy eyes upon it.

But if thou art of that Athenian spirit, that thou have no leisure to hear of
Jesus, and Resurrection, or other matters of Religion, but only to enquire and
discourse of What is the News? or worse: if thou should be of that profane
spirit as Duke d'Alva, who being told of a great Eclipse of the Sun, and called
to see it, Atheistically answered, He had so much to look after on earth, that
he had no leisure to look up to heaven, Then I shall dismiss thee with the
words of the Preacher, Walk on in the ways of thy heart, and in the ^ight of
thine eyes, but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into
Judgment.

Thine, if he cannot further, yet to desire thy Salvation, JOHN SHEFFEILD.

Reader, I thought good to let thee know, this reverend Author has published
another excellent Treatise of Conscience, worthy thy perusal, and most useful
in these times, wherein so many make shipwreck both of Faith and a good
Conscience.

Thine SA. GELLIBRAND.

MAL. 4. 2. But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of righteousness
arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of
the Stall.
THis last Angelical Prophet is Malachi. i. Angelus.
purely Evangelicall in his short Prophetic Gospel, describing 1. The Gospel
Church in her worship. 2. The head thereof the Messiah, and 3. His eminent
forerunner John the Baptist.

1. The Gospel Church and her spiritual and holy worship is described, cap. 1.
11. From the rising of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, my Name shall
be great among the Gentiles; and in every place Incense shall be offered unto
my Name, and a pure offering: and my Name shall be great among the heathen,
says the Lord of hosts.

2. John Baptist Christ his forerunner is described, 1. Under his two Names and
Titles. 2. Under his twofold office in relation to those Titles. 1. He is
called a Messenger, Mal. 3. 1. Man. 1. 2.
( Ecce mittam Angelum meum) and his office or errand in that respect, was to
make way for Christ as his Herald or Harbinger.

2. He is in a figure called Elias, and so in the Gospel he is called: and his
office was Mal. 4. 5. Matthew. 11. 14. Luke 116, 17.
in that respect, to make ready a People for the Lord, by Turning father and
child, as Elias had brought back a halting people from Baal to God.

3. Here is a description of Christ 1. In his Person. 2. His coming.


1. His Person, under sundry denominations. 1. The Lord whom ye seek, shall
come (...) Adonai is given to God 134 times in the old Testament, signifies
that God is he who as a Pillar sustains all. So Christ. Heb. 1. 3.
suddenly to his Temple. Adon, one of the Titles of God, showing his equality
with the father, cap. 3. 1.

2. The Angel or messenger of the covenant;] he the Mediator herein distinct
from, and inferior to the Father; The Father sending, The Son sent.

3. The Angel in whom ye delight.] Christ is 1. The delight of the father, Isa.
42. 1. 2. The delight and desire of the godly, Hag. 2. 7.

4. A Refiner and Purifier of his Church, with his fire, soap, and fan in his
hand, ver. 3. Matthew. 3. 11.

5. Here styled the Sun of Righteousness, cap. 4. 2.

2. His coming described, and that 1. In a more Terrible manner, 2. In a more
comfortable manner.

1. More Terribly, and that 1. To wicked men, set out in 4. Expressions. 1. His
Coming will to them be a scorching coming, and a scouring coming; as fire to
scorch, as soap to scour, as refiners fire, and fullers soap, cap. 3. 2.

2. As a Judge] ver. 5. I will come near to you in Judgment: He will bring
their judgment home to them, lay it close, he will not be slack to repay them
to their face, Deuteronomy. 7. 10. He will not go behind the door, as we say, to tell
them their own, for Conviction and Condemnation.

3. To convince them, he will be both Judge and Evidence, an eye witness, a
swift witness, h. e. 1. Ready to depose, and make proof of what he charge
them withal: or 2. Importunately instant and pressing for Judgment. How sad
will it be with wicked men, when Christ shall turn Informer and accuser against
them; the Churches Advocate becomes solicitor against them! Intercessor Romans
11. ^.
turn Plaintiff, as Elias interceeding against Israel * I will come near to
you in judgment, and will be a swift witness against the sor^erers, and against
the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that oppress the
hireling in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, and that turn aside the
stranger from his right, and fear not me, says the Lord of hosts, ver. 5.

4. To see execution done. cap. 4. 1. His day of execution shall be as a
flaming ^urnace, or a fiery oven, which shall burn the wicked as stubble. In
all which respects, it may well be said, who may abide the day of his coming,
and who may stand when he appears? cap. 3. 1.

2. To his own people, his first coming is a hot, smart coming, he shall be as
fire, and soap in his Temple, even to the Sons of Levi, he shall try, then
refine, and scour, and purge them as the fullers cloth, after much washing and
beating, or the Gold after much burning.

2. The benefit redounding to them, 1. They shall officiate and minister
better; they shall offer an offering to the Lord in Righteousness ver. 3. 2.
They shall be better accepted of God, ver. 4.

2. In a more comfortable manner, To be a Sun of Righteousness.] where we have
a description, 1. of Christ. 2. Of his people.

1. Of Christ, what he is at

least, and to all his Church* best, and to his chosen ones.
1. At least and to all his Church, he is a Sun.

2. At best to his chosen; where three things Promised. 1. He will be to them as
a Rising Sun, after their long sitting in obscurity, waiting for a joyful
morning: and never be to them a departing, declining, or setting Sun when once
risen, but as the morning light, shining more and more to perfect day, Prove 4.
18.

2. Above the ordinary Sun, he will be a Sun of Righteousness, imparting not
light, but life, John 1. 4. In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
The Sun in heaven gives only light, the Sun of Righteousness gives life.

3. He will be a healing Sun to such as are sick, infirm, and sad; amplifyed by
the place and part where this healing virtue resides; not in his Vesture,
Touch, Lips, Spitle, all which were healing, but in his wings. For a double
Reason. 1. To denote his swiftness, he has wings; ^e that came to be a swift
witness against the wicked, cap. 3. 5. is as swift a Savior, he comes suddenly
and unexpectedly into his Temple. cap. 3. 1. 2. Under his wings, to denote the
warmer, closer embraces which his servants shall be cheared and healed withal,
as tender chickins under the Hen. And this answers to that cap. 3. 5. As he
there came near in Judgment to wicked ones, so he comes near in mercy (with
healing mercy) to his chosen ones.

2. His people described, and that 1. What they are at least, and worst before
this Sun rising and healing them, h. e. before any extraordinary and sensible
manifestation of Christ to them. They are such as fear his Name, that is all
they can say for themselves.

2. What they are at best, when the Sun has risen and healed them: they shall
go forth with life, strength, and cheerfulness, as the fatted calves of the
stall. Calves are noted to be lively, lightsome, skipping creatures Psalm. 29.
6. Christ is compared to a fatted Calfe, Luke 15. The Calves sacrificed, were
Heb. 9. Hos. 14. 2. Heb. 13. 15.
1. Types of Christ and his blood. 2. Of our selves, and our sacrifice of
praises.

The words thus far opened, we come now to the Doctrines therein contained,
whereof the first is this, viz.

CHAP. I. 1. Christ is to his Church, what the Sun is to Doct. 1.
the world.
Christ is set forth under many resemblances, of a Rock, a Spring, the Brazen
Serpent, a Lamb, Morning Star, Bread, Water, Light, Garments, Gold, Pearl, of a
King, Prophet, Priest, Husband, Head, Root, etc. because no one good thing can
set out Christ fully, for all can set him out but partially: and because what
ever good is in any or all of these, that is Christ and more, and better; and
that when we behold and use any of these, we might be put in mind of Christ.

This is as High, and fit, and full a resemblance of him as any one thing can
be, if I could as fitly and fully pursue it. Psalm. 84. 10. The Lord God is a
Sun and shield to his people: But especially Christ is so often called, John 1.
12. Ego sum Lux mundi, what is that? But I am the Sun, I am the light of the
world. John 1. 4. In him was life, which life was the light of men; and ver. 9.
This is the true light etc. John Baptist was a light, John. 5. 35. burning and
shining: but not The Light. A Star of the first magnitude, but not the true
light; but Christ only the true Light, as the true Vine, John 15. 1. That is,
1. The great Luminare, (...). 2. The Universal light, giving light to all that
come into the world. 3. The Original uncreated light, that had his light from
himself, all others from him. In him was light. Rev. 1. 16. and 10. 1. Christ
is described, having his countenance shining, as the Sun in his strength. And
Rev. 12. 1. The Church in relation to him, and conjunction with him, clothed
with the Sun; that is, his Righteousness. Cant. 6. 10. fair as the Moon,
clear as the Sun; (that is,) full of Christ. The Moon is fair, not clear from
spots when at full; the Sun is always full, always clear. The Church has not
only her own imperfect, spotted Righteousness inherent to make her fair; but
Christ's perfect, Sunlike, imputed to make her clear without spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing.

In which regard, the Church is called upon, and encouraged to clear up, Isa.
60. 1. Parelius est reflexio radiorum solis in nube densa et aequabili, quae ad
latus solis existit, et lanquam speculum solis radios recipit, coloremque ejus
inde r^fert.
Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee. The Church is the only Halo or Corona, on which this Sun makes his
Impression. And the Church Militant and the Triumphant, are the two right
Parelii, on either side of this Sun, near to him, and full of his Luster and
Glory.

This is a deep and rich Mine* I am digging into, I dare not promise to bring
up all the treasures hid in it; I shall show you what I can get up, and your
selves may go and get much more. No Artist can draw all the Suns light into one
room, were his house all Crystal; no labor can get all the water of the Sea
into one vessel. Some abler Pen, or larger heart, may as a larger window, let
in more of this light. I shall but draw the Curtain, and set open my narrow
Casement, to let in what I have received.

There is in many things a likeness unlikeness between Christ and the Sun.

CHAP. 2. The Likeness between Christ and the Sun.
THeir Likeness is seen in many Particulars, and because so many, I shall not
defer the Application of all, til I have spoke of each, as usually we do, but
as we go along, apply each particular, to free your memories from the greater
burden, and my self from needless repetitions.

Alike they are, 1. In their Essence. 2. Attributes. 3. Properties. 4. Effects.
5. Accidents.

1. In their Essence much alike; who knows the essence and nature of the Sun?
what is that light unaccessible which it inhabits, what is the matter of it,
and what and whence that heat? The weary Philosopher astonished with long
admiration, and tired with deep contemplation of this lower, and lesser Suns
light and glory, gave over, seriously wishing himself out of this body, that he
might behold the Body of the Sun, and know his Essence. Enquire not after the
name, essence and generation of Christ: His Name is Wonderful, Secret. He dwells
in light unaccessible; Isa. 9 6.
well may we at death, come to a clear view of these two Suns, and they are
worth a death to come to a full view of them, especially the Sun of
righteousness, which we shall then see as he is 1 John 3. 3. (...), with open
face; the sight of perfect vision: here we are said only (...), John 1. 14.
attente, considerate spectare, contemplari. It is but a speculative Theory we
have here. The Suns essence is a Quintessence, or rather a Sextessence, (a
glorious essence indeed, or none such) being not of a gross, mixed, but pure,
simple, heavenly essence.

The heaven is a Quintessence purer far then earth or the other elements; but
the Stars are purer then those heavens, and the Sun as much purer then all the
stars put together. There is a Confluence and Treasure of light put together
in the Sun.

So is it with Christ. 1. His Divine Nature is Job. 15, 15.
the purest essence, heaven not Pure in his sight; The Angels far below him,
they hide their faces in his presence, Isa 6. 2. as the lesser stars their
heads before the Sun.

2. In his humane nature, There dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col.
3. 9. All treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, of grace and glory, more in
Christ by far, then in all the Angels: as Saul above all Israel for Stature,
higher from the shoulders and 1 Samuel 10. 23. 2 Samuel 14. 25.
upwards, and Absalom above all Israel to be praised for his beauty, from his
feet and upwards no blemish in him; so is Christ fairer then the children of
men from the feet and upwards, and higher then the highest Angel from the
shoulders and upwards.

1. This may check the pride and blasphemy Applicat.
of those proud spirits, and self anointing Cherubs, or new Christ's, who call
themselves not so low as Apostles, but are not, but Christ's, and are not
Apostles; who say, Naturam non vocat ipsam (...), sed cer^as (ut ita loquar)
qualitates, quas Dei virtus in nobis efficit. Ergo Impii et Ridiculi sunt qui
ex ^oc loco transfu sionem Divina essentiae in nos imaginantur ut Impius ille
Ser^etus prafracte ad mortem usque defendit. Bez Ann in. lo^um.
God is as much in them, as ever he was in Christ, because misunderstanding the
sense of that 2 Pet. 1. 3. made partakers of the Divine nature. There is but
one Sun, a many Stars, which partake of the nature and light of the Sun: cannot
these Stars partake of the Suns light, but they must be so many Suns, ceasing
to be Stars? The divine nature we are said to be Partakers of, is the
communication of Divine or holy (God like) qualifications, such whereof we are
capable, excluding the perfections of Christ, which are not communicable to the
creature. Like as Christ is said to partake of our humane nature, being in all
things like to us excluding only these imperfections of sin, whereof his Divine
nature was not capable, nor were suitable to him.

The water cold by nature, when boiling on the fire, is made partaker of the
nature of the fire, yet is water still; the waters coldness is not incapable
of the fires heat; the fires heat expels not the waters moisture; there is fire
and water both, water in nature; as fire in quality. The cold and rusty Iron in
the fire, loses both his coldness and color; of cold becoms fire hot, of
rusty fire-red; It partakes of the nature of the fire, yet is but Iron still.
Or as Judas may be said, when Satan entered into him, to partake of the nature
of the devil, He was a devil; he lived not, but Satan lived in him, (that is)
he Joh. 6. 70.
was full of all sin, hypocrisy, treason, impudence, malice, Impenitence,
despair, as if he had been a very devil rather then a man; yet was Judas Judas
still, a man, not transformed (at least not trasubstantiated) into a Devil. So
when Christ enters into us, we are so acted by him, that we seem not to live,
but Christ in us, Gal. 2. 20. And so that other place, as much mis-understood,
1 John 5. 17. As he is, so are we in this world, is to be taken; not as if
there were no difference at all between Christ and us; but there is 1. a sicut
similitudinis, as is the father begetting, so is the young infant begotten;
Ora. oculique, manusque eadem; an As of likeness. And there is a 2d Sicut
Aequalitatis, As of Equality: As is God the Father, suc^ is the Son;
Coessentiall, coeternal; not a^ [as] of equality, but of similitude between
Christ and us, we receiving of his fullness grace for grace, the same grace,
not the same fullness.

2. Then give unto Christ the Glory due unto his name, suitable to his nature,
Divine glory. Worship this rising Sun; it is not idolatry, but Purest Religion,
not base Policy, but truest P^ety. The Sun was idolatrously worshipped with a
forbidden worship among the Persians of old, and by some of the Atheistical
Jews, Ezekiel 8. 16. But it is commanded that this Sun should be worshipped both
by men and Angels, Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in his first be gotten into the
world, he says, let all the Angels of God worship him, Joh. 5. 23. that all
men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. Fear not then to give the
same divine honor, religious worship to the Son, as to the Father, to believe
in, place hope on, and make thy prayer to the Son of God. The creature Sun is
to be admired for his Brightness; it is a shadow of the Deity, not to be
adored. The Sun Heb. 1. 3.
the Creator is to be adored, he being the (...), The brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his Person, who upholdeth all things by the word of
his Power.

CHAP. III. Christ and the Sun alike in their Attributes. Unity the first.
THe Attributes of the Sun and of Christ, wherein they are alike, are either 1
Incommunicable, 2. Communicable.

The first incommunicable Attribute of Ci^^^.
both is their Unity; Sol quasi solus. Next to the glorious Essence, Unity is
the highest perfection of God, and his first Incommunicable Attribute. The Sun
among the Creatures is matchless in his glory, because of his Unity.

In heaven God has planted thousands of lesser Lights, whom he calls all by
their names; in earth thousands of other creatures, but one Sun for both. In
heaven, thousands of fixed Stars, which never fell; in earth, thousands of
less lights, whom the Father of lights knows, and calls every one by his name:
But as the same Sun gives light to the Stars above, and to the creatures below;
so one Christ is head to Angels, and Surety for sinners; from him they receive
confirming grace, Ephesians. 1. 10. Col. 1. 1 Timothy 2. ^. Act. 4, 12. Heb. 10, 14.
we reconciling. There is one God, and one Sun; one God, and one Mediator; one
Blood for Reconciliation, one name for Salvation, one Sacrifice for Universal
Redemption, one Righteousness for Justification. There was one Temple, High
Priest, Altar of old, one Brazen Serpent, one Rock, one Bread, one Garment of
the High Priest, for all his successors; now one spotless, seamlesse garment
for us all; One must die for all, and he once for all.

Travelers beyond the line, losing their old, find new Stars, no new Sun. They
under the Law, had other stars, the Prophets; we on this side the line, other
Apostles, Ministers, and ordinances, the same Sun. The Saints departed, having
crossed the line, leave all our Stars, Ministers, private Christians and
Ordinances, but enjoy the same Sun.

Unity is the glory of the visible heavens, one peerlesse Sun, and of the
invisible heavens. 1. The Unity of the Divine Essence in three Persons, I and
my Father are one, 1 John 5. 7. Unum sunt viz. Essentia, non unus, viz. Persona.
John 10. 30. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one. 2. So in Christ, visible for his
humanity, invisible for his Divinity; Unity is the perfection of his person.
Only in the former, Unity of Essence, there is (...), not (...), alius, not
aliud; here (...) not (...), aliud, not alius, in this unity of Person. As in
the Creature Sun, there is a conjunction and union of two different Uni^
Personalis, non personarum; naturarum, non naturali^. Trel^at.
qualities, light and heat; Light, such as is in heaven among the Stars, none
such on earth; Heat, such as is in living creatures on earth, none such in the
Stars. So in Christ there is an union of an heavenly and earthly nature. 1. Of
a Deity, which the other persons have without humanity. 2. Of Humanity, which
we have without a Deity. In this one High Priest alone, the Thummim and the
Urim, the perfections of God, and the light of men conjoined.

1. Then give unto Christ the glory of this Singular attribute of Unity, in a
double Unity. 1. The Unity of faith. 2. Unity of Love.

1. By an Unity of faith, eye Christ only, eye him with a single eye, look up
to no other Mediator; go not to glean in any other field, as was said to Ruth:
one Sun gives light to all the world, there needs no more. He were a mad man
should say, set me up another Sun, or light me a Candle at noon day to help out
the Sun: He more irrational who says, give me somewhat besides Christ, another
Mediator.

It is looked upon as prodigious in nature to see two or three Suns or Parelii
together. There is no such thing, they are but imaginary Suns in a cloud,
having a little light, no heat or vigorous Influence. There is but one Sun
which gives light to these: so to set up Saints merits, the Virgin Mary's
Intercession, or our own duties, were prodigious; all have what they have from
Christ, and contribute nothing to him. And these Parelii are never seen, but
when the Sun is low at morning or evening, never at noone. This flying to the
Saints with Papists, or imagined Righteousness with some carnal Protestants,
is only a sign of a dim knowledge, and of a weak faith, never of a sound
judgment, and a welinformed mind. How unhandsome is a new piece on an old
garment, or the garment part woollen, part linen! Christ will be Solus or
nullus. Look to me and be saved, all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and
there is none else, Isa. 45. 22. Each man puts out his candle, and opens his
window to let in heaven light when the Sun is up; do so for your souls; tread
out your sparks, they may burn thee, they cannot lighten thee. Isa. 50. 11.
Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks,
walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled: this
shall ye have of my hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

2. Next look after the other great Unity, The Unity of love, the Unity of the
spirit in the bond of Peace. Faith and love are the two great uniting graces,
faith to the head, love to the members. As there are two great unions in
heaven, the first, of three in one, Trinity in Unity; the other of two in one,
two natures in one person; So next to these two most glorious Unions, there are
two mysterial Unions in earth, of faith to Christ, where two are one; of love
to the Church, where all are one. And as this is Gods perfection, so the
Churches, according to Christ's last Prayer, John 17. 17. That they may be all
one, as Thou Father art in me, and I in thee, -- That they may be made perfect
in one. It was the glory and beauty of the Wheels, that they were so
Artificially joined one within another, that though diverse, they seemed one
wheel; and they had all one motion; for one Spirit animated Ezekiel. 1. 20.
them.

All those innumerable fixed Stars, keep their proper and certain station, are
therefore never eclipsed, nor do they eclipse others, but move together
uniformly; one motion is common to all. The Planets move in several Orbs, no
two together, and they are all eclipsed one by another.

Christians should as Stars in the Firmament, not thwart, cloud, censure,
slight, eclipse each other, disparaging this man's Ministry, question that man's
sincerity. Oh that the Trumpet might not make an uncertain or different sound,
but be all as one, as when the Temple was dedicated, and when Jericho was
besieged, all the Priests blew together, all the people gave one shout, thereby
should Babylons walls be finally ruined, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13 Josh. 6. 20.
and Jerusalems fully repaired. Then would it be said, Who is this that looks
forth Cant. 6. 10.
as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, terrible as an Army with
banners?

This Unity of the Spirit would become the bond and cement of our Peace; our
bands and beauty, the staff of the Church in her now old age, and bring in
those Primitive times again, when after storms The Churches regained rest, and
were edified, Act. 9. 31.
walking in the fear of the Lord; and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, were
multiplied. Why should there not be as one God, one Church; as one Lord, one
Baptism; as one Spirit, one Faith; as one Father, one Family; as one Christ,
one Hope; as one way, one Heart; as one Bread, one Body; as one Cup, one Lip?
Cor unum, via una, Dominus (...), Act. 4 32.
unus, Nomen unum, (...); not (...). 1 Cor. 12. 12. All should be one.

How delightful is it to see ten thousand beams streaming from the same Center
of the Sun in heaven, meet and re-center in the same punctulum on earth! What a
resplendent light, and piercing heat do they give? So when all the Graces
coming from the same head do unite and con-center together, what beauty, light,
and heat is there? The Beams dispersed are weakened, united are more burning, as
in a Burning glass, where all the Sun seems contracted in so narrow compass.
Where is most of Unity, there is most of Christ. And now thou glorious Sun of
Righteousness, and blessed Peace maker, who art all Union, and the Fountain of
it, in whose Person the Father and Holy Ghost was from eternity united, in
whose Incarnation the Humane Nature was united to the Divine; in whose
Mediation the Divine was again united to the Humane. In the strength of these
two great Unions, produce a third, that union of our Nature with it self, that
there may be no more Schisms in the body. Thou that did slay the enmity
between Jew and Gentile, slay that between Christian and Christian: and as thou
art the foundation stone of our faith, be also the corner (the coupling) stone
of our Love; and the binding stone to hold all the Building together.

CHAP. IV. Omniscience the second Incommunicable Attribute.
THE next Incommunicable Attribute of Christ is his Omniscience, whereof the
Suns All-seeing Eye is a lively Resemblance. Sol solus Oculus, mundi Ocellus,
Dei lumen, visibile numen. The Sun is all eye, has thousands of beams in every
place, looks upon every object with so direct a face, (as a well drawn Picture)
as if it beheld none else; filling the largest windows, peeping in at the
least crevise or key hole: the heaven above, earth beneath, air between,
enlightened all at once with his splendour, vieweth all Regions. The worlds great
overseer, glanceth into the Dungeon, and shines with the same beauty on the
poorest cottage as on Princes Palaces; the noisome dunghill, and the delightful
Garden, both are alike viewed and observed; there is nothing Psalm. 19, 6.
hid from the heat thereof; in it has God placed his ^abernacle, it is his
Chariot wherein he rides his daily circuit. What can be such an Emblem of Gods
Omniscience, and of that Visibile Numen, Jesus Christ, who is all eye, whose
eyes are as flames of fire, whose face shines as the Sun in his might, has
his beams, his eyes running to and fro, and Prove. 15. 3.
his spies out, watching in every place, beholding the evil and the good?
nothing hid from the Suns heat, nor this Suns sight. All things are naked and
opened to the eyes of Heb. 4. 13.
him, with whom we have to do.

Whither can thou go, O sinner, from his presence, and where will thou hide
thee from his eye? darkness and light are both alike to him, secret thoughts
and open acts both alike; the thought afar off^^e can discern, as clear as we
can the word spoken in Job. 34. 22.
our ears. There is no darkness or shadow of death, where the workers of
iniguity may hide themselves from him.

1. What a delightful meditation is this Applicat. 1.
to him who is (...), whose left hand (neighbor) knows not what his right hand
does; who shuts his doors and prays in secret; shuts up his Trumpet, and gives
Alms in Matthew. 6.
secret; anoints his face, and fasts in secret; shuts up his lips, and mourns
in secret? as being nunquam minus solus quam cum solus, and thinking nullibi
tot Testes ubi sine Test; Thou art never less alone, then when alone; nor
have so many observers, as when there is none to observe. Gods sincere ones are
his secret ones. The Ark which was close made up on every side, had a window in
the Top, Psalm. 83. 3. Genesis 6. 16.
open only to heaven. Matthew. 10. 26. Fear not, nothing is covered that shall
not be manifest; what thou speak in the ears shall be proclaimed on the
house top; and what in secret, shall be rewarded openly. Christ spyed out
Nathaniel lying under the fig tree, as well as Zacheus on the Top of his fig
tree; heard Paul below in the John 1 4^. Luke 19 4. Luke 18.
dungeon, as well as Peter on the house top; and took more notice of the
Publican standing a far off out of sight, then the Pharisee in the 1 Cor. 4 5.
midst of the Throng. The Lord will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart, then shall every mam
have prais^ of God. The Sun looks as well into thy closet casement, as into the
large Church windows. And into that closet especially Christ delights to look
and dwell, where as in Solomon's temple, the windows 1 King. 6. 4.
are of narrow lights, or as some read it, of windows narrow without, broad
within Applicat. 2


2. Is Christ his eye, as the Suns, in every place? what conviction, warning,
and terror may this speak to such Atheistical wretches, as say, How shall God
see? How Psalm. 94 7 and ^^* ^^. Job. ^2. 13* 14.
does God know? Thick clouds are a covering to him, that he sees not, and he
walks in the circuit of heaven. Especially such miscreants as in the Chambers
of their imaginary conclude, when they have shut out man, they can shut out God
too; and having already shut God out of their hearts, conclude, they have shut
him out of the world too, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9. The Lord sees us not, the
Lord has forsaken the earth.

Shut, oh Atheist, the Sun out of the world if thou can; shut it out of thy
house. It is impossible. Has the Sun his eye in every place, and has not God?
Understand then ye unwise among the people, Shall not he that made the Sun all
eye, be all eye himself? He that made the ear, does not he hear? Does Psalm.
94. 8, 9.
not the Watch-maker know all the wheels, and every Pin in the Watch he made?
Does not the Statuary know all the frame of his image? and is any thing hid
from him that made the heart?

Turpe quid ausurus, Te sine Test time. There are three witnesses when thou
art alone, who have always their eye on thee; the Sun, thy Conscience, and the
Lord Jesus; fear the Sun, but thy conscience more, which is a thousand Suns;
fear thy conscience much, but Christ more, who is a thousand consciences. The
Lord threatens to search out Zeph. 1. 12.
such as are settled on their Lees with Candles; that say in their hearts, The
Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil.

There are two sorts of candles God uses, 1. Some shining, 2. Some burning.

There are four shining Candles wicked men take no notice of: 1. The candle of
Gods mercies, bounty, patience. 2. The candle of the Sun. 3. Of his Word. 4. Of
their own conscience. These are Gods first candles, pleasant and shining
lights: if these be put out, or not regarded, God will set up four burning
Candles, that shall not be so easily blown out; He will search thee out 1. With
the burning candle of affliction, as he did Saul, wheh the Philistines were
upon 1 Samuel 28. 15.
him; this is lighted at the fire of mercy abused. 2. With the burning candle
of a terrifying conscience, lighted at the fire of an enlightened, awakened,
galled conscience, which is sadder then the former; this is a searching candle
indeed, with which Judas was searchched and lighted down to he^. 3. There is a
worse candle then both these, the candle of death, kindled at the wrath of God,
wherewith he searches those further, then ever he did yet either by affliction
or conscience; the day of death is a day of wrath; then does God set up a
candle that burns till the day of Judgment. The fourth candle is the saddest
Prove. 11. 4.
of all, the candle of Judgment, lighted from hell, whereby he will search out
all the sins of wicked men, and this candle shall never leave burning.

3. Then let thine eye be ever on him, Applicat.
whose eye is ever on thee: be an heavenly Heliotropium* turn to the Sun of
Righteousness; call thy place Beer-la-hai-ro^; I have seen him that ever sees
me: make thy house a Bethel, the house of God, and make thy heart a
Beth-shemesh, an house for the Sun.

Let thy heart be as the Sun-Dyal, which receives the Sun in the morning, and
goes along with it all day; only cast no shadow behind thee; in the face of the
Sun the Dyals do not: in the face of Christ, how gross is it? Be full of eyes
within, without, before, behind, as those living Creatures, Revel. 4. 6. or
those living wheels Ezekiel. 1. 18.

Can thou the secret sympathy behold, Du Barte^.

Betwixt the bright Sun and the Marigold,
And not consider that we must no less
Follow in life the Sun of Righteousness?
Let the morning Sun find thee praying with Jacob, Gen 32 24. The noon Sun see
thee working; and the evening Sun see thee meditating with Isaak, Gen 24. 63.
Let not the Sun when risen, see thee sleeping unrisen; Sun all day moving,
behold thee all day standing still; and Sun setting, leave thy Lust and
Passion not set.

CHAP. V. The Suns Omnipresence a shadow of Christ.
NExt to Christ his Omniscience, consider his Omnipresence, the ground and
cause of that Omniscience. In both which respects God may be said to have set
his Tabernacle in the Sun, which shadows out both: Christ's (...). John 1. 14
Humanity also is called the Tent or Tabernacle of the Divinity. The Sun
locally in Heaven, is virtually in earth, his light, heat, influence, every
where overspreading the face of the Sea and Land, penetrating the depths of
both, to the bottom of the sea, and to those subterraneous minerals in the
bosom and secret chambers of the earth. Christ when ascending heaven, left his
promise, as Elijah his mantle, with his Disciples, Lo, I Matthew. 28. 20. and 18.
20.
am with you always to the end of the world. And where ever two or three are
gathered together in my name, I am in the midst of them.

This may be a sensible Rebuke to the Applicat.
blind Atheists; who are not to be dealt with by Scripture or reason; who
having pu^ out both their own eyes of reason and conscience, would pull out
Gods also of Omniscience and Omnipresence: and having shut out the sense of a
Deity out of their own thoughts, would dispute the Essence of God out of the
world. If thou art not a man of Conscience, art thou of Reason? If not of
Reason, art thou of Sense? Then I shall convince thee. Will thou believe thy
own senses? Dare thou trust thine own eyes? open them, thou see the light
of the Sun; or shut them, if thou will, thou feel the heat of the Sun, which
though in Heaven, is not far from thee, but ever round about thee. Does its
light scatter all clouds, and shall any cloud or darkness cover thee? Does its
influence reach the subterraneous cavernes, and shall any corner hide thee from
the presence of God. This great Apostle (as some have called it) has preached
Heathens out of Atheism, and shall it not Christians? Every beam of the Suns
visible eye, writes upon the heart of a rational man, The invisible eye and
presence of God is here.

Among all those abominations represented to Ezekiel, the last and most hideous
was that posture of faces toward the Sun, and backs toward the Temple, Solemn
exosculari, Ezekiel. 8. 12. and 9. 9.
Deum exoculare: At the same time to see the Sun sees us, and to say the Lord
sees us not, but has forsaken the earth, is such brutish reasoning, as
Heathens have no such Logic, Hell has no such bad Divinity. The Heathen by
their Logic could see in lumine Numen, in the Suns light, another Invisible
Romans 1. 20.
Sun of greater light. And Hell it self is not so full of darkness, but
whatsoever other impieties there remain, there is no room for Atheism.

Nullus in Inferno est Atheos, ante fuit. How should this consideration of
Christ's continual presence, both awe and cheer the gracious soul? provoking it
to faith, patience, fortitude, diligence in the work of God. Christ is ever
present, 1. As an Observer: He remembered every of the seven Churches of this in
those seven Epistles, I know thy works, etc. Rev. chap. 2, 3.


2. As an Assister: Lo, I am with you always to the end of the world.

3. As a strong supporter: Jer. 1. 18. They shall fight against the^, but shall
not prevail, for I am with thee.

4. As a bountiful Rewarder: Therefore as all these Epistles begin with novi
opera, I know thy works, they end in vincenti dabo, To him that overcomes will
I give, etc. to represent to you continually Christ present as an Observer from
the first, as a rich rewarder at the last.

Hence let Godly and wicked both learn to reason as godly Jacob and wicked
Laban, See, if no man be present, yet God is ever present. Call thy dwelling
Mizpah, for wheresoever thou art, God has his Watch Tower Genesis 31. 49. 50
near thee.

CHAP. VI. The fourth Incommunicable Attribute, Omniinfluence.
AFter the Omniscience and Omnipresence of Christ, already touched, let us come
to consider that Admirable and Incommunicable Attribute of Omni-influence,
wherewith the upper and nether Sun are adorned and enriched.

The Sun has his residence in heaven only, but his Influence is diffused into
all the heavenly bodies, and to all these Sublunary Creatures; air, earth,
water, and all the host of them; yea, to those subterraneous Metals and
Minerals hid from the Vultures eye. We have the influence and benefit of the
Sun in every breath of air, bit of bread, in each dish of flesh, fish, foul,
yea, in each herb used for food or Physic.

The Sun has an universal influence upon the Creature in his Generation,
production, vegetation, maturation, etc. So Christ upon the new Creature, and
upon all his actions and motions.

Sol and homo generat hominem; The Sun and man beget a man; the Sun and seed
bring forth corn; the Sun and showrs bring on Harvest: But the Sun is one in
every thing. So Christ his influence is All in all: In works of Nature, nothing
was made without him at first, Joh. 1. 3. In works of Grace nothing is, or can
be done without him: John 15. 3. Without me ye can do nothing.

Christ in the instruction gives saving knowledge, Christ in the conviction
works repentance, Christ and the Promise work faith, Christ and the
Consolation works peace. Accedat Christus ad Elementum, fiet Sacramentum.
Christ and the Element make a Sacrament: Christ in the Sacrament makes a rare
Feast.

The Sun has a various and mavelous influence; but our Sun far more. The
Suns influence of light dispels darkness out of the air, Christ out of the
soul. The Suns influence of heat takes off the cold from the Creature, brings
in a reviving warmth; but what like the cheering of Christ his love? it takes
off deadness, restores the new Creature. Thy Psalm. 3^. Cant. 1. 4.
favor is better then life, sweeter then wine.

The Suns attractive influence draws up gross, earthy, and watery vapors,
and converteth them into air. Christ in conversion is so attractive, that he
draws earth up to Heaven, and turns Corruption into Grace.

The Suns dissolving influence again sends down those Vapors, when purged and
prepared, in rich and fruitful showers; and Christ, those hearts full of grace
and Peace, he had before attracted; turning again air into water, melting
heavenly hearts into tears of love.

The Sun has a productive influence, which animates all seeds, and Christ all
graces. And a Restrictive influence, sometimes binding the earth with a bar of
Iron, that no seed breaks forth; such Christ his restraining hand upon
corruption, that though all seeds of it in our nature, it breaks not forth.

Again, his mollifying influence dissolveth congealed mountains of snow, and
rocks of ice into fluid water; and Christ at work upon the heart, dissolveth
Petram in fontem, Petrum in Lachrymas, turns impenitents into Penitents,
unbelief into faith, obstinacy into obedience.

Lastly, The Suns admirable alterative influence, causes mines and springs of
Gold and Silver to grow in the bowels and kidneyes of the earth, the proper
seat of clods and stones. Christ has an higher operation in the soul, in that
strange alteration made there in the midst of a vile earthly heart, where
nothing grew but stone, nothing lay but mire and clods of dust; there he
seate^h mines of heavenly Treasure, Faith more precious then gold, and Holiness
more precious 1 Pet. 1. 7.
then Rubies. Instead of the thorn shall come up the Fir tree, in stead of the
bryar the Myrtle Isai. 55. 13.
Tree. And it shall be accounted to the Lord for a Name, and for an everlasting
sign that shall not be cut off. And in another place, For Brass will I bring
Gold; and for Iron Silver; Isai 60. 17.
for wood brass, and for stone iron. Here is a great alteration indeed.

1. This shows what reason the Apostle Applicat. 1.
had to use those two great expressions of Ephesians. 1. 23, and 4. 10.
Christ. 1. That he fills all in all. 2. which is more, That he is all in
all. Col. 3. 11.


1. That he fills all; herein he is as the Sun for his influence. All] that is,
1. All Persons, Men, Angels, men of meaner, or more excellent encowments; he
fills All, Ministers, Magistrates, etc.

2. All Places: heaven with glory, earth with grace, he^ with terror, whole
world with wisdom. Power, Providence, omnipresence, omni-influence, prisons
with liberty, dungeons with light, crosses with triumph.

3, He fills all Ordinances: preaching with efficacy, Prayer with
prevalencie, Sacraments with nourishment, the Sabbath with blessings.

4. Relations: Magistracy withhonour, fear, obedience, from their inferiors;
with love, justice, courage, watchfulness, care, fidelity, circumspection
toward their inferiors; with zeal, authority, boldness, diligence toward
God. Ministry with ability, assistance, Paternal affections, maternal bowels,
Nurses care toward their flocks, and with success in their labors. Conjngall
relations with love, sweetness, condescension, compliance and mutual delight
in each other.

5. All his peoples hearts: the ignorant with knowledge, the dead with life,
unbelieving with faith, secure with fear, impenitent with repentance, stony
with softness, sad with comfort, troubled with peace, unsatisfied with
certainty, weak with strength, wavering with stability.

6. All Conditions: riches with thankfulness, poverty with contentedness,
mercies with sweetness, afflictions with tolerableness, prisons with comforts,
sickness with patience, persecutions with joyfulnesse, death with peace.

7. All things: (when he says all, you may imagine more, I cannot name every
one;) reproof with terror, conviction with fear, promises with hope,
consolations with assurance, Sacraments with comfort, desires with
faithfulness, labors with fruitfulness.

8. All in All. In all thy needs, in all thy straits, and in all thy fullness,
in all cases, encouragements; dispensations, he fills thy prosperity, thy
adversity, thy society, thy solitude, etc.

2. The other expression is far higher; He is All in all; The Sun for light is
all in Col 3. 11.
all to make day all the world over, sta^s cannot do it; his heat all in all to
make summer, his influence all in all to make spring and harvest:

So Christ is all in all. Had we the united merits of all the Angels and Saints
in heaven, they could not help us being lapsed and fallen; one poor man would
beggar them all to set him up; had we the sufferings of all the Martyrs since
the beginning of the world, for the benefit and relief of one man, it were too
low a price for him. It cost so much, Christ only could bear the charges of it.
Christ is all in all, who can cast up the summa Totalis of this reckoning. To
be somewhat in some case, is as far as any creature can go, an Angel is
somewhat in some case, not all in any thing, not somewhat in all; somewhat in
excellency of grace, glory, and many perfections, somewhat to benefit man;
nothing to satisfy Gods Justice, nothing to Redeem man; but Christ is all, and
in all. They are good Ministers to the Saints, bad Mediators for the Saints.

The best creatures and graces have but one, and that a finite use; Christ has
many, and infinite. Bread is somewhat to a hungry person, nothing to a sick;
Physic somewhat to a sick, not to a person in health; sight to a blind, a
pardon to a condemned person, money to a poor man.

Of Graces, repentance is somewhat to a guil^y soul, knowledge to an ignorant
soul, certainty to a doubting, faith to a distrusting, righteousness to a soul
conflicting with strong corruptions; but it is only Christ who is all in all,
to a poor man, rich man, sick, found, bond, free, living, dying, condemned,
pardoned man, he is all in all; to an ignorant, knowing, repenting, believing,
righteous man, he is all in all; He is bread, clothing, gold, eye salve,
liberty, pardon, physician, way, truth, light, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, Redemption, all in all.

Especialiy Christ may be said to be all in all in ten respects.

1. His Teaching is All in All in the matter of our Illumination, man's teaching
nothing, were it by Paul or Apollo. Who teaches Job. 36. 32.
like him? 2. His Drawing is all in all in the matter of our conversion; not
others persuasion, not our own preparation. Draw me, we will run after thee.
Cant. 1. 4.
3. His Blood all in all in the matter of our Reconciliation, Col. 1. 20. Romans
3. 23. 4. His Death all in all in matter of Divine satisfaction, 1 Cor. 15. 3.
5. His Righteousness all in all, in the matter of our Justification, Romans 3.
22. 6. His Spirit all in all in the matter of Sanctification, 1 Cor. 6. 12. 7.
His Intercession all in all in the matter of our Acceptance, Heb. 7. 25. 8.
His Grace all in all in the matter of our Supportation against sin and Satan, 2
Cor. 12 9. 9. His Peace all in all in the matter of our complete satisfaction
and consolation ^ere, Ioh. 16. 33, and 14. 27. 10. And his Presence all in all
to our Glorification, and complete Beautitud^ hereafter. Phil. ^. 23.
Use 2. This informs us what singular benefit Use 2.
we have by the influence of Christ upon us, more then if we had his corporal
presence; it was expedient that he should go away, John. 16. 7.
both for his own glory, and our advantage; the spirit had not descended, nor
his Intercession been so prevalent, if he had not departed. The Suns body, if
it were possible to be with us on earth, would not be of that use as now his
influence is, though his residence only in heaven. It might astonish and dazzle
us, not so cheer us; it is better for us, that Christ is mediating in heaven,
then if he were working miracles again on earth.

3. Be ready to acknowledge Christ and his influence in every good, in
illumination, conversion, consolation, etc. his attractive, productive,
restorative, sin restraining, heart changing, his gracious dissolving,
mollifying, and his alterative influence.

So in every ordinance, if there be force in the Word, any sweet in the
Promise, any life in the Minister, any quickening in the Sermon, any warmth in a
Christian, any relish in the Sacrament, any benefit in a Correction; give
Christ the glory. Taste Christ in All, as we may the Sun in each morsel of
bread, and draught of drink.

Again, In every outward good: have we any joy in our enjoyments? any comfort
in our wants? It is he that has sanctified and sweetened all our toil, labor,
meat, drink, marriage, poverty, riches, crosses afflictions. He is the tree
that has sweethed the bitter water; he the Salt that has cured the cursed
Ex^d. 1^ 25 2 King. 2 21 Genesis 5. 29.
and unsavory waters; he, like Noah, comforts us concerning our toil. He has
restored us to a child like right to, and a blessing in all mercies. In Christ,
God has given us all things, Romans 8. 32. And in him it is that God has
blessed us with all spiritual blessings, Romans 5 32 2 Pet. 1. 3 1 Cor. 3 21
Ephesians. 1. 3. and has given unto us all things that pertain to life and
Godliness. Therefore all things are yours, says the Apostle, because Christ
is yours.

4. This shows whence it is (if the influence Use 4.
of Christ be of that force) that some are called, thereupon converted,
changed, sanctified, after that supported, comforted, and to the last
preserved; others are not called at all, or not moved when called, but remain
blind or deaf as the Adder, are hardened contradict, oppose and ^erish in their
unbelief and gainsayings. The Scripture puts it upon this energeticall,
special, and distinguishing operation of the influence of Christ. To you it is
given to kn^w the mysteries Matthew. 13 11
of the Kingdom; to others it is not given; it is revealed to babes, it is
hidden from M^th. 11. 25 1 Cor. 1. 26 27
the wise and prudent, the poor, simple, weak, despised are chosen and called,
when not many wise, Rich, noble, are called. The father chooses some and then
gives them to Christ, Joh. 6. 37. 44.
then draws them to Christ, then charge Christ with them. Those he keeps
in his John 10. 28, 29
hand none p^ucketh them out. Peter is yet winnowed by Satan, Christ prays
for him, he recovers his standing though he fell. Luke 22. 31, 32 2 Cor. 12. 8,
9.
Paul is buffeted, but Christ assisteth with sufficient sin-resisting Grace,
and Paul is upheld

Again, whence is it that the same Ministry is effectual in some pl^ce to some
persons, not to others? Paul preaches at Act. 22. 18.
Jerusalem, but in vain, They will not receive thy testimony concerring m^:
there was no such influence. At Rome he preached and spread the faith: the
Reason is given, The Lord who made Peter's Ministry effectual Gal. ^. 8.
to the Jews, wrought effectually in Paul's when he came among the Uncircumcised.

5. Lastly, This may satisfy sober men (curiosicy 5.
is never satisfied) in clearing Christ, notwithstanding such his influence,
from being Author or partner in any sin, or Anomaly. Act. 17. ^8. Col. 1. 1^.
In him we live, move, and have our being; yea, even the Devils and wicked men
live, move, have their being in and from him: he sustains their persons,
governs their actions, concurreth in their operations, this is not evil.
Judas could not betray John. 19. 1^.
Christ, nor Pilate condemn, nor Soldiers crucify him, if such power had not
been given from above. Shimei could not have cursed 2 Samuel 16. 1^.
or flung a stone at David, if God by his concurring permission had not said,
Shimei, Curse David.

The lame horse is ridden by his Owner; that he moves, is from his Master; that
he goes faster, slower, this way or that, is from his Master; that he halts, is
from his own lameness, not his Master. A Scholar uses an ill made blotting
pen, that it writes is from the Scholar, that it writes ill, or blots, is from
it self. A Workman lays a strait rule to crooked timber; the Workman and the
rule make it not crooked.

Object. Why does not God mend this then?

Resp. 1. Stay there, thou piece of clay. Romans 9. 20, 21.


2. Who shall give the Potter Law? he is not bound.

3. He can bring the greatest good out of the greatest evil, Genesis 50. 20.
Christ's Garments are always white as wool; when our Rev. 1. 13 Ezekiel. 18. 29
ways are unequal, his ways equal.

Christ is as the Sun: The Sun is the efficient cause of Light, therefore
cannot be of darkness; of heat, therefore not of cold: upon his departure
follows darkness and coldness, not caused by the Sun (if it be so said, it is
improperly, causa deficiens, not efficiens.) God who is the sole Author of
good, cannot be an abettor of evil, Jam. 1. 13.

The Sun shines on a Meadow, it brings forth sweet flowers; on the dunghill it
shines, that stinks; the Sun puts not that stink on the dunghill. The word of
Christ comes to the Jailer and Lydia, and is a sweet savor Acts 16. and 5. 33
and 7, 54
of life; to the High Priests, they are cut to the heart, and storm, and stink.
The Sun shines on Gardens, Herbs, Plants, they yield their fruit to recompense
the Dressers pains: But though the weeds also have a common influence of the
Sun, they put forth noisome leaves and Flowers, and seeds of their own; that
these weeds grow, is from the Sun; that they bear such leaves, flowers, and
seed, is from their own nature, and pristine seed. When God in Scripture is
said to harden, it is not so to be understood, that he does it, Infundendo
malitiam, sed non infundendo mollitiem; not by provoking unto sin, but by
denying or withdrawing his Grace, and the influence of his Spirit.

CHAP. VII. Perfection, another Incommunicable Attribute.
PErfection is another Attribute of this lesser Sun, much more of Christ the
greater and brighter Sun. In the one is a Perfection of Light, Luster, Beauty,
no spot, darkness, or defect in it; in the other, is all Perfection of Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption: all Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, all fullness of the Godhead 1 Cor. 1. 30: Col. 2. 3. 9
bodily.

Perfection implies two things.

1. Perfectum est id cui nihil addi, detra^ive potest. That is Perfect, to
which nothing Nunquam novus, nunquam vetus, sempe^ agens, sempe^ quietus,
colligens and non ^gens ^o^tans, and implans and protegens; creans and nutriens
and p^^ficiens* qu^rens cum nil desit tihi. Reddis debi^a, nulli debens; do^^s
omnia nihil perdens, Aug. Conf l. 1. ^. 4
can be added or diminished: both are so. The Suns light is of that perfection,
that all Stars shning, add nothing at all to it: All hid, lessen not the Suns
light. All Angels and Saints add nothing to Christ. Though the Sun enlighten
all the Stars, it has never the less; Christ beggars not himself at all, by
relieving us. The Sun has the same light, if there were no eye did heed it;
Christ had the same glory and blessedness before the world began, when none to
observe it.

2. That is perfect, which is not possible to be tainted, corrupted, or
prejudiced by any object, opposite, change or chance, whatsoever that may fall
out. The Sun beholds all objects, all the works of Nature, many of which have a
natural ill savor; all the Acts of men, many which have a wo^se moral
noisomeness; but the Sun is not at all tainted, nor his beams defiled by the
sight. Christ Jesus is privy (not accessory) to all the Oppressions, Treasons,
Murders. Whoredoms, Amas nec aest^as; zelas and s^securus es; poenitette, and
non doles; iras^eris and tranquillus es. Aug. ibid.
etc. acted under the Sun; an observer of all the damnable Heresies, and
pernicious Doctrines that are broached; but his Perfections are not in the
least impaired, because he receives no taint, he is no approver of them.

1. This shows us, that God receives Applic. 1.
nothing from the Creature. He did not out of any necessity or indigence create
the world; we want a house, therefore build; a horse therefore buy; a servant
therefore Recipis quod invenis, and non amittis; nunquam inops, et gaudes
lucris; nunquam avarus and usuras exigas. Idem
hire: but God did not create heaven because he needed a house, or the Angels
and men, because he wanted Servants: He had the same perfect blessedness in
himself before there was a world or Creature. The Sun receives not his light
from our eye, but our eyes from his light.

2. If he be perfect, then cannot wicked ones when they do their worst, hurt or
prejudice him; Whoredoms, Heresies reach not him. Look unto the Heavens, and
see, Job 35. 5. 6, ^.
and behold the clouds which are higher then thou. If thou sinnest, what do
thou against him, or of thy Transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto
him? Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy Righteousness may
profit the son of man.

3. Less does he need our Duties. If thou be Righteous, what is that to Job
35. 7
him, or what receives he at thy hands?

Set not up thy rush candle to the Sun, it needs it not, it bears it not, but
puts it out: All the Stars in Heaven, and Lights on earth are abashed and
appear not in the Suns presence. Even that which was 2 Cor. 3. 10.
made so glorious (that is the face of Moses) had no glory (said the Apostle)
in this respect, by reason of the glory (of Christ) that excels. But he that
put on a Veil when he Exodus 37. 33.
came from God to speak to Israel, that he might hide his Glory, needed to put
on another Veil when he went in unto God to hide his Imperfections.

CHAP. VIII. Unchangeableness the last Incommunicable Attribute.
WE are come to the last Incommunicable Attribute, Unchangeableness. All
things below are subject to mutations; Kingdoms are changed, and Republics
changed; Men, Manners, Cities, Families, Congregations changed. Apparel,
Fashions, Opinions daily changed; and which is saddest of all, there are
changes in Religion: yea, the Moon is daily changed, but the Sun never: his
Essence the same, Light as clear, Heat as cheering, Influence as operative,
Motion as swift as ever. Hence the Sun is often in Scripture brought in as a
demonstration of the unchangeablenesse of Gods Decrees, Love, and Promises
toward his people. Thus says the Lord, which gives Jer. 31. 35, 36.
the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the Moon and Stars by night.
-- If those Ordinances depart from me, says the Lord, then may the seed of
Israel cease, etc. Again, If you can break my Covenant of the Jer. 33. 20, 21
day and of the night, that there should not be day and night in their season,
Then may my Covenant be broken with David my servant, etc I suppose it but a
dream of the Astronomers, Fere quart^ pars decessit ^ltitudini solis in margin
eccentrici, qua res digna est admiratione, dubitari enim potest utrum propter
senectam mundi delabatur sol factus languidior paulatim ruente natura: an vero
in senecta natura tanqu^ effoeta opu^ sit viciniore positu Solis eam foventis.
that the Sun is come down lower, and moves nearer the earth, by one fourth
part, then it did in ancient times. But be it so, Christ is the Sun unchanged
in his effence, grace, glory, merits, all sufficiency; unchanging in his
purposes, promises, gifts, callings, love, compassion to his people. He is
Alpha and Omega, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world. And if he be at all changed, it is in his
Approximation, and nearer approach to the earth in his incarnation, and the
other passages of his Humiliation.

App. 1. Then is Christ able to save to the utmost, all that come unto the
father through him, he has the same penny for the last, as Nam hoc tempore Sol
proprior est Territ quam Ptolomaei temporibu^ milliaribus Germanicis novem
millibu^ non gentis septuaginta sex. Frigius l. 14. Deuteronomy. 34. 7. and 8. 4.
for the first. His hand not shortened, nor mercy abated. It is remembered of
Moses, as that which was not ordinary, that after an hundred and twenty years,
his eye was not dim, nor his natural strength abated. And that more strange,
that all the Israelites garments waxed not old in forty years space. But how
admirable is it, that the eye of the Sun is not made dim, nor strength abated,
nor do his garments wax old after six thousand years. He is as a mighty Giant,
as fresh after so great labors, and after so many ages revolution as ever; and
as fair as the young Bridegroom, as the Psalmist has it, Psalm 19
the emblem of this our Sun, and his unchangeablenesse. He is Lux Perennis, h^
is fons perennis; the Sun whose light, the spring whose water is perpetual;
generations pass, the Sun remains; new Traveller^ come to the old fountains
where their fathers drank; there they are, and as fresh they run; there
Abraham drank, an^ Romans 4 22
there do we; He believed, and it was counted to him for righteousness; we
believe, an^ it is our righteousness: ^here David dran^ in his time; he
believed and therefore spoke, w^ 2 Cor. 4 13
also believe, and therefore speak: there dran^ Paul* long after, and was
revived; he believed (...). 1 Timothy 1 16
and obtained mercy; and was set forth for an example to all after beleivers.
It is the most glorious Anthem that ever the Church militant sung, His mercies
endure for ever; therefore appointed to be sung in their most Solemn feasts.
Besides you have it twenty six times in one Psalm, the burden 1 Chronicles. 16 41 2 Chronicles. 7. 3 and 20, 27 Ezra 3 11 Psalm. 136 per totum.
of every verse, a meditation that can never be often enough repeated, remembered,
studied and believed.

2. Is Christ so unchangeable? then if he has appeared to thee once, chosen,
called, loved thee, his love is an everlasting love, free at first and without
cause, firm Jer. 31 3 Romans 11 29
to the last and without change. His gifts and callings are '(...), without
repentance. The Sun is the faithful witness in heaven; if it did shine into
thine house yesterday, it will to morrow, and for ever, as long as the house
stands. The Scripture usually comfort godly ones upon this consideration,
God is faithful by wh^m ye are called 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9
into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ. Therefore he shall confirm you
unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Again, faithful is he who calls 1 These. 5 14
you, who also will do it. Hence the godly soul comes to safe Anchor after all
storms. My salvation is not in my hands, it is in Gods; my unfaithfulness
hazards it, his faithfulness secures it; my unbelief shakes it, his faith
settles it; my mutable will and condition endangers all, his immutable decrees
and love secures all; my foundation is subverted, my seals cancelled; the
foundation of God yet 2 Timothy 2 19 Romans 11 1^
abides sure, and has his seal -- Our happiness is, the root bears the
branch, not the branch the root: our faith, love, holiness, is not the ro^t,
but branches of the love of God; the branch is broken, the root remains. We are
changed, and so sometimes we cannot do as at other times; we think God is
changed, he is not. Children in a Boat think the houses and trees remove; it is
the boat, not the trees: We measure Gods love to us, by ours to him; and so
perplex all. But the Scripture puts it out of doubt; our unbelief makes not
void Gods faithfulness: if Romans 3 3 2 Timothy 2. 13
we be unfaithful and deny him, he yet abides faithful and cannot deny
himself; if we forget we are children, he cannot forget to be 1 Samuel 15 11
a father. He may repent (it may be) that he gave Saul a Kingdom, or Jeroboam
ten Tribes; never repents of grace given, because this flows from unchanged
fatherly love, the other from common providence.

3. Then are the promises firm, which Christ has made, He is the Amen, Rev. 3.
14. And all his Promises are yea and Amen* 2 Cor. 1. 20
As the Suns motion is certain, varyeth not a minute, hence Eclipses can be so
long foretold by Artists, and every Countryman can tell you where the Sun will
be, and of what length the days seven years hence. If ever therefore there was
a promise to a believer, to justify the ungodly, to count faith Romans 4. 5, 24
and 14. 4
for righteousness, it will as well reach us, as Abraham, as the Apostle reasons.

The Sun moves constantly with in his Tropicks, and comes sooner or later to
all such climates as are within his bounds; Christ does as certainly meet those
that wait for him in his way. Isa. 64. 5.


4. Terror to wicked ones: If Christ his love, and promises firm, then his
threats, his truth, justice, jealousy, hatred of sin, is as much as ever: If
he ever hated an ungodly person, he loves not thee. He shows mercy to
thousands, but by no means clears the guilty. Exodus 34, 7. His garments are
white as wool, but his eyes red as flames of fire, and he has a sharp two
edged sword in his mouth. Rev. 1. 13
Woe to them who walk in the way of Cain, Balaam, or Corah, their damnation
slumbers not, though their conscience slumber.

The Sun never goes an inch beyond his Tropic, but returns; nor will Christ the
Son of peace ever come to such as are out of the way of peace, but return back
again. Luke 10. 6


CHAP. IX. Communicativenesse a Communicable Attribute.
HAving spoken of the Incommunicable Attributes, I shall descend to some
communicable ones, and that this discourse may not swel beyond intention, I
shall the more contract my self. I might name many Attributes of this sort, as
Communicativenesse, Greatness, Glory, etc. of which other creatures also do
participate, yet are they most eminent in the Sun. I shall speak of
communicativenesse under this head, and refer the rest to the next.

Communicativenesse is an excellent Attribute in the Sun. The Moon, Stars, Air
Seas, earth, are all communicative of their several benefits to man: But the
Sun most of all, and they enabled by the Sun. It buries not his light, shuts
not up his influence, shines not to it self, is as free and liberal to the poor
as rich, to the beggar as to the King; The Lord has divided it and the stars,
De^t. 4. 19.
(says Moses) to all nations under the whole heaven. They under the Poles have
their share, as well as they under the Line.

So has Christ received of the Father, Ephesians. 4 8 John 1 16 Matthew. 28 19 Mark
16. 15
gifts to be communicated unto men; of his fullness all receive* his merits are
of largest extent, his Gospel to be preached to all nations, and to every
creature.

1 Then is here provision for the poorest Applicat. 1.
Christian who has nothing to buy with* the Sun sels not, but gives his light
freely, it is Gods light, it is the poor man's friend, his candle, fuel,
raiment. Diogen^s has as good a propriety in ^t as Alexander; Christ is the
poor man's friend, Advocate, Physician, Savior and Master of that Corporation.
The^e are his Guests, Disciples, Bride. He entertains none of other quality,
but those in poverty. Come, he that has no bread, nor many. He calls all
thirsty to come drink freely an^ Isa. 55 1, 2
without price. We love to match into Estates, great Families, marry with
Nobility, Beauty, Preferments: Christ loves to bestow himself on poor, undone,
helpless persons; he matcheth with misery, beggary, infamy, base b^irth,
humility, deformity. Ahasuerus thought the Crown better s^t on Esthers head,
then Vashtyes, or al^ the Pri^cely Esther 2
Ladies of the Court. And Christ his grace and favor, is conferred still on the
humble soul; the highest Crown was set on the lowest handmaid. Poor Mary became
Deipara, she was (...), All be-graced, highly Luke 1 2^.
honored, and she got the name from the first and greatest of women, as her
Son from the highest and first of men; she became Chavah, the only mother of
the Living, and which is stranger, her Son the Adam and Parent of the world.

2. Then is Christ's not a scant, but plenteous Psalm. 130. 7.
Redemption, not from one, but infinite Transgressions; not of one or a few,
but of infinite persons. He shows mercy to thousands; his Sealed Book
contains an innumerable Heb. 12. 22. 23
company of Angels; and the (...), General Assembly, and Church of the first
born, Rev. 7, 9
whose names are written in Heaven contains so many Myriades as no man can
number, of all Kindreds, Nations, Tongues and people. They are not a few, but a
world who 1 John 2. 2 2 Peter 2. 5
are redeemed. The whole world of the Elect, severed from the world of the
Ungodly.

3. Then there is just ground for our hopes, prayers, endeavors for the
calling of the Gentiles who at present sit in darkness, and live without God in
the world; without Covenant, Ephesians. 2. 12.
Promise and Gospel. And for the Jews also, who shall be grafted in again, if
Romans 11. 23
they abide not still in unbelief, who are also at present without God, and
King, and Teraphim, Hos. 3. 4, 3
and Prophet, and Priest, and hope too, as much as the uncalled Gentiles; but
there are promises for both. The ends of the earth are the Fathers Advowson,
and the Son is ordained by him to be the Occumenical Bishop of the habitable
world. He shall Isai. 53. 1^ Psalm. 72 ^
sprinkle many Nations, inherit all Lands, rule from Sea to Sea, to the utmost
Indies. The Sun moves sometimes North, sometimes South, is sometimes in the
East, and sometimes in the West, but ere the year goes about and ends, has
viewed all Climes; so shall the Gospel be preached to all Nations, before the
end of the World. The Church is as the Sea, which if it lose in one place, gets
as much in another. The Gospel is as the Sun, which when it goes from one
place, goes to another.

4. Is Christ so communicative? then what an encouragement is this to poor
souls to go to Christ?

1. For his freeness. He keeps open house to all comers; as Titu^ sent none
away sad, he none empty that come to him, upbraiding James 1. 5 Luke 7, 42.
none, rejecting none, giving liberally, forgiving universally. The Sun is as
free of his light as thou of thy sight; it is free cost. Christ is as free in
giving as we can be in asking. Ask on, my Mother, said Solomon. Ask again, my
Queen, said Ahasuerus, Ask half 1 Kings 2. 20 Esther 7. 2.
a Kingdom. Ask all, Ask a whole Kingdom, ^aith Christ, I shall not deny thee.
The mother is as well pleased when her breast is drawn, as is the Infant. And
Mercy is not more pleasing to us to receive, then to God to impart it. Who is a
God like unto thee, that pardons Mic^^ 7 1^
iniquity, and passes by the Transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? he
retains not anger for ever, because he delightet in Mercy.

2. For his Fullness: In the Sun is mo^ of light then thou can need; in Christ
much more then thou can carry: when you come to him, you are as the poor
hunger famished 2 Kings 7. 8
Lepers, coming to the Syrians Tents, where they might eat their fill, load
themselves, and leave more behind them then they could carry, and may call in
others to partake of thy riches as they did. You 1 Samuel 14. 26
come into a wood dropping with honey.

Christ's merits are not only as the widows Cruse, which wasted not; but as the
loaves he blessed, the more was eaten, the more was left; and when the more fed
of fewer loaves, more baskets remained then when few of more. To the five
thousand remained Mark 8. 19, 20
twelve of five loaves; to the four thousand seven of seven.

While there was a Vessel empty, the Oil 2 Kings 4. 6
stayed not. There is more want of empty Vessels, then filling liquor.

In the Fathers house the returning son knew Luke 15 17
there was bread enough for every servant he kept, and to spare. At the Kings
Sons marriage, Luke 14. 22
much company, and room for more. Who then need want? None perish through
necessity, but of carelessness or wilfulness. Consider that Parable, All are
invited, all are entertained; the Refusers only refused.

Object. 1. Say not then, They must be so and so qualified who come to Christ;
the Rich, Noble, etc. or the Righteous, Innocent, strong Believers.

Answ. The Instruction was to call the poor, maimed, halt, blind, the unworthy,
the unlikely, Luke 14. 21.

Ob. 2. But they were such poor as had lain all their life at the Pools side,
or had been daily praying for an Alms at the Temple Gate.

Answ. They were such as were in the road to Hell, and lay in the Highways
(being very Hedge birds) such as were set by the Devils fire side, as Saul was,
such as are quite Heb. 5. 2
out of the way, Luke 14. 23.

Obj. 3. But then they were such as were very forward, and came running.

Answ. So backward, that they must be called, entreated, drawn, driven, and
compelled to come in. Luke 14. 23.

Object. But there can be no room for Scorners, Scoffers, Despisers of his
former Grace, and forsakers of their own mercy.

Answ, There is yet room for such, the door of hope is not yet shut; Christ in
the open Concourse calls out to the open Scorner. Prove. 1 21 22
He will open a door of Mercy to such as have shut the door of Duty against
him; he will receive such as have refused him; and stretches out his hand all
day to such as Romans 10 21
have stopped their ears many a day at him.

See then, there is no impossibility of attaining Salvation to any; God is no
austeer Master, that denies reaping to such as sow, or demands reaping where
he has not sowed. Perditio tua ex te, Israel would none of Hos. 13 9
me, that is Gods complaint. They who sin Psalm. 81 11 Prove. 8 36
wilfully against me, wrong their own souls, they hate me, and love death.

Salvation is offered on easy terms; If you cannot say, Have patience, and I
will pay all; say, Have patience, and he will forgive all. Patience is no pay;
forbearance is no acquittance with men, with God it is; his forbearance is our
discharge, our submission his satisfaction. Indulgentia tua justitia mea. Bern.
The Debtors (...), the Prodigals peceavi, and the Publicans miserere, are the
best plea, and do always speed.

Here is a community: All is common in the Church, as Sun and Air, which none
can challenge a Propriety in to exclude another: it is for me, it is for thee;
no meum and tuum here. A carnal community abominable in Families; Secular
community destructive to Republics. But spiritual community we preach to all
Believers: All have a like right to Christ, and his common Salvation. For the
Righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ is to all, and upon
all that believe: for there is no difference, Romans 3. 22.

Obj. Is there then an universal Salvation and Redemption?

Answ. As much the one as the other: but there is neither.

1. No universal Salvation; for broad Matthew. 7 13
is the way that leads to destruction, and many go in it.

2. No universal Redemption; for this is of the same latitude with Election and
Salvation. Ephesians. 17 Col. 1 14 Ephesians. 5 25 John 10 15 Ephesians. 5 23
All that have Redemption, have also Remission of sins, as the Apostle in
diverse places affirms. Christ is said to have loved his Church, laid down his
life for his Sheep: he is the Savior of his body.

Yet 1. True it is there are some common benefits all mankind have by Christ,
life, Sol non omnes quos calefacit, illuminat.
breath, reason, and comforts of this life; as the Sun affords some common
benefits to all creatures, who live, grow, increase by virtue of his influence,
though they see not his glorious light.

2. There is also a sufficiency in Christ as in the Sun; if there were ten
thousands of men more that had eyes to see, they should not want for light; but
if all see not, it is not the Suns defect but their own. There be several
sorts of men that have no benefit by the Suns light. 1. Some there be who are
by nature incapable till God give them sight as by a Miracle, being born blind.
2. Some lose their sight accidentally. 3 Some see not, being fast asleep, who
open not their eyes. 4. Some wilfully close their eyes, and shut their windows
to keep out the light. 5. Some have weak eyes, and take offense, therefore shun
the light. 6. Some are judicially blinded. as the Sodomites, Syrians, Elymas.

That none of these have benefit by the Sun, who offers his light to all, is
not his fault. So when Christ is offered to all, all have not benefit.

1. We are all born blind as he, John 9. 1. nor can nature make us see, til we
have been at Siloam.

2. Satan the God of this world, and Mammon that God the world, blind the eyes
of many. 2 Cor. 4. 4.


3. Some fall a sleep again after illumination, and it is as dark as midnight
with them, whom the Apostle calls aloud unto, that he 1 Cor. 15. 34. Ephesians. 5.
14.
may awake them; Awake to righteousness and sin not. Awake thou that sleep,
stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give the^ light.

4. Some wilfully close their eyes, and who so Matthew. 13. 15.
blind as he who will not see? Their eyes they have closed.

5. Others are much offended at Christ. Blessed is he whosoever is not offended
in Matthew. 11. 6.
him.

6. Others are judicially blinded. He has John 9.
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should
heal them. Again, God has given Job. 12. 40. Romans 11. 8.
them the Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear, unto this day. Cernitur ^^imorato contemplatore Deus, just^
sed occulte suo judicio reprobcrum, nec diluen^ mala, nec acceptans bona;
insuper et corda indurans, ne forte doleant, et recipiscant, et convertantur,
et sanet eos: et hoc non absque certa et aeterna ratione quod tanto
formidolosius, quanto immobilius fixum erat in aeternitate. Bern. Isa. 42. 8.
Isa. 14. 12. 13. Genesis 3, 6. Ezekiel, 28. 2, 3. Matthew. 5. 48.


So that it is as much a mercy to have an eye to see, as the Sun to give us
light; and the same cause to bless God for giving an eye, or ear, as for the
Gospel, and for giving faith as well as giving Christ. Christ without faith
profits no more then the Sun without an eye, or meat without a mouth. This
being a communicable Attribute, it gives us an imitable example, the
Uncommunicable Attributes of God, are Un-imitable. To aspire to be equal to God
in glory, (which he will not give to another) was the Pride of Lucifer; in
Omniscience, was the sacrilege of Adam; in Power, was the insolence of
Babylon; in wisdom and Policy, the ambition of Tire; they all perished in
such attempts: but to affect to be like God in holiness, purity, mercy,
forbearance etc, is a Gospel duty. So to affect to be like the Sun in his
splendour, glory, to move in a higher orb, that we might shine alone, and all
others be eclipsed by our fame and glory, were to say with Lucifer, I will walk
among the stars. But to be as like the Sun as may be in Communicativenesse, will
be our glory.

There is to be a communicativenesse 1. In Spiritual. 2. Civil matters.

1. In Spiritual things, and that 1. By the Est lucere Vanum ardere parum,
ardere et lucere perfectum. Vae nobis si solum Lux erimus Dominus f^rvorem ab
omnibus, splendorem non ita ^xigit Bern. Heb. 3.
Ministers, who must be as the lights of heaven, and the Salt of the earth, go
about as Christ himself, doing good. He must be eyes to the blind, warmth to
the cold.

The Sun when gotten higher, gives more heat then when it was lower, you must
be more useful then when you were private Christians. 2. By private Christians,
who must exhort one another, speak one to another. As you have received a gift,
minister the same as good stewards of the manifold grace of God. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal. Yet God 1
Pet. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 7.
being the God of order, not confusion, intended not that all should become
public teachers, to extinguish the calling of the Ministry; they are to be
Stars in private, not Suns; it were to be wished indeed, that the Isa. 30. 26.
light of the Moon were like the light of the Sun, and that the hearers were
almost and altogether such as the Preacher; that all the Lords people were
Prophets: but not that the Sun should be pulled down, and the Moon and Stars
which are to give light only by the night, in absence, and defect of Ministers,
should rule by day, and openly teach in the sight of the Sun. It went of old
for a fable: I fear as this age has turned many truths into fables, so it will
some fables into truths; and it may prove too true, that our Phaetons in the
Chariot of Phoebus, will set all on fire.

It is twice noted in sacred history, that 1 King. 13. 33,
the lowest of the people were made Priests, and both times ominous; In
Jeroboam's time, whose house sunk with it; and in Hosheah's Reign, when the
ten Tribes were finally cut 2 King. 17. 32.
off. But both times it was but to officiate to Calves, and the Images in the
high Places, never to the true God: Wooden Priests and Golden Calves may go
well together; as was said of Caligula, who would himself be adored as a God,
and would have his Horse consecrated for his Priest; there was like God, like
Priest, as the Historian observed. As for the Church of Christ, she is
described to be clothed with the Sun, the Moon under her feet, Rev. 12. 1.
and a crown of Stars on her head: It is a sad change, that now she should be
stripped of the Sun, clothed with the Moon, and have the Stars trod under her
feet.

2 In Civil things: 1 All rich persons should remember their charge: To be rich
in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, thereby laying up
in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to 1 Timothy 6. 18, 18
Romans 12. 13.
come; that they may lay hold on eternal life. Again, Distributing to the
necessity of the saints, given to Hospitality: propounding to themselves that
example of him, who when he was rich became poor, that we through his 2 Cor. 8.
9.
poverty might be made rich. Or this of the lower Sun, who is liberal to the
poor, and shines not only on the fertile pastures, but on the barren rocks,
and sandy wildernesses, whence no fruit can be expected.

2. But especially the Magistrate, who was wont to be emblem'd with a Sword in
one hand, Balances in the other, eyes closed, to be without respect of persons
in administering justice, and by a fountain, to denote their communicativenesse.

He should not (as Lucifer) affect a higher orb, and climb unduely to that
place to which he is not called. Such prove prodigies, not stars, and are as
the blazing stars (the astonishment of the world) made up of fiery and
malignant matter, which after they have caused terror in the Land of the
Living, consume themselves, and appear no more.

The Sun is not placed in the highest, but in the middle Sphere; there more
safe, there more useful. Saturn is far higher and Mars also is above him, but
both of malignant Aspect. The Sun is the Earths Patron and Benefactor.

The Sun is more full of lively heat and influence when gotten higher; a
warning to those exalted to Higher Places, to grow better as they are grown
greater. Prodesse magi^ quam praeesse.

Yet it is commonly observed in the Heavens, That the Sun moves slower when it
is at the Highest, swifter when lower, and we ordinarily find men with their
Advancement to lose much of their activity and usefulness. (...). Plut.


Yet it was the grave advice of Plutarch, That Magistrates should herein also
resemble the Sun, moving when at highest more slowly as to violence, not to
activity; but more deliberately and with Moderation, for the benefit of the
Commonwealth, and their own particular security.

CHAP. X Of several Properties of the Sun, whereof first his Greatness.
THE third thing wherein the resemblance holds between these two Suns is their
like Properties, whereof there be many; we shall begin with that of Greatness.
Who knows or will believe the stupendous magnitude Paeraeus in Genesis 1. 16
of the Sun! All the Etherial Bodies far exceed these Earthly in their
Greatness. The la^e Annotations of the Bible in loc.
The Sun especially, which though the ignorant Country man believes, as
Epicurus taught, that it is but Bipedalis, or of the bigness Du Bartas. Since
the least Star that we perceive to shine Abov^ dispersed in the Arch
Chrystalline, (If at the least Star-Clarks be credit worth) Is eighteen times
bigger then all the Earth.
of a Bushel, the Learned know, that of necessity it must be far bigger then
the whole Globe of the Earth and Seas; One hundred and sixty times bigger, the
Learned say (although by conjecture rather then certainty, to be exactly so and
no more.)

The fixed Stars are said to be of six Magnitudes, the least whereof are held
to be eighteen times bigger then the Earth, and those of the first Magnitude an
hundred and seven times greater. The Moon, however it seem to us, is the very
least of all (but Mercury,) and is Quadragesima pars terrae; the Earth being
thirty nine times bigger, and the Sun seven thousand times or thereabout, as is
conceived.

Should all the earth and seas be supposed to be where the Sun is, it would be
as a Mathematical Point, no bigger then a Diamond or a spark. But who can
compute the Greatness of the higher Sun, Christ Jesus? Job 117 8
Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the Almighty unto
perfection? It is higher then Heaven, what can thou do? d^eper then Hell,
what can thou know?

The Suns Body can be measured, his Diameter is taken to be so many thousand
miles, his motion observed to be so many hundred miles each hour. But Christ
his greatness unsearchable; the Sun to him an Atom or spark, the Heavens a
span, the earth as the dust of the Balance, the sea a drop of a bucket, Isaiah
40 15 Revel. 10 5 Isaiah 40 12
and all the Isles a little nothing, and man less then nothing. With the sole of
his foot he covers the earth and sea, in the hollow of his hand holds all the
deep.

1. What high thoughts should this beget Applicat. Isai. 40 23 25
in us of Christ? To whom will you liken him, or can you equal him? Regum
timendorum in proprios greges, Reges in ipsos Imperium Christi. He brings
Princes to nothing, He can crush them as a moth, and with his looks or frowns
can undo them and their projects, yea, command them into Hell. God looked on
Pharaoh, and he never looked up after it. His wheels moved no more. Ahasuerus
looked displeasedly, Hamans face was covered, and he was presently led to
Execution. Esther 7
Fear him, fear him.

2. But let the poor Believers rejoice. We have a great Savionr, whose Grace,
Mercy, Wisdom, Merits are infinite. He is many times bigger then the earth. All
sins of the world before his Merits no more then a cloud before the Sun. I
shall speak two great words. 1. The one this, That if all sins of all Believers
were all laid on one person, they were nothing to countervail his Meritorious
satisfaction. 2. The other a greater, yet as true, That if all sins of
unbelievers since the world was, were upon the account of one man; that if you
could suppose one man to be guilty of Cains Murder, Phara^^s Obstinacy, Ahabs
Impiety, Saul's Rage, Ahitophels Treason, Absoloms Parricide and Incest, and
Judas his Christicide and despair too, and Saul's blasphemy withal; yet this man
flying to Christ Jesus, should have all these sins done away as a cloud, and
should be as safe as Abel the Righteous. The latter Act of turning Tamar 2 Samuel
13 16
out of doors, was more shameful then the former in deflouring her. To turn
Christ out of doors, after all other Contumelies and abuses is the foulest sin.
Any were admitted to the Feast but they who slighted the Invitation, and had
abused Mercy. He who despised Moses Law, dyed without Mercy; ^eb. 10 2^
yet there is a sorer punishment for such as trample under foot the blood of
Christ, and despite the Spirit of Grace. Can any thing be sorer then to dye
without Mercy you will say? Yes, this, 1. They dyed without Mercy at man's hands,
might find Mercy at Gods: These without Gods Mercy. 2. They dyed Temporally,
these Eternally. 3. They, if they went to Hell also, have a more tolerable Hell
(there are several Dungeons there, as Mansions in Heaven,) then those who have
so much abused Grace.

What weight may a weak man swim with upon his back, who has bladders under
his arms? What sin can sink him that has Christ in his arms. Thou may sink
with all Duties without Christ; and be safe after all thy sins with Christ. Thy
sins are many, great, only less then infinite: Christ is great and infinite,
and more then one way infinite; his Person, Blood, Obedience, Intercession,
Grace, Power, so many Infinites.

Should I tell an ignorant person, That the Sun is One hundred sixty and six
times bigger then the Earth, he would laugh at it, and not believe me; yet so
it is, though he believe it not. So should I say, Christ his Grace, Mercy, and
Merits, are One hundred sixty and six times more then all our sins put
together, to an Unbeliever, he would not assent, yet so it is. The Apostle
calls them the unsearchable Riches of Christ. Ephesians. 3. ^


A little of sins Poison (one drop of Pride) may corrupt all our Righteousness.
A spoonful of Poison may infect a whole Vessel of Wine. All Poisons cannot
infect the Air, the sea, the Sun much less, which will dissipate and correct
all Malignity. A little sin may mar all our Box of Duty, and mar a man's, yea,
Angels Righteousness, and make us past recovery by Duties of the Law, o^ help
of Angels, but not past Christ's help.

The Stars of the first Magnitude, are One hundred and seven times bigger then
the Earth, yet show nothing to the Sun. The Angels are one hundred times more
pure then we, yet they need Christ, and are nothing to him.

Oh Unbeliever, cast not thy self and hope, and safety, wilfully away. The Sun
with one look dispels all darkness from the one Hemisphere, and at another the
darkness of the other: Two looks enlighten the whole world. What can two drops
of the blood of Christ do, and two of his looks! He looked and prayed for the
sins of all those before his coming, they were done away; he looked again up to
his Father for all these since his coming, and they are gone. Thus this one
Lamb takes away the sins of the world.

But as it sometime falls out with an over carfulf woman, riding over water, a
good horse under her, her Husband before her to hold by, yet betrayed by her
causeless fears, she lets all go and casts her self down, and is either drowned
or well washed. So do often we when we have Christ to hold by, and are as safe
as he himself, we cast away our confidence, and disquiet our selves with
unnecessary fears, Lord carest tho^ not that we perish?

Let the Great ones of the world, who are as the Sun in these lower heavens,
many times greater then other men, Resemble this great Pattern, who is not so
much greater then the other Stars, as it exceeds them all in Glory, Beauty,
Light, Influence, cherishing the inferior Orbs with his beams and presence. It
affects not the highest Sphere but the most convenient; is well content
others should be above it in place, so it may be more for common benefit. He
that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear 2 Samuel 23. 3, 4
of God- And he shall be as the light of the morning when the Sun arises; even
a morning without clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the earth by
clear shining after rain.

It is observed how all Creatures thrive and mend when removed into a better
Soil. Plants or Beasts taken out of a hard soil ever do, man only made worse by
such removes. Man cannot abide in Honor* Man when exalted, is corrupted. The
lowest and darkest Cellars keep our Beer fresh, Wine quick, meat sweet, which
would corrupt in upper rooms or in the Sun. Jeroboam in the dust more
industrious then any other; in the Throne more impious then any that ever came
after, they all might go to him to learn. And he that before had been in the
Garden of Eden, and was looked on as a holy Angel, the Anointed Cherub; (to
Ezekiel, 28. 13, 14, 15.
whom Daniel and all the Men of God were as no body) had the most iniquity
found in him, after he was perfect in his ways, and had by his Policy made all
fit to his hand, as he would have it.

Good men when Great, resemble God, with whom Mercy is sweetly matched with
Majesty, and Grace with Glory. But the wicked are like Satan, who when ever he
gains more power, employs it to do more mischief. He rises up (says Job)
and no man is sure Job 24, 22
of his life. No man can say what he has, and what is his own, speaking of the
wicked man armed with Power.

4. How great is the folly of the sons of men, who toil, sweat, fret* sue, go
to Law, go to War, yea* venture to go to Hell to get these earthly things! and
when they have done, what have they got but their labor for their pains in
this life, and after this worse pains for their labor? Why do thou set thine
eye on that which is not? What are P^ov. 23. 5
these to Heaven? The Sun is nothing in comparison of the Heaven of Heavens;
the Earth nothing to the Sun, thy Farm or Lordship nothing to the Earth, thy
Cottage or Manner is nothing to England, and England it self an inconsiderable
nothing to the Earth. Thy Lordship is not mentioned, nor to be found in the
Map of the Earth; and if by seeking it thou losest heaven too, how miserable
art thou? They are begged for fools, who have a fair estate befallen them, and
sport themselves with Rattles. How many wise Worldlings may be begged for
Fools! We count it childishness to see our boys to run after painted
Butter-flyes, wrangle for a Top, and fight for a Ball: We are the more children
who pant (as if Amo^ 3. 7
out of breath) for the dust of the Earth. The Philosopher on this Meditation
of the Heavens Magnitude, and Earths meanness, breaks out into a Passion, That
men like children strive for an atom: And hereupon Du Bartas excellently.

For though a King by wile or war had won
All the round earth to his subjection.
Lo here the guerdon of his glorious pains;
A needle point, a mote, a mite he gains,
A nit, a nothing did he all possess,
Or if then nothing, any thing be less.
O Lord, (said Austin) Thou art, and Tu eras and aliud nihil, ande fecisti
C^lum, and terram; duo quaedam, unum prope te, alterum prope nihil. Unum quo
superior tu esses, alterum quo inferius nihil esset Aug. Conf. lib. 12
besides thee nothing, of which nothing thou have made Heaven and Earth; those
two, the one of which is next to thee, the other next to very nothing. The
highest heaven yet thou art higher; the Earth so low, as nothing lower. Heaven
is great, but Earth little.

CHAP. XI. The Glory of the Sun the second Property.
THe Sun is the most glorious Body in the World, from whose Glory light is
borrowed to set out the greatest Glory whatsoever.

1. The Church Militant in her greatest Glory, and richest Robes is described
to be Rev. 12, 1
clothed with the Sun.

2. And which is far higher, the Saints Triumphant in that great day of Gods
greatest glory and man's, when Christ shall be glorified Matthew 13 43.
in the Saints, and the Saints in him, shall have their glorified Bodies
shining as the Sun.

3. Yea, which is more then either, when Christ himself had that great promise
fulfilled, That the Kingdom of Heaven should come with power, and was
transfigured, His face then shined as the Sun. That was a glorious Matthew. 17 2.
day when two Suns shone together But what will that be (said famous Mr Bolton)
when there shall be so many Saints, so many Suns?

There is one glory of the Stars, another of the Moon, but a far other of the
Sun, said the 1 Cor. 15. 41
Apostle. There is one Glory of Saints, another of Angels, but another far
greater of this Sun.

Moses had much glory in his countenance, 2 Cor. 3. 7.
such as Israel could not behold til his Veil was on, but he needs a Veil
when he comes into the presence of this Sun to hide his defects. Solomon's glory
was such, that the fame astonished a Queen, but the ^ight dazeled and struck
her dead. There was no more spirit in her, it is said.

Angels have a far greater measure of glory. 1 King. 10. 5.
Daniel the greatly beloved Prophet, and Mary the greatly beloved Virgin could
Dan. 10. 17. Luke 1. 29, 30
not stand before it. He fainted, she feared.

But Christ is above all: Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his
Holy One, to him whom man desp^seth, to him whom the Nation abhors, to a
servant of Rulers; Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship,
because of Isa. 49. 7.
the Lord that is faithful, and the Holy Ore of of Israel, and he shall choose
thee.

Yea the Angels themselves cover not their feet only, but their faces, when
they Isa. 6. 2.
come before Christ.

The Sun is exceeding glorious, though it dwells in that Light accessible, so
that his glory does superare visum, our eye is so weak, we cannot see and see:
but Christ who dwells in that Light Inaccessible, his glory does superare
Intellectum, we cannot see and live.

1. Therefore admire and adore this glorious Applicat. 1.
Sun of righteousness: This is no creature worship, to worship Christ; it is
the John 19 Col. 1 19 Ephesians. 1 21 1 Pet. 1. 12
Fathers will, the same Divine Honor should be given to the Son as to himself.
Worship this Rising, this Warming, this Healing Sun; Angels, Principalities,
and Powers, stoop and submit themselves to him.

Do to Christ, as the Philosopher, who Discendi ^am fuit cupidus, ut mori fuit
ipsi suave: modo ex dubiis questionibus in quibus sibi sa^isfacere non poterat
se p^sset expedare. M^^. Adam.
viewed and gazed on the Sun as long as he was able, then not able to
comprehend his glory, could have wished himself with the Sun, that he might
know it perfectly. If Erastus was so in love with Learning, that he could
gladly have dyed to have his questions resolved, which he could not satisfy
himself in. Why should not the Christian desire to be with Christ, in whom
though he does believe, and joy with joy unspeakable, and glorious, yet has he
never seen him, nor can he know him as he is? 1 Pet. 1. 8. S^l^m qui vid^^di
(...) causa est, ^^^ucri non p^ssamus; radas acies submovetur; obtatus
in^uentis hebetatur; et si diutius inspicias omnis visus extinguitur. Qui ipsum
solis Artific^m, illum (...) fontem poss^s sustinere, cum ^e an ejus ^alg^rib^^
(...), a fulminibus abscondas. Minut. Faelix. Act. 36. 13 (...). Just. Mart.
Exp. fid.


2. Pry not then into the Ark, nor press beyond those bounds, set us below at
the foot of the Mount, to comprehend those unconceivable mysteries of Christ
his Deity, Personality, Hypostatical Union, which the busy wits of the world
studying to reach by their humane reason, have fallen into the most monstrous
heresies of the world. Faith must begin where Reason ends. What vessel can
contain the Sea? or what visible eye can see ^n ^nvisible Deity? The Suns beams
in reflection, are delightful, but the Sun directly looked upon, does blind
thee; it must be an Eagle-eye can endure it. It is no wonder if Paul lost his
sight when Christ appeared and shone round about him with a light far greater
then the Sun.

CHAP. XII. The third Property, Light.
THe next great Property of the Sun, is his Light, which must not be forgotten,
Jer. 31. 35. Thus says the Lord which gives the Sun for a light by day etc.
He speaks as John 1 4 9 and 8 12, and 9 5 and 12, 35 Isa 426
if it was chiefly created for this purpose. Light is the glory of his glory
and greatness. Herein an eminent resemblance of Jesus Christ, who is so often
called a Light, the True Light, the Light of the world.

As in nature are to be seen several lights, so the Scripture mentions many
sorts of Lights. 1 Some good. 2 Some b^d.

1. Some good. 1. Divine and Uncreated. 2. Created.

1. Divine and Uncreated. Light is so excellent a thing, that God has not
disdained to be described by it, entitled to it, clothed with it.

1. Take God Essentially, he is a Light, 1 John 1. 4. clothed with Light, Psalm.
104. 2.

2. Consider God Personally, 1. The father is called the Father of Lights, as
he is Ja^. ^ 17
the father of Christ, h. e. the Original of increated Light. He has
communicated the Light of Divine nature to Christ, who is God of God, Light of
Light; into whom the Father has put all fullness.

2. Christ as God inhabiteth (...), Col. 1. 19. 1 Timothy 6. 16.
Light Inaccessible.

3. The Holy Spirit is a like coequal, and coeternal Light, whose proper work
is illumination; and his first work in the new Ephesians. 1, 18.
creature is answerable to that first word in the old Creation, let there be
Light, and there was light. So here the spirit of God moves upon the heart, and
brings it out of darkness into a mavelous Light.

4. Christ Jesus as Mediator is the Sun, into whom the God head has
plentifully imparted all fullness of Divine Light (as the light of heaven is
cumulatively aggregated and embodied in the Sun) to be the standing treasury of
the Church, as the Sun is of the world. Thus those phrases are to be
understood, that he is the true Light, and Light of the world, viz as he is
God-Man, and Mediator.

2. There are many Created Lights. 1. The Ancientest, the Angels who were at
first all of them Angels of Light by creation, (though since many of them are
fallen Stars) these the Lord calls the Morning stars who Job. 38. 7.
sang together, when all the Sons of God sung for joy; glorifying God for the
excellency of his work as they were created. These are Heavenly Lights.

2. There be other Lights in earth, whereof the first and chief are the holy
Scriptures, Psalm. 119. 105.
given to be a light to our feet, and a Lantern to our paths, to which we must
attend and follow as a light shining in a dark place. Our Cynosura and Pole
Star they are, as we are 2 Pet. 1.
Mariners; our Pillar of fire, as we are Travelers; our Sun, as Mr. Brightman
interprets all along in the Apocalypse.

2. Next to these are Religious and godly Magistrates, Stars of the first
magnitude in the inferior orbs; these come in place and dignity next to the
Angels in Principality, power, and Influence, and when they come nearest to
Scripture Rules and Presidents, they are of most sweet aspect, as Gods on
earth, Gods set over us in the likeness of men; and these are not as the
lesser stars, but as the greatest Sun; when they rule in the fear of God (as
David says.) 2 Samuel 23. 304
they shall be as the light of the morning when the Sun arises, as a morning
without clouds.

3. After these follow the godly and Est lucere Parum est ardere parum, ardere
et lucere perfectum. Vae n^bis filuxerim^^ tantum. Matthew 5 1^
exemplary Ministers, who are the Stars in the hand of Christ, Rev. 2. 1. are
to be burning and shining lights in grace, and doctrine; then are worthy to be
looked upon, and followed as the light of the world. You are the light of the
world, said our Savior to his Disciples, lesser lights in the lesser world;
these are to be as so many earthly Angels. (To the Angels of the seven
Churches.) Paul was called by Chrysostom, Angelus Terrestris, and these are to
receive their light of grace from the Sun of Righteousness in heaven, and
their light of doctrine from the Sun of scripture in earth, that they may be as
men of God thoroughly furnished to every good work.

4. Each private Christian is so to hold Phil. 2 15 16
forth the word of life, that they may be as so many lights shining in the
world.

Yet Christ and all these lights differ much, 1. He is the great and true
light: John Baptist John 1 John 15 ^ John 6 32
was a burning and shining light, Joh* 5. 35. but he was not that light, that
true Light. Christ is the true Light, as he is the true Vine, the true Bread;
that is the great and excellent Light.

2. Christ is perfect Light, in him no darkness at all. In the Angels there
has been a defection of Light, there are now many of them in chains of
darkness. In Scripture is some obscurity; in Ministers, Magistrates, Best
Christians are many defects, as spots in the Moon; there is smoke in our best
elementary fire, and a black steam in our purest wax candles; no smoke or steam
in the Sun.

3. He the fountain of Light (as the Sun to stars and creatures, having before
been furnished and called to that office) he having received all fullness from
the Father, freely imparts his light to Angels, Scriptures, Magistrates,
Ministers, other Christians, yea to Every man that comes in^^ ^he world, as
the Evangelist speaks: which John 1. 9
is to be understood 1. of the light of common understanding and natural
Reason, (not that higher light of supernatural Grace; this is not given to all,
but hid to many:) for this, as other common mercies, and universal
preservation, flows from Gods rich benignity, as a fruit of Christ's
interposing. Or 2. If you will understand it of saving knowledge, He enlightens
every one that comes into the world, then it must be understood of all, and
only those that are of that number; none have such light but from him. So in
many places of Scripture the word Every is to be taken (which, if well
considered, would discover the unsoundness of Pelagian Doctrines, and Arminian
Conclusions.) The Apostle says, as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith. The Romans 12 3 1 Cor. 12 7 Ephesians. 4 7 1 Cor. 4 5 Luke 16 16 2 These. 3 ^.
manifestation of the spirit is given to every one to profit withal; not that
every man has faith, (the same Apostle says, all have not faith) or that
every man has the spirit; but he speaks only of such as are of that number,
the Elect, called, and godly.

4. He the most eminent light, out shining all them, he present they silent,
and draw in their light, as the Stars before the Sun. So Angels, Ministers,
Scriptures, Ordinances, yea the Sun it self are silent, and of no more use to
the Church in that heavenly Jerusalem, where the Lamb is the Sun, and Rev. 21 23
Temple, and Bible, and all.

5. In him all fullness, as in the Sun of Light, in Sea of water; all receive
all from him, yet all cannot receive all; their all they have, his all they can
never have. The Seas treasure cannot be exhausted, when all Rivers, Springs,
and other vessels are filled. We have but our measure, no fullness: Romans 12 3.
He no measure, the Father gives not the spirit by measure to him. But all
fullness, of Joh. 3. 34.
whose fullness we all receive, and grace for grace.

Ob. Are not the godly said to be full? Stevenful of faith, Paul of the Holy
Ghost, the Acts 6 Acts 13. 10. Romans 15. 14.
Romans of all goodness?

Answ. Christ has his fullness, and the Saints their kind of fullness, but
with great Plenitudo multiplex. 1 Alia fontis, alia vasis. 2. Alia capitis,
alia membri. 3, Alia divinitatis, alia creaturae. 4. Alia maris alia fluminis.
5. Alia permaneus, alia tran^iens.
difference; theirs the fullness of a small vessel, his of a fountain; theirs of
a member, his of a head; theirs of men, and manhood, his the fullness of the
Godhead; theirs of a Rive^; his of the Sea; theirs of a Brook or River after
much rain, causing a land-flood, his an abiding undecaying fullness. Such a
land-flood was that fullness, Acts 4. 31. after they had prayed, the place was
shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, etc.

2. As there are these good and pleasing lights, so are there other sad and
uncomfortable lights.

1. Such as were the old false Apostles, who did put themselves into the form
of 2 Cor. 11. 13.
Angels of light, pretending to more communion with God, insight into his Word
and Worship, more choice revelations, extraordinary Holiness, Mortification,
purely Spiritual, perfect enemies to Antichrist, and all received forms, that
would bring in a new Christ, and a new Creed into the world. These much
troubled the Apostles and obstructed the spreading of the Gospel at first, and
this Age sees the sad effect of such new Angels of Light, pretending to new
Truths, new Light.

These would purge out in their Reformation all the Old leaven, not only that
of the Pharisee and of Antichrist, but that of the Matthew. 13. 33
Gospel and of Christ (for the Kingdom of Heaven has his leaven too) because
all old things must pass away, and all things must become new. But is the new
Wine better Luke 5. 39. Jerem. 6. 16
then the old? Can any new light be so good as the old Sun? Are not the old
paths, the good paths? All Truths hairs are as Christ's, white. Truths glory is
to be as ancient as God himself; Gods glory to Daniel 7. 22.
be the ancient of days, yet a God not changed.

2. There are others who are as prodigious, blazing Stars, who draw the gazing
multitude after them. New lights these are indeed, but true Stars they are not;
a while they blaze, but are ever of malignant Aspect: The Vulgar looks upon
them with admiration, the Judicious with horror. They outshine in appearance
the fixed Stars for the present, but after a while they are extinct, being not
made up of Heavenly, but combustible matter, and are ominous forerunners of sad
calamities. Such are those whom Jude and Peter described in their Epistles,
(...). Jude v. 11, 12, 13, 16
who would make their way by new coined phrases, speaking Great, high sounding,
swelling words of vanity, yet are but wells without water, clouds without rain,
trees without fruit, full of rage (at what they know not) till they foam
again; Raging waves of the Sea, foming out their own shame; 2 Pet. 2. 17, 18
walking in the ways, and treading in the very steps of Caine, Balaam and
Corah, eminent for all Impiety, Uncleanness and Opposition.

3. There are others who are as Wandering Stars, as Saint Jude terms them. Gods
Jude v. 12
Ministers are fixed Stars, Satan's are H^ra^i^k unfixt, wandering. 1. They have
no steadiness in their Doctrines, of one opinion to day, another to morrow, as
they receive new light they say, changing their faith and leaving their
Congregations, as often as the Nomades and Tartars their Pastures. 2. Unfixt in
their Orb and Stations, of one Calling to day, another to morrow. Heri
catechumenus, (...). Heri Sa. crilegi, hodie Sacrifici. Hierom.
hodie Pontifex, heri in Amphitheatro, hodie in Ecclesia; vesperi in Circo,
mane in Altari. Yesterday Tradesmen, Swordmen, to day Churchmen; at a Play
house, Tavern, Quarrel overnight, in the Pulpit next morning. 3. Most of all
wandering in their Practices, began Religiously, end Impiously, ^epent of their
repenting, praying, hearing, ^ast off Duties, Holiness, Morality, and ^re
translated into Swine that return after outside washing to wallow in the mire.
2 Pet. 2. 22.
Luth^r wittily compares these ignorant Teachers to unskilful Physicians; and
says, The Opus est juvene medico novo coemiterio, novo Theologo, novo inferno.
Luth.
new Doctor sends his Patient a new way to the Church yard, and these new
Teachers their followers a new way to hell.

4. There are others who are called falling Stars, of which sort diverse are
foretold, who shall arise and fall in the last days, Matthew. 24. 22. Before the
coming of Christ, there shall be putting out of the lights; the Sun Matthew. 24,
29 Rev. 8. 10 and 9. 1
shall be darkened, and many Stars shall fall from Heaven (from their former
profession) Godly Ministers and Professors are fixed Stars never shall fall.

Non est quae cecidit stella, cometa fuit, But these never were fixed in the
Firmament of Election or sound Profession, were but blazing Stars or Planets at
the best. These may fall and prove woeful Apostates, and which is worse, one
falls and fills all with Rev. 8 1^
wormwood, occasions bitter ( wormwood) divisions, Separations, Censures, at
last bitter Persecutions. Waters once turned into Marah, easily are after
turned into Blood. Another Rev. 9 ^
Star falls, and he has the Key of the Bottomless pit given him, none so fit
to be trusted with Hells Keys to let out those multiformed Locusts, and to
give a free toleration to all Satan's Agents and Emissaris as a fallen Star.
Fixed Stars have Keys of Heaven, fallen Stars of Hell.

5. There is another foolish light, ignis fatuus, which sometimes appearing to
the simple Country man affrights him, leads him out of his way into boggs and
pits, and a^ length he is conceited it is some ill Spirit Such are those Imps
of Hell, the Fortunetelling Astrologer, etc. who mutters and peeps, says 8* 19.
for he will deliver nothing plainly. A man of such an age, statute, hair,
(says he) has stole your Horse, Money, Plate, etc. Why does he not name the
man, and bring you to the Goods lost? but he mutters and peepes, that is all
the Wizard and Familiar Spirit do. Yet do the simple people go from the living
to the dead, from God, after Satan, by these. These pick the ^redutous Vulgars
purse, lead him into a world o^ ^Errors, destroy his dependence upon God* he
undertakes nothing but he first enquire^ of Baalzebub, Shall I recover of this
sickness? Shall I go up and prosper?

6. The last of these ill Lights is the e^^ Magistrate, (who as the good
Magistrate ^^ deservedly put in the first place, so these, ^^ they be not put
out of all place, deserve the lowest,) that suffers all those forenamed
dangerous Lights in Church and State t^ so wtheir Seeds while he connives or
sleeps The good Magistrate bears Gods Sword, which has two edges, with one
wounding Disturbers of Civil Peace, with the other Corrupters of Religion. The
evil Magistrate bears Satan's Buckler, who protects all, wounds none.

But to return: There are many Lights we see, such as they are, some better,
some worse: But Christ is the Light, the true light, the Sun; in diverse
respects:

1. The Suns light is the only day light; All Reas. 1.
other Lights of Moon, Stars, Fire, Candle are but night lights when all is
done, somewhat they relieve in the Suns absence; Christ makes the perfect day;
in his Light eternal Light to be seen, without Ministers, Rev. 21. 2^
Scriptures, Ordinances, which are of use only till we come to heaven.

2. Suns light at first appearance drives away the nights darkness, and Christ
his first Work is to deliver out of ignorance, and from the darkness of Error
and ungodliness: If we say we have fellowship with Christ 1 John 1. 6
and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the Truth. And the first effects of
Christ's influence upon the Ministers labor, is to open Acts 26. 1^
men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, etc.

3. Light discovers every thing that was 3 Ephesians. 5. 13
hid. That which makes manifest is light, and discovers things in their right
shape and colors, be they beauties or deformities. Christ is this light,
whose appearance chaseth darkness, and makes a new discovery of an unknown
world of sin in the heart, before hid and swept behind the door, -- I was alive
before the Law once. Concupiscence Romans 7 9
I had* but knew it not before the Law came, then sin revived, and I dyed.
Christ appearing, the deformity of sin, loathsomenesse of Nature, defects and
spots of Duties and Righteousness, are discovered, never seen before; and the
beauty of Grace, excellency of Holiness is laid open to enamour the soul.
Christ is the only light that discovers to us the deep things of God, hid in
darkness till he revealed them; and the deep things in men, both the hidden
mysteries of unknown wickedness, and the great mysteries of Grace and
Godliness.

4. The Light directs us how to walk and 4
keep our ways, and keeps from stumbling and falling into danger. If any man
walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he sees the John 11. 9
Light of this world. But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him. And Solomon, The way of the wicked is as darkness,
they know not at what they stumble. Prove. 4. 19.
When Israel followed the Pillar of fire they took no hurt. When Judas and
Peter followed the Light, kept near to Christ, they stumbled not; but Peter
leaving Christ, dashed his foot against a stone, in Petram scandali, a stumbling
stone, and bruised himself; but Judas into a Precipice, and broke his neck.

5 The Sun is sent to call us out of our 5
beds, and to invite man to go out to his labor. The Sun arises, and man
goes forth Psa. 104. 22, 2.
to his work, and to his labor until the Evening. And this Sun is sent, not
that we should play out our Damnation with negligence and security, but work
out our Salvation Phil. 2. 12.
with fear and trembling. Yet a little John 12. 35.
while the light is with you, walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come
upon you; for he that walks in darkness knows not whither he goes.

6. How sweet is light to the sight, and how 6 Eccles. 11. 7
pleasant it is for the eyes to behold the Sun? No sight so delightful as the
Light, and the Sun is the heart-cheering light: But no Totus di^ideratissimus.
Jun. Totus di^ideria. Montanus. Totus dulcedines. Heb.
sight of the Sun it self so cheering the soul as the light and sight of Jesus
Christ. His countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. His mouth is
most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my Beloved, says the Church,
ravished with his beauty, Cant. 5. 15, 16.

1. If Christ be the light of the world, what Applicat. 1
cause have we to bless God for Christ. We are excited to praise God again and
again by the Psalmist, that God made the great lights, and to say, His Mercy
endures for ever. Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9
The Sun to rule by day, and the Moon and Stars by night. But what praise is to
be given for Christ; who has delivered us Col. 1, 13
from the powers of darkness. The world had been a dungeon, if it had not been
for the Sun; and the Church a Hell without Christ.

2. See what need we stand in of Christ, much more then of the Sun. Satius
solemn non lucere (quam Chrysostomum non d^cere) quam Christum non lucere.
Better not see the Sun, then not know Christ. Better without eyes then without
faith Can we not walk but stumble without light? nor rise to work till Sun
rises, that we may go forth to labor? We can neither walk, nor work, nor
pray, without Christ: Without me ye can John 15: Psalm, 104. 20.
do nothing but err, wander, stumble, fall, perish. Does Sun withdraw, and
darkness follow? Darkness come, and Beasts of Prey come forth of their Dens?
What darkness follows when Christ withdraws? and then are we assaulted with
Satan and his Temptations. Do we open our windows to let in Sun light? open
thine eyes and Christ shall give thee light? Is this light cheerful to the
Traveller? Lord, what is the light of thy countenance? Blessed are they that
know thy joyful sound. They shall Phil. 89. 15
walk in the light of thy countenance all the day long. Do we daily need the
renewed light of the Sun, and do we not daily need a fresh supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Phil. 1. 19.
Christ!

None but the blind undervalue the benefit of light; none but of weak eyes are
offended at it; none but Thieves and Murderers Job 24. 17.
hate and fly it. None but very ignorant, or very wicked, take offense at
Christ, and are weary of him.

3. This may sadly warn us, who yet a 3
little while have the light amongst us, to John 12. 35
walk as children of light, lest darkness come upon us, God either taking away
his Gospel from us, or us from it, or his blessing from it and us both. The
longest day has his night, and the brightest day of Gospel grace abused, ends
in the grossest darkness. The children of the Kingdom are above all others
Matthew. 8. 12
cast into utter darkness. They who were lifted up highest to heaven, by
enjoying most light, are thrown lowest into Hell for abuse of Light, and this
Title of condemnation written over their heads, These loved darkness John 3. 19
better then light, because their deeds were evil. Was it not sad the Egyptians
should follow the Cloud and Pillar of Fire into the deep and perish? How many
go laden with Mercies, and lighted with Sermons into the Chambers of Hell? How
sad, the Samaritans should be led blindfold into their enemies hands! More
sad, if we will go with open eyes into Perdition, and with the Decii, leap
headlong into the gaping Gulf at noon day! But much more sad, those Samaritans
should be stricken blind by the Prophet, sent of God to be a Seer, and to make
the blind to see! How sad was it that the Sodomites should be stricken with
blindness by an Angel of Light! Sad if Satan the God of the World blind thee;
but nothing so sad as when Christ shall take away thy sight, and God shall blind
thine eyes. For this great judgment came I into the world, that they who see
not may see, and that they John 6 39
who will not see (when they see) should be made blind. The case of none so sad,
as those who go to hell with Balaam, after their eyes are opened, and wilfully
perish, as did that obstinate thief in the presence of a Savior.

4. Though Christ be the great light and Sun, yet remember that Ministers,
Scriptures and Ordinances,, are not to be cast aside. God created the Stars,
and placed them in their orbs, as well as the Sun; they have their measure of
light, and place for use, though all of them united, equal not the Suns light,
and he present, they of little use. Christ holds the Stars in his right hand,
both to present and preserve them; the Church takes them as from Christ's hand,
and sets them on her head to honor them. They are Christ's charge, and the
Churches Crown; in vain is the Arrow shot against the Sun or Stars, it may
recoile and wound the shooter, it cannot reach those lights of heaven. Wicked
men may be used as Gods snuffers to top (and overtop) his lights (the
Ministers) but shall not extinguish them, God has set them up to give light to
his house, he will not suffer them to be buried under a Bushel. It is our duty
therefore, still to attend to the Scriptures, and to the Ministry of the Word. 2
Pet. 1. 9.


1. To attend to the Scriptures; we have also a more sure word of Prophecy,
(said the Apostle) whereunto ye do well that you take heed, as to a light that
shines in a dark place. Here the Apostle calls Scripture Light, our most sure
rule to walk by. The most extraordinary Revelations are not to be equalled to
them. The most solemn, clear, and infallible Revelations are less then
Scripture. We, says the Apostle, were with Christ on the Mount, and were eye
witnesses of the glorious transfiguration, and were ear witnesses of that
Divine testimony, Thou art my beloved Son. Yet you that have none of these
Revelations have that which is as sure (more sure, (...)) the holy Scriptures,
whereto ye do well to attend, etc.

Obj. But the Antiscripturist objects* that we must attend to this light of the
written word, till the day star arise, and the day dawn in our hearts; but when
we have once the spirits teaching, we need no more the Letter of the Scripture.

Obs^urus locus est, Tota vita Homints. Dies autem est p^^^a cognitio Christi,
vel vita illa ^^ata p^^^ ha^^. Qamdiu ig^tur his sumus. Summ^ utilitatis est
Scriptura. A^^^. in loc.
Answ. Here this Scripture is mis-applyed, upon a double mistake. 1. Of what is
the meaning of the day dawning, and day star arising in your hearts, which is
to be understood of the state of glory, when we shall no more see in a glass
darkly; but while we are here we are in the dark, and in comparison of clear
and perfect vision, we may say, now it is night, and then day. This is the
first mistake.

2. If you understand it of the Revelation of Christ here, who is the day star,
whose discovery of himself by his spirit to the believers soul, is the day
dawning; then is there another mistake in the word Til, it is not a til of
termination, but of provocation rather, and so of continuation still, Til I ^
Tim 4 13.
come, give attendance to Reading. Did Paul mean Timothy should read no more
after his coming to him? The leaven is put into the Meal, and it sowres the
Dough til all is Matthew. 13 33.
leavened; but does the woman take it out, or does the sowrnesse cease, when
all is leavened? It still continues. Attend to the Scripture, searching til the
day star arise, and then you will see much more of the use and excellency of the
Seripture, then you now imagine. And very observable it is, that our Savior at
his departure after his Resurrection, having breathed on his Apostles, and
given them his spirit, bids them not be above Scripture, and lay it by. But he
opened their understandings that they might understand Luke 24 45
the Scriptures.

2. To attend on the Ministry of the Word, for Christ has given not only
Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists (extraordinary officers) but Pastors and
Teachers to perfect the Saints, to work in the Ministry to build up the body of
Christ, til we come Ephesians. 4, 11, 12, 13.
to a state of perfection, and the whole Church be completely gathered and made
one perfect man (or body) in Jesus Christ, viz. to the end of the world. Heb. 8
11


Ob. Is it not said, they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man
his brother? therefore there is an end of the calling of the Ministry.

Answ. 1. Therefore there is a bar to the teaching of the uncalled Artificer.
They shall not teach every man his neighbor, that have no more call then any of
his neighbors. It is no where said, that the Minister shall not teach his
neighbors.

2. This is meant, there shall be so much of heavenly knowledge by means of the
Scripture, Ministers, and Ordinances, when the spirit of God goes along, that
they shall not need every man to teach his neighbor; not so much need, his
meaning is. Not teach at all, he means not, for he bids them in this Epistle to
Exhort one another, Provoke one another, Heb. 3 13 Heb. 10 24 Heb. 13 22
and suffer the words of exhortation. All which, he would not have done, if
there needed not one man to teach his neighbor at all.

The Particle ( not) is in many places not to be taken absolutely, but
comparatively; not negatively, but diminutively: we wrestle Ephesians. 5 John 6 27
not against flesh and blood, says the Apostle; not only, not so much, he
means; labor not for the meat that perishes. He means not we should not
labor at all; but not only, or not so much, as for that which endures to
eternal lise. To conclude, This place of Heb. 8. 11. is best opened by
considering such a place as that of Christ. At that day, ye shall ask in my
Name, and I say John 16 26
not unto yo^, that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father loves you.
He means not, that he will forbear his Intercession; but besides it, they shall
find the Father bearing a particular propensity of good will to them. So here
they shall not need to teach one another, as if that was all, but God will give
in his spirit, so that it shall become more effectual; they shall all know me,
from the least to the greatest.

Obj. 3. Against Scripture and Ministry both, 1 John 2. 27. But the anointing
which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye need not that any man
teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all things, etc.

Ans. The same answer to this, that to the former. You may with comfort attend
on Scriptures, and Ministry of the word, because you have the spirit to anoint
your eyes with eye salve, and lead you into all truth, and to teach you all
things, (not all things simply, or all things by inspiration, without use of
means) but all written things, all necessary things.

But he means not, they should upon pretending the spirit, either 1. Slight
the Scriptures; for then why did he write this Epistle to them, if they needed
none to teach them? 2. Or slight the Ministers? for why does he himself preach
and write to them? 3. Or Rely on the anointing, as if it was the only Bible and
Light, when he tells them notwithstanding the anointing they might be, and were
some of them seduced. These things have I written concerning them that seduce 1
John 2 26
you.

5. If thou want light then, this directs us where to seek it. Go to Christ
for it. And for that end, 1. Come out of the earth; live not as worms and moles
under ground, God bereaveth such of sight; they would not esteem the light,
but despise it. The darkness comprehends not the light; nor can an earthy
heart discern spiritual things. Damps arising from the earth, put out all
lights; and those of earthly spirits, cannot savor the things of God, but only
those of John 1 5 Luke 16 14 (...).
the world. The Pharisees who were covetous, when they heard Christ, derided
him, says St. Luke.

2. Live not in th^se climes where the Gospel Sun comes not; follow the light
(of Ordinances) as the wise men the Star. Our countrymen go not to Groenland
til the Sun have been there, and stay not when the Sun is withdrawing. The
Christian, as the Swallow, must follow the motion of the Sun Christ, and of the
Gospel his Chariot.

3. Close not thine eyes by wilful frowardness, lest God seals them up with
judiciary excoecation, Matthew. 13. 13. 15. Do nothing against the truth, but for
it, 2 Cor. 13. 8. The Pharisees, because they stood in their own light, and
said, they saw (better then our Savior) their sin remained; and professing
themselves wise, were made fools, (...), and because they saw they were Romans 1
21 John 9 40 41
made blind.

4 Op^n thy doors and windows stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light; Ephesians. 5 4
do what in thee is, that thou receivest not grace in vain. We cannot make the
Sun rise before Gods appointed time, and before that hour, it is in vain to
open all doors and windows; these drive not away the night, but the Sun. But
when the Sun is up, we may stop it out or let it in. We cannot by digging cause
springs run, where God denies them; but where he places them, we may by
digging make a well to receive them, or we may stop them up that they run not
to us. We can by no means procure a blast of wind at Sea, then all sails cannot
put on the ship* but the wind blowing fair, we hoise up the sail, and have
the benefit of it. Nature without grace cannot, grace without endeavor will
not save us.

5. Go to thy Minister. The Greeks made their way by Philip, to a sight of
Jesus; John 12 21 John 1 35 and 40 compared.
and the first Disciples that Jesus called were John's Disciples formerly. The
Magistrate may take civil Marriages out of the Ministers hands, if it be his
pleasure; but spiritual and sacred marriages he cannot; they are to espouse
believers to their husband, and to present them as chaste Virgins unto Christ, 2
Cor. 11. 2.

6. Pray much to Christ; Lord, that mine ^yes may be opened; those blind men
had not Matthew. ^233
power to see, but they had power to be sensible. Lord I cannot see thy light,
I can only see my own darkness; I cannot pray, or believe, but I can cry.
Thou give both light and sight, light where sight, sight where was no sight,
and eye salve to mend the bad sight. O Lord, who is so blind as thy Isa. 42 19
2^
servant? and who so deaf? Seeing many things, but observing nothing? Take off
the scales from these eyes, the veil from this heart, that I may come out of
my darkness, into thy mavelous light.

CHAP. XIII. Warmth the fourth Property.
THe fourth Property, which I may call the highest in the Sun, is his most
comfortable warmth, which is that that crowns all the former. His greatness is
commended by his glory, glory by his light, and light by this we now speak of,
warmth. It is a shining and a burning light, of whose heat we read often in
Scripture, Exodus 16. 21. When the Sun waxed hot. 1 Samuel 11. 9. By that time the
Sun be hot. which Property makes this creature ^ great resemblance of our Sun
of Righteousness in many pa^^iculars.

1. It is the sole property of the Sun (of all the Heavenly Bodies) to give
heat. The Moon and Stars have their Glory, give their measure of Light, give
not the least heat, That is the Suns work. Christ is the Garden enclosed, and
the Well sealed, of Grace to quicken, of comfort to revi^e the soul. No Angel,
minister, Ordinances can; they are of use, and can give light. The Law and
Knowledge of God came by Moses, and the Prophets; but Grace and Peace comes
only John 1. 17.
by Jesus Christ.

2. The Suns light is of more large extent then is his warmth, that many see,
who feel Sol non omnes quibus lucet etiam ^alefacit.
not this; that reaches those who are far off and lie in the shade: This,
those only who are nearer, whom it takes into closer embraces (it is in his
wings, not Beams) and beholds with a direct face, and who are a longer space
under it. Christ may impart common illumination to those who are far off; but
his Grace, and Peace, and Love he imparts to them only who are nearer to him,
more dearly embraced, whom he sets his eyes and heart upon, spreading his
skirt and wings over them. Thus does he manifest John 14. 22
himself to them otherwise then to the world. Many there are enlightened as by a
winter Sun, who have also tasted of the Word of God, but Hebrews 6. 4.
were never warmed at the heart with the Love and Spirit of Christ, who
therefore fall away, and as the stony ground, for lack of root and m^^^^ure,
hold not out.

3. The Suns warmth is another kind of Heavenly (and Divine) heat, then is in
all the Creatures again; fire, clothes, warm, but not as the Sun. Warm water
in Winter will not make trees to grow: let the Husbandman graff, plant, cut,
prune, dig, dung, water, no fruit comes of it till the Suns warmth brings it
out. The Prophets 2 Kings 4. 31
staff laid on the child's face, or if it had been b^oken on his back, brings no
heat. But the Prophet laying face to face, and stretching himself on the dead
child, his warmth brought in warmth and life into that child before dead.

The hens wing has another heat to form, bring forth and hatch the chicken at
first, and to recover it when drooping, then any other heat can have.

Now, as they are alike for these Properties in their Heat, so in their
Operations.

1. The Suns warmth, (not light) dryes up the rain, dryes the Fens and
Highways overf^owen with water, dissolves Rocks of Ice, thawes Mountains of
snow; turns Mare congelatum, into Mare Pacificum; Mare clausum, into Mare
Liberum, which no fire or Engine on Earth, or all the light in heaven could not
do. It is Christ his approach dryes up the dirt and mends our ways. At his
approach Fens and Floods of Ungodliness are dried up, as when he once went
through the red sea and Jordan. He breaks the hardest heart, which no Tool,
Art, Pains, Terrors and Fire of Hell, and Light of Heaven could do. Zacheus as
a Mountain of snow melted, and the Thief on the Cross as a Rock of ice
dissolved, when this Sun breaks out upon them: Therefore Isai. 64, 1, 2, 3
the Church prays, Oh that thou would rent the Heavens* that thou would
come down, that the Mountains might flow down at thy presence, as when the
melting fire burns, the fire causes the waters to boil. -- Thou came
down, the Mountains flowed at thy presence.

The Suns heat has a dissolving and mollifying virtue.

2. The Suns heat (not light) at spring produces various Creatures, which are
not engendered by propagation, but owe their being wholly and immediately to
the Sun; neither do they live longer then the Suns a biding in those Climes in
his strength and vigor. All our Graces in their first Production in the new
Creature, owe their very ess^* and afterward their conservari to Christ: Nature
has no hand in this Work. And a^^ our comforts depend only on Christ his
approach and abode with us. Without me ye can do nothing.

The Sun has also a Creating and vis formativa in it,

3. As the Sun produces some new, so it reduces, recovereth and restores by
a redeeming kind of Virtue, others of the Creatures. To the withered grass, to
the seeds, herbs, plants, trees it gives a new Resurrection. To the Fields
another face, to the Earth another Garment. The Suns warmth makes Fish, Foul,
Beasts breed and multiply. Christ by his return recovereth decayed Grace,
Peace, and Comfort, and causes a new and rich increase of Spiritual life.

It has a redeeming and recovering virtue also.

4. The heat (not light) of the Sun makes the Creatures grow; trees shoot at
the Spring. Rain falls all Winter in vain till the Suns approach, which then
makes good use of all the winter rain, frosts and snow, for the good of the
Creatures. All pains, Instructions, Corrections, Reproofs, Terrors, Judgments,
Mercies, Ordinances are in vain till Christ himself approach, he can make good
use of all.

It has a fructifying virtue we see.

5. The Spring-Sun's warmth gives growth. The Summer-Suns greater and longer
continuing heat* gives ripeness and perfection to the fruits and seeds sown;
Christ his nearer coming and making his abode with us, is John 14. 23.
that which brings Judgment unto Victory, Grace unto Perfection, Peace unto
completeness, and brings in the full Harvest of Joy to the waiting Christian.
Rain falls in Winter, fills the earth, fowls the ways; but without fruit, for
want of this enlivening heat. But the Summer Sun converts the falling showrs
into fruitfulness, and his Gleames causes them to ripen the fruits and hasten
Harvest. How untoward are we under all Ordinances, and Dispensations left to
our selves? But how does Christ convert the crossest providence, coldest
storms and soaking showrs of affliction into a means to ripen and better us.

Thus it has a ripening virtue.

6. By reason of this warmth the Creatures are refreshed and delighted. They
sport and lie beaking themselves in the Sun; they leap and play. The colder
Creatures, as Swallows and the like, feeling the benefit of the Sun, and
knowing their want, observe the Suns motion, come and go with it, stay not
behind it, because cannot live without it. So do the godly joy at the presence,
know not whether to go in the absence of Christ, after him they seek, with him
stay, Number. 9. 22, 23
he departing as at the cloud removing, they pack up and follow. Herein the
Christian resembling that admirable Sun^loving Flower Lotos; whereof our
English Du Bartas thus.

For lo, so soon as in the Western Seas
Apollo ^inks in silver Euphrates,
The Lotos dives deeper and deeper, ay
Till midnight, then remounteth toward day,
But not above the water till the Sun
Do re-ascend above the Horizon.
So ever true to Titans radiant flame,
That rise he, fall he, it is still the same.
It has an Exhilarating and Reviving Virtue.

7. It is the Light of the Sun which dispels darkness, but i^ is his warmth
that disperseth mists, chaseth fogs, and draws up the Vapors. It may be
common illumination may drive away ignorance, and fill the mind with some
general knowledge; but Christ his love is that which breaks through the
interposing fogs to the heart, and draws up those Earthy affections toward
himself.

It has an Attractive Virtue.

8. The Suns light causes only an outward alteration in the face of the Air,
and superficies of the Earth; but it is the strength of his heat which
penetrates the heart of the Earth, and the depths of the Sea; and in the one
ingendreth those Pearls, in the other those precious Stones, Jewels, and Mines
of Gold and Silver. So may the bare light of the Gospel make an overly change
in the face, speech, and outward carriage of a Hypocrite. But the heat and
strength of the piercing beams of Christ his Grace and Spirit works that
inward and mighty change, and breeds those rich Mines of Grace, Faith, Love,
Sincerity, etc. in the hidden man of the heart, and turns clods of Earth into
Gold and Rubies, as we said before.

Behold the Alterative Virtue of Christ and the Sun.

9. The Suns warmth and heat has an excellent clarifying and purifying virtue
in it; therefore we set out in May, and in the Summer Sun many things to be
purged and brought to their perfection. And how does it purge and clarify the
spirit, to be under the warm beams of Christ his presence and favor! and how
admirably is the impurity of the heart extracted, and the heart refined by this
heat!

It is full of clarifying and refining Virtue.

1. This informs what a vast difference Applicat. 1 Sol non omnes calefacit
quibus lucet: ibi instruimur, hic afficimur. Instructio facit doctiores,
affectio sanctiore^. Bernard.
there is between Christ's reaching, and man's, as much as between the Sun and
Stars. They give light, he heat: Man persuades, Christ draws. As between
Winter and Summer showers; they drown and foul the Earth, and make it freeze,
these make it fruitful. Moses Ethiopissam duxit, Ethiopissam non mutavit. Moses
made an Ethiopian his wife, but could not make his wife not to be an Ethiopian
when he had done.

Man's teaching is like man's hewing a stone; he may smooth it, but he cannot
make it soft. Christ's teaching turns stone into flesh. Man by Education or
better Instruction may take a thorn out of the Field, where it was noisome, and
set it in the hedge where it is of use (men may make men useful for Societies)
Christ turns this Thorn into a Isaiah 55. ult.
Myrtle. Hence see the difference to be found among so many Hearers; the
difference is not in the ground, nor in the seed, but in the Sun and Seeds man.
Many are called, few chosen. All with Paul saw the light, Paul only heard the
voice. All were stricken down, he only converted. All Israel saw the fire,
heard the same voice of words and thunder that Moses did, His face only shone;
he had nearer approaches of God unto his soul; Then did the Disciples hearts
burn within Luke 24. 32
them when this Sun was so near and gave light to the darker Scriptures.

It was the Sun, not the Wind, which got off the Travelers Cloak: It is the
love of Hosea 11. 4 Deuteronomy. 33. 14 Aurum optimum ac gemmas pre^iosissimas ad
O^^um and Meridi^m nasci* Cardan. Oriens and Africa minio and Argento vivo
caret.
Christ, not Laws Terror, that makes sin to be laid by. His Love is cords,
his love is chains, his love constrains and draws, I drew them with cords of a
man, with bands of Love.

M^ses speaks of the precions fruits brought forth by the Sun. Where the Suns
heat is most predominant, there are the richest Me^tals, the sweetest spices,
the rarest fruits, the most precious Jewels. There is not in the East and In
s^ptentrione ferrum in ipsa superficie terrae, ita anrum ad Meridiem in agris
and arena pura reperitur.
Africa any Quicksilver, very little Iron; but these meaner Me^tals of Brass,
Iron, Lead, are only in the Northern Countries; they have Gold as naturally
and abundantly as in our Countries Lead and Iron. Where this Sun is near and
vertical, what fruitfulness is here over all others? What precious things does
this Sun bring forth? For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron Silver, and
for Wood Brass, and for stones iron, Isaiah 60. 17.

2. It lets us see what difference between the comforts of Christ's giving, and
those which flow from the Creature. He that leaves this Fountain to go drink
of those Cisternes, goes from Gods blessing into the warm Sun (as we say): but
he that has drunk of those, and after tastes of this, finds he is come from
the freezing shady side, into the cheering Sun side. The Sun's is Calor
Coelestis, the most kindly heat, Christ's the most kindly comforts. The fire in
Winter heats for a while, afterward makes more chill. Strong Water at present
warmes, but after leaves the stomach cooler. The end of carnal joy is
heaviness, P^^v. 14. 13
The Sun's is the cheering and the lasting heat; it heats and alters the air
without, and it alters the temper of our bodies, that we need less fire,
apparel, and strong drinks. The comfort had from Creatures is presently gone;
Christ's alters the temper of our spirits, and abides much longer. The greatest
inward heater is Wine, and the greatest outward is fire. Christ his love and
comfort warmes more then both. Thy Love is better then Wine, Cant. 1. 2. The
coals of Love are coals of fire which has a most vehement flame, Cant. 8. 6.

There are nine differences observable between the comforts of Christ's giving,
and other comforts.

1. His are soul purifying, whereas others defile it. Carnal mirth lets out all
the spirits into looseness. They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play. They did eat Exodus 32. Judge. 9. 27
and drink, and curse. But Godly and spiritual comfort makes the heart serious,
savoury, dilates the heart to receive more Graces, expels what is noisome,
and is of the same operation with godly sorrow; whose sadness Eccles. 7. 3
Act. 9. 31
of countenance makes the heart better. Walking in the fear of the Lord, and in
the comfort of the Holy Ghost, are joined.

2. Soul pacifying: his comfort and presence gives richest peace: first, his
Love lets in Joy, and Joy brings in Peace; these three sit down together; and
this Trinity of Blessings, make up the Unity and Perfection of Blessedness,
the Love of the Father, the Joy Gal. 5. 22
of the Son, the Peace of the Holy Ghost. Other Joy corrodes and gnawes the
heart, has an ill farewell, and leaves it in sadness.

3. Soul satisfying. Corn, Wine, Oil, Lands, Moneys satisfy not the narrow
eyes, much less the enlarged heart. He still cries with the Horsleach, Give,
give, give more, give better. The Christians life consists not in these; the
Beasts, and the more brutish Worldlings do, who drink both in the same Trough,
and feed on the same husks. Theirs is a hungry Joy, this a filling; His
strength shall be hunger bitten, Job 18. 12. but John 16. 24. Your joy shall be
full. -- In thy presence fullness of Joy: and the heart full of this Job 20. 22
Joy says not with Esau in a bravado, I have enough, but with Jacob and Paul,
I have all, and abound, I am full, etc. Phil 4. 18. Though as having nothing,
yet I possess more then all things.

4. Soul quickening, making the soul active, vigilant, fit to pray, sing,
praise, fit for Duty, suffering, dying. Godly men are never so fit for duty,
never so prepared to die as with these comforts. The Martyrs have gone singing
and dancing with these to the flames. When Judas was gone out to fetch the
Officers to apprehend Christ, then did Christ rejoice, Now is the Son of Man
glorified, Job. 13. 31, 32
now shall God be glorified in him. God shall first be glorified in him, then
straightway glorify him in himself. This puts 1 Peter 4, 14
that Spirit of Glory, and of God upon the Saints.

The wicked man's Joy is intoxicating, stupifying, besotting, as Hamans,
Belshazzers, Benhadads; they eat, drink, feast, and fleshed with fleshly
delights, they run desperately Judge. 9. 27, 39
upon danger, as Benhadad, or Gaal the son of Ebed; much like the horse rushing
into the Battle, and crying, Aha at the sound of the Trumpet; or else besotted;
they eat, Job 21, 13
drink, sleep, spend their days in peace, and in a moment go down quick into
Hell. like Solomens Ox, who is going to the slaughter, or Prove. 7. 22
like Jeremyes Lambs (those who dye like Lambs) In their heat I will make their
feasts, Jer. 51. 39, 40
and make them drunken, that they may rejoice and sleep a perpetual sleep, and
not awake, says the Lord. I will bring them down like Lambs to the slaughter,
like Rams with he Goats. Danger is never nearer then when the wicked cry,
Peace, peace. Never is he less fit for death, nor dies so miserably, as when
overcharged with his Joys.

5. Soul raising to God, toward heaven, in thankfulness, love, praise,
dependence, submission, total resignation of self: these give Wings. Christ is
now higher, Grace, the Promise, Salvation is sweeter, Glory and Eternity more
precious; and Earthly Pleasures, Profits, Honors fall lower in his esteem.
Whereas worldly joies, as worldly sorrows, are heart-sinking, debasing,
depressing.

6. Soul strengthening: The joy of the Nehem. 8. 10
Lord is your strength. This strengthens a soul in Grace, and to Duty, in
faith, patience, waiting, and in Prayer. Carnal Joy sets men far off from God;
they never depart further, and never say to God, depart from us, so much as
then. In sorrow they are less desperate; Pharaoh, Ahab, Iehoiakim ( such wild
Asses) may be taken in their month: I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, and thou
Jer. 2. 24. and 22. 21, 23
would not hear; this has been thy manner from thy youth. -- But how
gracious will thou be when pangs come upon thee? Look how much Spiritual sorrow
brings men nearer to God then carnal joy; so does Spiritual joy as much more
then Spiritual sorrow: therefore in Heaven there shall be all Graces, yet no
spiritual sorrow, but all Spiritual joy, because there all is ripe: sorrow here
is but the seed, joy is the ripe fruit.

7. This solid: not a flash, as the fire of Thorns, but joys maintained with
joys, joy leading to joy, a standing boundless joy, an ending endless Joy;
whereas the wicked man's joy is brewed with sorrow, compassed with it, tends to
it, and ends in it, but has it self no end.

8. Unmixt. others muddy, impure, mixed with sin, guilt, gripes of conscience;
and when ready to run over, cooled with the handwriting upon the wall, the
remembrance of his sin, the apprehension of Gods wrath. But Spiritual joy is
the purest thing in the world; as the light of the Sun, light without darkness;
as his warmth, pure without smell or smoke.

9. Permanent; never eclipsed, not by any disease or danger threatening death. 2
Cor. 1. 12. not any distress. 2 Cor. 16. 10. as sorrowing, but always rejoicing.
John 16. 22. Your joy shall no man take from you. They must needs swim in Joy
whom Christ holds up by the chin. And as Joseph's bow, so the Christians Genesis
49. 22
joy must needs abide in strength when he has such a wall at his back, and
such a well at his foot. At this Beer-la-hai-roi Hagar Genesis 16
may fill her empty bottle as often as she will, and thirst no more.

3. This directs what to do when we complain we cannot profit, and do not
thrive, The heart yields not, the sin decays not. Go to Christ, desire to be
under the direct beams of the Sun. Trees thrive not in the shady side. Cry,
Blow, O Cant. 4. 16.
North wind, and breath O South wind, distill O rain, and look out thou Sun
upon my Garden that the Spices thereof may flow out. Let my Beloved come into
his Garden and eat his pleasant fruits. Have thou a heart that will not yield
under Judgments? his Love can melt it. The Manna dissolved by the Suns Numb.
11. ^.
gentle heat, that was hardened and dried in the Oven or boiling pot. Whom the
furnace of Judgments burn, and the Oven heated with wrath does bake and harden,
the melting love of Christ does mollify. The last and ^orest Vyal upon sin,
which ends the mystery of iniquity, and finisheth Satan's Kingdom, is poured
from the Sun. The brightness of Christ's appearing is the destruction of
Antichrist, and is that which alone distroyes the works of the Devil in the
heart. Cry out therefore with the Church, Oh that thou would rent the Heavens
and come, and make this Mountain melt and this rock flow at thy presence, as
when the melting fire burns, the fire causes the waters to boil. As thou
did of old at Mount Sinai, when thou did terrible things that we looked
not for. Is my heart harder then the rock, higher then Mount Sinai; break this
Rock, cast down this Mountain. Though I have had my part of Terro^s, and been
brayed with the pestle of afflictions, though I have not wanted for light, yet
my heart yields not, my heart freezeth in the shade, in midst of noon day
light, as in the depth of Winter. There is one thing only remains, and the work
is done. Shine out thou Sun of Righteousness, and with the warm beams of thy
favor melt those Rocks of Ice, and bring down these Mountains of snow. Thou
causest thy Spirit and warmer breath to blow, and the waters flow, Psalm. 147.
18.

4. Comfort to them that have Christ near to them. They are like those
Countries near the Line, they shall have a perpetual Spring, no Autumn; A
constant Summer, no Winter in their year, but a renewed and successive harvest.
These shall never want Grace sufficient, and peace necessary. Their tree
casts not leaf, nor loses fruit. Christ will be both Sun and Shield: he will
go with you in trouble. In the fire go with you, and be a Shield to keep you
from burning; in the water be a Sun to warm you, and keep you from shaking. So
he was to Jacob, Sun by day burnt him not, and frost by night starved him not.
The Lord will create upon every Isaiah 4, 5. 6.
dwelling place in Mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies, a cloud and smoke by
day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory shall
be a defense; and there shall be a Tabernacle in the day time for a shadow from
the heat, and for a place of Refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.
When the worldlings heart is cold in his belly, as Nabal, who became as cold as
a stone; and when like old David thy native heat is decayed so far, that no
clothes nor fire can keep thee warm, Christ the Shunamite shall lie in thy
bosom and cheer thy heart, that thou shall say for joy, Aha, I am warm, the
world is well amended with me, The Winter Cant. 2, 11, 12
is past, the rain is over and gone, the Flowers appear on the earth, the
singing of Birds is heard in the air, and the voice of the Turtle sounds, and
the Spring is come.

CHAP. XIIII. The Suns Regency.
ANother Property of the Sun is his Rege^cy; herein a shadow of Christ and his
Regal Office. The Lord gave the Sun to Genesis 1. 16. Psalm. 136. 8.
rule by day.

1 His Rule is Monarchical. The Sun has no Peer, but is an absolute Monarch.
So is Isaiah 33. 22 James 4. 12.
Christ the sole King and Lawgiver in his Church, who will admit of no
Compartners in his Government.

2. His Dominion is the largest. Christ and the Sun (no third) both the
universal Monarchs of the World, whose Dominion is Psalm 72.
without bounds, from Sea to Sea, and from East to West.

3. The Suns Dominion is the most ancient we read of; began before man's. The
Suns the fourth day, man's not till the sixth. Christ is the everlasting Father,
who had a Kingdom in Heaven before there was man on Earth: Our ancient Families
are but of yester day to him. The Princes of Zoan are Isa^ah 19. 11
Fools, the Counselors of Pharaoh are brutish. How say ye to Pharaoh, I am the
son of the Wise, the son of ancient Kings? Egypt above other Nations had ever
gloried in her Antiquity.

4. For Duration: both shall continue to the worlds end. These two Monarchs
have out lasted all others; have seen the fatal dissolutions of royal Families,
and the Translation of all other Monarchies. And both shall determine together:
when the Sun resigneth his, then shall Christ also resign his Kingdom into
the Fathers hands. 1 Cor. 15.


5. For Power the greatest Potentates. Other Kings and Commanders are only
titular many times, these have uncontrollable commands. The Sun has power over
all Creatures, the earth, air, seas, it raises storms, and does allay them;
gives Law to day and night, the worlds first subdividers; to winter and summer,
lets in both frost and snow by his withdrawing, and by his looking out
dissolves them.

The Sun of Righteousness has like, but greater power, has all nations,
times, seasons in his dispose. He has for the nations an Iron rod, for
Antichrist his Vyals, and for his Church sharp storms sometimes; he permits
heretics, lets lose persecutors, and at his pleasure binds them up. The
Dragon he let loose three hundred years, the Beast one thousand two hundred and
sixty, and at his pleasure, can put his hook into their nostrils, and his
bridle into their jaws.

6 The most sweet and pleasent Government to their Subjects. 1. Both ever
present, commit not (as did the Persian Kings) the managing of state affairs to
others, while they sat still pursuing their pleasures, and taking their ease.
But both are daily overlooking their charge. Lo, I am with you always. 2. The
government of both, is the government of the day, not of the night; Satan is
the ruler of the darkness of this world; as much difference between Christ's
and other governments, as between day and night; day and night divide the world
between them, so Christ and Satan; he who is not of Christ's Kingdom, is under
the Prince of darkness.

Christ's government is full of 1. Light; we know whom we worship, our service is
a reasonable service. No Altar to an unknown God or Saint, in Christ his
Temple. 2. Full of delight; He the Prince of peace, under 1 King 4.
whose protection his people sit, as of old under Solomon, eating, drinking,
making merry, Ad aquilonem positi corpore majores a^ robustiores; ad Meridiem
imbecilliores, aliis tamen ingenio praestant.
not secured by Armies, but by Solomon's wisdom.

7. Other Governors and Prince; may usurp a power over the lives and states of
their subjects, none ever attempted upon their minds and bodies, to form the
constitution Sub tropicis supra modum atri, sub Arcto fusco sunt color. Post
ad gradum 60 rubicundi, ad 45 candidi, ad 30 flavescunt, australes nigros,
Septentrionales glaucos habent oculos. Frigius de not. Popul. Caerula quis
stupuit Germani lumina, flavam Caesariem? J^venal.
of them, or to alter an hair of their head, from black to white. But these
two have a Dominion over both the Bodies and Spirits of men. The difference of
saces, color, complexion, skin, hair, eyes, voice, beauty, is from the force
of the Sun; the difference of stature, tallness, strength and constitution of
their bodies to hard^nesse, or effeminatenesse and delicacie, is from the Sun:
yea the difference of disposition of mind for courage, prowess, chastity,
sobriety, Temperance; whereas other nations are vicious, false, treacherous,
luxurious, is attributed to the Sun, making that difference between clime and
clime: the difference that is between nation and nation, Christ has made it,
that some have better laws, more love to God, abhorrence of evil, and that
difference between person and person, Christ only has put.

Here is 1. an encouragement to pray and hope for the bringing in of the
Gentiles yet uncalled, God having promised, That from Malach, 1. 11
the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof, his name should be great
among the Gentiles, and in every place Incense and a pure Offering should be
offered unto his Name. And that Psalm. 72. 8
Christ shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river to, the ends of
the earth.

2. This may support the Churches faith in all changes. Let enemies rage,
Heresies arise, spread, prevail; let persecutions and errors unite and gather
as a snow-bal, This Sun can scatter them as darkness, melt them as snow, can
cast the burning Mountain into Rev. 8
the sea. When the whole world became Arian, it was but for him to say again,
Let there be light, and it was so. When that Arch Apostate Julian endeavored
to bury Christianity in oblivion, and had opened the widest door of toleration
to all Religions (but the True) that ever was, great Athanasius cried out,
Nubecula, nubecula cito transitura. The bubble brake, the Malignant vapor was
dissolved, and his mischievous plots fell upon his own pate, and dyed with
him. We are afraid of storms and clouds, and very shadows; look up to the
Sun, it does rule, it will arise, break out and scatter all. If the Ordinances
and Dominion of the Sun should cease, or if it could be pulled out of Heaven,
or stayed in his course; if all mists, darkness could put out the light of it,
then might we fear. But the Churches comfort is, The Lord reigns, therefore
let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude of the Isles be glad thereof, Psalm.
97. 1.

3. If the Sun rule the day not the night, then must we be children of the
light, and of the day, not of darkness and night as others. Christ will own
no such subjects, but send them packing to the Prince of darkness, to whom
they belong.

4. Take notice of the cause of that difference between men and men. (The
Stars make not men wise, simple, rich, poor, virtuous, vicious.) Christ makes
it. Some are chaste, sober, zealous, valiant for the Truth, others not. To them
it is given, to others not given. God did often sever between Israel and the
Egyptians: Israel had the pillar of fire, Egyptians cloud of darkness; Israel
had the Sun in Goshen, Egypt no Sun for three days: Jacob is loved, not Esau;
Isaak had the Promise, not Ishmael. Peter is prayed for and kept, Judas only
admonished, not kept nor prayed for. The reason is hi^ Sovereign Dominion. He
does according to his will in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of
the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Dan. 4.
35. Grace goes not by Planets (^ we say showers sometimes do) but by the wise
and free dispose of this gre^ Sun.

Object. If the Sun be given to rule, and t^^ Sun and Moon be set for signs,
at the Scripture says, does not this warrant the Astrologers Art of Judiciary
Calculation, and peoples consulting them?

Answ. What consequence is here, God set them for signs, therefore we may
erect a figure, and foretell events, whom we shall marry, when we shall, what
death, what success of this or that undertaking? God has called them signs,
he must (men may not) make the signification. He calls the Rainbow a sign (is
it to calculate by?) he gives the signification to confirm the general Creature
Covenant, that there shall be no universal destruction by another Flood. He
calls the Passover, Circumcission, Sabbath, yea, his Prophets Isaiah and
Ezekiel signs, he tells the signification; where have these Astrologers these
signs interpreted to foretell such events? Signa sunt Luminaria Coelestiapartim
naturalia temporum and tempestatum, partim morali^, sive perfectionis
Creatoris, sive officii Creaturae, partim oeconomica, in variis rei oeconomicae
partibus obeundis Spanhem. in dubiis.


1. They are signs for Natural things. showing seasons of the year, for
Summer, winter, heat, cold.

2. Civil and Oeconomical signs (as Sphanhemius calls them) to direct when to
plant, low, sail, etc.

3. They are Prodigious and terrifying sometimes when the Sun is eclipsed, or
turned into darkness, Moon into blood; when the stars fall, warning the secure
world of the judgment of God drawing near. But never signs of fortuitous and
causal events, or of voluntary actions.

The madness of the deceiving Prophet Vide Paraeum in Genesis 1. 14.
is not here more to be condemned, then the blindness of the deceived people
who run after them, and with open hands carry to them the rewards of their
lying Divination, is to be pityed. Wicked Ahab gives more credit to Zedekiahs
signs (the Iron horns) then to Micajahs Sermons. The Socerer he loves, the
Prophet he hates, and so he prospers: God says of such, Take them Satan; Go,
1 Kings 22. 22
entice, persuade, prevail, and take them when thou have done. Who ever
prospered less then they who forsaking their own Mercy, went Jonah 2. 8
to them? Who dyed more miserably then such as made use of them? Balak, Ahab,
Iezabel, Ahaziah, Haman, Belshazzar, and that great Nebuchadnezzar, who at
every turn called in Astrologers, Chaldeans, Magicians, Dream-mongers to
advise with, was turned out of his Kingdom, yea turned out of Man, after all
these dismal consultations with those of Satan's Cabinet Council.

Nay, the greatest Artists in this black Art, have not only wilfully plunged
their souls into eternal perdition, but notwithstanding all their Star skill,
and their Covenants with Hell to prevent it, the dreadful judgments of God have
fallen most remarkably on their own heads. Their great Grandfather Balaam Vide
Spanhem. inter Dubia Evang. Dub. 33 in cap. 2. Mat. de Astrologia Iudiciaria.
slain by the sword, Jezabel their Grandmother torn in pieces by dogs; the like
befell Asclaterion a famous Mathematician, who took upon him to foretell Domitian
the Emperor, both his and his own death. What became of Dr. Lamb in our
remembrance? Stories are full of examples. Why did not these foresee those
ends? if they did foresee, why did they not by all their Art prevent them?

Yet what a reproach is it to Christian Religion, that such a generation of men
should be suffered? Not only Christian Emperors by their Edicts have punished,
but even Ab Augusto talc Urbe, a Tiberio primum, post a Claudio, Italia, a
Vitellio Orb and vita, a Domiti^no bis Urbe and Italia ^jecti and interdi^ti,
ut hominum genus potentibus infidum, sp^rantibus fallax. Idem* Quam multa
Pompei^, quam multa Crasso, quam multa Cae^ari a Caldaeis dicta, memini?
Neminem little nisi domi, nisi Senectut^, nisi cum claritate moriturum
Heathen States; Augustus banished them Rome, Tiberius and Claudius out of
Italy, Vitellius put them to death, Domitian made two Acts to banish them out
of City and Country. The Primitive Heathens left these Arts, and became
Christians, we set up these Arts and become Heathens. They burnt those curious
Art Books and took up the Bible; do thou burn the Bible if thou resolve to
meddle in these Books, full of nothing but Vanity, Uncertainty, Lying.
Falsehood and Impiety.

1. Of Lying. Said Tully, How many things did these Astrologers say to Pompey,
Crassus, and to Cae^ar, in my remembrance, that each of them should ^y in
Peace, Age, Honor? that I wonder (says he) that any will yet believe them,
whose former Predictions all prove false.

It is a notable story of Galeacius Prince of Millain; an Astrologer told him
he should dye suddenly, and himself live long; the Duke commanded him to be
presently hanged to prove him a Liar, and himself lived long after.

2. Of Impiety: To give you the relation of a Papist, and a famous Jesuit of
the Practices of Rome, and the doleful effects Cornelius a L^pide in Act, 19
thereof. In those few years (says he) I was at Rome, I saw many great men
undone by these Astrologers, who promised one should dye a Cardinal, another a
Pope, who were all deceived not only of their hope, but of their salvation.
For when (says he) they dreamt not of dying till they came to these
promotions, they never prepared for it: yea, being stricken by death and
admonished by their Physicians, they yet regarded not; which (says the Learned
Jesuit) is the only Fraud of the Devil, who by these baits ^ayeth wait for
poor souls, as a wolf for the sheep, that he may devour them.

CHAP. XV. The Suns Activity and Motion, the last Property.
WE are now come to the last Property of the Sun, his Activity and Motion,
herein a further Resemblance of Christ. The Motion of both is

1. Restless and perpetual. The Sun never stands still, what ever the other
Creatures do; it is not an idle spectator of humane affairs, but is it self
most active. When dressed in his glory, sits not as our Ladies to be looked on;
or as the Persian Emperors in a Chair of State to be worshipped. But as Job in
his splendour, who led others in their Job 29. 25
way, and sat chief, as the King in the Army. The Sun always is in motion,
Christ always in action, vigilant, sleeps not. The Sun makes night to others
by withdrawing, it self never had yet one night of Rest, or one day of Sabbath.

1. Then behold the great care and pains Applic. 1 Psalm. 19 Isa. 63
of Christ, who travels as a Giant. His life was nothing but labor; he went
about doing good. The Sun walks to day and to morrow. The Father works
hitherto and John 5 17.
still works, and I work says the Son. The Sons work in his Humiliation was
hard work, in his Exaltation he works still (not so hard) but higher work.
Who knows the care of a Master of a Family, of a General in an Army, of a
Public Magistrate? Moses was tired out with the encumbrance of his weighty
Office, and of the oversight of Israel all day from morning to night.

2. Be like these two great Lights, stand not still. The Sun has but an
imaginary solstice twice per annum; let not thy whole year be a Solstice, or
pingue Otium. Heavens are always in motion. Earth only stands still; let
heavenly minds be moving. Tempus est mensura motus, motus Temporis. Let not
time be the measure of thy life, but motion and action. Let it not be said, he
lived so many years, but did so many memorable actions; he saw so many days,
but the days saw him doing so many good acts; that there may be Latitude in
our lives as well as longitude.

1. In Gods work be not negligent. To do Gods work negligently, and the worlds
over diligently, both are accursed. Not slothful Romans 12. 11
in business, fervent in prayer, serving the Lord. The Oxen and Farm have A
must in Luke 14. 18
the Worlds sense: the Christian says, no must for the world, Must is only for
Gods work. I must work the works of him that sent John 9. 1 Luke 2. 49.
me. Again, Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? Take heed of
being early in the shop, late in the closet: busy at the Farm, idle in the
Vineyard; awake at the Exchange, asleep at Church. That the Christian be not
drowned in the good Husband.

2. In thy honest Calling. All things are Eccles. 1
full of labor, and man born to it. Heavens always moving, winds blowing, sea
flowing, springs running, earth moves not, yet rests not neither, is always
bearing fruits, trees, seeds; in Winter, if it bears not, yet only lies in,
after hard labor, to get strength for new births. No Creatures made to be idle:
the mighty Elephant, Warlike horse, paineful Ox, yea, the little Ant and Be.

The Christian is not exempted: when the Talent of Grace is given, it is with
this charge, Occupy till I come, Angels have their Luke 19 13
charge; Adam in his Innocence, had his Employment; the second Adam, all whose
life was a state of Innocence, yet had his work. If the Master be up at work, a
shame for the Servant to be in bed. If Caesar say Eamus, the soldier marches
after. The Sun looks into thy Chamber and says, up sluggard, I rested not all
night, will thou rest all day? The little Ant, to work sluggard, or to begging;
I have no Master to compel me to labor, but I hate idleness.

The idle person is a Monster in nature, a bryar in the field, a weed in the
Garden, a Drone in the hive, a thief in the candle. What wretches they, whose
life is but a long vacation, whose work is to eat, drink, play? they rise,
dress, dine half their days work is done; they play, sup, undress, and there
is the other half. The soul in such Drones is but as salt to keep the body from
putrefaction, Animam pros^le.
as the Proverb is.

Idleness is as Babylon, the Mother of Fornications; the cage of Uncleanness;
it is Ezekiel. 16. 49
Sodomy, or the mother of it; it was the sin of Sodom, it fills the body with
diseases, the soul with sins. It is a crying sin. Sodom's idleness cried. It
fills streets with Beggars, Highwayes with Robbers, The Gallows with condemned
bodies, Hell with condemned souls. Hence that Germane Proverb, Hell is paved
with the Crests of Gallants, and skuls of Monks, (the two most idle Societies
or Fraternities.) Idleness clothes the body with rags, soul with foul sins,
it fills the body with hunger, and back with vermin.

God made no man to be as the Leviathan, to play in the waters, and no woman to
be clothed as the Lilies in the field, or as Solomon in his glory, yet neither
to toil nor spin.

The Heathens dedicated Horses to the Sun, whom they worshipped, as you read 2
King 23. 11. An active Christian is fit to be dedicated to Christ. But the Ass
(a sluggish and dull Brute) was not to be sacrificed, but redeemed, or his neck
broke, if the Firstling. God would have no Dullard either for Priest Exodus 13.
13
or Sacrifice.

2. Swift. The Sun is said, 1. to run (not go.) 2. In a Race (the swiftest
running.) 3. As a Giant, or man of strength Psalm. 19
(the swiftest runner.) This Giant is never weary, in an hour he runs thousands
of miles, more then we do in many days or weeks. One hour is as much to Christ
as an Age to us; one day as a thousand years.

Christ is said to have wings here in the Text, he comes not creeping, but
flying. The winds are his wings, the Cherubims his Chariots, or his Chariot
horses, and he has twenty thousand of them in a Chariot, who Psalm. 68. 17
have six wings a piece: If a Chariot drawn with six horses make such
riddance, what speed will Christ make! The Poets in their fictions to set out
the Suns swift motion, feigned his chariot to be drawn with winged horses;
Christ's is with winged Angels.

What comfort may this be to the Church Applic. ^ Malach. 3. 1 2 Pet. 3. 9 Mal.
8. 5
or believing souls! The Lord whom ye think long, will come suddenly to his
Temple, He will awake as one out of sleep, and will not be slack, as men count
slacknesse, to deliver his Church: and he will be a swift Witness against the
enemies. I tell you, he will avenge Luke 18. 8
his own Elect, and that speedily, said our Savior of his Father; and his
Apostle of him, Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will Heb. 10 37
come, and will not tarry.

2. What Terror is this, or will it be to the wicked, who say, Where is the
promise of 2 Pet. 3 4 Isaiah 5 19
his coming? Let him make speed that we may see it. He can bring the flying
Role into the Grand child's house soon enough. How sudpenly are the wicked cut
off! Sodoms Sun set in the rising, Nebuchadnezzars at noon, Psalm. 64. 8
as sudden as an arrow or bullet, that is at the mark, before you hear the
noise. Babylon Rev. 18
shall be destroyed in one hour, no hand shall stay upon it. When I shall
visit, I will visit Exodus 32, 34 1 Samuel 3. 12
their sin upon them, said the Lord by Moses, and when I begin, I will also
make an end, and not be long about it.

3. The Suns motion is steady, certain, constant, to a minute; has not for
this six thousand years space altered his course; we know where to have it
every day, month, year; it keeps his Solstices, and Aequinoxes as at first.
Christ is as stable, he Ye^ and Amen: he the same to believing souls now,
that ever, in his love, care, faithfulness. And to wicked ones, the same
enemy, Oven, Furnace, consuming fire: He varyeth not a minute in his constant
and unchangeable affection, love and hatred to both.

1. See then if there be diversity of carriage Applic. 1
in God to some over others. There is no irregularity, no anomaly in Gods
actions o^ affections. The Sun moves by Rule and Line, and so do all Gods
proceedings; as David 2 Samuel 8. 2
had two Measuring Lines, one to save alive, another to put to death. So does
God in the way of his Judgments and Mercyes, he proceeds by Rule and Line.

2. Let a Believer have his Faith established in the steadfastness of such a
Savior and such Affections and Promises. O Lord, I will Isaiah 25. 1
exalt thee (says the Church) thy counsels of old are Faithfulness and Truth.
His Actions are founded on his Affections, his Affections in Council, his
Council in Faithfulness, therefore change not. In sapientum decretis nulla est
litura, the wise man is a certain man; he says, Quod scripsi, scripsi; quod
dixi, Jndg, 11. 35
dixi; I have opened my mouth and I cannot go back. How unlike are we to him?
we yea and nay: Amantes tanquam osuri. Amnon now loves, anon hates Tamar;
neither his love nor hatred was founded in counsel and reason; but his love
founded in lust, his lust in folly; therefore could not hold. Ahasuer^s now
dotes on Haman, to morrow hangs him up out of the way. Such is the favor of
Princes, such the certainty of worldly things. But Christ whom he loves, he
loves to John 13. 1. Exodus 33. 19
the end; where he shows mercy, he will show mercy; because he is God, not
man, that changes not, neither repents. We may be unfaithful and deny him,
and call all in question. He abides faithful, and cannot deny himself; our
unbelief shakes not his 2 Timothy 2. 13 Romans 3
faithfulness. When the Boat moves in the water, the child thinks the houses
move on the land; such is our folly, we are apt to conceive so of God; we are
changed, therefore he is changed.

3. Then woe to the wicked, it shall be ill with Isaiah 3. 11.
him. Heavens Almanac foretells thy ruin, the Sun erects an ominous figure for
thee. If God be not changed, thou art undone, unless thou be changed. God has
spoken evil against 1 Kings 22. 23
thee, was Ahabs ruin. It had been better for him, if his four hundred false
Prophets, and so many lying Astrologers more, had foretold his Destiny. That
terrible 1 Samuel, 15
threat of Samuel alive, to Saul, the Lord has rejected thee, was more sad and
certain, then that of the witch, and the conjured spirit, when Samuel was dead.
Sun and Stars Prognosticate thy ruin: if they certain, because made and moved
by the word of God; then his word certain, and thy ruin certain. The Sun
never goes beyond his Tropic, but returns. If Christ should give salvation to
any but such as repent, believe, live holily, it would be such a thing as never
was yet seen, he should go beyond his tropic. But ever where the Sun of
Righteousness Luke 10, 6.
comes and finds not the Son of Peace, thence he returns. We expect not that
the Sun should leave his wonted course, and stand still as in Joshuahs time, or
go back, as in Hezekiahs; expect not then that God should create some new
thing, and that heaven should open (against his decrees) to swallow thee up
alive in thy sins, and that a sinful Ahab should be carried up to heaven in
Elias's Chariot.

4. His motion, as it is certain and steady so it is uniform, equal, not
Tardior et velocior, not uneven, sometime slower, sometime swifter; but it ever
keeps the same pace. So is it with God, his way is perfect, Psalm. 18. 30. His
ways are equal, Ezekiel. 18. 29.

Let ours be so. Evennesse of the way commends Applicat. 1
the way; of the thread the cloth. Josiah was an even walker, kept his way
without 2 Chronicles. 34. 2
deviation or turning to the right hand or to the left all his days. Caleb
kept on going, slacked not his pace, but fulfilled to follow Number. 14. 22.
the Lord. Wicked men are like a landflood Josh. 3. 15.
(or as Jordan in the time of harvest) that overflowes all his banks at
sometimes, afterward all is dry land. Godly men are like a fountain, that runs
not so impetuously, but is always running. Pharaoh once sent for Exodus 10. 16.
Exodus 12. 31. Exodus 8. 9.
Moses in haste, another time by night; too violent to hold long; his usual
answer was Tomorrow. The heavy weight of judgment made this wheel move so
fast; when it was taken off, he stands stock still. You see Saul on a sudden
rapture prophesying, There is a morning cloud; Ahab humbling himself, there is
an early dew. But true grace moves not per saltum, is not a fit, flash, a
start, and stop, and Retrograde, hot, cold, feverish, (as he who was acted by
the evil spirit) now in the fire, anon in the water. Grace is not a morning
cloud, an evening dew; some noon ^eat drops, but a set rain; a morning-Sun,
that shines more and more to a perfect day. Not he that labors in his calling,
and sometimes is idle, and spending at the Alehouse, is the good husband, but
he who is still at his Genesis 26. 13.
business, and keeps doing. Isaac grew great and went forward, (the Hebrew is,
he went going) and grew til he became very great and rich. He went on getting
and gathering every day, and became a great man at last. So Job. 17. 9.
says Job, the righteous shall hold on his way, and he that has clan hands,
shall be stronger and stronger.

5. Irresistible. The Sun is not to be stayed or diverted in his course; this
Giant breaks all the opposition of clouds, which vanish in his sight; they
strive in vain who would make it stand, or go back.

1. Then vain is the force of persecutors, who arm themselves against Christ
and his members. Christum regem occidire nolite, timere bonum est. Betray, kill,
crucify, bury, seal the stone, set a watch, he will rise: slay the Witnesses,
they will rise again. This little stone must become a great mountain, and shall
Dan. 235
fill the earth; he that falls against this stone, shall be broken, but on whom
it shall fall, it will Matthew. 21 44
grind him to powder. They who would oppose the Gospel, Solemn sistunt, Deo
resistunt. they say to the heavens, move not, to the Sun shine not, and kick
against the Pricks. The Beast indeed has his seven heads and ten Rev, 131
horns, (much craft, more malice;) The Lamb has seven eyes and seven horns
(much wisdom Rev. 56
as much power); with the breath of his nostrils he will make the man of sin,
the son of perdition. When Antichrist is in the saddle, and Satan or the
Jesuit holds the stirrup; yet the Churches comfort is, Christ holds the
Bridle, (I Will put my Bridle into thy jaws:) And says, so far shall thou
go, no further. 2 Kings 19 28


2. As vain is the crafty attempt of the Heretic and Impostor. The three great
enemies of the Christian name shall fare alike; Rev, 16 13 14
the three unclean spirits, the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, who take
their turns one after another: The Dragon the first 300 years making wa^re upon
the Saints, under the heathen Emperors. Then the Beast (by name a Christian,
and hating the Dragon) yet indeed that great Antichrist, who alone exalts
himself above all that is called God, and worshipped, (or every one who is
called (...). 2 These. 2. 4.
a God, and worshipful, every Authority, Degree, not only Sacerdotal, or
Ecclesiastical, but Regal and Imperial) a more dangerous and
Saint-bloud-drinking enemy for a greater space of 1260 years. In the end and
tail of whom comes the false Prophet (under the name of a Saint, defying both
the former, detesting Idols more then uncleanness, and hating the
Antichristian Garment and name more then the Nicolaitans nakedness or deeds.
The most dangerous enemy of all the three. The uncleanest frog of all the fry,
who under the name of a separated Saint, or another Christ, or a better
inspired spirit, has his Prophesies, Revelations, new discoveries, new
heavens, but hates the old Saint, Ministry, Baptism, Supper, Belief, Prayer,
Doctrine, Holiness, as Antichristian. This also is of the Three, and goes
into perdition.

6. Unwearied. But after almost six thousand years restless motion is as fresh
and lively as the Bridegroom, -- Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo. An
emblem of Christ, whose arm is not shortened, but is able to save to the ut
most, all that come still unto him. Have thou not heard that the Creator. Heb
7. 25
of the ends of the earth faints not? The Isa. 40. 28, 29.
youths may faint and be weary; the young men Judge. 15. 18.
may utterly fail. Samson after a great victory may faint for thirst. Eliazar
the Son of Dodo, the second of the Worthies, his hand clave to the sword after
a great slaughter, he 2 Samuel 23. 10.
could not now open his hand again; he needs some rest. But Christ is the same,
his motion, care, might, the same; and as the Sun that has lightened the world
now so many ages, is as able for that service still as ever. So Christ who has
governed the world, and preserved his Church for this six thousand years, his
skill, power, and care, is not now to be questioned. But as old Caleb said, he
Josh. 14 11.
was as strong when he was fourscore and five years old, as when but forty:
A^my strength was then, so is it now for war, both to go out and to come in.
So years and time make no impression on the Captain of our salvation, who is
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Heb. 13. 8.


7. This motion is twofold. 1, Ordinary, and Quotidian, every day does rise,
run, set keep his course, scattering the darkness and removing the cold of the
night past, and giving light for the present use of that day; yesterday's light
serves not for to day, but there is the same need every day of the Su^
continued, or renewed light, as there was the first day of his creation, to
dispel the darkness which was upon the face of the unformed world. And do not
we daily need the fresh supply, and the renewed influence of the spirit of
Christ, as we did at first conversion? Sun is not set one hour, but darkness
comes; Christ leaves not one hour, but then comes on the power of darkness.
Auxiliary grace is as necessary as Habitual, Subsequent as Preventing: While
the spirit moved, the wheels moved, no longer. Go then to Christ daily, in him
are our fresh springs; beg to be anointed with new oil Ezekiel, 1.
from this Olive branch, which through the two Golden Pipes of his Spirit and
his Ordinances, empties his oil of grace into the hearts Zech: 4. 12.
his people.

2. Extraordinary and Anniversary; if the Sun see thee not every day, as the
remoter parts, yet will it ere the year go about; if it has ever shined in
that clime. So if Christ gives thee not a daily visit, stay thou, at the
appointed time, the Vision will speak. Hab. 2.
The Redeemer will return out of Sion. If thou have ever tasted that the Lord is
gracious, or can say, thou have feared the name of the Lord, then though thou
walk in darkness, Isa. 50. 10.
and have no light, yet trust in the name of the Lord, and stay thy self on thy
God. Say with the Church, in hope of his coming, when I fall I shall rise again,
though I sit in darkness, Mich. 7. 8.
the Lord shall be a light unto me; and with the Prophet, I will wait upon the
Lord who Isa. 8, 19.
hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

CHAP. XVI. The fourth thing wherein there is a likeness between Christ and
the, Sun is their effects.
AMong the many like effects, I shall content my self to name a few. (Having
among the Properties touched on diverse already, and finding this discourse,
begin to swel beyond my first intention) 1. The Suns appearance makes the day,
puts an end to night, not all the sta^s conjoined; so it is Christ his
appearance which makes the Christians day; when he appeared to Saul and Silas
at midnight in the dungeon, they could see to sing and Acts 16. 25.
praise God; and when to Paul before at midday; his eyes were dazeled, not with
the Suns, but with that light (of Christ appearing) far above the brightness of
the Sun.

2. The Suns first appearance brings day, Acts 26. 13.
his nearer approach the spring, his hotter beams the Summer, his longer
continuance brings on the harvest. So is it with the Soul, to whom after the
first day of grace caused by Christ his first appearance, the nearer approach
of his Vernal rising, with his Healing-wings-embrace, causes the growth or
spring. The walking in the light of his countenance all the day long, makes the
long summers day, and his abiding with us makes ou^ Psalm. 8915.
harvest and our joy to be full.

3. The Sun departing, night comes on, his longer absence brings on winter; in
the one so much darkness, in the other so much of cold, wet, and dirt, as if
it been never had either day or Summer. What a night of darkness came upon Lot
and Peter (Christ's back once turned) but what a longer winter for cold, and
mire, and dirty ways on David, upon that sad dereliction! The actings of
Saints in such cases differing little from the most vile actings of graceless
men, if they were to be judged by such single exorbitances. But Sun arises
and returns, those then awake by repentance, and come to themselves again.

4. It is the Sun which makes that difference in climes and countries, makes
one more sweet and delightful, another more sad, and not inhabitable, (those
near both Poles;) makes one more fertile, others more barren. And what is it
but Christ's presence, which makes the Church differ from the rest of the world?
he makes it a Goshen, whereas they have a perpetual night and winter. What was
it wherein Israel might glory above all other nations, but this? they had God
so near to them, in all which they called to him for; His cloud and pillar was
continually among them.

5. The Sun is the great Restorer of the world, Redintegrates the Universe once
in the year (at the Spring, as some conceive, at Autumn as others) puts the
world into the same condition wherein it was created. Herein a great
Resemblance of Christ, who is the worlds great Restorer and Renewer, who has
put lost mankind into the same condition of happiness wherein he was at first
created, as if he had never fallen or sinned. Behold I make all things new,
says Rev. 21, 5
Christ.

6. I might further also speak of the Productive, and as it were the Creating
effects of the Sun in bringing forth new Creatures yearly, as well as of his
reductive, reviving, and redeeming the plants and herbs before dead and gone,
as also of his nutritive and augmentative effects on all Vegetables, his
admirable Alterative virtue and operation on Metals and Minerals, his
Conservative, Maturative and Consummative Virtue and Effects on the Fruits and
living Creatures; but I have touched on them already. Herein is Christ his
vigorous operations fully represented; who besides his redeeming lost man,
makes the new Creature, creates grace de novo where none was, recovereth what
was lost, reviveth what was decayed; nourishes what is weak, increases what
is small, conserveth what is wrought, has a more admirable alterative force in
an earthly or stony heart, then the Sun in causing Gold and Silver to grow in
the earth, making flesh to grow where stone was, spirit where flesh was, grace
where sin, Heaven where Hell was; turning a Swine-sty into an holy Temple: and
besides, he ripeneth, perfecteth, consummateth whatever work of grace he has
wrought already.

7. Sun rising man goes forth cheerfully to Psalm. 104
his labor; but setting, man comes home and gives over work. What may not a
weak man undertake, Christ present and assisting? I can do all things through
Christ strengthening me, Phil. 4. 1^
said the Apostle; but what ca^ the strongest do withour him? Without me (says
the Lord) Isaiah 10 4
they shall bow down under the Prisoners, and fall under the slain. The
Chariot, though it have four wheels, and they all oyled, yet moves not a step
till drawn. Our Will, though very active naturally, and oyled with all the
skill Art can use, or with all the force Arguments can make, st^rs not in any
gracious manner till assisted by Grace, and acted by Christ; Draw me, we will
run after Cant. 1. 4 and 6. 12
thee; and my soul shall be as the Chariots of Aminadib.

8. The Sun present, we see our way, the John 11. 9
Traveller stumbles not; but when withdrawn, he loses his way, stumbles, or
falls into a pit, gropeth as if blind, is full of perplexed doubts and sadness
of heart. While Christ was with his Disciples, he kept them (though they were
as sheep among wolves) not one of them was lost; but when he was seized on,
(their light was taken away) the same night they were all scandal^zed and fell.
Judas, while he kept Christ's company, stumbled not; Christ departed, he fell
into a pit and broke his neck; Peter stumbled and got a foul fall. When we
follow the light of Christ his holy example, or have the light of his Grace
following us, we never fall; but when we leave his example, or his spirit
leaves us, we presently miscarry.

9. Let me add one more. We see all the Creatures how they are delighted with
the presence of the Sun. When the Sun approaches, the Elements change their
habit and temper, the Air grows more mild, warm, and pleasant, and all those
numerous tenants (those daughters of Music) do warble and echo out their
cheerful notes to the praise of the Sun; they build, they breed, they rejoice
(many of them come, stay, return with this their great Leader and Commander.)
The waters wax warm and temperate; there the fishes leap, play, breed and
multiply. But the Earth especially decked as a Bride to meet this Bridegroom,
cloatheth her self, and all her family in new and diverse colored apparel, and
with their several New years Gifts present the worlds Benefactor with their
Best, that he may not come in vain to any of their dwellings. Oh that we were
the Creatures Scholars, or School-fellowes in this respect, to acknowledge the
benefits, admire the perfections, sing out the praises of this Sun of
Righteousness, and with our best Presents of Thankfulness and Fruitfulness:
show we are loath to receive so much grace in vain.

CHAP. XVII. The likeness of both in sundry Accidents.
WE are now come to the last thing wherein the agreement holds between these
two Suns, viz. certain Accidents; whereof 1. one greater; 2. many less.

The greatest is that of the Eclipses, which these two great Luminaryes are
subject to. The less^r Luminary, the Sun sometimes loses his light and Luster;
and this greater Luminary has sometimes lost the glory and brightness of his
Godhead in his Exinanition, and in that self emptying abasement of his Passion.
The Suns Eclipse is often and ordinary, but this was extraordinary,
preternatural, and but once.

2. The Sun is never totally Eclipsed; in part often. (His body being so many
times bigger then the Moon's interposed, seven thousand times bigger, cannot
lose all his light.) So Christ might be in his Person eclipsed to the
unbelieving Jews by his poverty, Cross and afflictions (whereby he was made
lower then Heb. 2 9
the Angels) when some others (even then) saw his glory, as the glory of the
Only Begotten John 2, 14
of God, full of Grace and Truth.

2. In his Truth, by Heretics and prevailing Errors.

3. In his Regal Power, when persecuting enemies and Tyrants encroach on his
Churches Liberty, and his Prerogative, breaking his bonds and the Churches
hedge. But he is never totally eclipsed, because his power and grace does more
then seven thousand or ten thousand times exceed all Tyrants power, Heretics
Policy, persecuters rage, and Satan's malice.

3. Yet was there once (never but once) a total Eclipse of the Sun;
extraordinary it was, viz. at the time of Christ his Passion. Christ never had
the light of his Fathers countenance wholly suspended, but then in Articulo
Passionis, when he cried out, Eli-Eli-Lama-sabactani. Such an Eclipse never
did* nor can happen again: then did it appear Christ set his Tabernacle in the
Sun; that was his Chariot or Apostle. The Suns darkness then enlightened the
world, and There was dark ness over all the earth from the sixth to the ninth
hour, that is, from twelve a Clock to three Matthew. 27. 45
made the Philosopher cry out, Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi Machina
dissolvitur. Either the God of Nature is now suffering, or the frame of the
world is dissolving; then both Suns suffered, and were eclipsed together, and
went down at noon day; the Sun of the Lord, and that Lord of the Sun.

4. The Suns Eclipse is only caused by the interposition of the Moons dark
body, which has all her light from the Sun. The Sun is then obscured, and the
new changed Moon (never else seen by day) then dare show her self.

It is the only interposing the Churches dark body of sin and guilt, made this
Sun obscured. She has no light of her own, but borrows of him, and he was
content to lose all his glory protempore, that his Church and every new changed
( converted) soul may appear before God with boldness, not otherwise able to
abide the trial of his presence.

5. It is a sight sad to behold when the Sun is Eclipsed: and it was the
saddest day and hour of darkness that ever was in the world, when Christ was
put to death.

6. The Sun as to us seems, to lose his light; but as to Heaven, gives more.
And Christ never shined more bright in Heaven, never gave like satisfaction to
God, more Joy to Angels, Glory to Saints, then in his Passion. Then did the
pleasure of the Lord prosper Isaia^ 53. 2
in his hand. He that was before pleased in his Person, was now more pleased in
his Passion. In this only expiatory sacrifice did God smell a savor of rest.
This was to our Savior a day of Triumph, his Cross was the Trophy of his
Victory and success, whereon he was lifted up and exalted: then was sin, death,
hell swallowed up in Victory. The dread of this Cross, triumphed over Hell,
spoiling all those principalities, and thereby leading captivity captive. The
blood of this Cross tryumphed in Heaven: Having made peace ^^ the blood of his
Cross, Col. 1. 20. And the Merit of his Cross triumphed in the Church which
ever since has taken up those Angelical Hymns, Glory to God on high, on eart^
Rev. 5. 12 and 7. 10
peace, good will toward men. Salvation (...) ascribed to the Lamb that was
slain, and glory to the Sun that was obscured. This w^^ the day wherein ou^
great High Priest we^ in his richest Robes into the Holy of Holies with his own
blood (but bearing all o^^ Names in his breast, and all our iniquities o^ his
shoulder) and has made an everlastin^ atonement or expiation, and the
greatest Holy day the world ever saw.

7. The Sun eclipsed has the same ligh^ in it self, is only hid from us for a
while, b^^ recovers it self presently, and shines again (...) gloriously as
before. There may be mis^ and darkness interposing between us and God, between
Christ and the Father none between the Sun and the earth the Moon* between the
Sun and heaven no Moon to interpose: And changes there may seem to b^ between
us and God; between Christ and the Father all is well.

Satan might bruise his heel, Herod, Jews* Pilate might reproach, condemn,
crucify bury, set a guard about the Sepulcher. But if it be said, Who shall
bind the influences of the Pleiades? with what bonds of death (...) (...)t then
possible to hold the Prince of life prisoner?

8. Some great Scholars have said, The Suns Eclipse bodes much ill to this
lower world, and that the sad effects thereof are such, that the world is the
worse for it seven years after, ere it recover it self. The truth whereof I Will
not dispute: but certain I am, the sad effects of this Eclipse upon the Land
of Judea, where it was most visible, are not yet ^^ased, but for this One
thousand six hundred years it has felt the miseries which followed on their
Crucifying the Lord of Glory.

9. Lastly, The Suns Eclipse is said to Prognostic great changes, downfall of
Kingdoms, and deaths of Tyrants, etc. Sure I am, that this Eclipse did not
foretell as a Prognostic, but produce as the immediate cause, the greatest
changes in heaven and earth. Then was Satan ruined; this Eclipse was his bane.
When the Vyal of Gods wrath was poured on this Sun, and he had John 19. 30
cried, (...), It is finished, then was Satan's Kingdom darkened, divided,
destroyed, then was the Prince of this world judged and cast out; and then was
there nothing but gnawing of tongues all the Kingdom of the Dragon over.

2. There are many less Accidents.

1. The Sun is sometimes present, sometimes absent, respectu nostri, but
always present in heaven, Christ sometimes leading his Beloved, sometimes
leaving his Beloved; always interceding and giving light in heaven, when his
light shines not on us.

2. Sometimes it hides it self, sometimes shows it self; but his light is
intrinsecally the same without change. So there may be changes in us, mists
about us, storms above us; none in Heaven. Amas nec estuas; z^las Austin,
Conf. l. 1.
and securus es; Poenitet te and non doles; irasceris and tranquillus es; opera
mutas, ^^c mutas consilium. God is not changed when we are changed; we are
angry and sin, repent Vult mutationem, non mutat voluntatem.
and change our mind. He is angry without Passion, jealous without affection,
repents without grieving, changes his dispensation, not his disposition.

3. Sometimes Sun rises early, shines out at first rising gloriously, yet a
stormy day follows, and again clears up at even, and all ends well. Some in
first Conversion have much peace and comfort, as Job, Solomon, the Wise men,
had the Star at first setting out, afterward sad storms, desertions and
trials; but all ended well.

4. Sometimes at Sun rise the morning is gray, dark, duskish, and the day the
fairer. What storms were at the Conversion of the Jailer and of Paul? yet all
fair after.

5. Sometimes the Sun not seen all day, but showers from morning till almost
Sunset, then Sun breaks out and sets sereuely, and promises a fair day
following. Some true Christians have not a good day after their Conversion till
death, as some mothers between Conception and Delivery ever ill, yet then do
well. Christ fulfils that to many which he spoke to his Disciples, They shall
see the Kingdom of God in Power before they taste of death, and when seen, die;
that setene evening the forerunner of the fair day of Eternity.

6. The un begins with light, then follows heat. Christ his first work on the
new Creature is light, therewith Conviction, Consolation after. Grace and Peace
are twins, but Grace the elder sister. The Evening Genesis 1
went before the Morning in the first Creation; sorrow goes before joy in the
true Conversion. He that believes before he repents, must (as Magus was
directed) re Acts 8, 22
pent after such believing, and repent of it. Saul the King had many merry
signs and much joy before any sorrow, as the stony ground had all his joy at
first. Saul the chosen Vessel had a sad beginning with many sorrows, but his
joy followed and remained. The Butler had nothing but fears at first, Gen 4^
and joys at last. The Baker all hopes and joys, but they ended in sorrows.

7. The Sun sometimes discovers it self by light and heat both (as in Summer;)
sometimes as much light but no heat, as in Winter, when it freezeth in the
shade. Sometimes the Godly soul has Grace and Peace together Gods love shining
in his heart, hi^ heart again warm with love to God; sometimes his heart
frozen, as to any perception of the love of God to his own apprehension* when
the by-stander sees it clear day, (...) to the manifest actings of Grace and
Holiness.

8. The Sun when it is hid, it is the mist^ from below that do hinder the light
of it. Nothing but our sin does separate between God and Isaiah 69. 2
us, causing his face to be hid. Cold taken i^ the feet offends the head, and
fumes from within the stomach offend the brain. O^^ faith is damped, joy
eclipsed, soul distempered, yea, Christ the head offended, only by the
miscarriages and distempers from those Lusts that war in our Members.

9. We observe that before Sun does rise, there is nothing but gross
darkness; the Sun risen chaseth away that darkness, but the^ are seen long
shadows which appeared no^ before, but as Sun goes higher, these grow less
till Sun withdraw and decline, the^ these shadows increase again; but the Sun
never shines so clearly, but that there is a shadow inseparable from the Body.

So till Christ arise, nothing but darkness in the soul; at his first arising
this darkness scattered, but then long shadows of much corruption appear,
(till then not suspected) but Christ shining longer, these grow less^ and
less; But he withdrawing, these get head again, and we as bad to our thinking
as ever; but never any so perfect here as to be free from sin; It does easily
beset us, and we are all Periscii, in this sense; sin is as inseparable from
our imperfect nature here, as the shadow from the body. Those under the Line
are called, Ascii, Shadowless, where the Sun is Vertical, and directly over
their heads. In Heaven we shall be so, when under the direct Rays of Christ
his face and presence. Here he beholds us but oblique^^, so that if we be not
all corruption on both sides, as the Amphiscii, yet we have at least a dark
side, and so are Heteroscii.

10, Once more. The Sun, how does it with his beams alter the native and usual
color of things? rising, it gilds the clouds, enamels the drops of dew, makes
them look like so many drops of Pearl; but especially, how does it adorn that
watery melting cloud whereon the Rainbow is set, the reflection of his own face,
with all the delightful colors which the eye can behold?

So Christ arising and shining upon the black uncomely soul, puts it into
another complexion. When thou wast deformed, I made thee comely through my
comeliness; and thou wast perfect through my comeliness which I put upon
thee, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Oh how sweetly do young Converts look? who are as the dew
of the youth, coming out of the womb of this morning-Sun, Psalm. 1 10. 3.

But especially, what beauty is that put upon the melting and heart broken
Christian! upon him is set the Rainbow of the Covenant, and upon him are put
all the Ornaments Christ can bestow upon him; as Religious Mordecai (formerly
in sack^loth) advanced by the favor of the King, and going out from the
presence of the King in Royal Apparel, of blue and white, with a Royal Crown of
gold upon his head, with garments of fine linen and purple, Esth. 8. 15.

Yet sometimes the Sun arising and appearing, has represented some things in a
more dreadful appearance then before, 2 Kings 3. 22. When the Moabites rose up
early in the Morning, and the Sun shone upon the water in the trenches, the
Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as blood, and said, This is
blood, etc. Nothing represents sin in so horrid and amazing a dress to the
^ouls apprehension, as the breaking out of this Sun. Then break out, thou Sun
of Righteousness, upon our watery mourning hearts, and set on thy Rainbow the
token of thy Covenant; but let thy shining turn all that standing water in the
deep ditches or trenches of corruption in our hearts into so much blood, that
we may drink no more of them, but with amazement look upon former, and with
fear and horror fly from future sins.

11. Lastly, to name no more. The Sun shining out in his strength, disperseth
clouds and mists, but (though it causes not one, yet) it discovers a world of
m^tes, which are never taken away, for they hinder not at all the brightness of
the Sun. So when Christ shines out most gloriously to the soul, it now sees
what it could never have seen or imagined before: I have heard of thee by the
hearing ^f the ear, but now mine eye has seen thee, wherefore I abhor my self,
and repent in dust and ashes, Job 41. 5, 6. He now saw a world of motes.

But as it is the imperfection of our condition Quadam sun^ delicta Quotidianae
incursionis, quibus omnes sumus objecti, etc. in nego^i^^, in officiis, in
quaestu, in victu, in visu, in auditu, quanta ten^amur, ^t ^i nulla ^it venia
istorum, nemini salus competat. Tertul, de Pudicit.
here not to be free from such continual Motes, The Lord knows the thoughts
of men that they are vain, Psalm 94. 11. Yea, every man in his best estate is
altogether vanity. So it is our comfort and happiness, that these no ways
lessen the brightness of Christ his Love and Grace (for then no flesh could be
saved.) But as these sins do abound (.i. appear) so does his Grace abound (.i.
appear) much more.

CHAP. XVIII The unlikenesse and disagreement between the Sun and Christ.
TO make an end of this first point. There is in many things an unlikeness
between these two great Lights, between whom hitherto we have noted so many
agreements.

1. This is a creature, therefore ^inite in his essence, operation, motion,
influence. But Christ every way infinite, being the creating, not created Sun.

2. This lower sun shall suffer many changes, his light shall be turned into
darkness, the Moon into blood, and they shall both cease, There shall be no
more Sun: but this Sun Acts 2. 20 Rev. 22. 5 Heb. 1, 8
remains for ever; Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. When the Sun
cease to be the light of the world, the Lamb shall be the light of the
Church.

3. This shines on the good and bad alike; but Christ rises, shines, warmeth,
Matthew. 5. 45
heals, saves only those that fear his name.

4. The Sun really absents it self for a time, but Christ from the Godly soul
never, but in our apprehension.

5. This gives only light to the body, Christ to the soul.

6. This gives only light to us, we must find ^ight our selves; Christ gives
both eyes to see the light, and the light to be seen. The Eye, Eye*salve, and
Light all are from him; in his light we see light. In any good we do, we are
but Instruments or subordinate Agents; he the prime Efficient and chief Agent,
without whom nothing. We are but the hearth, the fire is his; we the Lamp, the
Oil is his; we the mouth, the tongue is his; w^e the pen, the writing his.
What can the hearth, the Lamp, the mouth, the pen do, without the fire, the
oil, the tongue, or hand?

7. The Sun moves naturally and necessarily, keeps a constant course, goes
and comes again only to those Climes where he ever formerly did. Christ moves
voluntarily and arbitrarily, goes to some at last that never were a people; and
when the Gospel Romans 9. 25
is slighted, departs for ever, never to return again to such as from
thenceforth become Lo-Ammi, and Lo-Ruhamah.

8. The Sun makes those more black that are nearer to his Beams. But Christ
them of all others most fair and beautiful that are under his Beams.

9. The Sun fills the Moon with his light only in the time of their
opposition, But Christ the soul with his light only in conjunction.

10. The Suns presence is oft-times the Mother of corruption, his heat the
Efficient cause of Putrefaction (as in Summer our meat and drink keep worse.)
But this Suns presence is the only preservative against putrefaction, and the
only enemy to corruption in the spirit.

CHAP. XIX Containing the second maine Proposition, That Jesus Christ is the
Sun of Righteousness.
HAving at large showed, That Jesus Christ is in many respects to his Church
what the Sun is to the world. We come now to our second Proposition, to show
how in a more special manner, and by way of Excellency he is the Sun of
Righteousness. The former sets out his Glory, this his Grace: the former his
Person, this his Office: A singular Elogy this, no where in all the Scripture
again do we meet with the same expression, though diverse like it and to the
same effect. He is called, Jesus Christ the Righteous. 1 John 2. 2. 1 Cor. 1.
30 Jer. 33. 23 and 23. 6
Our Righteousness. The branch of Righteousness. Melchi-zedek the King of
Righteousness, and Jehovah-tzidkennu, the Lord our Righteousness. And to show
that this is Christ his principal Title or proper cognomen or surname, (as in
our common Marriages the wife does Exuere Parentis, and induere mariti cognomen,
changes her own or fathers name into that of her husband) the Church is called
also, Jehovah-tzidkennu. Compare Jer. 23. 5, 6. ( Behold the days come, says
the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, etc. And this is the
name whereby [He] shall be called* The Lord our Righteousness.) with Jer. 33.
15, 16. In those days will I cause the branch of Righteousness to grow up unto
David, -- In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
fafely; and this is the name whereby [She] shall be called, The Lord our
Righteousness. They have both one name, and this the highest name to both,
especially to the Church. This is the new name spoken of Rev. 2. 17. And that
other name God promises to call his people by, The Lord shall call his people
by another Isaiah 65. 15 See Isai. 62. 2
name.

Three things shall here be spoken to.

1. How Christ is called the Righteous, or Righteousness. 2. What Righteousness
it is we have by and from Christ 3. Why he is called the Sun of Righteousness?
1 Christ Jesus may be said to be the Righteous, or Righteousness, in a double
respect.

1. Of his Person. 1 John 2. 2. Jesus Christ the Righteous. Who in respect of
his Divine Nature, is as Righteous as the Father, and the Holy Ghost. This is
not that which is so much to us; as our Righteousness extends not to God, so
this personal Righteousness of God Psalm. 16. 2
extends not to us in this sense. And in his Humane Nature he is Righteous
also, who never had spot in his soul, guile in his lips, sin in all his life,
but one who perfectly fulfilled all Righteousness. Matthew. 3. 15


2. Of his Office; his Mediatory Office. This is the meaning of that before
mentioned Scripture, This is the name wherewith he shall be called, The Lord
our Righteousness; that is to say, this is his Office and Business.

2. For the second. There is a twofold Righteousness we have by Christ.

1. A common, general, original (as I may call it) or imputed Righteousness, a
Righteousness without us, to which we contribute nothing, we only accept. We
put on this Righteousness and it clothes us, as a garment made ready to our
hands.

2 A particular, personal, inherent, actual Righteousness, which some call
imparted (as the other imputed) but not so properly, for both are imparted.

As all are under a double unrighteousness, so Believers are under a double
Righteousness. 1. One common, imputed unrighteousness, alike in all, without
any Magis and minus, good and bad having a like share of guilt and contagion
from Adam, his sin imputed, his corruption imparted and derived to us. 2 A
personal and particular, which we call actual unrighteousness; and is (besides
that imputed guilt and offense,) a particular, vicious disposition of the mind
unto evil; and is made up of all those anomalous and sinful actions, which are
so many Trangressions of the Law of God. This receives a magis and minus in
those in whom sin does not reign, much more in whom sin does fully reign and
command: for among those possessed with Devils one had but one, and another
seven, another had a whole Legion of Devils.

So is there I say a double Righteousness which Believers have. 1. One common
and imputed, which is to speak properly, only Christ his Righteousness
personally, but ours relatively: His by operation, ours by imputation. 2
Besides this, they have a personal Righteousness which is made up of those
gracious inclinations in the heart to every good, and of those many holy
actions they perform in conformity and obedience to the Law and Pattern of
Righteousness; of which two (that is, those gracious dispositions and actions)
our personal or inherent Righteousness is made up. Now both these
Righteousnesses we have from Christ; the matter of the one, viz. imputed
Righteousness; and the principle, power and ability whereby we are carried out
and enabled to the other. Concerning which twofold Righteousness we shall lay
down briefly these few Theses.

These. 1. These two Righteousnesses are never separated, as those two former
Unrighteousnesses are never separated. These. 2. Imputed Righteousness goes
before, then follows actual; as is also in the two Unrighteousnesses
forenamed. These. 3. Imputed Righteousdesse is alike to all* no magis and minus,
the strong Believer has not more, nor the weak Believer less of this: inherent
righteousness has different degrees as actual sin has. These. 4. Imputed
Righteousness is simul and semel, made over to the Believer all at once, and
once for all; it admits of no magis and magis in the same person, as of no
magis and minus in others Believers. Actual Righteousness is gradual and
progressive, and admits both of more and less in diverse persons, and of more
and more in the same godly persons. These. 5. Imputed is a righteousness
without us, made ready to our hand, inherent is within us: That costs us
nothing, is an Alms or act of pure grace; Inherent asks us cost of pains,
prayers, endeavors. These. 6. Imputed only is perfect in this life, inherent
only perfect in another life. These. 7. Imputed is the righteousness of our
Surety; inherent of our persons. These. 8. Imputed is Righteousness to be
pleaded before God; inherent makes us righteous before men, and only to be
pleaded before men. If I were righteous ( says Job) I would Job 9. 15
not answer God so, but make my supplication to my Judge. These. 9. The one is
the Righteousness of Justification, the other of Sanctification, which ever
agree, confirming not destroying each other. They touch each other with their
wings, as the two Cherubims, and with their faces, look upon Christ as their
Author.
3. For the third, Christ is called the Sun of Righteousness, 1 Because he is
the Spring of it; no light but from the Sun the Fountain; no water from River
or Spring, but what comes from the Sea; in which respect it is said, There is
none righteous, no not one; h. e, in himself. None righteous, but one; viz.
Jesus Christ the Righteous. Jer. 31. 15 Phil. 1. 11
He the branch of Righteousness, upon which all fruits of Righteousness do grow.

2 In Christ, as in the Sun is a plenitude or redundancy of Righteousness: So
Beza reads that Romans 5. 18. Per unam Iustificationem beneficium redundavit in
omnes homines ad justificationem vitae. By one Righteousness the benefit has
redounded to all men, ( all Believers) to Justification of life: and the
Apostle calls it, ver. 17 The abundance of Grace, and of the gift of
Righteousness, which reigns in life by one Jesus Christ. The Oil of Grace,
coming from the head of our High Priest, runs down to the skirts of his
Vesture, even to the lowest Member of his body. And as that increasing Spring
of Oil in the widows 2 Kings 4
house, which held out till there was no more empty Vessels to receive it, then
stopped.

3 He is the Sun of Righteousness, because his Righteousness is perfect and
spotless. The Moon has her Plenilunium, ^ul light, but it is spotted and
fading. The Stars are spotless, but their light is finite, though they be far
greater then the Moon; such are all the Angels whose Righteousness (so far
exceeding man's) is spotless, yet borrowed and finite. Man's best, like the Moon
at Full in six Properties: 1. It is the lowest light: 2. The least light: 3.
All borrowed light: 4. Spotted. 5. Subject to decay: 6. Without heat; not able
to warm the conscience, and cheer the heart before Gods Tribunal; but we must
say with Austin, Vae etiam laudabili vitae, etc Gal. 3. 10
or with Paul, So many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse. But
only Christ his garments are seamless, and his Righteousness spotless.

Our best tears are foul water, and need washing, sighs unsavory breath,
Prayers Malach. ^. 3 Exodus 28. 38
and Sacrifice are dung, our holy things have their iniquity; our blood tainted
blood, needing Christ's to cleanse it. We need to sorrow for our sorrow, to
mourn again for former mourning, be ashamed of our shame, and loath our selves
for our self-loathing, and repent of our repenting (not in the common sense of
some now adays, who are above all these) but because all is no better. When
thou have prayed for pardon, pray again for pardon of that Prayer: when thou
have confessed many sins, bewail thy sin in confessing; when thou do believe
most, cry out, Oh my evil heart of unbelief; when thou rejoycest in spirit, be
sad in spirit for such poor rejoicing. When thou art got highest, come down
with silence as the Larks after they have been out of sight, singing their
Lays nearer heaven, or with this in thy mouth, All have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God. Man's best is vanity.

If all the Righteousness, Graces, Duties, Services, Sufferings of all the
Godly from the beginning of the world were in one man, yea if all the holiness
of the Angels, were imputed to one man (fallen and defiled with sin) yet it
would prove a Garment too narrow to wrap him in, he would need the help of
Christ still to make it up.

In the day of Expiation (the solemnest Gospel day Israel had in all the year)
four things were done: 1. the Trumpet sounded. 2 Every soul was afflicted, and
upon hard duty Lev. 16
of Humiliation. 3 Then were Sacrifices offered. 4. But the chief which made it
a day of Atonement, was that the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies, and
sprinkled the blood of the Sacrifices upon the Mercy Lev. 16. 14
Seat, and this he did seven times.

The Holy Ghost hereby shadowed out to them, what was to be done by us in order
to an Atonement. 1. The Trumpet sounds;.i. the Gospel is to be proclaimed.

2. When the Gospel is proclaimed, every Israelite is to afflict his soul for
sin, that he may partake of the benefit of the Gospel. He must be in bitterness
as for an only son dead Zach. 12. 10. 11
yea, killed, (the only Son of God by our sins killed and slain,) and as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddo, (where Josias was slain)
bitterly bewailing that our sins have slain the best King, the Only Anointed
of the Lord, the very breath of our nostrils.

3. Then are Sacrifices to be offered, diverse Sacrifices;.i. All thy sins for a
whole Burnt Offering, thy Praises for a Peace Offering, thy Heart for a
Heave Offering, thy whole man a Living Sacrifice, holy and acceptable, which is
our reasonable Service. Romans 12. 1


4 But chiefly we must look to our High Priests entrance into the Holy of
Holies, and that which is done within the Vayl (out of our sight) the blood of
Sprinkling, so often sprinkled on the Mercy Seat, that is to say, again and
again applied to us: to this we are especially to look: So that if I had
repented better, mourned more, had a thousand more Duties, and a thousaud times
more Righteousness, I would cast away all as dung, Phil. 3. 8, 9
that I might be found in Christ.

We read Zach. 3. 1. When Ioshuah the High Priest stood before the Angel of the
Lord, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him; although he was in his
Priestly Vestments. The most holy Person, even in the most holy Service, when
in the best dress of Legal and personal Righteousness, is clothed with filthy
Garments; he needs a Christ to deliver him from Satan, and change of Garments
to cover his nakedness. As all unrighteousness cannot sink a soul that is in
Christ, so all Righteousness of the world cannot save a soul without Christ.

1. This informs us how true and just that Appli^. 1 Col. 1. 18 (...). John 1. 9
of the Apostle is, That Christ was in all things to have the Pre-eminence. He
is not a light, but the Light, the true light; (...). Of Lights, not a Star,
but the Sun; of Suns, not the lower, but the higher; the Sun, not of Light, but
of Righteousness. He is Bread, not common bread, but the true Bread, John 6.
32. The Bread of Li^e, ver 35. Bread from Heaven, ver. 50. Living Bread, ver.
51. The Bread of God, ver. 33. He the Shepherd, but the good Shepherd: He the
Vine, but the true Vine; the Pearl, but the only Pearl of great price: He a
Lamb, but without spot. He is the chief of the ways of God.

2 This shows us where Righteousness is to be had, and where only. There is
but one Sun of Righteousness for the Church, as one Sun for the world; we may
seek Righteousness and lose by seeking, Rom 9. 31. We may attempt to build a
Babel to reach heaven with our own Duties, and God pulls it down. In te stas,
and non stas, said St. Austin. But go forth (as David said) in the strength
Psalm 71. 16
of the Lord; and make mention of his Righteousness, and his only. The weak Ivy
climbing up, and clasping about the Oak, lives and continues green all Winter,
stands while the Oak stands, though it has no stem or stalk of his own to bear
it. But we are like to little children which learn to go, who having nothing to
hold on, hold on their own clothes, which throws them down. Rely alone on
Christ for Righteousness. A house whose foundation stands partly on a rock,
and partly on the sands, stands no firmer then if all stood on the sand, that
part pulls down the whole. Thou must lose thy own Righteousness, that thou
may gain Christ.

3. This shows us what a difference there is between Adam and Christ. Adam a
Sea of Unrighteousness, Christ a Sea of Righteousness. Adam a falling Star, a
blazing Meteor, who fell with Lucifer that bright Morning Star, and suffered a
total Eclipse; Christ a Sun, a fixed Sun of Righteousness. The two great
Luminaries, the Sun and Moon, are only discernably Eclipsed; so these two great
Creatures, Angels and Men. The greater Luminary, suffered a final (not total)
eclipse; all the Angelical Nature fell not. The less, a total (not a final.) The
greater, contrary to what is in the course of Nature, suffered the greater
Eclipse. But Adams was a sad Eclipse; He lost all his Righteousness and Light
for the time, as did the Angels: He conveyes to us nothing but sin and wrath.
We may sadly say, that of the first Adam, which was said of Christ, (...), (and
(...) too) he emptied Phil. 2. 7
himself and us, and became of no reputation. He was as that wormwood Star,
that imbittered all. A very pit or lake of mire to defile us, but Christ a
fountain of Righteousness opened to cleanse us, and he takes away all
unrighteousness.

4 How should this consideration, that Christ is the Sun of Righteousness,
endear him to us, and heighten our esteem of him! Who can give unto God the
praises due for the benefit of the air we breath in, and of the Sun whose
light we walk in? But for this Sun of Righteousness, by whom we are both
Justified and Sanctified, enlightened and enlivened, what praises can be given
unto God sufficient for such a Mercy? It was Righteousness we wanted more then
light. The Sun had not lost his light, nor Adam his sight by the fall, but all
that Righteousness wherewith he was adorned: we needed not a new Sun in the
Heaven to lighten the body, but a new Sun of Righteousness to enliven the
soul. Clothed with this Sun, Rev. 12. 1: Ephesians. 5. 27.
the Church may present her self before God, and is without spot or wrinkle or
any such defect. One Garment made for the High Priests fitted A^ron, and all
his successors, Exo. 29. 29, 30
they had no other. One garment of Righteousness fitteth Christ our High
Priest, and all his Members.

5. Yet here is a Caution to be entered. Christ is to all a Sun, not to all the
Sun of Righteousness; the light of the world; but the Righteousness of Saints,
whose properties Revel. 19. 8.
we shall here set down.

1. That of the Text, only such as fear his Name, have these promises made to
them. 1. That he shall be a Sun of Righteousness to them. 2. Rise and shine
upon them. 3. Embrace and cover them with his wings. 4. And therewith heal
them. 5. That they shall grow as the thriving, fatted, well attended Calves in
the stal. But all these shall be made good to none but such as truly fear him.

2. To such as do believe Christ is a Sun of Righteousness, a stone elect
and precious; to such as believe not, he is only a stone of stumbling, and
rock of offense. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. The righteousness of God which is by faith of
Romans 3. 22
Jesus Christ to all, and upon all that believe, for there is no difference:
not between believer and unbeliever, (as if asserting Universal redemption) but
between a weak believer and strong believer, as asserting an equal
Justification of all true believers. Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every Romans 10. 5
one that believes. None but such as have the eye of faith, have benefit by
this Sun, as only those who looked up to the Serpent received cure.

3. To whom he is made of God, wisdom and Sanctification; to them he is also
righteousness and redemption. He is made to us of God, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification 1 Cor. 1. 30
and Redemption. We must not pick and choose, take two, and leave two. As
Christ's, so the Christians garment is made up of four quarters; but they must
not be divided. Many would be content Christ should be Righteousness to them,
who desire not he should be Wisdom; All desire he should be Redemption, few
care for his being made Sanctification to them. But Christ will be all or none.

As there is a golden chain of Decrees, Romans 8. 30. Whom God has
predestined, he has called, whom called justified, whom justified glorified;
so that he that looks to have benefit by the one, must be sure to hold fast
all the other. So there are four other golden chains laid down in Scripture.

1. That golden chain of Graces, 2 Pet. 1. 5 Add to your Faith Virtue, to
Virtue Knowledge, to Knowledge Temperance, to Temperance Patience, to Patience
Godliness, to Godliness brotherly Kindness, to it Charity.

2. Of Beatitudes. Mat. 5. 3, 4. etc. Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed
they that mourn, Blessed are the meek, etc.

3. Of Duties; laid down, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17, 18. Rejoice evermore, pray
without ^easing, etc.

4. So of Privileges. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made to us of God, wisdom, etc.
Now in all these golden chains, hold one, hold all; break o^ lose one, lose all.

4. Christ is the Sun of Righteousness only to those who disclaim all other
Righteousness and stick to his. I count all but loss and dung that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own Righteousness which Phil. 3. 9
is of the Law; but that which is of the faith of the Son of God, the
Righteousness of God by faith. We must make loss of our Righteousness, ( durus
sermo) or it will lose us; and make dung of our Righteousness ( foetidus sermo)
defiling the Tophet of our Sacrifices, or it will defile us. Dung might do well
in the field, not in the streets; in the streets better then in the house; in
the house better then in the Church, and on the Altar. It makes a bad perfume,
an ill sacrifice, therefore God Exodus 29. 14* Lev. 8. 17
commanded the dung and skin of the beast sacrificed should be carried out of
the Sanctuary, and burnt in the field. Our Righteousness and Goodness may
extend to men, not to God; may benefit the Commonwealth, but not fit for a
Sacrifice: It is all but skin and dung, which we must carry and burn without
the Camp. In this sense that may Cave non tantum a malis operibus, sed etiam a
^bonis. (...). Job 9. 30, 31
pass for Orthodox. Bona opera sunt perniciosa ad salutem. If I should wash my
self with snow water (said Job) and make my hands never so clean, yet thou
shall plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall make me be abhorred.
Mordecai might not come into the Kings Court in sackcloth, nor we into Gods in
our own Humiliations; nor the fairest virgins come into the same Kings
presence, ^sther 4. 2 2. 12.
till besides their own native beauty they had been purified according to the
Kings appointment. The Priests were to put off their own, and put on the holy
Garments, whenever they came into Gods presence. Kings suffer no Money to go
in their Dominions, but what has their own Stamp. God will be paid in no Coin
but Christ's. He that ran to the City of Refuge, was to leave all houses and
Castles of Strength, and only abide in his Sanctuary, if taken out of it, he
might die. Over the Ark was the Mercy Seat, over Numb. 35, 26, 27
the Mercy Seat a covering. Law and Works need Mercy, Mercy needs a covering;
that Gods Mercies which are over all his own works, may cover even our best
works.

5 If Christ be the Sun of Righteousness let us (as followers of him) be
Stars of Righteousness. Righteousness makes one man more excellent then his
neighbor. It is the Prove. 12, 26
glory of God, called often the Righteous God; of Christ, he called Jesus Christ
the Righteous; of the Holy Ghost, whose fruit is in all Goodness,
Righteousness, and Truth; It is the paving of Gods Church; The Kingdom Romans
14. 17
of God is Righteousness and Peace. The members of the Church Militant must be
all Righteous, Isaiah 60. 21. And all in the Church Triumphant are called the
Righteous Mat. 25. 37.

Righteousness is Gods clothing; our Ornament, the Priests Vesture, Psalm. 132.
9. the Brides attire, Rev. 19* 8. The Christians Armor on the right hand, and
on the left, 2 Cor. 6. 7.

But we must distinguish here; there is a twofold Righteousness,

1. Dangerous. 2. Safe.
1. There are four kinds of Righteousness which are dangerous.

1. The seeming Righteousness, which is not real, but counterfeit. Simulata
Sanctitas* duplex iniquitas. Sincerity commends Sanctity, and Truth
Righteousness; the one is the warp, the other the woof of the Christians
garment; if the plague of Hypocrisy (...). Ephesians. 4. 24. Lev. 13. 32
had taken the warp or the woof, the whole garment or web was to be burnt.

2 Semi-Righteousness, which is partial, not universal. In this sense true
Righteousness must not be single, but double; to God and man. Moses came with
the two Tables Deuteronomy. 9. 1^ 2 Cor. 6. 7
in his two hands. Our Armor of Righteousness must be an the right hand (to
God) and left (to man.) The Pharisees were double hearted and double tongued,
and but one handed Professors, paid Tyth Mint, Rue and Matthew. 23. 23
Cummin, their petty Tithes, but kept back the greater Tithes; the sheaf of
Mercy, Truth, Righteousness.

3* The desaying Righteousness, which was as a morning cloud, or the morning
dew, growing Hosea 6. 4
less and less till the cloud is vanished, and the dew dried up, not as the
morning light which shines more and more to a perfect day. This has many a
terrible Threat denounced against it, more then any unrighteousness. See Ezekiel.
3. 20. and 18. 24, 26, 27.

4. Thy Self-conceited-Righteousness, or any Righteousness of thy own confided
in. Our Savior in the Parable of the Pharisee and Publican, does cut down all
this Righteousness: He spoke the Parable to such as trusted Luke 18. 9
in themselves, that they were Righteous. They were their own Creed, and their
own Saviors. The like Ezekiel. 33. 13. When I say to the Righteous, he shall
surely live; if he trust in his own Righteousness, -- all his Righteousness
shall not be remembered. Better no Righteousness at all, then so much as to
trust in. Be not righteous overmuch. We Eccles. 7. 16
pity the ignorance of such as make the Creed a Prayer; they are as much to
blame who make the Decalogue a Creed. Our best Righteousness makes but a bad
Savior. It may be an evidence of Sanctification, not an Advocate for
Justification, not the Surety for our Satisfaction, but our Security for our
Sanctification. When the Moon, full of her own light, goes from the Sun, she
loses all; and when in her wain she approaches the Sun and keeps following
him, she renews and increases her light again to a fullness.

2. There is a good Righteousness, whereof there be four kinds or degrees. 1.
The Philosophical: 2. Pharisaical. 3. Evangelical. 4 Divine, or Righteousness
of God. Two of these are External, two Internal, all of them together make
perfectly righteous before God and men.

1 The first and lowest Righteousness, is that we call Civil, Moral, or
Philosophical. The Righteousness of Nations, taught in their Schools, and
practiced in their Polities. This alone is enough to make one to become bonus
Civis, but is the lowest ingredient, which joined with the other three, makes
also the bonus Christianus. This is not to be spoken against; the world is not
so full of it. The Prophet complains that God had a Controversy with his
people for want of moral honesty. There is neither Mercy, nor Truth, nor
knowledge of God in the Land, but swearing, Hosea 4. 1, 2
^ying* killing, stealing, and committing Adultery and blood touching blood.
Say not this is Heathenish Divinity; it is Christian too; but is their highest
point in Divinity and our lowest; where theirs ends, ours is to begin. It is
not to be neglected then, but outstripped, neither to be rested in nor laid
aside. The Heathen shall sooner be saved with this, then the Christian without
it.

2. of Duties, Matthew. 5 20. That Philosophical, this Pharisaical; that good,
this better; that the effect of the Law unwritten, unless on the stony Table of
Man's heart, this of the Law written in Tables of stone. This we call legal
Righteousness, or Righteousness of Works, which is not to be spoken against
neither, but countenanced. Religion teaches not to lay aside Holy Duties, but
perform them better; not to fail in one* but abound in all; not to call any
Duty or Commandment little. This was the Righteousness of Zachary and
Elizabeth, who walked Matthew. 5. 19 Luke 1. 6
in all the Ordinances of God blameless. Of this the Apostle speaks, He that
does Righteousness 1 John 3. 7
is righteous.

3. The third Righteousness is of Graces: This an inward Righteousness, better
then both the former, and that which commends them. This the Evangelical
Righteousness, made up of Evangelical Graces, Faith, Love, Repentance,
Obedience, good Conscience, etc. This the Righteousness of the Gospel, or Law
of Faith. This exceeds the Righteousness of Philosophers, and of Scribes and
Pharisees. They had the outward works of the Law, without an inward work of
Grace: But this Righteousness Grace advances and urges, The grace of God
which Titus 2. 11, 12
brings Salvation, teaches us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present evil world. And
Romans 5. ult. Grace does reign by righteousness to eternal life. Yield your
members servants to Righteousness unto Holiness.

4. The fourth and best of all, is the Righteeusness of faith, or the
Righteousness of Christ, which commends all the former and exceeds them. This
is called the Righteousness of God for three Reasons. 1 Wrought by the Son of
God. 2. Accepted by the Phil. 3. 9
Father. 3. Applied by the Spirit of God.

The Christians garment is made up of these four; the three first insufficient
without this. We must not as the Soldiers, make four of one, but one of four;
dividing these and take each one of us a part, (the Heathen Civility, Pharisees
duty, the Professors Piety, and the Believers imputed Righteousness) but make
up a whole garment of these four quarters, Deuteronomy. 22. 1^ Num^. 15. 39
as the Israelites garment was to be, and bound about with one border or fringe
of sincerity.

Christ and all his followers are clothed alike; he in white, sitting on a
white horse, Revel. 19. 11. They so, ver. 14 And the Lambs wife has the same
garment also; all in white, this difference only, that Christ his Garments are
white as snow or wool (native, undied) the purest white; ours of linen, not
white naturally, but (made so) by washing. These have washed their garments in
the blood of the Lamb, and made them Rev. 7. 14
white.

CHAP. XX All the godly are such as fear the name of God.
BUt to you that fear my name.] Here we come to the third thing, from the
dedescription of Christ to the description of the Christian. 1. When they are
at worst, Such as fear his name. 2. When at the best, Such as grow as Calves in
the Stall. From the former our Observation is.

That it is the constant disposition of every Observat.
true Christian (the least of the flock, the meanest in the Kingdom of Heaven)
to fear God, and to fear his name. Mal. 3. 16. There they are described to be
such as fear the Lord, and thought on his name. Wicked men may fear man, they
God; wicked fear death, those sin; they fear Gods wrath, these his name. The
highest of the Godly can trust in his name, these can but think on it
sometimes; The highest Saint can glory in the name of Psalm 44. 8
God and praise it, In God we boast all the day, and praise thy name for ever.
All that these poor Saints can do, is to fear, (hardly say they trust in, never
yet could say, they glory in) the name of God. Death is to the natural man
(...), of all terribles most terrible. The Lord is to the Spiritual man,
timendorum maxim timendus, styled He that is to be feared. And the name of God
Psalm 76. 12
is to the gracious heart (...), Of all dreadfulls the most dreadful: That
glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy Deuteronomy. 28 58
God.

The Godly are always men of fear, subject to three sorts of fear.

1. To a natural fear. This a good (at least a lawful) fear. Thus Jacob
professed he feared Genesis 32. 11. 2 Chronicles. 20. 3
Esau; and Jehoshaphat had much of this fear upon him, when he understood of
the many enemies that combined against him; this comes from the apprehension of
apparent danger, when danger is great, and our help little. Thus may all the
godly safely fear death, pain, poverty, shame, prisonment, and fly sin the
cause, and all other evil occasions of them; the Wise fears and departs
Prove. 14. 16
from evil. Grace destroys not nature, but reformes the evil of it.

2 There is an evil fear ( inordinate and immoderate fear) which sometimes a
Godly man is incident to, and overtaken with; for which they are to be chidden
and reproved; Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Matthew. 8. 26
Too much fear, and too little faith always go together, when danger is great
but the doubts greater. Help is little, and their hopes less* Against this the
Godly are often encouraged, cautioned, charged to beware of it. This is to be
resisted, at least restrained: to be moderated, if it cannot be mortified.

3 Religious fear: Noah's (...). By faith, Noah warned of God, was moved with
fear: This is a Religious fear, and for its excellency is put for the whole of
Religion and Devotion: (...), men fearing God, Acts 2. 5 and 8. 2
(translated) Devout men. Therefore whereas we are often charged against the
two former, that we have not too much of them, we are as often charged to get
more of this, which we can never have too much of, 1 Samuel 12. 24. Exodus 20. 24.
Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not; but fear, again I say, fear him. Get a double measure
of this holy fear to fortify the heart against these two former fears.

This Religious fear has a twofold object

1. Evil, and is a fear of abhorrence. 2. Good, and is a fear of reverence.
1 Evil is to be feared with fear of Horror.

1 Evil of punishment. 1 Temporary judgments. I am afraid of thy Judgment, my
flesh Psalm. 119. 12^
trembles for fear of thee. Destruction from God was a terror to me (said Job)
and so a Job 31. 23*
curb from sin. The love of God is the only constraint to good; and the fear of
God to the Godly the only restraint from evil. 2 Spiritual Judgments. I was
afraid (said Deuteronomy. 9. 19
Moses) of the anger and hot displeasure of God. 3. Most of all, Eternal
Judgments. - Knowing 2 Cor. 5. 11 Heb. 10. 31 and 12, 29
the terror of the Lord. How fearful is it, to fall into the hands of the
living Lord? Our God is a consuming fire,

2 Evil of sin, yet more then all the former. This is the mother of all these
three fatal Sisters. There were no cause to fear Temporal, Spiritual, or
Eternal evil, if not for this evil of sin. Sin has filled earth with briars
and thorns, the body with Diseases, the mind with grief, head with cares, soul
with Terrors, labors with toil; yea, sin has put that brimstone into hell, and
kindled that fire there, yea, has carried fire into Heaven, and put wrath into
God.

This is to be feared with a fear of abhorrence and abomination; a wicked man
may forbear sin, the godly fears, flies, hates ^in, He fears an oath. Job
feared God, and Eccles. 9. 2 Job 1. 1
eschued evil. He feared God much, but sin more; God with fear of Reverence,
sin with fear of defiance, both with a Religious fear. This one fear well
feared, expels all other fears. The heart full of this holy fear of sin, has
no room to entertain any base tormenting fears,

2 Reverential fear is the fear of God, and is twofold.

1. Of lower Saints, proceeding from more weakness, and arguing less
perfection, which fear has pain. doubt, perplexity, torment, and is that we
call the spirit of bondage, that 1 John 4. 18
shuts out confidence and rejoicing. And arises from these five causes: 1 From
the apprehension of Gods infinite holiness, purity, and therefore jealousy and
indignation against sin and sinners. 2. From the apprehension of the Laws
strictness, rigor, and severity. 3. The dreadful threats of Gods wrath against
sinners. 4. Then the consideration of their own deep guilt, great frailties,
manifold imperfections: lastly, which adds to all the rest, the apprehension of
God a^ a distance to them, and not yet in 1 Covenant relation.

2 Of the higher Saints, arguing less weakness, and more Perfection:
therefore when this enters, the other ends, God has 2 Timothy 1. 7
not given us the spirit of fear, but of power, love, and of a sound mind. This
fear argues perfection and the best constitution. Job a perfect man fearing
God. This spirit of fear was upon our Savior. This arises from the
apprehension of God in relation, and in Covenant with us, as our Isai, 11. 2
God.

These fear God 1. As a servant his Master, Malachi 1. ^ Lev. 19. 3 (...) Ephesians.
5. 33
whom he serves; as a son his father whom he honors; as the Wife her
Husband whom she loves. This is a most gracious fear, timor amoris, the fear
of Love.

2 They are said to fear his Word, and to tremble at it, Isai. 66. 2. Where
Gods Word comes, there comes power, and causes fear, one rebuke thence shakes
and sweth the heart more then a thousand stripes does a profane fool. This is
timor obedentiae, fear of obedience.

3. They fear his name. They count Gods name the most holy, reverend, and
fearful of all things in the world. That thou may fear Deuteronomy. 28. 98
that glorious and fearful name, the Lord thy God. Of this the Godly are very
tender, Jo^ feared God, and therefore feared lest hi^ sons might pollute Gods
name in their hearts. Others would not that their own nam^ should suffer,
these that Gods. This is timor honoris, the fear of honor.

The first Reason of this Point, why it i^ Reas. 1.
the constant disposition of all the Godly, even the least of them, to fear the
name of God, is, Because this fear is the initial grace, the first grace that
appears and takes heavens Alarm. The fear of the Lord is the beginning Psalm
111. 10
of wisdom. Before knowledge of God, faith in God, acquaintance with God,
dependence upon God, delight in him, comes fear. The Spirit in his first
approach injects fear as the first seed of Grace. The Spirits business is
first to be a spirit of B^ndage, afterward of Adoption: First, to convince of
sin, afterward Romans 8. 15- John 16. 8
to discover Righteousness and Judgment. But fear is the holy porch at which
all Grace enters. In the first conversion of a stout and secure sinner, Gods
Spirit falls to undermining his hopes by strong convictions of his sin and
misery; then is Fear awakened: Fear takes the Alarm and calls up Conscience,
Conscience awakens Repentance, Repentance Faith, Faith calls up Prayer, Prayer
looks after the Promise, Promise runs to Christ and awakens him, as did the
Disciples in their storm, Lord, save us, we perish: But Matthew. 8. 25.
Fear begins. A little more fully to describe this, conceive it thus.

Conviction calls upon a sinner, Look well Jonah 1. 6
about thy self, What meanest thou, Oh sleeper? Will thou dye in a sleep! Up
Fear, see the danger, hide thy self, seek to escape for thy life, now deliver
thy self as the Roe: Fear says, I exceedingly quake and tremble, God is
angry, I am in great danger, alone I cannot secure my self: Now help Fear all
you other Graces; up Conscience. Conscience says, I am troubled and would
relieve Fear, but thou must help me Repentance; bestir thee Repentance, break
off sin without delay. Repentance says, I would ^ase Conscience, and secure
Fear; help Faith at a dead lift, or I can do no good. Faith says, I would help
Repentance, but thou must help me Prayer, (as Israel in their fear came to
Samuel, entreating him not to 1 Samuel 6. 7, 8
cease to cry to God for them; so) Faith says, Prayer cry aloud, be not
silent, take no repulse, pray not coldly, but plead, entreat, beg for thy life.
Prayer says, How should I help, if the Lord help not out of the floor or Kings
6. 27
^ine press of the Promises? Now for a Pro^ise to deliver Fear, ease
Conscience, secure Repentance, satisfy Faith, and keep up Prayer! Come some
precious Promise; how do ^ long for a Promise! Promise says to Christ ^s the
Gibeonite to Joshuah, Lord, slack Joshuah 10. 6
^ot thy hand: Lord, remember thy Covenant and Word, wherein thou have caused
thy ser^ant to put his trust. Or as David in another Psalm 119. 49
case to Jonathan, his bosom friend, Thou have brought thy servant into a
Covenant 1 Samuel 20. 8, 9
of the Lord with thee; deal thou kindly therefore with thy servant, deliver me
not up to thy Fathers displeasure; but mediate for me, hide nothing from me,
let me know whether thy Father be angry or pleased. Here is nothing but fear
all this while. But then Christ answers the poor soul in the words of
Jonathan, Fear not, far be it from thee: If I knew that evil was determined
against thee, I would tell thee. Go in Peace. He that seeks thy life, seeks
mine, abide 1 Samuel 22. 23
with me, and thou shall be in safety, as David said to Abiathar. Then is all
quiet, and Conscience secure: But you see Fear stands Sentinel and procures
this safety. The Spirit of God is the Spring, but holy Fear is the great wheel,
or else the weight that sets Sinon curarem non orarem; si non timerem, non
crederem. Reas. 2.
all a going. No cares, no prayers, said Melancton; no fears, no hopes.

The second Reason. As it is the initial first Grace, so it is the last, yea,
the lasting and standing Grace. When we can speak but little of Faith, Hope,
Love, and nothing at all of Assurance; Yet says the soul, I cannot deny this:
I fear God, said Jonah, though he fled from him: or as the poor Jonah 1. 9
Egyptians in that sore famine, fell down before Joseph, We cannot hide this
from thee, we Genesis 47. 19
are ready to perish, our store is gone, money spent, shall we dye at thy foot
for want of bread? Take our Lands, make us Servants, but let us live. This fear
is the lasting Grace; therefore as it is called, The beginning of wisdom, Prove.
1. 7. so the fear of the Lord, (said Job) that is wisdom it self. And Eccles.
12. 13. it is called the sum and final conclusi^n Job 28. 28
of the whole matter. So that when God ^romiseth, his people shall not depart
from ^im, he puts his fear into their hearts. Two things make us safe, engaging
God and the ^oul reciprocally. His Love to us, that he Jer. 32* 40
^ill not depart from us to do us good; and our ^^ar of him, that we shall not
depart from ^im.

3. This is the lowest and the abiding Grace, Reas. 3
^hen Grace is at the lowest ebb. As Cha^ity in Heaven, so Fear on earth never
fail(...), but when Prophesies fail, and tongues (...)ase, and faith
languisheth, fear remains. ^s when the body is in a swoun, there is no
(...)ynt stirs, the eye is shut or set, breathing ^ot discerned, pulse not
felt, yet there is (...)e, because there is yet some warmth, all (...)not cold
and stiff. So when the soul is (...)he saddest desertion, or under
Tempta(...)on, when there is no motion heavenward (...)ll to be discerned, no
affection, no de(...)es, no breathing as formerly in Prayer, no (...)oving of
the eye after a Promise, or Christ (...)it: Meat is refused, Ordinances are
un(...)oury, yet well fare this precious grace of (...)ar, the minimum quod
sic, the primum (...)ns and ultimum moriens of the new Crea^e* all is not dead,
the case is not desperate; (...) keeps the soul warm, from being stark cold and
stiff in sin. I cannot say, but yet I fear God, I fear sin, and I fear H^^^*
This is the description of a Christian in the lowest ebb. Who is among you that
fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his Servant, that walks in
darkness and has no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God.

4. This is the constant frame of the new heart, and the stamp of Gods
workmanship in the new Creature, I will put my fear into their hearts that they
shall not depart from me. There grace begins, there it continues, there it
increases, there it never departs nor ends. This fear is to the soul, as the
pulse to the body, Primum movens, ultimum moriens; moves with the first, and to
the last. The least Infant, strongest young man, feeblest old man, all have
their pulse continually beating. One has no sight, another no hearing, another
is lame, another sleeps, and all the Senses fast bound, but no living man but
has his pulse ever moving. The godly soul sometimes mourns, sometimes
rejoices, sometimes believes, sometimes doubts, sometimes prays,
sometimes cannot pray, but alwaie^ fears; and blessed he that fears
always* Prove. 28. 14.

We may say the same of this Grace o^ Fear which the Philosopher of the Sense
o^ Feeling. 1. It is ortu primus, the fir^^ thing that appears. 2. Duratione
ultimu(...) It continues longest, begins with the beginning, and ends not til
the end of life. 3. Usu maximus; sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, not so
necessary to life; without them there may be life, but feeling gone, life is
gone; so without many other gifts, parts, abilities, and the exercise of other
graces, (at present) such may live, never without this fear. 4. Hominis
optimus, Man the best Creature, has the quickest touch, (other Creatures
exceed man in the four other Senses) and the best Christian the most fear. 5.
Yet as he says of Tactus, it is usu summus, nobilitate ultimus, it is the
sense of the least Nobility. We prefer an eye, ear before it; so this principal
Grace of Fear is little esteemed; it cares for us most, we care for it least,
and we set it far behind Hope, Joy, Confidence, when it may be better then them
all.

1. This informs us, that all Christians Applicat.
are not of a stature, nor are all Graces to be always found in every
Believer. Some are Cedars in Lebanon, some as the Hyssop by the wall, or as
bruised reeds: Some as fatted Calves in the stall, well fed, well liking, fat
and fair and full of life and lightsomeness. Some as chickens not fully
hatched, or as weak tender chickens, that droop and hang the wing, that need
the warmth of the wing to cherish them. Some godly souls are all their their
life time subject Hebrews 2. 13
to bondage, and kept low with fears, can never get over the fear of death; yet
the Apostle says, Christ has delivered these. Some(...) are shut up long in
the Prison of unbelief, y(...) God shuts them in, and will let them out, a(...)
does shut them up in Mercy. God sh(...) them all up in unbelief, that he may
have mercy Romans 11. 32
on all. Unbelief is Gods Prison, Presumtion Satan's Palace; better to be bound
i^ Gods prison, then to dwell in Satan's pa^lace. Gods people are called his
Prisoners Prisoners of hope, his flock a Poor flock, Zachary 9. 12 11* 7
flock of slaughter (in their own apprehension appointed as sheep for
slaughter) yet Go^ promises to feed them. Those who fe(...) God most, may have
most fear of Hell; a^^ though they fear and fly sin, they fear the^ shall never
fly damnation. They have sometimes failing of eye, and faintings of hear^
rottenness in their bones, yet is God the God of their Salvation. When the
wicke^ Hab. 3. 16, 17
who make a mock at sin, and sing Peace, Pea(...) to themselves in life, shall
at death cry out Despair, despair. The trembling Believe who cries Fear, fear
in his life, shall sin(...) Prover* 14. 32
Hope, hope in his death. There is alw(...) least fear of their damnation, who
fea^ damnation most, and sin more, the cause o^ it. A thousand times better
fear without danger, then security without safety.

2 This secures the state of such poo^ Believers, who have only this grace of
fe(...) in them, without the perception of any other at present. I may say to
all those, (...) after another, as Absalom to every Israelite that came near
him, yet without falsehood and flattery, See thy matter is good. To 2 Samuel 15. 3
thee this Promise belongs, believe, urge, pray, wait for it, it will not ly:
the vision of it is for an appointed time; if it tarry, do thou also tarry.
Hab. 2
The Sun shall rise upon thee one day, and thou shall see the desire of thy
heart. Yea the daybreak is past already where this holy fear is wrought; it is
the gray and dark morning foregoing a fair day. The Lord delights (that is,
is more then ordinary Psalm. 147. 10. 11
pleased) in such as fear him, says the Psalmist. And next to the holy Angel
in Heaven, the humble Saint on earth is the fittest Mansion for the High and
Lofty one, who Isaiah 57. 25 and 66. 2
will dwell with him that is of a contrite heart, and trembles at his word.

Object. But I have so many fears.

Answ. The more is thy security. Vis in timore securus esse, securit atem time.
Fear Bern
nothing but security, and thou have best security against fear.

2 Thy fears are Religious fears, thou fear evil with fear of abhorrence,
God with fear of Reverence, dreadst his displeasure, art tender of his
dishonor, obeyest his Word, ^uest for his favor: fear not, only thus fear
still and thou art safe.

3 Christ his method is to kill and make alive, wound and heal; as Joseph, he
speaks roughly at the first; he cut down Saul at one blow to make him a chosen
Vessel; he darts hell into the conscience. He comes with fire and soap into
his Temple, and who Malachi 3. 2, 3
may abide the day of his coming? His eyes are as a flame of fire, in his hand
a fan, in his mouth a two edged sword. There are two notable days of the Lords
coming, the two saddest days of all others. 1. To the godly here, who in the
first appearing of Christ in their Conversion are in bitterness, when they see
him whom they have pierced, and they mourn because of him, as with the
mourning for an only Son; a sad, unforced, unfeigned, renewed, long lasting, and
heart breaking mourning. 2. The other day is more sad, when Christ shall come
in the clouds, then shall all Tribes wail because of Revel. 1. 7
him. The wicked that never mourned here penitentially, shall mourn
despairingly. But where the first mourning is past, the first woe is past, and
the last mourning is prevented. The way to Heaven lies by Hells Suburbs; and to
Salvation by Shen^h and Bozez, nothing 1 Samuel 14. 4
but steep and sharp Rocks on the one side and the other. The whirlewind,
earthquake, 1 Kin. 19. 11, 12
fire, then the still voice to Elias. The horror of great darkness, the
smoking furnace, Genesis 15
the Lamp of fire, then the Covenant to Abraham. The Fullers soap, Refiners
fire, the burning Oven, then the Sun of Righteousness. The Lord has no
readier way then to expel fear by fear, hellish by heavenly; therefore he takes
so much pains with his people by Mount Sinai terors, to drive this nail of
holy fear deep into their hearts, The Lord is come to prove you that his fear
may be in you; fear not. Therefore is the true fear of God often prescribed as
the only remedy against all hurtful fears. Fear not, but fear, 1 Samuel 12. 20.
24. Exodus, 20. 20. Isai. 8. 12, 13. Mat. 10. 28.

Notes of this holy fear are,

1. It must be a fear of Devotion, Act. 2. 5. This makes truly devout, puts
upon the exercise of all duties of Holiness. Cornelius Acts 10. 2
his fear, A devout man, one that feared God with all his house, gave much
Alms, and prayed always. 2 Of diligence: Work out your salvation Phil. 2. 12
with fear and trembling: Not fear of negligence, as the evil servant feared*
and hid the Talent. Lots fear, who feared and fled to the Mountains that he
might escape. Moses fear, who was afraid, fell down, fasted, prayed, besought
God, would not be put off with any denial. 3 Of dependence on God in the use of
Hebrews 11. 7
Means: Noah's fear. He by faith was moved to fear, and thereupon prepared his
Ark. True faith increases (lesseneth not) religious fear; fear confirms, not
infirmes faith. Such as fear God, and hope in his mercy are Psalm 147. 11
joined. 4. Of obedience. That fear the Lord, and Isaiah 50. 10
obey the voice of his servant. This is the fear of the servant (not a servile
fear.) The good Ephesians 6, 4
servant must obey his Master with fear and trembling. 5 Or Love; the fi^^al
fear: who fear the Lord and his goodness, Hose^ 3. 5. 6. A sin-resisting
fear, Jobs fear, Ioh 1, 1. 7 A heart-sanctifying fear, Isa. 8. 12.
3 This informs us, that God is pleased to take notice of every grace, even the
least and lowest, and every gracious inclination in any of his Servants. To
fear his Name is no great matter, yet these have a promise. To think on his
Name less, yet set down in a Malachi 3. 17
Book of remembrance. God se^s down how many good thoughts a poor soul has
had. As Evil thoughts in wicked men are taken notice of; they are the first
fruits of the evil heart. Mat. 15. 19. So good thought^ ^^e they which ly
uppermost, and best discover a good heart. A desire is a small matter
(especially of the poor man) yet God regards the desire of the poor: And calls
a good desire Psalm 10. 17 Prove. 19. 22
the greatest kindness; The desire of a man is his kindness. A Tear makes no
great noise, yet has a voice, God has heard the voice of Psalm 6. 8 56. 8
my weeping. It is no pleasant water, yet God bottles it up. A groan is a poor
thing, yet is the best part of a Prayer sometimes, Romans 8 26. A sigh is less,
yet Psalm 12. 5. God is awakened and raised up by it. A look is less then all
these, yet this regarded, Jonah 2. 4 Breathing yet less, yet Lam. 3. 56* the
Church could speak of no more. Panting is less then breathing, when one is
spent for lack of breath, yet this is all the godly can sometimes boast of,
Psalm. 42. 1. The description of a godly man is oft-times made from his least
quod sic. Blessed the poor, the meek, they that mourn, and they who hunger and
thirst. Never did Hannah pray better, then when she could get out never 1 Samuel
1. 15
a word, but cried, Hard, hard heart. Nor did the Publican, then when he smote
his breast and cried, Lord be merciful to me a sinner. Luke 18. 13 7. 37
Nor Mary Magdalen, then when she came behind Christ, sat down, wept, but kept
silence.

How sweet is Music upon the waters! How fruitful are the lowest Valleys!
Mourning hearts are most musical, lowest most fruitful. The good Shepherd ever
takes most care of his weak Lambs and feeble Sheep. The father makes most of
the least, and the mother looks most after the sick child. How comfortable is
that of our Savior, It is not Matthew. 18. 14
the will of your heavenly Father that one of these little ones should perish!
And that heaven is not to be entered but by such as are like the little child.

Therefore this discovers the sad mistake of such as cry out, I have no Grace,
because no Perfection; no Faith, because not Assurance; no Prayers, because
such weak expressions, many failings, wanderings, doubtings. It is as if the
foot should say, I am not the head, therefore not of the body. The Sanctuary
had his little pins, as well as longer boards: The Temple, small Snuffers of the
same gold 1 Kings 7. 26, 38
with the golden Altar, many small Lavers for one vast Sea. The great house has
vessels 2 Timothy 2. 20
of wood and stone, fitter for their use then the finest Crystal and richest
gold.

But because this is so frequent an Objection, I shall crave leave (if it be a
Digression) to speak a little more particularly to it; and first see what may
be said by such. 2. What to such.

Obj. 1. I have no Grace sure, or as good as none, nothing, nothing; unless I
had more, why should I be thankful for this?

Answ. 1. The best have always had lowest thoughts of themselves. The chosen
vessel calls himself Peccatorum maximum, Apostolorum minimum, the last and the
least of the Apostles, the first and greatest of sinners; yea, less then the
least of Saints. He wants a Ephesians 3. 8
term diminutive enough, therefore by a kind of Grammatical impropriety or
catachresis, he forms a Comparative of a Superlative. (...)
In another place he makes himself less then the least of men, yea of
children; if an Apostle, yet the least; if a Saint, yet less then the least; if
a child of God, yet the least and unlikeliest to live, an abortive child, 1
Cor* 15. 8
one born out of due time, yet not before the time: But the fear here is of
being born and regenerate after their time; repenting when it is too late; yea,
he makes himself less then the least of things; I am nothing. How low 2 Cor*
12. 11
and small a flower the Violet is, yet how sweet! The groaning horse we say,
seldom deceives his Master, but will hold out till he come home. The groaning
and complaining Christian seldom deceives his Master; or his Profession, but
holds out to the end.

2. The godly man is not always the most equal judge in his own case. The eye
se^^ every thing but it self. And Conscience spies every more in the eye of any
Duty, any defect in Grace, takes notice of least sins, but sees not the
Pearl that is in his own eye, I mean that precious tenderness, tremulousness
and sincerity. It has sight enough to see all sins, Duties, Truths, wants; but
his eyes are holden as Moses from seeing his own beauty. If the wicked might be
their own Judges, they would ever justify themselves, being so full of self
love: If the Godly; they would often condemn themselves, being as full of
felf-suspicion. So neither are fit for this work.

3 Possible it is for a godly man to have true Grace, and he not know of it, as
I said Exodus 34. 29
of Moses, his face shone but he wist it not, though others saw it. Sometimes
others can see more into thee then thou can into thy self. The Physician sees
good Symptoms in his Patient, who concludes his own case desperate. As the
wicked man may have more sins then he is aware of, and like Urias, 2 Samuel 11. 14
carry sealed Letters of his own condemnation, when he is not aware what is in
them. Go dancing with Agag to the block, and go to their last home, as Jepthab
did to his own house, full of joy and triumph. But their joy is turned into
bitter mourning when they come to the very threshold, their sin, which as his
daughter he least suspected, comes out to Judges 11. 35
meet him.

The wicked sometimes loyter when their 2 Peter 2. 3
damnation lingers not. Sisera loytered and stayed, when Barak pursued; and
their soul and judgment sleeps, when their judgment and damnation sleeps
not. Sisera slept secure when Jael was preparing the hammer and the nail. The
hungry dreameth, and behold Isaiah 29. 8
he eats; he awaketh, and behold he faints. So on the other side, the godly
dreameth with the Butler, of destruction, and the interpretation is
deliverance. Joseph's brethren Genesis 40
misconstrue all his intentions, and conclude themselves betrayed and undone,
when his purpose and thoughts were of peace and greatest love. Mordecai is
stripped of his sackcloth, and adorned in royal robes, when Haman is carried
from the Banquet to his Gibbet.

4 It is enough if God spy any grace in Romans 3
thee, whose judgment is according to Truth; thine according to thy
misapprehension; his eye is good, when thine evil. Thou notest only thy sins,
and as if thou wast a hired Steward to Satan, set down too much, for fifty
an hundred; and for infirmities set down in thy black bill Presumptions,
for unavoidable slips unpardonable sins. God on the other side overlooketh the
worst, and beholds only the fair side. He says not, Take thy bill, and for
an hundred sit down and blot out twenty, and leave eighty, or for an hundred
write fifty, but blot out all, write discharged, Ten thousand Talents remitted:
I see he Matthew. 18. 24
has nothing to pay, I frankly forgive him; I see him on his knees, I cannot
but pity him. Why should I pursue the stubble, and take him by the throat, who
lies humbled at my feet? I have his submission, shall I seek his destruction?
What do I desire more then the repentance of a sinner, whose death I could
never delight in. Ezekiel. 33. 11


There are Three ( Charites) graces, which where ever God sees, he cancells all
handwritings against such persons, viz. Repentance, Faith, Sincerity. 1. When
God sees in one page a thousand bloody crimes written, and on the other side
Repentance only, He says, Deleantur, bloody crimes, Let Repentance stand. 2.
When he sees in the same page again written, Horrible guilt, dreadful fears*
doleful transgressions, on the other side Faith, he says, blot out guilt,
fears, transgressions, let faith stand. 3. So where he sees after faith and
Repentance, a thousand infirmities on the one hand, and only sincerity on the
other, he says, Tegantur infirmities, overlook them, behold sincerity. Charity
with men, and sincerity with God, covers a multitude of sins. Sincerity is as
Tertia pars grani filum 130 pedum circumambit, in folia adeo tenuia tranfit, ut
auri uncia plusquam december jugera terrae tegere posset. Cardan.
gold, a little of it goes a great way: it is almost incredible how much ground
a little gold (one ounce) may cover, when beaten thin: But it is more
incredible how many frailties sincerity may cover.

Sincerity covered all Asa's oversights, and there were five sad ones. 1. The
highplaces not removed, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. 2. Syria relied on after former
experiences of Gods miraculous preservation forgotten, chap. 16. 7 3. The
Prophet committed, ver. 10. 4. The People oppressed, verse 10. 5. The Physician
relied upon in his sickness. Yet is Asa in the white Roll, not blackbook, for
his heart was perfect all his days.

God takes notice of Jobs patience, and James 5. 11
records it; not of his impatience, but forgets it, You have heard of the
patience of Job. Sarah spoke but one good word, and that is set down, She
called her husband Lord. But 1 Peter 3. 6 Genesis 11. 12, 15
when she showed that reverence to her husband, she showed both unreverence,
and untruth, and unbelief to the Angel; she doubted, and laughed, and lied,
denying it when she had done. That one word remembered, for then she spoke her
heart when she called Abraham, Lord; the other three evils are not so much as
mentioned; she was not her self when she laughed and lied, but under a
distemper.

Therefore how many courses does the Scripture set out God to take, that he may
Id agit tota Scriptura ut Deus misericors esse credatur. Luther.
beget good thoughts in his people toward him? It is the whole scope of
Scripture to represent God gracious and merciful, and man sinful and miserable.

1. Sometimes God kindly cheereth them: Isaiah 1. 18
Come let us reason together, says the Lord: Though your sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow; though as crimson, they shall be as wool. 2.
Sometimes he takes it unkindly, and challenges them, Why say thou, O Jacob,
and Isaiah 40. 27
speak, O Israel, My way is hid from the Lord? and my judgment passed over
from my God? 3. Sometimes he encourages them: Be of Luke 7. 50 and 8. 48
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven: Go in peace. Thy faith has saved thee:
Great is thy Faith, etc. 4. Sometimes excuses them, and pleads their
integrity, commending to the most their Graces, and makes the least of their
^ins. Nevertheless I have a few things, or (...) pauca vel parva; inde (...).
parva fide. Rev. 2. 14. 20 Cant. 4. 7 Matthew 8. 10
some small things against thee: when he might have said many and great sins. 5.
Sometimes commends; Thou art all fair, my Love, no spot is in thee. I have
not found so great faith in Israel, as in ^he Centurion: nor such love in an
Apostle ^s in that poor Woman, She loved much, Luke ^. 47.
Therefore if you fear not to wrong your ^lves, and charge your selves
foolishly, yet take heed you wrong not God, and charge him foolishly, to say he
is an austeer Master, he may reap but will not sow: and you may sow but never
reap; he marketh only your offense, not your graces of Repentance, Faith and
Sincerity.

Object. 2. But I have too much reason for what I say. I have no Grace, because
so little.

Answ. As there are little sins that are killing, (the small lice were a great
plague to the Egyptians) so little graces are saving. Each drop of water is
water; each spark of fire has heat in it. The grain of Mustard seed of Faith
is full weight in the scale of the Sanctuary. The penny has the Kings
Superscription, as well as the twenty shilling piece of Gold.

But consider, 1. There is an infancy in Grace, therefore it is small, not yet
grown up.

2 There is an infirmity and time of weakness (as to younger persons when
grown) which may cast faith down, and keep every grace under.

3 May be thou have thy stint, and thy measure is but one Talent; God gives to
every Romans 12. 3 Ephesians 4. 7
one his measure of Faith. He expect^ not the like measure of all: Ten Talent
must produce more then five. God give^^ not to every one Grace, as he did Mann^
by the Omer, each man alike.

4. If there be a difference between little grace and much, there is a greater
between little and none at all.

Obj. 3. But were there grace in truth, there would be growth.

Answ. And so there is. But here is the mistake, one may grow, and he not be
aware (of which in the last point) one grows in affection, when not in
knowledge; or in judgment when not so much in affection, and this much better.

There is a winter rooting to the trees, as a Summer shooting. If we grow not
in confidence, if in conscience; if not in Assurance, if in Repentance; if not
to eminency of parts, if in integrity and humility, it is much better.

Object. 4. I have no Grace, because no Parts.

Answ. This is a gross fallacy; grace and parts are not all one. The empty
Vessel makes the greater sound. The wise and prudent know not so much as the
babe and simple Surgunt indecti and rapiune regnum coelorum. Aug.
one. The little child is the great man in the Kingdom of God. Better lowest
parts with as low a heart, then highest parts with as high an heart. Where is
the Wise? Where 1 Cor. 1. 8. 5. 20
the Scribe? Where the great Disputer of the World? How does the Apostle
vilify proud parts and unsanctified abilities? He that is Doctor in the Chair
in the Sophisters Schools, is no body in the Divinity Schools. Philosophi
Tertullian.
Haereticorum Patriarchae. The Devil commonly makes use of the greatest parts,
God of the lowest; Satan of the Serpent, God of the Dove. Moses the Man of God
Numb. 12. 3 10. 2
was a meek soft man, of slow speech; Corah and his company men of Renown,
because of their parts; God had respect to his, not to their Sacrifice. Job a
man who abhorred himself in dust and ashes: his friends were the men of parts,
with whom when ever they Job 12. 2
died wisdom should dye with them; yet though, they thought Job might go to
School to them, and was hardly worthy to carry their Books after them: We are
more aged then thy Father, Job 15. 8, 9
they tell him; yet God would hear him, not them; they must carry their
Sacrifices after Job. They could speak better and Job 42. 8
more plausibly, he could pray better and more holily. The Pharisee was the man
of Luke 18. 14
parts and no Grace, the Publican of Grace but no parts, yet he justified, the
other condemned.

Object. 5. I have no grace because no comfort.

Answ. Grace and Peace are Sisters, but not Twins; Grace and Duty are the Seed,
Joy and Comfort the Harvest. There must be a patient waiting between sowing in
Righteousness, and reaping in Mercy. As there is much unsound joy where Grace
never was, so there may be much sound Grace where never yet was much of
spiritual Joy.

Obj. 6. Can there be any grace, any faith, where so many fears and troubles?

Ans. These argue Conscience is awake, and that thy sense not the danger is
greater. One sees his house on fire, he leaps out of his bed, cries out, Fire,
fire, Water, water, Help, help with all his might; he toils, fears, sweats and
saves his house: Another comes dreaming out, and when he sees the fire flame
out at the house top* he tells his neighbor in his ear he fears there is some
danger, there needs a little water; his house is consumed while he looks on. Or
as in an house on fire, one is a sleep, you call him, he stirs not; you will
not say, how sweetly and soundly he sleeps, and dies sleeping, he sleeps the
sleep of death; another when called, rises, flies, leaps out of the flames.
The quiet conscience has the more peace, but the troubled has the more
safety. There is an Bona turbata, mala pacata.
evil quiet conscience (says Bernard) as well as an evil unquiet.

Obj. 7. But I am so sore tempted.

Answ. Satan sets not on an empty Vessel, brings not his Army to sit down
before a Cottage, or storm a Village, where neither resistance will be made,
nor Treasure can be had. But it is otherwise with thee; thou have something to
lose it seems; Satan desires to winnow the wheat, not the chaff: He tempted
Peter, and found him wheat; he filled Judas his heart, he is carried as chaff
driven by the wind; he finds Judas his heart empty, swept, garnished, he enters
with a whole Legion; he assaults Peter, makes a breach, thinks to storm the
Fort, he is repulsed. There the strong man finds a stronger then he keeping the
Castle, who resists and disarmes him. Saint James calls him Blessed, who
endures temptation: call not James 1. 12
thou him Blessed who endures not (but escapes) temptation. To tempt is
sinful, to be tempted is not so. The Tempter God Amat proditu^, odit proditorem
and proditionem.
hates and the Temptation, but the Tempted he loves.

Object. 8. But where is so much corruption as I find, what Grace can there be?

Answ. Grace and corruption are joined together in this our imperfect state, as
the Daniel 2
iron and the clay in the Image. They neither so mix as to agree, nor so
disagree as to be parted. This War is not like that of the house of Saul and
David, that ends after seven years; but like that between Rehoboam 1 Kings 14.
30
and Jeroboam, which continued all their days. Where the house is divided,
Christ never stays, but where the heart is thus divided he never departs. It
is a hopeful sign Grace has abounded where sin is more discovered; but it is
a certain sign Grace has abounded, where sin is lamented, resisted, abhorred.

There are many Diseases like the Plague or Leprosy which are not they. There
were three cases wherein the party suspected of the Leprosy was to be
pronounced clean.

1. He might have a foul scab, yet if it Lev. 13. 56
did not spread or increase, but stand at a stay, he was not unclean; it is but
a scab. There are sad spots which may be the spots of Gods people: but they
stand at a stay.

2. There was a case wherein if one had a perfect Leprosy that covered all his
flesh, yet if it turned white, he was pronounced clean, ver. 13.

3 If no raw flesh did appear, though he were covered with Leprosy, he was
also clean, otherwise not. Godly men may have been all covered with foul sins
before Conversion, but they are turued white by Repentance: They fall after
Conversion into some gross sin; it is a scab, it spreads not: Or they are
covered with a world of infirmities, but there is no raw or proud flesh to be
seen; these are clean.

There are three things I have always judged hard to define.

1. How far an Hypocrite may go in a way of Duty, profession, and in that is
good, and yet perish.

2 How far a child of God may go in a way of sin, and yet be safe.

3 How low a child of God may fall in point of Grace, yet be safe. The maximum
quod sic of an Hypocrite, and the minimum quod sic of a Saint, are hard to
determine.

If you look upon the Apostle in the seventh to the Romans; you may see to what
sins a renewed Christian is subject, yet do they not destroy Sanctification,
nor in the least prejudice Justification, or prevent Salvation. Though such a
one look upon himself in such case as carnal, The Law is spiritual, I am
carnal. (Denominatione sumpta a potentiori part.) There is much of the old
Moon we say oftentimes, seen in the new changed Moon; and too much of the old
man in the new heart. Eight sins there you find which may stand with true (not
perfect) Sanctification: Perfect (if not certain) Justification; Certain and
assured Salvation.

1 The sin that a poor soul is sold under, Romans 7. 14 Ephesians 4. 19 Romans 6
ver. 14. The wicked sells himself to work wickedness, as Ahab; or gives
himself over, or yields himself servant to unrighteousness. The godly is
passive only, not consenting. Sold by an unnatural father, as Joseph by his
brethren; Samson by his wife in his bosom: He was bought and sold between the
Dalilah in his bosom within, and the Philistims at the door. She could not have
hurt him without their force, nor their force without her Treason. So is the
soul betrayed by Corruption to Temptation, and by Temptation to Corruption.
When Corruption stirs within, if Temptation be kept off, there is less hurt
done; when Temptation comes on, if Corruption be kept in, there is no hurt at
all; but when a poor soul comes into this (...), where these two Seas meet,
Acts 27. 41
there is a miserable shipwreck, yet upon the broken planks of repentance and a
broken heart he comes safe to Land.

2 Sin not known is not the sin unto death, ver. 15. What I do, I allow not,
(...), I know not; viz. with approbation. Sin approved, known, consented to, is
that which destroys. The Law did appoint Sacrifices to take away sins of
ignorance, none for him Numb. 25. 30 Hebr. 10, 26
that did sin presumptuously. If we sin wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice for sin.

3 Where the sin is hated, the sinner is loved. What I hate, that I do. No
wicked man hates sin, he may leave, but not loath it; he may fear or forbear,
he cannot hate sin. Where sin is loathed, the person is loved; Ezekiel 36. 31
where sin loved, the person loathed. All the godly loath sin, and themselves
for it.

4 Where sin is disclaimed (not excused or defended, but) protested against,
that sin damns not. It is not I, ver. 17. and 20. h. e. not my whole I, not my
better I: for I consent to the Law that forbids it. I join not Verse 16
with sin against the Law, but with the Law against my sin. I delight in the
Law as touching Verse 22
my inner man. The Law and I are all one, but sin and I are two. With the
wicked it is otherwise; they delight in sin in the inner man, dislike the Law;
they wish there were no Law, the godly wish there were no sin.

5 Sin only remaining damnes not, sin Romans 7. 17
reigning is the damning sin: Not I, but sin that dwells in me. Sin dwells in
the godly, but reigns only in the wicked, To the one it i^ as a busy mate, or
troublesome inmate, that cannot be got out of doors, which is a continual
dropping, and causes continual disquiet and wrangling. To the other, sin is in
the Throne, or in quiet possession, as Master in Exodus 17
the house. The Amalakites and Israelites are together in the Valley fighting,
sometime the one, sometimes the other prevailing. God left the Canaanites to try
his people, and to learn them War. He would not destroy them totally, that the
wild Beasts should not Deuteronomy. 7. 22
rise up against his people. Better a thorn in the flesh, and a Messenger of
Satan buffetting thee to keep thee humble, then a revelation, and a rapture
into heaven to puff thee 2 Cor. 12. 7
up.

6 Sin mourned under never damnes, but gloried in ever damnes. Oh wretched man
that I am, says the godly soul. Pain could never make Paul cry Oh, nor
miserable that I am, who shall deliver this body from death * But Oh wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver this soul from this body of death! He that
could glory in all infirmities and distresses, 2 Cor. 11. 30 12. 19
could not glory but mourn under sin.

7. Sin resisted, though it overpower the soul and prevail at present, leading
into captivity, damns not. I find a Law in my members Verse 23
warring against the law of my mind, and leading me into captivity, into the
law of sin. Samson was a Captive to the Philistims, but his heart was the same,
he hated them as much, waited and prayed for new strength to be revenged, and
dyed in the quarrel. The Christian Combat is like that of Joab, a hard charge,
the battle before and behind; 2 Samuel 10. ^
and we herein in the same distress that the old Britains when the Romans had
drawn oway their Forces to protect them against the Picts, they sent to Aetius
the Prefect, crying out, The barbarous enemy beats us to the Sea, and the Sea
beats us back to the enemy, between these two kinds of deaths, we are either
murdered or drowned. The Christian is often in like extremities; the fear,
pit, and Isai. 24. 17, 18 Amos 5. 19 2 Peter 2. 20
snare are before him; the Lion, Bear and Serpent. He no sooner escapes the
fear of the worlds pollution, but he falls into the snare of Satan's Temptation;
and if he escape that, he falls into the pit of bosom corruption. Between these
two he is like to be either murdered or drowned. Or as Amos has it. He that
flies from the devouring Lion, the worlds raging persecution, meets with a
more savage Bear, Satan's devouring Temptation; and flying both, is in his own
house bitten by the Serpent in the wall. Between Corruption and Temptation he
is hard put to it, often foiled and captived, yet fetched off safe at last. Here
is nothing but death before him, yet death without damnation. One while he
says, sin betrayed and deceived me, and thereby Romans 7. 11 and 7. 9 and 6. 11
slew me: another time says, sin revived, temptation revived, and I dyed. Yet
all this dying is but the dying to sin, and the death of sin, not that death in
sin.

8 Where sin is as death, it brings not death. It is mortuum, not mortiferum:
Where sin lives the soul must dye. If Agag be spared, Saul shall not be spared.
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death!

I may add a few other Notes from other Scriptures.

1 Sin whereby the heart is broken hinders not Salvation, but sin whereby the
heart is hardened. Pharaoh and Magus had hearts hardened by sin, Peter's was
broken with his.

2 Sin fallen into when one is overtaken, damns not, sin continued in is that
which damns. David fell, Saul and Jeroboam lay in their sin.

3 Sins of infirmity and inadvertency Genesis 9. 21.
damn not; such was Noah's. Sins of deliberation destroy Salvation. There was a
City of Refuge for him that slew a man unwittingly, and a pardon of course, but
wilful Deuteronomy. 19. 4, 11
Murder had no benefit of Sanctuary. Christ will be no City of Refuge to him
whose presumption of pardon is his provocation to sin.

4 Sin against resolution destroys not Salvation, Such was Peter's denial of
his Master, into which he fell through too much fear; sin resolved upon damnes:
Such was Judas his betraying his Master, which he had long plotted, and had
watched for an opportunity to effect.

5 Sin confessed and discovered, is ever covered and remitted: sin covered and
concealed Proverbs 28 1 John 1
shall be proclaimed on the house top. He that hides his sin shall not
prosper; He that confesses and forsakes, finds mercy.

6 Sin repented of never damns; sin not repented of ever damns. Take the two
thieves for an example: the one dyed in the presence of a Savior, his
impenitency made him incapable of Salvation: the other, though in the same
condemnation, saved by means of his true, though late repentance. But upon
this occasion of this rare (indeed sole) example of the Thief on the Cross, we
may use that Proverb, Many talk of Robin Hood who never shot in his bow; so
many speak of the Thief on the Cross, who do nothing like him. He confessed
Christ among enemies, these deny, revile him among his friends. He believed in
him, prayed to him, relied on him; these do none of these. How much grace did
appear in that man in so little a time! 1. Zeal for God, he rebuked the profane
Thief. 2. Charity to man whom he would reclaim, Do not thou yet fear God,
being in this condemnation? as if he should say, Cast not away thy soul, there
is yet hope or possibility of Salvation. 3. His repentanee manifested in that
self-condemning and God* justifying expression, We suffer justly. 4. His Faith
in Christ* whom he justified, when the world condemned him, He has done
nothing amiss. 5. His Prayer of faith, Lord remember me when thou come into
thy Kigdom. Verily there was not found so much faith in all Israel, no not
among all the Apostles who forsook him and fled. I may call his faith, a faith
of Miracles, as well as his Conversion a miraculous Conversion.

7 Sin forsaken never, sin not forsaken ever damns. When Manasseh and the
Prodigal returned, they found the gate of Mercy open to entertain them. Cast
away your Transgressions, and you shall not be cast away. Electio aut dilectio
peccati reprobatio peccatoris. It is that Reprobate sin, that reprobates
souls. But sin reprobated and rejected, the soul is elected and beloved.

But to return from this Digression, we shall proceed to a fourth Point.

CHAP. XXI. That Christ shall certainly and timely arise upon all such as fear
his Name.
TO you that fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise.]

Having spoken of Christ apart, that he is the Sun of Righteousness, and of the
godly apart, that they are such as fear his Name; We will now bring them
together, (and they are best when together) Christ and they that fear his Name.

Doct. What ever the present condition and apprehension of such as fear Gods
Name may be, there shall be a day when Christ shall rise upon them.

They shall come out of the cold shade into the warm Sun, and out of all their
darkness into his mavelous light. To the upright arises light in darkness,
says David. They Psalm 112. 4 Isaiah 60. 1
shall hear that voice, Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee.

To speak the least, all the godly shall before they taste of death see this
Promise fulfilled, and see the Kingdom of God come into them with power; or
when they have tasted of death, they shall enter with power into the Kingdom of
God, Mark 9. 1. where our Savior implies, 1 That the godly do but taste or sip
of deaths cup. It is a bitter potion to the wicked who drink the dregs. Christ
tasted of death himself, Heb. 2. 9. Wicked ones are said to die the death, the
godly to taste only; and Christ is their Taster, therefore they need not fear
it. 2. Nor shall they so much as taste neither till they have had a taste of
Heaven, the Kingdom of God coming with power. Saint John had Revel. 10. 9
honey in his mouth, before the gall in his belly. God will Antidote his
servants against the bitterness of death by his cordial Promise; and then death
tastes sweet, when heaven is tasted before.

This Promise does imply, 1. That such as belong to God, and have true grace, (
fear his name) may have small store of Peace and Comfort, no present sense and
taste of the love Isaiah 50. 10
of God, but walk long in darkness, seeing no light at all.

2 That as their condition is sad, their apprehension may be sadder, having
nothing but fears, dreadful fears of the Name of God.

3 Or that they may after a short winter day have a long night, without Sun and
Stars a long time, as Paul's company in their tedious Sea Voyage. They may cry
out with many a longing wish for day, and say with Job 29. 2. 3
Job, Oh that it were with me as in times past, when the candle of God shined
upon my head, when by his light I walked through darkness. The Lord is to some
of his people as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry but one Jer. 14. 8.
night. The Lord comes guest-wise, as the Angel to Manoahs wife, who after the
first apparition waited long for a second visit, and Judge. 13. 21.
having that, never had a third; her busband never had but one.

4. They may be long under sad desertions, Lam. 3. 17.
even to forget prosperity, and complain pro tempore, as if God dealt with
them as with Saul. I am sore distressed, and the Lord has 1 Samuel 28. 15
forsaken me, and answers me no more.

5. They may be also sick withal (which makes long nights seem much longer)
soulesick, their hearts fainting for the salvation of God, as David complained,
saying, when Ps. 119. 81, 82
will thou comfort me. What need of this sunrising with healing else?

6. They may be also ready to sink under the weight of their own guilt, and
Gods displeasure. What need of a Sun of Righteousness else?

7. Yet suppose all this, and what more you can, Christ shall arise to purpose
on these poor souls as the Sun in his strength, dispelling darkness (as a
cloud) dispersing righteousness (as beams of light) curing all the soul
distempers with his healing virtue.

1. The reason hereof is partly from somewhat Reas. 1.
in God. 2. Partly from somewhat in themselves. 1. On Gods part. 1. His Power
gives the first hope of it. He can say, Let he re be light, and there shall be
light. He who at first commanded light to shine out of darkness, can cause
his mavelous light 2 Cor. 4.
to shine on those who sit in darkness.

2. His power gives hope, but his promise (this promise here and many others)
makes it certain. When God created the first light, there was only power and
will set a work, there had been no Promise; here is a promise: Gods power makes
things possible* his promise, things certain. It was only possible there
should be these heavens and this earth before Creation; there was no promise.
But it is certain there shall be a new heaven 2 Pet. 3. 13.
and new earth, because we according to his promise expect it. It was possible
that Christ might come to dissolve the works of Satan when Adam fell. But is
certain Christ shall come to them that fear him; Here is his promise.

3. His Love backs his promise, as that his Psalm. 19.
power. He that is for Power a Giant, and for his promise and engagement
Sponsor, is for his love as a Bridegroom and Spouse to his Church, whom he
has betrothed to himself in loving kindness, righteousness, mercies Hos. 2.
19. 20.
and faithfulness.

4. His glory engages all the former. There is never more glory given to God
then when he makes good this promise. Great rejoicing there is when she who
has been long barren, has conceived, as Sarah, Hannah. When he who has been
long in captivity is enlarged, as Joseph; when the exile is returned, when the
blind come to see. The privation or want of the mercy sets the higher price
upon it when it comes. The desire attained is a tree of life. Here the greatest
Prove. 13. 12.
joy. Sing Oh barren, thou that did not bear, Isai. 54. 1.
break forth into singing, and cry aloud thou that did not travel with child*
Sharon breaks forth into singing, and Lebanon claps his hands, and all the
birds of the wood, and beasts of the field sing and leap for joy. The earth
puts on her new clothes to entertain the welcome sun.

2. Partly, from somewhat in them. 1. Their prayers raise this sun (as the
Prince of darkness is raised by magic spells, and cursed imprecations,) Christ
is raised by invocation. Thus the Disciples made the Sunrise before day, to
still the tempest. What the Poets fained of the Moons coming down to Endymion,
may be spiritually verified of Christ. This Sun of righteousness often comes
down to embrace such as fear him, and call him down by prayer.

2. Because of their miseries. In all their Isai. 63. 9. Psalm. 12. 5. Isai. 57.
18. Ezekiel. 16. 6.
spiritual affliction, he is afflicted, and because of the sighing of the
afflicted, he says, I will up, I will rise and shine upon him; I have looked
upon him, and see him in his blood, I will heal him, and say unto him, live.

3. Their prayers move him much, their miseries more. But their grace make his
bowels to role, and his repentings kindled within him. I have heard him
bemoaning himself, I will surely have mercy on him: I Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20.
have spoken against, but I will now remember him. Repentance is such a grace
as overcomes Gods displeasure; holy fear gains his favor; faith gets his
heart; humility gets what grace it would have; he that resists the proud, and
departs from the ungodly, He looks Job 33. 27.
upon man, and if any say, I have sinned and perverted that which is right, and
it profited me not, He will deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his
life shall see the light. So that we may say, Light is sown for the righteous,
Psalm. 97. 11.
and joy for the upright in heart: sown in these two fields, 1. Of Gods
eternal decree, in his power, promise, grace and love: These are the upper
springs. 2. In the field of their graces, and holy duties, these are the
nether springs, both which fall into one river, and make glad the City of God,
both these fields yield a plentiful harvest of comfort to the godly.

Quest. But here the godly soul is often troubled and says, when shall this
promise be Ezekiel. 12. 27
fulfilled? this vision is for many days to come. When will this Sun arise?

Answ. Though the Sun keep a certain hour of his arising known to all, yet
of this day and hour knows no man, when this Sun of righteousness will
arise. The operation and course of nature is much alike. The dispensations of
grace and peace are various and more different then any other actings of God,
therefore nothing can be set down certainly as a constant rule.

There are four notable days of the coming of Christ, two in this life, two
after, all alike unknown. 1. When Christ will come with his fan in his hand,
refiners fire, and fullers soap, at conversion to purify an elect unconverted.
2. When with healing under his wings, to cheer and satisfy the Elect
converted, yet unsatisfied soul. 3. The third great and notable day of the
Lord is at death, when he comes as a Bridegroom, his reward with him to make
perfect the elect converted, comforted soul; yet never perfected. And the
fourth is the greatest of all when he comes in the clouds to render to all
according to their deeds. None of these four days of the Lord are like the
Lords day which is known and kept by all alike, and we know that after every
six days another will certainly follow; but as the thief by night, or the
lightning (not Lu. 17, 24, 25 27
the sun) by day, come suddenly, unexpected, or as the days of Noah and of Lot
were, so shall all these comings of the Son of man be. 1. Those days came but
once. 2. Came of a sudden. 3. Came to put a mighty difference between them and
others, yet had we not need be as the world was then, Eating, drinking,
sinning, singing, etc. but as Noah and Lot, fearing, waiting, praying,
preparing.

Samuel had the Sun breaking out in the morning, (he was called young) and it
shined all day to his old gray ^ayres.

Abraham had no sun, nor ^ight of heaven Genesis 12. 4. Genesis 15. 1, 12, 18.
^^il he was seventy five years old, and had a sad hour of darkness before
the covenant made. The Lord had said he would be a shield to him, before he
showed himself to be his Sun.

Job had a glorious morning Sun in his younger age. It was sadly overclouded at
Noon, but brake out again ere night. Solomon the like or more glorious morning
and noone, waded toward evening and set in a cloud.

Moses had frequent familiarity with God Number. 12. 7, 8.
as a friend, forty days entertained by him as his Ghest, and one day above
all the rest had into the banqueting house as his only favorite, he saw the
similitude of the Lord, heard his Name proclaimed, beheld his glory, and had
this superadded, I know thee by thy name, and thou have found favor in my
Exodus 33. 12.
sight.

Jacob was twenty whole years kept in suspense about his son Joseph, ere he
knew what was become of him, and full twenty years it was between his first
vision at Bethel; and that at Penuel, where he saw God face to face.

Thomas was but eight days under that Joh. 20. 26.
uncomfortable fit of incredulity, then full satisfaction. Manoahs wife had two
heavenly Judge. 13.
apparitions, not long between the one and the other, no more all her life.
Solomon had his two also. The Son of God bad only one transfiguration; and
twice that testimony, Luke 3. and Luke 9.
Thou art my Beloved Son: the rest of his life was all Humiliation. Heman and
Ethan happily never saw the sun of righteousness Psalm. 77. and 88.
shine out all their days, never got higher then faith of Adherence, yet dyed
in faith, not having received the promises.

But first, usually the Promise is made good when the Christian is
conscientiously attending on Gospel ordinances to meet God in his way: when we
wait to receive, God wayteth to bestow grace. 1. The Lords day is usually the
day of the Lord, the desired day Luke 17. 22 Revel. 1. 10
of the Son of man; on that day John being in the spirit had that communion
with Christ and the Revelation of so great mysteries. The Sabbath sanctified,
is also blissed. Isaiah 56. 7 Exodus 20. 24
The house of prayer is the place where God will make his people joyful, and
where God records his name in any place he will there meet and bless his
people. Upon Isaiah 4. 5
every dwelling place of mount Syon and upon her assemblies the Lord has
promised to creaete a cloud and smoke by day, and a pillar of fire by night,
for upon all the glory shall be a defense. Where was Christ to be found but
in the Temple? And when did he appear Luke 2. 46
to his Disciples but on the Lords day, one day after another? It is observed,
if there be Jo. 20. 19. 29
any wind at all stirring, it is about the Church, and if any breath of the
spirit, it is within the Church. Sometimes Christ sets Isaiah 57. 19
this fruit on the Preachers lips, and there you must gather it.

Sometimes (and as usually) in and after prayer; Cornelius had his, and Peter
his vision Acts 10.
when both at prayer; Christ had both those famous testimonies by audible voice
on the day of the holy Ghosts Transfiguration into a dove, and his own
Transfiguration Luke 3. 21. and 9 21
after, when at prayer. When did Jacob see the face of God, but when he wept
Hosea 12. 4
and made supplication?

Often at the Sacrament, when we set John 3. 33 Deuteronomy. 26. 17 18
to our seals, and avouch God for our God, he sets to his seal* and does avouch
us for his people. Christ at Baptism received that first testimony from the
Fathers mouth and the spirits descending upon him. And how many do we read of,
that have together with Acts 2. 48. 8 and 10. 37
the water Baptism received that also of the holy Ghost? So for that other
Sacrament, how many can say in experience, the Lord has been known to them in
breaking of bread, when not till then discovered? Abraham Luke 24. 35 and 32
Genesis 15
had the covenant first made and sealed at that first and notable Sacrament, or
Sacramental sacrifice so solemnly celebrated. When Hezekiah and his people
prepared themselves to a religious celebrating the 2 Chronicles. 30 19, 20, 27*
Passover, their prayer came up to heaven, God heard and healed his people.

Wait then upon God in the way of his own ordinances. And if thou know not yet
where Christ is to be found, go thy way Cant. 1. 8
forth by the foot steps of the flock, and feed thy kids besides the shepherds
tents.

2. Sometimes God reveals himself in an extraordinary manner, when we have
been seeking him in a more extraordinary manner: when Jacob was more
importunate then ever, had wrestled, and wept all night, he saw Gods face in
the morning. Genesis 32. 24


3. Often before some singular trial to be undergone, and some hard service to
be performed; Jacob had that laetificall vision Genesis 28 Genesis 37
at Bethel, when he was to enter on Labans hard service. Joseph had his divine
dream before he was sold, that he might have somewhat to live upon in his
hard bondage. Christ Jesus had that first Testimony Matthew. 3 and 4
before that first and great tentation of forty days. Moses and Gideon were
prepared and forearmed with several signs that they Exodus 4 Jud. 6 and 7
might not dread those difficult undertakings they were set upon; if we have
well provinder'd the horse over night, his Master reckons he may travel him the
farther next day. Expect some change of weather when thou see the Sun rising
early, and shining gloriously.

4. Often again after some great and sad trial. Jacob never so much afraid of
Esaus face, a little before he saw Gods face; and when he heard of Esau coming
with his Troops to cut him off, he saw Gods host encamping at Mahanaim to
secure him; after the Trumpet had sounded louder and louder in Sinai terrors,
Moses spoke, and the Lord answered; after the last and sorest throw the Exodus
19. 19
child is borne. And after the great thunderclap heaven is opened, and the
refreshing showers fall plentifully on the thirsty earth.

5. Often even when under the heat and brunt of sorest trials and conflicts.
Holy Steven standing before the Judge (who condemned Acts 7. 55, 56
him, and the people who shut their ears against his Apology) sees heaven open,
and his Savior standing up to absolve him in heaven, who was condemned on
earth; in the midst of the fiery furnace, the Son of Daniel 3. 25
God walked among those precious sons of men. Into the dungeon, where Paul and
Silas Acts 16, 25
were cast, the Sun arose, and shone out at midnight. The spirit of Glory and
of God never sits nearer, nor rests longer upon any 1 Pet. 4* 14
then upon Gods servants under their greatest sufferings.

6. Sometimes again after some singular act of a well tried obedience. After
that high acting of Abraham's faith and obedience in a ready offering of his
son, God could not hold, but speaks expressly, By Genesis 22. 16, 17
my self I have sworn, that in blessing I will bless thee. The like to Jacob
after he had sanctified his whole family, and had taken his Genesis 35. 9, 10,
14, 15
journey to Bethel, the Lord appeared more fully, and renewed the former
promise and covenant with him.

7. But if at none of these forenamed times, then usually a while before they
taste ^f death. The Sun breaks out when near ^^tting, and gives the sign of
the fair day Deuteronomy. 34. 1, 5
^f eternity following. Moses saw not Canaan but at Nebo, there saw and dyed.
Ste^^en saw heaven open at his death, never before; before he had been full of
faith, now of Assurance; before of Courage, now of Comfort; he had believed in
Christ before, ^ow he beholds him; he was a precious Saint before, now like
an Angel full of glory, from a lower heaven here on earth he ascendes to a
higher, from vision, he goes ^o fruition. Jesus Christ gave up the Ghost ^n
peace after that bloody agony in the garden, his bloody death on the Cross,
and after that double horror of darkness. The Sun withdrawing his natural,
and the Father his divine ^ight from his spirit, yet all ended well.

8. But if not then, nor before, then certainly immediately upon the
dissolution, then is this and all the other promises (not fulfilled in life)
perfectly accomplished, therefore Heb. 11. 13 Heb. 6. 12
we are said here on earth to embrace the promises, there to inherit them.
Here the child of God is heir of the promises, yet (as the great heir during
minority) has but a small part not the whole of his inheritance till he come to
full age. Death is the time to us when we come to that state.

There are many promises never actually and wholly fullfilled til death, then
are they all to the full. Manyare called [ Blessed ^ here, that are only so by
virtue of a promis^ to be fulfilled then. Blessed are the poor i^ spirit,
Blessed such as mourn, as hunger an^ thirst after righteousness. They have
the promise now, they have the blessedness, an^ the fruition of the promise
then. Now ju^ ad rem, then jus in re.

9. Lastly, after all, and above all, at the day of judgment. There shall be a
rising o^ the Sun, and a rising of the Saints: when thi^ Bridegroom shall put
on his glorious robe attended with ten thousands of his Saints the children of
the Bride-chamber, and shall be admired in all those that believe; he with 2
These. 1. 10 Revel. 7
his Crown on his head, they with their Palms in their hands. Then shall be
sai^ to all that fear his name, arise, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light; ^oh. 5. 14 Isaiah 60. 1
arise and shine, for thy light is come* The^ shall all fear cease, tears be
wiped away death and finne be svvallovved up in victory darkness and shadows
fly away. And the Lamb shall be the Sun, this Sun shining i^ his strength
never more to set to all eternity* Then shall the Sun be ashamed, and the
Moon confounded, when the Lord of Host^ shall reign in Mount Zion, and in the
New Isaiah 24. 23
Jerusalem, and before his Ancients gloriously.

1. This shows that the people of God Use 1.
may expect and meet with sad times here both for themselves, and for the
Church. They who can say, are there any comforts like my comforts? Shall there
be any joys like my joys? May at present say, Behold and see if there be any
sorrows like my sorrows? I am he who has seen affliction by the rod of Lam. 1.
12 Lam 3. 1, 2
his wrath. He has led me and brought me into darkness and not into light.

In the world tribulation is the Churches legacy, and first payment; In Christ
peace their last portion, and full payment.

2. Yet may the godly expect glorious times also (many are apt to dream of such
on earth, but that will not be til Christ's kingdom John 18. 36
is of this world, which never was yet.) There are two glorious times the godly
may expect. 1. On earth for their souls, when this glorious promise is
fulfilled, when this Sun of righteousness has risen on them with healing in
his wings. This is the most glorious day to be expected on earth. All Solomon's
glory nothing to this. The approach of God in those signal manifestations of
his presence to Number. 16. 19 and 42 Romans 9. 4
Isaael, is often called the glory of the Lord, and the greatest glory of his
people.

2. The other is in heaven; There are glorious times to be expected indeed,
when the Sun shall no more give light by day, nor the Moon by night, but the
Lord shall be thy Isai. 60. 19, 20
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory. These are the only glorious times
the Scripture speaks of. Therefore let the over-busie and earthy Disciple take
off his thoughts from Kingdoms, and the right hand, and Mat. 21. 21, 22
left hand in seats of glory. And think again of the old Cup and Baptism of
Christ, wherein the true professor may sooner become an Anabaptist then he is
aware. Baptized, not baptismo flaminis, but sanguinis, not flaminis, but
flammae, not with the holy Ghost, but with fire.

3. This informs us that the foundation of all true peace and comfort is laid
in Grace. The Sun of righteousness only rises on them that fear his Name,
Grace and Peace always joined, but Grace leads the way; unsound Peace may go
before or without Grace, true Peace never without, never before Grace.

The same seed brings forth the straw and corn too; the husk, chafe and
kernel grow together, but are often parted, not to their loss. The corn is
beaten out of the straw by threshing, the kernel from the chaff by winnowing,
yet are both the purer and more fit for use; Grace and Peace grow both upon one
stalk, yet may Grace be beaten out of Peace and remain pure.

4. What a mighty difference is there between the godly and the wicked, both
in their Sorrows and Comforts? Their Rock is not alike.

1. In sorrow there arises to the godly light in darkness, non dantur purae
tenebrae Psalm 112. 4
to him; in the wilderness he has in darkest night a Pillar of fire; when his
wine is gone, Christ can turn his water into better wine; when he is
distressed he is not deserted, when 2 Cor. 4. 8 and 6. 10
perplexed not in despair; as sorrowing but then most rejoicing; when having
nothing, then possessing all things, but the wicked in their distress are
forsaken of God as Saul was. They run up and down fretting, fuming, cursing
God and King, and all that come in their way, and when they look down on the
earth, behold nothing but trouble and darkness, and dimness of anguish, and
after all Isaiah 8. 21, 22
they are driven into darkness. He often runs mad Deuteronomy. 28. 34
for the sight of his eye, which he must, but cannot see, and for the sorrow of
heart, which he cannot, yet must endure. Job falls down, and blesses, Saul falls
down, and despaireth; Job 1. 20
Job falls, and lights on his knees, and takes no hurt; Saul falls, and the first
that 1 Samuel 28. 20
comes to ground was his head, and he is tataken up dead.

2. In their comforts there is a great difference. How often is the candle of the
wicked put out, and how often comes their destruction upon them? God
distributeth sorrows in his Job 21. 17
anger, says Job. And again, A dreadful Job 15. 21
sound is in his ears. In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him. The
wickeds joy is as a fire of thorns, or the childrens squibs which crack,
smoke, burst and dye; or as the flash of lightning vanishes as it shines, but
after it a terrible thunderclap; or at best as the candle, which if it be not
suddenly blown out, is shortly burnt out. The godly man's comfort is as the Sun,
whose light no winds can blow, no time can burn out; Job 31* 28
they look not upon your sun when it shines, They have a light as Paul had
shining about them, passing the brightness of the Sun; he cares not to eat of
your dainties, having Jo^. 4, 32
meat to eat the world knows not of.

1. His Sun is a rising, morning, lightincreasing Sun; yours an Evening,
setting Sun.

2. His Sun once risen, sets no more, but shines more and more to that
prefect day of eternity; yours once set, shall never rise more, but as Sodoms
Sun entered into a thick cloud, as soon as risen, and set in fire and brimstone.

3. The godly's Sun brings with it righteousness. The Joy of the Lord is the
strength Isaiah 64. 5
of their graces, they rejoice and work righteousness; their comforts are
chaste, pure and, heartpurifying. The joy of the hypocrite, is a polluting and
infective joy; they are bad at all times, worse in their merry fit. Then they
say to God, depart from us. They eat Job 21. 14
and drink, and curse God in their hearts. They feast and revel, and praise no
other God, but the Gods of gold, and silver, and wine, and wantonness, till the
handwriting on the wall make them leave off with horror.

4. The godly's comforts bring healing with them, make the soul more sound,
expel vanity, increase humility, advance piety, sti^ up to pray, beget
praises, exalt God.

But the delights of the wicked taints the soul, engender Diseases, as the
sultry heat and moisture in Summer is the mother of putrefaction.

5 The godlies comforts are healing again, bringing the soul into perfect good
constitution, removing the Disease. The wickeds increase and strengthen the
Diseases; his is as water in a Fever, which only cooles as it goes, but feeds
the Fever. The godly man's as wine to one in a languishing condition, which
cheeres the heart, and begets good spirits.

6 The comforts of the godly make them grow (they never shoot higher, and
thrive better, then when under or after those comforts.) They then are fat and
flourishing, Psalm 92. 14
grow up as fatted Calves in the Stall, that come on apace when well kept, are
lively, lightsome, and will be the sooner fit for the plough or pale.

But the comforts of the wicked make them grow as wild Bulls of Basan, more
brutish, hurtful, unruly. They grow fat as the heifer Jerem. 50. 11
at grass, and bellow as bulls that are shortly to be brought to the slaughter.

5 The last Use is, to encourage the people of God in their present sadness.
Let them expect, pray, wait, hope, and importune God to fulfill this Promise,
Shall they Jeremiah 8. 4
fall and not arise? Shall he turn away, and not return? Has God cast away his
people? No, God forbid, says the Apostle. Is the Romans 11. ^
Sun so set as to rise no more, has not the longest night his morning
following? Sit not still then in despondency. as the Egyptians under their
judgment of darkness, as men without hope, but up and pray as Jacob, till
break of day. Urge this Promise; come in when thou art full of fears, as
Bathsheba to David, Did not my Lord promise me so and so, and is it thy mind I
should be disappointed? Produce this Scripture, Are 1 Kings 1. 17, 18
not these thy own words; thy hand writing? whose Staff and Bracelet is this?
Or as David when he had that Promise, 2 Samuel 7. he came before God, and fell to
Prayer, his heart was full, his faith was strengthenned, his Joy increased, he
was full of great expectations, Therefore has thy servant found 2 Samuel 7. 25,
26, 27
in his heart to pray this prayer unto thee, because thou have revealed so much
in the ear of thy servant. So say thou to God, Lord, remember Psalm 119
thy Word unto thy servant, wherein thou have caused me to trust.

Say, Lord, I should never open my mouth to ask, if thou had not promised;
nor could I once hope if thou had not power; not should I desire, if it were
not for thy glory; nor could I mourn for it, if I did not fear thy Name. Lord,
look on thy Promise, my need, thy glory, and my fear. Chase away shadows, Come
my Beloved, and be like the Roe, o^ like the Heart on the Mountains of Spices*
The Roe can leap over the mountains, though I cannot get over Molehils; either
make Psalm 18. 33
my feet like Hinds feet, and set me upon my high places, or be thou as the
Roe. Lord Jesus, thou could come to Peter, and can Matthew 14. 25
to me walking upon the waters; I would to thee, but cannot; stretch out thy
hand of Love, when I cannot stretch out the hand Faith: Lord save me, I perish.
I cannot apprehend thee, do thou comprehend me. The child's little arms cannot
clasp about the Father, yet the fathers do emb^ace his child's nevertheless.

Oh Lord, I am shut up, I cannot come forth Psalm 88. 8
to thee, when doors are shut, but thou could come in to thy Disciples when
all doors were John 20
shut.

Thou have wings and can come swiftly, Psalm 70
make no tarrying, O my God. The Chariots of the Sun tarry not beyond the
appointed hour, Lord, Why are the wheels of thy Chariot so slow? If it be
paved with Cant. 3. 10
Love, O that it were driven or drawn by Love, that it might move more
swiftly. The Sun with his wings flies not only over Rocks and Mountains, but
over Seas and Lands Psalm 10. 1
without any labor. Why art thou so far Jeremiah 14. 8
off, O Lord, and stand as a mighty man astonished, that cannot save?

Lord, why is light given *to him that is in Job 3. 10
misery, if I may not see the light of thy countenance to lessen my misery? Why
do I behold the Sun, if I may not behold the Sun of Righteousness? How sad is
it to see day abroad, and night within, all light on earth all dark in Heaven!

Take away thy Sun rather then thy favor, my life rather then thy light, which
is better Psalm 63* 3 2 Samuel 14
then life. If I may not see the Kings face, any Exile had been better. If I
may not have Exodus 33.
thy presence, any wilderness is good enough to mourn in.

Thou have stricken me down, as thou did Acts 9
Saul, and I am stricken blind; but will thou neither thy self tell me what
thou would have me do, nor send some Ananias to me? Romans 11. 33
Thou have shut me up in unbelief, but wilt not thou open the Prison doors,
that the ransomed of the Lord may come forth with Isaiah 35. 10
joy on his head, that his sighing and mourning may flee away?

It was said of the worst of Tyrants, it can never be said of the God of
Mercies, This is he that opens not the house of his prisoners.

Isaiah 14. 17
Use those means forementioned, attend on preaching, prayer, reading,
meditations, godly society, holy conference, on Sabbaths, Sacrament days. Look
on thy fleece after thou have prayed, draw up thy net after thou have cast it
forth, stir up Faith, resign thy self, only limit not the Holy One for time,
way, means, and manner. The patient expectation of the poor Psalm 9. 18
shall not perish for ever, nor shall the long tarrying of God be prolonged for
ever. Though God never gives grace for the use of the means, he usually
gives it in the use of Means.

CHAP. XXII. Of Christ his healing the soul. Diseases of his People.
WIth healing under his wings.]

Doct. Christ the Sun of Righteousness will not only rise with light to dispel
darkness, but with healing to remove all the Spiritual Diseases of such as fear
God.

He is the great Physician of bodies as well as souls. He healed all manner
of sickness, Matthew. 4. 23 and 8. 16.
and every Disease among the people.

But this is to be understood of Spiritual Diseases. Christ is not a Natural,
but Spiritual Sun; has not Natural, but Spiritual wings, and gives Spiritual
health.

The people of God are as so many impotent persons lying by the pooles side,
attending on his Ordinances, in expectation of cure from Christ. And as the
Diseases of the body are many, not easily numbered, so those of the soul more.

One is troubled, as Peter's mother in Law Mark ^. 30* 3. 1
with a Fever, sometimes very cold, sometimes a hot fit, no even Temper.
Another has a withered hand, can by no means stretch it out to act Faith; a
third has an universal Palsy, which takes away the use of Mark 2. 4
all his limbs, can do nothing to help himself, but must be born on other men's
shoulders, and saved by the communion of Saints; another has by some great
fall broken his bones, as David, and he lies by it, full of Psalm 51
aches and complaints; another has a sore Luke 4. 18
rupture in his heart which much torments him; another a bloody issue of foul
corruption continually running; another sore wounded Luke 10. 30
by falling among Cutters and Robbers; another Luke 13. 11
has a spirit of infirmity, which bows him down to the ground, cannot lift up
himself to a heavenly conversation; another complains of barrenesse,
Ordinances have 2 Kings 2
no fruitful efficacy as to him, but like the unsavory waters: another of
bitterness, Exodus 15. 23
Ordinances seeming to be the savor of death to death (he fears) and causing
to miscarry, as those waters, 2 Kings 2. 19. Another sadly complains of an
universal Cachexia, Atrophy, and dislike, a sad Disease called, Non
proficiency, which is next door to a Consumption; of such the Text speaks, they
shall be healed, and then grow as the fatted Calves. Another again complains
he is not one Disease, but all Diseases, Isaiah 1. 6
from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot wounds, blaynes, putryfied
sores. Totum pro corpore vulnus. Christ will undertake the cure of all.

Many other Diseases there are incident to several Christians: But five
especially all the people of God are afflicted with.

1 They all alike partake of that morbus Ezekiel 16
naturae, described by the Prophet, borne children of wrath, brought into the
world naked, crying, defiled, lying in their blood, unable to help themselves,
incapable of help from creatures; these does Christ pity to see them dying, and
says Live, washes, annointeth, feeds, closes, nurseth, adorneth, at last
glorifieth them.

2. Besides this, all the godly are born blind, as he John 9. and are not like
many other Leonum and canum catuli, etc.
creatures whose young see not for certain days, but after that nature gives
them sight; but we should never see, if Christ did not anoint our eyes with
his eye salve.

3. After these two are cured, all the Elect complain yet of another, the most
dangerous disease in the world, whereof Pharaoh 1 Samuel 25. 37.
died without remedy, and Nabal without sense; the Stone, the Stone of the
heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26
worse then that in the rains or bladder, which Nature may expel, or Art may
cure, but nothing will help here but manus Christi: He quite takes away the
stone, and fills it up with flesh.

4 After he is cured of this, every child of God comes to be stricken and sick
of the Plague (the worst Disease) in his heart (the worst place) a painful,
killing, tormenting Disease, and besides infectious. The Plague infects the
breath, sweat, urine, cup, dish, so this plague of heart infects all our
duties, acts, desires, Sacramental Cup and Bread; Every one has his plague in
his heart, and 1 Kings 8. 38
when he sees it, and cries ^ut to Christ, he will cure it; This all the
Godly have, but it ripens, breaks, runs, and none dye of it. The wicked have
taken the like Infection, but it lies within them, never breaks to put them to
that pain, but they irrecoverably dye of it.

5 After this, there is another Disease still. whereto all the godly are
subject, the Falling sickness, ever since that foul fall of our Parents. As
Mephibosheth and his nurse 2 Samuel 4. 4
fell together, and he lame all his life after. We are subject to Relapses, and
new fits of Stone and of the Plague, subject to many stoppings, haltings, and
that which the Je^* ^. 12, 14. 22 Hosea 14* 4
Prophets c^l backslidings. These will Christ heal as well as the former.

These are the five ordinary Diseases of the Godly, but there are three
extraordinary, which befall some, not all; but Christ will cure them too.

1. To be sick of love. A sad Disease, (if Cant. 5* 6
I may call it a Disease) but a safe Disease: Morbus vitalis, as Luther called
a Godly Ministers sickness. Many complain of it, none dye of it. There be two
sicknesses that are the sicknesses only of Saints.

1. To be sick of love to Christ. This is no Disease, but the best Constitution.

2 To be sick of sin, that sin revives, and Romans 7. 9 Eccles. 7. 26
we dye. Such are safe, they shall find Gods savor sweeter then life, who find
sin to them more bitter then death.

But there are two Diseases opposite to these which are killing.

1 To be Love sick to the Creature; Amnons 2 Samuel 13
sickness cost him his life; love of the Romans 8. 6
world ( earths sickness) kills all, to be carnal minded is death. 1 John 2, 15


2 To be sin sick, not of it, but for it, Ahabs, Amnons, Absaloms, Hamans
Disease. This Hells sickness, and the Damned have no worse.

2. There is a worse Disease then that former; to be Serpent stung,
Satan-bitten, Hellbeaten, buffeted, wounded with fiery darts, terrified with
Satan's rage and foul accusations: and more, vexed with his ugly and odious
representations, accusing God to us, as he did to our Parents, soliciting to
the perpetrating of most abhorred acts, as he did our Savior, injecting
blasphemous thoughts, disputing and arguing thee into distrust, darkness,
disuse of means, solitariness, despondency, yea, to utter despair. Yet thus
are the Israel of God stung Numbere 2^ 1 John 3. 8 Acts 10. 38 (...) *^. wholly
subjugated, subdued, and under the power of the (...). P. 8^. 7, 14* 16
with fiery Serpents, and by the brazen Serpent cured. Christ came to dissolve
the works of Satan, and heals those who were oppressed by the devil.

3 A worse Disease then both those, is to be stricken of God, to have his face
hid from us, and his indigration lying on the soul; his fierce wrath going over
us, and his ^err^rs cutting us off. How does the soul take on when this
scorching Sun, and scalding East wind beats upon the naked soul? The poison of
these arrows drink up the spirits. Who Job 6 Ps. 90. 11
knows the terror of the Lord, or the Power of his wrath? None can express
it, not the Damned that feel it: none can conceive it; but they who have lain
under it. The rack Stone, Gout, Child birth pains nothing to this. The wounded
spirit who can bear? Job Prove. 18 14 Job 6. 2, 3, 4
speaking of this, said, if his grief were weighed and put in the balances, it
would be heavier then the sands of the Sea, therefore my words are swallowed
up, (he had not words to express it) for the arrows of the Almighty are within
me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirit. The terrors of God set themselves
in array against me. Job had patience to bear much, Job had not patience enough
to bear this, but cried out. This is the saddest Disease in the world, and is
next door to hell, yet Christ recovereth these also.

These three last Diseases are Opprobria Medicorum, and Theologorum, not
opprobria Christi. Christ gives ease, and cures all these.

Reas. 1. He is the great Physician, whose curing virtue and Office is set out
by those many Resemblances in Scripture. 1. He is Numbers 21
the Brazen Serpent, upon which they that were stung with fiery Serpents were
to look, and were cured. 2. He the Samaritan, who Luke 10 30, 31
when the Priest ( Aaron with all his Sacrfices,) and the Levite ( Moses with
all Legal works of Righteousness) passed by and looked upon, unable to help,
took pity on the wounded Traveller, bound up his wounds, and took care for his
cure, and undertaketh to defray all charges. 3. He Rev. 22. 2
the Tree of Life, whose fruit is our meat to feed to everlasting life, whose
leaves our Medicine to prevent everlasting death. 4. He the good Shepherd, who
takes care of the whole flock of God, Seeking that which Ezekiel 34 16
was lost, bringing again that which was driven away, binding up that which was
broken, and strengthening that which was sick. And lastly, He the Sun (
Phoebus) God of Physic: The Sun is the universal Physician of the inferior
world, curing the Diseases and Distempers of the year, earth, air, and
creatures. The vernal Sun dries up the Ayrie Distillations, drives away the
earths cold, heals barrenness, cures Rheumes, Catarrhs, Agues, and other
cold diseases in man's body. How many graves does our Autumn Sun departing, dig?
And how many new births and resurrections does the March and May Sun produce?
Christ is this Sun to the soul.

Reas. 2. The Commission given him by the Father upon this his undertaking
enableth and obliges him to this Charge. The Commission was sealed, Isa. 61.
1, 2. and openly read, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me because he
has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken hearted,
to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to
set at liberty them that are bruised. As therefore the Disciples substituted
and subcommissioned by him to do some part of this work Ministerially, were
enabled and assisted to heal all Diseases, cleanse Lepers, raise dead, cast
Mark 6, 13
out Devils; much more Christ who received the Original commission from the
hands of his Father.

Reas. 3. His own disposition inclines him, as much as his Office or Commission
betrusts him: He is the compassionate Samaritan; the merciful High Priest. How
often is it said in the Gospel? He was moved with compassion and healed the
sick. He took our sicknesses, and bare our infirmities: Bare Matthew. 8. 17
them in his body by his Passion, bare them in his soul by compassion.
Bajulavit, Bare them as a Porter the burden which was too heavy for us to bear.
Christ is in his Office and Element when among languishing souls; where should
the Physician be, but among the sick? Christ's Church is the Pool, the proper
Receptacle and Rendezvous of impotent persons. Christ's Church is an Hospital,
Nosocomion, the Spittle or College for the Diseased. Moses Law excluded the
Leprous 2 Kings 5 2 Chro. 26. ^0.
out of the Camp; Gehazi went out from Elisha's presence; Uzziah was driven out
of the Temple when the Leprosy appeared: but Christ brings them into the
Camp into the Church. David banished the blind 2 Samuel 5. 8
and lame out of his City; Christ sends for the lame, blind, and halt, and
sets them Luke 14* ^^
at his table.

Quest. What does this healing imply?

Resp. 1. That Christ will ease the grief, heal the sore, as Physicians or
Chiturgians do in bodily Diseases.

2. Purge out the peccant humors, and draw out the corruption.

3 When one is healed, the decumbent is revived, cheered, raised up; so those
whom Christ does heal shall say now, I am Isaiah 33. 24
not sick, the Lord has forgiven my iniquity.

4 When one is healed, he has strength in the weak part, and use of the
disabled part; he can labor, travel, etc, David after his broken bones were set
again, could pray, praise God, believe, resist sin, perform any Duty, as well
as ever he could in all his life.

5 Then the danger of death is over; no danger to them that fear his name;
Christ has undertaken your cure, and yet never Patient dyed under his hand.

6 When one is healed, he is restored to his perfect health to be as well as
ever he was; yea, some are made more healthful by Physic then ever they were
before. Christ, whom he heals, makes to be as well as before they fell ill;
yes, in as good condition (for safety) as Adam before his fall; and in a better
(for Glory) then could have been if Adam had not sinned. Adams sin cast us out
of Paradise; Christ lets us into Heaven. Adams sin drove him from the Typical,
Christ has brought us to the Celestial tree of Life. Therefore this Sanitas is
vera salus, Health and Salvation, or saving health. And Christ is not only
(...), but (...). And as the Prophet joined them in his Prayer, so Christ in
his Promise, Heal me, and I shall be healed; Jer. 17. 14
save me, and I shall be saved.

Qu. 2. What are the means Christ uses in this healing?

Answ. Four especially.

1 His Word. He sends his word and Psalm 107. 20.
heals them. He sends it, and the Minister is he that brings it. I create the
fruit of the Isaiah 57. 20
lips peace, and I will heal him. The waters issuing out of the Sanctuary are
healing waters, Ezekiel. 47. 9
and the Sabbath day was often the day of Cures. The good word of a man makes the
Luke 13. Joh. 5 Proverb 12. 25
bones fat, and cheeres a drooping spirit: How forcible is the good Word of God
then!

2. His blood: By his stripes are we healed, every blow given Christ was a blow
to Isaiah 53 1 Peter 2. 24
our sin, every wound of Christ was health to our souls. The blood of Christ,
who through Hebrews 9. 14
the eternal Spirit offered himself to God, is only that which can ease the
troubled, purge the defiled, and heal the wounded conscience. Christ's spittle
could cure the blind, his touch Mark 8. 23
open the ears and mouth of the dumb and deaf, his word could send home health
to Mark 7. 33 Matthew. 8. 13 9. 20
the Centurions servant, his very garment stop an Issue of blood, but only a
plaster of his blood can heal a broken heart, purge out old festered sores,
and allay the Inflammations of the soul. This is present remedy against the
venomous stings of Satan's rage, and the poisoned Arrows of Gods wrath.

It is not thy tears, if thou should weep out thine eyes, nor thy blood, if
thou could bleed out thy heart, can heal thee: but this blood perfectly
cleanses us from all sin, (all without exception.) It is Sovereign against 1
John 1 7
all sores, sins, blasphemies, fear, despair it self. If Ahab and Saul, yea, if
Cain and Judas had gone to this blood, they had been saved. He whose sins are
as Scarlet, shall become (being washed in this fountain) as white as Snow. He
that has a bloody Issue of bloody crying Crimes ( David's bloody Issue or
Manassehs) the blackest Malefactor; he that has a bloody flux of Oaths or
Blasphemies, may be healed and saved, ( Paul's bloody flux of Blasphemy and
Persecution.)

Many Diseases are Opprobria Medici, none Christi. Many sinners are dangerously
sick, none can be desperately that he takes in hand The Devils case is
desperate, man's not There is an impossibility they should be saved, but a
possibility of every man's (even the vilest sinner) but a certainty of the
Salvation of all that fear his name.

3 The Spirit of Christ. This is the oil the Samaritan applied to the wounded
man, the former was the wine. Christ with his blood washes the sore, then with
his Spirit softeneth, suppleth, closes the wound. Justification and
Sanctification are of an even length: to whom one, to him both belong, That is
Purgative, this Restorative; that expels old ill humors, this breeds new
spirits.

4 His love and favor. In his favor is Psalm 30. 5
life, health, Salvation. This is Christ's extreme unction which he uses; after
this the soul is ready and willing to depart. The lovesick soul is only curable
by the love of Christ shed abroad into the heart. This healing is under the
wings of Christ: a Metaphor taken from birds, who cherish their young under
their wings. It is the nearer approaches and warmer embraces of Christ that are
our health. David calls The help of Gods countenance, Psalm. 42. 5. the health
of his own countenance* ver. 9. The sick child is half cured by lying in his
Mothers bed and bosom. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort
Isaiah 66. 13
thee, and thou shall be comforted, says the Lord to his afflicted people.

Christ is said to have wings for four Reasons.

1. The wings are to cover. The Cherubims with their wings covered their
bodies. Christ's are covering ( sin covering) wings.

2 The dams wings with their warmth recover the drooping young. Christ's are
sincovering, but soul-recovering wings.

3 The wings are used to secure the young. The Eagle carries her young upon her
wings, she ^eareth nothing above, but only from Deuteronomy. 32. 1^
below, and it must pie^ce her first, if hurt her young. The hen hides her
chickens under her wings, nothing from below hurts them, but the Kites above.
How safe are Matthew. 23. 37
the Godly whom Christ does secure both ways? bears them on his wings, as
the Eagle; hides them under his wings as the Hen; that whether Satan above
strike at the chicken, or the world below shoot at the young Eagle, both are
safe; and Christ must be first wounded ere we are hurt.

4. The wings are given to hasten the flight, and speed the way. Christ is said
to have wings, to show when he comes how speedily he will come, and will not
tarry; therefore is he for strength called a Giant; he travelleth in his
strength, mighty to save: Isaiah 63. 1 Canticles 8
for his expedition likened to the Roe, that is the swiftest Creature of foot;
and yet for more swiftness, to the winged foul whose motion is swifter then
the Roes: He is said to ride upon the Horses and Chariots of Salvation; Hab. 3.
8
yea, for more swiftness yet, he is said to ride upon Cherubims, or the wings
Psalm 18 Luke 17. 24
of the wind; yet swifter his pace is as the lightning.

Quest. But there is a sad and serious Question to be answered If Christ have
promised to come with healing, how is it that many fearing God remain uncured?

Ans. 1. It may be they are not healed, and then it is their sin.

2. It may be they are cured, and then it is their Error.

1. It may be they are not cured, and then it is their sin.

1 They go not to this Physician. They go from Doctor to Doctor, and from Duty
to Duty, as she that spent all on Physicians, Mark 5. 26
and came to Christ in the last place. These are not better, but worse by
Duties. The Silkworm spends the first part of her life in eating and sleeping;
the latter in working; and dies in working out of her own bowels, Our last is
not better then our first, if we are changed only from an idle to an operative
(not believing) life, and from neglect of Duties go no further then to a
performing and resting in Duties.

2 They go not to this Physician that they John 5. 40
may have life; but (may be) think they may wear it out, by strength of nature,
or Psalm 32
power of Grace. David thought once to get his peace, by holding his peace and
keeping silence, but it would not be. And a godly soul sometimes gives over by
too much contentedness and despondency, and says, Woe is me for my hurt, my
wound is Ser. 10. 19
grievous; but I said, Truly this is a grief* and I must bear it: Must bear it!
as if no remedy but patience. But is there no Balm in Gilead for a wounded
soul? is there no Physician there with healing in his Jer. 8. 2^.
wings?

3 They do not believe Christ able, ready, self-sufficient; therefore Christ
did not cure Matthew. 13. 5^
some because of unbelief.

4. They think to lick themselves whole by duties and endeavors. They repent,
mourn, watch, fast afflict themselves mingling Christ's blood with their own.
It is as if a person infected with the Pestilence should think to heal himself
by his spittle, breath, urine, licking his sores. All these are infected; it
must be somewhat without Luke 7. 38
him. Our tears of love may wash Christ's feet, not our own though tears of
greatest Repentance; only Christ's water washed the Disciples feet, and his
blood all our hearts.

We are as Naaman 2 Kin. 5. Magis honorificum est habere aliquid ex merito quam
ex donatione sola. Bellarm. Nobiliu^ est aliquid habere ^ se, and per se, quam
ab alio and per alium. Durand. Ab^it ut justi vitam aeternam ut pauper
eleemosynam expectarent; multo namque gloriosius est, ipsos quasi victores and
triumphatores eam possider^ ^anquam palmam suis sudoribus debitam. Tapper.
, who would not receive health upon so easy terms, Wash and be clean; he
could not believe it: He would have undergone it rather if the Prophet had
required some harder service. Herein we are too much of affinity with that
Popish Doctrine, who are not willing to give the whole glory of our Salvation
to Christ and free Grace, but think it too much for Christ to give all, and too
little for them to take all of grace, free gift, without any consideration of
congruity, if not condignity of merit.

5. Or they neglect the rules and Physic prescribed, as too strong, too
stirring, and too much weakening nature. Psalm. 32. 3. David laid by Confession,
Humiliation, Mortification, and such strong purging Physic, as not necessary
for a person once justified. He thought a while, that once come to faith, and
past repentance, (a justified person might after so foul acts as comfortably
apply the Promise, as confidently make prayers, as if he had never sinned) What
need pardon be asked for a person once beloved? But he was taught another
lesson ere he regained true peace. Nathan was sent to lance and cut such a ripe
Impostume, and to apply sharp Corrosi^es to take down such proud flesh. The
Apostle tells us in such a case, there must be mortifying Physic taken; we
Colossians 3. 5
must kill sin, or it, will kill us: Mortify your earthly members; mortify
the deeds of the body, and live. There must be crucifying Galatians 5. 24
the flesh: now how much a do is there to get sin to the Cross! There must be
cutting off of a rotten member, and how paineful that!

Answ. 2. They are cured, and it is their mistake to think they are not. For,

1 They expect a perfect cure, but that is not here. Christ has two Hospitals,
one in heaven of such as are perfectly cured; another in earth for such as are
under cure.

2 One may be said to be healed, who is at ease to what he was, and when the
danger of death is over, although he be not yet (...), every whit whole. Israel
was John 7. 23
delivered when by Moses brought out of Egypt, although not yet settled in
Canaan. Thy case is good to such as lie still in their blood, dead in
trespasses and sins. The blind man was much better then before, when upon the
first touch of Christ he saw men as trees walking; the second touch of Christ
Mark 8. 22, 23
made him see clearly. The first touch of Christ gives a dim sight of faith;
the second touch at death, gives the clear sight of vision.

3 He is in a way of cure who complain more of his sickness and pains, which
he felt less when he was in more danger. When the Plague sores break and run,
it is more painful and noisome then in those who dye of it. What does thy
mourning for sin, and resisting of it imply, but thou art alive from Romans 6.
13
the dead. God sees it meet to keep us humble; therefore after greatest
favors some Messenger of Satan, thorn in the flesh, or stroke in the hollow of
the thigh, to make us go halting and humbly to the grave. God to prevent
further danger, sees it good to leave an Issue open (of godly sorrow) to carry
away those humors which otherwise were more dangerous.

There are three Fountains you read of in Scripture; these do not all run
together; when one is open, another is shut.

1 The Fountain of sin; like her (...) a bloody fountain; while this runs the
Mark 5. 29
other are shut.

2 The Fountain of godly sorrow. When the hear^ is a Spring, and the eyes
Conduits as Mary M^gd^lens was, then is the former fountain dried up.

3 The fountain of Grace opened for Zachary 13. 1
sin, (...), a Fountain of blood, which is shut up and sealed to such as live
in sin, but opened to such as have the fountain of godly sorrow opened in them.
In that day there shall be opened to the house of David a fountain for sin and
for uncleanness.

Jesus Christ is not one benefit, but many. Applic.
Here are four promised, 1. He is a Sun, 2. of Righteousness, 3. with Healing,
4. with Growth. He is made of God, Wisdom, Justification, ^ Cor. 1. 30
Sanctification, Redemption, says the Apostle; and here the same. 1. The Sun,
here Wisdom. 2. Of Righteousness, there Justification. 3. Healing, there
Sanctification. 4. Growth, there Redemption. He is All in All (as I said
before) who is best resembled by those rare fruits, the Cocos and the Melt,
whereof that divine Du Bartas thus in English.

-- The Cocos f^r richer Wonders yields The third day of the first week

Then all our groves, meads, orchards; gardens, fields.
What? would thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine,
Lack'st thou fine linen? dress the tender rine;
Dress it like flax, spin it, and weave it well,
It shall thy Cambrick and thy Lawn excel.
Long'st thou for butter? bite the poulpy part,
And never better came to any Mart.
Need thou oil? then boult it too and fro,
And passing oil it soon becomes so.
Or vinegar to whet thine appetite?
Then Sun it well, and it will sharply bite.
Or want thou Sugar? steep the same astound,
And sweeter sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will, or will be what you would;
Should Mydas touched (I think) it would be gold
And in another place as much of the Melt, or as others call it, the Metle-tree.

There mounts the Melt which servs in Mexico Du Bartas Eden

For weapon, wood, needle and thread (to ^ow)
Brick, honey, sugar, sucket, balm and wine,
Parchment, perfume, apparel, cord and line;
His wood for fire, his harder leaves are fit
For thousand uses of invencive wit.
Sometimes thereon they grave their holy things
Laws, Lauds of Idols, and the gifts of Kings:
Sometimes conjoined by a cunning hand
Upon their roofs for rows of tiles they stand:
Sometimes they twine them into equal threads;
Small ends makes needles, greater arrow heads.
His upper sap the sting of serpents cures;
His new sprung bud a rare Conserve endures;
And they extract from liquor of his feet,
Sharp vinegar, pure honey, sugar sweet.
2 No man's sin or misery can make his case desperate where Christ is Physician.
The Leprosy, dead Palsy, Stone in the heart, Bloody Issue, heart Ruptures,
Plague in the heart, the stinging of Serpents, strokes of divine vengeance; or
whatsoever else is incurable by men or Angels, Christ does perfectly cure
without difficulty or danger.

3 Oh how then are we bound to God for sending such a Doctor from heaven when
man's case was desperate? How much to Christ Jesus who voluntarily undertook
such a low Employment, to be master of the society of Cr^pples, lame, blind,
impotent persons? When Charles the Great had persuaded Ayg^^andus, an Affrican
King; and ^ Mohammedan, upon his voluntary promise to become a Chri stian, to
receive Baptism, he entertained him at his Court and placed there a company of
poor and lame people, at whom the barbarous King wondering, the Emperor told him
they were the servants of our Master Jesus Christ; at which he grew offended,
and refused to be a Christian, because he saw Christ's servants to be in so mean
condition. But it is the glory of Christ to have the greatest respect to such:
What a speech is that? Heaven is my Isaiah 66. 1, 2
throne, and earth my footstool, but to this man will I look who is of a
contrite spirit and poor. God will leave heaven and earth, to look after a poor
distressed soul. As a mother that has other children whom she leaves her
ma^ds to look after, but one is sickly whom she says, I Will look to this my
self, I Will trust none of you'all, I Will sit up with it, stay by it, I Will not stir
from it. So Christ charge the Angels to look after other of his Servants, but
him that is poor and contrite in heart, says Christ, I Will look to that poor
soul: all you Angels have not skill, nor care, nor compassion enough, I Will not
from him, but look to him; and he is well looked to whom Christ looks to.

4. Here is then a singular encouragement for all distressed souls to go to
Christ. To whom did he ever say, Thy case is past cure? Whom did he ever cast
out, and reject with repulses and denyals? And now he is not absent, though
invisibly present. His passion he has put off, but not his compassion.
Therefore, would thou be made whole? observe these five Directions.

1 Before all other means used, come to 2 Chronicles. 16 Mark 5. 26
Christ A^a was never cured because he only used means. The Haemorr^oesse
never mended while she used means and came not to Christ.

But it must be, 1. A coming with Faith. Matthew. 8. 2* and 8. 9
The Centurions and the Lepers coming. Lord, if thou will thou can make me
clean.

2 With Prayer, importunate Prayer, as that father, who besought Christ for his
son, and put Omnipotency upon it, If thou can Mark 9. 22
do any such thing, as ever thou did help poor Creature, as ever thou will,
have compassion on us and help us. This was the coming of the Canaanitesse, who
when she had begged Matthew 15
and waited for an answer, and at length was called dog or little better, she
retorts the term, Lord I am a dog. But as ever kind Master threw crumb to dog,
or as ever thou scatteredst the least crumb of mercy to poor unworthy creature,
think upon me. Her faith and importunity prevailed.

3 With Repentance. This Mary Luke 7 Luke 23
Magdalens coming; and thus came the penitent Thief at the last hour and was
saved; but the impenitent Thief dyed at the foot of Christ. Impenitency damnes
while Christ looks on; and is trodden down while it looks on the plenty that
it self never tastes of. Were Christ to dye a thousand times, he would not save
one Impenitent person.

2. Direction. After coming to Christ, then use of means, not before. Then must
we go and wash in five waters.

1. In the water of Repentance* This was Magdalens wash, and wash seven times
in this Jordan (with Naaman;) David washed 2 Kings 5
seven times, making so many Penitential Psalms, upon his Penitential
washings, and was cleansed. In this sense, we must be all Anabaptists, yea,
Hemerobaptists; God commanded diverse Baptisms, or washings, Heb. 9. 10. So often
as any touched a dead body, or any thing unclean, he was to wash again; so we,
so often as we are defiled by any dead works (as they are called:) In which Nulli
rei natus nisi ad poenitentiam.
respect we may say with Tertullian, I am born to daily repentance.

2. In the water of Baptism, a more sacred laver, which we may not despise or
neglect; it is a Gospel fountain of Christ's own opening. This our Poole of
Siloam, to which all Christ's are sent. Arise, why tar^yest Acts 22. 16 Ephesians.
4. 5
thou, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins. This washing is but once; there
is one Lord, and one Baptism.

3. In the water of the Word. This is the Churches wash, wherewith Christ has
after Ephesians. 5. 26 Ezra 47
Baptism further cleansed his Church. That he may sanctify and cleanse it by
the washing of water with the word. The Word is as the water of the Sanctuary,
Healing water. Wherewith shall the young man cleanse his way? Psalm 119 9
By thy Word. This is the Churches Holy water.

4. In the Blood of Christ. This the most precious Bath above all the rest; the
Kings Bath. Herein those sealed Saints had washed their long robes, and made
them so white Rev. 7 14
in the Blood of the Lamb.

5. After all these, the last washing is in the Sanctifying water of the
Spirit. Christ's Blood fetches out the guilt, the Spirit the stain. This the
Apostle calls the Laver of Regeneration* and Renovation of the Holy Tit. 3. 5.
Ghost. Christ Jesus comes with water and blood. This was shadowed ou^ in the
Ceremonious 1 John 5. 6.
cleansing of the Leper* where there was the blood of a slain bird applied with
another living bird, and running water, Lev. 14. 6 and 51
and the person was pronounced clean. Besides the blood of a dead Savior,
there must be the application of running water, and a living spirit. Therefore
beg after all the former washings, another dipping of Psalm. 51.
the spirit; Lord wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquities, and cleanse me from
my sin. If we be not thus Anabaptized, our first baptism is null as to
salvation. Except a man be born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter
the Kingdom of God.

3. Direction. Then to Duties, (here is their proper place, not before) take up
thy bed and walk; expect not Christ to say, thy sins are forgiven, go in
peace, be whole. And Matthew. 9. 6. John 5. 8, 9.
that he should carry thy bed after thee, and bear thy yoke. There is some
duty required after cure, when strength is given thee, from recovering and
assisting grace; grace assisting must be sin resisting grace.

Israel was delivered from the Egyptians while they struck not a stroke, God
fought for them; they must not expect they should always stand still and see the
salvation of God; and that the Canaanites should be overcome without battle;
God will fight for them, they must go before the Lord armed, and fight under
him. Justification and first conversion is Gods work, not ours; Christ fights
for us, dyed for us; we stand still and see that salvation: Sanctification must
be carried 2 Cor. 7. 1. Phil. 2. 12.
on by our Endeavors also.

4. Direction. Then take heed of relapses. Remember that Item, Behold thou art
made whole, sin no more, lest a worse evil come unto thee. Thou may sin thy
self into a worse Joh 5. 14.
condition then before; thou may sin away thy peace, pardon, comforts; If
thou return again to folly. Great care must be had of taking cold in Physic
taking, and of Psalm. 85. 8.
relapses after a begun recovery.

5. Direction. Then wait after all for the Appearing of Christ. The rising of
this Sun, with his nearer approaches; be still fearing his name, and ly at the
Pool in use of means. His appearance will make thee whole and grow up, giving
both strength and growth. All the Godly wait for the appearing of 1 Cor. 1. 7.
2 Timothy 4. 8.
Christ. A twofold appearance thou may waitfor:

1. Here for a more full discovery of his favor, and a more sensible
manifestation of his presence, which will cheer thy heart, and chase away all
former fears and troubles.

2. A perfect manifestation of him self to thee at death, saying, Lord Jesus
come, Rev. 22.
come quickly; this wipes away all tears from the eyes of Gods people.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Admirable growth promised to the Saints.
ANd ye shall grow up as Calves of the stal.] Observe Christ was compared to one
creature, the Christian to another, the gracious heart can read Christ and
himself in every creature. When he sees the Sun he thinks on Christ; when the
Sun Rising, he thinks of the Rising of Christ in the soul; when the Physician
healing, of Christ's healing; when the Bird with her wings cherishing her brood,
of Christ's wings; and when he sees the Calves, or other creatures grow, he
thinks how svveet a sight it were to see himself grow in grace. This is the
contemplative Divinity every spiritual and gracious heart studieth and
practices.

There is a threefold use to be made of the creatures.

1. A natural (which is the lowest) wherein men and beasts, good and bad men
share alike. We use the sun, and other creatures for food and Physic. This is
a lawful (but the lowest) use we should make of them, and in this we should
remember God the Creator, Lord, and Donor of them, and Joel 2 25 Deuteronomy. 8
when we have eaten and are full, praise his name: not being like the swine,
who gathers up the Acorns, fills his belly, then tumbles in the mire; but as
the Chicken, which every sip of water it takes, so often looks up to heaven.

2. There is a moral use to be made of Prove. 6. 6
them, which wisdom and natural reason extracteth. When a wise man sees the
Ant and Be at work in the Summer, he says what a shame it is for man to be
idle? when he looks on the idle man's back, and sees it covered with r^gs, on
the sluggards field, and sees the hedge broken, Thistles growing, Prove. 24 30
he needs no other Lecture against sloth; when he sees the Drunkards eyes red,
face clawed, countenauce disfigured, he Items himself and others from the
Tavern and Prove. 23. 29, 30, 31
Alehouse.

3. There is a Gracious and Divine use, the Christian makes, when we have our
hearts raised to a consideration of Gods goodness, and our own duty upon the
sight of every creature. And this is one of the chief ways we have besides
the word, for the knowing of God.

1. God is described and known Negatively. He is not a creature, the Sun, a
Man, an Angel, not mutable, weak, finite, passionate, etc.

2. Comparatively, when I compare him to the creatures, and extract al ^^ose
excellencies, that are sparsed ^^ngly in hem, and ascribe them all to God, to
^et out his p^rfections; when I consider the glory and power of a King, God is
a King and more; when I behold the light of the Sun, God is light and Sun, but
more; when the bowels of a Father or Mother; God is a Father but far more, Tam
Pius nemo, tam Pater nemo. T^rtul. de poenitent. Si ad solis aspectum oculorum
a^ies hebescit, hoc idem mentis acies pat^^ur in cogita^ione omni de Deo; et
quanto ad considerandum Deum intenditur, tanto raag is cogitationis suae luce
caecatur. Quid enim de eo condign dicas qui est omni sublimitate sublimior
benignitate benignior, bonitate melior, Iustitia justior, omni clementia
clementior?


So when in creatures I behold somewhat that minds me of duty, or of grace; the
leaven, mustardseed, fishers net, seed, field, talents, oxen, farm; every thing
may teach us somevvhat to contemplate God, or self in. It is said of
Pythagoras, as I remember, that he brought Philosophy down from heaven: what a
far higher Art was that which our Savior has taught us, who has brought up
Divinity from the earth. Study this contemplative Divinity in the Book of the
creatures.

There is a fourth use of the creature which some make, but God never intended,
which has neither Nature, Reason, nor Religion, to defend it, a Superstitious,
heathenish, and brutish use. When I see the Sun, or Constellation of Stars, to
raise such a conclusion; when the salt is spilt, or a Hare crosseh the way,
then there is some ill luck Tertul, de Trin
follows. What a beast is man to ask counsel of his staff, as the Prophet
says? This is to idolize or make Deities of the Creature, and to resolve God
into an Idol. And it is as great a folly in Christians to ascribe any thing to
such contingencies, as for the Egyptians Porrum and cepe nefas jugulare, a^
frangere morsu.
of old to worship their Leeks, and their Garden Gods.

They shall grow up as (...) saginarii, junius Saginati, Arius Mont^
Calvs of the stall, or fatted Calves.] O sanctas ge^^es quibus hac nas^nntur
in ho^tis numin^. Juven.


Doct. All the Godly in whom there is already wrought a work of Grace, shall
ere Christ has done with them, come to a manifest and excellent growth.

As the Ca^f.] His growth is great, speedy, sightly, comely in stature,
strength, to be more tractable, gentle, to be afterward useful for the plough
or paile. Hosea 14. 5, 6, 7. There is a like Promise, I will be as the Dew to
Israel, he shall grow as the Lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon; his
branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive tree, and his smell
as Lebanon. They that dwell under his shade shall return, they shall revive as
the corn, and grow as the vine, the sent thereof shall be as the wine of
Lebanon.

Here is a notable description of the Christians growth, 1. For the Nature of
it; set forth by four comparisons, the Lily, Corn, Vine, Olive, whose growth is
great and excellent.

2. The kinds, all kinds, 1. Downward, in roots cast forth, ver. 5. 2. Upward,
his branches spread, ver. 6. 3 In beauty, as the Olive. 4. In smell, as
Lebanon. 5. In taste as the wine of Lebanon.

3. The order of this growth (the same that in Malachi) I will heal their
backslidings first, ver. 4. then growth.

4 The means of all this, I will be as the Dew, ver. 5, or as the Sun here.

There is a threefold growth, or three remarkable growing times to the
Christian; two of which are manifest and sensible to all, the third is to some
less perceptible.

1 The first growth is at his conversion, which is a strange and supernatural
growth, a growth per saltum, a translation from darkness to light, from death
to life, from a stone to flesh, from a thorn to a fir tree, a bryar to a vine,
or a branch of a wild Olive to a grafted bough in a right Olive. This is the
greatest change in the world, far greater then that from Grace to Glory at
death. Grace and Glory differ but gradually, as the morning light and noon day.
But Nature and Grace do toto Coelo differ, as much as light and darkness.

2 The other sensible growth is at death* when from an imperfect he grows to a
perfect Saint; from a militant to a triumphant. This is a mighty shoot and
growth per saltum, then the feeble shall be as David; ye^ Zachar^ 12. 8
as an Angel, who in one moment was creat^ and made perfect in Grace and Glory.
There was not one feeble person among all the Tribes Psalm 105. 37
of Israel when they came out of Egypt; there was while dwelling there: So
there shall be no feeble Saint go to Heaven, but they shall be perfect when
carried hence by the Angels of God, though they complain of feebleness here.
There shall not be thence Isaiah 65. 20
an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days, for the
child shall die an hundred years old. As there is in all dying or departed
persons a great shooting in their stature observed; so is there in the soul
much more. The least Infant shoots in the instant of Dissolution to that
perfect knowledge of God, and such a measure of grace as is not attainable here,
(that he is as David;) and the tallest Christian comes to such a height, that
he is as an Angel of God.

3. Between these two great, and so remarkable growths, there is a third, which
is to some more, and to some (especially at some times) less perceptible and
discernable, and is fourfold; in grace, comfort, experience, acceptablenesse.

1. In Grace; and that, 1. For the number and kind. He that at first conversion
had but a little godly sorrow, now that seed has brought forth seven fold,
What carfulness has it wrought? what clearing? 2 Cor. 7. 11
what indignation? what fear? what vehement desire? what zeal? what revenge?
How does this little grain of Mustard seed multiply? So that ye come behind in
no gift, waiting 1 Cor. 1. ^
for the appearing of Christ. Here is a kindly shoot.

2. In the measure of Graces. His knowledge was dim and confused, now is more
clear, distinct, and certain; before notional, now practical and affectionate:
he before had dosires, now endeavors; good thoughts, now good words and deeds;
longings before, now labourings. In his Repentance more fear of hell, now more
hatred of sin: before more fears, now more hopes: before less love of God
because of more fear, now less servile fear because of more love: before faith
was historical, now experimental; (...). Romans 1* 17
of adherence, now of assurance.

3 In the strength of grace. As the Calfe in the stall to an Ox to bear the
yoke; from milk to strong meat: from a babe to a strong young man who has
overcome the 1 John 2. 14
wicked one; and from a strong young man to a solid experienced old father, who
has known the Father. He holds on his way, and becomes stronger and stronger.
He was Job 17. 9
wont as a weak child to stumble, fall; now he has more care and strength and
falls not. He stumbles at no command, being strong in obedience, staggers at no
promise, being Romans 4. 20
strong in faith.

4 In the actings and exercise of Grace, which is a great growth toward
perfection, when acts grow to habits, and habits are daily exercised. The life
of grace is exercise. To live by faith, to act it upon all emergencies; Acts
24. 16 Isaiah 32* ^
to exercise conscience in all undertakings; to devise liberal things. The
valiant man increases in strength when he is still about some notable acts to
exercise his valor; first to encounter a Bear, then a Lion, th^n a Philistin,
then not to fear an Host. He grows not the great Scholar, who hoards up much
Learning, but he who brings out of his Treasure things new and old. He not the
rich man who has much laid up in bags and chests, but has much laid out in
good works. Habits of Grace imply Truth, exercise growth; that denominates a
Saint, this one perfect. Jesus Christ in his Infancy grew Luke 2. 40
in grace, waxed strong in spirit, and filled with wisdom; there you have the
habits of Grace; but when he came to grown age, and to the work of his
Ministry and Suffering, he was then put much more upon the exercise of all
Grace; therefore he is said, to be made perfect through sufferings. And Hebrews
2. 10 (...) Hebrews 5. 14
the Apostle calls them perfect, or of full age, who by reason of use (or
through an habit) have their senses exercised to discern good and evil.

5 In more fruitfulness and usefulness, Psalm 92. To bear more fruit in age,
and to have their last exceed the first, as Thyatira Revelat. 2, 19
had. You are full of goodness (said the Apostle) able to admonish one
another. Your Romans 15* 14 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11*
faith grows exceedingly, and your love abounds. Exhort and edi^ie one
another as ye also do. These are great commendations, and a great progress in
Grace, when one becomes of a public spirit and more useful. Salute Tryphoena
and Tryphosa, who labor in Romans 16* 12
the Lord, and Persis who labored much in the Lord. When the growth of a
Minister and 1 Timothy 4. 15
his profiting does appear; when a private Christian grows so eminent and
useful, that he may of an old grown Disciple be fit to be set apart for the
public Ministry, as in the Primitive times they did; this is a good growth:
But when they who have had the Time for Teachers, have not the parts and
proficiencie Hebrews 5. 12
of good Learners, it deserves reproof, shows a poor growth.

2 There is a growth in comforts, when the Mourners in Sion have outgrown their
old garments of mourning, and have new white raiment of praise (as Mordecai for
sackcloth a Princes Robes) for ashes, beauty, for drops of tears oil of joy,
for spirit of heaviness* Isaiah 61. 3
garments of praise: Then shall they be called Trees of Righteousness, the
planting of the Lord. Hannahs growth from affliction to mourning, from mourning
to praying, from praying to quiet waiting, from waiting to believing, from
believing to obtaining, from obtaining to rejoicing. This 1 Samuel 2. 1
an excellent growth, when one has taken all those degrees, and gone through
those five forms in the School of Christ, beginning at Tribulation (the first
and lowest form) and then coming into the next form of Patience, then into the
higher of Experience, then ^^to the next of Hope, then into the highest,
Certainty. Hope makes not ^^m. 5* 3, 4, 5
ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad into our hearts by the Holy
Ghost which is given unto us. This is to have the white stone, and to eat of
the hidden Rev. 2. 17
Manna.

3 In Experiences. The Favorite grows great by the many favors, gifts,
jewels, Offices the Prince bestows on him. The Christian grows rich in
experiences, which he wears as Bracelets, and keeps as his richest Jewels. He
calls one Eben-ezer, hitherto 1 Samuel 7. 12 Genesis 30. 8 Exodus 1. 22 Genesis
30* 24
God has helped; another Nepthali, I have wrestled with God and prevailed;
another Gershom, I was a stranger; another Joseph, God will yet add more; and
another Penuel, I have seen the face of God. I have been delivered from the
Lion, therefore shall be from the Bear; from Lion and Bear, therefore from the
Philistin; from the Philistin, therefore from Saul; from Saul, therefore God
will deliver me from ev^y evilwork, 2 Timothy 4. ^^ Col. ^. 19* (...). Roman^ 8*
15 ^ Tim. 1. 7 Psalm 116. 7 2 Timothy, 1. 1^
and preserve me blameles^ to his heavenly Kingdom. This is scal^ ^^^i, or the
growth of God, as it is called, a most excellent growth; from a spirit of
B^ndag^ to a spirit of Adoption; from a spirit of st^^ to a spirit of love and
of a sound ^ind; that the soul can ^^^ down and say, Now return to thy rest,
the Lord has dealt gr^cious^y with thee. Now I know why I have believed, and
wherefore I have believed, and whom I have believed; and I know ^^ it able to
keep wh^^ I have committed to him to that day. When he can say with the
Samaritans, Now we John 4. 42
believe not because of thy Report, and because we have so read and heard, but
because we have seen and heard him himself. This is the glorious growth: when
Thomas who was John 20. 25, 26 27, 28
shut up in unbelief, and made such sad conclusions, I do not believe (though
you all affirm it;) nay worse, I will not believe, (wilful Thomas Mr. Bradford
calls him) or worse, I shall never believe; it is impossible I should; (as
impossible as for a Venice Glass to fall to the ground unbroken, as a
distressed Gentlewoman said, but was confuted) Mr^. Honywood
shall have Christ come in to him revealing himself more familiarly, singling
out Thomas from all the rest, and bid him believe his own eyes and hands, and
make proof of the love of Christ. He breaks into the highest admirations, and
in fullness of Assurance cries out, My Lord and my God! Before all unbelief,
here all faith.

4 In acceptablenesse. Jesus increased in stature and wisdom, and in favor
with God Luke 2. 52
and man. This is a growth indeed. So when from a state of loathing we grow
into a state of loving; removed out of our blood into a state of beauty, of
nakedness to Ornaments, Ezekiel 16
of deformity to comeliness, as is expressed in the Prophet. Abraham first a
servant, Isaiah 41, 8
then a friend; first Electus, then Dil^ctus: before from faith to faith, here
from love to love; from love of commiseration to love of benevolence, from
benevolence to complacency. What a preferment in Esther? of a Captive, taken
into Heges custody, thence into the Kings bed, thence into his highest favor,
thence to the Crown, thence to ask whatsoever she would. This the honor of
Angels, and the rising of all the Saints; from an enemy to reconciliation, then
a servant, then a son, then an heir, then a coheir with Christ, then to
inherit all things. I will be Rev. 21. 7
his God, and let him ask what he will, that my love and his joy may be full.
Thou shall Isaiah 62. 4
be no more termed forsaken, but thou shall be called Hephzibah, for the Lord
delights in thee. Moses at first was charged not to draw near, after Moses
was singled out to Exodus ^. 5 19, 24
draw near when Israel must keep their distance; afterward he talks face to
face with Deuteronomy. 34. 10
God as a friend; at last he desires, and is admitted to behold the glory of
God, and see all Exodus 33. 19
his goodness pass before him, as if he had been an Angel.

1. This is to be ascribed to a threefold Reas. 1.
cause.

1. To the nature of Grace, which (as Art and Nature do with their works)
brings all her works to perfection. The Workman leaves not his work
unperfected. Grace is as the leaven, mustard seed, as the corn, Mark 4
which by natures force dies, revives, roots, sprouts, brings forth a blade,
then a stalk, then an ear, then full corn. Grace as great Rivers, has slender
beginnings. Sin is killed by degrees. God begins with a reproof, reproof begets
a conviction, conviction grief, grief grows unto hatred, hatred unto loathing,
loathing causes a divorce of sin, that divorce death. Reproof discovers sin,
conviction fears it, sorrow lam^nts it, hatred resists it, loathing shuns it,
divorce puts it away. So the greatest measure of Grace proceeds from a spark,
first a motion, (in the Ministry or by the Spirit) begets a desire, that desire
cannot go, but creeps in longing The new man is not as the first Adam, created
perfect at first, but is renewed day by day.
and wishing, longing shows it self in a tear, the tear begets a Prayer, that
Prayer begins acquaintance, acquaintance brings on experience, experience more
hope, hope diligence, diligence confidence, confidence assurance, assurance
satisfaction. Thus where ever is life, is growth. The least twig grows, but the
biggest dead branch grows not; the young child grows, the old picture grows
not (unless fouler and more uncomely:) True grace has a seed of God in it,
and grows; ^ John 3* 9
counterfeit Grace grows not, unless as a Carcass, more unsavory every day
then other.

2 This growth is helped forward by the benefit of quickening Ordinances,
whereby the soul is made fruitful as the watered garden: Isaiah 58. 11
Those that are trees of Gods planting by the waters side, shall grow more and
more fruitful. They that be planted in the house of the Lord, (the Churches
Nursery) shall Psalm 92. 13* 14
flourish in the courts of our God.

3 But most of all is this to be ascribed to the singular undertaking, promise
and blessing of God. Grace for all its nature might decay, and when it is as
Jordan in harvest, overflows Joshuah 3. 15
all his banks, yet without a fresh supply it might stand still, be driven
back, or quite dried up. And Ordinances cannot help, if God put not influence
into Ordinances, and put this golden oil into those golden pipes, therefore
Paul looks for salvation through (...) Phil. 1. 19. Mark 4 6 Luke 8. 6
the supply and auxiliary Grace, as additional force to help out Habitual, for
lack of which supply the stony ground miscarryed, it lacked root below, and
moisture from above, the root of spiritual union to Christ, and the moisture of
spiritual unction from Christ. Now God has undertaken for his people, where he
has begun a good work to finish Phil. 1. 6 1 These. 5* 24
it, Faithful is he who has called you, he will do it, you may rely upon it.

1 To apply this, What thankfulness Apply. 1.
does this call for from those in whom Grace is wrought. It is a mercy to be
prized when the poor grows rich, the despised favored, the diseased strong;
but none to this, the sinner to grow gracious, to grow out of Gods displeasure
into his favor, when the soul prospers, 3 John 2

1 Hereby is more God honored then by any Isaiah 55. ult
other, It shall it be to the Lord for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall
not be cut off.

2 He that has past out of nature into grace has shot the great gulf, and is
in a safe state as to his soul.

3 God has not undertaken the rich shall grow richer, and that he who is now
in honor shall abide in his honor; but he has undertaken to keep those whom
he has begun a good work in.

4 This growth is always in mercy, others may be promoted in wrath, as Pharaoh
and Haman. They may have their hearts desire Psalm 116. 15
with lean souls. But this ever argues love in God, and such as accompanies
salvation.

5 Where this growth is, there shall be another and greater shoot at death;
but in all other growthes there may be an alteration (a sad alteration) at
death, They may spend their days in mirth, and in a moment go Job 21. 13
down to hell.

Use 2 Reproof to three sorts.

1 Such as grow not at all (unless as a stake in the hedge, more rotten:)
ignorant, vain, worldly, profane they were, and are; no changelings they, no
Apostates; this were a good Apostasy. Luther gloried he was an Apostate from
the Pope. Ever learning never 2 Timothy 3. 7
growing. Thy child becomes a man, and thou remainest a child. Thou have put
off thy childish years, not put away childish things. It was a heavy curse,
when to the figtree it was said, Never fruit grow on the^: Matthew 21. 19
Hebrews 6
These are near cutting down or burning up. This was the property of the high
way, (the worst ground of the four, the rest had all some good in them) which
brought forth no fruit at all, but seed and showers were all cast away upon it.

2 Such who are worse then those who grow not at all, who grow from evil to
evil, Jeremiah 9. 2 2 Timothy 3. 13
or worse and worse. It is the curse of God upon Seducers to become worse and
worse. There is a growth of God, Col. 2 19. this the growth of Satan; from
standing in the way to sit in the chair of scorners. It was the glory of Josiah
to outstrip all the Kings 2 Kings 23. 25 1 Kings 21* 25
that were before him: the contrary is said of Ahab, There was none like to
Ahab, who sold himself to work wickedness. He was too bad at first, his wife
Jezabel made him worse, his false Prophets worse still; and Satan with that
commission, Go, persuade, prevail, worse 1 Kings 2^. 23 Isaiah 3. 9 Phil. 3. 19
if worse could be. How is he grown to the highest pitch, who now proclaims
his sin and glories in it? Ahab served Baal a little, I will serve him much.
Cain killed a man, says Lamech, and denied it; feared, trembled, cried out his
sin was too great, and his punishment not to be born; but says he, I neither
deny the fact, nor fear the punishment; the murder committed grieves me not,
the hell threatened terrifies me not, I only glory to think that I have got the
name of the first three of all the Devils Worthies. If Cain be Gen* 4. 22, 23,
24
punished seven fold, then I trow Lamech, a more notable adventurer for hell,
shall be punished seventy and seven fold. In such the unclean spirit goes and
returns with an Octas (as Ir^naus says) of unclean spirits; then is the last
state worse then the first.

3 But there is a third basket of worse figs yet, such as are grown from good
to bad, There are two growths which are the growths of God; 1. From evil to
good: 2, From good to better. And two growths of Satan; 1. From ill to il: 2,
From good to ill; miserum est fuisse faelicem. Sa^an fell thus from an Angel of
Light to a Prince of darkness.
from seeming good to downright bad. The washed Sow becomes again a wallowing
Sow. Has not only left his love (which is possible to a Believer for a time)
but lost and loatheth his former love, turns again to his vomit; repents of
nothing more then of his former repentance, was once enlightened, had a taste,
found a liking, felt the power of the good Word, and the force and horror of
judgment to come, but is gone back, and now sins wilfully after receipt of this
knowledge of the Truth. Judas, a young Apostle, an old Apostate, Iuvenis
Discipulus, senex Diabolus, A young Disciple (never Saint) an old Devil, The
case of none is so sad. God owes these a shame, and will pay it them home to
their face. These lay a stumbling block in the way of others, and God lays one
in their way, and they fall usually into some notorious Ezekiel 3. 20
sin, that lays them open to the world, as Saul, Judas Hymenaeus, Alexander,
Ananias, Nicholas the Deacon. These are Trees twice dead, plucked up by the
roots: Jude v. 13 Matthew 23
Double children of hell above any others, and become usually Pros^lyte-Makers
for Satan, who makes of these fugitive Professors, the chief Janissaries to
guard his person, and enlarge his Kingdom. How disparingly above all others do
these men dye! Saul, Judas, Spira, how fearful was their end! This is the only
way to that sin against the Holy Ghost. As we said before, grace mounts up to
perfection by degrees, from small beginnings; so is sin perfected by as
unsensible degrees. There is a beginning in the spirit, first an Illumination,
then Conviction, (...). James 1. 15 Vide Bern. de conscien cap. 3 Vide lapsum
(inquit) im^ casum mal^ conscienti^, qu^ minuta^im and peditentim declinet a
Deo, and ita in profundum descendat ut super eum urgeat Puteus os suu^.
then Faelix his fear, then Aggrippas half Conversion, an outward restraint or
partial reformation, a bold avowing and open professing the doctrine of grace,
as Alexander; an attentive hearing with Herod, a flashy rejoicing as the stony
ground, a temporary believing, praying, joining, going in and out. Thus far
they run well, but here they stand, from standing still to declining, from
declining to discontinuance of holy duties; (they will not pray this morning,
they will at even, at even to morrow) from discontinuance to indisposednesse,
from indisposednesse to dislike, from dislike to enmity, from enmity to
scorning, from scorning to persecuting, then to impenitencie, then to all
uncleanness with greediness, then to despair, and there we leave them.

3 Use. Examine what growth is there in Use 3
us; if we see none, then certainly we are neither such as ever truly feared
Gods name, or ever had Christ risen upon us. It is manifest many grow not.

1. The nation generally is grown a degenerate Vine, which was at first a
noble plant. We are worse then our fathers, as the Lord Jeremiah 7. 26 Judges
2. 10 Jeremiah 24
complains. The good generation is worn out, and the better figs are carried
away. They joyed when the Manna first fell, we grow weary of it. The word of
the Lord Jeremiah 6. 10
was to them precious, to us it is become a reproach; they desired to see the
things we Isaiah 30. 11 Hosea 4. 16
see; we desire the holy one to depart from us. They grow as the Calfe in the
stall, we as the untamed heifer, or as the backsliding heifer.

2 Professors in particular grow not better but worse, in shadow, not
substance; in light as the increasing Moon, which grows bigger and bigger,
lighter and lighter; not hotter and hotter, as the Morning Sun, which goes
higher and higher, and grows hotter and hotter.

It is an ill growth when we grow in stalk not ear, in straw not corn. When
trees run up in stature, and put out leaves and blossoms without fruit. Many
grow colder and colder (as old David for his body) Ordinances can keep no heat
in them: or a worse cold in their spirits, as Solomon declining: indifferent
what, and how many Religions there were; All that pretend conscience, should
not want liberty. Many grow fowler and fowler, as the the linen garment; or
courser and courser as the woollen garment* when the nap is off, and grows
rotten and full of holes, the longer it is worn. Many Professors, how handsome
and hopeful were they at first, but wear very course and full of holes and
rents, the longer you are acquainted with them. We have cause to cry out with
Jeremy, Woe to us, for the day goes away, for the shadows of the evening are
stretched out. Jer. 46. Our harvest is past, Jeremiah 8 20
our Summer is ended, and our winter is come. Winter ways fouler and fouler,
winter days colder and colder, winter weather dark, foul, misty, boisterous,
unpleasant to go abroad in, and winter barrenness. All dead winter.

But for Notes of growth, take these:

1. There is variety of grace where growth; not all knowledge, no love; not all
faith and confidence, without fear and conscience. A hypocrite may have one
gift, the Saint has every grace. Integrality is a note of integrity. The body
is not one member, but many. Christianity is not one Grace, but 1 Cor. 1. 7
Revel, 22. 2
all. You come behind in no gift, etc. The tree of life brings forth twelve
several fruits. It is an unkind growth in the Rickets, where only the head
grows extraordinary big, but all the body thrives not. Many are all head for
knowledge, voice for discourse, praeterea nil; and all nose (as he said) for
censoriousness.

Tongilianus habet nasum scio, non nego; sed jam
Nil praeter nasum Tongilianus habet.
2 Higher thoughts of Christ are a fair sign of a higher growth. Ille se
plurimum Ille se plurimum profecisse sciat, cui Cicero valde placuerit* Erasm.
Quintil. 2 Peter 3. 18 Philippians 3. 8
profecisse sciat, cui Christus valde placuerit. Grow in grace and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Paul had outgrown all Pharisees, and his
own Righteousness, and was come to a high pitch, when he counted all loss and
dung to the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ. The man that stands on
earth thinks earth only great, but Sun and Stars little; were he lifted up to
them, earth would seem nothing (less then a punctulum) and they only great.
Our own Graces and Duties seem only great to him that is ignorant of Christ
and his Righteousness.

3 Lower thoughts of self, is ever a sign not of a lower Christian, but of the
growing and grown Christian. His expressions, are, Icount not my self perfect,
I have not yet attained, I am more brutish then any man, I have Phil* 3. 12
Proverb^ 30. 2 Ephesians 3. 8 Genesis 32. 10
not the understanding of a man, I am less then the least of all Saints, Less
then the least of thy mercies. Much humility argues much Sincerity. God gives
grace to Humility, Humility gives rooting to Grace.

4. Strong laborious desires argue much Grace. Our perfection here is but in
desires, Desires are infinite when Duties are defective. God measures men by
their desires, not deeds The desire of a man is his kindness. The Proverbs 19.
22
Godly boast more of their desires then any thing else* I desire to fear thy
Name. Vehement Nehemiah ^. 11
desires one of the best signs of saving Grace; but they must be laborious
desires, 2 Cor. 7. 11
not lazy wishes, Through desire a man separateth himself, and intermedleth
with all wisdom. Proverbs 18. 1
But there are lazy desires which hell is paved with and full of, the desire of
the sluggard Prove. 21. 25
kills him.

5 The grown person can climb over greatest difficulty, In the name and
strength of God go out against Goliahs or Anakims. With Rams horns and Faith
blow down Jericho's walls; with the rod of God divide the Sea; as Samson (when
he could not find the key, carries away the gates) is not discouraged with
difficulties; but emboldned, swims against stream; dares venture, if called, as
Peter, to go upon the waters, or into the fire, or Lions den; answers all
Objections with Gods Command, Promise, and Omnipotency. Abraham was grown
strong when he could believe against Faith; Hope above hope, neither stagger at
Promise through unbelief, nor Precept by disobedience, but resolved all into
Jehovah-jireh: He would not dispute Commands, nor question Promises; he had
learned to believe and obey when God spoke, with an implicit faith, and blind
Obedience. He could not unty the knot, and make Promises and Precepts agree; he
knew he who gave both, could. Endeavors, Faith, Obedience belong to us, issues
to God.

Oh strange Logic ^ Grace has learned to deduce strong Conclusions out of
weak Premises, and happy out of sad. If the Major be, My strength and my heart
fails; and the Minor, There is no blossom in the figtree, nor fruit in the
Vine, etc. yet his Conclusion is firm and undeniable, The Lord is the strength
of my heart, and my portion for ever: or, yet will I rejoice in the God of my
saltion. And if there be more in the Conclusion then in the Premises, it is the
better; God comes ever in the Conclusion.

6 Where labor is but an exercise, there is growth and strength. To a weak
one, exercise is hard labor, as to a child to go alone; to a sick man to go
cross his chamber. If we are out of breath when we begin a duty, and give over,
what strength? Revelat. 2. 2, 3. Thou have labored and not fainted.

7 When men leave their wonted fallings, they are grown stronger and better.
The weak unwary child gets many a fall and knock, but as he grows stronger,
he falls seldomer, and becomes more cautelous.

8 When a man can bear a heavy burden and not stoop or faint. 1. Of affliction
from Proverbs 24. 10
Gods hand: If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. 2 Of
provocation from man's. David was a high grown 2 Samuel 16. 10
Saint, that he could hear Shimei curse, yet not be distempered. That sword is
of good mettle that snaps not in pieces when bent, or stands not bent.

9 A good stomach is an excellent sign of growth. Children growing are ever
eating, their heat is much. Men grown eat heartily, more then the child. The
new born Babe desires 1 Peter 2. 2
the sincere milk of the Word that he may grow thereby. And the
man-grown-Christian desires with his Savior, the strong meat; With desire have
I desired to eat the Passover Luke 22. 15
before I suffer.

2 Hindrances of growth.

1 Idleness never comes to good. The diligent handmaketh rich. To him that
has Proverbs 10. 4
shall be given, and he shall have more abundantly. The Talent was doubled by
industry, forfeited by slothfulness. Milo putting out his strength daily to
carry his Calfe, had strength to carry it when an Ox. Stir up 2 Timothy 1. 6
the gift of God which is in thee.

2 Over much earthly activity is as bad. The thorns choke the Word: the Farm
and Luke 8 and 14
Oxen make Christ's plough to stand still. Earths best are heavens worst
husbands. Hell is full of good and bad husbands both. Some of the sons of Sodom
were very idle fellows, minding nothing but eating, drinking and Luke 17. 28
tippling; some were great husbands, building, planting, buying, selling. Both
perished together. The interposition of the earth eclipseth the Moon, depriving
it of the light of the Sun. If the world get between Christ and thy heart, all
is gone.

3 Pride is a blasting East wind, which destroys Grace, and breeds those
Caterpillars, which destroy both leaf and blossom. This is to the soul not as
a Disease, but poison; Diseases stop growth, poison takes away life, (though
taken in meat or Cordials.) Pride is poison to Grace, death to the soul (though
it be taken in the best Duties and parts.) This destroyed the Angelical nature,
when spiritual pride got into heaven. It infected the humane, till then in
innocence. It is a ^anker often bred in the fairest rose, but destroys it. The
Devil seeks to get into his service the best wits, choicest parts, greatest
Scholars, and by pride he makes them sure. What drew Arius, Paulus Samosatenus,
Novatus, etc. into their Schisms and pestilent Heresies? but their pride and
arrogance.

4. Evil company is as great a hinderance to growth in Grace as any of the
former. We may compare these four to those four devourers, Joel 1. 4
That which the palmer worm (of idleness) has left, has the Lo^ust (of
worldly activenesse) eaten; that which that Locust has left, has the Canker
(of Pride) eaten; and what that Cankerworm has left, has this Caterpillar (of
ill company) quite eaten. Or else to those four destroyers, the Sword, Ezekiel
14. 21
Famine, Pestilence, and (this ill company worst of all) the evil Beasts. Oh
Inimica Amicitia! Austin cries out upon it. Judas took no hurt in the Apostles
society, yet among the High Priests he was undone. Peter sitting by the High
Priests fire, fell in and burnt himself. Lo^ had perished in Sodom, had he not
hasted out. Nothing brings the Plague so soon, as eating, drinking, and
conversing with the Infected. Nebuchadnezzar became a Beast, by conversing with
Beasts; and man turns to earth lying in the earth. Such as the company, such
is, or shortly will be the man. Worldly company will make thee worldly;
profane, profane; corrupt company opinionative and erroneous. Satan and his
black Retinue come out in dances to meet this their great Champion singing.
Pride and other Commanders have slain their thousands; but good fellowship
(otherwise called, ill society) has slain his ten thousands. Other sins send
men single to hell; this as Phinehas Javelin, strikes two dead at one stroke;
or as Samsons Jaw Bone, lays heaps upon heaps.

5 Any reigning sin hinders growth. If the Worshipper comes with Idols in his
Ezekiel 14. 4
heart, his inquiry after God will not profit. Many complain of the Minister,
they cannot profit by him; their Idols cause it. Ahab could neither pro^it by
Elijah, nor Micajah, not one good Sermon from them both. Judas might be with
Christ all his days, yet not profit; he was a Thief and a Hypocrite. Nor could
Herod profit by John Baptist. Herodias, the right eye that caused him to
offend, should have been plucked out. It is the Physicians Aphorism, Corrupt
Bodies, the more they are fed, the more they are corrupted. Therefore Peter's
prescript is to lay aside ^ Peter 2. 1^2
all malice, guile, hypocrisies, etc. before you come to the sincere milk of
the Word, if you would grow thereby.

6 An ill diet, or an ill Ministry. Would you grow without meat, or by eating
unwholsom, flatulent, or poisoned meat? Take ^eed o^ such a Ministry: and fix
thy self under that godly Minister whom God has set over thee in the Lord. We
will not have our child suck every nurse, nor does the often changing the Nurse
benefit, but endanger the child. Be not carried about with diverse Hebrews 13. 9
Luke 8. 18 Mark 4. 24
and strange Doctrines. But take heed how and what, and whom you hear.

7 Intermitting Duties. Pray without ^easing, quench not the spirit, despise
not prophesying: ^ Thessalonians. 5. 16, 17, 18 1 Timothy 4 Hebrews 19
neglect not the gift that is in thee; forsake not the assembling of your
selves together. Intermitting Duties for two or three days, is like
intermitting meat for as long a time. The Amalakitish servant was taken 1 Samuel
30. 12
up fainting, but when he had eaten again, his spirit came to him again. We
need Duties to keep grace and soul together, as much as meat to keep life and
soul together. When the candle is newly blown out, you may D^ Harris
easily blow it in again, but when the fire is out, no blowing can light it.
When we go from Duty to Duty, the heart is kept burning; when we let grace die
for want of present blowing up, we are insensibly hardened and Grace decays.

8 Self sufficiency. There is more hope of Proverbs 26. 12
a fool, then of him that is wise in his own conceit. He that thinks he has
already attained, seeks to go no further. He that thinks he has Learning,
Wisdom, Riches enough to serve his turn, gives over the wise man's seeking and
intermeddling with all wisdom. Hosea 10. 1 Si dixifti sufficit, periisti. Aug
The emptiest Vine brings forth most fruit to it self.

3 Helps to Growth.

1 Thou must be the plant which God has planted. He is the only Husbandman, we
are Gods Husbandry. Every plant which his John 15. 1 1 Cor. 3. 9 Matthew 15. 13
right hand has not planted, at length is rooted up. Nature, Art, Education,
Industry, all moral persuasions make not a heavenly plant. Flesh and blood did
nothing to Peter, but the Father which is in Heaven. Matthew 16. 17


2 As planted by the Fathers hand, so ingrafted into Christ's root. Therefore is
the branches fruitfulness ascribed to a double cause. 1 The Fathers pruning
and purging: Every branch that bears fruit he^ purges, John 15. 2
that it may bear much fruit. 2 To our Insition into, and abiding in Christ.
He that John 15. 45
abides in me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit; for without me
ye can do nothing. Those parts of the tree which are nearest the root are
biggest, those twigs which furthest off, least.

3 The Spirit of God has the third hand in a Christians growth. When the
Spirit breathed on the dry bones, they stood up, Ezekiel 37 1 Samuel 10
and became an Army. Saul, when the Spirit came upon him, had another heart,
became another man. The Apostles were well Acts 2
grown before, but when the holy Ghost came upon them, then they grew mightily;
Pray, Blow O North wind, and breath thou Cant. 4. 16
South wind, that the Spices of my garden may flow.

4 To hold communion with the body as well as with the head, that being knit
together by those mystical bonds and joints, there Ephesians 4. 15 Coloss. 2* 19
may be an increase in the body to the edifying of it self in love. Yea, that
it may increase with the increase of God (a Divine and admirable increase.) The
branch cut off from the arm of the tree, is cut off from the root also, and
withers. The sheep straying from the flock is devoured, safe when it abides
with his fellows, then the Shepherds eye is upon it.

5 To attend upon living and lively Ordinances. The tree of life grows close
Revel. 22, 2
by the River of the water of life, no where else.

6 A good depth of Mortification to begin withal. The ground deep ploughed
retains the seed and gives it root; the stony for lack of this depth
withered. Mark it while you will, the well seasoned Christian with
Mortification, seldom warps and shrinks; but your flashy, high flown spirits,
over filled with joy at first. The meat well powdered with salt, keeps long
sweet; without, it corrupts and putrifies.

7. A good measure of Humility. God gives more grace to the humble. The low 1
Peter 5
valleys are ever more Rich then the lofty hills. Trees in time of drought
wither not because of deep roots, when as the corn and grass burn quite away.

8. Sincerity makes to grow up to him in all Ephesians 4. 15
things who is the head. This the Nutritive grace. Mortification prepares the
way for Humility, humility for Sincerity, sincerity for growth, growth for
perseverance, perseverance for the Crown. Faith is the mother or seed grace;
mortification the planting or ploughing grace, humility the rooting grace,
sincerity the watering grace, perseverance the crowning grace. Sincerity makes
grace to be, and makes grace to grow: without sincerity no grace is, only
seems: Faith is not faith without sincerity, repentance no true repentance;
prayer no prayer. And without sincerity grace thrives not, but decays, wanting
what should water and nourish. The life and growth of all grace is bound up in
the life of sincerity.

9. Lastly, but especially, wait and pray for the Rising of the Sun of
Righteousness, for a further and fuller manifestation of Christ to thy soul:
when Christ came in to Thomas, and took him by the hand, he raised him from the
lowest pit of unbelief and doubting, to the highest pitch of confidence and
Rejoicing. My Lord and my God. John 20. 28
The Sun returning, makes the trees shoot again at Spring, which grew not all
winter.

Let me add a few Motives to seek after a Growth. The Husbandman loves to go
out to see his corn grow in the field; the mother how her child comes on at
nurse, the father his son at School.

The first Motive. This an Argument of Truth, how differs the living child from
the dead, the Picture from a true man but in growth? Where you see not growth
suspect truth.

2 There is a Perfection attainable here. As many as are perfect, let us be
thus minded, Phil. 3. 15. That is, 1. A perfection comparative (with others
that fall short), not absolute. The Stars compared with the other parts of
heaven are perfect lights, with the Sun are darkness. Saints compared with
other men are lights, but with Christ they are but darkness. 2 In Desires,
Endeavors in voto: The Godly have weak performances, strong desires, are
stinted and bounded in their doings, but their desires are boundless,
aspiring, infinite. 3 They have an inchoated, not complete perfection, as a
child in his parts, which daily receive a growth. We must labor after such a
perfection as we are capable of. The child cannot speak when born; first he
gets one word, then another, then all his Native Language perfectly; so must we
be growing. All Natures works tend to it. The child grows first in stature,
when no more in stature, then in strength; when no more in strength, then in
judgment; when no more in judgment, then in affection, then in Grace. Sin
stays not till it come to its unhappy perfection, and shall Grace stop in the
middle? Shall the tares ripen for the fire, and not the wheat for the Garner?

3 There is no perfection here; viz. Actual, Absolute, Complete. This
contradicts not, but fortifies the former Motive. As many of us as are perfect,
Phil. 3. 15. yet ver. 12 he puts not himself into that number, I have not yet
attained, I am not yet perfect; therefore follow the harder after it. If I were
at the Race end, I might rest; I am but entered, therefore must look forward,
not backward. The water runs out of the Springs, and stops not till it come
together and makes a River, The River stays not till it comes to the Sea;
there is his fullness. Our measure and pitch is to do the will of God on earth
as it is in heaven: and our pattern, Be perfect as your Father in Heaven is
perfect. Be holy as God is holy; which because we can never reach, we must be
still striving after. The body at length comes to his growth, the soul never in
this life. The Christian herein like the Crocodile, which cease not to grow
till it cease to live. Therefore the Godly is described, thirsting after
Righteousness. The greedy Worldlings desires after Riches are enlarged as
Hell, and the desires of the Godly after Grace are enlarged as Heaven. Another
says, Had I so much Grace I should be satisfied. Be thankful for the least, be
not satisfied with the most Grace. The Godly at first says, Oh that I had
knowledge; after, what will knowledge do without Repentance? when he has
Repentance, yet I want Faith; when Faith, I would have more; when more, I would
have Assurance; when Assurance, I thirst still, I would have Christ; more
union, more communion. When Christ on earth, he longs to be with Christ in
heaven. The young Christian is like the young Housekeeper, who thinks a few
things go to furnish and keep a house; but the well experienced Christian (like
the old Housekeeper) finds much to do about a house, many things wanting,
many decaying.

4 Non progredi, est regredi. If we go not forward we go backward; and this
motus recessus, is ever motus trepidationis, a sad and dreadful motion: God
has made all Creatures to go forward, that is a handsome motion; to go backward
how unhandsome is it! The Spirit moved the wheels Ezekiel 1. 12
ever forward, never backward. The Sun rising gets heat and strength till noon,
when it declines night hastens on; at Spring it goes higher every day, and
makes days longer till it comes to the Tropic or Solstice, then farewell
Spring; Autumn and Winter hastens. The Sun once stood still, but it Joshuah 10
Isaiah 38. 7, 8
was prodigious and fatal to the enemies of God; once went back, and was a
sign of recovery. Our Sun neither stands nor goes back but is always ominous.

5 This the only way to be secured from the incursion of Error and prevailing
Impieties. That ye be not drawn away from your steadfastness into the error of
the wicked, grow 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18 1 Kin. 11. 6, 7
in Grace, is Saint Peter's Antidote. When was Solomon drawn to commit or permit
those foul Idolatries, and tolerate all those new Religions, but when he cooled
in his love, and was declined? The man and beast seldom falls going up hill,
usually down hill; the Carters Proverb, When did Cart overthrow up hill? Take
heed how you descend. Those that were made a prey to house-creeping and
house-subverting Seducers, were only such as had made no proficiency; but
learning 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7
and learning, and never able to come to the grounded knowledge of the truth;
leave off growth in strictness, and the next error carries thee away.

6 Those may be able to look Christ in the face at death and Judgment, who
have 1 Cor. 1 7
been growing; You come behind in no gift, waiting for the coming of Christ. A
little Grace is enough to begin the world with, not to dye with. One Talent
serves to begin with, one Talent bad to appear with. If th^se be 2 Peter 1
in you and abound, -- Then shall an abundant entrance be ministered to you into
the Kingdom of God: we are apt to say, if I once have true grace, I shall be
safe; away despair; take heed of saying, away diligence too. A little grace
may bring thee to glory, a little brings none to God, Phil. 1, 11. and will thou set thy glory in opposition to Gods glory? A little may bring thee into
heaven when thou die, much would bring heaven into thee while thou live.
Some truly Righteous are Saved with a Vix, and in their own apprehensions often
with a Ne vix quidem, scarcely or hardly saved, as through fire; but these with
an Euge bone serve.

The man grown in grace is the great man in Gods Books: Jobs goodness is set
down in Gods inventory before his goods; that he was a perfect man, is set down
before his so many Thousands. What a poor Inventory is there, where you can
only say, Imprimis so many thousands per annum; Item so many children: no
Imprimis a perfect man, a grown Christian? Somewhat like that short Chronicle
of that long lived Methuselah, he lived nine hundred sixty nine years, Genesis 5.
26, 27
begat sons and daughters, and dyed. That is a better memorial of Samuels and
John Baptists childhood, then of such an old age; The child grew, and was
strong in spirit, Luke 1. 80. Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him. 1 Samuel 3.
19.

Obj. I shall only resolve one great question, and troublous case of
conscience, and conclude; I grow not at all in Grace, I fear I never had Truth,
what will become of me?

Answ. This is as weighty and sad an Objection as can be made, yet is
frequently the complaint of many gracious hearts, no where more need of a wary
Answer.

1 It may be thou say true, then is thy Heb. 6, 4
case sad. It is a fearful case to go back: It Revel. 22. 11
is a fearful curse if God say, Let him be filthy still, never let fruit grow
more on that tree: Let neither dew nor rain be upon the mountains of Gilb^a.

2 Thou may be mistaken, for as all do not grow who say they do; so all are
not growing back who fear they are. Hypocrites make their Phylacteryes broader,
Godly men often make their Evidences of Heaven narrower then others.

1 We see not that growth which is really* Growth is insensible, not
momentaneous. The Sun we know moves, but we perceive it not moving. The blade
grows but imperceptibly, Mark 4 ^7
not so fast, but though the husbandman rise every night, and see it every day,
he sees not how it grows. Little children, if we be a while from them, we see
they have grown, but they with them discern not when. Others that converse with
us can discern more then our selves.

2 Growth is usually more sensible at the first conversion then after. Children
grow faster at their birth, then they do all their life again. The Sun is more
easily observed to move after his first rising then at noon, yet moves still.
The new married persons may show more fondness, yet have the same or greater
love continuing to their dying day.

3 God gives not the like measure of grace to all, therefore though thou come
short of another measure, yet thou may be a good Proficient. God does stint
each man with Roman^ 12. 3 Matthew 25. 15
his measure of Faith, one man two Talents, another five, another ten, to each
according to their ability, not his ability, but according to his own wisdom,
not happily according to theirs. The Lord expects not of all alike. He gives not
Grace by the Omer, as he did Manna, to every man his Omer, none more, none
less. Gods Church is not like an Army, wherein only valiant men are listed,
all perfect Saints, men of statu^e; but as an Army in another respect, where
are a few Commanders, and many common Soldiers. Thou have the measure which God
has dealt thee, as well as the ablest Christian. The good ground brought forth
some sixty, some thirty, some an hundred, not all alike.

God requires not the like rate and measure of Grace in all, as he did the
like Ransom* Exodus 30. 15
money from each Israelite, The Rich should not give more, the poor less, (^n
Emblem of the same price of Redemption paid by Christ for richer and poorer
Believers;) but as he did for Sacrifices, he that could not go to the price of
a greater Sacrifice, might bring his Lamb, if not that, a pair of turtle Lev.
12. 8
Doves or two young Pigeons. There are Mites in Gods Treasury, as well as
Talents. Mark 12. 42


4 There may be a stop at present, yet in order to growth, by some Disease and
hinderance. Children under a fit of sickness, grow not at present, but shoot
the more after. Est mora in vi^i^^ regressus qui progressu^ conducit, ut in
saltu qui toto impetu antrorsum ferri cupi^, regreditur. Bolles Past. Evan*
lib. 2. c. 21
The children of Israel went not always forward toward Canaan, but about and
about; sometimes stayed, sometimes went backward; but at last, after many a
weary step in a way they knew not, they were possessed of Canaan. Godly ones
may under temptation or desertion be as the trees in Winter, lose their Summer
leaves and fruit, but the life is hid in the root. Godly may lose the measure
of their comfort and sense of Gods favor, but grow in experience, humility,
self denial, poverty of spirit, and love to Christ.

5 There may be a growing in one kind Crescunt Pom^ and corpora humana, non
solum cum vel magnitudine, aut proceritate augentur, sed and illa ubi
maturescunt, and h^c ubi firmius consolidan^ur membra* Bol. ubi sup^^*
when not in another: Look well and you may find it. If you grow not upwards as
trees in blossoms (which often kill the tree) you may grow downwards. Be not
high minded but deep rooted. All growth is not in knowledge, or Comfort, or
Faith, but if we grow judicious, solid, serious, experienced. If we grow not in
Joy, if in spiritual sorrow, if we act not Faith at present so lively, if we
are exercising Repentance, it is as well. Graces as Stars, are not all seen
together, but take their turns; some setting, others rising; some in the
Meridian when others out of sight. God sometimes puts upon the exercise of
Faith, sometimes of Patience, sometimes of Zeal, sometimes of Meekness,
sometimes it is high water with floods of godly sorrow, and Joy at an ebb;
sometimes Springs and Rivers of fresh joy carry away all the salt waters of
sorrow; heavyness Psalm 30. 5
over night, joy in the morning.

6 The soul often sympathizeth with the body and mind in their natural or
accidental Distempers; melancholy humors abounding Natura ^^ obtu^i^r
languidius gratiae exerci tium. Non zelus in senibus, ut plerumque videtur, sed
ardor ^uvenilis deserbuit. Idem.
in the body, or melancholy passions in the mind, damp and cloud the present
actings of grace in the soul: as the Sun when thick clouds cover it, is not
seen at present, though it be at the same time in his height.

7 Grace is not always decaying when there are new eruptions of old
corruptions. Paul is led captive into sin ( Pugna coesus, non praelio victus,)
yet recovers himself and conquers. The Christian Soldier is dismounted and
thrown beside his confidence, and fighting on his knees, overcomes his enemy.
Pride is such a wild Beast, and such an enemy Est superbia gratia imprimis
infesta; banc bestiam ut subigat Deus, facit quod medicis solemn morbura non
ita gravem fovet, ut qui certe let^alis devitet. Idem*
to Grace, that God leaves the Canaanite within us to learn us war, that it
should not rise up against us to destroy us. As the wise Physician leaves his
Patient to conflict with a less distemper, to break the force of a mortal
Disease.

Object. But I have had stronger and more stirring desires formerly: I am cold
and flat to what I was: is not this a decay?

Answ, 1 There are at first legal stirrings raised from the Laws terrors; and
heightened by the quickness and sharpness of strong convictions, which gall
and wound the conscience; such a one is as on a Rack, he roars, cries out,
takes on, he has drops of Gods wrath falling on him, which puts him into a
flame (as one in a fever, who cries out, Drink, drink.) This is a diseased,
not right thirst. And there are Evangelical stirrings and desires begotten by
the Spirit, raised by the Gospel, cherished by the Promise. These are not so
loud, turbulent, make not like noise, but argue more grace. The former said,
Give me ease, I am sick, I am damned, give me a pardon, or I dye. This says,
Give me grace, let me have Christ, let me be renewed, or I die. There was more
of self-love in those first desires, more of love to God in these.

2 Have thou not, 1. Bemoyled and bemired thy self with the world? We cannnot
both prize Christ and Mammon, grow in Grace and Wealth. The stomach that feeds
on coals and ashes, and such trash, must needs forsake his meat.

2 Or has not spiritual pride given thee a fall? Thou see not that need of
dependence on God, use of Ordinances, frequency of Duties, but art in conceit
above all. Take away the wood, the fire goes out.

3 Happly thou have obtained thy desire. Why should the Sponse seek, fear, be
so solicitous, when she has found her Beloved, as when she mist him? Shall the
children of the Matthew 9
Bride-chamber mourn when the Bridegroom is with them? Say to thy soul, Now
return to thy rest. The Floods stop their course when come to the Sea. The
stone rests when at the center. Hope deferred makes heart sicl, Prove. 13. 12
desire obtained is a tree of life. A poor man condemned to die, falls down,
entreats, weeps, cries out for his life; it is granted, he kisseth the pardon,
blesses the Prince, thanketh his friends, he leaps, joys, praises God. A
Month after, this man is not so full of joy, or grief, or care, yet his life is
as dear to him as ever it was.

4 Thou have more work to do then thou could apprehend. Thy desires are
divided into many streams, which then were confined to one object. Then thou
more earnestly thirstedst after knowledge, prayedst more for pardon, now more
for a broken heart, Increase of Faith, power against this Lust, skill to manage
this calling, that business, and to look to the whole charge of God, and the
whole Armor of a Christian. One work in hand goes on faster, but when we must
use the Sword and Trowel, fight and build, this Church work goes slowly an end.

Object. 3. But my desires are not uniform, equal, sometimes up, sometimes
down; I know not what to think on it.

Resp. This may be, and yet all well.

1 This may come from the different actings and assistance of the Spirit, which
is a free Agent, as the wind blows sometimes higher, then the Ship moves
faster. The Spirit is not as fire or other natural Agents, which always act to
the utmost of their activity: fire burns as much as it can at all times: The
Spirit not so, but as it pleases; When Ezekiel 1
the Spirit moved the wheels, they moved; when it stood, they stood. When the
Spirit of God came upon Samson, he was more then a man, when the Spirit
departed he became like another man.

2 Faith acts differently, and the Affections are raised or abated according to
the actings of Faith. The more faith is acted in the persuasion of the love of
God, the more thou love, prayest, obeyest, etc.

3 Thy mind is better prepared by spiritual Meditation, therefore thou art more
affected; at another time thou have slackned thy thoughts, and thou art more
dull.

4 Is not thy body or mind distempered with melancholy? This makes thee as
blind Samson to the Philistines, sport for Satan. Luther Caput melancho^ licum
Diaboli B^^n^u^
was wont to call the melancholy head, the Devils bath, where he could cool and
refresh himself. There are two sights, which above all other please Satan: 1.
To see a wicked man merry. 2. A godly man sad. He reckons himself sure of both
when he sees them thus.

Object. But I find those corruptions in my heart which I never suspected, what
a sad growth is this?

Answ. As the day lengthens the cold strengthens. When thou wast alive without
Regredi non est, plura^n se peccata animadver^ere; quo enim peccatum nobis
conspectiu^, eo pl^^ adest luci^ ^nterna. Bolls
the Law and thy sins, thou wast dead really; when sin revives thou art alive.
As sin reigned unto death, so grace by righteousness reigns to eternal life.
There may be these two opposite Kings in one Kingdom, reigning sin, (or raging
rather) and Grace reigning; death and life reigning; sin and death reign in
thy apprehension, Grace and life in Gods intention. Where sin abounds most,
Grace abounds the more in one sense; that is, Grace is seen and set out the
more to pardon so much sin. So in another sense it is as true, where Grace
abounds most, sin abounds the more in making opposition so new, so great, so
strange against Grace. Doubtless the greatest Scholars have the greatest
Doubts and Objections, which they cannot answer, and the highest Saints have
the sorest temptations. The more the Spirit lusts against the flesh, the more
the flesh lusts against the Spirit. But Tandiu non relabimur, ubi ad priora
contendimus. Aug.
what does thy resisting of sin, lamenting for it, watching and praying against
it signify, but that thou art fighting the Lords battles? and thou must never
think of putting off thy harness till death. There is no triumphant Church on
earth, all the Saints are militant. We must not look to see the Egyptians*
drowned till we are on the other side the red sea. It is enough if the Lord
keep a distance between them and us here, that they may not come so near as to
overcome us, though in continual sight to terrify us. Sin has received his
deaths wound by Christ his death, and the Law of the Romans 8. 2
spirit of life in Jesus Christ, but in the grave it is not; on the Cross it
is, but it is long a dying (as if it had nine lives, as we say) the legs and
arms of it are broken; it can never come down (it is fast nailed) to rule
over thee; dying it is, not dead; but shortly what is now dying, thou shall see
dead; and what now thou see on the Cross, thou shall see in his grave; when
sin and death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire. All swallowed up in
victory.

Lastly, This and all the other Promises shall be fulfilled at death, then
shall be the great shooting of the departing soul, as of the bodies at the
departure: then shall what is imperfect be done away; or rather made perfect.
Therefore in this case I conclude with the Angels words to Daniel, Go thy way
Daniel, for the words are closed Daniel 12, 9
up, and sealed till the time of the end. Many of the choicest and greatest
Promises concerning the Church are sealed up and closed (unfulfilled) till the
end of the world. And the best and richest Promises made to the Saints are
sealed, closed up, not perfectly fulfilled till the end of their life; among
which this is one great and glorious one.

Etiam veni Domine Jesus.
The TABLE.
THE Introduction to, and opening of the Text page 1 Chap. 1 That Christ is to
the Church what the Sun is to the world 6 This prosecuted, in showing, 1-A
Likeness: 2 Unlikeness between Christ and the Sun 8 Chap. 2 The Likeness
between Christ and the Sun, in five particulars; viz. 1 Their Essence, 2
Attributes: 3 Properties: 4 Effects: 5 Accidents. Of the Agreement in their
Essence. 8, etc Chap. 3 The agreement between Christ and the Sun in their
Attributes, Whereof, 1 some Incommunicable: 2 Some Communicable Unity the first
Incommunicable Attribute 13 Chap. 4 Omniscience the second incommunicable
Attribute. 19 Chap. 5. The Suns Omnipresence a shadow of Christ's 25 Chap. 6.
The Suns Omni-influence a fourth Incommunicable Attribute 28 Chap. 7.
Perfection another Incommunicable Attribute 39 Chap. 8 Unchangeableness the
last Incommunicable Attribute 42 Chap. 9. Communicativeness a Communicative
Attribute 47 Chap. 10 Of several Properties in the Sun as a resemblance of
Christ, whereof Greatness the first 60 Chap. 11 Glory a second Property 68
Chap. 12. Light the third Property 71 Chap. 13 Warmth the fourth Property 93
Nine Effects in the Suns warmth, the like whereof in Christ, 96, 97 and seq.
The vast difference between Christ's teaching and man's 100 The difference
between comforts given by Christ; and those flowing from the creature, showed
in nine particulars 123 Chap. 14. The Suns Regency a shadow of Christ's, alike
in seven particulars 109 How the Sun is said to rule? How said to be for a
Sign. Judiciary Astrology condemned 115, 116 Chap. 15 The Suns activity and
motion the last Property Alike in seven particulars 118 Chap. 16 The fourth
agreement between Christ and the Sun in their like Effects 132 Alike in nine
Effects ibid Chap. 17 Their likeness in their Accidents 137 Whereof, 1 one
greater, viz. the Suns Eclipse, wherein a likeness in nine particulars ibid 2
Many less accidents: eleven mentioned 141 Chap. 18 The unlikeness and
disagreement between Christ and the Sun in ten particulars 147 Chap. 19 The
second main Proposition, That Christ is the Sun of Righteousness 150 Three
things opened. 1 How Christ is said to be Righteous or Righteousness. 1. In
respect of 1. his Person. 2. His Office 151 2 What Righteousness we have by
Christ? A twofold Righteousness 152 Sundry Theses or Aphorisms of
Righteousness 154
3 How and why called the Sun of Righteousness? Showed in three particulars 155
Man's best Righteousness like the Moon at full; in six parlars 156 Four things
done in Isreal's solemn Expiation day 157 Four Notes of such to whom Christ is
made Righteousness 161 Five golden chains laid down in Scripture; viz. 1 Of
Decrees: 2. Graces: 3 Duties: 4 Beatitudes: 5. Privileges 163 A fourfold
unsafe Righteousness; 1 Seeming, not real* 2 Semi-righteousness, not complete:
3 Decaying, not persevered in. 4 Relied upon, not disclaimed 166 A fourfold
good and necessary Righteousness. 1: Moral, or of Nations. 2 Legal, or of
Duties. 3 Evangelical, or of Graces. 4 Divine, or of Faith 167 Chap. 20 The
third main Doctrine, That all the Godly are such as fear Gods Name 171 Godly
subject to a threefold fear: 1 Natural. 2. Inordinate. 3. Religious 172
Religious fear has a double object. 1 Evil, 2 Good Evil to be feared with fear
of abhorrence 173 Good with fear of Reverence 174 Reverential fear twofold. 1.
Of lowest Saints arguing less perfection. 2 Of greater perfection and the
highest Saints 175 Religious fear,
1 The initial grace 176 2 The lasting Grace 178 3 The lowest grace 179 4 The
constant frame of the new heart 180
All Christians are not of one stature 181 The safety of such who have only
this grace of holy fear 182 Eight Notes of holy fear 185 God takes notice of
the least grace and lowest measures in his servants 186 Eight Objections
answered. 1 I have no Grace. Answ.
1 Godly ones ever have low thoughts of themselves 188 2 Not always equal
judges in their own case 189 3 It is possible to have true grace, and be
ignorant of it ibid. 4 God can espy grace where we espy nothing but sin 190
Three Gospel graces cover all sin: 1 Repentance: 2 Faith: 3 Sincerity 191
Object. 2. No grace because so little, answered 194 Object. 3 No grace because
no growth 195 Object. 4 No grace, because no parts ibid. Object. 5 No grace,
because no more comfort 196 Object. 6 No grace, because so many fears 197
Object. 7 No grace, because so many temptations 197 Object. 8 No grace, because
such corruptions 198 Three things hard to determine 199 Eight kind of sins
destroy not sanctification, lessen not Justification, hinder not salvation,
observed out of Romans 7. 199, 200 Seven other sins neither destroying Grace, nor
depriving of glory 204 Chap. 21. The fourth main Proposition, That Christ shall
certainly and timely arise upon all such as fear his Name 207 Seven Positions
employed 208 The Reasons, 1 Partly from somewhat in God; viz. 1. His Power. 2
His Promise to back his Power. 3 His love which confirms his Promise. 4 His
Glory which engages all 210 2 Partly from somewhat in the godly, 1 Their
prayers. 2 Miseries. 3 Graces 2^1 Quest. When shall this Promise be fulfilled,
or what is the time of this Sun rising? 212 Dispensations of Grace and comfort
various, not like the dispensations or operations of nature ibid The four
notable and great days of the Lord all unknown, 213 Nine special times when
this Promise fulfilled 215 The Godly may meet with sad times 220 The godly may
expect glorious times 221 Two glorious times to be expected ibid The foundation
of all sound hope laid in Grace 222 The great difference, 1 Between the sorrow
in the godly and in the wicked ibid. ^ In their comforts; set out in six
particulars 224 The godly to expect and pray for the accomplishment of this
Promise 225 Chap. 22 Of Christ his healing all the soul Diseases of his people
229 The many and various soul Diseases of the Godly ibid. Five sad but common
Diseases of all the Godly 231 Three extraordinary Diseases of some Godly ones
232 Three Reasons of the Point 234 This healing implies six things 237 Four
Means Christ uses to heal the soul 238 Quest. Whence is it that many complain
they are not healed? 242 Ans.
1. It may be their sin, from a fivefold default. ibid 2 Or is their mistake. A
threefold mistake of the godly 244
Christ is not one benefit but many 246 No man's case desperate 248 How are we
bound to bless God for Christ? ibid. Five Directions to get spiritual health
249 Chap. 23 The gracious heart can read Christ and self in every creature 254
A threefold good use of the Creature ibid A fourth sinful use made of the
Creature 256 The last Doctrine, That all the godly in whom Christ has begun a
good work shall come to an excellent growth in due time 257 Three especial
growths or growing times to the godly 258 Two growths more easily discernable
ibid. A third growth not so perceptible 259 A fourfold growth in the godly
ibid. 1 In grace; in five particulars 260 2 In Comforts 262 3 In Experiences
263 4 In Acceptableness 264 Three Reasons of the Point 265 Thankfulness for
Grace bestowed 267 Five Motives to this thankfulness. ibid. Three sorts
reproved:
1. Such as grow not at all 268 2 Such as grow from evil to evil 269 3 Such who
grow from good to evil 270
Enquiry and examination of growth 271 Nine Notes of growth 273 Eight
Hindrances to spiritual growth 277 Nine Helps to growth 281 Six Motives to
growth 284 That sad Objection of many of the godly who complain of their non
proficiency and want of growth. 288 Seven Considerations laid down in answer
to this Objection 289 Object. 2. I feel a decay, I have not such life, or
lively stirrings of grace as formerly 292 Four things in answer thereunto. 293
Object. 3. My desires are not alike and uniform, but unconstant 294 Four things
in answer to such a case ibid. Object. 4 I find more curruption in my heart
beyond all imagination. 295 Two things in answer thereunto 296
FINIS.
Errata quomodo Corrigenda.
REader, If thou be not ingenuous, thou have greater Faults of thy own to look
over; and if thou be, greater of mine then litteral or vocular to overlook;
pass by another, amend thy own: but think not to mend thy own at the end of
thy Death-Book, but have a care to avoid or amend them all along in thy Book of
Life, so will thou be sure to --

Farewell.

