

THE SHEE-DEVIL OF Petticoat-Lane: OR A True and Perfect Relation of a Sad
Accident which befell Mr. Freeland at the King's Head in Petticoat-Lane near
White-Chappel-Bars on Friday last, Iully 20, 1666.

Occasioned (as it is supposed) by a Maidservant living in the House; who,
upon cause thereof was searched by the Neighbour-Women, and what was the
effects thereof.

Attested by several Eminent Persons, some of whose names are hereunto
subscribed.

Printed with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Peter Lillicrap, 1666.

The SHEE-DEVIL OF Petticoat-Lane:
Or a Relation of sundry strange Accidents in the House of Mr. Freeland, on
Friday the 20th. of July last.
THis following Discourse (being no doubt the effects of Witchcraft) would
require a large Prologue, if the limits whereunto we are confined would permit
it; as to show what manner of people these Witches are, what strange things
have been done by them; of which I might produce many hundreds of examples;
together with the sad Catastrophe of such people as deal in those works of
darkness: But being confined to a single Sheet of Paper, we shall presently
fall to the work in hand.

This person, Mr. Freeland (a man whose honest civil carriage has brought him
to be of good repute amongst his Neighbors) about the 16th. or 17th. of this
present July, entertained into his House a Maidservant, of about fourteen
Years of Age; but after four days entertainment, found such dislike in her as
to turn her away; But at the instant before her departure, two Men being at
work in the Yard, one of them had two blows on the Back by a piece of Tyle, or
Hewed Brick; of which mistrusting his Fellow, asked him the reason why he did
so. The other denying it (as well he might) whilst he was busy at his Work,
was served in the same manner by this stone Devil; who also blaming the other
for abusing him, their feud might have increased at length to blows, had they
not been diverted by the breaking of the Glass-Windows; for now the Stones came
out from the Yard into the House, not making Quarrels, but breaking Quarrels;
and in a short space had so ordered the Window, that it was now become a
perfect Summer House. And one thing is to be observed, that these Stones never
came in at the broken places, but always took a fresh Pane or Quarrel, till
such time that all was broke, which made one there present to say, The Thrower
had a good aim, or he could never have hit so right: and which is more
observable, when the Maidservant was within the House, then the Stones came
flying inwards; but going into the Yard, then the Stones came as it were out of
the House, that betwixt them both there wanted a Glazier to compose the
Quarrels.

Whilst these things were in agitation, the Bungs and Corks out of the Buts in
the Sellar began to fly, the Beer spurted out, and every thing appeared there
in such a case as threatened a general inundation in the Seller, the
Brewers-Servant was present to put a Remora to what damages might acrew
thereby: but (as he told me himself) endeavors were to little purpose for
stopping one, two or three would want his help, so that not withstanding what
means could be used, in a little space the Sellar was so overflown that it was
above anckle height in beer.

Now this I must say in respect of Mr. Freeland that as for these strange
effects of his beer, it may happen only by the ordinary course of Nature, as by
putting Quicksilver into it, and other means as you may read in Mr. Scot's
Discovery of Witcheraft; but this that I shall mention afterward, I must
conceive is more then comes in the compass of my belief, to think that there
was nothing of VVitchcraft in it. For,

Presently after a Looking-Glass that stood on a Shell in the Kitchen of its
own accord flew out of the window into the yard, the good woman of the house,
knowing it to be a necessary implement for dressing her in the morning, went
and fetched it in again, and to be the more sure thereof, clapped it on the
dresser with a dish upon it, but that was of such little force to withstand
those strong things then in agitation, that it flew out from under the dish,
and struck one in the room a blow upon the shoulder.

But what is more strange, one Rowland Bennet sitting in a Drinking Room
besides the Kitchen, a Flaggon that stood upon the Shelf, there came flying
Circular, and struck him upon the Nose, with such violence as wounded him, and
caused a great effusion of blood.

Matters growing thus high, and notice being taken concerning the Maid, that
whilst she was within the house, the Stones flew inwards, and being in the
yard, the Stones then came as fast out of the house, still following her; a
mistrust came that these disasters were occasioned by her; which made (by a
general consent of the Neighbors) that she should be searched, which
accordingly was done, and (as I was told by some women in that employment)
there was found under her arms the likeness of Warts (I will not say duggs)
very flesh and red; whether such things be ordinary with women (especially
those of her age being but 14.) I must confess I am so much a stranger to that
Sex, that I can only plead ignorance unto it; and were it not for the opinion
of some who will not believe there is any witches (although the Scripture
confirms it) I should not have taken this pains upon me, especially having read
so much for Confutation thereof in Mr. Scot's Discovery of Witchcraft, only
this I shall say, that if there was nothing of VVitchcraft in it, it appears to
me extraordinary wonderful.

One thing (which I had almost forgot) that Mr. Freeland seeing his Windows go
so to wrack, put up the shutters, but then the pewter in the house began to
dance, and amongst the rest a Breader or Flower-Box, came off of the Shelf, and
flew at a distance upon a man's shoulder, with so great force, as made him have
good cause to remember it.

Many other things I might insert in confirmation of what is already written,
but if any remain dissatisfied they may be certified by hundreds of sufficient
people thereabouts.

And now to return to those who are so opininative that there is nothing done
by Witchcraft, first I shall produce these lines of the Poet.

Some Waters have so powerful been
As could not only bodies change,
But even the very minds of men,
Their operation is so strange.
It is truth many Cheats have been done; which have passed for matters
extraordinary, and many Stories I have read to that purpose; Which has made
many approved Sch^llers, to write against the vanities of Magicians, and
Inchanters which boast they can do miracles, hear what Cornelius Agrippa
himself says, who dived as much into this secret as any in his age. I have
tried oftentimes by the Witches and Conjurors themselves (says he) that their
arts (especially those which do consist of Charms, Impossibilities,
Conjurations, and Witchcraft whereof they were wont to boast) to be mere
foolishness, doting, lies, and dreams; and again in his book of Occult
Philosophy he blames his former practice of that art and assigns the
practisers thereof a place with Iannes and Iambres, by which it is doubted,
(we see) by learned men, whether Magicians have such power as is ascribed to
them or no, although no doubt witches have been in all ages; as we may read of
the Witch of Endor, etc.

But some perhaps may think this passage needless tobe inserted in such serious
matt^rs, but those who have consulted with Magic Books. As Bodin, Cardanus,
lib. 15. and others, assert, that in their Magical Assemblies, the Witches
never fail to dance, and in their dances they sing these words; Har, har,
Devil, devil, dance here, dance here, play here, play here, And vvhiles they
sing and dance every one has a broom in her hand, and holds it up aloft, and
as Mr. Freeland told me that vvhiles he stood in his shop, there came running
betwixt his legs a pevvter dish (vvell-bovvled that it broke not his shins) and
that off of a Shelf in the Kitchen; certainly this Devil (if it were a Devil)
as he was in part mischevious so he intermixed mirth vvithal.

To dravv toward a Conclusion, I know Readers will have a different
Construction of this work; some judging that this might be only things
Customarily done by Nature: others ascribing it to the highest pitch of
Witchcraft, for my own opinion, I do Imagine that there are such people as
Witches, although it be stiffly denied by many, and whether Mr. Freelands goods
were bewitched or no, I shall leave it to the Readers judgment; But this I am
informed that as this trouble began on Friday last being the 20 July 1666.
about two of the Clock in the afternoon, so about 11 at night, the
Maidservant being put away, these disturbances ceased and the house has
continued quiet ever since.

Being credibly informed that the Contents of these are true* Constables
Anthony D^^^, William ^^^ter*
Howard L^^^* William Law^^^tner.



