SHE VENTURES, AND HE WINS. A COMEDY, Acted at the New Theater, IN Little
Lincoln's End Fields, By His Majesty's Servants.

Written by a Young Lady.

LONDON. Printed for Hen. Rhodes, at the Corner of Bride-Lane, in Fleet Street;
J. Harris, at the Harrow in the Poultry; and Sam. Briscoe, at the Corner of
Charles-street, in Russel Street, near Covent Garden, 1696.

A New Comedy, called, The Mock-Marriage. Written by Mr. Scot.

THE PREFACE.
I Dare not venture to send this Play barefaced into the World, without saying
something in its Defense: I am very sensible of the many nice Judgments I
expose my self to, who may justly find an infinite Number of Faults in it;
which, I profess ingenuously, I am not able to mend; for, indeed, I am
altogether unacquainted with the Stage and those Dramatick Rules, which others
have with so much Art and Success observed. It was the first I ever made
Public by appearing on the Stage, which, (with the Advantage it met with, of
admirable Acting) is all the Recommendations I have for exposing it, in its own
naked Simplicity, without any Ornaments of Language or Wit; therefore, I
believe, the best Apology I can make for my Self and Play, is, that it is the
Error of a weak Woman's Pen, one altogether unlearned, ignorant of any, but her
Mother Tongue, and very far from being a perfect Mistress of that too; and
confess I have but just Wit enough to discern I want it infinitely; yet these
Reasons which should have dissuaded me, could not conquer the Inclinations I
had for Scribbling from my Childhood. And when our Island enjoyed the Blessing
of the Incomparable Mrs Behn, even then I had much ado to keep my Muse from
showing her Impertinence; but, since her death, has claimed a kind of
Privilege; and, in spite of me, broke from her Confinement.

The Plot was taken from a small Novel; which, I must needs own, had Design and
Scope enough to have made an excellent Play, had it met with the good Fortune
to have fallen into better Hands; but, as it is, I venture to send it abroad,
where, if it finds but a favorable Reception from my own Sex, and some little
Encouragement from the other, I will study in my next to deserve it: Which
then, perhaps, may make me ambitious enough to be known; but, in the mean time,
I humbly beg the Favor to borrow the Name of

ARIADNE.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mrs. BOWMAN, in Man's Clothes. THis is a Woman's Treat you are like to
find;
Ladies, for Pity; Men, for Love be kind;
Else here I come, her Champion, to oppose
The two broad-sides of dreadful Wits and Beaux:
It Is odds indeed; but if my Sword will not do,
I can produce another Weapon too. --
But to my Task, -- Our Author hopes indeed,
You will not think, though charming Aphra's dead,
All Wit with her, and with Orinda's fled.
We promised boldly we would do her Right,
Not like the other House, who, out of spite,
Trump'd up a Play upon us in a Night.
And it was scarcely thought on at the most,
But Hey-Boys, Presto! conjured on the Post.
These Champions bragged they first appeared in Field,
Then bid us tamely article and yield;
So did the French, and thought themselves secure;
But, to their cost, have fairly lost Namur.
And so much, Gentlemen, by way of Satyr,
Now I am come to examine your good Nature:
Since it is a Lady hopes to please to Night,
I Am sure you Beau's will do the Ladies Right.
Clap every Scene; and do your selves the honor,
Loudly to boast the Favors you have done her.
So may the Playhouse, Park, and Mall befriend you,
And no more Temple-Garden Broils attend you.
EPILOGUE, Spoken by Mr. Dogget, dressed as a Beau.
Written by Mr. Motteux.
OUR Poetess is troubled in her Mind,
Like some young Thing, not so discreet as kind,
Who, Without Terms, has her dear Toy resigned.
You all are wild to bring her to the touch;
You beg, you press, you swear, and promise much;
'Twere well if your performances were such.
Our Authress now is in, at your Devotion,
Though she, perhaps to please you, want the Notion,
Be generous once, she will quickly mend her Motion.
For, pray take notice, it is her Maidenhead,
(that of her Brain I mean) and you that wed
Feel seldom easy Joys, till that is fled.
If you are kind, she is willing to go on;
But if you turn her off, the Nymph turns Nun;
And what a scandal would be to the Nation,
Sheu'd some for want of Trade leave their Vocation;
And, among Friars pray for Occupation?
I Am much afraid a Woman's like a Play,
Yeu'd have 'em new and pretty every Day,
Or, else, your Servant; 'Gad I cannot stay.
It Is true, you wait a while in expectation
(When up the Curtain flies) of Recreation;
But you all go, when ere the Play is done;
Then down the Curtain drops, and whip you're gone,
And thence to tell ungrateful Truths you run.
Be kinder; let our unknown Fair appease ye,
Though you mislike her Play, her Face may please ye:
She hides it now, yet she mislikes the Task,
But knows how much you love a Visard Mask.
Yet sure she must be safe among You here;
We Beaux can never be Critics on the Fair:
As for you, Judges, if I rightly know ye,
You should think that ungrateful Task below ye.
Ye Braves, that made your Campaign at the Wells,
Storming the Breach of some Fair Citadels,
If kind, may chance to find out where she dwells.
Ladies, for your own sakes you must be kind;
Lest, while we scarce one writing Beauty find,
Vain Man deny your Sex the Graces of the Mind.
Take you her part, the Men of course submit,
And so your Beauty shall secure her Wit.
Let all these Reasons kindly draw you in,
And safely then She Ventures, and we Win.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Charles Frankford, Brother to Charlot, in Love with Juliana. Mr. Boman.
Sir Roger Marwood, Friend to Sir Charles. Mr. Scudamore. Lovewell, a younger
Brother of small Fortune, married to Charlot. Mr. Hudson. Freeman, a Vinter,
Husband to Urania. Mr. Freeman. Squire Wouldbe, a proud pragmatical Coxcomb of
poor extraction, Husband to Dowdy. Mr. Doget.
WOMEN.
Charlot, a Rich Heiress. Mrs. Bracegirdle. Juliana her Cousin, in Love with
Sir Chapter Frankford. Mrs. Boman. Bellasira, in Love with Sir Rog. Marwood. Mrs.
Martyn. Urania, Wife to Freeman. Mrs. Barry. Dowdy, wife to Squire Wouldbe,
pretending to rule her Husband, yet always jealous and uneasy. Mrs. Bowtel.
Mrs. Beldam; her Mother, a Pawn-broker. Mrs. Lee. Doll, Urania's Maid. Mrs.
Lawson.
Servants. Waiters. Chairmen. Bailiffs. Turnkey, etc.
She Venters, and He Wins, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Charlot and Juliana in Men's Clothes. JUL. Faith, Charlot, the Breeches
become you so well it is almost pity you should ever part with 'em.


Char. Nor will I, till I can find one can make better use of them to bestow
'em on, and then I Will resign my Title to 'em for ever.


Jul. It Is well if you find it so easy, for a Woman once vested in Authority,
though it is by no other than her own making, does not willingly part with it:
But, prithee Child, what is thy Design? for I am yet to learn.


Char. Why, to ramble the Town till I can meet with the Man I can find in my
heart to take for better for worse. These Clothes will give us greater Liberty
than the scandalous World will allow to our Petticoats, which we could not
attempt this Undertaking in without hazard to our Modesty. Besides, should I
meet with the Man whose outside please me, 'twill be impossible by any other
means to discover his Humor; for they are so used to flatter and deceive our
Sex, that there is nothing but the Angel appears, though the Devil lies lurking
within, and never so much as shows his Paw till he has got his Prey fast in his
Clutches.


Jul. Methinks you that have so true a Notion of that treacherous Sex, should
be afraid to venture for fear of being your self deceived.


Char. No, my dear Julia, to avoid it is the scope of my Design; for, though by
Laziness and Ease the generality of Mankind is degenerated into a soft
Effeminacy, unworthy of the noble Stamp was set upon their Soul, there still
remains a Race retains the Image Heaven made them in, Virtuous, and Just,
Sincere and Brave: And such a one I Will find, if I search to the Antipodes for
him, or else lead Apes in Hell.


Jul. But, Dear Child, will not every one think you stark mad for a Husband, to
take this extravagant course for one?


Char. No sure; none can think one of my Youth and Fortune can want the Tenders
of Hearts enough; I Am not obliged to follow the World's dull Maxims, nor will I
wait for the formal Address of some Ceremonious Coxcomb, with more Land than
Brains, who would bargain for us as he would for his Horse, and talks of
nothing but Taxes and hard Times, to make me a good Housewife; or else some gay
young fluttering Thing, who calls himself a Beau, and wants my Fortune to
maintain him in that Character: Such an opinionated Animal, who believes there
needs no more to reach a Ladies Heart than a boon mien, fine Dress, the
Perriwig well adjusted, the Hand well managed in taking Snuff, to show the fine
Diamond-Ring, if he is worth one; sometimes a conceited Laugh, with the Mouth
stretched from one Ear to the other, to discover the white Teeth, with sneak and
cringe in an affected Tone, cries Damn me, Madam, if you are not the prettiest
Creature my Eyes ere saw! It Is impossible for me to live if you are so cruel to
deny me; with a world of such foolish stuff, which they talk all by rote; no,
my Julia, I Will have one who love* my Person as well as Gold, and please my
self, not the World, in my choice.


Jul. Is there is any such thing as real Love in that false Sex, none sure is so
capable to inspire it, as the charming Charlot, your Person is indeed
infinitely taking, your Humor gay, and Wit refined, and Beauty enough to tempt
a Hermit; yet, after all, you will find it a difficult business to distinguish,
which the most zealous Adorations are paid to, your Beauty, or Gold.


Char. I warrant thee, Child, I Will take Care of that: But come, to our Affairs
in hand.


Jul. Where Is your Brother?


Char. He Is safe enough, he dined to Day at Sir Roger Marwood's, where, it is
twenty to one, he will be engaged the Evening.


Jul. Suppose he should meet us in our Rambles, he would certainly know us.


Char. You're so full of your Supposicions; suppose he should, which there is no
great danger of, but at the Playhouse, where we'll first stear our Course;
he is too discreet to discover us, and too good humored to be angry, but will
think it one of my mad Frolicks, without other Design, but a little Diversion.
But I know from whence your Fear proceeds; which, if you put any more Scruples
into my Head, I Will discover; therefore look to your good Behavior.


Jul. sighs. I confess you have me at an Advantage, but that has now no part in
my design, to serve you with that little Wit I have; there is a Coach waits us
at the Garden-Gate.


Char. Allons, my Dear, now Love be propitious.


[Ex. Char. and Jul* SCENE II.
Enter Freeman, and Urania with a Letter in her Hand. Uran. Nay, prithee
Freeman, be not in such a Rage at a thing so contemptibly ugly, that is not
worth raising the Passion of a Man; you must trust to my Honesty after all you
can do, and, if I designed you foul play, I would not acquaint you thus freely,
as I do, with all the Coxcomb's proceedings: Pray leave him to my management,
and for once trust a Woman's Revenge; I Will warrant you I Will handle him so as
shall give you more pleasant Satisfaction than any you can propose; nothing so
sharpens our Sexe's Invention, as Revenge, the darling Delight of our Nature;
and, if I do not pursue mine home, may the Curse of being thought dishonest,
without knowing the pleasure of it, fall upon me.


Freem. Urania, I do not suspect you of any Design to abuse me, but, as I
believe you honest, I would have the World do so too. Besides, there is no Fort
so impregnable, that may not one time or other, with long Assaults or
Stratagem, be taken: But I will have Patience, and see the result of your
Designs; and, if they do not satisfy me very well, will then take my own
Measures with him.


Uran. Agreed, with all my Heart, here is the Letter I just now received from
him, and likewise my Answer.


[Gives him two several Billets. Freem. reads. Dear Mrs. Honysuckle,
I don't know what a Devil you have done to me, but I can neither eat, drink,
or sleep, for thinking of those dear, damned Eyes that have set my Heart on
fire; let me know when that troublesome Property, your Husband, is out of the
way, and I will fly to assure you, I am your devoted Slave,

S. Wouldbe.



Freem. Familiar sawey Fool, I know his Impudence so well, I do not wonder at
him: But now for yours.

Reads.'It Is impossible to gain any opportunity by my Husband's being abroad,
because then I am confined to the Bar; but, if you dare, for my sake,
metamorphise your Breeches into Petticoats, but avoiding the seeing of my
Husband, and you may pass with all the security possible: To night, in
Play-time, will be very convenient, it being a new one, we shall in all
likelihood be empty of Company; so that you may have the opportunity, if you
desire it, of being alone, with your obliged humble Servant.


Freem. What mean you by this, Urania? Sure you mistook when you gave me this
Letter? What is your Design? The Devil take me if I can imagine.


[Looks surly. Uran. Why, first to draw the Woodcock into the Net, and then to
use him as I think fit. Pray rely on me, and be not so suspicious, for, if you
are, you unravel my whole Design.


Freem. I can scarce confine my Anger to a Jest; but, for once, I trust you,
but if you play me false, and make me thus the Property, as he calls me, of my
own Disgrace, look to 't, by Heaven I Will murder thee.


Uran. Your Threats no way terrify me, having no Designs that will give you
any cause of Displeasure: I Will dispatch away a Messenger to my Gallant, and, in
the mean time, give you your Instructions, for you must be assistant to me.


Freem. Well, go in, I Will follow you immediately.

[Ex. Urania. Freeman Solus. I never had the least reason to distrust her
Honesty, though I Am not perfectly satisfied with this Letter of hers; but I Will
watch her narrowly, and it shall escape me hard if she deceive me.


[Exit. Freem. SCENE III.
St. James's Park. Enter Lovewell crossing the Stage; Charlot and Juliana
following him in Men's Clothes. Char. Thus far we have kept sight of him, see we
don't loose him now.


Jul. No, he is turning again this way.


Charl. Well, if I like his Humor and Sense as well as his Person, my search
is at an end; for this is my Man, I believe he will make an excellent Frugal
Husband, he has led us a sweet Jaunt; I am very weary, but must not complain.
O, here he comes again, I Will accost him, and try what Mettle he is made of.


Jul. Why sure thou art not stark mad; s'life he will beat us, do you see how
surly he looks.


Char. No Parlying now; Prepare to second me, whilst I give the Onset.


Jul. You Are a Mad-Wench, but I Will not fly from my Colors.


Char. Well said Girl, now I like thee; but here he is.


Enter Lovewell, as crossing the Stage, Charlot stops him. Char. Give a
Stranger leave Sir, to disturb your Meditations, which seem to be as serious,
as if you had just received the fatal Nay, and were now breathing Vengeance
against Fortune, Love, and Womankind.


[All the while she speaks, he surveys her from Head to Foot. Love. Indeed, you
mistake, young Sir, I was thinking of no such Trifles: those Fooleries belong
to your Years, or at least are only then excusable, But I believe you are
disposed to be merry, Gentlemen, and at this time I am very unfit Company for
you; the serious Humor I am in, will not agree with yours.


Jul. Is it the effects of being crossed in some Design, makes you so, or your
natural Temper?


Love. Neither Sir, but why does it concern you to know.


Char. Because we would gladly divert it, Sir, would you accept of our
Endeavors toward it, by admitting us into your Company.


Jul. There Is nothing so pernicious to Health, as the indulging of Melancholy,
and we having a particular interest in yours, must by no means leave you with
so dangerous a Companion.


Love. A particular Interest in my Health, for what end, Sir?


Char. Oh, for several: My future Happiness and all my Joy on Earth depends
upon it, had I as many Lives as Argus's Eyes, I Would hazard 'em all for the
preservation of yours.


Love. Hey day! whence grows this mighty kindness? I fear Sir, you are
mistaken; I do not remember I ever had the honor to see you before.


Char. I have evidences enough confirms me, you're the Man that has cruelly
robbed a near and dear Relation of mine of her Repose for ever, and except you
restore it her by reciprocal Love, I fear the worst effects of this unhappy
Passion.


Love. Oh Sir, I find you design to divert your self instead of me.


[Love walking off. Char. By Honor, Truth, and all that is Sacred, I Am serious.


[Char. catching hold off him. Love. Well Sir, bring me to the Lady, I Am not so
cruelly inclined, to let a pretty Woman languish for any civil Kindness I can
do her.


Char. O Heavens! Julia! if he should be Married! I dare not proceed, till I
know, do you ask him the Question, for I have not Courage.


[Char. aside to Julia. Jul. Never fear it, he has not the Slovenly Air of a
Married Man, but you shall soon be satisfied.

Pray Sir, give me leave to ask you an impertinent Question. Are you Married?


[To him. Love. Heavens forbid, it is the only happiness I can boast.


Char. Perhaps you may find it a greater than you are aware of, before we part,
if you use it to your advantage.


Jul. What think you, Sir, of a young Beautiful Lady with a great Fortune, who
loves you well enough to throw her self into your Arms? Could you find in your
Heart think you to refuse her.


Love. Why Faith, my little Acquaintance, these would all very well agree with
a Man under my circumstances; but pray Gentlemen, unriddle, and let me know the
good Fortune you tantalize me with.


Char. Well Sir, I will most faithfully discharge my Message, I have as I told
you, a Relation that is infinitely dear to me, who is, if the World does not
flatter her, not Unhandsome; Young I Am sure she is, and not Ill-humour'd, but
what supplies all Defects, is a Fortune not despicable, being by the Death of
her Mothers Father, who was a Rich East India Merchant, possessed of 1500 l. a
Year, besides a considerable value in Money and Jewels; but what renders her
most worthy of your Affections, is that she passionately loves you, loves you
to Madness, from the first Moment she saw you, and must be ever-miserable to
live without you.


Jul. Alas, it is not possible she can live at all, without a suitable Return
to her Affection, you cannot sure Sir, be cruel to a young Lady.


Love. Looks surly. Ah poor Lady, it may be so.

[To Julian. But you had best Sir, put your Friend upon some other Subject, for
we shall not be Company for each other long, if he proceeds in this, one of you
I presume have been dabling with your Lady's Mothers Woman, and wants a
convenient Tool to cover shame; you were strangely ill-advis'd to pick me out,
there be Cullies enough to serve your gross purpose, for whatever Opinion you
may have of your moving Rhetoric, you will find it no easy matter to impose
upon a Man, who has had more Experience of the Town than your Years will give
you leave to know. It Is your Youth indeed that best excuses your Folly, in
attempting a Man you have no reason either from his Character (if you ever
heard it) or that Conversation you have had with him, to think a Fool fit for
the use I find you design me.


[Is walking off. Char. By Heaven, and all that is good, you do me wrong: I Am
sensible how hard a matter it would be to impose on you, or did she think you
so, I Am sure would scorn you; may all the Happiness I wish my self, prove
endless Torments, if every Word I have said, be not sincerely true.


[Char. holds him and looks concerned. Love. What, I warrant, it is some good
Pious Alderman's Wife, that finding her Husband defective, wants a Drudge to
raise an Heir to the Family, it is indeed the common Game we younger Brothers
live by.


Jul. Sir, does our Habits or Addresses merit no better an Opinion, than so
sordid a Thought of us: Besides, did we not tell you, she is a Rich Young
Heiress, and consequently unmarried.


Love* Pardon me, Sir, I had forgot that, but there follows a greater mischief;
she is, I suppose, for Honourable-Love: No, I Am for none of that. If she will
accept of a Civil Kindness or so, I Will do my best to pleaseher.


Char. When I have told you Sir, that this Lady whom you please to be so witty
upon, is Sister to Sir Charles Frankford, think if you can hope for any thing
from her, but what Marriage which you so much despise, entitles you to; if you
do not know him, give your self the trouble to enquire after him, and his
Sister Charlot, whom perhaps you may not find so contemptible, as you imagine;
or at least if she does not merit your Love, she may a little more respect.


Love. This looks very real, it may be true, and I like an unlucky Dog be too
incredulous.

[Aside. Sir, I most earnestly entreat your Pardon, Sir Charles Frankford I
know very well, and have often heard of his beautiful Sister, but yet you must
give me leave to distrust my own merit, so much as to think she cannot cast
away a Thought, much less her Love on so unworthy an Object of it, as the
unhappy Lovewell.


Char. You're as suspicious as an old Lady, that Marries a Young Man, is of a
Handsome Chambermaid, (but no more Doubts and Scruples dear Infidel, but if
you resolve to Marry this kind-hearted Lady, make me the Messenger.


Love. Well, conduct me to the Lady, we shall make the best Bargain, I hope you
would not have me Marry without seeing her.


Char. No Sir, be to Morrow Morning exactly at Nine a Clock, at Rosamond's
Pond, she will meet you there with one Lady more, both masked, she that gives you
her Hand, accept with it her Heart and Person, but come not, if you do not
fully resolve to Marry her; consider of it till to Morrow Morning. Come Cozen,
I believe by this time we have tired the Gentleman of our Company.


Jul. But first, let us know your final Resolution.


Love. It Is to meet the Lady however.


Jul. We may trust to her Charms for the rest.


Char. Well Sir, adieu, remember Nine.


Love. Fear not, I Am too much pleased with the imagination of my approaching
Happiness to forget it.


Char. We'll set you down where you please.


Love. With all my Heart, I lodge in Leicester-fields.


Char. That Is in our way, come Sir.


[Exeunt Omnes. The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Squire VVouldbe, with a Letter in his Hand, Reading. I Am the luckiest
Fellow that ever was born, I was surely wrapped in my Mother's Smock, none of all
the weak Sex can find in their Heart to deny me: I have most powerful Charms,
that is certain. But Oh, ye Gods! that a Man of my Parts should be born of such
mean Parents! I must hasten, for it is near Six.


Enter Dowdy. Squire VVouldbe puts the Letter hastily up. Sq. Wouldbe. Pox on
her, now shall I be plagued with her Impertinence.


[Aside. Dow. Nay, I will see that Paper, what is it you put up so hastily: Let
me see you Rebel you, for I Am resolved I will see it, that I will.


[Running to him. Sq. Wouldbe. See, what would you see? 'tit nothing but a
Libel* There, take it, bid the Maid bring my Cloak and my Sword; I Am just sent
for out, to a Client.


[Gives her a wrong Paper. Dow. Is this all? here take it again; but you shall not
go out to never a Client in England, that you shall not: Marry gap! Go to a
Client, and leave me to Sup alone, after I have got a Hot Supper for you too.
You Don't care for my Company, that you don't: I don't care, I Will go and tell
my Mother, that I will, I will not be used so.


[Gives him the Paper. [Crys and Snivels as she speaks: Sq. Wouldbe. I must
wheedle the Fool; not that I care for the Mother more than the Daughter, but I
shall lose many a good forfeited Pawn in the Year* if any Complaints are made.


[Aside. Dow. What Is that you mutter to your self? I swear and protest I will
go to my Mother, and make her fetch Home all the Plate and Linen in your
House, you Rebel you, and see where you can get more: Was not I the making of
you? Now you would leave me, and a Hot Supper, for a Client. Marry come up.


[She going off, he catches hold of her. Sq. Wouldbe. Nay, prithee Bunny, don't
be nangry; as true as I am God A'mighty's Child, I Will come Home to Supper; pay
Bunny let I go.


[Makes a Courtesy and looks simply. Dow. You shant go, that you shant, you
Rebel you.


[She pouts and looks surly. Sq. Wouldbe. If you will not let me go to my Clients,
how shall I be able to maintain my Family. Let me go Bunny, and indeed and
indeed I Will give you a Fine New Petticoat, such a one as your Neighbor Mrs.
Whatyoucallun has.


Dow. But will you come Home to Supper then at Eight a Clock?


Sq. Wouldbe. I will truly, Bunny, what have you got?


Dow. A most lovely Buttock of Beef and Cabbage; do Puggey, pray come Home. Ha,
but will you?


[Fawns upon him, and Kisses him. Sq. Wouldbe. Deed I will Mrs. Honysuckle, tum
dive I one, two te Busses, nay, one mo: B'y Bunny.


Dow. Your a Wicked Man, well go, but make haste Home.


Sq. Wouldbe. Heaven make thankful, I am at last rid of her nauseous fondness.

[Aside. B'y b'y, I Will take my Cloak within.


[Exit. Sq. Wouldbe. Dow. B'y dear Rogue, oh it is a sweet natured Man, he is
strangely fond of me.

Enter Beldam. How now Daughter, where is my Son?


Dow. He Is just gone out Mother, but he will come Home again to Supper.


Bell. He Would best, or he may look for the Point Cravat: I have here for him a
Forfeited Pawn, of no less than one of the King's Officers, Mr. Constable of
our Parish, it is almost spick and span new, he never wore it but of Sundays.
But are you sure Daughter, he will come back to Supper, or else I will not leave
it.


Dow. O, I am sure he will, for he promised me, and he is never worse than his
Word. Poor Rogue! O, he is the kindest Wretch, Mother, that ever was, he grows
fonder and fonder every day than other. Will Not you sup with us Mother? Poor
Wretch, he longs to see you.


Bell. No, Daughter, I cannot stay, I have appointed a Customer to be at Home at
Seven, to take in a Silver Tankard, which I will send to you, for that you
have, is called Home, and I am to return it to Morrow; this is one much of the
same value, the change will hardly be perceived.


Dow. But you will bring it before you take the other Home I hope; for my
Puggey will drink out of nothing but Silver.


Bell. Ai, Ai, that I will, since you say my Son is so good, you shall have any
thing. Here, take what I have brought for him; remember my love to him, and so
good Night, Daughter; I must be gone.


Dow. Good Night, Forsooth, if you must.

[Exit. Bell. It Is a rare thing to have such a Mother; she is always giving my
Puggy one good thing or other, which makes him take care to please me: she will
one time or other disgrace me, by coming in her every Day Clothes; I am ashamed
to call her Mother in them.


Exit. Dow. SCENE II.
Sir Charles's Garden. Enter Sir Charles Frankford and Sir Roger Marwood, with
Music. Sir Char. I think Sir Roger, we must give my Sister, and Cozen Julia,
an Essay of our Serenade; the Song is pretty, and may properly be applied to
any of the fair Sex: But is it not very gallant to treat a Sister thus?


Sir Roger. I believe, Sir Charles, if Madam Juliana had not a greater share in
it than your Sister, she would lose her part in this Entertainment.


Sir Char. I must own my fair Cozen has charmed me; but I have of late observed
her grown so thoughtful, I fear her Heart already is engaged, which makes me
fear to own any Pretensions to it.


Sir Roger. She cannot sure be insensible to the Brother of Charlot, whom she
so tenderly loves; advance your Addresses, you have a good Advocate.


Sir Char. No, I Will see that Mad Sister of mine disposed of first: I Would give
Five Hundred Guineas to see her in love; for I dare not own my being so, till
she is a little tamed. She Will only make me her sport, as she does all Mankind
besides.


Sir Roger. I think Sir Char. you should rather give it to secure her from it
if possible; for what Assurance have you she will not blind with that mad
Passion, be betrayed to match her self to one unworthy of her Merit, and bring
an Alliance to your Family, you would blush to own.


Sir Char. No, I dare swear for her; however frollicksome she is in her Humor,
she would scorn to look on any Thing was basely born: but I have often heard her
declare she would, when ever she married, match her self where she found more
Merit than Estate. I know so well her Pride in that Concern, I dare trust the
Honor of our Family in the Hands.


Sir Rog. Then if she should throw her self away upon some well-born younger
Brother, not worth a Groat, I find you would easily forgive her.


Sir Char. She has a plentiful Fortune, enough to make any Man happy; she is
free and absolute, and has as much Right to dispose of her self and Fortune as
I of mine.


Sir Rog. It argues but little Kindness, for your Sister to be so careless of
her Advantage.


Sir Char. You need not instruct me in my Kindness for my Sister, she never
found any want of it, nor shall she. But whence comes your Concern for her, Sir
Roger?


Sir Rog. As she is the Sister of my dearest Friend: But come, let us have that
Song. Are you sure they are together?


Sir Char. They seldom part so soon, you know. Come, Gentlemen, let us have the
Song.


[To the Music. SONG.
YOung Celinda's youthful Charms,
Fills the admiring Town with wonder;
The stubbornst Heart, her Eyes alarms,
And makes them to her Power surrender.
Face, and Shape, and Wit so rare!
Heavens Masterpiece she was designed:
A graceful Mien, and such an Air,
Nothing excells it but her Mind.
Though Women envy, Men admire;
Her Eyes, in all, do Love inspire.
Sir Rog. I think the Door opens.


Sir Char. Pray, Gentlemen, retire a little, we'll come to you immediately in
the Street.

[Ex. Music. Enter Charlot and Juliana in their own Clothes; and Betty. It Is
they, let us get behind this Arbor, from whence we may discover what they say;
they certainly will go in there; it is the usual place of discoursing their
Secrets in: Perhaps I may pay for my listening; but I cannot resist so sweet a
temptation.

[They go behind the Arbor; Charlot and Juliana go into the Arbor. Julian's
Maid stays without. Charlot speaks as she enters the Arbor. I told you 'twas
but your Fancy; I was sure to Music, nor no one else, but my Brother, would
enter here, and he is not at home. Now, my dear Julia, do not you applaud my
happy Fortune? Is it not better, thus to choose for One's self amongst a
Multitude, than out of a few, whose Interest, more than Love, solicites me? If
all things prove but successful to my Wishes, in this Affair, I shall be
perfectly happy; if my dear Julia was but so, I could not wish my self another
Joy.


Jul. Nothing would more alleviate my Grief, than constantly to see you so;
which is the hearty wish of your unhappy Friend.


Char. You heighten your own Trouble, by your obstinate refusal to let him
know, what I am sure he would accept with Joy: For Heavens sake let me tell him,
I Am confident he will bless me for it, and so will you hereafter.


Jul. I Will sooner yield my Body to the Stake, than own a Passion for a Man
thinks me not worth his taking notice of: No, my dear Charlot, I beg you to
conceal it, as you would do a fatal Secret, that would betray my Life; for, the
first Minute he discovers it, I Will put it out of his Power ever to see me more.


Char. It grieves my Soul, to see you thus afflicted, and will not give me
leave to ease your Pain; but, be assured, I never will betray the least of all
your Thoughts, without your free Consent.


Jul. No matter what becomes of wretched Juliana, so my dear Charlot's happy.


Char. Take but the same Method, and you may be so too; for, should my Designs
fail, the way I Have laid them, I Will openly own them, and then I do not fear
being denied; though 'twould vex me heartily, to miss the Pleasure of knowing,
whether I Am beloved or not.


Jul. Alas! your Passion's but in jest; you do not yet know the Torments, to
wake whole Nights with restless Thoughts.


Char. No, no, never will; where ere I loved, I Would tell him so, and break that
useless piece of Modesty, imposed by Custom, and gives so many of us the Pip.


Jul. I wish I had your merry Heart; but I am now so serious, that the least
Jest is unsavory to me. Prithee Betty sing the last new Song I gave you.


Char. Nay, if you are come to Rhiming, you are in Love indeed.


SONG.
REstless in Thoughts, disturbed in Mind,
Short Sleep's deep Sighs: Ah much, I fear,
The inevitable Time assigned,
By Fate, to Love's approaching near.
When the dear Object present is,
My fluttering Soul is all on fire:
His sight's a Heaven of Happiness;
And, if he stays, I cannot retire.
Tell me, some one, in Love well read,
If these be Symptoms of that Pain.
Alas, I fear, my Heart is fled,
Enslaved to Love, and Love in vain.
Char. That Is your own Fault: But come, let us in, the Air grows cool.


Jul. I Will wait on you to your Chamber, and there leave you to your Repose.

[Exit. Char. Jul. and Bet. Sir Charles comes forward and speaks. Well, what
think you now, Sir Roger, had I not reason for my Suspicion? I have paid for my
Curiosity; but I am only too well assured of what I feared before.


Sir Rog. Suppose, Sir Charles, you should prove the Man: I dare believe I
guess not much amiss, who should your Sister take such Liberty with, as to
offer to declare a business of that nature to, but to you?


Sir Char. I wish no happy Fortune: But much I fear my Stars are not so kind.


[Sighs. Sir Rog. We forget our Music; or, at least, they will think so.


Sir Char. Come, let us to 'em.


[Exit. Sir Charles and Sir Roger. SCENE III.
A Tavern Kitchen.
Enter Freeman, Urania and Cook-Maid. Ura. Doll, do you be sure to keep the
Kitchen clear, we must be as quick as possible for fear of Interruption by
Companies coming in.


Freem. Pl -- on him, if he would but make haste, there is now but one Company
in the House.

Doll looking out. O he is here, Sir, just got out of a Chair.


Ura. Run you Doll, and bring him in here; and get you gone, Freeman, you know
your end.


[Ex. Doll. Freem. I warrant I Will remember it with a Vengeance.


[Ex. Freeman. Doll returns with Esquire Wouldbe in Woman's Cloths, and Exit. Esquire
Wouldbe makes a Curtchy, goes up to her.] Your Servant, sweet Mrs. Strawberry,
am not I a pretty Gentlewoman? Now tum dive I a Buss.


Ura. Fie Sir, what do you mean, you know there is always Capitulation before a
Surrender; you must promise Constancy, Secrecy, and a thousand other things
beside, before we come to the main point.


Esquire Wouldbe, Hark you dear Child, is this a place to make Conditions in? What
a Devil made you bring me into the Kitchen, your Chamber had been a properer
place for what we have to say and do?


Ura. Ai, but to have sent you up alone, or carried you up directly, might have
given cause of suspicion to my Servants, which now I avoid by taking you from
hence.


Esquire W. Let Us lose no time, dear Child, but go where Love and Beauty calls.

Aside. I Gad, that was a high touch if it passes for my own.

To her. Come, come, do not delay my Bliss, your House begins to fill; and we
may lose this blessed Opportunity.


Ura. Well, come then, but you must be sure to be very Civil.


Esquire W. Ay, ay, as Civil as you desire.


[Leaves off amazedly, hearing Freeman's Voice Freeman within aloud. Freem. A
Man, say you, in Women's Cloths with my Wise? D -- him, give me my Sword, I Will
stick him to the Wall.


Ura. O Heavens what will you do, your betrayed!


[Esque W. shakes and shows great signs of fear. Sw -- s what shall I do?
here is never a Hole to creep in, as I see, that will hide a Mouse.


Freem. within. Here, Sirrah, charge this Pistol for me whilst I charge the
other, perhaps he is armed for a Surprise; but I Will Maul the Dog, I Will lay his
Letchery for him I warrant him.


Ura. seeming in a great fright. You're a dead Man if you do not do something
presently.

[Looking about sees the Cystern. Here, here, get into the Cystern, there is as
it happens but very little Water in it.


Esquire W. Ah Lord, any where so I may but save my dear Life; well this is a
Judgment upon me for coveting my Neighbor's Wife, if I had been at home with
my own, I need not have feared any body.


[Gets into the Cystern. Enter Freeman Armed looking about. Freem. What have
you done with your Metamorphos'd Gallant, produce him you would best, for if he
escape my Fury you shall feel it, you Jezebel you.


Ura. What is it you mean, are you mad to make me and your self ridiculous? I
know of never a Gallant that I have, if you do you had best find him out; Who
is it puts these Crotchets in your Crown? you never had reason to believe ill
of me, and why should you hearken to every Fool's Tale?


Freem. Why, had not you a Man with you in Women's Cloths?


Ura. I have had no body with me but my Midwife, and if you had come sooner you
might have examined if you pleased.


Freem. Indeed Urania, I am too blame to suspect you upon every idle story; but
I was told that Esquire Wouldbe was with you in Women's Cloths; pray forgive my
Passion.


Ura. Indeed you are unkind, but I can forgive you more than this.


Freem. Have an Eye to the Bar, for I am sent for out, but will not stay.


[Ex. Freeman. Esquire Wouldbe peeps out. Esquire Wouldbe. Is he gone? I Am almost
drowned, the Water's come in ever since I Have been here.


Ura. He is, you may venture forth.


Aside. Pray Heaven I hold from laughing.

Esquire Wouldbe comes out dropping wet. Esquire Wouldbe. What shall I do, I shall
catch my death, with all these wet Cloths about me?


Ura. Here, take this Key, and go up to the Star, there is a Bed provided for
you, and as soon as I can secure my Husband I Will come to you.


Esquire W. Dear kind charming Creature, how you revive me? but are you sure he is
gone now, and the coast clear, for it is impossible I can take Sanctuary in the
same place again, for by this time it is full of Water.


Ura. You Will have no more occasion, I hope, but if you should, I think you must
hide there in the Feather-Tub; pointing to a Feather-Tub.


Esquire W. I wish I had seen that before, it would have saved me a Ducking.


Ura. Alas, I forgot it in my fright, but you had best be gone for fear of a
Surprise again.

Just as he goes to the Door, he here is trampling within, returns in a great
Fright, and jumps into the Feather-Tub, and says, Ay Lord he is here again.


Ura. This was such an unexpected Jest, I shall burst with Lauging.

She goes to him.] It Is only your fear, here is no body coming, my Husband's
gone out, and will not return this hour.


Esquire W. comes out all over Feathers.] For the Lord's sake don't let me stay
here I shall be frighted out of my wits.


Ura. Go as soon as you please, lock your self in, and put the Key under the
Door against I come.


Esquire W. See, see, is there no body stirring?


Ura. Not a Mouse, go make haste.

[Exit Esquire Wouldbe. Enter Freeman Laughing. So I think I have had my Jest too
to make him go into the Feather-Tub.


Ura. You heard me mention it, did you?


Freem. Yes, and I knew his fear would make him take to it upon the least
noise; are all things in readiness above?


Ura. Ay, never fear, let me alone for Mischief.


[Ex. Freem. and Vra. The end of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Scene draws, discovers Esquire Wouldbe undressing himself to go to Bed. Wouldbe.
MY fright's amost over, but I Am plaguey Wet and Coid, P -- confound the Cuckold.

[Going toward the Bed with the Candle in his Hand falls in at a Trap-Door up
to his Neck, and puts his Candle out.] Hey! what the Devil's come to me now; am
I going quick to Hell?

Enter two Devils with Torches, and point at him. Help! help! will no body come
to my rescue? the Devil's come for me indeed.


Dance. Enter two more Devils, who join in a Dance with other two frighting and
seizing him, he cries out and shows great signs of fear after the Dance; two
more enters and sings. Devil. SAy Brother Devil say, what must be done,
With this wicked Mortal, whose Glass is now run,
VVee'll dip him in Styx to abate his hot Lust,
Then headlong to Hell we the Letcher will thrust;
VVee'll laugh at his Torments and jest at his Groans,
The Horns he designed he shall feel in his Bones.
Let Us away with him then to great Pluto our King,
Who expects before this the lewd Victim we will bring.

[They take him up and carry him off, who roars out help, The Devil, the Devil.
Enter Freeman and Urania Laughing. Freem. So I think we have sufficiently
frighted the Fool, but what have ordered them to do with him now?


Ura. To carry him home just in the pickle he is in to his Wife.


Freem. Sure the Coxcomb will never venture hither again?


Ura. If he do, my next Revenge shall be more home.


Freem. I would at any time lose a Nights sleep for so much sport: It Is time to
raise the rest of the Family, and then try to get a little sleep.


Ura. With all my heart, my Head aches a Laughing.


SCENE II.
Mr. Lovewell knocks at a Door, Enter Servant. Love. Is Sir Roger Marwood
within?


Servant. Yes Sir, i will acquaint him you are here, if you please to walk in.


[Lovewell goes in, returns, and after him Sir Roger dressed to go out. Love. Sir
Roger, your Servant, you're an early riser I see; I thought I had been time
enough to your levee?


Sir Roger. That you might have been, had not Sir Charles Frankford sent in
great haste to speak with me; for early rising is not a fault I am often guilty
of.


Love. You are very happy, Sir Roger, to have so free access where so much
Beauty is your daily Entertainment; how is it possible to defend your Heart
from so many Charms the lovely Charlot, they say, is Mistress of. But is she so
beautiful as the Town reports? for I never saw her.


Sir Rog. She is indeed beyond Imagination, but of so strange and fantastical a
Humor no one can please her; you have more right to pretend to her Favors
than I, for she so much declares against a Man of an Estate, I dare not think
of Addressing.


Love. That can be only an extravagant way of Talking, she cannot think an
Estate, where it is but Embellishment to both Qualifications, a Fault.


Sir Rog. Sir Charles indeed is of your opinion, but I am much mistaken if he
does not quickly find it, the real Sentiments of her Heart; for last Night we
heard she and Madam Juliana, her Cozen, discoursing in the Garden; she talked of
Love and some design she had in hand to day, she feared being crossed in, but
what that was Heaven knows.


Love. aside. Hah, this absolutely confirms me, it is real, I am impatient till
I see her; well Sir Roger, I Will take my leave of you, I hinder your intended
visit.


Sir Rog. I must confess, I am very eager to see Sir Charles in hopes to hear
more of his Sister's design.


Love. Shall I see you any where in the Evening, Sir Roger?


Sir Rog. With all my heart.


Love. Where?


Sir Rog. I shall be at Lockets from 8 to 10 or later.


Love. I will, if possible, wait on you there.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
St. James's Park. Enter Charlot and Juliana Maskt. Jul. I see you will really
meet him then?


Char. Ay, and marry him too, if he has Courage enough to venture on me.


Jul. It Is a strange Resolution, Heaven send you may never have reason to
repent it; think well, my Dear, what you do, consider it is irrevocable.


Char. Prithee forbear; Thy serious* Notions almost spoil my design; but know
my Juliana, I have given him my Heart, and will my Person, for I passionately
love him.


Jul. I wish him worthy of his happy Fortune; the time draws near; does not
your Heart go a pit a pat?


Char. Yes, for fear he will not come.


Jul. looking out. That care is at an end, prepare for the Combat, for yonder
comes your Antagonist.


Char. It Is he indeed, my Courage almost fails me, but it is too late to
retreat; I Will stand the brunt let what will be the event.


Enter Love, and gazes on them. Charlot. advances toward him, pulls off her
Glove and gives him her Hand, which he kisses. Love. If the whole Piece prove
as beautiful as this Sample, I find I Am undone already; come unmask, dear
Madam, and kill me quite.


Jul. Not to show a better Face, but better Nature; I Will give her my Sample.


[Pulls off her Mask. Love. 'Twas kindly said and done.


To Char. But I gad Madam, if you mean to preserve the Conquest of my Heart
entirely to your self, you would best put by that cloud, for there are dangerous
Eyes.


[Looking at Juliana. Jul. She Will soon reduce the Rebel to his Obedience,
convince him of the Truth, by showing him a Prospect of that Heaven which is
also (...) him.


Char. No, I Will leave it to his Imagination, which perhaps may be to my
advantage; and if you have Courage enough to venture on me as you see me,
here is my Hand and Heart, and all that is mine to be entirely yours.


Love. It Is a large Proffer; but I Am for none of Fortune's blind Bargains, come
upon the square, dear Lady, and I am for you; I ever had an aversion to a
Vizir-Ma^k, it shall be one of my Articles, that from this day forward you
shall never wear one.


Char. With all my heart, conditionally that this day the only one in which I
must reign, I may wear it at pleasure.


Love. After you have discovered that Face which is to charm me out of my
Liberty, I Will agree to all you desire.


Char. pulling off her Mask. As you're a Man of Honor, stand to your word, for
now I claim you as my own.


Love. eagerly kissing her Hand. By Heavens, an Angel! dear charming Creature,
dispose of your happy Slave for ever; I am now no more the cautious ill-natured
Fellow, I have been all this time; I am all over Love and Rapture, come lovely
Creature, lets away to Church, where I may make you mine without danger of ever
losing you.


Char. Laughing. Mercy on me! what an Alteration's here! from whence proceeds
this mighty Change?


Love. Could you expect less from that bewitching Face, enough to tempt
Diogenes from his Tub, and make that surly Stoic turn Epicure; Heaven never
made such dazzling Beauty but to do Miracles, I Am now Love's Convert.

Aside. So I find I Am a Woman's Ass already, I am downright damnably in Love,
and will through this Matrimonial Gulf, if I perish in the attempt.


Char. You're very serious Sir, pray don't consider too much, I may chance to
lose a Husband by it.


Love. I am thinking how very happy I shall be when the Divine Charlot's mine;
come dear Madam, I will delay my bliss no longer.


Char. Ay, for Heavens sake, let us away while this Passion lasts, this Violence
will soon be over, and then the Tide will turn.


Love. It never, never shall, dear charming Angel.


Char. to Jul. Come Cozen, you must be our Witness.


Jul. I wish I may be ever so to all that makes you happy.


[Exeunt om SCENE IV.
Enter Esquire Wouldbe and Dowdy. Esquire. VV. Nay, pray dear Bunny, don't be nangry
indeed and indeed; I was taken up by the Watch and carried to the Round house.


Dow. Yes, yes, a likely matter, and how came you out pray?


Esquire VV. Why the Devil sent four of his Lifeguard, and took me out by main
force.


Dow. Don't think to make a Fool of me, but tell me the truth, you would best, you
Rebel you; who was it brought you home, they looked like Devils indeed; but how
come you in this pickle to come home without your Cloths?


Esquire W. Aside. What the Devil shall I say now!

[Pauses a little. Why indeed Bunny I cannot tell, for I was damnable Drunk,
and did not know I was in the Round-house till I wakt this Morning and found my
self there: Pray Bunny fordive I, as true as I am God Almighty's Child, I will not
do so no more.


[Kneels and makes pitiful Faces. Dow. Get you gone, you Fool, and don't make
your self such an Ass; you are like to wear your old Cloths till Easter, for
you shall have no new ones.


Esquire W. Nay, pray Bunny now don't be so nangry; indeed I do love Bunny.


[Rises, kisses and fawns on her. Dow. You have such a way with you; well, come
then, but will you be good?


Esquire W. I will indeed Bunny, go and bid the Maid warm my Bed, for I am very
weary with my last Nights Lodging; if any body comes to speak with me, let me
not be disturbed.


Dow. I will my Dear, poor Wretch, I Will go and make you some Butter'd-Ale too.


[Exeunt Dowdy. Esquire W. Ay do, so I have appeased one Fool; I Am damned Mad at
this Disappointment, if I thought Urania had a hand in it, I Would be revenged of
her, by Publishing to the Town I had lain with her; I did verily believe the
Devil had run away with me, till I discovered one of them to be Ben the Drawer;
'twas certainly a Contrivance of Freeman's, I Will return it to him with the
honorable Badge of a pair of Horns. I Will sleep three or four Hours, and then
write to her for another Appointment, I doubt not but the kind Soul is willing.


[Exit. Esquire W. SCENE. V.
Enter Lovewell, Charlot, and Juliana, at the Blew Posts in the Hay-market.
Love. Now, my dear Charlot, that I can call you mine; how much I prize the
Blessing you shall find by the great Value I shall set on you.


Char. You are wondrous Devout, but 'twill never last long: The sawey Name of
Husband will in short time claim its Lawful Authority. But pray Mr. Lovewell,
hasten Dinner.


Enter Servants with Dinner. Jul. It Is here you are always happy; you can but
wish and ^ave.


Love. Come, Ladies, fall to, if you have any Appetite; I must restrain mine,
though Grace is said.


Char. If you have any to what is here lets sit -- Remember this is my Day of
Power; and being the last that I must Reign, you must expect me to be very
tyrannical.


Jul. All Happiness to you both, and may it ever continue.


[Drinks to 'em Char. As much to dear Juliana in the Man she loves.


Love. Success and Happiness attend us all. What think you of a Song, Ladies,
'twill give us time to eat.


Char. With all my Heart.


Love. Call in the Music there?

[Exit Waiter Enters with Music. To the Music. Come, pray oblige us with a
Song.


A Dialogue by a Man and Woman. Woman. OFTEN have you told me that you loved,
And asked how I your Flame approved;
Of Love and Flames I Have heard it is true,
Yet never till it came from you.
But I would know what it is so called,
Before my Heart in it be involved.

Man. It Is a desire in the Mind,
A pleasing Pain, and Joy refined.
Life is a dull insipid Thing,
Where Love its Blessings does not bring.
The Gods themselves, who Joys dispense,
Have felt its mighty influence.

Woman. If Gods that Power have owned, alas! I fear
I strive in vain to keep my Freedom here.

Man. Resign it then, and bless me with your love,
A Glory I Would not change to move
The brightest Star in all the Orb above.

Woman. If you will promise ever to be true,
My Heart and Freedom I Will give up to you.

Man. As well the Needle from his Pole may move,
As I to Love and Thee unfaithful prove.
Chorus together. In Love and in Pleasure we'll pass all our Nights,
And each day we'll revel with some new Delights.
Thus we'll Live, and Love on, till together we Die;
And in each others Arms to Elysium will fly.

[Ex. Music. Char. Now, Mr. Lovewell, you must give my Cozen and I permission
to leave you for a little time, to go to the Exchange to provide some
Necessaries; and because I will not leave you idle, pray take Pains to tell
that Purse of Gold.


Love. Since it must be so, what you please. But I hope you will not make it
long before you return.


Char. You shall not stay for us half an Hour.


Love. Where will you go when you come back?


Char. We'll discourse of that when we meet again; farewell. Come Cozen.

[ Ex. Char. and Juliana. Lovewell waits on them to the Door, returns, siss
down, and tells the Gold. Five hundred Pieces; a pretty Sum, and not unwelcome
at this time. I Gad I was a very lucky Fellow to have a pretty rich young Lady
thus thrown into my Arms, just in the Ebb of my Fortune.


Enter Frank with a Note. Enter Waiter with a Letter. VVait. Here Is a Note,
Sir, left for you at the Bar, as they went out.


[Ex. VVaiter. Love. Ha! What should be the meaning of this!

[Opens, and reads. -- Dispose of your self as your Humor serves you, when you
have done with the Employment I left you; for you will meet at this time with
no other Entertainment from your Bride.

[Drawer ready. Death, Hell, and Furies! what can this mean! Am I thus Jilted
at last by some lewd Woman! O Sot! that I could think one of Charlot's Birth
and Fortune would marry at that wild Rate. She only took up that Name to gull
the easy Coxcomb, unthinkful Fool; I could curse my self, her, the Sex, and all
the World. What shall I do, O dear damned Impostor! By Heaven I love her so, I
can scarce repent I have made her mine; were she but Honest, which much I fear,
I would not change her for the Worlds Empress. But why do I flatter thus a
senseless Passion? This Toad, for ought I know, a lewd Prostitute, who only has
drawn me in to go to Goal for her. O there it is! Some false fair Devil,
forsaken by her Keeper, that wanted only a Husband for that use, or else to
Father some Body's Child: But however, she is no very poor Whore.

[Shews the Purse. But this is no Place to Expostulate in. Here Drawer.


Drawer. Did you call, Sir?


Enter Dubois. Love. Ay, what is to pay?


Drawer. All Is paid, Sir, by the Ladies?


[Exit Drawer. Love. So that is some Comfort still; come cheer thy Heart,
Lovewell; all yet may be well: They Are Jilts of Quality however. I believe it
is even some Lady errant that is run mad reading of Don Quixot; but hanged,
jesting is a little Unsavory at this time. I Will see if I can find out Sir Roger
Marwood, who may tell me some Tidings of the true Charlot, though not of my
fair damned Devil; O curse of my Credulity.


Well; since this damned Jilt is gone,

I am fairly rid of all the Sex in one.


[Exit Lovewell The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Lovewell, and Drawer. Love. IS Sir Roger Marwood here?


Draw. Yes, Sir.


Love. Who Is with him?


Draw. Only Sir Charles Frankford.


Love. Tell them Lovewell desires to know if he may have admittance to them.


[Enter Sir Roger. Draw. Yes, Sir, I will.


Love. 'S death, what shall I do? Tell him I Am married, he will only laugh at me,
as all the World will do besides. He Is here! Heavens what shall I say?


Sir Roger. Why so ceremonious, Mr. Lovewell, to your Friends? Come, come in,
we are all alone, and shall be glad of a third Person to make us Company.


Love. Mine will be but very indifferent at this time; for I Am cursedly out of
Humor.


Sir Rog. I Am sorry for that, and much more so, if you have any just Occasion;
but come we'll endeavor to divert you.


Love. 'Twill be ineffectual at this time. (Aside.) Call Drawer. I Will follow
you, Sir.


[Ex. Sir Rog. and Love. Scene draws, discovers Sir Charles Frankford writing
at a Table. Glasses and Bottles, Enter to him Sir Roger Marwood, and Lovewell.
Sir Charles rises. Mr. Lovewell, your Servant: You Will pardon me I did not wait
on you. I was writing an Excuse to my Sister, whom I promised to fetch home
from Kensington this Evenning, but an unexpected Business is fallen out which
hinders me. You Will give me leave to make an end.


(Sits down.) Love. Ay, pray Sir Charles.


To him. Has Madam Charlot been long out of Town, Sir Charles?

[Aside. So I find I Am indeed ruined, she is out of Town. Oh! I could Curse! Sir
Char. She went but this Morning to make a Visit to a Relation we have there,
who she brings home with her; I Am sending my Coach for her, she would go this
Morning into a Hackny.


Love. Ha! some Hopes still.


[Aside. To Sir Char. If your Coach goes empty, pray, Sir Charles, give me
leave to make use of it, for I am obliged to be at Kensington to Night to mount
the Guard.


Sir Char. With all my Heart; it is at your Service.


Love. I Will lose no time then, for fear the Ladies should stay for it.


Sir Char. I Am sorry to lose your good Company so soon, but I Am likewise
engaged. Here, who waits?


Enter Drawer. Sir Char. Bid one of my Servants come to me.


Draw. Yes, Sir.


[Ex. Drawer. Sir Char. Enter Footman. Sir Char. Here, give this Letter to the
Coachman, and bid him carry it to my Sister at my Aunt Treaters, and wait on
the Gentleman where he pleases.


Love. Sir Charles, your Servant. Sir Roger, yours.

Aside. So now if I can but get this Letter from the Coachman, which I suppose
will be no hard matter to effect, I shall certainly find whether it be my
Charlot, or no.


[Ex. Lovewell. Sir Rog. This Lovewell's a pretty Gentleman. I have often
thought he is in all Circumstances the very Man I have heard your Sister wish
for to meet in a Husband: But how goes the Business with your fair Cozen
Juliana? I dare believe she loves you.


Sir Char. I dare believe so too: But only as she is a Relation, I fear some
happier Man is the Subject of her Sight.


Sir Rog. That you may soon resolve your self, by discovering your Passion to
your Sister, who knows the deepest Secrets of her Heart.


Sir Char. It Is true, I may: But I so much fear the Discovery will not be to my
Advantage, that I find some Pleasure in being unresolved, to hope the best.


Sir Rog. Take Courage, Sir, and try: My Life on it it is you, and only you that
takes up all her Thoughts.


Sir Char. Well, I Will venture, let the Event be what it will: But come, Sir,
Roger, we shall out stay our time, it is now near Six, the Hour which we
appointed to be at Whitehall.


[Ex. Sir Char. and Sir Rog. SCENE. II.
Enter Freeman and Urania at several Doors. Ura. I find there is no getting rid
of this opinionated Blockhead's saucy Importunities, but by exposing him to the
whole Town, which I Will venture bearing a Share in to be revenged of him: Have
the Letter Freeman?


Free. Yes, here it is. I warrant old Madam Beldam catches at it as greedily as
she would a Client for her Son.


Urania takes it, and reads. Madam,
I Cannot see so much Goodness as your virtuous Daughter is possed with, abused
so grossly by the Lewdness of her Husband, without (if it is possible) making
you sensible of it; if you will be further informed, be this Evening at Seven a
Clock in St. James's Park, where you may be convinced how great a Brute he is
to her, by finding him with a Wench.

Your Friend unknown.


Ura. You have adapted it to her Capacity; but I thought you would have writ it
to Madam Dowdee her self.


Free. O no; it might have lighted in the Husband's Hands, and that would spoil
all: But have you answered his Letter?


Ura. Yes; and appointed him to be here at Nine, to come in Boldly, and call
for a Room, and to let me alone with the rest, which I Would contrive for him. I
warrant him I Will be as good as my Word; be sure to get some Cherry Bounce for
them, you know they are all Souls.


Free. I Will warrant I Will have that shall do their Business for 'em: I Will put
the Letter into the Penny Post my self.


Ura. And I Will go and see the Chamber prepared for him.


[Exeunt. SCENE III.
Enter Charlot, Juliana, Bellasira, with a Servant. Char. A Gentleman say you
come in my Brother's Coach with a Letter for me?


Serve. Yes, Madam.


Char. Do you know his Name?


Serve. Yes, Madam, it is I think Mr. Lovewell.


Char. Go tell him I Will wait on him presently.

[Exit Serve. Now, my dear Girl, you must assist me, or all my Designs are croft.


Bell. What is it you would have us do?


Char. Come in, and I will tell you.


[Exeunt omnes. Enter Lovewell, and Servant. Serve. 'Please, Sir, to stay one
Moment here, my Lady will come to you presently.


Love. Thank you honest Friend. I have easily compassed the Letter; but never
was poor unfortunate Lover upon a Rack as I am this Minute, between Hope and
Fear.


Enter Bellasira. Love. (aside.) By Heavens I am lost! It is not my Charlot. I
am so confounded I know not what to say.

[Goes to her, and salutes her. Madam, Sir Charles made me so happy to be the
Messenger of this to his fair Sister, Madam Charlot, whom I presume you are.


[Gives her the Letter. Bell. My Name is Charlot, and Sister to Sir Charles
Frankford; but I am amazed why he should give a Gentleman the trouble his
meanest Servant could have performed.


Love. Ruined and lost! Cursed, cursed, deluded Fool!

(Aside.) Madam, 'twas at my earnest Entreaty to have an Opportunity to make me
Welcome where I could hope none, but from such an Introducer.

I Am so distracted I know not what I say, or do.


(Aside. Bell. You seem disordered. Sir, are you not well? Please you to sit?


Love. No, Madam; I Am taken on the sudden with a strange Diziness in my Head,
nothing but the Air will do me good. Madam, your most humble Servant.


[ Exit Lovewell. Bell. So this is but one part over, the greatest yet remains
behind: I Will in and dispatch this Letter after him.


[Exit Bell. Enter Mrs. Belldam and Dowdy. Dow. I don't care, I will tell him
that I will; and I Will tear his Eyes out, a Rebel as he is.


[Blubbering and Crying. Beld. Nay, pray Daughter be persuaded, that will make
him be upon the march; let us go into this St. James's Park, and catch him
there, and then we'll swinge him off both together.


Dow. But don't go in that pickle, Mother; 'twill Disgrace me now I am a
Gentlewoman. Oh, oh, oh! that he should Cuckold me that have been the making of
him.


Beld. Have patience, Daughter; perhaps it is a Story laid upon him. I Will go
home, and put on my best Clothes, and come presently.


[Ex. Beld. Dow. Well, I will go and see whether he is there, or no; but I Will
up for a Dram of Comfort, for my Spirits are cast quite down.


Exit Dow. SCENE V.
Enter Lovewell reading. IF it may be permitted me to hope any thing from the
Disorder I see in you at our last Conversation, I would gladly believe it to my
Advantage; the Sight of you has given me an infinite deal of Disquiet, but your
Absence an insupportable Pain. I conjure you to return to me with all speed you
can, that I may know what Reception my Heart may find with you, upon whom I
have bestowed it unaskt. I demand yours in return, upon which depends the
Felicity of

Charlot.


Lovewell speaks, and sighs. I would it was in my Power to give.

What has my cursed Fortune reserved me for! Must I ever be her Sport! I Am
Jilted by a false Charlot, when I might have had the true one. But that is not
the worst of my Misery; for to complete it, and make me truly wretched, I love
this False, Unknown, beyond my Reason, and all Things. Here she comes, and I Am
more out of Countenance than she will pretend to be.


Enter Bellasira. Love. To answer your Commands, Madam, I am come; not that I
dare wish any thing from the Hopes you give me here.

[Shews the Letter. Such Blessings does not belong to the unhappy Lovewell, who
serves only for the Sport of Fortune, and all the World besides.


Bell. I believe you found nothing in my Letter, Sir; (tho I must Blush to own
it) but what looks too sincerely to give the least mistrust it was not real:
Heaven is not truer than that Charlot Loves, Languishes, and without a grateful
Sense of her unbounded Passion, Dies for you.


Love. Heaven has not now another Curse in store to make me more unhappy.


Bell. Is then my Youth and Fortune so contemptible, that it would only heap up
Miseries upon the Man I love? The generous offer I make you of my Heart is not
a common Prize; no, my dear Lovewell, (she sighs) for I must call you so, it is
unacquainted in Love's wide Labyrinth, and there will lose its way.


Love. Forbear, dear Madam, to distract me with this Angel's Goodness, I am not
worthy of the least of all this mighty Kindness, I wish 'twere in my power to
give my Heart to her that best deserves it, for none has so just a Claim as the
Divine Charlot. You have treated me with that Sincerity, that 'twould be a
Baseness I never should forgive my self to betray you with such hopes, (Pardon
the Expression) I cannot justly give; in short Madam, to my Eternal Confusion I
speak it, I am not Master of my Inclinations, I love with all the Ardour of
prevailing Passion, a false ungrateful Woman, and what renders my Folly
inexcusable, one I know not, nor ever perhaps may see again.


Bell. And can you be so unjust to your self, and cruel to me, to scorn my real
Love for a Chimera?


Love. Express my cursed Misfortune by some gentler term, I beg you that does not
suit with the respect that I will always pay you.


Bell. If you will still prefer a base ungrateful Woman before the truest Love
that ever possessed a tender Virgin's Breast, yet grant me this one Boon, that I
may always know where to hear of you, I mean no wrong to your ingrate, or to
trouble you with the Persecution of my unwelcome Love.


Love. Be assured, dear Madam, you always shall command me in that and all
things else, that lies within my power.


Bell. Well Sir, I will not detain you longer in this uneasy Entertainment.


Love. kisses her Hand. Adieu, dear Madam, you shall very speedily hear of the
unhappy Lovewell.


[Ex. Lovewell. Bell. So I think I have done pretty well for a young beginner,
but I must give an account of my success, that I believe they have heard it all.


[Exit Bell. SCENE V.
St. James's Park. Enter Beldam and Dowdy, Beldam dressed in an old fashion Point
Coif, a laced Mazarene Hood over her Face, an A-la-mode Scarf laced round
ruffled full behind, both Masked. Bell. I wonder how the Misses, as they call
'em do, that were these Masks, I never wore one before; I am all in a Sweat
with it, how can you bear yours?


[Pulls of her Mask and wipes her Face. Dow. Oh, I have learnt to wear one
since I was a Gentlewoman.


Enter several Men and Women crossing the Stage. Beld. What a World of fine
Folks here is, but I don't see my Son yet?


Dow. He may be a the other side, let us go round.


Enter Freeman. Freem. So, there is my Game, (to them.) You seem Ladies, to be
in search of some body, can I assist you?


Dow. You? why, what are you?


Freem. A Knight Adventurer, to serve all pretty Ladies.


Beld. What, I warrant you, you take us for Misses now, because we have got
Masks; but I Would have you to know my Daughter and I are not for your turn, we are
none of this end of the Town Folks.


Freem. Pray good angry old Gentlewoman, I mean no harm, nor do not take you
for any of this end of the Town Ladies; but would perhaps if you would accept
the Service, help you to a sight of him you come to find.


Dow. Why, how do you know who we come to find?


Freem. Know, why I know by the Stars, not only that, but all your most secret
Thoughts, did you never hear of Partridge?


Beld. Yes, he that makes Almanacks, I always buy his, because he Nosticates,
as they call it, what will come to pass.


Freem. Why, I am he, I can tell you now what you come here for.


Dow. O Mother! he may tell me perhaps where we may find my Rebel.


Freem. Ay, that is a small matter in my Art, to let you see I perfectly know
your Concerns; you come here expecting to find your Husband with his Mis, at
Rosamonds Pond.


Beld. Oh Daughter, this is certainly Dr. Partridge, and he can tell this by
Strology; may be he may tell us where to find him.


Dow. Pray Sir, be so kind if you can.


Freem. Can, that is a good one, why, I Will carry you to the very House; nay, the
very Room where he is, if you will go with me.


Dow. Your Servant good Sir, I Will go with all my heart, shall not us Mother?


Beld. Yes, if the Learned Doctor pleases; but will you go with us, good Sir
Doctor?


Freem. Yes, that I will, (to Dowdy) lets see your Hand Lady, (looks in her
Hand) Hah, you were born under Vulcan, you must have a care of Horns; I doubt
you have been a little too near his Forge already by your Complexion, let me
see, you will have seven Children, as beautiful and wise as the Mother, and as
honest and modest as the Father; you will be a Widow very speedily, that is,
within these five or six Years, next Husband shall keep a Coach.


Beld. O good Sir, tell me if I shall live to see that day.


[Shews her Hand to him. Freem. Yes, you may, if you spare your Brandy-Bottle a
little more than you do.


Beld. Aside. O Lord, I see he knows all I do, I wish he does not find out from
whence I furnish my Daughter's House with fine Sugar, Spice, etc. and Candles,
and make Mrs. Lockup the Housekeeper be turned out of her place.


Freem. Well, come Ladies, shall I conduct you where I promised? I have set a
Spell upon him, that he cannot stir till I come.


Dow. Ay, come Mother, I long to be at him.


Beld. My Fingers itch too, I Will pull off his Point Cravat again with a
Vengeance.


Freem. Come Ladies, I Will lead the way.


[Exeunt omnes. SCENE VI.
Enter Charlot and Juliana at several Doors. Char. O Coz. Juliana, I was just
seeking; I have a Secret to discover to you gives me a great deal of pleasure;
my Brother is passionately in Love, and just now confessed it to me, and has
engaged me to be his Advocate, will not you assist me?


Jul. Cruel Charlot, why this to me, do you triumph over my Misfortune?


Char. Unkind Juliana, to think I would, it is you your self has charmed him.


Jul. I fear 'twas Gratitude, and not his Choice, made him think on me
unfaithful Creature, to betray to him the dearest Secret of my Life, and force
an Inclination, perhaps he never had thought of.


Char. By all that is good, my Dear, you wrong me, he owned it to me with all
the signs of Fear your Heart was prepossest; he ever heard our late
Conversation in the Garden, and charged me if I knew you would not receive his
Addresses favorably, never to tell you the least tittle of it; I gave him so
much Encouragement as to revive his hopes.


Jul. And so your Discourse ended, did it?


Char. No, I told him then of my Marriage, which he was far from being angry
at, but blamed me a little for using of him so; and promised to forgive me,
upon Condition I would prevail with you to accept his Addresses.


Jul. You need not doubt succeeding, my Heart too much pleads for him, to need
another Advocate.


Char. Lets go to my Cozen Bell. I left her with my Brother, and flew with all
Impatience to bring these happy Tidings.


[Exeunt. The end of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Charlot and Sir Roger Marwood. Sir Rog. YOU could not, Madam, have made
a better Choice, for Lovewell wants not Virtues to make him in all things a
complete Gentleman, but an Estate, which his Elder Brother was born to, and he
best deserves; but why will you use him thus, Madam?


Char. Only to find which he has most Esteem for, my Person or Estate.


Sir Rog. That was a Trial to be made before, and not now; when it is not in
your power to revoke what you have done.


Char. It Is, Town, a foolish Curiosity; but pray Sir Roger no more Objections,
but if you will oblige me, do as I desire.


Sir Rog. Well, Madam, I will, upon two Conditions; first, That you use your
Interest with your pretty Cozen, you have brought to Town with you, to accept
the Prize she has made of my Heart; and secondly, To put poor Mr. Lovewell out
of his pain to Night, by discovering his Happiness to him.


Char. I engage my Honor for both, do but as I desire for two or three Hours,
and after I Will be guided by you.


Sir Rog. I Will obey you, Madam, but remember the Conditions.


[Exit. Sir Rog. Enter Juliana, Bellasira. Char. What have you done with my
Brother?


Bell. My Aunt is entertaining him with Politics, which we thought we had but
little concern in; so have left them to settle the Nation, whilst I come to
settle my Heart; but I find you have disposed of him whose hands I did design
to put it in: Prithee what have done with him, I shall grow monstrous jealous,
if you do not give a very good account of him?


Char. Hey day! what are you in Love too! Sure the little God will empty his
Quiver in our Family, for never was such a Company of Loving Souls?


Jul. You see it is dangerous jesting with edge Tools; You cannot, Charlot, but
in honor assist her, for 'twas you that screwed her up to a Love Key.


Char. I am glad to find her so inclined, for Sir Roger just now engaged me to
be his Intercessor.


Bell. You Will find it no hard task to persuade me to a good Opinion of him; but
have you engaged him in your Affair?


Char. Yes, he is gone about it; but I have yet another part for you, and then
I Will undeceive him.


Bell. I Will do any thing you would have me promise, but that; for I Will swear I am
in pain for him.


Char. I do sincerely promise you I will, I wait but for Sir Roger's return,
and then you shall know my farther design; come let us now in and release my
Brother.


Enter Sir Roger Marwood. Love. Sir Roger, your most humble Servant, you are
the only Man that now is only welcome to me; how can you have so much Goodness
to throw away a Thought on one so wretched?


Sir Rog. I never forsake my Friends in their distress, I wish I could being
comfort to your trouble; all I can say, is, still to hope the bell; a day or
two may perhaps unriddle the Mystery, and you may yet be happy. But come, Mr.
Lovewell, you must go out with me, I will not leave you alone to your
melancholy Thoughts.


Love. I am at your Service, dispose of me as you please.


Sir Rog. Are you ready?


Love. Always to wait on you.


[Exeunt. Enter again as in the Street, Sir Roger and Lovewell. Sir Rog. aside.
It goes against my nature to betray this Man, though it is but in a Jest; here
are the Rascals coming.

Enter Four Bailiffs. They seize Lovewell's Sword before he sees them.


Sir Rog. Hah! what mean you Hell Hounds?


First Bailiff. No harm to you, Sir, Mr. Lovewell? I Arrest you at the Suit of
Alderman Saintly in an Action of 10000 l.


Love. I never heard of such a Name.


Second Bailiff. I suppose, Sir, your Lady does.


Love. Oh does she so, Hell confound her for it; nay, Hands off, I Will follow
you upon my Honor, where ever you will carry me.


First Bailiff. Will you not send for Bail, Sir?


Love. No Sir, I Will directly to the Goal where I must lie.


Sir Rog. Will not my Bail be accepted? I Will willingly engage for one.


Love. By no means, Sir Roger, I will not involve my Friends in my Misfortunes;
they must e'n take my Body for the Debt; for I am not worth it no way else.


Sir Rog. I Will strait away to this Alderman Saintly, and see what is to be done.


[Exit. Sir Rog. Love. Farewell Sir, you will find me at the Gate House; come
Sirs, conduct me where you will, I Will tamely follow; I think the Mystery is now
disclosed with a Vengeance.


[Exeunt om. Enter Sir Charles Frankford, Charlot, Juliana and Bellisira. Sir
Char. Why should you delay my Happiness, dear Cozen, for the Punctilio of
formal Courtship; I have long loved you, let that atone for it; and if my
Sister does not flatter me, you do not hate me.


Jul. What would the World, and you your self think of me, to catch at your
first Proffer, as if I feared you would recant?


Smiling. I dare trust your Constancy, and stay till it is convenient.


Sir Char. To the World you may very well answer your Conduct; for it is but
confirming the Reports which have been often of it, being so designed for me,
it is what I beg of you; and what time's more convenient than now, at the
consummating my Sisters Wedding?


Jul. Upon this condition, that you can oblige Sir Roger and my Cozen Bell. to
marry at the same time I Will promise you.


Sir Char. Do you dispose her to it? I Will warrant him, for he is passionately
in Love with her; what say you Cozen, will you obstruct my Bliss? for now it
alone depends on you.


Bell. You know, Sir Charles, you may dispose of me, who are my Guardian.


Enter Sir Roger Marwood. Char. Now for some news from enchanted my Esquire.


[She takes Sir Rog aside. Sir Rog. It Is done as you commanded; but it is well
if you do not repent it, for I left him in a desperate Humor.


Char. Good Heaven forbid! Sir Roger, pray wait on my Cozen Bell. to him, but
do not you appear; by that time she has done, we'll all be there, (to Bell.)
you have my full Directions.


[Exit Sir Roger. leading Bellasira. Sir Char. Indeed, Sister, you have gone
too far, in thus imprisoning a Man who shortly must command you. What is it you
Design now? If you play him any further Pranks I Will betray you to him.


Char. I will not; I have only sent my Cozen Bell, to once more try him; after
which, I, and Sir Roger, will go to him. You, and my Cozens, shall be in
hearing; and when you find we come to any Agreement, then come in.


Sir Char. Suppose he takes Cozen Bell. at her Word, what think you then?


Char. Think! why, I shall think him a Man: But if he can resist the
Temptation, an Angel.


Sir Char. Come, let us go. I Am very impatient to see him disabused.


[Exeunt. Enter Turnkey. Turnkey. Sir, here is a Gentlewoman desires to speak
with you; Shall I let her in?


Love. A Gentlewoman! Ay, pray conduct her in; this is a pretty Place to
entertain Ladies in, but it is her own seeking; Who should it be? my fair Devil
of a Wife perhaps!


Enter Bellasira. Love. This is indeed amazing Goodness! How could you think of
a lost Wretch, dear Madam, forsook by all the World?


Bell. Not all you see, no my dear Lovewell, I never will forsake you, but
constantly attend your Fortunes; mine cannot be favorable whilst yours are
adverse; would you but make mine yours, as I will always espouse your Concerns,
there should not be a Joy possessed by Charlot, but what should be her
Lovewell's, and all his Griefs be hers.


Love. Your Generosity confounds me, I must not add so much to that vast heap
of Favors I stand indebted to you for; I Am incapable any way to make the least
return.


Bell. Is it so hard to Love? I have Youth and Fortune, is that no Charm?


Love. Your Person is infinitely charming, and that more than Angel's Goodness,
not to be resisted; but know, dear Madam, (sighs*) since I must tell you, to
justify my self from that Ingratitude, you justly might reproach me with; I am
to my Destruction Married, Married, dear Lady; that is the cursed cause of all my
Misery.


Bell. Then I am lost indeed, a fatal Moment that I saw you first; why were we
born to be both unhappy?


Love. I could, dear Madam, for ever be blessed with you, but would not wrong
your Goodness to involve you in my wretched ruin.


Bell. This is mere excuse: But for all your Cruelty to me, I Will free you from
this uncomfortable place, and if you will still persist in your Ingratitude,
expect the Curse that follows that base Sin of never being happy.


[Exit. Love. For Heavens sake, dear Madam, stay and hear me speak.

[Following her to the Door. He returns. She Is gone, and much I fear, will keep
her word; had I but known her before I was bewitched by that damned Sorceress,
how happy might we both have been? But I Will no longer cavil with my Fate, but
by a tame Submission to it ba^^le its utmost Malice.


[Sits down and reads. Enter Sir To. Marwood and Charlot. Lovewell starts up
and throws away his Book. Love. Hah! What do I see! God's Death it is the dear Devil
her self; now shall I play the Fool and be again deluded, for I find I have not
power to be heartily angry at her. But how came he with her?


Char. You seem surprised, Sir, I fear my sight offends you.


Love. I wish it never had pleased me, (sighs) false Woman, of all the Coxcombs
that this Town abounds with, Why was I culled out to be your Property! but tell
me if thou have so much Grace left to once speak Truth, how came he with you?


Sir Rog. As a kind Friend should do to release thee of thy pains, and take
them on my self; I love this Lady with all the Blindness which attends that
Passion, marry her at any rate, and Sacrifice the World to give my self that
Satisfaction. She has prudently considered your equal want of Fortunes will but
make you both miserable.


Char. Therefore if you will consent to make void our Marriage, you shall this
minute be released from this place, if not, stay till Necessity compels you.


Love. Treacherous Man, how could you call me Friend, and thus basely betray me?


Char. Well, what say you, Sir?


Love. Hell confound you both; no, I Will still keep thee to be revenged of thee,
and plague thee for the Wrongs thou have done me, ungrateful Creature, to
torture thus a Man thou know loved thee from the first Moment he see that
damned bewitching Face; were but honest, I could love thee still; but I will
tear thee from my Heart and never think of thee again, (sighs) if possible;
(she weeps) an stop those Crocodiles Tears, for though I know them to be so,
they pierce me to the Soul.


Char. Can you forgive me, Sir? for all this usage I long have loved you, which
made me resolve some way or other to Marry you; how I effected it, I need not
tell you, I had no sooner done it but I repented, believing justly you would be
provoked to use me ill, when once you found I had only borrowed the name of
Charlot, this made me fly your anger.


Love. And to secure your self, secured me. Hah! was it so? I thank you kind
Wife, indeed 'twas wondrous Love.


Char. Pray hear me out. Sir Roger here, who has long solicited me to his
unlawful Love, presuming on the Scantiness of my Fortune, when he found all
other ways ineffectual to obtain me, proffered to marry me; which I likewise
refused, acquainting him withal of my Marriage with you, which made him clap
this Action on you, to drive you to the Choice of either renouncing me, or else
to keep you here.


Love. Oh Heavens! that ever such a Piece of Villainy should harbor in that
Heart I always thought was Noble: How could you call me Friend, and thus betray
me?


Rog. aside. She makes me appear a pretty Rogue, that is the truth of it; but I
must let her run on. You know, Mr. Lovewell, Love and Friendship are not
compatible, where the Object of it is adored by both.


Love. Then art thou Honest? Come swear and damn thy self, you know I am
credulous, and shall believe you.


Char. By Heavens, and all that is Sacred, I am chaste; and love thee at that
extravagant Rate, I Would quit a Throne to dwell with thee in Chains, Oh my dear
Lovewell, could you meet mine with an equal Passion, how happy might we be!


Love. Yes, in some Country, where we could live by Air and Love; for I know
not how we shall maintain a costlier Diet.


Char. Providence will not let us starve, we must trust to that; I ask you
nothing but your Love, I will maintain my self.


Char. Indeed you wrong my Virtue, I Am truly honest, and would not injure you,
though in a thought to gain the World; Forgive what is past, and take me to your
bosom.


Love. holds her in his Arms. Heaven knows how willingly I could, yes, I could
love thee, dote on thee, and be thy Fool.

Puts her from him. Stand off, vain easy Ass; what am I doing, trapanning of
my self again?


Char. You shall not throw me from ye, I Will follow thus, (hangs on him) and
never will forsake you; and here I swear I will not leave this place, till you
conduct me hence.


Love. May I believe you serious?


Char. You must, you shall; I ever will be yours, with as much Truth as ever
Turtle loved her dearest Mate.


Love. Well, I will live with thee, for Heaven knows I Love thee; and though
you have used me thus, will always use you well.


Sir Rog. Smiling. So, Madam, I see I Am quite forsaken.


Enter Sir Charles, Juliana, Bellasira. Sir Char. Here are more Witnesses to
your bargain, Mr. Lovewell, th^n you are aware of; but methink, my new Brother,
you might have asked me leave.


Love. O, Sir, do not triumph over the Easiness of a deluded Man; I humbly ask
your Pardon for the Wrong I did design in marrying this fair Impostor, whom I
did indeed believe your Sister; my love for her transported me beyond all
thoughts of what I owed you.


Sir Charles takes Charlot, and gives her to Lovewell. Here, Lovewell, take
her; for my sake use her well: I Will leave it to her to justify her Procedure to
you. But upon my Honor she is my only Sister, the rich Heiress, Charlot, whom
you first believed.

Love. The happy sequel does indeed make a large amends for all I have
suffered: But are you sure we do not Dream? for I am so accustomed to
Misfortunes I cannot yet believe them real.


Char. But you were not so diffident, Mr. Lovewell, before my Estate was added
by my Brother's Discovery.


Love. An Estate to one in my Circumstances is no unwelcome Addition: But be
assured, dear Madam, from the Sincerity I ever used to you, it is the least Part
of my Joy; but I have, by my knowledge who you are, an unquestioned proof of
your Virtue, and Sir Roger's being still my Friend.


Sir Rog. And so you shall always find me.

(To Bell.) For here is my Pretensions.


Bell. Do you think, Sir Roger, I can so soon disingage (aside) my Heart from
cruel Mr. Lovewell?


Love. Fair cruel Lady! how could you torture so a wretched Man not then
himself, with a pretended Love that gave me more disquiet than my own Troubles?
But I am now all Joy, and will, unaskt, forgive the World and Fortune for all
past Injuries; now my dear Charlot's mine, Heaven has not another Blessing left
that I think worth the asking.


Char. You are wondrous Zealous now, pray Heaven it lasts.


Love. It must, it ever shall. How can you distrust my love, who have given you
such evident Proofs of it?


Sir Rog. Since Heaven is in this bounteous Humor of dispencing Blessings, why
should it be only a niggard to me, and make me only a dull Spectator of your
Happiness? Say; will not you join with me in my Suit to your fair Cozen here?


[Looking at Bellasira. Sir Char. She is my Charge, which here I resign to you.
I know she will be guided by my Advice; (Gives her to Sir Roger,) and now Cozen
Juliana I claim your Promise.


Jul. Methinks you might stay till to Morrow, it is time enough, considering how
long it is to last.


Sir Char. No, we'll not trust the Treachery of another Day; Fortune is fickle,
and may Frown to Morrow.


Jul. Well then here is my Hand, From this Day forward, for better for worse,
etc.


Bell. What think you of those Words, Sir Roger, do they not make you tremble?


Sir Rog. Yes, for fear of some fatal Interruption before they come to be
pronounced.


Sir Char. Let Us lose no time then; I have a Friend will quickly dispatch the
Ceremony.


[Exeunt. Enter Freeman, Urania, and Doll. Ura. Well, Doll, what have you done
with the 'Squire?


Doll. As you commanded, Madam, conducted him to your Chamber, with charge not
to speak but in a Whisper; and because I Would be sure he should discover nothing
by his Candle, I took it away with me, for fear I told him it might be seen at
Windows, which might occasion a Suspicion; not being a Room in use, he readily
consented; and said, he could find the way to Bed by dark, and slipped a Crown
into my Hand to secure my Master not coming up.


[Exit Doll. Free. So it is well, there remains no more now; the House fills a
Pace, but the Company I design to entertain with this Jest is Sir Charles
Frankford, and Sir Roger Marwood, who have just sent to bespeak a Supper here.
I Am sure they bring Company with them, they have ordered such a noble one; we had
best take Orders for it, and then we shall have time to entertain them.


Enter Sir Charles, Sir Roger, Lovewell, Charlot, Juliana, Bellasira, Freeman
and Urania. Ura. I Have used all Methods to restrain his Folly, by showing all
the Scorn a virtuous Woman could to a dishonest Love; that but increased his
Persecutions till I was weary of being Angry. I thought, by counterfeiting to
return his Kindness, which his Vanity easily induced him to believe, I might
draw him into some Snare to betray his lewd Intentions to the World, without
the hazard of my own Reputation, which is generally sacrificed to the Malice of
a disappointed Coxcomb. And to perfect my Revenge, I have contrived to let his
Wife be witness to it, and so leave the Fool to her punishing, which he will find
Plague enough.


Free. Call in Doll, and let us begin the Farce.

Enter Doll. Come, Doll, to your Post.


Aloud. Where Is your Mistress, Doll?

[Doll squeaks. Ha! what are you frighted at?


Doll. Nothing, Sir, But I was almost Asleep, and you surprised me.


Free. That will not serve your turn, Mistress. What do you guard this Door so
close for, is any Body in that Chamber?


Doll. In this Chamber, Sir, no; who should be here?


Free. Where is your Mistress, I say?


Doll. My Mistress, Sir; in her Chamber not well; and gone to Bed.


Free. No, but she is not; for, missing her, I have been to seek her, not only
there, but in all the Rooms in the House, except this. Pray deliver the Key,
without more Fooling; for I will see what you keep Century for.

So by this time I suppose the Fool is frighted enough.


Aloud. Deliver it me, I say, you had best.


Doll. Pray, Sir, don't fright me so, there it is.


[Gives the Key. [Ex. Freem. as into the Room. Freeman within. That shall not
serve your Turn: I Will fetch you out of the Chimney here. Doll, bring my Pistols
presently.


'Sq. W. within. O pray, Mr. Freeman, spare me this time, and you shall never
catch me in your House again, nor with your Wife.


Free. Come down then, or I Will fetch you, with a Pox to you.


'Sq. W. O pray, Mr. Freeman, have a little Patience, and I will.


Enter Freeman pulling in 'Sq. W. wrapped in a Blanket. Free. Nay, nay, no
Struggling; I must show the Company my Wife's Gallant.


[They all Laugh. 'Sq. W. aside. Who the Devil have I been with all this time?
Here Is Urania, now I find she fools me.


To Ura. How dare you thus expose me; Do not you fear my Revenge?


Ura. aloud. Not at all; I have Witnesses enough to prove both your Intentions
and mine: But I have one within you know not of, whom I Will fetch to you.


[Ex. Ura. Free. Well, 'Squire Wouldbe, I hope hereafter you will leave my Wife
to such a poor clownish Fellow as my self; you see she does not understand your
Merit, but thinks me good enough for her.


Sq. W. aside. I am ashamed of my self, that is the truth of it, which makes me
silent.


Enter Urania, with Dowdy in a Nightgown. Sq. W. My Wife! nay then I Am ruined
past Redemption.


Aside. How the Devil came she here? But that she has not Sense enough for an
Intrigue, I should suspect she was as much mistaken in her Bedfellow as my self.


Dow. Have I caught you, you Rebel you; I warrant you I Will do your Errand to my
Mother.


'Sq. W. Nay, good Bunny, not so fast; pray let me know first how you came here
a Bed with me.


Dow. Why, Dr. Partridge conjured me here on purpose to catch you.


'Sq. W. That Is likely; you and I must come to a Reckoning about it.


Dow. Reckon me no Reckonings; there the Doctor can tell you as much.


[Pointing to Freeman. 'Sq. W. This Dr. Partridge! why, this is Freeman, the
Master of this House. There is some Trick in this, (to Freeman.) I suppose you
have been before hand with me, and given me the Horns I designed you.


Dow. What do you mean by Horns? Do you think I Would be a Whore?


Free. 'Faith, 'Squire, no: You may keep your dainty Bit to your self; when I
have a Mistress it shall be one that will have Wit enough to conceal what we
do; for of my Conscience she would tell.


Dow. aside. I cant't imagine how I came here, to say truth; for I thought I
had been a Bed at home, till that Gentlewoman came and waked me, and bid me say
what I did.


Ura. You know, Esquire Wouldbe, how many Disappointments I have given you just in
the height of your Expectations, which would never persuade you was done in
scorn of your lewd Design; this was the only way I thought would rid me of your
Saucy Importunity. I did believe it very necessary to let you Wife be an
Eyewitness of your Faith to her, that she may hereafter take more than usual
Care to keep her Coxcomb to her self; I will not give you the Satisfaction to
let you know how I effected it, but if she or her Mother remembers, they may,
I Will only add this; There has been no wrong offered to her Honesty, which you
may easily believe, if you consider the Charms of her Wit and Person.


Char. I think it is great pity they should not be entirely each others, for
they are the best matched Pair I ever saw.


Jul. Indeed, Urania, you are a Woman of a singular Virtue, that can resist the
force of that tempting Mein and Air.


Sir Rog. Faith Sir, you would better march off, these Ladies will be too hard for
you else.


Sir Char. Ay, prithee Freeman, we have e'n enough of their Companies, dispose
of them as you please.


Esquire W. aside. Gad I Would be revenged of her if I live.


Freem to Esquire W. Well, Sir, you may go if you please, and take your pretty Lady
with you, your Cloths are in the Bar-room where you may dress you, there you
have your Dismission from this Company.


Ura. And what can you leave your dear Mrs. Honisuckle? tum d'ive I a Buss,
sure you cannot think but I Love you strangly after all this Proof of my
Kindness.


[They all Laugh. Esquire W. aside. P -- x C -- d ye, I could cry for Madness.


[Ex. Dow. Ladies, your Servant; I thank you for all your Complements, and
shall be very glad to see you at my House, (going.)


[They all Laugh. Ura. Hark ye, pray take your Booby home with you, and see to
keep him there.


Dow. I Will have nothing to say to him, I Will go home to my Mother and tell her.


[Exit Dow. Sir Char: Prithee put out the Coxcomb and bring some Music with
you; what think you Ladies of a Dance?


Char. With all our Hearts.


Bell. You see what constant Things you Men are to your Vows, I war^^^ this
Fellow swore as much Faith and Constancy as any of you can.


Char. Hang the Poor Animals, disgrace not so the Race of Men, to compare him
to one; such senseless Wretches are only lumps of Dirt, not fit for any nobler
Form.


Enter Freeman with Music. Love. So, here is the Music; what shall we Dance?
the Brawls?


Char. No, by no means, Mr. Lovewell, not on our Wedding Day, lest it prove an
ill Omen.


Sir Char. Come, come; I Will lead up if you will follow, every one take his Bride:
Freeman, you and your Wife must make a Couple.


They Dance, after which this Song. Look down great Hymen from Above,
These Pairs preserve in Peace and Love.
May never Jars their Joys molest,
But still a sweet and Halcyon rest
Upon their mutual Bliss attend,
And every Hour new Pleasures send.
Freem. All Happiness to you all.


Enter Drawer. Drawer. Supper waits you Gentlemen.


Sir Char. Come, Ladies, let us in and take a short Repast; it grows late, and
time to be at home, where indeed I ought to have given my Wife her Wedding
Supper, but that the Warning was so short.


Love. At last the Storm is over blown,
And on that happy Coast I Am thrown
Where all my Joys are laid in store,
Heaven cannot give, nor could I ask one more.

[Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

