THE Act of Parliament AGAINST Religious Meetings, Proved to be The Bishops
Act: OR, A LETTER of the Archbishop of Canterbury to his fellow-Bishops, to
promote the Persecution intended by it.

Printed, to save the trouble of copying it out.

With some ANIMADVERSIONS thereupon.

Anno Dom. 1670.

For the Right Reverend Father in God, my very good Lord and Brother, the Lord
Bishop of --
Right Reverend and my very good Lord,
IT has pleased his Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, out of their
pious care for the welfare of this Church and Kingdom, by making and publishing
the late Act for the preventing and suppressing Conventicles, to lay a hopeful
way for the peace and settlement of the Church, and the Uniformity of Gods
Service in the same; It becomes US the Bishops [as more particularly sensible
of the good providence of God] to endeavor as much as in us lies, the
promoting so blessed a work* And therefore, having well considered what will be
fit for me to do in my particular Diocese, I thought fit to recommend the same
Counsel and Method (which I intend, God willing, to pursue my self) to your
Lordship, and the rest of my Brethren the Bishops of my Province, being
thereunto encouraged by his Majesty's Approbation and express Direction in this
affair.

Par. 1.
In the first place therefore I advise and require you, that you call before you
not only your Chancellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Registers, and
other your Ecclesiastical Officers, but that also by such means, and at such
places as you shall judge most convenient, you assemble before you, or some
grave and discreet person or persons, your Commissioner or Commissioners, the
several Parsons, Vicars and Curats of your Diocese and Jurisdictions, within
their several Deanaries; and that you impart to them respectively, as they
shall come before you or your Commissioners, the tenure of these my Letters,
requiring them and every of them, as well in Mine as in your own Name, that in
their several capacities and stations they all perform their duty toward God,
the King, and the Church, by an exemplary conformity in their own persons and
practice, to his Majesty's Laws, and the Rules of the Church in this behalf.

Par. 2.
I advise that you admonish and recommend to all and every of the Parsons,
Vicars and Curates within your Diocese and Jurisdiction, strictness and
sobriety of life and conversation, checking and punishing such astransgress,
and encouraging such as live orderly; that so they by their virtuous and
religious deportment may show themselves patterns of good living to the people
under their charge. And next, that you require of them, as they will answer the
contrary, that in their own persons in their Churches, they do decently and
solemnly perform the Divine Service, by reading the Prayers of the Church, as
they are appointed and ordered in and by the Book of Common Prayer, without
addition to or diminishing from the same, or varying either in substance or
ceremony from the order and method which by the said Book is set down; wherein
I hear and am afraid too many do offend; And that in the time of such their
officiating they ever make use of and wear their Priestly Habit, the Surplice
and Hood, that so by their due and reverend performance of so Holy a Worship
they may give honor to God, and by their own Example instruct the people of
their Parishes what they ought to teach them in their Doctrine.

Having thus counseled the Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers and the Clergy
of your Diocese in their own particular duties, Par. 3.
your Lordship is further desired to recommend unto them the care of the people
under their respective Jurisdictions and Charges, that in their several places
they do their best to persuade and win all Nonconformists and Dissenters to
obedience to his Majesty's Laws, and unity with the Church; and such as shall
be refractory, to endeavor to reduce by the Censures of the Church, or such
other good means as shall be most conducing thereunto: to which end I advise,
that all and every of the said Ecclesiastical Judges and Officers, and every of
the Clergy of your Diocese, and the Churchwardens of every Parish, by their
respective Ministers, be desired in their respective stations and places, that
they take notice of all Nonconformists, Holders, Frequenters, Maintainers,
Abetters of Conventicles and unlawful Assemblies, under pretense of Religious
Worship, especially of the Preachers and Teachers in them, and of the places
wherein the same are held, ever keeping a more watchful eye over the Cities and
greater Towns, from whence the mischief is for the most part derived unto the
lesser Villages and Hamlets: and wheresoever they find such wilful Offenders,
that then with A Hearty Affection to the Worship of God, the Honor of the King
and his Laws, and the Peace of the Church and Kingdom, They do address
themselves to the Civil Magistrate, Justices and others concerned, imploring
their help and assistance for preventing and suppressing of the same, according
to the late said Act in that behalf made and set forth.

And because there may be within the limits of your Diocese some peculiar or
exempt Jurisdictions, Par. 4
belonging either to your Dean, Dean and Chapter, Archdeacons, or to some
Ecclesiastical or other persons: I do therefore desire that by such ways and
means as your Lordship shall conceive most proper, you do communicate this my
Letter unto them, delivering unto every of them Copies of the same for their
better Instruction; and that you require them in My Name, that within their
several Jurisdictions they also pursue the Advices and Directions before set
down, as if the same had been given by a particular Letter unto them under my
own hand.

Par. 5.
Lastly; That for the better direction to all those who shall be concerned in
the Advices given by this Letter, I advise you will give out amongst the
Ecclesiastical Officers and your Clergy, as many Copies of the same as your
Lordship shall think conducible to the end for which it is designed.

And now, my Lord, what the success will be we must leave to God Almighty; yet
(my Lord) I have this confidence under God, That if we do our parts now at
first seriously, by Gods help, and the assistance of the Civil Power,
[considering the abundant care and provision the Act contains for Our
Advantage] We shall within a few months see so great an alteration in the
destractions of these times, as that the seduced People returning from their
seditious and self-seeking Teachers, to the Unity of the Church, and Uniformity
of God's Worship, it will be to the Glory of God, the welfare of the Church the
praise of his Majesty and Government, the happiness of the whole Kingdom. And
so I bid your Lordship heartily farewell, and am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate Friend and Brother, GILBERT CANT'
Lambeth-house, May the 7th. 1670.
A Copy of a Letter from the Archdeacon of Lincoln, to the several Parishes
within his Jurisdiction.
SIR,
I have received a Command from my Lord Bishop of Lincoln, to disperse Copies
of the preceding Letter, to the several Parishes within the Jurisdiction of the
Arch-Deaconry of Lincoln. In pursuance therefore of his Lordships Order, I send
this to you; Earnestly desiring you to take especial regard to perform
whatsoever is therein required of you, either in your own Person, or relating
to your Parishioners. And how you shall discharge your duty therein, I shall
expect an account at the next Visitation. I am

Your very loving Friend and Brother, I. CAWLEY, Archidiac. Lincoln.
June 7. 1670.
Some Animadversions upon the foregoing Letter.
IT has been some matter of Wonder, to many sober and impartial men, to see
that Gospel Liberty, which out Lord Christ has purchased for all his
Followers, and which in this Nation, by many remarkable Providence, and sad
Rebukes, God has been working (as it were out of the fire) on the behalf of
his Innocent and Mistaken People, and which for some years they have been in a
peaceable and undisturbed possession of (to the Universal satisfaction of all,
that without prejudice have observed their carriage) should now lately of a
sudden, and without any provocation given, be ravished from them; and an Act of
Violence contrived and executed against them, in so precipitate and furious a
manner, that (together with their undoubted Liberty as Christians) their known
Common Rights as Englishmen and Freeborn, are forcibly taken away; and they,
in their Persons and Estates, are exposed to the utmost rapine and malice of
all that are willing to destroy and devour them; as if mere difference of
opinion had made them the vilest of Malefactors, and, for that, they were
utterly to be excluded, from the relief of Pity as well as of Protection.

After many conjectures about the Rise and Projection of this Mischievous
Device, it has pleased God (who will not suffer the Authors of Iniquity to lie
long concealed) to bring it now to light: And in this Letter (Reader) thou
see who they are that are called upon to rejoice* Preface.
as more particularly sensible of the good providence of God therein, and who
are earnestly desired, to execute it with utmost Rigor, Par. 5.
considering the abundant Care and Provisions that Act contains for their
Advantage: And these are no less persons, than, The Right Reverend Fathers in
God, our very good Lords, the Lord Bishops: Persons whose Names and Titles, as
they are in this Letter given to them, the Scripture is utterly unaquainted
with; and yet they daily boast of their Pedigree, and cry out, as the Jews did
of old, The Church* the Church! But by no means will they be prevailed with to
tell us, what they mean by the Church, or who is their Father: only we are
sure, that God is not; since they have so little resemblance to the Humility,
Patience, Condescension and Meekness of the Lord Christ* his Son.

Though these may be accounted Harsh words, yet we desire they may be weighed;
for we are sure we need go no further than this Letter, to justify our selves
in using them; Behold here the Chief of the Bishop's Order, an Archbishop; one
who is in Name a Christian, in profession a Protestant, yet so wholly
unconcerned, in either of these, that throughout his whole Letter, in matters
of the greatest concernment, he makes no mention at all of the Name of Christ,
(as if he knew he had nothing at all to do with him; but were wholly, as indeed
he is, an Apocryphal Officer.) And likewise, altogether passing by the Papists
(as if no Law had ever been made against them, or they had left off to be
dangerous). He only fixes a Character of Odium upon his Protestant Brethren; To
persecute and oppose these, he calls a Pious and Blessed work, Preface.
and is so far from bewailing the Calamity that is likely to be brought upon
them, and upon the whole Nation for the Injuries done to them, that he stirs up
All to help it forward, and to join with him in this odious and for ever to be
abhorred Employment. All which, though we might ascribe to Gilbert Shelden, and
make it his personal miscarriage, (of whom we can say, and are ready to prove,
That his too little Learning has made him thus mad) yet we will fix this
Violence rather, upon (according to his own style) Gilbert Cant. or, (to speak
out his Title in words at length) Gilbert Archbishop of Canterbury; who being
(as such and in that capacity) not a creature of God's making, nor any part of
a Divine Ordinance, must answer the Darkness of his Original, since the same
evil Spirit which begets Pride in any, does likewise instill and direct unto
Civility, by which that Pride may be maintained and upheld.

Concerning this Prelates Pride, besides his Intolerable Title (which is no
small part of that Name of Blasphemy, which is more fully and at large written
upon his Father, the Pope's forehead) what need w^^ any other Argument to prove
it by, than the base and contemptible style he uses to those, whom (What ever
we think of them) yet he owneth as Ministers of Christ? The Apostle Peter calls
those he writes to, Elders, and himself their fellow-Elder, 1 Pet. 5.1. But
this Archbishop being in a higher elevation, and transcendent in his
Privileges to any Apostle, looks down with scorn upon his Brethren, the
Teachers of the Nation, and Parsons* Vicars, Curates is the best language he
can afford them. We wish those poor despised men (many of whom we hope are only
mistaken in their way) would a little consider what unworthy Bondage they are
under, and what vile drudgery is exacted from them; instead of being
Gospel-Preachers, they must now turn State-Informers, and set up an Inquisition
to rack and torture their innocent Neighbors, whom it should be their business
to convert and save: It is indeed pretty (but too thin a covering at this time
of day) to command them to be careful of their Lives, Par. 3.
[Pope Paulus did it to prevent Luther's Reformation] and now it is merely in
other words, to desire them to put on Sheeps clothing for a time, that they
may play the Wolves with the better pretense and greater advantage.

We may indeed be excused if we seem to wonder, that he did not (at least for
forms-sake) desire his Curates to preach somewhat more frequently; but we think
it prudently forborne: for why should those who are so professedly the Servants
of men, be exhorted so much to contradict themselves, as to preach Christ the
Lord? or upon what pretense of Reason, could this Archbishop require, that
from others, which he has so little care or skill to do himself? Passing by
this Oversight therefore (wherein he is rightly Episcopal) as carrying a good
decorum with it, give us leave ( Christian Reader) to observe only that we find
him in open terms, without any figure, to call the Surplice and Hood a Priestly
habit, Par. 3.
enjoining all to wear them in the time of officiating at Divine Service, that
so by their Ordered performance of so Holy a work, they may give honor to God,
and by their own example instruct the People of their Parishes, as they ought
to teach them in their Doctrine. We hope he is serious, and if so, and these
things he would indeed have thus highly esteemed; we need no more to justify
us in our continued refusal, and utter abhorrance of them:

For, to call any kind of Garments a Priestly Habit; to command the wearing of
them, as conducing to the honor of God in his Worship; and by these to think
to instruct the People (which is to make them not only significant, but
teaching Ceremonies) This is to introduce the old Antiquated Jewish Rites and
Habits, which were to be disused with their Worship: It is to fill the Church
of Christ with as many Inventions, under pretense of Decency, as vain men are
pleased to devise, and wilful men have power to impose; and lastly, it is to
render all Qualifications requisite unto the Ministry, wholly useless: For, the
Reading Clerk of every Parish, or the Public Cryers, may do all that our Arch.
requires, as well as the ablest and most Learned Minister.

It will be necessary, before we conclude, to wipe off that slander wherewith
he reproacheth those that join with the Nonconformists, calling them Seduced
People; Par. 5.
and their Teachers* Seditious, and self-seeking. In just indignation against
which base and unworthy Calumny, we have this to say, That we stand amazed that
one, who enjoys for his own single share, more than would well maintain an
hundred able Preachers with their Families; and yet never did, nor can do any
thing in the Church of Christ to deserve the hundredth part of it* should
venture to charge any with self-seeking: But we know that those, who persecute
the poor through the pride of their countenance, will never seek nor make any
inquiry into their own actions, Ps* 10.2, 4.

And indeed, How can these Preachers be either Seditious, or self-seeking, who
having often declared, that Men for their Consciences are not to be imposed
upon; and being under the conviction of that Principle, have quietly suffered
the loss of all things, rather than they would deny or forgo it: whereas this
unrighteous man, not content with the full enjoyment of his own Corruption
rather than Conscience, will not let his Brethren alone; but first procures a
Law against them, which he knew beforehand they could not obey, and then seeks
to destroy them for not obeying; In which lot we have reason to rejoice, being
used no otherwise than Daniel was by those, that for his Integrity and
Faithfulness envied him: whose Faith, and the gracious dealing of the Lord with
him, as it is on record for our encouragement; so the unprosperous end of those
malicious and crafty Contrivers, we heartily wish might seriously be reflected
upon by this their grand Imitator.

As for the Peoples being seduced, it is a Cavil not worth the answering: for
we appeal to the reason of all unprejudiced men, whether those, who are
commanded to follow the Laws of the King, and of the Church, with an Implicit
faith and blind obedience (as this blind Guide would have them) are not in much
more certain danger of being seduced, than those who are daily exhorted by
their Teachers, to search the Scripture, and by that unerring Rule to order
their whole Conversation: Which all that ever heard the Nonconformists preach,
know to be the sum of their Doctrine.

Par. 5.
And now, having thus briefly made our defense, We must (as this Bishop says he
does) commit the success to God Almighty, Believing (which we fear he does not)
that our Lord Christ* has committed to him from the Father the Government of
the World, as well as of his Church in it, for whose Sovereignty and Supremacy
(according as the Apostle Paul has stated it Romans 14.9, 10.) we are now
contending.

Therefore whilst our Adversaries are directed to seek unto Men for help
against us, and rely upon an Arm of Flesh; our confidence is in the Name of the
Lord, who will in due time bring forth our Righteousness to light; and then
perhaps this very Man, who now so proudly exalts himself, shall see it, and be
ashamed at all his envy. Mich. 7.9, 10. Isa. 26.11.

FINIS.

