THE SINCERE CONVERT DISCOVERING THE PAVCITY OF TRUE BELIEVERS; And the great
difficulty of Saving Conversion.

By THO. SHEPHERD, sometimes of Immanuel College in Cambridge.

MATTHEW. 19. 30. Many that are first, shall be last, and the last, shall be
first.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Humphrey Blunden, at the Castle in
Cornhill. 1641.

To the Christian Reader.
IN these evil and perilous times God has not left us without some choice
mercies. Our sins abound, and his mercies superabound. The Lord might justly
have spoken those words of death against us, which of old he did against the
Jews; I have taken away my peace from this people, loving kindness, and
mercies, which had he pulled from us, we had had cause enough to mourn with
Rachel, and to refuse comfort, for all our happiness lies wrapped up in peace,
loving kindness and mercy. Psalm. 73. 1.
But God is yet good unto Israel, he commands deliverances for Jacob, Psalm. 44.
4
he overrules all the powers of darkness, Psalm. 76, 10.
and tells the sons of Belial, ( men of corrupt minds and cursed practices)
that they shall proceed no further, 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9.
but that their folly shall be manifest unto all. He makes all enemies, all
devils, all creatures, to further his own glory, and the good of his peculiar
people. Esaias 26. 20.
When times are naught and dangerous, he says, Come my people, enter into thy
chambers, and shut thy doors about thee, hide thy self as it were for a
little moment till the indignation be over past. If troubles threaten life, he
says, Esaias 4 32.
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
rivers they shall not over flow thee, when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flames kindle upon thee; for I am the
Lord thy God, etc. When enemies are incensed, fear and sorrows multiplied, he
says, Esaias 41. ^0, 11.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God, J will
strengthen thee, I will help thee, yea J will uphold thee with the right hand
of my righteousness. Behold all they that were incensed against thee, shall
be ashamed and confounded, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive
with thee shall perish. Such words of comfort and life does God speak unto
his. And among other mercies he stirs up the spirits of his servants to write
many precious truths and tractates to further the everlasting good of his
beloved ones. If the bottomless pit be open, Revel. 9. 2 Revel. 1^. 19.
and smoke rise thence, to darke^ the air, and obscure the way of the Saints;
Heaven also is opened, and there are lightnings, and voices, to enlighten their
spirits, and direct their paths. Had ever any age such lightnings as we have?
Did ever any speak since Christ and his Apostles as men now speak? We may
truly and safely say of our Divines and writers, the voice of God, and not of
man: Such abundance of the Spirit has God powered into some men, that it is not
they, but the Spirit of the Father that speaks in them.

What infinite cause has this age to acknowledgthe unspeakable mercy of God in
affording us such plenty of spiritual Tractates full of Divine, necessary and
conscience searching truths, yea precious soule-comforting, and soule-improving
truths? such whereby Head, heart, and soule-cheating errors are discovered and
prevented; such as soundly di^^erence true grace from all seemings and
paintings. No time, no Nation exceeds us herein; and shall we that abound in
truths be penurious in praises?

Consider Reader, whether Spiritual truths be not worthy of thy choysest
praises. Every Divine truth is one of Gods eternal thoughts, it is
Heaven-borne, and bears the image of the most High. Truth is the glory of the
whole sacred Trinity. Hence the Spirit is called Truth. 1 John 5. 6. Christ is
called Truth. Joh. 14. 6. and God himsel^e is said to be the God of Truth,
Deuteronomy. 32. 4. It is so delightful to him, that his eyes are ever upon the
Truth. Ier. 5. 1. and when the only wise God would have men make a purchase,
he counsels them to buy the Truth. And is it not good counsel, is it not a
good purchase? Can you bestow your pains or lay out your money better? If you
be dead in sins and trespasses, Truth is the seed of a new life, of a
heavenly birth. James 1. 18. If you be in any bondage, Truth can make you free.
John 8. 32. If compassed about with enemies, Truth can shield thee, Psalm. 91.
4. If you be full of fisthy thoughts and lusts, or any imp^rities, the Truth
can sanctif^e you, Io^. 17. 17. If darkness and faintness possess your
souls, Truth is lumen and p^pulum animae, the light and life of the soul,
Psalm. 119. 105.

Let us then advance our thoughts of Truth, John ^1. 15, 16, ^7
and rate it above all sublu^irie things, and buy it though it cost us all: it
is no Simon^; it is not too dear, you cannot overvalue Truth. It is sister to
the Peace of God which passes all understanding: See how God himself
estimates his word and truth, Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy word above
all thy Name. Whatsoever God is known by besides his word, is heneath his
word. Take the whole Creation which is Gods Name in the greatest letters, it is
nothing to his word and truth. Therefore Christ tells the Pharisees, it is
easier for heaven and earth to pass, then one tittle of the Law to fail. If
the least Jod or Tittle of the Law, be prized by God above all the world, let
us take heed of undervaluing the great and glorious Truths of the Gospel, and
settle it as a Law upon our hearts, that we can never overprize or yield
sufficient praise for any truth.

Men can praise God for the blessings of the field, the seas, the womb, and of
their shops; but where is the man that praises God for this blessing of
blessings, for Truth, for good Books, and heavenly Treatises. Men seldom
purposely lift up their hearts and voices to heaven to praise God for the
riches of knowledge bestowed upon them. In good Books you have man's labor,
and Gods truths. The tribute of thanks is due for both, that God inables men
to so great labors, and that he conveyes such precious treasure through
earthen vessels. David thought it his duty to praise God for Truth, Psalm. 143.
2. and has left it upon record for our imitation. He saw such excellency, and
found so much sweet gain by Truth, that he must break out into praises for
it.

Reader, give over thy old wont of slighting and censuring men's labors.
Experience has long since told thee, that no good comes that way. Now learn
to turn thy prejudices unto praises, and prove what will be the fruit of
honoring and praising God for Truths dispensed by his faithful ^ervants. Let
me tell thee, this is a chief way to keep Truth still amongst us. If ^ruths
be not received with the love of them, and God honored for them, presently
strong delusions come, and Truth must suffer or fly. God has made good that
promise in Jeremie, he has revealed to us abundance of peace and truth, and we
through ingratitude have ferfeited both. Our peace is shaken, and who can
promise himself with Hezekiah there shall be peace and truth in my days; Peace
may fail thee, but let not Truth. Every good Christian may and should say with
the good King, there shall be Truth in my days, if not peace and truth. I will
so far honor truth, as to receive the love of it. I will hold it fast by faith,
hold it forth by practice, praise God daily for it, and venture all in defense
of it; So did the Martyrs, whose memory is sweet, and whose reward is great.
It is better suffering for truth, then with truth: yet if Truth must suffer or
can die, better it is to dye with Truth then outlive it.

But that Truth may live, and we live by truth, let us magni^ie God much for
truth, for his word and good books that spring thence. Some p^obably may say,
its en^ugh to prais^ God for his word, other books are not ^^nti? Will thou
praise God ^or the Se^, and ^e unthankful for the rivers and springs? Will thou lift up thy voice for the great Waters, and be silent for the silver drops
and showers? If the former rai^e affect thee, be not ungrateful for the
latter. God would have men to value his servants, and praise him for their
labors.

But they have errors in them.

Be it so, shall we refuse to praise God for the Flowers and the corn, because
there be some weeds in the garden, and thistles in the field? Prejudice not thy
self, buy, read, take thy delight, here is a garden without weeds, a corn
field without Cockle or darnell, thorn or thistle. Art thou a Sincere Convert,
here are truths suitable, solid, and wholesome, thou may feed and feast
without fear.

The Author is one of singular piety, inward acquaintance with God, skild in
the deceits of men's hearts, able to enlighten the dark corners of the little
world, and to give satisfaction to staggering spirits. His work needs not the
purple of another commendation to adorn it. But because custom, not
necessity, for it is truths prorogative to travail without a pasport) I say,
because Customo causes Truth to crave and to carry Epistles Commendatory; know
that the work is weighty, quick and spiritual, and if thine eye be single in
perusing it, thou shall find many precious soule-searching, soule-quickning,
and soule-enriching truths in it: yea, be so warned and awakned, is that thou
can not but bless God for the man and matter, unless thou be possessed with a
dumb devil.

To conclude, Christian Reader, take heed of unthankfulness; spiritual
mercies should have the quickest and fullest praises. Such is this work, thou
foresaw^est it not, thou contributedst nothing to the birth of it; It Is a
preventing mercy. By it and other, of the same nature, od has made knowledge
to abound, the waters of the Sanctuary are daily increased and grown deep.
Let not the waters of the Sanctnary put out the fire of the Sanctuary. If there
be no praise, there is no fire. If thy head be like a winters Sun full of
light, and heart like a winters earth without fruit, fear Jest thy light end
in utter darkness, and the tree of knowledge deprive thee of the tree of
life. The Lord grant thou may find such benefit by this work, as that thy
heart may be ravished with truth, and raised to praise God to purpose, and made
to pray; Lord still send forth thy light and truth, that they may lead us.

So prays,

Thine in Christ, W. Greenhill.

An Introduction to the Work.
THe knowledge of Divinity is necessary for all sorts of men, both to settle
and establish the good, and to convert and fetch in the bad. Gods principles
pull down Satan's false Principles set up in men's heads, loved and believed
with men's hearts, and defended by their Tongues; whilst strong holds remain
unshaken, the Lord JESUS is kept off from conquering of the soul.

Now Spiritual Truths are either such, as tend to enlarge the understanding,
or such as may work chiefly upon the affections. I pass by (in this knowing
age) the first of these, and (being among a people whose hearts are hard
enough) I being with the latter sort: For the Understanding, although it may
literally, yet it never savingly entertaines any truth, until the Affections
be therewith smitten and wrought upon. The principal heads infisted upon.


I shall therefore here prosecute the unfolding of these Divine Principles.



Adam in a most glorious estate.

now fallen from that estate, into a bottomless gulf of sin and misery.

only means of Redemption out of this estate.

very few, and these few are saved with much difficulty,

themselves: either

1. By Reason of their bloody Ignorance, they know not their misery: or

2. By reason of their Carnal security, they feel not, they groan not under
their sin and misery.

3. By reason of their Carnal confidence. they seek to help themselves out
of their misery by their own duties, when they see or feel it: or

4. By reason of their false faith, whereby they catch hold upon and trust unto
the merits of Christ too soon, when they see and feel they cannot help
themselves.

The Contents of this Treatise.
THat there is a God. Page, 3, 4. That this God is most Glorious. p. 16. The
happiness of them, that forsake all for this God. p. 15. A Discovery of
Atheism. p. 10. Whence terrors of Conscience arise. p. 8. An Explanation of
Gods Attributes, p. 17. We should make God to be Our God. p. 14. God made all
Mankind at first in a glorious and happy estate. p. 25. Wherein this glory or
blessedness of man did appear. p. 26. How Adams estate was Ours. p. 29. We
are more perfectly righteous in Christ, then we could ever have been in Adam.
p. 32. How to get the Image of God, renewed in us. p. 40. A Discovery of such
as content themselves, with a certain measure of holiness. p. 34. How justly
God may require perfect obedience, to all the Law, of every man, and curse him
if he cannot perform it. p. 30. Man's misery in respect of Sin. p. 42. Every
natural man is dead, while he lives. p. 48. The haynousnesse of Adams sin. p.
96. Sins of the Heart, are worse then sins of the Life. p. 55. Every Action
of wicked men is sinful. p. 57. Whether good duties ought to be performed by
natural men, seeing their best Actions are si^nes. p. 61. Man's misery in
respect of the Consequents of sin. p. 63. Man's fearful flavery under
Satan. p. 67. How to prove there will be a day of Judgment. p. 80. The time
and manner of that day. p. 81. How Jesus Christ does redeem men. p. 98, Whom
Christ does redeem. p. 108. Upon what conditions Christ may be had. p. 110.
The great evil of rejecting Christ. p. 115. Who they are, that reject him. p.
114. The Paucity of true believers. p. 122. The Difficulty of saving
Conversion. p. 144. Wherein a child of God, goes beyond a hypocrite. p. 139.
Every easy way to heaven, is a false way. p. 148. Nine easy ways to heaven.
p. 150. Four straight gates to heavens p. 147. The grand-cause of man's ruin,
is from himself. p. 156. How men do plot their own ruins. p. 157. A
Discovery of unsound Professors. p. 158. Ten false principles, by which men
are deceived in their spiritual estates. p. 163. The cause of men's mistake
about their eternal condition. p. 164. How false peace is bred in the soul.
p. 195. Whence Carnal Security arises. p. 213. How Carnal Confidence ruins
men. p. 228. Means to get a broken heart. p. 225. The danger of Resting in
holy performances, p. 234. Wherein men's resting in duty app^ars. p. 229. Why
men do rest in their duties. p. 242. The insufficiency of all duties to save a
man. p. 255. Six signs of a man's resting in duties, p. 247. We must use good
duties, though we cannot be saved by them. p. 259. How to know whether we make
Christ our chief aim, and end in all things. p. 191.
THE SINCERE CONVERT.
CHAP. I
There is one most Glorious God.
EXODUS 33. 18. I beseech thee, show me thy Glory.
THis is the first Divine Truth, And there are these two parts considerable in
it.

1. That there is a God. 2. That this God is most Glorious.
I will begin with the first part, and prove (omitting many philosophical
arguments) that there is a God, a true God: for every nation almost in the
world, until Christ's coming, had a several God. Some worshipped the Sun,
some the Moon, called by Ezechiel, the Queen of Heaven, which some made Cakes
unto: Some the whole Heavens, as some worshipped the Fire, Plin. lib. 1. Not.
Hist.
some the bruit beasts, some Ba^l, some Moloch. The Romans (says Varro) had
6000 gods: who imprisoning the life of nature, were given up to sins against
nature, either to worship Idols of man's invention, Romans 1.
as the ignorant: or GOD and Angels in those Idols, as the learned did: but
these are all false Gods.

I am now to prove that there is one true God, the being of beings, or the
first being. Although the proving of this point seems needless, because every
man runs with the cry, and says there is a God; yet few thoroughly believe this
point. Many of the children of God, who are best able to know men's hearts,
because they only study their hearts, feel this temptation, Is there a God?
bitterly assaulting them sometimes. The Devil will sometimes undermine, and
seek to blow up the strongest walls and bulwarks. The light of nature indeed
shows, that there is a God; but how many are there, that, by foul sins
against their conscience, blow out and extinguish almost all the light of
Nature? and hence though they dare not conclude, because they have some light,
though dim; yet if they saw their heart, they might see it secretly suspect,
and question whether there be a God: but grant that none questions this truth,
yet we that are builders, must not fall to a work, without our maine props and
pillars: It may appear there fore that there is a God, from these grounds.

First, Grounds to prove a God.
From the works of God, Romans 1. 20. when we see a stately house, although we
see not the man that built been working here: can we when we behold the
stately theater of Heaven and Earth, conclude other, but that the finger,
arms, and wisdom of God has been here, although we see not him that is
invisible, and although we know not the time when he began to build. Every
creature in heaven and earth is a loud preacher of this Truth: who set those
candles, those torches of heaven on the Table? who hung out those lanthornes in
heaven to enlighten a dark world? who can make the stature of a man, but one
wiser than the stone out of which it is hewne? could any frame a man, but one
wiser and greater than man? who taught the bi^ds to build their neasts, and the
bees to set up and order their commonwealth? who sends the Sun post from one
end of heaven to the other, carrying so many thousand blessings to so many
thousands of people and Kingdoms? what power of man or Angels can make the
least pile of grass, or put life into the least fly, if once dead? There is
therefore a power above all created power, which is God.

Secondly, From the Word of God, There is such a Majesty st^^^ing, and the
voice of God, and not the voice of man. Hence Calvin undertakes to prove the
Scripture to be the word of God, by reason, against all Atheists under heaven.
Have thou not thought sometimes at a sermon, the Minister has spoken to none
but thee, and that some or other has told the Minister what thou have said,
what thou have done, what thou have thought? now that word which tells thee the
thoughts of thy heart, can be nothing else but the word of an alseeing God that
searches the heart.

Again, that word which quickneth the dead is certainly Gods word, but the
word of God ordinarily preached quickneth the dead; it makes the blind to see,
the dumb to speak, the deaf to hear, the lame to walk, those that never
felt their sins to load them, to mourn, those that never could pray to
breath out unutterable groans and sighs for their sins.

From the Children begotten of God: For we may read in men's foreheads, as
soon as ever they are borne, the sentence of death; and we may see by men's
lives what hellish hearts they have. Now there is a time that some of this
monstrous brood of men, are quite changed and made all new; they have new
minds, new opinions, John 3. 3*
new desires, new joys, new sorrows, new speeches, new prayers, new lives:
and such a difference there is betwixt these and others, that they are hated by
others, who loved them well while they loved their sins: and whence came this
strange change? Is it from themselves? No; For they hated this new life, and
these new men once themselves. Is it because they would be credited thereby?
no, It is to be hated of Father, Mother, Friends, and maligned every where. Is
it out of simplicity, or are their brains grown crazie? they were indeed once
fools, and I can prove them all to be Solomon's fools: b^t even simple men
have been known to be more wise for the world, after they have been made new.
But lastly, is it now from a slavish fear of hell, which works this
alteration? Nothing less; they abhor to live like slaves in Bridewell, to do
all for fear of the whip.

Fourthly, From Gods Register or notary, which is in every man; I mean the
which tells them there is a GOD: and although they silence it sometimes, yet
in thundertime, or great plague, as Pharaoh: or at the day of Death, then they
are near Gods Tribunal, when they acknowledge him clearly. The fearful
terrors of Conscience prove this, which like a Bayliffe arrests men for their
debts; Ergo, there is some Creditor to set it on; sometimes like a hangman it
torments men, ergo, there is some strange Judge that gave it that command:
whence arise these dreadful terrors in men? of themselves? No surely, all
desire to be in peace, and so to live and sleep in a whole skin: Comes it from
Melancholy? no, for melancholy comes on by degrees: these terrors of conscience
surprise the soul suddenly at a sermon, suddenly after the commission of
some secret foul sin. Again, Melancholy sadness may be cured by Physic;
but many Physicians have given such men over to other Physicians. Melancholy
sadness may be borne, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Thus you see that
there is a God. But, who ever saw God, that every one is bold to affirm that
there is a God? Indeed his face never was seen by mortal man, but his
back-parts have been seen, are seen, and may be seen by all the world, as
has been proved.

Objection. Obj.
All things are brought to pass by second causes.

Answ. 1. Answ.
What though? Is there no Master in the House, because the servants do all the
work? This great God maintains state by doing all by the Creatures
subjection; yet sometimes we may cry out in beholding some special pieces of
his administration, here is the finger of God.

2. What though there be such confusion

Object. Obj.
But if there be a God, why hears he not his peoples prayers? why does he
forget them when they have most need of him?

I answer; Answ.
Noah's Dove returns not presently with an olive branch of peace in his mouth.
Prayers sometime that speed well, return not presently, for want of company
enough to fetch away that abundance of mercy which God has to give. The Lord
ever gives them their asking in money or mony-worth, in the same thing or a
better. The Lord ever gives his importunate beggars their desires, either in
pence by little and little, or by pounds; long he is many times before he
gives, but pays them well for their waiting.

This is a use of reproo^e to all Atheists either in opinion or practice. Use 1.


First, A discovery of Atheism.
In opinion; such as either conclude, or suspect there is no God. Oh
blasphemous thought! Are there any such men? men! nay beasts, nay Devils, nay
worse than Devils, for they believe and tremble. Yet the fool has said in his
heart, there is no God, Psalm. 18. 1. Men that have little heads, little
knowledge, without hearts, as scholars sometimes of weak brains, seeing how
things come by second causes, though they might believe their books, yet
cannot raise their dull thoughts to the beholding of a first cause. Great
Politicians are like children always standing on their heads, and shaking
their heels against Heaven; these think Religion to be but a piece of
policy, to keep people in awe: profane persons desiring to go on in sin,
without any rubb or check for sin, blow out all the light of nature, wishing
there were no God to punish, and are willing to suspect that which is not.
Those also that have sinned secretly, though not openly against nature, or the
light of Conscience: GOD smites men for incest, sodomy, selfe-pollution, with
dismal blindness. Those also that are notorious worldlings, that look no
higher than their barnes, no further than their shops: the world is a pearl in
their eyes; they cannot see a God.

Lastly, I suspect those men that never found out this thief, this sin, that
was bred and born with them nor saw it in their own hearts, but there it lies
still in some dark corner of their souls to cut their throats: these kind of
men sometimes suspect there is no God: O this is a grievous sin; for if no
God; no heaven, no hell; no martyrs, no prophets, no Scriptures. Christ was
then an horrible liar, and an Impostor. Other sins wrong and grieve God and
wound him, but this sin stabs the very heart of God, it strikes at the life,
and is (as much as lies in sinful man) the death of God: for it says, there
is no God:

in practice, which say there is a God, and question it not, but in works they
deny him. He that pluckes the King from his throne, is as vile as he that
says he is no King. These men are almost as bad as Atheists in opinion. And of
such dust-heapes we may find in every Corner, that in their practice deny God,
men that set up other gods in Gods room, their wealth, their honor, their
pleasure, their merits, their backs and bellies to be their gods: men that make
bold to do that against this true God, which Idolaters dare not do against
their Idol Gods, and that is, continually to wrong this^God; Men that speak
not for all they want by prayer, nor return all back again to God by praise.

A second use is, Use 2.
for exhortation. O labor to see and behold this God. Is there a God, and will thou not give him a good look? Oh, pass by all the Rivers, till thou come to
the spring head; wade through all creatures, until thou art drowned, plunged,
and swallowed up with God. When thou see the Heavens, say, where is that
great Builder that made this? when thou hear of mutations of Kingdoms, say,
where is the Lord of Hosts, the great Captain of these armies? when thou
tastest sweetness in the Creature or in Gods ordinances, say, where is
sweetness it self, beauty it self? where is the Sea of these drops, the Sun
of these beams? Oh that men saw this God; its heaven to behold him: thou art
then in a corner of hell, that can not, do not see him, and yet what is
less known than God. Methinks when men hear there is a God about them, they
should lie grovelling in the dust because of his glory: If men did see him, they
would speak of him; who speaks of God? Nay men cannot speak to God; but as
beggars have learned to cant, so, many a man to pray. Oh men see not God in
prayer, therefore they cannot speak to God by prayer. Men sin, and God
frowns, (which makes the devils to quake;) yet men's hearts shake not, because
they see him not.

Use 3. Use 3.
Oh make choice of this God as thy God. What though there be a God, if it be
not thy God, what art thou the better? Down with all thy Idol gods, and set
up this God, If there be any creature that ever did thee any good, that God fet
not a work for thy good, love that, think on that, as thy God. If there be any
thing that can give thee any succor on thy deathbed, or when thou art
departed from this world, take that to be thy God. Thou might have been
borne in I^dea. and never have heard of this true Go^, but worshipped the
Devil for thy God: O therefore make choice of him alone to be thy God; give
away thy self wholly and for ever to him, and he will give away his whole
self everlastingly unto thee. Seek him weeping, and thou shall find him.
Bind thy self by the Strongest oaths and bonds in covenant to be his, and
he will enter into covenant with thee, and so be thine, Ier. 40. 5.

The fourth use is, Use 4.
an use of comfort to them that forsake all for this God: thou have not lost
all for naught; thou have not cast away substance for shadows, but shadows
for somewhat. Proverbs 8. 18. When all comfort is gone, there is a GOD to
comfort thee. When thou have no rest here, there is a God to rest in: when thou
art dead, he can quicken thee; when thou art weak, he is strong, and when
friends are gone, he will be a sure one to thee.

Thus much of the first part of this Doctrine, or Divine truth, that there is a
God: Now it follows to show you that this God is a most glorious God, and
that in four things he is glorious.

1. In his ESSENCE. 2. In his ATTRIEUTES. 3. In his PERSONS. 4. In his WORKS.
1. He is Glorious in his Essence. Gods Essence.
Now what this Glory is, no man or

God is Glorious in his Attributes, which are those Divine perfections whereby he
makes himself known unto us. Which Attributes are not qualities in God, but
natures. Gods Wisdom is GOD Himself, and GODs Power is GOD Himself, etc.
Neither are they diverse things in God, but they are diverse only in regard of
our understanding, and in regard of their different effects, on different
objects. GOD punishing the wicked is the justice of GOD; God compassionating
the miserable is the mercy of God.

Now the Attributes of God, omitting curious divisions, are these.

1. An explanation of Gods Attributes.
He is a Spirit, or a spiritual God, John 4. 24. therefore abhorres all
worship and all duties performed without the influence of the spirit; as to
confess

2. He is a living God, whereby he other things. Away then with thy dead heart
to this principle of life to quicken thee, that his Almighty power may pluck
thee out of thy Sepulcher, unloose thy grave-lockes that so thou may live.

infinite God, whereby he is without limits of being, 2 Chronicles. 6. 18. Horrible
then is the least sin that strikes an infinite great God, and lamentable is
the estate of all those with whom this God is angry: thou have infinite
goodness to forsake thee, and infinite power and wrath to set against thee.

Eternal God, without beginning or end of being, Psalm. 80. 1. Great therefore
is the folly of those men that prefer a little short pleasure before this
eternal God, that like Esau sell away an everlasting inheritance for a little
pottage, for a base lust and the pleasure of it.

all-sufficient God, Genesis 17. 1. what lack you therefore, you that would
feign have this GOD and the love of this God, but you are loath to take the
pains to find him, or to be at cost to purchase him with the loss of all?
Heer^s infinite, Eternal, present sweetness, goodness, grace, glory and
mercy to be found in this GOD. Why post you from mountain to hill, why spend
you your money, your thoughts, time, endeavors, on things that satisfy not?
Here is thy resting place. Thy clothes may warm thee, but they cannot feed
thee; thy meat may feed thee, but cannot heal thee; thy Physic may heal
thee, but cannot maintain thee; thy money may maintain thee, but cannot
comfort thee when distresses of Conscience and anguish of heart come upon thee;
this GOD is joy in sadness, light in darkness, life in death, Heaven in Hell.
Here is all thine eye ever saw, thine heart ever desired, thy tongue ever
asked, thy mind ever conceived. Here is all light in this Sun, and all Water
in this Sea, out of whom as out of a Crystal fountain thou shall drink
down all the refined sweetness of all Creatures in heaven and earth for ever
and ever. All the world is now seeking and tyring out themselves for rest, here
only it can be found.

omnipotent God, whereby he can do what ever he will: yield therefore, and
stand not out in the sinful or subtle close maintenance of any one sin
against this God so powerful who can crush thee at his pleasure.

an all-seeing God; He knows what possibly can be or may be known: approve
thy self therefore to this God only in all thy ways. It Is no matter what men
say, censure or think of thee. It Is no matter what thy fellow Actors on this
stage of the world imagine. GOD is the great Spectator that beholds thee in
every place: God is thy spy, and takes complete notice of all the actions of
thy life; and they are in print in heaven, which that great spectator and Judge
will open at the great day, and ^^^de allowed in the ears of all the World.
Fear to sin therefore in secret, unless thou can find out some dark hole
where the eye of God cannot discern thee. Mourn for thy secret neglect of
holy duties, mourn for thy secret hypocrisy, whoredom, prophannesse, and with
shame in thy face come before this God for pardon and mercy. Admire and wonder
at his patience, that having seen thee has not damned thee.

8. He is a True God; whereby he feelings, but under a promise, shall one day
be all made good: and let all wicked men know, what ever threatening God has
denounced, whatsoever Arrows are in the bowstring, will one day fly, and hit
and strike deep, and the longer the Lord is a drawing, the deeper wound will
Gods arrow, (that is, Gods threatening) make.

9. He is an holy God: Be not ashamed it madness, If the righteous, that is,
those that be most holy be scarcely saved, where shall the ungodly, and the
sinner appear, 1 Peter 4. 18. Where? Not before Saints and Angels, for
holiness is their trade; Not before the face of the man Christ Jesus, for
holiness was his meat and drink; Not before the face of a blessed God, for
holiness is his Nature; Not in Heaven, for no unclean thing crawles there;
they shall never see God, Christ, Saints, Angels, or Heaven to their comfort,
that are not holy: wear therefore that as thy crown now, which will be thy
glory in Heaven, and if this be to be vile, be more vile.

just and merciful God, just in himself, and so will punish all sin:
merciful in the face of Christ, and so will punish no sin. A just GOD
against an hard-hearted sinner, a merciful God toward an humble sinner. God
is not all Mercy and no Justice, nor all Justice and no Mercy. Submit to him,
his mercy embraces thee. Resist him, his justice pursues thee. When a Child of
God is humbled indeed, commonly he makes God a hardhearted cruel God, loath to
help; and says, can such a sinner be pardoned? a wicked man that was never
humbled makes God a God of clouts, one that (howsoever he speaks heavy words,
yet he is a merciful God, and) will not do as he says, and he finds it no
difficult work to believe the greatest sin may be pardoned: conceive
therefore of him as you have heard.

Thirdly, God is glorious in his Persons, Father begetting, Son begotten, and
the Holy Ghost the third person proceeding. Here the Father is called the
Father of glory, Ephesians. 1. Christ is called the Lord of glory, 1 Cor. 2. and the
Spirit is called the Spirit of glory, 1 Pet. 4. the Father is glorious in his
great work of Election; the Son is glorious in his work of Redemption; the
Holy Ghost is glorious in his work of Application: the Father is glorious in
choosing the house, the Son is glorious in buying the House, the Spirit is
glorious in dwelling in the House, that is, the heart of a poor lost sinner.

Works, in his works of Creation, and in his works of providence and
government: wonder therefore that he should so vouchsafe to look upon such
worms, such dunghils, such Lepers as we are, to provide, protect, to slay his
Son, to call, to strive, to wait, to give away himself, and all that he is
worth unto us; O fear this God when you come before him. People come before
God in Prayer, as before their fellows, or as before an Idol. People tremble
not at his voice in the Word. A King or Monarch will be served in state, yet
how rudely, how slovenly do men go about every holy duty.

Thus much of the first Principal Head, that there is One most glorious God.
Now we are to proceed to the second, viz.

CHAP. II.
THat this God made all mankind at first in a most glorious and happy estate
like unto himself.
For the opening of which Assertion I have chosen this Text, Eccles. 7. 29. God
made man righteous, which clearly demonstrates; Doct. 1.
That GOD made all mankind at first in Adam, in a most glorious, happy, and
righteous estate; Man when he came first out of Gods mint, shined most
glorious. There Is a mavelous glory in all Creatures, (the servants and
household stuff of man,) therefore there was a greater glory in man himself,
the end of them. God calls a Parliament, and gathers a Council when man was
to be made; and said, Come, let us make man in our own Image; as though all
the Wisdom of the Trinity should be seen in the creation of man.

Wherein did the glory or blessedness of man appear? Quest.


In the impression of Gods Image Ans.
upon him, Genesis 1. 26. Can there be any greater glory for a Joseph, for a
subject, than to be like his Prince?

What was the Image of God? Quest.


The Schoolmen and Fathers have many curious, Ans.
(yet some necessary) though difficult questions about this. I will omit all
theirs, and tell you only what is the APOSTLES judgment, Ephesians. 4. 23
Colossians 3. 20. out of which this general description of GOD s Image may
be thus gathered. The Image of God in Man.
It is man's perfection of Holiness, resembling GODs admirable holiness,
whereby only man pl^aseth God.

For, all other inferior Creatures did carry the works and footsteps of GODs
power, wisdom, goodness, whereby all these Attributes were seen. Now the
most perfect Attributes of God, that is, his Holiness, that he would have
only appear in, and be made manifest by man, his best inferior creature, as a
Kings wisdom and bounty appears in managing the affairs of all his
Kingdom; but his Royal, Princely, and most eminent perfections appear in the
face and disposition of his Son, next under him; But more particularly this
Image of GOD appeared in these four particulars.

1. In man's understanding: this was Gods Image here chiefly consisted in this
particular, viz. As God saw himself, and beheld his own infinite endless
glory and excellency; so man was privy to Gods excellency, and saw God most
gloriously; as Moses, though a sinful man, saw him face to face, much more
Adam, a perfect man; God loving man could do no less than reveal himself to
man.

2. In his Affections: the image of

First, As God seeing himself, loved himself: So Adam seeing God loved this
God, more than the World, more than himself; as Iron put into the fire seems
to be nothing but fire: So Adam being beloved of God, was turned into a lump
of love, to love GOD again.

Secondly, As God delighted in himself. Prove. 8.
So did Adam delight in God, took sweet repose in the bo^ome of GOD. Me
thinks I see Adam wrapped up in continual ecstasies in having this God.

his Will: the Image of God chiefly appeared in two things;

First, As GOD only willed Himself, as his last end: So did Adam will GOD, as
his last end, not as man does now.

Secondly, As God willed nothing but good; So did Adam will nothing but good,
for Gods Will was his.

his life Gods Image did appear thus: that even as God, if he had assumed man's
Nature, would have lived outwardly; So did Adam: for God would have lived
according to his own Will, Law, and Rule: So did Adam. Adams body was the
Lantern through which Holiness like a lamp burning in his heart shined;
this was Gods Image; by means of which (as it is said in the description) he
plesed GOD; similitude being the ground of love: and hence God did most dearly
love him, and highly honor him to be Lord over all creatures; hence no evil
could hurt him; here was no sorrow, no sickness, no tears, no fears, no
death, no hell, nor ever should have been if there he had stood.

Objection. Obj.
How was this estate ours?

Answ. Ans.
As Christ's righteousness is a Believers by imputation, though he never
performed it himself: So Adams righteousness and image was imputed to us and
accounted ours; for Adam received our Stock or Patrimony to keep it for us,
and to convey it to us. Hence he proving Banquerupt, we lost it. But we had
it in his hands, as an Orphant may have a great estate left him, though he
never receive one penny of it from him that was his Guardian, that should have
kept it for him, and conveyed it to him.

Here see the horrible nature of Sin, Use 1.
that pluckes man down by the ears from his Throne, from his Perfection,
though never so great. Adam might have pleaded for himself, and have said:
Although I have sinned, yet it is but one, and the first fault. Lord, behold I
am thy first borne: Oh pity my poor posterity, who are for ever undone, if
thou forgivest not. Yet see, one sin weighs him down, and all his posterity
(as we shall hear) into eternal ruin.

Hence learn, Use 2.
how justly God may require perfect Obedience to all the Law, of every man, and
curse him if he cannot perform it: because man was at first made in such a
glorious estate, wherein he had power given him to please God perfectly: God
may therefore require this debt of perfect obedience. Now man is broke and in
prison: in Hell must he lie for ever, if he cannot pay justice every farthing,
because God trusted him with a stock, which if he had well improved, he
might have paid all.

See what cause every man has to lament his miserable estate he is now Use 3.
fallen into. For beggars children to live Vagrants and poor, is not so
lamentable, as for a great Princes children to become such. One never in favor
with the Prince grieves not as he does, that was once in favor, but now cast
out. Man is now rejected of God, that was beloved of God: he is now a runagate
up and down the earth, that was once a Prince, and Lord of all the world. This
is one aggravation of the damneds sorrows; oh the hopes, the means, the
mercies that once I had! Can these, do these lament for the loss of their
bare hopes and common mercies? Lord, what hearts then have men that cannot, do
not, that will not lament the loss of such special high favors, now gone,
which once they had. It is said, that those that saw the glory of the first
Temple, wept when they saw the glory of the second, and how inferior it was to
the first. You that either have the Temple of GOD begun to be repaired in
you, or not begun at all, Oh think of the Temple burnt, the glory of GOD now
vanished and lost.

This speaks comfort to all Gods people. Use 4.
If all Adams posterity were perfectly righteous in him, then thou that art of
the blood Royal, and in Christ, art perfectly righteous in him much more, in
as much as the righteousness of the second Adam exceeds the first, so art thou
more happy, more holy in the second Adam, than ever the first in himself was;
he might lose all his Righteousness, but the second Adam cannot, has not; so
that if Christ may be damned, then thou may, else not.

This likewise reproves three sorts of people. Use 5.


I. A threefold reprehension.
Such as are ashamed of holiness. LORD, what times are we fallen into now.
The Image of GOD, which was once men's glory, is now their shame; and sin,
which is men's shame, is now their glory. The world has raised up many false
reports of holy courses, calling it folly and preciseness, pride, hypocrisy,
and that whatsoever shows men may make they are as bad as the worst, if their
sins were writ in their foreheads. Hence it comes to pass that many a man,
who is almost persuaded to be a new man and to turn over a new lease, dares
not, will not, for shame of the world, enter upon religious courses. What will
they think of me then (says he?) men are ashamed to refuse to drink healths,
and hence maintain them lawful. Our gallants are ashamed to stay a mile behind
the fashion: hence they will defend open and naked breasts and strange apparel
as things comely; O time-servers! that have some conscience to desire to be
honest and to be reputed so, yet conform themselves to all companies; if they
hear others swear, they are ashamed to reprove them; they are ashamed to
enter the lists of holy discourse in bad company, and they will pretend
discretion, and we must not cast pearls before swine; but the bottom of the
business is, they are ashamed to be holy. O fearful! Is it a shame to be
like God? O sinful wret^hes. It Is a credit to be any thing but Religious,
and with many Religion is a shame. I wonder with what face thou dare pray, or
with what look thou will behold the Lord of glory at the last day, who art
ashamed of him now, that will be admired of all men, Angels and devils then?
Do thou look for wages from Christ, that art ashamed to own Christ, or to
wear his livery?

2. It reproves them that hate holiness, which is more than to be ashamed of
it.

3. It reproves them that content themselves with a certain measure of
holiness. Perfect holiness was ADAMS Image whereby he pleased God, and shall
a little holiness content thee? Men that content themselves with a certain
measure of holiness and go no further.


Now there are these three sorts of them.

1. The Formalist, who contents himself with some holiness, as much as will
credit him.

The form and name of Religion is honos, honor sometimes; but the power and
practice of it, is onus, a burden: hence men take up the first, and shake off
the second. And indeed the greatest part take up this course, if they have no
goodness, they should be the shame, scorn, and table-talke of the times;
therefore every man will for his honors sake, have his form. Now this form
is according to the mould wherein he is cast: if his acquaintance be but
civil, he will be like them; if they be more exact, as to pray, read,
confer, he will not stay one inch behind them. If to be better than his
companions, to bear the bell before them will credit him, he will be so what
ever it cost him; but yet he never will be so exact in his course as to be
hated for it, unless he perceives the hatred he contracts from some men
shall be recompensed with the more love and credit by other men. He disguiseth
himself according to the places, or company he comes into. King Ioash was a
good man so long as Iehoiada the Priest lived. If a little Religion will serve
to credit men, that shall serve for that time, if more in another place, you
shall then have them commending good men, good sermons, good books, and drop
forth 2. or 3. good sentences; what will they think of him then? They cover
themselves over with these Figleaves of common honesty to cover their
nakedness; they bait all their courses over with honesty, that they may
catch, for they fish only for credit.

One may trap these people thus: Follow them in their private houses, there is
worldliness, passion, loosenes, and to their private chambers, there they
ordinarily neglect or shuffle over duties to their private vain thoughts. In
this Tyring house you shall then see these stage players, their shop-windowes
are shut, here no honesty is to be seen scarce, because their gain, their
respect comes not in at this door where none beholds them: Let either Minister
or any faithful friend search, try, discover, accuse and condemn these men,
as rotten (though gilded) posts, as unsound, hollow-hearted wretches, their
hearts will swell like toads, and hiss like snakes, and bark like dogs against
the^ that thus censure them, because they rob them of their God they served,
their gain is gone.

2. The guilty self condemned sinner, that goes further than the Formalist,
and contents himself with so much holiness as will quit him, and hence all
the Heathen have had some Religion, because they had some Conscience to trouble
them This man, if he has lived in foul sins, Romans 2. 12
and begins to be wrackt and troubled for them, he will then confess and
forsake those roaring sins; but how? as a dog does his meat, not because
he hates his carrion, but because he fears the cudgel; he performs holy
duties, not because he will use them, but because he must use them, there is
no quiet else. If Conscience be still, he omits duties: if Conscience cry and
stir, he falls to duties; and so has his good mood as conscience has his
sits. They boast and crow over hypocrites, because the holiness they have is
not a bare show; No, but it is to stop thy conscience, and only to quiet the
clamors of that. Thou do bribe, and so quiet (the Bailiffe,) thy conscience,
by thy praying, hearing, and sorrowing, but GOD thy Judge has heavy things to
lay to thy charge, before whom thou shall shortly with dread appear.

The pinching devont hypocrite, that being pursued with the fear of Hell, goes
further, and labors for just so much holiness as will save him only, and
carry him to heaven at last. Hence the young man in the Gospel came with that
great question to Christ, which many unsound hearts come with to Ministers now,
what he should do to inherit eternal life. These people set up such a man in
their thoughts to be a very honest man, and one doubtless that shall be
saved, and hence they will take him to be their Copy and Sampler, and labor
to do as he does, and to live just as he lives, and to hold opinions as he
holds, and so hope to be saved. They will ask very inquisitively what is the
least measure of grace, and the least grain of faith, and the best Sermons are
not such as humble them most, but such as slatter them, best; wherein they may
hear how well good desires are accepted of by God; which if they hear to be
of that virtue to save them, God shall be served only with good desires, and
the Devil in deed all their life time.

Thus they pinch God; they labor not after so much holiness as will honor
Christ, but after just so much as will bear their charges to heaven, and save
themselves. For this is one of the greatest differences betwixt a child of God
and an Hypocrite. In their obedience, the one takes up duties out of love to
Christ, to have him, and hence he mournes daily, because Christ is no greater
gainer by him: the other o it of love to himself, merely to save his own
soul; and hence he mournes for his sins, because they may damn him; Remember
that place therefore, 1 Cor. 15. ult.

Lastly, labor to get this Image of GOD ren^wed again. Use 6.
Honest men will labor to pay their debts; this is Gods debt. How do men
labor to be in the fashion; better to be out of the world, then out of the
fashion. To be like God is heavens fashion, Angels fashion, and it will be in
fashion one day, when the Lord Jesus shall appear. Then if thou have the
superscription and Image of the devil, and not the Image of GOD upon thee, GOD
and Christ will never own thee at that day. Labor therefore to have Gods image
restored again, and Satan's washed out, seek not, as many do, to purchase such
and such a grace first: but.

1. How to gain the Image of God.
Labor to mortify and subdue that sin, which is opposite in thine heart to
that grace. First, put off the old man, and then put on the new, Ephesians. 4.

2. Labor, for a melting tender heart for the least sin. Gold is then only fit
to receive the impression, when it is tender and is melted; when thine heart is
heated therefore at a Sermon, cry out, Lord now strike, Rom 6. 7.
now imprint thine Image upon me.

3. Labor to see the Lord Jesus in his glory. For as wicked men looking upon
the evil example of great ones in the world, that will bear them out, grow
like them in villainy: so the very beholding the glorious grace in Christ, this
great Lord of glory, transformeth men into his Image, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. As the
Glass set full against the sun receives not only the beams, as all other
dark bodies do, but the image of the sun: So the understanding with open
face beholding Christ, is turned into the Image and likeness of Christ. Men
now adays look only to the best men's lives, and see how they walk, and rest
here; o look higher to this blessed face of God in Christ, as thine own; As
the application of the seal to the wax imprints the Image, so to view the
grace of Christ, as all thine, imprints the same image strongly on the soul. I
come now to the third Principal Head, in order, which I shall insist upon, out
of Romans 3. 23. All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Whence
observe.

CHAP. III.
THat all mankind is fallen by sin, from that glorious estate he was made in,
into a most woeful and miserable condition;
The Devil abusing the Serpent, and man abusing his own free will, overthrew
Adam, and in him all his posterity by sin, Genesis 3. 1, 2, 3, etc.

Now man's misery appears in these two things.

1. His misery in regard of sin. 2. His misery in regard of the consequents
of sin.
1. Man's misery in regard of sin
His misery in regard of sin, appears in these particulars.

1. Every man living is borne guilty of Adams sin. Now the justice and equity
of God in laying this sin to every man's charge, though none of Adams posterity
personally committed it, appears thus.

Adam standing, all mankind had stood; then it is equal that he falling, all
his posterity should fall. All our estates were ventured in this ship:
therefore, if we should have been partakers of his gains, if he had continued
safe, its sit we should be partakers of his loss too.

But secondly, we were all in Adam, Adam to stand for us, yet the Lord made it
for us; who being goodness it self, bears more good will to man, than he can
or could bear to himself; and being wisdom it self, made the wisest choice,
and took the wisest course for the good of man; For this made most for men's
safety and quiet; for if he had stood, all fear of loosing our happy estate
had vanished; whereas, if every man had been left to stand or fall for
himself, a man would ever have been in fear of falling.

And again, this was the sure way to have all men's estates preserved; for
having the charge of the estates of all men, that ever should be in the world,
he was the more pressed to look the more about him, and so to be more
watchful, that he be not robbed, and so undo and procure the curses of so
many thousands against him. Adam was the Head of mankind, and all mankind
naturally are members of that head: and if the Head invent and plot Treason,
and the head practice treason against the King or State, the whole body i^
found guilty, and the whole body must needs suffer. Adam was the poisoned root
and cisterne of all mankind, now the branches and streams being in the root
and spring originally, they therefore are tainted with the same poisonous
Principles. If these things satisfy not, God has a day coming wherein he
will reveal his own righteous proceedings before men and Angels, Romans 2. 4.
Use


Oh that men would consider this sin, and that the consideration of it could
humble peoples hearts. If any mourn for sin, it is for the most part for
other foul actual sins, few for this sin, that first made the breach and
began the controversy betwixt God and man. Next unto the sin against the
Holy Ghost, and contempt of the Gospel, The horrible nature of the first sin.
this is the greatest sin that cries lowdest in Gods ears for vengeance day
and night against a world of men. For now men's sins are against God in their
base and low estates; but this sin was committed against Jehovah, when man
was at the top of his preferment. Rebellion of a Traitor on a dunghill is not
so great as of a Favorite in the Court. Little sins against light are made
horrible: no sin by any man committed was ever against so much light as Adam
had. This sin was the first that ever displeased God. Drunkenness deprives God
of the glory of sobriety; whoring of Chastity, but this sin darkens the very
Sun, defaces all the Image of GOD, the glory of man, and the glory of GOD in
man; this is the first sin that ever did thee a mischief. This sin like a
great Captain has gathered together all those troops and swarms of sins that
now take hold upon thee. Thank this sin for an hard heart, thou so much
complainest of: thank this sin for that hellish darkness that overspreads
thee. This has raised Satan, Death, Judgment, Hell and Heaven against thee.

O consider those fearful sins that are packt up in this one evil.

1. Fearful Apostacy from GOD like a Devil. The heinousness of Adams sin.


2. Horrible Rebellion against GOD

unbelief in suspecting Gods threats to be true.

Blasphemy in conceiving the Devil, (Gods enemy and man's murderer) to be more
true in his temptations, then GOD in his threatening.

pride in thinking to make this sin of eating the forbidden fruit to be a step
and a stayre to rise higher, and to be like God Himself.

6. Fearful contempt of God, making

7. Horrible unthankfulness, when God had given him all but one tree, and

8. Horrible theft, in taking that which

9. Horrible Idolatry; in doting upon, God, the Creator, who is blessed for
ever.

You therefore that now say, no man can say black is your eye, you have lived
civilly all your days, look upon this one grievous sin, take a full view of
it, which thou have never shed one tear for as yet, and see thy misery by it,
and wonder at Gods patience. He has spared thee who wast borne branded with
it, and have lived guilty of it, and must perish for ever for it, if the Lord
from Heaven pity thee not.

But here is not all, consider secondly, Secondly dead in sin
every man is borne stark dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. he is borne empty of
every inward principle of life, void of all graces, and has no more good in
him (whatsoever he thinks,) then a dead Carrion has. And hence he is under
the power of sin, as a dead man is under the power of death, and cannot
perform any act of life: their bodies are living coffins to carry a dead soul
up and down in.

It Is true (I confess) many wicked men do many good actions, as praying,
hearing, almesdeeds, but it is not from any inward principle of life: Best
actions of the wicked, how sinful.
External motives like plummets on a dead (yet artificial) clock, set them a
running. Iehu was zealous, but it was only for a kingdom: the Pharisees gave
alms only ^o be seen of men. If one write a Will with a dead man's hand
deceased, that Will can hold no Law, it was not his Will, because it was not
writ by him, by any inward principle of life of his own. Pride makes a man
preach, pride makes a man hear, and pray sometimes. Self-love stirs up strange
desires in men, so that we may say, this is none of Gods Act by his grace in
the soul, but Pride and self-love. Bring a dead man to the fire, and chase
him, and rub him, you may produce some heat by this external working upon
him: but take him from the fire again, and he is soon cold: so many a man
that lives under a sound Minister, under the lashes and knockes of a chiding,
striving Conscience, he has some heat in him, some affections, some fears,
some desires, some sorrows stirred, yet take him from the Minister, and his
chasing conscience, and he grows cold again presently, because he wants an
inward principle of life.

Which point might make us to take up a bitter lamentation for every natural
man. Use. 2.
It is said, Exodus 12. 30. that there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was
not an house wherein there was not one found dead. Oh Lord, in some towns and
families what a world of these are there? Dead Husband, dead wife, dead
servants, dead children, walking up and down with their sins (as Fame says
some men do after death) with their grave-cloathes about them, and God only
knows whether ever they shall live again or not. How do men lament the loss
of their dead friends! O thou have a precious soul in thy bosom stark dead,
therefore lament thine estate, and consider it seriously.

First, How every Natural man is dead while he liv^^.
a dead man cannot stir, nor offer to stir. A wicked man cannot speak one good
word, or do any good action, if heaven it self did lie at stake for doing of
it, nor offer to shake off his sins, nor think one good thought. Indeed he may
speak and think of good things, but he cannot have good speeches, nor good
thoughts; as an holy man may think of evil things, as of the sins of the
times, yet the thought of those evil things is good, not evil, so, e contra.



Thirdly, A dead man cannot be Let Christ come out of Heaven and fall about
the neck of a natural man, and with tears in his eyes beseech him to take his
blood himself, his Kingdom, and leave his sins, he cannot receive this
offer.

Fourthly, A dead man is stark Mar. 23. 37. 38.
and stark deaf and hears nothing, he cannot taste any thing: so a natural
man is stark blind, he sees no God, no Christ, no wrath of the Almighty, no
glory of Heaven. He hears the voice of a man, but he hears not the voice of
God in a Sermon; he savoureth not the things of Gods Spirit.

Fifthly, A dead man is senseless, and

Sixthly, A dead man is a speechless man, he cannot speak unless it be like

Seventhly, he is a breathless man; wit, or he may have a few short-winded
wishes; but to power out his soul in prayer, in the bosom of God, with
groans unutterable he cannot. I wonder not to see so many families without
family prayer; Why? They are dead men, and lie rotting in their sins.

Eighthly. A dead man has lost all beauty: So a mere natural man has lost
all glory: He is an ugly creature in the sight of God, good men and Angels,
and shall one day be an abhorring to all flesh.



Abraham loved Sarah well while living, yet when she was dead; he seeks fora
burying place for her to carry her out of his sight: so God may let some
fearful judgment loose, and say to it, take this dead soul out of my sight,
etc. It was a wonder that Lazarus, though lying but four days in the grave,
should live again: O wonder thou, that ever God should let thee live, that
have been rotting in thy sin 20. 30. perhaps 60. years together.

III. Every natural man and woman is borne full of all sin, Romans 1. 29.
Fullness of sin.
as full as a Toade is full of poison, as full as ever his skin can hold;
Mind, Will, Eyes, Mouth, every limb of his body, end every piece of his soul
is full of sin; their hearts are bundles of sin: hence Solomon says,
foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child; whole treasures of sin, An
evil man (says Christ) out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil things; nay raging seas of sin, Isaiah 20. James 3. 6
nay worlds of sin. The tongue is a World of mischiese; what is the heart
then? for out of the abundance of the heart the tongue speaks: so that look
about thee and see, what ever sin is broached and runs out of any man's
heart into his life through the whole world, all those sins are in thine
heart; thy mind is a nest of all the soul opinions, berisies, that ever were
vented by any man; thy heart is a stinking sinkhole of all Atheism, Sodomy,
Blasphemy, Murder, Whoredom, Adultery, Witchcrast, Buggery; so that if thou
have any good thing in thee, it is but as a drop of Rosewater in a bowl of
poison, where fallen, it is all corrupted.

It is true, thou feel not all these things stirring in thee, at one time,
no more than Hazael thought he was or should be such a blood sucker, when he
asked the Prophet Elishab if he were a dog; but they are in thee like a nest of
snakes in an old hedge. Although they break not out into thy life, they lie
lurking in thy heart, they are there as a filthy puddle in a barrel, which
runs not our, because thou happly want the temptation or occasion to broach
and tappe thine heart, or because of Gods restraining Grace by Fear and Sham,
Educaeion, good Company, thou art restrained and builded up: and therefore when
one came to comfort that famous picture, pattern and monument of Gods justice
by seven years horror and grievous distress of conscience: Francis Spira.
when one told him he never had committeed such sins as Manasses, and
therefore he was not the greatest sinner isince the Creation, as he conceived;
he replied that he should have been worse than ever Manasses was if he had
lived in his time, and been on his throne.

Master Bradford would never look upon any ones lewd life with one eye, bnt he
would presently re^urne within his own breast with the other eye, and say, In
this my vile heart remains that sin, which without Gods special grace I
should have committed as well as ^ee. O me thinks this might pull down men's
proud conceits of themselves, especially such as bear up and comfort
themselves in their smooth, honest, civil life; such as through education have
been washed from all soul sins, they were never tainted with whoredom,
swearing, drunkenness, or profaneness; and here they think themselves so safe,
that God cannot find in his heart to have a thought of damming them.

Oh consider of this point, which may make thee pull thine hair from thine
head, and turn thy clothes to sackloth, and run up and down with amazement and
palenes in thy face, and horror in thy conscience, and tears in thine eyes.
What though thy life be smooth, what though thy outside, thy sepulcher be
painted? oh thou art full of rottennes of sin within. Guilty not before men as
the sins of thy life make thee, but before God, of all the sins that swarm
and roar in the whole world at this day, for God looks to the heart; guilty
thou art therefore of heart-whordom, heart-sodomy, heart-blasphemy,
heart-drunkennes, heart-buggery, heart oppression, heart-idolatry; and these
are the sins that terribly provoke the wrath of almighty God against thee,
Isay 57. 16. for the iniquity of his covetousness (says our Translation,) I
smote him, but the Hebrew renders it better, the iniquity of his conscience
(which is the sin of the heart and nature,) I smote him. As a King is angry and
musters up his army against rebels, not only which brings his soldiers out to
fight, but who keeps soldiers in their trenches ready for to fight. These
sins of thine heart are al ready armed to fight against God at the watchword or
alarm of any temptation. Nay I dare affirm, and will prove it, that these
sins provoke God to anger, and are as bad, if not worse, than the sins of
thy life. for

1. The sin of thine heart or nature, Sins of the heart worse than the sins of
the life.
its the cause, the womb that conteines, breeds, brings forth, suckles all the
bitter, all the troop of sins that are in the life, and therefore giving life
and being

heart than in the life. An actual sin is but a little breach made by the
sea of sin in thine heart, where all sin, all poison is met and mingled
together. Every actual sin is but as a shred broken off from the great
botrome of sin in the heart, and hence Christ says, out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks, and out of the evil treasure of the heart we
bring forth evil things. A man's spending money (I mean sin in the life) is
nothing to his treasure of sin in the heart.

Romans 7.
Hence the Apostle calls it, sin that dwells in me, that is, which always
lies and remains in me. So that in regard of the sins of thy heart thou do
rend in pieces and break, 1 All the laws of God. 2 At one clap, 3. Every
moment of thy life. Oh! me thinks the thought of this might rend an heart of
Rock in pieces, to think I am always grieving God, at all times, whatsoever
I do.

than many without; A traitor on the throne is worse than a traitor in the open
field. The heart is Christ's Throne. A swine in the best room is worse than in
the outward house. More I might say, but thus you see, sins of the life are
not so bad, nor provoke Gods wrath so siercely against thee, as the sins of
thine heart. Mourn therefore not so much, that thou have not been so bad as
others are, but look upon thy black feet, look within thine own heart, and
lament that in regard of the sins there thou art as bad as any; mourn not so
much merely that thou have sinned, as that thou have a nature so sinful, that
it is thy nature to be proud, and thy nature to be vain and deceitful, and
loath, not only thy sins but thy self for sin, being brimfull of
unrighteousness. But here is not all, consider fourthly.

4. 4. Every action is sinful as coming from a Natural Man.
That what ever a natural man does is sin; as the inside is full, so the
outside is nothing else but sin, at least in the sight of an holy God, though
not in the sight of blind sinful men; Indeed he may do many things, Lu. 16.
15
which for the matter of them are good, as he may give Alms, pray, fast, come
to Church, but as they come from him they are sin, as a man may speak good
words, but we cannot endure to hear him speak because of his stinking breath
which de^iles them: some actions indeed from their general nature are
indifferent, for all indifferences lie in generals; but every deliberate action
considered in Individuo, with all its circumstances, as time, place, motive,
end, is either morally good, or morally evil, as may be proved easily; morally
good in good men, morally evil in unregenerate and bad men: For let us see
particular actions of wicked men.

thoughts are only evil, and that continually, Genesis 6. 5.

words are sins, Psalm, 50. 16. their mouths are open S^pulchers which smell
filthy when they be opened. Romans 3. 13


civil actions are sin, as their eating, drinking, buying, selling, sleeping
and ploughing, Prove. 21. 4.

4. All their religious actions are sins, as coming to Church. Praying. Pr^.
Isai. 13. 14
they are sins, Isa. 58.

5. All their most Zealous Actions Iehu who killed all Baals Priests; because
his action was outwardly and materially good, therefore God rewarded him with
temporal favors; but because he had a Hawks eye to get and settle a
Kingdom to himself by this means, and so was Theologically evil, therefore
God threatens to be revenged upon him. 2. King. 10.

6. Their wisdom is sin. Oh, men Romans 8. The wisdom of the flesh is
enmity against God.

Thus, all they have or do are sins; For, how can he do any good action
whose person is filthy? A corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit; thou art
out of Christ, therefore all thy good things, all thy kindnesses done unto the
Lord and for the Lord, as thou think, are most odious to him. Let a woman
seek to give all the content to her Husband that may be, not out of any love
to him, but only out of love to another man, he abhorres all that she does.
Every wicked man wants an inward principle of love to God and Christ, and
therefore, though he ^eekes to honor God never so much, all that he does,
being done out of love to himself, God abhorres all that he performs All the
good things a wicked man does, are for himself, either for selfe-credit, or
selfeease, or selfe-contentment, or selfesafety: He sleeps, prays, hears,
speaks, professes for himself alone; hence, acting always for himself, he
commits the highest degree of idolatry, he pluckes God out of his throne,
and makes himself a God, because he makes himself his last end in every
Action; for a man puts himself in the room of God as well by making himself
his finis uttimus as if he should make himself primum principium. Sin is a
forsaking or departing from God. Ier. 20. ^3.
Now every natural man remaining always in a state of separation from God,
because he always wants the bond of union which is Faith, is always sinning,
Gods curse lies upon him, Deuteronomy. 28.
therefore he brings out nothing but briers and thorns.

Object. Obj.
But thou will say, if our praying and hearing be sin, why should we do
these duties? we must not sin.

Answer, Ans.
1. Good duties are good in themselves, Why good duties must be performed
though we sin in doing them.
although coming from thy vile heart they are sins.

2. It is less sin to do them, than to omit them; therefore it thou will go
to hell, go in the fairest path thou can in thither.

3. Venture and try, it may be God may hear, not for thy prayers sake, but for
his names sake. The unjust Judge help the poor widow, not because he loved
her or her suite, but because of her importunity; and so be sure thou shall
have nothing if thou do not seek: what though thou be a dog, yet thou
art alive, and art for the present under the Table. Catch not at Christ, snatch
not at his bread, but wait till God give thee him; it may be thou may have
him one day. Oh wonder then at Gods patience, that thou live one day longer,
who have all thy lifetime like a filthy Toade spet thy venom in the face of
God, that he has never been quiet for thee: oh look upon that black bill
that will one day be put in against thee, at the great day of account, where
thou must answer with flames of fire about thine ears, not only for thy
drunkenness, thy bloody oaths, and whoring, but for all the actions of thy
short life, and just so many actions so many fins.

Thou have painted thy face over now with good duties, and good desires; and a
little honesty amongst some men, is of that worth and raritie, that they think
God is beholding to them, if he can get any good action from them. But when
thy painted face shall be brought before the fire of Gods wrath, then thy
vileness shall appear before men and Angels. Oh know it, that as thou do
nothing else but sin, so God heaps up wrath against the dreadful day of
wrath.

Thus much for man's misery in regard of sin.

Now follows his misery in regard of the consequents or miseries that follow
upon sin. And these are,

1. Present. 2. Future.
First, Man's present miseries, Man's present miseries.
that already lie on him for sin, are these seven, that is;

First, God is his dreadful enemy, 5. 5.

Quest. How may one know another to be his enemy?

Ans. 1. By their looks. 2. By their threats. 3. By their blows. So God,

1. Hides his face from every natural man, and will not look upon him, Isay
59. 2.

2. God threatens, nay curses every natural man, Gal. 3. 10.

3. God gives them heavy bloody lashes on their souls and bodies.

Never tell me therefore, that God blesses thee in thine outward estate; no
greater sign of Gods wrath, then for the Lord to give thee thy swinge, as a
Father never looks after a desperate Son, but lets him run where he pleases.
And if God be thine enemy, then every creature is so too, both in Heaven and
Earth.

God has forsaken them, and they have lost God, Ephesians. 2. 12. It Is said, that
in the grievous famine of Samaria, Isai. 55. 6.
Doves dung was sold at a large price, because they wanted bread. Oh! men live
and pine away without GOD, without bread, and therefore the dung of worldly
contentments are efteemed so much of. Thou have lost the sight of God, and the
favor of God, and the special protection of God, and the government of God.
Caines punishment lies upon thee in thy natural estate, thou art a Runagate
from the face of God, and from his face thou art hid. Many have grown mad to
see their houses burnt, and all their goods lost. Oh, but God the greatest good
is lost: This loss made Saul cry out in distress of conscience, 1. Sam. 28.
15. The Philistians make war against me, and God is departed from me; the
loss of the sweetness of whose presence, for a little while only, made the
Lord Jesus himself cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? whereas
thou have lost God all thy life time. Oh, thou have an heart of brass that
can not mourn for his absence so long. The damned in hell have lost God, and
know it, and so the plague of desperate horror lies upon them; thou have lost
God here, but know it not, and the plague of an hard heart lies upon thee,
that thou can not mourn for this loss.

Thirdly, They are condemned men, treason, treason, against the most high God,
and condemned by justice and merey by the Gospel, which cries murder murder
against the son of God, John 3. 18. so that every natural man is damned in
Heaven, and damned on earth. God is thy all^seeing terrible Judge: Conscience
is thine accuser; an heavy witness: His word is thy Iayle: thy lusts are thy
Fetters: In this Bible is pronounced and writ thy doom, thy sentence: Death is
thy hangman, and that fire that shall never go out, thy torment: The Lord has
in his infinite patience reprived thee for a time; O take heed and get a pardon
before the day of execution come.

he is a bondslave to Satan, Ephesians. Act. 28. 21.
2. 3. for his servants ye are whom ye obey, says Christ. Now every natural
man does the Devills^drudgery, and carries the Devillspack, and howsoever he
says he defyeth the Devil, yet he sins, and so does his work. Satan has
overcome and conquered all men in Adam, and therefore, under his bondage and
dominion. And though he cannot compel a man to sin against his will, yet he
has, 1 Power.

First, to present and allure a man's

Secondly, to follow him with it, if

Thirdly, to disquiet and wrack him

Fourthly, besides he knows men's Man's fearful slavery under Satan.
who is;

1. A secret enemy to thee.

2. A deceitful enemy to thee, that Evah) even in her integrity, that he is in
a fair way, yet most miserable.

3. He is a cruel enemy or Lord over Cor. 4. 3. he gaggs them, so that they
cannot speak, as that man that had a dumb devil, neither for God, nor to God
in prayer; he starves them, so as no Sermon shall ever do them good; he robs
them of all they get in Gods ordinances, within three hours after the market,
the Sermon is ended.

4. He is a strong enemy, Luke 11. 21. So that if all the devils in hell are
able to keep men from coming out of their sins, he will: so strong an
enemy, that he keeps men from so much as sighing or groaning under their
burdens and bondage, Luke 11. 21. When the strong man keeps the palace, his
goods are in peace.

He is cast into utter darkness, as cruel Jaylors put their prisoners into
the worst dungeons; so Satan does natural men, 1 Pet. 2. 9
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. they see no God, no Christ, they see not the happiness of the
Saints in light, they see not these dreadful torments that should now in this
day of grace awaken them and humble them. Oh those by paths which thousands
wander from God in, they have no lamp to their feet to show them where they
err. Thou that art in thy natural estate art borne blind, and the Devil has
blinded thine eyes more by sin, and God in justice has blinded them worse for
sin, so that thou art in a corner of hell, because thou art in utter
darkness, where thou have not a glimpse of any saving Truth.

Sixthly, They are bound hand and foot in this estate, and cannot come out.
Romans Cor. 2. 14. for all kind of sins like chains have bound every part and
faculty of man, so that he is sure for stirring; and those are very strong in
him, they being as dear as his members, nay his life, Col. 3. 7. so that when
a man begins to forsake his vile courses, and purposes to become a new man,
Devils fetch him back, world enticeth him, and locketh him up, and flesh says,
oh, it is too strict a course, and then farewell merry days, and good
fellowship. Oh thou may wish and desire to come out sometime, but can not
put strength to thy desire, nor endure to do it. Thou may hang down thy
head like a bulrush for sin, but thou can not repent of sin, thou may
presume, but thou can not believe, thou may come half way and forsake
some sins, not all sins, thou may come and knock at heaven gate as the
foolish virgins did, but not enter in and pass through the gate; thou may
see the land of Canaan, and take much pains to go into Canaan, and thou may
taste of the bunches of grapes of that good land, but never enter into Canaan,
into heaven, but thou lie bound hand and foot in this woeful estate, and
here thou must lie and rot like a dead carcass in his grave, until the Lord
come and roll away the stone, and bid thee come out and live.

They are ready every moment to drop into hell. God is a consuming fire against
thee, and there is but one paper wall of thy body between thy soul and
eternal flames. How soon may God stop thy breath, there is nothing but that
between thee and hell; if that were gone, then farewell all. Thou art
condemned, and the mufflter is before thine eyes, God knows how soon the
ladder may be turned, thou hangest but by one rotten^ twined thread of thy life
over the flames of hell every hour.

Thus much of man's present miseries.

Now follows his future miseries, Man's future Miseries.
which are to come upon him hereafter.

They must die, either by a sudden, Psalm. 89. 48. which though it is to a
child of God a sweet sleep, yet to the wicked it is a fearful curse
proceeding from Gods wrath, whence like a Lion he tears body and soul
asunder, death comes hissing upon them like a fiery Dragon with the sting of
vengeance in the mouth of it, it puts a period to all their worldly
contentments, which then they must forsake, and carry nothing away with them,
but a rotten winding sheet. It Is the beginning of all their woe, it is the
captain that first strikes the stroke, and then armies of endless woes follow
after, Revel. 6. 2. Oh thou had better be a toade, or a dog then a man, for
there is an end of their troubles, when they are dead and gone, they fall now as
men from a sleep, they know not where they shall go; now Repentance is too
late, especially if thou have lived under means before, it is either a cold
Repentance, when the body is weak and the heart sick, or an hypocritical
repentance, only for fear of Hell, and therefore thou say, Lord Jesus
receive my soul. Nay commonly then men's hearts are most hard, and therefore
men dye like Lambs, and cry not out; Then it is hard plucking thy soul from
the Devils hands, to whom thou have given it all thy life by sin, and if thou
do get it back, do thou think that God will take the devils leavings? Now
thy day is past, and darkness begins to overspread thy soul; now flocks of
Devils come into thy chamber, waiting for thy soul, to fly upon it as a
Mastive Dog when the door is opened. And this is the reason why most men dye
quietly that lived wickedly, because Satan then has them as his own prey, like
Pirates that let a Ship pass by, that is empty of goods, they shout commonly at
them that are richly laden. The Christians in some parts of the Primitive
Church took the Sacrament every day, because they did look to die every day.
But these times where in we live, are so poisoned and glutted with their ease,
that it is a rare thing to see the man that looks death steadfastly in the face
one hour together, but Death will lay a bitter stroke on these one day.

II. After death they appear before Heb. 9. 27. their bodies indeed rot in
their graves, but their souls return before the Lord to judgment, Eccles.
12. 7. The general judgment is at the end of the world, when both body and
soul appears before God and all the world to an account. But there is a
particular judgment that every man meets with after this life, immediately at
the end of his life, where the soul is condemned only before the Lord.

You may perceive what this particular judgment is, thus, by these 4.
conclusions.

the wages of sin is death; in justice therefore it should be paid a sinful
creature as soon as he is borne.

Tim. 4. He is the Savior of all men, that is, not a Savior of eternal
preservation out of hell, but a Savior of temporal reservation from dropping
into Hell.

Cor. 6. 2.

Cor. 11. 31.) shall not be judged of the Lord. Now wicked men will not judge
and condemn themselves in this life, therefore at the end of it, God will
judge them. All natural men are lost in this life, but they may be found and
recovered again; but a man's loss by death is irr^coverable, because there is
no means after death to restore them, there is no Friend to persuade, no
Minister to preach, by which Faith is wrought, and men get Christ; There is no
power of returning or repenting then, for night is come and the day is past:
Again, the punishment is so heavy, that they can only bear wrath, so that
all their thoughts and affections are taken up with the burden. And therefore
Dives cries out, I am tormented. Oh that the consideration of this point might
a waken every secure sinner. What will become of thine immortal soul when
thou art dead? thou say, I know not, I hope well. I tell thee therefore that
which may send thee mourning to thy house, and quaking to thy grave, if thou
dyest in this estate, thou shall not dye like a Dog, nor yet like a Toad; but
after death comes judgment; then farewell Friends, when dying; and farewell
God for ever when thou art dead.

Now the Lord open your eyes to see the terrors of this particular judgment;
which if you could see, The terror of man's particular judgment.
unless you were mad, it would make you spend whose nights and days in
seeking to set all even with God.

I will show you briefly the manner and nature of it in these particulars.

Luke 19. 27. as at the Assizes first the Jailer brings the prisoners out.

terror upon the Judge. Now, thou see no God abroad in the world, but then
thou shall see the Almighty Jeho. vah, which sight shall strike thee with that
Hellish terror and dreadful horror, that thou shall call to the mountains
to cover thee, o Rocks, Rocks, hide me from the face of the Lamb, Rev. 6. ult.

3. Then all the sins that ever Psalm. 50. 21. as letters writ with juice of
Oranges cannot be read until it be brought unto the fire, and then they
appear; thou can not read that bloody bill of indiotment thy conscience has
against thee now; but when thou shall stand near unto God a consuming fire,
then what an heavy reckoning will app^are. It may be thou have left many
sins now, and go so far, and profitest so much, that no Christian can
discern thee, nay, thou think thy self in a safe estate; but yet there is
one leake in thy Ship that will sink thee; there is one secret hidden sin in
thine heart, which thou live in, as all unsound people do, that will damn
thee. I tell thee, as soon as ever thou art dead and gone, then thou shall see
where the knot did bind thee, where thy sin was that now has spoiled thee for
ever, and then thou shall grow mad to think; o that I never saw this sin I
loved, lived in, plotted, perfected mine own eternal ruin by, until now,
when it is too late to amend.

no spirit to strive with thee any more, and so shall passesentence, though
happily not vocally, yet effectually upon thy soul, and say, Depart thou cursed.
Thou shall see indeed the glory of God that others find, but to thy greater
sorrow shall never taste the same, Luke 13. 28.

5. Then shall God surrender up thy Pet. 3. 19. and hence thy forlorn soul
shall lie mourning for the time past now too late, amazed at the eternity of
sorrow that is to come, waiting for that fearful hour when the last trump
shall blow, and then body and soul meet to bear that wrath, that fire that
shall never go out: Oh therefore suspect and fear the worst of thy self now,
thou have seldom or never or very little troubled thine head about this
matter, whether Christ will save thee or not, thou have such strong hopes and
confidences already that he will; know, that it is possible, thou may be
deceived; and if so, when thou shall know thy doom after death, thou can not
get an hour more to make thy peace in with God, although thou should weep
tears of blood. If either the muffler of ignorance shall be before thine eyes,
like an handkercher about the face of one condemned, or if thou art pinioned
with any lust, or if thou make thine own pardon, proclaimest (because thou
art sorry a little for thy sins, and resolvest never to do the like again)
peace to thy soul, thou art one that after death shall appear before the Lord
to judgment; thou that art thus condemned now, dying so, shall come to thy
fearful execution after death.

There shall be a general Judgment of soul and body at the end of the world,
wherein they shall be arraigned and condemned before the great Tribunal seat
of Jesus Christ, Jude 14, 15. 2 Cor. 5. 10. The heating of Judgment to come
made Felix to tremble; nothing of more efficacy to awaken a secure sinner, then
sad thoughts of this siery day.

But thou will ask me how it may Obj.
be proved that there will be such a day.

I answer, Ans.
Gods justice calls for it, this world is the stage where Gods patience and
bounty act their parts, and hence every man will profess and conceive, Why
there must be a day of Judgment.
because he feels it, that God is merciful; But Gods justice is questioned,
men think God to be all mercy and no justice; all honey and no sting; now the
wicked prosper in all their ways, are never punished, but live and die in
peace, whereas the godly are daily afficted and reviled. Therefore because this
Attribute suffers a total eclipse almost now, there must come a day wherein it
must shine out before all the world in the glory of it, Romans 2. 5.

The second reason is from the glory of Christ: he was accused, arraigned,
condemned by men, therefore he shall be the Judge of men, John 5. 27. for this
is an ordinary piece of Gods providence toward his people, the same evil he
casts them into now, he ex^lts them into the contrary good in his time. As the
Lord has a purpose to make Joseph Ruler over all Egypt, but first he makes
him a slave. God had a meaning to make Christ Judge of men, therefore first he
suffers him to be judged of men.

Quest. Quest.
But when shall this Judgment day be?

Answ. Ans.
Though we cannot tell the day and hour particularly, yet this we are sure of,
that when all the Elect are called, for whose sake the world stands, Isa. 1. 9.
when these pillars are taken away, then woe to the world; as when Lot was taken
out of Sodom, then Sodom was burnt. Now it is not probable that this time
will come as yet: for first Antichrist must be consumed, and not only the
scattered visible Jews, but the whole body of the Israelites must first be
called, and have a glorious Church here upon earth, Ezech. 37. This glorious
Church Scripture and reason will enforce, which when it is called, shall not be
expired as soon as it is borne, but shall continue many a year.

Quest. Quest.
But how shall this Judgment be?

Answer. Ans.
The Apostle describes it 1 These. 4. 16, 17.

1. Christ shall break out of the third heaven, The manner of the last
judgment.
and be seen in the air, before any dead arise, and this shall be with an
admirable shout, as when a

2. Then shall the voice of the Archangell Rise you dead and come to Judgment,
even as he called to Lazarus, Lazarus arise.

Exodus 19. it is said the trumpet sounded, much more louder shall it now sound
when he comes to judge men that have broken the Law.

rise first, then the others that live, shall, like Enoch, be translated and
changed, 1 Cor. 15.



Oh consider of this day thou that live in thy sins now, and yet art safe,
there is a day coming wherein thou may and shall be judged.

1. Consider who shall be thy Judge: mercy, pity, goodness it self, even
Jesus Christ that many times held out his bowers of compassion toward thee. A
child of God may say, yonder is my brother, friend, husband. But thou may
say, yonder is mine enemy. He may say at that day, yonder is he that shed his
blood to save me; thou may say, yonder he^ comes whose heart I have pierced
with my sins, whose blood I have despised. They may say, O come Lord Jesus,
and cover me under thy wings: But thou shall then cry out, O Rocks fall upon
me and hide me from the face of the Lamb.

2. Consider the manner of his coming, These 1. 7. He shall come in flaming
fire, the heavens shall be on a flame, the ^lements shall melt like ^^alding
lead upon thee: when a house is on fire at midnight in a Town, what a
fearful cry is there made? When all the world shall cry fire, fire, and run
up and down for shelter to hide themselves, but cannot find it, but say, O now
the gloomy day of blood and fire is come, here is for my pride, here is for my
oaths, and the wages for my drunkenness, security, and neglect of duties.

whoredom, self- pollution, speculative wantonness, men with men, Eccl^s.
ult. ult.
women with women, as the Apostle speaks Romans 1. Why, at this day, all the
world shall see and hear these privy prankes, then the books shall be opened.
Men will not take up a foul business, nor end it in private, therefore there
shall be a day of public hearing; things shall not be suddenly shuffled up,
as carnal thoughts imagine, vi^. That at this day, first Christ shall raise
the dead, and then the separation shall be made, and then the sentence past,
and then suddenly the Judgment day is done: No, no, it must take up some large
quantity of time, that all the world may see the secret sins of wicked men
in the world, and therefore it may be made evident from all Scripture and
Reason, that this day of Christ's Kingly office in Judging the world, shall last
happily longer than his private administration now (wherein he is less
glorious) in governing the world. Tremble thou time server, tremble thou
Hypocrite, tremble thou that live in any secret sin under the all-seeing
eye of this Judge; thine own conscience indeed shall be a sufficient witness
against thee, to discover all thy sins at thy particular judgment, but all
the world shall openly see thine hidden close courses of darkness, to thine
ever Insting sh^me at this day.

4. In regard of the fearful sentence cursed creature into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Thou shall then cry ou^, O mercy, Lord,
O a little mercy: No, will the Lord Jesus say, I did indeed once offer it you,
but you refused, therefore Depart. Then thou shall plead again, Lord, If I
must depart, yet bless me before I go: No, no, Depart thou cursed. Oh but,
Lord, if I must depart cursed, let me go to some good place; no, Depart thou
cursed into hell fire. Oh Lord, that is a torment I cannot bear, but if it must
be so, Lord, let me come out again quickly. No, depart thou cursed into
everlasting fire. Oh Lord, if this be thy pleasure, that here I must abide, let
me have good company with me: No, Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. This shall be thy sentence. The hearing
of which may make the rocks to rent, so that, go on in thy sin, and prosper,
despise and scoff at Gods Ministers, and prosper, abhor the power and
practice of Religion as a too precise course, and prosper; yet known, there
will a day come when thou shall meet with a dreadful Judge, a doleful
sentence. Now is thy day of sinning, but God will have shortly his day of
condemning.

When the Judgment day is done, Revel. 21. 8.

Now this wrath of God consists in Wherein consists the wrath of God.
these things.

1. Thy soul shall be banished from the face and blessed sweet presence of God
and Christ, and thou shall never see the face of God more. It is said, Acts 20.
that they wept sore, because they should see Paul's face no more. Oh, thou shall
never see the face of God, Christ, Saints, and Angels more. O heavy doom to
famish and pine away for ever without one bit of bread to comfort thee, one
smile of God to refresh thee. Men that have their sores running upon them must
be shut up from the presence of men sound and whole. Oh, thy sins like
plague-sores run on thee, therefore thou must be shut out like a dog from
the presence of God, and all his people, 2. These. 1. 9.

Mich. 1. 3. there was never such wrath felt or conceived as the Lord has
devised against thee that live and dyest in thy natural estate: Hence it is
called wrath to come, 1 These. 1. ult. The torment which wisdom shall devise,
the almighty power of God shall inflict upon thee, so as there was never such
power seen in making the world, as in holding a poor creature under the
wrath, that holds up the soul in being with one hand, and beats it with the
other, ever burning like fire against a creature, and yet that creature never
burnt up, Romans 9. 22. Think not this cruelty, it is justice; what cares God for
a vile wretch whom nothing can make good while it lives. If we have been long
in hewing a block, and we can make no meet vessel of it, put it to no good use
for our selves, we cast it into the fire: God heweth thee by Sermons,
sickness, losses, and crosses, sudden death, mercies, and miseries, yet
nothing makes thee better; what should God do with thee, but cast thee hence?
Oh consider of this wrath before you feel it. I had rather have all the world
burning about mine ears, than to have one blasting frown from the blessed
face of an infinite and dreadful God. Thou can not endure the torment of a
little kitchen fire on the tip of thy finger, not one half hour together: how
will thou bear the fury of this infinite endless consuming fire in body and
soul throughout all eternity?

leaf: I remember so many knocks God gave at this iron heart of mine, so many
mercies the Lord sent, but oh no means could prevail with me. Lastly, by
showing thee how easily thou might have avoided all these miseries. Oh, once
I was almost persuaded to be a Christian, but I suffered my heart to grow dead,
and fell to loose company, and so lost all. The Lord Jesus came unto my door
and knocked, and if I had done that for Christ, which I did for the Devil many
a time, to open at his knocks, I had been saved. A thousand such bites will
this worm give at thine heart, which shall make thee cry out, O time, time, O
sermons, sermons; O my hopes and my helps are now lost, that once I had to
save my lost soul.

4. Thou shall take up thy lodging shall fill thy soul when thou shall be
banished from Angels society, and come into the fellowship of Devils for
ever? Mat. 25. 41.




Rev. 10. 9. And here thou shall lie and weep and gnash thy teeth in spite
against God and thy self, and roar and stamp and grow mad, that there thou
must lie under the curse of God for ever. Thus I say thou shall lie
blaspheming, with Gods wrath like a pile of fire on thy soul burning, and
floods, nay seas, nay more, seas of tears (for thou shall for ever lie
weeping) shall never quench it. And here which way so ever thou look thou
shall see matter of everlasting grief. Look up to heaven, and there thou shall
see (oh) that God is for ever gone. Look about thee, thou shall see Devils
quaking, cursing God; and thousands, nay millions of sinful damned creatures
crying and roaring out with doleful shrikings: Oh the day that ever I was
borne. Look within thee, there is a guilty conscience gnawing. Look to time
past, oh those golden days of grace, and sweet seasons of mercy are quite lost
and gone. Look to time to come, there thou shall behold evils, troops and
swarms of sorrows, and woes, and raging waves, and billows of wrath coming
roaring upon thee. Look to time present, O not one hour or moment of ease or
refreshing, but all curses meet together, and seeding upon one poor lost
immortal soul, that never can be recovered again. No God, no Christ, no
Spirit to comfort thee, no Minister to preach unto thee, no friend to wipe away
thy continual tears, no Sun to shine upon thee, not a bit of bread, not one
drop of water to cool thy tongue.

This is the misery of every natural man. Now do not thou shift it from thy
self, and say; God is merciful. True, But it is to very few, as shall be
proved. It Is a thousand to one if ever thou be one of that small number whom
God has picked out to escape this wrath to come. If thou do not get the Lord
Jesus to bear this wrath, farewell God, Christ and Gods mercy for ever. And I
am sure that it is no common evil which God gives to every wicked man; if
Christ had shed seas of blood, set thine heart at rest, there is not one drop
of it for thee, until thou come to see, and feel, and groan under this
miserable estate. I tell thee, Christ is so far from saving thee, that he is
thine enemy. If Christ were here and should say, here is my blood for thee, if
thou will but lie down and mourn under the burden of thy misery, and yet for
all his speeches, thy dry eyes weep not, thy stout heart yields not, thy hard
heart mournes not, as to say; oh! I am a sinful, lost, condemned, cursed, dead
creature: what shall I do? do not think but he would turn away his face
from thee, and say, oh! thou stony hard-hearted creature, would thou have me
save thee from thy misery, and yet thou will not groan, sigh, and mourn for
deliverance to me, out of thy misery? if thou likest thine estate so well, and
prizest me so little, perish in thy misery for ever.

Oh labor to be humbled day and The scope of knowing our miseries is to be
humbled.
night under this thy woeful estate. Thou art guilty of Adams grievous sin;
will this break thine heart? No, Thou art dead in sin, and top-full of all
sin, will this break thine heart? No, Whatsoever thou do, have done, shall
do, remaining in this estate, is sin, will this break thine heart? No. God
is thine enemy, and thou have lost him, will this break thine heart? No. Thou
art condemned to die eternally; Satan is thy Iaylor, thou art bound hand and
foot in the bolts of thy sins, and cast into utter darkness, and ready
every moment to drop into hell, will this break thine heart? No. Thou must
dye, and after that appear before the Lord to judgment; and then bear Gods
everlasting insupportable wrath, which rents the rocks, and burns down to the
bottom of hell; will this break thine hard heart man? No. Then fare well
Christ for ever, never look to see a Christ, until thou do come to feel thy
misery out of Christ. Labor therefore for this, and the Lord will reveal the
brazen Serpent, when thou art in thine own sense and feeling stung to death
with thy fiery Serpents.

So I come to open the Fourth Principal point, v^z.

CHAP. IIII.
THat the Lord Jesus Christ is the only means of Redemption and deliverance
out of this estate, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption through his blood:
which plainly demonstrates, that

Doct.
Jesus Christ is the only means of man's Redemption and deliverance out of his
bondage and miserable estate. And this is the Doctrine I shall now insist upon.

When the Israelites were in bondage and misery, he sends Moses to deliver
them. When they were in Babylon, he stirs up Cyrus to open the prison-gates
to them. But when man is in misery, he sends the Lord Jesus, God and man, to
redeem him, Act. 4. 12.

Quest. Quest.
How does Christ redeem men out of this misery?

Answ. Answ.
By paying a price for them.

Cor. 6. ult. Gods mercy will be manifested in saving some, and his justice
must be satisfied by having satisfaction or price made and paid for man's sin.

Hence Christ sa^^sfieth Gods Justice.

First, by standing in the room of all Heb. 7. 22. How men are redeemed.
As the first Adam stood in the room of all mankind fallen: So Christ
stands in the room of all men rising, or to be restored again.

Secondly, by taking from them, in Cor. 5. 22. Hence Luther said, Christ was
the greatest sinner by imputation.

Thirdly, by bearing the curse and Gal. 3. 13. Christ drinks up the cup of all
the Elect at one draught, which they should have been sipping, and drinking,
and swilling, and tormented with millions of years.

Romans 5. 11. for this also Gods Justice required perfection, conformity to the
Law, Dan. 9. 24
as well as ( perfect satisfaction) suffering for the wrong offered to the
Lawgiver. Justice thus requiring these four things, Christ satisfies Justice
by performing them, and so pays the price.

Turkey, and then because he cannot come to his own Prince himself, he is
fetched away by strong hand.

Here is encouragement to the vilest sinner, Use 1.
and comfort to the selfe-succourlesse and lost sinner, who have spent all
their money, their time and endeavors upon these duties and strivings, that
have been but poor Physicians to them: Oh look up here to the Lord Jesus,
who can do that cure for thee in a moment, which all creatures cannot do in
many years. What bolts, what strong fetters, what unruly lusts, temptations
and miseries art thou locked into? Behold the Deliverer is come out of Sion,
having satisfied Justice, and paid a price to ^anisome poor Captives, Luc. 4.
18. with the Keys of Heaven, Hell, and thy unruly heart, in his hand, to fetch
thee out with great mercy and strong hand; who knows but thou poor prisoner
of Hell, thou poor Captive of the Devil, thou poor shackled sinner may be
one whom he is come for^ Oh look up to him, sigh to Heaven for deliverance
from him, and be glad and rejoice at his coming.

This strikes terror to them, Use. 2.
that though there is a means of deliverance, yet they lie in their misery,
never groan, never sigh to the Lord Jesus for deliverance; nay, that rejoice
in their bondage, and dance to Hell in their bolts; nay, that are weary of
deliverance, that sit in the stocks, when they are at prayers, that come out
of the Church, when the tedious Sermon runs somewhat beyond the hou^e, like
prisoners out of a Jaile, that despise the Lord Jesus, when he offers to open
the doors, and so let them out of that miserable estate. Oh poor creatures!
is there a means of deliverance? and do thou neglect, nay despise it. Know
it, that this will cut thine heart one day, when thou art hanging in thy
gibbets in Hell, to see others standing at Gods right hand, redeemed by Christ;
thou might have had share in their honor, for there was a Deliverer come to
save thee, but thou would have none of him. Oh thou will lie yelling in those
everlasting burnings, and tear thy hair, and curse thy self: from hence
might I have been delivered, but I would not. Has Christ delivered thee from
Hell, and has he not delivered thee from thine Alehouse? Has Christ delivered
thee from Satan's society, when he has not delivered thee from thy loose
company yet? Has Christ delivered thee from burning, when thy faggots, thy
sins, grow in thee? Is Christ's blood thine, that make no more account of it,
nor feel no more virtue from it than in the blood of a chicken? Art thou
redeemed, do thou hope by Christ to be saved, that did never see, nor
feel, nor sigh under thy bondage? O, the devils will keep holiday (as it
were) in hell, in respect of thee, who shall mourn under Gods wrath, and
lament. Oh there was a means to deliver us out of it, but thou shall mourn
for ever for thy misery. And this will be a bodkin at thine heart one day, to
think there was a deliverer, but I wretch would none of him.

Here likewise is matter of Reproof, Use 3.
to such as seek to come out of this misery from and by themselves. If they be
ignorant, they hope to be saved by their good meaning and prayers. If Civil,
by paying all they owe, and doing as they would be done by, and by doing no
body any harm. If they be troubled about their estates, then they lick
themselves whole by their mourning, repenting, and reforming. Oh poor stubble,
can thou stand before this consuming fire without sin? Can thou make thy
self a Christ for thy self? Can thou bear and come from under an infinite
wrath? can thou bring in perfect righteousness into the presence of God?
This Christ must do, else he could not satisfy and redeem. And if thou can
not do thus, and have no Christ, define and pray, that heaven and earth shake,
till thou have worn thy tongue to the stumps, endeavor as much as thou can,
and others commend thee for a diligent Christian; mourn in some Wilderness
till doomes day, dig thy grave there with thy nails, weep buckets full of
hourly tears, till. thou can weep no more. Fast and Pray till thy skin and
bones cleave together; Promise and Purpose, with full resolution to be better,
nay reform thy head, heart, life, and tongue, and some, nay all sins; live
like an Angel, shine like a sun, walk up and down the world like a
distressed Pilgrim going to another Country, so that all Christians commend
and admire thee. Die ten thousand deaths, lie at the firebacke in Hell so many
millions of years as there be piles of grass on the earth, or sands upon the
Seashore, or stars in heaven, or motes in the Sun: I tell thee, not one
spark of Gods wrath against thy sin shall be, can be quenched by all these
duties, nor by any of these sorrows, or tears; for, these are not the blood
of Christ. Nay if all the Angels and Saints in heaven and earth should pray for
thee, these cannot deliver thee, for they are not the blood of Christ. Nay, God
as a Gal. 5. 2.
Creator having made a law, will not forgive one sin without the blood of
Christ; Nay, Christ's blood will not do it neither, if thou do join never
so little, that thou have or do, unto Jesus Christ, and make thy self or
any of thy duties copartners with Christ in that great work of saving thee.
Cry out therefore as that blessed Martyr did, None but Christ, none but Christ.

Take heed of neglecting or rejecting so great salvation by Jesus Christ. Use 4.
Take heed of spilling this potion, that only can cure thee.

But thou will say, Ob.
this means of redemption is only appointed for some, it is not intended for
all, therefore not for me, therefore how can I reject Christ?

It is true, Answ.
Christ spent not his breath to pray for all, John 17. 9. much less his blood
for all; therefore he was never intended as a Redeemer of all; But that he is
not intended as a Deliver of thee. How does this follow? How do thou know
this?

But secondly, I say; Though Christ be not intended for all, yet he is offered
unto all, and therefore unto thee. The offer of Christ universal, and why.
And the ground is this chiefly.

The universal offer of Christ arises not from Christ's Priestly office
immediately, but from his Kingly office, whereby the Father having given him
all power and dominion in heaven and earth, he hereupon commands all men to
stoop unto him, and likewise bids all his Disciples and all their successors
to go and preach the Gospel to every creature under Heaven, Mat. 28. 18, 19
For, Christ does not immediat^ly Mark. 16. 15.
offer himself to all men as a Savior, whereby ^hey may be encouraged to
serve him as a King. but first as a King commanding them to cast away their
weapons, and stoop unto his Scepter, and depend upon his free mercy,
acknowledging, if ever he save me, I will bles^e him; if he damn me, his name
is right^ous in so dealing with me.

But that I may fasten this exhortation; I will show these four things.

I. The Lord Jesus is offered to every particular The offer of Christ
universal, and wh^rein.
What have thou to say against it, that thou do doubt of it? It may be thou will plead.

Oh, I am so ignorant of my self, God, Ob.
Christ, or his will, that surely the Lord offers no Christ to me.

Yes, but he does, though thou lie in utter darkness. Our blessed Savior
glorified his Father, Ans.
for revealing the mystery of the Gospel to simple men, Prove. 9. 4.
neglecting those that carried the chief reputation of wisdom in the world.
The parts of none are so low, as that they are beneath the gracious regard of
Christ. ^ Cor. 5. 20.
God bestows the best fruits of his love upon mean and weak persons here,
that he might confound the pride of flesh the more. Where it pleases him to
make his choice, and to exalt his mercy, Pro. 1. 22, 23.
he passes by no degree of wit, though never so incapable.

But thou will say; Obj.
I am an enemy to God, and have a heart so stubborn and loath to yield; I have
vexed him to the very heart by my transgressions.

Yet he beseeches thee to be reconciled. Ans.
Put case thou have been a sinner, and rebellious against God, yet so long as
thou art not found amongst malicious opposers, and underminers of his truth,
never give way to despayring thoughts, thou have a merciful Savior.

But I have despised the means of Reconciliation and rejected mercy. Obj.


Yet God calls thee to return; Ans.
Thou have played the Harlot with many lovers, yet turn again to me, says
the Lord, Jer. 3. 1. Cast thy self into the arms of Christ, and if thou
perishest, perish there; if thou do not, thou art sure to perish. If mercy
be to be had any where, it is by seeking to Christ, not by running from him.
Herein appears Christ's love to thee, that he has given thee a heart in some
degree sensible; he might have given thee up to hardness, security, and
profaneness; of all spiritual judgments the greatest. But he that dyed for
his enemies, will in no wise refuse those the desire of whose soul is toward
him. When the Prodigal set himself to return to his Father, his Father
stays not for him but meets him in the way. If our sins displease us, they
shall never hurt us; but we shall be esteemed of God to be, that which we
desire and labor to be, Psalm. 145. 19.

But can the Lord offer Christ to me, Obj.
so poor, that have no strength, no faith, no grace, nor sense of my poverty.

Yes, even to thee; Ans.
why should we except our selves, when Christ does not except us. Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden. We are therefore poor, because we
know not our riches. We can never be in such a condition, wherein there will be
just cause of utter despair. He that sits in darkness, and sees no light, no
light of comfort, no light of Gods countenance, yet let him trust in the Name
of the Lord. Weaknesses do not debar us from mercy, nay, they incline God
the more. The Husband is bound to bear with the wife, as being the weaker
vessel; and shall we think God will exempt himself from his own Rule, and
not bear with his weak Spouse?

But is this offer made to me that cannot love, Obj.
prize, nor desire the Lord Jesus.

Yes, to thee, Ans.
Christ knows how to pity us in this case. We are weak, but we are his. A
Father looks not so much at the blemishes of his child, as at his own nature
in him; So Christ finds matter of love from any thing of his own in us. A
Christians carriage toward Christ may in many things be very offensive, and
cause much strangeness, yet (so long as he resolves not upon any known evil)
Christ will own him, and he Christ.

Oh! but I have fallen from God often, Obj.
since he has enlightened me; And does he tender Christ to me.

Thou must know that Christ has married every believing Soul to himsel^e, Ans.
and that where the work of grace is begun, sin looses strength by every new
fall. If there be a spring of sin in thee, there is a spring o^ mercy in God,
and a fountain dialy opened to wash thy uncleanenesse in. Adam (indeed) lost
all by once sinning; but we are under a better Covenant, a Covenant of Mercy,
and are encouraged by the Son to go to the Father every day for the sins
of that day.

If I was willing to receive Christ, Obj.
I might have Christ offered to me. But will the Lord offer him to such a one
as desires not to have Christ?

Yes, Ans.
(says our Savior) I would have gathered you, as the hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and you would not. We must know, a creating power
cannot only bring something out of nothing, but contrary out of contrary; of
unwilling, God can make us a willing people. There is a promise of pouring
clean water upon us, and Christ has taken upon him to purge his Spouse, and
make her fit for himself.

What have thou now to plead against this strange kindness of the Lord in
offering Christ to thee? Thou will say, it may be:

O! I fear time is past, Oh time is past. Obj.
I might once have had Christ, but now mine heart is sealed down with
hardness, blindness, unbelief; oh! time is now gone.

No, Ans.
not so, see Isai. 65. 1, 2, 3. All the day long God holds out his hands to a
back-^l^ding and rebellious people. Thy day of grace, thy day of means, thy
day of life, thy day of Gods striving with thee, and stirring of thee, still
lasts.

But if God be so willing to save, Obj.
and so prodigal of his Christ, why does he not give me Christ, or draw me to
Christ?

I answer. Ans.
What command do thou look for to draw thee to Christ, but this word, Come;
Oh come thou poor, forlorn, lost, blind, cursed, nothing. I will save thee, I
will enrich thee, I will forgive thee, I will enlighten thee, I will bless
thee, I will be all things unto thee, do all things for thee. May not this
win and melt the heart of a Devil?

II. Quest.
Upon what conditions may Christ be had?

Make an exchange of what thou art or have with Christ, Ans.
for what Christ is or has; and so taking him, (like the wise Merchant the
Pearl) thou shall have Salvation with him.

Now this Exchange lies in these four things chiefly. On what terms Christ
may be ^ad.


First, give away thy self to him, head, heart, tongue, body, soul, and he
will give away Cant. 6. 3. yea he will stand in thy room in Heaven, that thou
may triumph and say, I am already in Heaven, glorified in him. I see Gods
blessed face in Christ; I have conquered Death, Hell, and the Devil in him.

sins to Christ, confess them, leave them, cast them upon the Lord Jesus, so
as to receive power from him to forsake them. And he will be made sin for
thee, to take them away from thee, 1 Ioh. 1. 9.

Thirdly, give away thine honor, pleasure, profit, life, for him; he will give
away his Crown and honor, life and all to thee, Luk, 18. Let nothing be sweet
unto thee but him, and nothing shall be sweet unto him but thee.

Fourthly, give away thy Rags, forsake Phil. 3. 8, 9. Thou shall stand as
glorious in the sight of God, howsoever thou art a poor sneake in thy self,
as an Angel, nay, as all the Angels, because clothed with his Son Christ
Jesus his Righteousness.

Now tell me, will you have Christ? He is offered to you. Yes, you will all
say: Yea, with all mine heart. But will you have him on these terms? upon
these IIII. conditions?

Now because men will flatter themselves, and say, Yes.

III. I will show you four sorts of people Fouresorts of people that reject
Christ.


First, The sleighty unbeleever; that when he hears of an offer of Christ, and
should wonder at the love of the Lord in doing preach for their living: There
was a good plain Sermon to day, the man seems to mean well, but I think he
be no great Scholar; and so makes no more of the offer of Christ, then of the
offer of a straw at their feet. If a good bargain be offered them, they will
forget all their bus^nesse to accomplish that; yet they make light of this
offer, Matthew. 22. 5.

The desperate unbeleever: that feeing his sins to be so great, and seeling
his heart so hard, and finding but little good from God, since he sought for
help, (like Cain,) flies from the presence of the Lord; like a mad Lion he
breaks his chains of restraining grace, and runs roaring after his prey,
after his cups, queanes, lusts, etc. and so will not honor Christ with such a
great cure of such great sins, that he shall never have the credit of it, nor
will be beholding to him for such a kindness.

The presumptuous unbeleever* that seeing what sins he has committed, and it
may be having a little touch and some sorrow for his sins, catches at
Christ, hoping to be saved by him before ever he come to be laden with sin
as the greatest evil, or Gods wrath kindled against him as his greatest curse;
and so catching at Christ, hopes he has Christ, and hoping he has Christ
already, shuts out Christ for the future, and so rejects him. Mich. 3. 11. You
shall have these men and women complain never of the want, but only of the
weakness of their Faith, and they will not be beaten off from thence; let them
hear never so much of their misery, nor see never so much of their sins, yet
they will not be beaten off from trusting to Christ.

Fourthly, The tottering doubtful unbeleever, Iam. 1. 6, 7. these people
reject Jesus Christ.

IV. And now come and see the greatness The great evil in rejecting Christ.


1. It Is a most bloody sin, it is a trampling under foot the blood of the
Son of God, Heb. 10. 21.

2. It Is a most dishonouring sin; for, as break all those Laws of God in an
instant, and so do dishonor him.

ungrateful sin, it is despising Gods greatest love, which the Lord takes
most heavily.

most inexcusable sin; for what have you to cast against Jesus Christ? Oh, my
sins are so great, thou will say. But take Christ, his Blood will wa^h thee
from all thy sins.

Oh! but mine heart is hard, Obj.
and my mind blind.

Yea, Ans.
but take me, and I will break thine heart, open thine eyes. A new heart is
Gods gift, and he has promised to create it in us.

Oh! but then I must forsake all my pleasures. Obj.


Thou shall have them fully, Answ.
continually, infinitely in Christ.

Oh! but I cannot take Christ. Obj.


Oh! but Christ can give thee an hand to receive him, Answ.
as well as give away himself.

most heavy sin. What sin will gripe so in Hell, as this? Ioh. 3. 19. God
the Father shall strike the Devils for breaking the Law of the Creation, but
God the Son shall strike thee, and the Comforter himself shall set himself
against thee, for despising the means and offers of Redemption. The Devils
might never have had mercy, but thou shall think with anguish, and vexation,
and madness of heart, I might have had a Christ, he was offered unto me; mercy
wooed this stubborn proud heart to yield. But, O Rock of Adamant that I was,
it did not affect me. Oh fly speedily to this City of Refuge, least the
pursuer of blood overtake thee.

Away then out of your selves to the Lord Jesus. Use 5.
Heaven and earth leave thee, and have forsaken thee; now there is but one more
that can do thee good, and deliver thy soul from endless sorrow: go to him,
and take hold on him, not with the hand of presumption and love to thy self to
save thy self, but with the hand of faith, and love to him to honor him.

I am well enough already, Ob.
what tell you me of Christ?

This is the damning sin of these times, Answ.
when men have Christ offered unto them, foretelling them else of wrath to
come, they say they are well; hence feeling no judgment here, they fear no
wrath hereafter; hence being well, they feel no need of Christ; hence till
they dye, they never seek out for a Savior. Men will not come into the Arc
already made for them, before the flood arise. The world makes so much of those
it nurseth up, that they are unwilling to come to heaven, when they are called
to come home.

But it may be Christ has not redeemed me, Obj.
nor shed his blood for me, therefore why should I go to him?

It may be it is true, Ans.
may be not, yet do thou venture as those, Joel 2. who knows but the Lord may
return? It is true, God has elected but few, and so the Son has shed his
blood, and dyed but for a few, yet this is no excuse for thee, to lie down and
say, what should I seek out of my self for succor? Thou must in this case
venture and try, as many men amongst us do now, who hearing of one good living
fallen, twenty of them will go and seek for it, although they know only one
shall have it. Therefore say as those Lepers in Samaria; if I stay here in my
sins, I die: if I go out to the Camp of the Syrians, we may live, we can
but die however: if I go out of Christ, I may get mercy, how ever I can but
dye, and it is better to dye at Christ's feet, than in thine own puddle.
Content not your selves therefore with your bare reformation and amending your
lives, this is but to cross the debt in thine own book, it remains
uncancelled in the Creditors book still: but go, take, offer up this eternal
sacrifice before the eyes of God the Father, and cry guilty at his bar, and
look for mercy from him; sigh under thy bondage, that as Moses was sent unto
the Israelites, so may Christ be sent into thy soul. Rest not therefore in the
sight or sense of a helpless condition; saying, I cannot help my self
unless Christ does: sigh unto the Lord Jesus in Heaven for succor, and admire
the Lord for ever, that when there was no help, and when he might have raised
out of the stones children to praise him; yet he should send his Son out of
his bosom to save thee. So much for this particular; The fifth Divine
Principle follows to be handled.

CHAP. V
THat those that are saved out of this estate, are very few, and that those
that are saved, are saved with very much difficulty, Matthew. 7. 14. Straight is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it.

Here are two parts.

1. The paucity of them that shall be saved; few find the way thither.

2. The difficulty of being saved. straight and narrow is the way and gate unto
life.

Hence arise two Doctrines. Doct. 1.


1. That the number of them that shall be saved is very small, Luke 13. 24. the
devil has his drove and swarms that go to hell, as fast as bees to their
hive; Christ has his flock, Luke 22. 32.
and that is but a little flock; hence Gods children are called Jewels, Mal.
3. 17. which commonly are kept secret, in respect of the other lumber in the
house; hence they are called strangers and pilgrims, which are very few in
respect of the inhabitants of the Country, through which they pass: hence
they are called Sons of God, 1 John 3. 2. of the blood royal, which are few
in respect of common subjects.

But see the truth of this point in these two things.

First, Few saved in all ages
Look to all ages and times of the world. Secondly, to all places and persons
in the world, and we shall see few men were saved.

Cain living, and a good Abel slain. And as the world increased in number, so
in wickedness, Genesis 6. 12. it is said, All flesh had corrupted their ways,
and amongst so many thousand men, not one righteous but Noah, and his family;
and yet in the Arc there crept in a cursed Cham.

Afterward, as Ab^ahams posterity increased, so we see their sin abounded.
When his posterity was in Egypt, where one would think if ever men were good,
now it would appear, being so heavily afflicted by Pharaoh, being by so many
miracles miraculously delivered by the hand of Moses; yet most of these God was
wroth with, Heb. 3. 12. and only two of them, Caleb and Joshua went into
Canaan, a type of Heaven. Look into Solomon's time, what glorious times! what
great profession was there then! yet after his death, ten Tribes fell to the
odious sin of Idolatry, following the command of Jeroboam their King. Look
further into Isaiahs time, when there were multitudes of sacrifices and
prayers, Isay 1. 11. yet then there was but a remnant, Isa. 1. 9.
nay a very little remnant, that should be saved. And look to the time of
Christ's coming in the flesh (for I pick out the best times of all) when one
would think by such Sermons he preached, such miracles he wrought, such a life
as he led, all the Jews should have entertained him, yet it is said, Ioh, 1. 12.
He came unto his own, and they received him not. So few, that Christ himself
admires at one good Nathaniel, Behold an Israelise in whom there is no guile.
In the Apostles time, many indeed were converted, but few comparatively, and
amongst the best Churches many bad: as that at Philippi, Rovel. 3. 4.
Phil. 3. 18. many had a name to live, but were dead, and few only kept their
garments unspotted. And presently after the Apostles time, Act. 20. 28. 29. 30.
many grievous wolves came and devoured the sheep; and so in succeeding ages,
Revel. 12. 9. all the earth wondered at the whore in Scarlet.

And in Luthers time, when the light began to arise again, he saw so many
carnal Gospellers, that he breaks out in one Sermon into these speeches; God
grant I may never live to see those bloody days that are coming upon an
ungodly world. Latimer saw so much profaneness in his time, that he thought
verily Doomes day was just at hand. And have not our eyes seen in the
Palatinate, where scarce one man in twenty that stood out, but fell from their
glorious profession to Popery, as fast as leaves fall in Autumn. Who would
have thought there had lurked such hearts under such a show of detesting
Popery, as was among them before. And at Christ's coming, shall he find faith
on the earth?

2. Let us look into all places and persons, Few shall be saved in all places.
and see how few shall be saved. The world is now split into four parts,
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America: and the three biggest parts are drowned in a
deluge of profaneness and superstition; they do not so much as profess
Christ; you may see the sentence of death writ on these men's foreheads, Ier.
10. ult. But let us look upon the best part of the world, and that is Europe,
how few shall be saved there. First, The Grecian Church, howsoever now in these
days, their good Patriarch of Constantinople is about a general Reformation
among them, and has done much good, yet are they for the present, and have
been for the most part of them without the saving means of knowledge. They
content themselves with their old superstitions, having little or no Preaching
at all. And for the other parts, as Italy, Spain, France, Germany, for the
most part they are Popish; and see the end of these men, 2 These. 1. 9. And now
amongst them that carry the badge of honesty, I will not speak what mine ears
have heard, and my heart believes concerning other Churches: I will come into
our own Church of England, which is the most flourishing Church in the world:
never had Church such Preachers, such means, yet have we not some Chapels and
Churches stand as dark lanthornes without light, Few shall be saved in England.
where people are led with blind, or idle, or licentious Ministers, 1 Cor. 1.
29.
and so both fall into the ditch?

Nay, even amongst them that have the means of grace, but few shall be saved.
It may be sometimes amongst ninety nine in a Parish, Christ sends a Minister to
call some one lost Sheep, Luke 15. 24, 25.
Matthew. 13. Three grounds were bad where the seed was sown, and only one
ground good. It Is a strange speech of Chrysostom in his fourth Sermon to the
people of Antioch, where he was much beloved, and did much good. How many do
you think (says he) shall be saved in this City? It will be an hard speech
to you, but I will speak it; though here be so many thousands of you, yet
there cannot be found a hundred that shall be saved, and I doubt of them too;
for what villainy is there among youth, what sloth in old men? and so he goes
on: So say I, never tell me, we are baptized, and are Christians, and trust to
Christ; let us but separate the Goats from the Sheep, and exclude none, but
such as the Scripture does, and sets a cross upon their doors, with, Lord have
mercy upon them, and we shall see, only few in the City shall be saved.

1. Cast out all the Profane people

2. Set by all Civil men, that are but wolves chained up, tame devils, swine
in a fair meadow, that pay all they owe, and do no body any harm, yet do
none any great good, that plead for themselves and say, who can say black is
mine eye? These are righteous men, whom Christ never came to call, for he came
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

3. Cast by all Hypocrites, that like stage players in the sight of others, act
the parts of Kings and honest men; when look upon them in their ^yring house,
they are but base varlets.

4. Formal Professors, and Carnal Gospellers, that have a thing like faith,
and like sorrow, and like true repentance, and like good desires, but yet they
be but pictures, they deceive others and themselves too, 2 Timothy 3. 5.



First, Use 1.
Here then is an use of encouragement. Be not discouraged by the name of
singularity. What? do you think your self wiser than others? and shall none
be saved but such as are so precise as Ministers prate? are you wiser then
others, that you think none shall go to heaven but your self? I tell you, if
you would be saved, you must be singular men, Tit. 2. 14.
not out of fashion, but out of conscience, Act. 24. 16.

Secondly, Use 2.
here is matter of terror to all those that be of opinion, that few shall be
saved; and therefore when they are convinced of the danger of sin by the
Word, thy fly to this shelter, if I be damned, it will be woe to many more
besides me then; as though most should not be damned. Oh yes, the most of them
that live in the Church shall perish. And this made an Hermit, which Theodoret
mentions, to live fifteen years in a Cell in a desolate will dernesse, with
nothing but bread and water, and yet doubted after all his sorrow, whether he
should be saved or no. Oh, Gods wrath is heavy which thou shall one day bear.

Thirdly, Use 3.
this ministers exhortation to all confident people, that think they believe,
and say, they doubt not but to be saved, and hence do not much fear death,
Oh, learn hence to suspect and fear your estates, and fear it so much, that
thou can not be quiet, until thou have got some assurance thou shall be
saved. When Christ told his Disciples that one of them should betray him, they
all said, Master, is it I? but if he had said, elev^e of them should betray
him, they all except one, would they not all conclude, Surely it is I: If the
Lord had said, only few shall be damned, every man might fear, it may be it
is I; but now he says, most shall, every man may cry out and say, Surely it is
I. No humble heart, but is driven to and fro with many stinging fears this
way, yet there is a generation of presumptuous, brazen^ faced, bold people,
that confidently think of themselves, as the Iemes of the Pharisees, (being so
holy and strict) that if God save but two in the world, they shall make one.

The child of God indeed is bold as a Lion; but he has Gods Spirit and
promise, assuring him of his eternal welfare. But I speak of diverse that have
no sound ground to prove this point, (which they pertinaciously defend) that
they shall be saved. This confident humor rages most of all in our old
Professors at large, who think, that is a jest indeed, that having been of a
good belief so long, that they now should be so far behind hand, as to begin
the work, and lay the foundation anew. And not only among these, but amongst
diverse sorts of people, whom the Devil never troubles, because he is sure of
them already, and therefore cries peace in their ears, whose consciences never
trouble them, because that has shut it is eyes; and hence they sleep, and
sleeping dream that God is merciful unto them, and will be so; yet never see
they are deceived, until they awake with the flames of hell about their ears;
and the world troubles them not, they have their hearts desire here, because
they are friends to it, and so enemies to God. And Ministers never trouble
them, for they have none such as are fit for that work near them; or if they
have, they can sit and sleep in the Church, or choose whether they will believe
him. And their friends never trouble them, because they are afraid to
displease them. And God himself never troubles them, because that time is to
come hereafter. This one truth well pondered and thought on, may damp thine
heart, and make thy conscience fly in thy face, and say, thou art the man; it
may be there are better in hell than thy self that art so confident; and
therefore tell me what have thou to say for thy self, that thou shall be
saved; in what thing have thou gone beyond them that think they are rich, and
want nothing, who yet are poor, blind, miserable, and naked?

Thou will say happily, Obj. 1.
first, I have left my sins I once lived in, and am now no drunkard, no
swearer, no liar, etc.

I answer, Ans.
thou may be washed from thy mire, (the pollution of the world,) and yet be a
swine in Gods account, 2 Pet. 2. 20. thou may live a blameless, innocent,
honest, smooth life, and yet be a miserable creature still, Phil. 3. 6.

But I pray, Obj. 2.
and that often.

This thou may do, Ans.
and yet never be saved, I say 1. 11. To what purpose do your multitude of
sacrifices? Nay, thou may pray with much affection, with a good heart, as
thou think, yet a thousand miles off from being saved, Prove. 1. 28.

But I fast sometimes a swell as pray. Obj. 3.
So did the Scribes and Pharisees, Ans.
even twice a week, which could not be public but private fasts. And yet this
righteousness could never save them.

But I hear the word of God, Obj. 4.
and like the best Preachers.

This thou may do too, Ans.
and yet never be saved. Ezekiel. 33. 31, 32.
Nay, thou may so hear, as to receive much joy and comfort in hearing, nay
to believe and catch hold on Christ, and so say and think he is thine, and yet
not be saved; as the stony ground did, Mat. 13. who heard the word with joy,
and for a season believed.

I read the Scriptures often. Obj. 5.


This you may do too, Answ.
and yet never be saved; as the Pharisees, who were so perfect in reading the
Bible, that Christ needed but only say, It has been said of old time, for
they knew the text and place well enough without intimation.

But I am grieved, Obj. 6.
and am sorrowful, and repent for my sins past.

Judas did thus, Answ.
Matthew. 27. 3. he repents himself with a legal repentance for fear of hell,
and with a natural sorrow for dealing so unkindly with Christ, in betraying
not only of blood, but innocent blood. True humiliation is ever accompanied
with hearty reformation.

Oh! but I love good men, Obj. 7.
and their company.

So did the five foolish Virgins love the company, Answ.
and (at the time of extremity) the very oil and grace of the wise, yet they
were locked out of the gates of mercy.

But God has given me more knowledge then others, Obj. 8.
or then I my self had once.

This thou may have, Ans.
and be able to teach others, and think so of thy self too, Romans 2. 18
and yet never be saved.

But I keep the Lords day strictly. Obj. 9.


So did the Jews, Ans.
whom yet Christ condemned, and were never saved.

I have very many good desires and endeavors to get Heaven. Obj. 10.


These thou and thousands may have, Ans.
and yet miss of Heaven.

Many shall seek to enter in at that narrow gate, Luke 13. 24.
and not be able.

True, Obj. 11.
thou will say; many men do many duties, but without any life or zeal. I am
zealous.

So thou may be, Answ.
and yet never saved; Phil. 3. 6. 11.
as Iehu; Paul, was zealous when he was a Pharisee, and if he was so for a
false Religion and a bad cause, why much more may thou be for a good cause;
so zealous, as not only to cry out against profaneness in the wicked, but
civil honesty of others, and hypocrisy of others, yea, even of the coldness
of the best of Gods people: thou may be the forehorse in the teame, and the
ringleader of good exercises amongst the best men, 2 Chronicles. 44. 4, 5, 6.
(as Ioash a wicked King was the first that complained of the negligence of his
best Officers in not repairing the Temple) and so stir them up unto it: Nay,
thou may be so forward as to be persecuted, and not yield an inch, nor
shrink in the wetting, but may manfully and courageously stand it out in
time of persecution, as the thorny ground did: so zealous thou may be, as to
like best of, and to flock most unto the most zealous preachers that search
men's consciences best, as the whole Country of Judea came flocking to John's
ministry, and delighted to hear him for a season, nay thou may be zealous,
as to take sweet delight in doing of all these things, Isa. 58 2, 3. they
delight in approaching near unto God, yet come short of heaven.

But thou will say; Obj. 12.
True, many a man rides post, that breaks his neck at last: many a man is
zealous, but his fire is soon quenched, and his zeal is soon spent; they
hold not out. Whereas I am constant, and persevere in godly courses.

So did that young man, Ans.
yet he was a graceless man, Matthew. 19. 20. All these things have I done from
my youth: what lack I yet?

It is true, Hypocrites may persevere, but they know themselves to be naught
all the while, Obj. 13.
and so deceive others: but I am persuaded that I am in Gods favor, and in a
safe and happy estate, since I do all with a good heart for God.

This thou may verily think of thy self, Answ.
and yet be deceived, and damned, and go to the Devil at last. There is a way
(says Solomon) that seems right to a man, Pro. 14. 12.
but the end thereof is the way of death. For he is an hypocrite, not only
that makes a seeming outward show of what he has not, but also that has a
true show of what indeed there is not. The first sort of Hypocrites deceive
others only; the latter, having some inward, yet common work, deceive
themselves too. I am. 1. 26. If any man seem to be religious (so many are, and
so deceive the world) but it is added, deceiving his own soul. Nay, thou
may go so fairly, and live so honestly, that all the best Christians about
thee may think well of thee, and never suspect thee, and so may pass
through the world, and dye with a deluded comfort, that thou shall go to
heaven, and be canonized for a Saint in thy funeral sermon, and never know
thou art counterfeit, till the L O R D brings thee to thy strict and last
examination, and so thou receivest that dreadful sentence, Go ye cursed: so
it was with the Five foolish Virgins that were never discovered by the wise,
Mat. 25.
nor by themselves, until the gate of grace was shut upon them; If thou have
therefore no better evidences to show for thy self, that thine estate is good,
then these, I Will not give a pinnes point for all thy flattering false hopes of
being saved: but it may be, thou have never yet come so far as to this pitch;
and if not; Lord, what will become of thee? Suspect thy self much, and when in
this Ship-wracke of souls thou see so many thousands sink; cry out, and
conclude, It Is a wonder of wonders, and a thousand, and a thousand to one, if
ever thou come safe to shore.

Oh! strive then to be one of them that shall be saved, Use 4.
though it cost thee thy blood, and the loss of all that thou have; labor to
go beyond all those that go so far, and yet perish at the last. Do not
say, that seeing so few shall be saved, therefore this discourageth me from
seeking, because, all my labor may be in vain. Consider that Christ here
makes another and a better use of it, Luke 13. 24. Seeing that many shall
seek, and not enter, therefore (says he) strive to enter in at the straight
gate; venture at least, and try what the Lord will do for thee.

Wherein does a child of GOD, Quest.
(and so how may I) go beyond these Hypocrites that go so far?

In three things principally. Answ.


First, no unregenerate man, though Wherein a child of God goes beyond an
Hypocrite.
let him do never so much, but he lives in some one sin or other, secret or
open, little or great. Judas went far, but he was covetous. Herod went far,
but he loved his Herodias. Every dog has his kennell, every swine has his
swill, and every wicked man his lust, for no unregenerate man has fruition of
God to content him, and there is no man's heart, but it must have some good to
content it; which good is to be found only in the Fountain of all good, and
that is God; or in the cisterne, and that is in the creatures: hence a man
having lost full content in God, he seeks for, and feeds upon contentment in
the creature, which he makes a God to him, and here lies his lust or sin,
which he must needs live in. Hence, ask those men that go very far, and
take their penny for good silver, and commend themselves for their good
desires: I say, ask them, if they have no sin. Yes, say they, who can live
without sin? and so they give way to sin, and therefore live in sin; Nay,
commonly, all the duties, prayers, care, and zeal of the best Hypocrites, are
to hide a lust; as the whore in the Proverbes, that wipes her mouth, and goes
to the Temple, and pays her vows; or to feed their lusts, as Iehu his zeal
against Baal was to get a Kingdom. There remains a root of bitterness in the
best Hypocrites, which howsoever it be lopt off sometimes by sickness, or
horror of conscience, and a man has purposes never to commit it again, yet
there it secretly lurkes, and though it seems to be bound and conquered by
the Word, or by prayer, or by outward crosses, or while the hand of God is upon
a man, yet the inward strength and power of it remains still; and therefore
when Temptations, like strong Philistines, are upon this man again, he breaks
all vows, promises, bonds of God, and will save the life of his sin.

Secondly, no unregenerate man or Paul before his conversion, they fasted, and
prayed, and kept the Sabbath, but they rested in their legal righteousness,
and in the performance of these and the like duties. Take the best Hypoc^ite
that has ^he most strong persuasions of Gods love to him, and ask him, why he
hopes to be saved. He will answer, I pray, read, hear, love good men, cry out
of the sins of the time. And tell him again, that an Hypocrite may climb
these stairs, and go as far. He will reply, True indeed, but they do not
what they do with a sound heart, but to be seen of men. Mark now, how these
men feel a good heart in themselves, and in all things they do, and therefore
feel not a want of all good, which is poverty of spirit, and therefore here
they fall short, Isa. 66. 2. there were diverse Hypocrites forward for the
worship of God in the Temple, but God loathes these, because not poor in
Spirit, to them only it is said, the Lord will look. I have seen many
Professors very forward for all good duties, but as ignorant of Christ, when
they are sifted, as blocks. And if a man (as few do) know not Christ, he must
rest in his duties, because he knows not Christ, to whom he must go and be
carried if ever he be saved. I have heard of a man that being condemned to dye,
thought to be saved from the Gallows, and to save himself from hanging by a
certain gift he said he had of whis^ling; so men seek to save themselves by
their gifts of knowledge, gifts of memory, gifts of prayer, and when they see
they must dye for their sins, this is the ruin of many a soul, that though
he forsake Egypt and his sins, and fleshpots there, and will never be so as
he has been, yet he never comes into Canaan, but loses himself and his
soul in a wilderness of many duties, and there perishes.

Thirdly, if any unr^generate man eternal rest and lodging in any thing else
but Jesus Christ, Heb. 4 4. Judas followed Christ for the bag, he would have
the bag and Christ too; The Young man came unto Christ to be his Disciple,
but he would have Christ and the world too; they will not content themselves
with Christ alone, nor with the world alone, but make their markets out of
both, like whorish wives, that will please their husbands and others too. Men
in distress of conscience, if they have comfort from Christ, they are
contented; if they have salvation from hell by Christ, they are contented: but
Christ himself contents them not. Thus far an Hypocrite goes not. So much
for the first Doctrine, observed out of the Text. I come now to the second.

Doct. 2. Doct. 2.
That those that are saved, are saved with much difficulty: or it is a
wonderful hard thing to be saved.

The gate is straight, and therefore a man must sweat and strive to enter; both
the entrance is difficult, and the progress of salvation too. Jesus Christ is
not got with a wet finger. It is not wishing and desiring to be saved, will
bring men to heaven; hells mouth is full of good wishes. It is not shedding a
tear at a Sermon, or blubbering now and then in a corner, and saying over thy
prayers, and crying God mercy for thy sins, will save thee. It is not Lord
have mercy upon us, will do thee good. It is not coming constantly to Church;
these are easy matters. But it is a tough work, a wonderful hard matter to be
saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18. Hence the way to Heaven is compared to a race, where a man
must put forth all his strength, and stre^ch every limb, and all to get
forward. Hence a Christians life is compared to wrestling, Ephe. 6. 12. All the
policy and power of hell buckle together against a Christian, therefore he must
look to himself, or else he falls. Hence it is compared to fighting, 2 Timothy
4. 7. a man must fight against the Devil, the world, himself, who shoot
poisoned bullets in the soul, where a man must kill or be killed. God has not
lined the way to Christ with velvet, no^ strewed it with rushes; He will never
feed a sloth^ull humor in man, who will be saved, if Christ and Heaven would
drop in their mouths, and if any would bear their cha^ges thither: If Christ
might be bought for a few cold wishes and lazy d^sires, he would be of small
reckoning amongst men, who would say, lightly come, lightly go. Indeed Christ's
yoke is easy in it self, and when a man is got into Christ nothing is so
sweet; but for a carnal dull heart, it is hard to draw in it; for,

There are four straight gates which every one must pass through before he
can enter into Heaven. 4 Straight gates to be passed through before we can
enter into heaven.


There is 1. the straight gate of Humiliation: God saves none but first he
humbles them; now it is hard to for sin and from sin, (...) is is true
humiliation, and this is hard

Faith, Ephesians. 1. 19. its an easy matter to presume, but hard to believe in
Christ. It is easy for a man that was never humbled to believe and say, it is
but believing: but it is an hard matter for a man humbled, when he sees all
his sins in order before him, the devil and conscience roaring upon him, and
crying out against him, and God ^rowning upon him, now to call God Father, is
an hard work. Judas had rather be hanged than b^leeve. It is hard to see a
Christ, as a rock to stand upon, when we are overwhelmed with sorrow of heart
for sin. It is hard to prize Christ above ten thousand worlds of pearl: it is
hard to desire Christ, and nothing but Christ; hard to follow Christ all the
day long, and never to be quiet till he is got in thine arms, and then with
Simeon to say, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace.

3. The straight gate of Repentance.



Hence learn, Use.
that every easy way to Heaven is a false way, although Ministers should
pre^ch it out of their Pulpits, and Angels should publish it out of Heaven.

Now there are nine easy ways to Heave (as men think) all which lead to
Hell. The false ways to Heaven discovered.




education, whereby many wild natures are by little and little tamed, and like
wolves are chained up easily while they are young.

Balams way of good wishes, whereby many people will confess their ignorance,
forgetfulness, and that they cannot make such shows as others do, but they
thank God their hearts are as good, and God for his part accepts (they say)
the will for the deed; And, My son give me thine heart, the heart is all in
all, and so long they hope to do well enough. Poor deluded creatures thus
think to break through armies of sins, devils, temptations, and to break
open the very gates of Heaven with a few good wishes; they think to come to
their journeys end without legs, because their hearts are good to God.

4. The way of formalitie, whereby Mark. 1. 14. Every man must have some
Religion, some fig leaves to hide their nakedness. Now this Religion must be
either true Religion, or the false one; if the true, he must either take up the
power of it, but that he will not, because it is burdensome: or the form of
it, and this being easy, men embrace it as their God, and will rather lose
their lives, than their Religion thus taken up. This form of Religion is the
easiest Religion in the world; partly because it eases men of trouble of
conscience, quieting that: Thou have sinned, says conscience, and God is
offended; take a book and pray, keep thy conscience better, and bring thy
Bible with thee. Now conscience is silent, being charmed down with the form
of Religion, as the devil is driven away (as they say) with holy water; partly
also because the form of Religion credits a man, partly because it is easy in
it self, it is of a light carriage, being but the shadow and picture of the
substance of Religion: as now, what an easy matter is it, to come to Church?
They hear (at least out wardly) very attentively an hour and more, and then
to turn to a proof, and to turn down a leaf, here is the form. But now to
spend saturday at night, and all the whole Sabbath day morning in trimming the
Lamp, and in getting oil in the heart, to meet the bridegroom the next day,
and so meet him in the word, and there to tremble at the voice of God, and
suck the breast while it is open, and when the word is done, to go aside
privately, and there to chew upon the word, there to lament with tears all the
vain thoughts in duties, deadness in hearing, this is hard, because this is
the power of godliness, and this men will not take up: so for private prayer,
what an easy matter it is for a man to say over a few prayers out of some
devout book, or to repeat some old prayer got by heart since a child, or to
have two or three short-winded wishes for GODS mercy in the morning and at
night; this form is easy: but now to prepare the heart by serious meditation
of God and man's self before he prays, then to come to God with a bleeding
hunger-starved heart, not only with a desire, but with a warrant, I must h^ve
such or such a mercy, and thereto wrestle with God, although it be an hour or
two together for a blessing, this is too hard; men think none do thus, and
therefore they will not.

Fifthly, the way of presumption, catch hold easily upon Gods mercy, and snatch
comforts, before they are reached out unto them. There is no word of comfort in
the Book of God intended for such as regard iniquity in their hearts, though
they do not act it in their lives. Their only comfort is, that the sentence
of damnation is not yet executed upon them.

sloth, whereby men lie still, and say, God must do all; If the Lord would set
up a Pulpit at the Alehouse door, it may be they would hear oftener. If God
will always thunder, they will always pray; if strike them now and then with
sickness, God shall be paid with good words and promises enough, that they will
be better if they live; but as long as peace lasts, they will run to Hell as
fast as they can; and if God will not catch them, they care not, they will not
return.

carelessness, when men feeling many difficulties, pass through some of them,
but not all, and what they cannot get now, they feed themselves with a false
hope they shall hereafter: they are content to be called Precisians, and
fools, and crazie brains, but they want brokennesse of heart, and they will
pray (it may be) for it, and pass by that difficulty; but to keep the wound
always open, this they will not do, to be always sighing for help, and
never to give themselves rest, till their hearts are humbled; that they will
not; these have a name to live, yet are dead.

Eighthly, The way of moderation or Rev. 3. 16. which indeed is nothing but
luke-warmenesse of the soul, and that is, when a man contrives and cuts out
such a way to Heaven, as he may be hated of none, but please all, and so do
any thing for a quiet life, and so sleep in a whole skin. The Lord says, He
that will live godly, must suffer persecution: No, not so, Lord. Surely (think
they) if men were discreet and wise, it would prevent a great deal of trouble
and opposition in good courses; this man will commend those that are most
zealous, if they were but wise, if he meet with a black-mouthed swearer, he
will not reprove him, lest he be displeased with him; if he meet with an
honest man, he^l yield to all he says, that so he may commend him; and when he
meets them both together, they shall be both alike welcome (what ever he
thi^kes) to his house and Table, because he would feign be at peace with all
men.

self-love, whereby a man fearing terribly he shall be damned, uses
diligently all means whereby he shall be saved. Here is the strongest
difficulty of all, to row against the stream, and to hate a man's self, The
way of self-love.
and then to follow Christ fully.

I now come to the sixth General Head proposed in order to be considered.

CHAP. VI.
THat the grand cause of man's eternal ruin, or why so many are damned, and so
few saved by Christ, it is from themselves, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Why will you dye?
The great cause why so many people dye, and perish everlastingly, is because
they will; every man that perishes, is his own Butcher, or murderer, Matthew.
23. 27. Hos. 13. 9. this is the Point we purpose to prosecute at the present.

The question here will be, Quest.
how men plot and perfect their own ruin.

By these four principal means, Answ.
which are the four great Rocks that most men are split upon; How men plot
their own ruin.
and great necessity lies upon every man to know them; for when a powder plot
is discovered, the danger is almost past. I say, there are these four causes
of man's eternal overthrow, which I shall handle largely, and make use of every
particular reason when it is opened and finished.

ignorance of men, whereby thousands remain woefully ignorant of their
spiritual estate; not knowing how the case stands between God and their
souls; but thinking themselves to be well enough already, they never seek to
come out of their misery, till they perish in it.

carnal security, putting the evil day far from them, whereby they feel
not their fearful thraldom, and so never groan to come out of the flvish
bondage of sin and Satan.

carnal confidence, whereby they shift to save themselves by their own duties
and performances when they feel it.

presumption, whereby men scramble to save themselves by their own seeming
faith, when they see an insufficiency in duties, and an unworthiness in
themselves for God to save them.

I will begin with the first Reason, Ignorance the first Gene^^ll Reason of
man's tuine.
and discover the first train, whereby men blow up themselves, which is this:
They know not their misery, nor that fearful accursed forlorn^ estate wherein
they lie, but think and say, they shall do as well as others; and therefore
when any friend persuades them to come out of it, and shows, them the danger
of remaining in such a condition; what is their answer? I pray yon save your
breath to cool your broth. Every Fat shall stand on his own bottom; let me
alone, I hope I have a soul to save as well as you, and shall be as careful
of it as you shall or can be; you shall not answer for my soul, I hope I shall
do as well as the precisest of you all. Hence likewise, if the Minister come
home to them, they go home with hearts full of outcries against the man, and
their tongue dipped in gall against the Sermon. God be merciful unto us, if all
this be true; here is harsh doctrine, enough to make a man run out of his wits,
and to drive me to despair. Thus they know not their misery, and not knowing
(they are lost and condemned Creatures under the ever lasting wrath of God)
They never seek, pray, strive or follow the means whereby they may come out
of it, and so perish in it, and never know it, till they awake with the ^lames
of Hell about their ears. They will acknovvledge indeed many of them, that all
men are borne in a most miserable estate, but they never apply particularly
that general truth to themselves; saying, I am the man, I am now under Gods
wrath, and may be snatched away by death every hour, and then I am undone and
lost for ever.

Now there are two sorts of people that are ignorant of this their misery.

First, the common sort of profane, blockish, ignorant people.

Secondly, the finer sort of unsound hollow professors, that have a Peacocks
pride, that think themselves fair, and in a very good estate, though they
have but one feather on their crest to boast of.

I will begin with the first sort, The 1. sort.
and show you the reasons why they are ignorant of their misery, that is for
these 4. Reasons.

First, Sometimes because they want Reason.
There Is no faithful Minister, no compassionate Lot to tell them of fire and
brim-stone from heaven for their crying sins; there is no Noah to forwarne
them of a flood; there is no messenger to bring them tipings of those Armies of
Gods devouring plagues and wrath, that are approaching near unto them; they
have no pilots, poor forsaken creatures to show them their rocks; they have
either no Minister at all to teach them, either because the Parish is too
poor, or the Church-living too great to maintain a faithful man (the
strongest Asses carrying the greatest burdens commonly) O woeful Physicians!
sometimes they be profane, and cannot heal themselves, and sometimes they be
ignorant, and know no^ what to preach, unless they should follow the steps of
Master Latimers Friar; or at the best, they shoot off a few pot-gunnes against
gross sins; or if they do show men their misery, they lick them whole
again with some comfortable ill applied sentences (but I hope better things of
you, my brethren) the man's Patron may happily storm else. Or else they say
commonly, thou have sinned* but comfort thy self, despair not, Christ has
suffered, and thus skin over the wound, and let it fester within for want of
cutting it deeper: I say therefore, because they want a faithful watchman to
cry fire, fire, in that sleepy estate of sin and darkness wherein they lie;
therefore whole Towns, Parishes, generations of men, are burnt up, and perish
miserably, Lam. 2. 14.

Reason.
when they have the means of revealing it unto them, as Foelix, Acts 24, 25.
Many a man has many a bitter pill given him at a Sermon, but he has no
leisure to chew upon it. One man is taken up with suites in Law, and another
almost eaten up with suretiship, and carking cares how to pay his debts, and
provide for his own; another has a great charge and few friends, and he
says the world is hard, and hence, like a Mole, roots in the earth,
week-dayes and Sabath-dayes; the world thus calling them on one side, and lusts
on another, and the Devil on the other side, they have no leisure to consider
of Death, Devil, God, nor themselves, Hell nor Heaven. The Minister cries and
knockes without, but there is such a noise and lumber of tumultuous lusts and
vain thoughts in their hearts and heads, that all good thoughts are sad
unwelcome guests, and are knocked down presently.

Thirdly, because if they have leisure, they are afraid to know it. Hence
people cry out of Ministers, that they damn all, and will hear them no more,
and they will not be such fools as to believe all that such say; the reason
is, they are afraid to know the vvorst of themselves; they are afraid to be
cut, an^ therefore cannot endure the Surgeon; they think, to be troubled in
mind as others are, is the very high-rode to despair; and therefore if they
do hear a tale, how one after hearing of a Sermon grew distracted, or
drowned, or hanged hi^ self, it shall be an item; an a warning to them, as
long as they ^^ve, for troubling their heads about such matters. Men of guilty
consciences (hence) fly from the face of God, as prisoners from the Judge, as
debtors from the Creditor. But if the Lord of Hosts c^n catch you, you must and
shall ^eele with horror of heart that which you fear a little now.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
because if they be free from this foolish fear, they cannot see their misery,
by reason that they look upon their est^tes through false glasses, and by
virtue of many false princip^es in their minds, they cheat themselves.

Which false Principles are these principally; I will but name them.

First, They conceive, God that (...)

Secondly, because they feel no misery

Thirdly, because God blesses the^ in

Fourthly, because they think sin to be no great evil for all are sinners,

Fifthly, because they think Gods

Sixthly, because they think Christ

Seventhly, because they hope well,

Eighthly, because they do as most do, doing as such do, they shall dye happily
as others have done.

desires and hearts are good, as they think.

only, if they perish.

These are the reasons and grounds upon which profane people are deceived.

Now it follovveth to show the grounds on which the finer sort miscarry.

Secondly, 2. Sort.
Hollow Professors cheat and cozen their own souls. It is in our Church, as
it is in an old Wood, where there are many tall Trees, yet cut them and search
them deeply, they prove pithlesse, saplesse, hollow, unsound creatures. These
men twist their own ruin with a finer thread, and can juggle better then
the common sort, and cast mists before their own eyes, and so cheat their
own souls. It Is Ministers first work to turn men from darkness into this
light. Act. 26. 18. and the Spirits first work to convince men of sin, Ioh.
16. 9. and therefore it is peoples maine work to know the worst at first of
themselves.

Now the cause of these men's mistaking is threefold. How men come to be
deceived about their spiritual estates.


First, the spiritual madness and drunkenness of their Understanding.

Secondly, the false bastard peace Conscience.

Thirdly, the sly and secret distempers Will.

First, There are these seven drunken distempers in the understanding or mind
of man, whereby he comes to be most miserably deceived.

First, the understandings Arrogancy. Psalm. 25. 9. but a proud man or woman is
often cheated; Hence proud Haman thought surely he was the man whom the King
would honor, Esthe^ 6. 6.
when in truth it was intended for poor Mo^decay: For, pride having once
overspread the mind, it ever has this property, it makes a penny stand for a
pound, a spark is blown up to a flame, it makes a great matter of a little
seeming grace, and therefore the proud Pharisee, when he came to reckon with
himself, he takes his poor counter, that is, I am not as other men, nor as
this Publican, and sets it down for 1000. pound, that is, he esteems of
himself, as a very rich man for it: So many a man because he has some good
thing in himself, as, he is pitiful to the poor, he is a true man though
a poor man, he was never given to wine, or women. He magnifieth himself for
this title, and so deceives and over-reckons himself. There are your
Bristow-stones like Diamonds, and many cheaters cozen Country folks with
them, that desire to be fine, and know not what Diamonds are. So many men are
desirous to be honest and to be reputed so, not knowing what true grace means,
therefore Bristow-stones are p^^rles in their eyes. A little seeming grace
shines so bright in their eyes, that they are half bewitched by it, to think
highly of themselves, although they be but glittering seeming jewels in a
swines snout. A cab of Doves dung was sold in Samaria's time of famine at a
great rate; a man living in such a place, where all about him are either
ignorant, or profane, or civil, a little moral honesty (dung in respect of
true grace) goes a great way, and is esteemed highly of, and he is as honest a
man as ever lived. A man that looks through a red glass, all things appear
red; a man looking upon himself through some fair spectacles, through some
one good thing that he has in himself, appears fair to him. It is said,
Luke 20. ult. the Pharisees devoured widows houses. Might not this racking of
Rents make them question their estates? No. Why? They for pretense made long
prayers: so, many men are drunk now and then, but they are sorry; they cannot
but ^inne, but their desires are good; they talk idly, but they live honestly;
they do ill sometimes, but they mean well. Thus when some good things are
seen in themselves, pride puffs them with an overweening conceit of it, and so
they cozen their own souls.

Obstinacy: whereby the mind having been long rooted in this opinion, that I
am in a good estate, will not suffer this conceit to be plucked out of it. Now,
your old rooted, yet rotten professors, having grown long in a good conceit of
themselves, will not believe that they have been fools all their lifetime,
and therefore now must pull down, and lay the foundation again; and hence you
shall have many say of a faithful Minister, that does convince and condemn
them and their estate to be most woeful; what? shall such an upstart teach
me? does he think to make me dance after his pipe, and to think that all my
good prayers, my faith, my charity, have been so long abominable and vile
before God? No silver can bribe a man to cast away his old traditionall
opinions and conceits whereby he cheats himself, till Christ's blood do it, 1
Pet. 1. 18. And hence the woman of Samaria objected this against Jesus Christ,
that their old Fathers worshipped in that Mountain, and therefore it was as
good a place as Jerusalem, the place of Gods true worship, Ioh. 4. 20. Men grow
crooked and aged with good opinions of themselves, and can seldom or never be
set straight again. Hence such kind of people though they would feign be
taken for honest religious Christians, yet will never suspect their estates to
be bad themselves, neither can they endure, that any other should search or
suspect them to be yet rotten at the heart: And are not those wares and
commodities much to be suspected, nay concluded to be stark naught which the
seller will needs put upon the chapman without seeing or looking on them
first? It Is a strong argument we produce against the Papists Religion to be
suspected to be bad, because they obtrude their opinions on their followers to
be believed without any hesitation or dispute about them, either before or
after they have embraced them: certainly thy old faith, thy old prayers, thy
old honesty or form of piety are counterfeit wares, that cannot ondure
searching, because thou will not be driven from this conceit, I am in a good
estate, I have been so long of this good mind and therefore will not begin to
doubt now. It Is to be feared, that such kind of people, (as I have much
observed) are either notoriously ignorant, or have sometime or other fallen
into some horrible secret grievous sins, as whoredom, oppression, or the
like, the guilt of which lying yet secretly on them, makes them fly from the
light of Gods truth, which would find them out, quarrelling both against it,
and the Ministers that preach it, Romans 2. 8. And therefore as it is with
thieves when they have any stolen goods brought within doors, they will not
be searched or suspected, but say, they are as honest men as themselves that
come to search, for they fear if they be found out, that they shall be
troubled before the judge, and may hardly escape with their lives: so many old
Professors, when the Minister comes to search them, they clap to the doors
upon the man and truth to^, and say they hope to be saved as well as the best
of them all. The reason is, they are guilty, they are loath to be troubled and
cast down by seeing the worst of themselves, and think it is hard for them to
go to heaven, and be saved, if they have been in a wrong way all their
lifetime. An honest heart will cry after the best means, Lord search me, John
3. 20. and open all the doors to the entertainment of the straightest,
strictest truths.

Thirdly, the understandings Obscurity being set in their minds, rotten
grounds of their own righteousness, doing some things according to the Law
of God, shines and glisters gloriously in their eyes, in the dark night time
of dismal darkness, by doing of which they think they please GOD, and their
estates are very good, I was alive, says Paul, Romans 7. 9. without the Law, and
he gives the reason of it, because sin did but sleep in him like a cutthroat
in an house, where all is quiet. Before the Law came, he saw not that deadly
secret core of corruption, and that litter of Rebellion that was lurking in his
heart, and therefore thought highly of himself for his own Righteousness.
The Gospel is a glass to show men the face of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 2. ult.
The Law is that glass that shows a man his own face, and what he himself
is. Now if this glass be taken away, and not set before a deformed heart, how
can a man but think himself fair? And this is the reason why civil men,
formalists, almost every one, think better of themselves then indeed they are,
because they reckon without their host, that is, they judge of the number,
nature, and greatness of their sins by their own books, by their own
reason, they look not Gods debt-book, Gods exact laws over, and compare
themselves therewith; If they did, it would amaze the stoutest heart, and
pluck down men's plumes, and make them say, is there any mercy so great as to
pass by such sins, and to put up such wrongs, and to forgive such sins and
debts, one of which alone may undo me, much more so many?

^ourthly, the understandings Security whereby men never reflect upon their
own actions, nor compare them with the rule; although they have knowledge of
the law of God, yet it is with them, as it is with men that have a fair glass
before them, but never beholding themselves in the glass, they never see their
spots. This is the woe of most unregenerate men; they want a reflecting power
and light to judge of themselves by, Ier. 8. 6. you shall have them think on a
Sermon, Here Is for such an one, and such an one is ^ouched here; when it may be
the same Sermon principally speaks of them; But they never say, this
concerns me, I was found out through the goodness of the Lord to day, and
surely the man spoke unto none but unto me, as if some body had told him what I
have done. And hence you shall find out many lame Christians, that will yield
to all the truths delivered in a Sermon, and commend it too, but go a way,
and shake off all truths that serve to convince them. And hence many men, when
they examine themselves in general, whether they have grace or no, whether
they love Christ or no, they think yes, that they do withal their hearts;
yet, they neither have this grace or any other, what ever they think, because
they want a reflecting light to judge of generals by their own particular
courses. For, tell these men, that he that loves another truly, will often
think of him, speak of him, rejoice in his company, will not wrong him
willingly in the least thing: Now ask them if they love Christ thus; If they
have any reflecting of light, they will see, where they have one thought of
Christ, they have 1000. on other things. Rejoice? nay they are weary of his
company in word, in prayer. And that they do not only wrong him, but make a
light matter of it, when it is done, all are sinners, and no man can live
without sin. Like a sleepy man (fire burning in his bed-straw) he cries not
out, when others happily lament his estate, that see a far off, but cannot
help him, Isay, 42. 25. A man that is to be hanged the next day, may dream
overnight, he shall be a King; why? because he is asleep, he reflects not
on himself. Thou may go to the Devil and be damned, and yet ever think
and dream, that all is well with thee. Thou have no reflecting light to judge
of thy self. Pray, pray therefore that the Lord would turn your eyes inward,
and do not let the Devil and delusion shut you out of your own house from
seeing what Court is kept there every day.

impiety; whereby it lessens and vilifies the glorious grace of God in another:
whence it comes to pass, that this deluded soul seeing none much better then
himself, concludes, if any be saved, ^ shall no doubt be one, Isay 26. 10, 11.
Men will not behold the Majesty of God in the lives of his people; many a man
being too light, yet desirous to go and pass for current, weighs himself
with the best people, and thinks, what have they that J have not? what do
they that J do not? and if he see they go beyond him, he then turns his own
balance with his finger, and makes them too light, that so he himself may
pass for weight.

And this vilifying of them and their grace, judging them to be of no other
metal then other men, appears in three particulars.

First, they raise up false reports, of Gods people, and nourish a kennell of
evil suspicions of them: if they know any sin committed by them, they will all
such; if they see no offensive sin in any of them, they are then reputed a
pack of Hypocrites: If they are not so uncharitable (having no grounds) they
prophesy they will hereafter be as bad as others, though they carry a fair
flourish now.

Secondly, if they judge well of

Thirdly, if they see, Gods people lives, and better hearts, and better
knowledge, yet they will not conclude that they have no grace, because it has
not that stamp that honest men's money has. But this prank they play, they
think such and such good men have a greater measure, and a higher degree of
grace then themselves, yet they dare be bold to think and say, their hearts
are as upright, though they be not so perfect as others are; And so vilify the
grace that shines in the best men, by making this gold to differ from their
own copper, not essentially but gradually, and hence they deceive themselves
miserably, not but that one ( star or) sincere Christian differs from another
in glory: I speak of those men only, that never were fixed in so high a
sphere, as true honesty dwells, yet falsely father this bad conclusion, that
they are upright for their measure, that they have not the like measure of
grace received as others have.

idolatry: whereby the mind sets up, and bows down to a false image of grace;
that is, the mind being ignorant of the height and excellence of true grace,
takes a false scantling of it, and so imagins and fancies within it self, such
a measure of common grace to be true grace, which the soul easily having
attained unto, conceives it is in the state of grace, and so deceives it self
miserably, Romans 10. 3.

And the mind comes to set up her image thus.

First, the mind is haunted and pursued Conscience tells him, he has sinned,
and the Law tells him he shall die, and Death appears and tells him, he must
shortly mere with him; And if he be taken away in his sins, then comes a
black day of reckoning for all his privy prankes, a day of blood, horror,
judgment and fire, where no creature can comfort him. Hence says he, Lord,
keep my soul from these miseries; he hops it shall not prove so evil with
him, but fears it will.



Grace, which is meat and drink to an holy heart, is but Physic to this
kind of men, to ease them of their fears and troubles.

true grace, he fancieth to himself such a measure of common grace to be true
grace. As, if he feels himself ignorant of that which troubles him: so much
knowledge will I then get, says he. ^f some foul sins in his practice
trouble him, these he will cast away, and so reformes: If omission of good
duties molests him, he will hear better, and buy some good Prayer-booke, and
pray oftener. And if he be persuaded such a man is a very honest man, then he
will strive to do as he does; and now he is quieted.

When he has attained unto this That is not to be done now, he thanks God,
that care is past. The truth is (beloved) it is too high for him; his own
legs could never carry him thither, all his grace, coming by his own
working, not by God Almighties power. Let a man have false weights, he is
cheated grievously with light gold; why? because his weights are too light: So
these men have too light weights to judge of the weight of true grace;
therefore light, clipped, cracked pieces cheat them. Hence you shall have those
men commend pithlesse, saplesse men for very honest men as ever brake bread;
why? they are just answerable to their weights. Hence I have not much wondered
at them, who maintain that a man may fall away from true grace: The reason
lies here: They set up to themselves such a common work of grace to be true
grace; from which, no wonder that a man may fall. Hence Bellarmine says, That
which is true Grace, veritate essentiae only, may be lost, not that grace
which is true, veritate firmae soliditatis; which latter, being rightly
understood, may be called special, as the other, common grace. Hence also you
shall have many Professors hearing a hundred Sermons, never moved to grow
better. Hence likewise you shall see our common Preachers comfort every one
almost, that they see troubled in mind, because they think presently, they
have true grace: Now they begin to be sorrowful for their sins. It Is just
according to their own light weights.

For the Lords sake take heed of this deceit. True grace (I tell you) it is a
rare pearl, a glorious Sun clowded from the eyes of all but them that have it,
Rev. 2. 18. a strange admirable, almighty work of God upon the soul, which
no created power can produce, as far different in the least measure of it, from
the highest degree of common grace, as a Devil is from an Angel; for it is
Christ living, breathing, reigning, fighting, conquering in the soul. Down
therefore with your Idol grace, your Idol honesty: true Grace never aims at
a pitch, it aspires only to perfection, Phil. 3. 12, 13. And therefore
Chrysostom calls Saint Paul, insatiabilis Dei cultor: A greedy, insatiable,
devouring worshipper of the Lord Almighty.

Seventhly, The Understandings error is another cause of man's ruin. And that
is seen principally in these five things, these ^ive errors or false conceits.

after the committing of it, there is a sting in it, Prove. 23. 31. 32. then the
time comes when this poison works, making the heart swell with grief,
sorry they are at the heart, they say, for it; and the eyes drop, and the man
that committed sin with delight, now cries out with grief in the bitterness
of his soul; O that I, beast that I am, had never committed it, Lord, mercy,
mercy, Prove. 5. 3, 4. 11. 12. Nay, it may be they will fast, and humble, and
afflict their souls voluntarily for sin, and now they think they have
repented, Isai. 58: 3. and hereupon, when they hear, that all that sin shall
dye, they grant this is true indeed, except a man repent, and so they think
they have done already.

This is true, At what time soever a sinner repents, the Lord will blot out his
iniquities. But this Repentance is not when a man is troubled somewhat in mind
for sin, but when he comes to mourn for sin as his greatest evil, as if
he should see all his goods and estate on a light fire before him; and that not
for some sins, but all sins, little and great; and that not for a time, for
a fit and away (a Land-floud of sorrow) but always like a Spring never dry,
but ever running all a man's lifetime.

Secondly, In judging the striving The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak: and hence men think, they being thus compounded of flesh and spirit,
are regenerate, and in no worse estate then the Children of God themselves: as
sometime I once spoke with a man that did verily think, that Pilate was an
honest man, because he was so unwilling to crucify Christ; which
unwillingnesse did arise only from the restraint of conscience against the
Fact. So many men judge honestly, yet simply upon such a ground of themselves,
they say, they strive against their sin^es, but Lord be merciful unto them,
they say the flesh is frail; and hence Arminius gives a diverse interpretation
of the seventh Chapter of the Romans from ordinary Divines; concerning which,
Paul speaks in the person of an unregenerate man, because he observed diverse
graceless persons (as he says himself) having fallen, and falling commonly
into sins against conscience, to bring that chapter in their own defense and
comfort, because they did that which they allowed not, verse. 15. and so it was
not they, but sin that dvvelled in them.

And so, many among us know, they should be better, and strive that they may
grow better, but through the power of sin, cannot; conscience tells them they
must not sin, their hearts and lusts say they must sin; and here forsooth
is flesh and spirit: Oh no, here is, conscience and lust only by the ears
together. Which striving, Herod, Balaam, Pilate, or the vilest Reprobate in the
World may have. Such a war argues not any grace in the heart, but rather
more strength of corruption, and more power of sin in the heart; as, it is no
vvonder if a horse run away when he is loose; but when his bit and bridle is
in his mouth, now to be wild, argues he is altogether untamed and subdued.
Take ^eed therefore of judging your estate to be good, because of some
backvvardnesse of your hearts to commit some sins, though little sins; for
thy sins may be, and, it is most certain, are more powerful in thee, then
in others that have not the like struglings, because they have not such checks
as thou have to restrain thee. Know therefore that the striving of the Spirit
against the Flesh, is against sin, because it is sin; as a man hates a
Toad, though he be never poisoned by it; But the striving of thy conscience
against sin, is only again sin, because it is a troubling, or a damning
sin; The striving of the spirit against the flesh, is from a deadly hatred of
sin, Romans 7. 15. But thy striving of conscience against sin, is only from
a fear of the danger of sin; for Balaam had a mind to curse the Israelites
for his moneys sake, but if he might have had an house full of silver and gold
(which is a goodly thing in a covetous eye) it is said, he durst not curse
them.

therefore I am upright. Why? Oh, because mine heart is good, mine affections
and desires within are better then my life without, and what ever others judge
of me, I know mine own heart, and the heart is all that God desires. And thus
they fool themselves, Prove. 28. 26. This is one of the greatest causes and
grounds of mistake amongst men that think best of themselves: they are not
able to put a difference between the good desires and strong affections that
arise from the love of Jesus Christ.

Self-love will make a man seek his own good and safety; hence it will pull a
man out of his bed betimes in the morning, and call him up to pray; it will
take him and carry him into his chamber toward evening, and there privately
make him seek, and pray, and tug hard for pardon, for Christ, for mercy, Lord
evermore give us of this bread* But the love of Christ makes a man desire
Christ and his honor for himself, and all other things for Christ. It is
true, the desires of Sons in Christ by faith are accepted ever, but the
desire of servants, men that work only for their wages out of Christ, are not.

2 King. 10 18.
Yes, and ordinary too. A man may be liberal to the poor, maintain the
Ministry, be forward and stand for good things, whence he may not doubt but
that God loves him: But here is the difference, though a wicked man may make
Gods glory in some particular things his end, yet he never makes it in his
general course his utmost and last end: A subtle Apprentice may do all his
Masters work, but he may take the gain to himself, or divide it betwixt his
Master and himself, and so may be but a Knave, as observant as he seems to
be: So a subtle heart, (yet a vile villainous heart) may forsake all the world,
as Judas did, may bind himself Apprentice to all the duties God requires
outwardly at his hands, and so do good works, but what is his last end? It Is
that he might gain respect or place, or that Christ may have some part of the
glory, and he another. Simon Magus would give any money sometimes that he could
pray so well, know so much, and do as others do, and yet his last end is for
himself; but how can you believe, if you seek not that glory that comes from
God, says Christ? there is many seek the honor of Christ, but do you seek
his honor only; Is it your last end, where you rest and seek no more but
that? If thou would know whether thou make Christ's glory thy last end,
observe this Rule:

If thou art more grieved for the eclipse of thine own honor, and for thine
own losses, then for the loss of Gods honor, it is an evident sign thou
love it not, desire it not as thy chiefest good, as the last end, for thy
summum bonum, and therefore do not seek Gods honor, in the prime and
chiefest place. Sin troubled Paul more than all the plagues and miseries of
the world: Indeed, if thy name be dashed with disgrace, and thy will be
crossed, thy heart is grieved and disquieted, but the Lord may lose his honor
daily by thine own sins, and those that be round about thee, but not a
tear, not a sigh, not a groan, to behold such a spectacle. As sure as the
Lord lives, thou seek not the Lords name, or honor, as thy greatest good.

infirmity; for if any thing trouble an unregenerate man, and makes him call
his estate into question, it is sin either in the being or power of it. Now
sin in the being ought no^, must not, make a man question his estate, because
the best have that left in them, that will humble them, and make them live by
faith; therefore the power of sin only can trouble a man. Now if a man do
judge of this to be only but infirmity, which the best are compassed about
withal; he cannot but lie down securely, and think himself well. And if
this error be settled in one that lives in no one known sin, it is very
difficult to remove: for let the Minister cast the sparks of hell in their
faces, and denounce the terror of God against them, they are never stirred:
why? because they think, here is for you that live in sin, but as for
themselves, although they have sins, yet they strive against them, and so
cannot leave them; for, we must have sin as long as we live here, they say.
Now mark it, there is no surer sign of a man under the bloody reign, and
dominion of his lusts and sins, than this; that is, to give way to sin,
(though never so little and common) nor to be greatly troubled for sin (for
they may be a little troubled) because they cannot overcome sin; I deny not,
but the best do sin daily; yet this is the disposition of Paul, and every
child of God, he mourns not the less, but the more for sin; though he
cannot quite subdue them, cast them out and overcome them* As a prisoner
mournes the more that he is bound with such fetters he cannot break; so does
eyery one truly sensible of his woeful captivity by sin; This is the great
difference between a raging sin a man will part with all, and a sin of
infirmity a man cannot part withal; a sin of infirmity is such a sin as a
man would, but cannot part with it, and hence he mournes the more for it. A
raging sin is such a sin, as a man happily by virtue of his lashing
conscience, would sometimes part withal, but cannot, and hence mournes the
less for it, and gives way unto it. Now for the Lords sake take heed of this
deceit; for I tell you, those sins you cannot part withal, if you groan not
day and night under them, (saying; O Lord, help me, for I am weary of my
self) and my life, will certainly undo you. You say, you cannot but speak
idely, and think vainly, and doeill, as all do sometimes; I tell you, those
sins shall be everlasting chains to hold you fast in the power of the devil
until the Judgment of the great day.

And thus much of the understandings corruption, whereby men are commonly
deluded; Now follows the second.

Secondly, in regard of the false bastard

Now this false peace is begot in the heart, How false peace is bred in the
soul.
by these four means.

1. By Satan. 2. By false teachers. 3. By a false spirit. 4. By a false
application of true promises.
1. By Satan, whose kingdom shall for peace, Luke 11. 21. When the strong man
keeps the palace, his goods be in peace, that is, when Satan armed with
abundance of shifts and carnal reasonings possesses men's souls, they are at
peace.

Now look as Masters give their servants peace, even so the devil.

1. By removing all things that may trouble them: and

2. By giving unto them all things that may quiet and comfort them, as meat,
drink, rest, lodging, etc. so does Satan deal with his slaves and servants.

First, by removing those sins which trouble the conscience; for a man may live
in a sin, and yet never be troubled for that sin; for sin against the
light of conscience only troubles the conscience; as children that are
tumbling and playing in the dust, they are not troubled with all the dust, nay,
they take pleasure to wallow in it; but only with that (whether it be small or
great) that lights in their eyes. And hence that young man came boasting to
Christ, that he had kept all the commandments from his youth, but went away
sorrowful, because that dust, that sin he lived in with delight before, fell
into his eyes, and therefore was troubled: Now mark the plot of the Devil,
when he can make a man live, and wallow, and delight in his sins, and so
serve him, and yet will not suffer him to live in any sin against conscience,
whereby he should be troubled, and so seek to come out of his woeful estate,
he is sure this man is his own; and now a poor deluded man himself goes up
and down, not doubting but he shall be saved; why? because their conscience
(they thank God) is clear, and they know of no one sin they live in, they
know nothing by themselves, that may make them so much as suspect their estate
is bad, Matthew. 9. 13. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, that is, such an one as in his own opinion, is fish whole; every
sin being a child of Gods sickness, he is never without some kind of
sorrow: but some sins only being a natural man's sickness, they being
removed, he recovers out of his former sorrow, and grows well again, and
thinks himself sound: but, the Lord Jesus never came to save such, therefore
Satankeepes possession of them. For the Lords sake look to this subtilty; many
think themselves in a good estate, because they know not the particular sin
they live in, whereas Satan may have stronger possession of such as are bound
with his invisible fetters and chains, when those that have their pinching
bolts on them may sooner escape.

liberty to recreate it self in any sinful course, wherein the eye of
conscience may not be pricked and wounded. Servants when they are put always
to work, and never can go abroad, are weary both of work and Master: that
Master pleases them, that gives them most liberty. To be pent up all the day
long in doing Gods work, watching, praying, fighting against every sin, this
is a burden, this is too strict, and because that they cannot endure it, they
think the Lord looks not for it at their hands. Now Satan gives men liberty
in their sinful courses; and this liberty begets peace, and this peace makes
them think well of themselves, 2 Pet. 2. 19. There Is many rotten professors in
these days, that indeed will not open their mouths against the sincere
hearted people of God, yet they walk loosely, and take too much liberty in
their speeches, liberty in their thoughts, liberty in their desires and
delights, liberty in their company, in their pastimes, and that sometimes under
a pretense of Christian liberty, and never trouble themselves with these
needless controversies, to what end, or in what manner do I use these things?
whereas the righteous man fears always, considering there is a snare for him
in every lawful liberty. May not I sin in my mirth, in my speaking, in my
sleeping? Oh! this liberty that the Devil gives, and the world takes, besots
most men with a foolish opinion, that all is well with them.

meat and drink enough, what dish he likes best. Let a Master give liberty,
yet his servant is not pleased, unless he has meat and drink and food: so
there is no wicked man under Heaven, but as he takes too much liberty in the use
of lawful things, so he feeds his heart with some unlawful secret lust,
though all the time they live in it, it may be, it is unknown to them, Luke 16.
Dives had his dish, his good things, and so sang himself a sleep, and bad his
soul take his ease and rest: yea observe, this diet is poisoned in it self,
but ever commended to the soul as wholesome, good, and lawful. They christen
sin with a new name, as Popes are at their election; if he be bad, they call
him sometimes Pius, if a coward, Leo, etc. So covetousness is good husbandry;
company keeping, good neighborhood; lying, to save their credit from cracking,
but a handsome excuse: and hence the soul goes peaceably on, and believes he
is in a good estate.

Matthew. 12. 43. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, it returns
worse. Sampsons strength always remained, and so does sins strength in a
natural man, but it never appears until temptation come.

Evah by the Serpent, she should not dye, so does he infinuate his persuasions
to the soul, though it live in sin, he shall not dye, but do well enough,
as the precisest. Satan gives thus good words, but woeful wages, the eternal
flashes of Hell.

By false Teachers. Who partly by their loose examples, partly by their
flattering doctrines in public, and their large charity in private, dawbing
up every one (especially that is a good friend unto them) for honest and
religious people, and if they be but a little troubled, applying comfort
presently, and so healing them that should be wounded, and not telling them
roundly of their Herodias, as John Baptist did Herod. Hereupon they judge
themselves honest, because the Minister will give them the beggarly pasport,
and so they go out of the world, and dye like Lambs, being woefully cheated,
Matthew. 24. 11. Look abroad in the world, and see what is the reason so many
feed their hearts with confidence they shall be saved, yet their lives condemn
them, and their hearts acquit them; the reason is, such and such a Minister
will go to the Alehouse, and he never prays in his Family, and he is none of
these precise hot people, and yet as honest a man as ever lives, and a good
Divine too. Ahab was miserably cheated by four hundred false Prophets. Whilst
the Minister is of a loose life himself, he will wink at others and their
faults, least in reproving them, he should condemn himself, and others should
say unto him, Physician, heal thy self. Thieves of the same company will not
steal from one another, least they trouble thereby themselves; and hence they
give others false Cards to sail by, false Rules to live by; their
unconscionable large charity, is like a gulf that swalloweth Ships (souls I
mean) tossed with tempests, and not comforted, Isa. 54. 7, 8. and hence all
being fish that comes to their net, all men think so of themselves.

false spirit. This is a third cause that begets a false peace; as there is a
true Spirit that witnesses to our spirits, that we are Sons of God, Romans 8.
16. So there is a false spirit, just like the true one, witnessing that they
are the Sons of GOD, 1 John 4. 1. we are bid to try the spirits: now, if
these spirits were not like Gods true Spirit, what need trial? As, what need
one try whether dirt be gold, which are so unlike to each other. And this
spirit I take to be set down, Matthew. 24. 23. Now look as the true Spirit
witnesses, so the false spirit, being like it, witnesses also.

First, The Spirit of God humbles false spirit, they are mightily cast down
and dejected in spirit, and hereupon they pray for ease, and purpose to lead
new lives, and cast away the weapons, and submit, Psalm. 66. 3.

Secondly, the Spirit of God in the false spirit discovers Christ's excellency
and willingness to receive him, if he will but come in. It fateth with this
soul as with Surveyors of Lands, that take an exact compass of other men's
grounds, of which they shall never enjoy a Foot. So did Balaam, Number. 24. 5, 6.
this false spirit shows them the glory of Heaven and Gods people.

Thirdly, Hereupon the soul comes Heb, 6. and the soul breaks out into a
passionate admiration: Oh ^ that ever there should be any hope for such a vile
wretch as I am and have been, and so joys exceedingly, like a man half way
wrapped up into Heaven.

my God, and Christ, my sweet Savior, and now it doubts not but it shall be
saved; why? because I have received much comfort after much sorrow, and
doubting, Hos. 8. 2, 3. and yet remains a deluded miserable creature still.
But here mark the difference between the witness of each spirit. The false
spirit makes a man believe he is in the state of grace, and shall be saved,
because he has tasted of Christ, and so has been comforted, and that
abundantly: But the true Spirit persuades a man, his estate is good and safe,
because he has not only tasted, but bought this Christ; as the wise Merchant
in the Gospel, that rejoiced he had found the pearl, but yet stays not here,
but sells away all, and buys the pearl. Like two Chapmen that come to buy
Wine, the one tastes it, and goes away in a drunken fit, and so concludes it is
his: So a man does, that has the false spirit: but the true spirited man does
not only taste, but buys the Wine, although he do not drink it all down,
when he comes to taste it; yet he having been incited by tasting to buy it,
now he calls it his own: So a child of God tasting a little of God, and a
little of Christ, and a little of the promises at his first conversion,
although he tastes not all the sweetness that is in God, yet he forsakes all
for God, for Christ, and so takes them lawfully as his own.

Again, the false spirit having given a man comfort and peace, suffers a man
to rest in that estate; but the true spirit having made the soul taste the
Love of the Lord, stirs up the soul to do and work mightily for the Lord.
Now the soul cries out; What shall I do for Christ that has done wonders
for me? if every hair on my head were a tongue to speak of his goodness, it
were too little. Nehem. 8. 10. the joy of the Lord is our strength. Psalm. 51.
12. Uphold me with thy free spirit, or as the Chaldean paraphrase has it, thy
kingly spirit; the Spirit of Adoption in Gods child is no underling, suffering
men to lie down, and cry, my desires are good, but flesh is frail; No, It is
a kingly spirit that reigns where it lives.

False applying of true promises, is the last cause of false peace. And when a
man has Gods Spirit within, and Gods hand and promise (as he thinks) for his
est^^e, now he thinks all safe. Thus did the Jews, they said, We have
Abraham to our Father, and so reputed themselves safe, God having made them
promise, I will be a God of thee, and of thy seed. But here is a difference
between a child of Gods application of them and a wicked man's; the first
applies them so to him, as that he lives upon them, Ps. 38. 16.
and nothing but them; and to whom does the dugge belong, but to the child
that lives upon it. The other lives upon his lusts, and creatures, and yet
catches hold on the promise.

By these four means is begot a bastard false peace.

Thus much of the second cause of man's deceiving himself; False peace in the
Conscience.

Now follows the third.

III. The corruptions and distempers the Will, which is the third cause why men
deceive themselves. Which are many. I will only name three.

First, When the Will is resolved to there where his da^ling lust lies; he sits
upon that, and covers it willingly from his own eyes, as Rachel did upon
stolen gods, and so never finds out himself, 10. 3. 20. a man that has a
mind to sleep quietly, will cause the curtains to be drawn, and will let
some light come in, but shuts out all that, or so much as may hinder him from
sleeping: So a man having a mind to sleep in some particular sinful course at
his ease, will search himself, and let some light come into his mind.

And hence many profane persons, that know much, (their opinions are orthodox,
their discourse Savoury) yet do they know little of themselves, and of those
sins and lusts that haunt them, which they must part with, because this light
troubles them* if hinders them from sleeping in their secure estate, and
therefore they draw the curtain here: Hence many men that live in those sins
of the grossest usury, finding the gain, and tasting the sweet of that sin,
will read all books, go to all those Ministers, they suppose, that hold it
lawful, and so pick up and gather reason to defend the lawfulness of the
sin, and so because they would not have it to be a sin, find out reasons
whereby they think it no sin; but the bottom is this, their will has got
the bribe, and now the understanding plays the lawyer, and hence men live in
the most crying sins, and are sure to perish, because they will not know they
are in an error.

Secondly, when the will sets the understanding the best man sins seven times
a day, and who can say my heart is clean? What is the reason that a child of
God has little peace many times after commission of small sins? Oh! it is
because they see the horrible nature of the least sin: small wrongs against
so dear, so great a friend as the Lord is, it cuts their hearts; yet a carnal
heart is never troubled for great sins, because they make a light matter of
them.



These are the causes why men are ignorant of their woeful, miserarable estate,
which Ignorance is the first Rock, or the first powder plot that spoils
thousands. Yet, there are three more dangerous, because more secret.

Now follows the second reason of men's ruin. The second Reason why men ruin
themselves.
By reason of man's carnal security, whereby men cannot be affected with, nor
so much as have hearts to desire to come out of their misery, when they know
it: for if a man's mind understand his misery, yet if the heart be hard or
sleepy, and not affected, laden, wounded, humbled, and made to groan under
it, he will never greatly care to come out of it, Isa. 29. 9, 10. Now this is
the estate of many a soul, he does know his misery, but by reason of the
sleepy, secure, senseles spirit of slumber, he never feels it, nor mournes
under it, and so comes out of it.

Now the Reasons of this security are these.

Because God powers not out the full measure of his wrath upon men, Reas. 1.
because he kindles not the pile of wrath that lies upon men, its reserved and
concealed, Nahum 1. 2.
not revealed from heaven, and so long, let God frown, Ministers threaten, and
smaller Judgments drop, yet they will never seek shelter in Jesus Christ, but
sleep in their sins, until God rain down floods of horror, blood, fire,
until Gods arrows stick in men's hearts, they will never seek out of
themselves unto Jesus Christ, Eccle. 8. 11. so long as Gods plagues were upon
Phara^h, he gives fair words, and Moses must be sent to pray for him: but
when Gods hand is taken away, now Pharaohs heart is hardened. So long as Gods
sword is in his scabberd, men have such stout hearts, that they will never
yield; God must wound, and cut deep, and stab, and thrust to the very heart,
else men will never yield, never awaken, till Gods fists be about men's ears,
and he is dragging them to the stake; men will never awake and cry for a pardon
and deliverance of their woeful estate.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
because if they do in part feel, and so fear Gods wrath, they put away the
evil day far from them, they hope they shall do better hereafter, and
repent some other time, and therefore they say, soul eat, drink, follow thy
sports, cups, queanes; thou have a treasure of time which shall not be spent in
many years, Isay 22. 12, 13. that look as it is with the wax* let it be of
never so pliable a disposition, and the fire never so hot, yet if it be not
brought near the fire, and be held in the fire, it never m^lts, but still
remains hard: so it is here. Let a man or woman have never so gentle or
pliable a nature, and let Gods wrath be never so hot and dreadful in their
Judgments, yet if they make not the day of wrath present to them, if they see
it not ready every moment to light upon their hearts, they are never melted,
but they remain hard-hearted, secure, sleepy wretches, and never groan to
come out of their wo^full estate; and this is the reason why many men, that
have guil^y consoiences, thought they have many secret wishes and purposes to
be better, yet never cry out of themselves, nor ever seek earnestly for
mercy, till they lie upon their deathbed, and then, oh the promises that they
ply God with! try me Lord, and restore me once more to my health, and life
again, and thou shall see how thankful I will be; because that now they
apprehend wrath and misery near unto them, Heb. 3. 13.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
Because they think they can bear Gods wrath, though they do conceive it
near at hand, even at the very doors: men think not that Hell is so hot, nor
the devil so black, nor God so terrible as in deed he is. And hence we shall
observe the Prophets present Gods wrath as a thing intolerable before the eyes
of the people, that thereby they might quench all those cursed conceits of
being able to bear Gods wrath, Nahum 1. 6. and hence we shall have many men
desperately conclude, they will have their swinge in sin, and if they perish
they hope they shall be able to bear it, it is but a damning they think, and
hence they go on securely. O poor wretches! the devil scares and fears all
the world, and at Gods wrath the devils quake, and yet secure men fear it
not, they think hell is not so terrible a place.

Fourthly, because they know no Ioh. 4. 14.

Take a Princes child, and bring it up in a base house and place, it never
aspires after a Kingdom or Crown: So men, hatched in this world, knowing no
better an estate, never cast about them to get a better inheritance than that
they scramble for here. Wives mourn for the long absence of their beloved
Husbands, because they know them and their worth. God may absent himself from
men, weeks, months, years, but men shed not one tear for it, because they
never tasted the sweetness of his presence. It is strange to see men take more
content in their cups and cards, pots and pipes, dogs and hawks, than in the
fellowship of God and Christ, in Word, in Prayer, in Meditation, which
Ordinances are burdens and prisons unto them. What is the reason of it? Is
there no more sweetness in the presence of Gods smiling in Christ, than in a
filthy Whore? Yes, but they know not the worth, sweetness, satisfying
goodness of a God; yet into fresh waters they will never return, because now
they taste a large difference of each estate: So it is here, if men did but
once taste of the happiness of Gods people, they would not for a thousand
worlds be one half hour in their wild loose Sea again* e.

Fifthly, Reas. 5.
because if they do know a better estate, yet their present pleasures, their
sloth does so bewitch them, and Gods denyals when they seek unto him, do so
far discourage them, that they sleep still securely in that estate. A
flothfull heart bewitched with present ease and pleasures and delights,
considering many a tear, many a prayer must it make, many a night must it
break its sleep, many a weary step must it take toward heaven and Christ, if
ever it come there, grows discouraged and deaded, and hard-hearted in a sleepy
estate, and had rather have a bird in the hand then two in the bush, Prove. 1.
32. Ier. 48. 11. The Israelites wished that they were at their Onyons and
garlike again in Egypt. Was there no Canaan? yes, but they wished thus because
there were walls built up to heaven, and Giants sons of Anack in the Land,
difficulties to overcome. O slothful hearts! Secondly, because God sometime
put them to straights, and denied them what they sought for, they were of such
a waspish, teasty, sullen spirit, that because the Lord had them not always on
his knees, they would run away: so many a man meets with sorrow enough in his
sinful, dropsy, drunken estate, he hears of heaven and a better estate; yet,
why goes he to his lusts and flesh pots again? Oh! because there are so many
difficulties and blocks and hindrances in his way, and because they pray and
find not ease, therefore they eat, drink, laugh, sport and sleep in their
miserable estate still, Matthew. 7. 14. therefore men walk in the broad way,
because the other way to life is straight and narrow, it is a plague, a burden,
a prison to be so strict; men had rather sit almost an hour in the stocks,
than be an hour at prayer; men had rather be damned at last, than sweat it out
and run through the race to receive a Crown, and hence men remain secure.

Sixthly, Reas. 6.
because of the strange strong power of sin, which bears that sway over men's
souls, that they must serve it; as prisoners stoop to their Jailer; as
soldiers that have taken their pay, their pleasure of sin, must follow it as
their Captain, though they go marching on to eternal ruin: Romans 1. ult.
nay though Doomes day should be to morrow, yet they must and will ^erve their
lusts. As the Sodomites when they were smitten with blindness, which tormented
their eyes* as though they had been pricked with thorns, for so the Hebrew
word signifies* even when destruction was near, they groped for the door. Men
cannot but sin though they perish for sin; hence they remain secure.

Seventhly, Reas. 7.
Despair of Gods mercy: hence, like Cain, men are Runnagates from the face of
God; men think they shall never find mercy when all is done: hence they grow
desperately sinful; like those Italian Senators, that despairing of their
lives (when upon submission they had been promised their lives, yet) being
^onscious of their villainy, made a curious banquet, and at the end of it, every
man drank up his glass of poison, and killed himself: so men feeling such
horrible hard hearts, and being privy to such notorious sins, they cast away
lives, and heaven, and souls for lust, and so perish woefully, because they
lived desperately, and so securely.

Eighthly, Reas. 8.
Because men nourish a blind, false, flattering hope of Gods mercy: hence many
knowing and suspecting that all is naught with them, yet having some hope they
may be in a good estate, and God may love them; hence they lie down securely,
and rest in their flattering hope. Hence observe, those people that feldome
come to a conclusion, to a point, that either they are in the state of grace,
or out of it, that never come to be affected, but remain secure in their
condition; they commonly grow to this desperate conclusion; that they hope God
will be merciful unto them; if not, they cannot help it: like the man that
had on his Target the picture of God and the Devil: under the first he writ,
si tu non vis, if thou will not; under the other he writ, ipse rogitat, here is
one will.

Ninthly, Reas. 9.
because men bring not their hearts under the hammer of Gods word to be broken,
they never bring their consciences to be cut. Hence they go on still securely
with festered consciences. Men put themselves above the word, and their hearts
above the hammer, they come not to have the Minister to humble them, but to
judge of him, or to pick some pretty fine thing out of the word, and so remain
secure sotts all their days: for if ever thy heart be broken, and thy
conscience be awaked, the word must do it: but people are so Sermo^trodden,
that their hearts, like footpaths, grow hard by the word.

Tenthly, Reas. 10
because men consider not of Gods wrath daily, nor the horrible nature of
sin; men chew not these pills: hence they never come to be affected nor
awakened.

Awaken therefore all you secure creatures; Use.
feel your misery, that so you may get out of it. Do thou know thine estate
is naught, and that thy condemnation will be fearful, if ever thou do
perish; and is thine heart secretly secure, so damnably dead, so desperately
hard, that thou have no heart to come out of it: what^ no sigh, no tears?
can thou carry all thy sins upon thy back, like Sampson the gates of the
City, and make a light matter of them? Do thou see hell fire before thee,
and yet wilt venture? art thou worse than a beast which we cannot bear nor
drive into the fire, if there be any way to escape: oh get thine heart to
lament and mourn under thy miseries, who knows then but the Lord may pity
thee? But oh hard heart! thou can mourn for losses and crosses, burning of
goods and houses, yet though God be lost, and his image burnt down, and all is
gone, thou can not mourn. If thine heart were truly affected, the pillow
would be washed with thy tears, and the wife in thy bosom would be witness
to thine heart-breakings in midnight for those sins which have grieved the
spirit of God many a time, thou could not sleep quietly, nor comfortably
without assurance. If you were sick to death, Physicians should hear how you
do; and if you were humbled, we should have you in the bitterness of your
spirits cry out, What shall we do? but know it, thou must mourn here or in
hell. If God broke David's bones for his adultery, and the Angels backs for
their pride; the Lord, if ever he saves thee, will break thine heart too.

Quest. Quest.
But thou will say, how shall I do to get mine heart affected with my misery?

Answ. Answ. 1. How to get a broken heart.
Take a full view of thy misery. 2. Take special notice of the Lords
readiness and willingness to receive thee yet unto mercy: for, two things
harden the heart. 1. false hope: whereby a man hopes, he is not so bad, as
indeed he is. ^. No hope; whereby a man when he sees himself so notoriously
bad, thinks there is no willingness in the Lord to pardon or receive such a
monster of men to mercy; and if neither the hammer can break thy stony heart,
nor the Sunshine of mercy melt it, thou have an heart worse than the Devil,
and art a spectacle of the greatest misery. 1. In regard of sin, 2. in regard
of Gods wrath.

First, in regard of sin. Thou have sinned, and that grievously against a
great God, thou make no great matter of this: No, but though it be no load
to thee, it is a load on the Lords heart, Isa. 1. 24. and time will come he
will make the whole sinful world by rivers of fire and blood to know what an
evil it is.

For 1. In every sin thou do strike God, and fling a dagger at the heart of
God. 2. In every sin thou do spite against God: for if there were but one
only thing wherein a man could do his friend a displeasure, was not here
spite seen if he did that thing? Now tell me, has not the Lord been a good
friend unto thee? Tell me, wherein has he grieved thee? and tell me, in what
one thing can thou please the devil, and do God a displeasure, but by
sin? yet O hard heart thou make nothing of it; but consider thirdly, in
every sin thou do disthrone God, and sets thy self above God: for in
every sin, this question is put, whose will shall be done, Gods will or man's?
Now man by sin sets up his own will above the Lords, and so kicks God,
(blessed for ever, adored of millions of Saints and Angels) as filth under his
feet. What, will this break your hearts?

Consider then of Gods wrath; the certainty of it, the unsupportablenesse of
it, how that dying in thy sins, and secure estate, it shall fall; for when
men cry, 1 These. 5. 3, 4.
Peace, Peace, then comes sudden destruction at unawares; pray therefore to
God to reveal this to thee, that thine heart may break under it. Secondly,
consider of the Lords mercy and readiness to save thee, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
who has prepared mercy, and in^reates thee to take it, and waits every day
for thee to that end.

The third Reason of man's ruin is, 3. General Reason of man's ruin.
that carnal confidence, whereby men seek to save themselves, and to scramble
out of their miserable estate by their own duties and performances, when they
do feel themselves miserable: the soul does as those Hos. 5. 13. men when
they be wounded and troubled, they never look after Jesus Christ, but go to
their own waters to heal themselves, like hunted Hearts when the arrow is in
them, Romans 9. 31, 32.

For the opening of this point, I shall show you these two things.

1. Wherein this resting in Duties appears. 2. Why do men rest in themselves.
First, Wherein Men's Resting in Duties appears.
this resting in Duties appears in these Eleven degrees.

1. The soul of a poor sinner, if ignorantly bred and brought up, rests
confidently in superstitious vanities. Ask a devout Papist, how he hopes to be
saved; he will answer, By his good works. But enquire further; what are these
good works: why, for the most part superstitious ones of their own inventions
(for the Crow thinks her own bird fairest) as whipping themselves,
pilgrimage, fasting, mumbling over their Paternosters, bowing down to Images
and Crosses.

2. Now these being banished from raging Seas filthy frothy speeches: others,
like Ismaels, scoffing at the best men, yet these are confident they shall be
saved. Why, (they say) they are no Papists, hang them, they will die for their
Religion, and rather burn than turn again by the grace of God. Thus the
Jews boasted, they were Abraham's seed: Zeph. 3. 11.
so our carnal people boast: Am not I a good Protestant? am I not baptized?
do I not live in the Church, and therefore resting here, hope to be saved? I
remember a Judge, when one pleaded once with him for his life, that he might
not be hanged, because he was a Gentleman; he told him, that therefore he
should have the Gallows made higher for him; so when thou pleadest, I am a
Christian and a good Protestant (yet thou will drink, and swear, and whore,
neglect prayer, and break Gods Sabbath) and therefore thou hopest to be saved;
I tell thee thy condemnation shall be greater, and thy plagues in hell the
heavier.

follow them out of their Chambers, watch their discourses, you shall find it
frothy and vain, and now and then powdered with faith and troth and obscene
speeches. Watch them when they are crossed, you shall see them as angry as
Waspes, and swell like Turkies, and so spit out their venom like Dragons.
Watch them in their journeyes, and you shall see them shoot into an Alehouse,
and there swill^ and swagger, and be familiar with the scumme of the country
for profaneness, and half drunk too sometimes. Watch them on the Lords day,
take them out of the Church once, and set aside their best clothes, they are
the same then as at another time; and because they must not work nor sport
that day, they think they may with a good conscience sleep the longer on the
morning. Ask now such men how they hope to be saved, seeing their lives are so
bad; they say, though they make not such shows, they know what good prayers
they make in private, their hearts they say are good. I tell ye brethren, he
that trusts to his own heart, and his good desires, and so rests in them,
is a fool. I have heard of a man that would haunt the Tavernes, and Theaters,
and whorehouses at London all day, but he durst not go forth without private
prayer in the morning, and then would say at his departure; now devil do thy
worst, and so used his prayers (as many do) only as charms and spells against
the poor weak cowardly devil, that they think dares not hurt them, so long
as they have good hearts within them, and good prayers in the chamber; and
hence they will go near to rail against the Preacher as an harsh Master, if
he do not comfort them with this, that God accepts of their good desires.

sins, and now all the Country says, he is become a new man, and he
himself thinks he shall be saved, 2 Pet. 2. 20. they escape the pollutions of
the world, as swine that are escaped and washed from outward filth, yet the
swinish nature remains still, like Mariners that are going to some dangerous
place, ignorantly, if they meet with storms, they go not backward, but cast
out their goods that endanger t^eir ship, and so go forward still: so many a
man going toward hell, is forced to cast out his lusts and sins, but he
goes on in the same way still for all that. The wildest beasts (as Staggs) if
they be kept waking from sleep long, will grow tame: so conscience giving a
man no rest for some sins he lives in, he grows tame; He that was a wild
Gentleman before, remains the same man still, only he is made tame now (that
is) civil and smooth in his whole course, and hence they rest in reformation:
which reformation is commonly but of some troublesome sin, and it is because
they think it is better following their trade of sin at another market, and
hence some men will leave their drinking and whoring, and turn covetous,
because there is more gain at that market; sometimes it is because sin has
left them, as an old man.

Humiliations, Repentings, Tears, Sorrows, and Confessions. They hear a man
cannot be saved by reforming his life, unless he come to afflict his soul
too; he must sorrow and weep here, or else cry out in hell hereafter. Hereupon
they betake themselves to their sorrows, tears, confession of sins, and now
the wind is down, and the tempest is over, and they make themselves safe,
Matthew. 11. 21. They would have repented, that is, the Heathen, as Beza speaks,
when any wrath was kindled from Heaven, they would go to their sackcloth and
sorrows, and so thought to pacify Gods anger again, and here they rested: so
it is with many a man; many people have sick fits and qualmes of conscience,
and then they do as Crows that give themselves a vomit by swallowing down
some stone when they are sick, and then they are well again; so when men are
troubled for their sins, they will give themselves, a vomit of prayer, a
vomit of confession, and humiliation, Isa. 58. 5. Hence many when they can get
no good by this physic, by their sorrows, and tears, cast off all again;
for making these things their God, and their Christ, they forsake them when
they cannot save them; Mat. 3. 14. more are driven to Christ by the sense of
the burden of an hard, dead, blind, filthy heart, than by the sense of
sorrows, because a man rests in the one, viz. in sorrows most commonly, but
tr^mbles and flies out of himself when he feels the other: thus men rest in
their repentance, and therefore Austin has a pretty speech which sounds ha^sh,
that Repentance damneth more than sin; meaning that thousands did perish by
resting in it: and hence we see among many people, if they have large
affections, they think they are in good favor; if they want them, they think
then they are cast-awayes, when they cannot mourn, nor be affected as once
they were, because they rest in them.

moral men, that is, strict in all the duties of the moral law, which is a
greater matter than reformation or humiliation, that is, they grow very just
and square in their dealings with men, and exceeding strict in the duties of
the first Table toward God; as fasting, prayer, hearing, reading, observing
the Sabbath, and thus the Pharisees lived, and hence they are called the strict
sect of the Pharisees. Take heed you mistake me not, I speak not against
strictness, but against resting in it, for except your righteousness exceed
theirs, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. You shall find these
men fly from base persons and places like the Pesthouses, commend the best
books, cry down the sins of the time, and cry against civil or moral men
(the eye sees not it self) and cry up zeal and forwardness. Talk with him
about many moral duties, that are to be done toward God or man, he will speak
well about the excellency and necessity of it, because his trade and skill
whereby he hopes to get his living and earne eternal life, lies there; but
speak about Christ, and living by faith in him and from him, and bottoming the
soul upon the Promises (pieces of Evangelicall righteousness) he that is very
skillful in any point of controversy, is as ignorant almost as a beast when he
is examined here; hence if Ministers preach against the sins of the time,
they commend it for a special Sermon, (as it happily deserves too) but let him
speak of any spiritual inward soule-working point, they go away, and say, he
was in their judgment confused and obscure, for their parts they understood
them not. (Beloved) pictures are pretty things to look on, and that is all the
goodness of them; so these men are (as Christ looked on and loved the natural
young man in the Gospel) and that is all their excellency. You know, in Noah's
flood, all that were not in the Arc, though they did climb and get to the top
of the tallest mountains, they were drowned: so labor to climb never so high
in morality, and the duties of both Tables, if thou go not into God's Ark,
the Lord Jesus Christ, thou art sure to perish eternally.

morality, they grow hot within, and turn mavelous zealous for good causes
and courses, and there they stay and warm themselves at their own fire: Romans
2. 10
thus Paul, Philip. 3. 6. was zealous and there rested. They will not live as
many do, like snailes in their shells, but rather than they will be damned for
want of doing, they are content to give away their estate, children, any thing
almost to get pardon for the sin of their soul, Mich. 6. 7.

but are forced to see and say, when they have done all, they are unprofitable
servants^ and they sin in all that which they do; then they rest in that
which is like unto Evangelicall Obedience, they think to please God by
mourning for their failings in their good duties, d^siring to be better, and
promising for the time to come to be so, and therein rest, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.

9. If they feel a want of all these, Hosea speaks 14. 3, 4. think to save
themselves by their riding on Horses, (that is) by their own abilities.

10. If they feel no help here, then power to leave sin and do better,
whereby they may save themselves; and so they live upon Christ, that they may
live of themselves; they go unto Christ, they get not into Christ, Psalm. 8.
34, 35. like hirelings that go for power to do their work, that they may
earne their wages: A child of God conten^s himself with, and lives upon the
inheritance it self, the Lord in his free mercy has given him. But now we
shall see many poor Christians that run in the very road, the Papists
devoutly go to H^ll in.

First, the Papist will confess his misery, that he is (and all men are) by
nature a child of wrath, and under the power of sin and Satan.

Secondly, they hold Christ is the only Savior.

Thirdly, that this Salvation is not by any Righteousness in a Christ, but
Righteousness from a Christ, only by giving a man power to do; and then
dipping men's doings in his blood, he merits their life. Thus the wisest and
devoutest of them profess, as I am able to manifest; just so do many
Christians live. First, They feel themselves full of sin, and are sometimes
tired and weary of their lives, for their vile hearts, and they find no power
to help themselves. Secondly, Hereupon hearing, that only Christ can save
them, they go unto Christ to remove these sins that tire them and load them,
that he would enable them to do better than formerly. Thirdly, If they get
these sins subdued and removed, and if they find power to do better, than
they hope they shall be saved. Whereas thou may be damned and go to the
devil at last, although thou do escape all the pollutions of the world, and
that not from they self and strength, but from the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 2. 20. I say woe to you for ever, if you die in this estate, it is with
our Christians in this case, as it is with the Ivy, which claspes and grows
about the tree, and draws sap from the tree, but it grows not one with the
tree, because it is not ingrafted into the tree: so many a soul comes to
Christ, to suck juice from Christ to maintain his own berries, (his own
stock of grace,) alas, he is but Ivy, he is no member or branch of this tree,
and hence he never grows to be one with Christ. 2. Now the reasons why men
rest in their duties are these.

First, Why men do rest in their good duties.
because it is natural to a man out of Christ to do so. Adam and all his
posterity was to be saved by his doing, Reas. 1.
Do this and live, work and here is the wages; win life and wear it: Hence
all his posterity seeks to this day to be saved by doing; like father, like
son. Now to come out of all duties truly to a Christ, has not so much as a
coat in innocent, much less corrupted nature; hence men seek to themselves:
now as it is with a bankrupt, when his stock is spent and his estate cracked,
before he will turn Prentice, or live upon another, he will turn Peddler of
small wares, and so follow his old trade with a less stock: so men naturally
follow their old trade of doing, and hope to get their living that way: and
hence men having no experience of trading with Christ by faith, live of
themselves. Sampson, when all his strength was lost, would go to shake
himself as at other times; so when men's strength is lost, and God and grace is
lost, yet men will go and try how they can live by shifts and working for
themselves still.

Secondly, Reas. 2.
because men are ignorant of Jesus Christ and his righteousness; hence men
cannot go unto him, because they see him not, hence they shift as well as they
can for themselves by their duties, John 4. 14. men seek to save themselves by
their own swimming, when they see no cable cast out to help them.

Thirdly, Reas. 3.
because this is the easiest way to comfort the heart, and pacify conscience,
and to please God as the soul thinks; because by this means a man goes no
further than himself. Now in forsaking all duties, a soul goes to heaven
quite out of himself, and there he must wait many a year, and that for a
little it may be. Now if a fainting man have Aquavitae at his beds head, he
will not knock up the shopkeeper for it. Men that have a Balsome of their own
to heal them, will not go to the Physician.

Fourthly, Reas. 4.
because by virtue of these duties a man may hide his sin, and live quietly in
his sin, yet be accounted an honest man: as the whore in the Pro. 7. 15, 16.
having performed her vows, can entice without suspicion of men, or check of
conscience; so the Scribes and Pharisees were horribly covetous, but their long
prayers covered their deformities, Matthew. 23. 14. and hence men set their
duties at a higher rate than they are worth, thinking they shall save them,
because they are so useful to them. Good duties, like new apparel on a man
pursued with Hue and cry of conscience, keep him from being known.

Take heed of resting in duties; Use 1.
Good duties are men's money, without which they think themselves poor and
miserable; but take heed that you and your money perish not together, Gal. 5.
3. The paths to Hell be but two. The first is the path of sin, which is a
dirty way. Secondly, the path of Duties, which (rested in) is but a clearer
way. When the Israelites were in distress, Judge. 10. 14. The Lord bids them
go to the Gods they served: so when thou shall lie howling on thy deathbed,
the Lord will say; Go unto the good prayers and performances you have made,
and the tears you have shed. Oh they will be miserable comforters at that day.

Object. Ob.
But I think thou will say, no true Christian man hopes to be saved by his
good works and duties, but only by the mercy of God and merits of Christ.

Answ. Ans.
It is one thing to trust to be saved by duties, another thing to rest in
duties. A man trusts unto them, when he is of this opinion, that only good
duties can save him. A man rests in duties, when he is of this opinion, that
only Christ can save him, but in his practice he goes about to save himself.
The wisest of the Papists are so at this day, and so are our common
Protestants. And this is a great subtilty of the heart, that is, when a man
thinks he cannot be saved by his good works and duties, but only by Christ:
he then hops, because he is of this opinion, that when he has done all, he
is an unprofitable servant: (which is only an act or work of the Judgment
informed aright) that therefore, because he is of this opinion, he shall be
saved.

But, because it is hard for to know when a man rests in duties, and few men
find themselves guilty of this sin, which ruins so many: I will show two
things.

1. The signs of a man resting in duties.

2. The insufficiency of all duties to save men. That so those that be found
guilty of this sin, may not go on in it.

First, Signs of men's resting in Duties.
for the signs whereby a man may certainly know, when he rests in his duties,
which if he do, (as few professors especially, but they do) he perishes
eternally.

First, Sign 1.
Those that never yet saw they rested in them, they that never found it an hard
matter to come out of their duties. For it is most natural for a man to stick
in them, because nature sets men upon duties; hence it is a hard matter to come
out of resting in duties. For two things keep a man from Christ.

1. 2 things keep us from Christ.
Sin; 2. Self. Now as a man is broken off from sin by seeing and feeling
it, and groaning under the power of it: so is a man broken from himself. For
men had rather do any thing than come unto Christ, there is such a deal of
self in them; therefore if thou can not tell the time when thou did rest
in thy duties, and then did groan to be delivered from these
intanglements, (I mean not from the doing of them, this is familisme, and
profaneness, but from resting in the bare performance of them,) thou do
rely upon thy duties to this day.

These rest in duties, Sign 2.
that prize the bare performance of Duties wonderfully; for those duties that
carry thee out of thy self unto Christ, make thee to prize Christ. Now tell
me, do thou glory in thy self? now I am somebody. I was ignorant,
forgetful, hard-hearted, now I understand and remember better, and can sorrow
for my sins; if thou do rest here, thy duties never carried thee further
than thy self. Do thou think after that thou have prayed with some life,
now I have done very well, and now thou do verily think (meaning for thy
duties) the Lord will save thee though thou never come to Christ, and say as
he in another case; now I hope the Lord will do good to me, seeing I have got
a Priest into mine house, Judge. 17. 13. Do thou inhance the price of duties
thus, that thou do doat on them, then I do pronounce from God, thou do
rest in them: Phil. 3. 8.
these things (says Paul) I accounted gain, (that is, before his conversion
to Christ, he prized them exceedingly) but now I account them loss: and this
is the reason why a child of God commonly after all his prayers, tears and
confessions, doubts much of Gods love toward him? whereas another man that
falls short of him, never questioneth his estate; the first sees much
rottenness and vileness in his best duties, and so judges meanly of
himself: the other ignorant of the vileness of them, prizeth them and
esteems highly of them, and setting his corn at so high a price, he may
keep them to himself; the Lord never accepts them, nor buyeth them at so
high a rate.

Thirdly, Sign 3.
those that never came to be sensible of their poverty and utter emptiness of
all good: for so long as a man has a penny in his purse (that is) feels any
good in himself, he will never come a begging unto Jesus Christ, and therefore
rests in himself: Now did thou never feel thy self in this manner poor,
viz. I am as ignorant as any beast, as vile as any devil; O Lord, what a neast
and litter of sin and rebellion lurks in my heart. I once thought at least,
mine heart and desires were good, but now I feel no spiritual life. Oh! dead
heart, I am the poorest, vilest, basest, and blindest creature that ever lived.
If thou do not thus feel thy self poor, thou never came out of thy
duties, For when the Lord brings any man to Christ, he brings him empty,
that so he may make him be holding to Christ for every farthing token. Isa. 66.
2.


Fourthly, Sign 4.
those that gain no Evangelicall righteousness by duties, re^t in duties; I
say, Evangelicall righteousness, that is, more prizing of acquaintance, with
desire after, loving and delighting in union with the Lord Jesus Christ: for a
moral man may grow in legal righteousness, (as the stony and thorny ground
seed, sprang up and increased much, and came near unto maturitie,) and yet
rest in duties all this while. For, as it is with tradesmen, they rest in their
buying and selling, though they make no gain of their trading: now Jesus
Christ is a Christians gain, Phil. 1. 21. and hence a child of God asks
himself after Sermon, after prayer, after Sacrament, what have I gained of
Christ? have I got more knowledge of Christ, more admiring of the Lord Jesus?
Now a carnal heart that rests in his duties, asks only what he has done,
as the Pharisee, I thank God I am not as other men, I fast twice a week, I
give alms, and the like, and thinks verily he shall be saved, because he
prays, and because he hears, and because he reformes, and because he sorrows
for his sins, that is, not because of the gaining of Christ in a duty, but
because of his naked performance of the duty, and so they are like that man,
that I have heard of, that thought verily he should be rich, because he had got
a wallet to beg: so men, because they perform duties, think verily they shall
be saved. No such matter, let a man have a bucket made of gold, does he think
to get water, because he has a bucket? No, no, he must let it down into the
well and draw up water with it: so must thou let down all thy duties into
Christ, and draw life and light from his fullness, else though thy duties be
golden duties, thou shall perish without Christ. When a man has bread in his
wallet, and got water in his bucket, he may boldly say, so long as these last,
I shall not ^amish: so may thou say, when thou have found and got Christ, in
the performance of any duty, so long as Christ's life lasts, I shall live, as
long as he has any wisdom or power, so long shall I be directed and enabled
in well doing.

Fifthly, Sign 5.
if thy duties make thee sin more boldly, thou do then rest in duties; for
these duties which carry a man out of himself unto Christ, ever fetch power
against sin; but duties that a man rests in, arm him and fence him in his
sin, Isa. 1. 14. A cart that has no wheels to rest on, can hardly be drawn
into the dirt, but one that has wheels, comes loaded through it; so a child
of God that has no wheels, no duties to rest upon, cannot willingly be drawn
into sin: but another man, though he be laden with sin (even sometimes
against his conscience) yet having duties to bear him up, goes merrily on in
a sinful course, and makes no bones of sin; when we see a base man revile a
great Prince, and strike him, we say, surely he durst not do it, unless he
had some body to bear him out in it, that he rests and trusts unto: so when
we see men sin against the great God, we conceive, certainly they durst not
do it, if they had not some duties to bear them out in it, and to encourage
them in their way, that they trust unto.

For, take a profane man, what makes him drink, swear, cozen, game, whore? Is
there no God to punish? Is there no hell hot enough to torment? are there no
plagues to confound him? yes, why ^inneth he then so? Oh! he prays to God for
forgiveness, and sorroweth, and repents in secret (as he ^aith) and this
bears him out in his lewd pranks.

Take a moral man, he knows he has his failings and his sins, as the best
have, and is overtaken sometimes as the best are; why does he not remove these
sins then? He confesses them to God every morning when he rises; why is he
not more humbled under his sin then? the reason is, he constantly observes
morning and evening prayer, and then he craves forgiveness for his failings,
by which course he hopes he makes his peace with God, and hence he sins
without sear, and rises out of his falls into sin without sorrow. And thus
they see and maintain their sins by their duties, and therefore rest in
duties.

Sixthly, Sign 6.
those that see little of their vile hearts by duties, rest in their duties:
For if a man be brought nearer to Christ, and to the light, by duties, he will
spy out more moats; for the more a man participates of Christ, his health and
life, the more he feels the vileness and sickness of sin. Romans 7.
As Paul when he rested in his duties before his conversion, before that the
Law had humbled him, he was alive, that is, he thought himself a sound man,
because his duties covered his sins, like fig leaves. Therefore ask thine own
heart, if it be troubled sometimes for sin, and if after thy praying and
sorrowing thou do grow well, and think thy self safe, and feel not
thy self more vile. If it be thus, I tell thee, thy duties be but fig leaves
to cover thy nakedness, and the Lord will find thee out, and unmaske thee one
day, and woe to thee, if thou do perish here.

Secondly, The insufficiency of any duty to save a man.
Therefore behold the insufficiency of all duties to save us; Which will
appear in these three things, which I speak that you may learn hereafter
never to rest in duties.

First, Consider thy best duties are tainted, poisoned, and mingled with some
sin, and therefore are most odious in the eyes of an holy God, (nakedly and
barely considered in themselves) for if the best actions of Gods people be
filthy, as they come from them, then to be sure, all wicked men's actions are
much more filthy and polluted with sin: but the first is true, Isay 6. 6.
All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; for as the fountain is, so is
the stream; but the fountain of all good actions, (that is the heart) is
mingled partly with sin, partly with grace, therefore every action participates
of some sin, which sins are daggers at Gods heart, even when a man is praying
and begging for his life, therefore there is no hope to be saved by duties.

I say 40. 6. All flesh and the glory thereof is but grass. So thy best
actions would soon wither, if they were not perfect: and if thou can not
persevere in performing all duties perfectly, thou art for ever undone, though
thou should do so for a time; live like an Angel, shine like a Sun, and
at thy last gasp have but an idle thought, commit the least sin, that one
rock will sink thee down even in the haven, though never so richly laden;
one sin, like a penknife at the heart, will stab thee; one sin, like a
little fire-stick in the thatch, will burn thee; one act of treason will hang
thee, though thou have lived never so devoutly before, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Gal. 3. 10.
For it is a crooked life, when all the parts of the line of thy life, be not
straight before almighty God,

persevere, yet it is clear, thou have sinned grievously already, and do thou
think thine obedience for the time to come can satisfy the Lord for all those
Rents behind, for all those sins past? as can a man that pays his Rent
honestly every year, satisfy hereby for the old rent not paid in twenty
years? all thy obedience is a new debt, which cannot satisfy for debts past.
Indeed men may forgive wrong and debts because they be but finite, but the
least sin is an infinite evil, and therefore God must be satisfied for it. Men
may remit debts, and yet remain men; but the Lord having said, the soul that
sins shall die, and his truth being himself, he cannot remain God, if he
forgive it without satisfaction. Therefore duties are but rotten crutches for a
soul to rest upon.

But to what end should we use any duties? Obj.
cannot a man be saved by his good prayers, nor sorrows, nor repentings? what
should we pray any more then? Let us cast off all duties, if all are to no
purpose to save us. As good play for nothing as work for nothing.

Though thy good duties cannot save thee, Ans.
yet thy bad works will damn thee. Thou art therefore not to cast off the
duties, but thy resting in these duties. Good duties not to be cast off, but
our resting upon them.
Thou art not to cast them away, but to cast them down at the feet of Jesus
Christ, as they did their crowns, Rev. 4. 10, 11. Saying, if there be any good
or graces in these duties, it is thine Lord, for it is the Princes favor that
exalts a man, not his own gifts; they came from his good pleasure.

But thou will say; Ob.
to what end should I perform duties, if I cannot be saved by them?

For these three ends. Ans.


1. Use 1.
1. To carry thee to the Lord Jesus the only Savior, Heb. 7. 25. he only is
able to save ( not duties) all that come unto God (that is, in the use of
means,) by him: hear a Sermon to carry thee to Jesus Christ: Fast and pray,
and get a full tide of affections in them to carry thee to the Lord Jesus
Christ, (that is,) to get a more love to him, more acquaintance with him, more
union with him: so sorrow for thy sins, that thou may be more fitted for
Christ, that thou may prize Christ the more; use thy duties, as Noah's dove
did her wings, to carry thee to the Ark of the Lord Jesus Christ, where only
there is rest. If she had never used her wings, she had fallen in the waters:
so if thou shall use no duties, but cast them all off, thou art sure to perish;
Or as it is with a poor man that is to go over a great water for a treasure
on the other side, though he cannot fetch the boat, he calls for it; and
though there be no treasure in the boat, yet he uses the boat to carry him
over to the treasure: so Christ is in heaven, and thou on earth, he does not
come to thee, and thou can not go to him; now call for a boat, though there
is no grace, no good, no salvation in a pithlesse duty, yet use it to carry
thee over to the treasure the Lord Jesus Christ. When thou come to hear,
say, Have over Lord by this Sermon. When thou come to pray, say, Have over
Lord by this prayer to a Savior. But this is the misery of people, like
foolish lovers, when they are to woe for the Lady, they fall in love with her
handmaid that is only to lead them to her: so men fall in love with, and
doat upon their own duties, and rest contented with the naked performance of
them, which are only handmaids to lead the soul unto the Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Use 2.
use duties as evidences of Gods everlasting love to you when you be in Christ;
for the graces and duties of Gods people, although they be not causes, yet they
be tokens and pledges of salvation to one in Christ: they do not save a man,
but only accompany and follow such a man as shall be saved, Heb. 6. 9. Let a
man boast of his Joys, feelings, gifts, spirit, grace, if he walks in the
commission of any one sin, or the om^ssion of any one known duty, or in the
slovenly ill favored performance of duties, this man, I say, can have no
assurance without flattering of himself, 2 Pet. 1. 8, 9, 10. Duties therefore
being evidences and pledges of salvation, use them to that end, and make much
of them therefore, as a man that has fair evidence for his Lordship, because
he did not purchase his Lordship, will he therefore cast it away? no, no,
because it is an evidence to assure him that it is his own, and so to defend
him against all such as seek to take it from him, he will carefully preserve
the same: so because duties do not save thee, will thou cast away good duties?
No, for they are evidences (if thou art in Christ) that the Lord and mercy is
thine own. Women will not cast away their love tokens, although they are such
things, as did not purchase or merit the love of their husbands, but because
they are tokens of his love, therefore they will keep them safe.

That God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ may be honored by the
performance of these duties, Use 3.
therefore use them: Christ shed his blood, that he might purchase unto
himself a people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. not to save our souls by
them, but to honor him. Oh! let not the blood of Christ be shed in vain.
Grace and good duties are a Christians Crown; it is sin only makes a man
base: now shall a King cast away his Crown, because he bought not his Kingdom
by it? No, because it is his Ornament and glory to wear it, when he is made a
King; so I say unto thee, it is better that Christ should be honored, than thy
soul saved; and therefore perform duties, because they honor the Lord Jesus
Christ. Thus use thy duties, but rest not in duties; nay, go out of duties,
and match thy soul to the Lord Jesus: take him for better and for worse, so
live in him and upon him all thy days.

Fourthly, 4 General reason of man's ruin.
By reason of man's headstrong Presumption or false faith, whereby men seek to
save themselves by catching hold on Christ, when they see an insufficiency in
all duties to help them, and themselves unworthy of mercy. For this is the
last and most dangerous rock that these times are split upon. Men make a bridge
of their own to carry them to Christ; I mean, they look not after faith,
wrought by an omnipotent power, which the eternal Spirit of the Lord Jesus
must work in them, Ephesians. 1. 19.
but they content themselves with a faith of their own forging and framing, and
hence they think verily and believe, that Christ is their sweet Savior, and
so doubt not but they are safe, when there is no such matter, but even as dogs
they snatch away childrens bread, and shall be shut out of doors, (out of
heaven hereafter for ever) for their labor.

All men are of this opinion, that there is no salvation, but by the merits of
Jesus Christ; and because they hold fast this opinion, therefore they think
they hold fast Jesus Christ in the hand of faith, and so perish by catching at
their own catch, and hanging on their own fancy and shadow. Some others catch
hold of Christ before they come to feel the want of Faith and ability to
believe, and catching hold on him (like dust on a man's coat whom God will
shake off, or like burrs and briars cleaving to ones garment, which the Lord
will trample under foot) now they say they thank God, they have got comfort by
this means, and though God kills them, yet they will trust unto him, Mich. 3.
11.

It is in this respect a harder matter to convert a man in England than in
India, for there they have no such shifts and forts against our Sermons, to say
they believe in Christ already, as most amongst us do: we cannot wrap off
men's fingers from catching hold on Christ before they be fit for him; like a
company of thieves in the street, you shall see an hundred hands scrambling for
a jewel that is fallen there, that have least, nay nothing to do with it.
Every man says almost, I hope Christ is mine, I put my whole trust and
confidence in him, and will not be beaten from this. What, must a man despair?
must not a man trust unto Christ? thus, men will hope and trust, though they
have no ground, no graces to prove they may lay hold and claim unto Christ.
This hope skared out of his wits damnes thousands, for I am persuaded if men
did see themselves Christlesse creatures, as well as sinful creatures, they
would cry out, Lord, what shall I do to be saved?

True faith is a precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 2. precious things cost us much: and
we set them at an high rate; if thy Faith be so, it has cost thee many a
prayer, many a sob, many a salt tear. But ask most men how they came by their
faith in Christ? they say, very easily: when the Lion sleeps a man may lie and
sleep by it, but when it awakens, woe to that man that does so: so while God
is silent and patient, thou may befoole thy self with thinking thou do
trust unto God: but woe to thee when the LORD appears in his wrath, as one day
he will; for by virtue of this false faith, men sinning, take Christ as a
dish-clout to wipe them clean again, and that is all the use they have of this
faith. They sin indeed, but they trust unto Christ for his mercy, and so lie
still in their sins: God will revenge with blood and fire and plagues this
horrible contempt from heaven.

Hence many of you trust unto Christ, as the Apricock tree that leanes against
the wall, but it is fast rooted in the earth: so you lean upon Christ for
salvation, but you are rooted in the world, rooted in your pride, rooted in
your filthiness still. Woe to you if you perish in this estate, God will hew
you down as fuel for his wrath, what ever mad hope you have to be saved by
Christ. This therefore I proclaim from the God of Heaven to you. 1. you that
never felt your selves as unable to believe as a dead man to raise himself,
you have as yet no faith at all. 2. You that would get faith, first must feel
your inability to believe; and fetch not this slip out of thine own garden: it
must come down from Heaven to thy soul, if ever thou partakest thereof.

Other things I should have spoken of this large subject, but I am forced here
to end abruptly; The Lord lay not this sin to their charge, who have stopped my
mouth, laboring to withhold the truth in unrighteousness. And blessed be the
good God, who has stood by his unworthy servant thus long, inabling him to
lead you so far, as to show you the rocks and dangers of your passage to
another world.

FINIS.

