Clayton, Mayor.
CVria special. tent. die Dominico, quarto Die Julij, 1680. Regni Annoque Regis
Caroli Secundi, Angliae, etc. XXXII.

THis Court does desire Mr. Shelton to Print his Sermon, lately Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City.

Wagstaffe.

Divine Providence. THE SUPPORT OF GOOD MEN Under all EVENTS. A SERMON Preached
before the Lord Mayor, etc. At Guild Hall Chapel, June 20th. 1680.

By William Shelton, Rector of St. James Colchester.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ranew at the King's Arms, and Jonathan Robinson
at the Golden Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE Right Honorable, Sr. ROBERT CLAYTON Lord Mayor, And to the Right
Worshipful the ALDERMEN and SHERIFFS OF THE CITY of LONDON.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
THe Doctrine of Providence has diverse Adversaries: Not only such as
Atheistically disbelieve it, but such also as perversely infer from it; so do
they who from present Success argue to the Merits of their Cause, and justify
their Villainies in the Name of God.

If to grate upon former times were a pleasing Argument, or such as might serve
any good End, I could have made this a part of my Discourse: But having
contented my self to give an hint, that the Providence of God is no
Justification of wicked Enterprises, I chose these Words for another purpose.

Instead of disputing a Controversy (of which these Times are full) I thought
it as seasonable to put men in mind of a Truth, which we all acknowledge, but it
has not a sufficient Influence upon our Lives. If it be too hard to call them
Adversaries to this Doctrine, yet it must be owned that they disparage
Providence, that they have low and dishonorable thoughts of God's governing
the World, who cannot infer from his Wisdom and Goodness and Power, that it is
safe and happy to trust in him.

That which is said to this End in the following Sermon, was by your Lordship
and the Aldermen then present, received with such candor and good acceptance,
that you have thought fit to command it to be made Public. To which I consent
more as a Testimony of my Obedience, than an Instance of my Choice. I have not
so great an Opinion of it, as to think, it deserves better than many others
which are not Printed.

Yet I know it was preached with an honest Design, And I know there is need
that men should be awakened to a sense of their dependence on God; And if any
honest man finds himself brought to a better temper of mind by reading this
Sermon; If it give occasion to any man, to resolve by the Grace of God to live
better, that he may not make God his Enemy; and if it shall then encourage him
to trust in God whatever befalls him; I will thank God, who put these thoughts
into my mind, and I will thank your Lordship and your Brethren, for being
Instruments thus to reform any wan's life, or to satisfy his mind.

I am, Right Honorable and Right Worshipful, Your most Humble and Faithful
Servant, W. SHELTON.
Colchester, July 8th. 1680.
DIVINE PROVIDENCE, THE SUPPORT OF GOOD MEN UNDER ALL EVENTS.
A Sermon preached before the right Honorable the Lord Major, etc. on June
20th. 1680.
PSALM 97. 1. The Lord Reigns, let the Earth Rejoice.
THey who deny that the Providence of God is concerned in humane Affairs, as
they may well be thought to deny the being of God, because the very notion of a
Deity infinite in knowledge and Almighty in Power, supposes it no difficult
task for him to govern the World who first made it; so do they undermine and
destroy the principal support of a good man's Confidence. For where shall the
weary mind of man repose it self, amidst the surprising Accidents, and
afflicting disappointments of this life? Is the World a Lottery? and do things
come to pass by chance? What a poor content then do our present Enjoyments
administer to us, and where is our security for the time to come? To what
purpose Antonynus.
do I live in a world void of God, and void of Providence? But there is a God,
and he does take care of human Affairs. This was the satisfaction of the
Heathen Emperor; The Lord Reigns, let the Earth rejoice. So here the Divine
Psalmist. An Inference which a Religious man may at all times make, but he
never more needs it than in an unquiet and unsettled state of things. The
Doctrine is great, and the Inference is good. The Lord Reigns, the most high
rules over all the Kingdoms of me. Nothing escapes his Knowledge. Nothing
controles his Power: All things are managed by incomprehensible Wisdom, and
infinite Goodness. And here we sit down and rest our selves. When we have
prayed (as we do in the Collect of this day) that God would keep us under the
protection of his good Providence; with a Peace that passes Uall nderstanding,
with an inward satisfaction of mind and a deep joy, among the manifold changes
and hazards of this mortal life, we commit our selves, and all our concerns to
the governance of God, and give him thanks that he will please to undertake the
care of us.

A Consideration of so great Importance, that I willingly wave all farther
preface, and take no notice of the rest of the Psalm, nor enquire whether these
words may bear another sense in reference to Christ's Kingdom, but apply my self
to discourse on this Argument.

It is a great satisfaction to a good man, that the Providence of God governs
the World. In which I distinctly consider.

1. The Lord Reigns. The Providence of God governs the World. 2. This is a
great satisfaction to the mind of man. 3. But, He must be a good and religious
man that may with reason actually rejoice in this Assurance of Gods Providence.
In all which I have not the Vanity to pretend that I can crowd into an hours
discourse, all that might pertinently be said in this matter. But though out of
respect to the time, and your patience, I must of necessity omit many things,
that might here have a proper place, yet according to my poor ability, I will
endeavor to say nothing that may be Impertinent.

1. The Lord Reigns. God guides and governs the World, all the Creatures in it,
all the Affairs of it, especially those of mankind. By the right of Creation he
has Authority over us, and he exercises that Authority in making Laws for us.
To us Christians he has given his Holy Word, which is the Law of our Creation,
and of our Redemption too. But to all men he has given a Law written in their
Hearts, Romans 2.
a Conscience of good and evil. But because Authority separate from Power is
insignificant; therefore* that is also visible, in rewarding those Hebr. 11.
that diligently seek him, and punishing the Refractory and disobedient; which
Rewards and Punishments, if to humane sense they sometimes seem unequally
distributed; yet is this no sufficient exception against the Doctrine of
Providence; as will appear in the sequel of this Discourse, when I have first
given a fuller declaration of this thing.

The Providence of God governs the world, and extends it self to all Times, and
Places, and Persons upon the face of the Earth. Interposes in all Events, has
the Supremacy in all Affairs, so that nothing upon any pretense is remote or
exempt from his Jurisdiction.

For, 1. There is nothing so high or great as to be above the reach, and out of
the power of Almighty God. 2. Nothing is so mean, and low, and inconsiderable,
as to be unworthy the Care of an Universal Father. 3. Nothing so secret,
intricate, or perplexed; as to puzzle Infinite Wisdom.
1. The King of Kings Reigns over all: He is King of all the Earth, Emperors,
and Kings, and Popes, Powers Civil and Ecclesiastical, have no Authority but
what they derive from God; and if they usurp any other power, it is at least by
his permission. We read of one that Opposes and Exalts himself above all that
is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
whether it be not the same who undertakes to dispense with and against Divine
Laws, let they look to it that are concerned in the Usurpation. There have not
been many greater than Nebuchadnezzar, nor that have arrogated more; but it
pleased God to humble him, and to teach him to know, and to keep his distance:
When his Understanding (which he had forfeited by his pride) returned to him,
he knew that the Most High ruled in the Kingdoms of Men. He Dan. 4.
acknowledged, that His Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom
from Generation to Generation: That, All the Inhabitants of the Earth are
reputed as nothing, that he does according to his Will in the Army of Heaven,
and among the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none may stay his hand, or say unto
him, what do thou?

2. There is nothing so mean, and low, and inconsiderable, as to be unworthy of
Gods Care: He who numbers the hairs of our heads, who regards the falling St.
Math. 10.
of a Sparrow, who owns the Caterpillar and Locusts to be of his great Army;
who made the smallest Creatures, and foresees the least Events; Joel 2.
why should it be difficult to believe, that all these little things are within
the guidance, and subject to the disposals of Gods Providence. It is some what
surprising, to find so grave an Author as Plutarch (who elsewhere De s^ra
Numin. vindicta,
endeavors to reconcile the Providence of God, with the flow punishments of
wicked men) De placit. Philosoph.
should reprove Plato and Anaxagoras, (...)* As if he thought it below the
Majesty of God, to condescend to humane affairs. But I am amazed to observe so
learned a man as Jerome, who understood the Christian Religion so well, should
think it absurd, Ad hoc deducere Dei Majestatem, ut sciat Commentar. in Habak.
Cap. 1.
per momenta singula quot nascantur culices quotve moriantur; the light of
Nature did teach some Heathens better Divinity: From the exquisite Curiosities
of the Industrious Be, Virgil infers,

-- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque, tractusque Maris, Coelumque profundum. Georg. lib. 4.

But I offer no other conviction in this thing, than this Observation; I hat
great and signal Events do many times depend on small matters: Anacreon is
choked with a Grape stone, and Pope Adrian the Fourth with a Fly; Absalom is
hanged in his own hair; so small a thing as the want of a Nights sleep, is a
means to preserve Mordecai's Life, and by consequence, to ruin Haman, and save
a whole Nation. The over-Officiousness of Caesar Borgia's Butler, poisoned his
Father, Pope Alexander the Sixth, and Onupher. Vit. Alex. 6.
thereby broke all the designs of Borgia. In the course of Providence, all that
concurrs is not alike visible, nor at first considerable: Great weights may
hang on small wires, we may be superstitious in observing every little
Occurrence, as if it were ominous and presaging; we may also be too regardless
of smaller Events; sure it is they are not altogether neglected of God: Within
his wise disposal of all things, is comprehended his Governing those Events,
which at first are as hardly discerned and as little regarded, as the Cloud
about the bigness of a man's Hand; but as that overspread the whole Heavens, so
sometimes are little Accidents the first steps and advances to greater matters.

3. Nothing is so secret or far removed from ordinary Observation, as to
preserve it self from the knowledge and Control of God: The Empire of the great
God extends farther than any power of men can; our secret thoughts and most
inward motions of our minds, all these are naked and open to the eye of God;
and he Prove. 21.
in whose hand are the hearts of Kings, to turn whithersoever he will, is not a
Stranger to what is secretly agitated in other men's Breasts. Thought is free we
say; to humane Cognizance it is so, if by our own indiscretions we do not
betray our selves; but he that made the heart, and that will call us to account
for every secret thing, he has a perfect knowledge of, and an undoubted
Authority over all that is transacted within our own mind.

Again, The Providence of God extends to secret things as well as open, to all
those Mysteries of Iniquity that are plotted and contrived in Hell and
Darkness: When we hear of Plots and Conspiracies, we are solicitous lest their
depth should be unfathomable, and therefore lest the destruction they contrive
should be unavoidable. But, There is no darkness nor shadow Job 34.
of death, where the workers of Iniquity may hide themselves. He that cast the
Devils into Hell, confines and rules them there; or if he suffer them sometimes
to range the world* and inspirit men to designs devilish and hellish, i. e.
full of subtilty and full of mischief; yet shall they make no farther progress
than God will give them leave: He can check them when he pleases, he can
discover the deeds of darkness, and disappoint the devices of the Crafty; He
that sits in the Heavens, can laugh all the Devils in Hell to scorn.

Against what has been hitherto said, if any prejudice arise, I conceive there
is none greater than these three.

If the Providence of God govern the world, then

1. Why does he permit sin, which he so much hates? Or, 2. If he think fit to
permit it, why does he not punish it? And 3. Why are holy and Religious men so
unregarded?
1. Why does a pure and holy God permit sin, which is so infinitely displeasing
to him? I might answer,

First, If there were no God, there would be no Devil, there could be no Sin:
Sin is a transgression St. Joh. 1. ^.
of the Law; if God did not Rule the World, if he have not exercised his
Authority in giving Laws for the governing men's actions, Romans 4.
then, where no Law is, there is no Transgression; so that this Objection
overthrows it self. The very being of Sin in the world, supposes Providence:
but I add to that answer; God has done so much to prevent Sin, and to overruled
it, and will do so much in the punishing of it, that this can be no reasonable
Objection against Providence.

1. In order to the prevention of Sin, God has declared his pleasure in
Commanding the contrary; he has offered the assistance of his Holy Spirit, that
Sin may not have Dominion over us. He withholds no help or aid that he is bound
to give, but if, in the offering or bestowing this Assistance, he think not fit
to do violence to the nature of a reasonable Creature, it ought not to be
wondered at. He forbids sin, and makes known the danger of it, and earnestly
sollicits men to turn from their evil ways: Why will ye die, O House of Israel?
But if men will abuse their own liberty, this is enough to vindicate the
Providence of God toward those that remain wicked; he deals with them as with
reasonable Creatures: Men are wanting to themselves, God is not wanting to them.

2. As God has done much to prevent Sin, so does he likewise overruled it. He
restrains it and makes it serve his own Glory; so succeeded the Envy of
Joseph's Brethren, and the malice of the Jews to our blessed Savior: And in
many other cases God has brought good out of evil, and thereby declared that
his Providence governs the world.

Especially when, 3. It is considered, that God will punish the sin he so much
hates: But this is of it self another Objection.

2. If God govern the world, why does Providence seem so lame and unconcerned;
when men dare the Justice of God and defy Heaven, and grow enormously wicked?
Yet The wicked live, become old, and are mighty in power: Their Houses are safe
from fear, neither is the Rod Job 21.
of God upon them.

I answer as follows.

1. Who can tell that the Vengeance of God does not often overtake wicked men,
when to outward appearance they brave and hector, and live as if nothing
disturbed them? There are secret throbings of Conscience, which men strive to
preserve from outward notice, and so long as those inward Horrors do not
approach very near despair, they may be undiscerned. But the Heart knows its
own bitterness; the mind of man does severely lash itself. And from hence may
it rationally be argued to the conviction of those that quarrel at Providence.

Juven. Satyr. 13.
-- Cur tamen hos tu
Evasisse putes, quos diri conscia facti
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.
Do you think wicked men escape the vengeance of God? No; the Viper gnaws and
torments within. Dreadful are the Agonies. Bitter is the distress and anguish
that men feel in their own minds. Or, if this do not always happen, yet for
ought a by-stander knows it may happen, and even then, when men outwardly
ruffle and seem to sin without fear.

But, 2. is our Eye evil because God is good? What if the long-suffering of God
wait upon men, that his goodness may lead them to Repentance, this must not be
accounted an Imputation upon Providence?

3. God has it in his power to animadvert when he pleases: And therefore no
wonder if he delay that execution, which he can hasten at his own pleasure.

For, 4. Punishment shall come, and the longer it is deferred, the more
dreadful it shall at last be. Sometimes Providence justifies it self, and meets
with men in this world; by many strange discoveries of Treasons, and Murders
and Robberies, and other licentious practices, God has honored the Justice of
his Administrations, or if he sometimes delay, Yet

5. The revelation of the Righteous Judgment of Romans 2.
God, at the last and great day, will give all men satisfaction, that the
righteous God is not now an Idle, and unconcerned spectator of the wickedness
of men: for then he will reward every man according to his deeds.

3 There remains but one thing more to be argued in this matter. Why does a
gracious and good God, so little regard holy men in the midst of those
tribulations they suffer in this World? A common objection, and some have
boldly expressed it. When Lucan finds Pompey, whom he thought the better man,
and to have the juster cause, ruined by Caesar, how does he exclaim and
blaspheme?

Lucan. Lib, 7.
-- -- Sunt nobis nulla profecto
Numina, cum caeco rapiantur saecula cursu
Mentimur regnare Jovem. --
So Atheistical men may talk: but holy men notwithstanding all they suffer in
this world, are not dissatisfied in their Religion. Though God slay them yet
they will trust in him. And by Job. 13.
their casting all their care upon him, it appears they 1 S. Pet. 5.
believe he takes care of them. If we consider farther, that no man suffers
more than he deserves; that it is good for men to be afflicted. If Psalm. 119.
we can believe that the promises, which suppose that holy men may be
afflicted, shall be fulfilled to them: God will never leave them nor Hebr. 13.
Psalm. 46. Romans 5.
forsake them. He will be a present help in trouble, and will work all things
for good. And if we can rise up to St. Paul's confidence about the happy issue
of our present sorrows. That our light Affliction which is but for a moment,
shall work 2. Cor. 4.
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; I say if we can
believe these things, then neither is this any sufficient prejudice against
Providence. I may conclude then the first part of my undertaking. The Lord
Reigns; the Providence of God governs the World.

2 This is a great satisfaction to the mind of man; The Lord Reigns, let the
Earth rejoice. We meet with enough in this world to make it a vale of Tears.
Sometimes we foresee a storm, sometimes we sail in the midst of Rocks, and are
just ready to strike upon the Sands. Few are so over-happy, as not to be often
engaged in considerable difficulties: but we may always Hebr. 6.
ride at Anchor; such is our hope in God, an Anchor sure and steadfast. Yea we
may weather out the Storm, for if we can trust our Pilot he will never fail us.
Under all our sorrows and fears, it is an unspeakable satisfaction, to commit
our selves to the never failing guidance of the good Providence of God. And of
this I say three things.

1 Those things of which we are ignorant are known to a wise God. 2 Those
things which are against our wills, which we apprehend evil for us, are guided
and ordered by the will of a good God. 3 Those things which are out of our
power, are within the Power of Almighty God.
1* Our Ignorance is one great cause of our solicitude and dissatisfaction:
What would some men give certainly to foreknow their own fortune. Alas! In many
cases our Ignorance is a great advantage to us.

Horat. Carm. lib. 3.
Prudens, futuri temporis Exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus.
God does wisely and mercifully conceal some things, a foreknowledge of which
would add to our sorrow. But take the case as it is, we are utterly uncertain
about the time to come: But how will this consideration calm those troubled
thoughts, that upon this account arise within us? The wise God knows what shall
befall us, though we do'n't.

Great are the anxieties upon the minds of men in the present posture of
Affairs. But now try we if this will not relieve us: What time I Psalm. 56.
am afraid, I will trust in thee. Thou, O Lord, Job. 5.
art able to take the wise in their own craftiness. In Psalm. 31.
thee O Lord have I put my trust, let me never be confounded. Is not this now
an ease to our minds? A wise God governs the World, He knows what shall come to
pass; and why.: It is not blind chance, but infinite wisdom that superintends
and governs all things. If men go down to Hell God is there. The most probable
contrivances of desperate Ahitophel's, whose Counsel among men is received as
the Oracle of God, may yet be turned into foolishness 2. Sam. 17.
and end in their own confusion; and in a rage impatient to see their Plots
miscarry, they may save the labor of public Justice and hang themselves. The
subtilest platform of Policy of the most Atheistical Machiavels, may be as
unfortunate as that of his wretched Duke Valentine, and may prove abortive from
some unforeseen accident, to which they themselves may yet contribute. The
mysterious Intrigues of the most villainous Jesuits (or if there be any other
name among men, that signifies greater Apostasy from Faith and Truth, and
closer confederacy with Hell,) that were ever hatched in the most inward
Recesses of the depth of Darkness; these all are but like Spiders Webs, thin
and transparent, and as easily swept down when Infinite Wisdom shall think fit
to make use of Almighty Power. This then is our Comfort and our Joy, when they
who are too cunning for us, have advantages upon us, he who is wiser than the
wisest takes care of us.

Yea moreover when we are disappointed in our expectations, this may satisfy
us. It is with us as it pleases the all-wise God. Peradventure we are mistaken
in our own business, and may passionately desire what may be to our loss.
However, shall we have less Religion than the Heathen? shall it be harder for
us to resign our wills and wisdoms to God?

Juve^* Sat. 10.
Permittes ipsis expendere Numinibus quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris:
It may come to pass, that our very Errors may be happy for us; as was St.
Austin's being Posidonius de vita August.
led out of his way by the error of his Guide, and thereby he was preserved
from the fury of the Circumcellion's that waylaid him. Whatever befalls us,
God is wiser than we, he who knows all things, best knows what is fit and
convenient for us.

2. That which is against our wills, which we apprehend evil for us, is guided
by the will of a good God, and this is marvelously to our satisfaction. Now we
may rejoice in tribulation, because the hand of a good God is still upon us,
and he will work even this for good; the Life of Dr. Hammond.
Incomparable Dr. Hammond's word, Even this for good. When our affairs succeed
not according to our expectation, shall we quarrel at Providence, and disquiet
our selves, and add to our own Afflictions by the fretfulness and impatience of
our minds? No, say we every one to our selves, why should I entertain any
suspicion, that a merciful God who has made so many gracious promises, which my
dear Savior dyed to confirm, will be wanting to me? No, never let me distrust
that God whom I have so much reason to love. Wisdom and goodness join together
in the dispose of all that befalls me, therefore will I rejoice in the Lord,
Habak. 3.
and joy in the God of my Salvation.

3. Those things that are out of our power, are within the Power of Almighty
God: We are troubled upon many accounts, and cannot help our selves, and because
we cannot help our selves we are troubled; but he that governs us and our
affairs, can do all things by the word of his power: When we come into
Jehoshaphat's case, then are we to behave our selves as he did.; Neither know
we what to do, but our Eyes are 2 Chronicles. 20.
upon thee: The Lords hand is not shortened, that it Isa. 59.
cannot save. Nothing is too hard for him to do, God Almighty has undertaken
our protection; wherefore when we consider these in conjunction, the wisdom,
and goodness, and power of God, are sufficient reasons for our satisfaction and
joy.

And if we extend these latter Considerations as well as the former, beyond our
private Concerns, and suffer our thoughts to travel the world; we shall indeed
find that the follies and passions and interests of men bear great sway here
below, and in a great measure turn the world upside down. Restless Ambition,
insatiable Envy, greedy Covetousness, and Implacable Revenge, have often
disturbed the peace and quiet of Mankind; yet sure we are, God has not let
loose these Furies, and discharged them of his super-intendence, nor privileged
them from his Control. We shall too curiously pry into the Arcana Imperii, if
we will not be satisfied, till we can always render a reason why things are
thus or so: The Judgments of God are often unsearchable, and his ways past
finding out; but an humble Soul can trust it self and the whole world with God,
can believe that all things are well and wisely ordered, is secure that the
all-wise God can commit no errors, that a good God cannot be chargeable with
any male-administrations; and that God Almighty does not suffer things to run
at random, because of any impotency to mend what is amiss: It would be
uncomfortable living in the world, if all things were left to the arbitrament
of mere men, who at best are too weak to bear so great a burden, and often are
so corrupt, that Maximilian's Exclamation may suit other times as well as his
own, when he was Emperor, and Julius 2d. Pope.

Deus Aeterne! nisi tu vigilares quam male effet Morn. Histor. Papatus.
mundo, quem regimus nos, ego miser venator and ebriosus ille and sceleratus
Julius.

But God retains his Supremacy over all the Kingdoms and Nations of the Earth,
he does never sleep nor intermit his care; it shall not be entirely as men
please: He that stills the raging of the Sea, restrains the madness of People.
A great part of mankind know not of what manner of Spirit they are, and how
much mischief they should do, if they had power to fulfill their own wills. But
when it pleases God to put an hook into the Nose of the Leviathan, Rabshekah's
swelling words shall be but impotent Rage. Haman shall build a Gallows for
himself, No weapon formed against God shall prosper; Isa. 54.
it shall not be as man pleases, but as it pleases God: No man indeed should be
unconcerned, when either Sin or Judgment for Sin rages in the world; but still
keep we within our own bounds of Patience, and Faith, and Prayer; endeavor we
all to mend our selves, and then, whatever happens, rest it not all on second
causes. The overruling of Gods Providence, is no manner of excuse for wicked
enterprises; but if by a faithful discharge of our duty, if in Religion to God,
in Loyalty to the King, in Peace, and Gentleness, and Brotherly Love one to
another, we do what in us lies, that the state of things shall not grow worse
by any default of ours; if others take not the ^ame care, though they shall
find no extenuation of their faults, nor mitigation of their punishment from
this Doctrine of Providence; yet we shall gain a world of case and satisfaction
from it: It is not for us to know Times and Seasons which the Acts 1.
Father has put in his own power; we would fain hope well, that God will never
forsake those that seek him: But whatever we may live to see or feel,

We commit our selves and all our private Interests, we commit the Peace and
Prosperity of the whole Nation, we commit our King, our Church, our Religion,
all that is dear to us to a wise and good God: We will cease to govern the
world, but commit it to him whose right it is; neither the indiscretions nor
the extravagant passions of men shall overruled; nor Men nor Devils, but the
Providence of God is the Supreme Arbitrator: This is our satisfaction, a joy
that no man takes from us, The Lord reigns therefore does the Earth rejoice.

May I exercise your Patience but a little longer, till I have finished the
third part of my Discourse.

3. He must be a good man that may, with reason, actually rejoice upon this
account: Gods Providence is not the peculiar inheritance of some few men, but
the earth may rejoice in it, i. e. all men every where unless they disable
themselves. But if men will live wicked and ungodly lives, there is another
Text not far off, Psalm. 99. 1.
that does rather belong to them; The Lord reigns, let the People tremble:
Every wicked man while he continues such, has reason to fear, rather than to
rejoice in the Providence of God: For let it be considered,

1. Only he who is in Gods way, may hope for Gods blessing: When men will walk
contrary to God, why should they hope but that God will walk contrary to them:
Must he be the darling Levit. 26.
of Providence, who scorns to submit to God, but in pride and stubbornness
contemns his Laws? Who may flatter himself as if he were in a secure Station,
who may presume that God is on his side, while he notoriously withdraws himself
from obedience to his Commands. He who waits on the Lord, and keeps his way,
may hope well; but to forsake God, is the way to be forsaken of him. No man may
rejoice in confidence that God will always watch over him for good, who by
running out of the way of a good life, discharges Providence from taking any
farther care of him.

2. Who may rejoice in Gods Providence, that can make no Title to his Promises?
God is holy, and just, and true, what he has promised he will perform; But unto
the wicked God Psalm. 50.
says, What have thou to do to take my Covenant into thy mouth? There are
Curses in the Holy Scripture as well as Blessings; and for the same reason that
Religious and Holy Men hope well, that God will be merciful to them, because he
will be true to his word; I say, for the same reason may wicked men tremble:
God is angry with the wicked every day; and he will be faithful* Psalm. 7.
to his Threatenings as well as to his Promises. How then should they tremble
who despise the Authority of God, who forfeit all that goodness and kindness by
which they live, who are every moment obnoxious to Almighty Power, who enjoy no
Accommodations in this life, but only by the long-suffering and patience of
God, which how soon it may expire, no man can tell; who if they continue in
this sinful state must be miserable, or God must lie, who has told them so? Let
these things be well considered, and then let wicked men say, whether that
Doctrine of our Religion, which affords such unspeakable comfort and
satisfaction to holy and good men, be not otherwise very terrible; and so much
the more, because he who cannot take comfort in the Providence of God, has
nothing else to rejoice in; for all other things are under the dominion of
Providence, and controulable by it. The greatness of his Fortune, the multitude
of his Riches, the abundance of his Pleasures, are all in the hand and power of
God, who can easily curse the blessings of men, so that their very lives and
all that was pleasurable in them, shall be bitterness and a burden to them.

This is a sad Argument so far as it reflects upon particular persons, to whom
while they continue in their Impieties, the thoughts of God must needs be
terrible: But if we consider farther, what influence growing wickedness has
upon public Calamities, it will administer more sad thoughts to us. We have
been awakened to a sense of danger from an Enemy restless and daring, we have
prayed many and many a time, that God would abate their Pride, assuage their
Malice, and confound their Devices; and hitherto God has been merciful to us:
But shall I be bold to say, there is another Plot against the King, against the
Government, and against our established Religion: I say, another Plot less
feared, but not less dangerous: Every wicked man is a Traitor to his Prince and
Country, and by his doing wickedly provokes 1 Samuel 12.
God to consume him and his King. Every common Drunkard, every bold Swearer,
every lascivious and unclean Person, every dishonest Trader, who postpones his
Religion to Twopence of unjust gain; every man that allows himself in a wicked
course of life, is in conspiracy for the ruin of this Nation.

The Church of England, the worthy labors of whose eminent Divines, have made
the Papists weary of disputing with them; the Church of England, whose regular
Reformation is as strong a bulwark* against the encroachments of Popery, as any
is this day in Christendom; the Church of England who stands her ground, and
maintains the very same Articles of Religion, that it did above an hundred
years ago, and who has not by any Rubric, or Canon, or Constitution since
those times, corrupted our well-Reformed Religion; yet this once glorious
Church sometimes the Terror of her Enemies and the Envy of her Neighbors,
cannot escape the Censures of malevolent men: Instead of taking the advice that
was here lately given, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same Rule, let us mind the same thing. Instead of uniting as far as we can,
some there are that take a pleasure in reporting us to make advances toward
Rome.

Alas! There is another piece of Popery, in which the Nation does indeed
advance; I mean in the Licentiousness of our Morals. They by their Doctrines of
easy Confessions, ready Dispensations and plenary Indulgences, tempt men to be
securely wicked: But how many among us practice as if they believed the same
Doctrine? Were we as reformed in our Lives, as we are in our Established
Doctrines (for there is no reason the Church of England should be responsible
for all that particular men may rashly say) But I say, were our Lives as
sincere and incorrupt as our Established Doctrines, we would fear neither Rome
nor Hell. The Providence of God would be a wall of fire round about us: God
would defend this City and this Nation, and would save it for his Name's sake:
He would hear the Prayer we this day make, and would still keep us under the
Protection of his good Providence. But if neither Plagues nor Fires: If neither
Wars nor Conspiracies will reform us; though religious and holy men may hope
well, that God will never cast them off, but whatever befall them, the good
hand of God shall be upon them, and therefore they rejoice because the Lord
Reigns: Yet all wicked men have as much reason to tremble in dread of the
displeasure of Almighty God.

What then remains, but that we should search and try our ways: What are we,
and how do we live? If we endeavor to serve and please God, then will God
watch over us for good; and then all the Comforts of this World are not
comparable to the satisfaction we may take in this, that the* Lord our God, who
loves us and has a kindness for us, that he Reigns in the World. It is a word
too big for a Heathen,

Horat. Carm. lib. 3.
Si fractus illabatur Orbis
Impavidum feriunt ruinae.
Nay, every pious good Christian cannot reach Saint Paul's triumphant
unconcernedness, who says, None of these things move me, neither Acts 20.
count I my life dear to my self.

But this our Religion teaches us to aspire to, and as we grow strong in the
Faith, we shall with the greater Constancy of Mind, resign our wills and our
enjoyments, and our designs to the wise disposals of God, and if we be true to
our Religion, we shall always rejoice that we are under his care.

But if our Consciences reproach us, that we take no heed to walk in the ways
of God; then woe be to us, that dare contend with the Almighty. We are then
upon our good behavior in this matter. God will be to us a Friend or an Enemy;
we shall inherit a Blessing or a Curse, according as we obey or as we contemn
God.

Thus I have set before you Life and Death, a Blessing and a Curse. Choose you
this day whether or no you will serve God; but according as you choose, as you
do so God will requite you. Judge. 1.


The Lord Reigns, let the Wicked tremble. The Lord Reigns, let the Righteous
rejoice.

FINIS.
The Reverend Author has lately Published a Treatise Entitled,

A Discourse of Superstition, with respect to the present Times, wherein the
Church of England, is Vindicated from the Imputation, and the Charge retorted
not only on the Papists, but also on men of other Persuasions.

Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.


