CERTAIN PROPOSALS FOR Regulating the Law, to make the same more plain and
easy to be understood, and less Chargeable and expensive then heretofore.
FIrst, I take for an undeniable principle, that the Law which so much
concerns every man, ought not to be a Mystery, but as much as possible be
made most pros^icuous and evident to the meanest capacity, nothing being more
unjust then for a man to be judged by a law of which he was unavoydably
ignorant. For if we consider the rise and original of all Laws, because men
knew not when they did well, when they did evil, what was theirs what not
theirs; they instituted Laws to the end every man might know his Duty and the
penalty of transgressing. Moreover, it is a maxim in our own Law, that
ignorance thereof excuses no man, but every man is presumed to be conusant
thereof. And it is a true saying, Misera est servitus ubi jus est vagum aut
incognitum, It is a miserable slavery where the Law is uncertain or unknown; a
wonder it was to all wise men even to the ingenuous of the Professors of the
Law themselves, that the Law should be kept so close locked up in an unknown
tongue, when the reason why the Laws were first written in that brackish
French, was because that Language was then best understood of those whom those
laws most concerned (viz.) the Normans.

Therefore blessed be God, it has been and still is the Wisdom and Integrity
of the PARLIAMENT, to make the Laws so plain and obvious to every
understanding, that every man might know his duty and his property.

The Laws of this Land are either Criminal or Civil; as for the criminal
Laws they are not so many or mysterious, but with a little study a man may
attain to a competent knowledge thereof; but for the Civil laws, especially
those which concern Lands, they are infinitely Intricate, mystical, and
expensive. Now because when a Disease is known it is half cured, that which I
conceive is the cause thereof, is multiplicity and diversity of Tenures, and
Conveyances, together with the secret and clandestine making of Conveyances.
There are not so little as Ten several ways whereby men may convey estates of
Inheritance, upon every of which depends such innumerable quirkes and
intricacies, all of them having several operations, that men which make it
their whole studies all their lives long, can hardly if at all come to some
reasonable knowledge thereof.

Now that which I propose for the Remedy of this evil is --
1. THat all Estates of Inheritances as well Freehold as Copyhold, might be
but of one Tenure, to wit, Fee simple. Entailes, my L. Cook being Judge,
having so fettered and entangled men's Estates, that infinite are the
controversies which do ari^e thereupon. And to the end no man might be a looser
hereby nor any man's Property destroyed, certain Commissioners not of the same
County might be authorized to Assign and apportion to every Lord of Manor,
some part of the Tenancy in liew of his chief Rents, Heriots, and proquisites
of Courts, etc. in case the Lord and Tenant did not agree between themselves.

2. That there might be but one kind of Conveyance for all Estates of
Inheritance (viz.) a Feofment in fee executed with Livery and Seisin, or
atturnment and intolement in the proper County.

3. That every Lease longer then for Seven years, and all Wills that concern
Lands, should be by writing to be enrolled likewise as aforesaid.

If this were done, I am persuaded the Law --
1. Would be reduced into one considerable volume, which now a small Library
does not contain; and there being but one Tenure and one kind of Conveyance,
every man almost without Herculaean labor might attain to some competent
knowledge thereof. And I would gladly know, why there should be so many sorts
of Conveyances when one will serve the turn; unless it be to make the Law
more mystical.

Frustra fit per p^ura quod fieri possit per pauc(...)ora.

2. The excessive expense and chargeable ceremonies of Fines and Recoveries,
would be saved.

If in like manner all Conveyances were enrolled, then would there be plain
dealing above-boord, the Commonwealth (1.) should be sure of their Escheats
and forfeitures upon any Treason committed or otherwise.

2. Purchasers should deal upon sure grounds, and not purchase a multitude of
suites and troubles, in stead of an estate.

3. Farmers should be sure of their bargains, when they are sure their
Landlords have good estates.

4. Creditors should be sure of their Debts, whereas now men of very great
estates in Lands, so convey and entangle them, that a Creditor can take no
advantage against them.

5. Men upon Marriages of their Daughters shall be much more sure of
Joinctures; and in general, in all Contracts and bargains there would be
much more certainty, which is the mother of quiet and repose; whereas now who
sees not the innumerable controversies do arise upon secret and clandestine
Conveyances: also what abundance of Suites are commenced upon supposition that
they have right but cannot come to know the certainty, because they can not
come to sight of Evidence. How many poor Widows, Orphans, and others loose
their right by reason their Evidences are imbezeled. These and many more
mischiefs would be remedied by inrolement of Conveyances in the County.

Now next of all let us consider what may be the Inconveniences which may
arise hereupon.

And first it may be objected, that for Copy-holds the alteration would be
very great; and that all Copie-holds pass by Surrender which do amount to
as much as the Inrolement mentioned.

For answer thereunto it is confessed, That Copie-hold Estates by reason
thereof, are not liable to fraudulent Conveyances, and therefore there do not
so many suites arise concerning Copie-holds as of Freehold. Yet
notwithstanding, they being not extendible for Debts (which is a thing very
unreasonable in my judgment, that a man should have any Estate not liable to
the payment of his Debts) but chiefly, because they retain in them as yet more
of Villenage and slavery, by reason of the arbitrary Fines, Herriots, Oaths,
and suites of Court due to the Lord then is well consistent with the Freedom
and liberty of Englishmen. And to the end the Law might be the more easy and
plain to be understood, and all occasions of Controversies as much as possible
might be removed. J suppose it best that as aforesaid, all Estates of
Inheritance of Copie-hold might be made free, and all lesser Estates made
only liable to certain Rents, as of Freehold lands.

2. It may be objected, That it would be inconvenient to take away Entailes,
whereby some would loose the benefit of Reversions after those estates ended.
As to that we know every Tenant intayl at this day may at his pleasure make it
Fee-simple. And for any thing else may be said therein, my Lord Cook in his
first Institutes, fol. 19. b. shall answer for me in these words. (When all
Estates were Fee-simple, then were Purchasers sure of their Purchases, Farmers
of their Leases, Creditors of their Debts, the King and Lords had their
Escheates, Forfeitures, Wardships, and other profits of their Seigniories; and
for these and for other like causes, by the wisdom of the Common Law, all
Estates of inheritance were Fee-simple; and what Contentions and mischtefes
have crept into the quiet of the Law by these fettered Inheritances, daily
Experience teaches us.) So that for this change there is a sufficient
President, the ancient Common Law of this Land, and the advice of him who knew
the Laws of this land as well as most that ever studied the same, (viz.) the
Lord Cook.

Then also concerning the Inrolments aforesaid, --
1. It may be objected, That a man cannot borrow money upon a Morgage without
letting the Country know thereof; now as for that J conceive it no great
matter, if he that is rich be so esteemed, and he that is poor be so
reputed.

2. But then the maine objection will be, There be many Conveyances which if
examined would be found defective, whereby Estates which have long continued in
a Family might be carried away to others. which in stead of ending
Controversies would beget new.

For answer to which, that admit it were so, yet that would be but only for
the present, and after the first Suit it would be settled for Posterity.
Moreover, it would but help those to possession to whom the Law had given most
right.

But for remedy of such like Inconveniences, was a profitable Statute made in
the 21. year of King James, (viz.) That after 20. years quiet Possession, no
action should be commenced, unless in case of Infancy, Coverture, or the
like; which Statute if it were enlarged and put in execution would salve that
sore sufficiently.

The next Proposal for to remedy delays in Suites* and to take away excessive
Charge; is to take away Arrests in the beginning of suites. It would require a
volume of it self to show the excessive expense* the great delays of Justice,
the briberies and extortion by Sheriffs and Bayliffes, the batteries,
barbarous cruelties, and many times Murders, and many other inconveniences
which do flow from this wicked fountain of Arrests.

As for Example; a Nobleman or Great man, owes me 10, or 20. l. perhaps for
wages or some other thing, for twice it may beeten times my debt, J cannot get
him arrested, and until he be arrested J can never so much as proceed in my
suite; and if after disbursement of a great sum, J get him apprehended I
shall have some five shillings allowed toward it by the Court. So if a man
live in some Privileged places, or rather which usurp such privileges there
they secure themselves, and be their Estates never so great can by no means
be laid hold on to pay their just debts. It would be too tedious to give
instances of sculking wandering persons, and of some that secure themselves by
the company of lewd and desperate fellows, that they can not be apprehended
without abundance of charge and oftentimes danger of life; these Mischiefs are
so well known that I need not further set them forth. I appeal to many men's
experience, whether if the arrest of diverse persons would not cost them more
then all the charges of Suite besides, nay and their proper Debts to boot; and
how many years men may wait through the corruption of under-Sheriffes and
their Bayliffes, before they can get a Debtor arrested, when if they were once
taken the suite would come to Execution in three quarters of a year at most
without much charge.

Now for remedy hereof, J suppose a sufficient Summons might serve turn well
enough, and so in default of not Answering, the Plaintiff upon proof and
evidence-given might proceed to Judgment and Execution. For my own part I
confess. I see no satisfactory reason but that every man, as well as Tradesmen,
might be brought within the Statute of Banckrupts. All that ever a Tradesman
has must be sold to pay his Debts; and why other men's Estates who are as
justly indebted, as they, should not; in true reason I do not understand. The
Law seems to me, too mild and remiss against the estates of Debtors, and
against their persons as much too rigid and severe.

Another Proposal is, that Experience does show what very great delays and
intolerable charges arise, from being tossed from Court to Court, (viz.) from
Chancery to Common Law, and so back again; nay, J am persuaded that not one
cause of ten, especially if of any consequence, but first or last comes into
the Chancery merely for delays; by which means peaceable minded men, will
rather give away half their right then be troubled to sue for it.

Now the remedy hereof, I suppose might be to empower the Common Law Courts
with equitable Jurisdiction, that the same Court might as well determine the
Equity, as the Law of every case.

Another thing very necessary would be, That the Act for relief of Debtors
might extend to persons which now are, or hereafter shall be Imprisoned.

Lastly, it were to be wished, That the Committee for the Regulating of the
Law, would procure some learned in the Laws who might be well Fee'd for their
pains, to argue and set forth before them the Inconveniences on the one side
with the profit, and commodity on the other which may arise on these or the
like Alterations their work would be much more easy, and they themselves the
better able to ponder and judge what is fit to be done; it would not be Time,
labor, or money ill spent, to procure good and wholesome Laws for our selves
and Posterity.

Finis.

