THESES SABBATICAE. OR, THE DOCTRINE OF THE Sabbath: WHEREIN The Sabbaths I.
Morality. II. Change. III. Beginning. IV. Sanctification. are clearly discussed.

Which were first handled more largely in sundry SERMONS in Cambridg in
New England in opening of the fourth COMMANDMENT.

In unfolding whereof many Scriptures are cleared, diverse Cases of Conscience
resolved, and the Moral Law as a rule of life to a Believer, occasionally and
distinctly handled.

By THOMAS SHEPARD, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England.

What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? did not
your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon
this City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath.

Nehem. 13 17, 18. If ye hallow the Sabbath to do no work therein, then shall
there enter into the gates of this City Kings and Princes.

Jer. 17.24.25. London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Rothwell. Sun and
Fountain in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

THE Preface OF THE AUTHOR To the READER.
THat a seventh part of time has been religiously and universally observed
both under the Law and under the Gospel, is without all controversy; the great
doubt and difficulty which now remains concerning this Time, is the Morality
of it, whether it was thus universally observed in the Christian Churches by
unwritten Tradition, or by Divine Commission; Whether from the Churches Custom
or Christ's Command. Whether as a Moral Duty, or as a Humane Law; for although
some would make ^he observation of such a portion of time the sour fruit of
the Ebionites superstitious Doctrines, yet all the Ancient and best Writers in
the purest times do give such honor to it, that whoever doubts of it must
either be utterly ignorant, or wilfully blinded in the knowledge of the
Histories and Doctrines of those times; and must desire a Candle to show him
the Sun at noone day: Clemens only seems to cast some stain upon it by
making all days equal, and every day a Sabbath; but upon narrow search, his
meaning may appear, not to deny the observation of the day, but only to blame
the froth and vanity of sundry Christians, who, if they externally observed the
day, they cared not how they lived every day after: nor is it to be wondered at,
if Origin turn this day sometime into an Allegory and a continual spiritual
Rest-day, who miserably transformes (many times) the plainest Scriptures into
such shapes, and turns their substance into such shadows, and beating out the
best of the Kernels, feeds his guests with such chafe and husks; and although
many other Festivals were observed by those times, which may make the Sabbath
suspected to be borne out of the same womb of humane custom with the rest, yet
we shall find the seventh days Rest to have another Crown of glory set upon
the had of it by the holy me^n of God in those times then upon those which
superstition so soon hatched and brought forth, so that they that read the
Histories of those times in observing two Sabbaths in some places, Easter,
Whitsunday, yea diverse Ethnic and Heathenish days, will need no other comment
on those texts of Paul, wherein he condemns the observation of Days; which
beginning to fly abroad in the day light of the Apostles, might well outface
the succeeding ages, and multiply with more authority in darker times; yet so,
as that the seventh days rest (call it what you will) still kept its place and
ancient glory, as in the sequel shall appear.

When therefore the good will of him who dwelt in the burning bush of the
afflicted Primitive Churches, gave Princes and Emperors to be their nursing
fathers; pious Constantine among other Christian Edicts, injoynes the
observation of the Lords Day: wherein (if he was bound by his place to be a
nourishing father) he went not beyond his Commission, in swaddling and
cherishing this truth and appointment of Christ, and not suffering it to dye
and perish through the wickedness of men; the power of Princes extending to
see Christ's Laws observed, though not to impose any humane inventions and
Church constitutions of their own. Its true indeed that this Princely Edict was
mixed with some imperfection and corruption, it following too short in some
things, and extending too far in others; but there is no just cause for any to
stumble much at this, that knows the sick head and heart by the weak and
feeble pulse and crasie temper of those clouted, though otherwise triumphing
times.

The Successors of this man-child (borne out of the long and weary throws of
the poor traveling Church) were enlarged generally in their care and
conscience to preserve the religious honor due to this day, until the time of
Charles the Great, who in the latter end of his reign observing how greatly the
Sabbath was profaned (especially by the continuance and lewdness of
Churchmen) did therefore call five National Councels (which I need not here
mention) in all which the Sabbath is advanced to as strict observation to the
full, as has been of late years condemned by some in the Sabbatarian
Reformers: that it is a wonder how any man should cast off all shame, and so
far forget himself, as to make the Sabbath a device of Fulco, or Peter Bruis,
Eustachius, or the Book at Golgotha, and put the Visor of Novelty upon the aged
face of it, as if it were scarce known to any of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's
time, but receiving strength and growth from Master Perkins, was first hatched
and received life from under the wings of a few late Disciplinarian Zelots.

And it cannot be denied but that the Sabbath (like many other precious
appointments and truths of God) did shake off her dust, and put on her comely
and beautiful garments, and has been much honored and magnified since the
times of the Reformation; the doctrine and darkness of Popery (like that of
the Pharisees) not only obscuring the Doctrine of Faith, but also of the Law
and obedience of Faith, and so has obscured this of the Sabbath; only herein
they did excel their forefathers the Scribes and Pharisees, for these added
their own superstitious resting from things needful and lawful to their
merely external observation of the day; but they (unto their eternal
observation of the name of the Day) added their abominable prophanations to it,
in May-games and May-poles, in sports and pastimes, in dancing and revellings,
and so laid it level, and made it equal (in a manner) to the rest of their
Holy days; that as they came to shuffle out the second Commandment almost out
of the Decalogue, so in time they came to be blinded with that horror of
darkness, as to translate the words of the Commandment into some of their
Catechismes, Remember to keep the Holy Festivals, and therefore those Worthies
of the Reformation who have contended for all that honor which is due to this
day, are unjustly aspersed for pleading for a jewish and superstitious
strictness, when the cause they handle is no other in truth, then to vindicate
the Sabbath both in the Doctrine and observation of it from Papists
profaneness; and therefore all the world may see that under pretense of
opposing in others a kind of Iudaizing upon this day, the adversaries of it do
nothing else but maintain a gross point of practical Popery, who are by Law
most ignorant and gross prophaners of this day, and therefore when many of
Christ's servants are branded and condemned for placing so much of Religion in
the observation of this day, and yet Bishop White and some others of them shall
acknowledge as much as they plead for, if other* Festivals be taken in with it
ordained by the Church, (as that they are the Nursery of Religion and all
virtue, a means of planting Faith and saving knowledge, of heavenly and
temporal blessings, and the profanation of them hateful to God and all good
men that fear God* and to be punished in those which shall offend) they do
hereby plainly hold forth* what market they drive to, and what spirit acts them
in setting up man's posts by Gods Pillars, and in giving equal honor to other
Festivals and Holy days, which those whom they oppose do maintain as due to
the Sabbath alone, upon better grounds.

The Day star from on high visiting the first Reformers in Germany enabled them
to see many things, and so to scatter much, yea most of the Popish and horrible
darkness which generally overspread the face of all Europe at that day; but
diverse of them did not (as well they might not) see all things with the like
clearness, whereof this of the Sabbath has seemed to be one: their chief
difficulty lay here; they saw a Moral command for a seventh day, and yet
withal a Change of that first seventh day, and hence thought that something in
it was Moral in respect of the Command, and yet something Ceremonial because
of the Change: and therefore they issued their thoughts here, that (...) was
partly Moral and partly Ceremonial, and hence their observation of the day
has been (answerable to their judgments) more lax and loose; whose arguments
to prove the day partly Ceremonial, have (upon narrow examination) made it
wholly Ceremonial; it being the usual unhappiness of such arguments as are
produced in defense of a lesser Error, to grow big with some man-child in
them, which in time grows up; and so serve only to maintain a far greater;
and hence by that part of the controversy they have laid foundations of much
loosnesse upon that day among themselves, and have unawares laid the corner
stones of some gross points of Familisme, and strengthened hereby the hands of
Arminians, Malignants and Prelates, as to profane the Sabbath, so to make use
of their Principles for the introduction of all humane inventions under the
name and shadow of the Church; which if it has power to authorize and
establish such a day of worship: let any man living then name what invention he
can, but that it may much more easily be ushered in upon the same ground: and
therefore though posterity has cause for ever to admire Gods goodness for
that abundance of light and life poured out by those vessels of glory in the
first beginnings of Reformation, yet in this narrow of the Sabbath it is no
wonder if they stepped a littele beside the truth; and it is to be charitably
hoped and believed, that had they then foreseen what ill use some in after ages
would make of their Principles, they would have been no otherwise minded then
some of their followers and friends especially in the Churches of Scotland and
England, who might well see alittle farther (as they use to speak) when they
stood upon such tall men's shoulders.

Its easy to demonstrate by Scripture and argument as well as by experience,
that Religion is just as the Sabbath is, and decays and grows as the Sabbath
is esteemed: the immediate honor and worship of God which is brought forth and
swadled in the three first Commandments, is nursed up and suckled in the bosom
of the Sabbath: if Popery will have gross ignorance and blind devotion
continued among its miserable captives, let it then be made (like the other
Festivals) a merry and a sporting Sabbath; if any State would reduce the people
under it to the Romish Faith and blind obedience again, let them erect (for
lawful pastimes and sports) a dancing Sabbath; if the God of this world would
have all Professors enjoy a total immunity from the Law of God, and all
manner of Licentiousness allowed them without check of Conscience, let him
then make an every-day Sabbath: if there has been more of the power of
godliness appearing in that small enclosure of the British Nation then in
those vast continents elsewhere, where Reformation and more exact
Church Discipline have taken place, it cannot well be imputed to any outward
means more, then their excelling care and conscience of honoring the Sabbath
and although Master Rogers in his Preface to the 39. Articles injuriously and
wretchedly makes the strict observation of the Sabbath the last refuge of lies
by which stratagem the godly Ministers in former times being drive^ out of al
their other strong holds, did hope in time to drive out the Prelacy and bring
in again their Discipline; yet thus much may be gathered from the mouth of
such an accuser that the worship and government of the Kingdom and Church of
Christ Jesus is accordingly set forward as the Sabbath is honored; Prelacy,
Popery, Profaneness must down and shall down in time, if the Sabbath be exactly
kept.

But why the Lord Christ should keep his servants in England and Scotland to
clear up and vindicate this point of the Sabbath, and welcome it with more
Love then some precious ones in foreign Churches, no man can imagine any
other cause then Gods own Free Grace and tender Love, whose wind blows where
and when it will; Deus nobis haec otia fecit, and the times are coming wherein
Gods work will better declare the reason of this and some other discoveries by
the British Nation, which modesty and humility would forbid all sober minds to
make mention of now.

That a seventh days rest has (therefore) been of universal observation is
without controversy; the Morality of it (as has been said) is now the
controversy; in the Primitive times when the Question was propounded Servasti
Dominicum? have thou kept the Lords Day? their answer was generally this,
Christianus sum, intermittere non possum; i. I am a Christian, I cannot neglect
it: the observation of this day was the badge of their Christianity. This was
their practice; but what their judgment was about the Morality of it is not
safe to enquire from the tractates of some of our late Writers in this
controversy; for it is no wonder if they that thrust the Sabbath out of
Paradise, and banish it out of the world until Moses time, and then make it a
mere ceremony all his time till Christ's Ascension, if since that time they
bring it a peg lower, and make it to be a humane Constitution of the Church,
rather then any Divine Institution of Christ Jesus; and herein, those that
oppose the Morality of it by dint of argument, and out of candor and conscience
propose their grounds on which they remain unsatisfied, I do from my heart
both highly and heartily honor, and especially the labors of Master Primrose
and Master Ironside, many of whose Arguments and Answers to what is usually
said in defense of the Morality of the day, who ever ponders them, shall find
them heavy; the foundations and sinews of whose discourses I have therefore
had a special eye to in the ensuing Theses, with a most free submission of
what is here returned in answer thereto, to the censure of better minds and
riper thoughts, being verily persuaded that whoever finds no Knots or
Difficulties to humble his spirit herein, either knows not himself, or not the
Controversy: but as for those whose chief arguments are reproaches and
revilings of embittered and corrupt hearts, rather then solid reasons of modest
minds; I wholly decline the pursuit of such creatures whose weapons is their
swell, and not any strength, and do leave them to his tribunal who judges
righteously, for blearing the eyes of the world, and endeavoring to exasperate
Princes, and make wise men believe that this Doctrine of the Sabbath is but a
late Novelty, a Doctrine tending to a high degree of Schism, a phanatick
Iudaizing, like his at Tewksbury Sabbata sancta colo. i. e. a piece of
Disciplinary Policy to advance Presbytery, a superstitious seething over of the
hot or whining simplicity of an over-rigid, crabbed, precise, crack-brain'd
Puritanicall party: the righteous God has his little days of judgment in this
life to clear up and vindicate the righteous cause of his innocent servants
against all gainsayers, and who sees not (but those that will be blind) that
the Lord has begun to do something this way by these late broils? the
controversy God has with a Land, is many times in defense of the
controversies of his faithful Witnesses, the sword maintains argument, and
makes way for that which the Word could not; those plants which (not many years
since) most men would not believe not to be of Gods planting) has the Lord
pulled up: the three innocent Firebrarnds so fast tied to some Foxes tails, are
now pretty well quenched, and the tails almost cut off; this cause of the
Sabbath also the Lord Jesus is now handling; God has cast down the Crowns of
Princes, stained the Robes of Nobles with dirt and blood; broken the Croziers,
and torn the Miters in pieces for the controversy of his Sabbath, Jer. 17.27.
he has already made way for his Discipline also (which they feared the precise
Sabbath would introduce again) by such a way as has made all hearts to ache,
just according to the words never to be forgotten, of Mr. Udal in his Preface
to the Demonstration of Discipline. The Council of Matiscon imputed the
irruption of the Goths into the Empire, to the profanation of the Sabbath.
Germany may now see, (or else one day they shall see) that one great cause of
their troubles is, that the Sabbath wanted its Rest, in the days of their
quietness. England was at rest, till they troubled Gods Sabbath. The Lord
Jesus must reign; the Government of his House, the Laws of his Kingdom, the
Solemn days of his worship must be established; the cause of his suffering and
afflicted servants (not of our late religious scorners at Ordinances, Laws and
Sabbaths) who are now at rest from their labors, but in former times wept, and
prayed and petitioned, and preached and writ, and suffered, and dyed for these
things, and are now crying under the Altar, must and shall certainly be cleared
before men and Angels: Heaven and earth shall pass away, before one tittle of
the Law (much less a whole Sabbath) shall perish.

But while I am thus musing, me thinks no measure of tears are sufficient to
lament the present state of times, that when the Lord Jesus was come forth to
vindicate the cause and controversy of Sion, there should rise up other
Instruments of spiritual wickednesses in high places, to blot out the name and
sweet remembrance of this Day from off the face of the earth; the enemies of
the Sabbath are now not so much malignant time-servers, and aspiring brambles
whom preferment principally biased to knock at the Sabbath; but those who have
eaten bread with Christ, (a generation of professing people) do lift up their
heel against his Sabbath: so that what could not formerly be done against it by
Angels of darkness the old Serpent takes another course to effect it by seeming
Angels of light; who by a new device are raised up to build the sepulchers of
those who persecuted the Prophets in former times, and to justify all the
books of sports, and the reading of them yea all the former and present
profanations, yea scoffs and scorns against the Sabbath day. For as in former
times they have Ceremonialized it out of the Decalogue, yet by humane
constitution have retained it in the Church; so these of later times have
spritualized it out of the Decalogue, ye out of of all the Churches in the
world. For by making the Christian Sabbath to be only a spiritual Sabbath in
the bosom of God out of Heb. 4. they hereby abolish a seventh days Sabbath,
and make every day equally a Sabbath to a Christian man. This I hope will be
the last, but it is the most specious and fairest color and banner that ever
was erected to fight under against the Christian Sabbath; and is most fit to
deceive not only some sudden men of loose and wanton wits, but especially men
of spiritual, but too shallow minds. In times of Light (as these are reputed
to be) Satan comes not abroad usually to deceive with fleshly and gross
forgeries, and his cloven foot, (for every one almost would then discern his
haltings) but with more mystical, yet strong delusions, and invisible chains
of darkness, whereby he binds his captives the faster to the judgment of the
great day. And therefore the watchword given in the bright and shining times of
the Apostle, was, to Try the Spirits; and, Believe not every Spirit; And take
heed of Spirits, who indeed were only fleshly and corrupt men, yet called
Spirits, because they pretended to have much of the Spirit, and their doctrines
seemed only to advance the Spirit; the fittest and fairest cobwebs to deceive
and entangle the world in those discerning times, that possible could be spun
out of the poysonfull bowels of corrupt and ambitious wit.

The times are now come, wherein by the refined mystical divinity of the old
Monks, not only the Sabbath, but also all the Ordinances of Christ in the
New Testament are allegorized and spirituallized out of the world: And
therefore it is no marvel when they abolish the outward Sabbath because of a
spiritual Sabbath in Christ, if (through Gods righteous judgment blinding
their hearts) they be also left to reject the outward Word, because of an
inward wo^d to teach them; and outward Baptism and Lords Supper, because of an
inward Baptism by the Holy Ghost and spiritual Bread from Heaven the Lord
Christ Jesus; and all outward Ordinances, Ministries, Churches, because of an
inward Kingdom and Temple: and the Argument will hold strongly, that if
because they have an inward Sabbath of Rest in the bosom of Christ (which I
deny not) that they may therefore cast away all external Sabbaths, they may
then very well reject all outward Baptism, Lords Supper, all Churches, all
Ordinances, because herein there is also the inward Baptism, spiritual
feeding upon Christ and inward Kingdom and Temple of God. But thus they
wickedly separate and sever what God has joined and may well stand together,
through the madness of which hellish practice I have long observed almost all
the late and most pernicious errors of these times arise; and those men who
have formerly wept for Gods precious Sabbaths and Ordinances, and have prayed
for them, and pleaded for them, and have offered their lives in sacrifice for
them, and fought for them, yea, that have felt perhaps the comfort, sweetness,
and blessing of Gods Sabbaths, yea the redeeming and saving-power of Gods
Ordinances to their own souls; yet through pretenses of more spiritual
enjoyments above, and beyond, and without all these, they can part with these
their old friends without weeping, and reject them as polluted rags, and
fleshly forms, and dark vailes and curtains which must be drawn aside, that
so they may not hinder the true Light from shining in them.

This therefore is the reason why the love of man^ at this day is grown cold
toward the external Sabbath; because the internal and spiritual Sabbath is
now all in all: And therefore many men walk either with bold consciences, and
will observe no Sabbath; or else with loose consciences, thinking it lawful to
observe it (if men will enjoin it) but no^ thinking that they are tied and
bound thereunto from any precept of God. That place of Hebrews 4. which they so
much stick to* wants not light to demonstrate that the Sabbatisme there may
well agree not only with the internal, but the outward Christian Sabbath: but
some of the ensuing Theses will serve to clear up these things. This only I
fear; that because of these indignites done thus to Gods Sabbaths even by the
under-workings of some of Gods own people, that the time hastens, wherein if
no man should speak, yet the right hand of the sore displeasure of a provoked
God by plagues and confusion upon the glory of all flesh, will plead for his
own Name, and for that in special which is engraven upon the forehead of his
holy Sabbaths. Jerusalem remembered with regret of heart, in the days of her
affliction and misery, all her pleasant things, and especially this of the
Sabbath, Lam. 1.7. If the days of our rest and quietness cannot make us to
relish the good things of his Temple in the fruition of our Sabbaths; then
doubt not of it, but that the days of our affliction shall make a remnant to
remember that they were pleasant things: of all the mercies of God to Israel,
this is reckoned to be one of the greatest, that he gave his Laws to Israel,
Psalm. 147.19, 20. And of all Laws, this of the Sabbath; (For so the remnant of
the Captivity acknowledged it, Nehem. 9.14. who perhaps had far lower thoughts
of it before their bondage. And if the very making of it known be such a sweet
mercy, what then is the rest and peace of it, the blessing and comfort of it?
for which I doubt not but many thousands are admiring God in heaven at this
day. And shall a shady imagination of an Every-day-sabbath, make us sell away
for nothing such a heavenly and precious season, and make it common? The Lord
Jesus wished his Disciples to pray that their flight from Jerusalem might not be
in winter, nor on the Sabbath Day, Matthew. 24.20. accounting it a great misery,
that his people should lose the public benefit (through the disturbance of
any) of one Sabbath Day; (for be it Jewish or Christian Sabbath, I now dispute
not; sure I am it was a Sabbath Day, which it seems was to continue after
Christ's Ascension to the Father, and therefore not wholly ceremonial) And shall
we account it no affliction or misery to fight or fly, to ride or go, to work
or play, to hear the Word in public, or stay at home upon the Sabbath Day? Is
it no mercy in these days to enjoy many Sabbaths, which was so sore a misery
in Christ's account, and in the Apostles days to lose but one? if man's heart be
lost in the necessary cumbers of the week, (upon the Sabbath) the Lord is wont
to recall it again to him; if any fear that the time of Grace is past, the
continuance of the Sabbaths, (the special seasons of grace) confutes him; if a
man's soul be wearied with daily griefs and outward troubles, the bosom of
Jesus Christ (which is in special wise opened every Lords day) may refresh
him; and shall we have and profess so little love to such a time, (more
precious then gold to humbled hearts) as to cast away such a rich portion of
precious time, and make it common under a pretense of making every day a
Sabbath, which is either impossible to do* or sinful: the loudest voice (one
of them of the love of Christ, which now sounds in the world continually in the
years of his people, is this, Come into my bosom ye weary sinners and enjoy
your rest; and the next voice to that is this of the Sabbath to call us off
from all occasions, and then to say to us, Come to me my people, and rest in my
bosom of sweetest mercy all this day: Which call would not be a mercy, if it
were every day; for then our own occasions must be neglected, which the wise
and fatherly providence of God forbids; and spiritual work only minded and
intended, which God did never command: Nor should any marvel that the voice of
the Law should contain such a voice of Love, and therefore should not think
that this controversy about the Law (or for this one law of the Sabbath is
unfit and unsuitable to these Evangelicall and Gospel times: for although the
Law is dreadful and full of terror as considered without Christ, and is to
man fallen a voice of words and a voice of terror and fear, which genders
unto bondage; yet as it is revealed with reference to Christ, and a people in
Christ, so every Commandment does spirare amorem (as he speaks) and breaths out
Christ's love, for which the Saints cannot but bless the Lord with everlasting
wonderment that ever he made them to know these heart-secrets of his good will
and love, especially then when he writes them in their hearts, and thereby
gives unto them the comfort thereof. And verily if it be such a sweet voice of
love to call us in to this Rest of the day, certainly if ever the Enlish Nation
be deprived of these seasons (which God in mercy forbid) it will be a black
appearance of God against them in the days of their distress, when he shall
seem to shut them out of his Rest in his bosom by depriving them of the Rest
of this day. What will ye do in the solemn day, in the day of the feast of the
Lord? For lo they are gone because of destruction; Egypt shall gather them,
Memphis shall bury them, their ^ilver shall be desired, nettles shall possess
them; thorns shall be in their Tabernacles; the days of visitation are come,
the days of recompense are come, Israel shall know it; the Prophet is a fool,
the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great
hatred. Hos. 9.5, 6, 7. But let men yet make much of Gods Sabbaths, and begin
here; and if it be too tedius to draw near to God every day, let them but make
conscience of trying and tasting how good the Lord is but this one day in a
week, and the Lord will yet reserve mercy for his people, Jer. 17, 24, 25.26.
for keep this, keep all; lose this, lose all: which lest I should seem to
plead for out of a frothy and groundless affection to the Day, and lest any
in these times should be worse then the Crane and the Swallow who know their
times of return, I have therefore endeavored to clear up those four great
difficulties about this Day in the Theses here following.

1. Concerning the Morality. 2. The Change. 3. The Beginning. 4. The
Sanctification of the Sabbath.
Being fully persuaded that whosoever shall break one of the least
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of God. I
do therefore desire the Reader to take along with him these two things.

1. Suspending his judgment concerning the truth and validity of any part or of
any particular Thesis, until he has read over the whole; for they have a
dependence one upon another for mutual clearing of one another; and lest I
should bis coctum apponere, and say the same thing twice, I have therefore
purposely left out that in one part, and one Thesis which is to be cleared in
another, either for proof of it, or resolution of objections against it; and
although this dependence may not so easily appear (because I have not so
expressly set down the method) yet the wise-hearted I hope will easily find
it out, or else pick out and accept what they see to be of God, in such a
confused heap; for it was enough to my ends if I might lay in any broken pieces
of timber to forward this building, which those that are able to wade deeper
into this controversy, may please to make use of (if there be any thing in
them, or in any of them) in their own better and more orderly frame; for it
has been, and still is my earnest desire to heaven that God would raise up
some or other of his precious servants to clear up these controversies more
fully then yet they have been, that the zeal for Gods Sabbaths may not be
fire without light, which perhaps has hitherto been too little through the
wickedness of former times, encouraging the books one way, and suppressing
those of most weight and worth, for the other.

2. To consider that I do most willingly give way to the publishing of these
things; which I could in many respects have much more readily committed to the
fire then to the light; when I consider the great abilities of others; the need
such as I am have to sit down and learn; the hazards and knocks men get only by
coming but into the field in Polemical matters, and the unusefulnesse of any
thing herein for those in remote places where knowledge abounds, and where to
cast any thing of this nature, is to cast water into the Sea; I confess I am
ashamed therefore to be seen in this garment; and therefore that I have thus
far yielded, has been rather to please others then my self, who have many
ways compelled me hereunto; the things for substance contained herein were
first preached in my ordinary course upon the Sabbath days in opening the
Commandments; the desires of some Students in the College, and the need I saw
of resolving some doubts arising about these things in the hearts of some
ordinary hearers among the people, occasioned a more large discussing of the
controversy; to which I was the more inclined, because one among us (who
wanted not abilities) was taken away from us, who had promised the clearing up
of all these matters; when therefore these things were more plainly and fully
opened and applied to the consciences of some more popular capacities as well
as others, I was then put upon it to reduce the Doctrinall part of these
Sermons upon the fourth Commandment, into certain Theses for the use of some
Students desirous thereof; when being scattered and coming to the view of some
of the Elders in the Country, I was by some of them desired to take off some
obscurity arising from the brevity and littleness of them by greater
enlargements and a few more explications of them which promising to do, and
then coming to the bearing of many; I was then desired by all the Elders in the
Country, then met together to commit them to public view; which hitherto my
heart has opposed, and therefore should still have smothered them, but that
some have so far compelled me, as that I feared I should resist and fight
against God, in not listening to them; in which many things are left out, which
perhaps might be more useful to a plain people, which then in the application
of matters of Doctrine were publicly delivered; and some few things are added,
especial in that particular wherein the directive power of the Moral Law is
cleared against the loose wits of these times. We are strangers here (for the
most part) to the books and writings which are now in Europe, but its much
feared that the increase and growth of the many Tares and Errors in England,
has been by reason of the sleepiness of some of the honest husbandmen; and
that those who are best able to pluck them up, have not seasonably stood in the
gap, and kept them out by a zealous convicting and public bearing witness
against them by word and writing, and that therefore such as have with too much
tenderness and compliance tolerated Errors, Error will one day grow up to
that head that it will not tolerate or suffer them to speak truth; We have ^
Proverb here, That the Devil is not so soon risen but Christ is up before him;
and if any of his precious servants have slept and lien longer a be^ then their
Master has done, and have not spoken or printed soon enough for Jesus Christ
in other matters, yet oh that in this matter of the Sabbat^ God would betimes
awaken; and that these weak^nesses might stir up their strength: for I much
fear and foresee that if it be not done, there is a^ hour and a nick of
temptation in such a juncture (...) times approaching, wherein the enemy will
come (...) like a flood, and rise up from all quarters against the Doctrine of
the Sabbath, and then farewell all the good days of the son of man, if this be
lost, which then men shall desire to see and shall not see them. I have
therefore been the more willing to let my own shame and weakness appear to
the world (if so it be found) if this might be any means of doing the least
good for keeping up the price of Gods Sabbaths in the hearts of any; I have
therefore spent the more time about the Morality of the Sabbath, because the
clearing up of this, gives light to all the rest.

The general CONTENTS of the Theses concerning the Morality of the Sabbath.
1. GOD is the superior disposer of man's time. These. 1 2. Man who is made next
to God, and to return to his rest at the end of the larger circle of his life,
is to return to him at the end of the lesser circle of every week. These. 7 3.
What a Moral Law is not. 10, 11 4. How a Divine Law may be said to be Moral 14
5. What a Moral law is strictly taken. 16 6. A Moral Law considered in a strict
sense is not good merely because commanded, but is therefore commanded because
it is good. 17 7. What is that goodness in a Moral Law for which it is
commanded. 21 8. By what Rules may that goodness be known, which are four.
24, 25 9 Diverse consectaries flowing from the description of a Moral Law. 1.
That Divine determination of something in a Law does not always take away the
morality of it. 26 2. That those are not Moral laws only, which are known to
all men by the light of corrupt nature. 29 3. That the whole Decalogue in all
the parts of it is the Moral Law of God: These. 30. where Objections are
answered to. 38
10. Three sorts of Laws which were among the Jews, Moral, Ceremonial,
Judicial. 38 11. The true state of the Question whether the Sabbath be a Moral
or Ceremonial Law. 43 12. The agreement on all hands how far the Law of the
Sabbath is Moral. 44 13. Something general is agreed on, and whether it lies
under this general, viz. a seventh day. 46 14. The chief means of resolving
this controversy in opening the meaning of the fourth Commandment. 47 15. The
things which are Moral in the fourth Commandment, are either primarily or
secundarily moral. 48 16. Those things which are primarily and generally moral
in the forth Commandment, are 3. 1. A time of worship. 2. A day. 3. A 7th day
determined. 17. Not the worship it self, but only the solemn time of it is
required in the fourth Commandment. 53 18. How holy duties are for time. 56 19.
Instituted worship is not directly required in the fourth, but in the second
Commandment, wherein the meaning of the second Commandment is occasionally
cleared against Wallaeus. 59 20. If the moral worship it self be not required
herein, much less is the whole ceremonial worship. 63 21. Neither the public
worship only, nor Jewish holy days required in this fourth Commandment 64 22.
Not a part of a day, but a whole day is moral by the fourth Commandment. 65 23.
Gods wisdom did rather choose a whole day together for special worship then
borrow a part of every day. 66 24. The sin of Familists and others who allow
God no special day, but make all days equal. 68 25. How any day is said to be
holy, and that though all places are alike holy, yet all days are not
therefore alike holy. 69, 70 26. Answer to such Scriptures as seem to make all
days alike holy under the New Testament. 72, 73. to 79 27. The chief reason
why some abolish the day of the Sabbath in the fourth Commandment, is because
they abandon the whole Decalogue it self as any Rule of life unto his people.
79 28. An inward Sabbath may well consist with a Sabbath day. 80 29. The great
controversy whether the Law be a rule of life to a believer, discussed in
sundry Theses. 81 30. The Spirit is not the rule of life. 86 31. Not the will
of Gods Decree, but the will of his command is the rule of life. 91 32. The
fundamental Error of Antinomians. 93 33. The rule of the Law is kept in Christ
as matter of our justification, not sanctification. 94 34. How Christ is our
Sanctification as well as our Justification. 95 35. Duties of Christian
thankfulness to God were not performed by Christ for believers under that
notion of thankfulness, but by way of merit. 97 36. Whether a believer is to
act in virtue of a command. 98 37. The sin of those who affirm that Christian
obedience is not to be put forth by virtue of a command. 100 38. To act by
virtue of a Commandment, and by virtue of Gods Spirit, are subordinate one to
another. 101 39. Whether the Law is our rule as given by Moses on mount Sinai,
or only as it is given by Christ on mount Sion. 102 40. How Works and
Law-duties are sometime commended and sometime condemned 105, 106 41. The new
creature how it is under the Law. 107 42. How the children of God under the Old
Testament were under the Law as a Schoolmaster, and not those of the New. 108
43. How the Gospel requires doing, and how not, and about conditional promises
in the Gospel. 110 44. Various motives to obedience from the Law and Gospel,
from God as a Creator, and from Christ as a Redeemer, do not vary the Rule. 111
45. Unbelief is not the only sin. 112 46. Three evils arising from their
Doctrine who deny the Directive use of the moral Law. 113 47. The sin of such
as deny the humbling work of the Law under Gospel ministrations. 114 48. Their
Error who will not have a Christian pray for pardon of sin, or mourn for sin.
115 49. Whether Sanctification be a doubtful evidence, and may not be a just
evidence, and whe^^er the Gospel and all the promises of it belong to a sinner
as a sinner, and whether sight of corruption be (by the Gospel) the settled
evidence of salvation as some plead for. 117 50. Whether the first evidence be
without the being, or only the seeing of grace. 118 51. The true grounds of
evidencing Gods love in Christ, cleared. 119. 52. Not only a day, nor only a
Sabbath day, but a seventh day determined is the last thing generally moral in
the fourth Commandment. 120.122 53. That which is particularly moral herein, is
this or that particular seventh day. 123 54. The morality of a Sabbath may be
as strongly and easily urged from the Commandment of observing that particular
seventh day from the creation, as the morality of a day. 125 55. It is not in
man's liberty to take any one of the seven days in a week to be the Christian
Sabbath. 126 56. A determined time is here required, but not what nature, but
what counsel shall determine, and consequently this or that seventh day. 130
57. The force of Gods example in resting the seventh, and working six days,
how far it extends. 132 58. No reason that God must have a seventh year,
because he will have a seventh day 134 59. How a circumstance of time is
capable of morality. 137 60. The Law of the Sabbath is a Homogeneal part of the
Moral Law, and is therefore Moral: and whether it be Moral in respect of the
letter. 138 61. Whether the Decalogue is said to be the Moral Law in respect of
the greater part only. 139 62. The Law of the Sabbath has equal glory with all
the other nine Morals, and has therefore equal morality. 140 63. The Sabbath
was given as a moral law to man in innocence. 151 64. The Sabbath said to be
sanctified, Genesis 2 not merely in a way of Destination or Anticipation. 162 65.
Adam in innocence might need a Sabbath. 174 66. No types of Christ given to man
in innocence. 177 67. The Sabbath was no type in respect of its original
institution. 178 68. The Heathens by the light of corrupt nature had some kind
of knowledge of the Sabbath. 189 69. The Law of nature diversely taken, and what
it is. 194 70. No argument to prove the Sabbath ceremonial, because Christ
appointed no special day for the Lords Supper. 198 71. No argument to prove the
Sabbath ceremonial, because it is reckoned among the ceremonials. 199 72.
Christ is not said to be the Lord of the Sabbath, because it was ceremonial.
200 73. Though the Sahbath be made for man, yet it is not therefore ceremonial.
201 74. A fond distinction of the Sabbath in sensu mystico and literali. 202
75. Although we are bound to rest every day from sin, yet we are not therefore
to make every day a Sabbath. 203 76. The Sabbath was not proper to the Jews,
because they only were able (as some say) to observe the exact time of it. 204
77. An answer to M. Carpenters and Heylins new invented argument against the
morality of the Sabbath. 206
FINIS.
PART. I. The Morality of the Sabbath.
Wherein the chief Arguments used by Gomarus, Mr. Primrose, Mr. Ironside, Mr.
Broad, with sundry others against it, are briefly answered, the reasons for it
more fully cleared:

Wherein also the great Controversy, whether the whole Moral Law contained in
the Decalogue be a Rule of life to a Believer, is occasionally and distinctly
handled.

THE MORALITY OF THE SABBATH.
Thesis 1.
TIme is one of the most precious blessings, Solomon) knows not his time,
Eccles. 9.12. It is therefore most just and meet, that he who has the
disposing of all other things less precious and momentous, should also be the
supreme Lord and disposer of all our times.

Thesis 2.
He who is the disposer of all our times, is the sovereign

Thesis 3.
Now although all creatures in the world, are of God, Deus qu^ principium dat
esso qua finis firmat and stabilit esse datum: Gibbe^^. de lib. Dei and creat.
preserved and governed by him, as their utmost end; yet no other inferior
visible creature is set so near to God, and consequently is not in that manner
for God, as man is.

Thesis 4.
For although all inferior creatures are made lastly for nextly for man; but
man havin^ nothing better than himself, between him and God, therefore made,
both lastly and nextly for God, and hence is, that no inferior Creature, which
comes out and issu^eth from God, has such a reflux and return again bac^
unto God, as man has; because, in and by this reflux an^ return into him,
man's immortal being is eternally pre^served, like water running into the Sea
again, from whence it first came.

Thesis 5.
For whatever is set next, and as it were contiguous to e^ternall, Omne
contiguum ae^erno spirituali est a^ternum (say some) and hence it is that the
soul is eternal because it is made nextly for God, and as it were con^tiguous
to him. The body also shall be eternal, be^cause contiguous to the eternal
soul: But no other in^feriour Creatures are thus eternal: For although they
b^ made nextly for man, yet so, as that they are firstly for the body, which is
of it self mortal, and not eternal, an^ therefore not being contiguous to
that which is spirituall^ eternal, are not so themselves* and the reason of
this i^ because all inferior Creatures, as they come out from God, so their
motion is toward man, for whom they a^^ nextly made, Field of the Church, chap.
2.
and they go out strait forward from God as it were in a strait line toward
man, to the last end an^ term of which strait line when they are come, in the
ser^vice of man, they then cannot proceed any further, and d^ therefore perish
and cease to be, without reflecting, or re^turning back again immediately unto
God. But man being made immediately and nextly for God, has therefore his
motion so toward God, as that he returns immediatel^ unto him again, and is
not led in a strait line, but led ((...) it were) about in a circular motion,
and hence returning immediately to him, he is hereby eternally preserved i^
him, for whom he is immediately made, and unto whom h^ is nextly contiguous, as
has been said.

Thesis 6.
^ead him back again (as it were in a heavenly circle) into himself.

Thesis 7.
Look therefore as when man has run his race, finished Tu hic ord^nem
considera, alia creantur prepter hominem, ideo post illa co^ditur homo.

Homo vero ad Dei cultum, ideo statem post illius creationem Sabbathi
benedictio, and sanctificatio inducitur. Pet Mart. in prac 4 m.


Peter Martyr observes: For although man is not made for the Sabbath merely in
respect of the outward rest of it, as the Pharisees dreamed, yet he is made
for the Sabbath in respect of God in it, and the holiness of it, to both which
then the soul is to have its weekly revolution back again, as into that Rest,
which is the end of all our lives, labor, and in special of all our weekly
labor and work.

Thesis 8.
As therefore our blessed rest in the fruition of God at by means and
ordinances, but there we shall be possessed with it, without our need of any
help from them; our God who is our rest, being then become unto us immediately
All in All.

Thesis 9.
Were it not for man's work and labor ordained and

Thesis 10.


Thesis 11.


Thesis 12.
moral law, by the law of nature, and so make it to be that law, which every
man is taught by the light of nature. That which is morally and universally
just (say some) which reason, when it is not misled, and the inward law of
nature dictateth, by common principles of honesty, or ought to dictate unto all
men without any outward usher: It is that (say others) which may be proved not
only just but necessary, by principles drawn from the light of nature, which
all reasonable men, even in nature corrupted, have still in their hearts, which
either they do acknowledge, or may at least be convinced of without the
Scriptures, by principles still left in the hearts of all men. But this
description seems too narrow: For 1. Although it be true that the law natural
is part of the law moral, yet if the law moral be resolved into the law of
nature only, and the law of nature be shrunk up and drawn into so narrow a
compass, as what the principles left in corrupt man only suggest and dictate;
then it will necessarily follow, that many of those holy rules and principles
are not the law of nature, which were the most perfect impressions of the law
of nature, in man's first creation and perfection, but now by man's apostasy are
obliterated and blotted out, unless any shall think worse than the blind
Papists, either that man's mind is not now corrupted by the fall, in losing any
of the first impressions of innocent nature; or shall maintain with them, that
the Image of God (of which those first impressions were a part) was not
natural to man in that estate. 2. It will then follow that there is no morale
discipline, (as they call it) that is, nothing moral by discipline informing,
or positively moral, but only by nature dictating, which is cross not only
to the judgments, but solid Arguments of men judicious and most indifferent.
3. If that only is to be accounted moral which is so easily known of all
men, by the light of nature corrupted, then the imperfect light of man's corrupt
mind must be the principal judge of that which is moral, rather than the
perfect rule of morality contained in the Scripture, which Assertion would not
a little advance corrupt and blind Nature, and dethrone the perfection of the
holy Scripture.

Thesis 13.
They who define a moral law, to be such a law as and times, do come somewhat
nearer to the mark, and are not far off from the truth, and such a description
is most plain and obvious to such as are not curious: and in this sense our
adversaries in this cause affirm the Sabbath not to be moral, meaning, that
it is not a Law perpetual and universal. Others on the contrary affirming
that it is moral, intend thus much, that it is perpetual and universal, a
law which binds all persons, all times, and in all ages, and herein lies the
chief matter of controversy at this day. Now in what respect and how far
forth the law of the Sabbath is perpetual, shall be hereafter shown; mean
while it may not be amiss to enquire more narrowly into the nature of a moral
law. For though a Law primarily moral is perpetual, yet perpetuity seems to
be an adjunct rather than of the essence of a moral law, and the difficulty
will still remain untouched, viz. to know when a law is perpetual, and what
is internal and intrinsicall to such a law as makes it perpetual or moral;
whereinto I would not search, lest I should seem to affect curiosity, but that
our critical adversaries put us upon it, with whom there is nothing lost in
case we^ gain nothing by wrestling a little with them upon their own grounds,
where for a while we shall come up to them.

Thesis 14.
1. More largely and generally moral. 2. More strictly and specially moral.


Thesis 15.


Thesis 16.
viz. It is such a Law, which is therefore commanded because it is good, and is
not therefore good merely because it is commanded.

Thesis 17.
This is Austins description of it long since, whom most Aug. de lib. arb li. 1
ca. 3.
which learned Camer in Matthew 16.
Cameron with sundry late Wri^^^ confirm, and which our adversaries in this
controversy plead hard for, and unto which the evidence of Scripture and
reason seems to incline: for laws merely judicial and ceremonial are good
laws, Deuteronomy. 6.18, 24. but this was merely because they were commanded, and
therefore it had been simply evil to burn Incense, offer Sacrifice, or
perform any ceremonial duty in the worship of God, unless they had been
commanded. What is there therefore in moral laws which is not in those laws?
verily this inward goodness in them which others have not, and because of
which goodness they are therefore commanded: For to love God, to honor
parents, to preserve the life of man, to be merciful and bountiful and just
in all our dealings, etc. are inwardly good, and are therefore commanded, and
are therefore moral laws: and hence we see that when the Apostle would set
forth the glory and excellency of the moral law (for of no other law can he
speak, Romans 7.7, 12.) he gives these titles to it, that it is holy, just and
good: which holiness, justice and goodness, he opposes to his own moral (not
ceremonial) wickedness: I am carnal (says he) but the law is holy, just and
good. And look as it was evil in it self for to have a nature contrary to the
law, so the Law which was contrary to that nature, was good in it self and was
therefore commanded, and therefore in this thing, moral laws are in a higher
degree good, than such as were only ceremonial, which were therefore good
merely because commanded. The Prophet Micah therefore perceiving how forward
many were in ceremonial duties and sacrifices, in opposition hereunto, he tells
them, The Lord has showed thee, O man, what is good (speaking of moral
duties, of showing mercy, and walking humbly with God, Micah 6.8.) Was not
Sacrifice and Offerings good, as well as mercy and walking humbly? Yes verily,
but herein lies the difference (as our most Orthodox generally make it)
Sacrifice and Offerings were not per se and in themselves good, but only as
commanded for higher ends, and to further moral obedience, Ier. 7.22, 23, and
6.19, 20. Isa. 1.14, 16, Psalm. 50.13, 14, 15. but such moral obedience as the
Prophet mentions, viz. to show mercy and to walk humbly, were good in
themselves, and were therefore commanded of God, and here called by the Prophet
good. The sum of moral obedience is love to God and man, Matthew. 22. But what
love is this? surely it is in such things ^^ are in themselves lovely, and
consequently in themsel^^^ good, for otherwise ceremonial obedience should be
a part of moral obedience, because in performing such obediences is merely
ceremonial, we show our love to God also, It being a branch of love to have
respect unto all Gods Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2, 3. with 5, 6. Only herein
our love toward God appears in ceremonial duties, because these laws are
commanded, our love appears in the other, because the things commanded are
also lovely in themselves* The Image of God is good in it self, as God
himself is good in himself, now the moral law is an exact rule of nothing
else but Gods Image, as is evident, Ephesians. 4.24. where the Image of God is made
to consist in holiness and righteousness, the first Table being the rule of
the one, the second Table being the rule of the other; and hence it follows
undenyably, that moral laws, respecting only Gods Image, have respect only
to such things as are good in themselves, and wherein we resemble and are made
like unto God. C^^^et. Pral. in ^^p. Mat. 16.
Some things (says Cameron) are good in themselves, viz. such things wherein
Gods Image shines forth, as he is holy, just and good, Colos. 3.10. Ephesians.
4.24. Some things are indifferent, neither good nor bad in themselves, but
merely as commanded or forbidden, which also bear not Gods Image, unless it
be sub ratione entis, but not sub ratione boni moralis, i. e. they resemble God
as he is a being, but not as he is holy, just and good in himself, the rule of
which resemblance is the moral law, which therefore commands things because
they are good.

Thesis 18.
God which makes all things good; for it is the sovereign will of God (as is
proved) to make every moral law good, and therefore to command it, rather than
to make it good by a mere commanding of it.

Thesis 19.
The will of God is indeed the rule of all goodness, and voluntas decreti, and
voluntas mandati, the first of which, viz. the will of Gods decree (as it
appears in the execution of it) makes a thing to be good, whether it be
creature or law: the second of these, viz. the will of Gods command, enjoynes
the practice of such a duty, the rule and law to guide which is first made good
(if it be a moral law) by the wisdom and power of the will of Gods decree;
so that the will of God appearing in both these ( viz. Gods decreeing and
commanding will) is the complete rule of every moral law: So that as no law is
morally good merely because it is commanded, so neither is it thus good unless
also it be commanded. Gods will in all moral laws, is first to make them good,
and then to command them, when they are thus far made good; both which together
make up a moral law.

Thesis 20.
It Is true that sin is the transgression of Gods law; there fundamentally evil
before it be forbidden, but it is not morally evil until it be forbidden. The
like may be said concerning moral obedience according to any moral law: No man
should therefore think, that this description given of a moral law, should
give occasion to any to imagine, that some things are morally good or evil,
before any law pass upon them, and that therefore there are some duties, and
some sins, which are so without and before any law of God. For we see that
things good in themselves must be commanded, else they are not moral duties,
yet withal they are therefore commanded because they are good in themselves.
Its true that by the verdict of some of the Schoolmen, some duties are morally
good, before any law commands them (as to love and magnify God) and that some
sins (as to curse and blaspheme God) are morally evil, before any law
forbids them: but (to omit other answers) if such suppositions may be
rationally made (which some deny) yet it may be upon good grounds denied, that
any duty can be morally good, or any sin morally evil, until some law pass
upon them either to command or forbid the same. It Is indeed suitable and meet in
nature for man to love God, and unsuitable and unmeet to blaspheme and hate God;
but such sutablenesse or unsutablenesse, as they make things fundamentally good
or evil, so they cannot make any thing morally good or evil, unless we
suppose some Law; for it would be in this case with man as it is in brute
creatures, who do many things unnatural (as to eat up and destroy their own
young) which yet are not morally sinful, because they are not under any moral
law; and Alex Hal. part. 3. Q. 32. Art. 1.
one of the most ancient and best of the Schoolmen, though he thinks that the
observance of the Sabbath before Moses time was not secund^m rationem
praecepti, or debite fieri, i. was not actually commanded; yet that it was
secundum rationem honesti, hoc est digne steri. i. It was congruous, and a
thing meet and worthy to be observed even from the first creation: But will
any of our Adversaries hence say, that because it was meet and worthy to be
observed, that therefore it was a moral law from the beginning of the world,
while it had no command (as is by them supposed) to be observed? For it must be
something meet and congruous, and worthy to be observed of man, which when it
is commanded makes it to be a moral law, for then the Law commands a thing
that is good, and because it is good i^ is therefore commanded, which goodness
we must a little more narrowly now enquire into.

Thesis 21.
moral law for which it is therefore commanded? The Answer is given by
Vasques, Suarez, Smifinga, and most of the Schoolmen, and sundry of our own
Writers, that it is nothing else, but That comely sutablenesse and meetnesse in
the thing commanded unto humane nature as rational, or unto man as rational,
and consequently unto every man. When I say, Irons Q 2. cap. 8.
as Rational, I understand as Master Ironside does, viz. as right reason
neither blinded nor corrupted does require. When I say as suitable to man, and
consequently to every man, I hereby exclude all laws merely Judicial and
Evangelicall from being moral, the first of which are suitable to some men
only, the other are not suitable to men as men, but to man as corrupt and
fallen; and therefore bind not all men, but only those among whom they are
sufficiently and actually promulgated, as is evident, Romans 10.14 John. 15.22.
But moral laws are suitable to all men, and have an inward meetnesse and
congruity to be observed of all men: For look as when the Lord gives Laws to
any particular nation, whether immediately by himself, or mediately by man, he
ever makes them suitable to the peoples peace and good of that nation; so when
he makes laws binding all mankind in all Nations, he makes them suitable to
humane nature or all mankind therein. And look as national Laws bind not
merely by the mere will of the Lawgiver, but from the Driedo de lib. Christ.
lib. 3. cap. 3. Vasquez. To. 2. Dis. 12.
goodness and sutablenesse in the thing unto their common good; so here moral
laws which concern all Nations, bind not merely because of the will of God
(which of it self is sufficient to bind all men, if he had pleased to put no
more in moral laws) but also because of some goodness in the things
commanded, which is nothing else but such sutablenes as is mentioned unto the
common good of man. What this sutablenesse to humane nature is, we shall show,
in due place; mean while, I do not understand by sutablenesse to humane
nature, the inclination of humane nature now corrupted by sin; for infused
and supernatural virtues and graces (to which therefore humane nature is not
inclined) are (as Vasquez truly and strongly maintains) in some sense natural
and good in themselves, not because humane nature is inclined to them, but
because they are very congruous and consentaneous thereunto, and perfecting
humane nature, as such, and consequently suitable thereunto: A good is said to
be utile and delectabile in respect of some profit or delight which comes to
man by it, Suarez metaph. Disp. 10. Sect. 2. Surifing^. de Deo. Tract. 3. Disp.
1. Sect. 32.
but bonum honestum in genere moris (as Suarez and his fellows call it)
consists in a kind of decency, comeliness and sweet proportion between such an
act, and such a nature as acts by right reason; to which nature it is exceeding
comely and suitable, whether any profit or delight come thereby yea or no. As
now in the divine nature, it is exceeding beautiful and comely for it (and
therefore good in it self) to be bountiful and merciful, and to do good
unto the creature, although no profit could come to him thereby: It is Gods
nature, as I may so say, so to do; so it is in humane nature, it is a comely
thing to honor parents, reverence Gods Name, to be loving and merciful to
all men, in heart, word and deed; to give God a fit and the most meet
proportion of time for solemn service of him, who allows us many days to
serve our own good; this is good nature, and being thus seemly and suitable to
it, this and such like things are therefore good in themselves, though perhaps
neither profit or pleasure should come unto man hereby: And hence it is well
observed by some of the Schoolmen, that right reason does not make a thing
moral, but only judges and discerns what is moral; for right reason does
not make a thing suitable, but only sees whether it be so or no, a thing may
be suitable before right reason see it, yet when it is presented to reason it
sees it suitable, as the wall is white before the eye see it, yet when the eye
does see it, it appears white also: It may be a meet and comely thing to give
God a seventh part of our time, though no man's reason can of it self find out
such a meet proportion, yet when reason sees it, it is forced to acknowledge a
comeliness of equity, and suitableness therein, as shall hereafter appear.

Thesis 22.
Wallaeus well observes out of Scotus, Wall. disser^ de 4. prac. ca. 3.
that there is a double morality, the first is de lege naturae stricte sumpta,
i. e. such laws as are so deeply engraven upon nature, as that these principles
cannot be blotted out, but by abolishing of nature. The second is, de lege
naturae late sumpta, and these laws do much depend upon the will of the
Lawgiver, but yet they are very congruous and suitable to humane nature, even
from the light of those principles of nature. And hence I suppose it will
follow, that the law for a seventh part of time to be dedicated to God, may
well be a moral law, although it depends much upon the will of the Lawgiver,
and is not so immediately written upon man's heart, nor so equally suitable to
humane nature, as the law of love and thankfulness to God our Creator is:
Came^. pra^* in Mat. ca. 16.
For (as Cameron well observes) that some things which are good in themselves
have more of Gods Image stamped upon them, some have less of it: and hence it
is that though all moral laws are good in themselves, yet not equally so*
there is more unsuitablenesse to hate and curse God, than to lust after another
man's house or servant, and yet both are evil in themselves and breaches of
moral rules.

Thesis 23.
Hence therefore it follows, that because moral precepts Abraham might have
killed his Son by extraordinary dispensation: Adams Sons and Daughters did
marry one another by special Commission, which now to do ordinarily would be
incestuous, and consequently against a m^^^ll Law, as is evident, Leviticus 18.
Only let it be here remembered that when I call moral Laws perpetual and
universal, that I speak of such laws as are primarily moral, which do
firstly and originally suit with humane nature: for laws as are at second hand
moral and as it were accidentally so, may be changeable as hereafter shall
appear.

Thesis 24.
How these things may evince the morality of a seventh part of time, will be
difficult to conceive, unless further enquiry be made, to wit, when and by
what rules may it be known that any law is suitable and agreeable unto humane
nature, and consequently good in it self? For resolution of which doubt, there
is great silence generally in most Writers: Bishop White endeavors it by
giving three rules to clear up this mist; but ( pace tanti viri) I much fear
that he much darkens and obscures the truth herein, White Treat. of Sab. day.
p. 26 28.
and muds the streams. For 1. Because the Sabbath is not simply moral, but
has something positive in it, he therefore makes it temporary, as appears in
his conclusion of that discourse: when as it is evident by his own confession,
that some laws positively moral are general and universal. For laws
positively moral (he says) are either personal only, as was Abraham's
coming out of his own Country, Genesis 12.1. Some are for one Nation or
Republic only, Exodus 22.1, 3^7. Some are common and general for all
mankind, as the law of Polygamy. 2. He seems to make laws simply and
entirely moral to be such as are in their inward nature morally good, before
and without any ex^ernall imposition of the Lawgiver: Now if by external
imposition he means the external manner of Mosaicall administration of the
law, there is then some truth in what he affirms; for doubtless before Moses
time the Patriarchs had the law revealed after another manner; but if by
external imposition be meant external Revelation, whether immediately by God
himself unto man's conscience, or mediately by man, then it is most false that
any thing can be morally good or evil, much less entirely and simply so,
before and without some such law: for though it may be good and suitable to man
before a law pas^e upon it, yet nothing can be morally good or evil without
some law, for then there should be some sin which is not the transgression
of a law, and some obedience which is not directed by any law, both which are
impossible and abominable. 3. He makes moral laws by external imposition and
constitution only, to be such, as before the external imposition of them, are
a diaphorous, and good or evil only by reason of some circumstance. When as
we know that some such laws as are most entirely moral, yet in respect of
their inward nature generally considered, they are indifferent also: for not to
kill and take away man's life is a moral law entirely so, yet, in the general
nature of it, it is indifferent, and by circumstance may become either lawful
or unlawful; lawful in case of war or public execution of justice;
unlawful out of a private spirit and personal revenge. In one word, the whole
drift of his discourse herein, is to show that the Sabbath is not moral, and
this he would prove because the Sabbath is not simply and entirely moral,
(which is a most feeble and weak consequence) and this he proves, because the
Sabbath day has (in respect of its inward nature) no more holiness and goodness
than any other day, all the days of the week being equally good by creation.
But he might well know that the day is not the law of the fourth Commandment,
but the keeping holy of the Sabbath day, which is a thing inwardly good, and
entirely moral if we speak of some day: Ibid.
Nay, (says the Bishop) the law of nature teaches that some sufficient and
convenient time be set apart for Gods worship; if therefore some day be
moral, although all days by creation be indifferent and equal, according to
his own confession, what then should hinder the quota pars, or the seventh
part of time from being moral? will he say because all days are equally holy,
and good by creation? then why should he grant any day at all to be entirely
moral in respect of a sufficient and convenient time to be set apart for God?
If he says the will and imposition of the Lawgiver abolisheth its morality,
because he binds to a seventh part of time; then we shall show that this is
most false and feeble in the sequel.

Thesis 25.
There are therefore four rules to guide our judgments

1. Such laws as necessarily flow from natural relation, both between God and
man, as well as between man and man; these are good in themselves, because
suitable and congruous to humane nature: for there is a decency and sweet
comeliness to attend to those rules to which our relations bind us. For from
this ground the Prophet Malachy calls for fear and honor of God as moral
duties, because they are so comely and seemly for us, in respect of the
relation between us, If I be your Lord, and Master and Father, where is my
fear? where is my honor? Mal. 1.6. Love also between man and wife is pressed
as a comely duty by the Apostle, from that near relation between them, being
made one flesh, Ephesians. 5.28, 29. there are scarce any who question the morality
of the duties of the second Table, because they are so evidently comely,
suitable and agreeable to humane nature, considered relatively, as man stands
in relation to those who are or should be unto him as his own flesh; and
therefore he is to honor superiors, and therefore must not kill, nor steal,
nor lie, nor covet, nor defile the flesh, etc. but the morality of all the
rules of the first Table is not seen so evidently, because the relation between
God and man, which makes them comely and suitable to man, is not so well
considered: for if there be a God, and this God be our God, according to the
first Commandment, then it is very comely and meet for man to honor, love,
fear him, delight, trust in him, etc. and if this God must be worshipped of
man, in respect of the mutual relation between them, then it is comely and meet
to worship him with his own worhsip, according to the second Commandment, and
to worship him with all holy reverence according to the third Commandment; and
if he must be thus worshipped, and yet at all times (in respect of our
necessary worldly imploiments) cannot be so solemnly honored and worshipped as
is comely and meet for so great a God, then it is very fit and comely for all
men to have some set and stated time of worship, according to some fit
proportion, which the Lord of time only can best make, and therefore a seventh
part of time which he does make, according to the fourth Commandment.

2. Such laws are drawn from the imitable Attributes and Works of God, are
congruous and suitable to man's nature: For what greater comeliness can there
be, or what can be more suitable to that nature, which is immediately made for
God, then to be like unto God, and to attend unto those rules which guide
thereunto? Hence to be merciful to men in misery, to forgive our enemies and
those that do us wrong, to be bountiful to those that be in want, to be
patient when we suffer evil, are all moral duties, because they are comely
and suitable to man, and that because herein he resembles and is made like
unto God: Hence to labor six days and rest a leventh is a moral, because a
comely and suitable duty, that because herein man follows the example of God,
and becomes most like unto him. And hence it is that a seventh year of rest
cannot be urged upon man to be as much moral as a seventh day of rest, because
man has Gods example and pattern in resting a seventh day, but not in resting
any seventh year; God never made himself an example of any ceremonial duty,
it being unsuitable to his glorious excellency so to do, but only of moral
and spiritual holiness; and therefore there is somewhat else in a seventh day
that is not in a seventh year: and it is utterly false to think (as some do)
that there is as much equity for the observation of the one as there is of the
other. And here by the way may be seen a gross mistake of Mr. Primrose, Prim.
par. 2. cap. 7. Sect. 13, 14, 15.
who would make Gods example herein not to be morally imitable of us, nor man
necessarily bound thereunto, it being not naturally and in respect of it self
imitable, but only because it pleased God to command man so to do: as also
because this action of God did not flow from such attributes of God as are in
their nature imitable, as mercy, bounty, etc. but from one of those attributes
as is not imitable, and which we ought not to imitate, viz. his omnipotency.
But suppose it did flow from his omnipotency, and that we ought not to imitate
his omnipotency, and that we who are weakness it self cannot imitate
omnipotent actions, yet its obvious to common sense, that such acts which arise
from such attributes as cannot be imitated of us, in respect of the particular
effects which are produced by them, yet in the actings of such attributes there
may be something morally good which is imitable of us. As for example, though
we are not to imitate God in his miraculous works (as in the burning of Sodom
and such like) yet there may be that justice and wisdom of God shining
therein which we ought to imitate, for we ought to see before we censure and
condemn, as God did in proceeding against Sodom: So it is in this
extraordinary work of making the Word, wherein although we are not to go
about to make another world within that time as God did, yet therein the labor
and rest of God was seen, which is imitable of man; which labor and rest as
they are moral duties, so they are confirmed by a moral example, and
therefore most seemly and comely for man to imitate from such an example: And
whereas he affirms that this example was not moral, because it was not it
self imitable, being grounded only upon Gods free will: The reason is weak;
for to labor in ones Calling is without controversy a moral duty (as
idleness is a moral sin) yet if one would ask why man is to labor here, and
not rather to lead a contemplative life in the vision and fruition of God
immediately? I suppose no reason can be given, but the good pleasure of God,
who in his deep wisdom saw it most meet for man to spend some proportionable
time in labor for himself, and some in rest for God, whereunto he gave man
such an eminent example from the beginning of the world. Master Primrose cannot
deny but that a convenient time for labor and rest in general, is moral:
Ibid.
But (says he) if God had not declared his will by a Commandment particularly
to labor six days and rest the seventh, the Jews would not have thought
themselves bound to this observation from Gods example only; which shows that
there is no morality in it to bind the conscience for ever. But it may be as
well doubted whether acts of bounty and mercy (to which he thinks we are
bound merely from Gods example) in respect of the particular application of
these acts, to enemies of God and of our selves as well as to friends, be of
binding virtue merely by Gods example, unless we had a commandment thereunto:
for in moral precepts, as the thing is commanded because it is good, so it is
not morally good Vid. These. 9.
unless it be commanded: but suppose that Gods example of labor six days and
rest the seventh, should not have been binding as other examples, unless there
had been a commandment for so doing, yet this is no argument that this example
is not moral at all, but only that it is not so P^aecopt^rum m^ralium t^^p^ex
est gradus, etc. Aqui. 1 2. q. 10^, art. 11.
equally moral and known to be so, as some other duties be; for man may
spend too much time in labor, and give God too short or too little time for
rest, if therefore he wants the light of a commandment or rule to direct and
guide him to the fittest and most meet proportion of time for both, is he not
apt hereby to break the rule of morality, which consists (as has been shown)
in that which is most suitable, comely and convenient for man to give to God or
man? The commandment therefore in this case measuring out and declaring such a
proportion, and what time is most convenient and comely for man to take to
himself for labor, or to give to God for rest, it does not abolish the
morality of the example, but does rather establish and make it: It sets out the
most comely and meet proportion of time for labor and rest, and therefore such
a time as is most good in it self, because most comely and proportionable,
which being therefore commanded is a moral duty in man, and the example hereof
morally binding in God.

3. Such laws which man's reason may see, either by innate light, or by any
other external help and light to be just and good and fit for man to
observe, such laws are congruous and suitable to humane nature. I say by any
external help, as well as by innate light, for neither internal nor external
light do make a thing just and suitable to man, no more than the light of the
Sun or the light of a Lantern do make the Kings highway to the City, but
they only declare and manifest the way, or that which was so in it self
before: Hence it comes to pass that although man's reason cannot see the equity
of some laws, antecedenter by innate light, before it be illuminated by some
external light, yet if by this external light the mind sees the equity,
justice, and holiness of such a law, this may sufficiently argue the morality
of such a law, which was just and good, before any light discovered it, and is
now discovered only, not made to be so, whether by internal or external
light: And hence Aquinas well observes, Aquin. 1.2. q. 99. art. 2. and 100 ar^.
^.
that moral laws (which he makes to be such as are congruous to right
reason) sometimes are such, as not only command such things which reason does,
readily see to be comely and meet, but also such laws about which man's reason
may readily and easily err and go astray from that which is comely and meet.
And hence it is, that although no reason or wit of man could ever have found
out the most just and equal proportion of time, or what proportion is most
comely and suitable, or that a seventh part of time should have been
universally observed as holy to God; yet if any external light and teaching
from above, shall reveal this time, and the equity and suitableness of it, so
that reason shall acknowledge it equal and good, that if we have six days
for our selves, God should have one for himself, this is a strong argument
that such a command is moral, because reason thus illuminated cannot but
acknowledge it most meet and equal: For though reason may not by any natural
or innate light readily see that such a division of time is most suitable, and
yet may readily err and misconceive the most suitable and convenient
proportion and division of time, it is then a sufficient proof of the morality
of such a command, if the congruity and equity of it be discerned consequenter
only (as we lay) and by external light.

4. What ever law was once writ upon man's heart in pure nature is still
suitable and congruous and convenient to humane nature, and consequently good
in it self and moral. For whatever was so writ upon Adams heart, was not writ
there as upon a private person, but as a common person, having the common
nature of man, and standing in the room of all mankind: Hence as nothing was
writ then but what was common to all men, so such things thus writ were good
for all men and suitable to all men, it being most injurious to God, to think
that any thing evil should be imprinted there: if therefore it be proved that
the law of the Sabbath was then writ upon man's heart, then it undenyably
follows that it is meet and suitable to all men still to observe a Sabbath
day; and indeed to the right understanding of what is suitable to man as man,
and consequently moral, there is nothing more helpful, than to consider of
our primitive estate and what was suitable to our nature then; for if that
which is moral in marriage is to be searched for, in the first and ancient
records of our first creation by the appointment of our Savior; I then know no
reason (whatever others object) but morality in all other laws and duties is
there to be sought also; for although our original perfection is now defaced
and lost, and in that respect is a merum non ens, (as some call it) yet it had
once a being, and therefore in this controversy we may lawfully enquire after
it, considering especially that this being which once it had, may be suffiently
known by the contrary being of universal corruption that is in us now, as
also by the light of the Scriptures, in which the searcher and maker of all
hearts declares it unto us, and indeed there are many moral duties which will
never appear good and suitable to man, but rather hard and unreasonable
(because impossible) until we see and remember from whence we are fallen, and
what once we had.

Thesis 26.
determination of something in a law, does not always take away morality from a
law, for divine determination is many times no more but a plain and positive
declaration of that which is suitable, just and good and equal for man to
observe: now that which points out and declares unto us the morality of a law,
cannot possibly abolish and destroy such a law. For a moral law commanding
that which is suitable and good (as has been shown) it is impossible that the
Commandment which determines and directs to that which is good, that by this
determination it should overthrow the being of such a good law, nay verily
particular determination and positivenesse (as some call it) is so far from
abolishing, as that it rather adds to the being, as well as to the clearing up
and manifestation of such a law. For if it be not sufficient to make a moral
law, that the thing be good in it self, but that also it must be commanded;
then the Commandment which many times only detemines to that which is good
(and consequently determination) does add unto the being of a moral law.

Thesis 27.
There is scarce any thing but it is morally indifferent, until Vid. Course of
conformity. page 114.
but divine determination of twofold. 1. Of such things which are not good, fit
or needful for man to observe without a command, as Sacrifices and Sacraments,
and such likes: now herein, in such laws, positive determination may be very
well inconsistent with morality; and it may be safely said that such a law is
not moral, but rather positive, and thus the learned sometimes speak. 2. Of
such things as are equal, good in themselves, needful and suitable for man;
and here particular determination and morality may kiss each other, and are
not to be opposed one to another: and hence it is that if Gods Commandment
positively determines us to observe any part of instituted worship (suppose
Sacraments or Sacrifices) yet such laws are not moral (although it be moral
in general to worship God after his own will;) because the things themselves
are not good in themselves nor needful: but if God shall determine us to
observe a Sabbath day, this determination does not take away the morality of
the command; because it being good in it self to give God the meetest and
fittest proportion of time for holy Rest, and the commandment declaring that
this seventh part, or so, is such a time, hence it comes to pass that this
time is good in it self, and therefore determination by the commandment in
this case, does not abolish the morality hereof. It is a moral duty to pay
tribute to Caesar, to give to Caesar that which is Caesar's: hence because a man
may give too much or too little to him, that determination which directs us to
that particular which is Caesar's due and most meet for him to receive, and us
to give, that is best in it self, and is therefore moral; so prayer is a
moral duty, but because a man may be tempted to pray too often, or else too
seldom, hence determination of the fittest and this fittest season, makes this
or that moral. So it is here in the Sabbath. I do willingly and freely
profess thus far with our Adversaries of the morality of the Sabbath; that
it is a moral duty to give God some time and day of holy Rest and worship, as
it is moral to give Caesar his due, and to pray to God: but because we may give
God too many days, or too few, hence the determination of the most meet and
fittest proportion of time, and particularly of this time, makes this and that
to be also moral. If no day at all in general was good and fit for man to
give to God, and God should notwithstanding command a seventh day, then the
commandment of such a day with such positive determination could not be moral
any more then the determination of sacrrifices and such like. But every day
(say some of our Adversaries) some day (say others of them) being acknowledged
to be equal, just and good, and most meet to give to God, hence it is that
determination of a seventh day does not abolish but clear up that which is
moral, because it points out unto man that which is most meet and equal:
Hence therefore it follows, that a seventh day is therefore commanded because
it is good, and not good merely because commanded. Determination also,
declaring what is most meet, declares hereby that this commandment is also
moral, and not merely positive and ceremonial: which not being well
considered by some, this fourth commandment (having some more positivenesse and
determination then diverse of the rest) has therefore been the chief stumbling
stone and rock of offense to many against the morality of it, by which they
have miserably bruised themselves, while they have endeavored to destroy it,
upon so gross a mistake.

Thesis 28.
good pleasure of his will, might have determined us to observe a fourth, a
ninth, a twentieth part of our time in holy rest more or less, as well as to a
seven^h; yet let us consider of God as acting by counsel, and weighing and
considering with himself, what is most meet and equal, and what proportion of
time is most fit for himself; and then (with leave of better thoughts when I
see better reason) I suppose no man can prove (unless he be made privy to
the unknown secrets of the wisdom of God) that any other proportion had been
as meet as this now made by the actual determination of God; there was not
therefore the mere and sovereign will of God which thus determined of this
seventh part of time, but also the wisdom of God, which considering all
things saw it most mee^ and suitable for man to give, and God to receive from
man, and therefore being commanded, and thus particularly determined, becomes
moral.

Thesis 29.
If that commandment be moral which is therefore commanded Paul which he never
saw, nor could have seen by the light of corrupt nature, until the law fell
upon him with mighty efficacy and power, Romans 7. for God is not bound to
crook his moral laws to what our corrupt minds are actually able of
themselves to see, any more than to what our corrupt wills are actually able to
do: If the light of nature be imperfect in us since the fall (which no wise
man doubts of) then there may be many things truly moral, which the light of
nature now sees not, because it is imperfect, which in its perfection it did
see, and this consideration of the great imperfection of the light of nature,
is alone sufficient for ever to stop their mouths and silence their hearts,
who go about to make an imperfect light and law of nature, the perfect rule
and only measure of moral duties; and who make so narrow a limitation of that
which is moral to that which is thus imperfectly natural: it is not now lex
nata, but lex data, which is the rule of moral duties: The holy Scriptures
contain the perfect rule of all moral actions, whether man's corrupted and
imperfect light of nature see them or no. It is a common, but a most perilous,
and almost groundless mistake of many in this controversy, who when they
would know what is moral and what is not so, of such things as are set down
in the Scriptures, they then ^lye to the light of corrupt nature, making it to
be the supreme Judge hereof, and there fall to examining of them, whether they
are seen by the light of nature or no, which is no less folly than to set up a
corrupt and blind Judge to determine and declare that which is moral, to make
the perfect rule of morality in Scripture to bow down its back to the
imperfection and weakness of nature, to pull out the Sun in heaven from
giving light, and to walk by the light of a dim candle, and a stinking snuff
in the socket almost gone out; to make the horne-book of natural light, the
perfection of learning of the deepest matters in moral duties; to make
Aristotle's Ethics as complete a teacher of true morality, as Adams heart in
innocence; and in a word to make man fallen and in a manner perfectly corrupt
and miserable, to be as sufficiently furnished with knowledge of moral
duties, as man standing, when he was perfectly holy and happy: Imagine
therefore that the light of nature could never have found out one day in seven
to be comely and most meet for man to give unto God; yet if such a proportion
of time be most meet for man to give to God, and it appears so to be when God
reveals it, it may and should then be accounted a moral law, although the
light of nature left in all men could never discern it. The Schoolmen, and
most of the popish generation not considering these things (which
notwithstanding are some of their own principles) have dug pits for
themselves, and made snares for some of their followers, in abolishing the
fourth Commandment from being (in the true sense of it) moral, because they
could not see how such a special part of time, viz. a seventh part, could be
natural, or by the light of corrupt nature discernable; which things so
discernable they sometimes conclude to be only moral. But how far the light
of corrupt nature may discern this proportion, shall be spoken to in its
proper place.

Thesis 30.
If lastly, those things which are thus commanded because suitable to humane
nature, I do not mean humane nature considered absolutely, but relatively,
either in relation to God, or relation unto man: for not only the light of
nature, but of common sense also, bear witness that every precept of the
second Table, wherein man is considered in relation to man, is thus far good:
for how comely and good is it to honor Parents, to be tender of other men's
lives and comforts, to preserve ones self and others from filthy pollutions,
to do no wrong but all the good we can to other men's estates? etc. Nor do I
think that any will question any one Commandment of this Table to be good and
suitable to humane nature, unless it be some Nimrod or Brennus (that professed
he knew no greater justice than for the stronger, like the bigger fishes of the
Sea, to swallow up the lesser in case they be hungry) or some Turkish Tartar
or Caniball, or some surfetted Professor, transformed into some licentious
opinionist, and so grown Master of his own Conscience, and that can
audaciously outface the very light of nature and common sense, through the
righteous judgment of God blinding and hardening his heart: And if the
Commandments of the second Table be thus far good in themselves, are not
those of the first Table much more? Is love to man (when drawn out into all
the six streams of the second Table) good in it self, and shall not love to
God, drawn out in the four precepts of the first Table, as the Spring from
whence all our love to man should flow, much more? Are the streams morally
sweet, and is not the spring it self of the same nature? Love to God, and love
to man are the common principles (says Aquinas truly) of the law of nature;
and all particular precepts (says he perhaps unawares) are conclusions
flowing from these principles, out of Matthew. 22. And are the principles good in
themselves, and suitable to humane nature, and do not all the conclusions
participate of their nature? For what are all particular precepts, but
particular unfoldings of love to God, and love to man? If all the precepts of
the second Table be moral, which do only concern man, why should any of the
first fall short of that glory, which do immediately concern God? Shall man
have six, and all of them morally good, and God have but four, and some one or
more of them not so? Is it comely and good to have God to be our God in the
first Commandment, to worship him after his own mind in the second, to give
him his worship with all the highest respect and reverence of his Name in the
third, and is it not as comely, good and suitable, that this great God and King
should have some magnificent day of state to be attended on by his poor
servants and creatures, both publicly and privately, with special respect and
service, as often as himself sees mere, and which we cannot but see and confess
to be most equal and just, according to the fourth Commandment? If man's life
must be divided into labor and rest, is it not equal and good if we have
six days, that God should have a seventh? If the bruit beasts could speak
they would say that a seventh days rest is good for them, Exodus 23.12. and
shall man (who has more cause and more need of rest, even of holy rest) say
that it is not good for him even to rest in the bosom of God himself, to
which he is called this day? Take away a Sabbath, who can defend us from
Atheism, Barbarism, and all manner of Devilisme and profaneness? And is it
evil thus to want it, and shall it not be good to have it? I confess if God
had commanded a perpetual Sabbath, it had not then been good but sinful to
observe any set Sabbath: but if God will have man to labor for himself six
days, and this labor be morally good being now commanded; why is it not then
as good to observe a seventh in rest to God, being also commanded of him?

Thesis 31.
It is therefore at least an indigested assertion of those Aqui^. 1, 2, q. 98.
Art. 5. Zanchy in 4. Praec.
and yet withal does superad certain precepts proper to the Jewish people; in
which last respect they say all men are not bound to the observance thereof
(and they produce the fourth Commandment for proof) but in respect of the first
they are: But although in the application of a law, something may be proper to
the Jewish people, yet (with leave of the learned) there is never a law in it
but it is moral and common to all: for to make any law in the Decalogue
proper, is an assertion springing from a false and blind principle, viz. That
that law only is moral which is natural; not natural, as suitable to humane
nature, but which is seen and known by the common light of corrupt nature
without the help of any external usher or teacher. If also any laws in the
Decalogue be proper, how will any find out and discern moral laws which
concern all, from proper laws which appertain only to some? For if God has
made such a mingling, and not severed moral laws by themselves, then man has
no law or revelation by any dictinct and severed laws left unto him to
discern laws proper and peculiar, from laws moral and common, which how
pernicious it may be to men's souls to be left to such uncertainty, as also
how injurious to God and cross to his maine ends in discovering moral laws,
let the wise consider; for if they say that we must fly for help herein to
the light of corrupt nature, then as has been shown, an imperfect light, and a
blind guide, and a corrupt judge must be the chief rule of discerning that
which is moral, from that which is peculiar and proper, for doubtless such a
kind of light is the light of corrupt nature.

Thesis 32.
Some think that those commandments only are morally viz. what is moral and
what is not, Mr. Primrose therefore excludes the fourth Commandment from being
moral, the other nine being ratified by the light of the Gospel, which this
(he says) is not: but if his meaning be that there must be a general
ratification of laws moral by the verdict of the Gospel, then the fourth
Commandment cannot be excluded from being moral, because it has a
ratification in general from the Gospel: for therein we read that the moral
law is holy, just and good, Romans 7. and that Christ came not to destroy the
least jot or tittle of the law, Matthew. 5. much less a whole law of the fourth
Commandment. In the Gospel also God promises to write his Law upon our hearts,
wherein the fourth Commandment is not excepted. But if his meaning be^ this,
that the Gospel must particularly mention, and so make a particular
ratification (as it were) by name of every moral law, then his assertion is
unsound; there being many judicial laws of Moses, of which some are wholly
moral, others containing in them something of common and moral equity, which
we have no express mention of in the blessed Gospel: and let him turn over
all the leaves of the Gospel, he shall not find that proportion of time which
himself affirms to be moral in the fourth Commandment, to be expressly and
particularly mentioned in the Gospel; and therefore that also must be excluded
from being moral upon his own principles, as well as what we contend for in
this Commandment so to be.

Thesis 33.
Some of those who maintain the law of the Sabbath to be ceremonial, Prim. 2.
par. cap. 6. S. 8. Irons. quest. ^. cap. 9.
affirm that every Law in the Decalogue is not moral upon this ground, to
wit, because the Law is called Gods Covenant, which Covenant they show from
sundry instances, not only to comprehend moralls, but also ceremonialls: for
they make it the excellency of the Decalogue to comprehend, as a short epitome,
all Gods Ordinances, both moral and ceremonial, which epitome is more largely
opened in the writings of Moses, where not only moral, but also ceremonial
laws are expressed and dispersed. And hence they think that as the other nine
are the summary and epitome of all moral Ordinances, so the fourth Commandment
which was kept with the practice of Ceremonies, was the summary and epitome of
all the ceremonial ordinances, and hence the fourth Commandment becomes
ceremonial. But for answer to this wily notion, unjustly fathered upon Austin
and Calvin by some, it may thus far be granted, that as the word Law is
sometimes taken more strictly for the Decalogue only, Romans 3.20. James 3.8.
and sometimes more largely, for the whole doctrine contained in all the
writings of the Old Testament, wherein the Gospel also is comprehended, Psalm.
19.7. Psalm 119.1.51, 55. so the word Covenant is sometime taken more strictly
for the covenant of works, which is contained compendiously in the Decalogue
only, writ by the finger of God, in two Tables, Deuteronomy. 4.13, 14 Exodus 34.38.
and sometime more largely for all the holy writings of Moses, Exodus 24.7, 8.
and 34.10. Levit. 26.14. Ier. 34.13. Now although all the writings of Moses may
be called the Covenant, as it is largely taken; and so the covenant comprehends
not only moral, but ceremonial laws; yet they are never called That
Covenant which was writ by the finger of God in two Tables of stone, and given
to Moses: and in this strict sense the word Covenant comprehends no other laws
but moral, nor can the places and texts which they allege evince the
contrary, for in that place of Exodus 24.7. it is not said that the Tables of
the Covenant, but the Book of the Covenant was read in the audience of all the
people; which Book, we readily acknowledge to comprehend ceremonials as well
as morals, but not the Tables of the Covenant, of which the question now is: so
also when the Lord says, Exodus 34.10. that he will make a Covenant, his
meaning is that he will revive his Covenant by writing (as it is there set
down in the same chapter) in which writing it is very true that there is
mentioned made of many ceremonial laws; but suppose this covenant written by
Moses comprehends sundry ceremonial laws, will it therefore follow that the
Tables of the Covenant written with the finger of God did the like? No such
matter, and therefore there is an So Iuni^^, W^llet, in loc.
express difference put in the same chapter, verse 27, 28. between the
covenant written by Moses, and the ten Commandments written by the finger of
God. But secondly, Let it be granted that the Decalogue comprehends summarily
all the laws which are particularly dispersed here and there in the writings
of Moses, yet it does not follow that there must be one ceremonial law
written by the finger of God, and lifted up in the Decalogue to be the epitome
and summarie of all ceremonial laws elsewhere explained in the writings of
Moses: For all laws, whether ceremonial or judicial, may be referred to the
Decalogue as appendices to it or applications of it, and so to comprehend all
other laws as their summary. But such a summary will no way enforce a
necessity of making any one of them the epitome of ceremonialls, and the other
nine of them of the morals, for we know that many judicial laws are
comprehended under moral laws, being referred as appendices thereunto by
Calvin, Martyr, Chemnitius, Ames, and sundry others, and yet it will not follow
from hence that one of the laws in the Decalogue must be a judicial law as
the summary of all judicials, which are branches of the Covenant as well as
Master Primrose his ceremonials.

Thesis 34.
It should not seem strange that that law which in the general of it be unto a
thing ceremonial, and in this respect it cannot be denied but that the moral
law may comprehend all ceremonial laws; but it will not hence follow (as Mr.
Primrose inferres) that one law in the Decalogue must be ceremonial as the
head and summary of all ceremonial laws, because we say ceremonial laws may
be comprehended under some moral law, as special applications thereof: ex
gr. It is a moral law to worship God according to his own will, and not after
man's inventions, as the second Commandment holds it forth: Now in the
application of this law the Lord points out his own instituted worship in
sundry significant ceremonies, sacrifices, sacraments, etc. which particular
institutions (though ceremonial) are to be referred unto, and are comprehended
under the second Commandment which is a moral law: for if God will be
worshipped with his own worship according to this Commandment, then its
necessary for the Lord to show (and that under his Commandment) what those
institutions be, wherein he will be worshipped, many of which are ceremonial,
which are therefore directly comprehended here.

Thesis 35.
viz. because ceremonialls are branches of the covenant, which is the
Decalogue; for upon the like ground there must be one judicial law also as
the summary of all judicials, nay one Evangelicall law also as the head of all
Evangelicals, sprinkled here and there in Moses his writings, of which we read
John 5.43. Rev. 10.6, 7, 8. with Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13. Gal. 3.8. with Genesis 12.3. for
judicials and Evangelicals are branches of the Covenant, as well as
ceremonials, if Mr. Primrose his principle be true; but if by his own
confession nine of them are morals, and one of them only the head of
ceremonialls, how shall judicial and Evangelicall summaries come in? which
either he must make room for in the Decalogue, or acknowledge his foundation to
be rotten, upon which he has built up one ceremonial law among the nine
moralls.

Thesis 36.
It is true, that among men, the same body of Laws may Primrose pleads, but
that the Decalogue was such a body as had ceremonials mixed with morals, it can
never be made good by any color of proof, except it be that which we have
shown will as strongly enforce an introduction of some one judicial and
another Evangelicall law into the Decalogue, as well as one ceremonial; but
such a confusion of Law and Gospel, Evangelicals and judicials, ceremonialls
and morals, the blessed God abhorres: for it neither suits with Gods wisdom
and end in giving the law, nor yet with man's weakness (which God pitties) to
make such a jumbling and confusion of things together: for who can then tell
what law is moral and what Evangelicall, and what ceremonial, unless it be
(as was shown) by flying for light to the dictates and instinct of nature, to
show unto poor deceitful man, what laws are moral and what not, wherein the
remedy would have been as bad as the disease?

Thesis 37.
If there must be one law in the Decalogue, ceremonial, Prim. part. 2. cap. 6.
S. 8.
that so the more Authority may be procured hereby (as Mr. Primrose pleads)
unto all Gods Ordinances, and therefore one of the ceremonials was written in
the Decalogue with Gods own finger, and honored with the like prerogatives as
the moral laws were, which were immediately spoken by God himself: Then (if
this reasoning be solid) why was not one judicial and another Evangelicall
precept alike honored also? For was there not as much need to procure
Authority to this as well as to ceremonials? and yet we see their Authority
was sufficiently procured without being shusted into the Decalogue, and so
might ceremonialls also.

Thesis 38.
There were three sorts of laws which are commonly 1. Moral. 2. Ceremonial.
3. Judicial.


Thesis 39.
The moral respected their manners as they were men, as a civil society: Thus
the Learned speak, and being heartily understood, are true.

Thesis 40.
Love to God in holiness; the second, Love to man in righteousness: which
holiness and righteousness are the two parts of Gods Image which was once
engraven upon man's soul, in his primitive and perfect estate, Ephesians. 4.24. Nor
indeed do I see how that popish Argument will be otherwise answered, pleading
for a possibility in man to keep the law perfectly in his lapsed and fallen
estate in this life, for, say they, God makes no laws of impossible things, it
being unjust for God to require and exact that of a man which he is not able
to do: to which it is commonly and truly answered, That man had once power to
keep the law in his innocent estate, and hence though man be not able to keep
it now, yet God may require it, because he once gave him power to keep it; and
that therefore it is no more unjust to exact such obedience which he cannot
perform, than for a creditor to require his money of his broken debtor, or
spend-thrift, who is now failed (as they say) and not able to repay. Man
therefore having once power to keep the law, and now having no power, this
argues strongly that the law of the Decalogue contains nothing but what was
once written as a law of life upon his heart in his innocent estate: for I see
not how Gods justice can be cleared if he exacts such obedience in the
Decalogue which is impossible for man to give, unless the very same law and
power of obedience was written upon his heart at first: and therefore it is a
wild notion of theirs who think that the Covenant of works which God made
with Adam, is not the same for matter with the Covenant of works expressed in the
moral law; for we see that there is the same Image of holiness and
righteousness required in the Tables of stone, as the condition of this
Covenant, which was once written upon man's heart, and required in the same
manner of him. Now this law thus revived and reprinted is the Decalogue,
because most natural and suitable to humane nature, when it was made most
perfect, therefore it is universal and perpetual; the substance also of this
law being love to God and man, holiness toward God, and righteousness toward
man, Matt. 22.37, 39. Luke 1. Hence also this law must needs be moral,
universal and perpetual, unless any should be so wicked as to imagine it to
be no duty of universal or perpetual equity, either to love God, or to love
man, to perform duties of holiness toward the one, or duties of
righteousness toward the other: Hence again, the things commanded in this law
are therefore commanded because they are good, and are therefore moral,
unless any shall think that it is not good in it self to love God or man, to
be holy or righteous; and which is still observable, there is such a love
required herein, and such a loveliness put upon these laws, as that by virtue
of these all our obedience in other things, which are not moral, becomes
lovely; for there were many ceremonial observances, in which and by which the
people of God expressed their love to God, as Mr. Primrose truly concludes from
Deuteronomy. 6.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and Matthew. 22.37, 38, 40. but yet this love did arise
by virtue of a moral rule, par. 2. cap. 6. l. 12.
for therefore it was love to worship God in ceremonial duties, because it was
lovely to worship God with his own worship (of which these were parts) which is
the moral rule of the second Commandment. And hence Master Primrose may see his
gross mistake in making one law of the Decalogue ceremonial, because the
summary of the Decalogue being love to God and love to man, and our love to God
being shown in ceremonial as well as in moral duties, because our love is
seen and shown in our obedience to all the Commandments of God, ceremonial as
well as moral. For though there be love in ceremonial dutys, it is not so much
in respect of themselves, as in respect of some moral rule by virtue of which
such duties are attended.

Thesis 41.
The ceremonial law consisting chiefly of types and shadows Heb. 8.5. and
therefore being to cease when the body was come, Col. 2.17. was not therefore
perpetual (as the law moral) but temporary, and of binding power only to the
nation of the Jews and their proselytes, and not putting any tie upon all
Nations, as the moral law did. Every ceremonial law was temporary, but every
temporary law was not ceremonial (as some say) as is demonstrable from sundry
judicials, which in their determinations were proper to that Nation, while that
Jewish polity continued, and are not therefore now to be observed.

Thesis 42.
Judicial laws some of them being hedges and fences to safeguard both moral
and ceremonial precepts, their binding power was therefore mixed and various,
for those which did safeguard any moral law (which is perpetual) whether by
just punishments or otherwise, do still morally bind all Nations: Pisc.
pr^fat. on Exodus
For as Piscator argues, a moral law is as good and as precious now in these
times as then, and there is as much need of the preservation of these fences to
preserve these laws, in these times, and at all times, as well as then, there
being as much danger of the treading down of those laws by the wild beasts
of the world, and brutish men (sometimes even in Churches) now as then; and
hence God would have all Nations preserve these fences for ever, as he would
have that law preserved for ever which these safeguard: but on the other side
these judicialls which did safeguard ceremonial laws, which we know were not
perpetual, but proper to that Nation, hence those judicials which compass
these about are not perpetual nor universal; the ceremonialls being plucked up
by their roots, to what purpose then should their fences and hedges stand? As
on the contrary the morals abiding, why should not their judicials and fences
remain? The learned generally doubt not to affirm, that Moses judicials bind
all nations, so far forth as they contain any moral equity in them, which
moral equity does appear, not only in respect of the end of the law, when it
is ordered for common and universal good, but chiefly in respect of the law
which they safeguard and fence, Vid. Pisc. pr^f. in Exodus Vid Iun. de Pol. Mos.
which if it be moral, it is most just and equal, that either the same or
like judicial fence (according to some fit proportion) should preserve it
still, because it is but just and equal, that a moral and universal law
should be universally preserved: from whence by the way, the weakness of
their reasonings may be observed, who that they may take away the power of the
civil Magistrate in matters of the first Table (which once he had in the
Jewish commonwealth) affirm that such civil power, then, did arise from the
judicial, and not from any moral law: when as it is manifest that this his
power in preserving Gods worship pure from Idolatrous and profane mixtures,
according to the judicial laws, was no more but a fence and safeguard set
about moral Commandments; which fences and preservatives are therefore (for
substance) to continue in as much power and authority now, as they did in those
days, as long as such laws continue in their morality, which these preserve:
the duties of the first Table being also as much moral as those of the second,
to the preserving of which later from hurt and spoil in respect of their
morality, no wise man questions the extent of his power.

Thesis 43.
If therefore the question be now made, whether the law Whether the law of the
Sabbath be a principle of the light of nature, known and evident of it self,
or at least such as every man that has the use of reason may readily find
out, without some external revelation (as Mr. Ironside injuriously states it
wrestling herein with his own shadow, Irons. quaest. 2. cap. 8.
with many others of his fellowship in this controversy.) For morality (as
has been declared) is of larger extent then such naturality. But the question
is, whether it is one of those laws which is therefore commanded, because it
is holy, just and good in it self, whether man see it by any previous light of
corrupt nature, I or no; and being thus commanded as such a law, whether it be
not therefore of perpetual and universal obligation, binding all Nations and
persons in all ages, in their hearts, lives, manners, to the observance
thereof, as a part of that holiness we owe to God, and which God requires of
all men according to rules of moral equity: or on the contrary whether it be
not rather a typical, ceremonial, figurative and temporary precept, binding
only some persons, or that one Nation of the Jews for some time, from the
obedience of which law, Christians (in respect of any law of God) are now
exempted?

Thesis 44.
For clearing up whereof, it may not be amiss to take notice of the agreement
(at least in words) herein, on all hands, even by those who oppose that
morality of the Sabbath which we plead for. All sides agree in this, viz. That
the law of this fourth Commandment concerning the Sabbath, is moral. But as
the differences about the meaning of Tu es Petrus are many, so here the
difficulty lies to know, how, and in what sense and respect it may be called
moral; for Master Ironside expressly consents in this, Irons. quast. 2. cap.
9.
viz. That all the Commandments of the Decalogue are moral, but every one in
his proportion and degree, and so (says he) is that of the Sabbath, it is
moral for substance, but not for circumstance.

Prim. par. 2. cap. 6. Sect. 15, 19.
Master Primrose also (when he is awake) expressly confesses thus much, viz.
That the Sabbath is moral in its foundation, end, marrow and principal
substance; and that a stinted time is moral, and grounded on the principles of
nature; and therefore the Gentiles (says he) had their set days of religion:
and this (he tells us) is ratified by the Gospel, which commends to the
faithful the Assembling of themselves together for Word and Sacraments, and
consequently that they have appointed times to attend upon them, wherein the
word of God be read and preached as under the old Testament every Sabbath day:
nay he yields yet more, viz. That not only stinted times, but that also there
should be a convenient proportion and suitable frequency of time for Gods
service, now under the Gospel, as under the Law; and therefore affirms, that
the Jewish annual Feasts, and new Moons, being but once a year or once a
month, and so being rare and seldom, could not teach us the convenient and
most suitable frequency of Gods public service, as the Sabbath did, which
returned weekly, and therefore he says that the Commandment runs not thus,
viz. Remember to keep the new Moons, but Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day.
So that by Mr. Primrose concession, not only a time, but a stinted time, not
only a stinted, but also such a convenient proportion and suitable frequency
of time, as is once in seven days, is morally holy by virtue of the fourth
Commandment.

Gomarus also concludes that the public worship of God required in the fourth
Commandment, Gom. Invest. Orig. Sab. ca 5
calls for observation, not only of certain, but also of sufficient days for
worship; and what these sufficient days be, is to be gathered from the
fourth Commandment, viz. that they be not more rare and less frequent, then
the weekly Sabbaths of the Israelites, because, if God (as he shows)
challenged a weekly Sabbath of a stiff-necked people laden with the burden of
many other Festivals and Ceremonies, how then should Christians, freed from
their yoaks and burdens, have them less frequent?

Master Breerwood also to the like purpose professes, Breer. p. 47, 48
That Christians should no^ be less devout and religious in celebrating the
Lords day, then the Jews were in celebrating their Sabbath, and his reason
(laboring with some spice of a contradiction) is this, viz. because the
obligation of our thankfulness to God is more then theirs, although the
obligation of his Commandment to us in that behalf is less: for I confess
its beyond my shallowness to conceive, how the thankfulness should be more
and the Commandment less; unless he will imagine some such popish work, as
exceeds the command.

Wallaeus comes almost quite over the threshold unto us, and maintains upon
solid arguments, Wall. dissers. de pr^c. 4. c 4.
that by the force and analogy of this fourth Commandment, all the true
worshippers of God, are bound to the exact observation of one day in the circle
and compass of seven; and then he produces a cloud of witnesses, both ancient
Fathers, and the chief of our late reformers, testifying to the same morality
of one day in seven, which himself maintains; that whoever shall read him
herein, would wonder how it should ever enter into the hearts of learned men
(as White, Rogers, Dow, the Heylin.
Historian, and many others) to imagine and go about to befoole the world, as
if the morality of a seventh day was the late and sour fruit growing out of
the crabbed and rigid stock of some English Puritans and reformers, wherein
they are forsaken of all their fellows, whom in all other things they so much
admire in other Reformed Churches. It being therefore confessed on all hands
that the Sabbath is moral (though I confess at other times our Adversaries
unsay this at least in their Arguments;) the Controversy therefore only lies
in this, viz. How and in what respect it should be so?

Thesis 45.
The general consent herein also is this, to wit, That the or in respect of
something which is more general in this Commandment, rather then in respect of
that particular day which the Commandment does also point at: for if the
morality of it did lie in observing that particular day only, how could there
be a change of that day to another? For if the morality of a Sabbath was
limited unto a particularity, or to that one particular day, it is then
impossible that any other day to which that first is changed, should be moral
by virtue of the same Commandment: but we shall show in fit place, that the
day is lawfully changed and morally observed, and therefore that which is in
this Commandment firstly moral, must of necessity be somewhat more general.

Thesis 46.
general which we acknowledge to be moral in this command (rightly
understood) is a seventh day. Our adversaries would make it more general, and
resolve it into a day or some day for solemn worship, yet when they are forced
to see and acknowledge by the dint of argument, that this is too general,
because thus the Commandment may be observed, if one day in a thousand, or once
in ones life it be sanctified; they do therefore many times come nearer to us,
to somewhat less general then a day, viz. to a stinted, fixed and appointed
day, and to such an appointed day as contains a sufficient proportion of time
for God, with convenient frequency, no less frequent then theirs in the old
Testament, which was every seventh day, as may be seen Thesis 44. and truly
thus much being acknowledged by them, one would think that the controversy
(with this sort of men) was brought unto a comfortable and quiet issue and full
agreement, but it is strange to see how contrary the language is of these men
sleeping, from what it is when they are awake: They strike fiercely at a
seventh day, and a determined time, as impossible to be moral, when they meet
with them in the dark, and yet we see, acknowledge them (in effect) to be
moral, when they meet with them sometimes in the light.

Thesis 47.
lax or narrow, viz. either to any day in seven, which man or the Church may
appoint; or to such a seventh day as God shall determine, It is therefore
needful for the clearing up of this controversy, to seek out with an
impartial and sober mind, the true meaning of the fourth Commandment, and to
enquire more particularly and exactly what is required it it, and what is
commanded by virtue of it, which some able men not taking a right observation
of in the dark and tempestuous times of controversy, have therefore made
miserable shipwreck, not only of the truth, but also of themselves, and souls
of others.

Thesis 48.
The things which are morally enjoined in this Commandment, 1. Some things are
Primario; i. Primarily, firstly and more generally moral. 2. Some things are
secundario; i. Secondarily, derivatively and consequently moral.


A time, a day, a seventh day of rest are in the first respect moral, but in
the other respect this or that particular seventh day may be said to be moral:
Things primarily moral are perpetual; things secondarily moral are not
necessarily so: As for example, To honor superiors and fathers, whether of
Commonwealth or family, is primarily moral, but to honor these or those
particular superiors is secondarily moral, because our honoring of them
arises from that primary and general law of moral equity, viz. that if our
fathers are to be honored, then in the second place it follows, that these
and those particular persons being our lawful fathers, are to be honored
also: To honor our fathers whom God has set over us, is perpetual; to honor
these or those particular fathers, is not perpetual, because themselves are
not perpetual but changeable. It was a moral duty to honor this particular
King David, but it was not perpetual, for when David was taken away, they were
not bound to honor King David any more, when King Solomon his son became his
successor: nor was it a ceremonial duty to honor this or that particular
King, because it was changeable from one to another, but it was a moral duty
so to do; wherein the law and rule is not changed (it being primarily moral)
but only the object, which we are bound to honor secondarily in respect of
the general rule: So it is in this law of the Sabbath; To keep a day, a seventh
days Sabbath, is perpetual, it being primarily moral, but to observe this or
that particular day, is of it self changeable being secondarily moral: For if
it be a moral duty to sanctify a seventh day which God shall appoint, then
it is moral (as it were) in the second place to sanctify this or that seventh
interchangeably which God does appoint, and yet it does not follow that this or
that particular seventh is in it self ceremonial, because it is changeable^
for in such a change the moral rule is not changed, but the moral object
only to which it is morally applied; the duty is not changed, but only the
day: and in this respect it should not seem hard to make somethings moral
which are not perpetual; for laws primarily moral are properly perpetual,
but laws secondarily moral, not necessarily so, but changeable, because, as
has been said, herein there is no change of the rule, but only of the object
or application of the rule, which may be variously and yet morally observed.

Thesis 49.
David's measure, Psalm 119 96. and very comprehensive, and hence the generals
include many particulars, and sometime the particulars have a special respect
to things more general, as is evident in the second and fifth Commandment,
Broad. Tract. de Sob. cap. 4.
which Synechdoche, Master Broad acknowledges to be in all other commands
except the Sabbath, wherein he will have no general understood, but only a
commandment to observe that particular day only, that so he may go one step
further then some of his betters, and utterly abolish the morality of this
command: but whether this Commandment is so narrowly restrained, will appear
more fully in showing the truth of this distinction out of the Commandment,
more particularly.

Thesis 50.
primarily and more generally moral, and morally commanded, are these three,
1. That there be some solemn convenient time set apa^t for Gods worship. 2.
That this time be not any small pittance of time, but a solemn day of worship,
bearing the most meet proportion to those days man has for himself. 3. That
this day be not any day indefinitely which man sees meet, but (as it is in the
Commandment) the Sabbath or Rest day, which God himself interprets and
determines to a seventh day.


Some of our Adversaries in this Controversy, will not acknowledge any set
time or day to be moral by virtue of this Commandment, because they think that
That particular seventh day from the creation is only commanded but now
abolished under the Gospel; and it only is commanded (they say) because it is
only expressed and made mention of in the Commandment; I confess that That
particular seventh is expressed and pointed at, but not only expressed (as we
shall show in fit place) but suppose it were granted, that That seventh only
is expressed, yet it will not follow that therefore a seventh day, and
consequently a day, and consequently a time of worship is excluded: for look as
it is in the second Commandment, we see the worship of a graven Image is
particularly forbidden, and yet that which is more general, is also herein
forbidden, viz. the worship of God by humane inventions: and why may not the
like general be enjoined by commanding that particular seventh in the fourth
Commandment? Others of our adversaries, on the contrary, acknowledge therefore,
that in this particular seventh (which they make ceremonial) something more
general and moral is herein required, but this general they limit to a time
or some day of worship, but a seventh day which is more general then that
particular seventh, yet less general then a day or time, they fly from this
as from some serpent or bugbear, and will not admit it as any thing generally
moral in this Commandment: But it is very observeable in this Controversy,
that upon the same grounds on which they would exclude this general of a
seventh from being moral, they may as well exclude their own generals, viz. a
time or a day from being moral: for if they think it irrational, that
because a particular seventh day is required, that therefore a seventh day more
general cannot be commanded; why is it not as irrational upon the same ground
to exclude a time, a day also? Surely a seventh day lies nearer the bosom of a
particular seventh, and is of nearer kin to it then a day. And I marvel that
they should gather a solemn time and day of worship, which is more general,
rather then a seventh out of that particular day, as not possibly to be
intended, although in a manner expressed in the Commandment it self. I know
there are some who think that there is nothing generally moral in this
Commandment, but a seventh day; which unless it be well and warily
explicated, I then crave leave to concur thus far with our adversaries, viz.
That a solemn time, and a day of worship are generally moral in this command,
but not only moral, but that a seventh day also which God shall determine is
generally, yea principally moral also in this Commandment.

Thesis 51.
Tempus cultus or the time of worship; now this time must either be
indeterminate time, which necessarily attends all acts of worship, and duties
of piety, or else determinate and solemn time. Indeterminate time is not
required here, because to make a special commandment about such a time, would
be both needless and ridiculous, for if it be impossible that any duty should
be performed without such time, then wherever that duty is required, the time
which necessarily attends it must be supposed and enjoined in the same
commandment: Some determinate and solemn time is therefore herein generally,
though not only commanded.

Thesis 52.


Thesis 53.
The worship it self therefore is not required in this common worship as some
call it, or rather all that holy and reverend manner of worship which we owe to
God is required in the same command; and if all natural, instituted and common
worship or holy manner of worship be required in the three first commands, I
marvel then how any worship (any further then as a time of worship, may be
called worship,) can be required in this fourth command, The time therefore,
and not the worship it self is required herein: for if any worship be
required, it is either the whole worship of God, or some special kind of
worship; if the whole worship, then there should be no worship of God required
directly in the three first Commandments, but the very same which is commanded
in the fourth also, which gross Tautology is most absurd to imagine in the
short sum of these ten words; but if any special kind of worship should be
required and not the whole, then the Sabbath day is sanctified to some one kind
of worship, rather then to the exercise of all kind of worship, which is most
false and profane: for who will affirm that the Sabbath is to be sanctified,
suppose by that kind of worship which is public, and not private also, by
external, and not by internal worship also; by natural worship in love and
fear God, etc. and not with instituted in the use of all Gods Ordinances, and
that with all holy preparation and reverence also?

Thesis 54.
all worship is here required, but most false that the worship it self is so:
The worship it self is required in the three first commands, but the special
exercise of all this worship at such a time, is required in the fourth Command:
the exercise of holiness and holy duties is here required as the end, and a
holy rest as a means thereunto, and in this respect it is true which Wallaeus
observes, Wall. diss. de 4 pr^^. cap. 5.
viz. That it is not a bare and naked circumstance of time, but the rest it
self from labor, and the application of the day to holy uses which is here
enjoined; but does it therefore follow that the worship it self, and the holy
duties themselves are here directly commanded? which he seems to maintain: no
verily, no more then that works of mercy in the second Table, are required in
this fourth Command of the first Table, because the exercise of mercy and love
as well as of piety and necessity is required also in this Command.

Thesis 55.
worship and holy duties at this time, is required for the duties sake, as at
other times, the time is required for the times sake; by which words they seem
to make the bare circumstance of time to be required here; but this assertion
had need be understood with much candor, and the true explication of it; for in
some sense its most true which our Savior affirms, that man is not made for
the Sabbath or the time of it, Mark 2.27.

Thesis 56.
or as it is a holy time; set a part for holy rest, that so man might attend
upon God: and in this respect all holy duties are for this time, because in
this respect they are for God who is all in all in holy time: And therefore
Wallaeus need not put us upon search to see whether the holy rest of the day be
required in the second or any other Command, Wall. ibid.
for it is not affirmed by any, that the naked circumstance of time is here
only required, without any holy rest; but that a holy time of rest is herein
commanded, and therefore to be referred to this command: hence also it is most
false which some affirm, Do^.
viz. That the rest from ordinary labors on this day, as it is connected with
holy duties of worship without which they cannot be performed, is as necessary
now, as when the Jewish Sabbath was in being; but otherwise out of these duties
there is no holy time of rest commanded. For such a restraint of time to holy
duties as makes the time holy for the duties sake, so that no time is holy but
in the performance of holy duties, and these duties (upon narrow examination)
only public duties, does but open a gap for licentiousness, voluptuousness,
sports, May-poles and Dog-markets, and such like profaneness, out of the time
of holy public worship; or what private worship each man shall think most
meet. For in this sense holy duties are for the time, because the whole day
being sanctified, holy duties are therefore to attend, and in this respect are
for this time; and not the time for them, viz. That when the time of the
exercise of some holy duties does cease, the time of holy rest or holy time
must then cease also.

Thesis 57.
Nor should it seem strange that holy duties should attend Romans 14. Gal. 4.
which dirty ditch of observing times, they unawares fall into who plead against
a determined Sabbath, sanctified of God, and yet would have some time and day
observed by the appointment of men: For the observation of such days which God
shall appoint, cannot be condemned as an observing of times: but the
observation of days which humane wisdom shall think fit may be quickly
reduced to such a transgression.

Thesis 58.
exercising the whole worship of God, in respect of such a time: but it does
not therefore follow, that any new kind of worship (which Wallaeus hence
pleads for) is required herein: Wall. dissert. de 4. praec. c 6.
for this higher degree and special manner of worship is not the substance of
any new worship, it being only a peculiar degree of worship, In hoc quarto
praecept^ aliquem peculiarem sanctificationis modum mandar^ quae in aliis
praeceptis non mandatur, a nobis qu^que extra controversiam deb^t coll^^ari,
^um in his december verbis Tautologia supervacu^ non committ^^ur. Wall. Ibid.
and therefore varies not the kind: And if the three first Commandments
enjoyne the worship it self, then they do command the highest measures and
degrees also severally, for where any duty is required, the highest degree and
extension of it is also therewithal required. Hence therefore it still
follows, that this peculiar manner of exercising holy duties upon this day, is
chiefly with reference and relation to the time which God has sanctified,
that herein he might be in a special manner worshipped and served: And verily
Wallaeus foreseeing the blow, had no other way to expedite himself from making
the three first Commandments, either to be mere cipers, or the fourth
Commandment from laboring with a needless Tautology, but by flying for refuge
to this peculiar manner of holiness which he thinks is required herein, and not
in any of the rest; but what has been said may be sufficient to clear up the
ungroundednesse of this mistake.

Thesis 59.
Wallaeus among many others, that he might make the worship it self to be
required in the fourth Commandment, disputes therefore against those who place
the instituted worship of God* directly under the second Commandment, which if
he could make good, he had then the fairer probabilities to show that the
worship it self was required directly in the fourth Command; which principle
if it was granted, would expose the morality of the Sabbath to sorer blows and
bruises then perhaps appears at first blush: It may not therefore be amiss,
but be rather of special use for the clearing up both of the meaning and
morality of the fourth command, Wall. diss. de 4 praes. cap. 51
to demonstrate, that the instituted worship of God, (which Wallaeus calls,
Cultus externus and instrumentalis salutis nostrae, per auditum verbi and
sacramentorum usum, etc.) is directly required in the affirmative part of the
second command.

Thesis 60.
The clearing up of this, depends much upon a right and 1. What the graven
Image and likeness is. 2. What is meant by those words. [ Love me and keep my
Commandments.]


Thesis 61.
First, Graven Images, after which the whole world almost Terminative, i. When
people terminated their worship upon the dumb Idols themselves, as if they were
gods, without looking any further to any God more supreme and glorious: This
is the sin of many of the ignorant sort of Papists by Bellarmine's own
confession, as also many of the brutish sort of the blind heathens: And this
kind of worship and Idolatry is directly forbidden, not in the second, but in
the first Commandment; and that appears upon this undeniable ground, to wit,
that if the first Commandment expressly enjoynes us to have no other God but
Jehovah, to trust in, pray to, love, fear no other God but Jehovah, then for
any to have and worship such Images as their gods which are not Jehovah, is
directly forbidden here: Hence therefore it undenyably follows, that by the
making to our selves a graven Image, in the second Commandment, somewhat else
must be understood then the worshipping of Images terminatively as gods. 2. Or
else they were worshipped relative, i. Relatively or in reference to the true
God, as means and helps, In which, At which, and by which, the true God was
worshipped: And thus the learned and well instructed Papists maintain their
abominable worship of Images, whether graven or painted, crosses, crucifixes,
etc. to be good and lawful; for say they, we do not worship, nor are we so
senseless as to honor the Image, or Crucifix it self, but only as helps to
devotion, to carry our hearts to God and Christ, resembled by these Images:
Thus also the Jews of old, they did never worship the Images themselves, but
God in them and by them: They were not grown so soon, so extremely sottish, as
to think that the golden Calfe was the true God himself which brought them a
few weeks before out of the land of Egypt, but it was a visible help to carry
their hearts to God only, and therefore the Feast was proclaimed to Jehovah,
Exodus 32.4, 5. Micha's Idolatrous mother professes that she had dedicated the
eleven hundred shekels of silver to Jehovah to make a molten Image, Judge 17.3.
she was not simple (no not in those confused and blind times) to think that
the Image was Jehovah, nor did her son Micah think so, and therefore he does
not say, Now I know that the Teraphim will bless me, but that Jehovah will now
bless me, having set up an Image for his service. Nay verily, the wisest and
best instructed among the Heathens did never think that the Idols and Images
themselves were God, but they only worshipped God by them; which if any doubt
of, Vid Rain. de Eccles. Romans Idol. l. 2. c. 3.
let him but read Doctor Rainolds, who by pregnant and most evident proofs
demonstrates, that neither the Jews, nor the Heathens in their deepest
apostacies, did ever worship their Images any other ways then relatively, as
helps and means of the worship of the true God; and hereby sets forth the
abominable Idolatry of the Romish Church, for such a worship of their Images,
which even themselves condemn in the Idolatrous Jews and Heathens, who had as
much to say for their Image worship as the Papists have: Hence therefore it
follows, that if the graven Image in the second Commandment, was not
worshipped as God, but only as a means devised and invented by man to carry
the heart unto God, then (by a usual Synechdoche in every command) all humane
inventions and institutions, and devised means of worship, or of carrying the
heart better unto God, are forbidden in this Commandment; and if all humane
institutions and devised means of worship, be herein directly forbidden, then
certainly All divine institutions and means of worship, and consequently All
Gods instituted worship, in Ministry, Sacraments, etc. is directly commanded in
the affirmative part of this second Command; and consequently not in the fourth
Command: And if all Orthodox Divines condemn the Popish relative worship of
Images, as directly cross and contrary to the second Command, I then see no
reason why any should question, but that all the instituted means of worship
(Images as it were of Gods own devising) should belong to the affirmitive part
of the same Command. The second thing to be explained in this Commandment is,
What is love to God and keeping of his Commandments, which we read of in the
close of the Commandment? Love to God is here opposed to Hatred of God, and
those that Love him, to those that Hate him: Now this Hatred is not hating of
God at large (for there is a hatred of God in every sin, Prove. 1.29. and
8.36.) but in particular, when it appears in this particular sin of setting up
of Images and men's inventions, forbidden in this Commandment, which therefore
sets down the proper punishment for this sin: So by love of God, is not meant
love of God at large (which is seen in keeping every Command) but in
particular, when we love God in his own Ordinances and institutions. Look
therefore as hatred of God in setting up man's inventions and institutions
(which superstitious persons think to be much love to God) is here condemned
in the negative part of the Commandment; so on the contrary, love to God in
closing with him and seeking of him in his own Institutions, whether Word or
Sacraments, etc. is here enjoined in the affirmative part of this Command, and
consequently not (as Wallaeus would have it) in the affirmative part of the
fourth Command, Keeping my Commandments being set down as a fruit of this
love, and both together being opposed to hatred of God: Hence by Commandments,
cannot be meant in general, all the ten Commandments (as some imagine upon
miserable weak grounds, which I lift not to mention) but in special, Gods
Institutions and Ordinances commanded in special by him, to which humane
inventions and Images of men's heads and hands, are commonly in Scripture
opposed, and are therefore condemned, because not commanded, or because none of
his Commandments, Ier. 7.31. Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31. Matthew. 15.9. If therefore
(again) Gods Institutions and Commandments are here enjoined in this second
Commandment, they cannot be directly required in the fourth Command. These
things being thus cleared, the objections of Wallaeus are easily answered: For
first, he says, That from the negative part of this second Commandment cannot
be gathered such an affirmative part as this is, Object. 1.
viz. That God will be worshipped by the Word and Sacraments. But that this
assertion thus barely propounded, but not proved, is false, appears from what
has been said concerning the true meaning of the negative part of this
Command: For if humane inventions, under the name of graven Image be
forbidden, then Divine Institutions, such as Word and Sacraments be, are here
commanded, and from that negative any ordinary capacity may readily see what
the affirmative is. He says again secondly, That if instituted worship was
contained under the affirmative part of the second Commandment, Object. 2.
then this Commandment is mutable, because God was thus worshipped one way
before Christ, and another way since Christ; but (says he) the second
Commandment is moral, and therefore immutable, and therefore such mutable
worship cannot be enjoined herein. But we have Vid. These. 34
formerly shown that although this Commandment be moral and immutable in
respect of it self, yet in respect of the application of it to this or that
object or thing commanded, it may be in that respect mutable: For it is an
immutable law that God must be worshipped with his own worship, such as he
shall institute (and this is the sum of the second Commandment it self) yet
the things instituted (wherein there is only an application of the command)
may be mutable: the second Commandment does not immutably bind to the
observance of this or that particular instituted worship only: But to observe
Gods instituted worship, and to attend his appointments, which is the only
moral law and rule in the affirmative part of this Command. He thirdly
objects, That the worshipping of God in Word and Sacraments, Object. 3.
etc. is never opposed in all the Scripture to the worshipping of Images. But
this is false; for Gods Institutions (of which Word and Sacraments are a part)
are frequently opposed to humane inventions, the worship appointed by God to
the worship devised by man: Images of Gods devising, are often opposed to Images
of men's own inventing; the voice of God which was only heard with the ear,
is opposed to an Image or similitude which might be seen, Deuteronomy. 4.12. A graven
Image, a teacher of lies, is opposed to the Lords teaching of truth, and also
to his presence in his Temple, which was the seat of instituted worship, Habak.
2.18, 19, 20. The worship of Images which God would have abolished, is opposed
to the worship of God by Sacrifices and Ceremonies, in the place which God
should choose, Deuter. 12.1. to 20. but yet he tells us, That to worship God in
Images, and to worship him in Spirit and Truth (which is inward worship) are
opposite: as also the lifting up of pure hands in every place, John 4.28. 1 Timothy 2.8. He tells us also that acknowledging of God in his Immensity and
Infinite Majesty, are opposed to Image Worship, Romans 1.20, 21, 22. Isa. 40.22.
Be it so: But will it therefore follow, that to worship God according to his
own Institutions* is not to worship him in Spirit and in Truth? Is it rather a
carnal than a spiritual worship, to attend on God in Word and Sacraments? May
we not lift up pure hands in the use of Gods own institutions? Is not Gods
Immensity and Majesty acknowledged and seen in the use of his own Ordinances,
as well as creatures and providence? I confess the blinder sort of Heathens
might worship stocks and stones and Images of creeping things, and four-footed
Beasts, in the place of God himself terminatively, and God might account of
all their Image Worship as such, though used relatively, and hence the
opposition may well be made between worshipping them as God, and an infinite
God; and this worship (as was said) falls then under the first Commandment: but
assuredly this Image Worship which the Apostle condemns, Romans 1.21, 23. in
debasing the infinite Majesty, and limiting it to this and that Image wherein
they did worship it, is forbidden (being only relative worship) in the second
Command: For I think the Apostle in Romans 1. has an eye principally at the most
lascivious Idolaters in the world, viz. the Egyptians, among whom principally
we read of those Images of creeping things and foure-footed beasts, in their
Hier^gliphicks: and yet we know that all that base worship did set out
something or other of the Deity, which therein (and so relatively) they did
worship. But I must not enter into the Discourse of these things here:
sufficient is said to clear up this point, viz. That Gods instituted worship
falls directly under the second, not fourth Command.

Thesis 62.
It is true, that the exercise of public worship of many public worship it
self falls directly under this command? For if public Assemblies be (as some
think) a part of natural worship, so as that the light of nature directs all
men dwelling together as creatures, to worship God together publicly as
Creator, then this worship falls directly under the first (not fourth)
Commandment, where natural worship is directly commanded; but if public
Assemblies be considered as distinct Churches politically united and combined,
publicly to worship God; then such Churches considered thus as political, not
mystical Assemblies, do fall directly under the second Command, as parts of
instituted worship: for as all devised forms of Churches, whether Diocesan,
Provincial, National, Universal (being the inventions of man to further the
worship of God) are condemned directly in the second Command: (...) all such
Churches as are framed into a spituall policy, after the fashion and pattern
of the Word and primitive institution, are (with leave of Erastus and his
disciples) enjoined in the same Commandment, and therefore not in the fourth.
Gom. Inv. sent. and Orig. Sab. ca 5. Prim* par. 2. cap. 6. Sect. 15.
Gomarus and Master Primrose therefore do much mistake the mark, and scope of
the fourth Commandment, who affirm, That as in the three first Commandments,
God ordained the inward and outward service, which he will have every
particular man to yield to him in private and severally from the society of men
every day, so in the fourth Commandment he enjoyneth a service common and
public, which all must yield together unto him, forbearing in the mean while
all other business. But why should they think that public worship is more
required here than private? Will they say that the Sabbath is not to be
sanctified by private and inward worship, as well as by public and external
worship? Is not private preparation, meditation, secret prayer and converse
with God, required upon this day, as well as public praying and hearing the
Word? If they say that these are required indeed, but it is in reference to the
public, and for the public worship sake, it may be then as easily replied,
that the public worship is also for the sake of the private, that each man
secretly and privately might muse and feed upon the good of public helps; they
are mutually helpful one to another, and therefore are appointed one for
another, unless any will think that no more holiness is required upon this
day than while public worship continues; which we hope shall appear to be a
piece of professed profaneness: In the mean while, look as they have no
reason to think that private worship is required in this command, because the
exercise of private worship is at this time required; so they have as little
reason to think that the public worship it self is herein enjoined, because
the exercise of it is to be also at such a time. It is therefore the time, not
the worship it self, either public or private, which is here directly
commanded: although it be true that both of them are herein indirectly
required, viz. in relation to the Time.

Thesis 63.
If therefore the moral worship it self, whether public, external or
private, be not directly required in this fourth Prim. par. 2. cap. 6. S. 3, 4,
5.
as Master Primrose maintains, for the whole Ceremonial worship, both in
Sacrifices, Ceremonies, Type^, etc. was significant, and were, as I may so say,
Gods Images, or media cultus, means of worship, by carrying the mind and
heart to God, by their special significations, and therefore were instituted
worship, and therefore directly contained under the second, and therefore not
under the fourth Command: And if there be but nine Commandments which are
moral, and this one (by his reckoning) is to be ceremonial, and the head of
all ceremonials, and that therefore unto it all ceremonial worship is to
appertain, then the observation of a Sabbath is the greatest Ceremony,
according as we see in all other Commandments, the lesser sins are condemned
under the grosser, as anger under murder, and lust under adultery; and
inferior duties under the chief and principal, as honoring the aged and
Masters, etc. under honoring of parents; and so if all Ceremonialls are
referred to this, then the Sabbath is the grossest and greatest ceremony one of
them; and if so, then it is a greater sin to sanctify a Sabbath at any time,
than to observe new moons and other festivals, which are less Ceremonial,
and are therefore wholly cashiered, because ceremonial; and if so, why then
does Master Primrose tell us, That the Sabbath is moral for substance,
principal scope and end, and that its unmeet for us to observe fewer days
than the Jews, in respect of weekly Sabbaths? Why is not the name and
memorial of the Sabbath abandoned wholly and utterly accursed from off the
face of the earth, as well as new moons and other Jewish festivals, which upon
his principles are less ceremonial than the weekly Sabbath? It may be an
audacious Familist, whose Conscience is grown Iron, and whose brow is brass,
through a conceit of his immunity from, and Christian liberty in respect of any
thing which has the superscription of law or works upon it, may abandon all
Sabbaths together with new Moons equally: but those I now aim at, I suppose
dare not, nor I hope any pious mind else, who considers but this one thing,
viz. that when the Lord commands us to Remember to keep the Sabbath holy, he
must then (according to this interpretation) command us, that above all other
Commandments we observe his Ceremonial worship (which they say is here
enjoined) rather than his moral worship which they acknowledge to be enjoined
in all the other nine Commands, at the gate of none of which Commands is
written this word Remember; which undoubtedly implies a special attendance to
be shown unto this, above any other; for as we shall show, keep this, keep
all, break this, slight this, slight all; and therefore no wonder if no other
Command has this word Remember writ upon the portall of ^t, which word of
fence, denotes special affection and action in the Hebrew Language: but I
suppose it may strike the hardest brow and heart with terror and horror, to
go about to affix and impute such a meaning to this Commandment, viz. That
principally above all other duties we remember to observe those things which
are ceremonial: for although the observation of Ceremonies be urged and
required of God, as Master Primrose truly observes from Psalm 118.27. Ibid.
Sect. 6.
Jeremiah 17.26: Ioell 19.13. Malachy 1.7, 8, 10, 13, 14. yet that God should
require and urge the observation of these above any other worship, is evidently
cross to reason, and expressly cross to Scripture, Isaiah 1.11, 12, 13, 14,
15. Isaiah 66.3. Psalm 50.13. Jeremiah 6.20. Amos 3.21. Micah 6.7. To remember
therefore to keep the Sabbath, is not to remember to observe Ceremonial
duties.

Thesis 64.
Nor should it seem strange, that Jewish holy days Sabbath day is commanded:
for those Jewish holy days were principally instituted (as Wallaeus well
observes) for signification of Christ and his benefits (as may appear from ^
Cor. 5.7. Wall. dissert. de 4. p^aec.
Luke 4.19. Hebrews 10.5.) and therefore being significant were parts of
instituted worship, belonging to the second, not fourth Command, but the
Sabbath day (as shall be shown) is in its original institution and
consecration of another nature and not significant: yet this may be granted,
that ceremonial holy days may be referred to the fourth Command, as
appendices of it; and if Calvin, Vrsin, Danaeus and others aim^ at no more, it
may be granted, but it will not follow from hence that they therefore belong
to the second command indirectly, and directly to the fourth (which Master
Primrose contends for) but rather directly to the second, and reductively and
indirectly, as appendices to the fourth: which appendices, as they may be put
to, so they may be taken off again, the moral Commandment remaining entire:
even as we know Calvin referres many ceremonial duties as appendices to such
Commands, concerning the morality of which Master Primrose doubts not: and
therefore for him to think that the Sabbath comprehends all Jewish Festival
days, upon this ground, viz. because the Sabbath is joined with, and put in
among the reckoning of such Festivals, Leviticus 23. Isaiah 1.13, 14. has no
more force in it, than by retorting the argument, and upon the like ground
prove it to be moral, because it is joined with Moral Commandments, as
honoring of Parents, Leviticus 19.3. and prayer, Isaiah 1.19. and by his own
confession with the other nine which are all of them moral also.

Thesis 65.
Secondly, not only a solemn time, but more particularly whole days for our
own work, then (not some part of a day) but a day, a whole day, according to
the reason and express words of the Commandment, should be marked out and set
apart for his work and service: if that place, Isaiah 56.6, 7. will not
demonstrate a seventh days Sabbath under the new Testament, yet ^^sufficiently
and fully clears the point in hand, viz. that a Sabbath day is to be observed
by the sons of the stranger or Gentiles who are called strangers to the
Commonwealth of Irsael, Ephesians 2.12. and indeed Wallaeus freely confesses
and proves that a whole day is here required; Wall. diss. de 4 pr^^. cap. 5*
and if a whole day, I hope none will think that the time out of public
Assemblies is common and profane, if a whole day be holy: Prim. part 2. c.
6.8.15.
and therefore Mr. Primrose tells us, that the Gentiles having no other law but
the light of nature, have appointed set days, for the exercise of their
religion, and that as the Jews had their set days, (which we know were whole
days) so should Christians have theirs, for their public Assemblies under the
Gospel; which I hope must be therefore whole days also: it is also
considerable that if the three first Commandments requiring Gods worship, do
consequently require some time for that worship (as being a necessary adjunct
to all actions whether moral or civil, and without which they cannot be
performed) then the fourth Command, must require somewhat more particularly
than a time of worship: and therefore they that place the morality of the
fourth Command in requiring only a time of worship (because say they a time of
worship is necessary,) may upon this ground wholly and perfectly abolish the
fourth Command as superfluous and needless, because such a time of worship is
required in all other Commandments necessarily. They may also imagine as great
a morality in the command of building the Temple the place of worship, because
a place of worship is necessary as well as a time: it is not therefore a time,
but such a time as is preserved in a day even in a whole day for worship which
is here commanded.

Thesis 66.
wisdom saw this proportion of time every day to be more unmeet, in respect of
man's daily cumbers, which do so easily entangle man's thoughts and affections,
so as within some small piece of a day he cannot ordinarily nor so easily
recover and unloose himself to find the end of a Sabbath service, which is
most sweet and full rest in the bosom of his God, as he may within the
compass of a whole day set a part for that end: or suppose he could so do in
a piece and part of a day, yet Gods Name should lose by it, if he should not
have the ho^^ur of some solemn day, which we see do serve to adv^^ce the
names of idol gods, and men on earth: it is meet and just that Gods Name should
be magnified by us commonly every day, by setting a part some time which we may
well spare (as whet to the sith) out of our callings for God, and this does
honor him, but a day, much more.

Thesis 67.
They therefore who maintain that a seventh day is not moral, because it is
but a circumstance of time, may as well abolish time to be moral, or any day
to be moral, because a day (let it fall out when it will) is but a
circumstance of time; which notwithstanding they account to be moral in this
command; but we know that much morality lies in circumstances, and why a day
sanctified may not be as much moral as a duty, I yet see not.

Thesis 68.
The Familists and Antinomians of late, like the Manichees All days equally
holy under the Gospel, and none to be observed more than another by virtue of
any command of God, unless it be from some command of man to which the outward
man they think should not stick to conform, or unless it be pro re nata, or
upon several occasions, which special occasions are only to give the Alarums
for Church meetings and public Christian Assemblies: an audacious assertion,
cross to the very light of nature among the blind heathens, who have
universally allowed the deity whom they ignorantly worshipped, the honor of
some solemn days; cross to the verdict of popish Schoolmen and Prelatists,
whose stomachs never stood much toward any Sabbath at all; cross to the scope
of the Law of the Sabbath, which if it has any general morality (not denied
scarce to any of Moses Judicials,) surely one would think it should lie in the
observation of some day or days, though not in a seventh day, for which now we
do not contend. Cross also to the appointment of the Gospel, foretold by
Isaiah and Ezekiel, Isa. 56.4, 6. Ezekiel. 43.27. made mention of by our Savior
to continue long after the abolishing of all ceremonies by his death, Mat.
24.20. who therefore bids them pray, that their flight may not be in the
winter, nor on the Sabbath day, which whether it be the Jewish or Christian
Sabbath, I dispute not, only this is evident, that he has an eye to some
special set day, and which was lastly ordained by Christ, and observed in the
Primitive Churches, commonly called the Lords day, as shall be shown in due
place, and which notion under pretense of more spiritualnes in making every day
a Sabbath (which is utterly unlawful and impossible, unless it be lawful to
neglect our own work all the week long and without which there can be no true
Sabbath) does really undermine the true Sabbath, in special set days; and look
as to make every man a King and Judge in a Christian Commonwealth, would be the
introduction of confusion, and consequently the destruction of a civil
government, so to crown every day with equal honor unto Gods set days and
Sabbaths which he has anointed and exalted above the rest, this anarchy and
confusion of days, does utterly subvert the true Sabbath: to make every day a
Sabbath, is a real debasing and dethroning of Gods Sabbath.

Thesis 69.


Thesis 70.
all times are so; and Wallaeus himself confesses the argument to be invalid:
for it was not easy nor meet, but very dissonant from divine and heavenly
wisdom, to appoint in his word all particular places where his people should
meet, their meetings being to be in so many thousand several Countries, and
various situations, which places are indeed for their general nature commanded
and necessary, but in respect of application to circumstances of this and that
place and country, the variation of them is almost endless, and therefore
very incongruous and useless to set them down in the word: but it was not so
in respect of solemn time, or a solemn day of worship, for herein the Lord
might easily appoint a particular day to be observed, according to the rising
and setting of the Sun proportionably throughout all the world: and the
Scripture has expressly fore told in respect of place, that neither in
Jerusalem, Judea, nor Samaria, but that in every place incense should be
offered up to God, Malach. 1.11. but it has not so spoken, but rather the
contrary in respect of time.

Thesis 71.
viz. instrumentally holy, or as an instrument and means by which God will
convey any spiritual and supernatural grace (as Sacraments now do, and
sacrifices of old did) but being sanctified of God, they are holy seasons, in
which, God is pleased to meet and bless his people rather then at other times
and days of our own devising, or of more common use* reserving only the
Lords prerogative to himself, to work at other times also more or less as he
sees meet. Indeed it is true, that by our improvement of our time, and of such
times, the Lord sweetly conveyes himself to us, yet still it is not by time it
self, nor by the day it self, but as he conveyes himself to us by holy things,
and at holy places (as the Ark and Temple) so in holy times.

Thesis 72.
There are indeed sundry Scriptures, which to one rigidum examen of them, they
are more weighty and heavy than the disputers in this controversy usually
feel them, and therefore they do more lightly cast them by and pass them
over: and it is to be wished, that those who do not think that all days are
equal, yet will not acknowledge a seventh day to be moral, had not put
weapons unawares into the hands of others, strengthening them thereby to
destroy the morality of any day, and so to lay all days level, for I scarce
know an argument or Scripture alleged, by any Germane writer, against the
morality of a seventh day, but it strikes directly against the morality of any
day, which yet they acknowledge to be moral.

Thesis 73.
The fairest color and strongest force from Gal 4.10. and Col. 2.16. lies in
the gradation which some suppose to be intended in both those places. Ye
observe (says the Apostle) days, and months, and times, and years, Gal.
4.10. Wherein the Apostle seems to ascend from the lesser to the greater, from
days (which are less then months, and therefore weekly Sabbath days) to
months, from months or new moons, to times, which are higher then months,
and by which is meant their annual feasts and fasts, ordered according to the
(...) or fittest seasons of the year; and from times he ascends yet higher to
years, viz. their Sabbaticall years, because they were celebrated once in
many years, sometime seven, sometime fifty years: by which gradation it seems
evident, that the observation of days (which are less than months) and
therefore of weekly Sabbaths, are hereby condemned. The like gradation is urged
from Col. 2.16. where the Apostle seems to descend from condemning the greater
to the condemnation of the lesser: Let no man judge you (says the Apostle) in
respect of a holy day, new moon, or Sabbath days: there holy days seem to be
their annual or Sabbaticall days, their new moons are less than them, being
every month; and therefore by Sabbath days (they infer) must needs be meant
the weekly Sabbaths, less than new moons: Indeed some understand by days and
times (in Gal. 4.) heathenish days, but he speaking of such days as are
beggarly rudiments, under which not the Heathens, but the Children of the old
Testament were in bondage, verse 3. he must therefore speak not of Heathenish
but of Jewish days. I know also that some understand that of Col. 2.16. to be
meant of Jewish and ceremonial Sabbaths, which were annual, but this, the
Apostles gradation seems to overthrow.

Thesis 74.
Gal. 4.10. is not necessarily meant, all weekly Sabbath days, for there were
other days Ceremonial which the Jews observed, and which the Jewish teachers
urged, besides the Sabbath; to instance only in Circumcision which they
zealously pressed, Gal. 5.3. which we know was limited unto the eighth day, and
which they might urge as well as Circumcision it self. However, look as the
Apostle when he condemns them for observing times, (...) which signifies Fit
seasons, he does not therein condemn them for observing all fit seasons (for
then we must not pray nor hear the word in fit seasons) but he condemns the
Jewish Ceremonial times and seasons; so when he condemns the observation of
days, the Apostle does not condemn the observation of all days (for then
days of fasting and feasting must be condemned, as well as days of resting,
under the new Testament) but the observation of Ceremonial days, which the
Jews observed, and false teachers urged: and indeed the Apostle speaks of such
days as were beggarly elements and rudiments: now James speaking of the moral
law, which comprehends Sabbath days, he does not call it a beggarly law, but
a royal law, Iam. 2.8.12. nor does he make subjection thereunto, to be the
bondage of servants (as that was, Gal. 4.9.) but the liberty of children, and
therefore called a royal law of liberty.

Secondly, Suppose the weekly Sabbath be here comprehended under days, as
also that by Sabbaths is meant weekly Sabbaths, Col. 2.16. yet hereby cannot be
meant the Christian Sabbath, but the Jewish Sabbath: for the Apostle condemns
that Sabbath and those Sabbath days, which the Jewish teachers pleaded for,
among the Colossians; now they never pleaded for the observation of the
Christian Sabbath, but were zealous and strong procters for that particular
seventh day from the creation, which the Jews their forefathers for many
years before observed, and for the observation of which, some among us of late
begin to struggle at this day: Now, as was said, admit the gradation; we do
not observe the Jewish Sabbath, nor judge others in respect of that Sabbath, no
more than for observing new moons, or holy days, we do utterly condemn the
observation of that Sabbath: If it be said, why, do we not observe new moons
and holy days as well, by substituting other days in their room, as we do a
Christian Sabbath in the room of that Jewish Sabbath? we shall give the reason
of it in its proper place, which I mention not here, lest I should bis coctam
apponere. These places therefore are strong arguments for not observing that
seventh day which was Jewish and ceremonial, but they give no sufficient
ground for abandoning all Christian Sabbaths under the Gospel.

Thirdly, there is a double observation of days (as Wallaeus and Davenant well
observe) 1. Moral. 2. Ceremonial. Daven in Col. 3. Wall. in 4. praec.
Now the Apostle in the places alleged, speaks against the Ceremonial and
Pharisaicall observation of days, but not moral: For days of fasting are to
be observed under the Gospel (the Lord Christ our Bridegroom being now taken
from us, when our Savior expressly tells us that then his Disciples, even when
they had the greatest measures of John 16.^.
Christ's spiritual presence, should fast, Matthew. 9.15, 16.) But we are to
observe these days, with moral, not ceremonial observation, such as the
Jews had, in sackcloth, ashes, tearing hair, rending Garments, and many other
Ceremonial trappings; we are to rend our hearts, and cry mightily unto God
upon those days, which is the moral observance of them: So it is in respect of
the Sabbath, no Sabbath day under the Gospel is to be observed with
ceremonial or pharisa^call observation, with Jewish preparations, Sacrifices,
needless abstinence from lawful work, and such like formalities; but does it
hence follow that no days are to be observed under the Gospel with moral
observation, in hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, singing of Psalms?
etc. There was no morality in the new moons, by virtue of any special
commandment, and therefore it is in vain to ask, why new moons may not be
observed still, as well as Sabbaths? provided that it be observatione morali,
for there is a morality in observing the Sabbath, and that by a special
command, which is not in new moons and holy days; and therefore as we utterly
abandon all that which was in the Sabbath ceremonial, so we do and should
heartily retain and observe that which is moral herein, with moral
observance hereof.

Thesis 75.
Romans 14.5. therein days ceremonial are compared with meats ceremonial, and
not moral days with ceremonial meats. It is therefore readily acknowledged
that it was an error and weakness in some, to think themselves bound to
certain ceremonial days, as well as it was to abstain from certain
ceremonial meats; but will i^ hence follow that it is a part of Christian
liberty and strength to abandon all days as ceremonial? and that it is a part
of Christian weakness to observe any day under the Gospel? this verily has not
the face of any reason for it from this Scripture, wherein the Apostle
(doubtless) speaks of ceremonial, not moral days, as (shall appear) our
Christian Sabbaths be: And look as it is duty (not weakness) sometime to
abstain from some meats, as in the case of extraordinary humiliation, as we
see in Daniel, Dan 9. and 11. so it may be duty (not weakness) still to
observe some days; I say not the seventh day, for that is not now the
question, but some days are or may be necessary to be observed now.

Thesis 76.
does not, and so think one day more holy than another, this is most abominable
superstition, and this is indeed to observe days; and of this the Apostle
seems to speak, when he says, Ye observe days: But when the Lord shall put
holiness upon one day more then upon another, we do not then put any holiness in
the day, but God does it, nor do we place any holiness in one day more then in
another, but God places it first, and this is no observation of days, which
the Apostle condemns in those that were weak; but of the will of God which he
every where commands.

Thesis 77.
There is (as some call it) Sabbathum internum and externum, an internal and
external Sabbath; the first (if I may lawfully call it a Sabbath) is to be
kept every day in a special rest from sin; the second is to be observed at
certain times and on special days; now if that other place, Isa. 66.23.
(which is much urged for the equality of all days) be meant of a continual
Sabbath, so that those words, from Sabbath to Sabbath, if they signify a
constant continual worship of God indefinently, then the Prophet speaks of an
internal Sabbath, which shall in special be observed under the Gospel; but
this does not abolish the observation of an external Sabbath also, no more
then in the times before the Gospel, when the people of God were bound to
observe a continual Sabbath and rest from sin, and yet were not exempted
hereby from external Sabbaths, only because more grace is poured out upon the
people of God under the new Testament then under the old, and under some times
and seasons of the new Testament, and some people, more then at and upon
others: hence this prophecy points at the times of the Gospel, wherein Gods
people shall worship God more spiritually and continually then in former times:
But if by this phrase From Sabbath to Sabbath, be meant, succession, i. one
Sabbath after another successively, wherein Gods people shall enjoy blessed
fellowship with God from Sabbath to Sabbath, successively in the worship of
him, one Sabbath after another; then this place is such a weapon in their own
hands against themselves, as that it wounds to the heart that accursed conceit,
that all days should be abandoned by those under the new Testament: But
suppose that by Sabbath, is not meant the weekly Sabbath (for then, say some,
what will you understand by new moons which are conjoined with them?) yet these
two things are evident, 1. That Sabbaths and new moons were set times of
worshipping God under the old Testament. 2. That it is usual with the Prophets
to veil, (and not always to type out) the worship, and so the times of worship
which were to be under the new Testament, under the Ordinances of God observed
in the old, as may appear Isa. 19.19. Mal. 1.11. as also by Ezekiels Temple,
and such like: hence then it follows, that although this place should not
evict a seventh days Sabbath, yet it demonstrates at least thus much, that
some let times and days shadowed out under the name of new moons and Sabbaths,
are to be observed under the new Testament, and this is sufficient to prove the
point in hand, That all days are not equal under the Gospel.

Thesis 78.
Romans 14.17. i. in the use of external indifferent things, as those meats and
drinks, and some kind of days were, or if in some sense it did, yet not
chiefly in them, as if almost all religion did chiefly consist in them: but
does it from hence follow, that it consists not in things commanded, nor in any
set days of worship which are commanded? If because the kingdom of God
consists in internal peace and righteousness, and joy of the holy Ghost, that
therefore all external observances of times and duties of worship are not
necessary to be attended by Gospel-worshippers (as some secretly imagine) then
farewell all external Preaching, Sacraments, Profession and Confession of the
Name of Christ, as well as Sabbaths: and let such artists of licentiousness
bring in all profaneness into the world again, by a law from heaven, not
condemning the acts of the outward man, though never so abominable, in
abstinence from which (by this rule) the kingdom of heaven does not consist.
Is it no honor to the King of glory (as it is to earthly Princes) to be served
sometimes upon special Festivals, in special state, with special and
glorious attendance by his people, as well as after a common and usual manner
every day? We have seen some who have at first held community of days only,
to fall at last (through the righteous judgment of God blinding their hearts)
to maintain community of wives; and that because the kingdom of God has (as
they have thought) consisted no more in outward relations (as that is between
Husbands and Wives) than in the observation of external circumstances and
days.

Thesis 79.
led to maintain an equality of days under the Gospel: but this chiefly,
viz. that the moral law is not to be a Christians rule of life; for we
aknowledge it to be no Covenant of life to a Believer, that either by the
keeping of it he should be justified, or that for the breach of it he should be
condemned; but they say that when a Believer has life by the Covenant of
grace, the law is now not so much as a rule of life to such a one; and then
it is no wonder if they who blow out the light of the whole moral law from
being a light to their feet and a lamp to their paths, if they hereby utterly
extinguish this part of it, viz. the Commandment of the Sabbath: This dashing
against the whole law, is the very mystery of this iniquity, why some do
cashier this law of the Sabbath: and they do but hide themselves behind a
thread, when they oppose it by their weapons, who therefore abandon it, because
it alone is ceremonial, above any other law.

Thesis 80.
The Sabbath (says one) is perpetual and moral, but not the H. Den.
the Sabbath (which some make continual and inward only) is perpetually to be
observed, but not the Sabbath day; a Sabbath is by Divine ordination, but a
Sabbath day is to be observed only as a humane constitution. But they should
do well to consider, whether that which they call an inward continual Sabbath
be inconsistent with a special day; for I am sure that they under the old
Testament were bound equally with us to observe a continual Sabbath in resting
from all sin, and resting in God by Jesus Christ, Heb. 4.1, 2. yet this did
not exempt them from observing a special day: A special day is a most
powerful means to Sabbatize every day; Why then may not a Sabbath and a
Sabbath day consist together? An every day Sabbath is equally opposite to a
time occasionally set, as to a set day, which the Commandment enjoins; and
therefore if it exempts a Christian from observing a set day, it sets him free
also from all observation of any such set time; for if because a Christian
Sabbath ought to be continual, and that therefore there ought to be no set
days, then there should not be any occasionally set times for the worship of
God, because these neither can be continual; and if there ought to be no such
set times, we may then bid good night to all the public worship and glory of
God in the world, like the men with one eye to him who put his other eye quite
out: And if any here reply that there is not the like reason, because holy time
and days are not necessary, but holy duties are necessary, and therefore
require some occasional set time for them: I answer, That let the difference
be granted, yet that which I now dispute on is, this ground and supposition
only, viz. That if all set days are to be abandoned, because a Christians
Sabbath ought to be continual and inward, then all occasional set times also
are to be abandoned upon the same ground, because these cannot be continual
and inward no more than the other: as for them who think no holy day necessary,
but holy duties lawful every day, we have already and shall hereafter clear
up more fully in its proper place: Mean while it is yet doubtful to me,
whether those who follow Master Saltmarsh and some others, Saltmarsh Sparkles
of glory. p 265.
will acknowledge the lawfulness of any occasional set times for public
worship, of hearing the word and prayer, etc. For he makes the bosom of the
Father to be the Christian Sabbath, typified in the seventh day of the first
Creation, and he makes the six days of work to be a type, not only of the
Lord Jesus in his active and fulfilling administrations while he was in the
flesh, but also to be a figure of the Christian in bondage, or (to use his own
words) of a Christian under active and working administrations, as those of the
law and Gospel are, as all forms of worship, Duties, Graces, Prayer,
Ordinances, etc. From whence it will follow (from his principles, for I know
not his practice) that all forms of worship, Duties, Graces, Prayer,
Ordinances, are then to cease, as types and shadows and figures, when once the
substance is come, to wit, when they come in this life to the highest
attainment, which is the bosom of the Father, which bosom is the true Sabbath
of a Christian man. Now I confess that the bosom of God in Christ is our
rest, and our All in All in heaven, and our sweet consolation and rest on
earth, and that we are not to rest in any means, Ordinances, Graces, Duties,
but to look beyond them all, and to be carried by them above them all, to him
that is better than all, to God in Christ Jesus; but to make this bosom of God
a kind of canker-worme to fret and eat out the heart and being not only of all
Sabbaths and Ordinances of worship, but also of all duties and graces of Gods
Spirit, nay of Christ Jesus himself, as he is manifested in the flesh, and is
an external Mediator, whom I. S.
some lately have also cast into same box with the rest, Being sent only (as
they think) to reveal, but not to procure the Fathers love of delight, and
therefore is little else than a mere form, and so to cease when the Father
comes in the room of all forms, and so is All in All, This I dare say is such
a high affront to the precious blood of Christ, and his glorious Name and
blessed Spirit of grace, that he who has his Furnace in Zion, and his fire in
Jerusalem, will not bear it long, without making their judgments and plagues
(at least spiritual) exemplary and wonderful, and leading them forth in such
crooked ways, with the workers of iniquity, when peace shall be upon Israel:
Are these abstracted notions of a Deity (into the vision and contemplation of
whose amazing glory (without seeing him as he is in Christ) a Christian (they
say) must be plunged, lost, and swallowed up, and up to which he must ascend,
even to the unaproachable light) the true and only Sabbath? Are these (I say)
the new and glorious light breaking out in these days, which this age must
wait for? which are nothing else (upon narrow search) than Monkish
imaginations, the goodly cob-webs of the brain-imagery of those idolatrous and
superstitious hypocrites the Anchorites, Monks and Friars; who to make the
blind and simple world admire and gaze upon them, gave it out hereby, like
Simon Magus, that they were some great ones, even the very power and familiars
of God. Surely in these times of distraction, war and blood, if ever the Lord
called for sackcloth, humiliation, repentance, faith, graces, holiness,
precious esteem of Gods Ordinances, and of that Gospel which has been the
power of God to the salvation of thousands, now is the time; and must Gods
people reject these things as their A. B. C? and must the new light of these
times be the dreams and visions and slaverings of doting and deluded old
Monks? Shall the simplicity of Gospel-ministery be rejected, as a common
thing, and shall Harphius his Theologia Mystica, Augustinus Elutherius, Jacob
Behmen, Cusanus, Raimundus Sebund, Theologia Germanica, and such like
Monk-admirers, be set up as the new lights and beacons on the mountain of
these elevated times? Surely (if so) God has his time and ways of putting a
better relish to his precious Gospel, and the cross of Christ, which was wont
in Paul's time to be plainly preached, without such popish paintings, and
wherein Gods people knew how to reconcile their swe^^ rest in the bosom of the
Father, and their Sabbath day.

Thesis 81.
If sin (which is the transgression of the law) be the greatest evil, then
holiness (which is our conformity to the law) is our greatest good. If sin be
man's greatest misery, then holiness is man's greatest happiness: It is
therefore no bondage for a Christian to be bound to the observance of the law
as his rule, because it only binds him fast to his greatest happiness, and
thereby directs and keeps him- safe from falling into the greatest misery and
woe: and if the great design of Christ in coming into the world, was not so
much as to save man from affliction and sorrow (which are lesser evils) but
chiefly from sin (which is the greatest evil) then the chief end of his
coming was not (as some imagine) to lift his people up into the love and
abstracted speculation of the Father above the law of God: but into his own
bosom only, where only we have fellowship with the Father above the Law of
sin.

Thesis 82.
John 3.5. Tit. 3.14.) then he dyed to make his people sensible of sin,
because hereby his peoples hearts are chiefly weaned and severed from it and
saved out of it (as by hardness and unsensiblenesse of heart under it, they
chiefly cleave to it and it to them) and therefore we know that godly sorrow
works repentance, never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.10. And that Pharaoh's
hardness of heart strengthened him in his sin against God unto the last gasp,
and hence it is also that the deepest and greatest spirit of mourning for sin
is poured out upon Believers, after God has poured out upon them the spirit of
grace, as is evident, Zach. 12.10, 11. because the blood of Christ which was
shed for the killing of their sin, now makes them sensible of their sin,
because it is now sprinkled and applied to them, which it was not before, for
they now see all their sins aggravated, being now not only sins against the
law of God, but against the blood and love of the Son of God: It is therefore a
most accursed doctrine of some Libertines, who imagining that (through the
bloodshed and righteousness of Christ in their free justification) God sees no
sin in his justified people, that therefore themselves are to see no sin,
because now they are justified and washed with Christ's blood; and therefore
lest they should be found out to be gross liars, they mince the matte^, they
confess that they may see sin by the eye of sense and reason, but (faith
being cross to reason) they are therefore to see the quite contrary, and so to
see no sin in themselves by the eye of faith; from whence it follows that
Christ shed his blood to destroy all sight and sense of sin to the eye of
faith, though not to the eye of reason, and thus as by the eye of faith they
should see no sin, so (it will follow) that by the same blood they are bound to
see no law, no not so much as their rule, which as a rule is index sui and
obliqui, and in revealing man's duty declares his sin. I know that in
beholding our free justification by the blood of Christ, we are to exclude all
law from our consciences as a covenant of life, not to see or fear any
condemnation for sin, or any sin able to take away life: But will it hence
follow that a justified person must see no sin by the eye of faith, nor any
law as his rule to walk by, to discover sin? and is this the end and fruit
of Christ's death too? Surely this doctrine, if it be not blasphemous, yet it
may be known to be very false and pernicious, by the old rule of judging false
Doctrines, viz. if either they tend to extenuate sin in man, or to vilify
the precious grace of Jesus Christ, as this Doctrine does.

Thesis 83.
If sin be the transgression of the law (which is a truth written by the
Apostle with the beams of the Sun, 1 John Psalm 119.11. for whoever makes
conscience of sin, cannot but make conscience of observing the rule, that so
he may not sin, and consequently whoever make no conscience of observing the
rule do openly profess thereby that they make no conscience of committing any
sin, which is palpable and downright Atheism and profaneness; nay it is
such profaneness (by some men's principles) which Christ has purchased for them
by his blood; for they make the death of Christ the foundation of this liberty
and freedom from the law as their rule; the very thought of which abominable
doctrine may smite a heart, who has the least tenderness, with horror and
trembling. Porquius therefore a great Libertine, and the Beelzebub of those
flies in Calvin's time, shuts his sore eyes against this definition of sin,
Calv. adv. Liber^.
delivered by the Apostle, and makes this only to be a sin, viz. to see,
know, or feel sin, and that the great sin of man is to think that he does
sin, and that this is to put off the old man, viz. Non cernendo amplius
peccatum, i. by not seeing sin. So that when the Apostle tells us that sin
is the trangression of the law, Porquius tells us, That sin is the seeing and
taking notice of any such transgression; surely if they that confess sin
shall find mercy, then they that will not so much as see sin shall find
none at all: A Believer indeed is to dye unto the Law, and to see no sin in
himself in point of imputation (for so he sees the truth, there being no
condemnation to them in Christ Jesus) but thus to dye unto the law, so as to
see no sin inherent in himself, against the law, this is impious (for so to
see no sin and die unto the law is an untruth, if the Apostle may be
believed, 1 John 1.10.) Those that so annihilate a Christian, and make him
nothing and God all, so that a Christian must neither scire, velle or sentire
any thing of himself, but he must be melted into God, and dye to these (for
then they say he is out of the flesh) and live in God, and God must be
himself, and such like language, which in truth is nothing else but the
swelling leaven of the devout and proud Monks, laid up of late in that little
peck of meal of Theologia Germanica, out of which some risen up of late have
made their cakes, for the ordinary food of their deluded hearers: I say these
men had need take heed how they stand upon this precipice, and that they
deliver their judgments warlly, for although a Christian is to be nothing by
seeing and loathing himself for sin, that so Christ may be all in all to
him; yet so to be made nothing, as to see, know, think, feel, will, desire
nothing in respect of ones self, does inevitably lead to see no sin in ones
self, by seeing which the soul is most of all humbled, and so God and Jesus
Christ is most of all exalted; and yet such a kind of annihilation the old
Monks have pleaded for, and preached also (as I could show abundantly from out
of their own writings) insomuch that sometime they counsel men not to pray,
because they must be so far annihilated, as nihil velle; and sometimes they
would feign themselves unable to bear the burden of the species of their own
pitchers in their cells from one end of them unto another, because forsooth they
were so far annihilated (as neither to vel^^ so neither to scire or know any
thing beside God, whom they pretended to be all unto them, Vid. Taule^i vit^.
and themselves nothing, when God knows these things were but brain bubbles,
and themselves in these things as arrand hypocrites as the earth bore, and the
most subtle underminers of the grace of Christ, and the salvation of men's
souls.

Thesis 84.
A true Believer, though he cannot keep the law perfectly, Paul, The law is
holy and good, but I am carnal: he loves this Copy though he can but
scribble after it; when therefore the question is made, viz. Whether a Believer
be bound to the law as his rule? the meaning is not whether he has power to
keep it exactly as his rule, or by what means he is to seek power to keep it;
but the question is, whether it be in its self a Believers rule; for to be a
rule is one thing, but to be able to keep it, and by what means we should keep
it, whether by our own strength or no, or by power from on high, is another.

Thesis 85.
If the Apowle had thought that all Believers were free viz. because all the
law is fulfilled in love, Gal. 5.13, 14. for they might then have c^st off this
argument as weak and feeble, and have truly said (if this principle were true)
what have we to with the law?

Thesis 86.
There is the inward law written on the heart, called the Romans 8.2. and there
is the outward law revealed and written in the holy Scriptures, now the
external and outward law is properly the rule of a Christian life, and not the
internal and inward law (as some conceive) for to outward law is perfect, in
that it perfectly declares what is Gods will and what not; but the inward Law
(as received and writ in our hearts) is imperfect in this life, and therefore
unfit to be our rule: The inward law is our actual (yet imperfect) conformity
to the rule of the law without, it is not therefore the rule it self: The law
within is the thing to be ruled, Psalm. 17.4. Psalm 119.4.5. The outward law
therefore is the rule: The law of the Spirit of life (which is the internal
law) is called a law, not in respect of perfect direction (which is essential
to the rule) but in respect of mighty and effectual operation, there being a
power in it as of a strong law effectually and sweetly compelling to the
obedience of the law: For as the law of sin within us (which the Apostle
calls, the law of our members, and is contrary to the law of our minds, or the
law of the spirit of life within us) is not the rule of knowing and judging
what sin is, but the law of God without, Romans 7.7. and yet it is called a
law, because it has a compulsive power to act and incline to sin, like a
mighty and forcible law; so the law of the spirit of life, the law of our
minds, is called a law, not that it is the rule of a Christians life, but that
it compels the heart, and forces it like a living law to the obedience of that
directing rule (when it ^s made known to it) from without: It is therefore a
great mistake to think, that because God translates the law without into a
Believers heart, that therefore this heart-law is his only or principal rule
of life, or to imagine that the spirit without the external law is the rule of
life; the spirit is the principle indeed of our obedience, whereby we conform
unto the rule, but it is not therefore the rule it self. It is true indeed, 1.
That the spirit inclines the heart to the obedience of the rule; 2. It
illuminates the mind also many times to see it by secret shinings of
preventing light, as well as brings things to their remembrance, which they
knew before: 3. It acts them also sometime, so as that when they know not what
to pray, it prompts them, Romans 8.26. When they know not what to speak before
their Adversaries, in that day it is given to them, Matthew. 10.19. When they know
not whither to go nor how to go, it is then a voice behind them, and leads
them to fountains of living waters, Isaiah 30.21. Revel. 7.17. But all these
and such like quickening acts of the spirit, do not argue it to be our rule,
according to which we ought to walk, but only by which or by means of which
we come to walk, and are inclined, directed and enabled to walk according to
the rule, which is the law of God without. For the Pilot of the ship is not the
compass of the ship, because that by the Pilot the ship is guided: nor does it
argue that the Spirit is our rule, because he guides us according to the rule:
It is not essential to the rule to give power to conform unto it, but to be
that according to which we are to be conformed: And therefore it is a crazy
argument to prove the law of the Spirit to be the rule of our life, because it
chiefly gives us power to conform unto the rule; for if the law be that
according to which are to be guided, although it should give us no power, yet
this is sufficient to make it to be our rule.

Thesis 87.
The Spirit of God which writ the Scriptures, and in them Isa. 8.20. The Lord
Christ himself referres the Jews to the searching of Scriptures concerning
himself, John 5.39. The men of Bereah are commended for examining the holy and
infallible dictates of Gods Spirit, in Paul's Ministry, according to what was
written in the Scriptures of old. It is therefore but a cracking noise of windy
words for any to say that they open no gap to licentiousness by renouncing the
written and external law as their rule, considering that they cleave to a more
inward and better rule, viz. The law of the spirit within: for (as has been
shown) they do indeed renounce the holy Spirit speaking in the rule, viz. the
law without, which though it be no rule of the Spirit (as some object) yet it
is that rule according to which the Spirit guides us to walk, and by which we
are to judge whether the guidance be the spirits guidance or no.

Thesis 88.
Some say, That the difference between the old Testament dispensation Saltmarsh
Sparkles p. 243.
or pure Gospel and new Covenant, is this, to wit, That the one, or that of
Moses was a Ministry from without, and that of Christ from within: and hence
they say that the mere Commandments or letter of Scripture, is not a law to a
Christian why he should walk in holy duties, but the law written on our
hearts, the law of life. But if this be the difference between the old and new
Testament dispensation, the ministry of the old, and the ministry of the new,
then let all Believers burn their Bibles, and cast all the sacred writings of
the new Testament and old, unto spiders and cobwebs in old holes and corners,
and never be read, spoken or meditated on, for these external things are none
of Christ's Ministry, on which now Believers are to attend: and then I marvel
why the Apostles preached, or why they writ the Gospel for after times (for
that was the chief end of their writing, as it was of the Prophets in their
times, Isaiah 30.8.) that men might believe, and believing have eternal life,
and know hereby that they have eternal life, John 20.31. 1 John 5.13. For
either their writing and preaching the Gospel was not an external and outward
Ministry (which is cross to common sense) or it was not Christ's Ministry,
which is blasphemous to imagine: and it is a vain shift for any to say, That
although it was Christ's Ministry, yet it was his Ministry as under the Law
and in the flesh, and not in mere glory and spirit: for its evident that the
Apostles preachings and writings, were the effect of Christ's ascension and
glory, Ephesians. 4.8.11. when he was most in the spirit, and had received the
spirit that he might pour it out by this outward Ministry, Acts 2.33. and it
is a mere New-nothing and dream of Master Saltmarsh and and others, to
distinguish between Christ in the flesh and Christ in the Spirit, as if the one
Christ had a diverse Ministry from the other: For when the Comforter is come
(which is Christ in the Spirit) what will he do? he will lead (its said) unto
all truth, John 16.13 But what truth will he guide us into? Verily no other
(for substance) but what Christ in the flesh had spoken, and therefore it is
said, that he shall bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have
said unto you, John 14.26. and therefore (if I may use their phrase) Christ in
the Spirit leads us to what Christ in the flesh said; inward Christ leads the
faithful to the outward Ministry of Christ; Christ in the Spirit to Christ
speaking in the letter, the Spirit of truth to the Word of truth, the Spirit
within to the Word without, by which we shall be judged at the last day, John
12.48. and therefore certainly are to be regulated by it now.

Thesis 89.
It is true, that the faithful receive an unction or an anoin^ing immediate or
mediate? If immediate, why does John tell them that he writ to them that hereby
they might know they had eternal life, 1 John 5.13. but if it be mediate, viz.
by the word externally preached or writ, then the external word still is to be
our rule, which the anointing of the Spirit helps us to know: It is true, the
Apostle says, 1 John 2.27. that they being taught of the Spirit, did not need
that any man should teach them; what then? was their teaching therefore
immediate? No verily, for the Apostle explaines his meaning in the words
following, viz. otherwise, and after another way and manner, then as the Spirit
taught them, for so the words run, You need not that any man should teach
you, but as the anointing teaches you all things, and is truth. For if
Ministers are to preach and write in demonstration of the Spirit, then those
that hear them and are taught by them, need no man to teach them otherwise,
than as the same Spirit in the same demonstration teaches them all things: It
might be truly said that the men of Bereah did need no man to teach them
otherwise than as the Spirit in comparing and searching the Scriptures did
teach them the things which Paul spoke. And Calvin well observes upon this
place, that the scope of the Apostle in these words, is to confirm his
Doctrine which he writ to them, it being no unknown thing, but a thing known
to them by the anointing of the Spirit, which either they had received by
former Ministry of the word, or which now they might receive by this writing:
As therefore the Spirit leads us to the Word, so the word leads us to the
Spirit, but never to a spirit without and beyond the word, I mean so far
forth as that the outward administration of Christ in the flesh or in the word
or letter must cease, and be laid aside, when the inward administration of
Christ in the Spirit comes.

Thesis 90.
It Is as weak an argument to imagine, That we are not as to think that we are
not to look to any promises without us to direct and support our faith, because
Christ is also to fulfill and accomplish all the promises for us: For if the
question be, by what are we to live? The Apostles answer is full, Gal. 2.19,
20. that as he did not live but by the faith of the Son of God, so are we: But
if the question be, According to what rule are we to live, and wherein are we
to live? The answer is given by David Psalm 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us
to keep thy precepts diligently, Oh that my heart were directed to keep thy
Statutes. Deal bountifully with thy servant that I may live and keep thy word,
ver. 17. Let thy mercy come to me that I may live, for thy law is my delight,
verse. 27. So that if the question be, What is the rule of faith by which we
live? The answer is, the Gospel, Phil. 3.16. But if the question be, What is
the rule of life it self? The answer is, the moral law; and of this later is
the controversy.

Thesis 91.
The commanding will of God, called Voluntas mandati, is to be our rule, and
not the working will of God, Voluntas decreti, or the will of Gods decree: for
we cannot sin by fulfilling the one, but we may sin in fulfilling the other.
Gods secret and working will was fulfilled when Joseph's brethren sold him into
Egypt, and when Nebuchadnezzar afflicted Gods people seventy years, as also
when the Scribes and Pharisees caused Christ to be crucified: yet in all these
things they sinned and provoked Gods wrath against them; How? Was it in
crossing and thwarting Gods working will or the will of Gods Decree? No verily,
for it is expressly said, that Christ was crucified according to the
determinate counsel and will of God, Acts 4.28. It was therefore by crossing
Gods commanding will. It is therefore a hellish device of Libertines to exempt
men from all Law, and from the sense of all sin: Because (say they) all
things good and evil come from Gods will, and all things that are done are
wrought by him, and all that he does is good, and therefore all sinful actions
are good, because God works them; for what have we to do to take the measure
of our ways by his working will? Gods will is his own rule to work with, not
our rule to work by: Our actions may be most sinful when his working in and
about these may be most just and holy, for though God purposes to leave the
creature to fall and sin, yet he so purposed it, as that it should be only
through their own fault that so they sin: And although a Christian is to
submit humbly to the just dispensations of God when he leaves it to any evil,
yet Gods working will in all such dispensations must not be our rule, for then
we must will not only our own sin, but our own affliction and perdition
for ever, for all these are contained under his working will: It is therefore a
most subtle and pernicious practice in many, who when they are overtaken with
any sin, or hampered with sin, they wash all off from themselves, and lay all
the blame (if any be) upon God himself, saying, The Lord left me and he does
not help me, and he must do all, and has undertaken to do all, if
therefore I sin, upon him be the blame, or if there be any upon them it is but
little: But why should any judge of the evil of their sin by Gods working
will, for that is not your rule, but the commanding will of God, according to
which Samuel convinced Saul (when he was left of God to spare Agag) that his
disobedience against the commandment was rebellion, and as the sin of
Witchcraft in the eyes of God, 1 Samuel 15.23.

Thesis 92.
It is a great part of Christ's love to command us to do John Baptist will
count it a high favor if he may but untie Christ's shoe-latchet, and be
commanded by him to do the meanest work for him: David wondered at Gods grace
toward him, that God should command him, and in some measure enable him to
offer willingly, Lord, (says he) what are we? I do therefore marvel how
any can pretend that they are acted by the love of Christ, and not by the law
of commands, considering that there is so much love in this for Christ to
command, and how they can profess their relish of preaching Gods free grace
and love, and yet cannot away with sweet and gracious exhortations pressing to
holiness and holy duties, in the revealing and urging of which there is so
much free grace and heart-love of Christ Jesus; surely if the love of Christ is
to lead us, then the commands of Christ (wherein he discovers one chief part
of his love) are to guide us and be a rule of life unto us, The man who in his
cool and deliberate thoughts imagines that a Christian under the rule of the
law, is a Christian under bondage, may be justly feared that himself is still
under the bondage of sin and Satan, and never yet knew what the true love of
Christ Jesus is to this day.

Thesis 93.
viz. That the law requires doing, but the Gospel no doing, and that all
believers being under the Gospel are therefore under no law of doing: but we
must know that as the Gospel exacts no doing that thereby we may be just, so
it requires doing also when by Christ Jesus we are made just: For if the
Gospel command us to be holy as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15. and perfect as our
heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. then the Gospel does not only require
doing, but also as much perfection of doing as the Law does; the Law and the
Gospel require the same perfection of holiness, only here is the difference
(which many have not observed) the Gospel does not urge this perfection nor
require it of us as the Law does; for the law calling and urging of it that so
hereby we may be made just, it therefore accepts of nothing but perfection, but
the Gospel requiring it because we are perfectly just already in Christ,
hence though it commands as much as the Law, yet it accepts of less, even the
least measure of sincerity and perfection mixed with the greatest measure of
imperfection.

Thesis 94.
A believer has repented in Christ, and mortified sin in Christ, and that
mortification and vivification is nothing but a believing that Christ has
mortified sin for them, and been quickened for them, and that That
sanctification which is inherent in Christ, and not that which is inherent in
us, is an evidence of our justification. But this principle which confounds a
Christians justification, and sanctification, as it casts the seed of denying
all inherent graces in a Believer, so it lays the basis of refusing to do any
duty, or conform to any law in our own persons: for if this principle be
true (which no Orthodox writer doubts of) viz. That we are to seek for no
righteousness in our selves to our justification, because we are perfectly
just and made righteous for that end in Christ, then it will undenyably follow
that we are not to seek for any holiness and sanctification in our selves,
because we are perfectly sanctified also in Christ Jesus, who has repented,
and believed, and mortified sin perfectly for us in his own person; Look
therefore as the perfection of Christ's righteousness to our justification,
should make a Christian abhor any personal righteousness of his own to his
justification, so if we be perfectly sanctified in Christ, then perfection of
Christ's holiness to our sanctification should make a believer not only
renounce the Law, but to abhor all personal holiness through the Spirit to our
sanctification, and then a Believer must abhor to seek any love or fear of God
in his heart, which is not painted but professed profaneness, and the inlet not
per accidens but per se, to all manner of looseness and wickedness in the
world.

Thesis 95.
We deny not but that Christ is our sanctification as Cor. 1.30. but how? not
materially and formally, but virtually and meritoriously, and (with meet
explications) exemplarily: our righteousness to our justification is inherent
in him, but our sanctification is inherent in our selves, yet it is derived
from him, and therefore it is virtually and meritoriously only in him: and
hence it is that we are never commanded to justify our selves, unless it be
instrumentally and sacramentally, when as we are commanded by faith to wash our
selves, Isa. 1.16. and as Paul at his baptism was commanded to wash away his
sins, Acts 22.16. but we are frequently and abundantly exhorted to repent,
believe, mortify our affectiions upon earth, to walk in newness of life, to
be holy in all manner of conversation, etc. because these things are wrought by
Christ in us to our sanctification, and not wrought in Christ for us as our
righteousness to our justification.

Thesis 96.
They that are in Christ are said to be complete in Christ, Col. 2.10. and that
they receive all grace from his fullness, Job. 1.16. so that is seems that
there is no grace in themselves, but it is first in him, and consequently that
their sanctification is perfected in him: but we must know that though the
perfection and fullness of all grace is first in Christ, yet that believers
have not all in him after one and the same manner, nor for the same end: for
our righteousness to our justification is so in him as never to be inherent in
us, in this or in the world to come, but our righteousness to our
sanctification is so far in him, as that it is to be derived and conveyed
unto us, and hence it is formally in our selves, but meritoriously and
virtually only in him: even as our resurrection and glorification at last day,
are not so in Christ as never to be derived to us (for then the resurrection
were past already) but they are so in him as that they are to be conveyed to
us, and therefore they are meritoriously and virtually in him, and we are
meritoriously and virtually risen in him: a Christian therefore may be complete
in Christ, and yet not be perfectly formally sanctified in Christ, our
sanctification being completed in him after another manner, and for other ends
than our justification.

Thesis 97.
Phil. 2.8. Matthew. 20.28. now by this satisfaction he did two things, 1. He
brought in such a righteousness before God as might merit mercy and make us
just: now this is wholly in Christ out of our selves; but because there was a
righteousness of new obedience and thankfulness to be wrought in us for this
love, therefore, 2. By the same satisfaction he has merited (not that this
new obedience might justify us or make us accepted) but that it might be
accepted though imperfect and polluted with sin, 1 Peter 2.5, 6. as also that
it might be crowned and recompensed: Now hence it follows that the Lord Jesus
has not performed our duty of thankfulness and new obedience for us (sub hoc
formali) or as of thankfulness; for though Christ was thankful and holy for us,
yet it was not under this notion of thankfulness for his own love to us, for
this is personally required of us, and it sounds very harsh to say that Christ
walked in all holy thankfulness to himself, for his love to us; but he was
thus thankful for us, sub ratione meriti, or in way of merit, it being part of
that satisfaction which justice exacted. All that which might satisfy justice,
and merit any mercy, Christ did for us in himself* but he did not believe and
repent, and perform duties of thankfulness for us, because these and such
like are not to satisfy justice, but follow as fruits of that satisfaction,
and therefore are wrought within us, and so are personally required of us, and
therefore when a Christian finds a want of these things in himself, he is not
to comfort himself with fond thoughts of the imputation of these in Christ
only unto him, but he is to look up to Christ Jesus for derivation of these
out of Christ into himself; otherwise by making Christ his sanctification,
only in way of imputation, he does really destroy Christ from being his
sanctification; for if Christ be our righteousness only by imputation, then
if Christ be our sanctification, it must be by derivation from him, which they
must needs destroy who make him their sole sanctification by mere imputation.

Thesis 98.
Spiritual errors like strong wine make men's judgments viz. To do what is
commanded, but not in virtue of a command: Town. Ans. to Tail.
the spirit, say they, will bind and conform their hearts to the law, but
they are not bound by any authority of the law to the directions thereof; the
spirit, they say, is free, and they are under the government of the spirit,
which is not to be controled and ruled by any law. Now if by virtue of a
command they meant, by virtue of our own natural strength and abilities
looking to the command, so it is true that that a Believer is not so bound to
act by virtue of the law, for then he was bound to conform to the law
pharisaically, for what is our strength but weakness and sin? but if by
virtue of a command they mean thus much, viz. that a Believer is not bound by
the commanding power of any law to conform thereunto, only the spirit will
conform his heart thereunto, so that he shall do the things (perhaps) which
the law requires, but not because the law requires or commands them to be done:
If this, I say, be their meaning (as surely it seems to be) then the mystery
of this iniquity is so plain, that he that runs may read it: For hence it
undeniably follows, that in a case a Believer fall into any sin, of
whordome, murder, theft, witchcraft, etc. These wicked acts though they be sins
in themselves (because they are against the law) yet they are not sins unto
him, because he is now set free from the law, and not bound to the obedience of
it by virtue of any command: for where there is no law, there is no
transgression; and if there be no law which binds him, there is no
transgression then at least unto him: They are sins indeed in themselves, but
not unto him, they are sins (as some say) to sense, but not to faith, sins
in the conversation, but not to conscience, sins before men (because they may
cross their laws) but not sins before God, who exempts them from all law:
And it is in vain here to reply, that they may be sins To him, because they
may be against the law of the Spirit which is his rule; for we have already
shown, that although the spirit be the principle by which we obey, yet it is
not our rule according to which we are to obey: Indeed it is an high
aggravation of sin when it is against the spirit, but to cross the spirit
does not firstly make these things sinful, nor could they be sins unless
they cross such a spirit as speaks in and by some holy law, the very essence
of sin lying in the transgression (not of any law) but of the law, i. the
known moral or Evangelicall law. Again, if these and such like be sins,
because they are only against the law of the spirit, then it is no sin to
bow down before an Image, to commit filthiness, theft, etc. supposing that
the Spirit shall suspend his act and not restrain; nay then it will follow
that sins of ignorance (of which the spirit has not convinced a Christian)
are no sins, nor to be repented of, which is expressly cross to the holy
practice of David, Who knows his errors? Psalm. 19.12.
Lord cleanse me from my secret sins. If sin therefore be the transgression
of the law (whether the Spirit work upon a Christian or no) then certainly,
if he be under no commanding power of the law, he cannot be guilty or be said
to commit any sin, and then the conclusion is this, That every Believer
neither has sin, or should say he does sin, no not when he commits murder,
adultery, and the foulest enormities in the world: Which Doctrine, though so
directly and expressly against the light of Scripture, the confessions of all
the Saints, yea of the light of nature and common sense, and is the very filth
of the froth of the sum of the bottomless pit; yet some there are who are not
ashamed to own it, the very (...) and depth of a perfect Familist consisting
in this, viz. when a man can sin and never feel it,
or have any remorse or sorrow for it, and when one has attained to this
measure, He is then Deified, and then they profess the Godhead does petere
fundum animae (as they call it) when believing that he has no sin, he can
therefore neither see it or feel it. From which depth of darkness the God and
Father of mercies deliver his poor people in these corrupting times, and I
with that those who defend this kind of a Believers immunity from the law, did
not lay this corner stone of hell and perdition to their followers; I am sure
they lead them hereby to the mouth of this pit, who upon this principle, refuse
either to mourn for sin, or pray for pardon of sin, or to imagine that God
afflicts for sin, being now freed from the mandatory power of any law of God,
they being now not bound to act by virtue of any command.

Thesis 99.
If God did work upon Believers as upon blo^ks or brute Adam by his fall
conveyes to us, not only condemnation, but also an inherent power of
corruption, then the second Adam, the Lord Jesus, much more conveyes unto all
his posterity, not only justification, but also some inherent power of grace
and holiness, which is begun here and perfected in glory, for as sin has
abounded, so grace abounds much more: and yet suppose they had no inherent
power thus to act, yet they have an adherent power, the Lord Christ Jesus, by
faith in whose Name they may and shall receive power to act: And therefore,
although God works in us, both to will and to do of his good pleasure, yet this
hinders not, but that we are to work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, by attending the rule, by virtue of which we are bound to work,
both by putting forth that power which we have already received from God, as
also in fetching in that power we have not yet received, but is reserved daily
in Christ's hands for us, to enable us thereunto.

Thesis 100.
viz. That he is not to act by virtue of the bare letter and external words
and syllables of it, they then speak truly, for such kind of acting is rather
witchery than Christianity, to place power and virtue in bare characters and
letters, which though mighty and powerful by the spirit, yet are empty and
powerless without it: But if their meaning be that we are not to act by
virtue of any command in any sense, then the assertion is both pernicious and
perilous, for the Lord Jesus being the (...), or first subject of all grace and
gracious efficacy and power; hence its true, we are not to make the command of
God the first principle of our obedience, for this is proper unto Christ by the
Spirit, John 5.40. John 16.13, 14. 2. Tim. 2.1. Ephesians. 6.10. Romans 8.2. But
because the Lord Jesus conveyes by his Spirit virtue and efficacy through his
word, not only words of promise, but also words of command (as is evident,
Ier. 3.22. Acts 2.38, 41. Mat. 9.9. Psalm 19.8.) Hence it is that a Believer
is bound to act from a command, though not as from a first, yet as from a
second principle, though not as from the first efficient, yet as from an
instrument in the hand of Christ, who in commanding of the duty works by it,
and enables to it; and therefore we see Abraham comes out of his own Country,
because called and commanded of God to follow him he knew not whither, Heb
11.8. And Peter cast his net into the (...), merely because he was commanded,
Luke 5.5. And David desired, Oh that my heart were directed to keep thy
precepts, because God had commanded, Psa. 119.45. There is a virtue, a vis or
efficacy in the final cause, as well as in the efficient to produce the
effect, and every wise agent is bound to act by virtue or for the sake of his
utmost and last end. Now the naked commandment of the Lord, may be and should
be the chief motive and last end of our obedience to his highness; for
whatever is done merely because of Gods command, is done for his glory (which
glory should be our utmost end in all our obedience:) And hence it is that that
obedience is most absolute and sincere (whether it be in doing or suffering the
will of God) which is done merely in respect of commandment and will of God;
when the soul can truly say, Lord, I should never submit to such a yoke but
merely for thy sake, and because it is thy will and thou do command it: What
is it to love Christ? but to seek to please him and to give contentment to him;
What is it to seek to give contentment to him, but to give contentment to his
heart or his will? and what is his will, but the will of his commandment? If
therefore it be unlawful to act by virtue of a command, then it is unlawful,
1. To love Christ, 2. To be sincere before Christ. 3. Or to act for the glory
of Christ. And hence it is that let a man do the most glorious things in the
world out of his own supposed good end (as the blind Papists do in their
will-works and superstitions) which God never commanded, nay let him do all
things which the law of God requires, give his goods to the poor, and his body
to be burnt, and yet not do these things because commanded, let him then quit
himself from hypocrisy and himself from being a deep hypocrite in all these
if he can: Surely those who strain at this gnat, viz. not to do a duty
because commanded, will make no bones of swallowing down this camel, viz. not
to forsake sin, because it is forbidden, and whosoever shall forsake sin
from any other ground, shows manifestly hereby that he has little conscience
of Gods command; I know the love of Christ should make a Christian forsake
every sin, but the last resolution and reason thereof is because his love
forbids us to continue in sin; for to act by virtue of a command, is not to
act only as a creature to God considered as a Creator, but by virtue of the
will and commandment of God in a Redeemer, with whom a Believer has now to do.

Thesis 101.
To act therefore by virtue of a command, and by virtue to make our selves
just, but because we are already just in Christ; not that hereby we might get
life, but because we have life given us already; not to pacify Gods justice,
but to please his mercy, being pacified toward us by Christ already; for as
Iunius well observes a great difference between placare Deum, Iun. These. de
bon. oper.
and placere Deo, i. between pacifying God and pleasing God, for Christ's blood
only can pacify justice when it is provoked, but when revenging justice is
pacified, mercy may be pleased with the sincere and humble obedience of sons,
Col. 1.10. Heb. 13.21. When a Believer is once justified he cannot be made
more just by all his obedience, nor less just by all his sins in point of
justification, which is perfected at once: but he who is perfectly justified is
but imperfectly sanctified, and in this respect may more or less please God or
displease him, be more just or less just and holy before him: It is I confess
a secret but a common sin in many, to seek to pacify God (when they perceive
or fear his anger) by some obedience of their own, and so to seek for that in
themselves chiefly which they should seek for in Christ, and for that in the
Law which is only to be found in the Gospel; but corrupt practices in others
should not breed (as usually they do) corrupt opinions in us, and to cast off
the law from being a rule of pleasing God, because it is no rule to us of
pacifying of God: For if we speak of revenging (not fatherly) anger, Christ's
blood can only pacify that, and when that is pacified and God is satisfied,
our obedience now pleases him and his mercy accepts it as very pleasing, the
rule of which is the precious law of God.

Thesis 102.
They that say the law is our rule as it is given by Christ, Moses, do speak
niceties, at least ambiguities; for if the Lord Christ give the law to a
Believer as his rule, why should any then raise a dust, and affirm that the
law is not our rule? For the Law may be considered either materially, or in it
self, as it contains the matter of the Covenant of works: and thus
considered, a Believer is not to be regulated by it, for he is wholly free from
it as a covenant of life; or it may be considered finally, or rather
relatively, as it stood in relation and reference unto the people of the God of
Abraham, who were already under Abraham's Covenant, which was a Covenant of
free grace, viz. To be his God and the God of his seed, Genesis 17.7. And in this
latter respect the law, as it was given by Moses, was given by Christ in Moses,
and therefore the rule of love toward man (commanded by Moses) is called the
law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. For the law as it was applied to this people, does not
run thus, viz. Do all this, and then I will be your God and redeemer (for this
is a Covenant of works) but thus, viz. I am the Lord thy God ( viz. by
Abraham's Covenant) who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and house of
bondage, Therefore thou shall do all this. If therefore the law delivered by
Moses, was delivered by Christ in Moses, then there is no reason to set Christ
and Moses together by the ears, in this respect I now speak of, and to
affirm that the law, not as delivered by Moses, but as given by Christ, is our
law and rule.

Thesis 103.
The law therefore which contains in it self absolutely Luther calls Moses
Mosissimus) the Covenant of works, yet relatively considered as it was
delivered by Moses to a people under a Covenant of grace (which the same Author
calls Moses Aaronicus) so it is not to be considered only as a Covenant of
works, and therefore for any to affirm that the law is no Covenant of works,
as it is delivered on Mount Sion, and by Jesus Christ, and that it is a
Covenant of works only, as it is delivered on Mount Sinai and by Moses, is a
bold assertion both unsafe and unsound: For if as it was delivered on Mount
Sinai, it was delivered to a people under a Covenant of grace, then it was not
delivered to them only as a Covenant of works, for then a people under a
Covenant of grace, may again come under a Covenant of works, to disanull that
Covenant of grace, but the Apostle expressly affirms the quite contrary, and
shows that the Covenant made with Ahraham and his seed (which was to be a God
to them, Genesis 17.7.) and which was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law
which was four hundred and thirty years after* cannot disanull, Gal. 3.17.
Now that the people were under a Covenant of grace when the law was delivered
on Mount Sinai, let the Preface of the ten Commandments determine, wherein Gods
first words are words of grace, I am the Lord thy God, etc. and therefore thou
shall have no other Gods but me, etc. I know Paraeus, Zanchy and others
affirm, that the law is abrogated as it was in the hands of Moses, but not as
it is in the hand of Christ, but their meaning is at sometime in respect of the
manner of administration of the Law under Moses, and when they speak of the
moral law simply considered, yet it never entered into their hearts, that the
law as delivered on mount Sinai was delivered only as a Covenant of works, as
some would maintain.

Thesis 104.
as given by Christ, for their meaning is this, to wit, As Christ by his Spirit
writes it in our hearts, Saltmarsh Overflowing of Christ's blood.
not any way a rule as written by Moses: A Believers heart (says Master
Saltmarsh) is the very law of Commands, and the two Tables of Moses, and in
this respect it becomes not (says he) the glory of Christ to be beholding to
any of the light upon Moses face. It seems then that the law written is not to
be a Christians rule, but only so far as it is written in the heart, a most
accursed assertion; for how and why did Christ Jesus himself resist temptation
to sin? was it not by cleaving to the written word? Matthew. 44.10. and was not
this done for our imitation? why did David and Christ Jesus delight to do Gods
will? was it not this, because it was written of them that so they should do?
Psa. 40.7, 8. Did not the law in their hearts make them thus cleave to the
written law without? Why did Paul persuade Children to honor their parents?
was it not, because this was the first Commandment with promise? Ephesians. 6.2.
had it not been more Evangelically spoken to persuade them rather to look to
the law of Moses written on their hearts within, to direct them hereunto,
rather than to be beholding for any light upon Moses face to direct them
herein? how comes it to pass that Paul preaches no other thing but what was
in the old Testament of Moses and the Prophets, who were only the Interpreters
of Moses? Acts 22.20. How is it that Christ himself borrowes light from Moses,
Psalms and all the Prophets, to clear up his resurrection and suffering, Luke
24.27, 32* if no light must be borrowed from the face of Moses? if indeed we
were perfect in this life as we shall be in heaven, there would then be no
need of the writings of the Apostles, Prophets, or Moses, of Law or Gospel,
but we being but imperfectly enlightened, it is no less than extreme
ingratitude and unthankfulness to prefer our own imperfect and impure
light, before that perfect, spotless and heavenly Law and counsels of God
without us: which when the most perfect believer does see he may cry out with
Paul, The Law is holy but I am carnal: what is this but painted Popery, to
make the spirit within to be the supreme Judge and superior to the Spirit of
God in the written word without? only they shrine it up in the Popes private
Conclave and Kitchen, or somewhat worse, but these in a company of poor,
imperfect, deluded, and perhaps corrupted men: it is true the Covenant of grace
(strictly taken) in the Gospel, needs not to borrow any light from the Covenant
of works in the Law, but yet for all this the grace of God appearing in the
Gospel, will have us to walk worthy of God unto all well pleasing according to
the Law, Tit. 2.12, 13. and to mourn bitterly that we are so unlike the will
and image of God revealed in the Law, Romans 7.23, 24.

Thesis 105.
The Apostle Paul as he sometimes condemns works and sometime commends them,
so he sometimes rejects the Law,

Thesis 106.
When the Gospel nakedly urges Believers to good etc. at opposition one
against another, then the Law in such places is ever considered as a Covenant
of life, from which we are wholly freed, and unto which we should be wholly
dead, that we^ may be married unto Christ, Romans 7.4. hence therefore their
arguings are feeble and weak, who would prove a Christian to be wholly free
from the directive power of the Law, because a Christian is said not to be
under the law but under grace, Romans 6.14. and because the Law was given by
Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John 1.17. and because the
inheritance is not by the law, but by promise and by faith, Gal. 3.12.18. for
these and such like Scriptures speak of the law as standing in opposition to
Christ, and therefore speak of it as of a Covenant of life, by which men seek
to be justified: from which (we grant) a Believer is wholly freed, and unto
which he is not bound, nay he is bound to renounce it, and cast out this
bondwoman, but all this does not prove that he is free from it as his rule of
life.

Thesis 107.
Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 13. but when (through the grace of Christ) the heart is
changed, so as there is a new nature or new man in a believer, then there is a
sweet agreement between this new nature and the Law, for (says Paul) I delight
in the Law of God in my inner man: it is therefore a most false assertion to
say, that the old man of a Believer is to be kept under the law, but the new
man or new nature is above all Law, for though the new nature be above it as a
legal covenant, yet it never comes to be willingly under it as a rule until
now: an imperfect new nature is infinitely glad of the guidance of a holy and
most perfect law. Psalm 119.140.

Thesis 108.
It is very evident that the children and sons of God Gal. 3.23. that before
the faith came, we ( i. the children of the Old Testament) were shut up and
kept under the Law, and were under it as under a Schoolmaster, verse 24. and
these of whom the Apostle thus speaks are not only wicked and carnal Jews,
but the dear children of God and heirs of eternal life in those times, as is
evident from Gal. 4 1, 2, 3. but the Apostle speaking of the sons of God in
Gospel Times, since faith is come and revealed, speaks as expressly that we are
now no longer under the law as under a Schoolmaster, Gal. 3 25. and that now
when the fullness of time is come, God sent his son, to redeem them that were
under the law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.3, 4, 5.
which though it be true of all men by nature, viz. that they are under the
law, yet an impartial clear eye will eas^ly discern that the Apostles
dispute is not of our being under the Law by nature merely, but of being under
the Law by peculiar dispensation, which was the state not only of the Jewish
Church, but of the children of God, heirs of the promise (and consequently
such as were believers) in this Church, in those old Testament times; we are
not therefore now in these new Testament times under the law as they were, the
great difficulty therefore remains to know how we are not under the law as
they were. Those who say we are not under the Ceremonial law as they were, do
speak truly, but they do not resolve the difficulty in this place; for
certainly the Apostle speaks, not only of the Ceremonial law, but also of
that law which was given because of transgressions, Gal. 3.19. and which shut
up (not only the Jews) but all men under sin, verse 22. which being the
power of the moral law chiefly, the Apostle must therefore intend the moral
law, under which the old Testament Believers were shut up, and we now are not:
The doubt therefore still remains, viz. How are we not now under the moral
law? Will any say that we are not now under the malediction and curse and
condemnation of it, but the Jews under the old Testament were thus under it,
even under the curse of it? This cannot be the meaning, for although the
carnal Jews were thus under it, yet the faithful (whom the Apostle calls the
heir and Lord of all, Gal. 4.1.) were not thus under it, for Believers then
were as much blessed then with faithful Abraham, as Believers now, cap. 3.9.
How then are we not now under it as they were? Is it in this, that they were
under it as a rule of life to walk by, and so are not we? Thus indeed some
strain the place, but this cannot be it; for the Apostle in this very Epistle
presses them to Love one another, upon this ground, because All the Law is
fulfilled in love, cap. 5.13, 14. and this walking in love according to the
law, is walking in the Spirit, verse 16. and they that thus walk in the
spirit, according to the law, are not (says the Apostle) under the law, which
cannot, without flat contradiction, be meant of not being under the rule or
directive power of it; and it would be a miserable weak motive to press them
to love, because all the law is fulfilled in love, if the law was not to be
regarded as any rule of life or of love; for they might upon such a ground
easily and justly object, and say, What have we to do with the law? If we
therefore as well as they, are thus under the law as a rule of life, how are we
not under it as they were? Is it because they were under it as a preparative
means for Christ, and not we? They were under the humbling and terrifying
preparing work of it, but not we: There are some indeed who think that this
use of the law under the Gospel is but a back-doore, or an Indian path, or a
crookt-way about, to lead to Jesus Christ; but certainly these men know not
what they say, for the text expressly tells us, that the Scripture has
concluded (not only the Jews) but All under sin, that so the promise by
faith, might be given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22. So that the law is
subservient to faith and to the promise, that so hereby not only the Jews,
but all that God saves might hereby feel their need, and fly by faith to the
promise made in Jesus Christ; and verily if Christ be the end of the law to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4. then the law is the means (not of it
self, so much as by the rich grace of God) not only to the Jews, but to all
others to the end of the world, to lead them to this end Christ Jesus: If
therefore the faithful under the new Testament, are thus under the preparing
work of the law, as well as those under the old, How were they therefore so
under the law, as we are not, and we not under it as they were? I confess the
place is more full of difficulties than is usually observed by writers upon it,
only for the clearing up of this doubt, omitting many things, I answer
briefly, That the children of the old Testament were under the law and the
pedagogy of it, two ways, after which the children of the new Testament are
not under it now, but are redeemed from it.

1. As the moral law was accompanied with a number of burdensome Ceremonies,
thus we are not under it, thus they were under it; For we know this law was
put into the Ark, and there they were to look upon it in that type, if any man
then committed any sin against it, whether through infirmity, ignorance or
presumption, they were to have recourse to the Sacrifices and High Priests
yearly, and to their blood and oblations: They were to pray (which was a
moral duty) but it must be with incense and in such a place: They were to be
thankful (another moral duty) but it must be testified by the offering up of
many Sacrifices upon the Altar, etc. They were to confess their sins (a
moral duty also) but it must be over the head of the Scapegoat, etc. Thus
they were under the law, but we are not: And as it is usual for the Apostle
thus to speak of the law in other places of the Scripture, so surely he
speaks of it here, for hence it is that in the beginning of this dispute, cap.
3.19. he speaks of the moral law which was given because of transgressions;
and yet in the close of it, Gal. 4.3. he seems to speak only of the
ceremonial law, which he calls the elements of the world, under which the
children were then in bondage, as under Tutors and Governors; which implies
thus much, that the children of the old Testament were indeed under the moral
law, but yet withal as thus accompanied with ceremonial rudiments and
elements fit to teach children in their minority: But now in this elder age of
the Church, although we are under the moral law in other respects, yet we are
not under it as thus accompanied.

2. In respect of the manner and measure of dispensation of the moral law,
which although it had the revelation of the Gospel conjoined with it (for Moses
writ of Christ, John 5.46. and Abraham had the Gospel preached to him, Gal.
3.8. and the unbeleeving Jews had the Gospel preached, Heb. 4.2.) yet the law
was revealed and pressed more clearly and strongly, with more rigor and
terror, and the Gospel was revealed more obscurely and darkly in respect of
the manner of external dispensation of them in those times; there were three
things in that manner of dispensation, from which (at least ex part Dei
revelantis) we are now freed.

1. There was then much law urged, externally, clearly, and little Gospel so
clearly revealed, indeed Gospel and Christ Jesus was the end of the moral law
and the substance of all the shadows of the ceremonial law, but the external
face of these things was scarce any thing else but Doing and Law, by reason of
which there is a veil spread over the hearts of the jews in reading the old
Testament unto this day, as is evident 2 Cor. 3.13. so that the inside or end
of the moral law being Gospel, and the outside and means appointed to this
end being law, hence the Gospel was then less clearly, and the law was more
clearly revealed in those times; to say that Jesus Christ and his benefits, or
eternal life were then dispensed under a Covenant of works, or sub condition
perfectae obedientiae (as some eminent Worthies affirm) is such an error which
wise and able men might easily fall into by seeing how much law was revealed
and urged in those times; for though the law simply considered in it self
contained the matter of the Covenant of works, yet considered relatively in
respect of the people of God, and as they were under Abraham's Covenant of
grace, so it was given to them as a rule of perfect righteousness, by both
which they might the better see their own weakness and unrighteousness and
fly to Christ; and therefore the Apostle, Gal. 3.17. calls the promise which
was made to Abraham, the Covenant, and gives not this title to the Law, but
calls it the law which (he says) could not disanull the Covenant, confirmed in
Christ: and although it be propounded to them in way of Covenant, Exodus 19.5.
yet this is to be understood (as some think) of Evangelicall keeping Covenant,
not of legal; or if of legal, yet then it is not propounded simply as a
Covenant of works, to convey Christ to them, but ex hypothesi or upon
supposition, that if they did think to be Gods people and have him to be their
God, by doing (as Iunius observes the carnal Jews did think and hope so to
have him, and as that young man thought, Mat. 19.17.) as Chamier observes) that
then they must keep all these Commandments perfectly, and to be accursed if
they did not continue therein: I dare not therefore say, that Christ and
eternal life were dispensed in a Covenant of works, under which Covenant the
Jews were shut in old Testament times: but rather this, that the law was more
strongly pressed as a yoke upon their shoulders, and that this law which
contains the Covenant of works was more plentifully revealed and insisted on,
and the Gospel more sparingly and darkly: but now in Gospel times the
day star is risen (though in few men's hearts) yet in the doctrine and clear
revelation of it therein, and therefore the Gospel is called the mystery hidden
from ages and generations past, but now is made manifest to his Saints, Col.
1.^6. which cannot be meant as if they had no knowledge of it, for Abraham saw
Christ's day, and there is a cloud of witnesses in the Old Testament who dyed in
faith, Heb. 11. but not such clear knowledge of it as now: they were therefore
then under the Law as servants (because so much working and doing was urged and
chiefly revealed) but indeed were sons and heirs: but we now are not so
under it, but are as sons having the Lord Jesus and our fathers face in him
clearly revealed, and faith in him chiefly and most abundantly urged in his
blessed Gospel: and thus the Apostle tells us in this Text, Gal. 4.1. with 4.5.
that the heirs of the Promise under the Old Testament were as servants, but by
Christ^ coming we are now as sons; look also as they are said to be under
the Law, not as if they had no Gospel revealed or no use of the Gospel, but
only because the Gospel was more darkly revealed, and the Law more plentifully
urged, so we are said not to be under the Law, not as if there was no Law or no
use of the Law belonging to us, but because now the Gospel is more clearly
revealed, and the Law not externally so proposed and imposed as it was upon
them.

2. The Law was a Schoolmaster, Tutor and Governor to lead them unto Christ to
come, for so the Apostle tells us in this place, Gal. 3.23. that before faith
came, we were shut up under the Law, unto the faith, which should afterward be
revealed: Thus the Ceremonial law pointed to Christ to come, the moral law
discovered man's sin and misery, and need of Christ who was to come; nay, all
the promises were made with reference to Jesus Christ to come: but now the
fullness of time being come, that the Son of God is come, now we are no
longer under the Law after this manner, neither ceremonial or moral law are
of any use to us to lead us unto Christ to come, for Christ is already come:
and hence it is that Believers now are said to be rather under the Gospel than
under the Law, and Believers under the Old Testament to be rather under the Law
than under the Gospel: because although these had the efficacy of Christ's
Redemption, yet they were not yet actually redeemed, because the Redeemer was
not yet come into the flesh, and in this respect they were under the rigor of
the law, and hence it was fit that they should be handled as servants, and the
law and curse thereof principally revealed: but now Christ being come, and
having actually redeemed us, having been (not only virtually but actually)
made righteousness and a curse for us: now therefore is the time that we
should see Christ Jesus with open face, and hear principally concerning faith
and the fathers love in him: now Christ is revealed chiefly (being come) the
end of the Law, then the Law was revealed chiefly (Christ being not yet come)
as the means to this end: look therefore as the promise before Christ, of
which the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.17, 18, 19, 21, 22. was fulfilled in Christ
being come (as Divines speak) rather than abolished, and yet abolished as it
was a promise of grace to come: so the moral law is rather fulfilled than
abolished in Christ being come, and yet as it did lead unto Christ to come, it
is abolished to us now under the Gospel.

3. The law being principally revealed, and yet so revealed as to lead unto
Christ Jesus to come, hence arises a third thing of the law from which we are
now delivered, viz. they were therefore under more terror and fear of the Law
than we are (on Gods part revealing the Gospel more clearly) in these times;
and therefore says the Apostle, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. that when the fullness of time
came, God sent his Son to redeem us from under the Law, that we might
receive the adoption of Sons, and thereby the Spirit of Sons crying, Abba,
Father: could not they who were Sons under the Law call God Father? yes
verily, doubtless thou art our Father say they, Isaiah 63.17. but they having
less light they had more fear and less of the Spirit of Adoption, I say
still (ex part Dei revelantis) than we have in these days: We are not
therefore so under the law, i. the fear and terror of the law as they were:
the sum of all this is, that although we are not so under the law, 1. so
accompanied, and 2. so dispensed, as they were under the Old Testament, yet
this hinders not but that we are under the directive power of the Law as well
as they.

Thesis 109.
Cor. 3.6, 7, 11, 13. Is the moral law therefore abolished as a rule of life
now? no verily, but the meaning of this place is (as the former, Gal. 3.25.)
for the Apostle speaking of the moral Law by a Synecdoche, comprehends the
ceremonial law also, both which the false Teachers, in those times urged as
necessary to salvation and justification at least together with Christ, against
whom the Apostle here disputes: the moral Law therefore is abolished first as
thus accompanied with a yoke of Ceremonies, secondly, as it was formerly
dispensed, the glorious and greater light of the Gospel now obscuring that
lesser light under the Law, and therefore the Apostle, verse. 10. does not say
that there was no glory shining in the Law, but it had no comparative glory in
this respect, by reason of the glory which excels: and lastly the Apostle
may speak of the moral Law considered as a Covenant of life which the false
teachers urged, in which respect he calls it the Ministry of death and the
letter which kills, and the ministers of it (who were called Nazarei and
Minei as Bullinger thinks) the Ministers of the letter, Bulling. in loc.
which although it was virtually abolished to the believing Jews before Gospel
times (the virtue of Christ's death extending to all times) yet it was not then
abolished actually until Christ came in the flesh, and actually undertook to
fulfill this Covenant for us to the utmost farthing of doing and suffering
which is exacted, and now it is abolished both virtually and actually, that now
we may with open face behold the glory of the Lord as the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that does believe.

Thesis 110.
The Gospel under which Believers now are, requires no doing for doing is
proper to the Law; the Law promises life, and requires conditions: but the
Gospel (say they) promises to work the condition, but requires none, and
therefore a believer is now wholly free from all Law: but the Gospel and Law
are taken two ways. 1. Largely, the Law for the whole doctrine contained in
the Old Testament, and the Gospel for the whole doctrine of Christ and the
Apostles in the New Testament. 2. Strictly, Chamie^ d^ oper. Necess. cap. 3.
the Law pro lege operum (as Chamier distinguishes) and the Gospel pro lege
fidei, i. for the Law of faith: the Law of works strictly taken is that Law
which reveals the favor of God and eternal life upon condition of doing or of
perfect obedience: the Law of faith strictly taken is that doctrine which
reveals remission of sins, reconciliation with God by Christ's righteousness
only apprehended by faith: now the Gospel in this latter sense excludes all
works, and requires no doing in point of justification and remission of sins
before God, but only believing: but take the Gospel largely for the whole
doctrine of Gods love and free grace, and so the Gospel requires doing; for as
it is an act o^ Gods free grace to justify a man without calling for any works
thereunto; so it is an act of the same free grace, to require works of a person
justified, and that such poor sinners should stand before the Son of God on his
throne, to minister unto him, and serve him in righteousness and holiness all
the days of our lives, Tit. 2.14. and for any to think that the Gospel
requires no conditions, is a sudden dream against hundreds of Scriptures, which
contain conditional yet evangelicall promises, and against the judgment of
the most judicious of our Divines, who in dispute against Popish writers cannot
but acknowledge them, only thus, viz. conditions and promises annexed to
obedience are one thing (says learned Perable) and conditions annexed to
perfect obedience are another: the first are in the Gospel, the other not:
works are necessary to salvation (says Chamier) necessitate praesentiae not
efficientiae; and hence he makes two sorts of conditions, some antecedentes
which work or merit salvation, and these are abandoned in the Gospel, other^
(he says) are consequentes which follow the state of a man justified, and
these are required of one already justified in the Gospel: there are indeed no
conditions required of us in the Gospel, but those only which the Lord
himself shall or has wrought in us, and which by requiring of us he does
work will it therefore follow that no condition is required, in us: but
because every condition is promised? no verily, for requiring the condition is
the means to work it (as might be plentifully demonstrated) and means and
end should not be separated. Faith it self is no antecedent condition to our
justification or salvation, take antecedent in the usual sense of some Divines
for affecting or meriting condition, which Iunius calls essentialis conditio:
but take antecedent for a means or instrument of justification, and receiving
Christ's righteousness, in this sense it is the only antecedent condition which
the Gospel requires therein, because it does only antecedere or go before our
justification (at least in order of nature) not to merit it but to receive it,
not to make it but to make it our own, not as the matter of our righ^eousness
or any part of it, but as the only means of apprehending Christ's
righteousness, which is the only cause why God the Father justifies, and
therefore as Christ's righteousness must go before, as the matter and moving
cause of our justification, or that for which we are justified; so faith must
go before this righteousness as an instrument or applying cause of it, by
which we are justified, that is, by means of which we apply that
righteousness which makes us just. It Is true God justifies the ungodly, but
how? not immediately without faith, but mediately by faith, as is most evident
from that abused text, Romans 4.5. When works and faith are opposed by the
Apostle in point of justification, affirming that we are justified by faith not
by works, he does hereby plainly affirm and give that to faith which he denies
to works; look therefore as he denies works to be antecedent conditions of our
justification, he affirms the contrary of faith, which goes before our
justification, as has been explained: and therefore as do and live has been
accounted good Law, or the Covenant of works, so believe and live has been in
former times accounted good Gospel, or the Covenant of grace, until now of
late this wild age has found out new Gospels that Paul and the Apostles did
never dream of.

Thesis 111.
A servant and a son may be set to do the same work, and motives to this their
work, and the stripes and punishments for neglect of their work, may be various
and diverse; a son may be bound to it, because he is a son and beloved; a
servant may be bound to do the same work, because he is hired and shall have
wages* if the son neglect his work, his punishment is only the chastisement of
a father for his good; if a servant be faulty, he is turned quite out of doors:
So although Believers in Christ, and those that are out of Christ have diverse
and various motives to the obedience of the law of God, yet these do not vary
the rule; the law of God is the rule to them both, although they that be out of
Christ have nothing but fear and hope of wages to urge them, and those that are
in Christ should have nothing but the love of a Father, and the heart-bloud
mercy of a tender Savior and Redeemer to compel them: the one may be bound to
do, that so they may live, the other may be bound to do, because they do live;
the one may be bound to do, or else they shall be justly plagued, the other may
be bound to do the same, or else they shall be mercifully corrected: It is
therefore a mere feebleness to think (as some do) that the law or rule is
changed, because the motives to the obedience of it, and punishment for the
breach of it, are now (unto a believer) changed and a^t^ed; for the Commandment
urged from Ch^ists love, may bind strongly yea most strongly to do the same
thing which the same Commandment propounded and received in way of hi^e, may
bind also unto.

Thesis 112.
Some think that there is no sin but unbelief (which is a sin against An
adulterous and an evil generation made drunk with the cup of the wine of the
wrath of God, and strong delusion, do thus argue: Are drunkenesse, whoredom,
lying, cheating, witchcraft, oppression, theft, buggery, no sins, and
consequently not to be repented of, nor watched against, but only unbelief? Is
there no day of judgment, wherein the Lord will judge men (not only for
unbelief) but the secrets of all hearts, and whatever has been done in the
body, whether good or evil, according to Paul's Gospel? Romans 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.10.
How comes the wrath of God to be revealed from heaven, not only against
unbelief, but against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of man? Romans 1.18
If there was no sin but unbelief, how can all flesh, Jews and Gentiles become
guilty before God, that so they may believe in the Gospel (as it is, Romans 3 21,
12, ^3, 24) if they are all guiltless until unbelief comes in? There is no
sin indeed which shall condemn a man in case he shall believe; but will it
follow from hence that there is no sin in a man but only unbelief? A sick man
shall not die in case he receive the Physic which will recover him; but does
it follow from hence that there is no sickness in him, or no such sickness
which is able to kill him, but only his wilful refusing of the Physic? surely
his refusing of the Physic is not the cause of his sickness which was before,
not the natural (for that his sickness is) but only the moral cause of his
death. Sin is before unbelief comes, a sick sinner before a healing Savior can
be rejected; sin kills the soul, as it were, naturally, unbelief morally; no sin
shall kill or condemn us if we believe; but does it follow from hence that
there is no sin before or after faith, because there is no condemning sin
unless we fall by unbelief? No such matter, and yet such is the madness of
some prophets in these times, who to abandon, not only the directive use of the
law, but also all preparing and humbling work of the law, and to make men's
sinning the first foundation and ground of their believing, do therefore either
abolish all the being of any sin, beside unbelief, or the condemned estate of a
man for sin, yea for any sin, until he refuse Christ by unbelief; for
publishing which pernicious doctrines it had been well for them if they had
never been born.

Thesis 113.
Ps. 119. with any savor, or the Epistles of John and James with any faith; in
which the law is highly commended, and obedience thereto urged as the
happiness and chief evidence of the happiness of man; but that certainly the
root of this accursed doctrine is either a loose heart, which is grown blind
and bold and secretly glad of a liberty, not so much from the law of sin, as
from the law God; or if the heart be sincere in the main, yet it slights the
holy Scriptures at present, and makes little conscience of judging in the
matters of God according unto them; for if it did, it could hardly fall into
^his dirty ditch, out of which the good Lord deliver, and out of which I am
persuaded he will deliver in time all those that are his own: for I much
question the salvation of that man, who lives and dies with this opinion: and
as every error is fruitful, so this is in special; for from this darkning
the directive use of the moral law, arise (amidst many others) these ensuing
evils, which are almost, if not altogether deadly to the souls men; they are
principally these three.

Thesis 114.
The first is a shameful neglect (in some affecting foolishly To convince the
world of sin, John 16.9.10. which we know is chiefly by the law, Romans 3.20.
and shall the Ministers (not of the letter but of the Spirit) refuse to begin
here? Especially in these times of wantonness, contention, confusion, famine,
sword and blood, wherein every thing almost cries aloud for sackcloth, and
therefore not for tiffany and silken Sermons: As if this corrupt and putrefying
age stood only in need of sugar to preserve and keep them sweet from smelling:
As if sublime notions about Christ and free grace, Covenant of grace, love of
the Father, the kingdom within, and Ch^istian exc^llencies and privileges,
were the only things this age stood in need of, and not in any need of
searchings with candles, terrors, shakings, ^ence of sin, or forewarnings of
wrath to come: As if this old world did need no Noah to fortell them of floods
of fire and wrath to come: Or as if the men of Sodom and Princes of Gomorah,
should do well to mock at Lot for bidding him to hasten out of the city,
because God would destroy it: As if the spirit of Paul in these times should
not know the terror of the Lord, and therefore persuade men, 2 Cor. 5.10.11.
but only the love and free grace of the Lord Jesus, and therefore to exhort
men, nay rather therefore to relate to men stories and notions about
^ree-grace, general redemption, the mystery of the Fathers love, and the
Christ in you and in the spirit (not the person of Christ or Christ in the
flesh) the hope of glory: What will the Lord Jesus one day say to these sleepy
watchmen, that never tell the secure world of their enemies at the door? I
find diverse colors and pretenses for this course of daubing.

1. Some say this savours of an old Testament spirit, which was w^nt to wound
and then to heal, to humble and then to raise, to preach law and then Gospel;
but now we are to he Ministers of the new Testament; and let no law be heard
of. I confess those that preach the law as the means of our justification, and
as the matter of our righteousness without Christ, or together with Christ, as
the false teachers did, 2 Cor. 3 6. may well be called (as Paul calls them)
Ministers of the letter, not of the Spirit, of the old Testament, not of the
New; but to preach Christ plainly and with open face the end of the law, and to
preach the law as the means to prepare for, and advance Christ in our hearts,
can never be proved to be the old Testament Ministry, or to put a vail upon
men's hearts that they cannot see the end of the law (as the old Testament vail
did, 2 Cor. 3.14.) but it is to take away the vail of all conceit of man's own
strength and righteousness, by seeing his curse, that so he may s^^ to the end
thereof the Lord Jesus, and embrace him for righteousness: For the Apostle
does not call them Ministers of the letter and of the old Testament, because
they did preach the law to humble and lead unto Christ; but because they
preached the law for righteousness without Christ, whom he calls the spirit,
verse. 17. and therefore calls them the Ministers of the letter, and their
Ministry of death and condemnation, there is something in the law which is of
perpetual use, and something which is but for a time: the vis coactiva legis
(as some call it) i. the force of the law to condemn and curse, to hold a man
under the curse, and to hold a man under the power of sin, which the Apostle
calls the strength of the Law, 1 Cor. 15.56. is but for a time, and is but
accidental to the law, and may be separated from it, and is separated indeed
from it as soon as ever the soul is in Christ, Romans 8.1. he is then free from
the obligation of it to perform personal and perfect obedience to it, that so
he may be just; also from the malediction and curse of it, if he be not thus
just: But that which is of perpetual use in it, is not only the directive
power of it, but this preparing and humbling virtue of it; for if all men by
nature, Jews and Gentiles are apt to be puffed up with their own righteousness,
and to bless themselves in their own righteousness, and so to feel no such
need of Christ, then this humbling work of the law to slay men of all their
fond conceits and foolish confidences in their own righteousness, and to make
men feel the horrible nature of sin, by revealing the curse and malediction
due to it, is of moral and perpetual use: And hence it is that though the
Gospel strictly taken (as is intimated Thesis 110.) has no terror properly
in it, because thus it reveals nothing but reconciliation through Christ's
righteousness applied by says; yet the Gospel largely taken, for that
doctrine which reveals the glad tidings of Christ already come, so there is
terror in it, because in this respect the Gospel makes use of the law and
confirms what is moral and perpetual therein: The sin and terror which the
Gospel (largely taken) makes use of out of the Law, are but subservient to the
Gospel strictly taken, or for that which is principally and most properly
Gospel, for thereby the righteousness and free grace and love of the Lord
Jesus, and pretiousnesse and greatness of both are the more clearly
illustrated: The law of it self wounds and kills and rather drives from Christ
then unto Christ; but in the hand of the Gospel* or as Christ handles it, so it
drives the soul unto Christ, and (as has been shown) is the means to that end:
and it is a most false and nauseous doctrine to affirm that love only draws the
soul to Christ, unless it be understood with this caution and notion, viz.
love as revealed to a sinner, and condemned for sin; which sin and condemnation
as the law makes known, so the Gospel makes use of to drawn unto Christ: If
indeed the Gospel did vulnerare ut vulneraret, i. wound that it may wound and
terrify only (which the law does) then it (says Chamier) was all one with law
which Bellarmine pleads for) but when it wounds that it may heal, Cham. de
Oper. Nec^s. cap. 4.
this is not contrary but agreeable to the office of a good Physician whose
chief work is to heal, and may well suit with the healing Ministry of the Lord
Jesus; and hence we see that although Christ was sent to preach the Gospel, yet
he came to confirm the law in the Ministry of the Gospel, and therefore shows
the spiritual sins against the law more clearly, and the heavy plagues for the
breach of it more fully then the Scribes and Pharisees: he that is angry with
his brother is a murderer, and he that calls him fool is in danger of hell fire,
Mat. 5.22. Peter was no Minister of the old Testament, because he first
convinced and pricked the Jews to the heart for their murder of Christ Jesus.
Paul was no such Minister, neither (when as he would evince our justification
by Christ's righteousness only) in that he begins and spends so much time in
proving Gentiles and Jews to be under sin and wrath, notwithstanding all the
excuses of the one and privileges of the other; as appears in his three first
chapters to the Romans: but herein they were Gospel preachers. Nor can it with
any color of reason be thought that the Prophets in the old Testament were
herein Ministers of the letter, viz. when they did first wound and then heal,
first humble by the law and then revive by the Gospel. Mr. Saltmarsh has been
so blinded with this notion of the old Testament Ministry, that to make this
use of the law in preaching the Gospel, or to hold forth the promises of grace
to them that are qualified with the grace of the promise (as the old Testament
Prophets did) is to give (as he thinks) the wine of the Gospel burning hot, as
the covetous gentleman did to his guests, and another (whom I spare to name)
professes, That the old Testament (because it urges the law to humble)
contains little good news but much bad news; but ^ow when Christ says, Go
preach the Gospel, thereby he would have them (he says) Ministers of the new
Testament to preach glad tidings (nothing but Gospel) but no had bidings (not a
jot of the law) until men positively reject the glad tidings of the Gospel. If
these men speak true, then neither Peter in his preaching, nor Paul in his
writings, nor Christ himself in his Ministry were Ministers of the new
Testament, but did overheat their wine and preach much bad tidings to the
people of God: Verily if this stuff be not repented of, the Lord has a time to
visit for these inventions.

2. Some object, Gal. 3.24, 25. That the children of the old Testament were
under the law, as their pedagogue to lead them to Christ; but now (the Apostle
says) we are no longer under this Schoolmaster, who are sons of God in the new
Testament. Be it so that the sons of God under the new Testament are past the
terrouring of this Schoolmasters is it not therefore the work of the new
Testament Ministry to preach the law unto servants and slaves to sin and Satan
in new Testament times? No (says the same au^hor) for this is to preach bad
news; this is no good news to say Thou art condemned for these things, for the
Gospel says thus, Thou poor drunkard, thou proud woman here is a gracious God
that has loved thee, and sent Christ to die for thee, and Ministers to make it
known to thee, and here is everlasting salvation by him only, because thou art
a sinner; thou art now free from damnation: fear not that, Christ has loved
thee, therefore obey him; if not, thou shall not be damned, that is done away
already, etc. I would know whether a proud woman, or a poor drunkard, a
villain, who never yet believed, are in a state of condemnation, I or no? I
have read indeed that There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, Romans
8.1. but never of any such freedom to them that are out of Christ, unless it
was only in destination and merit; and I have read that we are by nature
children of wrath, while dead in sin, Ephesians. 2 1, 2, 3. but never of this, viz.
that we are in favor while we be in our sin, much less that we are to believe
this, because we are such: If therefore such persons be in a state of wrath and
death and condemnation, is not this like the old false prophets, crying peace,
peace and salvation, where there is no peace? There is no peace to the wicked
says my God, Isa. 48. ult. Isa. 57. ult. This is truth before they reject the
Gospel, is it not? This the law says (say some) true, But is not this
confirmed by the Ministry of the Gospel also? Job. 3. ult. He that believes
not, the wrath of God abides upon him, (...), it was upon him before he did
believe, and when he believes not it abides where it did: Must the Ministers of
the new Testament therefore preach lies and falsehoods, and tell proud women and
poor drunkards and villains before they refuse the Gospel by unbelief, that the
Lord Jesus loves them, and that they need not fear condemnation, when the
Scripture has shut up all men under it, that the promise by faith might be
given to those that believe, and them only? What is this Gospel Ministry but to
tell men they are whole, and not sick to death, but healed before they come to
the Physician, the Lord Jesus? surely that is Gospel Ministry which advances
Christ not only in word, but in power in the hearts of poor sinners; but does
this Ministry advance the Physicians custom and honor, which where it comes
must first tell all the crew of wretched drunkards, proud persons and villains,
that they are already well and whole, loved and pardoned, blessed and saved,
before ever they come to the Lord Jesus? suppose therefore (as some may say)
that servants and slaves to sin may have the Law preached to them, yet the sons
and children of God have no use of it in that respect now; it is true, I grant,
not as the servants have under the new Testament, nor yet as the sons of God
had under the old, for the children of God under the old Testament had need of
this Schoolmaster to lead them to Christ to come, and ad Christum typecum, i.
to Christ typed out in sacrifices and oblations, high Priest and Altar, and so
it led them to Christ afar off, and as it were a great way about; but it does
not follow that there is no use of the Law therefore to be a Schoolmaster still
to lead unto Christ immediately and already come; those that are servants to
sin under the new Testament have need of the law to show them the condemnation
and curse under which they lie by nature, and are now actually under: but the
sons of God, (for whom Christ is made a curse) are not thus under it, and
therefore have not this use of it, but only to show that curse and condemnation
which they do of themselves deserve; and therefore the holy Apostle, when he
was in Christ, and did live unto God, he shows us how he did live unto God,
viz. by dying to the Law, and how he did die to the Law, and that was by the
Law, i. as it did show him his condemnation; he did live to God in his
justification; as it did show him his sin, and wants, and weakness, it made
him die unto it, and expect no life from it, and so live unto God in his
sanctification; for so the words are, I through the Law am dead to the Law,
that I may live unto God, Gal. 2.19. the issue therefore is this that if the
doctrine be taken strictly pro lege fidei (as Chamier calls it) or that doctrine
which shows the way of man's righteousness and justification only, there indeed
all the works of the law, all terrors and threatenings are to be excluded, and
nothing else but peace, pardon, grace, favor, eternal reconciliation to be
believed and received; and therefore it is no new Testament Ministry to urge the
Law, or to thunder out any terror here, for in this sense it is true (which is
commonly received) that in the Law there are terrors, but in the Gospel none;
but if the Gospel be taken largely for all that doctrine which brings glad
tidings of Christ already come, and shows the love of God in the largest extent
of it, and the illustrations and confirmations of it from the law, then such
servants of Jesus Christ, who hold forth the law to make way for grace, and to
illustrate Ch^ists love, must either be accounted New Testament Ministers, or
else (as has been shown) Christ Jesus and his Apostles were none.

Thesis 115.
The second is a professed neglect, and casting off the work of repentance and
mourning for sin: nay of asking pardon of sin; for if the Law be no rule to
show man his duty, why should any man then trouble himself with sorrow for any
sin? for if it be no rule to him, how should any thing be sin to him? and if
so, why then should any ask pardon of it, or mourn under it? why should not a
man rather harden his heart like an Adamant, and make his forehead brass and
iron, even unto the death, against the feeling of any sin? but what doctrine is
more cross^ to the Spirit of grace in Gospel times, then this? which is a
Spirit of mourning, Z^c. 12.10, 11. what doctrine more cross to the express
command of Christ from heaven then this? who writes from heaven to the Church of
Ephesus to remember from whence she is fallen and repent, Rev. 2.5. what
doctrine more cross to the example of holy men then this? who after they were
converted, then repented and lamented most of all, Ier. 31.18.19. 2 Cor.
7.9.10, 11. what doctrine more cross to the salvation of souls, the mercy of
God, and forgiveness of sin? for so the promise runs, if we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9. what
doctrine so cross to the Spirit of the love of Christ shed abroad in the
heart, that when a man's sins are greatest (which is after conversion, because
now against more love and more nearness to Jesus Christ) that now a believers
sorrow should be least monkish and macerating? sorrow indeed is loathsome, but
godly sorrow is sweet and glorious; doubtless those men's blindness is
exceeding great, who know not how to reconcile joy and sorrow in the same
subject, who cannot with one eye behold their free justification, and therein
daily rejoice, and the weakness and imperfection of their sanctification with
another eye, and for that mourn.

Thesis 116.
The third thing is, a denying sanctification the honor of habitual
conformity to the Law, as inherent corruption is nothing else but habitual
disagreement with it: although sanctification be no part of our righteousness
before God, and in this sense is no evidence of our justification, Ps. 119.4, 5
1 Ioh. 2.3, 4 and 3.14. 2 These. 2.1^, 14. Isa. ^8.3. 1 These. 1.4, 5, 6.
yet there is scarce any clearer truth in all the Scrip^u^e then this, viz.
that it is an evidence that a man is in a justified estate; and yet this leven
which denies the Law to be a Christians rule of life, has sowred some men's
spirit^ against this way of evidencing. It is a doubtful evidence (says D^
Crisp) an argument, not an evidence, it is a carnal and an inferior evidence,
the last and the least, not the first evidence; it is an evidence if
justification be first evident (say Den and Saltmarsh) some men may be led to
these opinions from other principles then a plain denial of the directive use
of the Law, but this I fear lies undermost; however let these two things be
examined.

1. Whether sanctification be a doubtful evidence: 2. Whether it be a carnal,
inferior, and may not be a first evidence.
Thesis 117.
Ioh. 1.6. and 2.4. why may not sanctification then (whereby we are set free
from the power of sin) be a sure and certain evidence of our actual
justification? for hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 2 3. whereby it is manifest that the Apostle is not of
their minds who think the negative to be true, viz. that they that keep not
Christ's commandments are in a state of perdition, but they will not make the
affirmative true, viz. that they that keep his Commandments may thereby know
that they are in a state of salvation: If Jesus Christ be sent to bless his
people in turning them from their iniquities, Act. 3. ult. then they that know
they are turned from their iniquities by him, may know certainly that they are
blessed in him; and if they be not thus turned they may know certainly that
they are yet accursed; If godliness has the promises of this life, and that
which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and if the free grace and actual love of God be
revealed clearly to us only by some promise, how then is sanctification (so
near akin to godliness) excluded from being any evidence? is there no inherent
grace in a believer that no inherent sanctification can be a true evidence?
verily thus some do think; but what is this but an open graceless profession,
thrr every believer is under the power of inherent sin, if he has not the
being of any inherent grace? or if there be any inherent grace, yet it is (say
some) so mixed with corruption, and is such a spotted and blurd evidence, that
no man can discern it? I confess such an answer would well become a blind
Papist who never knew where grace grew (for so they dispute against certitudo
salutis certitudine fidei, when the conclusion of faith arises from such a
proposition as is the word of God, and the assumption the testimony of Gods
Spirit to a man's own experience of the work of God in his heart) but it ill
beseems a Minister of the Gospel of Christ to plead for such popish ignorance
in a Christian as can see no further then his own buttons, and that cannot
discern by the Spirit of God the great and wonderful change from darkness to
light, from death to life, from Satan to God, the visible work of God, and
graces of the Spirit of God, the things (which the Apostle calls love) are
fr^ely given to them of God. 1 Cor. 2.12. Peter's was imperfect, blotted and
mixed, and yet he could say, Lord, thou know I love thee. Ioh. 21.17, the
poor doubting mourning man in the Gospel had some faith, and was able to see it
and say certainly, Lord, I believe, help my unbeleef. Could Paul discern
(without extraordinary revelation because he speaks as an ordinary Christian)
an inner man and a Law in his mind, delighting in the Law of God, yet mixed
with a Law in his members, leading him captive into the Law of sin, and cannot
we? and yet the Doctor does cast such stains upon sincerity, universal
obedience, love to the brethren, etc. and heaps up the same cavils against the
truth of them in the souls of the Saints, as the Devil himself usually does by
sinful suspicions and suggestions, when God lets him loose for a season to
buffet his people, that so they may never know (if it were possible) what great
things the Lord has done for their souls: and whoever reads his book shall
find that he makes a Believer such a creature as cannot tell certainly whether
he be a sincere-hearted man or an arrand hypocrite, whether he be under the
power of sin and Satan or not: whether one man can be discerned from another to
be a Saint or a devil, or whether he has any charity and goes love to them
that are Saints from them that are not: and so about to befool and nonplus and
puzzle the people of God (as the story relates of the German woman desirous to
rid the house of her husband) who first making him drunk, and casting him into
a sleep did so shave him, and dress him, and cut and clip him, that when he
awakened, he knew not what to think of himself, or to say who he was: for by
looking upon and in himself, he thought he was the woman's husband, and yet by
his new cut and habit, he almost believed that he was a Friar, as his wife
affirmed: Sanctification is an evidence always in it self of a justified
estate, although it be not always evident unto us, and therefore what though a
Christian sees his sanctification and graces to day, and cannot see them, but
is doub^full about them, suppose to morrow? shall he therefore reject it as a
doubtful evidence; which is ever clear enough in it self, though not always to
our discerning? for I would know what evidence can there be of a justified
estate, but partly through dimnesse and weakness of faith (which is but
imperfect and therefore mixed with some doubtings all a man's life, sometime or
other) and partly through the wise and adored providence of God to exercise
our faith, but that some time or other it cannot be discerned? is the immediate
testimony of Gods Spirit (which some would make the only evidence) always
evident, and the shinings, sheddings and actings of it never suspended, but
that by some means or other they will be at a loss? why then should
sanctification be excluded as a doubtful evidence, because sometime it is, and
at other times not discerned? I know there are some who perceiving the
conceived uncertainty of all such evidences, have therefore found out a strange
catholicon for these sick times, a sure way of evidencing and leding all men's
consciences in a way of peace and unshaken assurance of the love of Christ; and
therefore they make (which I name with horror) the sight of corruption and
sinful pollution, through the promise of the Gospel, the certain and settled
evidence of life and salvation, which opinion the least I can say of it, is
that which Calvin said in the like case, to be exundantis in mundum suroris Dei
slagellum. Woe to the dark mountains of Wales, and the fat valleys, towns and
cities in England, and sea coasts and Islands in America, if ever this delusion
take place: and yet this flame begins to catch, and this infection to spread,
and therefore I find M. Saltmarsh and W. C. to speak out, and openly to own
that which the Familists in former times have either been ashamed or afraid to
acknowledge, and that is this, viz: That the promise of the Gosp^l do belong to
a sinner, qua sinner, or as a sinner; and that the Law speaks good news to a
righteous man, quatenus a righteous man; but the Gospel quite contrary, it is
to a man quatenus a sinner, not as a regenerate man, or as an humble man, or as
a Saint, or as a believer, but as a sinner; and hence they infer, That a
Christian will never have any settled peace, but be off and on, as a bone out of
joint, in and out, in and out, a reed tossed with the wind, never knit to
Christ, if they lay hold on Christ and Gods love under any other consideration
then as to sinners ^ and therefore though they see no good in themselves,
though they be not humbled, brokenhearted sinners (as one Preacher tells them)
nor believing sinners (as another Preacher tells them) yet if they see
themselves sinners, they must know a sinner is the proper object of the Gospel,
and therefore this is ground enough to believe: so that if the devil tell a man
that he is no Saint, if the soul can say, I am a sinner, if the devil say thou
art an hypocrite, I but an hypocrite is but a sinner still; though I be not a
brokenhearted sinner, this will be (they say) a refuge of peace to retreat
unto in all temptations; and when men have learnt this lesson, their souls will
not be in and out any more, but have constant peace: for though they have no
interest in Christ as Saints, yet they have real interest in the promises of
Christ as sinners: hence also they say, that no Minister is to threaten or
declare the curse and wrath of God against drunkards and sinners as such,
until first Christ be offered in the Gospel, and they refuse him, and that if
any do this, they are Ministers of the Old Testament not of the new. Sic
de^init in piscem mulier formosa; let us therefore see what chaff and what
corn, what truth and what falsehood there is in this n^w divinity. It is true,
1. That the Gospel reveals the free grace and love of God, the death of Christ
and salvation by him for sinners, and that all those that are or shall be
saved, are to acknowledge and aggrava^e Gods love toward them, in casting his
eye upon them when they were sinners notwithstanding all their si^s; this the
Scripture everywhere holds forth, Romans 5.6, 7. 1 Timothy 1.15.2. It Is true also,
that the Gospel makes an offer of Christ, and salvation and remission of sins
to all sinners, where it comes, yea, to all sinners as sinners and as
miserable, yea, though they have sinned long by unbeleef, as is evident, Hos.
14.1. Rev. 3.17. Ier. 3 2^. Isa. 55.1. all are invited to come unto these
waters freely without money or price: these things no man doubts of that knows
the Gospel: but the question is not whether Remission of sins and
reconciliation in the Gospel belong to sinners? but whether they belong to
sinners immediately as sinners? not whether they are merited by Christ's death,
and offered out of his rich grace immediately to sinners? but whether they are
actually and immediately their own, so as they may challenge them thus as their
own, from this as from a full and sufficient evidence, viz. because they are
sinners and because they see themselves sinners? for we grant that Jesus Christ
came into the world actually to save sinners, yet mediatly by faith, and then
they may see salvation: that he justifies also the ungodly; but how?
immediately? no, but mediatly by faith, Romans 3.5. and that where sin abounds,
grace abounds; to whom? ^o all sinners? no; but mediatly to all those only who
by ^aith receive this grace, Romans 5.17. so that the Gospel reveals no actual
love and reconciliation immediately to a sinner as a sinner, but mediatly to a
sinner as a believing and brokenhearted sinner; and the Scripture is so clear
in this point, that whoever doubts of it, must caecutire cum sole, and we may
say to them as Paul to the Galathians, O foolish men, who has bewitched you
that you should not see this truth? For though Christ came to ^ave sinners, yet
he p^ofesseth that he came not to call the righteous, but the sick sinners,
Mat. 9.13. though God justifies the ungodly, yet it is such an ungodly man as
believes in him, whose faith is imputed unto righteousness, Rom 3.5. though
grace abounds where sin abounds, yet it is not to all sinners (for then all
should be saved) but to such as receive abundance of grace by faith, Romans 5.17.
although God holds forth Christ to be a propitiation for sinners, yet it is
expressly said to be mediatly through faith in his blood, Romans 3.24.25: although
the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise might be given,
yet it is not said to be immediately given to sinners as sinners, but mediatly
to all that believe; and in one word, though it be true that Christ died for
sinners and enemies, that they might have remission of sins (then procured and
merited for them) yet we never actually have, nor receive ^his remission (and
consequently cannot see it) as our own, until we do believe; for unto this
truth (says Peter) do all the Prophets witness that whosoever believes in
him shall receive remission of sins, Act. 10.43. and hence it is that as all
the Prophets preached the actual favor of God only to sinners as believers, so
the Apostles never preached it in New Testament times otherwise; and hence
Peter, Act. 2.38. does not tell the sorrowful Jews that they were sinners, and
that God loved them, and that Christ had died for them, and that their sins
were pardoned because they were sinners, but he first exhorts them to repent,
that so they might receive remission of sins; nor does Paul tell any man that
salvation belonged to him, because he is a sinner, but if thou believe with all
thy heart thou shall be saved, Romans 10.5, 6, 7. if the love of God be revealed
to a sinner as a sinner, this must be either, 1. by the witness of the Law;
but this is impossible, for if the curse of God be herein revealed only to a
sinner as a sinner, then the love of God cannot; but the Law curses every
sinner, Gal 3.10. Or 2. by the Light and witness of the Gospel; but this
cannot be; for it reveals life and salvation only to a believer, and confirms
the sentence of the Law against such a sinner as believes not, Ioh. 3.17, 36.
he that believes not is condemned already, not only for unbeleef (as some say)
for this does but aggravate condemnation) but also for sin, by which man is
first condemned before he believes, if the Apostle may be believed, Romans 3.19.
and if a man be not condemned for sin before he believe, then he is not a
sinner before he believe, for look as Christ has taken away any man's
condemnation in his death, just so has he taken away his sin. 3. Or else by
the witness and testimony of Gods spirit: but this is flat contrary to what
the Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.26. with 4 6. ye are all the sons of God by faith in
Christ Jesus, and because ye are sons (not sinners) he has sent the spirit of
his son crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, and verily if the love of God
belong to sinners as sinners, then all sinners shall certainly be saved (for a
quatenus ad omne val^^ consequentia) so that by this principle, as sin has
abounded actually to condemn all, so grace has abounded actually to save all,
which is most pernicious: nor do I know what should make men embrace Viz. that
the Gospel belongs to sinners as sinners.
this principle, unless that they either secretly think that the strait gate
and narrow way to life is now so wide and broad, that all men shall in Gospel
times enter in thereat, which is prodigious, or else they must imagine some
Arminian universal Redemption and reconciliation, and so put all men in a
salvable and reconciled estate (such as it is) before faith, and then the
evidence and ground of their assurance must be built on this false and crazy
foundation, viz. Jesus Christ had died to reconcile (and so has reconciled)
all sinners.

But I am a sinner,

And therefore I am reconciled: No universal redemption the ground of faith.
If this be the bottom of this Gospel Ministry and preaching free grace (as
doubtless it is in some) then I would say these things only.

1. That this doctrine under a color of free grace does as much vilify and
take off the price of free grace in Christ's death, as any I know, for what can
vilify this grace of Christ more, then for Christ so to shed his blood as that
Peter and Abraham in heaven shall have no more cause to thank Jesus Christ for
his love therein, then Judas and Cain in hell? it being equally shed for one as
much as for the other.

2. That this is a false bottom for faith to rest upon, and gather evidence
from: for 1. if Christ has died for a^l, he will then certainly save all: for
so Paul reasons, Romans 8.32. and 6.10. he has given his Son to death for us,
how shall ^e not but with him give us all other things, and therefore he will
give faith, and give repentance, and give perseverance, and give eternal life
also; which is most false. 2. If he did not pray for all, then he has not died
for all, Ioh. 17.9. which Scripture never yet received scarce the show of a
rational answer, though some have endeavored it with all wiliness.

3. That whereas by this doctrine they would clear up the way to a full and
settled evidence and Christian assurance, they do hereby utterly subvert the
principal foundation of all setlednesse, and assurance of faith, which is
this, viz. that if Jesus Christ be given to death for me, then he will
certainly give all other things to me, if we were reconciled to God by the
death of his son, much more shall we be saved by his life, if Christ has died
and risen for us, who then shall condemn? who shall then separate us from Gods
love? Romans 8.32. Romans 6.9, 10. But if they hold no such principles, I would
then know how any man can have evidence of this, viz. that God loves him, and
that Christ has died for him while he is a sinner, and as he is a sinner? or
how any Minister of the New Testament can say to any man (under the power of
his sins and the devil) that he is not condemned for his sins, but that God
loves him, and that Christ has died for him, without preaching falsehoods, and
lies, and dreams of their own heart? for 1. God has not loved nor elected all
sinners, nor has Christ died for all sinners. 2. If every man be in a state of
condemnation before he believe the Gospel, then no man can be said to be in a
state of reconciliation, and that God has loved him until he refuse the
Gospel* but every man is in a state of condemnation before he believe, because
our Savior expressly tell us, that by faith we pass from death to life, Ioh.
5.24. and he that has not the son, has not life, 1 Ioh. 5.12. and therefore
if those be Ministers of the new Testament who first preach to all the
drunkards and whoremongers and villains in a parish, that God loves them, and
that they are reconciled by Christ death, and that they may know it because
they are sinners, then let the heavens hear, and the earth know that all such
Ministers are false Prophets, and cry Peace, Peace, where God proclaims wrath;
and that they acquit them whom God condemns: and if they be Ministers of the
Old Testament spirit, who first show men their condemned estate, and then
present God as wroth against them, while they be in their sin, that so they may
prize and fly to favor and free grace, then such are Ministers of the old
Testament and not of the new, because they preach the truth; and if preaching
the truth be an old Testament Ministry, no wise man then I hope will desire the
new wine, for the old is better: while the Lion sleeps and God is silent, and
conscience slumbers, all the beasts and wild sinners of the world (and many
preachers too) may think that there is no terror in God, no curse, or wrath
upon themselves in the midst of the rage, increase, and power of all their
sins; but when this lion roars, and God awakens, and conscience looks above
head, they shall then see how miserably they have been deceived, they may
slight sin, abolish condemnation, talk of and wonder at free grace now, and
believe easily, because they are sinners, but certainly they shall be otherwise
minded then: Some men may have good ends in preaching Gods free grace after
this manner in the Gospel, and make the Gospel a revelation of Gods actual
love to sinners as sinners; and make a Christians evidence of it nothing else
but the sight of his sin, and of his being under the power of it, but little do
they think what Satan the father of this false doctrine aims at, which are
these four things chiefly.

1. That sanctification, faith, etc. might be no evidence at all to a Christian
of a good estate, for this they say is a doubtful evidence and an unsettling
way of assurance; because they will hereby be as bones out of joint, in and
out; humbled to day, and then comforted, but hard-hearted to morrow, and then
at a loss: whereas to see ones self a sinner, that is a constant evidence, for
we are always sinners, and the Gospel proclaims peace to sinners as sinners.

2. That so men may keep their lusts and sins and yet keep their peace too, for
if peace be the portion of a man under the power of sin and Satan; look then,
as he may have it, why may he not keep it upon the same terms: And therefore W.
C. says, That if conscience object, thou art an hypocrite (perhaps truly) yet
a hypocrite is but a sinner, and Gods love belongs to sinners as sinners: And
if this be thus, what does this doctrine aim at, but to reconcile God and
Belial, Christ and Mammon? not only to open the door to all manner of
wickedness, but to comfort men therein,

3. That so he may bring men in time purposely to sin the more freely, that so
they may have the clearer evidence of the love of God; for if Gods love be
revealed to sinners as sinners* then the more sinful the more clear evidence
he has of Gods love; and therefore one once entangled with these delusions,
was enticed to commit a gross wickedness, that more full assurance might be
attained.

4. That so the true preaching and Ministry of the Gospel of Gods free grace
might be abolished (at least despised) which is this, viz. Thou poor condemned
sinner, here is Christ Jesus, and with him eternal remission of sins and
reconciliation, if thou believe and receive this grace offered humbly and
thankfully; for this is Gospel, Mat. 28.19. Mark. 16.16. Romans 10.5, 6, 7, 8.
Romans 3.14, 25. Act. 8.37. And hence Mr. W.C. has these words. That if the
Gospel hold forth Christ and salvation upon believing ( as many says he,
preach) it were then little better tidings then the law. Ah wretched and
unworthy speech, that when Jesus Christ himself would show the great love of
God unto the world, Ioh. 3.16. he makes it out by two expressions of it, 1.
That the father sent his only Son; 2. That whosoever did believe, in him (or if
they did believe in him) they should have eternal life; The Lord shows
wonderful love, that whoever believe may have Christ and eternal life by
believing; but this doctrine breathing ou^ Gods dearest love, by this man's
account is little better then law, which breaths out nothing but wrath: But why
does he speak thus? Because (says he) it is as easy to keep the ten
Commandments as to believe of ones self: Very true, as to believe of ones
self, but what is this against the preaching and holding forth Christ and
salvation upon condition of believing? For is not this preaching of the Gospel
the instrument and means of working that faith in us, which the Lord requires
of us in the Gospel? And must not Jesus Christ use the means for the end? Were
not those three thousand brought into Christ by faith, by Peter's promise of
remission of sins upon their repentance? Were not many filled with the holy
Ghost when they heard this Gospel thus preached upon condition of believing?
Act. 10.43. Does not the Apostle say that the Gospel is the power of God to
salvation, because therein is Christ's righteousness revealed (not to sinners
as sinners) but from faith to faith? The condition of works is impossible to be
wrought in us by the Spirit, but the condition of faith (though it be
impossible for us to work it in our hearts) yet it is possible, easy and
unusual for God to work it by requiring of it, Ier. 3.22* which is no
prejudice to Gods free grace, because faith is purposely required and wrought,
because it chiefly honors and advances free grace, Romans 4, 16. The promise is
of faith that it might be by grace: If Mr W.C. will not preach Christ upon
believing, how will he or any man else preach it? Will they tell all men that
God loves them, and that Christ has died for them, and that he that gives
grace and salvation will work faith in them? Truly thus W.C. seems to affirm;
but if they shall preach so to all sinners as sinners, and tell them absolutely
God will work faith in them also, I suppose that the Church walls and plentiful
and abundant experience would testify against this falsehood; and the
Scripture testifies sufficiently, that every man shall not have faith to whom
the Gospel is preached: Now I do beseech the God and father of lights to pity
his straying servants who are led into these deep and dangerous delusions
through feeble mistake of the true difference between old and new Testament
Ministries, and that he would pity his people for whose sins God has let loose
these blinding anct hardening doctrines, by means of which they are tempted to
receive that as the Gospel of truth, which is but a mere lie, and to take that
as an evidence of salvation that is in truth the evidence of perdition and
condemnation, as has been shown.

Thesis 118.
The second thing remains to be cleared, whether sanctification may not be a
first evidence and therefore more then a carnal inferior and last evidence,
as Mr Saltmarsh calls it: For if it be (not a doubtful) but a clear and certain
evidence in it self (as has been proved) why may it not be a first evidence?
why may not the Spirit of God who works it in a person justified, first reveal
it as an evidence that he is justified? What mortal man can limit the Spirit
of God, to what evidence he shall first bring in to the conscience of a
justified estate? For let sanctification be taken in the largest sense, for any
work of saving grace wrought in the Elect (whether in vocation to faith, or in
sanctification which (strictly taken) follows our justification by faith) and
take evidence not for evidence of the object (for Christ Jesus in his
free grace must be seen first as the ground on which faith rests) but for
evidence of testimony to the subject, and then I thus argue, that this first
evidence of special actual love in beholding Gods free grace to a sinner, it
is either 1. Without the being of faith and other graces. Or 2. Without the
seeing of them only, the eye looking up only to Christ and free grace.


But this first evidence is not without the being of faith and holiness; for
then it should be to a man actually under the power of sin and his filthy lusts
and the devil; which has been already proved in the former Thesis to be a mere
delusion: there being no such word of the Gospel which reveals Gods free love
and actual reconciliation to a sinner as a sinner, and as under the power of
his sins, but the Gospel rather reveals the quite contrary; and to affirm the
witness of the Spirit clears this up, is to pretend a testimony of the Spirit
contrary to the testimony of the world; and yet I strongly fear and do fully
believe that this is the first evidence which some men plead for, viz. to see
Gods love toward them, while they neither see grace or any change of heart in
them: or have grace, but are still under the dominion of their sin.

And on the other side, if any affirm that this evidence is not without the
being of grace but only without the seeing of it: so that a Christians first
evidence is the seeing of Gods free grace out of himself, without seeing any
faith or grace in himself, and seeing nothing else but sin in himself, this I
confess is nearer the truth, but it is an error which leads a man to a
precipice and near unto the pit: for if this be so, then these things will
unavoidably follow.

1. That a Christian must see the love of God toward him in Christ, and yet
must not see himself to be the person to whom this love only belongs: for
(according to this very opinion it self) it belongs only to a believer, and one
that has the being of grace, and not to a sinner as a sinner.

2. Then a Christian must not see the love of Christ and free grace of God by
that proposition or testimony of the Spirit which reveals it, and that is this,
Tu fidelis, thou Believer called and sanctified, art freely beloved: and thus a
man must not see his estate good by the light of the spirit, nay thus a
Christian must receive the testimony of the Spirit which assures him that he is
loved without understanding the meaning of the Spirit, which is (not thou
sinner as such) but thou Believer art beloved: not thou that have no grace, but
thou that have the being of it, art beloved.

3. Then the first evidence is built upon a mere weakness, nay upon an untruth
and falsehood; for it is a mere weakness not to see that which we should see,
viz. the being of faith and grace in the heart, in which respect the promise is
sealed, and if any man by not seeing it shall think and say there is no grace,
no faith, no sanctification, and now he sees Gods love to such a one, and he
thinks himself to be such a one when he sees Gods free grace, and has this
first evidence, it is a falsehood and an untruth, for it is supposed to be
there in the being of it all this while; suppose therefore that some Christians
at their first return and conversion to God or afterward, have grace and faith,
but see it not in their assurance of Gods love (the eminency of the object and
good of it swallowing up their thoughts and hearts from attending themselves)
yet the question is quo jure, they do not see, nay should not see and take
notice of the being of them in themselves? Is not this a mere weakness and
falsehood which is now made the mystery of this first evidence? and indeed
somewhat like Cusanus his summa sapientia, which he makes to be this* viz.
Attingere illud quod est inattingibile inattingibiliter, That a Christian must
see and touch Gods deep love, and yet neither see not touch nor feel any change
in himself, or any being of grace, when in truth it is there; in which respect
also Gods free grace and love is revealed.

4. If this be the first evidence, then no Minister, no nor any Apostle of
Christ Jesus, can give any first evidence of Gods love by the ordinary
dispensation of the Gospel; for although a Minister may say. Thou art a sinner,
therefore the Lord Jesus may save thee, yet he cannot say upon that ground that
therefore the Lord Jesus will save him, for then every sinner should be saved:
No Minister can say to any unbeleever, Christ has redeemed thee, therefore
believe, or say absolutely Thy sins are pardoned, for then he should preach
contrary to the word which expressly tells us, That he that believes not is
already condemned. No minister can say God will work faith in all you that are
sinners, as has been shown; but they can say, Thou Believer are pardoned, thou
that art sanctified art reconciled, etc. It is therefore an evil speech of one
lately in print, who calls That a bastard assurance, arising from a lying
spirit, which first proceeds from the sight of any grace, and thence concludes
they are justified and shall be saved. For I would thus argue, that this work
of grace (suppose love to the Saints, hunger and thirst after righteousness,
universal respect to all Gods Commandments, etc.) it is either common to
hypocrites and unsound, or else it is peculiar to the elect and sincere? If the
first, then it cannot be either first or second evidence: it can be no evidence
at all either without or with seeing, first, Gods free love to sinners as
sinners; if the second, then either Gods promise (made to such as are hungry
and humble, and have a work peculiar to Gods elect in them) must be falls (which
is blasphemous to imagine) or else whenever it is seen, whether first or
last, it must needs be a most blessed and sweet, and sure evidence: for when we
say that such a work of grace may be a first evidence, we do not mean, as if
the work simply considered in it self could give in any evidence, but only as
the free promise of grace is made to such as have such a work of grace; this
promise we say to such persons, whenever they see this work, gives in full
and clear evidence of their blessed estate: And if the word of grace to a
sinner as a sinner, may give in a first evidence (as some imagine) then much
more may it give in evidence^, where there is not only the word of grace, but
also the spirit of grace, yea the work of grace to assure the conscience: and
for any to affirm that faith and sanctification are good evidences, if
justification be first evident, is but a quirk of frothy wit; for it may be as
safely affirmed on the contrary, that justification is a good evidence, if
faith and sanctification he first evident; for it is not these simply, but the
promise which is our evidence, which is never to a sinner as such: I shall
therefore conclude these things with showing the true grounds of effectual
evidence of the love of Christ.

Thesis 119.
free grace of God in Christ (not works) is the only sure foundation of
justifying faith, or upon which faith is built, Romans 3.24, 25. 1 Pet. 2.4, 5,
6. Mat. 16.18. This free grace therefore must first be revealed by the Spirit
of God in the Ministry of the Gospel in order unto faith, Romans 10.14, 15. Ephesians.
1.13. which general revelation of free grace, some make to be the first
evidence on which faith rests, and thus far it is true; but now this free grace
is revealed two ways.

1. In the free offer of it to be our own by receiving it, Act. 10.43. Gal.
2.16. 2. In the free promise of it revealing it as our own already, having
actually and effectually received it, Ioh. 1.12. Romans 5.1, 2. 1 Ioh. 5.12.
The free offer of grace (containing Gods call, commandment and beseechings to
believe and be reconciled) gives us right to this possession of Christ or to
come and take and so possess Christ Jesus by faith. Ierem. 3.22. 1 Cor. 1.9.
Romans 1.5, 6. The free promise of grace (containing revealed immutable purposes
and actual assurances of present and future grace) gives us right to the
fruition of Christ, or to enjoy Christ as a free gift when it is offered; the
command and desire of the donor to receive it to be our own, gives us right and
powet to possess it: and when it is received, his promise to us assuring us
that it is and shall continue our own, gives us right and privilege to enjoy
it and make use of it. For by two immutable things (the promise confirmed by
oath) we have strong consolation who have fled for refuge to the hope before
us, Heb. 6.17, 18, 19. The free offer is the first ground of our faith, why we
receive Christ to be our own: but the free promise is the first ground of the
assurance of faith, why we are assured and persuaded that he is our own
already: for the Gospel containing three things, 1. The revelation of Christ:
2. The offer of Christ. 3. The promise of Christ to all those that receive this
offer; Hence faith (which runs parallel with the Gospel, the proper object of
it) first sees Christ, secondly receives Christ, thirdly is assured of the love
of Christ having received him.

The free offer of grace being made to the soul because it is poor and sinful,
cursed and miserable, and that therefore it would receive Christ, hence it is
that in this respect the soul is not bound first to see some good in it self
and so to receive him, but rather is bound (at first breathings of God upon it)
rather to see no good, i. nothing but sin and perdition, death and darkness,
enmity and weakness, and therefore to receive him, Luke 14.21. Revel. 3.17,
18. Gal. 3.22. Romans 11.32. Hos. 13.3. But the promise of free grace being
actually given to the soul (and not declared only as it is in the free offer,
because it has received Christ already by which he is actually its own) hence
it is that in this respect, the soul is bound to see some good or saving work
of grace in it self first, and so embrace and receive the promise and Christ
Jesus in it: So that although in receiving Christ to be our own, we are to see
no good in our selves wherefore we should receive him or believe in him; yet in
receiving him as our own already, we must first see some good (the work of free
grace in us) or else we have no just ground thus to receive him: No man can
challeng any promise belonging to him without having a part in Christ the
foundation of them; no man can have Christ but by receiving of him or believing
in him, Ioh. 1.12. Hence therefore they that say that the first evidence of
Gods love and free grace or actual favor, i^ to a sinner as a sinner, had
need consider what they say; for is it to a sinner as possessed with Christ and
receiving of him, or as dispossessed of Christ not having of him, but rather
refusing and rejecting of him. If they say the first, they then speak the
truth, but then they raze down their own pernicious principle, that Christ and
Gods love belongs to them As sinners: If they affirm the latter, then they do
injuriously destroy Gods free grace and the glory of Christ, who think to
possess promises without possessing Christ, or to have promises of grace,
without having Christ the foundation of them all. For though the common love of
God (as the bare offer of grace is) may be manifested without having Christ,
yet special actual love cannot be actually our own, without having and first
receiving of him: And if the Spirit of God convince the world of sin (and
consequently of condemnation) while they do not believe, Ioh. 16.9. I wonder
how it can then convince them of pardon of sin and reconciliation, before they
do believe? unless we will imagine it to be a lying spirit, which is
blasphemous. These things not considered of, have and do occasion much error
at this day in the point of evidencing, and has been an inlet of deep
delusion, and open gaps have been made hereby to the loose ways and depths of
Familism and gross Arminianism, and therefore being well considered of, are
sufficient to clear up the ways of those faithful servants of the Lord (who
dare not sow pillows, nor cry peace to the wicked, much less to sinners as
sinners) both from the slanderous imputation of legal ministrations after an
old Testament manner, as also of making works the ground of faith, or the
causes of assurance of faith; the free offer being the ground of the one, and
the free promise the cause and ground of the other: Briefly therefore.

1. The free offer of grace is the first evidence to a poor lost sinner that he
may be beloved. 2. The receiving of this offer by faith (relatively considered
in respect of Christ's spotless righteousness) is the first evidence showing
why he is beloved, or what has moved God actually to love him. 3. The work of
sanctification (which is the fruit of our receiving this offer) is the first
evidence showing that he is beloved.
If therefore a condemned sinner be asked whether God may love him, and why he
thinks so? he may answer, Because Jesus Christ is held forth and offered to
such a one: If he be further asked, why or what he thinks should move God to
love him? he may answer, Because I have received Christ's righteousness
offered, for which righteousness sake only I know I am beloved, now I have
received it: If he be asked lastly, how he knows certainly that he is beloved;
he may answer safely and confidently, Because I am sanctified: I am poor in
spirit, therefore mine is the kingdom of heaven: I do mourn, and therefore I
shall be comforted: I do hunger and thirst, and therefore I shall be satisfied,
etc. We need in time of distress and temptation all these evidences, and
therefore it is greatest wisdom to pray for that spirit, which may clear them
all up unto us, rather then to contend which should be the first.

And thus we see that the whole moral law is our rule of life, and
consequently the law of the Sabbath, which is a branch of this rule: We now
proceed to show the third branch, of things generally and primarily moral.

Thesis 120.
Thirdly, Not only a day, nor only a rest day, but the rest day the seventh
day, or a seventh day of Gods determining, and therefore called The Sabbath of
the Lord our God) is here also enjoined and commanded, as generally moral. For
if a day be moral, what day must it be? If it be said, that any day which
humane wisdom shall determine, whether one day in a hundred or a thousand, or
one day in many years; if this only be generally moral, then the rule of
morality may be broken because the rule of equality may be thus broken by
humane determination: For it may be very unequal and unjust to give God one
day in a hundred or a thousand for his worship, and to assume so many beside to
our selves for our own use. There is therefore something else more
particularly, yet primarily moral in this Command, and that is The Sabbath
day, or such a day wherein there appears an equal division, and a fit
proportion between time for rest and time for work, a time for God and a time
for man, and that is a ^^venth day which God determines: A fit proportion of
time for God is moral because equal, man cannot determine nor set out this
proportion, God therefore only can and must, A day therefore that he shall
determine is moral, and if he declares his determination to a seventh, A
seventh day is therefore moral. Gomarus confesses that by the Analogy of this
Commandment, not one day in a thousand, or when man pleases, but that one day
in seven is moral, at least equal, fit, and congruous to observe the same: and
if the Analogy he speaks of arises virtute mandati divini, or by virtue of
Gods Commandment, the cause is in effect yielded; but if this Analogy be made
virtute libertatis humanae, so that humane liberty may do well to give God one
in seven, because the Jews did so, and why should Christians be more scant?
then I see not but humane liberty may assume power to it self to impose monthly
and annual holy days as well, because the Jews had their new moons and yearly
festivals; and by Analogy thereof, why may not Christians who have more grace
poured out upon them, and more love shown unto them under the Gospel, hold some
meet proportion with them therein also, as well as in Sabbaths? But it can
never be proved that God has left any humane wisdom at liberty to make holy
days, by the rule of Jewish proportions: Beside, if humane wisdom see it meet
and congruous to give God at least one day in seven, this wisdom and reason is
either regulated by some law, and then it is by virtue of the law of God, that
he should have one day in seven, or it is not regulated by a law, and then we
are left to a loose end again, for man to appoint what day he sees meet in a
shorter or a longer time, his own reason being his only law; and this neither
Gomaras nor the words of the Commandment will allow, which sets and fixes the
day, which we see is one day in seven, which not man but God shall determine
and therefore called The Sabbath of the Lord our God.

Thesis 121.
Primrose apprehension) to writhe and wrack the words of the Commandment; the
second (if granted) abolisheth our Christian Sabbaths.

Thesis 122.


1. Because the express words of the Commandment do not run thus, viz.
Remember to keep holy That seventh day, but more generally, the Sabbath day;
it is in the beginning and so it is in the end of this Commandment, where it is
not said that God blessed That Seventh day, but The Sabbath day, by which
expression the wisdom of God, as it points to that particular seventh day that
it should be sanctified: so it also opens a door of liberty for change, if God
shall see meet, because the substance of the Commandment does not only contain
That seventh day, but The Sabbath day, which may be upon another seventh, as
well as upon that which God appointed first: and that the substance of the
command is contained in those first words, Remember the Sabbath day to keep it
holy, may appear from the repetition of the same Commandment, Deuteronomy. 5.12.
where these words, As the Lord thy God commanded thee, are immediately inserted
before the rest of the words of the Commandment be set down, to show thus
much: that therein is contained the substance of the fourth command: the words
following being added only to press to the duty, and to point out the
particular day, which at that time God would have them to observe.

2. Because in the explication of those words [ the Sabbath] it is not called
That seventh, but The seventh, for so the words run, Six days shall thou
labor, but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God, the meaning of
which is thus much, to wit, that man taking six days to himself for labor,
that he leave the seventh to be the Lords: now unless any can show that no
other day but that Seventh could be the seventh for rest, nor no other six
days but those six days going before tha^ seventh could be the six days for
labor, they can never prove that this fourth Commandment has only a respect
to That particular Seventh, and it is no small boldness necessarily to limit
where God has left free: for we know that if God will, man may take other six
days for labor, and leave another Seventh for God, then those six days and
that Seventh day only.

3. The change of the Sabbath undeniably proves thus much (if it can be proved)
that the morality of this command did not lie in that particular day only: for
if that only was moral, how could it be changed? and if it did not lie only in
that Seventh, wherein then did it more generally lie? was it in a day more
largely or in a Seventh day more narrowly? now let any indifferent conscience
be herein judge, who they be that come nearest to the truth, whether they that
fly so far from the name Seventh, which is expressly mentioned in the
Commandment, or they that come as near it as may be? whether they that plead
for a Seventh of Gods appointing, or they that plead for a day (but God knows
when) of humane institution? and it is worth considering why any should be
offended at the placing of the morality of the command in a Seventh, more then
at their own placing of it in a day; for in urging the letter of the
Commandment to that particular Seventh, to abolish thereby the morality of a
Seventh day, they do withal therein utterly abandon the morality of a day; for
if That Seventh only be enjoined in the letter of the Commandment* and they
will thence infer, that a Seventh therefore cannot be required, how can they
upon this ground draw out the morality of a day?

4. Because (we know) that ratio legis est anima legis, i. the reason of a law
is the soul and life of the law: now let it be considered, why God should
appoint the Seventh rather then the ninth or tenth or twentieth-day, for
spiritual rest? and the reason will appear not to be Gods absolute will
merely, but because divine wisdom having just measures and balances in its
hand, in proportioning time between God and man, it saw a seventh part of time
(rather then a tenth of twentieth) to be most equal for himself to take, and
for man to give: and thus much the words of the Commandment imply, viz. that it
is most equal if man has six, that God should have the seventh: now if this
be the reason of the law, this must needs be the soul and substance of the
morality of the law, viz. That a Seventh day be given to God, man having six,
and therefore it consists not in That Seventh day only: for the primary reason,
why God appointed this or that Seventh, was not because it was that seventh,
but because a Seventh was now equal in the eye of God for God to take to
himself, man having the full and fittest proportion of six days together for
himself; and because a seventh was the fittest proportion of time for God,
hence this or that individual and particular seventh in the second place fall
out to be moral, because they contain the most equal and fittest proportion
of a Seventh day in them; there was also another reason why That Seventh was
sanctified, viz. Gods rest in it, but this reason is not primary as has been
said, and of which now we speak.

5. Because if no other Commandment be in the Decalogue, but it is
comprehensive, and looking many ways at once, why should we then pinion and
gird up this only to the narrow compass of that Seventh day only?

6. Because our adversaries in this point are forced sometime to acknowledge
this morality of a Seventh with us: we have heard the judgment of Gomaras
herein, Thesis 44. and M. Primrose who speaks with most weight and spirit in
this controversy, professes plainly, That if God give us six days for our
own affairs, there is then good reason to consecrate a Seventh to his service,
and that in this reason there is manifest justice and equity which abides for
ever, to dedicate to God precisely a seventh day after we have bestowed six
days upon our selves: it cannot be denied (says he) but that it is most just;
Now if it be by his confession, 1. just, 2. most just. 3. manifestly just. 4.
perpetually just, to give God precisely one day in seven: the cause is then
yielded: the only evasion he makes is this, viz. that though it be most just to
give God one day in seven, yet it is not more just, then to give God one in six,
or five, or four, there being no natural justice in the number of seven more
then in the number of six or four: but the answer is easy, that if man may
give unto God superstitiously too many, or profanely too few: and if the
appointment of God has declared it self for a seventh, and that the giving of
this seventh be most just and equal, then let it be considered, whether it be
not most satisfactory to a scrupling conscience, to allow God a seventh day
which he has appointed, which is confessed to be most just and perpetually
equal, and consequently moral: and if there be a moral and perpetual equity
to give God one day in seven, then it is no matter whether there be any more
natural equity therein, then in one in five or six: the disputers of this
worl^ may please themselves with such speculations and shifts, but the wisdom
of God, which has already appointed one day in seven rather then in six or
ten, should be adored herein, by humble minds, in cutting out this proportion
of time, with far greater equity then man can now readily see.

7. Because deep corruption is the ground of this opinion, the plucking up of
Gods bounds and landmarks of a seventh, is to put the stakes into the Churches
hands, to set them where she pleases; or if she set them at a seventh, where
God would have them, yet that this may be submitted to, not because God
pleases, but because the Church so pleases; not because of Gods will and
determination, but because of the Churches will and determination, that so it
being once granted, that the Church has liberty to determine of such a day,
she may not be denied liberty of making any other holidaies, or holy things in
the worship and service of God; and that this is the main scope and root of
this opinion is palpably evident from most of the writings of our English
adversaries in this controversy.

Thesis 123.
A seventh day therefore is primarily moral, yet (as was Thesis. 48.) there is
something else in this commandment which is secundarily moral, viz. This or
that particular seventh day, I will not say that it is accidentally moral (as
some do) but rather secundarily, and consequently moral: for it is not moral
firstly, because it is this particular seventh, but because it has a seventh
part of time, divinely proportioned and appointed for rest, falling into it,
and of which it participates: to give alms to the needy is a moral duty, and
primarily moral; but to give this or that quantity may be moral also, but it
is secundarily moral, because it flows ex consequenti, only from the first;
for if we are to give alms according to our ability and others necessity, then
this or that particular quantity thus suting their necessity must be given:
which is also a moral duty, so it is in this point of the Sabbath.

Thesis 224.


Thesis 125.
Ironside and others do usually dash all such reasonings out of countenance,
with this answer, viz. That by this argument, That particular seventh from the
creation is moral, which we see is changed; for (say they) that also is set in
the heart of the Decalogue, with a special note of remembrance also. But the
reply from what has been said is easy, viz. That that also is indeed moral;
only it is secondarily moral, not primarily; and therefore (as we have shown)
was mutable and changeable, the primary morality in a seventh immutably
remaining; the moral duty of observing a seventh day is not changed, but only
the day. If Mr. Primrose could prove that there is nothing else commanded in
this fourth command, but only that particular seventh from the creation, he had
then enough to show that (this day being justly changed) the Commandment is not
moral of perpetual, Prim. part. 2. cap. 6. S. 24.
but out or this particular seventh which now is changed; himself acknowledges
that out of it may be gathered the morality of a day, and why not of a seventh
day also as well as of a day? He says that it is a bold assertion to say that
this genus of a seventh is herein commanded: But why is it not as bold to
affirm the same of a day? for out of that particular seventh whence he would
raise the genus of a day, we may as easily, and far more rationally collect the
genus of a seventh day.

Thesis 126.
Nor will it follow that because a seventh is moral, that A seventh determined
and appointed of God for holy rest, which is herein commanded. 2. The Lord has
in wisdom appointed such a seventh as that man may have six whole days
together to labor in: and hence it follows that divine determination without
crossing that wisdom, could not possibly fall upon any other days in the Cycle
of seven, but either upon the last of seven which was the Jewish, or the first
of seven which now is (as shall be shown) the Christian Sabbath. 3. As God has
appointed one day in seven for man's rest, so in his wisdom he so orders it, as
that it shall be also a day of Gods rest, and that is not to be found in any
day of the week, but either in the last of seven, wherein the Father rested, or
in the first of seven wherein the Son rested from his work also.

Thesis 127.
It Is true that the Sabbath day and that seventh day from exegesis or the
explication of the other, as Genesis 2, 2, 3. Exodus 16.29. and elsewhere; but that
it should be only so understood in this commandment, Creda^ Iudaeus Apella --
non ego, as he said in another case; I see no convicting argument to clip the
wings of the Scripture so short, and to make the Sabbath day and that seventh
day of equal dimensions: Although it cannot be denied, but that in some sense
the Sabbath day is exegeticall of the seventh day, because the commandment has
a special eye to that seventh from the creation, which is secundarily moral,
yet not excluding that which is more generally contained in that particular,
and consequently commanded, viz. a seventh day or The Sabbath day.

Thesis 128.
Prim. part. 2. cap. ^. S. 24.
M. Primrose would prove the exegesis, That by the Sabbath day is meant that
seventh day only from the creation, because God actually blessed and sanctified
that Sabbath day, because God cannot actually bless a seventh, being an
unlimited, indefinite and uncertain indetermined time: The time (says he) only
wherein he rested, he only actually blessed, which was not in a seventh day
indetermined, but in that determined seventh day: But all this may be readily
acknowledged and yet the truth remain firm; for that particular seventh being
secundarily moral, hence as it was expressly commanded, so it was actually
and particularly blessed; but as in this seventh a general of a seventh is
included, so a seventh is also generally blessed and sanctified. Otherwise how
will M. Primrose maintain the morality of a day of worship out of this
commandment? for the same objection may be made against a day, which himself
acknowledges, as against a seventh day which we maintain; for it may be said,
that That day is here only moral wherein God actually rested, but he did not
rest in a day indefinitely, and therefore a day is not moral; let him unloose
this knot, and his answer in defense of the morality of a day will help him to
see the morality of a seventh day also: That particular day indeed wherein God
actually and particularly rested, he particularly blessed, but there was a
seventh day also more general which he generally blessed also; he generally
blessed the Sabbath day, he particularly blessed that Sabbath day, and in blessing
of that he did virtually and by Analogy bless our particular Christian Sabbath
also, which was to come: As Moses in his actual blessing of the tribe of Levi,
Deuteronomy. 23.7, 10. he did virtually and by Analogy bless all the Ministers of the
Gospel not then in being: And look as when God commanded them to keep holy the
Sabbath in ceremonial duties, he did therein virtually command us to keep it
holy in Evangelicall duties; so when he commanded them to observe that day
because it was actually appointed and sanctified and blessed of God, he
commanded us virtually and analogically therein to observe our seventh day also
if ever he should actually appoint and bless this other.

Thesis 129.
puncto indivisibili, i. in an indivisible point, and a set measure; so as that
if more or less be done or given in way of justice, that then the rule of
justice is thereby broken, ex. gr. it is just to give alms and pay tribute; yet
not so just, as that if men give more or less, that then they break a rule of
justice; so it is in this point of the Sabbath, a seventh part of time is
moral, because it is just and equal for all men to give unto God, who have
six for one given them to serve their own turn, and do their own work in, yet
it is not so just but that if God had required the tribute of a third or fourth
part of our time, but it might have been just also to have given him one day in
three or two or four, for in this case positive determination does not so much
make as declare only that which is moral: And therefore if Mr Primrose thinks,
that a seventh part of time is not moral, upon this ground, viz. because it is
as equal and just to dedicate more time to God, and that a third or fourth day
is as equal as a seventh, it is doubtless an ungrounded assertion; for so he
affirms, That although it be most just to give God one day in seven, Part. 2.
cap. 7. S. 4.
yet no mo^e just then to ded^cate to him one day in three or six: And suppose
it be so, yet this does not prove that a seventh day is not moral, because it
is as equal to give six as seven, no more then that it is no moral duty to
give an alms, because it may be as equal to give twenty pence as thirty pence
to a man in want: If furthermore he think that it is as equal and just to give
God more days for his service, as one in seven, out of humane wisdom and by
humane consecration, not divine dedication, then it may be doubted whether one
day in two or three or six is as equal as one day in seven; for as humane
wisdom, if lest to it self, may readily give too few, so it may superstitiously
give too many (as has been said:) But if four or three or six be alike equal
in themselves to give to God, as one in seven, then if he thinks it a moral
duty to observe any such day in case it should be imposed and consecrated by
humane determination, I hope he will not be offended at us if we think it a
moral duty also to observe a seventh day, which we are certain divine wisdom
has judged most equal, and which is imposed on us by divine determination: we
may be uncertain whether the one is as equal, as we are certain that a seventh
day is.

Thesis 130.
Actions of worship can no more be imagined to be done nature, but which
Counsel determines; Determination therefore by Counsel of that time which is
required in this command does not abolish the morality of it, but rather
declares and establishes it. God therefore who is Lord of time, may justly
challenge the determination of this time into his own hand, and not infringe
the morality of this command, considering also that he is more able and fit
then men or Angels to see, and so cut out the most equal proportion of time
between man and himself; God therefore has sequestered a seventh part of time
to be sanctified, rather then a fifth, a fourth, or a ninth, not simply because
it was this seventh, or a seventh, but because in his wise determination
thereof, he knew it to be the most just and equal division of time between man
and himself; and therefore I know no incongruity to affirm, that if God had
seen one day in three or four, or nine, to be as equal a proportion of time as
one day in seven, that he would then have left it free to man to take and
consecrate either the one or the other (the Spirit of God not usually
restraining where there is a liberty) and on the other side, if he had seen a
third or fifth or ninth or twentieth part of time more equal then a seventh, he
would have fixed the bounds of labor and rest out of a seventh; but having now
fixed them to a seventh, a seventh day is therefore moral, rather then a
fourth or sixth or ninth day, because it is the most equal and fittest
proportion of time (all things considered) between God and man; the appointment
therefore of a seventh rather then a sixth or fourth* is not an act of Gods mere
will only (as our adversaries affirm, and therefore they think it not moral)
but it was and is an act of his wisdom also according to a moral rule of
justice, viz. to give unto God that which is most fit, most just and most
equal; and therefore although there is no natural justice (as Mr Primrose
calls it) in a seventh simply and abstractly considered, rather then in a sixth
or tenth, yet if the most equal proportion of time for God be lotted out in a
seventh, there is then something natural and moral in it rather then in any
other partition of time, viz. to give God that proportion of time which is most
just and most equal; and in this respect a seventh part of time is commanded
because it is good (according to the description of a moral law) and not only
good because it is commanded.

Thesis 131.
Scriptures, meditate, pray, etc. the time for these and the like duties is
left to the will and determination of man according to general rules of
convenience and seasonablenesse set down in the word; man's will (in this sense)
is the measure of such times of worship, but there is not the like reason here,
in determining time for a Sabbath, as if that should be left to man's liberty
also; because those private duties are to be done in that time, which is
necessarily annexed to the duties themselves, which time is therefore there
commanded, where and when the duty is commanded: but the time for a Sabbath is
not such a time as naturally will and must attend the action, but it is such a
time as Counsel (not nature) sees most meet, and especially That counsel
which is most able to make the most equal proportions of time, which we know
is not in the liberty or ability of men or Angels, but of God himself, for do
but once imagine a time required out of the limits of what naturally attends
the action, and it will be found necessarily to be a time determined by
counsel: and therefore our adversaries should not think it as free for man to
change the Sabbath seasons, from the seventh to the fifth or fourth or tenth
day, etc. as to alter and pick our times for p^ivate duties.

Thesis 132.
There is a double reason of proposing Gods example in the viz. to persuade men
hereby to labor six days, and give God the seventh, which he should appoint,
as well as to direct to that particular day which for that time (it is granted)
it also pointed unto; and therefore let the words in the Commandment be
obse^ved, and we shall find man's duty 1. More generally set down, viz. to
labor six days, and dedicate the seventh unto God, and then follows Gods
persuasion hereunto from his own example, who when he had a world to make, and
work to do, he did labor six days together, and rested the seventh; and
thus a man is bound to do still: but it does not follow, that he must rest that
particular seventh only, on which God then rested; or that that seventh (though
we grant it was pointed unto) was only aimed at in this example: the binding
power of all examples whatsoever (and therefore of this) being ad speciem actus
(as they call it) to that kind of act, and not to the individuum actionis only,
or to every particular accidental circumstance therein; If indeed man was to
labor six days in memorial only of the six days of creation, and to rest a
Seventh day in memorial only of Gods rest and cessation from creation, it
might then carry a fair face, as if this example pointed at the observation of
that particular seventh only; but look as our six days labor is appointed
for other and higher ends, then to remember the six days work of God, it
being a moral duty to attend our callings therein; so the Seventh day of rest,
is appointed for higher and larger ends (as Didoclavius observes) then only to
remember that notable rest of God from all his works, it being a moral duty to
rest the Seventh day in all holiness.

Thesis 133.
not always binding in their accidentals (as the case is here) although it be
true that in their essentials they always do.

Thesis 134.
There is no strength in that reason, that because one day Wall. dis^ert. cap.
1. Jun. Annal. Explic. in Lev. 25.
that therefore one year in seven is to be so also, as of old it was among the
Jew^^ for beside what has been said formerly, viz. that one year in seven was
merely ceremonial, one day in seven is not so (says Wallaeus) but moral; God
gave no example (whose example is only in moral things) of resting one year
in seven, but he did of resting one day in seven. I say, beside all this, it is
observable what Iunius notes herein, The Lord (says he) challenges one day in
seven jure creationis, by right of creation; and hence requires it of all men
created: but he challenged one year in seven, jure peculiaris possessionis, i.
by right of peculiar possession, the Land of Canaan being the Lords land in a
peculiar manner, even a type of Heaven, which every other Country is not; and
therefore there is no reason that all men should give God one seventh year, as
they are to give him one seventh day: By the observation of one day in seven
(says he) men profess themselves to be the Lords, and to belong unto him, who
created and made them; and this profession all men are bound unto: but by
observation of one year in seven, they professed thereby that their Country
was the Lords, and themselves the Lords Tenants therein, which all Countries
(not being types of Heaven) cannot nor ought to do; and therefore there is not
the like reason urged to the observation of a seventh year, as of a seventh
day.

Thesis 135.
Look therefore as it is in the second Commandment, although

Thesis 136.


Thesis 137.


Thesis. 138.
Lev. 23. but if it be one link of the chain, and an essential part of the
moral Law, then its undoubtedly moral; but so it is, for its part of the
Decalogue, nine parts whereof all our adversaries we now contend with confess
to be moral; and to make this fourth ceremonial, which God has set in the
heart of the Decalogue, and commanded us to remember to keep it above any other
Law, seems very unlike to truth, to a serene and sober mind, not disturbed
with such mud, which usually lies at the bottom of the heart, and turns light
into darkness: and why one ceremonial precept should be shuffled in among the
rest which are of another tribe, lineage and language, has been by many
attempted, but never soundly cleared unto this day: surely if this Commandment
be not moral, then there are but nine Commandments left to us of the moral
Law, which is expressly contrary to Gods account, Deuteronomy. 4.

To affirm that all the commands of the Decalogue are moral, yet every one in
his proportion and degree, and that this of the Sabbath is thus moral, viz. in
respect of the purpose and intent of the Lawgiver, viz. That some time he set
apart, but not moral in respect of the letter in which it is expressed: it is in
some sense formerly explained, true, but in his sense who endeavors to prove
the Sabbath ceremonial, while he says it is moral, is both dark and false:
for if it be said to be moral only in respect of some time to be set apart,
and this time an individuum vagum, an indeterminate time, beyond the verges of
a seventh part of time; then there is no more morality granted to the fourth
Commandment, then to the Commandment of building the temple and observing the
new moons, because in Gods command to build the Temple: the general purpose
and intention of the Lawgiver was that some place be appointed for his public
worship, and in commanding to observe New Moons, that some time be set apart
for his worship, and so there was no more necessity of putting Remember to keep
the Sabbath holy, then to remember to keep holy the new moons: And look as the
commandment to observe new moons, cannot in reason be accounted a moral
commandment, because there is some general morality in it, viz. for to observe
some time of worship, so neither should this of the Sabbath be upon the like
ground of some general morality mixed in it; and therefore for M Ironside to
say that the law of the Sabbath is set among the rest of the moral precepts,
because it is mixtly ceremonial, having in it something which is moral, which
other ceremonial commands (he says) have not, is palpably untrue; for there
is no ceremonial law of observing Jewish moons and festivals, but there was
something generally moral in them, viz. That (in respect of the purpose and
intention of the Lawgiver) some time be set apart for God, just as he makes
this of keeping the Sabbath.

Thesis 139.
Prim. part. 2. cap. 6.
To imagine that there are but nine moral precepts indeed; and that they are
called ten in respect of the greater part according to which things are usually
denominated, is an invention of M. Primrose, which contains a pernicious and
poysonfull seed of making way for the razing out of the Decalogue more laws
then one: for the same answer will serve the turn for cashiering three or four
more, the greater part (suppose six) remaining moral, according to which the
denomination arises: For although it be true that sometime the denomination is
according to the greater part, viz. when there is a necessity of mixing diverse
things together as in a heap of corn with much chaff, or a Butt of wine where
there be many lees, yet there was no necessity of such a mixture and jumbling
together of morals and ceremonials here: M. Primrose tells us that he does not
read in Scripture, that all the Commandments are without exception called
moral, and therefore why may there not (says he) be one ceremonial among
them? But by this reason he may as well exclude all the other nine from being
moral also; for I read not in Scripture that any one of them is styled by
that name, Moral: And although it be true which he says, That covenants among
men consist sometime together of diverse articles, as also that Gods Covenant
(taken in some sense) sometimes did so; yet the Covenant of God made with all
men (as we shall prove the Decalogue is) ought not to be so mingled, neither
could it be so without apparent contradiction, viz. That here should be a
covenant which binds all men in all things to observe it, and yet some part
of it being ceremonial, should not bind all men in all things it commands:
nor is there indeed any need of putting in one ceremonial law, considering how
easily they are and may be reduced to sundry precepts of the moral law as
appendices thereof, without such shuffling as is contended for here.

Thesis 140.
if it be not of the same nature with the rest?

Thesis 141.
Our adversaries turn every stone to make answer to this Jun. Paral.
and the reasons against it are long since answered by Iunius, on Heb. 2.2, 3.
but it is useless here to enter into this controversy.

Thesis 142.
Nor do I say that because the law was spoken by God immediately, Abraham, Job,
Moses in the mount, immediately about other matters then moral laws; but
because he thus spoke and in such a manner openly and to all people, young and
old, Jews and Proselyte Gentiles then present, with such great glory and
terror and majesty. B. Manus^: of Sab.
Surely it stands not (says holy Brigh^man) with the majesty of the universal
Lord who is God not only of the Jews but also of the Gentiles, speaking thus
openly (not privately) and gloriously and most immediately, to prescribe laws to
one people only which were small in number, but wherewith all nations alike
should be governed: Mr Ironside indeed thinks that the Lord had gone on to have
delivered all the other ceremonials in the like manner of speech from the
mount, but that the fear and cry of the people (that he would speak no more to
them) stopped him; but the contrary is most evident, viz. that before the people
cried out, the Lord made a stop of himself, and therefore is said to add no
more, Deuteronomy. 5.22, It was a glory of the Gospel above all other messages in that
it was immediately spoken by Christ, Heb. 1.2. and 2.3. and so Gods immediate
publication of the moral law puts a glory and honor upon it above any other
laws; and therefore while Mr Ironside goes about to put the same honor upon
ceremonial laws, he does not a little obscure and cast dishonor upon those
that are moral, by making this honor to be common with ceremonial and not
proper only to moral laws.

Thesis 143.
Nor do I say that the writing of the law on stone argues it stone by Ioshuah,
Josh. 8.32.) but because it was writ immediately by the finger of God on such
Tables of stone, and that not once but twice; not on paper or parchment, but on
stone, which argues their continuance; and not on stone in open fields, but on
such stone as was laid up in the Ark, a place of most safety, being most
sacred, and a type of Christ who kept this law, and upon whose heart it was
writ, Psalm. 40.6, 7. to satisfy justice, and to make just and righteous before
God, all that shall be saved, of all whom the righteousness of this Law,
according to justice was to be exacted; what do these things argue, but at
least thus much, that if any Law was to be perpetuated, this surely ought so to
be? Mr. Primrose tells us, that the writing upon stone did not signify
continuance of the Law, but the hardness of their stony hearts, which the Law
writ upon them was not able to overcome; and it is true that the stony Tables did
signify stony hearts, but its false that the writing on stone did not signify
continuance also, according to Scripture phrase: For all the children of God
have stony hearts by nature; now God has promised to write his Law upon such
hearts as are by nature stony, and his writing of them there implies the
continuance of them there; so that both these may stand together, and the
similitude is fully thus, viz. The whole Law of God was writ on Tables of
stone, to continue there: so the whole Law of God is writ on stony hearts by
nature to continue thereon.

Thesis 144.
Only moral Laws, and all moral Laws, are thus summarily Primrose's argument
is weak, who thinks that this honor put upon the Decalogue does not argue it
to be moral, Because then many other particular moral Laws set down in
Scripture, not in Tables of stone, but in parchments of the Prophets and
Apostles, should not be moral: For we do not say that all moral Laws
particularly were thus specially honored, but that all and only moral Laws
summarily were thus honored; in which summaries, all the particulars are
contained, and in that respect equally honored: It may affect ones heart with
great mourning, to see the many inventions of men's hearts to blot out this
remembrance of the Sabbath day; they first cast it out of Paradise, and shut it
out of the world until Moses time; when in Moses time its published as a Law,
and crowned with the same honor as all other moral Laws, yet then they make
it to be but a ceremonial Law, continuing only until the coming of Christ;
after which time it cease to be any Law at all, unless the Churches
constitution shall please to make it so, which is worst of all.

Thesis 145.
Every thing indeed which was published by Gods immediate promises or motives
only, annexed to the Law to persuade to the obedience thereof; but they were
not Laws; for the question is whether all Laws spoken and writ thus immediately
were not moral; but the argument which some produce against this is, From the
promise annexed to the fifth Command, concerning long life, and from the motive
of redemption out of the house of bondage, in the preface to the Commandments,
both which (they say) were spoken immediately, but yet were both of them proper
unto the Jews: But suppose the promise annexed to the fifth Commandment be
proper to the Jews, and ceremonial, as Master Primrose pleads (which yet many
strong reasons from Ephesians. 6.2. may induce one to deny) what is this to the
question, which is not concerning Promises, but Commandments and Laws: Suppose
also that the motive in the Preface of the Commandments literally understood is
proper to the Jews; yet this is also evident, that such reasons and motives as
are proper to some, and perhaps ceremonial, may be annexed to moral laws
which are common to all; nor will it follow, that laws are therefore not common,
because the motives thereto are proper: We that dwell in America may be
persuaded to love and fear God (which are moral duties) in regard of our
redemption and deliverances from out of the vast sea storms we once had, and
the tumults in Europe which now are, which motives are proper to our selves.
Promises and motives annexed to the Commandments, come in as means to a higher
end, viz. obedience to the Laws themselves; and hence the Laws themselves may
be moral, Wall. di^^. de 4. prae^. cap. 3.
and these not so, though immediately spoken, because they be not chiefly nor
lastly intended herein. I know Wallaeus makes the preface to the Commandments a
part of the first Commandment, and therefore he would hence infer, that some
part (at least) of a Commandment is proper to the Jews; but if these words
contain a motive pressing to the obedience of the whole, how is it possible
that they should be a part of the law or of any one law? For what force of a
law can there be in that which only declares unto us who it is that redeemed
them out of Egypts bondage? For it cannot be true (which the same Author
affirms) that in these words is set forth only who that God is whom we are to
have to be our God in the first Commandment; but they are of larger extent,
showing us who that God is whom we are to worship, according to the first
Commandment, and that with his own worship according to the second, and that
reverently according to the third, and whose day we are to sanctify according
to the fourth, and whose will we are to do in all duties of love toward man,
according to the several duties of the second Table; and therefore this
declaration of God is no more a part of the first then of any other
Commandment, and every other Commandment may challenge it as a part of
themselves as well as the first.

Thesis 146.
Gal. 2.20. Ioh. 5.24. The law therefore is the rule of our life; now if nine
of these be a complete rule without a tenth, exclude that one, and then who
sees not an open gap made for all the rest to go out at also? For where will
any man stop, if once this principle be laid, viz. That the whole law is not
the rule of life? May not Papists blot out the second also, as some of
Cassanders followers have done all but two; and as the Antinomians at this day
do all? and have they not a good ground laid for it, who may hence safely say
that the Decalogue is not a rule of life for all? Mr. Primrose, that he might
keep himself from a broken head here, sends us for salve to the light of
nature and the testimony of tbe Gospel, both which (says he) maintain and
confirm the morality of all the other Commandments, except this one of the
Sabbath. But as it shall appear that the Law of the Sabbath has confirmation
from both (if this direction was sufficient and good) so it may be in the mean
time considered why the Gentiles who were universal Idolaters, and therefore
blotted out the light of nature (as Mr. Primrose confesses) against the second
Commandment, might not as well blot out much of that light of nature about the
Sabbath also; and then how shall the light of nature be any sufficient
discovery unto us of that which is moral and of that which is not?

Thesis 147.
There is a Law made mention of, Iam. 2.10. whose parts Totum or whole law: If
it be demanded, What is this Law? the answer is writ with the beams of the Sun,
that it is the whole moral Law contained in the Decalogue: For 1. The Apostle
speaks of such a Law which not only the Jews but all the Gentiles are bound to
observe: and for the breach of any one of which, not only the Jews but the
Gentiles also were guilty of the breach of all, and therefore it cannot be
meant of the ceremonial Law which did neither bind Gentiles or Jews at that
time wherein the Apostle writ. 2 He speaks of such a Law as is called a royal
Law, and a Law of liberty, verse. 8.12. which cannot be meant of the ceremonial
Law in whole or in part, which is called a Law of bondage, not worthy the
royal and kingly spirit of a Christian to stoop to, Gal. 4.9. 3. It Is that law
by the works of which all men are bound to manifest their faith, and by which
fa^^h is made perfect, verse. 22. which cannot be the Ceremonial nor
Evangelicall, for that is the Law of faith: and therefore it is meant of the Law
moral. 4. It Is that Law of which, Thou shall not kill nor commmit adultery are
parts, verse. 11. Now these Laws are part of the Decalogue only, and whereof it
may be said, he that said Thou shall not commit adultery, said also, Remember
to keep the Sabbath holy: and therefore the whole Decalogue, and not some parts
of it only, is the moral Law, from whence it is manifest that the Apostle does
not speak (as M. Primrose would interpret him) of offending against the Word at
large, and of which the Ceremonial Laws were a part, Prim. part. 2. cap. 10.
S. 15.
but of offending against that part of the word, to wit, the moral Law, of
which, he that offends against any one is guilty of the breach of all; hence
also, his other answer falls to the dust, viz. that the fourth command is no
part of the Law, and therefore the not observing of it is no sin under the
New Testament, because it was given only to the Jews and not to us: for if it
be a part of the Decalogue, of which the Apostle only speaks, then it is a mere
begging of the question to affirm that it is no part of the Law of Christians:
but we see the Apostle here speaks of the Law, and the Royal Law, and the
Royal Law of Liberty: his meaning therefore must be of some special Law which
he calls (...) The Law: now if he thus speaks of some special Law, what can it
be but the whole Decalogue, and not a part of it only? as when he speaks of the
Gospel (...), he means not some part, but the whole Gospel also: and if every
part of the Decalogue is not moral, how should any man know from any Law or
rule of God what was moral, and what not; and consequently what is sinful, and
what not? if it be said, the light of nature; we have proved that this is a
blind and corrupt-Judge, as it exists in corrupt man: if it be said by the
light of the Gospel, this was then to set up a light unto Christians to discern
it by, but none to the Jews while they wanted the Gospel, as dispensed to us
now: many moral Laws also are not mentioned in the Gospel, it being but
accidental to it to set forth the Commandments of the Law.

Thesis 148.
Mat. 5.17. then the Commandment of the Sabbath is not abolished by Christ's
coming; if not one jot, prick or tittle of the Law shall perish, much less
shall a whole Law perish or be destroyed by the coming of Christ.

Thesis 149.
Matthew; but by Law is meant the moral Law, and by Prophets those
prophetical illustrations and interpretations thereof, in which the Prophets
do abound* for 1. The Lord Christ speaks of that law only, which whosoever
should teach men to break and cast off, he should be least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.19. but the Apostles did teach men to cast off the Ceremonial
Law, and yet were never a whit less in the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. He speaks of
that Law by conformity to which all his true Disciples should exceed the
righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees: but that was not by being externally
ceremonious or moral, but by internal conformity to the spiritualnesse of
Gods Law, which the Pharisees then regarded not. 3. Christ speaks of the least
Commandments, and of these least Commandments, (...), now what should those
least Commandments be, but those which he afterward interprets of rash anger,
adulterous eyes, unchaste thoughts, love to enemies? etc. which are called
least, in opposition to the Pharisaicall Doctors conceits in those times, who
urged the gross duties commanded, and condemned men only for gross sins
forbidden; as if therein consisted our complete conformity to the Law of God:
and therefore by the least of those Commandments is meant no other then those
which he afterward sets down in his spiritual interpretation of the Law, verse.
21. never a one of which Commandments are Ceremonial, but moral Laws; and
although Mr. Primrose thinks that there is no connection between the seventeen,
and the other expositors verses of the Law which follow, yet whosoever ponders
the Analysis impartially, shall find it otherwise: even from the 17 Verse to
the end; the conclusion of which is, to be perfect as our heavenly Father is
perfect, who is never made a pattern of perfection to us in ceremonial, but
only in moral matters: it is true indeed (which some object) that there is
mention made of Altar and Sacrifice, verse. 23 which were ceremonials: but there
is no Law about them, but only a moral Law of love is thereby pressed with
allusion to the ceremonial practice in those times: he speaks also about
divorce, but this is but accidentally brought to show the morality of the Law
of adultery; the Law of retaliation wants not good witnesses to testify to the
morality of it, but I rather think it is brought in to set forth a moral Law
against private revenge. Our Savior indeed does not speak particularly about
the law of the Sabbath, as he does of killing and adultery, etc. but if
therefore it be not moral because not spoken of here, then neither the first,
second, or fifth command are moral, because they are not expressly opened in
this Chapter; for the scope of our Savior was to speak against the
Pharisaicall interpretations of the Law, in curtalling of it, in making gross
murder to be forbidden, but not anger; adultery to be forbidden, but not lust;
which evil they were not so much guilty of in point of the Sabbath: but they
rather made the Phylacteries of it too broad by overmuch strictness, which our
Savior therefore elsewhere condemns, but not a word tending to abolish this
Law of the Sabbath.

Thesis 150.
If therefore the Commandment is to be accounted moral, Primrose principles)
then the fourth Commandment may well come into the account of such as are
moral; but the places mentioned and cleared out of the New Testament evince
thus much: The Lord Jesus coming not to destroy the Law of the Sabbath, but to
establish it: and of the breach of which one Law he that is guilty, is guilty
of the breach of all.

Thesis 151.
Sinai, there might be then some color and reason to cloth the Sabbath with
rags, and the worn-out garments of ceremonialnesse: but if it was imposed upon
man in innocence not only before all types and ceremonies, but also before all
sin: and upon Adam as a common person, as a Commandment not proper to that
estate, nor as to a particular person and proper to himself: then the morality
of it is most evident; our adversaries therefore lay about them here, that they
might drive the Sabbath out of Paradise, and make it a thing altogether unknown
to the state of innocence: which if they cannot make good, their whole frame
against the morality of the Sabbath, falls flat to the ground; and therefore it
is of no small consequence to clear up this truth, viz. That Adam in innocence,
and in him all his posterity were commanded to sanctify a weekly Sabbath.

Thesis 152.
Genesis 2.2, 3. were so plain to prove a Sabbath in that innocent estate, that
there could be no evasion made from the evidence of them; for it is expressly
said, that the d^y the Lord rested, the same day the Lord blessed and
sanctified; but we know he rested the Seventh day immediately after the
Creation, and therefore he immediately blessed and sanctified the same day
also: for the words run copulatively, he rested the Seventh day, and he
blessed and sanctified that day; but its strange to see not only what odd
evasions men make from this clear truth, but also what curious Cabilismes and
fond interpretations men make of the Hebrew Text, the answer to which learned
Rivet has long since made, which therefore I mention not.

Thesis 153.
And, as Mr. Primrose truly shows, Exodus 16.32, 33. 1 Samuel 17.54. but they are
coupled and knit together in respect of time; for it is the like phrase which
Moses immediately after uses, Genesis 5.1, 2. where it is said, God created man in
his Image, and blessed them, and called their names, etc. which were together
in time; so it is here, the time God rested, that time God blessed; for the scope
of the words, Gen 2.1, 2, 3. is to show what the Lord did that seventh day,
after the finishing of the whole creation in six dai^s, and that is, He blessed
and sanctified it. For look as the scope of Moses in making mention of the six
days orderly, was to show what God did every particular day; so what else
should be the scope in making mention of the seventh day, unless it was to
show what God did then on that day? and that is, he then rested, and blessed
and sanctified it, even then in that state of innocence.

Thesis 154.
God is said, Genesis 2.1, 2, 3. to bless the Sabbath as he blessed Genesis 1.22,
28. and therefore he blessed the Sabbath at that time he rested; Shall Gods
work be presently blessed, and shall his rest be then without any? Was Gods
rest a cause of sanctifying the day many hundred years after (as our
adversaries say) and was the^e not as much cause then when the memory of the
creation was most fresh, which was the fittest time to remember Gods work in?
Prim. part. 2. cap. 1. S. 14.
M. Primrose tells us that the creatures were blessed with a present
benediction, because they did constantly need it; but there was no necessity
(he says) that man should solemnize the seventh as soon as it is made; but as we
shall show that man did then need a special day of blessing, so it is a
sufficient ground of believing that then God blessed the day when there was a
full and just, and sufficient cause of blessing, which is Gods resting; it
being also such a cause as was not peculiar to the Jews many hundred years
after, but common to all mankind.

Thesis 155.
The Rest of God (which none question to be in innocence i. a rest set apart in
exemplum, or for example, and for holy uses; but it was not a natural rest
merely: for then it had been enough to have said, that at the end of the sixth
day God rested; but we see God speaks of a day* the seventh day. God has
rested with a natural rest or cessation from creation ever since the end of
the first sixth day of the world until now; why then is it said that God rested
the seventh day? Or why is it not rather said that he began his rest on that
day, but that it is limited to a day? Certainly this argues that he speaks not
of natural rest merely, or that which ex natura re^ follows the finishing of
his work, for it is then an unfit and improper speech to limit Gods rest within
the ci^cle of a day; and therefore he speaks of a holy rest then appointed for
holy uses as an example for holy rest; which may well be limited within the
compass of a day; and hence it undeniably follows, that if God rested in
innocence with such a rest; then the seventh day was then sanctified, it being
the day of holy rest.

Thesis 156.
example of any act, but that in the present example there was and is a present
rule, binding immediately to ^ollow that example: if therefore from the
foundation of the world, God made himself an example in six days labor and in
a seventh days rest, why should not this example then and at that time of
innocence be binding? there being no example which God sets before us, but it
supposes a rule binding us immediately thereunto? The great and most high God
could have made the world in a moment or in a hundred years, why did he make it
then in six days, and rested the seventh day, but that it might be an example
to man? Its evident that ever since the world began, man's life was to be spent
in labor and action which God could have appointed to contemplation only; nor
will any say that his life should be spent only in labor, and never have any
special day of rest (unless the Antinomians, who herein sin against the light
of nature) if therefore God was exemplary in his six days labor, why should
any think but that he was thus also in his seventh days rest? Pointing out
unto man most visibly (as it were) thereby on what day he should rest: A meet
time for labor was a moral duty since man was framed upon earth, God
therefore gives man an example of it in making the world in six days: A meet
time for holy rest, the end of all holy and honest labor, was much more moral
(the end being better then the means) why then was not the example of this also
seen in Gods rest? M. Ironside indeed is at a stand here, Irons. Q. 1 cap. 4.
and confesses his ignorance In conceiving how Gods working six days should
be exemplary to man in innocence, it being not preceptive but permissive only
to man in his apostasy. But let a plain analysis be made of the motives used
to press obedience to the fourth command and we shall find (according to the
consent of all the Orthodox not prejudiced in this controversy, that Gods
example of working six days in creating the world, is held forth as a motive
to press Gods people to do all their work within six days also; and the very
reason of our labor and rest now, is the example of Gods labor and rest then,
as may also appear, Ex. 31.17. And to say that those words in the Commandment
(viz. Six days thou shall labor) are no way preceptive but merely promissive,
is both cross to the express letter of the text, and contrary to moral
equity to allow any part of the six days for sinful idleness or neglect of
our weekly work, so far forth as the rest upon the Sabbath be hindered hereby.

Thesis 157.
The word Sanctified is variously taken in Scripture, and sanctify the
Sabbath, Genesis 2.2, 3. it must be one of these two ways: either, 1. By infusion
of holiness and sanctification into it, as holy men are said to be sanctified:
Or, 2. By separation of it from common use, and dedication of it to holy use,
as the Temple and Altar are said to be sanctified.

Thesis 158.
God did not sanctify the Sabbath by infusion of any habitual

Thesis 159.
It must therefore be said to be sanctified in respect of its

Thesis 160.
Now if the Sabbath was thus sanctified by dedication; it i. either that God
might keep this holy day, or that man might observe it as a holy day to God,
but what dishonor is it to God to put him upon the observation of a holy day?
and therefore it was dedicated and consecrated for man's sake and use, that so
he might observe it as holy unto God.

Thesis 161.
This day therefore is said to be sanctified of God that man

Thesis 162.
Genesis 2.2, 3. that man is commanded hereby to sanctify it, Jun. in Genesis 2.
and dedicate it to the holy use of God: Sanctificare est sanctifica ^ mandare,
says Iunius: And therefore if M Primrose and others desire to know where God
commands the observation of the Sabbath in Genesis 2.2. they may see it here
necessarily implied in the word Sanctify: And therefore if God did sanctify
the Sabbath immediately after the creation, he commanded man to sanctify it
then; for so the word Sanctified is expressly expounded by the holy Ghost
himself, Deuteronomy. 5.15. We need not therefore seek for wood among trees, and
enquire where and when and upon what ground the Patriarchs before Moses
observed a Sabbath, when as it was famously dedicated and sanctified, i.
commanded to be sanctified from the first foundation of the world.

Thesis 163.
Genesis 2.2. to wit, that the Sabbath was comman^ed to be sanctified before the
fall, do fly to their shifts and seek for refuge from several answers;
sometimes they say it is sanctified by way of destination, sometimes they ^ell
u^ of anticipation, sometime they think the Book of Genesis was writ after
Exodus, and many such inventions; which because they cannot possibly stand one
with another, are therefore more fit to vex and perplex the mind, then to
satisfy conscience; and indeed do argue much uncertainty to be in the minds
of those that make these and the like answers, a^ not knowing certainly what to
say, nor where to stand: yet let us examine them.

Thesis 164.
Genesis was writ after Exodus, and yet to affirm that the Sabbath in Genesis
is said to be sanctified and blessed, only in way of destination, i. because God
destinated and ordained that it should be sanctified many years after; seems to
be an ill favored and misshapen answer, and no way fit to serve their turn who
invent it: for if it was writ after Exodus; what need was there to say that it
was destinated and ordained to be sanctified for time to come? when as upon
this supposition the Sabbath was already sanctified for time past, as appears
in the story of Exodus 19.20. And therefore M. Primrose translates the words
thus, that God rested, and has blessed and has sanctified the seventh day, as
if Moses writ of it as a thing past already; but what truth is there then to
speak of a destination for time to come? I know Iunius so renders the Hebrew
words, as also the word Rested, but we know how many ways some of the Hebrew
^enses look, nor is it any matter now to trouble our selves about them, this
only may be considered; That it is a mere uncertain shift to affirm that
Genesis was writ after Exodus; M. Ironside tells us he could give strong reasons
for it, but he produces none; and as for his authorities from humane
testimonies, we know it is not fit to weigh out truth by humane suffrages; and
yet herein they do not cast the scale for Genesis to be writ after Exodus; for
although Beda, Abulensi^, and diverse late Jesuits do affirm it; yet Eusebius,
Catharinus, Alcuinns, a Lapide, and sundry others, both Popish and Protestant
writers, are better judgmented herein; and their reasons for Genesis to be the
firstborn as it is first set down, seem to be most strong: The casting of this
cause therefore depends not upon such uncertainties; and yet if this disorder
were granted, i^ will do their cause no good, as, if need were, might be made
manifest.

Thesis 165.
M. Ironside confesses, That Gods resting and sanctifying the Irons. Q. 1 cap.
4.
are ^^etaneous, and acknowledges the connection of them together at the same
time, by the c^pulative And, and that as God actually rested, so he actually
sanctifed the day: but this sanctification which he means is nothing else but
destination, or Gods purpose and intention to sanctify ^t afterward: so that
in effect this evasion amounts to thus much, viz. that God did actually purpose
to sanctify it, about 2500. years after the giving of the Law, but yet did not
actually sanctify it, and if this be the meaning, it is all one as if he had
said in plain terms, viz. that when God is said to sanctify the Sabbath, he
did not indeed sanctify it, only he purposed so to do, and although M.
Primrose and himself tells us that the word sanctify signifies in the Original
some time to pr^pare and ordain: so it may be said that the word signifies
sometimes to publish and proclaim: if they say that this latter cannot be the
meaning, because we read not in Scripture of any such proclamation that this
should be the Sabbath, the like may be said (upon the reasons mentioned)
concerning their destination of it thereunto: Again, if to sanctify the day be
only to purpose and ordain to sanctify it, then the Sabbath was no more
sanctified since the Creation, then ab aeterno, and before the world began, for
then God did purpose that it should be sanctified: but this sanctification here
spoken of seems to follow Gods resting which was in time, and therefore it must
be understood of another sanctification then that which seems to be before all
time: again as God did not bless the Sabbath in way of destination, so neither
did he sanctiffe it in way of destination: but he did not bless it in way of
destination, for let them produce but one Scripture where the word blessed is
taken in this sense, for a purpose only to bless: indeed they think they have
found out this purpose to sanctify in the word sanctified. Isa. 13.3. but
where will they find the like for the word blessed also? for as the day was
blessed so it was sanctified, and yet I think that the Medes and Persians in
Isa. 13.3. are not called Gods sanctified ones, because they were destinated to
be sanctified for that work, but because they were so prepared for it as that
they were actually separated by Gods word for the accomplishment of such work:
but our adversaries will not say that God did thus sanctify the Sabbath in
Paradise by his word: and yet suppose they are called his sanctified ones in
way of destination, yet there is not the like reason so to interpret it here,
for in Isa. 13.3. God himself is brought in immediately speaking, before whose
eternal eyes all things to come are as present, and hence he might call them
his sanctified ones, but in this place of Genesis 2.2. Moses (not God immediately)
speaks of this sanctifying in way of Historical narration only; this
destination which is stood so much upon is but a mere imagination.

Thesis 166.
Prolepsis and Anticipation, as they call it, i. to set down things aforehand
in the history, which many years happened and came after in order of time, but
there is no such Prolepsis or Anticipation here (as our adversaries dream) so
that when God is said to sanctify the Sabbath in Genesis, the meaning should
be, that this he did 2500. years after the creation, for this assertion wants
all proof, and has no other prop to bear it up, then some instances of
Anticipations in other places of Scripture: the Jesuits from some unwary
expressions of some of the Fathers, first started this answer, whom Gomarus
followed, and after him sundry others prelatically minded: but Rivet, Ames, and
others have scattered this mist long since, and therefore I shall leave but
this one consideration against it, viz. That throughout all the Scripture we
shall not find one Prolepsis, but that the history is evident and apparently
false, unless we do acknowledge a Prolepsis and Anticipation to be in the
story: so that necessity of establishing the truth of the history, only can
establish the truth of a Prolepsis in the history: I forbear to give a taste
thereof by any particular instances, but leave it to trial; bu^ in this place
alleged of Genesis 2.2. can any say that the story is apparently false, unless
we imagine a Prolepsis? and the Sabbath to be first sanctified in mount Sinai,
Exodus 20. for might not God sanctify it in Paradise, as soon as Gods rest, the
cause and foundation of sanctifying of it, was existing? will any say with
Gomarus that the Sabbath was first sanctified, Gomar. Inv. Se^^. and Orig. Sab.
126.
Exodus 16. because God blessed them so much the day before with Manna, whenas
in the Commandment it self, Exodus 20. the reason of it is plainly set down to
be Gods resting on the seveth day, and sanctifying of it long before?

Thesis 167.
There is not the least color of Scripture to make this Prim. part. 2. cap. 2.
S. 1.
when he had rested from his works, and yet M. Primrose casts this block in the
way for the blind to stumble at, supposing that there should be no such
Anticipation as he pleads for: for surely if God blessed and sanctified the
day, it was a real and an effectual sanctification and blessing, but this
magnifying and glorying in it, in Gods mind, is no real thing in the blessed
God, he having no such affections in him, but what is said to be in him that
way is ever by some special effects: the simple and pure essence of God
admitting no affections, per modum affectus sed affectus, as is truly and
commonly maintained.

Thesis 168.
If God sanctified and commanded Adam to sanctify the Adam himself only,
there being the same cause for his posterity to observe a Sabbath, as himself
had, which was Gods example of labor and rest; and if this was given to his
posterity also then it was a moral duty, and not a point of mere order proper
to Adam to attend unto: yet Mr. Primrose for fear lest he should shoot short
in one of his answers, Prim. part. 2. cap. 2. S. 5.
wherein he tells us, that it did derogate much from the excellency of Adams
condition to have any one day for God appointed unto him: Prim. part. 2. cap.
2. s. 19.
yet here notwithstanding he tells us, that if God had appointed such a day, it
was no moral thing, nor yet a ceremony directing to Christ, but only as a
point of order, which God was pleased then to subject him unto: and that a man
may as well conclude that it was a moral thing to serve God in Eden, because
it was a place which God had appointed Adam to serve him in, as the seventh day
to be moral because it was the time thereof: but this assertion is but a mere
(...); for the text tells us expressly, that God did both bless and sanctify
the Seventh day in a special manner, as a thing of common concernment, but is
never said to bless and sanctify the place of Eden. All men in Adam were made
in the image of God, and was there but one thing in innocence wherein God made
himself eminen^ly exemplary in labor and rest? and shall we think that that one
thing was rather a point of order proper to Adam, then a part of Gods image
common to all? the appointment of that royal seat of Eden, was an act of
heavenly bounty, and therefore might well be proper to him in that estate; but
the appointment of the time for Gods special honor, was an act of justice,
made and built upon a rule of common equity, as may appear out of the second
edition of this Law in the fourth Commandment, and therefore might well be
morally binding unto all, and not a point of mere order only for Adam to
observe.

Thesis 169.
If Adam had stood, all mankind might, and perhaps should have observed that
particular seventh day for ever on earth: but look as Adam observed it not
merely because it was That Seventh (as has been shown) which was but
secundarily and as it were accidentally moral: but because it was the Seventh
day appointed of God, which is firstly and primarily moral: so although we now
do not observe that Seventh day which Adam did, yet the substance of the
morality of this command given unto him is observed still by us, in observing
the Seventh day which God has appointed, to which the equity of this command
binds generally all mankind: hence therefore it is of little force which some
object, that if the Commandment to man in innocence be moral, that then we are
bound to observe the same Seventh day, which Adam in innocence did: this is often
laid in our dish; but the answer is easy from what has been said.

Thesis 170.
Moses time did sanctify a Sabbath, that therefore the Sabbath was not
sanctified at that time, we may as well argue that it was not observed all the
time of the Judges, nor of the books of Samuel, because no express mention is
made in those books of any such thing: for if it be said that there is no doubt
but that they observed it because it was published on Mount Sinai, the like we
may say concerning the Patriarchall times, who had such a fam^us manifestation
of Gods mind herein, from the known story, Commandment and example of God in
the first creation, Genesis 2.2. it is not said expressly that Abram kept the
Sabbath, but he is commended for keeping Gods Commandments, Genesis 26.5. and is
not the Sabbath one of those Commandments, the breach of which is accounted the
breaking of all? Exodus 16.27, 28. and may we lawfully and charitably think that
Abram neglected other moral duties because they are not exp^esly mentioned?
again it may be as well doubted of, whether the Patriarchs observed any day at
all (which our adversaries confess to be moral) because it neither is
exp^esly mentioned^: again it may be said with as good reason, th^^ the
sacrifices which they offered were without warrant from God, because the
Commandment for them is not expressly mentioned: but we know that Abel by faith
offered, and faith must arise from a precedent word: so that as the approved
practice of holy men does necessarily imply a command, so the command given (as
has been shown) to Adam, does as necessarily infer a practice: again if no
duties to God were performed by the Patriarchs, but such as are expressly
mentioned and held forth in their examples, we should then behold a strange
face of a Church for many hundred years together, and necessarily condemn the
generation of the just* for living in gross neglects and impieties, t^ere
being many singular and special duties which doubtless were done that were
not meet particularly to be mentioned in that short epitome of above 2000 years
together, in the book ^f Genesis: and therefore for M. Ironside and Primrose to
conclude that the keeping of the Sabbath had certainly been mentioned if it had
been observed, is very unsound. M. Primrose thinks that if the Sabbath had been
observed, Irons. Q. 1 cap. 2. Prim. part. 1. cap. 2^ S. 4.
it had been then mentioned, because lesser things then the Sabbath are made
mention of, there being also frequent occasion to speak of the Sabbath, and
that Moses and the Prophets would have pressed the observation of it from the
Patriarchs example if they had so practiced. But what is this kind of arguing,
but to teach the holy Ghost, what and when and how to speak? for there be many
lesser matters expressed in many other historical parts of the Scripture, and
good occasion as man may fancy to speak of the Sabbath, and yet we see it is
past by in ^^ence: but it is no wonder if he who questions whether there were
any days of fasting and prayer for 2000 years together, because they are not
expressly mentioned, if that he doubts also whether there were any Sabbath all
that time, upon the same ground: but can any question that considers the
sorrows of those times, which all ages have put men to seek God in such duties,
but that they had such days of fasting, as well as their betters in
Evangelicall times, when the Bridegroom was gone.

Thesis 171.
Cain and Abel, Genesis 4.3. were upon the Sabbath day, the usual stated time
then for such services; for that which our Translation renders, In process of
time, the Hebrew calls it, (...) i. The end of days; and why may not this be
the end of the days of the week (a known division of time, and most famous
from the beginning of the world, as R^vet demonstrates out of the best
Antiquaries) rather then at the end of the months of the year? But it is not
good to wrestle with probabilities, of which many are given, which do rather
darken then clear up this cause: This only may be added, that suppose the
Patriarks observed no Sabbath from man's fall to Moses time; yet it will not
follow that man in innocence was a stranger to it, because man in his apostasy
forgot, or did not regard to keep it.

Thesis. 172.
Adam and his posterity were bound to keep by a Law given them in innocence:
Then it undeniably follows, that the observance of a Sabbath does not depend
upon great numbers of people to sanctify it; for at first creation the number
was but two, and yet they both were bound to observe it then: nor yet is it to
be cast aside through any man's freedom from worldly imcumbrances, whereby he
has liberty to serve God more frequently every day; for thus it was also in
the state of innocence, and yet the Sabbath to be observed then: It is
therefore unsound which M. Primrose affirms herein, viz. That the consecration
of a certain day for Gods service is not necessary, but then only, when many
troop together and make up the body of a great Assembly; and that therefore it
may be doubted whether the Patriarks having but small families and little
cumber, observed any Sabbath, but rather served God alike every day with great
ease and assiduity; and that therefore there was no need nor cause of a Sabbath
till they became a numerous people at mount Sinai. But beside what has been
said, how will it appear that the posterity of Seth called the sons of God,
Genesis 6.1, 2. were not a numerous people? Or that Abraham's family was so small?
out of which he could gather three hundred fighting men to pursue five mighty
Princes in battle? But suppose they were few, yet have not small companies,
and particular persons as much need of the blessing of a Sabbath? and special
communion with God therein, as great numbers and troops of people? Is not the
observation of the Sabbath built upon better and surer grounds mentioned in
Scripture, then bigness of number, and freedom from cumbers, not mentioned at
all?

Thesis 173.
If Adams fall was before the Sabbath (as Mr. Broad and some Psalm. 49.12. John
8.44.) yet it will not hence follow that he had no such command in innocence to
observe the Sabbath before his fall: For whether man had fallen or no, yet the
thing it self speaks that God was determined to work six days in making the
world, and to rest and so to sanctify the seventh, that he might therein be
exemplary to man; and consequently God would have given this law, and it should
have been a rule to him whether he fell or no; and indeed the seventh days
rest depends no more upon man's fall, then the six days work of creation,
which we see were all finished before the fall; the seventh days holiness
being more suitable to that state then the six days labor, to which we see he
was appointed, if Gods example had any force to direct and lead him thereunto.
Again, if the law of labor was writ upon his heart before he was actually
called forth to labor, viz. To dress and keep the garden, Genesis 2.15. why
might not also the law of holy rest be revealed unto him by God, and so
answerably writ upon his heart before he fell, or came actually to rest upon
the Sabbath? Little of Adams universal obedience to the Law of works, was as
yet actual while he remained innocent; and yet all his obedience in time to
come was writ upon his heart the first moment of his creation in the Image of
God, as it were aforehand, and why might not thi^ Law of the Sabbath be writ so
aforehand? Broad. Tract. c. 1.
And therefore M. Broad need not trouble himself or others in enquiring whether
God sanctified the Sabbath before or after the first seventh day wherein God
rested; and if before it, how Adam could know of the Sabbath before Gods
complete rest upon the first seventh day, the cause of it? for God was as well
able to make Adam privy to his counsel aforehand concerning that day, before
Gods rest on it, which was a motive to the observance of it, as he was to
acquaint his people with his purpose for a holy Passover before the occasion
of it fell out: Ibid.
Mr. Broad indeed tells us that its most probable that God did not bless and
sanctify the first Sabbath or seventh day of rest, because it is not said that
God blessed the Sabbath because he would, but because he had rested in it; but
by his leave it is most proper to say that God at the end of the six days
work had then rested from all his works; and thence God is said to sanctify
and rest the seventh day; his cessation from work which is the natural rest
being the cause of resting the seventh day with a holy rest (as we have shown)
and therefore there is no reason to stay till the seventh day was past and then
to sanctify it against the next seventh day; the first seventh day, upon the
ground mentioned, being first sanctified, and which Adam might be well enought
acquainted with aforehand, as has been shown.

Thesis 174.
Genesis 1.31. and therefore could not as yet be bad and evil by any sin or fall;
and now because it is more then probable that if Adam had completely sanctified
and stood one Sabbath, he had stood immutably, as I think might be
demonstrated; he therefore not standing a whole seventh day, for then he could
not have fallen, and yet not being fallen the sixth day, he therefore fell upon
the Sabbath day, that as the breach of every other command was wrapped up in that
first sin, so this of the Sabbath. The objections against this from John 8.44.
that Satan was a murderer from the beginning, and from Psalm. 49.12. that man in
honor did not (...) or abide one night in that estate, with some other
conjecturall reasons taken from some of the Schoolmens Obs and Sols are easily
answered by a serious and sober mind, and therefore I leave them.

Thesis 175.
soul (say some) did not need a Sabbath, because every day was a Sabbath to
him; Greg. Val. Tom. 5. disp. 7. Q. 4.
nor did his body need it, because it was impassible, say some, nor subject to
weariness in its work, say others truly: Alex. Ales. part. 2 Q. 86. Ri^et. in
Com. 4.
to what purpose then should any Sabbath be appointed unto him in that estate?
But we must know, that the Hebrew word for Sabbath, signifies holy rest, and
therefore as Rivet well shows, it is called (...) not (...) Menuchah, which
signifies common rest from weariness; hence it follows that the Sabbath being
originally sanctified for holy rest, not for common rest or rest from natural
weariness in labor; Adam might therefore stand in need of a Sabbath, though
his body was not subject to any weariness in or after his labor. Hence also
although he was to live holily every day, yet this hinders not but that his
soul might then have need of the holy rest of a Sabbath: For 1. Adam was to
serve God in a particular calling then, as is manifest from, Gen* 2.15. for he
was then to keep and dress the garden, and to act with and under God in the
government of many inferior creatures, Genesis 1.26. And thus his time being
filled in serving God with all holiness in his calling, he might need a
Sabbath; nor was it lawful for him to turn days of work in his calling into
days of rest, and so to keep a Sabbath every day, no not in that innocent and
happy estate: for if it was contrary to Adams holy estate to work six days,
how could it be agreeable or suitable to the holiness of God to work six days?
If God did labor six days and rested a seventh without any need of a rest in
respect of any weariness in his work, why might not, nay why should not man
imitate and be like to his God in labor and rest, although he was not subject
to any weariness in his holy work? 2. Though every day was to be spent in
holiness mediatly, both in seeing God in the creatures and meeting with God in
his labor and calling: yet it was not unsuitable, nay it was very needful in
that estate to have one day in the week for more immediate and special
converse with God, and for God more immediately and specially to converse with
him. Nor indeed was it suitable to Gods wisdom to confine man's holiness either
then or now, either to holy labor only, or to holy rest only, for then he
should not have been so like unto God who was exemplary holy unto man in both.
Special time for action wherein he closed with God more mediatly throughout
the six days labor, might well stand with special time for contemplation of
God upon the Sabbath, wherein he was to enjoy God more immediately. Adam did not
need a Sabbath upon the same ground of weakness that we do, viz. because we
cannot be earnest enough (as M. Primrose objects) in holy services to God upon
the week days, but we see it did not suit Gods wisdom nor man's holy estate,
then to be intent and earnest only in the enjoyment of his rest, to which his
intention on his calling and labor then, could not be any hinderance when the
Sabbath came; being free from such clogs of sin then, as we are now pressed down
withal: and therefore it is an unworthy expression, but often used by the same
author and others: viz. That it did derogate from the excellency of Adams
condition to observe a seventh days Sabbath, Ibid. s 19.
and that the determination of a time then, did argue Adams inability, or want
of inclination and affection to serve God ordinarily, and that the observance
of a Sabbath is a mark of a servile condition, as of other holy days under the
law; and that if Adam was able to serve God continually, that it was then
needless to limit him to a particular day; and that if a day were needful God
would have left the choice thereof to his own freedom, considering the wisdom
and godliness wherewith God had endowed him: These and such like expressions
are but hay and stubble, which the light of the truth delivered may easily
consume.

Thesis 176.
etc. in Paradise? because there is no marriage nor dressing of gardens, nor
weeks, nor reckonings of day and night in heaven? If God has work for Adam to
do, not only upon the Sabbath, but upon the week days also, why might he not
be said to glorify God without stint or ceasing, as the Angels do in heaven,
unless M. Primrose will say that Adams marriage and dressing the garden, was a
stinting and ceasing from glorifying God; which either he must affirm, or else
his argument falls flat upon all four, who thinks that Adam could not have any
set day for a Sabbath, because then he should not be like the Saints and Angels
in heaven, Ibid. s. 18.
who glorify God continually without stint or ceasing.

Thesis 177.
Adam, because it was given as a peculiar perogative and privilege to the
Jews: Irons. Q. 1 cap. 2.
and they that think that it was the Jews prerogative and privilege because of
such Scriptures as affirm that God gave unto them his Sabbaths, Exodus 16.29.
Nehem. 9.14. Ezekiel. 20.12. and such like; they may as well imagine that neither
the whole Decalogue or any part of it did belong to Adam, because the very same
thing is affirmed of it, viz. That he gave his laws to Jacob, his statutes and
judgments to Israel, Psalm. 147.19. to them also it is said were committed the
Oracles of God, Romans 3.2. The Sabbath therefore is not said to be given to them
as a peculiar propriety to the Jews no more then other parts of the Decalogue,
but as a special mercy, yea as a sweeter mercy in some respect then the giving
of any other laws, it being the sweetest mercy upon earth to rest in the bosom
of God (which the law of the Sabbath calls to) and to know that it is our
heavenly Fathers mind that we should do so upon every Sabbath day in a
special manner, without the knowledge of which law we have less light of
nature to hold the candle to us to the observance of it, then from any other
laws to direct us to the obedience of them.

Thesis 178.
It is affirmed (but unwarily) by some, that the tree of life Adams estate and
condition in innocence, to be taught by types, and that the Sabbath might
therefore be ceremonial, supposing that it was observed by Adam in his
innocent estate: but although the tree of life and sundry other things in
Paradise, are made Similitudes to set forth Christ Jesus in his Church by the
holy Ghost, Rev. 22. yet it is a gross mistake and most absurd to make every
metaphor or similitude and allusion, to be a type: for the husbandman sowing of
the seed is a similitede of preaching of the word, Mat. 13. and yet it is no
type of it, an effectionate lover and husband is in sundry Scriptures a
similitude and resemblance of Christ's affection and love to his Church and
spouse, the head and members of man's body are similitudes of Christ the head
and the Church his members; but will any affirm that these are also types of
Christ? and just thus was Paradise and the Tree of life in it, they were
similitudes to which the holy Ghost alludes in making mention of Christ and his
Church, but they were no types of them: there was typus fictus in them or
arbitrarius (which is all one with a similitude) but there was no Typus
destinatus therein, being never purposely ordained to shadow out Christ: for
the Covenant of works by which Adam was to live, is directly contrary to the
Covenant of grace by faith in Christ, Romans 11.6. by which we are to live,
Christ is revealed only in the Covenant of grace, and therefore could not be so
revealed in the Covenant of works directly contrary thereunto. Adam therefore
was not capable of any types then to reveal Christ to him: of whom the first
Covenant cannot speak, and of whom Adam stood in no need, no not so much as to
confirm him in that estate, for (with leave) I think that look as Adam breaking
the first Covenant by sin, he is become immutably evil and miserable in
himself, according to the rule of justice in that Covenant; so suppose him to
have kept that Covenant, all his posterity had been immutably happy and holy,
(not merely by grace) but by the same equity and justice of that first
Covenant, and hence it follows that he stood in no need of Christ or any
Revelation of him by types, no not to confirm him in that Covenant: I know in
some sense whatever God communicates to his creature in way of justice, may be
said to be conveyed in a way of grace, if grace be taken largly for that which
is conveyed out of Gods free will and good pleasure, as all things in the world
are, even to the acceptance of that wherein there is most merit, and that is
Christ's death and satisfaction for sin: but this is but to play with words;
for it is clear enough by the Apostles verdict that grace strictly taken, is
opposite to works, Romans 11.6. the law of works which only reveals doing and
life, to the law of faith which only reveals Christ and life; under which
Covenant of grace Adam was not, and therefore had no types then to shadow out
Christ: to say that Paradise and the Tree of life were types by way of
anticipation (as some lately affirm) is as much as to say that they were not
types then: and therefore neither these nor the Sabbath were Ceremonial then,
and that is sufficient for what we aim at; only it is observable that this
unsound expression leads into more palpable errors; for as they make the Tree
of life Typical by Anticipation, so they make the marriage of Adam and Eve,
and consequently the marriage of all mankind typical, and then why should not
all marriages cease, when Christ the Antitype is come? nay they make the rivers
and precious stones and gold in Paradise thus Typical of Christ and his
Church, Rev. 21. and then why may they not make the Angels in heaven Typical,
because men on earth who pour out the Vials are resembled to them? and why may
not men riding upon white Horses be typical, because Christ is so resembled?
Rev. 19.11. Pererius who collects out of Hugo de vict. a type of the whole new
Creation, in all the works of six days first Creation, may please himself (as
other Popish Proctors do) with such like shady speculations and Phantasmes, and
so bring in the Seventh day for company to be Typical also; but a good and
healthful stomach should be exceeding fearful of a little feeding on such
windy meat: nor do I think that Hugo's new creation is any more Antitypicall to
the first six days Creation, then Damascenes types in the fourth Commandment,
Damas. ^4 ^id. Orth. cap. 24.
who makes, Thou, thy son, thy daughter, thy servant, the stranger, to be types
of our sinful affections of spirit, and the ox and the ass figures of the
flesh and sensual part^ both which he says must rest upon the Sabbath day.

Thesis 179.
If therefore the Sabbath was given to Adam in innocence first and original
institution, of which we speak, it did not typifie either our rest in Christ
from sin in this life, or our rest with God in heaven in another life, or any
other imagined rest, which man's wit can easily invent and invest the Sabbath
with: but look as our Savior in reforming the abuses in marriage c^ls us to
the first institution; so to know what is perpetual in the Sabbath, it is most
safe to have recourse hither; which when it was first observed we see was no
way typical, but moral; and if man no way clogged with sin and earth had then
need of a Sabbath, have not we much more?

Thesis 180.
As before the Fall, the Sabbath was originally and essentially accidentally
typical, i. it had a type affixed to it, though of it is own nature it neither
was nor is any type at all: God affixed a farther end unto it after the Fall,
to be of farther use, to type out somewhat to Gods people, while in the
substance of it it remains moral, and hence it is that a Seventh day remains
moral and to be observed, but not that Seventh day which was formerly kept;
nor have we that end of resting which was under the Law, but this end only,
that we might more immediately and specially converse with God, which was the
main end of the Sabbaths rest before man's fall; for if the Sabbath had been
essentially typical, then it should be abolished, wholly, and no more
remembrance of it then of new moons and Jubilees, but because it was for
substance moral, being extant before the fall, and yet had a type affixed to
it after the fall, hence a Seventh day is still preserved, but that Seventh day
is now abolished: and hence new moons and other Jewish Festivals as they are
wholly Ceremonial in their birth, so they are wholly abolished (without any
change of them into other days as this of the Sabbath is) in their very being.

Thesis 181.
Isa. 66.23. Gal, 4.10. Romans 14.4, 5. Col. 2.16. but if we suppose that these
places be meant of the weekly Sabbath (which some deny) and rigidly urge them,
we may quickly press blood instead of milk out of them, and wholly abol^sh (as
Wallaeus well observes) the observation of any Christian Sabbath: but this one
consideration of a type affixed to it to make it so far forth ceremonial, and
therefore alte^^ble, which for substance is moral, may be as a right th^ed to
lead us into a way of truth in this great contoversie, and to untie many knots,
which I see not how possibly they can be otherwise unloosed, and therefore we
may safely say, that that Seventh day is abolished, because it has a type
affixed to it; but that a Seventh days Sabbath is still continued wherein
there is no type at all.

Thesis 182.
If any say, why was now the ceremony affixed, washed off and removed after
Christ's coming, and so that Seventh day still continued: as we see public
prayer is still used, but the type of incense removed, and the firstborn
still retain that which is moral, the type affixed to them being now
abolished? The reason of this is, because there is a necessity of the being of
both, both prayer and firstborn; for public prayer must be, and firstborn
must be, and they cannot be changed into any other; but there was no necessity
of the continuance of that first Seventh day to be the Sabbath* nay there was
some cause to change it, and another day might be our Sabbath as well as that
first: look therefore as the Lord could have kept the Temple at Jerusalem,
merely as a place of worship, which at this day in the general is necessary,
and have washed and wiped off the typical use of it in respect of Christ; yet
the wisdom of the Lord abolished the very being of the Temple, because that
place might be as well changed into another; and least through the typicalnesse
of it man's corrupt heart should abuse it, so I may say concerning the Sabbath,
it did not suit with the wisdom of God to wipe off the ceremony affixed to that
Seventh day, when it might well be changed, and so keep that day, considering
how apt men's ceremonious and superstitious hearts are to abuse such times or
places, unless the very types be abolished with the things themselves.

Thesis 183.
It Is true, the Sabbath is called a sign between God and us, Exodus 31.13. Ezekiel.
20.20. but it does not follow that therefore it is originally significative and
typical; for it may be only accidental ^o, by reason of a type and sign
affixed; yet upon narrow search of this place so much stood upon, no type at
all can hence be proved, because a sign is mentioned: for it is not necessary
to think that that it is a typical and sacramental sign, as circumcision and
the Passover were; for it might be only an indicant sign and declarative, as
Number. 16.38. and 17.10. and as the fruits of Gods regenerating Spirit are signs
of our translation from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3, 14. which signs still
continue: and if it be such a sign, it is rather a strong argument for the
continuance of the Sabbath, then for any abolition or change thereof.

Thesis 184.
The Sabbath being no visible sign of invisible grace, it indicant and
declarative sign of our communion with God, and God with us, of our interest
in him, and of his in us: and therefore in those places, Exodus 13.31. and Ezekiel.
20.20. where it is called a sign, it is not made a sign simply and nakedly
considered in it self (as all Sacramental and typical signs be) but it is
so called in respect of our keeping of it, or as it is observed and kept; and
therefore it runs in way of promise, Ezekiel. 20.20. If ye hallow my Sabbaths they
shall then be a sign between me and you, and you shall know (hereby) that I am
the Lord your God; and although the Sabbath it self be called a sign, Exodus
31. yet it is explained verse. 13. to be such a sign as to know hereby that the
Lord our God sanctifies us; and in Ezekiel. 20.20. that we may know hereby that he
is the Lord our God: for we know he is the Lord our God if he sanctifies us;
and that we are his people, if we sanctify, or be sanctified of him; and in
this respect it becomes not only a sign, but a mutual sign between God and
us, and in no other respect (as Wallaeus would stretch it) and hence it is that
whoever makes a conscience of sanctifying the Sabbath aright, shall not long
want assurance of Gods love, by this blessed sign.

Thesis 185.


Thesis 186.


Thesis 187.
gratis dictum, affirmed by some godly learned, who herein symbolize with
Popish postillers, who please themselves much in this and such like
allegorical significations of the Sabbaths rest: For if Christ did neither
enter into the state of rest till his resurrection, nor into the place of rest
until his ascension, how then could the rest of the Sabbath type out his rest
in the grave, which was part of his most heavy labor of humiliation, Act.
2.24. and no part of his rest, unless it was in respect of cessation therein
from actions of natural life? but the rest of one day is very unfit to
resemble and type out the rest of three days in the grave; and why may not
Christ's rest from labor in his sleep be as well the antitype, as Christ's rest
from the actions of this life in his grave?

Thesis 188.
Why may not our labor in the six days be made a type

The^^^ 189.
The rest on the Sabbath may be considered either in respect Change of Sabbath
proper place.

Thesis 190.
There wants not sufficient proof that the Gentiles generally Tertullian,
Eusebius, Josephus and Philo have formerly affirmed; Aretus also, especially
learned Rivet, have lately vindicated and made good against all the exceptions
of Gomarus and others; Aret. loc. Com. de Sab. Rivet. in Com. 4 and dissert. de
orig. Sab. Prim. part. 1. cap. 3. s. 9.
insomuch as that the last refuge both of Gomarus and Primrose is this, viz.
That all those Heathens who writ about the Sabbath and in honor of it,
received not their light from nature, but from the writings of the Jewish
Commonwealth, all those heathenish testimonies about the Sabbath, being
published and writ long after the delivering of the law upon mount Sinai: And
therefore they think this no argument to prove that this law was practiced ever
since the world began, or that it was known by the light of nature, by which it
might be evinced to be moral: but by this answer we shall scarce know any
thing to be according to the light of nature by the writings of the Heathens,
for all their writings are since Moses time, if they be of any credit; but
suppose they did not know it by the working power of the light of nature, yet
if they approved of, and honored this day when it was made known by other
means, so that rhey knew it by the approving light of nature, as the authors
alleged make good, its then sufficient to prove the seventh day moral, even
by the light of nature: And although Seneca and some others scoft at the Jewish
Sabbaths, as if they lost the seventh part of their time thereby; yet we know
that men's lusts will give them leave to scoff at that which yet their
consciences chastise them for; beside I think those scoffs were not so much at
the seventh day as at their ^^ict and ceremonious observance thereof, as also
of their seventh years, wherein its no wonder if that the light of nature
should not so clearly see.

Thesis 191.
the seventh part of time, and so dedicate it to God for his Sabbath; yet the
want of such light argues only the want of perfection of the light of nature,
which we should not expect to find in the present light of nature in matters
of the first Table, and in this of the Sabbath; and therefore it is no argument
to prove the Sabbath not to be of the Law of nature, because the perfect
knowled of the exact time thereof is not left in corrupt nature now.

Thesis 192.
Suppose the Gentiles did neither know, nor were ever reproved Nehem. 9.14.
Romans 3.2. so it was a curse upon the Gentiles to live without Christ, and so
also without Sabbaths, Ephesians. 2.12. The times of which ignorance God is said to
wink at, Acts 17.30. not by excusing them for the breach of Sabbath or other
sins, but by not reproving them for it, as neither he did for many other moral
transgressions, which notwithstanding were sins. The Patriarchs were not
condemned expressly till Moses time (by Mr. Primrose account) for their
Polygamie, that we read of, and yet it was a sin all that time against the very
first institution of marriage; and why might not the breach of the Sabbath be a
sin much more longer among the Gentiles, and yet none of the Prophets reprove
them particularly for the same? And therefore M. Primrose has no cause to mark
this argument with chalk, and with all attention, as he calls it; viz. That the
breach of the Sabbath among the Gentiles was no sin, because it was not any
where particularly reproved by the Prophets of God: for we see by what has
been said upon what weak crutches it stands.

Thesis 193.
The Gentiles shall not be condemned only for what they Primrose) and they
should have known the fittest proportion and most suitable frequency of such
days, which the same author acknowledges to be moral; therefore they should
have known the seventh days Sabbath, and possibly might have known it if they
had not held truth in righteousness, but made improvement thereof; for in this
sense habenti dabitur, to him that has shall be given, to wit, more of the
same kind of l^ght, whether natural, moral, or Evangelicall; if common light
in all these, more common light; if special light in them, they shall then
have more special and saving light.

Thesis 194.
Prim part. 1. cap. 3. S. 3.
I know M. Primrose thinks that the Sacrifices were by an instinct of nature,
Because it dictates that all sins whereof mortal men are guilty, are to be
expiated by Sacrifice and Offerings to God offended: Which assertion has some
truth in it, if those words By Sacrifices and Offerings be left out; for what
light of nature could make men think that an infinite Deity offended could be
pacified by such carnal observances as the Sacrifices of brute beasts, and
their blood, which never offended? This custom the Gentiles might retain as a
Relic of former instruction and institution, by their first Fathers after the
flood: which being matters merely ceremonious, might be retained more firmly
then other moral duties of great consequence; however we see that the practice
of the Gentiles is no fit guide to direct that which is according to the law
and light of nature.

Thesis 195.


1. The Law of nature is either of pure, or corrupt
nature.

The Law of pure nature was the Law of God writ on Adams heart in innocence,
which was nothing else but that holy bent and inclination of the heart within,
to act according to the holy Law of God revealed, or Covenant made with him
without, Aqu^ 1^, 2^. Q. 91. art. 1.
and thus Aquinas places the law of nature in this inclination.

The Law of corrupt nature is that dim light left in the mind, and moral
inclination left in the will in respect of some things contained in the Law of
God, which the Apostle calls Conscience, Romans 2.15. which natural conscience is
nothing but the remnants and general principles of the law of pure nature,
left in all men since the fall, which may be increased by more knowledge of the
Law of God, or more diminished and defaced by the wickedness of man, Titus
1.15.

2. The Law of corrupt nature is taken either more largely, or strictly.


As it is taken more largely, so it comprehends all that which is agreeable and
suitable to natural reason, and that from a natural innate equity in the
thing, when it is made known, either by divine instruction or humane wisdom,
although it be not immediately known by the light of nature, and thus many
judicial laws are natural and moral (though positive) and of binding nature
unto this day.

As it is taken strictly, so it comprehends no more but what nature immediately
knows, or may know without external instruction, as parents to be honored,
man's life to be preserved.

3. The Law of nature strictly taken, are either principles of nature, or
conclusions from such principles.


The principles of the law of nature are in some respect many, yet may be
reduced to this one head, viz. That good is to be followed, evil to be avoided.

Conclusions are deductions from those principles, like several streams from
the same spring, which though less evident then the principles, yet may be
readily found out by discourse and sad search.

4. Conclusions arising from these principles, are more immediate, or mediate.


Immediate are made (by Aquinas) to be two. 1. Love God with all thy heart. 2.
Love thy neighbor as thy self.

Mediate are such as arise from the former principles, by means of those two
more immediate conclusions: and of this kind are some (as he thinks*) yea, all
the laws of the Decalogue, if right reason may be judge. Now to apply these.

Thesis 196.
Adams mind knew of it, and his heart was inclined and bent to the keeping of
it, although it be true that now this light in corrupt nature (as in many other
moral duties) is almost wholly extinct and worn out, as has been formerly
shown; And to speak plainly, this great and first impression left on man's heart
in pure nature, is the first rule according to which we are now to judge of
what is the law of nature, and it serves to dash to pieces and grind to powder
and dust most effectually and strongly, the dreams and devices of such as would
make the Sabbath not moral, because not natural, or not easily known by the
present light of corrupt nature, when as corrupt nature is no perfect copy, but
a blotted discovery of some part of the light of nature, which was fully
imprinted at large in pure nature: and therefore it is no wonder, if our
adversaries so much oppose the Commandment of the Sabbath in the state of
innocence: such therefore as are otherwise Orthodox in this point, and yet make
this description of the Law of nature ( viz. which was written on man's heart in
his first first Creation) to be both uncertain and impertinent, do unwarily
pull down one of the strongest bulwarks, and the first that ever God made to
defend the morality of the Sabbath: there is indeed no express Scripture which
makes this description of the Law of nature (as they object) and so it is of
many other things which are virtually and for substance contained in the
Scripture, although there be no formal description set down of the same, and
the like I say of this description here.

Thesis 197.
yet it will not follow that it is not therefore moral: for the moral law once
writ on man's heart in pure nature is almost blotted out; only some rudera and
old rubbish is left of it in a perverse mind and a corrupt heart, Ephesians. 4.18.
we see the wisest of the heathens making those things to be moral virtues (
Iunius instanceth in the Law of private revenge, and we know they magnified
will worship) which the Scripture condemns as moral vices and sins: God would
have commonwealths preserved in all places of the world, from the inundation
and deluge of man's wickedness, and therefore he has generally printed the
notions of the second Table upon men's hearts to set bounds (as by sea-banks)
unto the overflowings thereof, and hence it is that they are generally known:
but he would not have Churches every where, and therefore there is but little
known concerning matters of the first Table, and consequently about this Law of
the Sabbath, which notwithstanding may be moral although it be not so
immediately known.

Thesis 198.
If we speak of the law of corrupt nature largely taken,

Thesis 199.
The Sacrament of the Lords Supper may be administered persecutions: and hence
our Savior limits no time for it, in the first institution thereof, as he did
for the Passover of old, but only this, As often as you do it, do it in
remembrance of me: Prim. part. 1. cap. 6.
Hence it will follow, that now under the Gospel there is no set Sabbath (as M.
Primrose would) because our Savior at the first institution of the Lords
Supper limits no particular day for the celebration thereof, as once he did for
the Passover; for though there is an appointed special time (as shall
hereafter appear) for the public exercise of all holy duties not being
limited to those times, but enlarged to other times also; hence there is no
reason why our Savior should institute a set Sabbath, when he instituted the
Lords Supper, as the proper time of the celebration thereof, as it was in case
of the Passover.

Thesis 200.
Prim. part. 2. cap. 2. Wall. diss. de 4. prae. cap. 2.
It is no argument to prove the Sabbath to be ceremonial, because it is
reckoned among ceremonials, viz. shewbread and sacrifices, as M. Primrose and
Wallaeus urge it out of Mat. 12.1, 2, 3. for 1. upon the same ground
fornication and eating of idolothytes are ceremonial, because they are ranked
among ceremonials, viz. blood and things strangled, Act. 15.29.2. upon this
ground the Sabbath has no morality at all in it, no more then shewbread and
sacrifices which were wholly ceremonial. 3. The Sabbath is in the same place
reckoned among things which are moral, as pulling a sheep out of a pit upon
the Sabbath day, an act of humanity; why may it not then be as well accounted
moral? 4. One may as well argue that the not keeping company with Publicanes
and sinners was a ceremonial thing, because the Lord Jesus uses the same
Proverbiall speech, I will have mercy not sacrifice, Mat. 9.13. upon which he
defends the lawfullnesse of pulling the ears of corn upon the Sabbath day, in
this Mat. 12.15. the scope therefore of this place is not to show the nature of
the Sabbath day, whether it be ceremonial or moral, but the lawfullnesse and
morality of his act in eating the ears of corn upon this day; and thus the
arguments of our Savior are very strong and convicting to prove the morality
of such an act, but no way to prove the ceremoniality of the Sabbath: for that
is the scope of our Savior, that mercy to the hungry is to be preferred before
the Sacrifice of bodily resting upon the Sabbath. M. Primrose indeed replies
hereto and tells us, that mercy is to be preferred before sacrifice or
ceremonial duties, but not before moral duties, Prim. part. 1. cap. 7. s. 3.
and therefore Christ preferring it before the rest on the Sabbath, the Sabbath
could not be moral: but we know that mercy in the second table is sometimes to
be preferred before moral duties in the first table: a man is bound to neglect
solemn prayer sometime to attend upon the sick; it is a moral duty to sanctify
some day for a Sabbath (says M. Primrose) and yet suppose a fire be kindled in
a town upon that day, or any sick to be helped, must not mercy be preferred
before hearing the word? which himself will acknowledge to be then a moral
duty.

Thesis 201.
When Christ is said to be Lord of the Sabbath, Mat. 12.8 Primrose thinks That
he is said to be Lord of it, because he had power to dispense with the keeping
of it, by whom and when he would: and that Christ did choose to do such works
upon the Sabbath day, which were neither works of mercy or necessity, nay,
which were servile, which the Law forbade: for Christ (says he) as mediator
had no power to dispense with things moral, but he might with matters
ceremonial, and therefore with the Sabbath. How far Christ Jesus might and may
dispense with moral laws, I dispute not now, I think Biell comes nearest the
truth in this controversy; only this is considerable, suppose the Sabbath was
ceremonial, yet it is doubtful whether Christ Jesus who came in the days of
his flesh to fulfill all righteousness, could abolish or break the law
ceremonial until his death was past, by which this handwriting of Ordinances
was blotted out, Colos. 2.14. and this middle wall of partition was broken
down, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. But let it be yielded that Christ had power to break
ceremonial laws then before his death, yet in this place there is no such
matter; for the words contain a clear proof for the right observance of the
Sabbath against the over-rigid conceptions of the superstitious and proud
Pharisees, who as they thought it unlawful for Christ to heal the sick upon
the Sabbath, so to rub out, and eat a few corn ears upon it, although hunger
and want (and perhaps more then ordinary in the Disciples here) should force
men hereunto, which was no servile work (as Mr Primrose would) but a work of
necessity and mercy in this case; and our Savior proves the morality of it,
from the example of David eating the Shewbread, and those that were with him,
preferring that act of mercy before sacrifice and abstinence from Shewbread;
and hence our Savior argues, That if they attending upon David might eat the
Shewbread, much more his hungry Disciples might eat the corn while they
attended upon him that day, who was Lord of the Sabbath, and that they might be
the better strengthened hereby to do him service: These things being thus;
where now is there to be found any real breach of the Sabbath, or doing of any
servile work, or maintenance of any unnecessary work, which the fame learned
and acute writer imputes to our Savior? which I had almost said is almost
blasphemous.

Thesis 202.
Mark 2.27. that man is not made for it, but it for man; for says Mr Ironside,
man is made for moral duties, not they for man: For let the Sabbath be taken
for the bare rest of the Sabbath, as the Pharisees did, who placed so much
Religion in the bare rest, as that they thought it unlawful to heal the sick
on that day, or feed the hungry; so man is not made as lastly for the b^re
rest, but rather it for man and for his good; but if by Sabbath be meant the
Sanctification of that rest, so man is made for it, by Mr Primrose own
confession: Nor our Savior speaks of the Sabbath in the first respect; for the
rest of it is but a means to a further and a better end, viz. The true
sanctification of it which the Pharisees little looked unto, and therefore he
might well say that the Sabbath was made for man, the rest of it being no
further good then as it was helpful to man in duties of piety or mercy
required of man, in the sanctification thereof: M. Primrose confessing that man
is made for the sanctification of the Sabbath, would therefore wind out from
this, by making this sanctification on the Sabbath to be no more then what is
equally required of man all the week beside: but he is herein also much
mistaken; for though works of piety and mercy are required every day, yet they
are required with a certain eminency and specialty upon the Sabbath day, and
thence it is that God calls men's to rest from all worldly occasions (which he
does not on the week days) that they might honor God in special upon the
Sabbath, as shall hereafter appear.

Thesis 203.
It Is a monkish speculation of M. Broad to distinguish so of the Sabbath in
sensu mystico, and sensu literali, as that the mystical sense like the lean
and ill-favored kine in Pharoah's dream shall eat up the literal sense, and
devour Gods blessed and sweet Sabbath; for the Lord never meant by the Sabbath
such a mystical thing as the resting from the works of the old man only every
day, no more then when he commands us to labor six days, he permits us to
labor in the works of the old man all the six days.

Thesis 204.
For though it be true that we are to rest every day Adam should have had no
Sabbath, because he was to rest from sin every day. 2. The Jews also before
Christ, should have rejected all Sabbaths, because they were then bound to rest
from sin as well as Christians now. 3. Upon the same ground there must be no
days of fasting or feasting under the Gospel, because we are to fast from
sin every day, and to be joyful and thankful every day. I know some
Libertines of late say so; but upon the same ground there should have been none
under the law neither, for they were then bound as well as we to fast from sin.
4. Hence neither should any man pay his debts, because he is bound to be paying
his debt of love to God and all men every day. 5. Hence also no man should pray
at any time in his family, nor alone by himself solemnly, because a Christian
is bound to pray continually: And indeed I did not think that any forehead
could be so bold and brazen as to make such a conclusion; but while I was
writing this, came to my hearing concerning a seaman who came to these coasts
from London, miserably deluded with principles of Familisme, who when an honest
New-English man his Cabbin-mate invited him to go along and pray together,
considering their necessities, he would professedly refuse to do it upon this
ground, viz. Do not pray continually? Why then should we pray together now?
6. The Commandment of the Sabbath does not therefore press us to rest only
from such works as are in themselves evil, which God allows at no ti^^* but
from the works of our callings and weekly employments which are in themselves
lawful and of necessity to be attended on at some time. It is therefore a
loose and groundless assertion to make every day under the Gospel to be a
Christians Sabbath day.

Thesis 205.
Primrose says) within a little corner of the earth, and that the Gentiles
therefore are not bound to it, because they cannot exactly observe the time of
it, in several quarters of the earth so far distant, is a very feeble
argument: For why might not all nations exactly observe the rising and the
setting of the sun according to several climates by which the natural day and
so this of a Sabbath is exactly measured? and which God has appointed (without
limitation to any hour) to be the bounds of the Sabbath as it sooner or later
rises or sets? were not the mariners of the men of Judah bound to observe the
Seventh day in all the several coasts where they made their voyages? did God
limit them to the rising or setting sun of Iudaea only? what color is there to
think thus of them? indeed it is true that in some habitable Northern coasts,
the Sun is not out of sight some months together, but yet this is certain, if
they know how the year spends into months, they can exactly reckon the weeks
of those months, and therefore can exactly tell you the days of which those
weeks consist, and therefore they have their exact rules and measures to know
East and West, the place of the sunrising and sunsetting, and consequently to
know the Sabbath days; and yet if they should not exactly know it, their will
to do it is herein (as in other things) accepted of God.

Thesis 206.
If this truth concerning the morality of the Sabbath Lev. 26.34. and although
I wish the Ministry of Christ Jesus a comely and comfortable maintenance, as
may richly testify his peoples abundant thankfulness, for the feet of those
his messengers as preach peace, yet me thinks it argues great blindness in
those men who plead for a morality in a tenth pigge or sheaf of corn, and yet
will acknowledge no morality in a Seventh day.

Thesis 207.
I shall therefore conclude and shut up these things with Carpenters and
Heylins (...) an argument against the Sabbath, which they have gone compassing
the whole earth and heavens about to find out, never heard of till their
days, and now it is brought to light. I would not make mirth with it (as some
have done and left the scruple untoucht) but in words of sobriety, and
seriousness and plainness. If the Sabbath or Lords day (say they) be moral,
then the moral Law is subject to manifold mutation, because the nations
issuing out of Noah's ark spread themelves from thence over the face of the
whole earth, some farther, some at a shorter distance, whereby changing the
longitude with their habitation, they must of necessity alter the differences
of times, neither can any exactly and precisely observe any one day, either as
it was appointed by Moses, or as it was instituted by Christ's Apostles
afterward, by reason of the manifold transportation of Colonies, and
transmigration of nations, from one region into another, whereby the times must
necessarily be supposed to vary. The answer is ready and easy, viz. Although
the nations issued out of Noah's ark, and spread themselves over the face of the
whole earth, some farther, some at a shorter distance, and thereby changing
their longitude altered the differences of time, some beginning the day sooner,
some later, yet they might observe the same day; for the day is regulated and
measured by the Sun, and the Sun comes to one meridian sooner or later then to
another, and hence the day begins in one place sooner or later then in another,
and so the beginning of the day is (respectively) varied, but yet the day it
self remains unchangeably the same: what though our countrymen in old England
begin their Sabbath above 4. hours before us in new, they beginning at their
evening, we at our evening, yet both may and do observe the same day: all
nations are bound to keep holy a Seventh part of time; but that time must be
regulated by the Sun, neither is it necessary that the same individual 24.
hours should be observed by all, but the same day as it is measured by the Sun
in this or that place, which may begin in places more easterly many hours
sooner then in other places more westerly; a day is not properly time but a
measure of time, and therefore the manifold transportation of Colonies, and
transmigration of nations from one region unto another, hinder not at all, but
that they may exactly and precisely observe the same day, which was instituted
and appointed: for although the time of the beginning of the day be varied, yet
the day it self is not, cannot be varied or changed. Now whereas they say, that
if any man should travel the world about, a whole day must needs be varied,
and if two men from the same place travel, the one Eastward, the other
Westward, round about the earth, and meet in the same place again, they shall
find that he who has gone Eastward has gotten, and the other going Westward
has lost a day in their account; yea, the Hollanders after their discovery of
Fretum de Mayre, coming home to their country, found by comparing their
accounts with thtir countrymen at home, that they had lost a day, having gone
Westward, and so compassed the earth round. I answet, what though a traveller
varying perpetually the quantity of the day, by reason of his continual moving
with or against the Suns motion, in time get or loose a day in his account, is
the day therefore of it is own nature variable or changeable? God has placed
the Sun in the Firmament, and appointed it for times and seasons, and in
special for the regulating of the day; and as the motion of the Sun is
constant, so there is an ordinary and constant succession of days without
variation; for unless the Suns course be changed, the day which is regulated
by it, is not changed, Now if any shall travel round about the world, and so
anticipate or second the diurnall motion of the Sun, and thereby varying
continually the quantity of the day, at length gain or loose a day, according
to their reckoning, they may and ought then to correct their accounts: Gregory
the 13. having found the Julian year to be too great for the Motion of the Sun,
cut off ten days by which the AEquinoxes and Solstices had anticipated their
proper places, that so the year might be kept at it is right periods: and is it
not as good reason that a traveller who opposing the Suns diurnall course
continually shortens somewhat of his day, till at last in compassing the earth
round he gains a whole day, should cut off in his accounts that day which he
has gained by anticipating the Suns course, and so rectify his account of the
day? For in every region and country whatsoever and howsoever situate, as men
are to begin the day at that time when the day naturally begins in that place,
so likewise they are to reckon and count the days as they are there regulated
and ordered by the Sun, and that should be the first or second day of the week
to them, which is naturally the first or second day of the week to that place
where they are: and thus their doubts are easily satisfied when they return to
the place from whence they first came. But if any shall say it is very difficult
for men thus to rectify their accounts, and to observe that time in every
place which was at first instituted, and it is probable that the nations in
their several transmigrations and transportations never used any such course.
The answer is obvious; men's weakness, or neglect and carelessenesse to do what
they ought, is not a sufficient argument to prove that not to be their duty;
besides it is not probable that any nations were thus put to it to travel round
about the whole earth (although some particular persons in this later age have
sailed round about it) and therefore could not vary a whole day possibly, but
going some Eastward, some Westward, some Southward, some Northward, they spread
themselves over the face of the whole earth, some at a shorter, some at a
farther distance, and so some began the day sooner, some later, and yet all (as
has been shown) might observe the same day: the morality of the Sabhath is not
built upon Astronomicall or Geometrical principles, and therefore it cannot
fall by any shady speculations so far fetched.

Here ends the Morality of the fourth Commandment: The Change of the Sabbath
follows.
THE CHANGE OF THE SABBATH.

Wherein the true Grounds of the Change of the Day are plainly opened.

Sundry Scriptures also (usually alleged) for this Change are more fully
cleared and vindicated from what Mr. Brabourne and Mr. Primrose have alleged
against the same.

The second Part.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell. 1650.

The general Contents about the change of the Sabbath.
1. SVfficient Light in the Scriptures for the change of the Sabbath. These. 1.
2. Apostolical unwritten-traditions no ground for the change of it. These. 2.
3. Neither Churches custom, or any Imperial Law ground of the change of it.
These. 3. 4. How the observation of the Christian Sabbath arises from the
fourth Commandment. These. 4. 5. How (...) day in the week may be called the
seventh day. These. 7, 8. 6. The will of God the Efficient cause, the
Resurrection of Christ the moral cause of the change of the Sabbath. These. 10.
7. The Asce^tion no ground of the change of the Sabbath. These. 13. 8. The (...)
spoiled in his first Creation by the sin of man, hence the Day of Rest may be
well changed. These. 16. 9. Neither the three days resting of Christ in the
grave nor the 33. years of Christ's labor, the ground of our labor and rest
now. These, 18. 10. Not only Christ's Resurrection, but an affixed Type to the
first Sabbath, is the ground of the abrogation of it. These. 20. 11. What the
affixed Type to the Sabbath is. These. 21. 12. The mere exercises of holy duties
upon a day are not any true ground to make such a day the Christian Sabbath.
These. 25. 13. How holy duties on a day may evince a Sabbath day. These. 26. 14.
The first day of the week honored by the Primitive Churches from the
Commandment of the Lord Jesus. These. 27. 15. The Apostles preaching on the
Jewish Sabbath, does not argue it to be the Christian Sabbath. These. 30. 16.
The first day of the week proved to be the Christian Sabbath by Divine
Institution. These. 34. 17. The first place alleged for the Christian Sabbath,
Acts 20.7. cleared by nine considerations. These. 35. 18. The second place from
1 Cor. 16.1, 2. cleared from seven considerations. These. 36. 19. The third
Scripture. Rev. 1.10. cleared by two (...) branches. These. 37. 20. How the
Christian Sabbath arises from the fourth Commandment, although it be not
particularly named in it. These. 40. 21. The error of those, especially in the
Eastern Churches, who observed two Sabbaths. These. 41. 22. How the work of
Redemption may be a ground for all men to observe the Sabbath. These. 42. 23.
How far the Judgment of God upon prophaners of the Lords Day is of force to
evince the holiness of the Sabbath. These. 44.
The Change of the Sabbath.
THESIS 1.
THe change of this day from the last to the first of change are not so fully
known: Sacred writings not so expressly setting down (as it does in some things
of less concernment) the causes hereof. Vide Spri^^ on Sabb. Ironsides answer
to 30 Argum. Qu. 5. c. 17.
And many of the Arguments heaped up, and multiplied by some for the change of
it, which may seem of great weight, while they want an adversary at the other
end of the Scale to balance them: Yet upon sad examination and search into
them they prove too light, and consequently occasion the temptation of
scrupling the truth and validity of others more clear. We are therefore with
more wariness and humility of mind to search into this Controversy, and with
much thankfulness and modesty to accept that little light which God gives us
in greater, as well as of much light which he is pleased to lend us in smaller
matters. Austin.
Pascimur apertis, exercemur obscuris, was his speech long since concerning the
Scriptures. There is no truth so clear, but man's loose wit can invent and mint
many pernicious Cavils against it; and therefore in those things which shine
forth with less evidence, it is no wonder if it casts such blots and stains
upon them as that they can fear (...) discerned, Nil magis inimicum veritati,
acumine (...) therefore be wise with sobriety, and remember that in this and
such like Controversies, the Scriptures were not written to answer all the
scruples and objections of Cavillers, but to satisfy and stablish the
consciences of poor believers. And verily when I meet with such like speeches
and objections as these, viz. Where is it expressly said that the old Sabbath
is abrogated? and what one Scripture is there in the N. Testament declaring
expressly that the Lords day is substituted and put in its room? I cannot
from such expressions but think and fear that the ignorance of this change in
some does not spring so much from deficiency and want of light on Gods part,
but rather from perverseness on man's part, which will not see nor own the truth,
because it is not revealed and dispensed after that manner and fashion of
expression as man's wit and fantasy would have it: Like Naaman, who, because
the Prophet went not about the cure of his Leprosy in that way and fashion
which he would have him, did not therefore (for a time) see that way of cure
which God had revealed to him. For the Holy Ghost is not bound to write all the
principles of Religion under Commonplace heads, nor to say expressly, In this
place of Scripture you may see the old Sabbath abrogated, and the new
instituted; for we find no such kind of expressions concerning Paul's Epistles
and many books of Scripture, that this or that Epistle or book is Canonical;
which yet we know to be so by other evidences. We know also that the Holy Ghost
by brief hints of Truth, gives occasion of large Comments; and by writing about
other matters tanquam aliud agens, it brings forth to light by the By
revelations of great concernment, which it saw meet purposely in that manner to
make known. And as in many other things it has thus done, so especially in
this of the Sabbath. So that if our hearts like Locks were fitted to Gods Key,
they would be soon opened to see thorough the difficulties of this point; which
I confess of all practical points has been most fu^l of knots and
difficulties to my own weakness.

Thesis 2.
unwritten inspirations notified and made known in their days to the Churches,
to be the cause of the change of the Day, is to plough with a Popish Heifer,
and to cast that Anchor on which deceivers rely, and by which they hope to save
themselves when they know not how otherwise to defend their falsehoods.

Thesis 3.
To make Ecclesiastical Custom, established (...) by the Imperial Law of
Constantine, to be the (...) of the change, Prim. part- cap. ^. Hey. lin. Hist.
l. 2.
is to make a prop for Prelacy, and a step to Popery, and to open a gap to all
humane inventions. For if it be in the Churches power to appoint the greatest
Holy day; why may not any other Rite and Ceremony be imposed also? and if it be
free to observe this day or not in respect of it self, because it wants a
divine institution, and yet necessary to observe it in respect of the Churches
Custom and constitution (as some pretend) why may not the Chu^ches Commandment
be a rule of obedience in a thousand things else as well as in this? and so
introduce Will Worship, and to serve God after the tradition of men which God
abhors?

Thesis 4.
The observation of the first day of the week for the media cultus, or means
of worship now under the New Testament, does from the force of the second
Commandment; only let this be supposed, that the day is now changed (as we
shall hereafter prove) as also that the worship it self is changed by divine
institution; for Gospel-institutions when they be appointed by divine and
sovereign Authority, yet they may then be observed and practiced by virtue of
some moral Law. The Gospel appointed new Sacraments, but we are to use them by
virtue of the second Commandment: so here the Gospel appoints a new seventh day
for the Sabbath, but it stands by virtue of the fourth Commandment: and
therefore the observation of it is not an Act of Christian Liberty, but of
Christian duty imposed by divine Auth^rity and by virtue of the moral Law.

Thesis 5.
For the morality of the fourth Commandment (as has that Sabbath only, nor yet
a Sabbath merely when man sees meet: but in observing the Sabbath, i. e. such a
Sabbath as is determined and appointed of God, (which may therefore be either
the first or last of the seven days) Hence it is that the first of the seven,
if it be determined and instituted of God under the New Testament, arises
equally from the fourth Commandment, as the last seventh day did under the old
Testament; and therefore it is no such piaculum nor delusion of the common
People, as Mr. Brabourne would make it, to put the Title of the Lords Sabbath
upon the Lords day, and to call it the Sabbath day; for if it be borne out of
the same womb the first seventh was, if it arise (I mean) from the same
Commandment, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day; why may it not bear the
name of the Sabbath n^w, as the firstborn did in former times?

Thesis 6.
viz. the first day to go before it, and five working days after it, and so
there should not nor could not be six working days continued together, that
the seventh might be the Lords according to the morality of the fourth
Commandment. And hence it is that no Humane or Ecclesiastical power can
change the Sabbath to what day of the week they please, from the first, which
now is.

Thesis 7.
Noah, though he was the first in order of years and dignity of entrance into
the Ark, yet he is called the eight, 2 Pet. 2.5. in that he was one of them (as
the learned observe) qui octonarium numerum perficiebant, or who made up the
number of eight: so it is in respect of the first day, which in diverse respects
may be called the first, and yet the seventh also. Mr. Brabournes Argument
therefore is of no solidity, who goes about to prove the Christian Sabbath to
be no Sabbath* Because, That Sabbath which the fourth Commandment injoynes is
called the seventh day; but all the Evangelists call the Lords day the first day
of the week, not the seventh day. For he should remember that the same day in
diverse respects may be called the first day, and yet the seventh day; for in
respect of its natural existence and being, it may be and is called the first
day, and yet in respect of divine use and application, it may be and is called
the seventh day, even by virtue of the fourth Commandment, which is the Lords
day, which is confessed to be the first day.

Thesis 8.
For although in numero numerante (as they call it,) i. e. in number num^^ing
there can be but one seventh, which immediately follows the number six: yet in
numero numerato. i. e. in number numbered, or things which are numbered, (as are
the days of the week) any of the seven may be so in way of relation and
proportion. As suppose seven men stand together, take the last man in order
from the other six, who stand about him, and he is the seventh: so again take
the first in order, and set him apart from the six who stand below him, and if
the number of them who are taken from him make up the number of six, he then
may and must necessarily be called the seventh. Just thus it is in the days of
the week; the first Sabbath from the Creation might be called the seventh day
in respect of the six days before it; and this first day of the week may be
called the seventh day also, in respect of the six working days together after
it. That may be called the last seventh; this the first seventh, without any
absurdity of account which some would imagine: and if this first day of the
week is called the eight day according to Ezekiels Prophecy of Evangelicall
times, and his reckoning onward from the Creation, Ezekiel. 43.27. why may it not
then in other respects put on the name of a seventh day also?

Thesis 9.
The reason why the Lord should depose the last seventh, and exalt and crown
the first of seven to be the day

Thesis 10.
The good will of him who is Lord of the Sabbath, is the first efficient and
primary cause of the institution of a new Sabbath; but the Resurrection of
Christ being upon the first day of the week, Mark 16.9. is the secondary,
moral or moving cause hereof: the day of Christ's resurrection being Christ's
joyful day for his Peoples deliverance, and the worlds restitution and new
Creation, it is no wonder if the Lord Christ appoint it, and the Apostles
preach and publish it, and the primitive Christians observe it as their holy
and joyful day of rest and consolation. For some notable work of God upon a
day, being ever the moral cause of sanctifying the day: hence the work of
redemption being finished upon the day of Christ's Resurrection, and it being
the most glorious work that ever was, and wherein Christ was first most
gloriously manifested to have rested from it, Romans 1.4, hence the Lord Christ
might have good cause to honor this day above all others: and what other cause
there should be of the public solemn Assemblies in the primitive Churches,
upon the first day of the week, then this glorious work of Christ's
Resurrection, upon the same day which began their great joy for the rising of
the Sun of righteousness, is scarce imaginable.

Thesis 11.
Brabourne does us wrong, as if we made the Resurrection of Christ, merely to
be the cause of the change of this day.

Thesis 12.
did not enter into his rest, but rather made entrance into his labor and
sorrow, who then began the wo^k of Humiliation, Gal. 4.4, 5. and in the day of
his passion, he was then under the so^est part and feeling of his labor, ^n
bitter Agonies upon the Cross and in the Garden. And hence it is that none of
those days were consecrated to be ou^ Sabbath or rest-dayes, which were days of
Christ's labor and sorrow; nor could the day of his Ascension be fit to be made
out Sabbath, because although Christ then and thereby entered into his place of
Rest (the third Heavens) yet he did not then make his first entrance into his
estate of rest, which was in the day of his Resurrection; the wisdom and will
of God did therefore choose this day above any other to be the Sabbath day.

Thesis 13.
Those that go about (as some of late have done) to make Christ's Ascension-day
the ground of our Sabbath Day, had need be fearful left they lose the truth
and go beyond it, while they affect some new discoveries of it, which seems to
be the case here. For through Christ at his Ascension entered into his place of
Rest, yet the place is but an Accidental thing to Christ's Rest it self, the
State of which was begun in the day of his Resurrection; and therefore there is
no reason to prefer that which is but accidental above that which is most
substantial; or the day of entrance into the place of his Rest in his
Ascension, before the day of Rest in his Resurrection: beside, its very
uncertain whether Christ ascended upon the first day of the week; we are
certain that he arose then; and why we should build such a vast change upon an
uncertainty, I know not. And yet suppose that by deduction and strength of wit
^t might be found out, yet we see not the Holy Ghost expressly setting it
down, viz. That Christ ascended upon the first day of the week, which if he had
intended to have made the ground of our Christian Sabbath, he would surely have
done: the first day in the week being ever accounted the Lords day in Holy
Scriptures; and no other first day do we find mentioned on which he ascended,
but only on that day wherein he arose from the dead.

Thesis 14.
And look as Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of the World
meritoriously, but not actually: So he was also risen again in the like manner
from the foundation of the world meritoriously, but not actually. Hence it is
that look as God the father actually instituted no Sabbath day, until he had
actually finished his work of Creation, so neither was it meet that this day
should be changed, until Christ Jesus had actually finished (and not
meritoriously only) the work of Redemption or Restoration: And hence it is that
the Church before Christ's coming might have good reason to sanctify that day,
which was instituted upon the actual finishing of the work of Creation, and
yet might have no reason to observe our Christian Sabbath; the work of
Restoration and new Creation, and rest from it, not being then so much as
actually begun.

Thesis 15.
Whether our Savior appointed that first individual day of his resurrection
to be the first Christian Sabbath, is somewhat difficult to determine; and I
would not tie knots and leave them for others to unloose; This only I aim at,
that although the first individual day of Christ's Resurrection should not
possibly be the first individual Sabbath, yet still the Resurrection of Christ
is the ground of the institution of the Sabbath, which one consideration
dasheth all those devices of some men's Heads, who puzzle their Readers with
many intricacies and difficulties, in showing that the first day of Christ's
Resurrection could not be the first Sabbath, and thence would infer that the
day of his Resurrection, was not the ground of the institution of the Sabbath,
which infer^nce is most false; for it was easy with Christ to make that great
work on this day to be the ground of the institution of it, some time after
that work was Past.

Thesis 16.
The sin and fall of man having defaced and spoiled ( de jure though not de
facto) the whole work of Creation, as that learned Lake Theses.
Bishop well observes; It was not so meet therefore that the Sabbath should be
ever kept in respect of that work, but rather in respect of this new Creation
or Restoration of all things by Christ, after the actual Accomplishment
thereof in the day of his Resurrection. But look as God the father having
created the world in six days, he rested therefore and sanctified the seventh:
So this work being spoiled and marred by man's sin, and the new Creation being
finished and ended, the Lord therefore rested the first day of the week, and
therefore sanctified it.

Thesis 17.
viz. because God rested on that day, and as it is in Exodus 31.17. was
refreshed in it, that is, took a complacency and delight in his (...) so done
and so finished. But the sin of man in falling from his first Creation, made
God repent that ever he made man, Genesis 6. and consequently the world for man,
and therefore it took off that complacency or rest and refreshing in this his
work; if therefore the Lord betake himself to work a new work, new Creation or
Renovation of all things in and by his Son, in which he will for ever Rest, may
not the day of his rest be then justly changed into the first of seven, on
which day his rest in his new work began, whereof he will never repent? If the
Lord vary his rest, may not be vary the time and day of it,? nay must not the
time and day of our rest be varied, because the ground of Gods rest in a new
work is changed?

Thesis 18.
As it was no necessary duty therefore, perpetually to observe that seventh day
wherein God first rested, because his rest on that day is now changed; so also
it is not necessary orderly to observe those six days of labor, wherein He
first labored and built the world, of which for the sin of man he is said to
have repented; yet notwithstanding, though it be no necessary duty to observe
those particular six days of labor, and that seventh of Rest, yet it is a
moral duty (as has been proved) to observe six days for labor, and a
seventh for Rest; and hence it follows that although the Lord Christ's Rest on
the Day of his Resurrection (the first day of the week) might and may justly be
taken as a ground of our rest on the same day; yet his labor in the work of
Redemption three and thirty years and upward, all the days of his life and
humiliation, could not nor cannot justly be made the ground or example of our
labor, so as we must labor and work thirty three years together before we
keep a Sabbath the Day of Christ's Rest. Because although God could alter and
change the Day of Rest without infringment of the Morality of the fourth
Commandment; Yet he could not make the example of Christ's labor thirty three
years together, the ground or example of our continuance in our work, without
manifest breach of that Moral Rule, viz. That man shall have six days together
for labor, and the seventh for Rest. For man may rest the first day of the
week, and withal observe six days for labor, and so keep the fourth
Commandment; but he cannot labor 33. years together, and then keep a Sabbath
without apparent breach of the same Commandment: and therefore that Argument of
Master Brabourne against (...) Christian Sabbath melt^ into Vanity, wherein he
urges an equity of the Change of the Days of our (...), either three Days
only together (as Christ did lie in the grave) or 33. years together (as he
did all the days of his Humiliation) in case we will make a Change of the
Sabbath, from the Change of the Day of Christ's Rest. And yet I confess
ingenuously with him, that if the Lord had not instituted the first Day of the
week to be our Christian Sabbath, all these, and such like arguings and
reasonings were invalid to prove a Change; for man's reason has nothing to do
to Change days without Divine appointment and institution: these things only
I mention why the wisdom of God might well alter the Day. The proofs that he
has changed it, shall follow in due place.

Thesis 19.
The Resurrection of Christ may therefore be one ground, not only of the
Sanctification of the Christian Sabbath, but also a sufficient ground of the
abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath. For, first, the greater light may darken the
less, and a greater work (as the Restoration of the World above the Creation
of it) may overshadow the less, Ierem 23.7, 8. Exodus 12.2. Secondly, Man's
sin spoiled the first Rest, and therefore the day of it might be justly
ab^ogated. For the horrible wrath of God had been immediately poured out upon
man (as might be proved, and as it was upon the lapsed Angels) and consequently
upon all Creatures for man's sake, if Christ had not given the Father Rest, for
whose sake the world was made, Revel. 4.11. and by whose means and mediation
the World continues as now it does, Ioh. 5.22.

Thesis 20.
Yet although Christ's Resurrection be one ground not only of the Institution
of the new Sabbath, but also of the abrogation of the Old, yet it is not the
only ground why the Old was abrogated; For, (as has been shown) there was
some type affixed to the Jewish Sabbath, by reason of which there was just
cause to abrogate, or rather (as Calvin calls it) to translate the Sabbath to
another Day. And therefore this dasheth another of Mr. Brabournes dreams, who
argues the continuance of the Jewish Sabbath, because there is a possibility
for all Nations still to observe it. For (says he) cannot we in England as
well as they at Jerusalem remember that Sabbath? Secondly rest in it. Thirdly,
Keep it holy. Fourthly, keep the whole day holy. Fifthly, the last of seven.
Sixthly, and all this in imitation of God. Could no Nation (says he) besides
the Jews observe these six things? Yes verily that they could in respect of
natural ability; but the question is not what men may or might do, but what
they ought to do, and should do. For besides the change of Gods Rest through
the work of the Son, there was a Type affixed to that Jewish Sabbath, for
which cause it may justly vanish at Christ's death, as well as other types, in
respect of the affixed Type, which was but accidental; and yet be continued
and preserved in another Day, being originally, and essentially Moral: A
Sabbath was instituted in Paradise, equally honored by God in the Decalogue
with all other Moral Laws, foretold to continue in the days of the Gospel by
Ezekiel and Isaiah, Ezekiel. 43. ult. Isa. 56.4.6. and commended by Christ, who
bids his people pray, that their flight may not be in the winter or
Sabbath Day, as it were easy to open these places against all Cavils; and
therefore it is for substance Moral. Yet the word Sabbatisme, Heb. 4.9. and the
Apostles gradation from yearly Holy Days to monthly new mons, and from them
to weekly Sabbaths, which are called shadows of things to come, Colos. 2.16.
seems strongly to argue some type affixed to those individual Sabbaths, or
Jewish seventh days; and hence it is perhaps that the Sabbath is set among
Moral Laws in the Decalogue, being originally and essentially Moral, and yet
is set among ceremonial Feast-dayes, Levit. 23.2, 3. because it is accidentally
typical. And therefore Mr. Brabourne need not raise such a dust, and cry out,
Oh monstrous! very strange! what a mingle-mangle! what a h^tch-potch have we
here! what a confusion and jumbling of things so far distant, as when Morals
and Ceremonials are here mingled together! No verily, we do not make the fourth
Commandment essentially Ceremonial; but being acidentally so, why may it
notwithstanding this be mingled among the rest of the Morals? Let one solid
reason be given, but away with words.

Thesis 21.
If the question be, what Type is affixed and annexed to the Sabbath? I think
it difficult to find out, although man's wanton wit can easily allegorize and
readily frame imaginations enough in this point. Some thing it typified Christ's
Rest in the grave; but I fear this will not hold, no more then many other
Popish conjectures, wherein their allegorizing Postillers abound. Bullinger and
some others think that it was Typical in respect of the peculiar Sacrifices
annexed to it, which Sacrifices were Types of Christ, Numb, 28.9. And although
much might be said for this against that which Mr. Brabourne replies, yet I see
nothing cogent in this; for the multiplying of Sacrifice (which were (...)) on
this Day proves rather a specialty of worshipping God more abundantly on this
Day, then any Ceremonialnesse in it; for if the offering of Sacrifices merely,
should make a day Ceremonial, why did it not make every Day Ceremonial in
respect of every days offering of the Morning and Evening Sacrifice? Some
think that our Rest upon the Sabbath (not God the Fathers Rest, as Mr.
Brabourne turns it) was made not only a resemblance, but also a Type of our
Rest in Christ, of which the Apostle speaks, Heb. 4.3. which is therefore
called a Sabbatisme, v^r. 9. or a keeping of a Sabbath at the word signifies.
What others would infer from this place to make the Sabbath to be merely
Cermonial: and what Mr. Brabourne would answer from hence, that it is not at
all Ceremonial, may both of them be easily answered here again as already they
have been in some of the former Theses. Some scruples I see not yet through
about this text, enforce me herein to be silent, and therefore to leave it to
such as think they may defend it, as one ground of some affixed Type unto the
Jewish Sabbath.

Thesis 22.
Learned Iunius goes before us herein, and points out the Type affixed to that
Sabbath; For, besides the first institution of it in Paradise, he makes two
other causes which he calls Accessory, or affixed and added to it. 1. One was
Civil or Civil; Jun. Ann. in Genesis 2.3.
that men and beasts might rest from their toilsome labor every week. 2.
Ceremonial or Ceremonial; for their solemn Commemoration of their deliverance
out of Egypt, which we know typified our deliverance by Christ, Deuteronomy. 5.15.
Some think indeed that their deliverance out of Egypt was upon the Sabbath day;
but this I do not urge; because though it be very probable, yet it is not
certain; only this is certain, that they were to Sanctify this Day because
of this their Deliverance; and it is certain this Deliverance was Typical of
our deliverance by Christ: and hence it is certain that there was a Type
affixed to this Sabbath; and because the Scripture is so plain and express in
it, I (...) inclined to think the same which Iunius does, that this is the Type
rather then any other I have yet heard of: against which I know many things may
be objected; only it may be sufficient to clear up the place against that
which Mr. Brabourne answer^ to it.

Thesis 23.
The Deliverance (...) of Egypt, says he, is not (...) as the ground of the
Institution of the Sabbath, but only as a motive to the observation thereof;
as it was more general in the Preface to the Decalogue to the obedience of
every other command which notwithstanding are not Ceremonial; for God says, I
am the Lord who brought thee out of Egypt, therefore keep thou the first, the
second, the third, the fifth, the sixth, as well as the fourth Commandment; and
therefore (says he) we may make every Commandment Ceremonial as well as the
Sabbath, if the motive of deliverance out of Egypt makes the Sabbath to be so.
This is the substance and sinews of his discourse herein; and I confess its
true, their Deliverance out of Egypt was not the first ground of the
institution of it, but Gods Rest after his six days labor; yet it was such a
ground as we contend for, viz. a secondary and an annexed or affixed ground.
And that it was not a Motive only to observe that day (as it is in the Preface
to the Decalogue) but a superadded ground of it, may appear from this one
consideration, viz. because that very ground on which the Lord urges the
observation of the Sabbath in Exodus 20.11, it is wholly left out in the
repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5.15. and their deliverance out of Egypt put into
the rome thereof: for the ground in Exodus 20.11. is this, Six days God made
Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh day and sanctified it; but instead of
these words, and of this ground, we find other words put into their room,
Deuteronomy. 5.15. Remember thou wast a servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the
Lord brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, therefore the Lord thy God
commands thee to Keep the Sabbath. Which seems to argue strongly that these
words are not a mere Motive but another ground of the observation of the
Sabbath. And why might not the general Motive in the Preface of the Decalogue,
serve as a sufficient Motive to the obedience of this Commandment, if there was
no more but a Motive in these words of Deutr. and therefore I suppose this was
also the ground and affixed Type unto the Jewish Sabbath.

Thesis 24.
But still the difficulty remains; for Master Brabourne Sabbath, as well as of
the abrogation of the old? which if it be not cleared. I confess this cause
sinks; here therefore let it be again observed, that we are not to expect such
evidence from Scripture concerning this Change, (as fond and humorous wit
sometimes pleads for) In this controversy, namely, That Christ should (...)
with (...) and (...), as it were upon Mount Zion, and proclaim by word or
writing in so many express words, That the Jewish Sabbath is abrogated, and
the first day of the week instituted in its room to be observed of all
Christians to the end of the world. For it is not the Lords manner so to speak in
many other things which concern his Kingdom, but as it were occasionally, or
in way of History, or Epistle to some particular Church or people; and thus he
does concerning the Sabbath: and yet Wisdoms mind is plain enough to them that
understand. Nor do I doubt but that those Scriptures which are sometimes
alleged for the Change of the Sabbath, although at first blush they may not
seem to hear up the we^ght of this cause, yet being thoroughly considered,
they are not only sufficent to stablish modest minds, but are also such as may
(...) or stop the mouths even of wranglers themselves.

Thesis 25.
I do not think that the exercise of holy duties on a Day argues that such a
Day is the Christian Sabbath Day; for the Apostles preached commonly upon the
Jewish Sabbath, sometime upon the first day of the week also: and therefore the
bare exercise of holy du^ies on a day is no sufficient Argument that either the
one or the other is the Christian Sabbath; for then there might be two
Sabbaths, yea many Sabbaths in a week, because there may be many holy duties in
several days of the week, which we know is against the Morality of the fourth
Commandment.

Thesis 26.
Yet notwithstanding although holy duties on a Day do not argue such a Day to
be our Sabbath* yet that Day which is set apart for Sabbath services rather
then any other Day, and is honored above any other Day for that end, surely
such a day is the Christian Sabbath. Now, if it may appear that the first Day
of the week was thus honored, then certainly it is to be accounted the
Christian Sabbath.

Thesis 27.
The Primitive pattern Churches thus honored the first Day of the week; and
what they practiced without reproof, that the Apostles (who planted those
Churches) enjoined and preached unto them so to do; at least in such weighty
matters as the Change of Days, of preferring one before that other which the
Lord had honored before; and what the Apostles preached, that the Lord Jesus
commanded Matthew. 28.20. Go teach all Nations that which I Command you: unless
any shall think that the Apostles sometime went beyond their Commission to
teach that to others which Christ never commanded, which is blasphemous to
imagine; for though they might err in practice as men, and as Peter did at
Antioch, and Paul and Barnabas in their contention; yet in in their public
ministry they were infallibly and extraordinarily assisted, especially in such
things which they hold forth as patterns for after times: if therefore the
Primitive Churches thus honored the first day of the week above any other day
for Sabbath services, then certainly they were instituted and taught thus to do
by the Apostles approving of them herein; and what the Apostles taught the
Churches, that, the Lord Jesus commanded to the Apostles. So that the approved
practice of the churches herein shows what was the Doctrine of the Apostles;
and the Doctrine of the Apostles shows what was the command of Christ: so that
the sanctification of this First Day of the week is no humane tradition but a
Divine institution from Christ himself.

Thesis 28.
That the Churches honored this Day above any other, Primrose says that this
latter is doubtful: and Mr. Ironside (not questioning the matter) falls off with
another evasion, viz. That they acted herein not as Apostles, but as ordinary
Pastors, and consequently as fallible men, Iron. Qu. 5. cap. 89.
not only in commanding this Change of the Sabba^h, but in all other matters of
Church government (among which he reckons this of the Sabbath to be one) which
he thinks were imposed according to their private wisdom as most fit for those
times, but not by any Apostolical Commission as concerning all times. But to
imagine that matters of Church Government in the Apostles days wete coats for
the Moon in respect of aftertimes, and that the form of it is mutable (as he
would have it) I suppose will be digested by few honest and sober minds in
these times, unless they be biased for a season by politic ends, and
therefore herein I will not now contend; one^y it may be considered whether any
private spirit could abolish that Day, which from the beginning of the world
God so highly honored, and then honor and advance another Day above it, and
sanctify it too (as shall be proved) for religious services. Could any do this
justly but by immediate dispensation from the Lord Christ Jesus? and if the
Apostles did thus receive it immediately from Christ, and so teach the
observation of it, they could not then teach it as fallible men, and as private
Pastors, as he would have it; a pernicious conceit, enough to undermine the
faith of Gods elect in many matters more weighty then this of the Sabbath.

Thesis 29.
Change, is needless to enquire. It is sufficient to believe this, that what
the Primitive Churches exemplarily practiced, that was taught them by the
Apostles who planted them; and that whatsoever the Apostles preached, the Lord
Christ commanded, as has been shown. Yet* if the Change of the Sabbath be a
matter appertaining to the Kingdom of God, why should we doubt but that within
the space of his forty days abode with them after his Resurrection, he then
taught it them, for it is expressly said that He then taught them such things,
Acts 13.

Thesis 30.
Pentecost, Passover and hours of prayer in the Temple, are to be observed
still as well as the Jewish Sabbath, if the Apostles preaching on their
Sabbaths argues the continuance of them, as Mr. Brabourne argues, for we know
that they preached also and went up purposely to Jerusalem at such times to
preach among them as well as upon the Sabbath days: look therefore as they
laid hold upon the days of Pentecost and Passover as the fittest seasons to
preach to the Jews, but not thinking that such Feasts should still be
continued, so it is in their preaching upon the Jewish Sabbaths.

Thesis 31.
Brabourne would infer); supposing that their Sabbaths should not be still
observed, they should then Iudaiz and after Ceremonies, says he, and so build
up those things which they labored to destroy: For, suppose they did observe
such Days and Sabbaths as were Ceremonial for a time, yet it being done not in
conscience of the Day, but in conscience of taking so fit a season to preach
the Gospel in, it could not nor cannot be any sinful Iudaizing, especially
while then, the Jews were not sufficiently instructed about the abolishing of
those things. For Mr. Brabourne could not but know that all the Jewish
Ceremonies being once the appointment of God, were to have an honorable
burial, and that therefore they might be lawfully observed for a time among the
Jews, until they were more fully instructed about them; and hence Paul
Circumcised Timothy because of the Jews, Acts. 16.3. and did otherwise
conform to them, that so he might win and gain the more upon them: and if
Paul observed purposely a Jewish Ceremony of Circumcision, which was not
necessary, nay which was not lawful to be observed among the Gentiles, Galat.
5.2. and yet he observed it to gain the Jews: why might not Paul much more
preach the Gospel, which is in it self a necessary Duty, upon a Jewish Sabbath
which fell out occasionally to him, and therefore might lawfully be observed
for such an end among the Jews, which among the Gentiles might be unlawful?
Suppose therefore that the Apostles might have taught the Jews from house to
house (as Mr. Brabourne argues against the necessity put upon the Apostles to
preach upon the Jewish Sabbath) yet what Reason or Conscience was there to lose
the opportunity of public preaching for the more plentiful gathering in of
souls, when many are met together, and which may lawfully be done, and be
contented only to seek their good in such private ways? and what although
Paul did assemble the chief of the Jews together at Rome when he was a
prisoner, to acquant them with Civil matters about his imprisonment, Acts.
28.17. yet had he power to do thus in all places where he came? or was it meet
for him so to do? Did not he submit the appointment of a sacred Assembly to
hear the word rather unto them, then assume it to himself, Acts 28 23. It is
therefore false and unsound which Master Brabourne affirms, viz. That Paul did
preach on the Jewish Sabbath in conscience of the Day, not merely with respect
of the opportunity he then took from their own public meetings then to
preach to them; For (says he) Paul had power to assemble them together upon
other days: This, I say, is both false: for he that was so much spoken against
among them, might not in all places be able to put forth such a power; as also
it is unsound; for, suppose he had such a power, yet whether it was so mee^ for
him to pu^^t forth in appointing other times, may be easily judged of by what
has been said.

Thesis 32.
Brabourne says) because we are not to imitate the Apostles herein in
preaching upon the Jewish Sabbaths. For no actions either of Christ or the
Apostles which were done merely in respect of some special occasion, or
special reason, are, eatenus, or in that respect binding to others: For, the
example of Christ eating the Lords supper only with men, not women, in an
upper chamber, and toward the dark evening, does not bind us to exclude women,
or not to celebrate it in other places and times; because we know that these
actions were merely occasioned in respect of special reasons (as the eating of
the Passover with ones own family, Christ's family not consisting of women) so
it is here in respect of the Sabbath; The Apostles preaching upon the Jewish
Sabbaths was merely occasional, by occasion of the public meetings (their
fittest time to do good in) which were upon this and any other day.

Thesis 33.
Now although the Jews observing this day, the Apostles observed it among the
Jews by preaching among them; yet we shall find that among the Christian
Gentile Churches and believers (where no Iudaisme was to be so much as
tolerated for a time) not any such day was thus observed, nay another day, the
first day in the week is honored and preferred by the Apostles above any
other day in the week for religious and Sabbath services. For, although Holy
duties do not argue always a Holy day; yet when we shall find the Holy Ghost
single out and nominate one particular day to be observed and honored rather
then any other day, and rather then the Jewish seventh day it self for Sabbath
services and Holy duties: this undeniably proves that day to be the Christian
Sabbath: and this we shall make evident to be the first day of the week. Which
one thing seriously minded (if proved) does utterly subvert the whole frame and
force of Master Brabournes shady Discourse for the observation of the Jewish
Sabbath, and most effectually establishes the Christian Sabbath. Master
Braburne therefore herein bestirs his wits, and tells us on the contrary that
Paul preached not only to the Jews, but even unto the Gentiles upon this
Jewish Sabbath rather then any other day; and for this end brings double
proof^; one is Acts 13.42, 44. where the Gentiles are said to desire Paul to
preach to them (...), i. e. the week between, or any Day between till the
next Sabbath (as some translate it) or (if Master Brabourne will) the next
Sabbath, or Jewish Sabbath, when almost all the City came out to hear Paul,
who were most of them Gentiles, not Jews. Be it so, they were Gentiles indeed;
but as yet no Church or Christian Church of Gentiles actually under Christ's
Government and Ordinances, among whom (I say) the first day of the week was so
much honored above any other day for sacred Assemblies. For, it is no wonder if
the Apostles yield to their desires in preaching any time of the week, which
they thought the best time, even upon the Jewish Sabbath; among whom the Jews
being mingled, they might have the fitter opportunity to preach to them also,
and so become all things to all men to gain some. His second proof is, Acts
16 12, 13. and here he tells us that Paul and Timothy preached not to the
Jews, but to the Gentiles, upon the Sabbath day. I confess they are not
called Jews no more then it is said that they were Gentiles; but why might not
Lydia and her company be Jews or Jewish Proselytes, who we know did observe
the Jewish Sabbath strictly till they were better instructed, as they did all
other Jewish ceremonies also? For Lydia is expressly said to be one who
worshipped God before Paul came. Master Brabourne tells us, they were no Jewish
Proselytes, because they had no Jewish Synagogue, and therefore they were feign
to go out of the City into the Fields, beside a River, to pray. I confess the
Text says that they went out to a River side where prayer was wont to be made;
but that this was the open Fields, and that there was no Oratory, house, or
place of shelter to meet and pray in, this is not in the Text, but its Master
Brabournes comment and gloss on it. But suppose it was in the open Fields, and
that they had no Synagogue: yet will it follow that these were not Jews? might
not the Jews be in a Gentile City for a time without any Synagogue? especially
if their number be but small, and this small number consist chiefly of women,
as it seems this did, whose hearts God touched, leaving their husbands to
their own ways? If they were not Jews or rather Jewish Prosely^es, why did
they choose the Sabbath day (which the Jews so much set by) rather then any
other, to pray and worship God together in? But verily such answers as these
wherewith the poor man abounds in his Treatise, make me extremely fear that he
rather stretched his Conscience, then was acted by a plain deluded Conscience
in this point of the Sabbath.

Thesis. 34.


I. Acts 20.7. II. 1 Cor. 16.2. III. Revel. 1.10. Which being taken jointly
together, hold these three things: 1. That the first Day of the week was
honored above any other day for Sabbath services in the Primitive Churches
practice, as is evident, Acts 20.7. 2. That the Apostles commanded the
observation of this Day rather then any other for Sabbath-services, as is
evident, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. 3. That this day is holy and sanctified to be holy to
the Lord above any other day, and therefore it has the Lords name upon it (an
usual sign of things Holy to him) and therefore called the Lords Day, as is
evident, Revel 1.10. but these things need more particular explication.


Thesis 35.
Acts 10.7. these particulars are manifest.

1. That the Church of Troas (called Disciples) publicly and generally now met
together, so that it was no private Church-meeting (as some say) but general
and open, according as those times would give leave.

2, That this meeting was upon the first day of the week, called (...): which
phrase although Gomarus, Primrose, Heylin, and many others go about to
translate thus, viz. upon one of the days of the week. Yet this is sufficient
to dash that Dream (besides what else might be said) viz That this phrase is
expounded in other Scriptures to be the first day of the week, Luke 24, 1. John
20, 1. but never to be found throughout all the Scriptures expounded of one day
in the week. Gomarus indeed tells us of (...) Luke 5.17. and 8.22. and 20.1.
which is translated quodam die, Gomar. Invest. Sent. and orig. Sab. cap. 9.
or a certain day; but this will not help him, for this is not (...) as it is in
this place.

3. That the end of this meeting was Holy Duties, viz. to break bread, or to
receive the Lords Supper, as the phrase is expounded, Acts 2.43. which was
therefore accompanied with preaching the word and prayer, Holy preparation and
serious meditation about those great mysteries. Nor can this breaking of Bread
be interpreted of their Love Feasts or common Suppers, as Gomarus suspects. For
their Love Feasts and common Suppers were not of the whole Church together (as
this was) but in several houses, as Mr. Cartwright proves from Acts 2.46. And
although the Corinthians used their Love Feasts in public, yet they are sadly
reproved for it by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.12. and therefore he would not allow
it here.

4. It Is not said that Paul called them together, because he was to depart the
next day, or that they purposely declined the Lords Supper till that day,
because then Paul was to depart (as Master Primrose urges) but the text speaks
of it as of a time and Day usually observed of them before, and therefore it is
said that when they came together to break bread; Primr. par. 3. cap. 5.
and Paul therefore took his opportunity of preaching to them, and seems to
stay purposely, and wait seven days among them, that he might communicate with
them, and preach unto them in this ordinary time of public meeting, and
therefore though he might privately instruct and preach to them the other seven
days, yet his preaching now is mentioned in regard of some special solemnity
of meeting on this Day.

5. The first Day was honored above any other Day for these Holy Duties; or
else why did they not meet upon the last Day of the week, the Jewish Sabbath
for these ends? For if the Christian Churches were bound to observe the Jewish
Sabbath, why did they not meet then and honor the seventh Day above the first
day? considering that it was but the day before, and therefore might easily
have done it, more fitly too, had that seventh day been the Christian Sabbath.

6. Why is the first Day of the week mentioned which is attributed only in the
New Testament to the Day of Christ's resurrection, unless this day was then
usually honored and sanctified for Holy Duties called here breaking of bread
by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole, and therefore comprehends all other
Sabbath Duties? For there is no more reason to exclude prayer, preaching,
singing of Psalms, etc. because these are not mentioned, then to exclude
drinking of Wine in the Sacrament, (as the blind Papists do) because this
neither is here made mention of. Master Primrose indeed tells us that it may be,
the first Day of the week is named in respect of the Miracle done in it upon
Eu^ichus: But the Text it plain, the time of the meeting is mentioned, Primr.
par. ^ cap. 5.
and the end of it to break Bread, and the Miracle is but brought in as a
particularly event which happened on this day, which was set apart first for
higher ends.

7. Nor is it said in the Text that the Church of Troas me^ every day together
to receive the Sacrament (as Master Pr^mrose suggests) and that therefore this
action of breaking Bread was done without resp^ct to any particular or special
Day, Ibid.
it being performed every Day. For, I do not find that the Primitive Church
received the Lords Supper every day: for though it be said, Acts ^.^2. That the
Church continued in the Apostles Fellowship and breaking of Bread; yet it is
not said that they broke Bread every day: they are indeed said to be daily in
the Temple, verse 46. but not that they brake Bread every day in the Temple, or
from house to house; or if they should, yet the b^eaking of Bread in this verse
is meant of Common not Sacred Bread, as it is verse 42. where I think the Bread
was no more Common, then their continuance in the Apostles Droctrine and
Fellowship was Common; and therefore in this 46. verse, the phrase is altered,
and the (...).
Original word properly signifies ordinary Bread for common nourishment, And
yet suppose they did receive the Sacrament every day, yet here the breaking of
Bread is made mention of as the opus diei, or the special business of the
day; and the day is mentioned as the special time for such a purpose; and hence
no other day (if they break Bread in it) is mentioned, and therefore its called
in effect the day of meeting to break bread: Nor do I find in all the
Scripture a day distinctly mentioned for holy duties (as this first day of the
week is) wherein a whole people or Church meet t^gether for such ends; but that
day was Holy: the naming of the particular day for such ends, implies the
Holiness of it, and the time is purposely mentioned, that others in after
times might purposely and specially observe that Day.

8, Nor is it said that the Disciples met together, the night after the first
day; but its expressly said to be upon the first day of the week: and supp^se
(as Mr. Brabourne says) that their meeting was no^ together in the morning,
but only in the evening time to celebrate the Lords Supper, a little before
the shutting in of the day: yet its a sufficient ground for conscience to
observe this day above any other for holy services, although every part of the
day be not filled up with public and Church duties; for suppose the Levites on
the Jewish sabbath should do no holy public duty on their own Sabbath until
the day was far ^pent; will Mr. Brabourne argue from thence, that the Jewish
Sabbath was not wholly holy unto God? But again, suppose the latter part of
the day was spent in breaking of Bread, yet will it follow that no other part
of the day was spent before, either in any private or public holy duties?
possibly they might receive the Lords Supper in the evening of this Sabbath
(for the time of this action is in the general indifferent) yet might they not
spend the rest of the morning in public Duties, as we know some do now in some
Churches, who are said to meet together to break Bread the latter part of this
day, and yet sanctify the Sabbath the whole day before. Suppose it be not
expressly said that they did shut up shopwindwes at Troas and forsake the
Plough and the Wheel, and abstain from all servile work; yet if he believes
that no more was done this day but what is expressly set down, Mr. Brabourne
must needs see a pitiful face of Christ in the Lords Supper, and people coming
^ushing upon it without any serious examination or preparation or singing of
Psalms, because no such Duties as these are mentioned to be upon this Day.

9. Lastly, Master Primrose like a staggering man knows not what to fasten on
in answer to this place, and therefore tells us that suppose it was a Sabbath,
yet that it might be taken up from the Churches Liberty and Custom, rather
then from any Divine institution: But besides that which has been said to
dashed his Dream, These. 27. the falsenesse of this common and bold assertion
will appear more fully in the explication of the second text, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2.
which now follows, wherein it will appear to be an Apostolical (and therefore
a Divine) Institution from Jesus Christ.

Thesis 36.
In the second of the places therefore alleged, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. These things
are considerable to prove the first day in the week to be the Christian
Sabbath, and that not so much by the Churches practice, as by the Apostles
precept; For,

1. Although it be true, that in some cases Collections may be made any day for
the poor Saints; yet why does the Apostle here limit them to this day for the
performance of this Duty? they that translate (...) upon one day of the week,
do miserably mistake the phrase, which in Scripture phrase only signifies the
first day of it, and beat their forheads against the maine Scope of the
Apostle, viz. to fix a certain day for such a Duty as required such a
certain time: For, they might (by this translation) Collect their Benevolences
one day in four or ten years, for then it should be done one day in a week.

2: The Apostle does not only limit them to this time, but also all the
Churches of Galatia, verse. 1. and consequently all other Churches if that be
true, 2 Cor. 8.13, 14. wherein the Apostle professes he press^th not one
Church, that he may ease another Church, but that there be an equality: and
although I see no ground from this Text, that the maintenance of the Ministry
should be raised every Sabbath day (for Christ would not have them reckoned
among the poor, being laborers worthy of their Hire) and although this
Collection was for the poor Saints of other Churches, yet the proportion
strongly holds, that if there be ordinary cause of such Collections in every
particular Church, these Collections should be made the first day of the week,
much more carefully and religiously for the poor of ones own Church; and that
in all the Churches of Christ Jesus to the end of the world.

3. The Apostle does not limit them thus with wishes and counsels only to do
it, if they thought most meet, but (...), verse 1. as I have ordained, or
instituted; and therefore binds their consciences to it; and if Paul ordained
it, certainly he had it from Christ Jesus who first commanded him so to appoint
it; who professes, that what he had received of the Lord, that only he
commanded unto them to do, 1. Cor. 11.23.

4. If this day had not been more holy and more fit for this work of Love then
any other day, he durst not have limited them to this Day, nor durst he have
honored this Day above any other in the week, yea above the Jewish seventh
Day. For we see the very Apostle tender always of Christian Liberty, and not to
bind were the Lord leaves his people free: for thus doing he should rather
make snares then Laws for Churches, 1 Cor. 7.27.35. and go expressly against
his own Doctrine, Galat. 5.1. who bids them stand fast in their Liberty, and
that in this very point of the observation of days, Galat. 4.10. But what
fitness was there on this Day for such a service? Consider therefore.

5. That the Apostle does not in this place immediately appoint and institute
the Sabbath, but supposes it to be so already (as Mr. Primrose is forced to
acknowledge) and we know Duties of Mercy and Charity, Primr. par. 3. c. 6.
as well as of necessity and piety, are Sabbath Duties; for which end this Day
(which Beza finds in an ancient Manuscript to be called the Lords Day) was more
fit for those Collections then any other day; partly because they usually met
together publicly on this day, and so their Collections might be in greater
readiness against Paul's coming: partly also that they might give more
liberally, at least freely, it being supposed that upon this Day, men's hearts
are more weaned from the world, and are warmed by the word and other
Ordinances, with more lively faith and hope of better things to come, and
therefore having received spiritual things from the Lord more plentifully on
this Day, every man will be more free to impart of his temporal good things
therein for refreshing of the poor Saints, and the very bowels of Christ
Jesus. And what other reason can be given of Limiting this Collection to this
Day? I confess I cannot honestly (though I could wickedly) imagine. And
certainly if this was the end, and withal the Jewish Day was the Christian
Sabbath, the Apostle would never have thus limited them to this Day, nor
honored and exalted this first D^y before that Jewish seventh; which if it had
been the Christian Sabbath, had been more fit for such a work as this, then the
first Day (if a working day) could be.

6. Suppose therefore that this Apostolical and Divine Institution is to give
their Collections, but not to institute the Day (as Master Primrose pleads)
suppose also that they were not every Lords Day or first Day, but sometime upon
the first day: Suppose also that they were extraordinary, and for the poor of
other Churches, and to continue for that time only of their need: Suppose also
that no man is enjoined to bring into the public Treasury of the Church, but
((...)) privately to lay it by on this Day by himself (as Mr. Brabourne urges
against this Text) yet still the question remains unanswered, viz. Why should
the Apostle limit them to this Day, either for extraordinary or private
Collections, and such special acts of Mercy, unless the Lord had honored this
day for acts of mercy (and much more of Piety) above any other ordinary and
common day? What then could this Day be but the Christian Sabbath imposed by
the Apostles; and magnified and honored by all the Churches in those days? I
know there are some other Replies made to this Scripture by Master Brabourne*
but they are wind-egges (as Plutarch calls That Philosophers notions) and have
but little in them, and therefore I pass them by as I do many other things in
that book as not worth the time to name them.

7. This Lastly I add, this first Day was thus honored either by Divine or
Humane Institution: If by Divine, we have what we plead for; If by Humane
custom and tradition, then the Apostle assuredly would never have commended
the observation of this Day, who elsewhere condemns the observation of days,
though the days were formerly by Divine Institution. Ye observe (says he)
Days and Times: and would he then have commended the observation of these
days above any other which are only by humane, but never by Divine
Institution? Its, strange that the Churches of Galatia are forbidden the
observation of days, Galat. 4.10. and yet commanded, 1 Cor. 16.1.2. a more
sacred and solemn observation of the first Day of the week rather then any
other! Surly this could not be, unless we conclude a Divine Institution
hereof. For we know how Zealous the holy Apostle is every where to strike at
Humane customs, and therefore could not lay a stumbling block (to occasion the
grievous fall of Churches) to allow and command them to observe a Humane
Tradition, and to honor this above the seventh Day for such holy services ar
are here made mention of. But whether this Day was solemnly sanctified as the
Sabbath of the Lord our God, we come now to inquire.

Thesis 37.
In the third Text, Revel. 1.10. Mention is made of the Lords Day, which was
ever accounted the first day of the week: It seems therefore to be the Lords
Day, and consequently the Sabbath of the Lord our God. Two things are needful
here to be considered and cleared.

1. That this Day being called the Lords Day, it is therefore set apart and
sanctified by the Lord Christ as holy. 2. That this Day thus sanctified is the
first day of the week, and therefore that first Day is our Holy or Sabbath Day.
Thesis 38.
The first Difficulty here to prove and clear up, is, that, This Day which is
here called the Lords Day, is a day instituted and sanctified for the Lords
honor and service above any other Day. For, as the Sacrament of Bread and Wine
is called the Lords Supper, and the Lords Table, for no other reason but
because they were instituted by Christ, and sanctified for him and his honor;
so what other reason can be given by any Scripture Light why this is called the
Lords Day, but because ^t was in the like manner instituted and sanctified as
they were? Master Brabourne here shifts away from the light of this Text, by
affirming that it might be called the Lords Day in respect of God the Creator,
not Christ the Redeemer, and therefore may be meant of the Jewish Sabbath which
is called the Lords holy Day, Isaiah 58 3. But why might he not as well say
that its called the Lords Supper and Table in respect of God the Creator,
considering that in the New Testament since Christ is actually exalted to be
Lord of all, this phrase is only applied to the Lord Christ as Redeemer? Look
therefore as the Jewish Sabbath being called the Lords Sabbath, or the Sabbath
of Jehovah, is by that title and note certainly known to be a Day sanctified by
Jehovah, as Creator; so this Day being called the Lords Day, is by this note as
certainly known to be a Day sanctified by our Lord Jesus as Redeemer. Nor do I
find any one distinct thing in all the Scripture which has the Lords
superscription or name upon it (as the Lords Temple, the Lords Offerings, the
Lords people, the Lords Priests etc.) but it is sanctified of God and holy to
him: why is not this Day then Holy to the Lord, if it equally bears the Lords
name? Master Primrose indeed puts us off with another shift, Primr. par. 3.
cap. 7.
viz. That this Day being called so by the Churches customs; John therefore
calls it so in respest of that custom which the church then used, without
Divine institution. But why may he not as well say that he calls it the Lords
Table in respect of the Churches Custom also? the Designation of a Day, and of
the first time in the Day for Holy public services is indeed in the power of
each particular Church (Suppose it be a Lecture, and the hours of
Sabbath-meetings) but the Sanctification of a Day, if it be Divine worship, to
observe it if God command and appoint it; then surely it is will worship for any
Humane Custom to institute it. Now, the Lords name being stamped upon this Day
and so set apart for the honor of Christ, it cannot be that so it should be
called in respect of the Churches customs; for surely then they should have
been condemned for will worship by some of the Apostles; and therefore it is in
respect of the Lords institution hereof.

Thesis 39.
The second Difficulty now lies in clearing up this particular, That this Day
thus sanctified was the first Day of the week, which is therefore the Holy Day
of the Lord our God, and consequently, the Christian Sabbath: for this purpose
let these ensuing particulars be laid together.

1. That this Day of which John speaks, is a known Day, and was generally known
in those days by this glorious name of the Lords Day, and therefore the
Apostle gives no other title to it but the Lords Day, as a known day in those
times; for the Scope of John in this Vision is as in all other Prophetical
Visions when they set down the day and time of it, to gain the more credit to
the certain^y of it, when every one sees the truth circumstantiated, and they
hear of the particular time; and it may seem most absurd to set down the day
and time for such an end, and yet the day is not particularly known.

2. If it was a known Day, what Day can it be either by evidence of Scripture
or any Antiquity but the first Day of the week? For, 1. There is no other Day
on which mention is made of any other work or action of Christ which might
occasion a Holy Day, but only this of the Resurrection, which is exactly noted
of all the Evangelists to be upon the first Day of the week, and by which work
he is expressly said to have all power given him in heaven and earth, Matt.
28.18. and to be actually Lord of dead and living, Romans 14.9. and therefore why
should any other Lords Day be dreamed of? why should Master Brabourne imagine
that this day might be some superstitious Easter Day, which happens once a
year? the Holy Ghost on the contrary, not setting down the month or day of the
year, but of the week wherein Christ arose, and therefore it must be meant of a
weekly Holy Day here called the Lords Day.

2. We do not read of any other Day (besides this first Day of the week) which
was observed for Holy Sabbath Duties and honored above any other day for
breaking of Bread, for preaching the Word (which were acts of piety) nor for
Collections for the poor (the most eminent act of mercy) why then should any
imagine any other day to be the Lords day, but that first day?

3. There seems to be much in that which Beza observes out of an ancient Greek
Manuscript wherein that first Day of the week, 1 Cor. 16.2. is expressly
called the Lords Day, and the Syriack Translation says that their meeting
together to receive the Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.20. was upon the Lords Day; nor is
there any antiquity but expounds this Lords Day of the first Day of the week,
as learned Rivet makes good against Gomarus, Rivet Dissert. De orig. Sab. cap.
10.
professing, that Quotquot Interpretes hactenus fuerunt, haec verba de die
Resurrectionis Domini intellexerunt; solus quod quidem sciam, Cl. D. Gomarus
contradixit.

4. Look as Iehovahs, or the Lords Holy Day, Isaiah 58.13. was the seventh Day
in the week then in use in the Old Testament, so why should not this Lords Day
be meant of some seventh Day (the first of seven in the week which the Lord
appointed, and the Church observed under the New Testament, and therefore
called (as that was) the Lords Day?

5. There can be no other Day imagined but this to be the Lords Day; indeeed
Gomarus affirms that its called the Lords Day, because of the Lord Jesus
apparition in Vision to John, and therefore he tell us that in Scripture
phrase, the Day of the Lord is such a Day wherein the Lord manifests himself
either in wrath or in favor, as here to John. But there is a great difference
between those phrases, The Lords Day, and the Day of the Lord, which it is not
called here. For such an interpretation of the Lords Day, as if it was an
uncertain time, is directly cross to the Scope of John in setting down this
Vision, who to beget more credit to it, tells us, First, of the person that saw
it, I John ver. 10. Secondly, the particular place, in Paimo. Thirdly, the
particular time, the Lords Day.



These considerations do utterly subvert Mr. Brabournes discourse to prove the
Jewish Sabbath to be the Lords Day, which we are still to observe, and may be
sufficient to answer the scruples of modest and humble minds; for if we ask
the Time of it? It is on the first Day of the week. Would we know whether this
time was spent in holy Duties and Sabbath services? this also has been proved.
Would we know whether it was sanctified for that end? Yes verily, because its
called the Lords Day, and consequently all servile work was and is to be laid
aside in it. Would we know whether it is the Christian Sabbath Day? Verily if it
be the Day of the Lord our God (the Lords Day) why is it not the Sabbath of the
Lord our God? If it be exalted and honored by the Apostles of Christ above the
Jewish Sabbath for Sabbath duties, why should we not believe but that it was
our Sabbath Day? And although the word Sabbath Day, or seventh day be not
expressly mentioned, yet if they be for substance in this Day, and by just
consequence deduced from Scripture, it is all one as if the Lord had expressly
called them so.

Thesis 40.
Hence therefore it follows, that although this particular of seven being
abrogated, and this being instituted in its room, it is therefore to be
perpetuated and observed in its room. For though it be true (as Mr. Brabourne
urges) That New Institutions cannot be founded, no not by Analogy of
proportion, merely upon Old Institutions; as because children were Circumcised,
it will not follow that they are therefore to be baptized: and so because the
Jews kept that seventh day, that we may therefore keep the first day. Yet this
is certain, that when New things are instituted not by humane Analogy, but by
Divine appointment, the Application of these may stand by virtue of old
precepts and general Rules, from whence the Application even of old
Institutions formerly arose. For we know that the Cultus institutu^ in the New
Testament in Ministry and Sacraments, stands at this day by virtue of the
second Commandment, as well as the instituted worship under the Old. And though
Baptism stands not by virtue of the institution of Circumcision, yet it being
De novo instituted by Christ as the Seal of Initiation into Christ's mystical
Body, 1 Cor. 12.12. it now stands by virtue of that general Rule by which
Circumcision it self was administered, viz That the Seal of initiation into
Christ's Body be applied to all the visible members of that Body: and hence
children are to be now Baptized, as once they were Circumcised, being members
of Christ's Body. So the first day of the week being instituted to be the Lords
Day or Lords Sabbath, hence it follows that if the first seventh which is now
abrogated, was once observed, because it was the Lords Sabbath or the Sabbath
Day which God appointed; by the very same Rule, and on the very same ground we
also are bound to keep this first day being also the Sabbath of the Lord our
God, which he has now appointed anew under the New Testament.

Thesis 41.
I think that Paul foreseeing this observation of days and Jewish Sabbaths to
be stirring and ready to creep into the Church, that he did therefore condemn
the same in his Epistles to the Galatians and Colosians; and that therefore
Christian Emperors and Councels in aftertimes did well and wisely both to
condemn the observations of the one and withal honor the other.

Thesis 42.
Although the work of redemption be applied unto few in Heb. 1.1, 2. Heb.
2.8.9. John. 5.22. Colos. 1.16.17. 1 Timothy 4.10. John. 3.35. and hence it is no
wonder if all men as well as a few elected, selected and called, be commanded
to sanctify the Lords Day, as once they were the Jewish seventh day; the work
of Christ being in some respect of as great extent through all the work of
Creation as the work of the Father. And therefore it is a great feebleness in
Master Brabourne to go about to vilify the work of Redemption, and extol
that of Creation above it; and that therefore the Sabbath ought still to be
kept in reference to the work of Creation which concerns all men, rather then
in respect of Redemption, which he imagines concerns only some few.

Thesis 43.
The Lord Christ rested from the work of redemption by price, upon the day of
his Resurrection; but he is not yet at rest from the work of Redemption by
power, until the day of our Resurrection and Glory be perfected. But it does
not hence fellow (as Master Primrose imagines) that there is no Lords day
Instituted in respect of Christ's Resurrection because he has not, nor did not
then ^est from Redemption by power; for look as the Father having rested from
the works of Creation might therefore appoint a Day of Rest, al^hough he did
not, nor does not yet rest from Providence, John 5.17. So the Lord Christ
having finished the great work of Redemption, he might justly appoint a day of
Rest, although his redeeming workly by power was yet behind.

Thesis 44.
The heavy and visible judgments of God revealed from heaven against
prophaners of this our Lords day Sabbath will one day be a convincing Argument
of the Holiness of this Day, when the Lord himself shall have the immediate
handling and pressing of it. Mean while I confess my weakness to convince an
adversary by it; nor will I contend with any other Arguments from Antiquity for
the observation of this Day; but these may suffice, which are alleged from the
Holy Word.

THE BEGINNING OF THE SABBATH Wherein five several Opinions about the
beginning of the Sabbath are set down; the Arguments commonly used for the four
first of them are answered; and the truth of the fifth, for its beginning in
the Evening, confirmed.

BY THOMAS SHEPARD, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England.

The third Part.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell. 1650.

The general Contents concerning the Beginning of the Sabbath.
1. FIve several Opinions concerning the beginning of the Sabbath, Thesis 2.
2. The time for beginning of the Sabbath not according to the various customs
of diverse Nations, Thesis 3. 3. The time of the Artificial day not the
beginning and end of the Sabbath as it begins and ends, Thesis 13. 4. The
beginning of the Sabbath not midnight, Thesis 28. 5. The morning does not begin
the Sabbath, Thesis 48. 6. That place of Mat. 28.1. usually alleged for the
beginning of it in the morning, cleared, Thesis 50. 7. The Resurrection of
Christ not aimed at by the Evangelists to be made the beginning of the day,
although it be of the change of it, Thesis 58. 8. John 20 19. cleared, Thesis
59. 9. Paul's preaching till midnight no argument of the beginning of the
Sabbath in the morning, Thesis 64. 10. The various acception of the word Day
and Morrow, to answer many proofs alleged for beginning the Sabbath in the
morning, Thesis 68. 11. Some that hold in the beginning of the Sabbath was from
Even to Even until Christ's Resurrection, and then the time was changed,
confuted, Thesis 69, 70. 12. There is not the like reason for the Sabbath to
begin at the first moment of Christ's entrance into his rest, as for the first
Sabbath at the beginning of Fathers rest, Thesis 71. 13 The reasons for the
Change of the day are not the same for the change of the beginning of the day,
Thesis 73. 14. The conceived fitness for the beginning of the Sabbath in the
morning rather then in the evening is a vanity, Thesis 75. 15. The Evening
begins the Christian Sabbath, Thesis 76. 16. The place Genesis 1.2 cleared, Thesis
78. 17. The Darkness mentioned Genesis 1.2. was not punctum temporis, Thesis 81
81. 18. The separation of Light and darkness, Genesis 1, 2. cleared Thesis
86.87. 19. Levit. 23.32. prov^s the beginning of the Sabbath at Evening Thesis
90. 20. Nehemiah an exemplary pattern beginning the Sabbath at Evening, Thesis
94. 21. Those that prepared for the burial of Christ began their Sabbath in
the Evening, Thesis 97.98. 22. Christ's lying three days in the grave, Thesis
100. 23. Those Nothern Countries who have the Sun in view diverse weeks together
in a year yet know when to begin the day, Thesis 101.
The Beginning of the SABBATH.
THESIS 1.
ITS a holy labor (says one) to enquire

Thesis 2.
There being therefore Five several opinions concerning this

Thesis 3.
Some there be who make the Time mutable and various; Opin. 1.
that God has not fixed any set time, or that he stands upon, or would have
his people troubled with such Niceties; so long as the day be observed (say
they) it is no matter when it be begun: nor do they make this variation to be
according to that which God allows (suppose from Sun to Sun, sooner or later as
the time of the year is) but according to the civil customs of several
Nations, as they variously begin or end their days among whom they live; as
suppose they live among Romans, (they think) they may begin it at midnight; if
with Babylonians, at Sunrising; if among Grecians, at Sunset; if among
Umbrians and Arabians, at midday.

Thesis 4.
viz to measure the beginning of the day according to humane custom; a
scrupulous conscience (I think) might have a most and ready quieting answer
here: but it will be found too true, that though Civil and common Time may
admit of such variations as may best suit with their manner and occasions, yet
sacred and holy time is not dependent upon humane customs, but upon divine
institutions: for which purpose God has made the lights of Heaven to be for
seasons, Genesis 1.14. to be guides and helps to begin and end the seasons and
days which he shall appoint.

Thesis 5.
Vzziah in in offering Incense, varied only in a circumstance of person, yet
we know that the ten Tribes were carried away captive for not sacrificing at
the Temple, and Vzziah smitten with Leprosy till his death: so the Lord having
determined the Seventh day to be his, what now should hinder but that he should
determine the Beginning also thereof?

Thesis 6.
Levit. 23.23. Exodus 12.6. why should we think that the Lord is less careful
about the beginning of his Sabbath?

Thesis 7.


Thesis 8.
within the circle of Seven days, and not appoint the Time for the beginning
and end of it, might he not lose much of the beauty of the holiness of the
day, every thing being beautiful in its season? may not man begin the day at
such a season as may not be beautiful?

Thesis 9.
The Deputation of Time for holy uses upon occasion is allowed

Thesis 10.
Application of holy Time to the performance of holy duties

Thesis 11.
The Scriptures have left the determination of the Beginning

Thesis 12.
If therefore God has sanctified a set Time, he has set and

Thesis 13.
O here there be who give god the honor of determining Opin. 2. T. Brabourne.
I.N.
from Sunrising to Sunsetting, to be the day of his Sabbath. Thus some affirm
downright. Others more modestly say, h^t man's conscience ought not to be
scrupulous nor trouble it self, if conscienciously give God the honor of the
Sabbath daylight, having some general preparations for it the night before,
and good affections the night after.

Thesis 14.
Russia and East-land must have once a year a very long Sabbath: for there are
some times of the yee^e wherein they have daylight a month together.

Thesis 15.


Thesis 16.
in ordine* or in re^erence to Day-labour, and is as a whet thereunto and in
this respect the whole weekly night as well as the day is for labor; as the
sleep we take on Sabbath night is in ordine, or with respect to spiritual
rest, and so that whole natural day is a day of spiritual rest. It is
therefore a vain thing for any to make the nights of the six working days to
be no part of the six working days, because (they say) they are given to man
to rest and sleep in; for upon the same ground they may make the Artificial
days no days of labor neither, because there must be ordinarily some time
taken out of them to eat, drink, and refresh our weak bodies in.

Thesis 17.
Nehemiah shut the gates of the City when it began to be dark least that night
time should be profaned by bearing burdens in it, Nehem, 13.19.
then certainly the time of night was sanctified of God as well as the day; to
say that this act was but a just preparation for the Sabbath, is said without
proof: for, if God allows men six days and nights to labor in, what equity
can there be in forbidding all servile work a whole night together which God
has allowed man for labor? and although we ought to make preparation for the
Sabbath, yet the time and measure of it is left to each man's Christian liberty;
but for a civil Magistrate to impose twelve hours preparation for the
Sabbath, is surely both against Christian liberty, and Gods allowance also:
Again, Nehemiah did this, lest the men of Tire should occasion the Jews to
break the Sabbath day by bringing in wares upon that night; so as if that night
therefore had not been part of the Sabbath, they could not ther^^y provoke the
Jews to profane the Sabbath day, by which Nehemiah tells them they had provoked
the wrath of God.

Thesis 18.
A whole natural day is called a day though it take in the Brabourne to
affirm, that the word Day, in Scripture, is never taken but for the Artificial
day or time of Light, is utterly ^alse, as might appear from sundry instances;
it may suffice to ^ee a cluster of of seven days which comprehended their
nights also, Exodus 12.15, 18, 19.41, 42.

Thesis 19.
To affirm that the Sabbath day only comprehends the Genesis 1 began with
morning light: is not only a bad consequence (supposing the ground of it to be
true) but the ground and foundation of it is as certainly false, as to say that
Darkness is Light; for its evident that the first day in Genesis began with
that darkness which God calls Night, Psalm. 4.5. and to affirm that the first
Day in Genesis 1. begins with morning Light, is as grossly false, as it is
apparently true that within six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, Ex. 20
11. for before the creating of that Light which God calls Day, the Heavens and
with them the Angels, and the Earth or first matter called the Deep, which was
overspread with Darkness, were created: either therefore the Lord did not
create the World in six Days, or it is untrue that the first day in Genesis
began with morning Light: and I wonder upon what grounds this notion should
enter into any man's head: for though God calls the light Day and the darkness
Night, (as we shall do when speak of the artificial Day) yet withal he
called the Evening of the morning the first day; and what was this Evening and
Morning? Surely its all that space of time wherein the Lord did his first days
work; now its evident that part of the first Days work was before God created
the light: and what though evening be oftentimes taken for the latter part of
the Daylight? yet its too well known to those who have waded the deep in this
controversy, that it is oftentimes taken not only for the bound between light
and Darkness, 1. e. the end of light and beginning of darkness, Ios. 10.26,
27. Psalm. 104.23. but also for the whole time of darkness, as it is here in this
first of Genesis, and as we shall prove in due place; and therefore to affirm
that the Hebrew word used by Moses for evening, not to be naturally applyable
to the Night, because it signifies a mixture of light and darkness in the
Notion of it, is a gross mistake; for the Hebrew word Gnereb, does not
signify a mixture of light and darkness, but only a mixture, because it is
the beginning of darkness wherein all things seem to be mixed and compounded
together, and cannot be clearly and distinctly discerned in their kinds and
colors, if Buxtorfius may be believed; as is also evident, Is. 29.15. and to
affirm that the Day is before the Night; even in this first of Genesis, because
Mose^ sometimes sets the Day before the Night; it may seem (...) an Argument
as to say that the Evening is before the Morning, because Moses here sets the
Evening before the Morning; but this will not seem rational to them who make
the Evening to comprehend the latter part of the Daylight, and the Morning the
first part of it: Lastly, to make the Light to begin the day, because the time
of light is a certain principle of compu^ation (the space of darkness before
that light was created being unknown) is all one, as if one should affirm that
the time of Daylight was not the beginning of the Day, because the space of
that is also as much unknown. For if we know that darkness was before light,
though we may not know how long it continued, yet we do know certainly that the
first Day began with darkness, and that this darkness and light made up the
space of 24 hours, or of a natural day (as in all other days works of
creation) and which is sufficient to break down this principle, viz. that the
first Day in Genesis began with Morning Light.

Thesis 20.
men thus to allegorize? how easily a thing is it thus to abuse all the
Scripture? and yet suppose it should signify Heaven, yet why may not the
Sabbath continue the space of a natural as well as of an artificial Day,
considering that the natural Day of the World or of both Hemispheres consists
only of light, which these men say is significative of Heaven?

Thesis 21.
We may and do sanctify time by sleeping on the Sabbath

Thesis 22.
Moses indeed tells the people, Ex. 16.23. that to morrow

Thesis 23.
To imagine that the Sabbath must be contained within Christ Jesus arose at
break of day, Mat. 28.1. is of no more force then as if one should conclude
the containment of it within the bounds of some darkness, and twylight; for
its evident that he arose about that time.

Thesis, 24.
There is no more necessity of sanctifying a day and a half should begin their
Sabbath at the Morning of both Hemispheres; but we know, that the Sabbath Day
is sanctified to begin and end according to the setting and rising Sun in each
Hemisphere and Longitude of places respectively.

Thesis 25.
Chaos made which did exist before light? those Fathers and Schoolmen who set
such narrow bounds to the Day, had need consider of it, least their answer be
like his who hearing a simple Preacher desiring the continuance of the life of
the King so long as Sun and Moon endured? and being asked, if that should be so
when should his son reign? he replied, it may be the Preacher thought that he
might rule by Candlelight.

Thesis 26.
Jews in the Nightime, yet it will not follow from hence that the Sabbath
was to continue no longer then Daylight; for the Sabbath might be sanctified
privately in the Night, as well as more publicly in the Day; and thus the
Jews were wont to sanctify their Sabbaths. and so should we, Is. 30.29. Psalm.
63.7. Psalm. 92.2.3.

Thesis 27.
It Is true that its very good to prepare for, and end the Sabbath Caesar have
his due, and God his.

Thesis 28.
Opin. 3.
which Midnight they call morning or Morning Midnight, or midnight Morning, and
therefore they imagine out of Genesis 1. that the Morning was half Night wherein
time began, and half, Day; six hours Night from midnight to six, and six
hours day from six to midday: and by the same proportion, the Evening to begin
at midday, and so to continue six hours Day from 12 to six, and six hours
Night from six to midnight, and therefore they say that God is said to stretch
the North upon the empty, Job. 26.7. because first beginning of the notion of
time began from the North point, when darkness was first upon the face of the
deep, and from this North point in the Revolution of the Heavens we do account
it midnight, as being opposite to the South which in the course of the Sun is
at midday: and therefore also (they say) that Evening is never taken in all the
Scripture for the whole Night: but as Evening begins at Midday so Morning
begins at Midnight.

Thesis 29.
But if the first day and consequently the Sabbath day should Zanchius and many
others have very good cards to show that this first darkness continued a
complete night of 12 hours; others on the other hand make it far less;
certain it is, it continued some considerable space of time, in that it has
the name of Night put upon it; but that it should be just six hours, neither
can man's reason demonstrate it, nor has God in any Scripture revealed it, but
it is a mere uncertainty, and therefore an ill foundation for settling the
beginnning of the Sabbath upon.

Thesis 30.
Some would prove the Sabbath to begin at Midnight because Sampson a Type of
Christ carried away the gates of Gaza at midnight, Judge. 16, 3. but such
allegorical reasonings were fit tools for blind Monks in former times to
delude the simple people with; I suppose men are wiser now then to be fed with
wind and chafe, and to build their faith upon cozening allegories of humane
wit, by which as the blind Monks of old did feed the people, so the Familists
now deceive the world: both which are the fruits of Gods heavy curse upon their
hearts, who because they did not love the truth to seed upon it, are therefore
fed with vanity of mind.

Thesis 31.
It Is true Paul Preached till midnight, Acts 20.7. but does Paul might have
continued Preaching longer then the Sabbath or midnight, the case being
extraordinary in respect of his departure the next day never to see their faces
more. And he might have continued a shorter time then the Sabbath continued, as
our Savior himself did before Sunset, Mark 1.22.32. for the bounds of of
continuance of the Sabbath are not set according to the beginning and end of
any man's Preaching, which is so exceeding uncertain: Paul's long Sermon was not
continued and ended at Midnight purposely, and because so long the Sabbath
continued; but occasionally, in regard of his final departure from them the
next day; and hence in respect of this extraordinary cause he continued so long
at it, which in ordinary course had bin very unseasonable.

Thesis 32.
Genesis that the Morning and the Evening were the first day, as if the day
should begin at Morning Midnight: but the Evening and the Morning were the
first Day; and therefore its strange that any should derive the beginning of
the Sabbath from Morning Midnight out of this Text: The Graecians because they
begin the day at the Evening of Sunset. did therefore orderly call their
natural day 2 Cor. 11.25.
(...) and is it probable that Moses would speak disorderly, and ordine
retrogrado here? and not rather according to the interpretation of Daniel, who
calls 2300 days by name of Ghne^eb Boker, which signifies Evenings Mornings,
because the Evening, not the morning, much less Midnight-Morning is to begin
the day, Dan. 14.26.

Thesis 33.
Genesis 1.4, 5. Now I do not find in all the Scripture, nor is any man I
thinkable to show that the whole Night is taken for the Morning, and therefore
the first darkness could not possibly begin at the Morning or Midnight
Morning, 2. Because the Scope of Moses in this Chapter is to set down not only
the work of Creation, but the exact order of it, and consequently of the order
of Time, which was consecrated with the World; first the beginning of it, then
the succession and vicissitude of it, first in the dark night, then in the
light day, and (which is all one) first in the Evening, then in the Morning, 3.
Because the Evening may be the end of the Artificial day; but I know no proof
from any instance in Scripture to make it the end of the Natural day, of which
Moses here speaks; and therefore as Evening cannot end the day, so Midnight
Morning cannot be^in it.

Thesis 34.
To affirm that the Evening is never taken in Scripture for Hab. 1.8. Ps.
92.2. Job. 7.4. Deuteronomy. 28.66, 67. Zach 14.7. Isa. 21.12.

Thesis 35.
Nor can it be proved that the Evening begins at midday,

Thesis 36.
For though it be said, Ex. 29.38, 39. Ex. 12.6. That the Hebrew) yet neither
these, or any such Scriptures are able to prove that one of those Evenings must
necessarily begin at midday; but only this that some part of the afternoon
when the Sun was in his declining, was one of these Evenings; and some of the
Jewish Rabbis, begin it at noone, yet it is without warrant from Scripture,
and they are overwhelmed with cross Testimonies from most of their fellows,
who begin it some about one, some about two of the Clock in the afternoon, and
Josephus (who knew best his Countreymens manners) and who is one of most credit
in his writings, tells us that they began their first Evening about three of
the Clock in the afternoon.

Thesis 37.
We read indeed of the shadows of the Evening, Ier. 6.4.

Thesis 38.
Although the Evening may be called by humane custom all of the Artificial
not Natural day, of which Moses speaks when he divides the day into Morning
and Evening, part of which afternoon is also called Evening by the Holy Ghost
in Scripture; because it is either approaching or hastening toward the Evening
of the natural day, or contiguous to it: even as part of the dark Night is
sometime called Morning, because it is either contiguous or not far from the
Morning light, and men are then usually up, and preparing for it.

Thesis 39.
Mark 13.35.

Thesis 40.
And therefore to Translate the words in Genesis 1: so was the Evening, so was the
Morning the first day; and then and this gloss and interpretation, viz. That
out of the premises of Night and Day, so was the Evening mixed of them both;
so was the morning also compounded of both, to wit of Night and Light: this I
say is but words; here is no proof for such an interpretation. Iunius
Translation is best and most clear, and rational, viz. So was the Evening and
the Morning of the first day: for as has bin said the whole time of Night is
never called by the name of Morning; let any man show the leaft Tittle in any
Scripture it, and I will yield to them in this cause.

Thesis 41.
Genesis 1. into Day and Night, was for civil use, and into Evening and Morning
for Religious use, in respect of the Evening and Morning s^crifice along time
after, is just such a device as his who would needs think that the first day
of the we^ke was called (...), because God foresaw and ordained the change of
the Sabbath unto that first Day; for we know, God speak^s of t^hings as they
were then in their nature when they did first exist, before Sacrifices were
thought of; Adam called the names of things according to their natures and
special use, and is it credible that before his fall where there was no use of
Sacrifices, that he should know of Morning and Evening Sacrifi^es in which
respect it was called Evening morning; and yet suppose it was in respect of
Religious use that these names are given to each day, yet why must not the
Evening begin the day rather then the Morning? it being as has bin proved,
first in being as it is first in naming.

Thesis 42.
It Is true, the time before day, Mark 1.35. is called early Ex. 14.24, yet
these places no way prove that which they are produced for, viz. That Morning
begins at midnight: that Christ went to prayer at midnight, because he went to
it in the early Morning, or that the Morning watch began at midnight; for we
know it was some time after it; these places indeed show thus much, That
sometime before Daylight is sometime called Morning, which is readily
acknowledged in the respects forementioned.

Thesis 43.
The Angels indeed were created together with the third Genesis 1.1. in the
beginning of Time; for being incorruptible (as the third Heaven is) they could
not be afterward created out of the first matter, as all this visible and
corruptible World was; therefore the Earth is said to be dark and void ( i. e.
of all Inhabitants and beautiful forms) in opposition to the third Heaven which
was made with it, which was lightsome and full of Inhabitants, viz. the Angels;
and if it was a Kingdom prepared from the foundation of the World, surely this
Kingdom had a King then, and this King had his subjects; who could they then be
but Angels? but to infer from hence that this Time of darkness wherein the
Angels were created, should be morning, and that therefore they are called by
Job the Morning stars, Job. 38.6, 7. as some imagine, will follow no more then
as if one should affirm that the King of Babel (called Lucifer) was certainly
born in the Morning, because he also is called a Morning star, Isa. 14 13. for
who sees not but that the speech is metaphorical in both? glorious excellency
above others being bestowed on them, as special brightness and luster is
given to the Morning star.

Thesis 44.
Belshazar is said to be slain in the night, Dan. 5.30. which Isaiah has
foretold should be in the Morning, Isa. 47.11. but will it follow hence that
this Morning is the time of midnight? might it not be after midnight as well?
for the Text is silent; and yet I do not think that the word Morning in Isay is
meant of midnight nor any part of any night, but by a metaphor the apparent
time of the beginning of his misery (the light of the Morning manifesting all
things apparently) the Lord also alluding to the manner of humane Judicatures;
who were wont to pass the sentence and inflict it in the Morning as the
Scripture frequently holds forth.

Thesis 45.
Egyptians at midnight, and that the Israelites were prohibited from stirring
out of doors till Morning, Exodus 12.22, 29, 30. and yet that they did stir up
one another to depart before morning-light; yet it will not hence follow (as
some would infer) that midnight was the beginning of their Morning: for then,
1. They might have risen at midnight just then when God was destroying the
Egyptians first born, for that was part of the Morning by this account. 2. They
are prohibited from stirring out of doors till Morning as of themselves: yet if
God and Pharaoh and Moses will force them out, there is no rule broken by
stirring out in such a case before day light morning. 3, It Is more then
probable that there was some good space after midnight before they stird out,
which is said to be in the Morning watch; for the Deaths stroke was at midnight
after which Pharaoh and his council must fit and consult, and conclude what to
do, and send for Moses; after which there must be some time for Moses to
acquaint the Israelites to make them fit and ready to depart their departure;
therefore in the Morning was not at midnight which began this Morning, 4.
Pharaoh sends for Moses after midnight, yet this Time is called Night Psalm.
30.31. and not Morning; and indeed properly it was not so, only called so by
an improper speech.

Thesis 46.
Job says that God stretched out the North upon the empty, Job 26.7. ^tis not
spoken of the empty Chaos, for Job has no occasion to speak thereof, nor is it
his scope; but of the places near the North Pole which are void and empty of
Inhabitants, none being able now to dwell in that frigid Zone.

Thesis 47.
holy Time which cannot be begun in a holy manner: there was never any
Ordinance of God but it was so ordered as that it might ordinarily be begun and
ended with God; which makes me question that the beginning of it at Morning
midnight cannot be of God.

Thesis 48.
Others there be who do not begin the Sabbath at Morning Opin. 4.
but begin and end it at Morning light, at the rising of the Sun and the light
of it: who indeed are assisted with better proofs and stronger arguments then
any of the rest, and therefore need trial, and we have need to know what
weight they are of. As also to be accurately wary least the rule of love be
broken toward such gracious and learned servants of God^ considering how much
they have to say in this point, in which case, much love, respect and
indulgence has been ever accounted necessary by men of moderate and sober
minds.

Thesis 49.
The six working days being considered absolutely in themselves, Caesar their
due: civil accounts to the one, and sacred to the other; for when the Jews were
subdued by the Romans, they might and did begin their reckonings of civil Time
as the Romans did, and yet reserve the bounds of sacred Time wholly unto God.
They did the like in England many years since, says Mr. Fox, and that their
civil days began in the Morning, and Religious days in the Evening; And when
they did thus variously begin their days, there was no such undecent
disproportion of Times as Reverend Mr. Cleaver imagines, in the like case, if
holy Time should not begin with Morning which he pleads for.

Thesis 50.
The principal foundation of this Opinion, are the words Mat. 28.1. Mark 1^.1,
2. Luke 24.1. John 20.1. Among all which that of Mat. 18.1. has most weight,
wherein it is said, In the end of the Sabbath as it began to dawn toward the
first day of the week, etc. from whence it seems to follow that if the Sabbath
Day did end at the dawning of the first day of the week, that then the dawning
of the daylight of the first day, must be the beginning of the Sabbath Day, or
of the Christian Sabbath.

Thesis 51.
viz. Beza, Iunius and others) who conceive the Sabbath to begin at even, to
affirm upon very probable grounds, that there was among the Jews, at this time
under their Roman bondage a double account, and reckoning of the days of the
week. 1. Civil. 2. Sacred account. According to sacred account (they say) the
Church of God began their Sabbath at Evening, not Morning, which they
demonstrate from sundry pregnant Texts in the old and new Testament; but
according to the civil account of the Romans who gave the precedence to the
Morning before the Evening, they begun it therefore in the Morning, and
according to this latter account they suppose the Evangelists to speak.

Thesis 52.


Thesis 53.
dawning implies, and the evidence of their fact in coming to the Sepulcher
demonstrates as much; for it is not the scope of the Evangelist to set down
when the first day of the week began, but at what time of the first day of the
week such and such actions ^ell out: any thing done in any Time of the day,
whether at six, or nine, or two of the Clock may be said to be done that day;
but it will not follow that they are therefore done in the beginning of that
Day: I meet with two Exceptions here.

1. Some say that it might be meant of the Artificial day if the words had run
thus, viz. at the Dawning of the day; or the first Day of the week about the
dawning of the day; but the dawning toward the first day, This phrase (they
say) seems to describe beginning of such a day a^ stands in Relation to the
whole week, and all the other days of the week, which are to be taken for
natural days: But, 1. There is I hope a first Artificial day of the week as
well as a Natural. 2. This Artificial day does not in this account exclude
the Night before as part of this first Day, and consequently the Natural Day
consisting of Night and light; therefore it may well stand in relation to the
other days of the Week which were natural; for although the Evangelist sets
down particularly when these things about the Resurrection of Christ happened
to be, viz. at the dawning toward the first day of the Week, yet we that begin
the Sabbath at Evening may and do use the same phrase, and yet so speak of the
Artificial day upon which some event begins, as not to exclude the Night before
upon which the Natural Day begins. 3. Compare the Evangelists; and the dawning
in Matthew toward the first day, will be found to be all one with this phrase,
viz. The first day about or at the dawning of it: for that which Matthew calls
dawning to the first day, Mark calls early in the Morning, the first day of
the Week at the rising of the Sun; and Luke calls upon the first day of the
Week very early in the Morning: whence it is evident that Matthews drawning to
the first day is all one with about the rising of the Sun upon the first day:
so that this difference between dawning toward the first day, and dawning upon
the first day seems to be an English Cabalisme, and a mere curiosity exhaled
and extracted out of the words, rather then any solid Truth which the Text
holds forth or the Spirit of God aimed at.

2. A second exception is; that though the word Day in Scripture be taken for
the Artificial day, yet never when the word first, second, or third Day, etc.
are joined together; and they point us to the first of Genesis, where when the
first or second day is mentioned, its constantly meant of a Natural and not an
Artificial Day. But 1. This is a great mistake; for the Day for the Levites
Travel (which was not in the Night but upon the Artificial day) is called the
fourth Day, Judge. 19.5. And the 5th day, verse 8. 2. This Artificial day may
be called the first day as that it may involve the Night before, (where we make
the Sabbath to begin) as well as the Night after, on which they make the
Sabbath to end; and thus the Natural day may be here comprehended also (which
they plead for) the same day which Artificially begins at daylight, may
naturally begin the night before.

Thesis 54.
Matthew, who affirms that this Daylight or Day-dawn was the End of the
Sabbath. Whereby it seems that the Sabbath began at the dawning of the day
before, and therefore it ends at the dawning of the first day following: and
hence they infer that the daylight of this first day cannot belong to the
night of the Jewish Sabbath, which immediately went before. And I confess the
argument is strong and undeniable, as the words lie under the gloss. We must
therefore enquire more narrowly into the true translation of the words, and
their meaning.

Thesis 55.


1. S^mewhile it signifies Late Time, or the extreme and last time of the
continuance of any thing: as, (...), i. e. the late time, or latter time of the
Day.

2. Sometime it signifies a long Time after: as, (...), i. a long time after
the Trojan war: Now in this place it is to be translated and in this latter
sense, thus, A long time, or a good while after the Sabbath was ended, as it
began to dawn to ^h^ first day of the week, etc. which interpretation if it be
made good will clear up this difficulty, viz. that the Jewish Sabbath did not
end at the dawning of the First day of the week, but long before: nor indeed
durst I incline to this interpretation, if I did not see the Evangelists (the
best interpreters one of another) making the same to my hand.

Thesis 56.
Mark, who writ after Matthew, and is best able to interpret his words,
expressly says, that the Sabbath was past when the women came to the Sepulcher;
his words are (...). The Sabbath being past, Mar. 16. 1. Hence therefore, if
Matthews words should be translated, Late on the Sabbath, or toward the end of
the Sabbath, then the Sabbath was not already past (as Mark affirms) but
drawing toward an end. Mark therefore telling us, that the Sabbath was ended,
and yet not telling us when it ended, why should we not Harmonize the
Evangelists by Mathews words, which tells us that it was long before? 2. The
time of the coming of some of the women to the Sepulcher, as it was upon the
first day of the week, so it was some time within the night: and hence Mark
tells us it was very early, Mark 16.2. which cannot be at the rising of the Sun
only when it is said also that they came to the Sepulcher; for that is not
(...), valde mane, or very early. Again, Luke tells us that it was (...), very
early or in the depth of the night; for so the word (...) frequently signifies
the time of the night when Cocks crow. I forbear to instance in Greek Writers,
because the Evangelist John clears up this most fully, who expressly says, that
it was (...), it being yet dark: and though it be said Mark 16.2. that the
women came to the Sepulcher about rising of the Sun; yet Piscator and others
interpret that of their last actual coming to it; their preparation for it
being very early, while it was yet dark night; and it seems there was two
comings by several of them to the Sepulcher: for its evident that Mary (who had
most affection) came to the Sepulcher while it was yet dark, the rest of them
possibly preparing thereunto. However the Evangelists be reconciled, this is
evident, that the first stirring of the women about that work from which they
abstained upon the Sabbath day, was very early in the depth of the morning
Darkness, before the Daylight, when some would begin the Christian Sabbath:
and from hence it follows, 1. That if the Sabbath was not past even before this
dark time of the night began, but rather ended when the first day of the week
began to dawn: then it will follow, that these holy women did not rest the
Sabbath according to the Commandment; for we see they are this night busy
about those things which they did forbear to do because of the Sabbath, Luke
23.52. 2. Hence it will also follow, that if the Sabbath was not ended before
this dark time of the night, but only at the dawning of the Daylight, then
our Savior could not arise from the dead the First day of the week, but within
the dark night of the Jewish Sabbath: for Mary came when it was dark, and the
Lord Christ was risen before she came, and how long before no man can tell; but
its evident that Christ arose the first day of the week, Mark 16.9. and
therefore the Sabbath was ended long before. 3. If therefore the Sabbath was
past at the dark time of the night, how then can the Sabbath begin at morning
Light; and if it was past when it was thus dark, when then could the Sabbath
end, but when this night did first begin? and if this was so, it was then truly
(...), a good while after the Sabbath was ended when this dawning toward the
first day began, according to the interpretation given.

Thesis 57.
Ephesians. 3.5. and so this night of the first day of the week, wherein the women
arose to their work, was an early time, and therefore called morning. Again,
suppose a double morning be acknowledged (as there was a double evening) yet it
will not follow that this morning belongs only to the day following, for it
may belong to the night before; for as where there are two evenings spoken of,
the former belongs to the day, the latter to the night: so if we grant two
mornings, the latter morning may belong to the day ensuing, and the former to
the Night preceding; if therefore any plead for the beginning of the Sabbath at
the morning light, these places of the Evangelist will not bear them out in it,
it being dark morning when Christ arose; if they say it begins in the dark
morning, then let them set exactly the time of that dark morning wherein Christ
arose, and when they would begin it; but no wit of man I fear is able to
demonstrate this.

Thesis 58.
but this is not made mention of; only we may gather by laying many things
together about what time it should be, and therefore I marvel at them who
would prove the beginning of the Sabbath at the time of Christ's Resurrection
from the four Evangelists speaking exactly to the time of the women's rising in
the morning to visit Christ's Sepulcher, but not a word of the main thing this
drives at, which is the exact time of Christ's rising.

Thesis 59.
Those that would have the Sabbath begin at morning, allege 20.19. where it is
said, That the same day at even, which was the First day of the week, Jesus
came among his Disciples, when the doors were shut, which (say they) was within
night; and therefore the night following belongs to the day before, which was
the Christian Sabbath: which place compared with Luke 24.33. does further
clear up (as they say) this truth; for the two Disciples who went to Emaus and
met Christ, are said to return to the Disciples when they are thus met
together; which evening cannot (say they) be possibly meant of the First
evening before Sun-light was set, because the day being far spent, ver. 29. and
they constrained him to abide with them (which argues that it was late) and the
distance of Emaus from Jerusalem being sixty furlongs, or eight miles excepting
a half; so that it was impossible for them to travel so long a journey in so
short a time, within the compass of the first Evening; Hence therefore its
meant of the second evening, which was within night, which yet we see belongs
to the day before. But there are many things considerable to evacuate the
strength of these reasonings.

Thesis 60.
For first, this invitation our Savior had to stay by the two Emaus to
Jerusalem before Sunset within the former evening; for the word toward
evening, (...) may be as well understood of the first evening toward two or
three of the clock, as of the second; and if it be objected, that before the
first evening the day could not be said to be Far spent; yet if the words be
well observed, no such translation can be forced from them, for the words are
(...). i. the day has declined; which is truly said of any time after
high-noon, and therefore might be a fit season to press our Savior to eat; as
may appear by comparing this with a parallel Scripture. Judges 19.8, 9. which
is almost word for word with this place of Luke: for the Levites father invites
him to eat something after his early rising, verse. 8. which was too soon for
supper, and therefore seems to be rather to a Dinner which they tarried for
until after high-noon, or as it is in the Original, (...) i. until the day
declined, (just as it is here in Luke;) and then when dinner was ended he
persuades him to stay still, because the day was weak, and (as we translate
it) toward evening; (as here the Disciples tell our Savior) and yet after
these persuasions to tarry, as late as it was he departed and came to Jerusalem
before night, and from thence to Gibeah (without any Miracle too) before Sun
was set, or the latter evening; and verily if we may give credit to
Topographers, Gibeah was almost as far from Bethlem (from whence the Levite
came) as Jerusalem was from Emaus: and therefore if the Levite came with his
cumber and concubine so many miles before the second evening, notwithstanding
all the Arguments used from the day declining, and that it was toward evening;
why may we not imagine the like of these Disciples at Emaus much more? who had
no cumber, and whose joy could not but add wings to a very swift return to
the eleven before the second Evening, notwithstanding the like arguments here
used in Luke, 24.29. And yet secondly suppose that they invited our Savior to
Supper, yet the former Evening beginning about two or three of the Clock in the
after noon, our Savior might stay some time to eat with them, and yet they be
timely enough at Jerusalem before the second Evening: for suppose our Savior
stayed an hour with them or more, after two or three of the Clock, yet if a
strong man may walk ordinarily three mile an hour, why might not the tidings
of this joyful news make them double their pace, whether on foot or horseback,
no mention is made of either, and so be there within an hour and half or
thereabout before the second Evening could come?

Thesis 61.
Jews and their Pursevants; that they might not rush in suddenly upon them,
which they might do in the Day as well as in the Night: and though this was a
poor safeguard from their enemies yet it was some, and the best which they
had, or at least could think of at such a time; and if our Savior came to
them when they were at Supper, Mark. 16.14. and if the ordinary time of the
Jews supper was a little after or about Sunset (as might be demonstrated) then
the second Evening was not as yet begun, no not when Christ came, much less
before the other two came, who were there from Emaus before.

Thesis 62.
It is said by some that if it was not very late, then the Arguments of the
Disciples to persuade Christ to stay were weak; but it seems (say they) they
were strong because its said they constrained him] but we know that much
affection will some time urge a weak argument very far, for stay of some
special friend; and when arguments will not prevail, it will hold them and
constrain them by force; and thus it seems the Disciples dealt with our
Savior; their constraining him was not so much by force of Argument as
violence and force of love, for so the words in the Original ((...)) properly
signifies: and hence it seems that there was day enough above head to travail
farther in; otherwise what need such violent persuasions to stay with them? and
for any to say, that the Parallel of the Levites Fathers persuasions to stay,
upon weak grounds, is not the same with this, because his Arguments might sure
well not to begin a long journey when it was past noone, which was the case
there; but its a reason of no force to persuade to go farther when a man is in
a journey already: which is the case here, I say this answer is against the
Practice of love in common experience; men weary in their journey may stand in
more need of persuasions to stay then they that have not begun to travail at
all, nor was the Levites journey long from Bethlem to Gibeah.

Thesis 63.
Nor is it an Argument of any weight from John 39.1. because the two Disciples
are said to abide with Christ that Day, that therefore the night following did
belong to that day (they staying as it is supposed all night) and consequently
that the Day begins in the Morning; for these Disciples coming to Christ at
the tenth hour or four of the Clock in the afternoon, there were then two
hours remaining until Night (the Jews artificial Day continuing from six to
six) within which time our Savior (who can do much work in a small time)
might sufficiently instruct them (for that time) within the space of two
hours; and why might they not depart before the night came, and so stay with
him only so short a time? And yet if they did stay that Night, they might
notwithstanding be said to stay that artificial day only, without reference
to any Night before or after, or to any part of the Morning following that
Night, when it is probable they departed if they did stay with him all that
Night.

Thesis 64.
Paul would never have Preached till midnight Acts 20.7. if that night had not
been part of the Sabbath which began the Morning before, much less would he
after this long Sermon have communicated with them in the Sacrament, ver. 11.
unless it had been the Sabbath Day, may do well to consider these things. 1.
That the cause of taking in so much of the Night following for Preaching till
midnight was extraordinary, viz. Paul's early departure never to see their faces
more; and to say that if this Night was no part of the Sabbath, it was then
unreasonable to hold them so long at it, is an assertion which wants reason, if
we do but consider the shortness of his time, the largeness of Paul's heart,
speaking now for his last, and the sweetness of their affections as might
easily enable them to continue till midnight and upward, with cheerfulness,
and without thinking the duty tedious, and unreasonable long. Paul therefore
might begin his Sermon some part of the Daylight, which was part of the
Sabbath Day, and continue it till midnight following, and yet this night be no
part of the Christian Sabbath, because it was an extraordinary cause which
pressed him hereunto. 2. That there is nothing in the Words which will evince the
Sabbath to continue so long as Paul's Sermon did; for suppose those who begin
the Sabbath at Evening, that it should be said of such, that being met together
the first day of the Week to break Bread, their Teacher being to depart on the
morrow, Preached* unto them and continued his speech till midnight, will this
argue a continuance of the same day? No verily, and the like reason is here. 3.
That the Lords Supper might be and was administered before Paul's Sermon; for
there is a double breaking of bread in the Text: the one is of common bread,
Verse 11. after Paul had Preached; the other is of holy bread in the Eucharist,
verse 7. for the Syriak calls Tha^ breaking of the bread which is mentioned
verse 7. the Eucharist or Lords Supper; but that which is mentioned, verse 11.
Common bread; and the Greek word (...), implies as much, and hence also its
spoken of one man principally, viz. That when he had broken bread and eaten,
and talked a long time till break of the day, he then departed, it being some
ordinary repast for Paul after his long Preaching and before his long journey,
and is not therefore any Sacramental eat^ng; the manner of which is wont to be
expressed in other words then as they are here set down; if therefore Paul's
eating verse* 11. was common Bread, it cannot be then affirmed that the
Eucharist was then administered after Sermon at midnight, and yet they pertaking
of the Sacrament this day, verse 7. it seems therefore that it was administered
some time before this extraordinary course of Preaching began.

Thesis 65.
Nor will it follow that the Sabbath begins in the Morning, Psalm for the
Sabbath, Psalm. 92.1, 2. for 1. The scope of the Psalmist is not to set forth
when the Sabbath begins: but how it is to be sanctified, and that is, not only
by showing forth the loving kindness of God every Morning or day time (for
that perhaps, many will readily do) but also in the Night, when men may think
it too unseasonable or too late: and therefore in a holy gradation from the
less to the greater, he first makes mention of the Morning. 2. The Hebrew word
for every Night, is, in the Nights; and therefore (suppose that this Psalm is
specially applyable to the Sabbath, which we know some question) yet this place
will as soon evince the Sabbath to begin in the Night before the Morning, and
to be continued in sweet affections the night after, as that it should begin in
the Morning and be continued the night after; so that this place will not clear
this cause, nor is there any weight in such kind of reasoning^.

Thesis 66.
Nor will it follow from Levit. 7.15. with 22.29, 30. and Ex. 12*10. that
because the ^^esh of the peace Offerings was to be eaten the same day, and
nothing to be left until the Morning (something like this being spoken also of
the Passover) that the day therefore begun in the Morning: for in Leviticus
there is a double Commandment, 1. To eat the flesh of their peace offerings the
same day; but yet because when they have eaten, some bones and o^fals might
remain, hence, 2. They are commanded to leave nothing till the Morning, which
does not argue that they had liberty to eat it as long as they might keep it,
but that as they had liberty no longer then the same day to eat it, so nor
liberty any longer then the next Morning so much as to keep any of the relics
of it: And as for the Passover (a place much urged by some) they were to kill
it on the fourteenth day, Exodus 12.6. which they might eat the night following,
verse 8. yet so as to leave nothing of it till the Morning, verse 10. This
night following i^ not therefore any part of the fourteenth, but of the 15th.
day: for at midnight there was a cry verse 30, 31. and this night they went
from (...) to Succoth, verse 37. with 46. and this time is expressly called the
morrow after the Passover, Numb. 33.3. nor is there any inconvenience or rule
broken to kill the Passover upon one day and continue eating of it some part
of another, the Passover being a Feast of more days then one.

Thesis 67.
Peter, Mark 14.30. Luke 22.34. that this Day, even this Night ( viz. of the
Passover) he should deny him, that this Night therefore was any part of the
precedent day; for it may be as fairly interpreted to belong to the day
following that Night. Nor is it necessary to determine this word Day always to
a determinate time of 24 hours, of which the Night was a part, but only of a
special season of time: for so it is frequently figuratively taken without any
respect to a day of 24 or 12 hours, viz, for a special season of Time wherein
some special providence of God does appear and is put into execution, as Isay
29.18. and 25.9. and 27* 1. Exodus 14.13. 1 Samuel 4.7, 8. 2 Samuel 4.5, 7, 8.

Thesis 68.
Day is frequently taken in Scripture for an artificial day, and that the word
Morrow frequently signifies a new artificial Day, which in respect of, and
reference unto, the artificial day going before or following after, is no part
thereof; but as the Proverb is, to morrow is a new day: and thus it is taken,
John 12.12. John 6.22. Act. 21.7, 8. 1 Samuel 14.24. Acts 23.31.32. 2 Samuel 11.12,
13. Exodus 10.4.13. Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23. Josh. 8.29. and 10.26. Exodus 7.4.11, 12,
17. with 8 6. to 13. Exodus 14, ult. with 34.2, 4, 28. Deuteronomy. 9.9.11. Whence
only let this be noted that to argue from hence, that to morrow Morning or to
morrow day light is the beginning of the natural day, because its called a new
or another Day, is not solid: nor also that although the Night following the
artificial day, be not so frequently called to morrow, yet sometime it is so
called, 1 Samuel 30.17. where the evening of their morrow stopped David, i. that
night.

Thesis 69.


Thesis 70.
1. Consid. That the foundation of this opinion is exceeding viz. That the day
must not begin, until that work which occasions the change does actually
exist. But we know that the Passover began before the work which did occasion
it, did actually exist, viz. the Angels passing over the Israelites at
midnight, Exodus 12.29. with 12, 13, 14. and 6.8. indeed the Christian Sabbath
day is not before the day of Christ Resurrection; yet the beginning of this day
may be before the beginning of the Resurrection, as it was in the Passover.

2. Consid. That if any of the Evangelists had intended a new beginning of the
Sabbath at morning, that they would then have set down the exact time of the
Lords Resurrection; but none of them do this; they set down the time of other
things to prove that Christ was risen, but not the exact time of the
Resurrection, for its wholly uncertain; certain it is, that it was before
Daylight began; for Mary came and found him risen while it was yet dark, John
20.1. and how long he was risen before, who can determine?

3. Consid. That if Christ's Resurrection began the Sabbath, so that in that
moment and point of time wherein Christ arose the Christian Sabbath began, then
Christ could not lie three days in the grave; for either he lay three days
according to the Jewish account, beginning the day at evening; and then the
third day on which Christ arose (which also was the first day) must begin at
evening as we plead for; or else he must lie three days according to the new
account, which begins the third day in the morning, leaving out the night
before as not appertaining to any part of the week before or after; but
according to this reckoning its impossible that Christ should lie three days in
the grave, he may be then indeed said to arise the third day, but not to lie
any part of the third day, because lying in the grave implies some time of
continuance therein upon the third day; but how could this be, when they say
that the moment of Christ's Resurrection began the day of our Christian Sabbath?

4. Consi. If the Jewish Sabbath was the last day of the week, and began and
ended at evening, then the Christian Sabbath must either begin at evening when
the Jewish Sabbath ended, or the first day of the week cannot be the Christian
Sabbath, but only a part of the first day, and part of the second day; for the
night which goes before the Christian Sabbath, either 1. they must make it to
belong to the Jewish Sabbath, and then that Sabbath must be sanctified 36.
hours, and so it must be more then a day which is sanctified, which is absurd;
or 2. they must make it belong to the Christian Sabbath, and then they cannot
make it begin in the morning; or ^. they must leave it out from all weekly
account, and so take in the night following (which is part of the second day)
as part of the Sabbath.

5. Consid. That the seventh part of time cannot be orderly given to God, but
it must be either the first or last seventh (as has been shown) and the
morality of the fourth commandment cannot be observed without giving to God
either of these; if therefore the Jewish Sabbath ended at Even, the Christian
Sabbath must immediately succeed it, and begin it then, or else a moral rule
is broken.

6. If the Jewish Sabbath began and ended at Even, and the Christian Sabbath
began at morning, what must become of that night which is between them both,
and to what day of the week must it belong? If any say, that it is no matter
whether it belong to any or no, so long as time runs on; this answer will not
suffice; for though time runs on, yet what orderly time is there here which is
running on? Time consists of years, and years of months, and months of weeks,
and weeks of days; to what day or what week then must this night belong? they
that maintain this opinion do roundly affirm, that its no absurdity to leave
that one Night out from weekly, nor as pertaining to any week before or after,
but say it was lost: alas poor forlorn Night that art thus strangely forsaken;
what a strange kind of night is this which belongs to no day? what a misshapen
lump of time art thou, and yet how can thou be part of time, that art part of
no day, but only (as they say) of Time flowing and running on, without head or
foot, week or day?

Thesis 71.
That in Joshua's time, when the Sun stood still, and in Hezekiah's time,
when the Sun went back, that there was as great a perverting of the order of
Time as this comes to; and that there is as good reason to alter the time upon
such a special and wonderful occasion as Christ's Resurrection, as there was to
disorder the course of time then: but the weakness of this answer may appear
from these things.

1. That in the days of Ioshuah and Hezekiah, there was no such monstrous
misshapen piece of time cut out, as here is imagined; for though the Sun stood
still, suppose about twelve hours in Ioshuas time, and so made a day of 36
hours; ye^ these twelve hours were part of that day, and of that which
ordinarily makes the day, viz. the motion of the Sun above the Earth, which is
ordinarily once in 24 hours, only the Lord stopped it a while, and so made it a
longer day, and yet measured by the ordinary measure of a day, viz. the Sun
compassing the earth; which this night is not.

2. Though some part of the weekly time was changed in some respect; yet no
part of sacred and Sabbath time was perverted by either the Suns standing
still, or its going back, because though these things were longer then
ordinary, yet they were but ordinary days in this sense, viz. because there
was no more to either day then that which ordinarily makes a day, to wit, that
space of time wherein the Sun circularly compasses the whole earth. For though
a seventh part of time be morally due to God, man having six days for
himself; yet this is to be understood, as each day is measured by, and made up
of the whole complete motion of the Sun circling the earth; now though these
days were longer then usual in those famous times, yet they were only such
days as were made by this motion; and hence there was no change or perverting
of the time of the Sabbath, but God has his due then orderly. But here we must
make a new and strange beginning of time, by leaving out a whole night, and
denying God a seventh day according to ordinary account and reckoning, and must
fall to a disorderly beginning, upon pretense of a more then ordinary occasion;
which yet we see was not so in those extraordinary times of Hezekiah and Iosuah.

3. In the days of Iosuah and Hezekiah there was some necessity of prolonging
those days and that in a course of providence, supposing that God would work
wonders by his providence; but what necessity is there to begin the day when
Christ did first arise? for this action falling out upon the first day, might
sanctify the whole day which in ordinary course should have begun at Evening:
we see the whole fifth of November is sanctified, upon an occasion, which
happened about nine or ten of the Clock: and the Evening of the Passover was
sanctified before the Angel passed over the Israelites at midnight, which was
the occasion of the sanctification of that day: what need or necessity was
there to leave a whole night out of weekly account, and lose such a part of
precious Treasure?

4. It was for the manifestation of the mavelous glory of God in the eyes of
all the World, good and bad; to make that violation (as it were) of the course
of Time in (...) of Iosuah and Hezekiah; but what glory does Christ ga^^ in the
eyes of others, by making the Day to begin at the Time of his Resurrection by
the loss of the whole Evening before, out of the account of weekly Time? or
what glory does Christ loose if he should begin the day at Evening when the
Jewish Sabbath ended, when as the whole day thu^ i^ celebrated and sanctified
for his glory in respect of his Resurrection upon this Day? and therefore it is
a great mistake, to imagine as much reason for the violation of the course of
Time in respect of Christ Resurrection) which makes so little for the glory of
Christ) as there was for the variation of Time in the days of Iosuah and
Hezekiah, which made so apparently and evidently and exceedingly for the glory
of God and the honor of those who were Types of Christ?

Thesis 72.
viz. That a seventh p^^t of Time be sanctified; for six days being finished
in creating the World, there was now a necessity of sanctif^ing the seventh Day
wherein his rest began, least a moral rule should be exemplarily broken; but
there was no such necessity here; for the whole Evening of the first day may be
sanctified upon occasion of Christ's Rest on some part of that day, and no
moral rule broken hereby: nay there had bin a moral rule broken if the
Christian Sabbath had not begun upon this Evening; because hereby God should
have lost a Sabbath Day within the compass of seven days as they are measured
by the Sun; and this is directly cross to the morality of the fourth command;
for if a whole night be lost (as these men reckon) only Time flows on (they
say) then it must be full seven days and a half before God have a Sabbath to
begin: and this absurdity in the course of Time, I believe will not be found,
in Iosuahs time nor in altering the beginning of the year in Moses time Exodus
12. for ^o moral rule was (...) upon by these and such like alterations.

Thesis 73.
It is an ungrounded assertion to say that the Reasons of the change of the Day
are the same for the change of the beginning of the Day* (...). There was a
Type affixed (as has bin shown) to that It (...) Sabbath* but I never yet
heard of any Type in respect of the beginning of the Sabbath. 2. Divine will
and (...) on changed (...) viz. That God has one day in seven given him: but
God could not begin the Sabbath with excluding the Evening before Christ arose
without breach of this Rule, as has bin shewen^ the day might be kept and
changed without breach of that rule, but the beginning could not be changed but
there would necessarily follow some breach thereof.

Thesis 74.
To think that the Sabbath must needs begin in the Morning, because ] I say,
to think the Sabbath must begin in the Morning upon this ground, is somewhat
like to his conceit who finding in the Old Testament that the seventh day is to
be sanctified; but not finding this expression, after Christ's Resurrection,
hence he thought there was now no seventh Day to be sanctified. Those who can
answer this Objection, may know how to answer thereby their own argument for
the beginning of it at Morning, which is just like unto it: if indeed there
were clear Scriptures for the beginning of it at Morning in the new Testament,
and none to show the beginning of it at Evening, the Argument had much weight;
but this has not yet appeared: old Testament evidences are not Apocrypha
proofs in moral matters, in these men's consciences, who thus argue for the
Morning.

Thesis 75.
To argue the beginning of the Sabbath at Morning, from

Thesis 76.
If therefore the Sabbath does not begin, neither according to the custom of
civil nations, nor at midnight, nor Morning, what Time then must it begin at
(from any color of Scripture,) but only in the Evening? at Evening therefore
after the setting of the Light of the body of the Sun, wherein darkness begins
to be predominant over the Light the Sabbath begins now, as the Jewish Sabbath
began in former Times, and here let me say that old Testament proofs may be in
this as in many other things, New Testament rules.

Thesis 77.
Genesis 1. That as all other days began at the Evening or dark night, so it was
not orderly or possible according to the moral rule God acted by, that the
Sabbath should begin upon any other Time then the Evening, nor is it improbable
but that Ezekiel fortells this that in the Christian Church, as the Gate for
the Sabbath should not be shut until the Evening, Ezekiel. 46.1, 2. so by just
proportion the time for opening of it, was the Evening before, when the Sabbath
began.

Thesis 78.
Genesis 1. to be in the Evening (deceiving themselves and their readers with the
ambiguity and various acceptance of the words Evening and Morning) yet this is
most evident, That the First day began with Night or darkness which is called
Night, Genesis 1.4, 5. and consequently ended with daylight; let Evening and
Morning therefore be taken how they will, yet its sufficient to prove that
which we aim at, viz. that as the first day began with Night, and ended at the
end of Day light, so by just consequence every other day did, even the Sabbath
it self, which still begins the beginning of Night, which is all that which we
mean by Evening, when we say that it begins then; which also the holy Ghost
calls darkness, which darkness, Genesis 1.2. he calls Night, verse. 5. and
which Night is all one with Evening.

Thesis 79.
bin regulated again, according to the first pattern, as the abuses crept
into the Lords Supper were by Paul. 1 Cor. 11.23. and as errors about Marriage
wereby our Savior, telling them that a^ initio non suit sic.

Thesis 80.
Nor should it be a wonder why the wise Creator should begin Chaos before a
glorious World; the progress of his wisdom in making the whole World being
for the most part from more imperfect things to perfect, from the Chaos to
beauty; from the servants, and furniture, to man the Lord and Master of this
great house; and so here, from darkness to light; the Sabbath also being a day
of Rest, was it not most proper to begin it then when man begins his rest which
is the Night? when also God began Rest from his work in the first Creation.

Thesis 81.
Some convinced by the evidence of the Text, that darkness Weemes on the
fourth Command.
yet wrestle with their wits to make it neither part of the night nor part of
time, but only punctum temporis, and by this shift would make the first day to
begin in the morning-light,

Thesis 82.
But was ever any punctum temporis (which is thought to be Genesis 1.4, 5. with 2.
Was the World made in six days and is there a Heaven and Earth made within the
time of this darkness, and yet this time of darkness to be no part of time,
but only a Mathematical point, but no real part of succeeding Time? Zanchy
long since has largely confuted and crushed this Egge-shell, where the Reader
may look; there was not indeed any Celestial motion of the Heavens to measure
this Time by, (for Master Weemes objects tempus est mensura motus) but by this
Argument there was no Time till the fourth day, when the Sun and Stars were
created, nor is Time properly mensura mo^us, but as Eternity is the
indeterminate duration of a thing together, so Time is the determinate duration
of things by succession: which was evidently since Time began on the first
moment of creation.

Thesis 83.
Others who acknowledge this first darkness to be part of privation) because
also this first darkness is not so called Night, but the separated
darkness, Genesis 1.3. when God separated the light into one Hemisphere, and
darkness into another.

Thesis 84.
Genesis 1. wherein it is most evident that light was created, after darkness had
bin some time upon the face of the deep; which darkness cannot be part of the
Daylight, no more then blindness is a part of sight and therefore is a part
of the Night, before this conceived separated darkness could exist. Beside
the separation of darkness from light does not make any new darkness which
is a new denominated darkness, but is the same darkness which was at first,
only the separation is a new placeing of it, but it gives no new being to it.

Thesis 85.
contraria privantia, yet it is not true either in Philosophy or Divinity, that
the habit must always actually go before the privation in the same subject; for
the privation may be first if it be in subjecto capaci; i. e. In a subject
capable of the habit; for silence may be before speech in a man, and blindness
and deafness in a man who never saw nor heard a word, because man is a
subject capable of both, and so here darkness might be before light, because
this subject of the first matter was capable of both.

Thesis 86.


Thesis 87.
Chaos* and all the dimensions of it at the same time; why might not the light
the habit be extended as far as was the privation before, and that at the same
time? there being no globe or dense body of earth and waters (existing as now
they do) at that time created, and consequently no opake and solid body to
divide between light and darkness and so to seprate them into two
Hemispheres, as by this means it is at this day, unless we imagine miracles
without necessity; and that God then miraculously did it when there was no
necessity of it. For the Element of fire being figuratively called light, it
being (as Iunius shows) proprietas essentialls ignis; being also created in
the superior part of the vast Chaos; might therefore be cast down by a mighty
hand of God (there being no ordinary means of Sun or Stars yet created to do
it) into all the inferior Chaos, and so make day. And the ascending of this
light upwards again might make it to be Night: and therefore although God
separated between light and darkness, yet this separation se^mes to be rather
in respect of time, then in respect of place, or two Hemispheres: for the light
when it was east down, separated and scattered the darkness, and so excluded
it, so that when there was light, there was no darkness; when darkness,
there was no light; and thus they succeeding and excluding one another, the
Lord is said to separate them one from another, but not into two imagined
Hemispheres, by which imagination of two Hemispheres it will be also very
difficult to set down when it was day and when it was night, at this time of
the Creation; because in respect of one part of the Chaos it might be called
day, in respect of the other Hemisphere of the Chaos it might be called night:
and therefore it seems more suitable to the truth, that the descending of the
Light, made day thorowout the whole Chaos remaining, and the ascending of it to
its proper place successively made night; which as it answers many curious
questions about the nature and motion of this light, so it yield a more then
probable argument, that if the daylight continued twelve hours (which none
question) why should not each night continue as long, and therefore that the
first darkness did continue such a time before the creation of the Light?

Thesis 88.
But suppose this local separation into two Hemispheres was it any part of the
first daylight; and so no part of the natural day; which if any should
affirm, they must deny the creation of the world in six days; for its evident
that the Heavens and Earth were made in the time of the first darkness.

Thesis 89.
Psalm. 110.2. is a mere shift to prove the beginning of time to be in the
morning, and an evasion from the evidence of truth. For 1. This first darkness
must either be the whole night, consisting as the light did of about twelve
hours; and then it cannot possibly be called morning or belong thereunto; or
it must be part of the night, and that which came after the light another part
of it, and then we may see a monstrous day which has part of its night before
it, and part after it; beside its contrary to the Text, which makes the whole
morning together, and the whole evening together, the whole daylight together,
and so the whole night together. 2. That darkness which by an improper speech
we make to belong to the morning, in our ordinary account, is the latter part
of the night or of the darkness; but we read not in all the Scripture, nor is
it suitable to any solid reason, to make the first beginning of Night or
darkness as part of the morning: Now this first darkness (which is the
beginning of darkness) is called night, at least is the beginning of night;
and therefore cannot be called morning, but evening rather, as we usually call
the first beginning of darkness after day light.

Thesis 90.
Lev. 23 32. to celebrate the Ceremonial Sabbath from Even to Even does
strongly prove the beginning of the moral Sabbath at the same time; for why
else is it called a Sabbath of rest, but because it is to be spent in duties of
humiliation, as the other Sabbath in duties suitable to the nature of it? and
hence the Lords care is greatly exact herein, 1. That no servile work be done,
because it is a Sabbath. verse 31, 32. 2. That it be spent and sanctified from
Even to Even, (meaning) like as you do your weekly Sabbaths. And hence the Lord
says not, You shall celebrate your day of Atonement from even to even, but
(the Lord usually wrapping up arguments in his words) Your Sabbath: as if he
should say, You would account it a profane thing not to celebrate your
ordinary weekly Sabbath from even to even, or to do any servile work on that
day: this day is a Sabbath, and therefore you must sanctify it from even to
even, and therefore do no servile work herein.

Thesis 91.
To imagine (as some do) That the ordinary Sabbath began at: one may from the
same ground imagine, that in other Sabbaths they might do any servile work,
because here also (...) are forbidden it; for it may be as well said, that
other (...) had been enough to say, You shall sanctify this day as you do
other Sabbaths: here therefore is no new institution of time from the beginning
of the Sabbath, but of a new Ordinance, together with the application of time
according to common and ordinary account: and the Lord expresses from even to
even (which makes up a natural day) left man's heart (which is soon weary of
duties of Humiliation) should interpret it of an artificial day; to prevent
which mistake the Lord had good reason to set the distinct bounds of it from
even to even.

Thesis 92.
Nor can this Evening, be fairly interpreted of the former verse 32. which
evening of the ninth day is not the evening of that day about two or three of
the clock, (for the tenth day only is called the day of Atonement, verse 27.
and therefore part of the ninth day is no part of the Atonement day) but as
Iunius well expounds it, at the evening of the ninth day, Vid. Iun. in loc.
puta qua nonus dies definit, at that nick of time, which is the communis
terminus of the end of the ninth day and beginning of the tenth, you shall then
celebrate your Sabbath: which curious exactness of the Lord, is partly to
express his zeal for the full and plenary observation of the day, that he may
not lose a moments time of honor, as also to show what care they should have
of holding out from the first point to the last period of that Sabbath.

Thesis 93.
And therefore it is a groundless deduction from the Text, gratis dictum, and
can never be made good, unless it be by such fetches of wit which can mould
the plainest History into the Image of a goodly Allegory, August. ep. 48.
a most impudent course of arguing in Austins judgment, and in his time.

Thesis 94.
Nehemiah (an exemplary Magistrate) command the Gates to be shut, when the
Gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the Sabbath? Nehem. 13.19. was it
not left the Sabbath should be profaned that night, by bringing in of wares
and burdens through the Gates, as well as in the ensuing day? is it not expressly
said, that he set his servants at these Gates that there might be no burden
brought in upon the Sabbath day? is it not expressly said that he set the
Levites to keep the Gates to sanctify the Sabbath day? verse 19, 22. Now if
this (...) was no part of the Sabbath, how could they then be said to sanctify
the Sabbath thereby?

Thesis 95.
Nehemiah did this to prevent the profaning of the Sabbath day after, is as if
a man should shut his doors at noon against such Thieves as he knows will not
come to hurt him until midnight be past. It would be weakness in a
Magistrate to take away any considerable part of the week which God allows for
labor to prevent that evil on the Sabbath which he knows he is sufficiently
able to prevent at the approach of the day it self: for Nehemiah might easily
have shut the Gates in the morning, if the Sabbath had not begun before; and
might have better done it, then to cut so large a Thong out of the week time to
prevent such defilement of the Sabbath day.

Thesis 96.
Jerusalem began to be dark, or as Iunius renders the words, quum abumbrarentur
portae, i. when they were shaddowed by the descent of the Sun behind the
mountains which compassed Jerusalem, and so did cast a shadow of darkness upon
the Gates of the City, somewhat sooner then in other places less mountainous;
this shadow, being no part of the dark night, is truly said to be before, or
(as the Hebrew is) before the face or looking out of the Sabbath; for although
the Sabbath be said to begin at Sunset, yet it is to be understood not of the
setting of the body of the Sun visibly, but of the light of the Sun when
darkness begins to be predominant over the light, and men are forced to
forsake their work; now just before this Nehemiah shut the gates, at the common
term and end of the six days labor, and the Seventh days rest; and therefore
it is a weak objection which some make, to say that this evening was not part of
the Sabbath, because the Gates are said to be shut before the Sabbath.

Thesis 97.
Its said the women who prepared spices for our Savio^^^ body, that they rested
the Sabbath, which is evident to be in the evening; and this they did not
superstitiously (as some say) but according to the Commandment, Luke 23.53, 54,
55, 56. if therefore these women began to rest according to the commandment of
God upon the evening, then the evening by the same Commandment is the beginning
of the holy Rest of the Sabbath. It is not only the commandment of God, that
one day in Seven be sanctified, but also that it be sanctified from even to
even.

Thesis 98.
Now that they began to rest in the evening is evident from

1. That our savior dyed the Ninth hour. Luke 23.44, 46. which was about three
of the clock in the afternoon. A little after, this Joseph begs his body and
takes it down because it was (...) or preparation for the Sabbath Mark 15.42.
in which preparation its said that the Sabbath did (...), draw on, shine forth
Luke 23.54. now this shining or breaking forth of the Sabbath cannot be meant
of the day light morning shining forth; for its a meare dream to think, that
Joseph should be so long a time in doing so little work, from Saturday in the
afternoon until the next morning light, only in taking of Christ from the
Cross, wrapping him in Linen, and laying him in his own Sepulcher, which was
not far off, but near at hand also. John 19.42. The shining forth of the
Sabbath also stop^ the women from proceeding to anoint Christ's Body, after
they had brought their Spices; and therefore if the shining forth of the
Sabbath had been the morning after, they might certainly have had sufficient
time to do that work in; the shining forth therefore of this Sabbath was in the
latter evening in which the Sabbath began; and its said to shine forth by a
metaphor, because it did then first appear, or draw on; or, as Piscator and
sundry others think, because about that time the stars in Heaven, and the Lamps
and Candles in houses began to shine forth; which is just then when darkness
is predominant, which is the beginning of the Sabbath at evening time.

2. If that evening had not begun the Sabbath, why did not the women (who
wanted neither conscience nor affection, nor opportunity) anoint his body that
evening, but defer it until the night after? what could stop them herein, but
only the conscience of the Commandment, which began the Sabbath that evening?

3. Either the Sabbath must begin this evening, or they did not rest the
Sabbath according to the Commandment; for if they began to keep the Sabbath at
morning light, then if they rested according to the Commandment, they must
keep it until the next morning light after; but its manifest that they were
stirring, and in preparing their Ointments long before that, even in the dark
night before the light did appear, as has been formerly shown.

Thesis 99.


Thesis 100.


Thesis 101.
Russia, and those Northern Countries, wherein for about a months time the Sun
is never out of sight; now although they have no dark evening at this time, yet
doubtless they know how to measure their natural days by the motion of the
Sun; if therefore they observe that time which is equivalent to our dark
evenings, and sanctify to God the space of a day, as it is measured by the
circling Sun round about them, they may then be said to sanctify the Sabbath
from even to even, if they do that which is equivalent thereunto; they that
know the East, West, South, North points, do certainly know when that which is
equivalent to evening begins, which if they could not do, yet doubtless God
would accept their will for the deed in such a case.

Thesis 102.
If therefore the Sabbath began at evening from Adams time Nehemiahs time, and
from Nehemiahs time till Christ's time, why should any think but that where the
Jewish Sabbath the last day of the week does end, there the Christian Sabbath
the first day of the week begins? unless any can imagine some Type in the
beginning of the Sabbath at evening; which must change the beginning of the day,
as the Type affixed did change the day: or can give demonstrative reasons that
the time of Christ's Resurrection must of necessity begin the Christian Sabbath,
which for ought I see cannot be done. And therefore it is a groundless
assertion, that the reasons of the change of the day are the same for the
change of the beginning of it; and that the chief of the reasons for the
evening, may be as well applied against the change of the day it self, as of
the time of it: But sufficient has been said of this. I shall only add this,
that there is no truth of Christ's, but upon narrow search into it, has some
secret knots and difficulties, and so has this about the beginning of the
Sabbath; it is therefore humility and self-denial to follow our clearest light
in the simplicity of our hearts, and to wait upon the Throne of grace with many
tears for more clear discoveries until all knots be unloosed.

FINIS.
THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE SABBATH.

WHEREIN The true Rest of the Day, together with the right manner of
Sanctifying of the Day, are briefly opened.

BY THOMAS SHEPARD, Pastor of the Church of Christ at Cambridge in New England.

The fourth Part.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell. 1650.

The general Contents upon the Sanctification of the Sabbath.
1. THe word Sabbath what it signifies, Thesis 1. 2. All weekly labor for the
Rest of the Sabbath, Thesis 2. 3. The Rest of the Sabbath, the means for a
higher end, Thesis 3. 4. As strict a Rest now required as was formerly among
the Jews, and those places cleared which seem contrary, Thesis 4, 5. 5. What
work forbidden on the Sabbath Day, Thesis 10. 6. Servile work forbidden, and
what is a servile work, Thesis. 11, 12. 7. The holiness required upon the
Sabbath in five things, Thesis 14. 8. A lamentation for profanation of the
Sabbath.
The Sanctification of the Sabbath.
Thesis 1.
THe word Sabbath properly signifies, not common, holy Rest. The Lord therefore
enjoins this Rest from labor upon this day, not so much for the Rest sake, but
because it is a Medium or means of that holiness which the Lord requires upon
this day; otherwise the Sabbath is a day of idleness, not of holiness; our
cattle can rest but a common rest from labor as well as we; and therefore its
man's sin and shame, if he improve the day no better then the beasts that perish.

Thesis 2.
And as the rest of the Day is for the holiness of it, so is all

Thesis 3.
As therefore the holiness of the Sabbath is moral, because Jews, which were
not ceremonial, the same duties he requires of us upon this day; so what every
Rest he required of them for this end, he exacts of all Christians also.

Thesis 4.
Those that make the Sabbath ceremonial, imagine a Jews then Christians are
now bound unto; because they place the ceremonialnesse of the Sabbath in the
strict Rest of it; but we are bound to the same Rest for substance of it; and
the ground for a stricter rest then we are bound unto, will be found too light
if well pondered.

Thesis 5.
Jews might not bake, nor sees meat upon this day, Exodus 16.23. no nor make a
fire upon it, Ex. 35.3. no nor gather sticks upon it without Death. Numb.
6.15.30. (all which things Christians now, may lawfully do) yet none of these
places will evince that for which they are alleged.

Thesis 6.
For first it is not said, Exodus 16.23. bake and sees that to day which may
serve you next day: but, that which remains viz. which is not sod nor baked)
lay it up until the Morning, and consequently for the morrow of the next day,
which being thus laid up, I do not find that they are forbidden to bake, or
sees that which remains upon the next day; but rather if they must use it the
next day, they might then bake it or sees it that day also, as they did that
of the sixth day, and without which they could not have the comfortable use of
it upon the Sabbath day: indeed it was as unlawful to grind and beat the
Manna in Mills and Morters, mentioned Numb. 11:8. upon this day, as now to
thrash and grind Corn this day; the meal therefore which did remain, is not
forbidden to be baked or sod upon this day; nor would Gods special and
miraculous providence appear in preserving it from worms and stinking, if
there had been any b^king of it the day before, and not rather upon the Sabbath
Day.

Thesis 7.
Exodus 35.3. in respect of some use, yet they are not forbidden so to do in
respect of any use whatsoever. For there was fire kindled for the Sabbath
sacrifices, and it would have bin a breach of the rule of mercy, not to kindle
a fire for the sick and weak in the wilderness. Nehemiah also a man most
strict and zealous for the Sabbath, yet had such provision made every day as
could not be dressed nor eaten without some fire upon the Sabbath day, Neh. 5.18.
and the Sabbath not being a fast but a feast in those times as well as those,
hence its not unsuitable to the time to have comfortable provisions made ready,
provided that the dressing of mea^ be not an ordinary hindrance to public or
private duties of holiness upon this day, Exodus 12.16. this kindling of the
fire here forbidden must therefore be understood in respect of the scope of the
place, viz. not to kindle a fire for any servile work, no not in respect of
this particular use of it, viz. to further the building of the Sanctuary and
Tabernacle, made mention of in this Chapter: for its said whosoever shall do
any work therein, (1. any servile work which is more proper for the week
time) shall be put to death, verse 2. there is therefore either no dependence
of these words in the third verse with those in the second, or else we must
understand it of kindling fires restrictively, for any servile work which is
there forbidden not only the Jews but us Christians also:

Thesis 8.
The man that gathered sticks on the Sabbath, Numb. 15.30. Exodus 1^. This
gathering of sticks therefore, though little in it self, yet seems to be
aggravated by presumption; and that the man did presumptuously break the
Sabbath, and therefore its generally observed that this very example follows
the Law of punishing a presumptuous transgressor with death in this very
Chapter: and though it be said that they found a man gathering sticks, as if it
were done secretly, and not presumptuously, yet we know that presumptuous sins
may be committed secretly as well as openly, though they are not in so high a
degree presumptuous as when they are done more openly: the fear of the Law
against Sabbath breakers, might restrain the man from doing that openly, which
before God was done proudly, and presumptuously; and though Moses doubted what
to do with the man, who had that capital Law given him before against Sabbath
breakers, yet they might be ignorant for a time of the full and true meaning of
it, which the Lord here seems to expound, viz. that a Sabbath breaker sinning
presumptuously is to be put to death: and although it be doubted whether such a
Law is not too rigorous in these Times, yet we do see that where the Magistrate
neglects to restrain from this sin, the Lord takes the Magistrates work into
his own hand, and many times cuts them off suddenly who profane his Sabbath
presumptuously: and it is worth enquiring into whether presumptuous Sabbath
breakers are not still to be put to Death: which I doubt not but that the Lord
will either one day clear up, or else discover some specialty in the
application of this judicial Law to that Polity of the Jews, as most fit for
them, and not so universally fit for all others in Christian Common-vvealths:
but this latter I yet see no proof for: nor do I expect the clearing up of
the other while the temper of the Times is loose and lukewarm.

Thesis 9.


Thesis 10.
Servile Work. The work forbidden in the annual Sabbaths, (which did but
shadow out the rest on this Sabbath) it is servile work, Levit. 23.7, 8. and
hence the rest on the Sabbath (in this fourth command) is opposed to the labor
on the week days which is properly servile, lawful to be done then, but
unlawful upon the Sabbath Day.

Thesis 11.


Thesis 12.
Ephesians. 4.28. 1 These. 4.12.) this is a servile work, all one with what the
Commandment calls Thy work: Hence buying, selling, sowing, reaping, which are
done for worldly gain, are unlawful on this day, being therefore servile
works: hence also worldly sports and pastimes (which are ordained of God to
whet on worldly labor, not necessary every day but only at some seasons) are
therefore most proper appurtenances unto days of labor, and are therefore
unlawful upon this day: holy Times are no more to be sported on, then holy
places; hence also on the other side, to rub the ears of Corn, to dress meat
for comfortable nourishment of man, because they respect not worldly gain, are
no servile works nor yet unlawful, but may be more lawfully done for the
comfort of man then to lead his horse to the water this day, Luke 6.2. and
13.15 and 14.5. hence also such works as are done only for the preservation of
the Creatures, as to pull a sheep out of a ditch, to quench fire in a Town,
to save Corn and Hay from the sudden inundation of Water, to keep Fire in the
Iron mills, to sit at stern and guide the ship, and a thousand such like
actions (being not done properly for worldly gain) are not unlawful; God
himself not ceasing from works of preservation, when he did from those of
creation: hence also such works as are not works of immediate worship, but
only required necessarily thereto, as killing the Sacrifices in the Temple,
traveling a Sabbath days journey to the public assemblies, being no servile
works for outward gain, are not unlawful upon this day.

2. Such worldly works, which though they be not done for worldly gain or
profit, yet if by a provident care and foresight they might be done as well the
week before, or may as well be done a week after the Sabbath, these also are
servile works: for thus the Commandment expresses it, Six days thou may do
all thy work, (meaning which can be done as well the week before) and if all
cannot be done, it may therefore be as well done the week after. Hence the
building of the Tabernacle (which was not so much for man's profit as Gods
honor) because it might be done upon the six days seasonably enough* hence it
is prohibited upon the Sabbath day, Exodus 31. If a man has Corn in the field,
though he may pretend that the weather is uncertain, and it is ready to be
brought into the Barn, yet he is not to fetch it in upon the Sabbath day,
because there is no eminent danger of spoil the Monday after, and then he may
fetch it in as well as upon that day: the like may be said concerning Sea men's
setting sail upon the Sabbath day, though they be uncertain of a fair gale
upon the day after. Yet we must trust Gods providence, who almost in all such
matters keeps us at uncertainties: hence also the sweeping of the house ought
not to be done now, if it may as well be done the day before: so also to buy
any things at shops, or to wash clothes; if they may be done the week before or
after, they must not be done upon this day: hence on the other side works of
necessity, which cannot be so conveniently done the day before or after, are
not unlawful upon this day, as to fly in persecution, to watch the City, to
fight with the Enemy, Math. 24.24. 2 Kings 1.2. Hence also works of necessity,
not only for preservation of life, but also for comfort and comeliness of
life, are not unlawful: for it is a gross mistake to think that works only of
absolute necessity are allowed only upon this day: for to lead an Ox to water,
which in the strictest times was not disallowed of, is not of absolute
necessity; for it may live more then a day without it; only its necessary for
the comfort of the life of the beast: how much more is allowed to the comfort
of the life of man? the Disciples possibly might have lived longer then the
Sabbath without rubbing Corn ears, and men may live on Sabbath days generally
without warm meat, yea ^hey may fast perhaps all that day; yet it is not
unlawful to eat such meat, because its necessary for the comfort of life.
Hence also to put on comely garments, to wash hands and face, and many such
things as are necessary for the comeliness as well as the comfort of life, are
not unlawful now: there is sometime an inevitable necessity by Gods
providence, and sometime a contracted necessity through want of care and
foresight; in this case the work may sometime be done, provided that our
neglect beforehand be repented of: in a word, he that shall conscientiously
endeavor that no more work be done on the Sabbath then what must be done for
the ends mentioned, that so he may have nothing else to do but to be with God
that day, shall have much peace to his own conscience herein, against Satan's
clamours: hence lastly, not only outward servile work, but servile thoughts,
affections, and cares, are to be cast off this day from the sight of God, as
others are from the eyes of men; servile thoughts and affections being as much
against the fourth Commandment as unchaste and filthy thoughts against the
seventh.

Thesis 13.


Thesis 14.
Holy rest therefore being for holy work, it may not be amiss to enquire what
this work is, and wherein it consists: for which end I shall not instance in
any the particular several duties in public and private, of holiness and
mercy, because this is to be found in all who write upon this subject: I shall
only speak of that kind of holiness which the Lord requires in all public
and private duties, and is to run through them, and as it were animate them; and
in truth to find out this, and observe this, is one of the greatest
difficulties (but yet the greatest excellency) of a Christian life. It consists
therefore in these five things,

Thesis 15.
The first; The Holiness upon this day ought to be immediate: Pet. 1.17.
Holiness is to be writ upon our cups and pots, and hors-bridles, and ploughs,
and sickles, Zach. 14.20.21. but this holiness is more immediate; we enjoy God
by and in the creature, and in our weekly occasions and providence: but do we
think that there is no more holiness required upon the Sabbath? verily every
day then should be our Christian Sabbath, which is most false; and therefore
some more immediate holiness is required now on this day which is not then,
nor required of us every week day; and what can this be but drawing near to God
this day more immediately, and as near as mortal man can do, and casting aside
the world and getting out of it, and so to be near God in Prayer, in hearing
the Word, in Meditation, etc? Psalm. 95.5.6. if it were possible to be with and
enjoy Christ in Heaven where there are no means we should this day long for
it, and prize it; but because this cannot yet be, and that the Lord comes down
from Heaven to us in his ordinances, and thereby makes himself as near to us
as he can in this frail life; hence we are not only to draw near to
Ordinances, but to God and Christ in them, upon this day, and so be as near
them with greatest immediatenesse that we can, Psalm. 42.1, 2. Psalm. 63.1, 2,
3. Adam did enjoy God in his calling the week day, but this was not so
immediate as he was to have upon the Sabbath day.

Thesis 16.
The second is this holiness ought not only to be immediate, but also
special, and in our endeavors after the highest degree, and with the greatest
intention of holiness: for we are bound every day to be holy in more immediate
and near approaches to God some time or other of the day; but now we are
called to be more specially holy, because both the day and our selves are now
set apart for it in a more special manner: we are to love, fear, delight in
God, and pray to him, and muse on him every day, but now in a more special
manner all these are to be done; the Sabbath is not only called holy, but
holiness to the Lord, Exodus 31.15. which shows that the day is exceeding
holy, and suitably our affections and hearts ought therefore so to be: the
Sacrifice on this day was to be doubled, Numb. 28.9. the Lord would have double
honor from us this day: that as in the week time we are sinfully drowned in
the cares of this world and affections thereto: so upon every Sabbath we should
be in a holy manner drowned in the cares and thoughts and affections of the
things of God; and hence we are commanded to call the Sabbath our delight, and
not to think our own thoughts, or do our own works this day, Esaias 58.13.
David said Psalm 43.4. that he would go to the Altar of God (the place of
public worship) to God his joy, yea his exceeding joy: so are we not only to
draw near to Altar, Word, Sacraments, Prayer, but to God in them; nay to God
in them as our exceeding joy, our exceeding love, our exceeding fear, etc.
especially upon this day; there is scarce any week but we contract soil from
our worldly occasions, and by touching worldly things; and we suffer many
decays and lose much ground by temptations herein; now the Lord pitying us,
and giving us a Sabbath of Recovery, what should we do now but return,
recover, and renew our strength, and like the Eagle cast our bills, and stand
before our God and King this day of State and Royal Majesty, when all his
Saints compass^ his Throne and presence, with our most beautiful Garments,
mourning, especially that we fall so far short of Sabbath acts and services?
we should not content our selves with working-day holiness, joys,

Thesis 17.
The third is; This holiness ought to be not only immediate and special, but
constant and continued, the whole day together. For upon every day of the week
we are to take some time for converse with God; but our worldly occasion soon
call us off, and that lawfully; but Sabbath holiness must be constant and
continued all the day; if the Lord was so strict that he would not lose a
moments honor in a ceremonial day of rest, Levtt. 23.3^. what shall we think
the Lord expects upon this day which is moral? the Lord would not be honored
this day only by fits and flashes, and sudden pangs, which pass away as the
early dew; but as it is in the Psalm for the Sabbath, Its good to sing of his
loving kindness in the morning, and of his faithfulness every night, Psalm.
92.1, 2. and though this be a wearisome thing to the flesh to be so long pent
in, and although we cannot perfectly do it, yet its a most sweet and glorious
work in it self, to think that the infinite glorious God should call a poor
sinful creature to be with him and attend upon him all the day long; to be
ever with the Lord is best of all, but next to that to be with him a whole day
together: they that see how fit they are to be for ever banished from the
presence of the most High, and how exceeding unworthy to come into it, cannot
but infinitely and excessively prize that love of Jesus Christ, this day to
come and enter into his rest, and lie in his very bosom, all the day long, and
as a most loving friend loath to part with them, till needs must, and that the
day is done.

Thesis 18.
The fourth is, This holiness ought not only to be immediate, we have them
and find but little by them conveyed to us, yet that by that little we may be
carried on the wings of faith beyond all means unto that Rest which upon this
day we may find in his bosom: that as Christ after his labors entered into his
Rest, Heb 4. so we ought to labor after the same Sabbatisme begun here on
earth, but perfected in Heaven; that after all the weary steps we tread, and
sins and sorrows we find all the week, yet when the Sabbath comes we may
say return unto thy Rest oh my soul. The end of all labor is rest; so the
end of all our bodily and spiritual labor, whether on the weeke-daies of
Sabbath day, it should be this Rest: and we should never think that we have
reached the end of the day until we Taste the Rest of the Day: nor is this
Rest a Meteor in the Air and a thing only to be wished for, but can never be
found; but assuredly those who are wearied with their sins in the week and
wants on the Sabbath, and feel a need of rest and refreshing, shall certainly
have the blessing, viz. the Rest of these seasons of refreshing and rest, and
the comforts of the Holy Ghost filling their hearts this day. Isa. 10.2, 3, 4.
Isa. 56.5, 6, 7, 8. Isa. 58.13, 14. Psalm. 36.7, 8. Not because of our holiness
which is spotted at the best, but because of our great high Priests holiness,
who has it written upon his forehead to take away the iniquity of all our holy
Offerings: Ex. 28.36.38. and who has garments of grace, and blood to cover us
and to present us spotless, before the face of that God whom we seek and
serve with much weakness, and whom at last we shall find, when our short
days work here is done, and our long looked for Sabbath of glory shall begin
to dawn.

Thesis 19.
viz. in doing our utmost that others under us or that have relation to us,
that they sanctify the Sabbath also, according to the Lords express
particular charg in the Commandment; Thou, thy Son, thy Daughter, thy
Servants, the Stranger within thy Gates; the excellency of Christ's holiness
consists in making us like himsele in holiness; the excellency and glory of a
Christians holiness is to endeavor to be like to the Lord Christ therein: our
Children, Servants Strangers who are within our Gates, are apt to profane the
Sabbath; we are therefore to improve our power over them for God, in
restraining them from sin, and in constraining them (as far as we can) to
the holy observance of the Rest of the Sabbath; least God impute their sins
to us who had power (as Eli in the like case) to restrain them and did not; and
so our Families and Consciences be stained with their guilt and blood.

Thesis 20.
And if superiors in Families are to see their Gates preserved viz. that. 1.
Ignorant Consciences in clear and momentous matters be first instructed. 2.
Doubting Consciences have sufficient means of being resolved. 3. Bold and
audacious Consciences be first forewarned: hence it is that though he has no
power to make Holy days and to impose the observation of them upon the
Consciences of his subjects, (because these are his own Laws) yet he may and
should see that the Sabbath Day (the Lords holy Day) that this he observed,
because he does but see to the execution of Gods Commandment herein. By what
Rule did Nehemiah not only forbid the breach of the Sabbath, but did also
threaten bodily punishment upon the men of Tire? (although they were Heathens,
yet were they at this time within the Gates and compass of his Jurisdiction:
Nehem. 13.21.) certainly he thought himself bound in conscience to see that
the Sabbath should not be profaned by any that were within his Gates,
according to this fourth Commandment. If Kings and Princes and civil
Magistrates have nothing to do in matters of the first Table (and consequently
must give any man liberty to Profane the Sabbath that pretends Conscience,)
why then does Jeremy call upon Princes to see that it be not profaned, with
promise of having their Crowns and Kingdoms preserved from wrath if thus they
do, and with threatening the burning up and consuming of City and Kingdom if
this they do not Jeremy? 17.19.25.27. If civil Magistrates have nothing to do
herein, they then have nothing to do to preserve their Crowns, Kingdoms,
Sceptets, Subjects from fire and Blood and utter ruin: Nehemiah was no Type of
Christ, nor were the Kings of Israel bound to see the Sabbath kept as Types of
Christ, but as nursing Fathers of the Commonwealth, and because their own
subjects were within their Gates and under their power; and therefore according
to this moral Rule of the Commandment, they were bound not only to keep it
themselves, but to see that all others did so also. It Is true, civil
Magistrates may abuse their power, judge, amiss, and think that to be the
command of God, which is not; but we must not therefore take away their power
from them, because they may pervert it and abuse it; we must not deny that
power they have for God, because they may pervert it and turn the edge of it
against God: for if upon this ground the Magistrate has no power over his
Subjects in matters of the first Table, he may have also all his feathers pulled
from him, and all his power taken from him in matters of the second Table; for
we know that he may work strange changes there and perve^t Justice, and
Judgment exceedingly: we must not deny their power because they may turn it
awry and hurt Gods Church and people by it, but (as the Apostle exhorts, 1 Timothy
^.1.2.) to pray for them the more, that under them we may live a peaceable life
in all Godliness and Honesty: its a thousand times better to suffer
persecution for Righteousness sake and for a good Conscience, then to desire
and plead for toleration of all Consciences, that so (by this cowardly device
and lukewarm principle) our own may be untoucht: it was never heard of until
now of late that any of Gods Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, faithful Witnesses,
etc. that they ever pleaded for liberty in error, but only for the Truth,
which they preached and prayed for, and suffered for unto the death; and their
sufferings for the truth with Zeal, Patience, Faith, Constancy, have done more
good, then the way of universal toleration is like to do, which is purposely
invented to avoid trouble. Truth has ever spread by opposition and
persecution; but error being a Child of Satan has fled* by a zealous
resisting of it.

Sick and weak men are to be tendered much, but Lunatic and Phranti^^ men are
in best case when they are well fettered and bound: a weak Conscience is to be
tendered, an humble Conscience tolerated; errors of weakness not wickedness
are with all gentleness to be handled; the liberty given in the reign of
Episcopacy for Sports and Pastimes, and Maygames upon the Lords Day, was once
loathsome to all honest minds; bat now to allow a greater Liberty, to Buy,
Sell, Plow, Cart, Thrash, Sport, upon the Sabbath day, to all those who pretend
Conscience, or rather, that they have no Conscience of one day more then
another, is to build up Jericho, and Babel again, and to lay foundations of
wrath to the Land, for God will certainly revenge the pollutions of his
Sabbaths: if God be troubled in his Rest, no wonder if he disturbes our peace:
some of the Ancients think that the Lord brought the flood of Waters upon the
Sabbath day as they gather from Genesis 7.10. because they were grown to be great
prophane^s of the Sabbath; and we know that Prague was taken upon this day. The
day of their sin, began all their sorrows which are continued to this day to
the amazement of the World: when the time comes that the Lords precious
Sabbaths are the days of Gods Churches Rest, then shall come in the Churches
peace, Psalm. 102.13.14. The free grace of Christ must first begin herein with
us, that we may find at last that Rest which this evil World is not yet like
to see, unless it speedily love his Law more, and his Sabbaths better.

I could therefore desire to conclude this doctrine of the Sabbath with tears,
and I wish it might be matter of bitter lamentation to the mourners in Sion,
everywhere to behold the universal profanation of these precious times and
seasons of refreshing, toward which, through the abounding of iniquity, the
love of many who once seemed zealous for them, is now grown cold: the Lord
might have suffered poor, worthless, sorrowful man to have worn and wasted
out all his days in this life in weariness, grief, and labor, and to have
filled his days with nothing else but work, and minding of his own things, and
bearing his own necessary cumbers and burdens here, and never have allowed him
a day of rest until he came up to heaven at the end of his life; and thus to
have done would have been infinite mercy and love, though he had made him grind
the Mill only of his own occasions, and feel the whip and the lash only of
his daily griefs and labors, until dark night came; but such is the
overflowing and abundant love of a blessed God, that it cannot contain it
self (as it were) so long a time from special fellowship with his people here
in a strange land, and in an evil world, and therefore will have some special
times of special fellowship and sweetest mutual embracings; and this time
must not be a moment, an hour. a little, and then away again; but a whole
day, that there may be time enough to have their fill of love in each others
bosom before they part; this day must not be merely occ^sionall at humane
liberty and now and then, least it be too seldom, and so strangeness grow
between them; but the Lord (who exceeds and excels poor man in love) therefore
to make all sure he sets and flxeth the day, and appoints the time, and how to
meet, merely out of love, that weary man may enjoy his rest, his God, his love,
his Heaven, as much and as often as may be here, in this life, until he come
up to glory, to rest with God; and that because man cannot here enjoy his days
of glory, he might therefore foretaste them in days of grace; and is this the
requital, and all the thanks he has for his heartbreaking love? to turn
back sweet presence and fellowship, and love of God in them, to dispute away
these days with scorn and contempt, to smoke them away with Prophannesse, and
mad mirth, to Dream them away with Vanity, to Drink, to Swear, to Riot, to
Whore, to Sport, to Play, to Card, to Dice, to put on their best Apparel that
they may dishonor God with greater pomp and bravery, to talk of the World,
to be later up that d^y then any other day of the Week, when their own Irons
are in the fire, and yet to sleep Sermon, or scorn the Ministry, if it comes
home to their Consciences; to tell Tales, and break Jests at home, or (at
best) to talk of Foreign or Domestical news only to pass away the time,
rather then to see God in his Works and warm their hearts thereby: to think
God has good measure given him, if they attend on him in the Foore^oone,
although the Afternoon be given to the Devil, or sleep, or vanity, or
foolish pastimes; to draw near to God in their bodies, when their Thoughts,
and Hearts and Affections are gone a Hunting or Ravening after the World the
Lord knows where, but far enough off from him: do you thus requite the Lord
for this great love, oh foolish people and unwise? do you thus make the days
of your rest and joy, the days of the Lords sorrow and trouble? do you thus
weary the Lord when he gives rest unto you? was there ever such mercy shown,
or can there be any greater love upon Earth, then for the Lord to call to a
wicked sinful Creature, which deserves to be banished for ever out of his
Presence, to come unto him, enter into his Rest, take his fill of love, and
refresh it self in his Bosom in a special manner all this day? And therefore
can there be a greater sin above ground committed out of Hell then thus to
sin against this love? I do not think that the single breach of the Sabbath
(as to sport or feast inordinately) is as great a sin as to murder a man
(which some have cast out to the reproach of some zealous for the observation
of the Sabbath day, truly the Lord knows) for I believe their milk sod over, if
thus they said; but I speak of the Sabbath under this notion and respect, and
as herein Gods great love appears to weary, sinful, restless man, as a day
wherein all the treasures of his most rich and precious Love are set open; and
in this respect let any man tell me what greater sin he can imagine, then
sins against the greatest Love? The same sins which are committed upon
other days in the Week are then provoking sins; but to commit these sins
upon the Sabbath Day, is to double the evil of them: Drinking and Swearing,
and Rioting, and vain Talking, etc. are sins on the weeke-day, but they are
now but single sins; but these are such like sins on the Sabbath Day are
double sins, because they are now not only sins against Gods command, but
also against Gods Sabbaths too, which much aggravates them; and yet men mourn
not for these sins; had the Lord never made known his Sabbaths to his
Churches and People in these days, they might then have had some excuse for
their sin; but now to profane them since God has made them known to us;
especially the English Nation and People to do it, upon whom the Lord has
shined out of Heaven with greater light and glory in this point of the Sabbath,
above any other places and Churches in the World, what will they have to say
for themselves, with what Fig Leaves will they hide this nakedness before the
Tribunal of God?

The Lord might have hid his Sabbaths from us and gone to another People, that
would have been more thankful for them, and glad of them then we have been;
and yet he has been loath to leave us; and do we thus require the Lord?
surely he has no need of the best of us, or of our attendance upon him upon
these days; its only his pity, which seeing us wearied with sorrows and
wearying our selves in our sins, makes him call us back to a Weekly rest in
his Bosom, who might have let us alone and tired out our hearts in our own
folly and madness all our days; and do we thus requite the Lord? Certainly
the time will come wherein we shall think (as once Jerusalem did in the days
of her affliction) of all our pleasant things we once had in the days of our
prosperity; ^ertainly men shall one day mourn for the loss of all their
precious time, who mispend it now, and (above al times) for the loss of their
precious pleasant Sabbath seasons of refreshing, which once they had given them
to find rest and peace in; when ^he smoke of their tormenting everlasting
burning shall ascend for ever and ever, wherein they shall have no rest day nor
night; you shall remember and think then with tears trickling down your dry
che^ks, of the Sabbaths* the pleasant Sabbaths that once you had, and shall
never see one of those days of the Son of man more: you shall mourn then to
see Abraham's bosom a far off, and thousand thousands at rest in it, where
you also might have bin as well as they if you had not despised the rest of God
here in the bosom of his Sabbaths.

You shall then mourn and wring your hands, and tear your hair, and stamp
and grow mad, and yet weep to think that if you had had a heart to have spent
that very time of the Sabbath in seeking God, in drawing near to God, in
resting in God, which you dispend in idle Talk, and Idleness, in Rioting and
Wantonness, in Sports and Foolishness upon this day, you had then been in
Gods Eternal Rest in Heaven, and for ever blessed in God. Its said Jerusalem
remembered in the day of her affliction all her pleasant things, when the Enemy
did mock at her Sabbaths; and so will you remember with sad hearts the loose of
all your precious seasons of grace, especially then, when the Devils and
Heathens and damned Out^asts, who never had the mercy to enjoy them, shall mo^k
at thee for the loss of thy Sabbaths. Verily I cannot think that any men that
ever tasted any sweetness in Christ or his Sabbath, and felt the unknown
refreshings of this sweet Rest, but that they will mourn for their cold
affections to them and unfruitful spending of them before they die; otherwise
never go about to bleare men's eyes with Discourses and Invectives and Disputes
against them, or with carnal Excuses for your licentious spending of them; for
doubtless you taste not, and therefore know not what they are; and you will
one day be found to be such as speak evil of the things you know not. Hear
ye despisers and wonder, and perish; is the infinite Majesty and glory of God
so vile in your eyes that you do not think him worthy of special attendance
one day in a Week? does he call you now to Rest in his Bosom, and will you
now kick his Bowels, despise this Love, and spit in his Face? does he call upon
you to spend this day in holiness, and will you spend it in Mirth, and Sports
and Pastimes and in all manner of licentiousness? Have thou wearied God with
thine iniquities, and thy self in thine iniquities all the week long (for
which God might justly cut thee off from seeing any more Sabbath) and does the
Lord Jesus (instead of recompencing thee thus) call you back again to your
resting place? and will you now weary the Lord again, that he cannot have rest
or quiet for you one day in a Week? Oh that we could mourn for these things:
And yet walk abroad the face of the whole earth at this day, and then say
where shall you find almost Gods Sabbaths exactly kept? viz. with meet
preparation for them, delight in them, with wonderment and thankfulness to God
after the enjoyment of them? all the world knows to whom the barbarous Turks
do dedicate their Frydayes, the Jews also how they sanctify their saturdayes,
to the Lord Jehovah indeed, but not unto the Lord their God. What account the
Papists put upon the Sabbath's not only their writings (which level it with all
other Holy Days) but also their loose practice in sports and revellings upon
this day bear sufficient witness: and oh that we had no cause to wash off
this spot with our tears from the beautiful and pleasant face of the glorious
grace and peace, which once shined in the German Churches, by whose Graves we
may stand weeping and say, this is your misery for this your provoking sin:
Scotland knows best her own integrity, whose lights have been burning and
shining long in their clearness in this particular. But England has had the
name, and worn this Garland of glory, wherewith the Lord has crowned it above
all other Churches. But how has that little flock of slaughter, which has
wept for it, and preached, and printed, and done and suffered for it, been
hated and persecuted? who have been the scorn and shame, and reproach of men,
but a company of poor weaklings, for going out a few miles to hear a faithful,
painful Preacher, from those idle Shepherds, who either could not feed them
with knowledge and understanding at home or else would not do it through gross
profaneness, or extreme idleness? And now, since God has broken the yoke of
their oppressors, and set his people at liberty to return to Sion and her
solemn assemblies as in days of old, and has given to them the desires of
their hearts, that they may now be as holy on the Sabbath as they will, without
any to reproach them, at least to countenance such reproaches of them: now I
say when one would think the precious Sabbaths (which so many of Gods servants
in former time have brought down to this generation, swiming in their tears
and prayers, and which many in these days have so much looked and longed for)
that every eye should be looking up to Heaven with thankfulness for these, and
that every heart should embrace Gods Sabbaths with tears of joyfulnesse, and
bid this dear and precious friend welcome, and lie and rest in their bosom;
and so I doubt not but that England has yet may a corner full of such precious
Jewels, to whom Gods Sabbath^ are yet most precious and glorious, and who
cannot easily forget such blessed seasons and means in them, whereby (if ever
the Lord did good unto them) they have been so often refreshed, and wherein they
have so often seen God, wherein they have so often met with him, and he with them;
but whose heart will it not make to relent and sigh, to hear of late a company
(not of ignorant debosht persons, malignants, prelatical, and corrupt and
carnal men) but of such who have many of them in former times given great hopes
of some fear of God, and much love to Gods Ordinances and Sabbaths; and now
(what hurt the Sabbaths Ordinances of the Lord Jesus therein have done them, I
know not, but) it would break ones heart to see what little care there is to
sanctify the Sabbath, even by them who think in their judgments that the day
is of God. What poor preparation for it, either in themselves or families!
what little care to profit by it, or to instruct and catehize their families,
and to bring them also it love with it! what, secret weariness and
dead-heartednesse (almost wholly unlamented) remains upon them! what earthly
thoughts, what liberty in speech about any worldly matter, presently after the
most warning Sermon is done! that the Lord Jesus has scarce good carcasses and
outsides brought him which cannot but threaten more crows to pick them unless
they repent: and yet this is not so sad as to see the looseness of men's
judgments in this point of the Sabbath, whereby some think a Sabbath lawful,
but not necessary (in respect of any command of God;) nay some think it
superstition to observe a weekly Sabbath, which should be every day (as they
imagine,) they have allegorized Gods Sabbaths, and almost all Gods Ordinances
out of the world, and cast such pretended Antichristian filth and pollution
upon them, that spiritual men must not now meddle with them; nay verily, all
duties of the moral Law, and fruitful obedience and holy walking, and
sanctification, graces, and humiliation, and such like, are the secret contempt
of many, and the base drudgery for a ^ll-horse and legal Christian, rather then
for one that is of an Evangelical frame; and herein Satan now appears with the
ball at his foot, and seems to threaten in time to carry all before him, and to
kick and carry Gods precious Sabbaths out of the world with him, and then
farewell dear Lord Jesus with all thy sweet love and life, if Sabbaths be once
taken from us by the blind and bold disputings of wretched men; authority as
yet upholds them (which is no small mercy) and the savor of Christ's sweetness
in them, and the external brightness of the beauty of them, do still remain
on many with that strength and glory, that it is not good policy for the prince
of darkness now to employ all his forces against the gates of the Sabbath: but
the time hastens wherein the assault will be great and fierce, and I much fear
that for the secret contempt of these things, the Lord in dreadful justice will
strengthen delusions about this day to break forth and prosper; and then pray
you poor Saints of God and hidden ones, that your flight may not be in the
Winter, nor on the Sabbath day: but woe then to them that give su^k, woe then
to the high Ministry that should have kept these gates, woe then to that loose
and wanton generation rising up, who think such outward forms and observation
of days to be too course and too low and mean a work for their enobled spirits
which are now raised higher and nearer God then to look much after Sabbaths or
Ordinances, graces or duties, or any such outward forms; for I doubt not but if
after all the light and glory shining in England concerning Gods Sabbaths, if
yet they are not thereby become precious, but that the Lord will make them so
by his plagues, if this sin once get head, God will burn up the whole world,
and make himself-dreadful to all flesh, until he has made unto himself a holy
people, and a humble people, that shall love the dust, and take pleasure in the
very stones of his house, and love the place where his Honor dwells, and long
for the time wherein his presence and blessing shall appear and be poured out
upon the Sabbath day. It Is matter of the greatest mourning, that they above all
other should trouble Gods rest, wherein perhaps their souls have found so much
rest, or might have done; that in these times, wherein the Lord Jesus was
coming out to give unto his house his Ordinances, and unto his people his
Sabbaths and days of rest every way, that now they above all others should
offer to pull them out of his hand, tread them under foot, and hereby teach all
the profane rout in the world to do the like with a quiet conscience, and
without any check by their reasonings; that now when God is wasting the Land,
and burning down its glory, for the sins against his Sabbaths, that just at
this time, more then ever, they should rise up to polute and profane this day.
The Lord grant his poor people to see cause at last to mourn for this sin, that
the rest of the Sabbath may be rest to their souls, especially in this weary
hour of Temptation, which is shaking all things, and threatens yet greater
troubles unto all flesh. The Lord Jesus certainly has great blessings in his
hand to pour out upon his people in giving them better days, and brighter and
more beautiful Sabbaths, and glorious appearances; but I fear, and therefore I
desire that this unwise and unthankful generation may not stand in their own
way, lest the Lord make quick work, and give those things to a remnant to
enjoy, which others had no hearts to prize.

FINIS.

