CERTAIN SELECT CASES RESOLVED.

Specially, tending to the right ordering of the heart, that we may comfortably
walk with God in our general and particular Callings.

BY THOMAS SHEPHARD, Sometimes of Emanuel-Colledge in Cambridge, Now Preacher
of Gods Word in New England.

LONDON, Printed by W. H. for John Rothwell, at the Sun and Fountain in Paul's
Churchyard, near the little North-door. 1650.

Imprimatur

This Reverend Author has other practical pieces. Viz.
The Treatise of the Sabbath. Sincere Convert* Sound Believer.

Joseph Caryl.

To THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THis holy Letter of that ready Scribe of Christ's Kingdom, is so full of Grace
and Truth* Mr. Shepherd of New England.
that it needs no other Epistle commendatory then it self.

Yet seeing the Lot is unexpectedly fallen upon my pen, to give it a
Superscription that it may pass current from hand to hand; I do heartily in
the first place, dedicate it to thee* thou bleeding, troubled-spirit. as a
choice cordial friend, an Interpreter, one of a thousand, that does not only
speak thy heart, but by the Comforter (whom Christ has promised to send) to
thy heart.

It may be this paper present is sent on Embassy from Heaven, on purpose, to
set thy house in order, to untie thy bosom knots, to bind the strong man, and
cast him out of thy doors, that thy heart may be once again set at liberty,
to serve the Lord thy God in thy general and particular Calling, whose service
is thy freedom. What is here sent by this Ambassador of Christ, (who is now
the voice of one crying in the wilderness) to a weary and heavy laden soul
in this Island. I had rather it should appear to thy judgment in the serious
reading, and to thy conscience in the ^ome application thereof, than from my
opinion of it: Therefore I shall only add (as the Contents of this letter)
certain select Cases, proposed and resolved in the several paragraphs thereof,
as they lie in order in the pages following, viz.

Page 3.

Trouble of mind in civil affairs by the secret injection of religious
thoughts.

Page 4.

From what Spirit, such suggestions do arise.

Page 8.

How to entertain them when they crowd in.

Page 12.

Concerning the not being humbled for sinful distractions that hinder and
interrupt the spiritual performance of holy duties.

Page 16.

How a Christian may be said to be under the Covenant of works.

Page 18.

How to conceive aright of that Mystery of Mysteries, the blessed Persons in
the Trinity.

Page 22.

The souls aptnes^e to go to God immediately in holy duties, without taking
Christ Jesus by the hand.

Page 26.

How to apply absolute promises to thy self, though they are made indefinitely
without condition.

Page 38.

A notable discovery of a secret unwillingnes in the soul, to seek God in the
strictest solemn services, before it enters into them: Weariness of them,
while they last; and a gladness, when they are ended.

Page 42.

A sound confutation of that Heretica^l Arminian Tenet, viz. That the strength
of Grace is to be got rather by Argumentation, then inward Communication and
influence, arising from union with Christ.

Page 44.

The experiences of this tried servant of Christ, (who is the Penman hereof)
how he was cured of Atheistical thoughts: whether they did wear out, or
whether by the di^t of Arguments they were rationally overthrown.

Page 48.

Lastly, whether those changes, which a child of God has sometimes, and those
movings of the spirit are caused by a natural temper, or Gods Spirit.

All which select Cases. (and many more, that collaterally issue from their
sides) are judicio^sly resolved with much perspicuity and b^^vity in these few
sheets, by the only judge of all C^ntroversies, the two edged sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God.

Thus humbly beseeching thee, to read over this Epistle of Christ to thee, with
the same Spirit of love, and of a sound mind, which indicted every line in it.

I do desire to leave thee at the Throne of Grace, in the arms of Christ,
with the Father of all Comfort; that thou m^i^st receive the Peace of God which
passes all understanding; and be crowned with joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory.

I subscribe my self Friend, Thine in any Spiritual furtherance of thy Faith,
William Adderley.
Dated from Charterhouse in London, Febr. 1. 1647.
Dear Sir*
I Dare not multiply many words in acknowledging and professing my own
unfitnes^e and insusficiency to yield your loving and most welcome Letter, that
satisfaction which both your Self desire, and it deserves: Neither yet will I
be so unfaithful to you (seeing your expectation ^uts me to reply) neither
ought I (I think) be so unserviceable to Jesus Christ, who in you, and by you,
beckens to me to take this call to write to you, and not to neglect so fa^r a
sea^on, seeing especially it may be possible my dy^ng Letter to you, before I
depart from hence, and return to him, as not knowing but our ^ast disasters
and Sea-straits (of which I wrote ^o you) may be but preparations for the
execu^ion of this next approaching voyage. Yet our ^eies are to the hills, and
our desires are your ^rayers; and at this time my endeavor shall be in respect
of your self, to break open that light to you, and to prepare it to you, with
that brevity I may, and with what plainness I am able; beseeching the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who must be when all fails, the wonderful
Counselor, to give you the spirit of revelation, and that after you have
suffered a while by these outward temptations, doubts, fears, desertions,
distractions, which the Letter mentions, he would make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, and settle you. And this I verily think will be the unexpected, yet
happy, joyful, and most glorious end of them; For since I have observed and
seen the lamentable ruins of the soul, and seeming graces of many men, by
being rockt a sleep in a quiet, still, calm, easy performance of duties;
without such awaking temptations and tumults within, which it self complains
of: I say since I have observed what a deal of mud is in the bottom of such
standing Pools, and what a deal of ^ilth is in such Moats, which are inwardly
at ease, and not emptied from vessel to vessel, next unto the donation of the
Lord Jesus to a man, I have accounted such tumultuo^s heart-storms and uproars,
together with the fruitful strange effects of them, the second mercy. For I
never saw that man kept from secret putrefaction and corruption, that was not
usually salted with such temptations (especially in a Christians first
Apprentiship) which usually preserve him entire till death. And therefore (Dear
Sir) faint not, for Jesus Christ will raise a world of blessings out of your
present Chaos and confusions. But I make have to answer. Before your reply to
my first Letter; your complaints are many.

Your first trouble is, concerning your disturbances in civil affairs, by the
secret injection of Religious thoughts; so that you know not how to follow the
one, without hazard of grieving the spirit, and breaking your peace, in not
maintaining and nourishing the same time the other: and hence being drawn to go
two ways at the same time (which you cannot well do) your heart is disquieted,
and your peace much interrupted.

This of yours, puts me in mind of the complaint of an honest, yet plain man,
to an able Minister once, who in bewailing his condition to him, among other
miseries, that was not the least: ( viz.) that he was exceedingly troubled with
good thoughts, so that he could not follow his place, ^nles^e very often he did
stand still and pray, for fear of grieving the Spirit, (as he thought) and
l^^ing his season of being heard in Heaven: (for said Conscience o^t unto him)
how do thou know but this may be thy accepted time, and if thou do not take
it, it may be thou shall never have it again? I have forgot the Ministers
answer, but I am sure in these complaints you go not alone: I have lately known
one very able, wise, and godly, put upon the Rack in these kind of thoughts by
him, that envying Gods peoples peace, knows how to change himself into an
Angel of light. For it being his usual course in the time of his health, to
make a diary of his hourly life, and finding much benefit by it, he was in
Conscience pressed by the power and delusion of Satan, to make and take the same
daily survay of his life in the time of his sickness, by means of which, he
spent his enfeebl^d spirits, cast on fuel to fire his sickness, and had not a
friend of his convinced him of his erroneous conscience, mis^eading him at that
time, he had murdered his body, out of conscience to save his soul, and to
preserve his grace, and do you think these were the motions of Gods spirit,
which like those Locusts? Rev. 9. 9, 10. had faces like men, but had tails
like Scorpions, and stings in their tails.

Your thoughts I know, are not likely to produce the same effects: although you
have the same efficient: and because you say your peace is hereby disturbed by
ignorance, as not knowing what to do in the midst of these Civil actions and
these religious thoughts, I conceive that two thin^^ are to be sadly considered
of, for the cure of them.

First how to know when such religious pious thoughts come from Gods spirit,
Two things to be considered about motion^.
and when from the devil transforming himself into an Angel of light, or from
a well-melted stirring conscience, yet blind. For when you know they come from
Gods spirit, you are bound to nourish them; but when not, you are bound not to
embrace nor comply with them. Secondly, learn how your soul is to behave and
carry it self in Civil employments: For when you see how you do, and may
honor God in following them, your spirit will not be so unquiet, if at any
time you embrace not the suggestions of the other.

1. For the first briefly, all good motions and thoughts are not the spirits
motions, as may thus appear.

There be three things chiefly by which were may discern the motions, How to
try the motions of Gods Spirit.
suggestions, and thoughts which come from Gods spirit: all which concurring
together in a good action, or thought, or word, (not one alone) will make
discovery whether they are from Gods spirit or not.

1. If it be suggested for Gods ends, its from

If they be animated and quickened from Gods command, for the higher measure of
holiness for glorious ends, without a warrant from the Word, is the more
^ordid superstition: Christ healed the L^per, when he charged him with anger to
tell no man, he, (no question for a good end) published the miracle the more;
this was a good motion, but it was sinful in him, being cross to Christ's
command: when Christ would have washed Peter's feet, he had many thoughts that
came into his head, concerning his own vileness, and Christ's glory; and had a
good end and meaning in his answers; yet his humility crossing Christ's command,
the Lord professes against it, and him for it, that he had no part in him, if
he should go on in it.

The r^ghteous bring forth fruit in its season: and hence Solomon speaks of
words spoken in season, ar^as apples of Gold: and hence we read in Ecclesia^tes
of a time, and season for ^very thing under the Su^ne: and therefore when there
is a season of Gods appointing for civil things or business, it is not season
now to be molested or perplexed in it, by the injection and evocation of those
thoughts which we think to proceed from the Spirit of God: I know indeed, that
the Spirit of God does enable a man to do whatever good he does; but as Grace
makes Nature sometimes to serve, so sinful Nature brings Grace into
captivity, (which Paul complains of, Romans 7.) and makes Grace to serve it. To
exhort and reprove another for sin, is from Gods Spirit that it is done, but
to reprove at an unseasonable time, its from sinful corruption, abusing Gods
grace, and making S^^^son to grind. Its from the excellency of a (...) to cut
well, but to cut my singer with it (...) ^ should be cutting of my meat with
it, (...) not from the end of the knife, nor from the intention of him that
made it: so to think of good things, it is from the spirit, I grant, but to
think of them in such a season that God sets you a work to mind and follow
other occasions, its from the enemy of Gods spirit, and your own peace; for as
it is a sin to nourish worldly thoughts when God sets you a work in
spiritual heavenly employments, so it is (in some respects) as great a sin to
suffer your self to be distracted by spiritual thoughts, when God sets you on
work in Civil (yet lawful) employments: such thoughts (I conceive) are but
the leven of Monkish holiness, if they divert you from your lawfulfull
affairs, when the Lord calls you to follow them. For the Lord never calls you
to two diverse employments at the same time, unless you make the one to be a
means to further the good of the other; which such pious thoughts in some
civil employments do, it being no piece of Christian wisdom or honesty to
turn round in worldly employments so long till by giddiness we fall down,
but by secret steps ever and anon to look up to heaven and to behold the face
of God, to whom only therein we are to approve our selves. But yet it seems
your thoughts are so far from being subservient the one to the other, that you
are distracted and molested, and your peace interrupted, and your Christian
course made troublesome, and an heavy burden, which surely can not be by the
yoke of Jesus Christ, therefore you must first bring your troubles in this
particular to this issue, either you may follow your Civil affairs, and
nourish these thoughts as helps to maintain your peace and make you heavenly
minded in them, (and if they serve sufficiently to such an end, why are you
troubled with them?) or else you cannot ^ollow God comfortably in civil
actions, unless you banish from you thoughts which do so miserably distract
you, and then why do you fear you shall grieve Gods Spirit, if at the same
time you do not give entertainment to them, the unseasonablenesse of which,
speaks plainly they came not from the spirits suggestions, besides their
hinderance of comfortably walking with God, which the employments themselves
can never hinder.

But you will say, when is the season of nourishing such thoughts.

I answer, Entertain those thoughts as (it may be) you have done some friends,
who came to you at that time you have business with strangers, (whom you love
not so well as your friends,) you have desired them to stay a while, until you
have done with the other, and then you have returned to your friend, and when
the other has been shut^out of the doors, the other has had the welcome, and
has lodged with you all night, and thus you have grieved neither, but pleased
both. It is so in this case, Worldly employments are our strangers, yet they
must be spoke with, Religious thoughts and practices are our friends, these
come unto us while God calls us to parley with the other, you cannot speak
with both at one time, in one place, without much perplexity: take therefore
this course, make much of the good thoughts, but parley not with them till your
business is done with strangers; and toward evening, which is your season,
set some time apart every day for meditation, and then make them welcome; then
consider and ponder well what was suggested to you in the day time, and ^i^t
every good thought to the bran, for then is your season, and after that let
them sup and lodge with you all night, and keep the house with you every day.
And surely, when the Lord Jesus shall see what a friend you shall make of his
Spirit, and how wisely you walk therein, you shall not need to fear any
grieving of it, or unseasonable times: nay (I say) you will most fearfully
grieve his Spirit, if you parley with the conceived suggestions of it at
unseasonable times, What thou do, do it with all thine heart. says Solomon.
Eccle. 9.

Therefore when you are to pray, confer, or meditate, do it with all your
mind, and all your thoughts, and all your strength. So when God calls you to
worldly employments, do them with all your mind and might, and when the season
of meditation comes, take it, which glorious ordinace of God, although many
Christian use it occasionally, and against some good time, or when they have
leisure meeting with them, yet to set some time apart for it in a solemn manner
every day, and that in conscience as we do for prayer generally, where is the
man to be found that does thus? Those men that thus neglect their season of
musing and entering into parley with Gods Spirit daily, may be well said to
grieve the Spirit, through the neglect of which ordinance, Gods S^irit is as
much grieved by Professors in England, as by any course I know. The Lord awaken
us: but I have run too far already in this first part of my answer.

For the second means viz. 2 Means.
how the soul is to carry it self in Civil employments, that so you may not
think you do for better, when you listen to good thoughts as you mention,



apprehend that for that time God calls you to them, and you attend upon the
work of Jesus Christ in them, that you honor God as much, nay more by the
meanest servile worldly act, then if you should have spent all that time in
meditation, praye^, or any other spiritual employment, to which you had no
call at that time: It is noted therefore by some, of P^ters wifes mother, that
when Christ had healed her of her Fevor, she ^ate not down at table with
Christ in communion with him, which (no question) was sweet, but ministered at
the Table, and ran too and fro, and so served him, and acted for him, wherein
she showed more love, and gave him more honor, viz. in that mean service, and
in acting for him, then in having communion with him: now if the Lord would out
of his abundant goodness, set the soul in such an acting frame for him, and
if if could do its worldly employments, as the work of Christ, and see how
greatly it honors Christ in attending on him, Oh what peace should a Christian
enjoy, notwithstanding all his distractions every day! And how easily would
such devout thoughts you speak of, be repelled like darkness before the light,
for the nobleness of those good thoughts you speak of presenting themselves
against the mean and base outsides of Civil affairs, makes you ready to honor
the one, when you are called to serve the other: but now, by seeing, you do the
work of Christ Jesus in them, you shall hereby see a glory in the meanest
service you perform in Civil affairs, and this will make you cleave unto
them. But I have said too much about repelling of good thoughts in these times,
wherein men have so few, though (it may be) little enough to satisfy you.

Your second trouble is this ( viz) that your heart is kept from being humbled
for sinful distractions, Quest. 2.
that hinder and interrupt the spiritual performance of holy duties, and that
for two reasons: First, Because they be involuntary and accidental. Secondly,
Because they cannot break the Covenant between God and your soul, being but
in^irmities.

For the latter clause concerning breach of Covenant, Answ.
together with the other. 1. I say, not only in^^rmities do not, but the
greatest sins cannot make a breach of Covenant between God and the soul that
is once really (not rationally) wrapped up in the Covenant of grace. Indeed
gross scandalous sins, nay infirmities, when they are given way to, and not
resisted, may keep the soul from the fruition for a time of Gods Covenant,
but never from the eternal jus and right unto it; for as the habit of Faith or
Grace gives a man a constant right to the promise and Covenant (which seed ever
remains, which habit ever lasts, Ier. 3. 9.) so the act of Faith or Grace
gives a man fruition of the Covenant and the benefit of the promise, and hence
by the acting and venting of some sins wherein there is included the neglect
of the exercise of grace, He that is really in covenant with God, may be
deprived of the fruition of it; yet seeing the seed of God, and the habit of
grace ever remains, he cannot by any sin break his covenant, for the covenant
of grace is absolute, wherein the Lord does not only promise the good, but to
begin and perfect and fulfill the condition absolutely, without respect of sin,
ex part creatur^: Indeed if Gods covenant of Grace did (as that of works)
depend upon man to fulfill the condition, having sufficient grace to fulfill
it, then gross sin might well break the Covenant: but seeing God has
undertaken to fulfill the Covenant absolutely, notwithstanding all the evils
and sins of the soul, no sin can possibly break that knot and covenant which
so firm and resolute love has once knit. And therefore, if this be a good
argument, Infirmities cannot break covenat: What cause have I to be humbled for
them? so as to say, It is thy mercy Lord that I am not consumed for them (as
you write) you may upon the same ground say so, If the Lord should desert you,
or you forsake the Lord, and so fall into the foulest sin, which I suppose
corrupt conscience dares not be so bold as to think or allow of.

Secondly, I say the least sins or infirmities sins shall die: and cursed
is he that continues not in all things of the Law. Gal. 3. 10. The least sin
being. ( ex part^ o^ject^) in respect of God against whom it is committed, as
horrible and as great as the greatest. For it being an infinite wrong being the
dishonor of an infinite Majesty, there can be no greater wrong then an
infinite one, unless you can imagine a thing greater then that which is
infinite; and therefore in this respect, there is as much venom and mischief
done against God in the least, as in the greatest sin: And therefore it, and
whosoever commits it, deserves death for it, as if they had committed the
foulest sin in the world: and therefore after the least and smallest
infirmities, you may from hence see what cause you have freely to be humbled,
and to confess for them how worthy you are to be destroyed; yea, even to look
upon your self as lying under the sentence of the Law and death, immediately
after the commission of them, and so to mourn bitterly for them.

But you will say, Object.
a Christian that is under the Covenant of grace, is not within the Covenant of
works, that Bond is cancelled, the last will must stand: and therefore he
being out of that Covenant, no sins of his can be said to break the
Covenant, for no man can be said to break that Law under which he is not, and
which he is not bound to keep.

I answer, Answ.
Every believer has a double being or standing, and so there may be put upon
him a double respect.

First, he may be considered as united to, and having a spiritual being on
Christ; and so it is Romans 8. 1. But as Christ is above condemnation, and law,
and death, and curse, so is he. And this truly understood, is the foundation of
a Christians joy and peace, and glory every day; yet so, as though sin does
not condemn him, yet he has good reason to say, it is mercy, and mere m^rcy,
Lord, that I am not consumed, that I am condemned. For sin is the same; nay
grace and Gods love aggravates sin; for to sin against the law deserves
death without recovery, but to sin when grace has received me, and loved me;
when the blood of Christ has bin shed abundantly to deliver me from sin; Oh
this makes the most secret silent sin a crying one ^ So that if you do
consider this well, you may see what little cause there is to have your heart
rising against the deepest humiliation for the least sin, though you be in
Christ, and under grace: For as Daniel when he was put into the Lions den, had
not he cause to wonder that he was not torn in pieces by them? and why?
because it was not from any defect on their parts to tear him in pieces, but
from the omnipotent power, and mercy, and grace of his God, that muzzell'd
their mouths; so though no Lion can tear, though no sins can hurt or condemn
a Christian, as he is considered in Christ; yet, has no^ he cause to confess
and wonder, and say, Lord, it is thy mere grace and mercy that it is not so?
(which is the act of humiliation you letter says you can hardly come unto) and
why? not because Gods grace puts any less evil in sin, but because it is
merely grace that keeps it from spitting that venom which otherwise it would.

Secondly, A Christian may be considered in respect of his natural being in
himself, and thus he is ever under the Law, and as often as he sins, under
the sentence of death (and as the Apostle speaks) by nature even we
(justified, quickened) are the children of wrath as well as others. And thus
after the least involuntary accidental si^ne, you may easily see what cause
you have to lie down deeply humbled, mourning under the sentence of death, and
Gods eternal curse, as a condemned man going to the execution, to feel that
fire that shall never go out; looking upon your self as you are in your self, a
forlorn castaway every moment: and this truly understood is the foundation of a
Christians sorrow, shame, and confusion of face, self-loathing,
self-forgetting, self^forsaking, and condemning every day: and (believe it Sir)
it is no small piece of a Christians skill and work, to put a difference
between himself and himself, himself as he is in Christ, and so to joy and
triumph, and himself as he is growing on his first root, and so to sorrow,
and loath, and condemn himself: so that (to wi^de up all that I have said)
look upon your self as in Christ, you may say these involuntary infirmities
do not, shall not, condemn me.

But Lord it is grace, Grace that it is not so, and this is Evangelicall
humiliation. Look again upon your self, as you stand on your own bottom, and
live in your own nature, and so you may say after the least infirmity; I have
now broken a most holy and righteous Law, and therefore I am already condemned:
O woe is me, I have already undone my self by mine iniquity: and this is
Legal humiliation, which serves for mortification, as the first for
vification. I know it is very difficult to bring the heart to acknowledge
freely it deserves death after so ^mall an involuntary offense: but when the
Lord reveals two things, First, himself in his glory, Secondly, how the least
sin strikes him: I persuade my self the vilest heart cannot but be forced to
confess how just God should be in his severest proceedings against him. And
withal consider, the more involuntary any sin is, the more strong and
natural it is, and the more natural, the more horrible, as to be a natural
Thief is far worse then to be a deliberat thief, who sometimes steals; and
therefore (good Sir) take heed of looking no deeper, nor seeing no further then
the bare act, and unvoluntarinesse and accidentalnesse, and suddenness of your
infirmities: for if you do, you look through the wrong end of the glas^e, and
they will appear so small, that you will find it a very tough work to bring
your heart consentively to say (if I may say and use your own phrase) It is
thy mercy Lord that I am not consumed for them: but look upon them as indeed
they are, in respect of that infinite glory, you strike doing the greatest
mischiefs to God by them, and (which makes them the viler) as they are so
strong, you cannot remove them; and so horrible, as that it is natural to you
to commit them, etc. And surely you will not (through grace) find such
thoughts haunt you long; not but that they will be (happily) rising and tempting,
but never allway vexing and prevailing. Satan's ground reaching as far as the
minds of Gods people, Answ.
and therefore so far he may come, and there he may walk, (for the came into
the mind of innocent Adam. nay Jesus Christ. by his suggesting temptations)
but the heart is Christ's peculiar pos^ession and purchase; and if he shall
still there offer to come in and vex you, and prevail against you, and to lodge
his suggestions this or any other way with you, you have Law and Christ on your
side, by this little light now given you, to cast him out.

The third thing that troubles you, is the disranking of the Persons in the
Trinity, Quest. 3.
for though you think the holy Ghost is God, yet you have not so high a repute
of him, as of the Father and the Son, because the Son addresseth himself
to God the Father in all his prayers and acknowledgements, in a more immediate
manner then unto the holy Ghost, and therefore you would know if the word
Father (as in the Lords Prayer,) includes not the Unity in Trinity.

To this briefly consider three things.

1. Without all question, Answ.
the same God which lies under that relative property of Father, is the same
God with the Godhead of the Son, and the Godhead of the holy Ghost, there
being not three Gods; and therefore the Godhead of the Son and Spirit, are
not excluded, but included in the Godhead of the Father, when we look upon the
Father as God, in the Lords Prayer, or any where else.

2. But secondly, the Father as Father, is never taken for the same holy Ghost
in Scripture, nor the Son as Son, is taken for the Father, nor the holy
Ghost as holy Ghost, is at any time taken for the Son: For it is a rule in
Theology, though the res subs^rata the thing that lies under the Relative
property ( viz. the Godhead) of every person, be common and communicated, yet
the same Godhead considered as clothed with his Relative property (as Father,
Son and Spirit) it is not common, but peculiar. For the Godhead of the Father
as Father, is not the Godhead of the Son as Son, etc.

3. Hence it follows that when Christ addre^seth himself to the Father as
Father in Scripture, it is not because he is either a diverse or greater God
then the holy Ghost, but it is for two other reasons.

1. Because the Father as Father, received primarily the wrong that sin did
against his work of creation. For the Father being the first Person in order,
and creation, the first transient act (as election and reprobation were the
first immanent) hence this work is attributed chiefly to God the Father, in
respect of our orderly apprehension; and hence man sinning then when he was
only made, this is chiefly attributed to be against the Father, because his
work appeared to be chiefly there, and not against the Son, for his work
chiefly appears in redemption, he being the second Person, and this the
second main and wonderful work, neither against the holy Ghost, for his work
chiefly appears to us in application, being the third Person, And this the
third main act that ever God will do, or show forth to the world in this life:
hence God the Father receiving to our apprehension, the wrong in creation by
sin, he is the Person that is to be satisfied and not the holy Ghost. And
hence Jesus Christ in all his prayers has a most special eye to him, and not
to the holy Ghost (as holy Ghost) because he came into the world by his death,
and intercession, and strong cries, to satisfy God the Father, and not God the
holy Ghost as a third Person. And hence it is said, 1 John. 2. 1. 2. If any man
sin, we have an Advocate with God the Father. (not God the holy Ghost)
because he was (to our apprehension) the Person wronged: and hence we are after
sins committed chiefly to eye the Father in our prayers, and to go to him for
pardon with our advocate with us, because to whom offense is chiefly offered,
from ^im chiefly pardon and reconciliation is to be expected.

2. Therefore Christ addresseth himself chiefly in his prayers to God the
Father, because he is the original and first cause of all good, because he is
the first Person in order of subsisting, and therefore first too in the manner
of conveying. I know the Godhead is the original of all good: but consider
the Persons one with another, and so the father is ever the first in operation,
as the holy Ghost is the last in consummation, for all good comes from the
Father, James 1. 17. through the Son by the holy Ghost. And hence in all our
prayers we are to look for all good from the Father, for his Sons sake to be
conveyed us by the holy Ghost: and hence it is said, John 6. 10. No man com^s
to me but whom the Father draws: Why? It is the immediate office and work of
the holy Ghost to draw and apply the soul unto Christ, why then is it said,
Vnle^se the Father draw? The reason is, because that which was perfected and
consummated by the holy Ghost, was intentionally and by way of purpose and
decree begun originally by the Father; and this is that which Christ's words
have chiefly reference unto ( viz) the Father through the Son by the holy Ghost
draws.

But I have waded too far in this Divinity, the clear knowledge of which is
reserved for us in heaven: But thus much to satisfy you, yet the word Father
in the Lords Prayer, I conceive under correction, as it does not exclude any
person of the Godhead, so its chiefly set down there, not so much to denote
the Person of the Father, as the affection of God as a Father to us his Sons by
Christ, which we are to believe in our first approaching to our prayers, to be
as, nay to transcend the affection of any father to his Son: when we com to
call upon him for those six things which the Petitions set down, for those
three ends, kingdom, power, and glory, which the Prayer concludes withal.

Your fourth trouble is your aptness to go to God immediately, Quest. 4.
especially when his graces are most striving in his ordinances, contrary to
that of Christ, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

So indeed it is usual for religious nature often to outrun and get the start
of grace; Answ.
as it appears in many other, so in this case you put; look as it is with
every man when God awakens him effectually, he first seeks to his kitchen
physic to save himself, by his duties, praying, mourning, re^orming,
endeavoring, repenting, working, before he will seek out to the Physician,
and to Christ to save him. Because it was natural to Adam to seek to live by
his working, it is natural to every Son and branch of that root, to seek to
save himself by doing as well as he can, or as God gives him the strength and
grace. So it is here. It was natural to Adam to depend upon, and go to God
immediately, as a creature to a Creator, as a Son to go nakedly to God as a
Father: Christ was not then known, nor seen: so it is natural to every man,
when rectified Nature is stirred up, to go immediately to God. It is grace in
the second Covenant that reveals and draws to Jesus Christ, and to God by
Christ, Heb. 7. 25.

For cure of this distemper, ponder but these three things.

1. Clearly convince the soul that the immortal, invisible, and most holy
God, that dwells in an un-approachable light, has set out himself to be
seen, or made himself only visible in Jesus Christ, so that he would have no
man look upon him any other ways, then as he has revealed himself in his
Son: In whom (though in all other creatures his vestigia and footsteeps are to
be seen) as he is God, the face of God is to be seen, which no creature is able
to behold, but there, being the brightness of his glory^ and the express
Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. And as he is man, the very heart of God, both
in respect of affection, and will to be seen; So that in and through Jesus
Christ, especially his humane nature, the glory of the great God breaks out
like the Sun through the clouds most brightly, in respect of us, and therefore
in and through his humane nature we are only to behold God, in whom all that a
Christian desires to know, is to be seen, which is the face and heart of so
dear a friend. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Ioh. 14. 9, 10. For we know by too lamentable
experience, how the whole world vanishing in their smoaky thoughts of the glory
of God, as he is considered in himself, and not able to conceive or retain the
knowledge of him, did hence invent and set up I makes as ^it objects for their
drunken staggering understanding to fasten upon, and to be limited with, and
hence adored God before these, (as our Popish Hypocrites do before the Altar)
and in these, and at these, as Papists do in respect of their Images. Hence
the Lord to cure this inveterate natural malady, has in the second Person,
united himself to man Christ Jesus, through whom we are both able to our
everlasting wonderment to see him, and also here bound only to behold him, who
as he is a sit handle for our faith, so he is a ^it object for our weak minds
to behold the glory of the most high God in. Wherefore then do you offer to go
unto God without Christ, when as you are not so much as to look upon God, but
as he appears in Christ. Is not the humane nature of the Lord Jesus more easy
to be seen and conceived of, then the invisible unlimited eternal Godhead?

2. Secondly, See evidently that there is not any dram or drop of God you have,
especially in Gods ordinances, but it issues from the blood, and is purchased
by the intercession, and delivered unto you by the hand of Jesus Christ. Eph^s.
1. 7. H^br. 7. 25. John 5. 22. You should never have heard the sound of the
gospel, nor never have had day of Patience, nor never have heard of Gods
Ordinances to find him in, nor never have been comforted, quickened, enlarged,
affected by God Ordinances, were it not for Jesus Christ, the efficacy of whose
blood, and power of whose glorious intercession, does at the very instant you
feel any good in Gods Ordinances, prevail with God the Father for what you
feel; for the Father loves the Son, and has put all things into his hands,
John. 4. 35. that all men might honor the Son; all the three Persons plotting
chiefly for the honor of the second; so that you may see, nay you are bound to
believe, at the time you feel your heart savingly affected in any ordinance
now, the Lord Jesus who is at the right hand of God in heaven, who is now in
his glory, now he remembering me a poote worm on earth, now I feel the fruit
of his death. O what a miserable forlorn wretch had I been, were it not for
Jesus Christ? Mercy could never have helped, enlightened, comforted, quickened,
assured, enlarged me, and Justice could never have relieved my dead, bloody,
peris^ing lost Soul, had it not been for Jesus Christ, whose Spirit, power,
grace, comfort, presence, sweetness, I taste, drink, and am satisfied
abundantly with, and now do enjoy.

Oh Sir, me thinks the sad meditation of this, should make you in all Gods
ordinances, where you are apt to say you go immediately to God, to hasten
suddenly in your thoughts, affections, praises, to Jesus Christ. Nay, me thinks
you should speedily have your heart elevated and lifted up to Jesus Christ, and
say, I receive this, and taste this from Jesus Christ. Oh, but this is but a
taste of the honeycomb with the end of my rod, and if this presence of Christ's
Spirit I feel now be so sweet, what is himself then?

3. Thirdly, Labor for increase of love and familiarity with Jesus Christ, by
taking notice of him, by coming often to him, by musing daily on his love, as
on a fresh thing, by banishing slavish false fears of his forgetfulness of
you, and want of everlasting love toward you: and then you know love will
carry you speedito him: amor meus pondus meum. nay, grant that you have been a
stranger to Christ, yet restore the love of Christ to life again in your Soul,
and when you come to his ordinances where he dwells, your Soul will make its
first enquiry for him, neither will it be satisfied till it has seen him, as
we do them we love, toward whom we have been greatest strangers.

Your fifth trouble is, you know not how to apply absolute promises to your
self, Quest. 5.
as in Heb. 8. because they are made indefinitely without condition.
Conditional promises you say you can, if you can find the qualification that
gives you right to the good of the promise within you.

This useful fruitful question, Answ.
how to apply absolute promises to ones particular, deserves a larger time and
answer, then now in the midst of perplexities, I am able, yet willing, to give.
For when the Lord says absolutely without condition, that he will take away
the stony heart, and he will put his fear into his peoples hearts, etc. and
these kind of promises are made to some, not to all, to those only whom the
Lord will, and in general to his people, Hereupon the Soul^s of many
Christians, especially such as question Gods love toward them, are most in
suspense: and therefore when they complain of the vileness of their hearts
and strength of their lusts, let any man tell them that the Lord has
undertaken in the Second Covenant, to heal their backslidings, and to subdue
their iniquities, they will hereupon reply, it is true, he has promised
indeed to do thus for some absolutely, though they have no good in them, but I
that feel so vile a heart, so rebellious a nature, will he do this for me, or
no? and thus the Soul floats above water, yet fears it shall fink at last,
notwithstanding all that God has said. I will answer therefore briefly these
two things in general.

1. I shall show you to what end, and for what use and purpose God has made
absolute promises, not only to them that be for the present his people, but to
them that in respect of their estates and condition are not.

2. I shall show you how every Christian is to make use of them, and how and
when he ought to apply them. For the first of these.

1. First, I conceive that as in respect of God himself, there are many ends
which I shall not mention, as being needless, so in respect of man, there are
principally these two ends for which the Lord has made absolute promises.

1. To raise up the Soul of a helpless sinful cursed lost sinner in his
own eyes, to some hope (at least) of mercy and help from the Lord. For thus
usually every man's Soul is wrought, to whom the Lord does intend grace and
merry: he first turns his eyes inward, and makes him to see he is stark
naught, and that he has not one dram of grace in him, who thought himself
rich, and wanting nothing before, and consequently, that he is under the curse
and wrath of God for the present, and that if the Lord should but stop his
breath, and cover his face, and take him away, which he may easily do, and is
to be feared he will, that he is undon for ever. Hereupon the Soul is awakened
and falls to his kitchen physic, as I spoke before, prays, and hears, and
amends, and strives to grow better, and to stop up every hole, and to amend it
self of every sin, but finding it self to grow worse and worse, and
perceiving thereby that he does but stir, and not cleanse the puddle, and that
it is not amending of nature that he must attain to, but he must believe, and
make a long arm to Heaven, and apprehend the Lord Jesus, (which so few know,
or ever shall enjoy) and hereby quench the wrath of God; I say, finding he
cannot do thus, no, nor no means of themselves can help him to this, hereupon
he is for^aken of all his self wisdom, and of all his vain hopes, and now
sits down like a desolate widow, comfortless, and sorrowful, and thinks
there is ^o way but death and hell, and the wrath of a displeased God to be
expected. And if any come and tell this Soul of Gods mercy and pity to
sinners, I says he, its true, he is even infinitely merciful unto them who
are rent from their sins, and that can believe, but that I cannot do; and am
sure shall never be able for to do, and therefore what cause have I but to lie
down in my sorrow, and to expect my fatal stroke every moment? Reply again
upon this Soul, and tell him, that though he cannot believe, or loosen his
heart from sin, yet that the Lord has promised to do it, that he will subdue
all his iniquity, and he will pardon all his sin, and that he will cause men
to walk in his ways, etc. True, says the Soul again, he will do thus for
his own people, and for them he has chosen, but I never had dram of grace in
my heart, and there is no evidence that the Lord is mine own, or that I am
his: Here again the Soul lies down, until the Lord discovers to the Soul
that he will do these things for some that have no grace, or never had grace,
for these promises were made to such.

Here upon the Soul thinks thus; These promises are made for some that are
filthy, for why should God pour clean water upon them, for some that be
hard-hearted, for why should he promise to take away the stony heart from
them, etc. and if unto some such, and I being such a one, why may not the Lord
possibly intend and include me, seeing he has not by his promise excluded nor
shut me out? Indeed I dare not say he will, but yet how do I, or men, or
Angels know, but yet I may be one? Hereupon Hope is raised to life again;
seeing God has undertaken the work for the vilest, it is possible he may do
it for me, now when I am vile and can do nothing for my self. And thus you
may see the first end and use of absolute promises, to be as it were, twigges
to uphold the sinking Spirits of hopeless, helpless, distressed Souls.

2. The Second End and Use of them is this. To create and draw out faith in
Jesus Christ in the promises. For as the Law begets terror, so the promises
beget Faith. Now no conditional promise firstly begets Faith, because he that
is under any condition of the Gospel, in that man there is a presupposed faith.
Its Gods absolute promise that firstly begets faith, for faith is not
assurance, but the coming of the whole Soul to Christ in a promise, John 6.
35. And then the Soul believes in Christ, when it comes to Christ, now this
God works in the Gospel. 1. The Soul is raised up by hope. And being raised,
it Secondly comes to Christ, which is faith, by vehement unutterable desire.
And being come to him, it 3. Embraces Christ by love, and thus the match is
made, and the everlasting knot is tied.

Now as you have heard, the absolute promise works hope of relief from
Christ: and if it works hope, it also works a desire, or coming to Christ by
desire. Oh! that thou Lord would honor thy grace, thy power, thy love, thy
promise, in helping me a poor castaway. And thus faith is created (as it were)
by this absolute promise: for it cannot but move the heart of any one that ever
felt his want, to cry mightily to the Lord for help, if he has any hope,
seeing the Lord has promised to do it for some. Oh says the Soul, that thou
would do it for me: And surely, were it not for this absolute promise of God,
no Soul would desire, because he would have no hope to be saved, or to seek
for any thing as from the hands of God. And thus you see to what end God makes,
and to what use a Christian may put these absolu^e promises.

2. For the second thing ( viz) How and when a Christian may apply these
promises. How to apply absolute promises.


I answer, every Christian is either,

1. Within Covenant with God, and knows it, or

2. Within covenant with God, and knows it not, or

3. Out of covenant indeed, for his present estate and condition, yet he is in
fieri. or making toward it.

1. If he be in Covenant and knows it, then you may easily perceive how and
when he ought to apply promises unto himself, for he may boldly conclude, If
God be his God, then all the promises of God shall be made good unto him; if he
be a Son of God, he may boldly challenge at all times at the hands of God,
(nay if in some respects, at the hands of Justice it self) the fulfilling of
God the Fathers will delivered in the several Legacies of the promise bought
by the blood, and sealed by the same blood of Jesus Christ, that they may and
shall be made good unto him that is clear.

2. Secondly, If he be in covenant and knows it not, and questions hence
whether God is his or not, and consequently, whether the promises belong unto
him: then the rule is to be observed, let him so sue and seek for the good of
the absolute promise, until by reflecting upon his own acts, herein he
perceive himself adorned and dignified with the qualification of some
conditional promise, and then if he can find the condition or qualification
within himself, then as you judge and write, he may conclude, that the
conditional promise belongs to him, and if one promise, then all Gods
promises, and therefore that absolute promises are his own, because at least
one conditional promise is. For no unregenerate man is within the compass of
any one conditional promise of grace, unless you will say he is under the
everlasting love of God, the promises of grace being but the midway between the
eternal purpose and decree of love, and the glorious certain execution of that
love in time. The promise being the break day of Gods most glorious love,
which must shine out in time.

But here you will say is the difficulty, Object.
viz. how I should to seek for the good of absolute promises, as therein to
find my self within the compass of some conditional one.

I answer, It is done chiefly by three acts.

1. By being humbly contented, that seeing the Lord has absolutely promised,
to work and do all for the Soul he intends for to save, even when it can do
nothing for it self, and that he has taken the work into his own hands; so
that it is his promise, offer, office and honor to do all, that therefore you
lie down, not sluggishly, but humbly at the feet of God, and contented to have
him to be your God, and for ever to be disposed of in any thing by God, if he
will fulfill his covenant in you, contented to part with any sin, if he will
rend it from you, contented to know any truth if he will reveal it to you,
contented to do any duty if he will enable you, contented to shine bright with
all his glorious graces, if he will create and maintain them in you, contented
to bear any evil if he will lay his hand under your head, and thereunto
strengthen you; and so seeing the Lord promised to undertake the work for some,
put out the work, and put over your Soul to him, that he would fulfill the
good that his covenant promises in your self. Now when you do thus, which (no
question) you and many a Soul does, many times reflect upon this act, and see
if you cannot or may not find your self by it under the condition of some
conditional promise, and if you do, then are you bound to believe all Gods
promises are and will be Yea and Amen unto you. Now that you do so by this act,
it self speak: ^ainely, for how many conditional promises (...) made to the
meek? Blessed are the meek, Mat. 5. and to the hum^ble? whom god will raise up.
For this is not saving meekness, to be quietly contented to be, or to do, or
to bear any thing that the Lord will have me from mine own strength and
feeling, but to be, to do, or to bear any thing that the Lord will have me, if
the Lord enable me. Many a stout heart would gladly have Christ, but if he
cannot have him in his own terms, viz. Christ and his lusts, Christ and the
world too, or by his own strength and power, he will have none of him, but
desperately casts him away, and says, what shall I look after him any more? I
cannot pray, I cannot believe, I cannot break this vile and unruly will, this
stony adamant heart, thus the pride of a man's heart works. Now he that is
truly meekned and humbled, he is contented gladly to have God his God, and
Christ his Redeemer, and that upon Jesus Christ his own terms. First, on his
own covenant; now what is that? why it is this, I will give you the good, and
work in you the condition too; I will give you my self, and therefore will
not stick to give you an eye to see, and a heart to receive too. This is the
covenant; now hereupon a humbled Soul accepts of Christ according to his
covenant, on his own terms thus, viz. upon that condition Lord, that thou will humble me, teach me* persuade me, cause me to believe, and in every thing
to honor thee; Lord, I am contented gladly and joyfully to have thee, do
therefore what thou will with me. Just as a sick man tells his Physician, who
comes not to him on thesetermes, If you will make your self half whole, then I
will cure you, and do the rest for you; but being utterly unable to cure, or
to know how to cure himself, he tells his Physician, I am content you should
begin and perfect the cure, and so honor your skill and love in me, to be
contented to take any thing if you will give it me, and if I offer to resist
that, you should bind me, and so do any thing with me.

2. The second act is, earnestly to long and come to Christ, to cleave unto
Jesus Christ by servent and ardent desire, that he would make good those
absolute promises to you, seeing that they are made to some, and that they do
not exclude you; for when you ponder well, and see what wonderful great things
the Lord promises to some, whose heart cannot but be stirred up to say, as
that woman in another case, Lord, give me of that wate^ to drink? and as they
in the fifth of John, Lord, evermore give us that bread. Now doing this,
reflect upon this Second act, and see if unto it, no conditional promise
belongs, and you shall find an affirmative answer from the word. For what is
this longing after the good, not of some (which many hypocrites do) but of all
the promises, but that which the Scripture calls thirsting, who are commanded
to come and drink of the waters of life freely. Isa. 55. 1, 2. and hungring, to
which all good things are promised, Mat. 5. 6. and which coming to Christ (as
I spoke even now) who has given this as the first fruit of eternal election,
and which kind of people he will never cast away, John 6. 37. Now when you see
these promises belonging unto you, why dare you not conclude but that all these
absolute ones are yours also.

3. The third act is this, Seeing God has promised absolutely such good things
in the Second Covenant, but has not set down the time when, or how much grace
he will give; and seeing only he can help, therefore look up, and wait upon
the Lord in the use of all known means, until he makes good what he has
promised to do, and perform, and work for you. Say as beggars that have but
one door to go to for bread, if none hear, or hearing help not, lay
themselves down at the door, and say, I will wait here, I am sure I perish if
I go away, or quarrel with them in the house, because they help me not so
soon as I would, and therefore I will wait, for it may be their compassions
may move them as they pass by to help me. So do you, Many a Soul comes and
longs for the good of the promises, but if the Lord do not speedily help him,
he goes with discouragements, fears, and discontents, or despair, or sin
away, and says one of these two things, either I shall never have help, or I
come not truly, and hence I feel no help. Oh remember that bread is only to be
had at the door, to be distributed when the Lord sees need, not when we
would, or think we have need, and therefore wait here and say, if I perish,
here I will, at the feet of God, and at the feet of the promises and covenant
of God, etc.

Now reflect upon this act, and see if you may not find some conditional
promise annexed unto it, which surely you may, and I will name you but two,
Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31. and Isa. 64. 4. and if the conditional promise belongs to
such a Soul, you may easily conclude the absolute promises are your own, and
the chiefest use you are to make of them when you know them that they are your
own, is to press God to make them good daily to you: and to believe as verily
and really, as if you had the performance of them, that they shall. It may be
you will ask me, how shall I know whether I have these conditions truly in me?
I answer, sincerity is a very witnessing grace, the frequent meditation of the
Scripture will give you much light, to judge of the sincerity of them, and that
which Saint Paul speaks 1 Cor. 2. 12. I say unto you, We have not received the
spirit of the World, but of God, whereby we know. (or may know) the things that
are freely given to us of God.

3. Thirdly, If he be out of the covenant, but yet God begins to work with
some common work of his grace upon him: all that I would say to him, and all
the use he can make of such absolute promises, consists in these things.

1. Let him consider the freenes^e of Gods promise, whereby he may be stirred
up to conceive some hope it may be made good to him in time. For the promise is
very free and large, excluding none (except those that sin unpardonably) be
their sins and natures never so vile before God, and yet not including any by
name, for that is in the conditional promise* and hence such an one is to make
this use of it, who knows but the Lord may have pity upon me in time; and so
hang thy hope upon him.

2. Let him consider the worth and price of Gods promise bought by blood, and
for which some men would give a thousand worlds for the benefit and comfort of;
and hereby raise up his heart, as by the freeness of it to hope, so by the
price of it to esteem of the thing promised, above pearls, and all the honor
and pomp of the world.

3. Let him consider the fullness of the promise, which is a plaster as big as
his sore, just answerable to all his wants, nay infinitely more large then his
wants. And surely these three things will draw his heart to long for the
promise, and then you know what is conditionally promised and bequeathed to
them that thirst: For similitude is the ground of love. Now when the fullness
of the promise is seen, there will appear such a suteablenesse and fitness of
the promise to his soul, that he cannot but long for it. Quest.
Thus much for the fifth trouble.

Your sixth trouble set down in two heads, put into one for brevity, viz.
secret unwillingnesse to seek God in the strictest sol^mn services, before you
enter into them; weariness of them while they last, and glad when they are
gone: the reasons which you mention are, partly fear of not using them aright,
together with melancholy, and lastly, the strictness of them. Answ.


It is very true, there is abundance of wildness in our hearts, which
naturally seek to have their liberty abroad, and cannot endure to be pent in
the narrow room of holy performances, extraordinary duties, etc. no more then
children can be pent up from their play. And hence it is weary of them, and
glad to think of their depa^tures and ends. And truly it is one of the most
grievous miseries that a holy heart can feel, and I beseech the Lord of heaven
and earth to keep you, and me, and all his for ever, while we are here in our
valley, under the sense of such distempers as our greatest misery. And
therefore me thought it was a solemn sweet speech of an honest man to his
friend, who seeing him oppressed with such distempers as you mention, and
perceiving him to droop under them, he came chearefully to him, and suddenly
said unto him, I can tell you good news, the best that ever you heard, viz.
As Soon as ever you are in Heaven, you shall serve Christ without weariness:
Which words well thought on, revived the man. That which I would speak with as
much tenderness of compassion as I am able to you, I refer to these things.

1. That a child of God is never usually weary of the ^uty, but rather of his
vile heart, to think of, and to look upon, that in the duty Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light, to him that takes it on his neck, and puts his
Soul under it. The duty nakedly considered in it self, is glorious in his
eyes, and sweet to his Soul, and hence sometimes never well, but when he
considers his dead, blind* barren, and senseless heart that he is to carry to
the duty, and that he fears, and has felt will abide with him in the duty:
Oh! this grieves, here the Soul pincheth. An Hypocrite is weary of the duty, a
child of God rejoices in it, but he is weary of his sin, and
unsavourinesse and weariness in the duty. I persuade my self Sir that you may
soon mistake your spirit herein: you think you are unwilling to come to the
duty; and are weary of it, when indeed, it is your glory, joy, and love; but it
is because you fear you can do it no better, that troubles you, that you have
such a vile heart in it. And if your trouble be from hence, the good Lord
increase it in you daily; and withal, bless the Lord and say, Lord, though I
am weary of my vile heart, in these days of humiliation, in these Sabbaths,
yet I bless thee, the days and duties themselves thou know are dear unto
me, It is not Lord because I am weary of thy word, but because I can do it no
better, I am weary of my self, and this vile heart; here is much love in such
a spirit to the Lord. And believe it Sir, your love wants not its recompenses
and remember that the Lord respects you not according to your duties done, but
according to your love in them, and to them. And therefore those duties you are
ashamed to own, the Lord will not be ashamed to crown.

2. Consider you must and shall be baited with these distempers of heart,
sometimes more, and sometimes less, as long as you live. It is part of Paul's
body of death which he must carry with him, till he come to bury himself.

3. Those means which may help you to be freed from them (a little at least)
are these among many.

1. Be but truly and really, not by fits and darkly, sensible of them, men in
deep miseries, are not unwilling to be helped out.

2. Judge ye not rigorously of God, although he we^e a bloody austere God, as
he did of his master whose talent he had, and hence never improved it; but
look upon God as having a Fathers heart and affection toward you in the
meanest and greatest performances; which is double, either to give you strength
to do what you cannot (I can do all things through Christ) or having come to
him for it, to accept of what you would do for him, as if it were done; and
this will make you joy in the poorest performance, that though it be never so
full of vileness, yet the Lord out of his fatherly love, accepts of it as
glorious.

3. Renew morning and evening by sad and solemn meditation, the sense of Gods
love to you in Christ; and in every duty that he sets you about, and love will
love and like the yoke, and make the commandments that they shall not be
grievous to you.

Thus I have briefly done with your new troubles which you mention, you say,
because you may not have the like opportunity of writing again. It may be so,
and therefore I have desired to satisfy you, which I beseech the Lord himself
to do.

Next you come to reply to my first Letter, of which I have kept no copy, as I
never did of any, and hence may and do forget what I writ then unto you. So
much light as your Letter lends me to bring things to mind, I will gladly take,
and be more brief in answer.

You find the strength of grace to be got in you rather by argumentation,
Quest. 1.
then inward communication and influence arising from the union to Christ. And
this troubles you.

To which I answer these three things. Answ.


1. That as the old sinful nature is communicated from Adam the first to us,
without any argumentation* so the new nature, which is the seed, foundation,
and plot of all grace, is diffused into us by the second Adam when we are
united to him, without argumentation. It is only by divine operation. The Lord
leave not me, nor any friend I have, to a naked Arminian illumination and
persuasion.

2. That to the increase of those habits, and drawing out the acts of the new
creature, the Lord is pleased to use moral and rational persuasions; as in
the instance you gave, Christ died for us, then hence the love of Christ
constraines: but remember withal, It is not the bare meditation, or strength
of reason or persuasion, that elicits such divine and noble acts in the heart
and affection, but it is the blood of Christ sprinkling these serious
meditations, that makes them work such graces in the Soul; which I might show
at large: which blood is the salve, though argumentation is the cloth or
leather to which it sticks, and by which it is applied; but from such leather
comes no virtue, all of it is from the blood of christ, which by argumentation
heales the Soul. For if it were nakedly in the argumentation to stir your
heart, and to work strength of grace, what should be the reason that some
times you are no more moved by all your argumentations, then a mountain of
brass is by the winds? why should the same truth affect you at one time, and
not at another, when you are as fitly dispoto be affected as at the first?
Therefore consider it is not your reason and argumentation, but Christ's blood
that does all, by as admirable, and yet secret operation.

3. Your union to Christ on your part is begun, and partly wrought by the
understanding, and hence the good that you get by it at any time, it is from
your union, or part of it at lest.

Again you ask me, Quest. 2.
whether Calvin does not express fully my thoughts about our Spiritual union,
in his lib. 4. cap. 17.

I answer, I have forgot what he has writ, Answ.
and my self have read long since out of him, and for the present I have no
books about me where I am, and therefore cannot satisfy you in this, neither
know I when I shall seek to find out the book and place; If I have leisure,
I will either write to you, or tell some of your friends before I am gone, what
he has said or writ that way, etc.

Again thirdly, Quest. 3.
You desire me to tell you how my self came to the cure of Atheistical
thoughts, and whether they did wear out, or whether they were rationally
overthrown.

I answer, Answ.
at first they did wear out, meeting with fruitless and dead-hearted company,
which was at the University.

2. The Lord awakened me again^, and bid me beware lest an old sore broke out
again: and this I found that strength of reason would commonly convince my
understanding that there was a God, but I felt it utterly insufficient to
persuade my will of it unless it was by fits, when as I thought Gods Spirit
moved upon the Chaos of those horrible thoughts; and this I think will be
found a truth.

3. I did groan under the bondage of those unbelieving thoughts, looking up,
and sighing to the Lord, that if he were as his works and word declared him to
be, he would be pleased to reveal himself by his own beams, and persuade my
heart by his own Spirit of his Essence and being, which if he would do, I
should account it the greatest mercy that ever he showed me. And after grievous
and heavy perplexities, when I was by them almost forced to make an end of my
self and sinful life, and to be mine own Executioner, the Lord came
between the bridge and the water, and set me out of anguish of spirit, (as she
prayed for a child) to pray unto him for light in the midst of so great
darkness; In which time he revealed himself, manifested his love, stilled
all those raging thoughts, gave return in great measure of them; so that
though I could not read the Scripture without blasphemous thoughts before, now
I saw a glory, a majesty, a mystery, a depth in it, which fully persuaded, and
which light (I desire to speak it to the glory of his free grace, seeing you
call me to it) is not wholly put out, but remains while I desire to walk
closely with him, unto this day. And thus the Lord opened mine eyes, and cured
me of this misery; and if any such base thoughts come (like beggars to my
door) to my mind, and put these scruples to me, I use to send them away with
this answer, Why shall I question that Truth, which I have both known and seen.

But you say this remedy is good, Object.
viz. of prayer, but that you cannot use it, especially because you question
the truth of God.

Yet (dear Sir) give not over this Trade, Answ.
you will doubtless find it gainefull, when it may be God has laden you more
with these thoughts, and made you loath your self for them. But the thing
seems strange to me, if I mistake you not, viz. that your heart will not be
persuaded, but that you must resolve your doubts concerning the perfection of
Scripture, not by seeking to h^rmonise those passages that seem to cross one
another, but by ascribing some humanity or error, (if I may interpret you) to
the penmen, seeing St. Paul says, We prophesy but in part. and seeing one of
the Evangelists leaves out the doxology in the Lords prayer.

Sir, if you take these thoughts, arising from these and the like grounds, as
your burden, I do not blame you, but pity you in that respect; but if your
judgment indeed think so, I am sorry you should harbonr such thoughts one
hour within doors: for you know that holy men writ the Scriptures (but so far
they might err, but it is added) as they were inspired, or (as the Original
has it) as they were moved or carried in the arms of the holy Ghost, and so
how could they err? how could God lie? It is true, Paul did prophecy but in
part, and is this an argument, because he did not prophecy fully, therefore in
some things he did not prophecy truly; I am persuaded you will say there are
many things my poor thoughts have suggested to you, as true; and yet I am
persuaded I do in them prophecy (if I may so say) but in part. The Spirit of
God directed the four Evangelists to write, yet so, as they did not all write
what another writ, but in great wisdom left some things doubtful, and short
in one, which are more clear and full in another: and hence the Doxologie is
fully set down in one, and not in another, and many reasons I could set you
down why, but that it is needless. I grant you ought not to put up all with a
charitable opinion of Scripture, but if you can, by reason, reading, and
comparing, help your heart to a full persuasion, this is Scripture: but many
things you cannot get satisfaction for, by that way and means, but still your
Spirit will be left dark and doubtful; What course will you here take for
resolution, which is Scripture? The Papists say it is so, because the Church
has christened it for Scripture; you say you will see reason for it that it is
so, or else you cannot be satisfied, then I fear you will never be satisfied.
(I think) In this case therefore these two things you are to do,

1. To go to God by prayer, to give you a resolution of all your doubts, and by
some means or other, some light to see whether this is his word or not,
Secondly, if this be his word, that he would persuade your heart of it, that it
is so: For the least resolution which is Scripture, and which is not, is made
by the same persuasion, and sole persuasion of the same Spirit that writ the
Scripture. Concerning the Angels that appeared to Mary. see Gerard. and he
briefly, (I think) will satisfy you: In your answer to the particular
scruples about the Scripture sense, and the dissonancy of them. Only this I
will add to the last clause about these things, that if the Scripture be
inspired by the holy Ghost, and that not in the sum and substance of it, but to
every word and sentence of it, which I think you will not doubt of, when you
have considered it, then I think it will undeniably follow, that the same
Spirit of truth is also a Spirit of order, and hence the method of various
penning of it, is from the Spirit too, which you say you stick at.

Again to your third thing, Answ. 2.
concerning your spirit being burdened with involuntary infirmities, as
burdens, but not as sins. I say nothing now, because I perceive by one part
of your reply that the Lord has done you some good by the first answer, only
it is your grief you cannot fear them, nor condemn your self for them, as
damning sins. For satisfaction of which, I hope this reply to your second
trouble will give you some satisfaction.

Again to your fourth question, Quest. 4.
to know whether these changes you have sometimes, and these movings of the
Spirit, are not of natural temper, or Gods Spirit. It seems I did a little
mistake the meaning, because you meant not the maine work of grace, but
occasional stirrings and movings of heart, as by reading some pa^heticall
Letter, your Spirit is moved with joy or sorrow, which it may be will not be
stirred at some other time, as by drinking a cup of wine, the spirit is made
more cheerful and lively, etc.

I answer these three things. Answ.


1. First, That it is very usual for natural affections to be raised by a
natural temper, as by drinking, eating, noveltinesse of the Gospel, John's
candle flies were ravished with the Gospel: People are naturally moved
sometimes by a thundering Minister, yet never a whit the more grace, etc. and
it is a good speech of Doctor Ames: Arminian universal grace (as they describe
it) may be the effect of a good dinner sometimes.

2. That though the being of grace depends not upon the temper of the body, yet
the exercise of grace, and many gifts of grace, together with the feeling of it
does. And hence a good dinner, and sometimes wine to a sad melancholy (if
gracious) heart may remove rem prohibentem that may keep grace, as joy and
thankefullnesse from working, and so take the grace and draw it out, not create
and diffuse the grace: The Prophet called (you know) for a Minstril, which some
think, (and that upon good grounds) was to raise up his heavy heart, and make
him cheerful and fit to speak, the body is the instrument, which if it be
broken, the best grace will hardly sound, but if whole, then they will.

3. If you would know when these things only draw out grace, or make a thing
like un^o grace in the Soul, I answer, by these two things chiefly.

1. If it be true grace, it ever makes you more humble and vile in your own
eyes, and say, Lord, why do thou give me any desire to thee, any
cheerfulness in serving thee? etc.

2. It makes you more thankful, and to bless the Lord that he thus remembers
you, for this is a standing rule, what ever comes from nature, and a man's
self, it ever builds up it self, and returns to self again; what ever
grace comes from Christ, it drives a man out of himself, by making him humble,
and draws him unto Christ that sent him, by making him thankful; I think all
grace, and stirrings, and movings, that have not this double effect in some
measure, are to be suspected, and if they have, it is dangerous to doubt
whether they are true or no.

5. Again, Your ^ifth thing about providence, you say you cannot see a positive
providence, although you do see a negative providence in all your occasions,
and comforts, and crosses, you meet withal, as namely, you can thank God for
not taking away your life, etc. but you cannot see God giving it.

I answer, Answ. 1.
1. Consider what I writ to you at first about this question in general.

2. Ponder sadly whether any creature or appurtenance to it, has its being
from it self, or from the will and word of God, viz. I will have such a man to
be, and such a memory to be, etc. I think you will say nothing can make it
self, therefore here is a positive providence in having life, liberty, etc.

3. Consider whether the same will and word that gives it a being, together
with all the appurtenances to it, does not also give it act and motion. That it
is so, I thus demonstrate it. 1. Every creature is made for an end, for no wise
efficient, but works for some wise end. 2. That no creature can lead it self
to its end, if sinful or irrational. 3. God must and does lead it by its
several acts and movings to that end. Hence 4. Every act is determined by God.

And although I grant some creatures move freely, some necessarily, yet it is
from a positive will and providence that they move, act and see. Therefore you
see what cause there is to see a positive providence in every thing.

Concerning the rest of your letter, Oh that I had time and heart to write
more, yet I hope I have writ enough for this time, and the Lord knows whether
evermore or no. However I thank you heartily for improving me this way of
writing, who have my mouth slopt from speaking. I wish I had more such friends
to deal thus with me, and my self more time, and a more fruitful head and
heart to improve my self, this, or any other like way for them: For who knows
what breathings of Gods Spirit are lost for want of writing, especially when
there is no season of speaking. Truly Sir, I meet with few that are much
troubled in that manner as your self, but they go on in an easy, quiet, and
very dangerous way: which troubles (I persuade my self) keep you awaking, when
other virgins are slumbring, and after which (I am persuaded) the Lord intends
to use you for more then common service, if you wade well through them; however
as I said before* be not discouraged, or too much perplexed in sorrow for them.
For surely, as far as I can guess, the Lord is preparing you for himself by
them. I shall not forget you, though I never saw you: and I beseech you if you
have any spark of affection toward me, kindled by these few lines, remember
when you are best able to pray for your self, to remember to look after me
and mine, and all that go with me on the mighty waters, and then to look up
and sigh to Heaven for me, that the Lord would out of his free grace but bring
me to that good land, and those glorious Ordinances, and that there I may but
behold the face of the Lord in his Temple, though he never delight to use me
there, though I and mine should possibly beg there, and that if the Lord should
call me to my solemn work and service for the good of his Church and People,
and company that go with me, or are gone before me, that then the lord Jesus
would reveal his secrets to me, and enable me the little time I have to live,
to bef^uitfull to him, and to have a larger heart then ever for him. As for
your self, I shall desire the Lord to keep you blameless and unspotted in an
evil world, and that as he has begun, so he would perfect, and crown his
divine graces and work in you, and that you may be preserved from national
sins, which shortly bring National and most heavy plagues.

And the presence of the Lord may abide with you, and in you, until the Lord
call for you. Remember my kind love to your Father, whose name I have forgot,
and by whom I could not send these lines, being then hindered by business. Now
the peace of Jesus Christ be with you and keep you upright and blameless till
death. And if I never see you more till the last and great day, then Farewell,
Farewell.

Yours in Jesus Christ T. S.


