SUBJECTION TO CHRIST IN ALL HIS ORDINANCES, AND APPOINTMENTS, The best means
to preserve our LIBERTY. Together with a TREATISE OF Ineffectual Hearing the
Word; How we may know whether we have heard the same effectually: And by what
means it may become effectual unto us. With some remarkable Passages of his
life. By Thomas Shephard, late Pastor of the Church of Christ in Cambridge in
New England.

MATTHEW. 11. 29. Take my yoke upon you, etc. LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John
Rothwell at the Fountain in Cheap Side. 1657.

TO THE READER.
ONe of the sweetest refreshing mercies of God, to his New England People,
amidst all their wilderness-tryals, and straits, and sorrows, wherewith they at
first conflicted in those ends of the earth, has been their
Sanctuary-enjoyments, in the beauties of holiness, where they have seen and
met with him whom their souls love, and had familiar and full converse with
him, above what they could then enjoy in the land from whence they came. This
is that that has sweetened many a bitter Cup to the remnant of Israel. The Lord
alone led him, and there was no strange God with him, was said concerning
Israel of old, and this was accounted mercy enough when he led them into a land
where no man dwelt, and which no man passed thorough. What God has done for
New England in this re^^^ct, and what their Sanctuary mercies be, thou have
here a taste, though but a taste. These notes may well be thought to be less
accurate, than if the Author himself had published them, and to want some
polishments and trimmings, which it were not fit for any other to add* however
thou will find them full of useful truths, and may easily discern his
Spirit, and a Spirit above his own breathing in them.

Concerning the Author; it were worth the while to write the story of his life.

It is needless to speak in his commendation, His works praise him in the
gates. They that know him, know he had as real apprehensions of the things of
God, and lived as much with God, and with his own heart, and more than the most
of Christians do. He had his education at Immanuel-College in Cambridge. The
Conversion and Change of his heart was wrought betimes when he lived in the
University, and enjoyed Dr. Prestons Ministry, whereby God had the very best
and strength of his parts and years for himself. When he was first awakened to
looked after Religion, having before swam quietly in the stream of the times, he
was utterly at a loss which way to take, being much molested with suggestions
of Atheism, (in the depths whereof Junius was quite lost for a time) and moved
and tempted to the ways of Familism also; for some advised him in this
condition to go to Grindlestone and to hear Mr. Brierley, and being informed
that the people were wont to find a mighty possessing over powering presence,
and work of the Spirit when they heard him, he resolved upon the journey; but
God in mercy diverted him; having reserved him for better things. Yet he read
what they said, and the Books of H. N. amongst the rest, where meeting with
this passage, That a Christian is so swallowed up in the spirit, that what
action soever the spirit moves him to, suppose whoredom, he may do it, and it
is no sin to him; this was enough: for being against the light of his natural
conscience, it bred in him an utter abhorrency of th^se loose and vile ways
and principles ever after. This ada^tage also he had, that Doctor Tuckney was
then his Tutor, whom he acquainted with his condition, and had his direction
and help in those mis^rable fluctuations and straits of his soul. Happy is the
man whose doubtings end in establishments, nil tam certum, quam quod de dubio
certum, but when men arrive in Skepticism, as the last issue and result of all
their debates and thoughts of heart about Religion, it had been good for such
if they had never been born.

After his heart was changed, it was observed of him, that his abilities of
mind were also much enlarged, divinity, though it be chiefly the Art and rule
of the will, yet raising and perfecting the understanding also; which I
conceive came to pass chiefly by this means, that the fear of God fixed him,
and made him serious, and taught him to meditate, which is the main improvement
of the understanding. Therefore such as came to him for direction about their
studies, he would often advise them to be much in meditation, professing, that
having spent some time in meditation every day in his beginning times, and
written down his thoughts; he saw cause now to bless God for it. He was
assigned to the work of the Ministry at a solemn meeting and conference of
sundry godly Ministers about it, there were to the number of twelve present at
the meeting, whose solemn advice was that he should serve the Lord in the
Gospel of his Son; wherein they have been the salvation of many a soul: for
upon this he addressed himself to the work, with that reality and seriousness in
wooing and winning souls, that his words made deep impressions, and seldom or
never sell to the ground.

He was lecturer a while at E^rles-cone in Essex (which I take it was the first
place of his Ministry) where he did much good, and the people there, though
now it is long since, and many are gone, yet they have a very precious and deep
remembrance of him, of the mighty power of God by him to this day. But W. Lawd
then Bishop of London soon stopped his mouth, and drove him away, as he did many
other godly Ministers from Essex at the same time. After this he lived at
Butter-chrome in Yorkshire, at Sir Richard Darleys house, till the Iniquity of
those times hunted him thence also. Then he went to Northumberland till
silenced there also; and being thus molested and chased up and down at home, he
fled to New England, and after some difficulties and delays, by great storms
and disasters at Sea upon the Sands and Coasts of Yarmouth, which retarded his
voyage till another year, he arrived there at last; where he was Pastor to a
precious flock at Cambridge about fourteen years. He was but 46. or 47. years
old when he dyed. His sickness began with a sore throat, and then a squinacy,
and then a fever, whereof be dyed August 25. 1649. This was one thing he said
upon his deathbed, Lord, I am vile, but thou art righteous; and to those that
were about him, he bade them love Jesus Christ dearly, that little part that I
have in him, is no small comfort to me now.

His manner of preaching was close and searching, and with abundance of
affection and compassion to his hearers. He took great pains in his
preparations for his public labors, accounting it a cursed thing to do the
work of the Lord negligently; and therefore spending usually two or three whole
days in preparing for the work of the Sabbath, had his Sermons finished
usually on Saturday by two of the clock; He has some^ime expressed himself thus
in public* God will curse that man's labors that lumbers up and down in the
world all the week, and then upon Saturday in the afternoon goes to his Study,
when as God knows that time were little enough to pray and weep in, and to get
his heart in frame, etc. He affected plainness together with power in
preaching, not seeking abstrusities, nor liking to hover and soar aloft in dark
expressions, and so shoot his Arrows (as many Preachers do) over the heads of
his hearers.

It is a wretched stumbling block to some, that his Sermons are somewhat
strict, and (as they term it) legal: some souls can relish none but
mealy-mouthed Preachers, who come with soft and smooth, and toothlesse words,
byssina verba byssinis viris: But these times need humbling Ministeries, and
blessed be God that there are any; for where there are no Law-Sermons, there
will be few Gospel-lives, and were there more Law-preaching in England by the
men of gifts, there would be more Gospel-walking both by themselves and the
People. To preach the Law, not in a forced affected manner, but wisely and
powerfully, together with the Gospel, as Christ himself was wont to do ( Mat.
5. and elsewhere) is the way to carry on all three together, sense of misery,
the application of the remedy, and the returns of thankfulness and duty. Nor
is any doctrine more comforting than this humbling way of God, if rightly
managed.

It is certain the foundations of after-^orrows and ruins to the Church, have
ever been laid in the days of her prosperity, and peace, and rest, when she
injoyes all her pleasant things. This the watchmen of Israel should foresee,
and therefore what should they do but seek to humble and awaken, and search and
melt men's hearts, and warn every one night and day with tears, that in the day
of their peace, they may not sin away the things of their Peace. There are
therefore three requests, which we would desire to beg of God, with bended
knees for England, to prepetuate the present prosperity and peace thereof; and
let us commend them to the mourning and praying ones amongst us, that they
would be the Lords remembrancers in these Petitions.

1. A right understanding and sober use of liberty. For when People come first
out of bondage, they are apt to be not only somewhat fond of their liberties,
but to wax giddy and wanton with liberty, and instead of shaking off the bl^ody
yokes of men, to cast off at least in part the Government and blessed yoke of
Christ also. Hence it ^o^es about, that a day of rest from persecution, which
should be a day of liberty to the Saints to serve God, may become a day of
great seduction, and of liberty to seducing Spirits, to deceive, and damn, and
mislead them from the truths and ways of God. But the machin^tions of men,
though in conjunction with the powers and gates of hell, shall certainly fall
at last before Truth and Prayer. And of this is the first Treatise which is
seasonably published.

To be fast bound to the rule with all the bonds and cords of God and Man is
the Perfection of liberty. Hence there is not a surer Cornerstone of ruin to
a Christian Commonwealth, that God will break them with unparalleled
destructions by some overflowing scourge, when the day of vengeance is in his
heart, than to think that Religion is none of their Liberties, and yet how many
sons of Belial, are there void of counsel, neither is there any understanding
in them, who imagine vain things, and say, Let us break his bands asunder, and
cast away his cord^ from us? How do men run into extremes, either stretching
and paring every one to the Giants bed, and thereby denying liberty to the
Saints to serve him, according to the measure of their stature in Christ, or
else on the other hand opening the door so wide, as to plead for liberty to all
the disguised enemies and sins against Christ, thereby instead of uniting the
Saints in one, endeavoring though a dreadful mistake to unite Christ and
Belial? It is a sad thing when a man is come to this pass, that he is not able
to resolve his conscience whether Baal be God, or the Lord be God, and
therefore would not have the worshippers of Baal punished, for fear lest Baal
should be God. Is liberty nothing but indifferency and irresolution of spirit
in the things of God? woe to the valley of vision, even to a sinful Nation
laden with iniquity, and led away from the truth as it is in Jesus, and to the
Host of the high ones that sit on high, in the day of his visitation, if this
be the spirit of these times; for in the day when he visits, God will visit for
these things.

2. That his Word, especially the Word of his Gospel, may be precious and
powerful, may run and be glorified in England. Alas! as there is much
preaching, but few serious, few heartbreaking Sermons: so there is much
hearing, but little effectual hearing. Men stand like the Oaks of Bashan,
before the words of the God of Israel, no terror of the Lord, no news of
everlasting destruction, no evidence of the fierce anger of God upon them,
which burns down to the bottom of hell, can take hold upon their spirits, or
awaken their consciences, to make inquiries after God in this their day: yea if
the bars of the pit of hell, were broken, and if the devils of hell should come
flying up amongst us, in our solemn Assemblies, from the fiery corners of the
Pit helow, with everlasting burnings about their ears, and with chains of
darkness rattling at their heels, they might fright men out of their wits
perhaps, or from the acts of sin it may be for a time, but it would not work
upon their hearts, their desperate, dead, besotted hearts. The fools in Israel
will have their swinge in their lusts, and go to hell in a full cariere, let
God do his best. Oh the hardness of men's hearts! And the main reason of it, is
because they hear but a sound of words, but they do not hear the Lord in that
Word: they hear words that are spoken by God, but they hear not, they see not
God himself therein. If ever thou would profit by reading or hearing, take
every word as a special message to thee from God; and of this fruitless
hearing, and the rules of hearing aright is the other Treatise.

3. Conscience of his Sabbaths. Of which there is an elaborate discourse of
this Author, formerly published by himself. Therefore we shall add no more.
The blessing of heaven go with these, to make us a willing People in the day of
his power, to submit to his Word, and to come under the wing of the Government
of Jesus Christ, as esteeming these spiritual mercies our best mercies, our
choycest and dearest liberties. If ever the Lord Jesus (which mercy forbid)
should take his doleful and final farewell of the English Nation, as when he
laid the tombstone upon Jerusalem, such as these will be his mournings over
us: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets and burnest them
that are sent unto thee, as they did in the time of Popery, how often would I
have gathered thy children together (by my Word and Spirit therein) even as a
Hen gathers her Chickens under the wings (of my special Government and
Protection?) but ye would not; behold your house is left unto you desolate. But
the Lord who does not only make the day dark with night, but also turns the
shadow of death into the morning, even the Lord avert these evils, and the Lord
make the English Nation his Hephfibah, and the land Beulah, which is the prayer
of his Mourners in Sion, and of

Thy Servants in Jesus, and for Jesus sake, William Greenhill. Samuel Mather.


TO THE Christian READER.
THe precious memory of the Author of these ensuing SERMONS, needs no reviving
to any gracious heart, that had any knowledge of him. Yea the world knows in
part (though but in a little part) by some pieces of his formerly Printed
(while he was yet (...)) who this Author was, what it owes to God for him, and
how justly it might sigh over his grave, with that of the Apostle, Of whom the
World was not worthy! His praise throughout all the Churches, is far above
any addition by so mean a pen as writes these lines. But it is not fit that the
first page of any thing published after his death (for I doubt not but his
death is long ago publicly took notice of) should go without some witness of
a mournful remembrance thereof, which indeed no tears can sufficiently lament.
We who sometimes sat under his shadow, and were fed from God by him, (the poor
flock of this Shepherd) among whom he lived, testifying Repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; and whom he sometimes exhorted,
comforted and charged every one of us as a Father does his Children; we cannot
but carry sorrow in the bottom of our hearts to this day, that we must here
see his face no more. Neither do we believe that his loss remains with us
alone, or only within the limits of this remote wilderness; the benefit (and
consequently the want) of such a burning and shining Light, is of more general
concernment that we easily apprehend, especially in this Age, wherein not only
many ^it in utter darkness, but which is more, the new Light thereof is
darkness; and the Love of many waxing cold. But we must all be silent before
Him, whose judgments are unsearchable. Neither may we presume to say to him,
What do thou?

It is instantly and not without cause desired by many, that such relics of
his Labors as do survive him, may be (at least some of them) imparted to the
public. To effect any thing considerable that way, is not an easy or sudden
work. But this small piece being at present attained; it seemed not amiss to
let it pass the Press. These were some of his Lecture-Sermons, Preached most of
them in the year, 1641. They are now transcribed by a godly Brother, partly
from the Authors own notes, partly from what he took from his mouth: The
subject (in both the Texts) is of great use, and needful for these times;
wherein there is more Liberty, than good use of it; and much more common and
outward, than saving and effectual knowledge of the word of God. These
posthumous editions are far short of what the Author was wont to do, and of
what the Sermons were in preaching. But though the sense be not every where so
full, nor every thing so thoroughly spoken to, nor the style so good by far, (as
the Authors manner was) yet the intelligent Reader will find a precious
treasure of truth in it, not fit to be buried or neglected. The Prophets do not
live for ever, but their words do: The Lord make them such ever-living words as
may take hold of all our hearts, not for judgment, but for mercy, for one of
these waye^ they shall live; yea, rise up at the last day.

Imprimatur,

March 29. 1652. EDM. CALAMY.

THE TABLE.
B.
BOndage: What it is to which God delivers them that cast off his government.
Page 7 Iuvasion by foreign enemies. 7 By setting authority against them. 7
Oppressing them by one another. 8 Taking away good Governors. 8 Giving them up
to Satan, 9 And to their own lusts. 9 What are the sins, for which God brings
into Bondage? 13 Bondage of the good and the wicked, how it differs. 15
C.
CHurch of God, why deprived of her liberty. 11 Church Members that are private
men in their duties are. 48. what etc. The causes of their neglect of their
duty. 52* etc. Why men receive not more good from them than they do. 53
Covenant of God, if broken, God rejects such as break it. 3 To break Covenant
with Christ, is to cast off his government as King. 31 People of God may be
said to break Covenant, and how. 33
G.
GOvernment: see Power. To cast of Gods Government, provokes God, to bring into
bondage. 3 Reasons of it. 9, 10 etc. What Gods government is. 4 The sorts of
it. 4 Internal. 4 And External. 5 Want of government, a judgment. 8 When men
may be said to cast off Christ's government. 18. see 24. and see Ordinances,
When men submit to Christ. 20, 21. to 29 In Christ's government, he uses a
threefold power. 30 Motives to come under Christ's Government. 81
L.
Laws, the causes of the breach of Laws. 67 What prudence is to be used in
making Laws. 70 And how for human laws bind. 70 etc* Gods Law only can
immediately bind the Conscience. 70 Good Laws have relation to the word and
law of God. 71 this proved. ib. Of Penal Laws. 74 Liberty see Government; the
sweetest Liberty, is to be under Christ. 11 Liberty, how its abused. 79 Love to
Christ, a sign of subjection to him. 84 Love to Gods people, another sign. 84
Who do not love Gods people. 85
M.
MAgistrates, We are to be subject to them, and why* 64 When Christ's power is
cast off in this respect, not being subject to them. 64 And objections about
this answered. 66 Ministerial power what it is. 54 And if this be not
submitted, Christ is cast off. 69 And when men despised it. 62
O.
ORdinances, When men add their own inventions to Gods Ordinances, they cast
off Christ's Government. 34 We must take heed off this; and why. 35 When men
destroy Ordinances and deny them, they cast off Christ's government. 35 To cast
of ordinances, is a temptation of Satan. 36 When Christ is thrust out of
ordinances, his government is cast off. 39 To pollute Ordinances what it is. 39
1. To contemn them. 39. 40 2. To use them with unbroken hearts. 40 3. To use
them without faith. 41 4. By not looking to Christ in them. 41
P.
POwer, see Government. Power of Christ in Government. 1. Absolute. 2.
Derivative. 3. Ministerial. 30 1. Absolute and Kingly: and when men cast off
this. 31 2. Derivative power which Christ gives to the Church, what this is,
see 45, etc* What power a private member of the Church has. 41, etc. 3. There
is a Ministerial Power. 54 What this Power is. 55, etc. Power of Christ* in a
Commonwealth, when its cast off. 63 See Majestrates. Of inferiors power, and
when that is cast off. 68
R.
REproofs, to be taken, and the taking of them, is the trial of a Christian,
and a Hypocrite. 47
S.
SAtan, to be given over to him, a judgment of God. 9 Service, what it is. 2
Servants censured for running from their Masters. 75 Subjection, see
Government. Dangerous not to yield subjection to Christ. 76 Subjection to
Christ, when it is to be yielded. 82 Directions how to yield subjection to
Christ. 85
T.
THankefulness. We are to be thankful for our liberty and freedom from
bondage. 77 Motives and Directions to it. 77, etc. Objections answered that
hinder this duty. 80
U.
UNbelief; The occasions of it. 83
W.
WIll of Christ, twofold. 23 How man cast off Christ^ will. ^4
A WHOLESOME CAVEAT For a time of LIBERTY.
2 CHRONICLES. 12. 8. Nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may know
my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the Country.
THe greatest part of this Chapter is spent in setting down that famous War
which Shishak King of Egypt made against Rehoboam King of Judah.

The cause of this War in regard of Shishak is not set down; probable
conjectures there be: Jeroboam probably might be treacherous, who having a
party in Egypt, lest Rehoboam should grow too great, together with some other
pretended wrongs, might awaken this Bear from his den; but in regard of God,
you may see the Reason set down, Verse. 2. Because they had transgressed against
the Lord.

The time of this War is set down in the 1. Verse. When he had established the
Kingdom by wholesome Laws, erecting Gods worship, and countenancing godly
men, 2 Chro. 11. 16, 17. which continued three years, and strengthened himself
by fortified places, and munition fit for war, as in the foregoing Chapter
appears. Now when he had most peace and quiet, he and all Israel suddenly
forsake the Lord, which was the fourth year; and in the fifth year comes
Shishak, and with a mighty host wastes all before him until he come to the
chief City.

Now in Verse. the 5. and 6. is set down the repentance of the people with their
Princes especially. Shemajah, who no doubt had spoke against their idolatrous
courses before, takes his season when they were low and tamed, and tells them
the true cause of their misery, Verse. 5. Many sins there were in the Land, as
Idolatty, and Whoredoines, etc. yet the venom was, They had forsaken the Lord:
Let the sin be what it will be, yet let it be such a one as men forsake the
Lord by it, that is the provocation; hereupon they humble themselves, some
effectually, some hypocritically, yet all outwardly, and say the Lord is
righteous; they extenuate not their sin, they lay not the blame on man, no not
on Shishak, but see the Lord, justify his proceedings, the Lord is righteous,
we unrighteous, although it were more heavy then it is.

Now in the 7. Verse. and in the words read is set down the mitigation of Gods
plague, and the moderation of his chastisement, I will not pour out all my
wrath, yet I think it not fit to show perfect deliverance, I Will make them
servants, to let them know, etc.

There are two parts in the words read.

1. The punishment or chastisement on Judah for forsaking the Lord, and
backsliding from him, which is hondage and privation of the liberty they had,
they must be shishaks servants.

2. The Lords end, it was very gracious, That they may know my service, etc.

For explication.

1. What is meant by service?

Answ. There are two things in service. 1. Government. 2. Subjection: cheerful
obedience to that governemt. Both the Hebrew word, as also the nature of the
thing it self has these two.

God sets up his Government over a people, his people do or should subject
cheefully to this government; By my service is therefore meant my government,
and your subjection wrought by me to this governmemt.

2. They shall know.

1. Not by the knowledge of the brain, for that they know now, but knowledge of
experience, as it is said in Ezekiel. 6. ult. When I shall have made the Land
desolate in all their habitations, they shall know that I am the Lord. Now what
shall they know of it?

Answ. the difference betwe^n them, the sorrow of the one, the sweet of the
other; the misery of the one, and blessedness of the other; the bondage of the
one, and the liberty of the other.

There might be many things observed from the words, but I note only the
general.

Obser. Doctr. 1.
That when any people of God forsake the Lord, and cast off his government ^ver
them, they provoke the Lord to put them under the bondage of another
government. They that abuse Gods liberty must be under bondage; the Lord has a
Kingdom in this world most glorious; hence when men will not be under it, if
they will not be ruled by him, they must be ruled by the whip; and if Christ's
laws cannot bind, Christ's chains must. Ier. 5. 19. And it shall come to pass
when ye shall say, Where^ore does the Lord all these things unto us? then shall
thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your
land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours. Psalm, 107. 10,
11. Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being ^ound in
affliction and iron, because they rebelled against the words of God, and
contemned the counsel of the most high. Ezekiel. 20. 24, 25. Because they had not
executed my Judgments, but had despised my Statutes, and polluted my Sabbaths,
etc. Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and judgments,
whereby they should not live, etc. Zach. 11. 15, 16. And the Lord said unto me,
Take unto thee yet the instruments of a foolish Shepherd. Verse. 16. For lo I
will raise up a shepherd in the land which shall not visit those that be cut
off, nor seek the young one, nor heal that that is broken, nor feed that that
stands still, etc.

When people break convenant with God, and loath him, then says the Lord, I'Ie
not feed and then he sets over them Idol shepherds.

This is certain, when the soul will not subject it self to God, he goes about
to subject God to him, nay to his lusts, Isa. 43. 24. Thou have made me to
serve with thy sins. For one of them must stoop, and a man would have the Lord
be merciful, patient, and pitiful to him, when he is in league with his
lusts, now this the Lord will not do: And hence, if he does not destroy him, he
with-draws himself from serving of the creature, and hence other evils take
hold of it, and bring it under. When Adam stood, and was for God, all creatures
served him, and the riches of Gods goodness preserved him, the Lord
communicated the sweet of his government or service to him: but when turned
away from the right ways of God: Now if the Lord should serve him by governing
of him in goodness, he should serve a lust, and bow to the creature, nay to a
lust, which is a viler thing, then for one creature to fall down and worship
another. Therefore now hence it comes to pass, because the Lord will not be a
servant to any man's lust, there must be some other government that must seize
upon them. Hence set all the Saints in the Churches with their faces subjected
to the Lord, his good will and righteous ways, and then his goodness shall flow
down upon them in a through Christ, for otherwise we have nothing to do with
good, but when we are set right for God. Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth thee unto
me for ever, yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, in judgment,
in loving kindness and mercy, etc. The Lord will then command all creatures to
be serviceable to his Church and people; Verse. 21, 22. But on the contrary
misery must needs seiz upon the soul that does cast off the government of the
Lord Jesus: Thus much for the general explication of the point.

Now in particular. 1. What is this government or service of God?

2. What is the bondage he captivates his unto?

3. Why does the Lord do thus?

Quest. 1. Quest. 1.
What is this government or service of God which being shaken off the Lord
gives them over to bondage?

Ans. Answ.
There is a double government of the Lord over his people.

1. Internal or inward, of which our Savior speaks, Luke 17. 21. The kingdom
of God (says Christ) comes not by observation and outward pomp; For behold the
kingdom of God is within you: And this is nothing else in general, but when
the Lord does by his Spirit in the word of his grace cause the whole soul
willingly to submit and subject it self to the whole will of God so far as it is
made known to it; this is the inward kingdom of God and government of Christ in
the soul. To. 8* 14. So many as are led by the Spirit are the sons of God. Ps.
110. 2. The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, etc. 2. Cor.
10. 4. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God
the pulling down of strong holds. Verse. 5. Bringing into captivity every
thought to the obedience of Christ. There are mighty boisterous distemp^rs, but
the Lord when he comes in his Kingdom, to sit upon the royal throne of the
hearts of his people, now they fly: and this is the inward Kingdom of Christ,
like a poor Subject pardoned and received to favor, he is before the face of
the Prince continually attending on him. Revel. 7. 14, 15. These are they which
came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb. Verse. 15. Therefore are they before the throne of
God, and serve him day and night in his Temple, etc. Now this is meant in part
by Gods service in these days; do you think the Lord cared for thousands of
Rams? no, but to walk humbly, Mica. 6. Did he care for Temple and Ordinances?
no, but Isa. 1. 19. If he be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land. Neh. 9. 20. In those days he gave them his good Spirit to instruct them.

2. External or outward, the end and instigation of which was to set up and
help forward the inward; for external Ordinances are nothing in themselves,
mean things, but as they are appointed and sanctified for this end, they are
most glorious: and therefore Christ threatens the Jews, Matthew. 21. 43. That
the Kingdom should be taken from them; what was that? Surely not inward, for
that they had not, but the outward and external means called Gods kingdom; all
these helps and means shall be taken from you, and all laid ruinous. Now this
external kingdom of Christ is double.

1. The external kingdom or government of God by his Church, in the
administration an^ execution, and subjection to the blessed Ordinances of God,
wherein the power and Kingdom of Christ is seen, and thus, Dan. 2. 44, 45.
Dan. 7. 27. It shall be given to the Saints of the most high, etc. Not to
profane herds of beasts, or cages of unclean birds, but to the Saints of the
most high, Whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all the Princes of
the world shall subject themselves to this kingdom of Christ.

This outward Kingdom Christ administreth amongst his people in this world: And
this was part of the Lords government over his people herein, though various
from our form now.

2. Of the Commonwealth, which may have diverse forms, and had in the time of
Israel; but it receiving its law from God, and governing for God, hence it was
the government of God, and subjection hereunto was subjection and service to
God himself: And hence when the people cast off Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 7. They have
not rejected thee but me, Rev. 11. 15. The kingdoms of the world are become
the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever. For although the Commonwealth of Israel was made up of the Church, and
hence Josephus calls it a Theocracy, where the Lord governed; and yet the same
thing had diverse (...), forms and respects, and hence there was a diverse
government then, and hence made diverse, 2 Chronicles. 19. 5, 8. Iehosaphat sets
Judges in the land throughout all the fenced Cities. Such is the wildness,
boldness, and carelessness of men's hearts, that they do not only need laws, but
watchmen over them to see they be kept: and hence the Lord appointed some
chief, some Judges in every City, and also some in every Village, as by
proportion may be gathered, Exodus 18. every ten men had one over them.

Now this was the blessed wisdom of God to put all into sweet subordination
one unto another for himself.

1. Every one professing his name is made for God, for Christ, as Lord of
Lords, unto whom every knee must bow, and inwardly subject.

2. Hence the Lord (it being not good to leave man to himself) erects a
Kingdom of the Church with his own power, and authority, and government in it
for that end.

3. This being poor shiftlesse against inward and outward revenge, hence the
Lords sets up Kingdoms of the world, which either rule for this end of these
ends or not, if they do not, they are to answer it, and shall one days to
Christ, whom God has made head over all things to the Church. Ephesians. 1. 22. If
they do, then their government, judgment and kingdom is the Lords in a
special manner: and hence break the yoke of subjection to any one of these,
you cast off Christ, the Lords government and service; and being so linked
together, in truth if you break one you break all, and this will provoke the
Lord to make you kiss the clink, and to put your necks under iron bondage that
refuse subjection to him.

Quest. 2. Quest. 2.
What is that bondage or other government to which the Lord gives over his
people when they have cast off his government, this will provoke the Lord if
the Lord be cast off, and the casting off the government of Christ will bring
the most famous Kingdoms, Churches and Families into bondage; you will say what
is this bondage? when is it that the Lord takes his season for the execution of
it?

A. 1. Answ. 1.
The Lord takes his own times to do it, these were a 12. month before the Lord
sent Shishak: Here he was more quick. Nebuchadnezza^ comes at last, and many
years it is before the Lord does it.

2. Answ. 2.
The Lord is various in working, as he is wonderful and has diverse ways or
means of bondage, he has more prisons and chains than one.

First, sometimes the Lord opens the door of a Kingdom or State, for the inrode
of some foreign, or it may be barbarous Enemy, breaking in sometime by power,
coming in sometime by craft, and then ruling like Lions, which the Lord makes
to vex and prick the people of God; thus here their lives were spared, but
liberties lost. Thus Judge. 2. 13, 14. They forsook the Lord, and served Baal
and Ashtaroth. And in verse. 14. The anger of the Lord waxed hot against Israel,
and he dilivered them into the hands of spoylers that spoiled them. Ver. 15
Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the Lord was against them for evil.
And this the Lord does many ^imes suddenly, that one would never think that
ever the Lord should be so sudden; the Lord can be as quick to punish, as man
to sin, and that unexpectedly. Eccl, 9. 12. Man knows (...) his time but are
taken like fish in an evil net suddenly, Lam. 4. 12. The kingdoms of the
earth, and all the inhabitants of the world would not have believed, Judge. 5.
8. They set up new gods, and war was in the gate.

^. Sometimes the Lord turns the edge of that lawful authority God has set
over them against themselves, to be a heavy scourge from God upon them: Thus it
was with Israel in Egypt, Exodus 1. 8, 9. there arose a King which knew not
Joseph, and it is said then they were oppressed. Thus Jeroboam whom the ten
Tribes chose, Hos. 5. 11. he oppressed the people he will be in novating, and
this becomes their oppression: Thus the people under the reign of degenerate
Solomon (though their complaint might be in part unjust.) Such is the venom of
sin an unsubduednesse to the Kingdom God, that the Lord turns light into
darkness, and makes an aching head matter of sorrow to all the state and body
of people. Eccles. 10. 16. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child. And
one man shall do a world of hurt, one Shebna or Amaziah, and this the Lord does
in justice many times for casting off his government.

3. Sometimes the Lord gives a people up into the hands of one another to be
mutual oppressors of each other, that a man neighbor shall be his oppressor.
Zach. 11. 9 I will pity no more the inhabitaents of the, land, I will deliver
them every one into his neighbors hands. I will feed you no more, that which
dies let it dye, and that which is cut off let it be cut off, and let the rest
eat every one the flesh of another. Sometimes the Lord is pleased to send
mavelous straits into a place, that men are forced to imbondage themselves
sometimes by words as bitter as death, as sharp as arrows; the Lord is pleased
for the forsaking of his righteous ways to make a man's self rip his own
bowels, the father against the child, the master shall be a scourage to the
servant, and the servant shall be a scourge to his master, weary him of his
lffe, the government of the Lord in a man's heart or family being cast off, Mic.
7. 4, 5. Trust not in a friend: No greater bondage in the world then for men
professing the Lord, to be desperately set one against another.

4. By taking from a people all that righteous power of government the Lord
has set over them, when a people despising the Lord and inward government
first (for there all begins) and so not prizing what they have, nor praying for
them, nor subjecting to them, the Lord hereupon sends some sickness, or some
other evil, that they are either suddenly taken away, or gradually, and when
they are gone, all sink, or else such cross carriages, that as Moses said, so
say they, I cannot bear this people. Thus Judges 21. 25. Men did what was right
in their own eyes when there was no King in Israel. No State so miserable as an
Anarchie, when every one is a slave, because every one will be a Master. Thus,
Isa. 3. 1, 2. 6. Be a ruler to us. No, I Will not undertake to rule. So, 2 Chro.
15. 3. 5. when without a teaching Priest, then no peace at all, men will not be
under government of them, you shall not have them, they shall rest in peace,
and you shall then know the want of them.

5. By giving them over to Satan's, and their own hearts lusts, that seeing they
will not serve the Lord, they shall serve their lusts and their sins, that now
the Lord he has left off chastising of men, and conscience shall check no
more, prosper, says the Lord, and go on in thy sin, Psalm. 81. 12. So I gave
them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked after their own counsels.
Rev. 22. 11. Let him that is filthy be filthy still.

When the Lord shall give a man over to Satan, not only to window him, to let
out the chafe, and so to make the grain the purer, or to buffet them as he did
Paul, but to ensnare them, and hold them, that he shall not only tempt, but his
temptations shall take, and not only take, but holds, 2 Timothy 2. ult. Who are
taken captive by him at his will; taken alive as a snare does, that now a man
is beyond the reach of all means, only peradventure God may give repentance,
Isa. 1. 5. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye wi^^ revolt yet more and
more. The Lord leaves smiting, and says, Go on and prosper in thy sin: and
which is the worst of all, Satan shall so blind him and harden him, fill him
with pride, passion, lying, hatred of Gods people, cavilling against the Lords
ways of grace, slighting of his betters despising of wholesome counsel from
his dearest friends, that he knows not that gray hairs are upon him. And after
this when God has cast out, in may be the Church does also, a most fearful
bondage that the Lord gives such a foul over unto.

There are two reasons of this point, which I collect only from the story in
this Chapter.

Reason* 1. Inregard of the righteous Judgment of God. It Is just and equal
that he that will not be ruled by this blessed Lord Jesus, he should be ruled
by his lusts; he that will ^ot be in subjection to a merciful Christ, he
should be in bondage to unmercifull men: this an humbled heart will
acknowledge, as these do here, Verse. 6. they acknowledged the Lord to be
righteous: Man being fallen it had been righteous with God to have left all men
as the Angels that fell in chains of darkness for ever* But among his Church
and people the Lord sends the Gospel to proclaim liberty, and with it sends
Christ with his Spirit, to come to the prison-doores of poor sinners, to give
repentance as well as remission of sins, and now if they will not come out of
their bondage, accept of the Lords liberty, it is exceeding righteous to deal
with them as we do with prisone^s condemned to die; if the Prince comes to the
prison-doores, and says, I am come to give thee thy life, nay and here is
pardon; nay favor, and to pull off thy chains also, now if he says no, I had
rather be in prison; every one will say it is just; and as it was in the year
of Jubilee he that would not go free was to be a bondsman for ever. It Is very
righteous to give men their own choice, it is no wrong to let them have their
own will: if indeed the laws of Christ were Draco's laws, hard and heavy,
there were something to object, but they are most sweet, and for which of all
other blessings men have cause to bless him, Psalm. 147. ult.

Reason 2. Reas. 2:
In regard of the mercy or merciful wisdom of the Lord toward his Church and
people, especially his peculiar ones, that hereby they keep the closer to the
Lord, set a higher price upon the rules and government of the Lord, love his
kingdom the more, and the liberties thereof, and use them better when they
have them again, so here, that they may know my service, etc.

Prove. 5. 11. and thou mourn at last when thy flesh is consumed; tell a man of
all the glory of the Saints, they never understand it till they feel it, tell
men of the woe of their ways; they will not believe it till they see it, Psalm.
32. 9. Be not as the horse or mule that has no understanding, whose mouth must
be held in with bit and bridle. Hosea 10. 11. Ephraim is like an Heifer that is
taught. Like untamed Horses that will cast their rider, unless they be held
under and backed, and then they are gentle, so it is here; and truly it is long
before a man can learn the sweet of Christ's government: hence Israel must be
long in Egyptian bondage, and many long miseries, so that if there be either
justice or mercy in the Lord he will do this, and this point shall be true.

Use. 1. Use 1.
Hence then see that the greatest liberty and sweetest liberty is to be under
the government of Christ Jesus, although men do not think so: hence the Lord
tells them here they shall know my service, they might have replied we do know
it. No, till they be in bonds they know it not, nor cannot learn it. So it is
now; and hence let men observe whiles they live loosly, and are guided by their
own wisdom, for their own ends, according to their own will, at peradventures,
at rovers, as they please, they do think this liberty very sweet; and it is
better than to be curbed in: But let the Lord strike an arrow in the heart of
these wild bucks, that have broke park and pale, send affliction, and an Iron
yoke of sorrow upon them, or distress of conscience, if there be any sense and
feeling left, they will bemoan themselves, and say, I did think my liberty
sweet, but now I see it is bitter in a sinful way: and the Lords way was most
sweet, by their own confession. Hence Psalm. 2. 3. Let us break their bands,
etc. But Oh now hence learn this truth, and digest it thoroughly, that the
greatest liberty lies here: do not in thy judgment think Christian liberty
lies, in being freed from the law as a rule of obedience in respect of the
matter of it to be done, nor in thy practice; but know, though thou did meet
with a thousand Sorrows with it and griefs, yet it is sweet. Christ's yoke, (Mat.
11. 30.) is easy, and his burden light. What? When not a hole to hide his
head in, when a reproach of men, a worm and no man, when he bore the Fathers
wrath? Yes, when he was meek under it, ( not mine but thy will be done) it was
then most sweet, 1 Kings 9. 21, 22. To be a servant to Solomon is no bondage,
Psalm, 119. 32. I will run, when thou shall enlarge my heart.

Use 2. Use 2.
Hence see the reason why the Lord has deprived his Churches of their liberty,
and his government over them at sundry times, and has put them under Iron
yokes, and bonds, and sore pressures, the reason is shown, they have either
openly or more secretly cast off the government of the Lord, here has been the
very wound the aile of all Churches famous and glorious, Psalm. 81. 14. Oh that
they had hearkened, I should then soon have subdued their enemies. The cause is
not so hard to find to a discerning spirit who is privy in any measure to the
counsels of God, 1 King. 9. 8, 9. Solomon has a promise that the Lords eyes
and heart shall be to his people which are under him: but if once they slip the
Collar, then woe; and why? Because they forsook the Lord that brought them out
of Egypt, they had liberty, but they cast it off.

What do you think was the moving cause of all those bloody persecutions, when
the blood of dogs was more precious then of Christian Churches? were not they
godly? yes, I do not doubt of it: but as it was here, though humbled they must
be in bondage, because they had cast off the government of the Lord Jesus. And
hence in the Apostles time evil times were come, sad apostasies from the
truth, and because it was long before they were low enough. And hence, Revel.
6. till the (...) was opened; no crying, as it was with Israel in bondage, no
prayer to purpose, and because the Lord saw they would abuse all liberties if
they had them. And hence in Constantines time, when peace came in, contention
came with it, and so abused all, that their peace was their poison. And hence
in the primitive Churches, they began to cast off the government of the Lord
Jesus, murmurings there were, hence came persecution; but they were a precious
people, and made blessed use of it. And the Lord couples their chief
persecution with their rest. And it is said, Acts 9. 31. Then had the Churches
rest, etc.

And what do you think of the reason of the long reign of Antichrist, exalting
himself above God and all that is called God, bringing the Church under the
heaviest bondage for body and soul that ever the earth saw? Men did not love
the truth, either speculative to guide their minds, or practical to rule their
wills; and hence left to this day.

What is the cause of Bleeding Germanies woe? Oh poor Germany! Whence the
Gospel first brake out in its full strength, that now it is a field of blood,
that men in woods like satyrs are afraid of men, and men in Cities glad to eat
the intrailes of Beasts, and sometimes the flesh of their own babes to preserve
their lives. What was there no evil, but the common condition of the Church to
be under the cross? ask them, they cannot tell what ailes them, but curse the
Emperor and Swedes, etc. Oh think of it with sorrow in secret for them that
know it not themselves, they have secretly, I say, secretly cast off the
government of a merciful Christ, and hence are under the hand of unmercifull
men.

What is the cause in our native Country, notwithstanding all prayers and
tears no diliverance? truly men do not know it but the Lord sees it, they know
not how to use their liberty.

And for our selves, what shall I say, I cannot but bless God and wonder to
see how it is with many, and rejoice to see many precious holy ones, to whom one
day in Gods Court is sweeter than a thousand elsewhere: but I must profess and
cannot but mourn for others, men that were eminent under bondage, but never
worse then here; as if the Lord should say, Look here by your eminent ones;
look, and fear, and mourn you Ministers of my house; here be the people you had
thought had been converted, and that of all others such a one would never a
fallen so; one an opinion takes him, another a lot, another loose company,
another his lust, another gowes proud, another fierce, another murmuring: what
should I name all? Oh that my words might be healing, etc.

Use 3. Use 3.
Hence see what will become of us that are now under the government of the
Lord; if ever we cast it off, either inward, or outward, or both. We are not
dearer to him then his people Israel here, nay Judah. When old Israel the great
and numerous tribes of Israel had set up calves, little Judah and Benjamin
received the Priests, and yet they fell and were in bondage. I know we are not
yet in bondage; yet it is not more unseasonable to speak now then for the Lord
to Solomon, 1 King 9. 1

Quest. But there being much unsubduedness in the hearts of the best, how shall
one know when there be such sins for which the Lord will cast from under his
government?

Answer 1. Quest.
When men do not loath their own hearts for the unprofitablenesse, but loath
Gods ordinances secretly, and grow weary of them as of their burdens, because
of the unprofitablenesse of them. When a people find not that special good by
them which recompenseth all losses, and so prize them, but lay blame on them,
because unfruitful to them, Malachie 3. 13. He speaks to a people got out of
Captivity, Your words have been stout against me, no say they, It Is in vain to
serve the Lord, what profit is there in this? you must conceive they had many
losses, were very poor, as verse. 11. a temptation which a proud heart cannot
endure above any, here is now no profit in mourning, fasting etc. and Gods own
people began to think so: and hence, Verse. 16. Then they spoke often one to
another, there was good effect of his Sermon: now what follows? Chapter 4. 1.
Hence the wicked shall come and cut off Branch and Root in Antiochus time,
there is a burning day a coming, that shall burn down house, root and branch!
and hence, Matthew ^1. 43. The kingdom shall be given to them that bring forth
fruit. You will say, we do; No thy own mouth shall condemn thee, you do not,
you find no good by all the ordinances of God, and hence come those Questions:
what warrant for such an ordinance? the bottom is, they never felt good of it,
and hence grow weary of it: well if it be your burden, the Lord will ease you
of it.

Eccles. 7. 9. Anger rests in the bosom of fools; when a man shall be glad
of an occasion of difference, that so he may depart and have something to quiet
conscience for breach of Covenant, that there can be no healing, but Bellies of
pigs are more dear then bowels of Saints, and when quiet, upon the least
occasion apt to p^ck holes and quarrel. Now it is time for the Lord to give over
to another government. Zach. 11. 14, 15. When Brotherhood is broken, then an
Idol-shepheard is set up. Exodus 2. Moses was sent to deliver Israel, but he
finds two Hebrews oppressed striving, and must not be checked neither, well then
farewell deliverance if you be of that spirit; you shall love one another
better if ever the Lord does that for you. It has been the wisdom of some
Princes, when their subjects have been at Civil wars, to call them forth to a
common enemy, and there they can agree. Oh brethren, there is no sin like this,
and yet none so slighted. You shall know what it is either by being yoked under
enemies or sins. The first of these breaking bonds of union to Christ, the
other with his members.

Use 4. Use 4.
Hence see the reason why many men are delivered up to the bondage of their own
lusts, the most sad bondage and power of Satan, who have seemed to be delivered
from it; truly they have cast off the government of the Lord. Men wonder why in
this Country men are more vile then ever they were, men that gave great hopes;
the reason is this, they have seemed to be under Christ's government, but
secretly cast it off: And hence filthy and vile lusts are their Apparitors and
Pursevants, etc.

Objection* Objection.
The Saints feel a bondage, how shall one know the difference?

Answer. Answ. 1.
The first and greatest inthralment is, when Satan and sin so rule as that they
know them not, this is lamentable, that like those, John 8. 33. when Christ
told them, if they continued in the truth it should make them free, they would
not believe that ever they were in bondage: so here a man thinks himself free
when he is a slave, thus Psalm. 81. 13. God gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, and they were led by their own Councels. The Saints may be much carried
away by the power of Satan's temptations, but never so far as to think their
bondage is their freedom, and to have reasons and arguments prevailing against
the good ways of Gods grace, and to have reasons to maintain their sinful
courses, and that is in such as have wit, and parts, and knowledge, which
through the righteous judgment of God are le^t so far to abuse it, as to make
use of it to maintain their sin-full lusts.

2. Answ. 2
When men if they see their bondage yet have no heart to come out of it, in
using all means for that end. When the will is in captivity, no captivity like
it, no gally-slave like it: A child of God has a bondage and is led into
captivity, but Oh miserable man he cries; but these, Prove. 17. 10. have a price
in their hand, but no heart to make use of it, Ezra. 1. 5. So many whose hearts
the Lordo stirred, they gat up to go to Jerusalem: But the Lord never stirs the
hearts of these poor creatures: they know and fear, yet have no heart to get
out of that condition, nay rather willingly are so. They sell themselves to
their lusts, and sins, and Satan: here is (says Satan) this gain, neglect
prayer for it, tell a lie for it, break Covenant for it, lose thy peace for it:
here is this honor and credit, look big on it: here is this estate, carry thy
countenance high, and thus apparel thy self with these trappings, walk thus
with thy boots French-like: here is this pleasure and mirth, keep thou this
company, loose thy heart, neglect thy God, give thy self over to it: here is
this ease, defer thy repentance, be cold in prayer, neglect thy family; and a
man sels himself to his lust, pleasures and honors; thou art thus provoked,
and therefore now thou must fret, and murmur, and rage, and hold thy own, and
so ease thy heart, thus men set themselves to sale willingly.

3. Answ. 3.
When men have some heart to come out of it, but the Lord leaves men to an
indifferency, and consequently to apostasy, as it was with Agrippa almost
persuaded, and like the Israelites that refused to go into the good land,
Numbers 14. And hereupon the Lord was wroth, and said they should not, but they
repented and would fain have had some pity showed in regard of their misery,
but their enemies felt upon them and destroyed them: all the plea of the
Arminians is for this, which is nothing else but men's misery. Luke 14. those
that were invited made their excuses and said, I must needs go and see it: But
found no necessity to come to Christ. Now the Saints the Lord never leaves them
to a spirit of indifferency, but keeps them in a spirit of necessity. I must
come out of this miserable condition, says the poor soul, they say not, flesh
is weak, but I must have help. Psalm. 110. because it is the day of the Lords
power, they must not rest contented without help; and if the Lord delays them
and hears not, they will follow the Lord so much the harder.

4. If they have any resolution to come out, and think it must not be thus, and
purpose never to live thus again* yet notwithstanding all their purposes and
resolutions, they fall again, and never get any real conquest, their un^anied
hearts and wills are never a whit more subdued. Isaiah 63. 7, 8. For he said,
Surely they are my people, children that will not lie. So he was their Savior,
but they soon rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: their wills were never
subdued. But now the Saints either the Lord preserves them from such falls and
Apostasies: Or if they do depart from the Lord by reason of the prevailing
power of any temptation, they ever get real conquest by their fall, their
sinful corruption thereby gets its deadly wound. Romans 11. 10. Their backs are
not always bowed down, but the Lord raises their bowed-down spirits, Psalm
145. 14. and upholdeth their spirits for them when they think they shall one
day fall by the hand of such Saul-like sins and distempers. A carnal heart may
carry a fair profession, and be in subjection to Christ for a time, but his
back stands always bowed down under his profession, is is his berthen, and
hence at last he casts it off as a man does his wearisome burden* but on the
contrary, a child of God being indeed weary of his sin, and carrying that up
and down with him as his burden, with his soul bowed down in the sense of his
own vileness, by this means, through the help of Christ, at last he comes to
get real conquest over his sin, and cast it off.

5. When the Lord in this case lets them alone without Hosea 4. 17. Ephraim is
joined to his Idols, let him alone, the Lord will take no more pains with them,
he is wearied out with striving. Isaiah 1. 5. Why should ye be stricken? ye
will revolt yet more and more; when the Lord sees men the worse for his
merciful corrections, he deals like parents that have striven long with their
children, and can do no good on them, they then resolve to let them take their
own course, and will own them no longer to be of their family: the Lord never
deals thus long with his; but if their sin will not waste by words, the Lord
will then try what chains will do, and now they shall find good, now they
shall remember their backslidings and apostasies from God, and their
impeni^ency in sin, in secret sins, especially in the days of their peace and
prosperity; now the Lord will make sin as bitter as ever it was sweet. Oh
consider this you that are prosperous, and because the Lord is good to you,
therefore you think the Lord likes well of your ways. No greater plague then
for the Lord to give a man peace in his sin, or if the Lord begins to afflict
thee in thy name, on estate begin to be blasted, and thou can see Gods hand
on thee, and know it, and yet thou remainest unhumbled, this is a sign thou
art under the bondage of thy sin.

Use 5. Use 5.
For examination, whether we do, or when a people do cast off the government of
the Lord and destroy his kingdom? it is needful to know the sin, that we may
prevent the misery; and it is certain, let New England be watchful, and make
sure here, to advance the Prince of peace, and to keep the right and government
in his hand, and you shall have the blessing of God and his Ordinances, peace
and mercy in your times, and continued to your children; for his kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, and of the increase of his kingdom there is no end. and
on the contrary, if New England cast off the government from over them* and
refuse his service, the Lord will then take the kingdom from you, and you
shall then know the want of what now ye enjoy. Now because Christ's government
or Kingdom is
1. Inward. 2. Outward in Church. in State.



I shall let you know 1. when the inward kingdom of Christ is set up, and when
it is razed down, which I shall do by giving you a brief view of the nature of
it, and wherein it confists, and so you may the better Judge of your own hearts
in this particular. As Satan has an inward kingdom in the hearts of those
that are without, so the Lord Jesus has an inward kingdom in the hearts of
all his Saints. Col. 1. 13. Blessed be god (says the Apostle) which has
translated us from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan into the
kingdom of his dear son, which is very spiritual, little seen, a man may be
under all outward government, and yet naught here; and therefore attend: this
inward kingdom therefore consists in four things, or when the whole soul
submits it self to God in these four particulars.

the Prince himself to come amongst them, but keep him out of the kingdom,
they cast of his government and his kingdom.

2. When the whole soul closes with the whole will

3. When the whole soul thus closes with the will of

4. When the soul thus submits to Christ's will for the

1. I say then, the soul is under the inward kingdom Lord of Lords, the Lord
himself with all his train, in and by the Gospel of grace, the royal sword
and Scepter of Christ's kingdom; for when Christ himself is thus received, the
kingdom of God is come to that soul, and entered into that heart; and hence
Mark 1. 14, 15. the Gospel is called the Gospel of the kingdom, and when John
and Christ preached believe and repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.
Under which word is comprehended much, but principally Christ Jesus ready to
enter the souls of his people; and hence John preached Christ. Now it is said,
those that were effectually wrought upon, Matt. 11. 12 that the kingdom of
heaven did suffer violence, and the violent take it by force; so that the
kingdom of God is come into the hearts of all the elect of God, when the soul
uses a holy violence, and the Lord does draw the heart to an entertainment of
the Lord himself; Many difficulties there be between them and Christ, and yet
they break through all.

This is the condition of all men by nature, they are strangers to Christ, and
live without God and Christ in the world, and Christ from them, and so Satan
takes possession, and rules them, and so men are under the kingdom of
darkness, so that the devil himself possesses every natural man, as the
Apostle speaks, he works in the children of disobedience, to run on so, and
remain so. Now the Gospel of the kingdom^, and the means to advance Christ in
his kingdom, makes a free offer of Christ himself; indeed it offers pardon,
grace, mercy, life, glory, but all these are in Christ himself, and we possess
them by possessing and receiving of Christ himself; as a poor woman has all
the wealth of the man by entertaining of the man. So that the Gospel firstly
and primarily offers Christ himself, and faith does pitch on Christ himself,
and does open those everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in,
John 1. 12. it is said, So many as received him, he gave power to be the sons of
God, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the Son, has Life; so that now let a man
refuse or reject the Lord himself as he is thus offered in the Gospel, he does
refuse the kingdom of the Lord, and does refuse to be under the power of the
Lord. True, it may be said the kingdom of God has been nigh to him, when
Christ is offered in the Gospel, and God says as it were nothing shall please
me so much as this, if thou do receive me. Luke 10. Go and preach to these
and these Cities, and if they will not receive you, shake off the dust of your
fe^t, and let them know the Kingdom of God has been nigh to them; then Christ
comes into the soul when the whole soul takes the Lord for himself, Christ, and
all that Christ has, Christ in a pardon, and Christ in a promise: at that very
day the Lord gave the heart to receive him, then is the kingdom of God come in
that heart, and with him all, life, peace, joy, and glory, God, Spirit, and all.

Now the whole soul receives him, when 1. The mind sees him in the glory of his
grace* that though it had low, mean thoughts of Christ before, for which it
mourns; yet the rising of this glorious Sun upon him, he esteems all things
loss for him that he may win Christ, and be found in Christ, I in him, and He
in me, in Vocation: and not having my own righteousness, in justification: And
to feel the life of Christ and death also, in sanctification: And to attain to
the resurrection of the dead, in glorification: and now nothing is dear to the
soul but Christ. -- 2. When the will, after the soul has had some hopes the
Lord may look toward it in his grace, and having had many heartbreaking tears
before the Lord, the Lord is now pleased by the glad tidings of the Gospel to
give the will power not only to receive and entertain the Lord, but gladly to
receive him. The soul wonders that ever the Lord should bow down to him, and
offer mercy to him; and when as together with this, by the sweet ^avour of his
Grace that he does let into the heart, the soul does receive the Lord with most
dear imbracings into his soul, that now there is none like to the Lord. Cant.
1. 3. Thy name is like an (...) poured out, where the very feet of the
messengers of glad tidings are beautiful: But the Lord himself is the only
crown and Joy of the soul, when the least look of love to a castaway is more
sweet than kingdoms, ay and much more, that is love it self. Isaiah 52 9. B^^ak
forth into joy, sing together ye waste pla^^s of Jerusalem; for the Lord has
comforted his people. When kings shall stop their mouths as vile in themselves,
and not able to set forth that glory they never heard of before, and the soul
for Joy sells away all to buy this pearl, that it says with David, How do I
love thy Law! Now beloved when the soul does thus receive the Lord, the
kingdom of God is come to that soul; and theref^re try and examine, is it thus
with you? or has the Lord begun to deal thus with thee, to give himself, the
glory of Angels, the wonderment of heaven, the mighty God of heaven, to come to
thy heart? thou art then under the government of the kingdom of God. But now
on the contrary, if thou can be content to receive the ordinances of Christ,
or the consolations of Christ, or some of the commands of Christ, and that is
all, and the Lord never gave thee a heart to close with Christ himself, it is a
strange thing to thee, that which is the main thing, the Diamond in the Ring of
the Gospel; thou art yet far enough off from the kingdom of God; I dare not
say, not think for all the world, that ever the kingdom of God came to thy
heart. Again, if you have received Christ, but not with thy whole soul: that
now the offer, promises, blood, life, grace, glory in the Gospel, are grown
common things to thee; that the Lord never sent thee home wondering at the
glory of Gods grace to a poor wretch, never yet said, Blessed is he that
comes in the name of the Lord ^he Lord never yet lay next thy heart, or if
thou have had some liking, and some love and affections in pangs; yet the Lord
is not only precious, and exceeding dear in thy heart, thy heart breaks not for
grief that thou have so much slighted him, so little born him of thy heart; It
is a sign that the Lord has begun to reveal himself to thy soul, when he gives
thee a heart to mourn for thy standing our against him, but this never came to
thy soul.

Certainly, here is the wound of many men: The Gospel of God never has its
proper effect, till the Lord help thee to give thy whole heart thus to a
Savior, to a God, to the Prince of peace; and till this is done, the Gospel is
ineffectuall, it does nothing. It was a sweet prayer of him, Make thy Son dear,
very dear, exceeding dear, only dear and precious, or not at all; If thou had
a thousand hearts, it was too little for Christ to love him, and do grudge
him one? when thou have imparted thy heart, and esteem to thy lusts and
creature, do thou love the Lord with part of thy heart? but a vile lust, a
poor creature must have a share, and the remnant will serve Christ, is he not
the only pearl of thy heart, to give him daily communion, know this thou art a
stranger to. Hear ye despisers, and wonder, and perish, God will work a work in
your days. What is that? the infinite God cannot express as it were the wrath
that shall come against such a soul, nor I cannot express the wrath that shall
come upon such a despiser of the Lord Jesus. Give him all thy heart or none: if
thou have the Lord, thou have his whole heart* if he had a thousand lives, he
would have laid them all down for thee. He poured out his blood for every one
of his, but for the present thou art out of the Kingdom of God to this day.

Ioh. 1. 6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we
lie, and there is no truth in us: But now when the whole soul does submit to
the whole will of the Lord, now his Kingdom is come indeed, when his will is
thus sweet, Dan. 7. 27. His Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all
nations shall serve him: and his servants ye are whom ye obey, whether Christ,
the devil, or your own hearts.

Now the whole will of Christ is 1. Directing. 2. Correctin.

Now when the soul submits to both, then Christ rules in his Kingdom; sometime
you meet with Christ's directing will; now this is men's frame, naturally they
will not see it, they will not come to the light, John 3. ^0. they are led by
their own counsel, and will not regard the light and counsel of God in his
word; they will quarrel with the light when it is cross to their ends, gain,
honor and the like; men have high thoughts against the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 10.
5. Casting down imaginations, and every high thought that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God. And again, if men do see it, yet like the devil
that has much light, they do not love it, nor out of love (not unless it be
out of fear) subject to it* like Balaam that had no love to Gods command, but
only was acted by fear and constraint; now when the soul continues thus, it
casts off Christ's Kingdom; but if the whole soul first comes to the light,
though it sees little, sets the whole will of Christ before it, Psalm. 18. 22.
says David; I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed
from my God: and though it has had many quarrellings against the truth of God,
yet now it has not, nor dares not, but says, Lord, teach me; the Lord gives
them hearts to lie down at the feet of any man that shall show them any thing
that is amiss in them, and they say with David, Lord, search me, and try me: I
have many crooked ways, and therefore, good Lord, find them out, and therefore
come to the Lord for that end; and though there be something in them that is
desperately contrary to the good will of God, yet there is an inward man that
does delight in the law of God, and when the Lord is pleased to give them an
heart to submit to the will of God; Oh the soul does wonder at the Lord, that
the Lord should show him any thing, and help him against temptations; and
though there be a great deal of weariness in the ways of God, yet there is a
spirit within him, that it is indeed heaven it self to him to be in the
ordinances of God; now ye stoop to the directing will of Christ, when this is
thy way, though thou go often out of it, yet come in it again, as sin is a
wicked man's way, although he goes a thousand times out of it.

Now for the other, the correcting will of Christ; The L. has strong trials:
Now here subjection to Christ is required as well as to the directing will of
Christ; then the soul submits to this will when the mind objects not, charges
not God with folly, as Eli, 1 Samuel 3. 18. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good; And likewise the will, though it has had many sad bouts, yet
this is his frame in the Conclusion, that the will of Christ is better than
every thing else, the will of Christ is alone sweet to him. Isa. 38. says
Hezekiah, Good is the will of the Lord, and so Lam. 3. It Is good for a man to
bear the yoke in his youth, and to turn his cheeks to him that smites him; Nay
when there is spiritual evils on the soul, as was on Christ himself, spiritual
desertions, nothing but bitterness and sorrow; yet the soul says, as Christ
did, Not my will, but thine be done, Father save me from this hour, yet Father
glorify thy self, and so the soul does humbly submit it self to the Lord;
though the Lord should never pity it, yet it will lie down at the feet of the
Lord, now is Gods Kingdom come.

But if the soul will have Christ, and yet cast off the will of Christ, 1. Either
in his judgment, that the law of God as given by Christ, should be no rule to
a Christian; suppose you were in England, and were there pressed to bow before an
Altar, or Image; what shall lead you, if that Gods will and law must not be
your rule? The Lord will one day make you know his blessed will, in that
blessed law of his, that ye shall never find peace to the end of the world,
except the Lord do help ye thus to walk. Again, when men cannot endure the will
of Christ, cannot e^dure exho^tations, what does the man mean to exhort us
thus? I tell thee, there goes forth power with the exhorta^ions of Christ. I
say, take heed of casting off the will of Christ here; and so when men in their
practice shall quarrel against any of Gods truths, and are loath to see it, or
if they do, yet not love dearly every truth of God, but it is a burden to them;
especially if it cross their own ends and gain, they will not see it to be a
truth, lest they should be convinced, and turn to the rule of it; if the will
and ordinances of Christ be a burden to a man, and a man is not weary of his
weariness, but weary of them all the while: Art thou under the government of
Christ? If a man forsaken of God, led by his own counsels, be under the Kingdom
of Christ, then thou art; so long as there is credit for the truth, so long it
is entertained; but now suppose it be costly, rhat it should bring beggary and
affliction with it, is it now sweet to you? does this support thy heart? I am
in Gods way, can lie dowu and subscribe to the equity of Christ's proceedings
with thee, though he should never show favor to thee; if it be not thus, I
dare not say thou art under the Kingdom of Christ. And so for the correcting
will of Christ, many sad afflictions the Lord tries thee withal, the Lord tries
men marvellously; when thou art under the hand of the Lord, those very things
that should make men cry to heaven, and wean thee from the world, those very
things do harden thee, and make thee grudge and repine. The L. be merciful to
thee, if this be thy frame, the Kingdom of Christ never came into that heart;
you are begging for mercy; and the Lord says, you mercy? you have abused it;
no says the Lord, Go to your lust that have despised the day of grace, and so
now you cast off the Lord, because the Lord will not give you mercy when you
would have it. Will you now quarrel with the Lord? no, down proud heart; pray
still, and mourn still, and turn to the Lord; and say, Lord do with me what
thou will, I am clay in thine hand, thou may make me a vessel of dishonor,
I deserve not the least bit of bread; such a one as is above the Lord and his
will, is not under the Lord, therefore submit thy self to the good will of
Christ.

3. When the soul does thus submit to the will of Christ, by virtue of the power
and Spirit of Christ, i.e. when the soul does not submit by virtue of its own
power, strength or ability, for this is foreign power; But as it does seek to
submit to the will of Christ, so it would have Christ himself act it and rule
it, and so enable it to submit there unto; Now is the Kingdom of God come near
to that heart. And herein Christ's Kingdom is different from Princes, they give
laws that men may keep them by their ^wn might; hence they command no
impossible things; but the will of Christ is so cross to a carnal hear^, that
it is impossible man of himself should submit to it: But the Lord does it for
this end, that the soul should then come to Christ in its need, that he would
do all the good pleasure of his will, and now the Lord himself reigns, and that
gloriously, To. 8. 1, 2. For the law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ
Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death, Acts 5, 31. A Prince an
Savior, for to give repentance and remission of sins. It is part of his
Princely power for to give remission of sins; both in turning from sin, and to
God, and all the ways of God, and now you exalt him when he is thus set up: 1
Cor. 4. 20. The Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. The power of
Christ Jesus is come into thy soul, and the soul is under the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus, when it does lie under the mighty power of the Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1, 11, 12. We pray always for you, that the Lord would work and fulfill
the good pleasure of his will, and the work of faith in power, that Christ may
be glorified. Yea, then is Christ glorified, when God omnipotent reigns over
sin and unbelief; and when the Lord does this, not only the Kingdom of God is
now come, but the Kingdom of Christ in glory is come; there is many a poor
soul thinks Christ rules him not, because he cannot do this nor that, because
he finds his heart unable, and unwilling for to submit to the will of Christ; I
find no strength at all, says the soul, and I go to Christ and find not
strength conveyed, and now he thinks he is not under the Kingdom of Christ. I
answer, that is not the question; but has the Lord made thee willing in the
day of his power? when the soul does lie under the power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, when the soul does lie like wax before the Lord Jesus; when the soul
says, Lord there was never any change of my nature; the good Lord change it,
and if there be any change, the good Lord increase and stir up the graces of
thy Spirit in my soul, and do thou lead me and guide me. Brethren, the Kingdom
of Christ is come to this soul: John 5. 40. You will not come to me for life;
He does not say, you do not quicken your selves, or ye cannot come to me, but
will not; here is their wound, they will not come to Christ for life, Romans 6.
19. As ye have yielded your members serva^^s to sin and Satan, so now yield up
your selves servants to righteousness and to holiness, Psalm. 119. 5, 6. Thou
have commanded that we should keep thy precepts continually. Oh that my heart
were directed to keep thy precepts continually! Oh that my heart were directed
to keep thy statutes! When a Christian is grapling with his own heart, ye will
never be able to overcome the unsubduednesse thereof; but when ye bring them to
the Lord Jesus Christ, that he would take a course with them. 1. Now ye please
Christ. 2. Ye take a sure course to have the will of God done, he being in
office for that end; for Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior to
Israel: When the soul does look up to the Lord Jesus, and lie under the power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus. 3. You now make the yoke of Christ sweet, and his
name glorious; nothing glorifies Christ so much as this, when Jesus does work
in a Christian, now the kingdom of Christ is come to the soul, and that in
power.

But now when men will not submit thus far to Christ: 1. They can do nothing,
but will not come to him, on whom God has laid salvation; you say, you cannot
understand, nor edify by the Sermons ye hear, and you cannot part with your
lusts. Ay, but now this is thy condemnation, thou will not go to a Savior that
he may teach thee and help thee, when men will not have the Lord Jesus to reign
over them: or 2. If men do come* they will not come to him where he may be
found; but say, I can do nothing; Christ must do all, and so neglect the means
wherein he will be found: or 3. Will submit and come in means to him, but not
then at the special time when He is to be sought, and may be found, viz. in
time of temptation. But then forget and forsake him, and cry not Hosanna: Lord,
now save, now help me against this lust: When temptation comes, when passion
and pride come, do you now go to Jesus Christ? When the world begins to draw
thy heart away; do thou say thus, Lord I have prayed this day against this
sin, and Lord I have no strength against it, now Lord help me? but here is the
misery of the soul, it does not go to Christ, and by this means live in
complaints all their lifetime. 4. If lastly any thing be to be done, they will
do it themselves; as Paul, Gal. 1. 12. Not but that a Christian should put
forth himself, a Christian is not a dead-hearted Christian at all times, but
the grace of God which comes from Christ, does act the soul in a continual
dependence on Christ; and where Christ acts not, there Satan does. Now I say
the Kingdom of God is come, when the soul does thus submit to the stream of
the bles^ed Spirit of the Lord, that the Lord may guide it. Oh beloved, here is
the skill, that poseth the Angels how to tell you; so to yield your selves to
Christ, as that Christ may come, so to abide in the stock, that all your fruit
may be from him: So to lie under the Lord, as that the stream of the Spirit of
life may fall on thee; so to be implanted in the Lord, as to fetch life from
him, and bring forth fruit to him. But try this course, submit to the will of
the Lord Jesus, be nothing in thy own eyes; and if the Lord do give thee any
thing, bless the Lord for it; if any strength against thy sin, be vile in thy
own eyes, and try and see if ye find not the Kingdom of God, the glory of
Heaven come into thy soul. Oh the light, life, prayers you might have, the
heavenly conference ye will have together, that it would do a man's heart good
to be with such a Christian; that those that are with you might say, Verily God
is in this man; verily there is joy in heaven when the Saints keep in this
frame.

4. When the soul yields thus to the will of Christ for Christ's ends; for such
is the subtle wretchedness of men's hearts, that men would have Christ
glorify himself, that he may glorify and honor them; like Simon Magus, that
would give any money for Apostolical gifts, that he might be some body that
way also: Now if a man shall submit, go to Christ for gifts and parts, that is
to set up another King, to advance a man's self; and so also sin and the devil,
and Christ must be made a servant for this end; He is now no King: like a
Rebel that is not content, that thousands of the Kings Subjects should serve
him, but he will have the Prince serve him a so: Every man will say, this does
utterly overthrow the Kingdom of such a Prince. When a man shall secretly fight
against the Lord, and be for himself; and for the devil and sin within; When a
man shall make all the creatures serve him, the soldiers of his army; meat,
drink, and outward comforts, this is a mavelous thing; Ay, but when a man
shall make Jesus Christ, and God himself, and profession of Christ, make these
to serve him, to raise up his name, this the Lord takes very ill.

Only this I would add; when the soul does look at Christ with a single eye,
that Christ is sweet and precious, and lies under the blessed Spirit of Christ
for that end; and now looks up to Christ, that he may submit to him with a
single eye, that the name of Christ may be glorified by life, and death: true
it is, self will be in every duty, and so is contrary to the Lord in all, and
not for the Lord. Yet though it be thus, there is another thing in the soul
that is wholly for God and Christ: and hence seeks that he may do his work; his
heart loves him, and so seeks him; and he begs it with many tears. Oh that my
children might serve and love this God; nay, that all the world might see, and
bless, and admire this God, and the Lord inlargeth his heart herein, Psalm. 72.
19. and truly now the Kingdom of God is come to thy soul, Romans 5. 17. As sin
and Satan do reign by death: So Jesus Christ does reign by life to eternal
life. Matthew. 25. 14. He is the true Subject that improves his Talents for the
King: Christ will subdue all his to himself, Psalm. 66. 3. Through the
greatness of thy power, shall thine enemies submit themselves to thee. Romans
14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not in meat and drink; but in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. When a man shall be
picking fault with things, and this and that offends him; get ye gone, the
Kingdom of God consists not in that. But when the soul does go to the Lord, and
maintain his peace with God, and love to the people of God, and joy in the holy
Ghost, here is the Kingdom of God. He that serves Christ in these things, the
Kingdom of God is come into his soul.

He that thus submits to the Lord Christ, he must first be a man weary of his
own counsels, and must loath himself: When the Lord has wearied a man of his
own ways; he says, What am I, that the Lord should show me any mercy? And
when the Lord calls him to any service; Lord, What am I, that I should now pray
to thee? Bless the Lord, when the Lord does keep thy heart in this frame; but
now when men will honor Christ, and yet Saul-like have Christ honor them:
Many poor creatures they think it a credit to be in Church Fellowship, and they
will seek to know Christ, that they may attain Church fellowship, and have
honor, but know it, till the Lord do pull down thy base ends, and make thee
loath thy self, and so to submit to his blessed will; truly till then, the
Kingdom of God is not come to thy soul: Think of these things, for if the
Kingdom of God be in our hearts, then look for good days; Brethren, let
New England be confident of it: but if this be gone from the souls and hearts
of men and women in their several families and places; though they may have
the outward Kingdom of Christ, yet the inward Kingdom being not set up; I say
no more but what he said, Go to Palestina and Bohemia. Certainly, if they had
not cast off the Lords government, they had never seen those lamentable days;
they had outward Ordinances; Oh, but here was the thing; the inward Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and subjection to the will of the Lord Jesus, and to be
for the Lord Jesus* this the Lord saw, was not in them, therefore the Lord has
left them to be lamentable spectacles. Therefore dear brethren. I do beseech
you, pray and beg for this Kingdom: Thou say, I fall short of this: Know
this Kingdom of God is at first like a grain of Mustard Seed, some little
lying under the will of Christ; if it be in truth, blessed be God ^or it; The
Kingdom of God is come, and the soul does weep and mourn after the Lord, that
the Lord would bring every thought into subjection.

Know it, the Kingdom of God is come to thy soul; and know it, thou have Jesus
Christ at the right hand of God the Father, interceding for thee; therefore, go
home and bless the Lord, and wonder at his grace, that has translated thee
from the Kingdom of darkness, to the Kingdom of his dear Son: If the Lord
has let thee find the beginning of these things in truth, go home, and bless
the Lord for it.

Matthew. 25. 1. And it is it which the Lord gives up at the last day to God the
Father: and hence, Mat. 8. 12. the members thereof are The Children of the
Kingdom; and hence we read of the rulers and governors of it; and the keys,
not only of doctrine; but of power and jurisdiction committed by Christ Jesus
to it, punctually expressed in Scripture.

Now we know, in the Church there is a threefold power of Christ in
Government: 1. The supreme Monarchical absolute power of Christ, in and by his
Ordinances. 2. There is some derivative power of the Church from Christ jointly
together. 3. There is a Ministerial power of the officers of the Church it
self. Hence the Kingdom of Christ is overthrown when these three are, when
this threefold cord is broken by the sons of men; and if whole America cast
off these, or any of these; then they fall to bondage; and if particular
persons in Churches do, the Lord will do the like to them much more: 1 Kings 9.
4, 5. When Solomon had been praying much, the Lord tells him; If he would walk
before him as David his father had done, to keep his statutes and obey his
commandments; then he would be a God, making good his promise; but if not, then
the Lord would cast off him and that place. So Zach. 14. 17. And it shall be,
that who so will not come up of all the families of the Earth, to worship the
King the Lord of Hosts; even upon them shall be no rain. The Lord is quick in
his judgments, and will spare none.

1. There is a supreme power of Jesus Christ in his Church and Ordinances
thereof, Isa. 9. 6. The Government is on his shoulders; it is true this power
is on others also, but he is the main, Heb. 3. Moses was only a servant in his
House, Christ as a Son. The guidance of all things in the Church does lie
chiefly on him, or else it would never be carried along. Christ is a Son, and
that in his own House; into whose hands the supreme power of guiding, and
ordering all things in the Church of God is put; the experience of Gods Saints
and People does find another power, which shows that the Lord Jesus has, and
does exercise a mighty power in the ordinances of his Worship; the supreme and
kingly power which he exercises in the hearts of his people.

Now cast off this kingly power, the Lord himself is cast off; I speak not
immediately as in the internal Kingdom, but mediately. And for this, the Lord
will bring into bondage, Luke 19. 17. Those mine enemies, says Christ: which
would not that I should reign over them; bring them hither, that I may slay
them; which is meant of the Lords external administration by his servants.

Quest. Quest.
When is this done?

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
When men impenitently break Covenant made with the Lord. Especially in his
Ordinances of cleaving and submitting to him therein, and remain so with
impenitency.

This is the main and first Original of all the rest. Now it is manifest, the
power of Christ Jesus, the supreme power of Christ is cast off; for a man does
profess by this, that not the will of Christ, but his own will shall rule him;
Christ shall not be Lord, but as they said, Ier. 2. 31. We are Lords, we will
come no more at thee. When the League and Covenant between Prince and People is
broke, then he is cast off from being King; this is certain, the Lord never did
receive any people to himself from the beginning of the world to this day, but
he has done it by some Covenant: Nor never any people took the Lord to be
their God, but by some Covenant, they bound themselves to the Lord. Whereby
they were either made his people, or continued to be his people, and he their
God; but I cannot now stand to clear this. Now look, as when the Lord breaks
his Covenant, he casts them off from being his people; (though this he never
does to the Elect) So when people break Covenant with him, they cast him off as
much as in them lies, from being their God; they do as much as in them lies,
make the Lord to be no God. You shall see therefore, Hosea 10. 3. They say, we
have no King; because we feared not the Lord. It is the speech of Conscience,
and that at a sad time, wherein they did not fear the Lord; They have spoken
words, swearing falsely, and breaking the Covenant. In their time of Covenanting
with the Lord, there seemed to be much sorrow and humiliation; yet in these
very Covenants, Hemlock did spring up, and hence captivity came. Many times the
Covenants that are made, there is such outward seeming reality, that not only
men, but the Lord speaking after the manner of men, He thinks certainly these
Promises, these Covenants will never be broke; yet they are broken, Isa. 65. 8,
9, 10. I said, surely, says the Lord; This is a people that will not lie. Such
profession, and such acknowledgements, etc. so it is said; In all their
afflictions, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence did redeem them:
But afterward, they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: They cast off the
Government of the Lord, they would not be under the bonds of the Lord, and so
he was turned to be their enemy; this is that which brings captivity and
bondage, Ierm. 2. 14, 15, etc. Is Israel a servant says the Lord? ye shall see
the reason why he was so; I have broken their iron yoke, says the Lord, and I
have burst thy bonds, and I have planted thee a nohle Vine; yet have thou
degenerated: and this is that which does make them vassals or slaves. And in
truth you never see Churches laid desolate; but when that time comes, men shall
see, and shall profess it. When other Nations shall ask; Why has the the Lord
dealt thus with his people? The answer shall be clear; They have broken the
Covenant of the Lord. When many miseries come upon particular persons, what is
the cause of it? then remember the Covenant thou have broken with the Lord.
Isa. 24. 5, 6. They have transgressed the ^aw, speaking of the whole earth; And
they have changed their Ordinances, and broken the everlasting Covenant. A
people that might have had everlasting mercy, they would not submit to the
Lord, they have broken this everlasting Covenant of the Lord: Now what
follows? The earth is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; and hence heavy
things that are there written, shall befall the whole world; It is a sin that
defiles the earth men tread on, and the houses men inhabit in, for it is a sin
against most light: They which make Covenants have a great deal of light, and
also most will. And that does aggravate a sin; when the whole heart, as it
were, does give up it self to a lust, and breaks hereby all bonds. And it is a
sin that men might avoid, if they would be watchful against: For it is a
sinful thing to make a Covenant of impossible things, therefore it lies heavy
on the conscience of men afterwa^ds; I might have been better, and might have
walked better; Nay, it is a ^^n that does destroy the Law of the Lord: this sin
it does destroy the very will of Christ. Had thou never been bound in
Covenant; had thou laid by this Covenant, the will of God had been kept whole.
As cords not used, are kept whole; but when broke, are utterly spoiled. When a
man does bind himself by a Covenant to the Lord, and then break it; he does as
much as in him lies, to destroy the Lord from being King.

It Is true, the Saints and people of God may be said in some case to break
Covenant, but yet they never impenitently break Covenant with the Lord; they
may break Covenant with the Lord very often* but yet it is with them as those
in Judges ^. 1, 4. When the Angel of the Lord came to them, and they were under
grievous sad bondage; says he to them from the Lord: I have brought you up out
of the land of Egypt, and I have broke your bonds; and I have said, I would
never break Covenant with you: and I said, you should make no League with the
Canaanites, but ye have not obeyed my voice; why have ye done this? And all the
people heard this; and it is said, All the people wept. Doubtless some were
sincere, though happily many were full of hypocrisy; and so the sincere heart
laments it, and renewes his Covenant. The poor soul has nothing to say many
times, though the Lord should bring never so much misery on it; yet the soul
stands weeping before the Lord, that it has broke the Covenant of the Lord,
and made void the Covenant of the Lord; yet the Saints they never break it
wholly, they never depart wholly from the Lord.

Now when a people shall impenitently break Covenant, as has been said: that
men can study arguments, how to nullify Church covenant; nay, worse when in
Covenant, then ever before; and the business is, they are loath to be in
bonds; when men shall grudge the truth of the Lord, others if their judgments
be not set against it; yet notwithstanding, in deed and practice, they live as
if they had never been in Covenant. Once they were a pleasant plant; but now
they are degenerated, as the Lord does there complain. Beloved, when it is
thus, the League between the Prince of peace, and the Church is broke; they do
as much as in them lies, seek to cast off the Lord from ruling over them.

Ieroboams calves, though they worshipped the same God which was at Jerusalem,
varying only in circumstance; yet the Lord professes, that they had set up new
Gods, and so indeed did pull down the true God and his government from over
them, and this brought bondage. And hence, Col. 2. 18, 16. Let no man heguile
you of your reward with a voluntary humility, says the Apostle, and
worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he has not seen, etc,

Whatsoever pretense be upon the inventions of men, take heed of that; if it be
the inventions of men, in Verse. 19. and not holding the head; the very headship
of Christ is denied, and the ground is this; To say that Christ is is not a
sufficient means of salvation, of saving his people, and ruling his people; it
is to deny the headship of Christ: and likewise to say, that Christ has not
appointed for his people sufficient means for that end; is to say, that Christ
is not a sufficient means to rule his people; and he that shall say, Jesus
Christ is not a sufficient means, he does deny the headship of Christ. Now to
set up any inventions of men in the worship of God, to be a means to carry the
heart to God, is to say, that Jesus Christ has not appointed sufficient means
for that end; and therefore he is not a sufficient means of guiding, and
saving, and ruling his people. Nay, this I will add; let there be any
invention added to the worship of God, that is merely the will of man; nothing
else, but only this I would have ye do it; they are such things as do neither
make a man better nor worse, but only use them, and ye are commanded to use
them, and nothing but the will of man: This is to set up a new Christ, and to
pull down the power of Christ Jesus, to submit herein to the authority of man,
merely because of the will of man, that there is nothing seen but his will:
There is (it may be) neither good nor hurt in it; It is to make that man a God
and Christ; it is peculiar to Christ to do it, and this does pull down the Lord
Jesus Christ from his throne; when there is adding to the worship of the Lord.
I need not I suppose speak any thing this way; Only remember to be watchful
against this; when the Lord does send tentations this way into Churches, or
into any place; be watchful against new inventions of men to be added or made,
they are very sinful; and if ye ask me when we shall look for such times; I
need not go far from my Text.

It is said, that Rehoboam and all the people walked in the worship of the Lord
three years; but in one year, Rehoboam and all the people fell off from the
worship of the Lord. O therefore take heed of this, when the tentation comes:
1. When the Lord bows the hearts of those in authority, men of eminency to fall
this way, then multitudes follow; as, verse. 1. Rehoboam sinned and Israel with
him. 2. When persecution arises for the truth, Gal. 5. 12. They must be
circumcised to avoid persecution, 3. When men's hearts are surfetted with the
Ordinances of God, and weary of them; when the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus
Christ, men find no benefit by them, the heart of man will then be making out
after some thing of its own; then we must look for Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, and this curiosity, and the other nicity; then a conceit and
imaginary picture of a man's own, is more beautiful than all Gods Ordinances
besides, and all Religion is placed there; it may be in extending too far any
Ordinance it self, though it may seem little at first; yet when it is thus,
then look for evil times.

3. When as a people seek to abolish and destroy any Ordinance of Christ, but
especially if on this ground; either because of some outward evil they bring
with them, in the fruition of them, or hope of some outward good they shall
receive by casting them off, or because of no good they reap by the enjoyment
of them: Whenever ye see this, that they are cast off on this ground, then
look for bondage; for it will come on whole Countries in general, and on
particular persons: For Jesus Christ is in his Ordinances, and his Throne is
not only in Heaven among the Angels; but, Isa. 9. 7, 8, 9. He sits on the
throne of David, among his Church and People; and pull these down, you pull
down Christ's throne, the Prince of peace; when ye pull down his Ordinances. 1
John 2. 19. there were many that did seem to be for Christ, and yet against
Christ, this is one sign by which he notes them; They went out from us, for
they were not of us: that it might be made manifest they were not of us. Now I
say, when men shall pull down the Ordinances of Christ, and withdraw themselves
from the communion of Saints; and when it is for one of these ends, in regard
of some outward evil that the Ordinances do bring with them, or some outward
good they shall get by casting them off; then certainly look for bondage. As a
Prince that has one near him, he may attempt change of things in State; but
when he is set a work by a foreign State, and is a pensioner to the Pope or
Spaniard: Now he is real to root out the Prince; and this provokes.

So here many times a Christian, he may in conscience speak against some of the
ways of the Lord, and this may be the condition of the Saints and people of
God, and they may speak it in conscience; and this may be tolerated, when it is
for want of light; nay, they may through stubb^rnnesse of spirit, cast off
Ordinances; but when now it is for this reason, though he has indeed his
colors for it; you shall, says Satan, have this gain, and this ease, and
these conveniences; and what do you do with Ordinances? and now a man begins to
find out arguments; and says, Satan, If ye attend to the enjoyment of
Ordinances, here be these miseries, therefore away with some of Gods Ordinances
at least. Oh, brethren, when it is thus, that there is this secret pension from
the world, that now had the Lord Jesus, the honors of the world attending on
them, then they could make much of them; but because they come with poverty,
therefore they can plot and speak against them, and in time come to cast off
the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus; It is certain the Lord has bondage for such
souls, and you will certainly find this true one day. Mal. 3. 14, 15. The
people, they say; What profit is it that we have served the Lord, and that we
have walked mournfully before him? and hence, they forsook the Lord; Hence,
Chap. ^. 1. the Lord threatens, that He will burn them up, both root and
branch. The Lord has consuming fire for such one day.

The Ordinances of the Lord were too costly for you. Mark 12. 9. 8. The Lord
has his Vineyard, he lets it out to husbandmen, and he sends for the fruit*
and at last the Son bimself comes to call for fruit. Now say they* Here is the
son, let us kill him. Why, what is the matter? out of gain, that is the
business; That the inheritance may be ours. Here is this gain to be without
them, and therefore to cast off Christ: What will the Lord do to these
husbandmen? he will take away his Vineyard frrom them, etc.

It is the speech of Luth^r* Venture in omni religione potentissi^um Idolum:
When the Belly is served, Christ must be destroyed. Men may have this quiet
life without these Ordinances; and hence men bear a privy grudge against the
Ordinances of the Lord, because the belly is not served. Look as it was with
the ^ews; they looked for a glorious King to come to them, and Christ come and
though they were told of it before; when he came, he had nothing but his
Cr^sse; and he tells them, If they will be his Disciples, they must take his
Cross. But now, because he came not with pomp, but only with his cross, this
is the great reason, why to this day the Je^es do set themselves against the
Lord Jesus Chr^^^; the Cross came with Christ, that is the cause of it: So when
men shall look for great things from the Ordinances of Christ, and when they
come to enjoy them, they meet with nothing else but Christ and his Cr^sse, and
disappointments, and desertions; when they meet with this* then Christ is cast
off, and they profess he is no King, and Caesar is our King: and if we take
this man to be our King; the Romans will ruin us.

I know it is a hard trial for a man to be put to such a strait; for the Lord
to advance the price of his Ordinances at that high rate, that all must be
parted with for the enjoyment of them. But yet notwithstanding, he is for ever
unworthy to have the Lord Jesus to rule him, that shall therefore make him a
King as they did, John 6. He was their Cook, therefore they made him King.
Therefore this I say, take heed of disputing against, or denying, or
nullifying, not only outwardly, but in thy very heart secretly, any of Gods
Ordinances: for that the Lord complains of his people, that their hearts went
after their wickedness. Oh take heed of doing thus against any one of Gods
Ordinances, because straits do attend on them: It was the speech of David, Ps.
119. Thy law is pure, therefore thy servant loves it. Suppose thou should
never get any good by any of Gods Ordinances; yet thy law is pure, the fault is
in thy own heart; and certainly the Lord he will remember, as there he
speaks, Ierem. ^. 2. I remember the love of thine espousals, when thou did
follow me in a land of barrenness, in a land where there was no water. Thy
life shall be precious to the Lord, that shall follow the Lord in all
afflictions; yet thy heatt does cleave to the Lord, and follow the Lord in all
his Ordinances; therefore this is that I would say, there are many wants now in
the country; But yet notwithstanding, let the people of God get near to
Christ; speak often one to another, and find out ways and means to pay your
debts, and lie down at the feet of the Lord Jesus, and be content if the Lord
will have it so, to be nothing, be content thus; and though thou do not find
any benefit from the Ordinance of the Lord as yet, yet notwithstanding loath
thy own heart, but love them; yet seek after the Lord, and look to the Lord in
them. And this is certain, the Lord has blessings for his people; not only in
this life, but as he there speaks to his Disciples, when they say to him,
Lord, what shall we have? says the Lord to them; You that have followed me,
you shall sit on thrones. But take heed of this, if once ye come to slight
Ordinances, and cast off Ordinances, because of these straits and wants, and so
forth: And what are your Ordinances, etc? and a generation of men risen up (I
think Christians should send forth their gronings to the Lord, that the terror
of the Lord may fall upon them) they deny all the Ordinances of the Lord, and
the Spirit must teach us only. It Is true, the Spirit must do it, but will ye
therefore take away the means? and hence, the very Scripture is made an
Alphabet for children, and so they do destroy the Ordinances of the Lord.
Beloved, if it be from this principle, take heed of it; for if it be, ye will
certainly find bondage.

4. When men do not thus pull down the Ordinances, Ierem. and Ezekiel. The very
great reason why the Lord did leave his Temple, where their fathers did praise
the Lord: they had polluted and defiled it, that was the reason of it: They had
driven the Lord away from his throne, and this does pull down the princely
power of the Lord in his Churches. I know, there be many sins and defilements;
and the sons of men have hidden ways of polluting the Ordinances of the Lord,
that a man shall sit undet all the Ordinances of the Lord; and as it is said of
Mount Gilboah, not any dew fall upon him; never see good, when good comes; the
Lord is not dear, that is the reason of it. Oh, thy secret defilements of the
Ordinances of the Lord, have driven the Lord far from you. There are many, I
shall only name three principally, that there may be a little heed taken of
them.

First. When there is a secret contempt grown upon a Mal. 1. 7. Ye have offered
polluted bread; wherein have we done it, say they? this was the cause of it; Ye
say, that the Table of the Lord is contemptible; the meaning is, you do despise
my Table and Ordinances, and so now do despise me too, and so ye do vilify and
contemn the Ordinances of the Lord: Therefore says the Lord, in the
conclusion of that Chapter, verse. 11. From the rising of the Sun, my name it
shall be known. As if he should say, I am uot bound to you, I can have a
people, among whom my name shall be great; For, says the Lord, I am a great
King. If one should have asked men in those days what good is in your
sacrifices? what great glory can ye see in them? the Saints can see a great
deal of glory in mean outsides: Now when this is wanting, the name of the Lord
is polluted, and so the Lord driven from his Ordinances. Heb. 12. 15. Take
heed, lest there be in any of you an evil root of bitterness springing up, and
many thereby be defiled. When men do live in secret lusts, or open pro^nenes^e;
a man that has a profane heart, such a heart as does contemn the portion of
mercy the Lord does offer to him; who like Esau did sell his birthright for a
m^sse of pottage.

Isa. 66. 1. 2. Heaven is my throne, and the Earth is my footstool; Now
observe what the Lord does there speak, To him will I look that is poor in
spirit and contrite; such a poor soul, says the Lord, will I look to; and to
these are opposed, such as have not such hearts, but do look only to the
Ordinances of the Lord: Now, says the Lord to such; He that offers a lamb;
is as if he cut off a dogs neck; and he that offers incense, as he that
blesses an Idol. These were a people that did plead for the Temple of the
Lord, and had the Ordinances of the Lord according to his command; but here was
their wound, they were not broken under the Ordinances of the Lord: This you
shall find, the Saints have many sins and wants under the Ordinances of the
Lord: but little does the world know their gronings before the Lord, and the
Lord has mercy for such souls as are sensible of their need they stand in of
the Ordinances of the Lord.

But now when men have found the Lord in an Ordinance subduing some particular
sin: there are other sins remaining in their hearts, and they stand
unremoveable in their hearts; and hence, are the strongest and dearest of all
the rest: Now, I say, when men having these sins, and knowing these sins in
their hearts and spirits; when as, because I cannot subdue these sins; and they
have attended on the Lord in the use of means, and the Lord helps them not;
and because, they hope to be saved at last for all these: Hence they come to a
truce with their sin, and never go mourning to the Lord; nor say, the Lord has
begun to subdue some of these lusts: Now Lord, go on, but the soul is at truce
with his s^nnes. Beloved, if there be any pollution of the Ordinances of the
Lord, here it is; that men come with unbroken hearts to the Ordinances of the
Lord; that never feel your need of them, and wounds and sores that are in your
hearts, that men do stand with those very sins, that they think they cannot
subdue; and because, they cannot ease themselves of them, therefore they give
way to them. When men keep these sins with unsensible hearts of them, ye do
resist the holy Ghost, ye feel not your need of the Lord; therefore ye keep
your sins, and your woes you shall have for them.

Thirdly, Where there is a spirit of unbelief, that there Tit. 1. 15. To the
unbelieving nothing is pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
Exodus 30. 29. It is said, Every thing that touched the Altar, was clean; and
hence, without this, all is unclean: When a poor soul shall come to the Lords
Ordinances, and prepare himself before he come; and in all, it has many
weaknesses, yet it does leave it self with Jesus Christ; every thing that does
touch this Altar, is sanctified, and is not polluted. But now when men shall
enjoy Ordinances, and make no great matter of sins in Ordinances; especially if
secret: such is the venomous nature of sin, it does defile the earth a man does
tread on: Now when men shall have these sins, and know them, and yet never
leave themselves with Christ, and lay themselves on this blessed Altar by
faith; they do pollute the Ordinances of the Lord,

Fourthly, When the soul does not so openly, manifestly Ezekiel. 48. 35. The Lord
is there; the Saints, they come to God in them and are carried to him by them:
Therefore, it is said, Acts 10. 33, 34. Now therefore, we are all present before
God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God, and Psalm. 84. 7. Every
one of them in Sion appears before God. Now the Saints and people of God,
when they do thus come to the Lord, they find many difficulties to break
through, a valley of Baca. Sometimes their heart is turned from the Lord, and
sometimes God is turned from them: so that now, the Saints when they do come to
the Lord in his Ordinances; They go through the vallie of Baca, that they may
see God in Sion. But now, when men do never break through difficulties, but
give way to a sluggish heart; when it is thus with a people, it is certain the
Lord is now cast off; and ye do as good now as live without Christ in the
world. Amos 5. 21. faith the Lord, I hate your new Moons, and Sabbaths; For
these forty years ye never sacrificed to me, verse. 25. Did they not sacrifice
those forty years to the Lord in the wilderness? It was the very thing they
came out of Egypt for, that they might sacrifice to the Lord: Yet says the
Lord, ye did not sacrifice to me; truly here was the thing, they did sacrifice,
but to enjoy communion with a God, that they did not; the Lord he saw none of
that, and this is the frame of many a man, ye never heard a Sermon; ye never
broke through your difficulties to come to a God in Ordinances: therefore, in
truth, though you had them, yet it is as if you never had them; because, ye
never did enjoy the Lord in them.

Therefore, this is that I would say: Oh, Brethren, let the Saints, let it be
the care of all the faithful and people of God; the first thing that ye do,
before ye come to hear a Sermon, or receive a Sacrament, or to any Christian
communion, or other Ordinance of God: Before thou do come, endeavor it at
least to bring thy soul to a God, to Christ, above all Ordinances, and break
through the difficulties; heart is dead, and mind is blind, and God is gone;
but yet break through difficulties, and wrestle with the Lord in Prayer, and
then ye will find the blessing of the Lord. The great reason why we enjoy not
that mighty presence of the Lord in his Ordinances, it is this; Men come to
Ordinances, and would enjoy Ordinances, but they never broke through
difficulties, to come to a God: When men shall come to Ordinances only, (and
blessed be God we have the temple of the Lord;) truly this will do you no good
in the world.



Look as it is with a company of Subjects, they are in some great Town, that
stands it out against a Prince; If the Prince send to them, and they parlie
with him, and they are thankful for his gifts, and glad of his parley; but yet
notwithstanding, they are unwilling to receive the Prince, with all his power
to come into the Town; if they be unwilling to do that, and are loath to join
sides against the other party, they cast him off from being King: So it is
here, when men come to the Lord in Ordinances, the Lord he parlies with them,
the Lord he sends promises, and they are mavelous precious things; and they
have some taste of what the Lord does send, and it is sweet to them; But now,
because they have lusts in their hearts; the Lord says, make war against thy
lust, and open the gates that I may come in: If so be, a man now out of secret
love to his sin, he content himself with the promises of Christ; but the life
of Christ, he cares not for that, he uses not all means that he may find that,
the supreme power of the Lord Jesus is now cast off, and I know no difference
between such a people and Capernaum; they did enjoy the Gospel of God, but now
to entertain the Lord Jesus in his spiritual power, this they were loath to
come to; therefore, says the Lord, W^ to thee Capernaum; the mighty work of
Jesus Christ in their hearts, this they never cared for, Says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 10. 5. The weapons of our warfare, they are mighty through God. As poor
things as you think the Ordinances of the Lord to be, they are mighty through
the Lord: When Christians shall not be willing to receive this mighty power of
the Lord Jesus Christ truly, now the Kingdom of Christ is cast off. John 6.
49. Your fathers ate Manna in the Wilderness, and are dead, that was outward
Manna; but he that eats me, shall live for ever.

In one word thus; this is certain, a man never gets good by any Ordinance, nor
the Lord Jesus does never attain his end in any Ordinance, till there be an
everlasting power and life of Christ Jesus communicated by the Ordinance. Psalm.
133. ult.
There, says he, God commands his blessing, life for evermore; mercy, for
ever comforting; and light, for ever teaching; and humbling, for ever
continuing: and a man will never think he does receive any good till he does
it. For if a man be healed of his blindness, and be blind presently again;
what is he the better? So, if a man has some flash of light in the Ordinance,
bless the Lord for it. The Lord quickens up the heart to walk with the Lord,
Blessed be the Lord for it: Ay, but when the heart now shall lose that life,
and strength which it had, (not but that a Christian does lose to his feeling,
but it will return again.) When he is a hearing, some affection, but he goes
away dead as he came: no, but when the Lord comes by his everlasting power and
mercy, and life in any Ordinance; now Christ comes in his power, and now ye
receive the King in his power, and Christ attains his end in the Ordinance.
This is all that I would say, I do beseech you brethren, in the Lord Jesus
Christ: Oh seek for this blessed life, everlasting life Lord, everlasting power
Lord; beg for that, and seek for that, and pray for that, and weep for that; do
not content thy self with sippings and tastings, look for everlasting life and
power to come with the Ordinance; though means be weak in themselves, do not
therefore vilify them: Look upon the brazen serpent, what a poor thing was
that to heal the people that were stung? yet the institution of Christ did put
virtue into it: So do thou attend on the Ordinances, and never be content, till
thou do find the Lord, and feel the Lord, and say as some have said; though I
feel not the Lord now as I have done, yet I think I shall for ever bless the
Lord. Never be content till ye find the Lord bringing your heart to this pass,
and then the King of glory, the Prince of peace is come; though ye find not the
same power at all times, yet if ye find that power which does inure your heart
for ever to bless the Lord, here is everlasting power. Jesus is now come to
thy soul; Ay, but when ye content your selves with some movings and beginnings;
and sin and Satan as strong again as ever, and ye find not your sin wasting and
consuming; in truth the Lord Jesus is cast off, and ye have not the end for
which ye come to the Ordinances of the Lord. But then, ye are blessed for ever
when ye find this.

Mat. 18. 17. Go and tell the Church, is the highest tribunal Christ has on
earth in the Kingdom of Saints. It Is Christ's high Court of Parliament, beyond
which there is no appeal to any higher power than the Church; and it cannot be
meant of the Officers of the Church (which is the fairest interpretation.) For
the case may be that there is but one Officer, and is he the Church? as also
that he may sin, and not hear of his sin, and must they leave him to himself,
at least to judge of his sin? They power of Keys was given to Peter, quia
fidelis, and the power to bind and loose to two or three gathered together in
Christ's name, Mat. 18. but these things are known.

For the clearing up of this, know that there is a threefold derivative power,
which the Lord has given to the Church jointly, and not to Elders only: Which
may be miserably abused, and so provoke the Lord to take it away from their
hands till they know better how to use it; yet when it is used according to
Christ, now not to be under the power of it, which is Christ, power delegated
to it, is to cast off Christ's Government. And I am confident, the bondage of
all the Churches in Christendom, if ye examine the Churches, is continued,
because the Lord sees hearts unwilling to submit to him in the government of
Churches; and will continue it till Churches know how to use it, and men lie
down to the power of it.

1. They have a power given them from Christ, of i. e. of letting in, and
keeping out any according to Christ; into, or out of their communion: and this
I conceive to be one part of the power of the Keys, committed to the Church:
The chief office of which, is to open and shut; to receive in, and keep out
according to Christ; and hence the three thousand were added to the Church,
though the Apostles were guides therein: and Acts 9. 26. Paul would have joined
himself, but they would not accept of him; because, they were afraid of him. No
body natural or politic, but they have power to receive to them the useful,
and keep from them the hurtful; so, much more Christ's spiritual body. And
hence, the Church of Ephesus is commended, Revel. 2. 2. together with their
Angel, for trying those that seemed good, and were not.

Now it is true, this power may be miserably abused in opening doors too wide,
or locking them up too long, or too fast; and in many sad disorders this way,
yet there is this power. Now when men shall refuse Church-tryall, and so
communion with the Church; and that not from sense of their unfitness and
unworthiness, or some other reason, which is in the fight of God of great
weight; but from a careless contempt of Gods Ordinances, or Gods people; a man
says, What care I for the one? and what are the other? and from a resolution
never to grow better; they know they are not like to be accepted of them, and
they are resolved they will grow no better; they think themselves as good as
they, and from a secret unwillingnesse to come to the light, they know things
are amiss, and will not be known of it; they appear better than they are, and
hence they are loath to be seen and jodged as they are: Certainly, this is to
casts Christ's power; and if continued in, the salvation of your souls is also
cast off: Acts 2. ult. The Lord added to the Church daily, such as should be
saved. To the Church. i. e. not the universal Church, but visible Church, where
it may be had; such as should be saved. Isa. 60. 14, 15. For the Nation and
Kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish; yea, those Nations shall
utterly perish: Lamentable is the condition of many; not so much for not
joining themselves to the Church, as not seeking of the Lord for that mercy;
that they may be first joined to the Lord, and so to his people for the Lords
sake.

There are great heaps of people amongst the Churches here that do stand guilty
of this, the Lord humble us for it; that content themselves to stand Aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12. Strangers from the Covenant of
Promise; having no hope, and without God in the world. The Lord is slow to
wrath; but there is a threefold bondage. 1. Of sin and Satan. Rev. 22. 14, 15.
Let him that is filthy, be filthy still; Nay, though there be some beginnings,
yet apt to fall back; because, not planted in the courts of the Lord. And
hence, Col. 2. 5. Ioying, and beholding your order, and the sted fastness of
your faith in Christ, order and steadfastness are joined together. 2. Of
misery, Zach. 14. 17. And it shall be, that whosoever will not come up of all
the families of the Earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King, the Lord of
Hosts; even upon them shall be no rain. 3. Sadness, hence, Isa. 56. 7. Even
them I will bring to my holy Mountain, and make them joyful in my House of
Prayer. To be joyful in the house of Prayer, is promised to such as join
themselves to Gods Covenant.

wrath of the Lord against the same; and this is mentioned, Matthew. 18. and by
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5. 1, 4. and this is given to them, to use against whatever
sinner or offender it be; be he great or small, Prince or Peer; if he be a
brother, he is to lie down here: An admonition is an arrest and message from
God, from Christ Jesus the King of Kings; Eglon must come down from his throne,
when this is brought.

Now I grant again, this power may be abused miserably; as to admonish without
conviction, or without compassion and love, but in heat and passion, etc. Yet
this is part of Christ's binding power in his Church; which when it is done, it is
bound in heaven.

Now when men come to that pass, that they do not only sin (for that the Lord
pardons) but are grown to that height, that they cast off all reproofs, and
Christlike admonitions for sin: steept it may be in many tears and prayers
before they came, and sweetened with the Spirit of mercy and terror of Christ
Jesus in the mouths of his servants, this brings under bondage. It Is not sin so
much, for this will be; but when they cannot abide reproofs, they are iron
morsels, cannot be digested; and hence, sometime hide it, and twenty shifts,
and half as many lies; or if it be found out, defend it, and fall a fencing and
thrusting, and try it out to the last, or extenuate it twenty ways, that a
beam is a more; and which is worse, their hearts rise and swell, and they bear
a privy grudge against them, as if they were their enemies, because they tell
them the truth; when they should say; Let the righteous smite me. Exodus 2. 14.
Who made thee a Prince and Judge over us? When Moses, the Israelites deliverer
was raised up, he thereupon departs, and they lie under heavy bondage, when
they cast off his reproof. It Is true, a Saint may not for a time submit; but
yet it argues a height of spirit for the present, unfit for communion with God,
and the Lord will bring them off, and humble them for their pride. 2 Samuel 23.
6. (...). But the sons of Belial shall be all of them as thorns (...) cause
they cannot be taken with hands.

A child of God may have many (...) many excellencies* (...) when they come to
be (...) now they yield there, and that as (...) shall either (...) question
their grace. Snakes will not hiss nor sting, till touched; a sheep will be led
to the slaughter, and turn the cheek to him that smites: So should one poor
brother do to another, when he comes to him in the name of the Lord; but not
many that will so do, but resist and oppose against all reason.

Ephesians. 4. 16. From whom the whole body, fitly joined and compacted together, by
that which every joint supplyeth, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, making increase of the body, unto the edifying it self
in love.

Members are not to stand like beautiful pictures in Church-windows, and as
costly Images in Churches; that have eyes, and see not, ears, and hear not;
but they are to be living stones in Gods building; not only to build up
themselves, but one another also, that so a man may not only get no hurt from
communion of Churches, but he may get good indeed from the same. And if I
mistake not, here is the wound of Churches: When Members seek not, and
endeavor not the good one of another; and so have Ordinances and means of
doing one another good, but exercise them not; or if they do, receive not the
good they might hereby; but may say, and shall say at last as he, Prove. 5. 14.
I was almost in all evil in the midst of the Congregation: Sin prevailing, and
sorrows by little and little, like water in a leaking ship, sinking the poor
bark.

Quest. Quest.
What are those means that are left to the Saints themselves, even private
Members to exercise in Christian communion for men and women; and so you may
see when these are neglected, or not improved, the power of Christ in his
Church is cast off so far forth?

Answ. 1. Answ.
The first is, a Spirit of dear Christ-like love one to another, every one to
all, and all to that again; being ready to express it self, in procuring the
good of others as well as its own: This does sweeten communion very much, and
edifies, quickens, and encourages a Christian in his whole course marvelously.
Ephesians. 4. 16. Making increase of the body, unto the edifying it self in love.
Love edifieth, 1 Cor. 8. 1. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth. It Is
the joy of the Saints, and that which makes the Saints to bless God in heaven;
where, take any one singly, all jointly besides honor it, tender it, and seek
the good of it; and that one blesses God, and seeks their good more than its
own again; and this is prophesied, Zeph. 3. 9. That they may call upon the name
of the Lord, to serve him with one ^^^sent, to serve the Lord with one
shoulder; to help one another spiritually and outwardly, where there be many
griefs and burdens which depresse the spirits, and make it unserviceable, is
removed: As, what is there that does alienate the hearts of men more from God
and his Church, but want of love? Now when men's love grows cold, that a godly
man is not esteemed whiles he lives, nor his death lamented so much as the
loss of a swine. When people grow strange one to another, and take distastes
and prejudices; when they can sit by the fireside, and censure, and whisper;
and make offenses, and take offenses; and minds divide, and hearts divide; that
if you ask what such a one is good for? the answer is; he is good for himself,
and good to breed brawles, and divide a Church; A Kingdom divided against it
self, cannot stand; and therefore hereby you cast off this Kingdom. Oh,
Christians should pray for this, and mourn for want of this; and study peace,
and follow it: It should be death to differ, or side, or make a party, one
against another.

2. Earnest prayer for the Church, and all in it besides thy self: and that
with striving with God, till an answer is given: Acts 5. 12.
Stretcht-out prayers, as they made for Peer. James 5. 16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for ather, that you may be healed. And so Jude 20.
But ye beloved, building up your selves in your most holy says, praying in the
holy Ghost. This is a means to edify one another, when there is inlargednesse
of heart to pray one for another; Psalm 122. 8. For my bret^^^^ sake, I Will
wish thy peace. Sometimes a Christian can do others little good; yet he will
wrestle for him in his prayers to God: One knows not the good comes here^^; if
withal a man keeps a good Conscience, making conscience of his ways. And it is
one of the greatest privileges that a man has, when once he has a share in
all the prayers of the Saints as his own; and it answers that Quere, What is a
Christian the better for the liberties of the Church? Matthew. 18. 19. Again, I
say unto you; that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching any thing
they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven. v.
20. For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the
amidst of them.

Now when people are false herein to their brethren, and to their Covenant; to
their God, and to their own souls; (for there is no one prayer thou make
that shall be lost; but if it attain not a blessing for others, it shall return
again into thy bosom.) When there shall be no heart to spend prayer, or shed
tears for them, whom Christ has shed his blood for; now, you cast off the
Kingdom of Christ.

Oh Brethren, consider of it, when there shall be many a soul in a Church taken
by Satan's temptations, and held in temptations, and ready to be overcome by
temptations; and it may be, would not be so, but because thou do not pray;
public Ordinances, the ministry of the word, little good done thereby;
because thou have no heart to pray. Acts 4. 31. And when they had prayed, the
place was shaken where they were met together; and they were all filled with
the holy Ghost. This is the reason, the hearts of thy children, servants, and
fellow-brethren remain secure and unshaken by all the Sermons they hear;
nothing does them good, nothing will pierce or penetrate their adamant-like
hearts; because, thou have no heart to pray for them, or at least, not to
purpose.

Heb. 3. 12, 13. Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart
of unbelief in departing from the living God; but exhort one another whiles it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
Brotherly exhortation is a remedy against Apostasy of heart; for though a man
cannot convince another, yet he may exhort him; and it is to be done in season,
whiles it is called to day, with due respect, and taking notice of what good
there is, with much wisdom, and a spirit of humility, or else thou spoilest
all thou medlest withal; putting your selves in their estate, and with hearty
unfeigned prayer, that the Lord would accompany the same with his blessing.
Heb. 10. 24. Consider one another, to provoke unto love and good works. Look
over the Congregation, and consider such a Brothers or Sisters estate; one is
poor and low, another falling, another very much altered: Now in some cases, a
private Brother may do more than a Minister; the Lord help us, and stir us up
to this work: Now when this is neglected, many souls are hardened.

4. Instructing and teaching one another, as occasion Romans 15. 14. And I my
self also am persuaded of you my brethren, that you also are full of goodness,
filled with all knowledge, able to admonish one another. They were able for to
instruct and teach one another. Isa. 54. 13. They shall be all taught of God.
What God teaches thee, that do thou teach others; what thou gainest by
hearing, or by praying, or meditation; by putting questions to others,
sometimes to teach, and sometimes to be taught; and this do, if possible, in
all occasional meetings, and worldly discourses; mix with it some sweet truth
that God has taught thee. But now on the other side, when Christians shall
meet, and a (...) is the worse for their fruitless discourse, no savo^^ of any
thing of God; Let them meet never so long or o^^en, walking or sitting, this is
sad.

5. In Comforting those that be sad; These. 5. 14. and ult. Comfort the
feeble-minded, and support the weak; wherefore, comfort one another with these
wo^^s. There are many sad hearts in Gods Church, and sad things are as wounds
to a man's limbs, that make him halt or fall. Oh brethren, be much in this work,
2 Cor. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. That a soul may say, such a one came to me, and spoke
some few words to me; but they were as seasonable, as though the Lord had sent
an Angel from heaven to speak to me, and of more worth, than if he had given me
^any pounds: But now, when this also is neglected, that one Christian has not
a word of encouragement to another, but dry and savourless discourse; this the
Lord takes very ill at the hands of his people, that have received comfort from
himself in the day of their sorrow and distress.

6. Restoring a Brother fallen with a spirit of meekness; Gal. 6. 1, 2.
Brethren, of any be overtaken with a fault, ye which are sprituall, restore
such a one with a spirit of meekness. Oh, how will a poor soul bless the for
such a Brothers prayers, admonitions, and exhortations, when the Lord shall
have brought his heart back again to himself; although before he did most of
all disesteem and vil^fie him.

Now, when these are not used, or not with a spirit of meekness improved, that
a man never blesses God for these; the Lord Jesus is pulled down from his
throne, when not done according to the ability, time and place that the Lord
affords. And this I wish, the Churches mourn not for another day: For my own
part, I do adjudge my self before God and men, as most guilty of this, that I
enjoy many sweet Ordinances, and we improve them not; and hence, the glory of
the Lord fills not his Tabernacle, abides not on his Churches, either to draw
others to them, or to make others abundantly bless God for them.

Now here I will show you the causes of this.

Not gaining much in private duties, in Prayer, Meditation, Reading, and daily
Examination of a man's own heart: And hence they cannot do good, because they
receive none, or very little themselves; they have not a treasure within, hence
they can spend little, have no heart or ability to exhort, instruct, comfort:
He that keeps not his shop, his shop will never keep him. As Psalm 41. 6. His
heart gathers iniquity to it self, when he goes abroad, he tells it.

A low spirit, which makes a man to have low thoughts, and endeavors, I mean
not an humble, but a narrow spirit, not enlarged to hold much, or to do much,
hence it does little. As take a plain Countreyman, he neither seeks or regards
the affairs of the State in public, because his spirit and condition is low;
but Princes do mind and attend to the affairs of the Kingdom, to advance it;
because their condition is high, and they know it. Moses, he suffered reproach
with the people of God, loss of all the honor and pleasure of Phara^hs out;
feared not Pharaoh, nor loss of life for their sakes: For, he saw that God
which is invisible; like Saul, when once a Ringdome comes to be in his eye, he
leaves off to seek the Asses.

Sloth. There are Thorns, Prove. 15. 19. and Lions, Prove. 26. 13. in a
sluggards way: There be many difficulties, businesses, occasions, and
objections; when as if once he were resolved to break thorough them, then the
work would go on: Like a man, when he is in his warm bed, he is loath to rise;
but when he is up, he would not be in his bed again, if he might be hired again
to put off his clothes: I shall get no good; says one, nor do none, says
another; and when these businesses are past, and occasions over; and at another
time, I will seek God, and go about Gods work; and thus a slothful spirit
hinders.

4. Want of Faith. 2 Cor. 4. 13. We believe, and Faith empties us most, and
hence fills us with Spirit and Life of Christ Jesus; hence Steven, full of
faith, and the holy Ghost. A lively Christian, when he comes in another
Christians company, it may be he knows not what to speak; but he looks up to
Christ, and says; Now Lord, here is an opportunity in doing or receiving some
good; and therefore now Lord help.

5. Want of fear of God, and consolation of the spirit of God* from the sense
of Gods love. Acts 9. 31. They the Church was edified by the consolations of
the Holy Ghost. A man that is wounded, keeps within, and stirs not; but when he
is in health and strength, now hard work is his meat, he cannot live except he
work. 1 Cor. 15. ult.

6. Not considering the shortness of our time of sowing.

There are two causes why they receive no good.

1. From a mean esteem of the Saints; looking on them Ephesians 4. 16. Edifying is by
love; Making increase of the body, edifying it self in love.

2. From want of being poor in spirit, and sensible of Isa. 11. 6. A little
child shall lead the Wolf and the Lion; that is, when the Lord has humbled
the heart of a man. Oh, when a Christian thinks none so poor and shallow, and
heartlesse as I, and every one is better than I, however I need more than any:
This soul will be glad to suck the breast; and the Lord will fill others with
light and life, and his own bowels, to do such a one good. Whereas, else they
are shut up, and they find no good conveyed to them by any of the Ordinances of
the Lord, nor any presence of God in them.

Peter and the rest of the Apostles, and the successors of Christ's Apostles in
Doctrine, sent of Christ, John 20. 23. Whosoevers sins ye remit, they are
remitted; etc. Because, though the power of Communication of it is in the
Churches hand, yet the power of usual administration of it is in their hand;
whiles they exercise it according to Christ, yet by the Church. And hence Paul
puts a difference between this extraordinary Ministry, as Apos^leship, and
ordinary. Gal. 1. 1. An Apostle not of men, not by the will of men, but by
Christ; for the Church, not by it: Now this I say, is by the Church from
Christ. Hence, Acts 20. 28. The holy Ghost haoh made them overseers; so that
it is no invention of man, or act of man, or the power of man; but of Christ,
and hence refuse to be under this power; men cast off the yoke and power of
Christ Jesus.

For though the estate of the Church be Democraticall and Popular; and hence no
public administrations or Ordinances are to be administrated publicly,
without notice and consent of the Church; Yet the government of it under
Christ, the Mediator and Monarch of his Church; it is Aristocraticall, and by
some chief, gifted by Christ, chosen by the people to rule them in the name of
Christ, who are unable, and unfit to be all Rulers themselves; and to cast off
these, or not to be ruled by these; is to cast off Christ. Luke 10. 16. He that
rejects you, rejects me. Numb. 16. 3. You are gathered together against the
Lord; The Lord accounts himself opposed and resisted, when the Officers of his
Church are slighted, and their government despised.

Quest. Quest.
What is this power?

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
Negatively: 1. It is not any Lordly pompous power, to bear the bell of great
smoakie titles, to govern in worldly pomp; or by worldly rewards, and civil
punishments. 2 Cor. 10. 4. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. It shall not be so
with you, says Christ; but as I have been without all worldly s^ate, so must
you be one to another. And hence, 1 Peter 5. 4. Not being Lords over Gods
heritage: Christ never gave his Ministers power of opening and shutting the
doors of Newgate, and Bonners Cole-house if they would not sub^^^ibe, or to
confute men's opinions with their own laws, and bind consciences with chains
of Iron, or to promote his servants by spiritual livings. Christ himself
refused to be a Judge in civil causes; hence some of our Divines, when they
would grant that Peter was Christ's successor, and the Bishop of Rome Peter's and
Christ's Vicar; yet as Christ being on earth, exercised no civil power, so much
less may these.

2. It Is not any Antichristian illimated power, viz. to Acts 20. 28. but never
of any one ordinary Minister, or Officer over many Churches; either to govern,
or to baptize, as the Anabaptists would among them, as many godly plead for now
in the misty confusion of England. And look as we cry out of one Minister
non-resident, that shall have six or ten livings, though he give never so good
a stipend; not only because of his pride and covetousness, but because of his
unconscionablenesse, etc. So here much more of one man Overseer over many
congregations, it may be an hundred at least.

3. It Is not any Magisterial power, Diotrephes-like; either Mat. 23. 8. and
their wills to be their law; No, Matthew. 28. 20, Teach, all that I command you:
If they do sin, their persons are under the censure of the Church, in case of
manifest offense and scandal by the mouths of two or three witnesses who
being Members of the whole Church, and under it, and being sinful Members;
may, if the case need it, be proceeded against by the whole. Neither have they
any power to act any public Ordinance which concerns the whole Church, and
where it is bound by Christ to judge, without the privity and consent of the
Church, as to elect Officers, admit Members, cast out offenders in the Vestry
without the knowledge of the Church, one of the blaines of the reformed
Churches, which the Apostles with their extraordinary power never did
themselves, much le^e should these. 1 Cor. 5.

Act 6. 3, 4. they were ordained by lifting up their hands. This is
Apostolical power, and an intrusion, and cuts asunder the force of the
argument of Master Ball his Book of power for Presbytery, etc.



Answ. 1. They have a power given them of ruling and governing from Christ by
the people; hence they are called Rulers, and such as rule, and are over Gods
Church; hence they have strict charge and command from the Lord to do it. Hence
Paul at Ephesus, When he was with them three years, yet had Rulers there; and
verse. 28. Feed Gods stock bought by blood; over which, not men, but the holy
Ghost has made you Overseers; Christ's Church being like sheep, apt to stray
and perish, unless these watch against wolves, and these the Apostle at his
last parting left; hence also, they are to give an account of it at the last
day. Heb. 13. Hence th^se cast off the Lords government over them, who will
have no Rulers or Governors in Churches, who shall either speak it or think
it, but leave all to themselves and their liberty; to teach, baptize, to order
things in Church, and so by this means they are not only single Members or
Officers; but Pastor, and Teacher, and Elder and all. This generation of men,
sons of Korah* are risen up in these latter times; especially amongst
Ana^aptists, Familists, and rigid Separatists, and who are privily crept into
New England Churches; Whose condemnation sleeps not, Satan carrying them to
extremes, and pride lifting them up above themselves, above Men, above
Officers, above Ordinances, and above God. That look as Commonwealths are
under greatest bondage, where there is an Anarchy, where every one must be a
slave, because every one must be a Master; So in the Churches, no greater
bondage can come than this, the foundation of all confusion, and the scand^ll
of the ways of God which through mercy his people here enjoy.

2. This power is more than any one private Member Submit to them that are over
you, 1 Thessalonians 5. 12. and Hebrews 13. 17. Obey them ^^at guide you, or
rule over you. Hence those that do acknowledge Governors in the Church for
names sake, but they are such as have no more power than a private Brother;
they do but allow the name, but deny the thing: Hence say they, they are to
watch; so are private Members: they are to admonish; so is every private
Member: they are to rule; the word signifies to guide and go before another.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
The word to rule, 1 These. 5. 12. is the same word with 1. Tim. 3. 4, 5. He
that rules his own house, which is a little more than they that are besides him
in the Family; though this be not such a paternall power, yet it is somewhat
more than that of private Members. And that Heb. 13. 17. is a word which is the
same with that in Matthew. 2. 6. Governor, particularly spoken of Christ's
government, to feed otherwise than private Members.

Answ. 2. Answ. 2.
It Is true, they are to watch and admonish in way of Christian duty; but others
in way of Christ's authority, as being his Ambassadors, and sent of him; as in a
family, one servant should watch over another; but the chief Steward, he is to
do it with authority in the absence of his Lord. And hence does it with more
majesty and power, and it takes, or should take deeper impression; so it is in
Elders of a Church.

Hence also, when men shall cry for liberty to speak, an Elder forbids it;
What, may not the Church have liberty? true, but you are not a Church. An Elder
reproves, and they will reprove again: What, shall not the Church have liberty?
An Elder gives reasons strong, and unanswerable for some thing to be done; a
young fellow shall step up, and say, without ground, or show of it, that is your
light, and mine is otherwise: What, may not the Church have liberty? Yes, but
you are not the Church; this is very sad, and has been a root of greatest
scandal that ever Gods ways had. If Elders sin openly, it is another case, and
somewhat also is there to be done; Submit your selves one to another, much more
to an Elder, etc.

Tim. 5. 19. but whiles they execute it according to Christ, they are therein
above the Church, and it is bound to be subject therein; and not to be subject,
is to refuse to be under Christ's government. Hence, Heb. 13. Obey them that
rule you; he speaks to the whole Church, which was not in evil, but in good
things according to God; and yet in evil things, look on them as those over
them. Exempli gratia, A Minister in the execution of his office, let him preach
Christ's eternal truth, deliver it and prove it; What ever humane weaknesses
there be in him, what ever darkness there is in others, yet he is therein
above Churches, Kings or Angels; and they shall answer it at the great day,
that do not submit. In regard of my person said Luther, I Will fall down before
any, but in regard of the truth I administer, I look on the Kings of the earth
as nits, nay dust, etc. ad Regem Angl.

So in the power of the Keys in opening and shutting out Members; they have
tried and proved such a one; if they sin, as they may, then give them reasons;
but if not, they are bound to submit. And that not as unto other Christians,
but as unto an Ordinance, stamped with an authority of God upon them; in ^eed
they are not to do any such thing without the presence, consent, and judiciary
power of the Church; and the Church may not submit to what Elders propose to be
Christ's mind; but then they cast ^ff the Lords power, which they are to answer
for another day. 1 Cor. 12. 28. they are called Governors. Now as a Ruler of a
Ship is to order it, though a King be in it, over him in that respect, and the
King is to be guided by him, whiles he guides it right; but if not, the King
has power over him, to command others to take the place, or cast him over
board.

It Is true, they are but servants to the Church, because they are by the
Church, for the Church, and to help the Church, 2 Cor. 1. 24. and are subject
to them if they sin; but yet they are servants unto Christ, and in exercising
his power according to him* above the Church. 2 Cor. 4, 5. We preach Christ,
and our selves your servants for Christ; yet therein above them: Hence being
their servants; if they sin, they are under the censure of the Church, and the
Church may cast them by. So being Christ's servants; if not submitted to, the
Lord does account himself cast off.

1. Because their power thus rightly executed, is the

2. Because, if there shall be no subjection here, it is

3. Elders are helpers of people, and there is no people

Acts 20. 28. and to see into, and enquire into the estate of the stock of God,
to know their spiritual condition, so far as is fit to be known, that so they
may be comforted in the work of Christ; though there be no sin break out, not
they come to them, 1. These. 3. 5, 6. The Apostle enquired into their faith,
charity, and prayer, verse. 7. and hence was comforted, etc. And this Paul does
not as an extraordinary man, but leaves his example as a president to the
Elders of Ephesus; to go from house to house, and enquire, to teach and exhort,
Acts 20. for Elders are to prevent scandals as well as to remove them, left
when they come they say, Oh that I had known this before, especially where they
see need. Now hence it is that men cast off the government of Christ, when they
will not have their spiritual condition searched into, the Elders foot is now
too great for his shoe, I am to give an account to God; so are they also of
thee; now thou can not give it if thou inquire not how thy condition
stands, neither can they with comfort unless thou tellest them how it stands
with thee. It Is true there are many secret things they can never find out yet
they are to attend their duty.

The Ministers charge is to cast the seed, the Elders duty is to enquire after
the fruit in the husbandry of Christ; it is a sad condition when a man has
such a wound that he will not go to the Lord for help, because he loves it;
and will not have man to know it, at because he is ashamed of it; But you
shall know it, the last day that the Lord would have healed you, and you would
not, but can quarrel and snap at the Elders when they come to enquire of your
condition? and why do ye inquire; you take too much on you.

guides and leaders to the people, Heb. 13. 17. Mal. 2. 7. I do not mean in all
personal things. Acts 20. 31. I warned you of wolves, etc. Hence

may all Churches, never to enquire at Abel is casting off the Lord, as in
election of Offices in Church, and Magistrates in the Commonwealth, etc.

2. Hence to receive any opinion different from all the

3. Hence to propose a doubtful question to the

4. Hence when men shall not take warning of evils according to the word of the
Lord by his servant Elisha, so will the Lord make good the words and
threatenings of his faithful servants.

5. They have power of public reproof of any Tim 5. 20. Now this is sad when a
man cannot forbear reproof of others, nor hear reproofs of Elder, but turns
again, and will be judge in his own cause though never so gross, a sign of an
extreme froward high spirit, Hosea 4. 4. which makes the Lord to take away
Elders as soon as any sin is committed, and stop their mouths. Exodus 2. Who
made thee a Judge, etc. And when afflictions come, and you then enquire, what
is the cause of it? you may be sure this is one, even by the confession of the
blindest deboist ones. Prove. 5. 12. How have I hated Instruction, and not
obeyed the voice of my teachers?

Acts. 20. 28. Hence.



Mal. 1. ult. although they cannot a bit, and hence thrive not, but a spirit of
slumber and a deep sleep grows on them, that they cannot be awakened by all the
Ordinances of God, These things call for chains. Amos 8. 12. When will these
Sabbaths be ended? for which the Lord threatens a ^amin, and then you shall
know the worth of them in the want of them.

These things I speak. 1. Because I see the Apostle in many of his Epistles
lays this charge on the people. Heb. 13. 7, 17. it is twice repeated. 1. Lest
Officers be sadded in their work that is heavy. 2. Lest it be unprofitable for
you; you think to get this and that good by it, but it will be nothing in the
conclusion.





Solomon's Temple. It Is observed of Ierobeam when he was sacrificing he had no
leprosy, but when he stretched out his hand against the Prophet it was
withered; for the Lord will not bear here, they may be depised, and you may
think your selves Kings without them, 1 Cor. 4. 8. and they will say so, they
may rule as they will, but you will do as you list. But the Lord will be
provoked for this, all Satan's subtilty lies here; disgrace the Elder says one,
divide them says* another, pull thom down says the third, that there may be
no King in Israel, no nor in Sion, that we may do what is right in our own eyes.

3. Try when the external Kingdom of Christ in a Revel. 11. 15. when the
seventh trumpet is blown, and the Lords last woe is come upon the world and the
Kingdoms thereof, which have opposed Christ, and those Kingdoms are turned to
embrace the Gospel, and submit to the power of Christ in the same, then it is
said, The Kingdoms of the world are become the Kingdoms of Christ; it is not
said, Christ's Kingdom is become the Kingdom of the word, as if Christ should
put down civil authority, and exercise rule by it himself, but The Kingdoms
of the world, i.e. the various Kingdoms are become Christ's, i.e. to advance
it, and debase themselves at his feet. Ephesians. 1. 2^. it is said, All things are
put under Christ's feet, and he is head over all things to the Church, (that is
universally, chiefly* nextly, particularly,) so then earths Kingdoms when they
are subject to Christ, for his ends, now they exercise the Kingdom of Christ,
in a manner; and hence to cast off this, is to cast off the Kingdom of Christ,
and so to provoke the Lord to put us under bondage.

Quest. Quest.
When is Christ's Power and Kingdom cast off here?

Answ. Answ.
There is a double Power in the Kingdoms of the world, which I suppose, when
they become Christ's Kingdoms, they will retain.

First, There is some supreme or higher power; in the

Secondly, There is some inferior power, by some Iethro propounded from God to
Moses, Exodus 18. 17, 18. ' It Is not good for thee to be alone, but thou will
both wear out thy self, and thy people. Public authority must have many eyes,
and many hands; and like a River that is to water a Country, it must have many
streams: And hence they had in the Commonwealth of Israel, which was for God,
in every City Judges, and in Towns, such as were over fifties and tens, Exodus
18. 25. which it seems continued long, till all fit men for government were
taken away; and then Isaiah 3. 3. their condition is lamented.

Now the form of this government is not in all Commonwealths alike; the Lord
not binding to any; and hence called (...), an ordinance of men. Hence it is a
foolish vanity to ask a warrant in Scripture for such a form of Government; for
humane wisdom may teach this, though not in Church Government. Yet this
supreme and inferior Government has been in all Kingdoms, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
to both which subjection is required; to refuse to give it, is to cast off the
Lords Government; and there are couched four reasons in that place to prove
this.

Do it for the Lords sake, for the name of Christ; and that honor and majesty
of Christ stamped on them, submit; hence cast them off, you cast by respect
unto; nay, the name of Christ Jesus.

In punishing evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. It Is true,
they may abuse their power otherwise; but yet their power is one thing, and
their abuse of it another.

this is the will of Christ, and you do well in it; and so you shall stop the
mouths of foolishmen, apt to speak against you for sin.

this is the liberty of Christ, verse. 6. and you are servants to Christ in it;
and to do otherwise is licentiousness; and their liberty to exempt themselves
from the power of lawful authority, was but a cloak of it. For so it seems in
those days, some held it part of their Christian liberty to be free from all
bonds; and said, that Christ had made them Kings on Earth, etc. So that if they
did cast off subjection, they did cast of the name of Christ, power of Christ,
will of Christ, liberty of Christ Jesus. Even under heathen Magistrates; what
then do they that cast it off under others?

Quest. 2* Quest. 2:
When is Christ's Government cast off in respect of the supreme power?

Answ. Answ.
Those that know the questions about the power of Princes and people,
especially revived in these last days; cannot but know the field is large,
where now I am, I shall be wholly silent; unless I saw greater cause of
speaking than I do, and only point out two or three particulars to prevent such
sins as stand next to the door; to break in upon this power.

1. When men cast off secretly dread, and fear, and reverence Able men fearing
God, chief amongst the people; was the counsel of God by Iethro and M^ses; but
when they be Elected, now to despise them, and hence not to bow the knee, or
stir the hat, and speak rudely before them; it is casting off, not only their
power in sight of God; but the very root of it, which is honor: And hence in
the fifth Commandment, all duties to them are comprehended under the word
Honor. And who sees not but this is a sin, which is apt to attend the spirits
of men in a place of liberty, and in our weak beginnings, and day of small
things? Reports are abroad, that no men of worth are respected; and hence the
Country is neglected. I cannot say so after many thoughts; for I am persuaded
no place in Europe more ready to honor men of public spirits, and of eminency
in piety, and humility; without the seeing of which, no Country more apt to
vilisie; because grace is the glory in the eye of a Country led by Religion:
But take heed, lest such a spirit be all us; lest the Lord put out our Lamps,
and cast our Crown down to the ground.

2. When men seek to pluck the sword of revenge for sin Romans 13. 4. He is Gods
Minister; y^s; when he gives good counsel* and when he is a revenger, to
execute wrath on him that does evil: So that be the evil what it will be, if
it hurt the Commonwealth, or be against any wholesome Law thereof; he is Gods
Minister to punish it civilly. In the first Reformation of Geneva, there were
as many heresies and errors almost as truths of God; Servetus, he denied the
Deity of Christ; whereupon the Magistrate put him to death, who dyed with
extreme horror; Whereupon heresies being begun to be s^ibb'd and blasted,
Bellius writes a Book: 1. That men should punish no heresy at all; but be
merciful and ^eek, as Christ was to the adulterous woman. 2. If they did; yet
that Magistrates they should not punish for Beza has given a most learned and
solid answer, detesting the hypocrisy of the man, and the sad consequences of
such opinions, if their power should be diminished.

I conceive, it is casting off Christ's power, to take away power from
Magistrates to punish sins against the first Table, of which errors and
heresi^s in Religion are part. It Is as clear as the Sun, that the Kings of
Ia^ah that were g^dly did it, and were commended for it; and it is as clear,
they were commended for it; not as types of Christ, but because they did
therein that which was right in Gods eyes, and according to the commandment of
the Lord; Which judicial commandments, concerning the punishing of
Sabbath Breakers, false Prophets, Heretics, etc. G^ds fence to preserve moral
laws; (...) are of moral equity, and so to be observed to this day of
Christian Magistrates, etc. To exempt Clergymen in matters of Religion from the
power of the civil sword, is that ^^pery; by means of which Antichrist has
risen, and has continued in his pomp and power so long together, The
indulgence of Princes toward the Papal function in matters of Religion, has
undone Christendom.

It Is true, every error is not to be immediately committed but when it is like a
gangrene, of a spreading nature, then the Magistrate in due time must cut it
off speedily.

Ohject. Object.
Leave them to the Church.

Answ. Answ.
True* leave them 1. there. But 2. Sometimes the Church will not, sometimes
they are not of any Church. A ^apist, an Arminian may come in and leaven and
damn many a soul, for which they had better never been; If it were but one,
and if he says, I do it with a meek spirit, (their trick of late) and none
must meddle, because mercy must be shown to their wolves: A wise shepherd had
rather let a hunter come in and kill one of his sheep, then let a Wolf or Fox
escape, Acts 20. 29 and see his people persecuted, than their souls worried.

Heresy and Error has this property; it ever dies by severe opposition, and
truth ever rises the more; because Christ is against the one, Hence it must
fall; but or the other, hence it shall rise by its fall: Hence, set your selves
against this, it is to oppose the power of Christ Jesus And hence in Henry the
8th time, the Abbeys fell, and never could rise to this day; but the six
Articles against the Saints pursued with blood, made them increase the more.

3. When men will not submit to the wholesome Laws Deuteronomy. 17. 12. He that will
not hea^ken, but do pres^mptuously, shall dye; He being the Minister of the
(...); and indeed it is to cast off the Lord. I go not about here to establish
a sovereign power in Magistrates, when is proper to God, to ma^e what laws
they will, about civi^l, Religious, or indifferent things, and then people to
(...) for no other ^eason, but because of their will^ under which notion,
superstition in Churches has been ushered and maintained, you must (...): in
that case, it is better to s^ffer than to sin, and nor to do, than do. But
suppose the laws just, righteous, holy, and for public good, and that
apparently so, and not in saying so only: Now here, to cast off laws, is to
cast off Christ.

There are two things especially, which are the cause and occasion of the
breach of all other laws; and the strongest sins and sweetest, which men,
young men especially, the hopes of the Common wealth, are caught with, Prove. 2.
13, 16.

1. Who^edome, secret lusts and wa^tonnesse, and other strange lusts which I
^^ase and dare not name, 1 Kings 1^. 24. The sin before Shishah came, a sin
which many times Solomon cannot see through his window, nor the eye of authority
discern; but God will judge for it, Heb. 13. 5* and if he be judge, who shall
be thy Jailor, but Satan? and what shall be thy sentence, but death? and what
thy ^naines, but a hard heart for the present, and horror afterward? A sin
which pollutes the very earth, the land, the very dust of the ground; and the
cause of all sin almost in a place, as drunkenness, idleness, corrupt
opinions, scoffing at the Ministers of God, and ways of God: For I seldom knew
a persecutor, but he was an adulterer, though it is not always true; and in the
end, poverty and ruin. And know it, though no man's eye has seen thee, no power
of Magistrate can reach thee; this word shall be fire to consume thee, unless
thou repent: for thy looks, thy lusts, thy dalliances, thy thoughts, thy
speeches, thy endeavors this way, much more for the thing. Man's law shall not
bind you here, because it cannot reach you; but know, that Christ is cast off
by you.

Prove. 25. 3, 4. A Commonwealth is a refined vessel of use of God, and
judgment is established; when these are taken away, your knors of loose
company. Take a poor Soldier alone, he is as other men, but when they are got
into a knot together; now they grow strong against all ^aws of God or men. So
here, the knot of good fellowship has been the bane of the flourishing State
of England, meeting in Tavernes and such places; and the cause of wheredome,
and of all evil commonly in a Nation. For hence* Much precious time is lost;
which if spent in praying, as in sporting with th^^, many a young man's soul had
been blessed: Hence, s^metimes dicing, feasting, excessive drinking, merry
(...), which take off all spiritual joy: Hence filthy songs, and lascivious
speeches; by which hopeful young men are i^s^a^ed, and taught to do wickedly,
and so knit to them; that it is death to part with them, and it is better to burn
a whole Town, than to poison one hopeful young man.

Next to communion with wanton women, I have ever looked on unnecessary
fellowship with graceless men, as the next. Well, know it, you cast off the
Lords g^vernment from you by his servants, which will be sad to answer for
another day. And as the Prophet said to Iehosaphat, Should thou love them
that hate the Lord? his wrath is against thee for this: So say I to thee.

Quest. 3. Quest. 3
Inferior power, when is that cast off, viz. in particular Cities or Towns by
meaner persons?

Answ. Answ.
I shall express it in three things chiefly.

safety for the Country; it is not now an artillery day, only I must speak a
word, because it is a thing of moment, and matter of great conscience with me.
^suppose, in such a place at least, according to the Centurio^s example amongst
Heathens, Mat. 8. 9. a word of a Commander to any of them should be a law. I
say to one, Go, ^ee goes. Now for men to come when they l^st to those meetings,
and so time is lost, and when they do come, no care; I had almost said
conscience, to mind their work in hand, and do it with all their might, as it
to which they are called; but Officers may speak, charge, cry, yea strike
sometimes, yet heed not, it is intolerable; but that Members of Churches, which
should be examples to others should do this, at least it is but brutishness.
But I do wonder what rules of Conscience such do walk by, and if they do, where
is their tenderness to withdraw their shoulders from under the work? which if
there be but English blood in a Christian, he will endeavor to be perfect in
his Art herein: but if grace, much more, that he may make one stone in the
wall, and be fit to shed his blood, if need be, for the defense of Christ's
servants, Churches, and cause of God.

2. When any Town does cast off the power and rule of I confess, if there be
not (...) no way of living under any gov^^nment (...) or Commonwealth, if the
public affairs of (...) cast off. I know sometimes, godly (...) through
weakness, want of light, (...) and violent tentation, oppose here; but I am
persuaded if they be the Lords, he will in time humble them for it, and make
them better after it.

I know the answer to two questions would clear up all the doubts about this
matter, 1. What prudence should be used in making laws? 2. How far those
humane laws and Town-orders bind conscience? But I cannot attend these; only
six things I would here say.

i. e. to urge it or constrain either to excuse for doing well, or to accuse
for sin; for conscience is at liberty without this) this is a truth urged by
all orthodox Protestant Divines against the Papists; so that no law can
immediately bind conscience but Gods.



James 4. 12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save or d^stry. Isa. 33.
22. for the law which so binds conscience to a duty that the breach of it is a
sin, and that against God: we know that the least sin of it self destroys the
soul, binds it over to death, but none have power to destroy it but the Lord
himself.

Prove. 2. 9. wisdom teaches every good path. Psalm. 119. 11. I have hid thy
word, that I might not sin. Whatever one does without a rule from the word, is
not of faith. Hence the word descends to the most petty occasions of our lives,
it teaches men how to look, Psalm. 131. 1. how to speak, Mat. 12. 36. it
descends to the plaiting of the hair, 1 Pet. 3. 5. moving of the feet, Isa. 3.
16. and what is of Christian liberty has its freedom from the word: a man
must give an account at the last day of every stirring of heart, thoughts,
motives, and secret words; and if so, then it must be according to the rule of
the word: and hence the word only has absolute power to bind Masters,
Servants, and Princes how they govern, and people how they subject; and this
the Lord has done to make men take counsel from him, and walk in fear before
him, and approve themselves to him, especially Townsmen in their places not to
consult without God.

men, are either expressly mentioned in the word, or are to be collected and
deducted from the word, as being able to give sufficient direction herein. For
all the authority of the highest power on earth in ^^rri^ing of Laws, is in
this alone, viz. to make prudent ^llection and special application of the
general rules, recorded in Scripture, to such special and peculiar
circumstances which may promote the public weal and good of persons, places,
proceedings. Prove. 8. 85. By me Princes decree justice. Joshua 1. 7, 8. Do what
Moses commanded, turn not on either hand. Object. But I cannot see my way from
hence always. Meditate therefore on it much, and then thy way shall prosper,
etc. Many things Joshua did, not particularly set down by Moses, but may be
collected from it. Deuteronomy. 1. 17, 18, 19, 20. The king is to have it, that he may
prolong his days in the midst of Israel, in his Kingdom. What made Rehoboam
to turn from these ways? he thought he could not stablish his Kingdom without
it; that was therefore the ruin of him and his Kingdom.

1. This appears, because the word is sufficient to direct,

2. Because either men have rules to walk by, or their

3. Humane laws or orders thus, either set down in i. e. as published and
imposed by man;) (...) do bind secondarily, i. e. by virtue of the Law of God,
wherein they are contained, or from whence they are derived and deducted, and
according to which (...) opposed; they are like subpoenas in the King^ name, or
writ of arrest, which by virtue of higher power challenge obedience; And thus
to break these, is to (...) against God, and makes the conscience liable to
punishment from God: And the reason is.

Sam. 8 7. They have not rejected thee, but me.

Romans 13. 2. He that resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, i. e.
when they command thee according to God, which the Lord takes very ill; and the
meaner the power is (as in Towns) the more terrible will the Lord be, when he
comes to visit for it; hence they receive to themselves damnation, both by God
and men.

It Is true, if they be not thus according to the word, but rather against the
general rules of it: though men in Towns and places are not to be obeyed, yet
subjection is their due even then; i. e. not to refuse obedience with contempt
of their persons, places, power, or scandal to their proceedings, or profession
of the Gospel. Revile not the Lords high Priest; speak evil of no man; but
rather come in private, and confer with them; and hear what may be said, and be
willing to give and take reason.



This I add to answer that great question in many scrupulous minds. I cannot
see (so ignorant) when an order is collected from the general rules of the
word; n^w this conclusion answers that doubt: For look as the main work of men
in place, is to promote public good; (and hence public spirited men are to be
chosen for i^) so the principal rule is that which God and his Word gives them
to walk by: whatever really does tend to the advancement of that; Publish that,
record that, and execute that, Romans 13. 4. He is Gods M^nister to thee for
good: i. e. for the public good. He is for men's private good, but it is in
reference to public good; that as private persons are to attend their work, so
public persons public g^od. Hence, 1. If a law be made for public hurt, that
law is not of God.

was Ioshuas spirit herein, Josh. 19. 49, 50.

3. If laws be only in appearance and pretense for public good, and not
really, they bind not; none must do evil, much less make a law of it, for
public good. Nothing more usual than to make civil laws and orders,
crossing Gods law, and to pretend public good; which ever prove the public
pests and plagues, and cankers of that place, as Ieroboams command for
Religion. Some things are forbidden plainly, they make not for public good,
but hurt, the statues of Omri. Other things are indifferent in their nature, as
swine to go abroad, or to be shut up; but inconvenient in their use, and
hurtful and scandalous, and that really to the general. They are not for
public good, whatever is pretended. Somethings are plainly commanded, they are
for the public good circumstantiated; some things are indifferent in their
nature, but convenient and comfortable in their use, those are indeed according
to God. And such things may be discerned, they are so obvious and sensible, of
such necessity and such profit, when duly considered by persons not blinded
with their private interests.

4. Hence things indifferent, which may as well be left i. e. such things which
make as much for public good, not to use, as use; the truth is, he has least
power here; because they are idle and Idol-lawes, no hurt, nor is there good in
them: And hence, some of the most rigid Schoolmen maintain such laws bind not
conscience; we are not to seek our private only; now all human laws are helps
to seek public.

5. That laws made for and according to God for public usually they will
press on some man's particular; the heaviest end of a staff that is to be
born, must fall on some man's shoulder, and such laws must be made. Hence a man
is to bear and submit cheerfully, i. e. from the rule of love, which will abate
of particular for the general good; love that more than mine own. 2. The law
of justice, a man is to do as he would be done by; there is no man, but if his
good was advanced by the general, but would be conteut that some particular
should be pinched. 3. The law of nature: The stomach is content to be sick, and
body weak, to heal the whole body. Hence Christians should not think that
Tow^smen are careless, unjust, and aimed at their hurt, when it is thus, 1
King. 12. 4.





aut, a disjunctive copula; and is indeed rather a proviso than a law.

i. e. there is a command it shall de done; and Lawgiver is sad, though
penalty being paid, as being about a matter of weight; it may be the livelihood
and comfort of men, as keeping hogs out of corn, and peace in a Town, that
there be no complaining; here the penalty will not satisfy, because this is no
penal law, but a law indeed deducted from rules of the word of God; as it is
in theft, he that steals, shall pay fourfold; or that brawles, shall be duckt
in the water: Suppose one should say, I will suffer my servant to steal or
revile; I hope it is no offense if he suffer the penalty. Yes, but it is,
beeause it is not a mere penal law; the thing is of weight, peace between
neighbors, so peace in a Town. It Is a flat charge not to break it, and thou
know such is the honesty and justice of a Magistrate, that he will say, I
would rather you would never do thus, than offer those to do. Hence in Gods law
Christ must suffer, and do also, because Gods law is not merely penal; but
doing the thing, gives more content than the punishment.

3. When servants cast off all subjection to their Governors. Tit. 2. 9, 10.
and so of Commonwealths. When they are not obedient; 1 Pet. 3. 18:
but answer again; if they be let alone, then idle; if rebuked and curbed, then
stubborn and proud, Ephesians. 6. 5.
and worse for chiding, and find fault with their wages, and victuals, and
lodging; weary, and vex out the heart of Master and Mistress, and make them
weary of their lives, and their God also almost sometimes; and that by such
professing Religion, and all that they might be from under the yoke.

And here I cannot but set a mark upon servants broke loose from their Masters,
and got out of their time, that are under no Family nor Church Government; nor
desiring 1 Pet. 3. 18.
of it, or preparing for it; Tit. 2. 9, 10.
but their reigns are on their necks. I confess, Ephesians. 6. 5
if under heathen Masters, then desire liberty rather; but when men will live
as they list, without any over them, and unfit to rule themselves; I much
doubt, whether this be according to God.

1. Hence they come to live idly, and work when they

2. Hence men of public use, can have little use but

3. When they be with them, they have no power to

4. Hence they lie in wait to oppress men that must

5, Hence they break out to drunkenness, whoring,

6. Hence they make other servants unruly, and to desire

Now examine and try these things: Is the Kingdom of Christ come into us? that
though there be a law in our members warring, yet there is a law of the mind
warring against it, and delighting in the will of Christ, and setting him up as
chief. Are we under the Kingdom of Christ in his Church and Commonwealth; so
as the soul is willing in the day of the Lords power, though there be, and have
been some pangs of resistance against persons and against Ordinances; so as
it is thy liberty to be subject to Christ in his Ordinances, in his servants;
and it is thy bondage to be otherwise, and thou longest for that day, that the
Lord would subdne all those boistrous lusts, and pride, and passions; and
bruise sin, Satan and self under their feet? Then I say, as the Lord, Isa. 33.
20, 21, 2^. Look upon Zion, the City of your solemnity, etc. See Romans 8. 7, 1.

But if the heart grows loose and licentious, and breaks the Lords bonds and
yokes, and will be led by your own fleshly ends and lusts, and so go on
quietly: Be you assured, this truth shall have a time to take hold of such
spirits; and know it assuredly, it is not to be in Christ's Family or Kingdom;
it is not scrambling for promises, catching at Gods grace, talking of assurance
of Gods love, which will shelter you from the wrath of the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords; to whom God has sworn, That every knee shall bow. It Is service
and subjection which the Lord aims at, and which the Lord looks for. I know
it is Gods grace which only can save; but it will never save when it is turned
into licentiousness.

Do not say, There is no danger of it, here where we have such means, and such
liberties are.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
Never such danger of being licentious, as in places of liberty; when no bit
nor bridle of external tyranny to curb in.

Judah here, which in one year all fell.



Do not say, we know not how bondage should come here, though we should cast
off the Lords Government.

Answ. 1. Answ. 1.
The Lord can let loose the natives against us. Ahab kills 1000000 of Benhadads
men, but afterward within seven years he returns again.

Abimelechs to be the King of the trees, when the Olives and the Vines are loath
to forsake their places, and to lose their fatness and sweetness.





5. If none of these, Satan, nay Christ himself will come

3. Do not say, It Is not so, there is sweet subjection, i. e. Cor. 10. 4, 5.
Mighty to pull down every high thought, who attains this, who can be thus? yet
there are means mighty for this end, not that all be abolished, but all are
abolishing. 2. Others otherwise, openly how zealous for an opinion, when it
should be death to differ, and things in your own heart lying miserably waste,
and some wretched lust the root of all, for which Gods Saints mourn in secret.
Let such know, that will not be ruled by Christ, or his servants or ordinances,
but will have them to rule them, and ^ot to be ruled by them. The Lords chains
are near, and therefore now take your time and come in submit to the Lord, and
do as these here did, acknowledge the Lord to be righteous, and turn unto the
Lord.

Use 6. Use 6.
Of thankfulness, for our present liberties and freedom from the bondage of
men, bondage of conscience, bondage of Satan and sin: need there is of laying
this use seriously to heart, considering two things principally. 1. The general
complaints of the Country, as they of Jericho, 2 Kings 2. 10. The waters are
bad, and the ground barren, and these are engraven in Marble, all other our
liberties are written on the water. 2. The disgrace and reproach cast upon Gods
people and ways of God, and that unjustly, which I am afraid to mention;
whence there grows a contempt of them, and the rivers of Damascus now are
better than Jordan. Oh beloved, if it be an heavy hand of God to be under
bondage, then look on it as a special grace of God to free us from bondage.
Deuteronomy. 32. 11, 12. The Lord alone did lead them, etc. Ier. 2. 20.
and Moses, chap. 33. 29. when he had blessed them, Happy art thou Oh Israel, a
People saved by the Lord. And the greater cause we have to do this, a People
that have abused all liberties. Is. 9. 8, 9, 10. He laments it, but yet is
thankful for it to Gods grace: no man that can say but he may be as holy as he
will, and none to curb or snib.

1: Means, Consider what all the liberties Gods people Gal. 5. Christ has made
you free, i. e. by his blood. Liberty of Conscience from the bondage, not of
Jewish, but of Antichristian Ceremonies, and Government, and Pressures: Liberty
of will from any sin; it is by Christ's blood and cost, that (as I am persuaded)
our liberties have cost Saints their blood. The tears, prayers and blood of men
are much; but of Christ much more, and are they not worth thanks that are of
this price? The great reason why unthankfulness comes in, is; because they
cost so much, as loss of estate, of wife, or of child by sea; do thou
repent now? Christ does not repent that his blood has been paid for them; and
if they be of so little value, as there it is said, He repented that he made
man, so may he that ever he gave them such glorious liberties.

Luke 22. 20. When you see Jerusalem compast with enemies, etc. fly to the
mountains, and woe to them that give suck. Consider them that are taken with the
Turks; if you were in their condition you would say so; to bring forth little
ones to the murderer or idolater, Isa. 42. 22. and 26. Men's hearts failing for
fear, this you should see some-where. A mote or a thorn is a little thing, but
no man would have it always vexing for all the estate he has, if he has any
eye or tenderness in it; so those small matters for which the Saints have
suffered, and for which God is provoked, and under which some have roared, and
others have been loaded one after another; it is worth a world; oh, bless God
for it: but consider those that be under the dominion of sin and Satan, so
strong and miserable; sin so dear, that there is not so much as a sigh under
that; be thankful for that.

Deuteronomy. 6. 10, 12. The Lord exhorts them, that when they be at liberty, they
would not then forget the Lord, but then fear. It Is Luthers note on the place:
When in trouble, you rejoice; but when in peace, you fear. I Will only name the
sins of liberty.

1. Take heed of a Prayerlesse spirit, and that that Israel under Pharaoh
cried, and under Gods afflicting hand in denying them water murmured. True
thankfulness will help to prize what liberty affords.

2. An unloving spirit to the Saints. It Is that I have often

3. Extreme ignorance how to use our liberties; and

4. Imperiousness of spirit, arising from a frothy emptiness, Who made thee a
Lord and Judge over us? though in bondage, much more in liberty; they think
Wills Commonwealth is in their heads chiefly, and hence will not be ruled by
Gods ordinances; and hence if once taken with an opinion, hardly ever removed,
etc.

5. Resting with liberties and in liberties. We were John 8. 33. yet servants
to sin. We be Abraham's seed, better than all the world; yet under all the power
of sin and Satan, and must not be told of their ways, but hate them that
censure them for their sins. Men in bondage are like sick men, that will cry if
they were in another bed, oh then they should be well; but they must first be
cured of their disease.

Deuteronomy. 15. 5, 10, 11. they were to bring the first fruits, and present them
before the Lord, and rejoice in all: so should you if ever you be thankful for
them, bring the first fruits to the Lord, and think there is more behind, and
more in heaven.

Object. Object.
But our outward streights are many, and temptations sad.

Answ. Answ.
If Christ himself should come on earth, what would you have with him? would
you have him come and set up an earthly Paradise? would you have better
entertainme^t than he, who had not that which Foxes and Birds had? or would you
have him come from his Cross, and then you will make him King? if you despise
his ordinances and liberties because of wants, you would despise himself if he
were present. But you will reply and say, What if we can have both? If that can
be, and Christ calls to take both, refuse not his love. But it may be an heavy
indictment against some at the last day, in that they forsake Christ, because
he is poor and naked; for they are therefore called to cloth him: and this
will be your Peace, and you will be no losers your selves another day.

Psalm. 145. 13, 14. His dominion is always, and raises up all that are bowed
down. Oh be humbled; he is said, Deuteronomy. 32. 13. to make the people suck honey
out of the rock, and oil out of the flint, sweetness and mercy out of the
hardest condition.



Ezza 9. 8, 10, 11. What grace has been showed us? what shall we say, that
after this, etc? Would thou not be angry with us till thou have consumed us?
Psalm. 81. 13, 16. Oh that my People had heard my voice, I would have subdued
their enemies. God would not be wanting unto us, if we were not to him.

Take therefore that example to imitate, in Acts 9. 31, Having rest, they were
edified: if we be not so, truly, as none have the like liberties; so no bondage
so sad, no where such poverty, no where such anguish of conscience, no where
such spirit and power of sin, no where such sad anger; if in practice we be
unthankful, or can mouth and speak against long Sermons, and against the
Country and Christians, or in hearts undervalue them; and when you see Indians
rise, Brambles, Abimelechs and Shebnas raised, etc. then know this is for abuse
of liberty.

Use 7. Use 7.
Of exhortation, to come under Christ's Government, and be in his service; lest
ye come to know the difference between it and some other by experience.

Mot. 1. Mot. 1.
You must be either under Christ's yoke, or Satan's and sins, and so all other
miseries: and therefore as Joshua said, so say I to you; Choose you whom you
will serve.

Mot. 2. Mot. 2.
Consider the difference between the service of the Lord and Shishak.

1. The government of others, tyrannical proud men, or Ezekiel. 34. 4. With force
and cruelty have ye ruled them. But Christ's Government is there shown to be in
mercy, and full of mercy; though sometimes lost, he will fetch thee in again;
though sick and weak, he will heal thee again. verse. 16. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. It Is for
thy good the Lord has no need of thy service, etc. True it is, the Lord may
show his people hard things, and give them sid miseries; but these wounds do
not kill them, only make way for healing the distempers of their hearts, that
are in his poor weak ones; and his end is to bring them to himself.

2. Their government is in it self hard and bitter. To

Saul can give, are Olive-fields and Vine-yards; but anguish of conscience
after the work is done: But the Lord gives a Kingdom; and not a word or
thought, but there is a Book of remembrance writ; not a cup of cold water, or
rag to any of Christ's naked servants, but it will be recompensed. You have
followed me, you shall sit on thrones.

Mot. 3. Mot. 3.
Consider how fain the Lord would have you under his Government; for many will
say, I have refused so often; and what shall I now do? the Lord will cast me by.
True, he may do so, and you may be glad if the Lord will honor you in doing
his work. Yet, Prove. 2. 23. Return you scorners at my reproof, and I Will power
out my Spirit upon you. Ier. 36. 3, 7. Read (says God) the words of the Roll
to them: It may be they will hear, and present their supplications before the
Lord, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may forgive their iniquity
and their sin. Read the place if you can without tears. You that have departed
from God and Christ, and provoked Gods wrath, when there is but little hope
left it may be; Oh, yet read the Roll.

Mot. 4. Mot. 4.
Once Christ's, and under his Government, you shall never be cast off; As sin
has reigned unto death, so shall grace reign unto eternal life, Romans 5. 21. He
will bestow on you the sure mercies of David, by an everlasting Covenant, Isa.
55. 5.

Quest. Quest.
But wherein should I submit to the Lord?

Answ. Answ.
None have power to rule conscience but Christ, give him therefore this glory;
that wherein he binds conscience; conscience not out of fear, but love may
indeed submit. I have instanced the particulars formerly, yet more distinctly.
There be two great commands or charges of Christ, that lie upon all men's
consciences to whom the Gospel comes, and therein lies our service of him
generally: Which two I name, because there we think we are free, or do not know
our liberty.

i. e. receive Christ Jesus in all his fullness in the Gospel. John 1. 12. For
that is to believe; in which command lies Gods offer. 1 John 5. 23. This is his
commandment, that ye believe, John 6. 25, 37, 38. This is the work of God, that
ye believe. Now here men think they are free. 1. They say they are unworthy;
and hence they say, Depart from me, Lord, I am a sinful man; as if Gods grace
was built on man's worthiness. 2. Because unhumbled, whereas Gods grace calls
in men unhumbled. Rev. 8. 17, 18. For Gods call and offer is general though
none but the humble will hearken to it. But there are none, but it may be said
to them; If they can believe, let them. 3. Because Christ is not theirs, and
are they bound to believe he is? Whereas the first act of faith, is not to
believe Christ is mine, then men were bound to believe a lie. But to receive
Christ as a woman her husband, that he may be mine by says; and so a man may
know and say, he is mine. The Gospel does no where say to any man, Christ is
thine; but if thou receive him, he is thine, and consequently the Spirit speaks
so also. 4. Because they cannot believe, unless they should presume; as if the
Gospel bound the conscience of none to believe, but them that were able to
believe it, and receive Christ in it: yet it is otherwise: for it binds all to
receive Christ Jesus; to go up and possess him, to feed, eat (...), and live
for ever. And I will leave this one (...) argument; If men are liable to
eternal con^^^mation at the great and last day, and to bear the (...) wrath of
God and Christ also, for disobeying the Gospel, for refusing Christ and the
offer of his grace therein: Then those men's consciences are bound to obey the
Gospel; i. e. to believe and receive Christ now in this life. -- But all that
have the Gospel preached to them, are liable to eternal condemnation, for
disobedience to it. John 3. 18, 19. Psalm. 2. 12. Kiss the Son, lest he be
ang^y. So. 2 These. 2. 8, 9. He comes to render vengeance on them that obey not
the Gospel. Romans ^. 10. The Lord shall judge the secrets of all hearts by my
Gospel. That is, where ever the Gospel comes; for they that have no law,
having no law shall not by judged by it: But men that have had the Gospel,
shall be judged by it, and therefore are bound to obedience thereunto.

The serious consideration of which one truth, is enough to draw all (...) from
the power of unbelief; especially they that say* I cannot, or ought not
believe. For the reason why me^ do not come, is,

1. They think the Gospel concerns not them; what





Come ye blessed, take a Kingdom; take a Christ prepared for you from before
the foundation of the world. Oh that this might sound in your ears: This is
the first and chiefest; without this, all your obedience is hypocrisy, and
abominable; but this will please, and then all poor obedience shall please.

Romans 8. 2. The Law of the spirit of life has made me free. What is that Law?
See Chap. 7. 23, 24. Spirit of delight in the Law in the inner man, and
mourning for contrary captivity. Know therefore, though you cannot do all; yet
love the whole will of God, and mourn where you do not; and then say. Now no
condemnation. Do not say, It Is impossible, Oh, here is men's woe, and trial of
subjection to Christ's will! How do you love it, love his Sabbaths and
Ordinances, because of his love to you? How does this constrain you?

In particular; Love the people of God, that is, his special commandment, 1
John 3. 23. John 13. 34. But now the want hereof, or the contrary hereto: As
when a man shall become, 1. A Distaster. 2. A Contemner. 3. A Censurer, and
whisperer. 4. A Sooffer. 5. If met on a Bridge, an opposer of the Truths or
servants of God. This is that which kindles wrath, and wherein the inward
venom of hypocrisy appears. There Is many duties neglected, and not that
spirit of prayer, and holy conferences amongst Christians; yet do you keep love
to them; that what you cannot do your selves, yet you love others that can do
it, and account it your blessedness to be like them, and daily mourn under
your neglects; that in every thing, the Gospel is not adorned by you: and on
the other side, although you have many duties, Sabbaths, and good acts; yet if
not love, all is vile. I fear it is not men's joy, sweetness, delight to hear
the least good word that falls from a good man's lips, but rather the truths and
things of God despised; if so, then look for woe. And for (...) Christ, their
lives not desired, their deaths not lamented, but you know how to contend, and
are careless though the Gospel and God be slandered; you (...) of the Lords
yoke. It was one man's speech, that the great sin of this Country will be
hatred of the Saints, a scornful contempt of them; It will come by degrees,
first distaste, and then censure and contemn. O^, but if herein you submit,
herein Christ is honored, and Gospel glorified in love and amiablenesse: Not
in a rigorous austerity of spirit, and diabolical censoriousnesse; but in word
and deed, countenance and gesture, comforting and encouraging one another.

When David would know what to do; Truly says he, my goodness extends not to
thee; but to the Saints, in whom is all my delight; Oh therefore submit here;
this conscience calls for, and Christ must have.

To conclude with a word for help here.

Means 1. Means 1.
Look to Gods Ordinances, not as they be in themselves; but as appointed of
God, to communicate an almighty power of spirit to them that wait on the Lord
in them. An almighty power must overcome, and go on Conquering, and to Conquer.
How shall we have this by Gods Ordinances? Some more principal, as Word and
Sacraments; some less, How shall we partake of this power in them? Look not on
them in themselves, but as appointed and sanctified, and so as glorious. And
there pray and wait, and look for the power; nay, believe you shall receive
this power. As the (...) of Jordan to Na^man; How did they cleanse? When (...)
looked upon them without the command and (...), he despised the^, and so found
not the benefit of them, but afterward he found the benefit of them, when he
washed seven times in attendance to the appointment of God. Brethren, it is but
go and wash here. 1 Cor. 10. 5.

Means 2. (...) 2.
Know your disobedience, the breadth of it: Some things Christians see, and
pray against them, and then all is well; but see the breadth of evil in your
disobedience. There is something that does oppose God in every lawful thing,
in whole or in part, (for flesh is in it) or else you are blinded if you see it
not. Oh therefore feel the breadth of evil in it; that being sensible of, and
humbled under, and striving against your continual disobedience; every thought
may be brought into subjection and obedience to Christ.

OF INEFFECTVALL HEARING.
JOHN. 5. 37. Ye have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape.
FRom the 31. Verse. to the end of this Chapter, Our Savior proves that he was
the Messiah to come, from four testimonies.

1. From the testimony of John; verse. 32, 33.

2. From the testimony of his works, greater than that John, verse. 36.

3. From the testimony of the Father, by his voice from verse. 37.

4. From the voice of the Scriptures, the highest of all, Pet. 1. 19.) verse.
39, 46.

Now these words are annexed to the third testimony, which I told you is the
voice of God from heaven, set down, Mat. 3. 17. For this Testimony of the
Father ^s not the inward testimony of the Spirit only; Because Christ speaks of
public, and evident testimonies in this place; no^ is it meant of the
testimony of the Father in the Scripture; for that is a distinct testimony: and
^^ough the Father does testify of Christ in the Scriptures; yet it is not as
his testimony, no more than the testimony of John, and of his works, whereby
the Father did testify also: Nor is it probable that our Savior would at this
time, omit that famous testimony of the Father at his Baptism; which if it be
not here, is no where in this Chapter. Beside, how is this testimony the
Fathers more than the Spirits; but then, being called his Son, he did evidently
declare himself to be the Father that spoke. Lastly, the Spirits testimony is
spoken of, as the testimony of Moses and the Prophets, Verse. 46, 47. For had ye
believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he w^ote of me, verse. 47. For if
ye believe not his writings how, shall ye believe my words.

Now our Savior in these words answers an Objection which the Jews (ever
conceited of their own knowledge) might make. We know the Father as well as
you; and yet we know no such testimony that he gives. Christ answers, You do
not know him; for the certain knowledge of a thing, is either by seeing or
hearing; now you never saw him nor heard him; you have therefore no
acquaintance with him.

So that the words contain 1. Christ's fearful accusation of the Jews to be
ignorant of God, 2. The aggravation and extent of it, at no time, i. e. not
only at Baptism, but at no other time, in any Ministry, or in any Scripture,
etc.

Quest. 1. Quest. 1.
What is it not to see his shape nor hear his voice?

Answ. Answ.
Some think they are metaphorical speeches, to express their ignorance of God;
Now though this be the scope, and the general truth, yet I conceive, the Lord
speaking particularly, and knowing what he spoke, intends something
particularly: and it is a rule, never to fly to metaphors, where there can be
a plain sense given. There is therefore two degrees of true knowledge of God in
this life, or it is attained unto by a double means.



2. By hearing thus from him, the mind also comes to have Idea of God, as he
reveals himself in the Word and Means by the Spirit, Job 42. 5. I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee; and this is the
shape here spoken of, not bodily and carnal. Now Christ does profess that
they did want both. Carnal and unregenerate hearts, neither hear Gods voice,
nor have a right Idea of God in their minds, but become vain in their minds,
though they have means of knowing, and their foolish hearts are darkened; the
wiser they be, the more foolish they grow.

2. At no time, i. e. neither at baptism, nor else in any

3. But did they not hear the voice of God at Christ's

Answ. Answ.
No, they never heard it. It Is a strange thing, that such men that read, heard,
preached, remembered the Scriptures, and could tell you mysteries in titles,
never heard the voice of God; and yet it is most true.

Observat. Observe.
That many men may a long time together know and hear the Word of God written
and spoken, yet never hear the Lord speaking that Word, no not so much as one
word, tittle or syllable; no not so much at once, at any time. This was the
estate of the Jews, and this is the estate of all unregenerate men. Hence
Christ, Luke 19. 41. laments and weeps over Jerusalem, saying, Oh that thou
had known in this thy day, etc.

1. Quest. Quest. 1.
How did the Jews hear, and yet not hear God speaking?

Answ. Answ.
There is a twofold word, or rather a double declaration of the same word. 1.
There is Gods external or outward word, containing letters and syllables, and
this is his external voice. 2. There is God internal word and voice, which
secretly speaks to the heart, even by the external word, when that only speaks
to the ear. The first the Jews did hear, at Christ's Baptism, in Christ's
Ministry, and in reading the Scriptures, and when they did hear it, it was
Gods word they heard, full of glory, and so they heard the word spoken, but
only man speaking it: the other comes to few, who hear not only the word
spoken, but God speaking the word, Romans 10. 18, 19. Israel did hear, but Israel
did not know. Christ speaks in parables; Hence in seeing they did not see, Luke
8. 10. And this is one way, how it is true that Christ says, They never heard
his voice. As it is with a painted Sun on the wall, you see the Sun and Stars,
but there is a difference between seeing this and the Sun and Stars
themselves, wherein is an admirable glory: go to a painted Sun, it gives you no
heat, nor cherishes you not; so it is here, etc.

Heb. 6. 2, 5. Many tasted of the good word of God, yet fell away. And such a
heart is compared to a field which a man plowes and sowes, and rain falls on
it, and yet the end is not attained, it brings forth thistles; and this many
Jews did hear, and hence had some kind of faith in Christ. 2. Effectual, is
that which has such an inward efficacy upon men's hearts, as that God attains
his end thereby, Isa. 55. 11. and brings men to a state of life, of which
Christ speaks, John 6. 45. and this voice none but the Elect hear; and of this
Christ speaks here, as appears, v. 38. Him whom he sent, ye believe not. Hence
it is you have heard God at no time. Hence he speaks of such a hearing and
knowing, such a hearing outwardly, as is accompanied with such a hearing
inwardly, Ioh. 14. 17. so that many men may hear the word spoken outwardly, but
never inwardly: they may hear it inwardly, but never effectually, translating
them from state to state, from death to life, from life to life and glory. No
sense of the Majesty of God speaking, nor effectual hearing of the word
spoken. When the Sun is down the Moon may arise, but yet a man is cold and
dark; but when the Sun arises, oh it warms, nourishes and cherishes, etc.
nothing is hid from it; so it is here, when the Lord speaks inwardly and
effectually to the heart.

Reas. 1. Reason 1.
From that great distance and infinite separation of men's souls from God, that
though God calls, yet they cannot hear no more than men a 1000 mile off. Ephesians. 2.
1. men are dead in sin. Now what is spiritual death, but separation of the
soul from God, and God from it. A dead man cannot hear one word at no one time,
he was not dead if he could. Men's minds are far from God, and hearts also, that
they are neither stricken with the sight of his glory, nor sense and savor of
his goodness, but must be vain, and have worldly hearts in the Church, nay
adulterous eyes, or if they listen, God is gone from them, and from his Word
also, Hos. 5. 6.

Reas. 2. Reason. 2.
From the mighty and wonderful strange power of Satan, which blinds their eyes
they cannot see nor hear, 2 Corinthians 4. 4. never such clear light, never
such an effectual Word, as that of the Apostles, yet it was hid; why? The God
of this world blinded them, either he will keep such a noise and lumber in
their heads, that they cannot hear God speaking for the noise, or else turn
himself into an Angel of light, and speak, and by their light will blind them,
that the light in them shall be darkness. Romans 1. 22. When men with natural
light began to be most wise, then they became the greatest fools: so it is with
other knowledge of Scripture, and things they hear. Happy were it for many a
man if he had never heard nor seen; for that which he has heard and seen keeps
him from hearing. Rev. 12. 9.
Tire and Sidon would hear sooner than Capernaum that heard most. Romans 1. 22.


Reas. 3. Reas. 3.
From the righteous judgment of God, in leaving men to be blinded and made
deaf, from and by the means whereby they should hear and know; that as it is
with the Saints, all evil things are for their good, so all good things are
for their hurt, Isa. 6: 10. the meriting cause is unbelief and sin, but the
deep and hidden rise of all is Gods eternal dereliction of them, God never
intended love, special love to them; hence he never speaks one word to them; 2
Cor. 4. 3. John 6. 65. Many were offended at his words and forsook him. Now to
take off this offense, I said, None can come to me, except it be given him of
the Father, what is that? see v. 45. and 37.

Use 1. Use 1.
Hence see the reason, why the Word is so wonderfully ineffectual to the souls
of many men, that it never stirs them, that it is a strange thing to them; it is,
Heb. 12. 19. like the law, a voice of words, a sound of words, so they hear men
speak, but understand no more than if they spoke in a strange language, or if
they do, it concerns not them; or if it stirs, it is but as the blowing of the
wind upon a rock, which blusters for a time; but when the wind is down they are
still. Truly they hear the word spoken, but they do not hear God speaking. They
heard Latimer speak, but not God speaking, they hear a sound, which every one
says, and they think is the word^ but they hear not God speaking it.

One would wonder that those Jews that heard John and his Disciples, Moses and
the Prophets, nay Gods voice from heaven, saying, This is my Son, that they
should not hear this, and receive him with all their hearts, but they did not
hear his voice. One would wonder to see, that such things which a gracious
heart thinks, this would draw every heart, yet main not stirred, things which
the devils tremble at, and others which Angels wonder at, yet they hear not. Oh
they hear not God speak, they are dead in their graves far from God; and
there they are kept by the mighty power of Satan, like one in a deep dark cave,
kept by fiery dragons under the ground, and the tombit^ne is laid upon them. If
Christ spoke he would make the dead to hear, and the blind to see.

Use 2. Use 2.
Hence see why the Saints find such changes and alterations in themselves when
they come to hear; sometimes their hearts are quickened, fed and cherished
healed and comforted, relieved and visited; sometime again dead and senseless,
heavy and hardened. Mark 8. 17, 18, 21. How is it ye do not understand? Nay
which is more, that the same truth which they hear at one time, should affect
them, and at another time does not; the same thing which they have heard a
hundred times, and never stirred them, at last should. The reason is, they
heard the Word of God spoken at one time, but not God speaking; and they heard
the Lord speaking that same Word at another time; the Lord is in his Word at
one time, the Word goes alone at another time; as in Eliah, the Lord was not in
the whirlwind, but he spoke in the still voice and hence there he was to
Elijah, Luke 24. 25. with 32. not that you are to lay blame on the Lord; for he
blows where he lists; but to make us see it is not in outward means, nor it is
not in our own spirits to quicken our selves; and to make us ashamed of our own
darkness, that when he speaks, yet we cannot hear, there is so much power of
spiritual death and Satan yet within us, only out of his pity he speaks
sometimes; not that you should despise the outward word; No, no, the Lord is
there shining in Perfection of glory, and that which does thee no good, the
Lord makes powerful to some others. But prize the Spirit of God in that Word,
which alone can speak to thee.

Use 3. Use 3.
Of dread and terror to all unregenerate men. Hence see the heavy wrath of God
against them: they have indeed the Scriptures, and the precious Word of God
dispensed to them; but the Lord never speaks one word unto them. If any one
from whom we expect and look for love, pass by us and never speak; What not
speak a word? and we call to him and he will not speak, we conclude he is angry
and displeased with us. You look for love, do you not? you that hear every
Sabbath, and come to Lectures, and you must out; it is well, yes, you will say,
His love is better than life, and frowns more bitter than death; Love? woe to me
if the Lord do not love me, better never been born. I hope he loves me. Happy I
if the mountains might fall on me, to crush me in pieces if he loves me not,
etc. but consider if he loves he will then speak peace unspeakable to thy
conscience when humbled, life to thy heart, joy in the Holy Ghost, Isa. 57. 19.
John 6. 63. 1 These. 1. 6. but look upon thy soul, and see this day in the sight
of God, whether ever the Lordspake one word to thee: outwardly indeed he has,
but not inwardly; inwardly also, but not effectually, to turn them from
darkness to light, and the power of Satan to God, etc. The voice of God is
full of Majesty, it shakes the heart; it is full of life, it quickens the dead,
and light, and peace, and gives wisdom to the simple. Ps. 119. Opening of thy
word gives light to the eyes. How many women, ever learning and never knowing,
and many men learning and knowing what is said, but never hear God speak? Then
know the wrath of the Lord, see and go home mourning under it. There is a
fourfold wrath in this.

1. It Is the Lords sore wrath and displeasure, Zach. 1. 2. verse. 4. If one
should expect love from another to do much for him, and he did not, it may be
he would not take it as a sign of displeasure: but if he will not do a small
thing, not speak a word to him, oh this is bitter; what will not the Lord speak
a word, not one word* especially when thy life lies on it, thy soul lies on it,
eternity lies on it, especially the Lord that is so merciful and and
pitiful? this is a sign of sore anger.

2. It Is a token of Gods old displeasure, eternal the Lord remove that
deafness? you old hearers, that have ears fat with hearing, but heavy, he
never intended love, else he would speak, there would be some time of love.
Romans 11. 7, 8. The Elect have had it, others are blinded, as it is written, God
has given them the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear to this day.

Sam. 28. 6, 15. He cries out of this, He answors me not by Urim nor dreams,
nor thee by the Gospel nor Law, neither where he uses to answer. If this anger
were to come, it were some comfort: but when it is now upon thee, even that very
Sermon and Word whereby he speaks to others, but not a word to thee.

Psalm. 71. 9. We see not our Prophets, nor any to tell us how long: so you that
despise means you shall then lament and say, none can tell how long. Oh
therefore, lament this thy condition now, that the Lord may hear some of your
cries, etc.

Use 4. Use 4.
Hence examine whether ever you heard the Lords voice or no: not only outwardly
(for that you know you have often done) but inwardly; and not only so, for so
ye may do, and yet your ears heavy; but effectually, that if it be not so, you
may be humble, and say, Lord how have I spent my time in vain? and if it be so,
you may be thankful, and say, Lord, what am I that the infinite God should
speak to me?

There is great need of trial of this, for a man may read, hear and understand
externally, what ever another may; and yet the whole Scripture a sealed Book.

There are therefore these three degrees, by which you shall discern the
effectual voice of God, you must take them jointly.

be generally written or spoken) speaks particularly to the very heart of a
man, with a mavelous kind of Majesty and glory of God stamp't upon it; and
shining in it.

When a man hears things generally delivered, the blessed estate of the Saints,
the cursed estate of the wicked, consolations to the one, curses to the other,
exhortations to faith and obedience, to both, and a man sits by, and never
thinks the Lord is now speaking, and means me. Or if it does so, yet thinks he
intends me no more than others, he hears not the Lord speaking; for when he
speaks, he speaks particularly to the very heart of a man: he does so fit the
word to him, whether it be the Word of the law to humble him, or of Gospel to
comfort, or of command to guide, as if the Lord meant none but them.

The word is like an exact picture, it looks every man in the face that looks
on it, if God speaks in it, Heb. 4. 12, 13. It searches the heart, verse. 12.
but verse. 13. he speaks of God, how comes that in? because God, the Majesty of
God comes with it when God speaks it; With whom we have to do, why is that put
in? because when the Lord speaks, a man thinks now I have to do with God, if I
resist I oppose a God. Before this a man thinks he has nothing to do with God,
they are such strangers. Hence it is one man is wrought on in a Sermon, another
not. GOd has singled out one, not the other that day. Hence take a man
unhumbled, he hears many things, and it may be understands not; if so, yet they
concern not him; if they do, and conscience is stirred, yet they think man
means them, and speaks by hap, and others (...) bad as they, and his troubie is
not much. At last he hears his secret thoughts and sins discovered, all his
life is made known, and thinks it is the Lord verily that has done this; now
God speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 2^. those things he did neither believe nor imagine;
etc. John 4. 29. See the man that has told me all that ever I did. Hence take
a soul that is humbled, he hears of the free offer of grace, he refuses it;
why, this is to all, and to hypocrit^s as well as to me. Apply any promise to
it, it casts by all, it looks upon them as things generally spoken, and ^polyed
by man, but they hear not God speaking; but when the Lord comes, he does so
meet with their objections, and speaks what they have been thinking may be
true, that they think this is the Lord, this is to me. Hosea 2. 14. I Will speak
to her heart: and hence it is called the ingraffed word, James 1: 21. like one
branch of many, applied to the stock. Job 33. 14, 16.

verse. 38. Ye have not his word in you, they had it out of them; and not only
in you, but abiding in you, 1 Pet. 1. 23. born of incorruptible seed, the
Apostle seems to speak of a kind of birth by corruptible seed, and such are
like goodly flowers which soon wither, but you are born of incorruptible seed,
which has an eternal savor, sweetness and power. Mat. 13. of the four
grounds three of them fall away. John 15. 16. Their fruit does not remain: they
have some living affection at the present, but they go away and it dies. Look
but upon particulars, does the Lord once speak by the Word, and humble the
heart? it never lists up its head more; does he reveal the glory of Christ?
that light never goes out more. Isa. 60. 19. 2 Cor. 4. 4, 5. As at the first
Creation, there was light, and so continues to this day; so does he give life,
John 11. 26. You shall never die more; does he give peace and joy? no man shall
take their joy from them. Isa. 32. 17. Fruit of Righteousness and Peace, and
assurance for ever. Does he give the Spirit of all these, which Gal. 3. comes
by hearing of faith? it shall abide for ever, John 14. 17.

That look as Gods love is everlasting, so his words have an everlasting
excellency and efficacy in them, and goodness in them, the sweetest token of
his love: and as Christ's purchase is only of eternal good things; so the
application of this purchase by the Word, it is of eternal worth: peace, but
peace eternal; life, light, favor, joy, but joy eternal; like Mustard seed,
though very little, yet mighty in increase, and never subdued again; so that
though it be but little, yet it is eternal; and hence observe where God has
spoken effectually, the longer the man lives, the more he grows in the virtue
and power of the word; another though wonderfully ravished for a time, yet
dies, most commonly outwardly in external Profession, but ever in inward
savor; so that when you hear the word, and it moves you, affects you, and John
is a burning light, and you rejoice therein, but it is but for a season. The
^vill Spirit comes on you, and David plays upon his Harp, and Ministers preach
sweet things, but as soon as the Music is done, the evil Spirit returns, I
say you never heard the Lords voice. The peace and joy of the Lord enters into
Eternity, and the Apostle expressly calls him an un^ruitfull hearer, James 1. 21
that sees his face and forgets himself. A gracious heart can say, This peace
shall go to heaven; and joy, and love, and fear, it is part of eternal glory.

3. The voice of the Lord comes not only thus particularly, For him whom God
has sent, you believe not. John 6. 41. They shall be taught of God: wherein
does that appear? they shall hear, and learn so as to come to me; if the law
humbles them, it is such a humbling as drives them unto Christ, poor and undon,
Rom 10. 4. if the word gives peace to them, it is such a peace, which at the
last they find in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 17, 18. with 14. i it live holily, it lives
unto Christ, not merely as to God, and to quiet conscience, unto a Creator, as
Adam, but for Christ's sake. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. We judge that if we were dead,
and Christ dyed for us, we should then live unto him; if they grow up by the
word, it is in Christ, Ephesians. 4. 14. though Christ be not mentioned, yet it is
strange to see, let the word speak what it will, whether terror, Oh my need of
Christ! mercy and grace; Oh the love of Christ! oh the blood of Christ!
command; oh that I may live to honor Christ, and wrong him no more! Duties; Oh
the easy yoke of Christ! They look upon the whole word rightly dispensed as
the bridegrooms voice, and truly his words are sweet.

For a man may have some such fear, reformation, affection, as may continue,
but never carry him out of himself unto Christ. The Pharisees knew the law,
were very exact even till their death, profited as Paul said he did; yet they
had not the word abiding in them; because not driven out of themselves to
Christ, to rest there.

Hence when men shall hear many things, but to what end do you hear, or what
virtue have the things you hear? Do they only please fancy for a time? or do
you hear to increase your knowledge and parts; or do you hear for custom and
company, and to quiet conscience? or are you affected and sunk, but not driven
by all to lay thy head on Christ? the Lord never spoke yet to thee; when the
word has laid you on this foundation, truly it is office is done and ended,
Gods end is now attained, etc.

Oh try your selves here, have you heard, but never heard the voice of the
Lord, rushing upon thee with Majesty, speaking to thy heart, and the very
secrets of it, but have said, This is for others, and when you have thought the
man has spoken to you, your hearts have then swollen against him? or have you
thus heard, but all dies and withers like flowers? the same heart still, or
have you had some powerful stroke which remains, but it forces you not out of
your selves to Christ, there to rest, there to joy, there to live, there to
die? truly your time has been spent in vain, you never yet heard the Lord
speak. Oh mourn for it, thou art still in thy blood, if he never said Live; in
thy bondage, if the Lord never said, Come forth. This is the condition of many
to be lamented with tears. But if thou have thus heard particularly, and though
but little light, life and peace, yet it is of eternal efficacy, and all to
draw thee to Christ; then bless the Lord; For blessed are your ears that hear,
and I say as Moses said, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. Ask, if ever People heard God speaking
and live. The Apostle, Heb. (...) makes it a greater matter to come to hear God
on Mount Sion, and yet live; Blessed be God I live.

Obj. Object.
But may not many of the Saints hear, and hear the Lord speak; but not feel
this everlasting power and efficacy?

Answ. Answ. 1.
I would not lay a foundation of unthankfulness, nor discourage any; and
therefore, note for answer these particulars.

till the Lord do bring it into some sad affliction; now a man begins to think,
I remember what my Father spoke to me once, and I regarded it not then: Now
this seed which was cast when the child was young, it shall spring up twenty
years after. John 2. 22. Christ had said, He would destroy the Temple, and
raise it again in three days: Now when he was risen from the dead, his
disciples remembered that which he had spoken to them, but they regarded it not
before; These things, says Christ, have I spoken to you whiles I was with you;
but when the comforter is come, he shall bring all these words to your
remembrance that I have said unto you. One sentence it may be that has
discovered a man's sin, it lies hid; but when the time of ripening draws near,
you shall see the word will have marvelous increase; and that sin it may be
will bring to mind twenty sins; and that promise of God which gives but a
little consolation, considered in it self, it shall give marvelous consolation.
One would wonder to see what one word will do, when the Lords time of blessing
it is come.

2. After that a Christian has had the feeling of the Paul, he had mavelous
Revelations; but Paul had more need of humiliation, than exaltation; and there
was not that use of Paul's having those glorious manifestations to him; I will
glory in my infirmities: There was need for Paul to know the evils of his
heart, that he might walk humbly; and it did not make so much for the glory of
the Lord, as this, that Paul should say, I have this misery and darkness, and
sins, and yet Jesus Christ he will take away all: There was not need for Paul
to have those joys at all times, that he had at one time. So the Lord he gives
a Christian joy and peace, now there is no need for a Christian to have it
always. I will pour floods of water on dry ground. Beloved, if there should be
nothing but rain, rain every day and night, the ground would be glutted with
rain, and so turned into a puddle, but when the land is dry and thirsty, now
the ground has need of rain: Let the Earth make use of that rain it has: and
when it is dry and thirsty, I will give more, says the Lord. So the Lord he
gives the soul joy and peace; Now, if it should continue, the very peace and
joy of God, would not be pleasant to the soul; or at least, not so pleasant as
it will be, when the Lord takes it away, and gives it the soul again. A
Christians comes to the meeting house, and the Lord fills the sails of a poor
soul, that he wonders the Lord should meet him, and speak so suitably to him:
But as soon as he is gone out again, this is the complaint of the soul, all is
lost again; now the soul it sals a mourning again. It is not for the glory of
God to give the soul such peace out of his Ordinances, as he does in them; the
soul it would not prize the Ordinances of the Lord so much; yet there it is;
and when they come again, the Lord, he either gives them the same refreshings
again, or else there is a new spring.

Psalm. 119. 4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
David he knew his own weakness; yet he intimates with what power it came on his
heart: Oh that my soul were directed to keep thy statutes; When the soul sees
the bea^ty of a command, and the good will of God, how sweet it is, and how
amiable the way and work of God is: Oh that my heart were directed to keep thy
statutes. And so when it is gone, Psalm. 63. 3. My soul thirsts after thee,
Lord, says David, that I may see thy glory and power, as I have seen thee in
thy sanctuary. He does not say, that I may see thy glory and power in thy
sanctuary, though that might be too; no, but that I may see thy glory and
power, as I have seen thee in the sanctuary. David he did find a want of seeing
him as he had done; yet the virtue of it did remain in a spirit of thirsting,
and desire: My soul thirrsteth for thee, as in a dry land where no water is,
that I may see thee. A Christian may have at some time such a glimpse (in
hearing the word) of Gods grace, of the exceeding riches of Gods grace, and the
love of God to him, that he may be in a little heaven at that time; ravished in
the admiration of that mercy, that ever God should look to him. It is so, and
the word says so, and the soul is ravished with wonderment at it; yet God is
gone again, and the soul loses it. Now the soul thinks, I have lost the
efficacy of Gods word, but it is not so; for thus it may be preserved. Oh that
I may see this God as I have done: And all his lifetime the soul may find the
want of this, and yet it may be preserved in a spirit of prayer. For whem the
Lord has given once a glimpse of his glory; the soul it cannot be at rest, but
it breaths for more of that mercy and presence; a Christian may find his
spirit marvellously refreshed at the word, he may taste how good the Lord is,
and he may lose it again: but this may be preserved in a spirit of longing
after this God, and presence again. And I will say this, Brethren, A Christian
may find no good by the word to his apprehension; he sees the admirable blessed
estate of the Saints, and exceeding riches of God in Christ, sees the sweetness
of the ways of God* goes home and thinks within himself, Happy they that are
in this condition: Blessed are they that can walk thus with God; But I cannot,
says the soul. I say it may find it thus, when he cannot find the real
efficacy of the word as he would do; he may receive the benefit of that word,
if the Lord do but only give him a heart to desire it. Oh that the Lord would
but thus manifest himself to me; the soul may go away poor and hungry from the
word, and the Lord may yet reserve a spirit of thirsting after that good which
a man desires to find; and there is the efficacy of the word there.

As now there are two golden vessels; one a man fills, and it is every day
dropping, and he preserves it; another vessel he does not fill, but with
something that he has, He is every day widening of it. So some Christians, the
Lord he is a filling of them; others, the Lord he does not fill them with such
peace and joy; ay, but though the Lord is not filling of them, he is a widening
of them: there is such a virtue that the Lord does enlarge the heart with
secret desires and longings after more of Gods grace, and Christ's: The Lord he
says, I intend to make this man a vessel of glory; and I intend he shall have
a great deal of glory and peace at the last. The Lord he leaves such an
impression of the word upon him, as that thereby he enlarges the heart* Open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

4. A Christian may have the everlasting efficacy of Psalm. 119. 7. I shall,
says David, then praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments. The Lord he may teach his people his
righteous judgments; and the savor and feeling, and strength of them to their
feeling may be gone, and yet it is preserved in a spirit of thankfulness and
praise, that ever the Lord should show it such mercy. When the Spirit is gone,
the spirit of love and thankfulness remains. As now a man has heard the word,
the Lord he has effectually wrought on him, and changed his heart, and drawn
him to himself; a Christian it may be he may lose those sorrows and
humiliations, and the remembrance of those things; yet there remains to his
dying day this Spirit, he blesses God, and wondereth at God, that ever he
should make the word effectual; that he should leave so many thousands in the
world, and cast his skirt over him, and say to him, Live; this does remain
still.

Brethren, the Lord does sometimes let light into a man's mind to discover his
sin: now this light it does not sensibly overcome the power of sin: But now the
s^ul blesses God for that word which has convinced it; had I never seen my
sin, says the soul, I should never a sought for power against it, and pardon
of it; and this continues now, and cannot but continue; here is the efficacy of
the word, the word of Gods grace; though the flower of it be gone, yet there is
an eternal power of the word; that the soul can say, It has come to me, and
helped me against these sins; and the soul wonders at the Lord, it should be so
much as it is. So again, a Christian he finds mavelous refreshings and
affection whiles he is a hearing; when he is gone away, he finds not the same,
but he blesses God for those affections he finds, and there remains an
eternal efficacy of the word.

new man that is eternal. There is a double efficacy that the word has; the
first is to beget a Christian to life, and this new man is eternal. I conceive
all the actions of the new man may be suspended, and the increasings of the new
creature may be decayed, though God does renew it again: But this never does
decay, it never dies: He that is born of God cannot sin, because he is born of
God; and because the seed of God remains in him.

2. There is efficacy in the word when it has begotten a man to nourish him
up; and so the word it is food Adam when he was in innocence, and had an
immortal body, his food it should have been an immortal food to him; but how
should that have been? should ^e always have had the same strength, from the
same diet, which he ate long before? No, but in this respect it should have
been an immortal food to him, in that it was to nourish that which was to be
eternal: So it is here, the word of Gods grace it begets a man, it humbles a
man, and draws the soul to Christ; but afterward, there are many things that
God speaks to the soul in the word that has an eternal virtue, (...) the new
creature; the word has a secret virtue in it (...) this end. I will show it you
thus; Isa. 58. 11. The Lord he (...) to his people thy soul shall be as a
watered garden, the (...) will make the souls of his people like watered
gardens, in peace, and joy, and life. Now look as if so be Trees by water or by
some springs that run by it, and slide away, and ye cannot tell, which it is
that makes them to grow; yet ye know this, there is in all of them joined
together, a secret insensible virtue; that every one of them adds something to
(...) flourishing of the Tree: So it is here, the Saints of God, the word of
God it comes to them, and passes by them; and ye cannot tell whether this part
or that part of the word leave any virtue, but many times a man feels no
virtue; yet it is manifest, here is a flourishing Christian, here is heart, and
life, and peace that it has with God, and the soul it remains flourishing;
there is a secret virtue, all the words that run by and pass by the souls of
Gods people, they do leave a mavelous virtue, to make the souls of Gods
people like watered gardens, and to increase in grace. Note it by the way you
that live under the means of grace, your souls shall be like watered gardens;
if God have spoken to you first or last, the Lord speaks many times to you,
sometimes affecting, and sometimes warning, sometimes convincing and humbling,
and speaking Peace, and there is a virtue that remains, and if ye find it not,
know that God has not spoken to you.

Mat. 12. 20. Christ will not break the bruised reeed, nor quench the smoking
flax, till judgment come to victory; Therefore there may be judgment, but it
may not come to victory, there may be smoke and fire, and it may almost go out,
and the Lord he blows it up again, and at the last, though it be weak and
little, and he think with himself he shall never get strength again, yet the
Lord will give victory in his time.

Only be cautious here; I told you there is an incomplete victory, the Lord
never sets his people at variance with their sin, but they have victory, but
it is an incomplete victory; Says the Lord, I will drive out the Hittites, and
Canaanites, and Perizzites before you, but I will do it by little and little.
There is many a Christian that finds within himself a Spirit of warfare
against his sin, and did he examine himself, he should find a Spirit of victory;
but he thinks he has none because his victory is not complete. If he had a
heart so to believe as never to doubt more, and such quickening as never to be
dead more, never to depart from God more, now I should think the Word comes
with power; but I find that these evils prevail against me. There is many a
one does scorn the kindness of Christ, because he finds not complete victory,
but darkness remains still, and sinful lusts remain still, therefore the
Word does me no good at all, says he. The Lord he has given thee a Spirit of
Conflict, and has s^t thee at an everlasting distance with thy sin, and he
does give thee some victory. Beloved, a Christian may decay in the power of the
grace of Christ, which he has received from the Word, and voice of God in the
Word, and he may decay, and grow to a very low estate; yet he shall find this,
the Word of the Lord has come with power to him, it will recover his soul
again, and so the efficacy of the Word is eternal. Psalm. 72. its said of
Christ, that his People shall fear him so long as Sun and Moon shall endure,
that is, continually, all their lifetime. It may be said, there be many that
find decay of their service and obedience, and lose their fear of the Lord, and
their dread, and their humble walking before him, He shall come as the rain on
the mowen grass: many times a Christian has his flourishing time as the
grass, but when the grass is mowen, it is as a dry chip; so the soul it may
grow dry, as dry as a chip. Now where is your sap and savor? but I tell you,
if you belong to the Lord Jesus, the rain it will fall again, the Word of God
set on by the Spirit of Christ, it shall fall upon you as the rain on the mowen
grass, and you know that it recovers little by little, and puts on a green
coat again. Here is the eternal love of the Lord Jesus to his People, and thus
the eternal efficacy of the word does continue.

3. Use Use 3.
is of exhortation. Oh Brethren and beloved in the Lord Jesus, may a Christian
hear the Word of God spoken, and yet never hear God speak? may he hear it
externally and not internally? then rest not in external hearing, and with
some little movings, and affections, and stirrings of the Word of Gods grace in
hearing. Let not the Word be to you as the sound of many waters, and a noise,
no efficacy of the Word that do remain on your souls. Brethren and beloved in
Christ, I lay my finger on the sore in these times. Oh the contempt of the
Gospel of Christ, though I believe it has its efficacy in the heart of the
Elect: that is the thing that I press, never be content with external hearing,
though thou may have some affection, and know new things, unless thou find
the Lord speaking with an eternal efficacy to thy soul. I conceive two things
are to be done, that the word may come with an everlasting efficacy; although
something is to be done by Ministers; that is, to preach truth, and
Gospel Truth, fetched from heaven with many prayers, and soaked truth with many
tears. Ye shall know the truth, and that truth shall make you free. Convicting
truth. We preach, says the Apostle, in the demonstration of the Spirit. The
Spirit of God when he comes, he convinces the world of sin. Let Ministes do
so. Preach convincing truth and Gospel Truth, fetched from heaven, and bathed
in tears. Oh brethren, let the fire burn clear, let there not be more smoke
than fire, it will never come with power then; convincing Gospel Truth, set on
by the demonstration of the Spirit of the Lord, and this will set a Christian
at liberty; there is never such a Sermon that the faithful ones of God preach
to you; if it come not with a power to loosen you and call you home; it comes
with a power to blind you: it is an ax at the root of the Trees; but I leave
this. What means ought the people to use, that the Word of God may come with
efficacy?

Them that are in their unregenerate estate, the Lord only knows how to work on
their hearts; they must come to the outward means. I speak to the Saints of
God, I leave others to the infinite mercy of the Lord; It is not in him that
wills or runs, but in the Lord that shows mercy. In the use of means.

1. Means. Do not only see thy infirmities and weaknesses, I do not say
wickednesses and wilfulnesses, but thy infirmities and weaknesses, get a heart
mourning under them, A Christian is made up of infirmities and weaknesses, a
man would not think there is that in another, which he knows by himself. Oh
brethren, labor for a broken heart in the sense of your many infirmities and
weaknesses, darkness and enmity, vanity and unsavourinesse, the Lord will have
his time to speak to such a soul. Break up the fallow ground of your hearts, --
lest my wrath break out with fire: the Lord has promised to dwell with the
poor and contrite. Look as it was with our Savior Christ, they brought the
sick and the lame ones to him, and virtue went out from Christ to heal them
all. Bring thy sick and blind heart to Christ, and virtue shall go forth from
Christ to heal it.

2. Draw near to God in the Word, by looking on it as You heard the Word as the
Word of God, 1 These. 2. 3.
which you felt in you. I do not speak that the soul should take every thing
that Ministers speak as the Word of God, but that which is the Word of God,
take it as God speaking. I am not able to express the infinite unknown
sweetness, and mercy, and presence of God, that you shall find thus coming. I
know it is a common truth, but I am not ashamed to tell you, I have not for
many a year understood this truth, and I see but little of it yet; ye have
heard of it, but ye do not understand what it is to hear God speaking. When God
has an intent to harden a man's heart and to damn him, either he shall have a
prejudice against the man, or else if he has not a prejudice against the man,
there is a secret loathing of the truth, in regard of the commands of it, and
that is all, and the Lord he hardens, and blinds, and prepares for eternal
ruin, all the men in the world by this means, that live under the means. When
the Lord spoke to Samuel, Samuel heard a voice, but he heard it not as spoken
by God, but when he took Elies counsel, and saw it was the Lord that spoke; now
he listens to the voice of the Lord, and now the Lord opens all his mind to him.

Speak the Word, Lord, and thy servants shall be whole; so bring you blind,
lame, and halt souls to Christ, and trust to the free grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The Work of the Lord it shall prosper in his hand; so the Word of the
Lord it shall prosper in his hand also.

Lastly, so seek the Lord, and so hear the Word, so see the truth, and so hear
the truth, as that you lay up your happiness in this world, in closing with
the truth and with the word. Brethren, what is a man's happiness in heaven, but
to close with God and Christ? I cannot come to God now, the most that I can
have of God now is in his word; if it be happiness in heaven to close with God
in Christ, truly then it is a man's happiness to close with God in his word on
earth; and if it be your happiness, lay up your happiness in it. Prove. 3.
My son, says Solomon, if thou will hear my words, let them not depart from
thine eyes; keep them in thy midst of thy heart; place thy happiness in them.
Verse. 22.
So shall they be life to thy soul. Nevertheless Brethren, let a man's soul be
set upon anything in the world, when he comes to hear, besides the word; if he
lay not up his happiness in closing with the word; truly, the word it will be
like a song to him. The Prophet Ezekiel tells them, Their hearts were gone
after their covetousness: When a man comes to hear a Sermon, there is a Sermon
and the Market, there is a Sermon and a friend to speak withal; and so many
young people will go abroad to hear Sermons; What is the end of it? It is, that
ye may get wives and husbands many of you; but it is not your blessedness to
close with the Lord in his word. I have known some men that have had a distaste
against the truth of the Lord; and I have known them for many a day, they have
not be able to understand the truth of the Lord. When it shall be thus with a
man, that a man's heart is set on something else besides the word of the Lord,
that it is not my happiness to close with the truth of the Lord; such a man
shall never understand the truth of the Lord. Though the word be sweet to you
sometimes, if your blessedness do not lie in this, to enjoy God; Oh this
Gospel of God, and these Commands of God, that your blessedness do not lie in
cleaving to the Lord in his word; I say, it is a certain truth, you shall be
blinded and harned by the word: For here is a Rule; Whatsoever a man's heart is
set on, as his chiefest good, the presence of that good it comes with power: So
here, the precious Gospel of Christ, when the presence of it commands the
heart, nothing is good enough for it, and it closes with it, and with Christ
in it.

I beseech you therefore, Beloved in Christ, set upon the use of these means,
think within your selves, What if the Lord had left me without the word? I will
tell you what ye would have been. Look upon these poor Indians, herds of
Beasts; look upon others on their Ale-benches, enemies to the Lord, such a one
thou had been.

This blessed word and voice of God, every tittle of it cost the blood of
Christ; written all the lines of it in the blood of Christ. Oh, make much of
it, and it will make much of you; it will comfort you, and strengthen you, and
revive you; and if the word come not with power, ye shall be under the power of
something else; if not under the power of the word, then under the power of
some lust. What is the reason that these poor creatures, that are come to the
trial for life and death, that have fallen into such sins as were never
heard of? What is the reason that they are under the power of their lusts? I
will tell you what Solomon says, My son, if wisdom enter into thy heart, and
discretion be pleasant to thy soul, it shall keep thee from the strange woman,
and sinful companion. If it be pleasant, here is the reason, the word of Gods
grace it never came with power, or if it came with power, powerless the word of
Gods grace has been to them; and because it has not come with power, the Lord
he has given them over to the power of their lusts, and sinful distempers.
Oh Brethren, truly I cannot see how any man can maintain any evidence of Gods
electing love, that shall hear and hear, and good days mend him not, nor bad
days pair him: that can commend a Sermon, and speak of it; but that efficacy
is not known to him, neither does he mourn for the want of it; but the eternal
efficacy thereof is a stranger to it. 1 These. 1. 5. Knowing, says the Apostle,
your Election of God; How did he know it? For, says he, Our Gospel came not to
you in word, but in power; ye will rejoice the hearts of your Ministers, when
the word comes with power. Let me say this, and so I conclude.

I remember the Lords threatening; I will take away the staff of bread, and ye
shall eat, and shall not be satisfied; When the Lord shall let men have the
word, when the Lord shall not take away the word, but the staff of the word.
Suppose you poor Parents, Fathers, and Mothers; your Families should have good
Corn, but when you come to eat it, no strength at all, but ye dye and wear
away; and others that are about you, they have planted the same Corn, and eat
and are satisfied; What will ye do in this case? You would set apart a day of
fasting and prayer, and say, Good Lord, what a curse is upon me? my poor
children are dying before me, others have the staff of Corn; but my Family
have no strength at all. Ye would mourn if it were thus with your poor Cattle.
Oh, for poor Creatures to have the word, but the efficacy of it to be taken
away; no blessing, no power at all. Oh poor Creatures, go and say! Oh the curse
of God that lies on me, the wrath of God that lies on my servants, it is a
heavy plague. But Oh the sweetness and excellency of it, when a Christian
shall find everlasting virtue and efficacy conveyed to him by the word.

All you that are before the Lord this day, ye shall see an end of all
perfection; but eternal things are not they worth something? You shall see an
end of all delights and contentments; but this shall comfort you when you are a
dying, that the word which you attended upon the Lord in, such peace, and such
consolations I have found by it; and the efficacy of that word then remains
with you; nay, goes to heaven with you. I commend you therefore to the word of
his grace, which is able to build you up unto an eternal inheritance amongst
them that are sanctified, Acts 20. 32.

FINIS.

