THE DAY-BREAKING, IF NOT The Sunrising OF THE GOSPEL With the INDIANS in
New England.

Zach. 4. 10. Who bath despised the day of small things?

Matthew. 13. 13. The Kingdom of heaven is like to a grain of mustard seed.

Ibid. Verse 33. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto Leven.

LONDON, Printed by Rich. Cotes, for Fulk Clifton, and are to be sold at his
shop under Saint Margarets Church on New-fish-street Hill, 1647.

To the Reader.
He that penned these following Relations, is a Minister of Christ in New
England, so eminently godly and faithful, that what he here reports, as an eye
or an ear witness, is not to be questioned; Were he willing his name should
be mentioned, it would be an abundant, if not a redundant, Testimonial to
all that know him.

Nathan. Ward.

A TRVE RELATION OF Our beginnings with the INDIANS.
UPon October 28, 1646. four of us (having sought God) went unto the Indians
inhabiting within our bounds, with desire to make known the things of their
peace to them, A little before we came to their Indian h^^ses or tents made of
ba^^ or matts.
Wigwams, five or six of the chief of them met us with English salutations,
bidding us much welcome; who leading us into the principal Wigwam of The name
(...) an Indian.
Waaubon, we found many more Indians, men, women, children, gathered together
from all quarters round about, according to appointment, to meet with us, and
learn of us. Waaubon the chief minister, of Justice among them exhorting and
inviting them before thereunto, being one who gives more grounded hopes of
serious respect to the things of God, then any that as yet I have known of
that forlorn generation; and therefore since we first began to deal
seriously with him, has voluntarily offered his eldest son to be educated and
trained up in the knowledge of God, hoping, as he told us, that he might come
to know him, although he despaired much concerning himself; and accordingly
his son was accepted, and is now at school in Dedham, whom we found at this
time standing by his father among the rest of his Indian brethren in English
clothes.

They being all there assembled, we began with prayer, which now was in
English, being not so far acquainted with the Indian language as to express
our hearts herein before God or them, but we hope it will be done ere long,
the Indians desiring it that they also might know how to pray; but thus we
began in an unknown tongue to them, partly to let them know that this duty in
hand was serious and sacred, (for so much some of them understand by what is
undertaken at prayer) partly also in regard of our selves, that we might agree
together in the same request and heart sorrows for them even in that place
where God was never wont to be called upon.

When prayer was ended it was a glorious affecting spectacle to see a company
of perishing, forlorn outcasts, diligently attending to the blessed word of
salvation then delivered; professing they understood all that which was then
taught them in their own tongue; it much affected us that they should smell
some things of the Alablaster box broken up in that dark and gloomy habitation
of filthiness and unclean spirits. For about an hour and a quarter the
Sermon continued, wherein one of our companyran thorough all the principal
matter of religion, beginning first with a repetition of the ten Commandments,
and a brief explication of them, then showing the curse and dreadful wrath of
God against all those who brake them, or any one of them, or the least title of
them, and so applied it unto the condition of the Indians present, with much
sweet affection; and then preached Jesus Christ to them the only means of
recovery from sin and wrath and eternal death, and what Christ was, and
whither he was now gone, and how he will one day come again to judge the
world in flaming fire; and of the blessed estate of all those that by faith
believe in Christ, and know him feelingly: he spoke to them also (observing his
own method as he saw most fit to edify them) about the creation and fall of
man, about the greatness and infinite being of God, the maker of all things,
about the joys of heaven, and the terrors and horrors of wicked men in hell,
persuading them to repentance for several sins which they live in, and many
things of the like nature; not meddling with any matters more difficult, and
which to such weak ones might at first seem ridiculous, until they had
tasted and believed more plain and familiar truths.

Having thus in a set speech familiarly opened the principal matters of
salvation to them, the next thing we intended was discourse with them by
propounding certain questions to see what they would say to them, that so we
might skrue by variety of means something or other of God into them; but
before we did this we asked them if they understood all that which was already
spoken, and whether all of them in the Wigwam did understand or only some few?
and they answered to this question with multitude of voices, that they all of
them did understand all that which was then spoken to them. We then desired to
know of them, if they would propound any question to us for more clear
understanding of what was delivered; whereupon several of them propounded
presently several questions, (far different from what some other Indians under
Kit^homakia in the like meeting The name of one of the chief Indians about us.
about six weeks before had done, viz. 1. What was the cause of Thunder. 2. Of
the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. 3. Of the wind) but the questions (which we
think some special wisdom of God directed these unto) (which these
propounded) were in number six.

How may we come to know Jesus Christ?

Our first answer was, That if they were able to read our Bible, 1 Quest.
the book of God, therein they should see most clearly what Jesus Answ. 1.
Christ was: but because they could not do that; therefore,

Secondly, we wished them to think, and meditate of so much 2.
as had been taught them, and which they now heard out of Gods book, and to
think much and often upon it, both when they did lie down on their Mats in
their Wigwams, and when they rose up, and to go alone in the fields and woods,
and muse on it, and so God would teach them; especially if they used a third
help, which was,

Prayer to God to teach them and reveal Jesus Christ unto them; and we told
them, that although they could not make 3.
any long prayers as the English could, yet if they did but sigh and groan,
and say thus; Lord make me know Jesus Christ, for I know him not, and if they
did say so again and again with their hearts that God would teach them Jesus
Christ, because he is such a God as will be found of them that seek him with
all their hearts, and he is a God hearing the prayers of all men both. Indian
as well as English, and that English men by this means have come to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ.

The last help we gave them was repentance, they must confess 4.
their sins and ignorance unto God, and mourn for it, and acknowledge how
just it is, for God to deny them the knowledge of Jesus Christ or any thing
else because of their sins.

These things were spoken by him who had preached to them in their own
language, borrowing now and then some small help from the Interpreter whom we
brought with us, and who could oftentimes express our minds more distinctly
then any of us could; but this we perceived, that a few words from the
Preacher were more regarded then many from the Indian Interpreter.

One of them after this answer, replied to us, that he was a 2 Quest.
little while since praying in his Wigwam, unto God and Jesus Christ, that God
would give him a good heart, and that while he was praying, one of his fellow
Indians interrupted him, and told him, that he prayed in vain, because Jesus
Christ understood not what Indians speak in prayer, he had bin used to hear
English man pray and so could well enough understand them, but Indian language
in prayer he thought he was not acquainted with it, but was a stranger to it,
and therefore could not understand them. His question therefore was, whether
Jesus Christ did understand, or God did understand Indian prayers.

This question sounding just like themselves, we studied to Answ.
give as familiar an answer as we could, and therefore in this as in all other
our answers, we endeavored to speak nothing without clearing of it up by some
familiar similitude; our answer summarily was therefore this, that Jesus Christ
and God by him made all things, and makes all men, not only English but Indian
men, and if he made them both (which we know the light of nature would
readily reach as they had been also instructed by us) then he knew all that
was within man and came from man, all his desires, and all his thoughts, and
all his speeches, and so all his prayer; and if he made Indian men, then he
knows all Indian prayers also: and therefore we bid them look upon that
Indian Basket that was before them, there was black and white strawes, and many
other things they made it of, now though others did not know what those things
were who made not the Basket, yet he that made it must needs tell all the
things in it, so (we said) it was here.

Another propounded this question after this answer, Whether English men were
ever at any time so ignorant of God and Jesus 3 Quest.
Christ as themselves?

When we perceived the root and reach of this question, we Answ.
gave them this answer, that there are two sorts of English men, some are bad
and naught, and live wickedly and loosely, (describing them) and these kind of
English men we told them were in a manner as ignorant of Jesus Christ as the
Indians now are; but there are a second sort of English men, who though for a
time they lived wickedly also like other profane and ignorant English, yet
repenting of their sins, and seeking after God and Jesus Christ, they are
good men now, and now know Christ, and love Christ, and pray to Christ, and are
thankful for all they have to Christ, and shall at last when they dye, go up
to heaven to Christ and we told them them all these also were once as ignorant
of God and Jesus Christ as the Indians are, but by seeking to know him by
reading his book, and hearing his word, and praying to him, etc. they now know
Jesus Christ* and just so shall the Indians know him if they so seek him also,
although at the present they be extrmely ignorant of him.

How can there be an Image of God, because it is forbidden in 4 Quest.
the second Commandment*

We told them that Image was all one Picture, as the Picture of an Indian, Bow
and Arrows on a tree, with such little eyes Answ.
and such fair hands, is not an Indian but the Picture or Image of an Indian,
and that Picture man makes, and it can do no hurt nor good. So the Image or
Picture of God is not God, but wicked men make it, and this Image can do no
good nor hurt to any man us God can.

Whether, if the father be naught, and the child good, will God be offended
with that child, because in the second 5 Quest.
Commandment it is said, that he visits the sins of fathers upon the
children?

We told them the plainest answer we could think of, via that Answ.
if the child be good, and the father bad, God will not be offended with the
child, if he repents of his own and his fathers sins, and follows not the
steps of his wicked father; but if the child be also bad, then God will visit
the sins of fathers upon them, and therefore wished them to consider of the
other part of the promise made to thousands of them that love God and the
Evangenesh Jehovah, i. e. the Commandments of Jehovah.

How all the world is become so full of people, if they were all 6 Quest.
once drowned in the Flood?

We told them the story and causes of Noabs preservation in Answ.
the Arc at large, and so their questioning ended; and therefore we then saw
our time of propounding some few questions to them, and so take occasion
thereby to open matters of God more fully.

Our first question was, Whether they did not desire to see God, Quest. 1.
and were not tempted to think that there was no God, because they cannot see
him?

Some of them replied thus; that indeed they did desire to see Answ.
him if it could be, but they had heard from us that he could not be seen,
and they did believe that though their eyes could not see him, yet that he was
to be seen with their soul within: Hereupon we sought to confirm them the
more, and asked them if they saw a great Wigwam, or a great-house, would they
think that A beast somewhat like a Fox.
Racoones or Foxes built it that had no wisdom? or would they think that it
made it self? or that no wise workman made it, because they could not see him
that made it? No but they would believe some wise workman made it though they
did not see him; so should they believe concerning God, when they looked up to
heaven, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and saw this great house he has made, though
they do not see him with their eyes, yet they have good cause to believe with
their souls that a wise God, a great God made it.

We knowing that a great block in their way to beleiving is that Quest. 2.
there should be but one God, (by the profession of the English) and yet this
God in many places; therefore we asked them whether it did not seem strange
that there should be but one God, and yet this God in Three Indian names of
places where the English sit down.
Massachusetts, at Concetacut, at Quimipeiock, in old England, in this Wigwam,
in the next every where.

Their answer was by one most sober among them, that indeed it was strange, as
everything else they heard preached was strange also, and they were wonderful
things which they never heard of before; but yet they thought it might be
true, and that God was so big every where: whereupon we further illustrated
what That He was present every where.
we said, by wishing them to consider of the light of the Sun, which though it
be but a creature made by God, yet the same light which is in this Wigwam was
in the next also, and the same light which was here at Massachusetts was at
Quinipeiock also and in old England also, and every where at one and the same
time the same, much more was it so concerning God.

Whether they did not find somewhat troubling them within 3. Quest.
after the commission of sin, as murder, adultery, theft, lying, etc. and what
they think would comfort them against that trouble when they die and appear
before God, (for some knowledge of the immortality of the soul almost all of
them have.)

They told us they were troubled, but they could not tell what Answ.
to say to it, what should comfort them; he therefore who spoke to them at
first concluded with a doleful description (so far as his ability to speak
in that tongue would carry him) of the trembling and mourning condition of
every soul that dies in sin, and that shall be cast out of favor with God.

Thus after three hours time thus spent with them, we asked them if they were
not weary, and they answered, No. But we resolved to leave them with an
appetite; the chief of them seeing us conclude with prayer, desired to know
when we would come again, so we appointed the time, and having given the
children some apples, and the men some tobacco and what else we then had at
hand, they desired some more ground to build a Town together, which we did
much like of, promising to speak for them to the general Court, that they
might possess all the compass of that hill, upon which their Wigwams then
stood, and so we departed with many welcomes from them.

A true relation of our coming to the Indians the second time.
Upon November 11. 1646. we came the second time unto the same Wigwam of
Waawbon, where we found many more Indians met together then the first time we
came to them: and having seats provided for us by themselves, and being sat
down a while, we began again with prayer in the English tongue; our
beginning this time was with the younger sort of Indian children in Catechizing
of them, which being the first time of instructing them, we thought meet to
ask them but only three questions in their own language, that we might not
clog their minds or memories with too much at first, the questions (asked and
answered in the Indian tongue) were these three, 1. Qu Who made you and all the
world? Answ. God. 2. Qu. Who do you look should save you and redeem you from
sin and hell? Answ. Jesus Christ. 3. Qu. How many commandments has God
given you to keep? Answ. Ten. These questions being propounded to the Children
severally, and one by one, and the answers being short and easy, hence it came
to pass that before we went through all, those who were last catechized had
more readily learned to answer to them, by hearing the same question so often
propounded and answered before by their fellows; and the other Indians who
were grown up to more years had perfectly learned them, whom we therefore
desired to teach their children again when we were absent, that so when we
came again we might see their profiting, the better to encourage them
hereunto, we therefore gave something to every child.

This Catechism being soon ended, he that preached to them, began thus
(speaking to them in their own language) viz, We are come to bring you good
news from the great God Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, and to tell you
how evil and wicked men may come to be good, so as while they live they may
be happy, and when they die they may go to God and live in Heaven. Having
made this preface, he began first to set forth God unto them by familiar
descriptions, in his glorious power, goodness, and greatness, and then set
forth before them what his will was, and what he required of all men even of
the Indians themselves, in the ten commandments, and then told them the
dreadful torment and punishment of all such as break any one of those holy
commandments, and how angry God was for any sin and transgression, yet
notwithstanding he had sent Jesus Christ to die for their sins and to
pacify God by his sufferings in their stead and room, if they did repent and
believe the Gospel, and that he would love the poor miserable Indians if now
they sought God and believed in Jesus Christ: threatening the sore wrath of God
upon all such as stood out and neglected such great salvation which now God
offered unto them, by those who sought nothing more then their salvation: thus
continuing to preach the space of an hour, we desired them to propound some
questions; which were these following. Before I name them it may not be amiss
to take notice of the mighty power of the word* which visibly appeared
especially in one of them, who in hearing these things about sin and hell,
and Jesus Christ, powered out many tears and showed much affliction without
affectation of being seen, desiring rather to conceal his grief which (as
was gathered from his carriage) the Lord forced from him.

The first Question was suddenly propounded by an old man 1 Quest.
then present, who hearing faith and repentance preached upon them to find
salvation by Jesus Christ, he asked whether it was not too late for such an
old man as he, who was near death to repent or seek after God.

This Question affected us not a little with compassion, and we Answ.
held forth to him the Bible, and told him what God said in it concerning such
as are hired at the eleventh hour of the day: we told him also that if a
father had a son that had been disobedient many years, yet if at last that
son fall down upon his knees and weep and desire his father to love him,
his father is so merciful that he will readily forgive him and love him; so
we said it was much more with God who is a more merciful father to those whom
he has made, then any father can be to his rebellious child whom he has
begot, if they fall down and weep, and pray, repent, and desire forgiveness
for Jesus Christ's sake; and we farther added that look as if a father did
call after his child to return and repent promising him favor, the child
might then be sure that his father would forgive him; so we told them that
now was the day of God risen upon them, and that now the Lord was calling of
them to repentance, and that he had sent us for that end to preach repentance
for the remission of sins, and that therefore they might be sure to find
favor though they had lived many years in sin, and that therefore if now
they did repent it was not too late as the old man feared, but if they did not
come when they were thus called, God would be greatly angry with them,
especially considering that now they must sin against knowledge, whereas
before we came to them they knew not any thing of God at all.

Having spent much time in clearing up the first question, the 2. Quest.
next they propounded (upon our answer) was this, viz. How come the English to
differ so much from the Indians in the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ,
seeing they had all at first but one father?

We confessed that it was true that at first we had all but one Answ.
father, but after that our first father fell, he had diverse children some
were bad and some good, those that were bad would not take his counsel but
departed from him and from God, and those God left alone in sin and
ignorance, but others did regard him and the counsel of God by him, and those
knew God, and so the difference arose at first, that some together with their
posterity knew God, and others did not; and so we told them it was at this
day, for like as if an old man an aged father amongst them have many children,
if some of them be rebellious against the counsel of the father, he shuts
them out of doors, and lets them go, and regards them not, unless they
return and repent, but others that will be ruled by him, they learn by him
and come to know his mind; so we said English men seek God, dwell in his
house, hear his word, pray to God, instruct their children out of Gods book,
hence they come to know God; but Indians forefathers were a stubborn and
rebellious children, and would not hear the word, did not care to pray nor to
teach their children, and hence Indians that now are, do not know God at all:
and so must continue unless they repent, and return to God and pray, and
teach their children what they now may learn: but withal we told them that
many English men did not know God but were like to Kitchamakins drunken
Indians; Nor were we willing to tell them the story of the scattering of Noabs
children since the flood, and thereby to show them how the Indians come to be
so ignorant, because it was too difficult, and the history of the Bible is
reserved for them (if God will) to be opened at a more convenient season in
their own tongue.

Their third Question was, How may we come to serve 3. Quest.
God?

We asked him that did propound it whether he did desire indeed to serve him?
and he said, yes. Hereupon we said, first, Answ.
they must lament their blindness and sinfulness that they cannot serve him;
and their ignorance of Gods book (which we pointed to) which directs how to
serve him. Secondly, that they could not serve God but by seeking forgiveness
of their sins and power against their sins in the blood of Jesus Christ who
was preached to them. Thirdly, that look as an Indian child, if he would
serve his father, he must first know his fathers will and love his father too,
or else he can never serve him, but if he did know his fathers will and love
him, then he would serve him, and then if he should not do some things as his
father commands him, and yet afterward grieve for it upon his knees before his
father, his father would pity and accept him: so we told them it was with God,
they must labor to know his will and love God, and then they will be willing
to serve him, and if they should then sin, yet grieving for it before God he
would pity and accept of them.

Their fourth Question was, How it comes to pass that the Sea water was salt,
and the Land water fresh. 4 Quest


It Is so from the wonderful work of God, as why are Strawberries sweet and
Cranberries sour, there is no reason but the Answ.
A Be^ry which is r^pe in the Winter and very sour, they are called here
Bea^berries.
wonderful work of God that made them so: our study was chiefly to make them
acknowledge God in his works, yet we gave them also the reason of it from
natural causes which the less understood, yet did understand somewhat
appearing by their usual signs of approving what they understand.

Their fifth Question was, that if the water was higher then 5 Quest.
the earth, how comes it to pass that it does not overflow all the earth?

We still held God before them, and showed that this must Answ.
needs be the wonderful work of God, and we took an apple and thereby
showed them how the earth and water made one round globe like that apple; and
how the Sun moved about it; and then showed them how God made a great hole or
ditch, into which he put the waters of the Sea, so that though it was upon the
earth and therefore above the earth, yet we told them that by making so deep a
hole the waters were kept within compass that they could not overflow, just as
if Indians making a hole to put in much water, the water cannot overflow nor
run abroad, which they would if they had no such hole; so it was with God, it
was his mighty power that dug a hole for all Sea-waters, as a deep ditch,
and thereby God kept them in from overflowing the whole earth, which otherwise
would quickly drown all.

They having spent much conference amongst themselves about 6 Quest.
these Questions and the night hastening, we desired them to propound some
other Questions, or if not, we would ask them some, hereupon one of them asked
us; If a man has committed adultery or stolen any goods, and the Sachim does
not punish him, nor by any law is he punished, if also he restore the goods he
has stolen, what then? whether is not all well now? meaning that if Gods Law
was broken and no man punished him for it, that then no punishment should come
from God for it, and as if by restoring again an amends was made to God.

Although man be not offended for such sins yet God is angry, Answ.
and his anger burns like fire against all sinners: and here we set out the
holiness and terror of God in respect of the least sin; yet if such a
sinner with whom God is angry fly to Jesus Christ, and repent and seek for
mercy and pardon for Christ's sake, that then God will forgive and pity. Upon
the hearing of which answer he that propounded the question drew somewhat
back and hung down his head as a man smitten to the very heart, with his eyes
ready to drop, and within a little while after brake out into a complaint, Me
little know Jesus Christ, otherwise he thought he should seek him better: we
therefore told him, that look as it was in the morning at first there is but a
little light, then there is more light, then there is day, then the Sun is up,
then the Sun warmes and heates, etc. so it was true they knew but little of
Jesus Christ now, but we had more to tell them concerning him hereafter, and
after that more and after that more, until at last they may come to know
Christ as the English do; and we taught them but a little at a time, because
they could understand but little, and if they prayed to God to teach them, he
would send his Spirit and teach them more, they and their fathers had lived in
ignorance until now, it has been a long night wherein they have slept and
have not regarded God, but now the daylight began to stir upon them, they
might hope therefore for more ere long, to be made known to them.

Thus having spent some hours with them, we propounded two Questions.

What do you remember of what was taught you since the last time we were here?
1 Quest.


After they had spoken one to another for some time, one of them returned this
answer, that they did much thank God for Answ.
our coming, and for what they heard, they were wonderful things unto them.

Do you believe the things that are told you, viz, that God is musquantum, i.
e. very angry for the least sin in your thoughts, 2 Quest.
or words, or works?

They said yes, and hereupon we set forth the terror of God against sinners,
and mercy of God to the penitent, and to such as Answ.
sought to know Jesus Christ, and that as sinners should be after death,
Chechainuppan, i. e. tormented alive, (for we know no other word in the tongue
to express extreme torture by) so believers should after death Wowein wicke
Jehovah, i. e. live in all bliss with Jehovah the blessed God: and so we
concluded conference.

Having thus spent the whole afternoon, and night being almost come upon us;
considering that the Indians formerly desired to know how to pray, and did
think that Jesus Christ did not understand Indian language, one of us
therefore prepared to pray in their own language, and did so for above a
quarter of an hour together, wherein diverse of them held up eyes and hands to
heaven; all of them (as we understood afterward) understanding the same; but
one of them I cast my eye upon, was hanging down his head with his rag before
his eyes weeping; at first I feared it was some soreness of his eyes, but
lifting up his head again, having wiped his eyes (as not desirous to be seen)
I easily perceived his eyes were not sore, yet somewhat red with crying; and so
held up his head for a while, yet such was the presence and mighty power of the
Lord Jesus on his heart that he hung down his head again, and covered his
eyes again and so fell wiping and wiping of them weeping abundantly,
continuing thus till prayer was ended, after which he presently turns from
us, and turns his face to a side and corner of the Wigwam, and there falls a
weeping more abundantly by himself, which one of us perceiving, went to him,
and spoke to him encouraging words; at the hearing of which he fell a weeping
more and more; so leaving of him, he who spoke to him came unto me (being
newly gone out of the Wigwam) and told me of his tears, so we resolved to go
again both of us to him, and speak to him again, and we met him coming out
of the Wigwam, and there we spoke again to him, and he there fell into a more
abundant renewed weeping, like one deeply and inwardly affected indeed, which
forced us also to such bowels of compassion that we could not forbear weeping
over him also: and so we parted greatly rejoicing for such sorrowing.

Thus I have as faithfully as I could remember given you a true account of our
beginnings with the Indians within our own bounds; which cannot but be matter
of more serious thoughts what further to do with these poor Natives the dregs
of mankind and the saddest spectacles of misery of mere men upon earth: we
did think to forbear going to them this winter, but this last days work
wherein God set his seal from heaven of acceptance of our little, makes those
of us who are able, to resolve to adventure through frost and snow, lest the
fire go out of their hearts for want of a little more fuel: to which we are
the more encouraged, in that the next day after our being with them, one of the
Indians came to his house who preached to them to speak with him, who in
private conference wept exceedingly, and said that all that night the Indians
could not sleep, partly with trouble of mind, and partly with wondering at the
things they heard preached amongst them; another Indian coming also to him the
next day after, told him how many of the wicked sort of Indians began to oppose
these beginnings.

Whence these Indians came here to inhabit is not certain, his reasons are
most probable who think they are Tartars passing out of Asia into America by
the straits of Anian, who being spilt by some revenging hand of God upon this
continent like water upon the ground are spread as far as these Atlanticke
shores, there being but few of them in these parts in comparison of those which
are more contiguous to the Anian straits, if we may credit some Historians
herein: what ever these conjectures and uncertainties be, certain it is that
they are inheritors of a grievous and fearful curse living so long without
Ephod or Teraphim, and in nearest alliance to the wild beasts that perish; and
as God delights to convey blessings of mercy to the posterity of some, in
respect of his promise to their fathers, so are curses entailed and come by
natural descent unto others, for some great sins of their Ancestors, as no
doubt it is in respect of these. Yet notwithstanding the deepest degeneracies
are no stop to the overflowing grace and blood of Christ, when the time of love
shall come, no not to these poor outcasts, the utmost ends of the earth being
appointed to be in time, the Son of Gods possession.

We are often upbraided by some of our Countrymen that so little good is done by
our professing planters upon the hearts of Natives; such men have surely more
spleen then judgment, and know not the vast distance of Natives from common
civility, almost humanity it self, and it is as if they should reproach us for
not making the winds to blow when we list our selves, it must certainly be a
spirit of life from God (not in man's power) which must put flesh and sinews
unto these dry bones; if we would force them to baptism (as the Spaniards do
about Cusco, Peru, and Mexico, having learnt them a short answer or two to some
Popish questions) or if we would hire them to it by giving them coats and
shirts, to allure them to it (as some others have done, we could have gathered
many hundreds, yea thousands it may be by this time, into the name of
Churches; but we have not learnt as yet that art of coining Christians, or
putting Christ's name and Image upon copper mettle. Although I think we have
much cause to be humbled that we have not endeavored more then we have done
their conversion and peace with God, who enjoy the mercy and peace of God in
their land. Three things have made us think (as they once did of building the
Temple) it is not yet time for God to work, 1. Because till the Jews come in,
there is a seal set upon the hearts of those people, as they think from some
Apocalypticall places. 2. That as in nature there is no progresses ab^ (...) ad
(...) nisi per media, so in religion such as are so extremely degenerate, must
be brought to some civility before religion can prosper, or the word take
place. 3. Because we want miraculous and extraordinary gifts without which no
conversion can be expected amongst these; But me thinks now that it is with
the Indians as it was with our New English ground when we first came over,
there was scarce any man that could believe that English grain would grow, or
that the Plow could do any good in this woody and rocky soil. And thus they
continued in this supine unbelief for some years, till experience taught them
otherwise, and now all see it to be scarce inferior to Old English tillage,
but bears very good burdens; so we have thought of our Indian people, and
therefore have been discouraged to put plow to such dry and rocky ground, but
God having begun thus with some few it may be they are better soil for the
Gospel then we can think: I confess I think no great good will be done
till they be more civilized, but why may not God begin with some few, to
awaken others by degrees? nor do I expect any great good will be wrought by
the English (leaving secrets to God) (although the English shall surely begin
and lay the first stones of Christ's Kingdom and Temple amongst them) because
God is wont ordinarily to convert Nations and peoples by some of their own
country men who are nearest to them, and can best speak* and most of all pity
their brethren and countrymen, but yet if the least beginnings be made by the
conversion of two or three, its worth all our time and travailes, and cause of
much thankfulness for such seeds, although no great harvests should
immediately appear, surely this is evident, first that they never heard
heartbreaking prayer and preaching before now in their own tongue, that we
know of, secondly, that there were never such hopes of a dawning of mercy
toward them as now, certainly those abundant tears which we saw shed from
their eyes, argue a mighty and blessed presence of the spirit of Heaven in
their hearts, which when once it comes into such kind of spirits will not
easily out again.

The chief use that I can make of these hopeful beginnings, besides rejoicing
for such shinings, is from Esaias 2. 5. Oh house of Israel, let us walk in the
light of the Lord; Considering that these blind Natives begin to look
toward Gods mountain now.

The observations I have gathered by conversing with them are such as these.

That none of them slept Sermon or derided Gods messenger: Woe unto those
English that are grown bold to do that, which 1.
Indians will not, Heathens dare not.

That there is need of learning in Ministers who preach to Indians, 2.
much more to English men and gracious Christians, for these had sundry
philosophical questions, which some knowledge of the arts must help to give
answer to; and without which these would not have been satisfied: worse then
Indian ignorance has blinded their eyes that renounce learning as an enemy to
Gospel Ministeries.

That there is no necessity of extraordinary gifts nor miraculous signs always
to convert Heathens, who being manifest and ^.
professed unbeleevers may expect them as soon as any; (signs being given for
them that believe not 1 Cor. 14. 22.) much less is there any need of such
gifts for gathering Churches amongst professing Christians, (signs not being
given for them which believe,) for we see the Spirit of God working mightily
upon the hearts of these Natives in an ordinary way, and I hope will, they
being but a remnant, the Lord using to show mercy to the remnant; for there be
but few that are left alive from the Plague and Pox, which God sent into those
parts, and if one or two can understand they usually talk of it as we do of
news, it flies suddenly far and near, and truth scattered will rise in
time, for ought we know.

If English men begin to despise the preaching of faith and repentance, 4.
and humiliation for sin, yet the poor Heathens will be glad of it, and it
shall do good to them; for so they are, and so it begins to do; the Lord
grant that the foundation of our English woe, be not laid in the ruin and
contempt of those fundamental doctrines of faith, repentance, humiliation for
sin, etc. but rather relishing the novelties and dreams of such men as are
surfe^^ed with the ordinary food of the Gospel of Christ. Indians shall weep
to hear faith and repentance preached, when Englishmen shall mourn, too
late, that are weary of such truths.

That the deepest estrangements of man from God is no hin^^^nce 5.
to his grace nor to the Spirit of grace, for what Nation or people ever so
deeply degenerated since Adams fall as these Indians, and yet the Spirit of God
is working upon them?

That it is very likely if ever the Lord convert any of these Natives, 6.
that they will mourn for sin exceedingly, and consequently love Christ
dearly, for if by a little measure of light such heartbreaking^ have appeared,
what may we think will be, when more is let in? they are some of them very
wicked, some very ingenious, these latter are very apt and quick of
understanding and naturally sad and melancholy (a good servant to repentance,)
and therefore there is the greater hope of great heart-breakings, if everGod
brings them effectually home, for which we should affectionately pray.

A third meeting with the Indians.
NOvember 26. I could not go my self, but heard from those who went of a
third meeting; the Indians having built more Wigwams in the wonted place of
meeting to attend upon the Word the more readily. The preacher understanding
how many of the Indians discouraged their fellows in this work, and
threatening death to some if they heard any more, spoke therefore unto them,
about temptations of the Devil, how he tempted to all manner of sin, and
how the evil heart closed with them, and how a good heart abhorred them; the
Indians were this day more serious then ever before, and propounded diverse
questions again; as (...) Because some Indians say that we must pray to the
Devil for all good, and some to God; they would know whether they might pray
to the Devil or no. 2. They said they heard the word humiliation often used in
our Churches, and they would know what that meant? 3. Why the English call them
Indians, because before they came they had another name? 4. What a Spirit is?
5. Whether they should believe Dreams* 6. How the English come to know God so
much and they so little? To all which they had fit answers; but being not
present I shall not set them down: only their great desire this time was to
have a place for a Town and to learn to spinne.

Sir, I did think I should have writ no more to you concerning the Indians;
but the Ship lingers in the Harbor, and the Lord Jesus will have you see more
of his conquests and triumphs among these forlorn and degenerate people;
surely he hears the prayers of the destitute and that have long lien down in
the dust before God for these poor prisoners of the pit: surely some of these
American tongues and knees must confess him, and bow down before him: for the
Saturday night after this third meeting (as I am informed from that man of God
who then preached to them) there came to his house one Wampas a wise and sage
Indian, as a messenger sent to him from the rest of the company, to offer The
name o^ an Indian.
unto him his own son and three more Indian children to be trained up among
the English, one of the children was nine years old, another eight, another
five, another four: and being demanded why they would have them brought up
among the English, his answer was, because they would grow rude and wicked at
home, and would never come to know God, which they hoped they should do if
they were constantly among the English.

This Wampas came also accompanied with two more Indians, young lusty men, who
offered themselves voluntarily to the service of the English that by dwelling
in some of their families, they might come to know Jesus Christ; these are two
of those three men whom we saw weeping, and whose hearts were smitten at our
second meeting above mentioned, and continue still much affected, and give
great hopes; these two are accepted of and received into two of the Elders
houses, but the children are not yet placed out because it is most meet to do
nothing that way too suddenly, but they have a promise of acceptance and
education of them either in learning, or in some other trade of life in time
convenient, to which Wampas replied that the Indians desired nothing more.

These two young men who are thus disposed of, being at an Elders house upon
the Sabbath day night, upon some conference with them, one of them began to
confess how wickedly he had lived, and with how many Indian women he had
committed filthiness, and therefore professed that he thought God would never
look upon him in love. To which he had this answer, that indeed that sin of
whoredom was exceeding great, yet if he sought God for Christ's sake to pardon
him, and confess his sin and repented of it indeed, that the Lord would show
him mercy; and hereupon acquainted him with the story of Christ's conference
with the Samaritan woman, John 4. and how Jesus Christ forgave her although
she lived in that sin of filthiness, even when Christ began to speak to
her: whereupon he fell a weeping and lamenting bitterly, and the other young
man being present and confessing the like guiltiness with his fellow, he
burst out also into a great mourning, wherein both continued for above half an
hour together at that time also.

It is wonderful to see what a little leven and that small mustardseed of the
Gospel will do, and how truth will work when the spirit of Christ has the
setting of it on, even upon hearts and spirits most incapable; for the last
night after they had heard the word this third time, there was an English youth
of good capacity who lodged in Waaubons Wigwam that night upon special
occasion, and he assured us that the same night Waaubon instructed all his
company out of the things which they had heard that day from the Preacher, and
prayed among them, and awaking often that night continually fell to praying and
speaking to some or other of the things he had heard, so that this man (being
a man of gravitie and chief prudence and counsel among them, although no *
Sachem) That is King.
is like to be a means of great good to the rest of his company unless
cowardice or witchery put an end (as usually they have done) to such hopeful
beginnings.

The old man who asked the first question the second time of our meeting (viz.
whether there was any hope for such old men or no) has six sons, one of his
sons was a Pawwaw, and his That is Sorcerers and Wit^hes.
wife a great Pawwaw, and both these God has convinced of their wickedness,
and they resolve to hear the word and seek to the devil no more. This, the
two Indians who are come to us acquaint us with, and that they now say, that
Chepian, i. e. the devil is naught, and that God is the author only of all
good as they have been taught. He therefore who preaches to the Indians
desired them to tell him who were Pawwaws when he went again to preach
amongst them; and upon special occasion this December. 4. being called of God to
another place where the Indians use to meet, and having preached among them,
after the Sermon, he that was the Pawwaw of that company was discovered to
him, to whom he addressed himself and propounded these questions, viz. 1.
Whether do you think that God or or Chepian is the author of all good? he
answered, God. 2. If God be the author of all good, why do you pray to
Chepian the devil? The Pawwaw perceiving him to propound the last question
with a stern countenance and unaccustomed terror, he gave him no answer, but
spoke to other Indians that he did never hurt any body by his Pawwawing, and
could not be got by all the means and turnings of questions that might be,
to give the least word of answer again; but a little after the conference was
ended, he met with this Pawwaw alone and spoke more lovingly and courteously to
him, and asked him why he would not answer, he then told him that his last
question struck a terror into him and made him afraid, and promised that at
the next meeting he would propound some question to him as others did.

And here it may not be amiss to take notice of what these two Indians have
discovered to us concerning these Pawwaws: for they were asked how they came to
be made Pawwaws, and they answered thus, that if any of the Indians fall into
any strange dream wherein Chepian appears unto them as a serpent, then the
next day they tell the other Indians of it, and for two days after the rest of
the Indians dance and rejoice for what they tell them about this Serpent, and
so they become their Pawwaws: Being further asked what do these Pawwaws, and
what use are they of; and they said the principal employment is to cure the
sick by certain odd gestures and beatings of themselves, and then they pull
out the sickness by applying their hands to the sick person and so blow it
away: so that their Pawwaws are great witches having fellowship with the old
Serpent, to whom they pray, and by whose means they heal sick persons, and
(as they said also) will slew many strange juglings to the wonderment of the
Indians. They affirmed also that if they did not cure the sick party (as they
often they did not) that then they were reviled, and sometime killed by some of
the dead man's friends, especially if they could not get their money again out
of their hands, which they receive aforehand for their cure.

We have cause to be very thankful to God who has moved the hearts of the
general court to purchase so much land for them to make their town in which
the Indians are much taken with, This town the Indians did desire to know what
name it should have, and it was told them it should be called Noonatomen,
which signifies in English rejoicing, because they hearing the word, and
seeking to know God, the English did rejoice at it, and God did rejoice at it,
which pleased them much; and therefore that is to be the name of their town.
and it is somewhat observable that while the Court were considering where to
lay out their town, the Indians (not knowing of any thing) were about that
time consulting about Laws for themselves, and their company who sit down
with Waaubon; there were ten of them, two of them are forgotten.

Their Laws were these.
1. That if any man be idle a week, at most a fortnight, he shall pay five
shillings. 2. If any unmarried man shall lie with a young woman unmarried, he
shall pay twenty shillings. 3. If any man shall beat his wife, his hands shall
be tied behind him and carried to the place of justice to be severely
punished. 4. Every young man if not another servant, and if unmarried, he
shall be compelled to set up a Wigwam and plant for himself, and not live
shifting up and down to other Wigwams. 5. If any woman shall not have her
hair tied up but hang loose or be cut as men's hair, she shall pay five
shillings. 6. If any woman shall go with naked breasts they shall pay two
shillings fix pence. 7. All those men that wear long locks shall pay five
shillings. 8. If any shall kill their lice between their teeth, they shall pay
five shillings. This Law though ridiculous to English ears yet tends to
preserve cleanliness among Indians.
It Is wonderful in our eyes to understand by these two honest Indians, what
Prayers Waaubon and the rest of them use to make, for he that preaches to
them professes he never yet used any of their words in his prayers, from whom
otherwise it might be thought that they had learnt them by rote, one is this.

Amanaomen Jehovah (...) metagh.

Take away Lord my stony heart.

Another.

Chechesom Jehovah kekowhogkow,

Wash Lord my soul.

Another.

Lord lead me when I die to heaven.

These are but a taste, they have many more, and these more enlarged then thus
expressed, yet what are these but the sprinklings of the spirit and blood of
Christ Jesus in their hearts? and it is no small matter that such dry barren and
long-accursed ground should yield such kind of increase in so small a time. I
would not readily commend a fair day before night, nor promise much of such
kind of beginnings, in all persons, nor yet in all of these, for we know the
profession of very many is but a mere paint, and their best graces nothing but
mere flashes and pangs, which are suddenly kindled and as so one go out and
are extinct again, yet God does not usually send his Plough and Seedsman to a
place but there is at least some little piece of good ground, although three to
one be naught: and me thinks the Lord Jesus would never have made so fit a
key for their locks, unless he had intended to open some of their doors, and
so to make way for his coming in. He that God has raised up and enabled to
preach unto them, is a man (you know) of a most sweet, humble, loving, gracious
and enlarged spirit, whom God has blessed, and surely will still delight in, and
do good by. I did think never to have opened my mouth to any, to desire those
in England to further any good work here, but now I see so many things
inviting to speak in this business, that it were well if you did lay before
those that are prudent and able these considerations.

1. That it is pretty heavy and chargeable to educate and train up those
children which are already offered us, in schooling, clothing, diet and
attendance, which they must have.

2. That in all probability many Indians in other places, especially under our
jurisdiction, will be provoked by this example in these, both to desire
preaching, and also to send their children to us, when they see that some of
their fellows fare so well among the English, and the civil authority here
so much favoring and countenancing of these, and if many more come in, it will
be more heavy to such as only are fit to keep them, and yet have their hands
and knees infeebled so many ways besides.

3. That if any shall do any thing to encourage this work, that it may be
given to the College for such an end and use, that so from the College may
arise the yearly revenue for their yearly maintenance. I would not have it
placed in any particular man's hand for fear of cousenage or misplacing or
careless keeping and improving; but at the College it is under many hands and
eyes the chief and best of the country who have been and will be exactly
careful of the right and comely disposing of such things; and therefore, if
any thing be given, let it be put in such hands as may immediately direct it
to the President of the College, who you know will soon acquaint the rest
with it; and for this end if any in England have thus given any thing for this
end, I would have them speak to those who have received it to send it this
way, which if it be withheld I think it is no less then sacrilege: but if
God moves no hearts to such a work, I doubt not then but that more weak means
shall have the honor of it in the day of Christ.

A fourth meeting with the Indians.
THis day being December. 9. the children being catechized, and that place of
Ezekiel touching the dry bones being opened, and applied to their condition;
the Indians offered all their children to us to be educated amongst us, and
instructed by us, complaining to us that they were not able to give any thing
to the English for their education: for this reason there are therefore
preparations made toward the schooling of them, and setting up a School among
them or very near unto them. Sundry questions also were propounded by them to
us, and of us to them; one of them being asks what is sin? he answered a
naughty heart. Another old man complained to us of his fears, viz. that he
was fully purposed to keep the Sabbath, but still he was in fear whether he
should go to hell or heaven; and thereupon the justification of a sinner by
faith in Christ was opened unto him as the remedy against all fears of hell.
Another complained of other Indians that did revile them, and call them Rogues
and such like speeches for cutting off their Locks, and for cutting their Hair
in a modest manner as the New-English generally do; for since the word has
begun to work upon their hearts, they have discerned the vanity and pride
which they placed in their hair, and have therefore of their own accord (none
speaking to them that we know of) cut it modestly; they were therefore
encouraged by some there present of chief place and account with us, not to
fear the reproaches of wicked Indians, nor their witchcraft and Pawwaws and
poysonings, but let them know that if they did not dissemble but would seek
God unfaignedly, that they would stand by them, and that God also would be with
them. They told us also of diverse Indians who would come and stay with them
three or four days, and one Sabbath, and then they would go from them, but
as for themselves, they told us they were fully purposed to keep the Sabbath,
to which we encouraged them, and night drawing on were forced to leave them,
for this time.

FINIS.

