Mixed Essays Upon TRAGEDIES, COMEDIES, Italian COMEDIES, English COMEDIES, And
OPERA'S.


Written Originally in FRENCH, By the Sieur de Saint EVVREMONT.

Licensed,

August 12, 1685. Rog. L'Estrange.



LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead, over against St.
Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

PREFACE TO THE Translation.
THe Theater was wont to be called the School of Virtue, the Scene of Men and
Manners; Aristotle himself, though an austere Critic, and a severe
Philosopher, confessed that the Stage might conduce more to the Instruction and
Refining of Mankind, than even Philosophy it self: It secretly insinuates that
into many dull people, which the best Books, or grave Harangues could never do;
the Eye being struck with the natural Impressions, and lively Representations
of Virtue and Vice, conveys them quickly to the Soul, and there lodges them;
who can see the Ambitious, the Proud, the Cruel, the Passionate, the
Treacherous, the Prodigal, or Covetous Man acted to the life, without being an
enemy to them; or the Magnanimous, Liberal, Courageous, Just, Mild, Temperate,
and Wise, without being a friend to, and imitator of them, the Reward and
Pleasure of these being always as great as the Punishment and Pain of the
other. Hence it was that the Greeks and Romans were civilized above other
Nations, instead of being idle they were employed daily in their Cirques,
Theaters, and Amphitheaters, where they learnt insensibly what was great and
useful; present objects raises lasting Idea's, whereas the Precepts of the
Schools vanishes, and dwindles often into Air; the Memory will seldom part with
any thing that comes in by the Eye, especially in so solemn and sensible a
manner; the Image or Picture sticks close to the Brain, and can scarce be razed
out with the all-devouring teeth of Time.

The late Age has been so extremely sensible of the use of the Stage, that
some of the most polite Scholars of Christendom have studied and practiced
nothing more than Aristotle, and Horace, Homer, and Virgil, Sophocles, and
Euripides, Eschylus, Aristophanes, Plautus, and Terence. The Italians having a
particular Sagacity above most of their Neighbors, began first to raise it
from the Grave, where Goths and Vandals, and other Northern Barbarians, had
buried it amongst the Pomp and Glory of the World; their Academies took the
Carcass up, and inspired it with Life, Shape, and some Vigor; those of the
Crusca at Florence, the Ricovrati at Padua, and the Lyncei at Rome, have
performed their parts; many of their Academicks began to write of the Stage,
and Poetry; several judicious Critics passed for and against the Amynta of
Tasso, and the Pastor Fido of Guarini.

After the Italians the French took fire, and began to sublime and purify
themselves upon the rising of that glorious Minister Cardinal Richlieu, who
founded the Royal Academy, and having mustered the best Wits together, employed
them in reforming the Stage, the Language, and Manners of his Country. L'Abbe
Hedelin undertook the Theater, of which he published the most perfect Treatise
yet extant; and if the Cardinal had lived some years longer, he would have
carried it much higher, and even contended with Athens, and Rome themselves.
Malherbe, Corneille, Chapelain, Moliere, Boileau, Fontaine, and Rapin, have
cultivated, and exalted that Subject. The Learned Chanoine of St. Genevieve R.
P. le Bossu, has given us the best Idea, and most exact Model of Epick Poem.
The Dutch and Germans (as though frozen up) have produced little in this kind;
yet we must confess that Grotius, Heinsius, Scaliger, and Vossius were Learned
Critics. Some of the English have indeed raised their Pens, and soared as high
as any of the Italians, or French; yet Criticism came but very lately in
fashion amongst us; without doubt Ben. Johnson had a large stock of Critical
Learning; Spencer had studied Homer, and Virgil, and Tasso, yet he was misled,
and debauched by Ariosto, as Mr. Rymer judiciously observes; Davenant gives
some strokes of great Learning and Judgment, yet he is for unbeaten Tracks, new
Ways, and undiscovered Seas; Cowley was a great Master of the Ancients, and had
the true Genius and Character of a Poet; yet this nicety and boldness of
Criticism was a stranger all this time to our Climate; Mr. Rymer, and Mr.
Dryden have begun to launch out into it, and indeed they have been very
fortunate Adventurers. The Earls of R. and M. and Mr. W. have given some fine
touches; Mr. Drydens Critics are generally quaint and solid, his Prefaces does
as often correct and improve my Judgment, as his Verses does charm my Fancy; he
is everywhere Sweet, Elegant, and Sublime; the Poet and Critic were seldom
both so Conspicuous and Illustrious in one man as in him, except Rapin. Mr.
Rymer in his incomparable Preface to Rapin, and in his Reflections upon some
late Tragedies, has given sufficient proofs, that he has studied and
understands Aristotle and Horace, Homer, and Virgil, besides the Wits of all
Countries and Ages; so that we may justly number him in the first rank of
Critics, as having a most accomplished Idea of Poetry, and the Stage.

What Monsieur Euvremont has performed in these his Essays upon Comedy,
Tragedy, and Opera's, the Reader will be best able to judge upon the perusal of
them; they seem to be nice, and delicate, thoughtful and judicious, grounded
upon Observation, and Reflection, though some may perhaps think them dashed here
and there with a little French levity and vanity; which if so, is the more
excusable, considering the Gallantry, the Variety, and Nature of his Subject.
If his Pen marches any where rough and peevish, it is upon the Athenian
Tragedians, upon the Italian Comedy, and Opera's, upon Machines, and
Decorations; otherwise it runs smoothly and gently enough, seeing true Critics
are seldom complaisant, or enamored with Minions, or Mistresses; all must go
to the Touchstone, or Furnace, and if the trial is not made according to Rule
and Art, then the Critic must be touched, or fluxt himself.

UPON TRAGEDIES.
I Confess we excel in the works of the Theater, and I think without flattering
Corneille I may prefer his Tragedies far before those of Antiquity. I know the
ancient Tragedians have had admirers in all times, but am not so sure that the
sublimity ascribed to them rests upon a good Foundation.

To believe that Sophocles and Euripides are so admirable, as we are told they
are, one must fancy greater matters of their works, than can be conceived from
Translations; and in my opinion, the terms and expression ought to have a great
share in their beauty.

Methinks that through the praises which their most famous Advocates give them,
one may perceive, that Greatness, Magnificence, and above all, Dignity, were
things they little understood: Wits they were, indeed, but confined to the
stock of a small Republic to whom a necessitous liberty stood instead of all
things.

When they were obliged to represent the Majesty of a great King, they ill
managed an unknown grandeur, because they saw nothing but low and clownish
objects, to which their senses were in a manner enslaved.

It is true, that the same wits being cloyed with these objects, did sometimes
raise themselves to what was sublime and great; but then they brought so many
Gods and Goddesses into their Tragedies, that hardly any thing more of Humanity
was to be found in them: what was great, was fabulous; what was natural, mean
and contemptible.

With Corneille, Grandeur sets it self off, the figures he employes when he
would embellish it with any ornament, are proper and suitable; but most
commonly he neglects the pomp of some certain shows, and borrows not from the
Heavens, to give a value to that which is considerable enough upon Earth; it is
enough for him to enter well into things, and the full image that he gives of
them, makes that true impression which men of sense love to receive.

Indeed, Nature is admirable in all things, and when men have recourse to that
foreign pomp wherewith they think to embellish objects; it is many times a
tacit confession, that they know not their property; hence come most of our
Figures and Comparisons, which I cannot approve, if they be not rare,
altogether Noble and Just: otherwise it is a cunning casting about for a
diversion to slip away from things which one cannot understand. What beauty
nevertheless may be in Comparisons, yet they suit much better with Epick Poem
than Tragedy: In Epick Poem the Mind seeks to please it self out of its
subject: In Tragedy, the Soul full of thoughts, and possessed with Passions,
turns not easily at the flash of a bare resemblance.

But let us return to these Ancients from whom we have insensibly digressed;
and to do them justice, let us acknowledge that they have much better succeeded
in expressing the qualities of their Heroes, than in describing the
magnificence of great Kings. A confused notion of the grandeurs of Babylon
spoilt rather than raised their imagination; but their Minds could not be
imposed upon in relation to Strength, Constancy, Justice and Wisdom, whereof
they had instances daily before their eyes. Their Senses weaned from pomp in a
mean Republic, left their Reason at greater liberty to consider men in
themselves.

Thus nothing took them off from the study of Humane Nature, and from applying
themselves to the knowledge of Vice and Virtue, Inclinations and Tempers: Here
it is that they have learnt to give so proper characters, that juster cannot be
desired according to the time they lived in. If it be thought sufficient to
know persons by their actions, Corneille thought it not enough to make them
act; he has dived to the bottom of their Soul to search for the principle of
their Actions; he has descended into their Heart, that he may see how their
Passions are formed there, and discover the most hidden ways of their Motions.

As to the ancient Tragedians, either they neglect the Passions by applying
themselves to an exact representation of what occurs, or they make Speeches
amidst the greatest perturbations, and tell you Sentences when you are
expecting trouble and despair.

Corneille omits nothing of what occurs, and exposes all the Action as much as
decency can allow; but also he gives the Thought all the extent it requires,
conducing Nature without constraint, or abandonning her too much to her self.

He has removed from the Theater of the Ancients all that was barbarous; he
has sweetened the horror of their Scene by some tender passions of Love
judiciously interwoven; but his care has not been less in preserving two
tragical Subjects our Fear and Pity, without diverting the Soul from the true
Passions that it ought to feel in them, to some little melancholy sight, which
though an hundred several times varied, are, for all that still the same.

What praises soever I give to that excellent Author, yet I will not say, that
none but his pieces deserve applause on our Theater. We have been touched with
Mariana, Sophonisbe, Alcione, Venceslaus, Stilico, Andromache, Britanicus, and
many others, from whose beauty I pretend not in the least to derogate because I
do not name them.

I avoid being tedious as much as possibly I can; and it shall be enough for me
to say, that no Nation can dispute with us the excellence in Tragedies.

As for those of the Italians, it is not worth the while to speak of them; to
name them alone is enough to breed a distaste. Their Peter's Feast would make a
very patient man lose all patience; and I never saw it acted but that I wished
the Author of the piece had been thunder-strucken with his Atheist.

There are four or five English Tragedies, wherein, to say truth, a great many
things ought to be left out, yet with that reformation they might be made
excellently good.

In all the rest you see nothing but a shapeless and indigested mass, a crowd
of confused adventures, without consideration of time and place, and without
any regard to decency, where eyes that delight in cruel sights may be fed with
murders and bodies weltering in blood.

To palliate the horror of them by relations, as it is the custom in France,
is to deprive the people of the sight that pleases them most.

The better-bred condemn a Custom established, through a sense of humanity
perhaps; but an ancient habit, or the humor of the Nation in general, prevails
over the delicateness of private persons.

To die, is so small a matter to the English, that there is need of Images more
ghastly than Death it self to affect them: Hence it is that we upon very good
ground, object to them, that they allow too much to their senses upon the
Stage. We must also bear with the reproach that they make to us, of passing to
the other extremity, when amongst us we admire Tragedies for the little
tendernesses of Passion, which make not an impression strong enough upon the
Mind; being sometimes dissatisfied in our hearts with an evil-formed Passion,
we expect a fuller emotion from the action of our Comedians. And sometimes we
would have the Actor more transported than the Poet, lend Fury and Despair to
an ordinary agitation, and a grief too vulgar.

The truth is, what ought to be tender is always soft; what ought to form Pity,
scarcely amounts to tenderness; Emotion stands instead of Surprise,
Astonishment, of Horror.

Our Sentiments have not depth enough, and Passions not thoroughly touched,
excite in our Souls but imperfect motions, that neither leave them to
themselves, nor transport them out of themselves.

UPON COMEDIES.
FOr Comedy, which ought to be the representation of the actions of common
Life, in imitation of the Spaniards, we have made it run altogether upon
Galantry, not considering that the Ancients made it their business to represent
man's Life according to the diversity of humors; and that the Spaniards
following their own genius have only painted out the life of Madrid in their
Intrigues and Adventures.

I grant that that kind of work might have had a more noble air in Antiquity,
with somewhat more of Gallantry too; but that was more the defect of these Ages
than the fault of Authors. Nowadays most part of our Poets know as little
what belongs to Manners, as in those times they knew what belonged to Galantry;
one would say that there were no more covetous Prodigals, easy and sociable
humors, no more peevish and austere natures; and as if Nature her self were
changed, and men had laid aside these various Sentiments, they are always
represented under one and the same Character, for what reason I cannot tell,
unless it be that the Women of this Age think all men ought to be Gallants.

We are ready to acknowledge that the Wits of Madrid are more fertile than ours
in Inventions, and that has made us borrow from them most of our Arguments,
which we have filled with passionate and amorous Discourses, and reduced to
more regularity and probability. The reason is, because in Spain, where the
women are hardly ever seen, the Poet spends his imagination in contriving
ingenious ways of bringing his Lovers together: And in France, where the
liberty of Commerce is allowed, the quaintness of the Author is employed in the
tender and amorous expression of the Thoughts.

A Spanish Lady of Quality not long ago, was reading the Romance of Cleopatra,
and after a long relation of Adventures, falling upon a quaint conversation of
a Lover and his Mistress alike passionate, What a deal of wit ill-employ'd,
said she, to what end so many fine words, when they are got together?

It Is one of the prettiest reflections that ever I heard made in all my life;
and Calprenet, though a Frenchman, ought to call to mind that Lovers born in a
hotter Climate than that of France, had very little need of words on such
occasions; but the good judgment of that Lady would not be received in our
ordinary gallantries, wherein one must speak a thousand times of a Passion that
he has not to be able to persuade, and meet his Mistress daily to complain to
her, before he find an opportunity of putting an end to that affected pain.

The Coy thing of Moliere is made ridiculous in the matter as well as in the
terms, in not reading the Romance backward, when the serious affair of Marriage
is to be treated with the Parents; but it had been no false nicety with a Lover
to expect his declaration, and all that comes by degrees in the progress of a
Gallantry.

It is no wonder that Regularity and Probability be less to be found among the
Spaniards than the French; for since all the gallantry of the Spaniards is
derived from the Moors, it retains still a certain relish of Africa, that is
uncoth to other Nations, and too extraordinary to be accommodated to the
exactness of Rules.

Besides, an old impression of Knight-errantry, common to all Spain, sets the
minds of Cavaliers upon odd and freakish adventures. The Maids also from their
childhood, taste of that air in their Books of Chivalry, and in the fabulous
conversations of the Women that are about them. Thus both Sexes fill their
minds with the same Ideas, and most part of the men and women would interpret a
scrupulosity at some amorous extravagance, to be an indifference unworthy their
Passion.

Though Love never observes very regular measures in any Country whatsoever;
nevertheless I dare be bold to say, that it has nothing that is very
extravagant in France, neither in the way of making it, nor in the ordinary
effects it produces. That which is called a Passionate love runs great risque
of being accounted ridiculous; for Gentlemen there, minding other business,
give not way to it, as the Spaniards do in the laziness of Madrid, where
nothing but Love can put them in motion.

At Paris, the assiduity of our Court engages us to the discharge of an Office,
or the design of an Employment busies us, Fortune outrivalling Mistresses in a
place, where it is the custom to prefer that which one owes to himself, before
that which he loves. The Ladies who are to take their measures accordingly, are
also more gallant than passionate, nay and make use of Gallantry to insinuate
into Intrigues.

There are but few who are not governed by Vanity and Interest; and the
Gallants and their Mistresses vie who shall make the best use one of another
for attaining to their end.

Love however mingles with that spirit of Interest, but it is very seldom the
master; for the conduct that we are obliged to follow in affairs, shapes us
into some regularity as to pleasures, or at least keeps us from extravagance.

In Spain there is no living without love; but what is called to love in
France, to speak properly, is no more but to talk of love, and to mingle the
vanity of gallantries with the sentiments of Ambition.

These differences being considered, it will not be thought strange that the
Comedy of the Spaniards, which is no more but a representation of their
Adventures, has as little regularity as their Adventures have; and it is not
to be wondered at, that the Comedy of the French which deviates not from their
Practice, retains those respects in the representation of their Amors which
commonly they have in their Loves themselves. I confess that good judgment
which ought to be in all Countries of the world, establishes some things, which
are no where to be dispensed with, but it is hard not to allow much to custom,
since Aristotle himself in his Poeticks, places some times Perfection in that
which was best liked at Athens, and not in that which is really most perfect.

Comedy has not greater privileges than the Laws, which though they ought all
to be founded on Justice, have nevertheless particular differences, according
to the different Genius of the people who made them. And if we be obliged to
retain the air of Antiquity; if we must observe the character of Heroes, who
have been dead Two thousand years ago, when they are to be represented upon the
Stage; how is it possible not to follow the humors, and not to accommodate to
the ways of those who are living, when we represent to their eyes, what they
themselves daily do?

Nevertheless what authority soever Custom may give, without doubt Reason ought
to have the Prerogative; but yet it ought not to be rigid in its exactness: For
in things which tend only to please, as Comedy does, it is uneasy to be
subjected to too austere an Order, and to begin with the rack in Subjects
wherein we seek only for Pleasure.

OF THE Italian Comedy.
SO much I had to say of the French and Spanish Comedies; I Will now tell you
what I think of the Italian. I shall not speak of Amynta, Pastor fido, Phillis
of Cyrus, and of other Comedies of that nature. I ought to be better acquainted
than I am with the graces of the Italian Language; for though I be touched with
Amynta, perhaps more than any Italian, that is because I enter into the fancy of
the Poet, and have a knowledge of some things that are more delicate than those
which I have of the Verses; besides, in this Discourse I pretend only to speak
of the Comedy which appears commonly upon the Stage. What we see in France upon
the Italian Stage, is not properly Comedy, seeing there is no true Plot in it;
the Subject is not well linked together, no Character strictly observed, nor
Composition wherein the scope of the Genius is well diverted, at least
according to some rules of Art; here is nothing but a kind of ill formed
concert amongst several Actors, of whom every one furnishes of his own head
what he judges proper for the person he acts: To take it rightly, it is no
more, but a medley of impertinent conceits in the mouth of Lovers, and silly
Buffooneries in that of Merry-Andrews.

You find no good sense any where in it, but a kind of false Wit that
predominates, either in thoughts full of Heavens, Suns, Stars, and Elements, or
in an affectation of native simplicity, which has nothing of true nature in it.

The Buffoons, I grant, are inimitable, and of an hundred that I have seen ape
and imitate them, never one could come near them in Grimaces, Postures,
Motions, Agility, Suppleness, and in a disposition for the making of Faces,
which they can shape and alter as they please. I cannot tell whether the
Mimicks and Pantomimicks of the Ancients have much surpassed them, what wonders
soever we read of them. It is certain that one must be a great lover of idle
Jesting and Drollery, to be taken with what he hears; as one must be also very
grave and composed not to laugh at what he sees: And it would be to affect too
great a nicety, not to be pleased with their acting, because a Critic will not
be satisfied with their discourse.

All Representations wherein there is but little Wit, are tedious at long run,
nevertheless they surprise, and are agreeable for some time before they cloy
us, as Buffoonry diverts not a man of breeding, but by little intervals: It
must be put an end to patly, and the mind not allowed time to reflect upon the
exactness of the Discourse, and the true and natural Idea of the thing: That
Dispensation were to be desired in the Italian Comedy; for one distaste comes
upon the heels of another with fresh irksomness, and the variety instead of
recreation, brings us only another kind of Langor.

The truth is, when you are weary of the Buffoons that have too long kept the
Stage, the Lovers step in next to oppress you: That, in my opinion, is the
worst of punishments to a delicate and nice man, and one would have more reason
to prefer a speedy death before the patience of hearing them, than the
Lacedemonian of Bocalini had, when he preferred the Gallows before the long and
tedious reading of the War of Pisa, in the History of Guichardin: If any man
fond of living, has been able to support so killing a fatigue, instead of some
agreeable diversity that may refresh his mind; all the change he finds is the
impertinence of a Doctor that puts him into despair. I know that to represent
the foppery of a Doctor aright, he must be made to turn all his discourse upon
the Learning he possesses; but that without ever answering what is said to him,
he should cite a Thousand Authors, and allege as many passages with a
volubility that puts him out of breath; that is to bring upon the Stage a fool
who ought to be sent to Bedlam, and not aptly to manage the impertinence of his
Doctor.

Petronius follows a quite different method in the ridiculousness of Eumolpus.
The Pedantry of Sidias is otherwise managed by Theophilus, who deserves the
praise of having formed the most complete Character that can be given to that
kind of Pedants. That of Caritides in the Morose of Moliere, is altogether
exact, nothing can be cut off from it, without disfiguring the whole piece.
These are the ridiculous Learned who may be pleasantly represented upon the
Stage.

But it is silly diversion for a Gentleman, to present before him a pitiful
Doctor, whom Books have made a Fool, and who, as I said, ought carefully to be
shut up, to keep from the sight of men the frailty of our state, and the misery
of our nature.

But I must not launch out too far in my Observations upon the Italian Comedy.
To recollect then in a few words what I have enough enlarged upon; I say that
instead of agreeable Lovers, you have nothing but affected talkers of Love;
instead of natural Comedians, incomparable Buffoons, but still Buffoons;
instead of ridiculous Doctors, poor mad Scholars: There is hardly any Part but
what is forced; unless it be that of Pantalon, which is least esteemed, and
nevertheless the only that exceeds not the bounds of probability.

Tragedy was the chief delight of the ancient Commonwealth; and the old Romans
endowed only with a rough virtue, sought no other examples in their Theaters,
but such as might fortify their natural disposition, and entertain their
fierce and austere Habits. When the sweetness of Wit for conversation, was
joined to the force of the Soul for great matters; then they began to delight
also in Comedy, and sometimes they were pleased with high Idea's, and sometimes
diverted with agreeable ones.

So soon as Rome grew corrupted, the Romans forsook Tragedy, and could not
relish on the Stage an Image of ancient virtue.

From that time, to the last of the Commonwealth, Comedy was the refreshment of
the Great men, the diversion of the Polite, and the amusement of a people
either grown loose or softened.

A little before the Civil Wars, the Romans were again animated with the spirit
of Tragedy, their Genius secretly disposing and preparing them for the fatal
Revolutions that happened afterward. Caesar made one, and many persons of Quality
did the like also, as well as he: The troubles ceasing under Augustus, and
Peace being again restored and settled, all sorts of Pleasures were sought after.

Comedies came in play again, the Pantomimicks had their credit, and Tragedy
still preserved its reputation. Under the Reign of Nero, Seneca entertained
dire Idea's, which made him write the Tragedies that he has left to us; when
Corruption was at the height, and Vice universal, the Pantomimicks wholly
ruined both Tragedy and Comedy; Wit had no more share in Plays, but in Postures
and Motions, the eye of the Spectators sought for that which might furnish
their minds with voluptuous imaginations.

The Modern Italians are satisfied to be enlightened by the same Sun, to breath
the same Air, and to inhabit the same Land, which heretofore the ancient Romans
inhabited: but they have left to History that severe Virtue which the Romans
practiced, and therefore think they have no need of Tragedy, to animate them to
hard and difficult things which they have no mind to undertake. As they love
the softness of an ordinary, and the delights of a voluptuous life, so they
love to act Plays that may have a relation to both; and hence came the mixture
of Comedy with the art of Mimicks which we see upon the Stage of the Italians.
And this is almost all that can be said of the Italians who as yet have
appeared in France.

All the Actors of the Company that acts at present, are generally good
Comedians, unless they act Lovers: and to do them right without love or hatred,
I must say that they are excellent Players, who have very bad Plays: Perhaps
they can make no good ones; perhaps they have reason not to have any; for as I
was objecting one day to Cintisio that there was not probability enough in
their Pieces; he made me answer, that if there were more, good Comedians, with
good Comedies might go starve.

OF THE English Comedy.
THere is no Comedy more conform to that of the Ancients, than the English, in
what relates to Manners; it is not a pure piece of Gallantry full of Adventures
and amorous Discourses, as in Spain and France; it is a representation of the
ordinary way of living, according to the various humors, and different
characters of men. It is an Alchymist, who by the illusions of his art, feeds
the deceitful hopes of a vain Curioso: It is a silly credulous person, whose
foolish Facility is continually abused; it is sometimes a ridiculous
Politician, grave and composed, who is starched in every thing, mysteriously
jealous-headed, that thinks to find out hidden designs in the most common
intentions, and to discover Artifice in the most innocent actions of life: It
is a whimsical Lover, a huffing Bully, a pedantick Scholar, the one with
natural Extravagancies, the other with ridiculous Affectations. The truth is,
these tricks and simplicities, these Politics and other Characters ingeniously
devised, are carried on too far in our opinion, as those which are to be seen
upon our Stage, are a little too faint to the relish of the English; and the
reason of that, perhaps, is that the English think too much, and that we
commonly think not enough.

Indeed, we are satisfied with the first Images that Objects afford us; and by
sticking to the bare outside, appearance for the most part stands us in stead
of reality, and the easy and free of what is natural. Whereupon I shall say by
the by, that these two last qualities are sometimes most improperly confounded;
the Easy and the Natural agree well enough in their opposition, to that which
is stiff or forced; but when the point is to dive well into the nature of
things, or the natural humor of persons, it will be granted me, that with
facility one does not always succeed in that: There is somewhat internal,
somewhat hidden that would discover it self to us, if we sounded the Subjects a
little more.

It is as difficult for us to enter in, as for the English to get out: They
become Masters of the thing they think on, though they are not of their own
thought; their mind is not at rest, when they possess their Subject; they still
dig when there is no more to be found, and go beyond the just and natural Idea
which they ought to have, by too sollicitous an enquiry.

The truth is, I have never seen men of better understanding than the French,
who apply themselves to consider, and the English, that can release themselves
from their too deep Meditations. But to return to the facility of Discourse,
and a certain freedom of Wit which, if possible, is always to be had: The
best-bred Gentlemen in the world, are the French who think, and the English
that speak. I shall insensibly run out into too general Considerations, and
therefore must resume my Subject of Comedy, and pass to a considerable
difference that is to be found betwixt theirs and ours; and that is, that we
being addicted to the regularity of the Ancients, do refer all to a principal
action, without other variety than that of the means that brings us to it.

It is not to be denied but that the representation of one principal Adventure
ought to be the sole scope and end proposed in a Tragedy, where the Mind would
feel some violence in the diversions that might avocate its thought.

The misfortune of an unhappy King, the sad and tragical death of a great Hero,
wholly confine the mind to these important objects, and all the variety it
cares for, is to know the diverse means that brought this principal action to
pass; but Comedy being made to divert and not to busy us, provided Probability
be observed, and Extravagance avoided, varieties in the opinion of the English,
are agreeable surprises, and changes that please; whereas the continual
expectation of one and the same thing, wherein there seems to be no great
matter of importance, necessarily dulls our attention.

So then instead of representing a signal cheat carried on by means all
relating to the same end: They represent a notable rogue with diverse cheats,
whereof every one produces its proper effect by its own Constitution. As they
scarcely ever stick to the unity of action, that they may represent a principal
person who diverts them by different actions: so many times also they quit that
principal person, that they may show what various things happen to several
persons in public places; Ben Johnson is much for that in his Bartholomew
Fair. The same thing has been done in Epsom-Wells, and in both these Comedies,
the ridiculous adventures of those public places are comically represented.

There are some other Plays which have in a manner two Arguments, that are
brought in so ingeniously the one into the other, that the mind of the
Spectators (which might be offended by too sensible a change) finds nothing but
satisfaction in the agreeable variety they produce. It is to be confessed that
regularity is wanting here; but the English are persuaded that the liberties
which are taken for better pleasing, ought to be preferred before exact rules,
of which a barren and dull Author makes it his art to importune and cloy.

Rule is to be observed for avoiding confusion; good sense is to be followed
for moderating the flight of a soaring imagination; but Rule must have no
constraint that racks, and a scrupulous reason must be banished, which adhering
too strictly to exactness leaves nothing free and natural.

They who cannot give to themselves a Genius, when nature has denied them one,
ascribe all to Art which they may acquire, and to set a value upon the sole
merit they have of being regular, they do what they can to damn a piece that is
not altogether so. For those that love the Ridicule, that are pleased to see
the humor of Fops, that are affected with true Characters, they will find the
ingenious English Comedies as much or, perhaps, more to their relish, than any
they have ever seen.

Our Moliere whom the Ancients have inspired with the true spirit of Comedy,
equals their Ben Johnson in well representing the various humors and different
ways of men, both observing in their descriptions, a true relation to the
genius of their Nation: I believe they have carried that point as far as the
Ancients ever did; But it is not to be denied, but that they have had greater
regard to Characters than to the main of their Subjects, the deduction whereof
might also have been more methodically linked together, and the unfolding of
intrigues more natural.

UPON OPERA'S.
TO The Duke of BVCKINGHAM.
OF a long time, my Lord, I have had a desire to tell you my thoughts of
Opera's, and to speak to you of the difference I find betwixt the Italian and
French way of singing.

The occasion that I had of speaking of it at the Duchess of Mazarine's, has
rather increased than satisfied that desire; at present therefore, my Lord, I
will satisfy it by the Discourse I send you. I shall begin with great freedom,
in telling you that I am no great admirer of Comedies in Music, such as
nowadays we see. I confess I am pretty well pleased with their magnificence,
the Machines have something that is surprising, the Music in some places is
charming, the whole together seems mavelous; but it must be granted me also,
that these Marvils are very tedious, for where the mind has so little to do,
there is a necessity that the Senses must languish after the first pleasure
that surprise gives us: The eyes are taken up, and at length grow weary of
being continually fixed upon the Objects. In the beginning of the Consorts, the
justness of the Concords is observed, and nothing escapes of all the varieties
that unite for making the sweetness of Harmony; some time after the Instuments
stun us, and the Music is no more to the ears but a confused sound that
suffers nothing to be distinguished; but who can resist the tediousness of
Rehearsal in a modulation which has neither the charm of Song, nor the
agreeable force of Words? The Soul tired out with a long attention wherein it
finds nothing to affect it, seeks within it self some secret motion to be
touched with; the Mind which in vain has expected impressions from without,
gives way to idle musing, or is dissatisfied with its own uselesness. In a word
the fatigation is so universal that there is no thought but how to get out, and
the only pleasure that remains to the languishing Spectators, is the hopes of
seeing a speedy end put to the show. The reason why commonly I soon grow weary
at Opera's is that I never yet saw any which appeared not to me despicable both
in the disposition of the Subject and in the Verses. Now it is in vain to charm
the Ears, or flatter the Eyes, if the Mind be not satisfied, my Soul being in
better intelligence with my Mind than with my Senses, struggles against the
impressions which it may receive, or at least fails in giving an agreeable
consent to them, without which even the most delightful Objects can never
afford me great pleasure; a foppery charged with Music, Dances, Machines and
Decorations, is a pompous foppery, but still foppery; it is an ugly ground
under beautiful Ornaments through which I see it with much dissatisfaction.
There is another thing in Opera's so contrary to nature that it offends my
imagination; and that is the singing of the whole piece from beginning to end,
as if the persons represented had ridiculously agreed to treat in Music both
the most common and most important affairs of their life. Is it to be imagined
that a Master calls his Servant, or sends him of an errand, singing; that one
friend imparts a secret to another, singing; that men deliberate in a Council,
singing; that Orders in time of Battle are given singing; and that men are
melodiously killed with Sword, Pike, and Musket? that is to lose the life of
representation, which without doubt is preserable to that of Harmony; for
Harmony ought to be no more but a bare attendant, and the great masters of the
Stage have added it as pleasing, not as necessary, having regulated all that
concerns the subject and discourse. In the mean time the Idea of the Musician
goes before that of the Hero in Opera's: It is Louigi, Cavallo, and Cesti who
are presented to the imagination. The mind not being able to conceive a Hero
that sings, applies it self to him that makes the Song; and it is not to be
denied but that in the Opera's of the Palais Royal, Baptista is an hundred
times more thought of than Theseus or Cadmus. I pretend not, however, to
exclude all manner of singing from the Stage; there are some things which ought
to be sung, and some that may be sung without offending against Reason or
Decency: Vows, Prayers, Praises, Sacrifices, and generally all that relates to
the service of the Gods, are sung in all Nations, and in all times; tender and
mournful passions express themselves naturally by a kind of tone; the
expression of a love in its birth, the irresolution of a Soul tossed by diverse
motions are subject matters for Stanza's, and so are Stanza's for a Song. All
men know that Quires were introduced upon the Stages of the Greeks, and it is
not to be denied but with as good reason they might be brought in upon ours.
This ought to be the distribution, in my opinion; all that belongs to
Conversation, all that relates to Intrigues and Affairs, what belongs to
Council and Action, is proper for Comedians who repeat, and ridiculous in the
mouth of Musicians who sing it. The Greeks made lovely Tragedies, wherein they
sang somewhat; the Italians and French make ugly ones, wherein they sing all.
Would you know what an Opera is, I Will tell you that it is an odd medley of
Poesy and Music, wherein the Poet and Musician equally upon the rack the one
for the other, put themselves hard to compose a naughty piece: Not but that you
may find agreeable words and very fine airs in it; but that you will more
certainly find at length a dislike of the Verses, where the genius of the Poet
has been stinted, and a surfeit of the singing, wherein the Musician is
exhausted by a too-long service of Music. Did I think my self capable of
giving counsel to persons of breeding who delight in the Theater, I should
advise them to reassume their relish for our good Comedies, where Dances and
Music might be introduced, that would not in the least would the
representation: there they might sing a Prologue with pleasant diversions; In
the Interludes singing might animate words that should be as the life of what
had been represented; after the Play ended an Epilogue might be sung, or some
reflection upon the finest things in the Play; this would fortify the Idea,
and rivet the impressions that they had made upon the Spectators: Thus you
might find enough to satisfy both the Senses and the Mind, wanting neither the
charm of singing in a bare representation, nor the force of acting in a long
continued course of Music. It remains that I give you my advice in general for
all Comedies, where there is any singing; and that is to leave to the Poet the
chief authority for the direction of the piece: The Music must be made for the
Verses, far rather than the Verses for the Music. The Musician is to follow
the Poets orders, only, in my opinion, Baptista is to be exempted, who knows
the Passions better, and enters farther into the heart of man than the Authors.
Lambert, without doubt, has an excellent Genius, proper for an hundred
different Musicks, and all well managed with a just Economy of Voices and
Instruments: there is no recitation better understood, nor better diversified
than his, according to the nature of Passions, and the quality of the
Sentiments that are to be expressed. He ought to take from the Authors those
lights, which Baptista can give them, and submit to direction; for Baptista
through the reach of his knowledge may justly be the director. I will not put
an end to my discourse without entertaining you with the small esteem that the
Italians have for our Opera's, and the great dislike that those of Italy give
us. The Italians who wholly apply themselves to Representation, and to a
particular care of expressing things, cannot endure that we should give the
name of Opera to a concatenation of Dances and Music, which have not an
exact-enough relation and natural sutableness to the Subjects. The French again
accustomed to the beauty of their Entries, the delightfulness of their Airs,
and charms of their Symphony, cannot away with the ignorance, or bad use of
Instruments in the Opera's of Venice, and deny their attention to a long
recitation, which becomes tedious for want of variety. I cannot properly tell
you what this recitation of theirs is; but I know very well that it is neither
singing nor reciting; it is somewhat unknown to the Ancients, which may be
defined an ugly use of Song and Words. I confess I have found things inimitable
in the Opera of Louigi, both as to the expression of thought, and the charm of
Music; but the ordinary recitation was very cloying, insomuch that the
Italians themselves impatiently expected those fine parts which in their
opinion came too seldom. I shall in a few words comprehend the greatest defects
of our Opera's; one thinks he is going to a representation, where nothing will
be represented; and expects to see a Comedy, but finds nothing of the life of a
Comedy. So much I thought I might say concerning the different constitution of
Opera's. For the manner of singing which we in France call Execution, I think
without partiality that no Nation can reasonably vie with us in that. The
Spaniards have an admirable disposition of throat; but with their warblings and
shakings, they seem to mind nothing in their singing, but to contend with
Nightingales for the facility of the Windpipe. The Italians have the expression
counterfeit, or at least forced, as not knowing exactly the nature or degree of
Passions; It Is a bursting out in laughter, rather than singing, when they would
express any sentiment of joy; if they would sigh, you shall hear sobs with
violence formed in the throat, and not sighs which unawares escape from the
passion of an amorous heart; of a doleful reflection they make the strongest
exclamations; the tears of an absence are the mournings of a Funeral; sadness
becomes so sorrowful in their mouths, that in grief they roar rather than
complain; and sometimes they express the languishing of a passion, as a natural
fainting. Perhaps there may be at present some alteration in their way of
singing, and that by conversing with us they are advantaged as to the neatness
of a polite execution, as we are emproved by them as to the beauties of a
stronger and bolder composition. There are Comedies in England wherein there is
much Music; but it is impossible for me to speak more discreetly of it, I
cannot accustom my self to the English singing. I came too late to find a
relish in that which is so different from all others. There is no Nation that
shows greater courage in the Men, more beauty in the Women, nor more wit in
both Sexes. One cannot have all things, where so many good qualities are
common, it is not so great a misfortune that a good judgment in singing is
rare; it is certainly very rarely to be met with there; but they in whom it is
to be found, have it as nice and delicate as any people in the world, as
exceeding most part of their Nation in an exquisite air, and most happy
constitution. Solus Gallus cantat, none but the Frenchman sings; I will not be
injurious to all other Nations in maintaining what an Author has published,
Hispanus flet, dolet Italus, Germanus boat, Flander vlulat, and solus Gallus
cantat, I leave to him all these pretty distinctions, and shall only back my
opinion by the authority of Louigi, who could not endure that the Italians
should sing Airs, after that he had heard Mr. Vyert, Hilaire, and La Petite
Varenue sing. Upon his return to Italy he made all the Musicians of the Nation
his Enemies, saying openly at Rome, as he had said at Paris, that to make
pleasant Music, Italian Airs must be in a French mouth. He made little account
of our Songs, except Beaussets, which gained his admiration: He admired the
Consort of our Violins, our Lutes, Harpsi-cords and Organs: he was ravished at
his first hearing the great Bells of St. Germain de Prez: and how would he have
been charmed with our Flutes, if they had been in use in those times? It is
most certain, that he was much disgusted with the harshness and rudeness of the
greatest Masters of Italy, when he had tasted the sweetness of the touch, the
neatness and manner of the French.

I should be too partial, if I insisted only upon our advantages: there is no
people that have a slower apprehension both for the sound of words, and for
humouring the thought of the Compositor than the French, there are but few that
less understand the quantity, and that with greater difficulty find the
pronunciation; but after that by long study they have surmounted all these
difficulties, and that they are masters of what they sing, nothing takes like
to them. The same thing happens to us upon Instruments, and particularly in
Consorts, where there is nothing very sure nor just, till after an infinite
number of repetitions; but nothing so neat nor so polite, when once the
repetitions are accomplished. The Italians profound in Music bring their art
to our ears without any sweetness. The French not satisfied to take from the
skill the first harshness that shows the labor of the Composition; they find
in the secret of execution, as it were a charm for our Souls, and I know not
what that touches, which they carry home to the very heart. I forgot to speak
to you of the Machines, so easy it is to forget things which one would
willingly have laid aside: Machines may satisfy the curiosity of ingenious
people for the mathematical Inventions, but they will never please persons of
good judgment in the Theater; the more they surprise, the more they divert the
mind from attending to the Discourse; and the more admirable they are, the
impression of that rarity leaves the less tenderness and exquisite perception
in the Soul which it needs, for being touched or charmed with the Music.

The Ancients made no use of Machines, but when there was a necessity of
bringing in some God; nay, and the Poets themselves were almost always looked
upon as ridiculous for suffering themselves to be reduced to that necessity. If
men love to be at expenses, let them lay out their money upon lovely
Decorations, the use whereof is more natural and more agreeable than that of
Machines. Antiquity which made Gods no strangers to Poets, and exposed them
even in their Chimney corners; that Antiquity, I say, how vain and credulous
soever, exposed them nevertheless but very rarely upon the Stage. Now the
belief of them is gone, the Italians in their Opera's have re-established the
Heathenish Gods in the world, and have not bogled to entertain men with these
ridiculous Vanities, provided they might make their Pieces look great by the
introduction of that dazzling and suprizing appearance; these divinities of the
Stage have long enough abused Italy, which being happily undeceived at length,
does now renounce the same Gods which it had recalled, and returns to things
which in truth have not the same exactness, but which are not so cumbersome,
and with a grain of indulgence not to be rejected by men of sense.

It has happened to us in the matter of Gods and Machines, as it happens
almost daily to the Germans about our Modes and Fashions, we just take up what
the Italians have laid aside. And as if we would make amends for the fault of
being prevented in the invention, we run into excess in a custom which they
impertinently introduced, but which they managed with reserve. In truth we
cover the Earth with Deities, and make them dance and descend in Troops,
whereas they made them descend but sparingly, on the most important occasions.
As Ariosto wronged the grandeur of Poems by incredible Fabulosity, so we wrong
Fabulosity by a confused muster of Gods, Shepherds, Hero's, Enchanters,
Apparitions, Furies, and Devils.

I admire Baptista as well for the divertion of Dances, as for what concerns
the Voices and Instruments; but the Constitution of our Opera's must appear
very extravagant to those who are true Judges of Probability and surprising
Grandeur; nevertheless one runs risk of having his Judgment called in
question, if he dare to show it; and I advise others, when they hear any
discourse of the Opera, to make their knowledge a secret to themselves. For my
part, who have past the age and time of signalizing my self in the world by the
spirit of modes, and the merit of Fancy, I am resolved to strike in with good
sense, for all it is so forsaken, and to follow Reason though in disgrace with
as much assiduity as if it were still in chief vogue. That which vexes me most
at this madness for Opera's, is that they tend directly to the ruin of the
finest thing we have, which is most proper for elevating the Soul, and most
capable to form the mind. After this long discourse let us conclude, that the
Constitution of our Opera's cannot be more defective than it is. But it is to
be acknowledged at the same time, that no man can perform more than Lully upon
an ill-conceived Subject, and that it is not easy to outdo Quinant in what is
demanded of him.

FINIS.

