MORAL VIRTUES BAPTIZED CHRISTIAN: Or the Necessity of MORALITY Among
Christians.

By WILLIAM SHELTON M. A. Late Fellow of Jesus College in Cambridge, and now
Vicar of Bursted Magna in Essex.

Verae divitiae non opes sunt, sed Virtutes, quas secum Conscientia portat, ut
in perpetuum Dives fiat.

Bernardus de Adventu Domini. Monstro quod (...) dare. Semita certe,
Tranquillae per (...) unica vitae.
Juven^^

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Nathaniel Ranew and Jonathan Robinson. 1667.

TO THE Right Worshipful Sir THOMAS DARCY Baronet, At Kentwell Hall in Suffolk.
SIR,
I Have undertaken to recommend Non est gloriosares gratum esse nisi tutum est
ingratum fuisse. Seneca d^ Benefi^.
Moral Virtue, which I should very little understand, if I did not believe
Ingenuity and Gratitude to be a considerable part of it. A Virtue which is
rather more then less excellent, because the contrary Vice is not (...)
punishable by Humane (...)

What are the favors to a grateful acknowledgment of which you have obliged
me; I could take a^ Wurd in ^elling the world, but that I would not bring you
under a suspicion of Symbolizing with those, who gave Alms for the Trumpets
sake. Yet Math. 6.
thus much I think my self bound to say: If there be any thing in these papers
does my Reader go^d, when he has given thanks to God, for this help (among
others) ^o ^a virtuous and good life; let him be i^ thankful to Sil Thomas
Darcy, for those endouragements of my first and earliest Studies, without which
it may be I had never been in capacity of doing this service.

Besides this Retribution which I was in Justice to make, if I would be Modish,
I should go on to take notice of your other Virtues. For Books are more
commonly without Epistles Dedicatory, then those Epistles without an Elogy of
the persons to whom they are made. Indeed Sir, you deserve it, and the Argument
I prosecute would fairly lead me to it: But I consider, if I should say little,
I should detract from your worth: For as he who with all seriousness and
pretended Faithfulness reproves another for some petty escapes and
inadvertencies of life, would have it believed that there are no greater faults
to come under Censure: (a note whereby Plutarch distinguishes De adulatoris and
amici discrimine.
a Flatterer from a Friend.) So will he who slightly and sparingly commends,
give occasion to suspect, that there is nothing else worthy of commendation.
But if on the other side, I should be as large, as Applications of this nature
use to be, and as your Merit justly Challenges; They who are strangers to your
Person, would not believe but I were a Flatterer: A Vice so abhorrent to my
Nature, (unless I flatter my self) that I think I have sometimes been too
Morose, and have been wanting to give Testimony of the Value I have had for
many persons, upon no other account, but because I would not be thought to
Flatter. To avoid which suspicion, I now say the less; yet I do not doubt, but
my thoughts of you, and all other Lovers of Virtue, are as Honorable as theirs
who complement and brag more.

Such there are in the world, bafely Mercenary Parasites, who have Men's persons
in admiration but for their own advantage; who under pretense of Honoring
Virtue, do it a great deal of disservice; for while they commend Men as if they
were Virtuous, and that at all adventures; they encourage many to be still
Vicious: And yet there is some good comes out of this evil; for when they who
do not deserve it are flattered and spoken well of, it is a great Argument that
Virtue is very Excellent and Praiseworthy where indeed it is: for why should a
Picture be drawn handsomer then the Face, but because Beauty is a desirable
thing? This is some advantage, in as much as it is a conviction to the world,
that, that Virtue which is so much commended, ought to be more practiced: Else
it is as true here as any where -- Laudatur and Alget.

Sir, If you please to give this Book a Palronage when you are at leisure to
read it, I hope you will find the Argument, as not unworthy of a Christian, so
neither of a Gentleman. However there may be some Gallants of the Times, (as
there have always been) who think it below them, and dishonorable to them, to
be tied up to the same Rules of Virtue with Ordinary Men: yet Virtue Generosum
Honestum. Persius.
of old has been counted so Generous and Noble a thing, that it has not only
made Men Gentlemen, but Gods too in the account of the Heathens. So Cicero De
Nature Deorum. Lib. 2.
gives this Reason why Hercules, and Aesculapius, and others were reputed Gods;
because while they lived they were excellent and useful Men. And even still
throughout the world, the design and intent of conferring Titles of Honor, is
this, to reward and encourage Virtue. Go on Sir, by your Virtuous Example to
let the world know, that you believe Virtue to be Excellent and Honorable. Go
on to 2 Phil.
shine as a light in this World, that hereafter you may shine as a Star in
Glory: Which is the hearty Prayer of,

March 6th 166 6 / 7. SIR, Your most Obliged and Humble Servant, William
Shelton.

THE EPISTLE To the READER.
OF those two Ends why Books are written, to make men wiser or better; the
latter is therefore to be preferred to the former, because it is incomparably
more safe to be good without Learning, then to have skill in Learning, and none
in Virtue; and so cum doctrina descendere in infernum. Knowledge is a rare
accomplishment, and they who undervalue it, betray their want of it; for it
has no Enemy but Ignorance: Yet is it not a Star of the first Magnitude, nor
the one thing needful. It has many times the Honor to be as John Baptist was
to Christ, a praecursor to goodness; yet we must say as he did; That which
(...) it, is preferred before i^. ^^ (...) if they were always together in the
same subject, yet (...) they are not: Though I will not say of the Learned men
of this Age, what L^cta^tius* said De (...) Sapientia Lib. 3. Cap. 15.
of the Philosophers' of old, Ex philosophis perraro fuerit qui aliquid in vita
fecerit laud dignum. Si quis mores eorum diligenter inquirat, inveniet
iracundos, cupidos, libidinosos etc. No doubt but there are many in whom
Religion and Learning dwell together; yet the other part of his observation is
fully true: Innumerabiles exist^nt and Ibid.
semper extiterunt, qui sunt and fuerunt sine ulla Doctrina boni. There have
been many men, of mean parts and small improvements, have had Grace and Virtue
enough to carry them to Heaven. But bare Knowledge gives no man a title to
those Heavenly Joys. This is a manifest and a considerable disproportion
between these two; answerable to which, there must be some difference assigned,
between Practical writings, and Controversial (though for some other reasons it
may be the difference is not so great.) If I should speak any thing to the
disparagement of the Learned Books of Learned men, I should deserve to be
counted an Envious Fool, who for want of abilities to attain to what they have
attained, envy the fame of their names. That small measure of Learning I have,
I thank God for; and without arrogance I may say, I have so much as to make me
wish for more, and to honor it where ere I find it. I have a great veneration
for those men, whose Reason being serviceable to their Religion, are able
solidly, and accurately, to dispute a controversy, and contend earnestly for
the Truth. It was a brave achievement of Hannibal (in regard it was
successful) to break himself a way through the Alps with Fire and Vinegar:
Such are there within the Church of God, men valiant for the Truth, whose way
lies through Rocks and Mountains of opposition and difficulty; yet there is a
certain sharpness, and piercingness of wit, whereby they make their way plain;
and it is easy to follow them, whom it was almost impossible (for ordinary men)
to go before. These men have not their deserts, if they be not men of renown,
and famous in their generations. This I have said, that I might not be thought
to derogate from them, nor by any thing that follows, eclipse or darken the
splendor of their names.

For notwithstanding all this, though Books of Controversy be very excellent in
their kind: yet Practical Books do more nearly concern us, than many
Controversial: Those disputes are most excellent that are most useful; and then
are they of greatest use, when they inform the judgment, in order to the
directing and bettering the life; from which end, those controversies which are
more remote, have least of excellency, and may best be spared. But Books of
Practice are therefore so called, because they do immediately tend to the
bettering the lives of men. There are many things concerning which
controversies are moved, which we may safely be ignorant of; There are others
which it is fit we should have a right understanding in; yet if we doubt, or it
may be are in Error, it is such a miscarriage as holy men may be obnoxious to,
and yet continue holy. But there are not so great allowances given us in
matters of practice, as that we may count our selves unconcerned in them.

Besides, it is not for every one to write, nor for every one to read Books of
Controversy: we whose employments fix us in obscure corners of the Country, far
from Books, but what our own poor Libraries furnish us withal, and far from
frequent converse with Learned men, it cannot be expected that we should
manage disputes equally with those who have better helps; or if we should,
what little notice would the greatest part of our people take of them; they who
little understand, would as little regard these things? But every Body has a
Soul to save, and is therefore obliged to understand the way that leads to that
Salvation, and more than so, to walk in it. So that there is a peculiar
excellency in those writings that teach us how to order our conversations
aright, which is not in many speculations and parts of Learning. Archimedes did
well to study the Mathematics, and the skill he attained in that Noble Science
was so great, that few men's inventions did better deserve an (...). But when
the City was taken, and his life in danger, it had been better for him if he
had more studied his own preservation. So they who retch their faculties as far
as they can, toward the comprehension of Omne scibile, do well, provided that
they do not in the mean time neglect that which is more necessary, the study of
a good life.

To promote which, is the design of this Book; a design certainly good, for it
aims to make men good. What I have done in it is not for me to say; sure I am,
I have meant honestly, and have faithfully endeavored. If any wonder why I
spend so many words in so an acknowledged an Argument (as if a man should write
a Book to prove, that so long as the Sun shines the day lasts) the first part
of any undertaking will answer him, that though it be acknowledged in Thesi,
yet there have not wanted those, who for several Reasons have had but a mean
opinion of Moral Virtue: Or if it were not so, yet the lives of men do greatly
need some such discourse. Wickedness and Immorality is very bold, and
barefaced, and it is no easy matter to put it out of Countenance: yea in all
likelihood, where Immorality discovers it self so shameless in the life, there
is Atheism settled at the heart. Something therefore I take occasion to say to
the Atheist more then once; Indeed he deserves to be more sharply and severely
dealt with, but that there is little to be got by Casting pearls before Math. 7.
Swine. That little I have said is too much for him to answer, if he read and
consider it; if he will not, nothing can be enough. For the rest I will not
pre-occupy my Reader (only I interpose, that for the greater perspicuity of
the Method, I cast it into Books, and Chapters, and Sections) but leave him
when he has read the whole, and considered the manners of mankind, to judge
whether I have not chosen a needful subject, and that which was fitting to be
suggested. If I have any where failed, as I am not the first who have appealed
to a Candid Reader; So I hope my offense is not so great, as that I should
despair of the same Candor.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian: OR, The Necessity of Morality among
Christians.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
the Mystery hid from ages and generations, viz. the redemption of Col. 1. 2^.
the world by a Crucified Savior; yet withal) does own and comprehend within
it self, yea and further improves, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, etc.
and if there be Phil. 4. 8.
any virtue or any praise does require us to think on these things. There have
been some Notices of God, and some acknowledged principles, tending to the
bettering of the lives of men, ever since there were m^n in the world: But if
it be lawful to allude to a fable; as some have seigned the Sun all night to be
clipped into Stars, which in the morning do reunite in the body of the Sun, so
has it been in this case: The knowledge of God and those precepts of the Law
of Nature, which grew up in the world, by being propagated from Adam to Noah,
and so downwards; after the multiplying of Languages and dividing of Nations,
were as the Sun broken into Stars; for the further they scattered, the weaker
and fainter they grew, till at last the Gentile world was be^ighted; for the
Gentiles did walk in the vanity of their mind, Having their understanding
Eph^^. 4. 17. 18.
darkened, etc. Thus it continued to be, the world for the greatest part of it,
was governed by dim lights, or indeed shadows rather than lights, till the Sun
of righteousness arose: Yet ^^^l. 4. 2.
still there was some starlight in this night of Ignorance, there did remain a
Conscience of good and evil; the Gentiles who had not the Law of Moses did by
Nature the things contained Rom* 2. 14.
in the Law. The more sober Heathens did believe themselves to be under an
obligation of being virtuous, and accordingly we find in many of their
writings, good precepts that direct us in our behavior in the world; which
though of themselves they cannot attain the end for which the holy Scriptures
are profitable, 2 Timothy 3. 17.
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works:
yet are not these precepts of Morality to be despised, in as much as our
Blessed Savior himself, from whom our Religion takes its name, does frequently
urge and inculcate those very rules of a good life, which were acknowledged
among the Heathens; and as he did himself assume our humane Nature to his
divine at his Incarnation, so does he assume Morality and incorporate it into
Divinity: so that the Gospel does require of every one that names the name of
Christ to depart 2. Tim. 2. 19.
from iniquity. That is as much as to say, he that pretends to be a Christian
(though he must be somewhat else; yet withal) he must be a Moral man: which is
the position I undertake; It is necessary for a Christian to be a Moral man.

Jesus Christ, and therefore is called a Christian, whether he be so only by
outward profession, or also by an inward participation of the Divine Nature;
this man is not at his liberty, but he is bound up, he is under a necessity (of
what kind will hereafter appear) of practicing moral virtues; ( i. e.) He owes
obedience to the Moral law. There is a certain manner of life, which the law
directs to, and is therefore called the moral law, because circa Mores, it is
concerning the manner of a man's conversation, his behaviors toward other men;
or his carriage toward himself: A Christian should be moral as well as
Religious, he must live soberly and ^it. 2. ^2.
righteously as well as godly: He must be just and honest, and temperate and
meek; and in a word, fulfill the whole law by an universal observation of that
comprehensive precept, Thou Mat. 22. 39
shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Which is enough to be said for the
explication of the Terms, they are plain to any one that is willing to
understand them.







By the first of these we shall gain an answer to all those objections that may
be made on the other side, and shall proceed thus far, that there does not
appear any thing to the contrary, but that it may be so; the second will be a
more full demonstration of the case, tha^ not only it may be, but so it is,
and so it must be, and cannot be otherwise, because it is necessarily so.

CHAP. II.


In the making good of which Proposition, it must be enquired what may have
been the reasons that have induced men thus to speak: in each of which it will
be found that they do not conclude moral virtues unnecessary; for they are such
as these.







Antinomianisme, has frequently ushered in Libertinisme.

who have said, with our tongue Psalm. 12. 4.
will we prevail: our lips are our own, who is Lord* over us?

Christ did, with a Thief on each hand; for whether we add to truth or diminish
from it, on both sides an injury is done to it. Thus is it between the Papists
and some of their eager adversaries: for the most part the Papists err by
adding to the word of God, by being wise above what is written: To the
Scriptures they add Traditions, and make them of equal Authority. We
acknowledge a power in the Church Artic. 20.
to de^ree rites or ceremonies, and authority in controversies of Faith; they
add Infallibility to that Authority. We acknowledge a superiority of order and
jurisdiction; they add the supremacy of their Pope. We own two Sacraments; they
add five more. We believe in one Mediator between 1 Timothy, 2, 5
God and man, the man Christ Jesus; they make many. And so in many other cases:
particularly to our present purpose, we acknowledge a necessity of good works;
they add* that they are meritorious. Now because the Papists go so far to
ascribe so much to good works; therefore some unwary men have adventured in
contradiction to them, to ascribe too little: if they be necessary, the Papists
make them meritorious; on the contrary, l^st they should be thought
meritorious, some have judged them little or not at all necessary. The extreme
opposite to the Papists in this case is the Antinomian, whom yet I reserve for
another Head afterward, their Doctrine being of so dangerous concernment, that
it does deserve a distinct con^ideration; now I only consider them as those
who in contradicting the Papists have run themselves into as great a danger on
the other side.

Vtrinque in contrarias parts velus in extremitates Holds^. Lect. 19 P. 158.
s^induntur adversarii: Hinc Pontificii plus aequo ad dextram vergunt, dum
causam salutis nostrae in legis operibus ponunt; illinc Antinomi ad sinistram,
dum legis usum omnem and obligationem explodunt. On either hand adversaries run
into extremes: The Papists err too much on the right hand, by making good
works the cause of our salvation: The Antinomians on the left, by denying that
there is any use of, or obligation to the law.

George Major and Nicholas Amsdorfius, two German Divines. Major defends this
Proposition according to Scripture, Melch. Adam. in vitis little.
Bonorum operum studium est necessarium ad salutem. The study of good works is
necessary to salvation. Against this Flacius Illyrious and Amsdorfius cry out
amain, It is a Popish Doctrine, and would introduce merit; and therefore they
oppose this bold and wicked speech to it, Bona opera sunt noxia and perniciosa
ad salutem. Good works are hurtful and pernicious to salvation. Which
proceeding, out of a dislike to the Popish Doctrine of merit, had been just if
it had gone no farther; for it is Usher answ. to Jesu. challenge. p. 498.
a doctrine which (as a very Learned and Reverend Prelate says) from our very
hearts we detest and abhor. But see how easy it is for men to contend for
victory rather than truth, and rather than not oppose an adversary, they will
condemn him though he be Innocent. Many men contend for the truth as men run
for the ball; when they come at it, they step over it or kick out of the way,
to wrestle with their adversary: whereas the truth of the case is, we do not
merit by good works, yet we are obliged to them; we do not merit, so we
acknowledge. Good Artic. 12.
works which are the fruits of Faith and follow after justification, cannot put
away our sins, and endure the severity of Gods judgment; yet we believe them
to be necessary for us; for it follows in the same place, Yet are they pleasing
and acceptable to God in Christ, and do spring out necessarily of a true and
lively faith.

And surely these have been thought by learned men to be very consistent;
though good works do not merit, yet they are necessary, else a Reverend Doctor,
afterward a Prelate of our Church, did little understand himself in his
disputation upon this argument, where this is one conclusion; Bona Davenant de
justit. actual. Cap. 31. Con. 7.
opera justificatorum, sunt ad salutem necessaria, necessitate ordinis, non
causalitatis, vel planius ut via ordinata ad vitam aeternam, non ut causae
meritoriae vitae aeternae. That is in few words. Good works are ordained as a
necessary means to eternal life, but they do not deserve eternal life.

etc. these are exercises of morality; and so far as good works are necessary,
so far will these be found to be: the necessity of which is not now to be
proved, but asserted, and vindicated from this Objection, which vulgar people
that do not know how to distinguish, are ready to burden it with: when we are
industrious to urge upon men the duties of honesty, and righteous and just
dealings between man and man, let it not be suspected that this is done out of
a secret design to symbolize with the Papists. For may not a man go 10. mile
unless he go 20.? True it is we do go on part of the way with the Papists for
the truths sake; that is, to assert good works and moral virtues necessary, and
here we ^ix: they would draw us on further to a persuasion that they are
meritorious; that does not at all follow upon the necessity we ascribe to them:
there is a necessity upon other accounts; as shall be demonstrated in due time.

And this is enough to be yielded to this plea, whereupon some speak but meanly
of moral virtues; and there does not yet appear any thing to the contrary but
they may be necessary for a Christian.

CHAP. III.
Davanant, ^^ supra.
works, and the perfection of them, are two different things, and diversely and
apart handled by a forecited Author; although therefore they be not supposed
to merit, yet if they be thought so perfect, as that faith and repentance may
be laid aside; no wonder if sometimes they be lightly made of and seemingly
disparaged; for it is to preserve our due esteem of faith and those spiritual
graces which are required in us over and above those Moral Virtues, which the
Heathens at any time could attain to. We do not wonder when we (...). Ch Princ.
^. 4* 3.
read, Moral Principles to such as rely upon them, and seek no further, prove
Mortal Principles: or as another likewise of our own: If Moral Vertuousness
Bolton's Discourse of True Happiness p. 14.
were able to put on the greatest Magnificence and applause that ever it
anciently enjoyed among the precisest Romans, whereby it might worthily draw
into admiration and just challenge, even these times of Christianity; yet in
respect of acceptance with God, and conformity to his will, and being not
guided and sanctified by supernatural grace; it is but at the very best the
very filthiness of a menstruous clout. For if this be true, it may be said, and
be no prejudice to the necessity of Morality; for the same Author in the same
place, in words a little before says, I deny not, but that Moral Vertuousness
is good and excellent in it self. Yea in the Articles of our Religion we do
profess thus much: They also are to be had accursed, that presume to Artic. 18.
say, that every man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so
that he be diligent to frame his life according to that Law and the light of
Nature. For holy Scripture does set out unto us only the name of Jesus, Christ
whereby men must be saved. Wherefore, as St. Paul could preach Faith in Jesus
Christ without making void the Law, Do we then make void the Law Romans 3. 31.
through Faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the Law. So can we and ought we
to say, do we then make void the Righteousness of God V. 22.
which is by Faith (which is the phrase in the same Chapter) through the Law,
or through our preaching of Virtue? God forbid: yea, we establish Faith.

Faith and Repentance, there being no other way of freedom from guilt and
recovering our Innocence. Yet those whom God has joined together let no man
put asunder; together with Faith and Repentance must go holiness in all manner
of Conversation, which certainly 1 Pet. 1. 15.
includes Morality. He that hopes to climb to Heaven by a Ladder of bare Moral
Virtues will do it as soon as build a Castle in the Air; that is, he goes about
a work, which because it wants a foundation, can never be brought to
perfection: So that Virtue is so far from destroying Faith, that it does
suppose it as that without which, howsoever it be necessary, yet without Faith
it is insufficient to attain its End. Yet notwithstanding it is true, though a
man cannot build without a foundation, a bare foundation is no perfect
building; wherefore Faith and Virtue do mutually require one another: There
must be Faith, and Virtue added to this Faith, as we are directed: And besides
this giving all diligence* add to your 2 Pet. 1. 5.
Faith Virtue; of which words more hereafter. Together with this let it be
considered that, that which pretends to be Faith, if it be without works, is
not Faith univocally and properly so called; It is but a dead Faith; It may
James 2. 17. Revel. 3. 1.
have a name to live but is dead, and therefore in truth is no justifying
saving Faith: which makes it the more evident, that though Morality be
insufficient without Faith, yet together with Faith it may be necessary. I say
it may be, because however there may be somewhat of Argument already hinted, in
what is before said to prove it; yet it is not my present business to prove
that it is necessary, only that it may be notwithstanding its insufficiency
without Faith and Repentance. There is then no great difficulty in reconciling
these two; the Dignity and Excellency of Faith, and the necessity of Moral
Virtues: Yea without any disparagement to Faith, after that we have given it
its due pre-eminence, yet we may safely say, that though it be more excellent
in some kind, yet it is not so in every respect; for there are some
excellencies of a good, upright, sober Conversation, which cannot properly be
affirmed concerning either Faith or Repentance, of which sort are these two.

Conditional duties then Absolute; etc. are absolute perfections belonging to
our Nature; and such as our Innocence (which would have made our Repentance
needless) would so little have exempted us from, that we could not have been
innocent without them. Now though we are Sinners, we do not cease to be men;
therefore as because we are Sinners, we must repent and believe; so because we
are men, we are obliged to Virtue.

Platonists speak) but Charity, etc. are paradeigmatical; that is, by Faith and
Repentance we are purged from Sin, and so prepared for Communion with God; but
by the other we do properly resemble God. It is therefore to be observed, we
are commanded to be holy as God is holy, particularly to be Merciful, to Love
and do good as God does, to be Meek and Lowly as Christ was: But we are not
commanded to believe as God believes; for Faith and Repentance in that notion
in which we now speak, as supposing sin to be repented of, and by Faith to be
justified from, cannot without Blasphemy be attributed to the infinite and holy
God: yet those other things are resemblances of the Divine perfections, as
might be at large shown; but I reserve it to another place. Book 4th.


True profession without honest Conversation not Hales Remains p. 39.
only saves not, but increases our weight of punishment: But a good life
without true profession, though it bring us not to Heaven, yet it lessens the
measure of our Judgment; so that a moral man, so called, is a Christian by the
surer side. So then, though our morality will not save us without Faith and
Repentance; yet for our immorality we may be damned for all our pretenses to
Faith, which is dead without works, and to Repentance, which must be again
repented of, if it be not a forsaking of sin together with a confessing of it.
And this is the answer to the second Objection; Notwithstanding the
insufficiency of moral virtues for salvation, without Faith and Repentance, yet
this does not prove them unnecessary.

CHAP. IV.
Abraham know Genesis ^^
Sarah to be barren when he turned in to his handmaid Hagar? and shall we not
be thought to blast the authority, or disbeleive the sufficiency of the
Scriptures, when we quote and turn to Plate and Aristotle together with or
instead of the Apostles: wherefore it may be judged safe to keep to
Scripture Language: Yea, it has sometimes been given out of the Pulpit (and
that in no mean an Auditory) as a sign of of a false Teacher, to teach the Law
and Moral Mr. Dell at St Maryes Cambr.
Virtues, Philosophy and Philosophical subtleties, which the Apostle long ago
forbad; the greatest mystery in the World is in Christ, and what have we to do
with Philosophy? Now lest this apprehension should get into some less
understanding minds, that this preaching Morality (which the Heathens likewise
urge) is a prejudice to the Scriptures, it will be worth our while to vindicate
it in this particular; and to show, that though the Scriptures be highly to be
honored and admired above any other writings whatsoever; yet this is no
argument but there may be a necessity of morality: and those Heathens did well
to recommend to the world the practice of those virtues, which the light of
Nature taught to be such. Yea there will be a further advantage by making stay
upon this argument; for by comparing the word of God and the writings of
Heathen Moralists together, there will be found so great a defect in all them,
that it will be necessary for us even upon this account to search the
Scriptures: for the moral Virtues that we now recommend, though they be the
same for substance with those that found praise among the Heathens; yet we
enforce them after another manner then they did: It is a more Divine,
Evangelical Morality; we preach Divinity and Morality both together: we do not
think that Abare and Pharpar, rivers 2 Kings 5
of Damascus, are as good as the waters of Israel. We draw water out of the
wells of Salvation, from Isa. 12 3.
the word of God we derive our authority, and urge commands for sobriety and
righteousness; and thus doing it ought not to be wondered at: if we sometimes
make use of Heathen Authors, as Christ himself though he had greater witness
than that of John, yet did not deny his John 5.
Testimony altogether.

that the Philosopher Charron preface to his book of wisdom.
handles this subject more sweetly and pleasingly, the Divine more austerely
and drily: again the virtue and honesty of Divines is too anxious, scrupulous,
deject, sad, fearful, and vulgar: Philosophy is altogether pleasant, free,
bucksome, and if I may so say, wanton too, and yet notwithstanding puissant,
noble, generous, and rare. These words I take to be the lash of a Lawyer
against men of another profession. However if there be any truth in it, it is
the fault of the Divine not of the Divinity; and possibly it may presently be
found, that this puissance and nobleness of Philosophy is one of its faults,
and an ^^warrantable Luxuriancy in their pens; whereas the Morality of the
Scriptures is, though more humble, yet certainly more safe. I proceed therefore,

Regula vitae and morum, which we have in the holy Scriptures; the word of life
is the rule of life: for there is some fault to be found with the best of
Heathens and their best writings. We must dress Virtue in another fashion than
either Plato, or Plutarch, or Seneca have done, before we can become Proxenetae
for it, and bespeak men that live in the Christian world to fall in love with
it. For not to mention their gross ignorance and manifold errors concerning
the right worship and service of God, even here, where their excellency chiefly
lay; it is easy to observe a double failure among them, which because they
themselves have not sufficiently corrected, we may not take their writings as a
just and adequate rule of Moral actions. They are, perfection of degrees, but
they have not attained to a perfection of parts: The discovery of these will be
a full discharge of my first task under this Objection.

I am therefore first to show, that they have been too presumptuous and bold in
some Cases, for which I give these Instances.

Apathy of the Stoioks is one great Argument of their vanity in assuming to
themselves a perfection, which neither Humane Nature is capable of, nor would
it properly ( rebus sic stantibus) be a perfection if it were attained, but
rather a stupid debasement of those who glory in it: And so some Philosophers
yield; Plutarch for one, (...) De. virtu. morali.
(...). To cast away our passions altogether is neither possible nor Expedient
for us. Wherefore Lactantius has passed this Censure upon them, that they are
furious and mad men; in these two passages, to omit others of the like nature:
Stoici De vero cultu. Cap. 2. 15.
furiosi qui (affectus) non tam temperant quam abscindunt, rebusque a Natura
insitis castrare hominem quodammodo volunt. And again a little after. Quare
nihil aliud dixerim quam Ibid. Cap. 17.
insanos, qui hominem mite ac sociale Animal orbant suo nomine; qui evulsis
Affectibus quibus omnis constat humanitas, ad immobilem stuporem mentis
perducere volunt. It is a madness to boast of a freedom from all manner of
passion, which is so connatural to us. Neither is this the only instance of
their Arrogance.

Prayer, which is so great and so excellent a part of our Religion. So says
Seneca in those infamous words of his often quoted: Turpe Epist. 31.
est etiamnum deos fatigare. Quid votis opus est? fac te ipse faelicem, It is a
shameful thing to weary God with your prayers, make your self happy. It may be
those words are not so proud as some would make them, especially if compared
with another passage before in the same Epistle: Si vis esse faelix deos ora,
etc. If you would be happy pray to the Gods, etc. which last words by their
Connection do suppose the providence of God to order events for us; but there is
a great suspicion, that the former contain an opinion, That if man will he
cannot but be happy; because he has the free use of his faculties so much in
his own power, that as Epictetus sayee (...). God himself cannot conquer
Dissert arri. Cap. 1
the choice of our wills. Wherefore we shall find that the Stoics parallel
the case of a good man to that of God. So Seneca, this Philosophy promises me,
that I may be Par Deo, equal Sen. Ep. 48.
to God, and he repeats it in other places: I add but one more; Deus non vincit
sapientem faelicitate, etiamsi vincit aetate, etc. God is longer Jb. Ep. 73
happy than a wise man, hut he is not more happy, and other expressions to the
same purpose. He that would see more of this Argument, may read Gatakers
Annotations on Antoninus. If I listed P. 65.
to be censorious I might observe the method of Antoninus his first Book;
wherein he does make all his other acknowledgments of gratitude to his friends,
before he gives his Thanks to God. But it shall suffice to pass him with this
observation, though he seem freely to acknowledge where he got good, whether
from God or man; yet I do not remember, that he is sensible of humane
frailties, but he seems to be of the same mind as to the whole carriage Cap. 1.
Verse. Finem.
of his life, as in the case of his anger toward Rusticus: though he were
often angry, yet he did nothing to make him repent. From such instances as
these I gather that the Philosophers had too great an opinion of themselves,
and did not well understand their dependence upon God, and how necessary it is
to pray without ceasing. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.


Seneca makes a handsome excuse not only for the Stociks but for other
Philosophers (who have been vainglorious enough to see it in one another,
though not to acknowledge it in themselves; witness the retort of Plato upon
Diogenes, Calco Platonis Fastum, at cum Majori fastu.) In his Book of De vi ta
Beata. Cap. 18.
a happy life: Aliter loqueris aliter vivis etc. If you object thus to me, you
discourse better then you live: I answer, this has been objected to Plato, to
Epicurus, to Zeno, all these did not so much tell us how they lived, as how
virtuous men ought to live. An excuse which Mr. Gataker makes in favor of
Antoninus who has been Pra loq.
observed not to be without a Tincture of this same fault, though may be not
(...) as his own phraise is. But let us consider, if they did really believe
what Seneca says of himself in the foresaid Book: Ibid. C. eodem.
Ego in alto vitiorum omnium positus sum: I am sunk into all manner of Vice:
how infinitely did they shame themselves who beleved it was in their own power
to be good and happy, and yet they were guilty of all manner of sin? And
moreover how shall we understand their Paradox, That vices and virtues are all
equal, if not by Tullyes explication, Pares esse virtutes nec bono viro
meliorem nec temperanti temperantiorem Tully parad.
and facile potest perspici? Virtues are equal; if one be good, another cannot
be better, etc. Now did they not believe Socrates and Cato, etc. to be good
men, if so they must by this rule be perfectly good or not at all so. They did
ascribe a perfection of Virtue to virtuous men; which is enough to be said of
the Stoics, who were but one Sect of Philosophers.

Pythagoras Hierocles.
are, (...): Philosophy is the purgation and perfection of humane life: and he
gives the reason of both in the next words; which being spoken of Philosophy in
general, may be supposed to be the opinion of all Philosophers, and is the
first thing laid to their charge; they are too Thrasonical in their boasting;
they do assume too much to themselves, and though their expressions in this
kind may be looked upon as generous, puissant, and noble, a thing before
observed they have been commended for; yet were they never the better men for
all this, for the second error is worse; then the first, and helps to make the
first worse, for when it shall be considered that they who have bragged of more
then they needed, have yet performed less then they ought, it will then be so
much the more evident, that all this is with good reason brought to prove what
it intends; viz. That the writings of the Heathen are not a sufficient rule
without the Word of God of Moral Actions.

CHAP. V.
Zeno Illustr. de Philosop.
professed that piece of Stoicism, to be free from passion and so from grief,
Antigonus caused a report to be raised that his house and lands were spoiled,
and his Wife and Children carried Captives; (...), says the story, the man
betrayed by his sorrowful looks, what he denied with his tongue, that he was of
like passions with other men. So would another Philosopher be above all fear;
but an unreasonable Creature was enough to convince an unreasonable man; he run
away at the barking of a Dog, and acknowledged Difficile est hominem exuere, It
is hard to be more than a man. Such a (...) there is between the presumptuous
confidences of these men, and their slender performances, an Objection which
Christians to their great shame are liable to; but then it is to be observed
that it cannot be objected against Scripture Morality, that which we object
against the Institutions of the Heathen, for we do not now only tax them for
their unanswerable lives (which yet might be done,) but there is a defect in
their very Philosophy it self, it does not sufficiently instruct a man, how he
should be a good man, which because it cannot be said against the Scripture,
does give this force to our present Argument, that therefore we must fetch our
instructions for a Moral life from the Scriptures, not from Heathen moralists.
The thing then to be proved is, That none of the Philosophers have perfectly
instructed us in moral Virtue, for which there will be a double proof, if we
consider the matter of their precepts and the manner of them:

Lactantius has De vero cultu Cap. 17.
a Chapter on purpose to prove; Quod ea qua Philosophi putant vitia, virtutes
funt, si tamen ad finem debitum referantur i. e. ad Deum; wherefore referring
to him in that case, the whole of this proof shall be taken up in the former,
they have set off some evil things with good names: there are some things which
because of their gay appearances and specious pretenses they have taken for
flowers, but when we come to consider them closely they are stinking weeds; and
that which first offers itself to consideration is,

Suicidium or their Self-Murder: They have thought it lawful if a man be weary
of his life, or be urged with some difficulties or troubles, which he knows not
how to bear, to dispatch himself out of the World, and this is a great piece of
Fortitude for a man to dare to kill himself; whereas we Christians who profess
that we ought to have vitam in patientia, as well as mortem in desiderio, we
ought to be willing to live as well as glad to dye; we who believe we are not
at our own but at Gods dispose, and withal who think it greater glory to suffer
and live patiently, then dye peevishly; we believe it to be nothing less than
valor, for a man in discontent to kill himself; it is as sneaking and
cowardly, as for a Soldier to run away out of the Field, because he is afraid
to fight. Men pretend to be gallant and noble spirited men, and dare kill
themselves in a bravado, that they may not be thought to be afraid of Death,
why is this, but because they are afraid to live? they choose a short pain of
Death (not considering what follows after) before the tedious and uncertain
troubles of life. Now this is neither Valor nor Virtue, we come into the world
to be serviceable to our Creator, and if it be his will we should serve him by
suffering, it is not for us to be Judges in our own Case; we ought to be
willing to dye when ever God calls, but we may not run before we be sent: Yet
now this has been looked upon as a great attainment, as an Heroic degree of
Courage and greatness of mind, for a man to be able to destroy himself. So did
the Romans admire Cato's valor who killed himself at Vlica, because he did not
like to come into Caesar's hands. It is somewhat that Florus says of him;
Accepta partium clade nihil cunctatus (ut sapiente dignum erat) mortem laetus
accivit; It was wisely done of him to kill himself. But Seneca much more in one
of his Books, Non video quid habeat in terris Jupiter Cur bonis mala fiant.
Cap. 2.
pulchrius, si convertere animum velit, quam ut spectet Catonem; and afterward
he describes his death; gladium sacro pectori infigit, and illam V. locum
sanctissimam animam manu educit, and more to the same purpose in the same
place: It was such a glorious fight to see Cato kill himself, that if God
should look down from Heaven, he could not have a more pleasing sight. Indeed
all the Philosophers were not of this mind, but the Stoics generally are; and
it is a Phrase often used by Epictetus, (...): The door is open for any man to
go out of the Disser lat. Cap. 9. alibi. Lib. 5. 8. 29. alibi.
world when he has a mind to it. And Antoninus to the same purpose, (...), and
(...): This is the valor of the Heathens which we may not imitate because it
is cowardlinesse nicknamed.

(...)
allowed, which the Apostle severely reproves. The men leaving the natural use
of the woman, Rom 1. 27.
burned in lust one toward another, men with men: or males with males. A sin
which Socrates himself is supposed to have been guilty of toward Alcibiades.
So Diogenes Laertius reports Diog. in vita Socratis.
it from another Author: (...). which probably is the reason of that verse in
Juvenal, Inter Sat. 2.
Socraticos notissima fossa Cinedos. I should be immodest to give a plain
translation of those (...).
words. Sure Plato speaks very broadly in one of his Dialogues, and brings in a
story between Socrates and Alcibiades to confirm what was before said of
Socrates; concerning which discourse although Fioinus make a mystical
interpretation in his Commentaries, and quotes a passage in Plato in another
place, which seems to detest this wickedness, in the sum he gives of the
Dialogue; yet in that same place he confesses, quod autem tam crebram (...)
injiciat mentionem abominanda est in ipso audaci^, nisi eo consilio id fecisset
ut eam detestandam esse hominibus suis voluisset demonstrare. But there needs
abundance of Charity to make a man believe he had this end. Now were this only
Plato's opinion it might be the less charged upon other men, but it seems it
did so generally obtain among the Platonists, that so grave and sober a man as
Plutarch who lived at the least four hundred V. Helvicum.
years after Plato was in a great doubt whether to affirm or deny the
lawfulness of this Fact. I do not remember such a doubtful passage Plut. De
Liberis educand. p 11. Xyl.
in all his morals, as are those words of his in this case, where he could find
in his heart to condemn it, but the Authority of Socrates, Plato, Xenophon,
Aeschines, etc. incline him to allow, whence I conclude the morality of the
Heathens did not enough censure this detestable enormity.

Community of Wives Lib. 5.
which Plato in his Commonwealth would persuade to be very advantageous if it
were but feasible. But having observed somewhat of the Stoics and Platonists,
it is necessary that somewhat be added of the Peripateticks, who are not
without their errors in this kind.

Aristotle makes a virtue, St. Paul reproves as inconvenient. Ephesians. 5. 3.
there are that think, that which Aristotle called a Virtue, is not here taxed
as a vice but the extreme of it, and among the rest, one has Zanchy in locum.
this note; Haec simpliciter ab Apostolo non damnatur, cum non dedeceat viros
bonos, sed suo tempore and loco, sed saepe capitur pro (...) which Aristotle
makes the extreme of it: likewise Beza and Heinsius though not often, yet here
they do agree, making the third word exegetical to the second, then is jesting
condemned when it is foolish talking and not otherwise: Now to speak as
favorably as may be in the case, if it be not directly a vice, yet sure it may
not be reckoned as a moral Virtue; no more than other innocent recreations are
to be accounted Virtuous: for if it be a Virtue for a man to be witty, then why
may not bare knowledge be as well accounted goodness, between which certainly
there is a vast difference, but if the words should be more severely
interpreted, there would not want probability for a conjecture, that that very
thing which Aristotle makes a Virtue is here judged inconvenient, for the two
other words (...) and (...), filthiness and foolish talking, may not unfitly be
called the extremes of this Vrbanity: If discourse be obscene and filthy on one
hand, it exceeds, if it be ridiculous and foolish that is the other extreme;
now not only these, but even jesting it self may seem to come under censure, as
being joined with them. But because Learned men have given a more favorable
interpretation of it, I do not conclude it unlawful altogether, though I have
as little reason to judge it a Moral Virtue, for then certainly it would be a
duty, and then it would be a sin for a man not to be witty; and withal it would
be considered, that for a man to make a trade of it, or to be frequent in it,
it will be found that Hae Nugae Seri^ ducunt in Horace.
Mala --

These things are toys and yet they do,
Bring many a man to many a woe.
the (...) of the same Author, that Aristot.
greatness and magnanimity of mind, whereby a man ought to judge worthily of
himself, and to aspire to those Honors and greatnesses he apprehends himself
to be capable of; which howsoever excusable it may be, if it be possible to
keep it from that arrogance and ambition which is made an extreme of it, yet
considering the general temper of those Heathens, who were counted most
magnanimous, we shall find not only the Philosophers but all other sorts of men
that did publicly appear in the world to have been Animalia gloriae. Sure
Aristotle would comprehend his Emperor Alexanders daring bravery of Spirit,
under this Magnanimity, and so were all the Usurpations of the Roman State
reckoned for Illustrious instances of the greatness of their Spirits; wherefore
Livy in the preface to his History says, Caeterum aut me Amor suscepti negotii
fallit, aut nulla unquam resp. nec major, nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis
ditior fuit. And if all their unjust encroachments upon their Neighbors be
instances of Magnanimity, it is easily seen, they mistook glory for Virtue: And
the Trophies they erected as tokens of their Triumph are so spoken of by one of
their own Satyrists.

Juven Sat. 10.
Humanis majora bonis creduntur, ad haec se
Romanus, Graiusque ac Barbarus Induperator
Erexit, Causas discriminis atque Laboris
Inde habuit: Tanto major Famae sitis est quam
Virtutis, quis enim Virtutem amplectitur ipsam
Praemia si tollas?
To raise a name and get renown,
Is all that is now in fashion grown;
For this the Roman and the Greek,
And Annibal and all did seek;
For this men hazard all and sweat,
Not to be good so much as great;
That all mankind is more in Love,
With Fame than Virtue this does prove;
Scarce any body cares to be,
A Virtuous man without this fee.


CHAP. VI.
Abraham Genesis 18.
leave to argue in case of Sodom: Will thou destroy all the City for lack of
five? So now may it be said, Shall we despise all morality that the Heathens
taught, because five or six or some few mistakes may be found among them: what
disparagement was it to eleven of the Apostles, that the twelfth was a Traitor
and a Devil? and why should the other precepts of Philosophy suffer, because of
some few escapes among them, if the rest be good and sound, it may rather be
wondered that they erred no more, then that they did at all err.

It remains therefore to make good the second part of the charge, that they
have failed not only in the matter but manner too. In some things they have
put evil for good, and good for evil; Virtue and Vice have exchanged their
names and garbs, and so have deceived the unwary world: But this is not all: In
those things which we acknowledge to be Virtues abstractly considered, yet we
deny the men that practiced them, to have been completely virtuous and good:
which is evidently true, if the Rule be good, Bonum ex integra causia, malum ex
quolibet defectu. To make an action thoroughly good it is necessary, that all
due circumstances should concur, if there be any defect either in matter or
manner, the Action is not good; or if it be, it is not well done. Wherefore it
is further to be considered that the Gentiles not having learned Christ as we
have done being ignorant of some mysteries which the Ephesians. 4.
Gospel reveals to us, have by this ignorance been alienated from a Godly life.
And two things especially (to name no more) they have been ignorant of, which
serve to our present purpose.

Works done before Ar^ic. 13.
the grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of the Spirit are not pleasing to
God, forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ. Indeed the Heathens
did well to follow their Reason so far as it was right, but they did not know
that their Reason was to be rectified before it could be right; That they were
to be created in Christ Ephesians. 2. 10*
Jesus to good works before they could walk in them: For how can the fruit be
good till the Tree be so? that therefore a man may live justly and righteously,
he must first be just; and what Mortal man can be just till he be justified? We
have all sinned, and if we be justified, it is by Faith in Christ, and then we
may be bold to say our works are good, when we put in this condition, as Mr.
Herbert did, It is a good work if it be sprinkled with the blood of Christ.
When likewise together with Christ dying for us; The holy Spirit of God lives
within us; we are now put into a State to 1 These. 4. 1.
walk so as to please God. Upon which accounts the Morality, Justice, Honesty,
etc. which the Scripture obliges us to, is more perfect, then that which the
Heathens by the light of Nature attained to.

large upon this third Objection, then upon either of the former, and also that
somewhat has been already said in the Case, under the second Objection where
it was declared, that our Christian Morality does necessarily suppose Faith in
Christ; and Christ without us would be little to our advantage, without the
work of the Spirit within us; wherefore it having been supposed already, I
enlarge not upon it, but conclude, that what has been said is enough to
discover an imperfection, in the Heathen Philosophers and Moralists,
notwithstanding they have been so vain glorious in their boasting of
perfection, yet have they had no such Cause; for they have failed in many
things, and we also should fail, if we had not a better and surer rule to walk
by, viz. the Word of God.

Which was the thing to be granted to this Objection; though we urge Morality,
Integrity, and Honesty, and a good Conscience toward man; yet we do not refer
our selves to the writing of the Heathen, as to our only or perfect Rule; but
we believe the Scriptures teach us much better.



Plato and Aristotle and we cannot tell who, and do not seem to make any
difference between their writing and the word of God. (And it is very likely
there have been some who have been over-lavish in this kind.) Now as Elijah
said to the Messengers of Ahaziah, Is it not because there is no God in 2 Kings
1.
Israel, that ye gae to inquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? so will it be
suspected: Is it not because these men slight the Scriptures, or it may be
understand them not, that they speak so much in the Language of the Heathen? as
they speak half in the speech of Ashdod, because Nehem. 13
they could not speak the Jews Language. At least it will be thought that such
men do too much magnify the light of Nature, and give too much honor, to
those men, who were without Christ (unless revealed unto them by a miracle) and
so without hope and without God Ephesians. 2.
in the World. And it is very likely this Treatise may meet with the same fate;
For I do not think so well of my self, as to expect more Candor than other men
have found; Yet am I willing to prevent mistakes if it may be, and for that
purpose have I made all these acknowledgments of the Errors and Imperfections
of the Heathens, that it may not be thought we attribute too much to them, or
refer to them as to perfect guides.

Let it not therefore trouble any whose leisure and want of better books, may
give them leave to look into this; I say let not this be a scruple, that I have
chose a subject, wherein it is not improper to make use of Heathen Authors;
for it is already confessed, that they have erred and failed in many things,
and are not to be compared to the word of God: And what more to say for the
satisfaction of such persons, I cannot tell. So then at last I have done with
those concessions which are to be made, in this Case to preserve the Honor and
Esteem of the Scriptures inviolate, and to prefer them to all other writings
whatsoever; which was the first thing promised uuder this head, to grant what
is to be granted to this Objection: In all which, I should do very vainly if I
thought I did contradict my self, or that any of these things did signify any
thing against the practice or necessity of morality; which was the second thing
to be confidered under this head, but that which need not take up so much time
as the former.

CHAP. VII.
Israelites, they have well said in all that Deuteronomy. 5.
they have spoken, though there wanted in them an heart to do it: so verily
though in their lives these men be weak as other men, yet they have well said
in many things, they have spoken very selfe-denyingly and like mortified
Christians, concerning the contempt of the world and worldly things: They have
given good rules for the government of a man's self, both as to his passions
within, and outwardly for his discourse and actions; they have disparaged
wickedness and vice, and they have done what they could to represent Virtue
amiable and lovely, that if it might be, that might come to pass which Plato
speaks of it as Tully quotes him: Formam ipsam, Marce Fili, and tanquam faciem
Tully Offic* l. 1.
honesti vides quae si oculis cerneretur, mirabiles amores (ut ait Plato)
excitaret sapientiae. Were it possible to see Virtue in an humane shape, she
would wonderfully, draw all men's eyes and affections after her. That Moral
Virtues are so excellent is not now to be prooved, but hereafter, when these
disadvantages are all remooved, for the present it is sufficient to say, that
because we have the Scripture to supply the defect of all other Authors, it
argues nothing against the necessity of morality, that others have been
imperfect in the descriptions and recommendations of it.

Paul whom we find to have inserted into the body of the New Testament three
sentences out of three several Heathen Authors, Aratas, Menander, Acts. 17. ^
C^r. 15. Tit. 1.
and Epimenides, and that for these three Reasons.

That we may justify the Scriptures as to a ^.
main part of them, the severe precepts they give for the right ordering our
conversation ought not to be looked upon as strange things, for they are such as
the world has been long acquainted with, where the light of the Gospel has
not come: yea as Balaam had a desire to curse the Children of Israel, yet did
altogether bless them; so have some Heathens unwittingly given an honorable
Testimony to Christian Religion and the Gospel, though they have persecuted the
Professors of it, in as much as they themselves have said many the same things;
though they could not lay so sure a foundation for a good life, nor build so
high toward perfection, as the Scriptures have done; yet somewhat they have
done, in the same kind, by which rude and imperfect Modells they have justified
that excellent platform of a new Creature, created to good works, that God has
given us in his

Cato or Socrates would have been ashamed of. Solomon expresses his indignation
against idleness, by sending the Sluggard to School to the Ant, who having no
Prove. 6. 6. 7. 8.
guide, overseer nor ruler, provides her meat in the Summer, etc. Now if so
ignoble a Creature be fit by its Example to teach a man, as it is Parvulanam
Horace.
Exemplo est magni formica laboris.

See how the little Pismires be,
Instances of great Industry.
Then may a Heathen be fit to teach a Christian. Go to the Philosopher thou
degemerate Christian, thou have the word of God for thy Rule, the Spirit of God
for thy guide, which they wanted; yet did they better provide for their credit
while living, and for their safety after death: Would Aristides have played the
Knave, and have cheated his Neighbor who was firnamed the just? Were Fabricius
and Curious so ^ordid and covetous as many Christians are, of whom the Roman
Stories report how little they cared for gold and Silver, or the bribes of
Pyrrhus? Would Regulus have been Treacherous to his own Country, who was
resolved to be true to his Enemies? How was Luxury and riot discouraged among
the Lacedaemonians, when the places where they used to feast together, were
called (...) Plutarch.
because of their frugality in their expenses. And so in other cases, It is
good to see what they have said and done, that the Man may shame the Christian;
for it is a very shame for us who have better helps than they, if we do not go
beyond them in all Virtue and goodness.

more closely couched in them: It is no defect in the Scriptures to be short,
but their glory, that in so little a compass, so much should be contained: But
in regard they are so much shorter, then many discourses of the Heathens, it
cannot be imagined, but that some things should be more dilated on elsewhere,
which may help to convey what is here commanded, with the greater force to our
understandings and affections: The gay adds nothing to the sense and meaning
of the book; yet it encourages the Child to take the book into his hand, and so
he may learn the sooner. So are those illustrations, and similitudes, and
examples, and apposite sentences, which we bring out of other Authors, not by
way of supplement to the word of God; but to try if by any way or means, we can
make any impression upon the minds of men. And this is Apology enough for the
use of Heathen Authors, in the use of which it is to be acknowledged it is
easy to over-doe: And it is a witty comparison of a Learned man, That to stuff
a Sermon with Citations Wilkins Ecclesia^^es.
of Authors, and the witty sayings of others, is to make a feast of Vinegar
and Pepper; which may be very delightful, being used moderately as sauces, but
must needs be very improper and offensive, to be fed upon as diet.

So much (if not too much) in answer to the third Reason, why some have spoke
so slightly of Morality, to save the prerogative of the holy Scriptures, by
preferring them above the writings of all Heathen Moralists.

CHAP. VIII.
Antinomians, who are of opinion that the Obligation of the Moral Law is not
consistent with the perfection of a Gospel state; and therefore no wonder if
they during that persuasion, undervalue Morality. Who first gave these men
their denomination, and of how long standing they have been in the World, is
almost as hard to find, as the Head of Nilus. A Learned Doctor of our Church
has taken Holdsw.
pains in it, to whom I dare add nothing. He finds Antinomianisme among the
Manachees, and higher a great deal: In hoc* se speculo intueantur Lect. 19.
Antinomi, and agnoscant prosapiam suam, Quis Pater ipsorum? Manes. Quis Avus?
Tatianus. Quis Proavus? Marcion. Abavus? Cerdon. Tritavus? Simon. Yea further
then Simon Magus he pursues the Serpent to his first Den. The Devils first
temptation was to make our first Parents Antinomians. Chapter 2.
Papists, has been observed before out of this same Author, but no more then
said of them, because this is their proper place: Certainly they are direct
Adversaries to this Doctrine of the necessity of Moral Virtues, for they own no
Obligation to the Moral Law; and so they say if we may credit those who have
perused their writings: There is a Sermon extant with this Title Gods eye on
his Israel, which is in Mr. Gataker.
the design of it a resutation of the Antinomians; in the Preface to which, the
Author reports one of their positions in these very words: That the Moral Law
is of no use at all to a Believer, no rule for him to walk or examine his life
by, and that Christians are free from the mandatory power of it. Another
borrowing this from Edwards Gangr.
the foresaid Author, adds this to it as another of their sayings. Neither
Faith, nor Repentance, nor Humiliation, nor Selse-denyal, nor use of
Ordinances, nor doing as one would be done, to are duties required of
Christians, or such things as they must exercise themselves in, or they can
have no part in Christ.

English mouths. Lex non est digna Hoornb. sum. controv.
ut vocetur verbum Dei. And again Non admittunt Antinomi, quod nos de bonis
operibus dicimus, esse ea viam ad regnum non causam regnandi. Afterward he
reports Richardson to say, condemnamus nos ali^uid agere ad nostram salutem.
Yea it seems there is a Book written by Eaton peacem*
one (whom Bishop Hall bewails, to have belonged to his Diocese of Norwich,)
and set out by Lancaster.
another, the same man I suppose who was used to such midwifery, for it was
such a name, that set out Dr. Crispe (whom I dare not join with the worst
Antinomians) which Book has this Title: The Honey*comb of free justification
by Christ alone. In which he discourses of the great privileges of Believers:
That now since Gataker ut supra.
the death of Christ upon the Cross, sin it self and guilt and punishment, are
so utterly and infinitely abolished, that there is now no sin in the Church of
God, and that God sees no sin in us, and whosoever believes not this point is
undoubtedly damned.

plus Aloes quam Mellis habent. The sting the severity of threatenings is more
safe for us to lie under. It is better to be terrified to obedience than to be
flattered to sin: But blessed be God we find Honey in the Scriptures too, yea
that which is sweeter then the Honey and the Psa. 19.
Honeycomb. There are glorious priviledeges we hope to partake off, but then
it must be by keeping in Gods way; that is the way of obedience to Gods
commands, some of which will hereafter be found to require good works and Moral
Virtues. It ought not to be expected that I should now undertake to confute
these dangerous and blasphemous positions; that will be sufficiently done, if
the second Proposition be proved, which will give good reasons for the
necessity of Moral Virtues, where it will appear, that what this wretched
generation of men has filthily devised, has proved nothing to our prejudice;
they have spoken swelling words, but they are words of vanity, and none of them
conclude against the necessity of Moral Virtues. So I dismiss these men
likewise only with this one Observation.

So many Antinomians as have proceeded to be Fift-Monarchy-men, as they are
commonly called, must needs contradict themselves: For that man that believes
Christ will come to reign personally upon the Earth, and introduce the Glorious
Kingdom of the Saints; and yet, shall not at the same time believe himself
obliged to be an honest man, and Morally Virtuous; he must not think that the
Kingdom of Christ will be like the new Heavens and the new 2 Peter 3.
Earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Which yet the Scripture says: And
surely if Christ be Head of this Kingdom, either he must Countenance
Unrighteousness or be unable to suppress it, or there shall be no
unrighteousness there, or if there be, it will be no glorious Kingdom nor any
such great advance, from the present Administration of things in the World.

CHAP. IX.
Paul, Evil men and seducers 2 Timothy 3.
wax worse and worse: Antinomianisme is the high way to Libertinisme: Wherefore
it is not to be wondered at, if those corrupt principles have given occasion to
rotten and abominable practices: Hence have proceeded those Ranters in
Religion, that late years have abounded with, who have made themselves truly
liable to those criminations, that were falsely objected to the Primitive
Christians. viz. Promiscui Concubitus, and the like; yea there are some that
have extinguished all sense of Religion; that laugh at Conscience, and will not
persuade themselves either of Heaven or Hell: Yea they will scarce profess to
believe a God in the World but that by their execrable Oaths they do out of
their own mouths damn themselves. This is their Motto:

Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas:
Let Us eat, and drink, and game, while we have leisure;
For Death will put an end to all our pleasure.
And if God do not give them Repentance and amendment of Life, they will find
the latter to be too True; for then comes wailing and gnashing of Teeth: They
will not be convinced now, to be sure not persuaded; but then comes an
unanswerable proof, and an intolerable Argument, The wrath of God executed upon
Unrighteous men, is the greatest, but dreadfullest demonstration in the world,
that it was necessary for them, to have lived sober and Righteous lives. In the
mean time some of them possibly, scarce believe themselves Reasonable
Creatures, and then it will be in vain to argue with them; if they pretend to
Reason, I will endeavor to speak pertinently to the case, by producing
Arguments of several sorts, to prove it necessary for them, and all the rest of
mankind, to he good and Virtuous, and presuming upon the strength of them (to
which I am now approaching) I may confidently say, that these evil
imaginations of men of corrupt minds, add no more disadvantage to the Cause,
then any thing that was before pleaded: Wherefore I conclude this first part of
my discourse, and I hope I have prooved my first general Proposition, which was
this; whatever Reasons may have induced some men to speak slightly of Morality,
yet none of them all conclude, that it is not necessary for a Christian to be a
Moral man.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian: OR, The Necessity of Morality among
Christians.
BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
viz. It is necessary for a Christian to be a Moral man.

Two ways an Action may become necessary: Necessitate praecepti, or Medii:
Some things are necessary because they are commanded; other things may likewise
be commanded, yet in their own Natures they are necessary as means to an End,
and would be so if there were no other command for them, but what is included
in the Law of Nature; according to which distinction there is this double proof
of the forementioned proposition.





The first of these will not take up so much time as the second, yet to make
the method more clear, I assign to each a distinct Book.

etc. These are things which we may be bold to press upon the consciences of
men, for we may add a more authoritative ipse dixit then the Scholars of
Pythagoras contented themselves with, we say Thus says the Lord to all of
them. Concerning which Commands these four things are worthy to be considered:
they are many, plain, particular, peremptory commands.

many, that we may easily find them.

plain, that when found we may easily understand them.

particular, that when understood we may easily apply them.

peremptory, that we may not easily shift off that application.

CHAP. II.
ordering of our Conversation the Old Testament not a few, the New Testament
Psa. 50.
very many.

Ten Commandments, whereof the six last directing our behavior toward our
Neighbor, comprehend Moral Virtues. As we are Creatures we owe our selves to
God, who made us for his own glory and service; but this same God has made us
fellow Creatures, and some of the service he requires of us, is to keep a good
conscience toward man: Wherefore as it has pleased God to direct us in his
worship, to those duties, which we call the duties of the first Table; so
withal the same God, at the same time, in the same extraordinary manner, did
speak all those words as we read: so that the latter are 20. Exodus 1.
the words of God as well as the former: Yea there will be found so near an
affinity between the first and second Table (a distinction which God himself
has authorized, by writing the Law in two Tables) that unless we obey both we
cannot duly obey either. Prima Tabula est magnes ad secundam, secunda est
Lapis ^ydius ad primam. Those two Tables which were at first of Stone; The
first is a Loadstone to the second, The second is a Touchstone to the first. If
we heartily love God we shall be engaged to keep all his Commandments: And this
Commandment 1 John 4. 21.
have we from him, that he who loves God, love his Brother also. And by way of
reciprocation, if we love our Brother, it is an Evidence of our love to God,
and his to us: If we love one another, God dwells in us, and 1 John 4. 12.
his love is perfected in us. But otherwise, if a man say, I love God, and
hates his Brother, he is 1 John 4. 20.
a Liar; for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love
God whom he has not seen? So that the Motto, which has sometimes been
otherwise applied, is not improper here: Si Collidimur, Frangimur. As Moses
brake both Exodus 32.
the Material Tables, by throwing them upon the ground; so certainly the Laws
written upon them, if they be made to clash one against another, they will all
be broken: for whosoever shall oppose one to the other, and presume that his
being Religious to God, will excuse him from being Righteous to his Neighbor;
James 2. 10.
he that shall thus offend, though it be but in one point, will be guilty of a
breach of the whole Law: And though the Reason there added be a little varied,
yet it holds good. He that said 11.
thou shall not be an Idolater, or an Atheist, said also thou shall not be an
Adulterer, or Murderer, or Liar, etc. Now if thou Commit no Idolatry, yet if
thou kill or lie, etc. thou art become a Transgressor of the Law, of the same
God who requires both. That which the Law of God commands is necessary for a
Christian man: But to abound in Moral Virtues is that which the Law of God (the
Moral Law) commands: Therefore to abound in Moral Virtues is necessary for a
Christian man.

Obj.
or New Testament Saints, are of a higher dispensation; The Law was indeed
given by Moses, John 1. 17.
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, and that such Grace as makes void
the works of the Law: Israelites, not as Israelites but as men; and then a
quatenus ad omne valet Consequentia: So long as Christians continue men,
Reasonable Creatures, so long they will be under an Obligation to this Law: And
this appears, because before the promulgation of this Law upon Mount Sinai,
Cain Genesis 4.
transgressed it in killing his Brother, Ham in mocking his Father, the men of
Sodom in Genesis 9. Genesis 19.
their uncleanness, which has ever since bore the name of Sodomy from them:
Now in those ages they must have this Law, else how could they trangress it;
for where no Law is there is ^o^. 4. ^5.
no Transgression?

Assirmantis est probare: If the Antinomians cannot produce how and when it was
repealed, we may persist to say it is still valid: But chiefly because a
determination of this question, when a Law as to the reason and foundation of
it ceases and is null; if it be accurately done, would be some what too
speculative for every vulgar reader, who I make account are most concerned in
what I write, whose practice if I may be useful to direct, I shall the less
care to make them wander in speculation. Scholars do not want Books that make
out this argument.

Old Testament, which are repeated in the New, are never the more out of date,
because they are first found in the Old: such are the precepts of the Moral
Law, which have been already named. Wherefore though other precepts and rules
of Life might be insisted on, out of the Old Testament, which are not liable to
any just exception, yet because there is so very great plenty in the New
thither let us go.

Book in the New Testam^nt but has some commands, or something very near
commands, for this purpose.

It is no small advantage to our cause to consider first, That the first Sermon
Christ preached M^^. 5. 6. 7. chap.
does handle much of this Argument, does enforce many commands of the moral Law
before mentioned, and does require us to love our Enemies, not to be guilty of
rash judging, to do as we would be done to: and many the like afterward in St.
Matthew's Gospel. St. Mark Mar. 7. chapter 12. chapter
does likewise repeat some of these, of Honoring Father and Mother, and loving
our Neighbor as our selves.

St. Luke also says the same things, and directs Luke. 6. chapter 10. chapter 11. chapter
12. chapter 21. chapter John. 13. 14. 15. chapter Acts. 5.
to show mercy and to give Alms, and warns against Covetousness, and elsewhere
against surfeiting and drunkenness. In St. John the same Savior spoken of in
the former Gospels, requires Humility and Love. The Acts of the Apostles being
a History is fuller of examples then commands; Acts. 4.
the judgment on Ananias and Sapphira for lying, and of the Church for love,
and one heartedness: but there are not altogether wanting commands there
neither, for Charitableness, Remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said,
it is more blessed to give then to Acts. 20. Acts. 23.
receive: for submission to Authority: Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler
of thy people: And we may presume that St. Paul's reasoning with Foelix of
Righteousness and Temperance Acts. 24.
was in an Authoritative commanding way; for it is an unusual thing for a
Prisoner to make the Judge tremble.

If we go on to the Epistles, they have much of the same Argument, Romans 12. 13.
chapter 1 Cor. 13. chapter 2 Cor. 13. 11. v. Galat. 5. 16. v. etc. to the end of that
chap. The latter end of the Ep. to the Ephesians. from the 24. v. of the 4. chapter the
greatest part of the remainder of the Ep. Philip. 2. chapter beginning, 4. chapter 8.
v. A great part of the 3. and 4. chapter to the Colos. 1 Thessal. 3. 12. v. 4. chapter
5. 6. v. 9. etc. 2 Thessal. 3. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 9. etc. 6. chapter 11. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
22. Titus. 2. 12. 3. 8. The Ep. to Philemon is in the design of it an
exhortation to forgive an injury. Heb. 13. chapter 1. etc. 5. etc. 16. The Ep: of
St. James, besides that it commends Works together with Faith, directs to the
government of the Tongue, to meekness, and against Envy, James 3. v. 2. etc.
13. 14. St. Peter has many such precepts, 1 Ep. somewhat in every Chapter, 2
Ep. 1. 5. etc.

The 1 Ep. of St John is known to commend love; so likewise the 2 Ep. v. 3. he
wishes them grace with truth and love; yea likewise the third, as it does
commend the hospitality of Gaius, so does it add a precept, v. 8.

St. Jude after he had described the sins of some of his time, v. 8. 9. etc.
some of which were Immoralities; he does not obscurely insinuate the contrary,
though not in so many words command it, v. 19. 20.

Yea for a conclusion of all, 22 Revel. 11. when unjust and filthy men are
given over to their injustice and filthiness, yet righteous men are established
in their righteousness, and blessed in it. v. 14.

These are many, but not all the directions that are to be found in the New
Testament, which teach us in our behavior in the world and in the exercise of
Moral Virtues. The force of these commands is not now to be considered, but
afterward, when it must be made appear that they are peremptory and admit of
no evasion or excuse. It is enough now to make an induction and enumeration of
particulars, which is sufficient for the purpose, though not so full as it
might be made: I have mentioned so many, that I may well give this
Advertisement to all those who are concerned in it; that they do us great
wrong, who despise our preaching of Morality, and do not think it Gospel
preaching: if we may follow the Example of Christ and the Apostles, we are then
certain we do truly preach the Gospel, when we command Moral Virtues; for it is
evident they did the like before us, and that not sparingly, but in abundant
manner. This is the first part of the Argument from the Scripture: The commands
for Moral Virtues are very many, and we may easily find them.

CHAP. III.
directions which the Scripture gives about the management of our Affairs, are
not so dark as the Answers that the Heathens had from their Oracles: They
themselves called their Apollo (...), because of his ambiguity: we may give him
another Epithete, that which the Pharisees without any Reason gave to Christ,
(...). That deceitful Spirit 27 Math. 63.
(the Devil that took upon him the state of a God) was ambiguous on purpose,
that by those riddles he might salve his own credit amongst them, though they
should chance to be deceived as Croesus and others were: But the Scriptures are
clear and plain, especially as to these matters of practice: The word of God 2
Pet. 1. 19.
is a light shining in a dark place: Such was the World till Christ's time, a
dark place, men were much in the dark, and that as to Virtue as well as
Religion, as has been before said, and made Book 1.
an Argument of the insufficiency of the writings of the Philosophers: But here
have we a lamp 119 Psa.
to our feet, and a light to our paths. So our Divine Poet expresses it;

But all the Doctrine which he taught and gave, Herbers Poems.

Was clear as Heaven, from whence it came;
At least those Beams of Truth which only save,
Surpass in Brightness any Flame. Divinity.

Love God, and love your Neighbor, watch and pray,
Do as you would be done unto;
O Dark instructions even as dark as day,
Who can these Gordian knots undo?
What the Disciples once said to our Savior. Joh. 16.
Lo now speak thou plainly, and speak no parable; So may we say of many
of the commands of Scripture: for what can be more plain, whether for matter or
manner, then for a man to Love his Neighbor as himself? who knows not how he
loves himself, and he who will not believe he has many Neighbors, will 10
Luke.
find that he ought to show himself neighbourly to whomsoever shall have need
of him, if he understand the Parable; so to recompense Evil for Evil, and many
others: These are such things, of which we use to say, he that runs may read
them: There needs no great intenseness of mind; it is not necessary to dwell
long upon them to understand them, they are plain and easy to be understood.
This is now another advantage we have by the Gospel; it does both bring us
light and open our Eyes to see that light* the directions of the Word, and the
teachings of the Spirit, promised in that Word, make our Rule very plain and
easily understood.

abstain from fleshly lusts, but we 1 Pet. 2. Gal. 5. 1 These. 4.
have particular Catalogues of those Lusts: we are not only bid to walk so as
to please God, but we are told what it is that is well pleasing to him: In so
small a Volume as the Scripture is* it would be unreasonable to expect
particular commands for every Punctilio, for every smaller Occurrence of Life:
There are general Rules of prudence, which may easily be accommodated to
particular circumstances; yet evident it is, that there are many commands for
persons in such Relations; For Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants, Magistrates and Subjects. Moreover there are commands for
particular duties; for Meekness, and Humility, and Charity, and Temperance,
etc. if the Scripture sometimes speaks in Parables, yet many of them are such
which we may easily apply to our selves, as Nathan did his to David, when he
said thou art 2 Samuel 12.
the man. As John the Baptist gave directions in particular to the people, to
the Publicans, and 3 Luke.
to the Soldiers, as they applied to him; so will the Gospel answer us, if we
come with the same question: And what shall we do? go and search the
Scriptures, see what is written, how read thou? It were a childish fancy to
expect to be called by our Names (as once Peter was, Arise Peter, kill and eat)
who will dare to say, that when the King issues out a Proclamation to all his
subjects; because I do not find my name there, it does not concern me? We are
all concerned, and we are as good as named, and particularly directed, in many
affairs of our lives, how to exercise our selves in righteousness, and
goodness, and all Moral Virtues.

Here are now 3 things said to prove that the Scripture does make Virtue
necessary, by giving many, plain, particular commands in the case; but that
there may remain no question of our Obligation, the 4th. follows.

CHAP. IV.
all Reason, that an Inferior Magistrate should control a Superior; but it
is monstrous, that the head and the feet should change places; that the Common
people, whose duty it is to obey Laws, should usurp Authority over the
Lawmakers, and dispute their commands: And if it be necessary there should be
such a distance between man and man, for the safety and preservation of
mankind; Is not then the distance greater between God and man? Think Job.
35. 2.
thou this to be right, that thou said my Righte^^sness is more than Gods?
Elihu first puts the question, but afterward God himself demands the same; I
will demand of thee and declare thou Job. 4^. ^. 8.
unto ^e; will thou also disannull my Judgments, will thou condemn me that thou
may be Righteous? Have thou an Arm like God, or ^anst thou Thunder with a
voice like him? Where is the power and Authority that dare oppose it self to
God, before whom the Hills mel^ like wax? 97 Psa. ^^. 2.
for fear of whom and for the glory of his Majesty, the lofty looks of men are
humbled, and the ^^^ghtiness of men is bowed down. Yea moreover where is the
wisdom that may better inform God, or alter what he has once established?
Isal. 40.
Who has directed the Spirit of the Land, o^ being his Counselor has taught
him? Out of the ^outh of the most High, and from infinite wisdom, have
proceeded the directio^^ we have for our Conversations: And it is Arrogance
beyond an Epithete, to offer our selves as Counsel to the Almighty, or to
pre^^^e or advise a change of that which has gone o^^ of the Mouth of God.
Unless it please God himself first to repeal his Laws, it is not possible that
a Creature should have Authority to usurp upon his Creator.

All the question then is, whether God himself have not annexed some conditions
to his commands, whether there be not some reserves and exceptions, which in
case they happen, then upon performance of the condition, the obligation
becomes void and of none effect. Indeed Christian privileges, by which we
ought to encourage our selves to Christian duties, have been abused (by those
that turn the grace J^de 4.
of God into lasciviousness) to patronize all manner of impiety; and three
things especially have been made use of to this purpose, Faith, and Repentance,
and Christian liberty; none of all which do give any indulgence to Immorality,
or vitiousness of life, or do weaken those commands which require Moral Virtues.

Book 1. Object. 2*
Faith; It must now be considered on the other side, that as Morality does not
make Faith useless; so neither does Faith bring any excuse for Immorality. If
it be said, I believe in Jesus Christ, for the pardon of my sins, and for the
Salvation of my Soul, upon his alone merits I rely, who has promised
Everlasting life to me if I believe; therefore what need I do any more? To this
I oppose the words of St. Paul, This is a Faithful saying, and these Ti^us 3. ^.
things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God
be careful to maintain good works; these things are good and profitable unto
men. They who have believed in God may not sit down and bless themselves with
the privileges of the Faithful, without any more ado, they must maintain, i.
e. they must (...)
excel, must be eminent in good works; they must be (...), a word which no body
that understands but will allow it thus much, they Antistites esse, Beza in loc.
must be Presidents of good works: And this they must take care of, and be
sollicitous about, and lest there should be any that may doubt of it, he will
have Titus affirm it constantly, he (...).
must be very firm and resolute in the case, without peradventure it is the
duty of Believers thus to do; to all which it is some Emphasis, that he begins
the Verse thus, A Faithful saying, a word which he does elsewhere use in
weighty matters, It is a Faithful saying, and 1 Timothy 1. 15.
worthy of all acceptance, that Christ came into the World to save sinners. To
all which nothing can be objected by any man, that does not magnify his own
private Spirit before St. Paul, who did more than think he had the Spirit of
God; unless possibly this should be imagined, that Moral Virtues are not here
comprehended under good works: wherefore let one Apostle interpret another, let
us borrow of St. Peter to explain St. Paul, And besides 2 Pet. 1. 5.
this giving all diligence, add to your Faith Virtue, etc. Temperance,
Patience, Charity. A place beyond all exception to prove, that though we have
Faith, yet we may not be without Virtue; for if there be any place in Scripture
where we are to understand Faith in the most excellent kind, it is here; for it
is that like precious Faith, which the Apostles obtained, V. 1.
it was a Faith joined with such a knowledge of Christ, as that by great and
precious promises they became partakers of the divine V. 4.
Nature; yet this Faith that makes men like God, is not too good to accompany
with Virtue, nor can it safely be alone; for he that lacks V. 9. (...).
these things (i. e. these Virtues) is blind and cannot see a far off. Now if
we must give diligence to add Virtue by way of supply to Faith (as the word
imports) then Faith is no excuse for a failure in Virtue. To these we may add
St. James, who speaks as confidently; What does it profit, my Brethren, though
a man say he has Faith and have no works, can Faith James 2. 14.
save him? will such a Faith which is dead without works be a saving Faith? no
surely, not till these contradictions can be reconciled, that a man may at the
same time be an unholy, or an unsanctified Saint, a wicked Believer, an honest
Knave. When Judas his kiss can be interpreted friendship, then when he comes to
betray his Master, when the way to Heaven lies through the midst of Hell; when
these things come to pass, then may a man hope to be saved by his Faith, though
he be and continue to be, the person whom God threatens to damn for the
wickedness of his Conversation. Faith is a saving grace, if it be true Faith,
but Noscitur ex socio; if it be not accompanied with good works it is but dead,
and will never entitle us to life. Therefore though it be our privilege that
we may believe, yet this is no excuse from Moral Virtues.

CHAP. V.
Repentance disoblige us any more than Faith. It is Mercy that Sinners can
never enough admire, that upon Repentance they may be accepted into favor, so
as that their iniquity shall not be their Ruin: But it is a wicked perverting
of this Mercy, if Ezekiel. 18.
instead of leading us to Repentance, it encourages Romans 2. 6.
us to sin the more, because this grace does thus abound; yet how many are
there in the World, who upon presumptions of Repentance some time before they
dye, do think it less needful for them to be holy and Virtuous while they live.
Drunkard or Swearer, or any other vicious person, intending hereafter to repent
and amend, now continues in those evil courses; but what do men mean when they
say they will repent? Do they not believe it is sin that must be repented of?
He that has not committed a fault must lie if he cry peccavi; why should he be
sorry and wish he had not done it? If this sorrow be for that which is amiss,
then Drunkenness etc. are hereby acknowledged to be Sins, by those who say they
will repent of them: If Drunkenness be a Sin, then it must needs be a duty to
be temperate and sober, and so for the rest; and if these Moral Virtues be our
duties, then are we under an obligation to them, and they are necessary for us:
It is therefore evident that Repentance is so far from excusing us in our
Immorality, that it does suppose the contrary Virtues necessary for us; if they
were not, we were fools to repent that we have not practiced them; but in
regard they are, theirs is the greater folly, that make Repentance a Plea to
excuse themselves: and this were enough to be said in the case, but it is not
all.

Repentance be understood, the necessity of that proves the necessity of good
works: Repentance in the comprehension of it, is an exercise of the life as
well as of the heart; he that repents must not only be sorry for his sins, but
he must turn from them, and forsake them: Let the wicked forsake Isa. 55.
his way, etc. and let him return to the Lord, etc. and therefore Repentance
and amendment of life are put for one and the same thing: The old English
Translation did so express it, Amend your lives; for the Kingdom of heaven is
at hand. And certainly if a man be sincerely sorrowful for his former sins, he
will take care for the time to come to do so no more, there will be a change in
his life as well as in his heart: So there was in his, who would not at first
obey his father, but afterward he repented Math. 21. 29.
and went. He that repents in earnest, will say, If I have done iniquity, I
will do no more. When sorrow is after a Godly sort, it Job 34. 32.
makes a man careful, studious and industrious, What carefulness it wrought in
you. Now if ^ Cor. 7. (...).
this be necessary thus to amend and change, then so far as Repentance is
necessary, instead of being an Argument the other way, it does clearly prove
the necessity of a holy life. He that repents of Drunkenness and dishonesty,
must leave it, else he is an Hypocrite; he that must leave it, must practice
the contrary; It is not possible a man can leave Drunkenness, if he be not
sober: And he that must practice, is therefore under an Obligation, so that
because it is necessary to repent of Immorality: and this wicked men
acknowledge; If they understood the consequence of the Argument, they must
needs acknowledge also the necessity of Moral Virtues.



Betwixt the stirrup and the ground,
Mercy is sought, Mercy is found)
Yet certainly the hazard is great that ^^ey ^^ who defer Repentance; It is
very hazardous whether ever they may live to execute their Intentions; They
give great provocations to God, to cut the^ off in their sins, and in
Impenitency among the rest: They lay many hindrances and obstructions in their
own way, because the longer they live in sin, it is* the harder for them to
leave it at last, if they do not make themselves incapable: But these things
are somewhat more out of my present purpose, and they are Arguments that may be
more safely omitted, because they are more copiously handled in their proper
places, by those that write particularly about Repentance. So much for answer
to the second presumption; the possibility of Repentance is no Argument against
the necessity of Moral Virtues; but the necessity of Repentance is a great
Argument that they are necessary.

Peter (what God has cleansed, that call not thou Acts 10.
common) of things as well as men, and of the Moral as well as the Ceremonial
Law? are not all things now lawful to us? is there any difference between one
action and another, now under the Gospel? are we not free so as not to entangle
our selves with any yoke of Bondage? so sure they would gladly hope, that say,
God sees no sin in his people: But it is a pitiful pretense to think, that
Christian Liberty should deliver us from a necessity of Obedience. If men will
make a Gospel of their own, and a Religion of their own, they must expect to be
saved by a Savior of their own: But then woe be to those men, that neglect that
great salvation, H^b. 3.
which Christ has purchased and procured, and will effect in his own way: If
we make the Gospel of Christ our rule then, nothing is more plain then this;
that the freedom which Christ has purchased for us, though it be from the
Curse of the Law, yet it G^l. 3.
is not from our Obligation to the Law: Being Romans 6.
then made free from sin, ye became the servants of Righteousness. There is
more in the same Chapter to the same purpose: Indeed the whole Gospel is a
proof to the contrary; there is no Liberty may be called Christian, but what is
allowed in the Gospel: It is not imaginable, that the Gospel should allow us
Liberty to transgress those commands, which it does so frequently urge; unless
we think Christ would be divided against himself, which is the way Luk^ 11.
(by his own confession) not to have his Kingdom stand. Wherefore it is enough
to say, that the Gospel being the Rule both of our Liberty and Duty, though it
be true, that we have allowances which the Jews had not, and that is our
Liberty; yet we have commands which both Jews and Gentiles had, and that is our
duty: And then it must needs follow, that the Liberty which would take us off
from good works and Moral Virtues, is Antichristian and Devilish. It is not
the Seed of God remaining in men, but the Seed of the Serpent, that teaches
them to wind, and turn, and roll themselves about any way, so as they may but
shift out of the paths of Gods Commandments. The commands of the Gospel for
Moral Virtues, are strict and severe; neither the pretense of Faith, nor of
Repentance, nor of Christian Liberty, is any sanctuary for men of unhallowed
lives.

And this is the proof from Scripture: It is Necess^^^^ (...)
necessary for a Christian to live Righteously and Soberly, because there are
many, plain, particular, peremptory commands, whereby God requires these things
of us; which was the first necessity assigned, because God in Scripture has
commanded them.

CHAP. VI.
Lawmakers, it will be sitting to add another Consideration, which will be a
great strength to it, and in likelihood may have greater force upon those that
are most likely to transgress. And this it is,

As it has pleased God to command Moral Virtues, so he has added in the same
Word many severe threatenings, to those who shall break these Commands, and be
guilty of the contrary vices. Neither would the Laws of God nor Man, signify
much to the greatest part of mankind, if they were not penal Laws. We ought to
be Romans 13.
subject not only for wrath but Conscience sake: But did not fear of wrath and
punishment scare many Men, little would Conscience of duty prevail with them;
for notwithstanding that there are good wholesome Laws made, and penalties
annexed; yet how many Robberies, and Murders, and other Enormities are there
committed in the world? But if these wild Beasts had not their way hedged up
with Thorns, they would quickly overrun the world, and make it a desolate
wilderness. The execution of the penalty adds life to the Law. So therefore it
has pleased God to provide, the more effectually to engage Men to a godly and
righteous life, to declare his wrath against unrighteousness; to threaten Hell
and Damnation, and Wrath to come, to Immoral, as well as to Ungodly Men. The
lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone is very terrible; but such as
Murderers, Revel. 21.
and Whoremongers, and all Liars shall have their part in; but not only these,
Wrath, Galat. 5.
Strife, Sedition, Envyings, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like; they that
do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. To 1 Cor. 6.
whom likewise, Covetous Persons, Extortioners and Revilers are added in
another place. These and such like places of Scripture there are, whereby
profane and wicked Men are given to understand, what they may trust to, while
they presume upon impunity in their wicked courses. As sure as God is in
Heaven, these wicked and evil practices lead to Hell: as sure as Hell is
dreadful and intolerable, it is necessary for Men to leave these sins; yea,
because these things being to come are not not so much feared, we find by
experience, that God does (as he threatens Gog) plead against the Ezekiel. 38.
world with Pestilence and Blood: And these now of late have we in England
felt, what God can do; when within the space of one year, and 1665. London.
Westminst
within the compass of two Cities so adjoining that they may go for one,
together with their Suburbs and Liberties, have been swept away mostly by the
Plague, (though not altogether) little less then an 100000 Persons, as by their
Weekly Bills we are assured. The good God give us every one to turn from the
evil of his Jonah 3.
way, that God may turn from his anger, that we perish not: Moreover, God can
send diverse Plagues and Diseases upon Men, that they may know (what Pharaoh
would not be convinced of, but by such kind of Arguments) that God Exodus 14.
is the Lord; that it is not safe to despise the commands of God, as if he were
not in earnest when he gave them.

one woe is quite past, behold Revel. 9.
another woe comes; after the Plague a Fire. Oh thou sometime one of the fairest
of Cities, with what Lamentation shall we bewail thee! In what a sad sense may
we apply those Words; The Lord has purged (London) by the spirit of Isa. 4. 4,
5.
Judgment, and by the spirit of Burning: The Lord has created (almost) upon
every dwelling place (of the City) yea and upon (the place of) her Assemblies
also, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night. How
did we hope that that besome of Destruction (the Plague) having swept so clean,
there would be no more work for new Judgments? and therefore we hoped those
words would not have reached us; For all this his anger is not Isa. 9.
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. But our old and our new sins
have plotted together, to provoke God to lay waste the City of our Solemnities,
the joy of the whole Nation. For how many Centuries of years, has the Lord
kept that City, and blessed the Labors of the Watchmen, that they have not
watched in vain? For how long together has God appointed Isa. 26.
Salvation for walls and bulwarks? How many Fires have been quenched, and the
breaches repaired? yea, we read the whole City was once in a manner consumed by
Fire, (Anno Godwin Catalogue of Bishops. p. 189.
1086.) yet out of the Ashes did arise a new City, that in succeeding
Generations had attained to greater Glories and Magnificence, then ever the
Original Structures could pretend to. The story or tale rather (for so even
Plinies Natural History.
Pliny himself suspected it to be) of the Phaenix, gives him 660 years to live,
before he fires his Nest. It is not yet 600 years, since that dreadful Fire in
the latter end of William the Conquerours Reign: So that in this respect, we
cannot make London parallel to the Phaenix; God grant we may in another, that
we may see a new City grow out of the Ashes of the old. In the mean time, we
are very blind, if so great a Fire as this will not light us to see how angry
God is with Men for their sins: We would not foresee our punishments in our
sins, now God himself undertakes to light us to see our sins in our
punishments: And surely our sins are great, for our punishment is so. Methinks
I find a weak fancy may imagine to it self a representation of this desolate
City, bewailing it self in words to this purpose:

Is it nothing to you all ye that pass by? behold Lamen. 1. 12.
and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce arger. Call me
not Naomi, call me Marah, for the Almighty Ruth 1, 20.
has dealt very bitterly with me. I was full, but now am empty: full of fair
Churches, of goodly Houses, of rich Shops, of stately Halls, of large Streets,
of many People, but full of sin too, and now I am emptyed; for see what a void
space this Fire has made. Why then do ye call me pleasant, seeing the Lord
has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me? Have pity Job
19. 21.
upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the hand of God has touched
me. Does it not grieve you to see these Ruinous Heaps? Have you no compassion
for my once Wealthy Citizens, whose Wealth is now below Envy, and they
themselves ashamed of their former Pride? The time has been, when my Poets
have thought nothing too much to say of me; and I myself thought, I deserved
such an honorable Testimony as this from one of them.

Vide Weavers Funeral Monuments. p. 350.
Take heedful view of every thing, and then say thus in brief,
This either is a world it self, or of the world the chief.
But now I cannot find any has given me my due so much as he, who after many
admirations of my glory, and plenty, and populousness, yet adds,

Ibid. p. 352.
Howbeit many Neighbor Towns, as much ere now could say,
But place for people, people, place, and all for sin decay.
Yet rejoice not against me, O mine Enemy: for Micah 7. 8, 9, 10.
though I fall, I shall arise, when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a
light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me: he will
bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.

Then she that is mine Enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her, which
said unto me, where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her, now shall
she be trodden down as the mire of the streets. But if it must follow, what
follows in that Chapter; Notwithstanding the Land shall ver. 13.
be desolate, because of them that dwell therein, for the fruit of their
doings. The Lord is righteous, and the will of the Lord be done.

Indeed this astonishing providence is a most demonstrative Argument for my
purpose; but such an one, as I was not aware of, when I first began to argue.
For before it came to pass, who would have believed, that in so short a time,
such a flourishing City could have been consumed? Who would not have hoped,
that some of those many Engines would have been useful to have quenched the
Fire? Some of those many Thousands, that the Plague had spared, might have been
able to have stopped the Flames? But the hand of the Lord was lifted up. It has
pleased God by a very severe proof, to chastise us into a belief of the danger
of wickedness and sin, and what less can we infer from it, then

Discite justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos. Virgil Ae^^id 6.
Which I a little vary and translate.

Learn to be good and honest, don't provoke
That God, that strikes with such a heavy stroke.
My Reader will pardon this digression, occasioned by so remarkable an
occurrence. I now return.

When God gave the Law upon Mount Sinai, it was accompanied with Thunders, and
Exodus 20*
Lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet, and the Mountain smoking, that the
people might be afraid to offend such a God. Though the voice of the Gospel be
a stiller voice, yet there are as it were Thunder and Lightning: The voice of
the Lord in his threatenings, does loudly proclaim to the World his pleasure,
that he will have his commands observed, else woe be to them that shall presume
to transgress. Wherefore because some of these commands require Moral Virtues,
and some of these threatenings condemn Vice; from the tenor of this Law, I
gather my first general Argument, why it is necessary for a Christian to be a
Moral Man.

Word of God; (if there be first a satisfaction that it is the Word of God)
then we may be sure we are not mistaken; especially when the Texts mentioned
are so plain as those formerly insisted on: But ignorant and mean Men may be
imposed upon; if falsehood be subtly devised, it may go for depth of right
Reason: Men may and sometimes do, pro falso non minus Grotius de Jure Bell* and
pacis prol^g.
quam pro vero, vires eloquentiae intendere; as is said of Carneades, who could
declaim one day for justice with a great deal of zeal, and the next day as much
against it: Certain it is, that many Books are written in contradiction to one
another; they all pretend to Reason, and it is not always easy to distinguish
between strength of Reason, and sleight of Wit: Wherefore I have first premised
the Authority of the commands, and by a large explication of them, have
endeavored to free them from all exception; that it may help forward what is
further to be said by way of Reason and Argument. So that when it shall be
seen, what an Harmony there is between Scripture and Reason, how they do
jointly defend the same Cause, it may make the greater impression upon those
that shall happen to be my Readers, and more effectually persuade to these
Virtues.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian: OR, The Necessity of Morality among
Christians.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I.
this sure word of Prophecy, we do not abstract from it, but add some other
considerations to those already named; for which likewise we have Authority
from the word of God: It is therefore further to be proved, that there is a
necessity of Moral Virtue, to which (for a further confirmation) I add there
is likewise an excellency in it, and such an excellency, as (though it may be
considered abstractly from the foresaid necessity, yet joined to it) will give
a further advantage to this argument; for by how much the more excellent it is,
it must needs be more necessary for us to practice it.

The first of these is an argument so worthy to be considered at large, that it
alone will enlarge this Book to the bigness of both the former; yet I hope I
shall enlarge upon nothing impertinent or unworthy notice taking.

a means in order to an end. So far Necessitas medii.
as an end is necessary to be obtained, so far those means must necessarily be
used, without which we cannot attain that end. Now there are these four ends
and purposes for the obtaining of which we ought to be virtuous in our
Conversation.















(...), These Tit. 3. ^*
things are good and profitable to men. The goodness of an Action consists in
its agreeableness to its rule: Now because these Moral Virtues are according to
Rule, therefore they must needs be good. Which is easily proved, if one thing
be but supposed, viz. that Man is a reasonable creature: Which proposition if
any man shall deny, or profess to doubt of, there is little to be got by
arguing with him; for he does profess himself to be incapable to discern of an
Argument: He must be taught by Correction rather then Instruction: He must be
taught as we teach Dogs, Argumento bacillino, with a wooden Argument. Wherefore
supposing this, that man has some nobler principle in him, then a Hog or a
Dog; somewhat above life and sense and motion; he is a Creature endued with
Reason, with an U^derstanding to discern what is truth, and a Will to choose
what is good; I am then to demonstrate that which if all men were virtuous
would need no other demonstration: But the wicked excesses and abominable
debaucheries of a great part of the world (not excepting those that live in the
Christian world) give occasion to think, that wickedness does alter men's
understandings. ( Malitia mutavit Wisd. 4.
intellectum.) So that they are not sensible of any difference betweeen good
and evil: men will not be persuaded (at least they live as if they were not)
but that it is as lawful to revenge an injury as to requite a kindness; It is
as noble and generous, to inflame their souls by Intemperance to Lust, as it is
to deny themselves and to mortify those affections. Dolus aut Virtus, they
cannot tell which to prefer; it is as creditable to cheat another, if it be
done handsomely and ingeniously, as it is to be scrupulous lest they should do
any wrong; and so almost in all sorts of Vice.

Church to go to the Tavern or Alehouse or worse places, it is not likely they
will find themselves in so melancholy retirements, as to be at leisure to
peruse an argument of this nature: Yet it is not impossible but out of an
humor at least they may: An Epicurean would hear St. Paul; Agrippa and
Bernice, very fanciful persons, had a great mind to hear what he could say for
himself: And I remember a story in Plutarch, that when Plato had persuaded
Timothy the Son of Conon to leave his great feasts, and one night to sup with
him, the next morning finding himself in a more happy temper of body, then he
used to be after his luxurious meals, he acknowledged that (...): They that sup
with Plato are better for it the Plutarch Sympos. ^. 6. proe^m*
Day after: So possibly may it be with these my endeavors, if any body will be
persuaded to try, they will find it true, what upon the former supposition I am
now to evince, that there is a goodness in Moral Virtues, and an
unsuitableness, an unbecomingness and naughtiness in every vice.

Which I prove by Propositions founded upon and drawn from one another.

CHAP. II.
THe first whereof is this.

Lex Vniversi, or a Law whereby the whole Creation may be said to act, or to be
acted by Rule: The Motions of the Heavens we call orderly and regular motions,
because they are by Rule, according to the appointments of that God, who has
appointed the Moon for Seasons, Ps^. 104.
and the Sun knows his going down.

The changes among the Elements are natural and according to Rule, the growth
of Plants, the exercises of sense in Beasts, pursuing that which is convenient,
and avoiding that which is inconvenient to their Natures; all these (...) a
kind of a Rule to act by. Now how comes it to pass that Man alone above all the
rest of the Creation should be lawless? In as much as we are Creatures, we have
the Law of our Creation; but in regard we are Reasonable Creatures, of a higher
and nobler Nature, than any beast of the Field; either our actions must be
below our Natures, or we must have an higher and more excellent Rule, than
other Creatures have. They have a Rule whereby they eat and drink, etc. They
have a Rule for their bodies, which is all they are worth: We have Souls
besides, and how can it be, but they must have a Rule proper and suitable to
their Natures? Our wills and affections have their proper objects to fix upon,
as well as the Eye has Colors, or the Ear Sounds: Now the objects of our
wills being as different, as those of our senses, there must be some way and
means whereby the Soul may distinguish between good and bad, as well as the Eye
between white and black. It is not possible that every thing should be fitting
for us to do; because of the contrari^ty that is in actions: If it be fitting
to be sober and temperate, then it is not fitting to be drunk; If fitting to
love others, then not fit to hate and malign them, and so in other cases: But
how shall we know what is fitting or not, but by some Rule, whereby we may try
and so pass a Judgment upon our actions? Some Rule then there must be proper
for us: Man being a reasonable Creature, must act by Rule, and by a higher Rule
than Brute Beasts are capable of. Which is the first Proposition.

Actum agere, now to insist on that, which indeed is our best Rule. But there
have been many Nations in the World with whom God has not dealt as with the
Jews of old, as for his Judgments, they have Psalm. 147.
not known them, or with Christians now: Many have not the Gospel among them,
yet they are not without a Rule; for even these Gentiles show the work of the
Law written in their hearts, Romans 2*
etc. the same Law which the Heathens call non scriptam, sed natam Legem, even
this Law of Nature, which is an universal Rule all the World over.

If any should be so brutish as to think their sensual appetite, the measure
and rule of what is good or bad; they do in effect deny themselves to have any
Reason, because they suffer it to be overborn and overruled by sense; for if
the actions of a reasonable Creature are governed by sense, what is the man's
Reason good for? how can he be said to be Reasonable in his Actions, or to have
Reason for what he does? They who are thus enchanted by the pleasures of sense
( as Homer fains Ulysses Odyss. 10.
followers to have been by Circe.) it is time for them to renounce their
Humanity, to go and keep Company with their Relations: Let them join themselves
to their kindred, and wallow in the same mire with Swine; Let them go to graze
with the beasts of the field, till their understandings return to them, as was
Dan. 4.
said of Nebuchadnezzar; for they are not fit to converse with men. We who
profess to* have Reason, must make it our Rule, or we can have no Rule worthy
of our Faculties.

Stat pro ratione voluntas, their will usurps the place of their Reason, and
gives a Law to it. Now men's interests and passions so often opposing and
thwarting each other, this cannot be a standing Rule for all mankind, because
of the manifest inconveniences, and disturbances, and disorders that would
follow hereupon. The former Rule of sense is too short, and therefore not
adaequate, nor proportioned to the vast dimensions of a reasonable Soul: The
latter is crooked, a Lesbian Rule, that will bend whither a man would have it;
wherefore neither of these is fit to measure our actions by, if we would know
when we do well or ill.

We must therefore distinguish between the Reason of the man, and the Reason of
the thing: The Reason of the man corrupt sometimes and depraved, and makes men
put good for evil, and evil for good: But the Reason of the thing is constant,
and certain, and uniform; that is, the Law of Nature and the directions of
right Reason, which every man may attain to, if he do not blind himself by
prejudice or passion; for it is that we are born with, viz. a Conscience of
good and evil: And this Law and Conscience (especially as it is supported and
confirmed by the Law of God, and his Commands in his Word) is a Rule whereby we
are to guide our conversations. So then, if the Virtues we speak of will abide
this Test, if they be found right according to this Rule, they must needs be
good Actions; for there cannot be any goodness in any Action, if it be not in
conformity to its Rule: which makes room for the 3. Proposition.



Philosophers were not much mistaken in it, when they thought, as Lactantius
represents them; Viam, quae sit assignata virtutibus, primo aditu De vere ^ultu
cap. 3.
esse arduam voluerunt, and confragosam; in qua si quis difficultate superata,
in summum ejus evaserit; habere eum de caetero planum iter, lucidum amoenumque
campum, and omnes laborum suorum capere fructus uberes atque jucundos. The
first attempts of Virtue are difficult: The bridling of our passions is like
the backing of a Colt, it cannot be done but warily and by degrees, and that
not without Labor: Now were not these things Pulchra, as well as Difficilia,
were it not an excellent thing thus to do; at least, did not those men that
thus behave themselves believe so, there can no good Reason be given why they
should take so much pains to no purpose. Virtuous men believe Virtue and
Goodness to be the same thing, or else it would never draw them so powerfully
to an admiration of it: (...), evocat ad Sibbs ad Clerum.
sui amorem vi quadam Magnetica. Men would never follow Virtue for Virtues
sake, if they did not believe it carried its reward along with it. Now if the
Rule be good, that Credendum est Artifici in sua art. Men are to be believed
there, where they have most experience; though men of corrupt affections and
vicious practices should deny that there is any goodness in Virtue, yet would
it he no great Argument on the other side; for whom should we sooner believe
than those who have tasted, and seen and tried? for thus much is certain, that
all men who practice Virtue, believe it to be agreeable to their Natures.

CHAP. III.
and in works deny; namely, that it is best to be Virtuous? this will be a
great evidence in the case, and this witness is true: Wicked men bear witness
to Virtue commonly when they dye, or if not so, yet certainly sometimes while
they live.

are of their Father the Devil: whatever shapes and disguises they have put on,
yet the lower end of their life is cloven-footed, they discover a breach that
they have made upon their Consciences; they acknowledge at the last that they
have been Sinners, they have not done well to be Drunkards or Swearers, to
cheat their Neighbors, etc. for which they now say, Lord have Mercy upon us:
that supposes they are in danger of being Miserable, else they would not need
Mercy: If they may be Miserable, then sure they have sinned, else how should
they discern it? Now I argue, are these Men's First or Second thoughts like to
be Wisest, and nearer to the truth of the case? Their eager pursuits of sin
while they lived, have had much of their will and fancy, and corrupt
Affections, but little 1 Samuel: 18. and 20. chapter
of their Reason; and so when the Evil Spirit is upon Saul, it is no wonder if
he cast a javelin at David, and afterward at Jonathan, his best Friends; but
when his Reason returns to him, he acknowledges his error, and says that David
was more righteous then he. In like manner 1 Samuel 24.
many Men hate those Virtues which are according to Gods own heart, as David
was; but this is during the prevalency of the Evil Spirit; when they come to
die, as the Soul is loosning from the Body, so by degrees they are wrought off
from the deceits of sense and the temptations of the World; when they are at
Deaths door, and see it opened for them, then they have another representation
of themselves: Sculls and dead Men's Bones, and the Worms that are to feed upon
them; and besides, a dismal pre-occupation of their thoughts concerning the
dreadful day of Judgment; these things alter the case. Then the Men who would
sometimes fill themselves with costly Wine and Ointments, and crown themselves
with Rosebuds, Wisd. 20.
to be partakers of their wantonness, etc. yet shall be afraid and remember
their sins, and Wisd. 4.
their own wickedness shall come before them to convince them: Yea they shall
change their minds, and sigh for grief of mind, and say within themselves; This
is he whom we sometimes had in Wisd. 5.
derision, and in a Parable of reproach: We fools counted his life madness, and
his end without Honor: How is he counted among the Children of God, and his
portion is among the Saints! If this be Apocryphal, yet it is good sense, and
the more likely to be true, because Canonical Scripture gives us a like
instance; wicked Balaam did even before his death desire to dye the death of
the Righteous, and that his last end Numb. 23.
should be like his. Herein are many wicked men like Balaam, of whom we read
this passage: Balaam the Son of Beor has said, and Numb. 24.
the man whose eyes are open has said. Dixit vir occlusus oculo, says
Montanus, according to the letter of the Hebrew: The Margin of our Translation
has this Exposition of it: The Man who had his eyes shut, but now open. There
is a beauty and luster in Virtue, against which Vicious Men shut their eyes,
and will not see, but Isa. 26.
they shall see and be ashamed: When death is closing their bodily eyes till
the Resurrection, then the understanding opens, and discerns the folly of the
fore-past life; when it is growing too late to amend, then Men begin to Repent,
and proceed thus far at least, to acknowledge they have done ill, and to own a
goodness in Virtue, and an agreeableness to their natures and right reason.

General Rule among others has its Exceptions: The Consciences of some Men are
past feeling while they live, and are not awakened when they dye: As Pope
Boniface the 8th lived like a Lion and dyed like a Dog. So is many a wicked Man
in this sense, Primus ad extremum similis sibi,

From first to last one and the same,
He lives in sin, dies without shame.
They live like Beasts, and so they dye: they sin like Lions boldly, and
undauntedly, and fiercely; they dye like Dogs wretchedly, and churlishly, and
basely; without the understanding of a Man to consider whither they are going,
without Faith in God, or love to Heaven, or Fear of Hell: Yet notwithstanding
all this, as we say of Brute Beasts, that they have some semblances of Reason
in many of their Actions, (of which Plutarch give many instances in his Book De
solertia Ammalium) so these Brutish Men while they live, have some Candlelight
of their understandings ( The Spirit Prove. 10.
of a man is the Candle of the Lord) not extinct, though it be shut up in a
dark Lanthorn, and do not discover it self to others, unless it be at unawares.



not Guilty, then for a Drunkard when he is sober, to deny that he was drunk:
And so they that will swear, will lie, and deny that they did swear; and he
that would revenge himself upon his Neighbor, will not own it to be Revenge:
he that would cheat his Neighbor, would be thought an honest Man, etc.
wherefore now is all this, were not these vices contrary to right Reason, and
the Virtues they oppose agreeable thereto? Why should any Man be ashamed of
that, which he does not believe to be unlawful? If it be a Virtue to be Drunk
or Kn^vish, why do not Men avow and profess it, and make as much conscience of
being Drunk, as others do to be Sober? Herein did Gehazi, Ananias, and
Sapphira, and others betray themselves; when a Man denies a fact which he knows
himself to have committed, he is therein a self-condemned Man: He denies it,
because he is loath to own it; and therefore Men do not own their sins,
because they know them to be sins, and the Virtues that are contrary to them to
be good and reasonable Actions.

Jehu would 2 Kings 10.
have his zeal for the Lord taken notice of, when yet he was but a Hypocrite:
And the Pharisees (likewise Hypocrites) would sound a Mat. 6.
Trumpet when they gave their Alms: Such Hypocrites still there are, who in a
sense but little commendable, would make a Virtue of necessity; because they
could not sin, they would be thought Virtuous because they did not. A Knave
that is made to be Virtuous against his will, how ready is he to allege that
as an Argument for himself, and to boast that he did no wrong! This supposes
Virtue to be praiseworthy, else why should they praise themselves for it, when
yet they are not Virtuous out of love to it, but only because they cannot
safely commit vice?

yet would fain be fed if he were poor, and will commend the persons that shall
so return good for evil. By these and by other such instances, it is easy to
observe how these kind of men contradict themselves: As Goliath brought David a
Sword to cut off his own Head, so do these Gigantick monstrous sinners, that
seem neither to fear God nor regard Man, whose boundless wickedness neither the
Laws of God nor Man can restrain; yet an Arrow out of their own quiver pierces
them to the Heart: Out of their own Mouths they are condemned, their own
consciences witness against them; their apprehensions of Virtue in others, will
rise up to their Judgment and Condemnation, because they were not Virtuous
themselves; for hereby they join in the same acknowledgements with Virtuous
Men, of its becomingness and agreeableness to the light and Law of Nature.
Which being so universally acknowledged, needs not be further proved, though it
may be done by other kind of Arguments: It is enough that wicked men do own a
goodness in Moral Virtue; I add no other Arguments under this Head, because I
believe it true what Grotius observes to this purpose: Esse aliquid Juris
Naturalis, probari De Jure Belli and pac. l. 1. c. 1.
solet tum ab eo quod prius est, tum ab eo quod posterius, quarum probandi
rationum illa subtilior est, haec popularior. To prove any thing to be
according to the Law of Nature a priori, from the convenience or inconveniency
of it to our Natures and Reasons, is a more subtle way of arguing, and may be
the strongest Argument in it self considered; but Arguments a posteriori, from
the consent of mankind (as he there instances) are more popular, that is, more
taking with, and more suitable to the apprehensions of ordinary men, and so may
be more effectual for their end, that is, to convince and persuade. Wherefore
so much shall suffice to prove that there is a goodness in Moral Virtue; which
was the first part of my first Argument, to evince the necessity of these
Virtues.

CHAP. IV.


Virtue, as it is with Meats and Drinks; there are many dainty dishes and
delicious drinks, yet they are not necessary, neither for the supply of our
need, nor for the satisfaction of our appetites: He that must say non habeo,
may likewise say, nec careo, nec cupio; he that has them not, may well be
without them, for there are other savory meat he may feed upon. But there is
such a necessity of Virtue, as that the defect of it cannot otherwise be
supplied: for if any thing would give a dispensation to an Immoral life, it
must be Christian Religion; but it has been before said, that neither Faith
nor Repentance, nor Christian Book 2.
Liberty; and it might as well be proved of every Christian privilege; none of
these will indulge a man, and give him leave to be wicked and vicious in his
Conversation. Christian Religion, and Moral Virtue, are not like two several
roads, either of which do indifferently lead to the same place: but indeed they
are one and the same thing; not that bare Virtue is Religion; but it is within
Religion, as a part is within the whole: for the commands of the Gospel do
plainly and peremptorily require it, as has been said; and therefore one and
the same thing (for example Charity, Humility, etc.) does bear both these names
of Moral Virtue, and Christian Grace. From whence it might be sufficiently
proved, that a man cannot be a man of a good life, if he do not fulfill these
Commands: yet for a further confirmation, let these considerations be annexed.

Friends to God, and Children of God; we come to be Brethren, and all members
of the same body whereof Christ is the Head: Yet notwithstanding there does
still remain a Relation, between Magistrate and Subject, Husband and Wife,
Father and Child, Master and Servant, etc. and this the Scripture does suppose,
by giving distinct precepts to these several sorts of persons: Moreover the
Scripture does require a continuance in these Relations, witness St. Paul: Let
every man abide in the same calling 1 Cor. 7. 24.
in which he was called. Art thou called being a Servant care not for it, but
if thou may be made free use it rather. And is not that as much as to say,
that our calling (to Christianity) does not make us free from this subjection?
Yea (as there is a Jus gentium as well as Jus Naturae, so) there are other
Relations between one Nation and another: There is a necessity that one Nation
should traffic, should maintain correspondence with another. Non omnis fert
omnia Tellus. No Country is a Paradise.

The Scripture tells us of a pearl of greater price, of better Riches then any
Merchant can fetch from either of the Indies: but as there will be eating and
drinking, so there will be buying and selling in this World, and our Religion
does not prohibit us to have intercourse with other Nations. Blessed be God we
live in a plentiful land, where we our selves are more churlish and barren then
our soil; yet it is no disparagement to us, that we are not planted in the
Garden of Eden. Every herb does not grow in our own Garden. There are some
things of daily use among us, our Sugars, and Spices, our Silver, and Gold,
etc. which we must go out of doors for, to fetch them in from other Nations;
though we have likewise Commodities of our own to export to others. Now if the
trade of a Merchant be a lawful calling, this likewise makes it evident, that
all Relations between man and man are not dissolved, there where the Gospel
takes place. So then there do continue such distinctions and Relations as these
in the Christian World.



Ethics are distinguished from Oeconomicks and Politic^^; yet evident it is,
that the latter do belong to the former generally taken. No man can live
morally well according to the rules of the Ethics, if he do not order himself
in his family, and political capacities according to those rules. Subjection to
Magistrates and protection of Subjects; Obedience to Parents, and respect to
Children; and all those other just and charitable, and liberal actions which
are necessary for us to practice as we are engaged in such relations, these are
duties of the second table, commanded in the Gospel, and are exercises of Moral
Virtue. So that the substance of the Argument contained in these premises is
this:

For as much as we Fellow Creatures are in some relation one to another, which
cannot be fulfilled nor managed unless we be virtuous; It remains that there is
such a goodness in Moral Virtue, as that we being as we are, and must continue
to be; without it we cannot be said to live good lives.

Heathen and the Christian be compared together, and it will be found true,
that, if Morality were necessary for the Heathen, so that where they failed,
their lives were not good; then it must be as necessary for us Christians: Who
doubts but that Justice and Temperance were virtues in the Heathen, how shall
they be judged but by the not be for Immorality as well as for Idolatry and
Irreligion? for wherein is the Light of Nature plainer, and they more
inexcusable then in Unrighteousness and Intemperance, and such like Vices,
which they themselves sometimes acknowledged to be such. Now need not a
Christian be as virtuous as a Heathen? undoubtedly he ought, unless the Gospel
exempt him, which has already been observed to be plain and positive in the
case. But furthermore, is not vice the same now that it was of old, as
abominable and reproveable, and virtue as commendable and necessary? If men's
lives may rather give them a denomination then their profession, a great part
of the Christian World is still Heathenish. The Devil is a revengeful as well
as a malicious spirit: It has pleased God to spread abroad the Christian
Religion far and wide, by his Almighty power. His name has Malac. 1.
been great among the Gentiles from the rising of the Sun to the going down of
the same. But if Heathenism has been dispossessed in one kind, has it not
returned in another? Is not the Devils Chapel near Gods Church? Has every one
that has been baptized into the name of Christ, put on Christ? Why then should
it now be thought a strange thing, that Drunkards, and Swearers, and Murderers,
and Adulterers, and Liars, and Thieves, and Knaves, and Rebels, and Covetous,
and Proud, and Peevish, and Uncharitable men, should be reproved for these sins
as well as Hypocrites, and Formalists, and Unbeleivers, etc. did not David sin
in the matter of Bathsheba as truly as Amnon in the case of Tamar? and was he
not accordingly reproved for it by Nathan? Would Treason be ever the less crime
if one of the Court or Bedchamber should be guilty of it? was Brutus more
pardonable then the rest who conspired the death of Julius Caesar, because of
his near relation to him? Surely the Israelites are taught otherwise, You only
have I known of all Amos 3.
all families of the Earth, therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities. There was a greater Communion between God and the Jews then with
other Nations, and more plentiful Communications from him; by reason of which
they knew more of God then other Nations did: This is now the case of us
Christians: We know more of God then the Heathens did, in particular we know
what the word of God requires of us in point of Morality. He has showed thee,
O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee but to do Justice,
and love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? and that which is showed us we
do or may know; Wherefore to him that knows to do good, James 4.
and does not, to him it is sin. And if it be a sin to break these commands,
then it is good to keep them; and if it be good so to do, then the first
Argument is made good: There is a goodness, and such a goodness in Moral
Virtue, as that without it we cannot be said to be men of good lives. Which was
the first necessi^^ assigned of Morality, that our lives may be good.

CHAP. V.
IT is necessary for us to be virtuous, that our deaths may be safe. I shall be
mistaken if I be thought to mean, that bare Moral Virtue will make our lives
good or our deaths safe: Faith and Repentance, and the grace of the good Spirit
of God have more then once been acknowledged necessary: Yet is it easy to
apprehend that Virtue may be necessary for these purposes, though not
sufficient. Concerning life it has been already said: It remains to say, that
if we desire to die in safety, we must be virtuous while we live, and that for
two reasons.





etc. cannot dye in safety, because it is possible they may be miserable after
death: which possibility has the force of an Argument, to persuade men to
provide better for their safety when they come to dye: The Husbandman makes his
best advantage of a fair day, it is not safe to let his Corn lie abroad, if it
be fit to take in, because the next day may prove rainy. The Merchant makes use
of the wind when it is lies right; it is not safe to defer, because it is
possible afterward the wind may not serve him as now it does. In all cases
about our worldly affairs, a possibility of danger is an effectual Argument for
present care: And why should it not awaken our Souls as well? It is at least
possible that after death, they who dye in these wickednesses, may perish
everlastingly for them.



much less will they consider of it; yet to make my discourse as complete as I
can, I have brought in this among other things, and it is pertinent enough: for
what Atheist in the world can deny it possible but that these things may be?
who can tell any thing to the contrary? they who will not believe there is a
Hell, yet it is not possible they should demonstrate that there is none. The
Jewish Doctors do supply that part of Scripture, where it is said, Cain talked
with Abel his Brother, thus: ^en. 4. Ainsw. in Loc. D. Helvic. de Chald. Bib.
paraphras. cum Te^a edit.
Cain said there was no judgment, nor judge, nor world to come, nor good
reward for justice, nor vengeance for wickedness, etc. But how could Cain then,
or any of his followers now, be assured of it? upon what account is it
impossible that our Souls should outlive our Bodies, or our Bodies afterward
be rejoined to our Souls? who can demonstratively answer St. Acts 26.
Paul's question? why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God
should raise the dead? and what contradiction is it to say, that they who do so
live in another world, shall be either rewarded or punished according as they
have lived in this.

Plato seems to make Socrates doubt in this case, when almost twice together he
says, (...); Apologia Socratis verse. sin^m.
and the last words of that Dialogue answers the question, whether it be better
to dye or to live, thus; (...): It is known only to God himself. Yet the
Dialogue next but one, Phaedo makes it evident, that however he would not
exasperate his Judges by proving of it; yet he did firmly believe the souls
immortality, and rewards and punishments in the world to come. Now put the
case, every one does not yield to his Arguments, (then which we have better
elsewhere) yet who is there that can deny but it may be so, and then what if it
should be so? what if possibly the lascivious person should roll and stretch
himself in a bed of everlasting burnings? what if possibly the drunkard, whose
reason is sunk and drowned in his cups, should sink into a lake that burns with
fire and brimstone? what if liars, and cheaters, and knaves, should be found to
have put the greatest cheat upon themselves at the last, when they have
irrecoverably destroyed their own souls? were there nothing else to be said
then this, It is possible all this may happen, it should be a powerful and
dreadful amazement to careless and secure sinners: They are in a road that they
do not consider whether it may lead, for ought they know (it is not possible
they should know the contrary) all their mirth may end in everlasting
bitterness* It is possible, they that live vitiously, and so dye, may be
miserable for ever; therefore it cannot be safe for such men to dye; and if so,
it is then necessary men should live virtuously, that they may dye safely.

thought themselves happy while they lived.

Book 2.
^he Word were added to the Commands, to ^rove a preceptive necessity of Moral
Virtue; ^t shall suffice therefore summarily now to ^peak* However there be no
sin so great or ^oul, which the blood of Christ is not of virtue enough to
cleanse us from, (and therefore this is not to be understood as a prejudice to
the free and overflowing grace of God) yet in regard those men are supposed
never to have truly and thoroughly repented and believed, whose repentance does
not proceed to a reformation of life, and their faith show it self by good
works; therefore they who thus live and dye, are under the curse of the Gospel,
as well as of the Law: and the threatenings of the Gospel have been already
produced: I only now say, the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven (and shall
one day be revealed and executed in Hell) not only against all ungodliness,
Romans 1*
but also against all unrighteousness of men; unrighteous, immoral, wicked men,
shall suffer for their faults, and how then can it be safe for them to dye?

before they will yield. I think I should too far digress if I should undertake
to prove these; which I shall the less need to do, because they are so
frequently and successfully undertaken by others: there may be the same reason
for this as for the former head about the possibility of these things, they are
the same persons who deny both. I took that in, because it might be dispatched
in few words. But the existence of a Deity and the souls Immortality, cannot be
proved convincingly to Reason, without a large discourse upon them: wherefore
in hopes that this Treatise will find all those it meets with ready to yield
both these; then supposing them, it cannot be but wicked men who are enemies to
God while they live, and dye in the same state, must needs be deserted of God
and separated from him after death. If God be not infinitely holy and pure, he
cannot be God: his nature being absolutely perfect, it must needs follow, that
God must infinitely abhor sin, and sinners for sin, where it is not purged
away, as it is not in these men. Now how can it stand to reason, that those men
who have dishonored God all their life long, have lived in contradiction to
his Nature, and Will, and Laws: He is holy, they are unholy; he is light and
they are darkness; I say, it cannot stand to reason, that these men should be
received into the favor of God: What communion has light with darkness? 2
Cor. 6.
what concord has Christ with Belial? what love can God bear to his desperate
enemies? They Job 21. Luke 13.
that say to God depart from us, why is it strange that God should command them
to depart from him? Indeed if God were such a God as the Heathens made their
Jupiter, and Venus, and Bacchus to be; then might God entertain such wicked
persons into his Court, for it would be but like to like. And it may be feared
it was one reason, why the Heathens did so allow themselves in all manner of
wickedness and vice, because they had gods to be their Patrons, whom their
Fables report to have practiced the same things. But the Lord is our God, the
Lord whose name is Holy and Reverend, and Psalm. 111
holiness is his nature: And it may be, it would not be a greater sin to say,
there is no God at all, then to say, there is such a God as the Poets speak of:
yea, and the more sober Heathens were of this mind; Plutarch for himself
affirms as much, (...), De superstitione* p. 169. Xyland.
etc. What say you, he that believes there is no God, is he not wicked? but he
that believes there is such a God as superstitious men fancy him to be, is he
not much more wicked? for my own part, I had rather men should say, there was
never such a man as Plutarch, then that they should say, Plutarch was an
inconstant, passionate, revengeful man, etc. It is very dishonorable to God,
to think him any thing less then infinitely and perfectly Holy; and then what
must become of those men, who are as unlike to God as the Devil is, or their
natures are capable of? they must look to be separated from God, as the Devils
are, they must keep company with their own kindred and allies; sin marries the
soul to the Devil, and his company, and his torments are the portion of a
sinner: Wherefore woe be to the wicked, it shall be ill with Isa. 3.
him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him: and men of loose,
profane, debauched, vicious lives, are wicked men, whose misery that waits for
them in the world to come, will express and enforce this Argument with greater
horror then they are now aware of: Then will it be proved, that it was
necessary to live honestly, and virtuously, because they that live otherwise,
are miserable when they dye: Which was the second instance of the necessity of
Moral Virtue; as that our lives may be good, so that our deaths may be safe.

CHAP. VI.
THere is a necessity of Moral Virtue, that both life and death may be
comfortable: what the world would be without light, that are our lives without
comfort; light is gladness, and therefore it would be a melancholy world, if we
were all benighted, and left to grope in the dark; and gladness is light: The
Jews had light, and gladness, and joy. We (...) 8.
should soon be weary of our lives, if we were debarred of all the comforts and
pleasures of life. But the question is, where is the Palace of Pleasure, and
which are the paths that lead to it? where does Hearts-ease and Comfort grow?
how may we come to live in Pleasure, and to dye with Joy? surely there is a way
that seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are Prove. 14.
the ways of death. So are the ways of wickedness and vice, in point of comfort
as well as safety; and if ever we hope for comfort and joy, whether living or
dying, we must apply those words to this case: Enter not into the path of the
wicked, and go not in the way of evil men, Prove. ^*
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. And the reason added
afterward is not impertinent, The path of the just is as the shining light,
that shines more and more unto a perfect day: The way of the wicked is as
darkness, they know not at what they stumble. And for the proof of this I offer
two things.





Job 21.
lives: They take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ.
They spend their days in wealth, (or properly in good) they good themselves in
the pleasures of sense. Had not Belshazzar a merry bout? (as the phrase
sometimes Dan. 5.
is) and have not the generation of Drunkards still the same, that count it
pleasure to riot in the day time? yea their pleasures are 2 Pet. 2.
too great to be confined to a day: Instead of Psa. 119.
rising at midnight to give thanks to God, they sit up till midnight to sin
against God. By such kind of persons as these, men of more severe principles,
that dare not let out so fast to their sinful excesses, are counted melancholy
fools, that will not allow themselves to be merry, and brisk, and take the
pleasures of life while they last. These things are indeed so, and pity it is
that men are so besotted, as not to understand true pleasure, nor to be able to
distinguish blazing Comets from fixed Stars: that joy and comfort that makes
the biggest show, that is most gazed after; whereas true joy is more inward and
serious, Res severa est Senec^. Epist. 23.
verum gaudium, quite another kind of thing then vicious men apprehend; and
that which they partake of, is not so considerable, as that they deserve to be
said to live comfortably. That appears thus;

sense or fancy, and therefore no great matter; or if they do reach the soul,
they are but corrupt affections that are gratified by them, and still they do
not amount to much; what are the pleasures, and joys of intemperate men,
whether (...) Aristot.
(...), as they are distinguished? whether they be Drunkards, or Gluttons, or
Unclean persons, these are carnal sensual pleasures, they are tasted and felt,
and that is all that can be said of them. What are the pleasures of games, and
plays, but to be heard, on seen or fancied? so is Covetousness a lust 1 John 2.
of the Eye; for when goods are increased, they are increased that eat them,
and what good is there to the owner thereof, save the beholding of them with
their Eyes? And the sweetness that Eccles. 5.
is in revenge, and malice, or any like distemper of the mind, they do but
please the fancy, not reason, or judgment, or conscience; these things men do
to satisfy their humors, not that by; reason they are satisfied they are fit
to be done: And are pleasures of sense so considerable, that men should lay
aside conscience for their sakes? Was it not a ridiculous thing for an Emperor
to raise an Army, and Callgula.
send them down to the Seaside, as if there were some new province for them to
go and conquer; but when they come there, all their business is to gather
Cockle-shells? so methinks do the men that thirst after the pleasures of
wickedness; they awaken and stir up the powers of their souls; their fancy
works; they have thoughts, designs, and contrivances, and projects in their
heads; to these are joined their busy affections, their longing hopes, and
their eager desires; and when all these are mustered together, they are a great
force: And what is all this for? not to conquer an Enemy, but to gather
Cockle-shells; not to purge their souls of the remainders of sin, and so to
march on Heaven-wards, when they have beat down all that stands in opposition;
but to find out some rare inventions to tickle their senses. A goodly errand,
for a man to come into the world to contest with the Brutes which shall be most
happy! Vain man, do thou not know, that thy Ox, and thy Ass, is happier then
thy self if thou have nothing else to glory in but the pleasures of sense? or
if not they, yet some other more inconsiderable creatures do out-vye us in all
these things. It is observed, there is no sense we have, but there is some
unreasonable creature has it in greater excellency then we; unless possibly
the Touch, which is the most ignoble of all. And there is an instance of all in
these two old plain Verses, but V. Charron Wisd. p. 38.
good enough for my purpose, unless the men they reprove were better.

Nos aper auditu praecellit, Aranea tactu,
Vultur odor^tu, lynx visu, simia gustu.
Vultures, and Lynces, Spiders, Apes, and Swine,
Each has a sense more excellent then thine:
Is it worth the while for a reasonable creature, to rise in the morning, and
so from day to day, for no other purpose, but to be dressed fine, and then to sit
down to eat, and drink, or rise up Exodus 32.
to play? Would Solomon have sent a Fleet to Tarshish for Apes, and Peacocks,
if there had been no Silver, nor Gold, or Ivory to be brought 2 Chronicles. 9
thence? much less would they have brought them, and left their Gold behind
them: yet thus do wicked men, they take more pains for toys and fancies, more
for what they shall eat, and drink, and put on, then for the Kingdom of Math. 6
God, and the righteousness thereof. This is all men live for, to eat, and
drink, and be merry; and if these things be so considerable, let us give the
right hand of fellowship to the beasts of the field, who enjoy these pleasures
as they are capable, more undisturbedly a great deal then we do. The pleasures
of sense are like the wisdom that contrives and pursues them, sensua and
d^vilish: yea the most spiritual pleasures James 3.
these men have, the gratifying their corrupt affections is no better, for
envying and Ibid.
strife are named in the same place. This is one instance how mean, and low,
and dreggy, the comforts of wicked men are; they ascend but to pleasure the
sense, or fancy, or they descend rather; for it is as if a Giant should put
forth all his strength to encounter a Pigmy, when a spirit stretches it self to
its utmost capacity, for no other thing, but to please the senses of the body.

Saul, there i^ an evil spirit upon them, 1 Samuel 16.
which cannot be charmed nor laid but by Music, as his was; they are so dull
and dumpish when alone, that they must go abroad again to seek for some
pleasure to allay the smart of the inward guilt: It is a precarious pleasure
that men must stand to the courtesy of others for, whether they will allow it
them or no; those comforts are best, that are freest, and most within our own
power. The feast of a good Conscience is such, as we may daily invite our
selves to, Nemine contradicente: if it please God to allow us the rejoicing
testimony of our own consciences, it is not all the world can make us
melancholy; and therefore holy men are most merry when they are alone: but so
are not drunkards, and swearers, etc. And it is of ordinary observation, that
many men cannot abide to be alone, (especially not in the dark) they are glad
of any company. And I believe, were it not for this, that men do not know how
to spend their time alone, to their own comfort and satisfaction, Taverns and
Alehouses would not be so full as generally they are; it is no sign a man
lives merrily, because his boon company makes him so: (...) Plutarch. p. 100.
John 7.
(...).

If we judge of men according to outward appearance, we shall not judge
righteous judgment. There are many are counted happy, but their hearts know
their own bitterness. Now this pleasure that men are fain to go out of doors
for, to get it where they can, to buy it by penniworths and small parcels, must
needs be little and inconsiderable, in comparison of that which virtuous men
have in a full stock within their own Souls. Besides it may be added, the more
our pleasure comes from without, it is the more uncertain; for the same causes
that give it may withhold it, if they either withdraw, or prove miserable
Comforters: Or if all second causes should conspire together to make a man
prosperous in his wickedness; yet it is but a forced mirth, not natural, and
therefore not constant: yea all the noise these pleasures make, cannot drown
nor still the clamor of a guilty conscience: but all this while, in the midst
of laughter, the heart is sorrowful. Prove. 14.
And it is evident that so it is, because the more men retire from the world,
their pleasure abates; the more they are alone, the more dejected and sorrowful
they are.

There may be an objection against this concerning one sort of men; and it is
the observation of the Poet of covetous men, who seem to be never so well
pleased, as when they are alone meditating on their wealth.

-- Populus me sibilet, at mihi plaudo Horace.

Ipse domi simul ac nummos contemplor in Arca.
I don't regard what people say,
Let them laugh on, and flout me:
At home I Am merrier then they,
I have all my bags about me.
It is hard to find an answer in the next words of the same Poet; but Plautus
does it fully in his Euclio.

Nunc ibo ut visam estne ita Aurum ut condidi, Aulular.

Quod me sollicitat plurimis miserum modis.
I hid my Money in a cunning hole,
And yet I cannot but be afraid it is stole:
I Am glad I Am rich, yet have a thousand fears,
Vexations, griefs, disquietments, and cares.
And if the solicitudes and perplexities of covetous men be set against their
pleasures, they have little to boast more then other men: And even these men
depend upon others for their comfort; for it is in the power of any body that
has to deal with them, to vex or disquiet them, either by disappointing of
them, or by making them afraid they shall be disappointed.

CHAP. VII.
and a destructive play; such a play as was between Abner and Joabs men: Abner
said to Joab, let the young men now arise and play before us, and Joab said let
them arise: but what was their sport? They caught every one his fellow by 2 Samuel 2.
the head, and thrust his sword into his fellows side, so they fell down
together. Or such sport as Sampson Judge. 16.
made the Philistines, Call for Sampson that he may make us sport; they did not
know what would follow, he pulled down the house upon the Lords and all the
People, and crushed them to pieces. Many are the woes and sorrows that men bring
upon their own heads, by indulging themselves in sin, which when they feel they
believe, though before they would not. Two ways sin is troublesome, formally
and efficiently.

forma dat esse and distingui, beings are distinguished by their forms; The
wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast forth
mire and dirt; and therefore no wonder that it follows, Isa. 5. 7.
There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked. How can that Nation be at
peace that nourishes an intestine War? so is it here, there is an 1 Pet. 2.
(...). Plutarch De virt. and vitio. p. 101.
Army of lusts that wars against our souls. Our passions in their nature are
disquieting and vexatious: So could a Philosopher challenge vice; (...); Where
is the sweetness and pleasure of wickedness? it is neither without cares nor
grief; neither does it satisfy and content, nor does it remove trouble, nor
produce ease. No verily, as the same word in the Hebrew (...)
does signify both sin and the punishment of it, so does the thing answer the
name. Virtue is not more its own reward, then Vice is its own punishment and
torment. The sollicitudes and fears of Covetousness and Ambition, the heats and
turbulencies of Anger, the impatiencies of Revenge, the frettings and pinings
of Envy, and generally the dissatisfiedness of every Lust; what are all these,
but plentiful demonstrations that sin and sorrow are so interwoven together
that they cannot be parted, unless all be unravelled by Repentance? which yet
is likewise an Argument to the purpose; for though Repentance be safe if it be
sincere, yet it is a troublesome work: As it is the property of a Wave to roll,
of the Wind to blow, of the Thunder to make a noise; so is sin in its own
nature formally and properly disturbing and troublesome. There are Crocodiles
in the River Nilus, for fear of whom the Dogs, who would otherwise be glad to
drink largely to quench their thirst, can only lambere and fugere, lick and be
gone, to secure themselves: But wicked men are not so happy; if they will
intoxicate themselves with the pleasures of the world, they must take them as
they are, one with another, and there is a pain accompanies the pleasure. There
is that in sin which embitters it: It is the property of vice to be disquieting
and vexatious, and while it is so, there is little comfort to be expected in a
vicious course of life.

Who has woe? who has sorrow? P^ov. 23.
who has contentions? who has babbling? who has wounds without cause? who
has redness of eyes? they that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek
mixed wine. Dearly do men pay for their frothy pleasures, when sometimes they
drink themselves to death; for which purpose Bear^s Theater of Gods judgm^nt.
there are many stories extant; or if not so, yet the aches, and pains, and
surfeits, and fevers, or at the best, the unaptnesses of such men's bodies to
any good employments, are testim^nies that these are troublesome sins. And if
the same cannot be said of all, yet somewhat else can, and that is the inward
trouble that follows upon a sense of guilt, after the sin is committed. It is a
fearful thing for a man to fall under the lash of his own conscience; how can
that man avoid his misery, that carries it about with him wherever he goes? we
may as soon command our souls out of our bodies, as our consciences out of our
souls. There is a principle in man that cannot be always bribed nor over-awed:
A man may loosen his reins, and gallop furiously to his intended stage; but
before he comes there he may break his neck. Men are pursuing their pleasures
in great earnestness, and because they can find no better mirth, they will try
what they can find in sin; but it is a Tragical story in the end. I have heard
of those who in acting Tragedies, when their parts have led them to make a show
of killing themselves, have by a venturous mistake killed themselves indeed: So
do many men to their great grief find, they have been out of the way of true
pleasure, they have undone themselves, and laid a foundation for their misery
and trouble as long as they live: There is little comfort to be had in sin, for
it is in its own nature the cause and original of many sorrows and
disquietments.

in the midst of laughter the heart is sorrowful; but the end of that mirth is
Prove. 14.
heaviness. When men come to dye, then they themselves understand, and
acknowledge the folly and vanity of these toyish pleasures: the comfort that
wickedness affords during life, ^^ but little, but at death it is none at all;
^hey who live sinfully, dye sadly, that is, un^ess they have some other comfort
then what ^hey gain from their sinful courses; for how should this be otherwise?

If thou do ill, the joy fades, not the pains. Herbert. Poems.
The pleasure that is taken in the commission of a sin, passes away together
with the act; but the stinging remorses of conscience abide, and then return
with greatest vehemence, when the pleasure of sin is gone and past. Concerning
the agonies and throbs of conscience that sin procures, it has been just now
observed an Argument in the case: It is enough now to suppose that, and to add
this consideration to it; that when men are dying, their wickedness affords
them no comfort, because their transitory pleasures are gone together with
their sins. The pleasures of intemperance, of rioting and drunkenness, of
chambering Romans 13.
and wantonness, of strife and envying, of revenge and malice, of injustice and
oppression, and wrong, or any such like sin; what is become of all these when
the miserable man is approaching to his death? when all that a man has is
going out of his possession, where is the appendage of pleasure that belongs to
him? Assuredly when death comes, as it changes men's minds concerning the
goodness of Virtue, (a thing before observed, and does not belong to this
place,) so does it give men to understand the unsuccessfulness of immorality,
that it cannot prolong those pleasures, which during life it did pretend to. As
the Greeks use to call the night (...), because it is a fit season for
consideration and meditation, when in our retirements we may more wisely
consider of our concerns; so may the evening of the night of death be very
fitly called. When men are retiring from the hurries of the world, where they
were not at leisure to distinguish between truth and appearance; then is the
evil day come, when men will speak as they find, they will say, they have
Eccles. 12.
no pleasure in it. And in the foreknowledge of this it was, that the
Egyptians had a custom at their feasts to bring in an old dry Skeleton to the
table, with such a kind of Rhodiginus.
Apothegme,

Ede, bibe, talis post mortem futurus.
Eat, Drink, and welcome, for you see,
What after death you are like to be.
Which in the fairest interpretation of it may be thought as a restraint upon
their excess of mirth; but it seems their meaning was quite contrary, they
would be merry while they lived, because death would put a period to all their
jollity: So are these Verses quoted out of Petronius upon this occasion.

Sic erimus cuncti, postquam nos auferet orcus, Causin. Hieroglyph

Ergo vivamus dum licet esse, been.
Such after death is every man,
Let Us then be merry while we can.
So it may be do many in the world, drink their full draughts of pleasures
while they live, because they know there is no such thing in the Grave, whither
they are going: But is not this as much as to say what I would now urge, the
pleasures of sin are inconsiderable for this Reason; because they dye, if not
before, yet certainly when we dye; and therefore is it that men's hearts dye
within them, before their body dies, as Nabals did. 1 Samuel 2


Esau made Jacob: Behold I am at the point to dye, Genesis 25.
and what profit do all these things do to me? And therefore I may argue a
little further in the words of the Apostle: What fruit has any man in those
things whereof he is now ashamed, for (if the next words may be inverted) Death
is the end of those things. Death puts an end to Romans 6.
all the merriments of life, and now at death the remembrance of those things
is grievous to them: Then succeed those wishes, (and it is well if they be not
as vain as their former joys) I would I had better understood my self; would I
had had more wisdom, and more grace, to have forsaken that evil company that
led me away to consent and partake in their wickedness: would I had looked on
my pleasures, not as they came with their flattering and inviting aspects, but
as they now go away from me, with repentance, and fear, and shame. Oh that I
had taken more care to please God, and less to enjoy the pleasures of sense!
Some such thing said Cardinal Wolsey, a little before his death: Had I served
Herberts History Henry 8.
God as diligently as I have done the King, he would not have given me over in
my gray hairs. So say men of wicked and immoral lives; had I pleased God more,
and my company and my self less, God would not have given me over in this my
necessity; but I have had my portion in this world: I have sought for sin, and
hunted after pleasure, and if God be not more merciful to my soul, I shall have
no portion in the world to come, but everlasting separation from the presence
of God. Surely these are the apprehensions of some men that send for their
Minister, and though they would fain justify themselves as much as they can,
yet they cannot deny but they have been Company-keepers, they have been
Gamesters, and it may be worse; they have spent a great deal of time idly and
wantonly. Now what becomes of these men, whether peradventure God may give them
grace to repent, is not for us to determine, our charity hopes the best: But
whether so or not, these self-accusations, and these different apprehensions
they have of things when they are dying, to what they had when they were lusty
and strong to sin, is an argument of the vanity and shortness of that pleasure
that men take in sin; and it is the fourth proof, that there is no considerable
comfort to be found in sin, either living or dying.

This is the first part of this Third Argument: There is a necessity of Moral
Virtues, that our lives and deaths may be comfortable; for so long as men
continue wicked, notwithstanding all the brags they make that they live the
merriest lives, yet it is found to be nothing so.

CHAP. VIII.
THe ways of Virtue are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
wisdom, but it is such a wisdom as dwells with Prove. 3. Prove. 8. Prove. 9.
prudence, and such a wisdom of which the fear of the Lord is the beginning;
and where it is so, it follows in another place; And unto man Job 28.
he said, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from
evil is understanding. So that Virtue being comprehended under that wisdom
which teaches a man to order his conversation aright; of that likewise may it
be said, that her ways are ways of pleasantness. Pleasure is the satisfaction
of an appetite, and according as the appetite is, whether sensible or rational,
so is the pleasure. The joys and pleasures of sin, are but the pleasures of
sense for the most part, and therefore inconsiderable: It will be now found,
that the pleasure that arises upon Virtuous Actions, is in the mind and soul.
Delight is nothing Reynolds Treatise of passions.
else but the Sabbath of our thoughts, and that sweet Tranquillity of mind,
which we receive from the presence and fruition of that good to which our
desires have carried us. Concerning which much might be said, and there is no
Theme gives a man a greater temptation to try his skill in Rhetoric then this:
But I intend to argue, not to declaim, I am therefore content to pass this
over, only when I have added one description of joy and pleasure, which I find
in an Author (though a Jesuit, yet) excellent in these kind of writings.
Gaudium Neiremberg. de Art voluntatis. Prolep. 5.
est quoddam silentium appetitus, quaedam Modestia Ambitionis, quoddam
claustrum cupiditatis, quoddam sine fastidio epulum cordis, quidam Thronus jam
considentis Affectus, quaedam Mors desiderii, etc. denique ut haec complectar
quoddam satis. And surely this Joy must needs be a glorious thing, when the
glory that God will beam on his servants in the other world, is so expressed,
Enter into the joy of thy Math. 25.
Lord. Those great and immeasurable measures of joy, are reserved for the world
to come: yet now in this life, in this vale of tears, there are rivers of
pleasure. True it is, the joy and Romans 15.
peace which God fills his people with, is in and by believing: And the joy we
have out of Christ is unsound, as we out of Christ are unsafe: wherefore it
has been before said, that Book 1.
Moral Virtue is not to be separated from Faith, but they suppose one another;
and then supposing the Virtue we speak of to be such, it will be easy to
prove, that the exercise of Moral Virtues, Righteousness and Temperance, etc.
do furnish us with a great deal of joy and comfort.

Jothams parable; Vice is Judge. 9.
the Bramble, that instead of shadowing, scratches the body: Virtue is the Vine
that chears the heart of man: Vice is a plaster that skins over an old sore;
Virtue is a cordial that preserves and refreshes the spirits: Vice gratifies
the sense, Virtue the understanding; and he that doubts whether of these be the
greater pleasure, does in effect blaspheme God; for he doubts whether the
Beasts of the Field be not more happy then God himself, and so becomes as
ridiculous an Idolater as the Egyptians, who had -- In Hortis Numina -- who
Juvenal.
worshipped Garlic and Onions, instead of God blessed for evermore. But has
the mind no greater pleasures then the body? Is not our reason more perfect and
excellent then sense? Are not our souls capable of more happiness, then any of
our bodily faculties? He that so little understands himself, and the worth of
his own soul, as not to believe it, no wonder if he mistake true pleasure. But
that it may not be said, this is gratis dictum, these questions are no proofs;
I proceed to prove, that there is a great deal of joy and pleasure in the
exercise of Virtue, and that such as does hugely over-balance the pleasures of
sin.

Our rejoicing is this, the 2 Cor. 1.
Testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, we have
had our Conversation in the World. It is true, he mentions the grace of God
that assisted him, and so we acknowledge that our Virtue must be animated by
grace; but it was his regular conversation (which certainly could not be so, if
he had not exercised those Moral Virtues, which are necessary in our dealings
between man and man) that gave him this joy, and our joy was (...).
great. Our boasting, or that glorying is this. In conformity to which example,
it is easy for any man to find the same in his own experience. There are many
virtuous actions are no otherwise rewarded in this World, but by the
acquittance and discharge of a man's own Conscience. Many good endeavors
succeed ill. Two Neighbors are at variance, a third would reconcile them, but
one or both return him hatred for his good will. One man does amiss, another
reproves him* but receives more reproaches than he gives reproofs. So is the
temperate man, the Song of the Drunkards. Psa. 69*
And may it not now be thought that Virtue is bitterness in the latter end? No
verily: still

Ipsa quidem Virtus pretium sibi -- Claudi^^*

Virtue is worthy of regard,
For it is its self its own reward.
Abimelechs Apology is the Virtuous man's satisfaction: In the Integrity of my
heart, and Innocence Genesis 20*
of my hands have I done this. From this satisfaction of mind proceeds
tranquillity, and joy, and pleasure; and if there were nothing else to be
understood by that (...), that self-sufficiency which the Heathens gave to a
Virtuous man than this; that a man in the Exercise of Virtue can furnish
himself with Joy and Comfort, without the external additaments of Fame and
Honor, and being admired by other men; I should not before have reckoned it
among the faults of the Stoics, that they did put such a value upon
themselves* They truly were blameworthy in shutting God out; yet did they mean
well, where they did mean no more than those words of the Emperor seem to
import: (...) Antonin. Lib. 7. Sect. 28.
(...). The mind of man is of such a Nature, that when it does well, it is
sufficient of it self to bless it self with a calm tranquillity.

Cain, according as we translate the words: If thou do well shall thou Genesis 4.
not be accepted? So says the Conscience of an honest man: He that does well
is acceptable to himself, he is not a burden to himself, as those men are,
whose guilty Consciences do heavily accuse them. It is a pleasant thing for a
man to reflect upon himself when he knows he has done well. We are not
contented with the admirations and flatteries of other men: Fame and applause
leaves us sollicitous, lest men may live to change their minds concerning us,
as the Romans of Sejanus.

-- Nunquam (si quid mihi credis) amavi Juven. Sat. 10.

Hunc hominem --
I never loved him, whom before
I did admire and adore.
Or as the Lycaonians who stoned the same Acts 14.
man as a Malefactor, whom before they worshipped as a God. These outward
appendages of Virtue, credit and praise, will never satisfy a fixed stayed
mind: But when a man comes to judge of himself by his own actions, and sees
that according to his best understanding he has done his duty, and that which
was fit for a man in his circumstances to do; the satisfaction that arises
hence is very joyous: and if I would descend to particular Virtues, it were
casie to show, how much content and pleasure arises from this satisfaction. All
the instance I for the present give, shall be in the case of being benevolous
and kind: The courteous and charitable man, who makes it his business to do
good offices, is plentifully rewarded into his own bosom. So was the experience
of a man (not only otherwise qualified to merit Respect and Reverence, but)
abundant in Charity to admiration, Dr. Hammond in his life by Dr. F^ll.
who would use to say; It was one of the greatest sensualities in the world to
give. They who delight thus to serve God by being Virtuous, their Virtue it
self is a delight and pleasure to them, because they are satisfied that they
are doing what they ought do.

Jews E^^h. 8.
had light, and gladness, and joy, when they had liberty to fight and destroy
their Enemies; much more was it a good day, a day of feasting and gladness when
the work was done: so is it with Virtuous men, they are fighting, and
conquering, and killing, and when their unruly passions are brought under, when
they have got the Victory, then they triumph, that is, they are full of joy.
Many a song of Thank^giving do we find in Scripture for deliverance from
Enemies: And great have been the triumphs of the Romans, when they returned
with the spoils of War. The feast of a good Conscience, and the triumphs of a
Virtuous Soul, may be less pompous as to outward show; but what they have less
of the fashion of Agrippa and Bernice, they are the more like the Kings
Daughter, all glorious ^^ 45.
within. The war that the Spirit manageth against the Flesh, has the same
design with other wars, to procure peace; which when it ^^ attained, we (
Englishmen especially) cannot but be sensible how desirable it is: We are at
the same time unthankful to God, undutiful to our Prince, and unnatural to our
selves, if we do not rejoice that we live in peace. There is no kind of peace
that is without its kind of joy: so is the peace within our own minds, when we
have bri^led and restrained our irregular and exorbitant passions, when we have
quelled our lustful inclinations, and have either in whole or in part, by the
blessing of God upon virtuous endeavors, Isa. 48. and 57.
attained that peace, which God himself twic^ says, does not belong to wicked
men: when Temperance. and Justice, and other like habits are so firmly rooted
in us, that we find none, or no great reluctance of the Flesh, in the exercise
of them; then behold how the soul enjoys it self! how glad it is to find things
in due order, the inferior faculties subordinate to the superior, and they to
their supreme Lord, the Father of Spirits! Go now and see if a righteous and
just man does not rejoice to consider, that temptations of Covetousness has
not made him unjust; go and ask of those men whom you observe to be most sober
and upright in their conversations, they will tell you that they thank God,
they have a peace within them that passes all P^il. 4.
understanding. They will say, that Meekness, and Charity, etc. are lovely
things, to be embraced for their own sakes: They rejoice to think that their
souls are delivered from their enthralling lusts, and disturbing passions. If I
should say that Virtue does this perfectly for us, I should my self incur the
censure which I before past upon the Stoics; who have boasted of a perfection
that they could not attain. Truly the Spirits of just men, are not yet in this
life made perfect: In many things we James 3.
offend all. Yet this is truth; though we are not in this state completely
holy, so as to be sinless, (and therefore our happiness and comfort is
incomplete) yet so far as we do arise toward a perfection of Virtue, we do
thereby get the conquest of our lusts and passions, and the more they are
subdued, the greater freedom and pleasure we gain to our selves: and for this
reason, there is a pleasure and joy in Virtuous Action^; which is the second
proof.

Simonides said of silence, I have often repented Plutarch ^e Garrulitate.
that I have spoken, but never that I held my peace; That says the Virtue us
man: I have have often repented, that I have been no more Virtuous, that I have
failed so often in my Duty; but where I have attained in any measure to any
degrees of it, I am glad, and did never repent of what I have done. There may
be some who for want of skill and proficiency in the School of Virtue, may
repent of their good deeds: but what though they do? Is it an Argument that
there is no pleasure in Learning, because a Dunce throws away his Book, and
wishes he had never gone to School? Was St. Paul ever the worse, because the
love of this world tempted ^ Tim. 4.
Demas to forsake him? Does it signify much to the disparagement of Christian
Religion, because Julian proved an Apostate? Now this is the case; some men
have ventured upon Virtue, out of an opinion that it was an easy thing, and
when they find the difficulties of it, vice is not easily mastered, nor
passions easily subdued, then they fall back again; and before they were
thoroughly redeemed from a vain conversation, they again make their bargain with
the Devil, and sell* themselves to work wickedness. But what shall we say of
these men? even this, they are to Virtue as the many Antichrists are to
Christian Religion; and of them may Virtuous men say, They 1 John 2.
went out from us, because they were not of us, for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out that they might
be made manifest that they were not all of us. They are not Virtues menial
servants, they are but retainers and hangers on; they do but pretend to some
Virtuous actions; some good things they may do, but they do not Been, out of a
love to Virtue: They may have a procatarctick, but they have no proegumenal
cause; they may be outwardly drawn to the exercise of Virtue, but not from an
inward principle of goodness. Now Virtue is not to stand or fall according to
the opinions of these men.

Plutarch applies to Temperance, will be found true of all sorts of Virtue:
(...): De sanita^e tuend^
Choose that manner of life that is best, and custonie will make it pleasant.
This Argument has somewhat of experience in it: for a man to disparage that of
which he has no knowledge, he talks for want of wit, and he must get into the
company of his fellow-fools to be believed. Come to those who have experience
what Virtue is, and they find the deeper the sweeter: The more Virtue, the less
Repentance, and the less Repentance, the more Joy: for he that chooses a course
of life, of which he sees no cause to repent, he must needs good himself in it,
and rejoice to think he has made a happy choice: He tastes the sweetness of
it, and then because, Contra gustum non est disputandum: No man can be disputed
out of his senses, nor persuaded that that is not sweet which he tastes to be
so; it remains a certain Argument, that there is a great deal of pleasure in
Virtuous Actions.

be to descend to particulars, which is somewhat without my purpose; I leave it
to be considered by any that will enter into a sober comparison of these
things. These Virtues have their marks in their foreheads; It is easy to
discern a difference, and then not hard to pass a judgment, that there is more
pleasure in Virtue than Vice; which was the second thing to be proved in this
Third Argument, and so it is dispatched.

It is necessary to be Virtuous, that both life and death may be comfortable.

CHAP. IX.
That it is necessary for us to be as has been before said, that hereby we may
become profitable to others as well as to our selves. It has been before
evidenced that it is for our own advantage to be Virtuous, that our condition
may be good, and safe, and comfortable: Whereby it appears that Virtue is Bonum
honestum, and jucundum; good and honest, good and pleasant: there is but one
other sort of good, Bonum utile, good and profitable, and so Virtue likewise
is; for hereby we do not live to our souls alone, we look on the things Romans
14. Phil. 2.
of others as well as on our own. That Virtue whereby we do good to others, is
properly called Beneficence, and is comprehended under Charity: But as there is
a justice in every Virtue, it is just, and equal, and fit to be done; so is
there a Charity too, insomuch that unless we be good our selves, we shall do
little good to others. But good and Virtuous men are Benefactors to the places
where they live. Two things will finish this Argument, and make it correspond
to the former.

Spartans allowed their Slaves to be Drunk, to teach their Children to abhor
it; but it was no part of their wisdom so to do. Is the Devil to be commended
for his malice against the Saints, because he thereby puts them upon their
guard, to watch more strictly over themselves, and so may be an occasion to
make them better? The Devil is a wicked malicious spirit for all this, for he
means not so, but it is in his heart to destroy; as was said of the Assyrians
Isa. 10.
against the Jews. What glory is it for a man to do that, in which the Devil
does as much or more then he? The vices of men are not the more excusable,
because they may be an occasion of Virtue to other men; for though they may
occasion good done, yet they themselves do none, nor do they intend any. The
design of wickedness is not to profit and advantage others. For

Minime absurdum Historia Concilii Tridentini. p. 382. Folio.
est, (said the Chancellor of France in a Solemn Assembly) ut multi boni Cives
sint, qui boni Christiani non sunt. Sure it may please God both in Church and
State, to make use of wicked men to do him service: for which there is no need
of other instance then of Judas and Saul! Judas was one of the 12 Apostles that
Christ sent on great errands, and gave them power and authority suitable to
their employment: Then he called his 12 Luke 9.
Disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all Devils, and to
cure Diseases, and he sent them to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the
Sick. It is possible they who preach to others, may be Cast-aways themselves:
God 1 Cor. 9.
may bless their gifts to others, though they want grace for themselves. At the
same time a man may out of his own mouth condemn himself and save others. And
for State Affairs, Saul is another instance, who though a wicked man, as he
afterward declared himself to be, so wicked that God would not own him, nor he
God; yet at his first coming to the Kingdom, God made choice of him to save his
people out of the hand of the Philistines; 1 Samuel 9. 16.
and in a particular case, he was enabled to the rescue of Jabesh-Gilead, by
the spirit of God coming upon him. Accordingly 1 Samuel 11. 6.
it is easy to observe, there are many men who have wisdom as an Intellectual
habit, when they have it not as a Moral Virtue; they have parts, and gifts, and
abilities, which it pleases God to overruled for the service of his Church and
the good of others; yet they want that grace which is saving to themselves. The
comparison will serve other men as well as Ministers; There are many are like
Greenham.
to Marks in the Highway, which rot away themselves, while they stand
instructing others. There are many Physicians prescribe rules to others, which
themselves will not observe: And thus it must not be denied, but there may be
many, who may continue bad themselves, and yet may have an influence upon the
welfare of others.

But then it is to be observed, that this is no prejudice to the Argument in
hand. Vicious men may do good, because they have some good in them; if not
grace and virtue, yet parts and abilities, and some actions materially good
they perform, which God blesses for good purposes: but all this while their
wickedness and vice is unprofitable and unserviceable: A Drunkard when he is
sober may work hard, to maintain his Family; but his Drunkenness is idle and
vain, and does no good; and the same is to be said of all other vices. For will
any man say that Envy, and Spite, and Revenge is for the benefit of mankind? as
well may recompensing evil be called doing good: or is a generation of
Drunkards an advantage to a Nation, because they maintain and uphold Taverns
and Alehouses? or is cheating and lying for the profit of others, because
thereby men scraping together great Estates, leave their Children rich? with as
much reason may we say, the World is the better for Adultery, Fornication, yea
and incest too; because the Pope gets money by toleration of Stews, and
dispensation in unlawful Marriages. There is a selfishness in wickedness: Men
desire their own pleasure, which according to the third Argument is
inconsiderable; or their own profit, which according to the second is none at
all: for if it be not safe for such a man to dye, then what is a man profited
if he Math. 16.
gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? And if the designs they propound
to themselves cannot be accomplished, much less that which they did not design.
Wickedness does no good, intends none; it is as vain to expect any, as for a
man to go to a Thorn to gather Grapes, or Math. 7.
to a Thistle for Figs; for a corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good Fruit. This
is now somewhat to the disparagement of vice, it does no good; but there is
more yet to come.



born into the World. It every Farmer should let his grounds lie fallow for
seven years together, how soon should we starve, unless we could live by Briars
and Thorns? But this is the bad husbandry of Vice, men's Souls lie nonimproved,
they bring forth no fruit for the benefit of others; they take up the room of
honester men, and crowd them out of employment; but they themselves are good
for nothing. Bare Idleness is a great mischief, and therefore the wicked and
slothful servant is called an Unprofitable servant, and accordingly Math. 25.
punished: If the man who had the five Talents, had managed that one, he would
have made a good use of it, and done good with it: but so long as it lay hid up
in a Napkin, it was as if there had been none at all. If Virtue had the
management of those parts and abilities that are spent upon Sin, it would be
better for the World than now it is: wherefore as he that throws away his money
does his Family harm, because he deprives them of that which should maintain
them; so does the man who sells himself to sin, he disables himself from doing
good: and this is a great mischief comes by wickedness, as it is Impeditivum
boni, the good it hinders is to be interpreted doing hurt.

whence come wars and fightings in the world, come they James 4.
not hence, even of men's lusts? There is an insatiabilis libido either habendi
or dominandi (that is Covetousness and Ambition) which do lead many Armies into
the field; many I say, not all: It is to be hoped that they mean well, and they
have a great desire to persuade the world to peace and concord, who are of
opinion that it is not lawful for Christians to make war. Indeed it were to be
wished that there were no need of it: But the world must be well amended,
before it can be supposed, that the honestest and justest cause will always
without any force, by its mere justice obtain against its adversary. Wherefore
without calling that into question which we are obliged to grant if we be true
to our selves, it must be yielded, That it is lawful for Christian men at the
command of the Artic. 37.
Magistrate, to wear weapons and serve in the w^rs. Yet all wars are not lawful
to be sure, not on both sides; and then if many be unlawful, either in their
original, as occasioned by covetousness or ambition, or oppression; or in their
progress as managed by cruelty and revenge; then let it be considered, how
unhappy they are in their end. How many millions of people has the sword
devoured? How many Countries have been harrassed, and for a time dispeopled?
How many Cities sacked and burnt? for the fire and the sword many times go
together. And whence is all this? from some of the forementioned sins, or some
other like them: Vna and ea vetus causa bellandi cupido divitiarum and imperii.
The instances of Salust.
Ambition and Pride are many. When Bajaz^t was taken Prisoner and carried to
Tamerlane, after that memorable battle, where some say more then 300000 men
lost their lives, one question that Tamerlane asked him was; what made him so
proud as to adventure upon the Greek Emperor, in hopes to conquer him and
Turki^^^ History.
win Constantinople; he gave him this answer: Even the same thing that moved
thee to invade me, the desire of glory and sovereignty. A truer account cannot
be given of the adventures of Alexander in Asia and the Indies, and of the
expeditions of the Romans into other countries. Sometimes Covetousness has
marched along with Ambition; men have promised to themselves, We shall find all
precious substance, we Prove. 1.
shall fill our houses with spoil. This Florus acknowledges Flor. expedit in
Cypron.
to have been the reason why the Romans invaded Cyprus, because of the same of
their riches. Sometimes Lust has begot war; So Paris his ravishing Helena
brought 10 years wars to Troy, and Troy to destruction. Sometimes revenge,
sometimes one sin, sometimes another, wickedness and sin brings war, and war woe
and misery, and calamity: and so it appears to be mischievous to the world.

Sesostris wheel, are emblems too good to signify the inconstancy and
inconsistency of humane affairs. The Moon decreases, and changes, and renews
again; and the wheel rises as fast as it falls: But there are many Kingdoms and
Empires have fallen to decay, without any visible hope of a resurrection. It is
small thing to enquire of Troy, where is Babylon and Nineveh, those two great
Cities, sometimes the wonder and terror of the world? we may almost as well go
to the mountains of Ararat, to seek for some broken planks of Noah's Ark, as to
rake in the rubbish to find out where those Cities once were. The Virgin Isa.
47.
daughter of Babylon is come down to sit in the dust, and there is no Throne of
the Caldaeans, none to be sure in comparison of what once was. Yea even Rome
her self, which is still not only in being, but in her glory and pride, yet
has changed its place, as well as its manner of government, as if the City it
self were beforehand taught, that it is moving toward a period. And as for the
Monarchies that have made these Cities famous, and the Ladies of the Earth,
Isa. 47.
how have they all supplanted one another? The Medes and Persians translated
the Empire from the Assyrians to themselves, but could not always keep it;
Alexander overpowered them, and laid the foundation of a Monarchy, but lived
to do no more: the Grecian Empire was even stifled in the birth by bad
midwifery; Alexanders successors dividing it into parts, weakened the whole.
Then came the Roman Eagles (those birds of prey) they gather upon the Earth,
and instead of finding make a carcass: Math. 24.
They dispirit other Nations, and by power and policy together prevail over the
rest, and make the world do homage to Rome.

( -- quae de septem totum circumspicit orbem
Montibus, Imperii Roma Deumque locus. Ovid.

Rome is enlarged from hill to hill so great,
That the Empire and the Gods make it their Seat.)
Yet now these Eagles have their wings clip't, and all they can do is but to
flutter about Germany, who has an Emperor indeed, but his Empire but small in
comparison of the extent of the Territories of old Rome; yea weak as well as
small, Tenue and exangue corpusculum, quod vix Sleidan*
^ssibus haeret. The body of the Empire little better then skin and bone. What
is now the reason of all this? is it not because there is a Dan. ^*
God in the Heavens, who changes the times and the seasons, who removes Kings
and sets up Kings? Yes verily so it is, and one of the proudest of the sons
of men have acknowledged it: Nebuchadnezzar was made to know, That the most
High rules over the Kingdoms of men, and Dan. 5.
that he appoints over it whomsoever he will. But withal it is true, though
God made desolations Psa. 46.
in the Earth, yet men deserve them. The Tekel is the reason of the Mean, Mean,
Men are weighed in the balances and are found wanting, Dan. 5*
and that is the reason why God numbers their Kingdoms and finisheth them.
Wanting indeed to God, and guilty of many sacrilegious impieties; but withal
wanting to themselves, and to the due administration of their affairs. Either
oppression and violence, or some other wickedness has shaken the foundations
of those Kingdoms and Monarchies, and at last ruined them. So the same
Histories that tell us of the original and growth of Monarchies, give us an
account of the decrease and fall of them. Sardanapalus Justin.
his luxury and effeminateness translated it from the Assyrians to the Medes.
The cruelty of Astyages to Harpagus, was the occasion of his revolt to Cyrus,
and by that means it came among the Persians. The softness and delicacy of the
Persians betrayed them to Alexander, whose successors, by their
self-designments falling off from, weakened one another; and it befell them that
(as before the Cities of Greece) dum imperare singuli cupiunt, imperium omnes
perdiderunt. Which advantage when the Romans had got, they lorded it for a
great while, but at length suffered more then a nominal diminution; when
Augustus dwindled into Augustulus: but really their greatness is eclipsed. They
have been no more innocent, then other Empires before them, and they have at
last suffered for their Ambition and Pride, and insolent Usurpations; so that
there is little left besides the name of the King of the Romans. Now it is to
be considered, that there cannot be such mutations in Kingdoms and States, but
there are many miseries and mischiefs attend them, and fall upon the common
people, who are involved in the same calamities with their Princes. Which
changes and miseries, though they may have other causes assigned them, yet
evidently this is one, the wickedness and vice of the persons concerned: and
thus Immorality appears to be a pernicious thing, because so many sad events
follow upon it.

The case of particular families is no less notorious: Many who have been born
to good fortunes, have yet been impoverished and beggered by the riot and
prodigality, and gaming or other wastfulnesses of their forefathers. How many
have been undone, that very way by which their fathers hoped to raise them? if
that observation be good,

De male quaesitis vix gaudet tertius haeres.
Ill gotten goods do many times prove Snares,
If not to men themselves, yet to their Heirs.
Men would fain leave their Children rich, and therefore take care to get
Estates any how, by cheating and couzenage, and for that purpose have many
artifices and devices; but they do not consider all this while, that when they
entail an Estate upon their posterity, they do at the same time entail a Curse
upon the Estate; and this also adds to the proof, that wicked men do harm in
the World.

A man shall Isa. 29.
be made an offender for a word. An action of slander is commenced for a rash
and unadvised word; or otherwise there are many waspish spirited men, that as
soon as ever they are stirred will sting. Some men seek, and some make
occasions to prejudice and wrong their Neighbors.

Pandora's box quite opened. Besides what has been already said, the very
example of wicked men leavens the World, and by making it a mass of iniquity,
increases the number of those mischiess which pester mankind. A Company of
Drunkards are a Plague to the place they live in, and so are most other sins;
for they are catching and infectious, and many perish by the evil example of
other men. This and the former might be plentifully insisted on, but that they
are obvious to every ones experience.

Liturgy (on good Friday) on purpose for Jews, and Turks and Infidels; that
they may be fetched home to the flock, and be made one fold, under one Shepherd
Jesus Christ our Lord: and surely they do a service acceptable to God, who are
any ways instrumental in so glorious an undertaking: but how had the men need
be qualified, who are like to do any good this way; they had need be men of
excellent lives, and be very true to the exercise of those Virtues, that have
found so much praise among the Heathens. I have read somewhere of Averroes (if
I mistake not) that a point of Doctrine alienated him from the Christian
Religion, Quandoquidem Christiani adorant quod comedunt, sit anima mea cum
Philosophis. Transubstantiation was then creeping into the Church, or if not,
he did not rightly understand the Doctrine of the Sacrament. But corruption in
practice will much more alienate: The Spaniards in some of their first dealings
with the Savages in Heylin Geogr.
America, to persuade them to be baptized, told them, that they who were
baptized should go to the joys of Heaven, the rest should go to Hell: One of
them, a person of quality, asked them whether they themselves (the Spaniards)
were to go; they said to Heaven; then (says he) I had rather go to Hell with
the unbaptized, than live in Heaven with so cruel a people. What marvel is it
if a Jew or Infidel argue thus: I see these men that go for Christians, take
little care of their lives, they pretend to the most excellent Religion in the
World; but if we may judge of it by their actions, their profession is vile and
contemptible. God does not stand in need of the ministry of men, when it
pleases him that the fullness of the Romans 11.
Gentiles shall come in, and all Israel shall be saved; he can-bring his own
ends about, with any or without any means: But as to humane probabilities, how
is this like to retard the spreading of the Gospel? Blindness is happened Romans 11.
to Israel, and it continues upon the Infidel, but they are not so blind as not
to see that True Religion includes Morality. If therefore in all our
Negotiations with them, our Merchants and Factors, or whoever any ways converse
with them, would not only exactly observe the rules of Justice (which it is to
be hoped they do) but would also take care and pains in the governance of
themselves, that they be discreet and sober, and advised in all their
behavior; it might be hoped that Infidels would by degrees entertain better
thoughts of Christian Religion than yet they do: But alas this is the very
thing to be feared, Christendom it self is in a great many places overgrown
with Barbarism: We may send them word to China, and the Indies and America,
that Virtue is no where so much honored and owned as among Christians; but
when they come to hear, that Pride, and Revenge, and Covetousness, and
Sensuality, and all manner of Vice does prevail, as much with us as in any
other parts of the World; our sin has the same aggravation with that of Eli's
Sons: The sin of the young men was great before the Lord, ^ Sam: 2.
for men abhorred the offering of the Lord. It is no wonder if Heathens abhor
Christian Religion, when they see Christians live such horrid lives: Though
this be not indeed the fault of our Religion, but of the professors of it, yet
it will be interpreted so; and this mischief is added to all the rest, men of
immoral wicked lives, hinder as much as in them lies (so far as they are
wicked) the spreading of Christian Religion. Wherefore if we would do good in
the World, we must abound in Moral Virtues, for the contrary Vices are much to
the detriment and damage of Mankind.

CHAP. X.
be good and profitable Tit. 3.
to men. These are the men whom the world can ill spare, for they are useful in
their places: There is no Creature in the world, be it never so mean, but so
far as it is useful is to be accounted of: even the Ass and her Colt, had a
value put upon them, because the Lord Math. 21.
had need of them. This is to be said in the behalf of Virtue, there is need of
it: It makes men fit to do good service, and therefore ought to be encouraged
and practiced. And that which was named last but one in the last Chapter, I now
begin with. Good men do good by their good examples: were nothing else but bare
pleasure, there may be as much said for Romances as for real stories. There is
a profit as well as a pleasure, Studia abeunt in mores, as the Lord Bacon Essay
of study.
observes; and then when men fashion their lives and manners according to their
studies, whereas other studies make men witty and subtle, this peculiar effect
has History, it makes men wise: And how is that, but by observing the examples
of others, and improving them to our advantage. So thought another Wise and
Learned Man: Defixum hoc Peireskius. Gassend. de vit a ejus.
habuit, confer maxim Historiam componendae vitae, censebat enim quodammodo
efficaciorem Philosophia, quod haec quidem verbis homines erudiat, sed illa
exemplis accendat, etc. Now the good we get by such examples, is an Argument
that Virtuous men do good in the world, because they help to make others good:
They stir them up to the same practices, by breeding such an emulation in them,
as Miltiades did in Themistocles: he was converted as I may say, ( i. e.) he
was changed in his behavior, from a debauched vicious man, by the fame
Miltiades got at the Battle of Marathon: So he Plutarch. Apophtheg.
gave this reason of his change, Miltiades his Trophy will not let me sleep, or
be dull and idle. Yea there are such inviting provocations in good examples,
that our blessed Savior himself thought good to make use of this Argument, to
teach his Disciples humility and condescension: I have given you an example
that Joh. 23.
ye should do as I have done to you. It is a great happiness when Parents or
Masters of Families, or any Public persons who have the governance of others,
are Virtuous themselves; for they can then urge the same Virtue with the
greater Authority upon others: Otherwise there is a great difference between
the precepts and instructions of those who practice Virtue, and those who
neglect it: Such as we read between Christ and the Scribes, He taught Math. 7.
them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes. How did they teach? They
taught, but they did not practice, They say and do not: Math. 23.
But (though other interpretations may be given of the words, this is a truth)
Christ spoke with Authority, he did enforce his Doctrine by his own example. A
Picture may be well drawn, and if it flatter, may be handsome^ then the person
it represents; but there is life in the person, which is wanting in the
Picture: In like manner Virtue may be pourtrayed, as to its lineaments and
colors, in good advice, and Moral precepts, and there may be Rhetorical
insinuations which may flatter it, and express some Heroical degrees which are
scarce practicable and attainable by flesh and blood; yet for all these
flourishes of Rhetoric, there is that same (...) still wanting; there is a
certain lifeness in Virtue which cannot be expressed but by a good example. Now
the world being so much advantaged this way, this good Virtue does, that they
who practice it, do good by their good examples.

Moses had been conversing with God in the Mount, the shinings of his face
struck an awe in the people of Israel Exodus 28.
at their approaches to him: So in some sort does the exercise of Virtue give a
luster to the persons of Virtuous men. Wicked men have such a Regard and
Reverence to them, that they will not commit those sins in their presence,
which yet they have a mind to commit, and would fain be in other company, that
they may be more bold in: So does it frequently happen, that those men who will
swear, and scorn, and scoff at all manner of goodness; yet in the presence of
some men, whom they know to have a hatred to their practices, they can contain
themselves: and they who will swear among their fellows, yet will not before
men of more severe Principles. Now as wickedness and vice does harm by hindering
good, (as has been said) so is Virtue hereby advantageous; it lays a restraint
upon wicked men, at least so as to prevent some Acts of sin, if not to
extinguish the Habits. There is one and the same reason given why Herod delayed
to kill John Baptist, and why the Pharisees would have delayed to take Christ;
he would have killed him but he feared the Math. 14.
multitude: They would have taken our Savior, but not on the Feast day, lest
there should be Math. 26.
an uproar among the people. Now though it may be all this multitude were not
indeed good and thoroughly honest, yet this good they had, they counted John as
a Prophet; and likewise they had a great esteem of Christ because of his
Miracles. Many such men there are in the world, who in this, as in other
things, are Hypocrites as the Pharisees were; they have a mind to sin, but they
are loath to be seen in it: By how much the more Virtuous men are scattered
about the world, they do help to loosen the knot, and weaken the conspiracy of
wicked men, that they cannot so confidently carry on the designs of Hell and
Darkness. There was somewhat in the presence of Aristides that did
discountenance dishonesty; and that was the reason that Themistocles (who
though not so debauched as before, yet was scarce honest) and others contrived
to banish him by the Ostracisme (a custom among the Athenians) that he might
not be at home to divert and restrain their indirect dealings.

light of the world, Math. 5.
are the salt of the earth: they who are exemplary in their lives, do season
the rest of the world, and preserve it from being corrupted and destroyed. It
pleases God to have Respect to the Prayers and Persons of his Holy Ones; and
for their sakes to forbear that punishment which he has threatened to wicked
men: So is the Language of the Scripture, when God does seem resolved to
destroy Israel in a moment; yet Moses prays and beseeches God, And then the
Lord repented of Exodus 32.
the evil which he thought to do to his people. And Moses his intercession is
given as the reason why he spared them: He said that he would destroy them, had
not Moses his chosen Psa. 106.
stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath lest he should destroy
them. Again, it seems Ten Righteous Men would have preserved Genesis 18.
Sodom; yea, God had so much Respect to the person of Lot (we do not read that
he prayed for Sodom) that so long as he staid there, he did as it were hold
Gods hands that he could do nothing: So may we with Reverence say, according to
those words in Scripture spoken to Lot in his going to Zoar, Haste thee escape
Genesis 19.
thither, for I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Yea, it pleased
God to have Respect to David and his Posterity after him; so that he would not
rend the Ten Tribes from Solomon for David his Fathers sake; so is 1 Kings 11.
it said to Solomon, yea, and to Rehoboam there is a promise with a threatening,
I will not rend away all the Kingdom, but will give one Tribe Ibid.
to thy Son for David my servants sake. This regard God has, not to the merits
of men; there is no man that sins (as every just man upon the earth does) who
is able to expiate for Eccles. 7.
his own sins by his own merits, (for then he would not need a Savior) and if
not so, how then should he deserve mercy for other men? The Papists speak of a
Treasury of the Saints merits, which is one foundation of their Doctrine of
Indulgences, as also a ground why they hope the sooner to be released out of
Purgatory; but this their Treasury is a well without water: yet though not for
their deserts and merits, for his mercies sake it pleases God so to honor
righteous and holy men, as to let the wicked world know, that they are the
better for their righteous neighbors. As God does many times send evil when
they are taken away, and therefore it is said; The Righteous Isa. 57.
is taken away from the evil to come: so does he stay and forbear to send it as
long as they remain: Wherefore good men are the props and supports of the
world. There are a sort of men who (as the men of Sodom were weary of Lot) are
weary of the company of honest men; and would be glad if there were no body in
the world but of their Gang; but it is because they do not consider who are
their best Friends: It is for the sake of the Wheat that the Tares are suffered
to grow till Harvest. There is a mixture of good and bad Math. 13.
together, in Nations, and Cities, and Towns, and almost in all Societies of
men: Now there are blessings derived upon wicked men, because they are in
company with those who are better then themselves, and whom God has a regard
to: This is more to the commendation of Virtue, it keeps the world a foot, it
does stay, and uphold, and preserve mankind from falling to that decay and
corruption to which vice does naturally tend; and so is an instance of what
good Virtue does.

^4
make Conscience of doing good; they who are so out of good Principles, (...)
out of a love to Virtue, will believe themselves obliged to the practice of
every Virtue, which they are in capacity for: They will endeavor to make good
that common observation, that there is a connection of Virtue, insomuch that he
who is Virtuous in one, will be so in all, or will strive so to be: and he that
strives to be completely Virtuous, how can he forget that Noble and Excellent
disposition of Charity, which the Scripture makes so much of, that all our
behavior toward our Neighbor is comprehended in this, Thou shall love thy
Romans 13.
Neighbor as thy self. He who is Virtuous, will be Charitable and well
disposed; and he who is so, how much good will he do? Here is a cluster of
Proofs, which (as the cluster of Grapes from Eshcol was born between two) is
Numb. 13.
somewhat too big to be crowded within one Argument: but because I would
multiply as little as I can, I include them all here. Charity is kind, there
are many good offices are performed 1 Cor. 13.
by a Charitable man: to Feed the Hungry, and Cloth the Naked, and relieve
those who are in want and distress; to resolve doubts and satisfy scruples; to
correct error and inform ignorance; to pity and comfort the sad and dejected
spirits of other men; to be helpful in all streights, to bear the burdens of
others, that they may be eased; to become all things to all men, that by all
means we may do good to some, this is the Trade of a good man: and when all
these rills are united in one, they make a forcible stream that cannot easily
be damned up: Suppose this good spirited man to have ability and opportunity
thus to let out his spirit, it is not easy to divert his good intentions, nor
to take him off from his endeavors of doing good: So that this is a pregnant
instance how advantageous Virtue is, because this doing good is it self a
Virtue; in which it were easy to enlarge, but that I consider I am slipped into
a particular consideration, which does not so much belong to Virtue in the
general, as to one part of it; therefore I go no farther in it.

Elisha made use of to heal the naughty waters; it does sanctify other
accomplishments, 2 Kings 2.
complishments, and convert them to do good service: other endowments, whether
of the body or the mind, are (as we say of the passions) neither good nor bad,
but according as they are used: Now (if that fancy may be Moralized) Virtue is
the Philosophers Stone that turns all into Gold; for which several instances
might be given, I take up with two: Knowledge and Riches are two such things,
which when they are found in a way of righteousness, are greatly serviceable to
the world; otherwise they are better lost then found. A man had better be
without a Knife then cut his Neighbors Throat with it; so is it less criminal
for a man to be a Fool then a Knave, or to be Poor then to have Riches and
abuse them to the wrong and prejudice of other men; wherefore this good Virtue
does, it teaches a man the right use of these things.

may be an instrument of much mischief: The Counsel of Ahitophel was as if a
man had enquired 2 Samuel 16.
at the Oracle of God, but if it had been successful it would have ruined
David. We use to compare crafty men to Foxes, and they are more like to none
than to Sampsons Foxes, Judge 15.
commonly they carry firebrands in their tails: The end of their contrivances
and designs, is to waste, and consume, and destroy. But the wisdom of the
Serpent, and the simplicity of the Math. 10.
Dove, are a happy pair when matched together. There is no man who does not set
his wits to work if he have any; now Virtue corrects and restrains the
extravagant sallies and wildnesses of wit, and purifies wisdom from those dregs
which make it earthly, sensual, and devilish; it alters the property of wit,
and makes it wisdom. The head receives influence from the heart. An honest good
man is more conscientious than to abuse his parts, and knowledge, and skill, to
the hurt of his Neighbor: He does not study a cunning craftiness, whereby he
may lie in wait to deceive: Ephesians. 4.
but his wisdom is from above, for it has the same characters, it is full of
mercy and good James 3. Herbert.
fruits. Wits an unruly Engine, and it is not every man knows how to use it:
There is a 1 Cor. 8.
great deal of knowledge that puffs up, and does not edify without Charity,
which is Virtue: There is a great deal of learning in the World, skill in
Languages, knowledge in Arts and Sciences; and many men that have these, are
but as sounding brass or a tinkling Cimbal; they want 1 Cor. 13.
grace to sanctify their gifts. There is then this great piece of service
Virtue does, it makes men (...), their wisdom is Romans 12.
a sober well governed wisdom; the more Virtuous and good any man is, the
better use he makes of his Learning and parts, not to his own vainglory, or to
the prejudice of other men, but to their benefit and advantage as much as he is
able.

A virtuous man makes a like improvement of his estate, that he does of his
knowledge; that is, he does good with it. Riches are which certainly may be
made use of to good purposes. He that threw his money into the sea because it
should do him no harm, was either a low-spirited man (according to Seneca's
observat^on, Epist. 5.
Infirmi animi est pati non posse divitias: It is an Argument of a weak mind
not to be able to hear riches) or else he was strangely humorsom, if not worse;
Lactantius could not tell what to think of him, whether he were in his wits or
no: Quid ille qui patrimonium in nummos redactum De falsa sap. Cap. 23.
projecit in Mare, ego dubito utrumne sanus an demens fuenit: and his reason is
to my purpose, fac beneficium, etc. he might have done good with it, etc.
riclies are the gift of God who gives power to get wealth, and it cannot
reasonably be Deuteronomy. 8.
thought they are given to be thrown away. But why then are they improved no
better? men either hoard up their money or throw it away. Many are the men who
make no use at all of their money, only to tell it, and bless themselves that
they are rich. And then this love of 1 Timothy 6.
money is the root of all evil. This greedy desire of gain has brought along
with it many mischiefs into the world, and almost undone it. ^^mpan. de
Monarch. Hispan.
Vere affirmare possumus mundum novum quodammodo perdidisse mundum veterem, nam
mentibus nostris avaritiam insevit, and mutuum amorem extinxit, etc. since
Silver and Gold have been so plentifully brought from America, the new world
has destroyed the old, by introducing Covetousness, and extinguishing Love and
good will among men. On the other side some are as Prodigal as others Covetous:
There are, that will venture almost all they have upon a cast at Dice: there
are (and they are not all Luke 15.
younger Brothers neither, as he in St. Luke) who waste their substance with
riotous living. These are now the extremes, and it is nothing but Virtue will
keep a man within the mean. A man that makes Conscience of his doings, believes
that God has made him rich in this world, that he 1 Timothy 6.
may do good, that he may be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing
to communicate. It is want of will rather then want of money that is the reason
why there is no more good done in this kind: if men were well disposed and
virtuously inclined, the rich discoveries that have been made in the
West Indies, of gold and silver mountains rather then mines (such as is that of
Potozi) would have helped to have restored the world to its golden age, in the
same sense the Poets speak of: men would be well furnished for the mutual
service and supply of one another, and it is well for the whole where the parts
agree, and are helpful to each other. So far as Virtue prevails it conquers
Vice (as has been said) so then hereby it is that a man gets rid of his
covetous and prodigal humor both. A good man who is likewise willing to do
good, he does neither hold too fast, nor does he let go too soon; but as there
is occasion, he makes his estate serve him, and not he that. And thus is Virtue
advantageous to the world, it makes a man a good steward of those things he is
entrusted with, particularly of his knowledge and riches.

The same may be said of Authority and places of public trust; of Credit and
reputation, of time and leisure; the more virtuous a man is, the more
Conscience he will make of making a right use of all these things. But it is
time I made haste to the Conclusion of this Argument; I have therefore but one
thing more to add.

fall off from Sejanus, when he was near his ruin: Yea and St. Peter, as holy
a man as he was, was for a while tempted to deny his Master, when he came into
trouble. Again, two men whom the Prison has reconciled, preferment has
severed and distanced from one another. Men's Neighbourhoods and Interests also
vary: If there be nothing else but these to glue men's affections together, they
will not always hold. If Virtue be not in the case, we are at a loss for a firm
Basis to found friendship Cicer. Laelius.
on. Hoc sentio nisi in bonis amicitiam esse posse; for why should I make that
man my Friend, whom I cannot trust? how can I trust a man, unless I believe him
to be an honest and just man? Again a proud man is unfit for a friend: there is
a kind of equality among friends (not of state and condition, as the Levellers
would introduce, but) the humility and condescensions of the Superior, will
meet with his friend, and in the simpathy of their Souls there is a likeness
and an oneness. Pride therefore makes men unsociable, so does Anger and
quarrelsomeness, and such like evil dispositions. Still therefore we want that
which cements friends together, and we shall not find it till we come to
Virtue: that is a thing to be confided in. Not that I would make every man my
friend, whom in charity I ought to judge honest as to the main (as we use to
say) for there are many such men, who are yet guilty of many unhappy failings
and weaknesses. Every one is not fit to keep a secret, and it is not safe to
unbosome our Souls to them. Some are censorious (a distemper that spreads very
far this day in England) and other things there are that make men less apt for
these purposes: but then it is to be observed, all this is want of those
degrees of Virtue which we ought to aspire to; still therefore so far as men
are virtuous they have the right disposition for friends; for hereby men are
taught to perform all good Offices for their friend that they are able (as has
been lately said, Virtue sets men on work to do good) and also it does restrain
men from doing those that are not good. There is a kind of obstinate
friendship, which many times proceeds to a Brotherhood in iniquity: Men are so
resolved to humor and gratify their friend, that they will do evil for their
sakes. So was C. Blossius to Cicer. Laelius.
Tiberius Gracchus, he was so much his friend, he said, that he would do any
thing for him; and when the question was asked, what if Gracchus should bid you
fire the Capitol, would you do it? he answers he would not bid me do such a
thing; but if he should, I would do as he bid me. So had Herod passed his word
Math. 14
and his Oath to the Daughter of Herodias, to do for her whatsoever she should
ask; and when she required the head of John Baptist, he would not deny it to
her. Now here is an excellent use of Virtue, to keep friendship within its
right Channel. A Virtuous man will do all the good he can to his friend, but
(unless he fail in his Virtue) he will not profane that sacred thing, by
entering into a League to maintain friendship, whether by lawful or unlawful
means. Now true friendship is a noble and gallant thing, an excellent
attainment of humane Nature; but that Ceremonies and Complements have almost
either obscured it where it is, or crowded, it into some few corners of the
World, that it is scarce any where to be found. Surely civility, and
affability, and courtesy, is a fine accomplishment; yet I am of opinion (and
though I be accounted a Clown for so thinking, I am not much sollicitous) that
as Sarah turned Hagar out of doors for her fcornful Imperiousness; so if ever
friendship get any considerable dominion in the World, smcerity and
plainheartedness must keep somewhat a stricter hand over dissembling
Complements. I fear men must grow less Complemental, if they would approve
themselves real friends; but I am going out of the way: I could not choose but
salute friendship when it came in my way; I return and make this use of this
short digression: If friendship be such an excellent thing, then is this
greatly to the commendation of Virtue, that it does so help to make and keep
men friends. Which is the last instance I give (and I cannot conclude with a
better) that it is much for the profit and advantage of mankind, that men
should live in the exercise of Moral Virtues. Which was the proof of the fourth
Reason I have given in this kind; Virtue is necessary ( Necessitate Medii) as a
means in order to an end. If we would live good lives; if we desire to dye in
safety; if we would have our lives and deaths Comfortable to our selves; and if
we believe our selves bound to live profitably to the advantage of others; It
is necessary for us (all of us Christians as well as other men, and Christians
more than other men, because of the commands beforementioned) to abound in
Moral Virtues.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian: OR, The Necessity of Morality among
Christians.
BOOK IV.
CHAP. I.
a few words; but I will not multiply many.

Virtue is not only necessary, but it is an excellent, brave, becoming thing, a
thing lovely and of good report: It cannot otherwise be, if that be true which
is already said; that which is so good and comfortable to our selves, so good
and advantageous to others, if we do not admire it, we do greatly undervalue
it; we do not well understand it, if we do not believe it to be very excellent.
So much has been said to those heads, that I am loath again to refer to them:
Any one may easily apprehend the force of an Argument, that which has the
qualifications beforementioned, is very Excellent: wherefore passing that by,
I add two things more: There is a great excellency in Moral Virtue, for it is
an imitation of God, and a Type of Heaven. Both which must be understood with
some caution.

proves that he does repent as we do) yet notwithstanding by virtue we resemble
God. The holiness of God is the perfection and rectitude of his Nature; so our
virtue, though alone it be not our perfection, yet it belongs to our integrity
and rectitude: When we are commanded to be holy, in all manner of Conversation,
how can we fulfill that Command, if we do not exercise those virtues without
which our Conversation cannot be as it ought to be? Now this holiness is a
conformity to God, for in the same place it follows, because it is 1 Pet. 1.
written be ye holy, for I am holy. And in many particular cases, that Justice
and Righteousness in our dealings, and that Truth and faithfulness in our word
and promise, which makes us honest, is an imitation of God, who is Righteous
Psa. 145.
in all his ways, and holy in all his works; and who does not suffer his
faithfulness to fail. Psa. ^9.
When we are kind and charitable, and desirous to do good, then are we the
Children of our Father Math. 5. Luke. 6.
which is in Heaven, and are merciful as our Father also is merciful: Again,
when we are gentle and meek, then we are like that God who is Merciful and
Gracious and Long-suffering, etc. whence Exodus 34.
it does appear that this Moral Virtue is a true and a considerable part of
godliness: that man is a beastly man, who lives like a beast, and he a manly
man who lives and acts like a man; accordingly, he who is thus God-like, does
so far deserve the name of a Godly man. The Heathens had the same apprehensions
of their Virtues; though they fell short of the attainment, yet so far as their
Philosophy made them virtuous, Hi^rocl.
it did (...). And is not this a great ennoblement of our souls, that we may be
raised up to be like God? does not God infinitely excel all his creatures?
wherefore though we come infinitely short of the divine perfections, yet so far
as we do attain to any resemblance of him, it is our excellency to be like that
God, who does so infinitely excel. To be transformed into the Image of our
Creator, what can be more desirable? yea, may we not say, (if we should
suppose that which yet cannot possibly come to pass) that if it were possible
for holiness and happiness to be separated from one another, it were a greater
perfection and glory to be like God in holiness then in happiness. The state of
happiness in Heaven we call a glorious state, and it is a greater glory then we
can now conceive: But is not holiness more glorious? if unholiness be worse
then unhappiness, then is holiness better then happiness: now so it is; for
unhappiness is our misery, but unholiness is our sin, and therefore more to be
avoided. Where are now the men that dare sit in the Seat of the Scorners, to
despise and laugh at all manner of Goodness and Virtue? is it nothing to be
like God? should we choose to be like the Devil in Malice and Revenge, and ill
will, and such like evil dispositions, is it a thing to be gloried in? is there
any will glory that he is going to Hell to keep company with the Devils? surely
we do not understand our Natures, or we cannot but acknowledge, it is a great
excellency to be like God, as we are, in the exercise of these Moral Virtues.
To which might be added as a consideration contiguous to this; the life of
Christ does greatly commend Moral Virtue: He was Temperate, and Meek, and
Humble, he went about doing good; and many proofs in the Gospel there are, that
in all his dealings with all men he behaved himself as did become him; which
may help to confirm us in a belief of the excellency of Virtue; it is such an
imitation of God, as the life of Christ was very remarkable for. But I add no
more to this first Instance.

glorious and spiritual bodies: and ^ Cor. 15.
therefore for the same reason they will not exercise that Virtue of Temperance
as it is here exercised: but the carriage and behavior (as there must be some)
whereby they behave themselves one toward another in that Glorious Quire, is
always as it ought to be: There is Love, and Meekness, and Humility, and such
like good Affections; there is no Envy, nor Pride, nor ill Will, nor any such
Hellish quality; their Charity is particularly 1 Cor. 13.
said never to fail. Indeed there is somewhat else in Heaven that does augment
the glory of the place, and their happiness who are taken up thither; they are
in close Communion with God, in whose presence is fullness of joy, Psa. 16.
and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Yet as it is an accessory to
their glory to be in company with one another; so is this somewhat not to be
despised, that their love is made perfect, and all the correspondencies of
Heaven are sinless and pure: Hell shall be shut up in Hell, all Devilish
qualities shall be banished Heaven, and Holiness and Righteousness will be in
its Triumphancy in that Church Triumphant. Now if this be the utmost perfection
of which our natures are capable, to be translated into this state; how must it
needs be an excellent attainment, to be in any measure like those glorified
spirits? There is somewhat in our natures, that does mind us of an
imperfection, in every state and attainment in this world; for it is natural
for us to desire a change: There are the strivings of the Infant in the womb,
which discover the inclinations of its nature to be born into the world, and to
be at liberty: Boys would fain be Men, and Men notwithstanding that they
despise Old Age in others, yet would live to be old themselves: an Apprentice
would be out of his time, to set up for himself; and a Servant has a great
desire to become a Master. There is scarce any thing in the Universe, but would
be graduate, and commence some higher degrees of perfection, then it has yet
attained. All this would not be, if there were not a belief, an imagination at
least, that there is some greater excellency in those states, to which we are
not yet arrived, then for the present we do enjoy: wherefore if ever we desire
after Heaven, while we are upon Earth, (as we ought always to do) this supposes
we believe it to be a place of more glorious excellencies, then any we have yet
seen or tasted now in this world; and if it be so, then we must go on to argue,
that (in regard it is not so much the place, as the the state that makes the
happiness) the nearer we come in the disposition of our minds, and the tenor
of our lives, to that Heavenly state, our lives are so much the more excellent.
And this being true of a Virtuous and good life, that it is some resemblance
to, and some weaker degrees of the life of Heaven; it adds to the Argument,
that as there is a great necessity of, so there is a superlative excellency in
Moral Virtue.

CHAP. II.
for those who preach up Morality.

suffer for righteousness sake, and we may 1 Pet. 3.
well glory in our sufferings. Where a People have conceived a prejudice
against their Minister, there is scarce any kind of Preaching, but they will
cavil at: If we endeavor to give them satisfaction concerning the order and
discipline of the Church, and tell them what reason they have to be peaceable
and modest, and not to make divisions; then we are the men who are all for
conformity and the service of the outward man; and if we can but bring our
people to conform, we do not care what lives they live. This we would not be
thought to do, to neglect to give our people good instructions for their lives;
and therefore we insist upon Moral Virtues sometimes, and would persuade men to
be just, and honest, and charitable, etc. but then we are in danger of being
counted Popish: these men sure hope to be saved by their good works, they extol
them so much, and preach them up so often: No not so neither* we do not trust
in our selves, nor put any confidence in the flesh, but in the merit of our
Savior; therefore we lay the foundation of Heb. 6.
Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God; and we insist upon the
great privileges of believers, that they are redeemed from the curse of the
Law, and the wrath of God; and though they be guilty of many failings, yet is
there no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Now happily it will Romans
8.
be suspected we are Antinomians or Solifidians, we attribute so much to faith,
that it may be our hearers may the less regard good works. When we explain the
Articles of our Creed, and so have occasion to mention some of the more
abstruse Doctrines of Christian Religion; it will be said these are dark
mysterious things, and we do not know how to understand them; we have more need
of milk then of this strong meat: If therefore we condescend to the meanest
capacities of our Auditors, and preach plain matters of practice, in a plain
and familiar way then shall we be censured for dull and plain; souls, that have
no Scholarship at all in us: And I would there were no Scholars this day in
England, that do exalt knowledge above goodness; and that choose rather to have
their fancies tickled, then their affections warmed. I fear it is an objection,
that many of the Learneder sort will make against Preaching Morality,
(especially when we Countrey-Preachers preach it in our plain way, suitable to
those that hear us) these are things that every body knows well enough; and why
should we trouble our selves so often to speak of these things? If now among
all these Cavils, there be any, who (upon any reason whatsoever) do under-value
this kind of Preaching; my answer to them who are thus quarrelsome, might be
this; Have we not power to make choice of what Texts and Subjects we apprehend
useful to those to whom we Preach? and why should we be abridg'd of this our
Liberty? But I say moreover;

Cry aloud, and Isa. 58.
not spare to show men their transgressions and their sins? But it may be these
men themselves are in the same condemnation with other men; it may be they are
Immoral themselves, notwithstanding all their pretenses to Faith, and the
privileges of Believers: And if so, then it is no wonder if the Horse kick
when he is pinched in a sore place; M^n are troubled because we speak home to
their Consciences, and tell them of their faults; but then we are so much the
more justified in what we do. There is need enough we should Preach up Virtue,
and we must do so, till men do more live it up: and when we can see the time
that our people will leave off their dishonesty and unrighteous dealings, they
will lie, and cheat, and be drunk no more, etc. we will encourage and commend
them for doing their duty; and will proceed to tell them of their blessed
estate, that they who know these things, are to be pronounced Joh. 13.
happy, because they do them. In the mean time, I think that man's boldness was
not the confidence of a Fool, of whom I have heard, that being abroad upon a
visit, and desired to give his Friend a Sermon, he Preached against Swearing;
and having occasion to stay there longer, the second and the third time he
Preached over the same Sermon; when being asked if he had not forgot himself,
in Preaching the same Sermon thrice together, he says no; I Preached it once,
and I observed little good came of it, you went on to swear; therefore I
repeated it again, and yet you did not mend; and now after the third time, it
may be you will not leave it: therefore I Preach over the same Sermon, because
you practice over the same sins. Is there not need we should reinforce and
renew our Sermons and Exhortations in this kind; for when we have done all, we
prevail little, still the world continues wicked and immoral? And this is no
unjust Apology for our selves, who Preach such Doctrines as these are. But we
are yet more then barely excusable; I suppose we are to be encouraged in these
undertakings, if that be true which has been already said: If Moral Virtue be
so necessary and excellent, (and if it be not, eedo rationem, they who are of
the opinion, but that they cannot, would do well to undeceive the world, that
men's Consciences may not be overawed by Bug-bears, and Specter, and Fancies;
as Niema Pompilius made use of the Goddess Aegeria among the Romans) then why
Livy.
are we not praiseworthy who do tell men so? And this is my first Conclusion
in Apology for ourselves who Preach Morality.

CHAP. III.
Physician heal thy self.

condemns not himself in that thing which Romans 14.
he allows: We all allow Virtue to be excellent and praiseworthy; happy is
that man, and happy is that party of men, whose judgment does not condemn its
practice. When then shall our zeal be more hearty then heady? When shall the
earnestness of our spirits, which provokes us to contend in matters of opinion,
be spent this way, some of it, to provoke H^b. 10.
one another to good works? It was an office of great repute among the Romans
to be Censor morum; by which it appears what an excellent opinion they had of
Virtue, and what care they took to correct vice, because this was one of the
most honorable offices in the Commonwealth. But now adays how is every body
almost got into this Office! Oh when shall our censurings of others be turned
to a self-judging, and that end in a self-amending? when shall we strive who
shall live the best lives?

Jew, the Mohammedan, and the Infidel, though they do all oppose the Christian
Religion, yet herein they do agree both with that, and with one another; they
acknowledge a certain decorum to be observed in our actions, and they applaud
Virtue so far as they understand ^t.

Among the many Traditions that the Jewish Writers abound with, those which
they call the seven precepts of Noah, are not the least considerable (of which
see Ainsw. upon Genes. 9. 4. and Weemse's Exercitat. Divine, page 41) now they
being some of them restraints upon Immorality* are some evidence in the case:
but besides, the Jew acknowledges the Old Testament for the word of God; at
least the Five Books of Moses, are owned by all of them, and there being
commands (as has been before said) for a Moral conversation, it cannot be that
they should deny the necessity of Virtue.

The Turks are a rude and unmannerly people, yet have they likewise a kind of
Religion and Gospel among them; and of those 8 Heads Heylin Geogr. Arab.
to which their Alcoran is reduced by a learned man: these are 4, Giving to the
Poor; Obedience to Parents; Against killing; and last of all, Do to others as
thou would be done unto thy self. (Upon which last let it be observed, that
as it is a grand Maxim of the Gospel, so has it found universal entertainment
all the world over, in so much that Alexander Severus, though a Heathen
Emperor, and one who is said to have Prideaux.
been at first harsh to the Christians; yet he thought this a fit Motto, only
turning the Affirmative Joh. Laetus.
into a Negative; Quod tihi non vis, alteri ne feceris, Do not to another what
you would not* have him do to you) Yea concerning the Turks it is worthy to be
added, that one who was an Eyewitness and a diligent observer of Busbeq.
Epist. 1.
their State-policies, gives this Character of them; In ea Gente, Dignitates,
Honores, Magistratus, Virtutum and Meritorum praemia sunt; Improbitas, Ignavia,
Inertia, nullo honor pensantur. I am sorry he had occasion to add, and more
sorry if it should still be true in Christendom; Ibid.
Apud nos aliis vivitur moribus, virtuti nihil est relictum loci, omnia
natalibus deferuntur.

Pagans and Infidels are not without an apprehension of the excellency and
becomingness of Virtue; the Philosophers of old have been produced before, and
it might be enough to say of them in the general what Grotius does; Inter
Paganos non defuerunt qui De verit. Christianae Relig. L. 4. adifinem.
dixerint singula, quae nostra Religio habet universa. Those precepts of Virtue
that are gathered together in the Gospel, are scattered up and down the several
writings of the Pagans. But I find in a late Author, one passage very
considerable to this purpose. In the great Empire of China (though it be far
removed from those parts of the World where Christian Religion principally
obtains) the Chinois have such honorable thoughts of Moral Virtue, that it
has been a stated Custom among them, (if the late invasions of the Tartars
have not interrupted it) that at every New and Full Moon, throughout that vast
Kingdom, there have been some public Officers appointed in every Town, to
proclaim a little before the Sunrising, these six Rules of life.

1. Parentibus omnes obediunto. 2. Superioribus Honorem and Observantiam
deferunto. Theophil. Spizelim De Re literaria sinensium. Sect. 12.
3. Inter proximos and vicinos concordiam and pacem concilianto. 4. Liberos and
nepotes literis and honestis disciplinis instruunto. 5. Parts and officia sua
quilibet debite exequatur. 6. Nemini ulla injuria irrogetur, sive corporis
laesione, sive Adulterio; sive Furto.
That is, 1. Let all obey their Parents. 2. Let them reverence and honor their
Superiors. 3. Let Neighbors make and keep peace with one another. 4. Let
Parents bring up their Children in good Learning, and honest Trades or
Callings. 5. Let every one look to the due discharge of his office and place.
6. Let none hurt another, neither by any corporal Violence, nor Adultery, nor
Theft. How like is Virtue to the Sun in the Heaven, or to the Heaven it self,
upon this as well as other accounts! There is no speech Psalm. 19.
nor language, where the voice of Virtue is not heard. Papist and the
Protestant; within the Reformed Churches, there are names and notes of
difference more than I am willing to reckon up; among all these are feuds, and
quarrels, and contentions; yet these all (though they are not of one heart and
mind) yet thus far they are of one Language, Genesis 11.
or one Lip; take them together, or take them apart (excepting a few
Strange-spirited Antinomians) and they profess to believe the necessity and
excellency of Moral Virtue. Thus far we have all attained to believe and know,
that it is necessary for us to live upright, and honest, and virtuous lives.
Here we are all of one judgment (though happily as to particular cases and
circumstances of life, there remain doubts and difficulties, as to what is fit
to be done, and what not, which is Virtue, and which Vice.) Wherefore we are
all concerned in the exhortation of the Apostle, if we apply it to the matter
in hand. There will be differences in opinion and judgment, perhaps as long as
the world stands; Nevertheless whereto Philip. 3.
we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same
thing: Even this same thing among others, that I have all this while been
recommending; viz. Moral Virtue. The Rule whereby we ought to walk in the
exercise of it, is the dictates of our own Conscience, when it is rightly
informed by the word of God. And as many as walk according Galat. 6.
to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the whole Israel of God,
and upon all those who let their light so shine before men, that they Math. 5.
may see their good works, and glorify their Father which is in Heaven.

FINIS.
Mr Geo. Herbert, Page 80.
Virtue.
SWeet day, so cool, so calm, so bright,
The bridal of the Earth and Sky:
The dew shall weep thy fall to night;
For thou must Dye.
Sweet Rose, whose hew angry and brave
Bids the rush gazer wipe his Eye:
Thy root is ever in its grave,
And thou must Dye.
Sweet Spring, full of sweet days and Roses,
A box where sweets compacted lie;
My Music shows ye have your closes,
And all must Dye.
Only a sweet and Virtuous soul,
Like seasoned timber, never gives;
But though the whole world turn to coal,
Then chiefly lives.
ERRATA.
THe slips of the Press are not many, nor very considerable; some Comma's and
periods are misplaced, and some Letters and Figures are mistaken, which the
Readers ingenuity (going along with his Eye) will pardon as he finds them. What
in any kind is most considerable let it be thus corrected.

P. 8. lin. 21 read kick it out. p. 20. In Marg. r. Lib. 1. verse. finem. p. 27.
In Marg. r. (...) p. 42. l. 14. r. Manichees. p. 48. l. 2. r. as much as
safely: p. 57. l. 29. r. so not to recompense. p. 70. l. 26. dele these. p. 79.
l. 1. r. (...). p. 87. l. 26. r. deserve it. p. 115. lin. Antepen. r. It is not
hard. p. 128. l. 31. r. and this Joy.


